F1388A R7125 12144028 172298
JULIJ 8vo. 1687. Libellus cui Titulus, ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. Imprimatur. Tho. Witherley, Praeses Coll. Med. Lond. Censores. Jo. Betts, Edw. Browne, Guil. Briggs, Guil. Dawkins,
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR THE Touch-stone of Medicines. Discovering the VERTUES Of VEGETABLES, MINERALS, & ANIMALS, BY THEIR TASTES & SMELLS. In Two Volumes. By Sir JOHN FLOYER, of the City of Litchfield, Kt. M. D. of Queens-Col∣lege, Oxford. Saporum Speculatio plurima jucunda, & non minùs utilia in se continet. Willis de A∣nima Brutorum. LONDON, Printed for Michael Johnson, Bookseller: And are to be Sold at his Shops at Litchfield and Ʋttoxiter, in Stafford-shire; and Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicester-shire. 1687.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines. VOL. I. Containing Three PARTS. Part the First. OF TASTES & ODORS In general. Part the Second. A Phytological Essay, How to Discover the Vertues of PLANTS, whether Spontaneous in England, or found in Gardens and Shops, by their TASTES and SMELLS. Part the Third. OF THE Tastes and Smells of the Products of VEGETABLES; viz. Gums, Re∣sins, Turpentines, &c. The Second Volume will be Publisht next Michaelmas-Term.
To the Right Honorable, George Lord Dartmouth, Master of the Horse to His Majesty, General of all His Majesty's Ordnance and Armories, Chief Governour of His Majesty's Tower of London, Lord Lieu∣tenant of the Tower-Ham∣lets, and One of His Maje∣sty's most Honourable Privy-Council. MY LORD, I Question not, but This Essay will be more kindly Recei∣ved, for having Your Name
prefixt to It; since That is so much honour'd for Your great Services to the Publick, and signal Loy∣alty to His present Maje∣sty: And all Persons must needs therefore greatly esteem Your Merit, Cou∣rage, and Experience in Military Affairs; since the KING hath manifested His Approbation of Them, by the Great and Honoura∣ble Trusts conferr'd up∣on You. My Lord, I will give You a few Instances of the De∣sign and Usefulness of these Papers; that I may
obtain Your Protection a∣gainst those morose Men, who endeavour to oppose this New Ʋndertaking, tho' they cannot but acknow∣ledge, that they approve of It. The Design of This Es∣say, is, To vindicate the Art of Curing Diseases, from the common Scan∣dal of being Conjectural, by Describing the Tastes and Odors of Medicines, and also of Animal Humours: For by These, Medicines were first discover'd, and the Humors of the Body examin'd; and from the
Observation of the A∣greement and Contrarie∣ties betwixt the Taste of Humours in the Body, and the Medicine, it was easie for Physicians to infer, That by a Medicine of the same Taste, the Humours of the Body are Preserv'd; and by the contrary Taste in the Medicine, they are Al∣ter'd and Corrected. These are the true Fun∣damental Rules of Phy∣sick, built on the Testi∣mony of our Senses, and not on the Whims of Chy∣mists, or the Fanaticisms of Occult Qualities; by
which Medicines work, like Charms, insensibly. Hence Quacks give to their Medicines very ma∣ny, and too unreasonable Commendations: They also pretend to an Expe∣rience of a particular Me∣dicine, as well as the best Physician. But 'tis only the Taste and Smell of the Me∣dicine, by which its Ver∣tue must be try'd betwixt the Physician, & the Quack: By these the true Physici∣an knoweth its Vertue, the Manner of its Preparation, the Suitableness of it to the Humour to be Corre∣cted,
and to the Consti∣tution of the Patient: Of all which the Quack is ig∣norant. When the several Com∣positions of Tastes, and some∣times Odors, in the same Plant, are well consider'd by those who shall read the Descriptions I have given of them, I questi∣on not, but that the Ar∣tificial Jumbles of many Medicines together, will be Rejected; and every Ingenuous Practicer will chiefly make use of Sim∣ple Medicines; by which his Patient will be more
suddenly, safely, and plea∣santly Cured. I have further propos'd some Notions about Tastes in general, for the easier discovering of the Nature of such Plants, as grow common in England. I have mention'd Those I have met with near Litchfield: And I have added Exo∣ticks; that by comparing the Tastes and Vertues of both, we might the bet∣ter understand Those of Our own. It is a great Shame to our Profession, that the Ignorant Indians should know more of
Plants in their Native Coun∣try, and do greater Cures by Them, than our Artists can by Ours. I thought it absurd to write a Latin Discourse a∣bout English Plants; which is design'd for the Use of English Men, who are fur∣ther to try and examine the Tastes and Vertues that I have mention'd. Hippo∣crates & Galen wrote their Physical Books in the Lan∣guage of the Country where they Practiced: And the Learn'd Mr. Boyl hath both Honour'd and Improv'd our Language,
by his Physical Discourses in English. I have therefore wrote in English, that I might the more encou∣rage our Country-Men to enquire into the Vertue of our Native Plants; we be∣ing hitherto oblig'd to our Old English Herbals, for a Collection of the Vertues of many Plants from the Country-Men; to whose Sagacity & Experiments the greatest Physicians are hitherto obliged. And since there have been so many false Commedati∣ons given of Medicines, and mistaken Notions of
Physick, I thought it rea∣sonable to give my Coun∣try-Men some Advertise∣ments of these Abuses, and to enable them to a bet∣ter Judgment of the right Nature of Physick. By the Instances I have given, I hope I have con∣vinc'd Your Lordship of the great Usefulness of this Essay; and presume, All who have a generous Love for their Country, will pardon the Fault (if it be One) of Writing in Eng∣lish. I here Present Your Lord∣ship with the first Fruits
of my Studies, as an hum∣ble Acknowledgment of Your great Favors to Me; and that I might make this Publick Declaration of My being, My LORD, Your Lordship's most Faith∣ful Humble Servant, JOHN FLOYER.
TO THE READER. THE famous Effects of the Cortex Peruvianus, in Curing of Agues, gave Me the first Occasion of in∣quiring into the Tastes of the Barks of Trees in our own Country; that I might find, which were like it: And from thence I proceeded to enquire into the Tastes of Herbs, for these Three or Four Years last past. I had then no other Herbal by Me, but Mr. Ray's Catalogue of English Plants: From whence I took the Names of Plants, and the Method of placing Them in an Alphabetical Order by Themselves: But because I could not meet with all He mentions, I resolv'd to supply that Defect from our Country-Gar∣dens, and Apothecaries Shops, where I ta∣sted some Plants that were Dry and Old. The Vertues of Those in the Shops being more experimented and known, I thought by
Them the better to understand our Country-Herbs: And when I had tasted, and set down the Tastes and Odors of those Plants, I per∣ceiv'd it was easie for Me to give an Account of their Vertues Collected by Dioscorides, Scroder, Etmuller, Mr. Ray, and Others. By the Reading of Hippocrates, Dioscorides, and Galen, I found that the Antients had the same Way of finding out the Vertues of Plants by their Taste and Smell: Wbich is most evident in Galen's Books of the Nature of Simple Medicines; where I found the Tastes and Odors of many Plants Described, as I have done; which gave Me a great Satis∣faction, when I found my Taste to agree with Theirs of former Ages; which I had not read till I had finisht my Descriptions of Tastes and Odors. This Summer I visited the Famous Phy∣sick-Garden at Chelsey, in which I found a great Number of curious Plants; but have not given the Tastes of above Forty or Fifty, my Affairs not permitting Me to go above twice. I was pleas'd with many Curiosities There, which the Ingenuous and obliging Mr. Watts shew'd Me; especially the Tree which bears the Jesuits Bark. We observ'd a Tur∣pentine in it; and not the Laurel-Bitter Taste, evident in ordinary Bark. I have since observ'd a Turpentine-Smell in the
fresh Young Leaves of Laurel and Walnut; and also of Black Currains, and some Others. The Leaves of the Tree mention'd, were then very Young; and the Taste could not then be so certainly describ'd, as it may be in the midst of Summer: But the Taste of the Bark would best discover the Specifick Taste and Juyce of that Tree. I very much admire Mr. Watts's Ingenuity, in ordering his Plants into a Method for Learners; and in his Ar∣tificial Heats for the more early Ripening of Fruit. His Taste and Smell did very much agree with Mine; and did readily acknow∣ledge my right Classing of many Plants. I was also obliged to the Company of Dr. Baynard, and Dr. Betts, Junior; who tasted some Plants at Chelsey with Me, and concurr'd also in the Description of their Tastes and Smells. I have not wholly trusted to my own Taste, in the Description of our Country Herbs, but have consulted the Tastes of all sorts of Per∣sons; and for that am oblig'd to divers Di∣vines, Apothecaries, Chyrurgeons, Gentle∣women, and Young Persons, who have been my Patients; whose Judgments, as Galen says, is Ʋncorrupt and Ʋnprejudic'd. I must needs acknowledge, that the Palats of Wo∣men are more Critical than Men's, who ge∣nerally dull it by Intemperance and To∣bacco.
I shall readily Retract any Error I have committed; but advise the Reader, not too confidently to conclude my Mistake on the sud∣den: For it did require a long Experience in Tastes, before I could distinguish many Com∣positions, and how to express Them; and I took notice, that by tasting many Things to∣gether, I could distinguish nothing. When I had Collected my Tastes and Smells,I found it necessary to Collect the known Vertues out of Dioscorides, Mr. Ray, and other Authors; that I might give an Ac∣count of those Vertues by their Taste and Smell: All which are mention'd in the Se∣cond Part of this Essay, which was first wrote; and out of which I made the Notions about Tastes and Smells in general. So that if a∣ny Assertion be obscure, for want of Instances, in the First Part, you may find Them in the Second; and if the Reason of the Vertue doth not appear clearly in the Taste given in the Second Part, consult the Taste in ge∣neral in the First. I added the Tastes of Resins, Gums, and Turpentines in the Third Part; because they are the Oyly Specifick Juyces of Plants. Because Plants grow amongst Minerals, and are at last turn'd into an Animal Sub∣stance, I thought fit to add what I knew of their Tastes; that thence the Tastes, Na∣ture,
and Vertues of Vegetables might be better explain'd. The Tastes of Animal Hu∣mours were long since observ'd by Hippo∣crates: . Hip. de Prisca Medicina. For there is in Man, a Bitter, a Salt, a Sweet, a Tart, an Acerb, an Insipid, and a Thousand more; which have all manner of Faculties. I have reduc'd, in the Fourth Part, Me∣dicines into Specifick Classes; and distin∣guisht the several Specificks by their Tastes, that Physicians might more readily find what Taste is necessary for the Correcting of par∣ticular Humours. In the Fifth Part I have reduc'd Plants into the Summa Genera, by these Eight Tastes, being All, but the First, the Tastes of the Specifick Juyces of Plants; (viz.) Earthy, Mucilaginous, Sweet, Bit∣ter, Aromatick, Fetid, Acrid, Corro∣sive; (Acids will not make a Class diffe∣rent from Astringents, neither of them be∣ing the Taste of any Specifick Juyce.) These
Summa Genera are sub-divided into Spe∣cies, by their several Compositions of Tastes, or a particular distinguishing Smell. I might have added some particular Ex∣ternal Accidents of either Seed, Leaf, Root, or Flower, for the Distinction of the Indivi∣duals in each Species: But for That I shall referr the Reader to Mr. Ray's Catalogus Plantarum nova, or his History of Plants; where he may read a full Collection of all the Accidents of Plants, and find a great many Tastes collected by him. Which excellent Book came not to my Hands, till the greatest Part of my Book was transcrib'd; and since, I have read it, and given some Account of the Vertues There mention'd by him. I hope, I shall make it manifest, in the en∣suing Discourse, that there is no Vertue yet known in Plants, but what depends on the Taste and Smell, and may be known by them. This was, certainly, the Foundation, on which the old Physicians rais'd the Art of Physick; but they were strangely led from it by Aristotle's Philosophy, which taught them to express the Vertues of Medicines, by Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry; to which, and to Occult Qualities, they attributed all Ef∣fects, neglecting the Information of their Sen∣ses. But We have now more Advantages,
than the former Ages. By Chymistry we di∣stinguish the Principles which produce each Taste: And the Learn'd Mr. Boyl hath given us a clear and satisfactory Account of Qualities. The Famous Malpighius, and In∣genious Dr. Grew, have discover'd the seve∣ral Vessels of Plants; and the Last hath gi∣ven us his Curious Reflections upon Tastes. From the Famous Anatomists of our Age, Harvey, Willis, Lower, Needham, Glisson, &c. we have a clearer Description of the Vessels, Viscera, and Humours of Animals, than was known to former Ages. All which Improvements I found very useful to Me, in the Explication of the Vertues of Medicines by their Tastes: And therefore I ought, here, to acknowledge it, not having leisure to make particular Quotations. I hope, the Reader will hereby be excited to promote the further Descriptions of Tastes; without which, the Nature of a Medicine, nor the Manner of its Operation, cannot be under∣stood: And let us not confine our selves to Five Empirical Medicines, since there are such Varieties of Tastes; and every Taste hath as certain an Effect, as the Laurel-Bit∣ter in the Jesuits Powder, if we use it in its due Time, Place, and Quantity. The chief Business of a Physician, being to chuse, and apply Tastes, and not to compound Medicines;
for That is done by Nature it self: For in those Medicines We call Simple, there are divers Compounded Tastes. I suppose, there is some Fear upon Physi∣ans, that they should do Themselves some Injury; and therefore have been discourag'd from Tasting: But, I hope, it will be con∣sider'd, how disingenuous it is in some Phy∣sicians, who cause their Patients to Swallow, what they dare not Taste Themselves. The Corrosive and Narcotick Plants may be warily Tasted; and though some of Them will, by being Tasted, get into the Stomach, yet a little can do no Harm. It is true, that Gesner Poyson'd himself; but it was by ta∣king Two Drachms of Doronicum-Root, and not by tasting of it only. I cannot believe, I have receiv'd any Prejudice by Tasting, though I have oft blister'd my Mouth, and disorder'd my Stomach. I hope▪ the Candid Reader will pardon those Faults which have happen'd in these Pa∣pers, by my Distance from the Press, and the many long and frequent Interruptions▪ I have had by a Country-Practice, and ill Health; which have hindred the making of some Corrections, that should have been made both in the Style and Method of the follow∣ing Book.
In Opus Elaboratissimum eru∣diti admodum Viri Joan∣nis Floyeri, Equitis, Au∣rati, & Doctoris Medici. MYstica Naturae panduntur multa fapore, Detergens virtus, discutiénsque patent. Tincturam Roseam, Lapathúmque, Sisym∣bria, Myrtum, Communi sensu Styptica Lingua sapit. Sparsus Odor verè referens Arcana Me∣dendi Quidni tantus erit quantus & ipse sapor? Quale Rosae spirant inter sua Lilia mixtae; Thus, Aloe, Muscus, Galbana tale do∣cent. Hoc lege, quod crebro tibi fert Floyerus ab usu, Cum dulci miscens utile; puncta tulit. Niltulit insipidum, si Sal sapit omnia; Odori Nil tulit ingratum, spirat ubi{que} Rosas. J. GROENEVELT, M. D.
NAturam solitis Medicina aggressa querelis, Dic, ait, ô Genitrix, quae tua Nata rogat. Ignotae valeant Plantae quid mille per oras; Ac Animal quantum prosit in Arte mea. Quid juvet, ac noceat, caecis Minerale Latebris Pulsum, quaeque tuo nunc geris ima sinu. An miris variata modis nisi ludis in Orbe, Si solum casus deteget ista modo? Respondet Natura; Meo deprompta recessu Cuncta patent, debitis excutienda modis: Praestet quanta Frutex, Animal, Minerale, docebit Vel sapor, ac nares quae ferit aura levis. Excolit ecce tuam Floyer Industrius Artem: It quâ ad summa viâ, quo fuit orta modo. Haec Sagacissimo Authori gratu∣labundus accinit Christophorus Crelle, M. D. Medicorum Londin. Collega.
A Phytological Essay, &c. The First Part. Of Tastes in general. CHAP. I. The Division of Tastes into Simple and Compound. THE Organ of Taste is curiously described by Malpighius, to be certain Nervous Papillae, placed upon the Tongue, and about the Mouth and Throat; which are affe∣cted differently in every sort of Taste. Dr. Willis affirms, That Gustatus is Quae∣dam
quasi tactus species, depending on the different Figures of Bodies; which, by the different Texture and Motion, produce di∣verse Affections, Alterations, or Modes of Tastes on the Organ: As Soft, Hard, Moist, Dry, Smooth and Rough; Grateful, as Sweetness; Ungrateful, as Bitterness Gree∣tiness, and Unctuousness; Cool, Hot, or Temperate; Sharp, Corroding; Salt, Sli∣my, or Astringent; Contracting the Lips, and Choaking; Vesicating, Exuleerating; Pungent, Penetrant; Aromatick, Fetid, or Abominable; Nauseous, Detergent; Burn∣ing in the Throat, Pricking in the Mouth by rough Leaves: And divers other Modes might be added to these. According to this Consideration, no Plant has any Simple Taste; but produces diffe∣rent Modes: Neither have the most Sim∣ple Principles of Plants one Simple Mode or Affection, but two or more depending on their Motion and Texture. Acids have a different and less Agita∣tion of Parts, than the Organ; and there∣fore they taste Cool; and by their Angu∣lar Figure or Edges, they are Pungent. Water cools and moistens by the Glo∣bular Figure of its Particles; and by their less Agitation, than the Organ of an Ani∣mal.
Oyl of Plants is of a congruous Temper or Heat; and by the ramose or viscous Parts, is slimy, and of a smooth Taste. Earthy Plants are greety, hard and dry in Taste, from the Solidity and unequal Par∣ticles of Earth. In distinguishing of Simple and Com∣pounded Tastes of Plants, I do chiefly con∣sider the different Textures and Motion of the Original Principles, as producing Sim∣ple Tastes; and not the different Modes of Taste. Therefore, because these Four, Earth, Water, Acid, and Oyl, are the Origi∣nal Principles of Plants, out of which some other Compositions are immediately made; as Salts, Gums, Turpentines and Mucilages, &c. and because these have a determinate Texture and Motion, whereby they pro∣duce some certain Modes of Taste; I think fit to call these Four Tastes, (viz.) Watry, Earthy, Oyly, and Acid, The only Sim∣ple Tastes in Plants. And where any Taste depends on diverse Principles, that Taste is justly esteem'd Compound; having a certain Texture, and Motion, resulting from the Composition of the different Tex∣tures, and Agitation of the Principles; which produce a different Taste in Com∣position, from the Taste of any Principle.
Compound Tastes (consider'd as particu∣lar  Textures of Plants) arising from some of the Four Principles of Plants, are, 1. Bitter, which is compounded of Oyl, Acid and Earth; having an unequal Tex∣ture; detergent, unpleasant: Compar'd by Dr. Willis, to the Head of a Teasle or Brush. 2. Astringents are compounded of Acid and Earth; having a roughness in Tex∣ture, contracting and exasperating. 3. Mucilaginous is compounded chiefly of Oyl, Acid and Water; and of a smooth Texture, cooling and moistening. 4. Tungent is compounded of an Oyly-Acid, and with some Earth, united, by Fermentation, into Volatile Salts; or, by Fusion in the Fire, into Fixt Salts; both of which taste Salt, Pungent, Penetrant, Drying, from their long sharp-pointed Fi∣gures. 5. Sweet is compounded of a Rarefy'd, and well-digested Oyl, and Acid; whereby it is of a smooth Texture, grateful, and easily convertible into Bitter; having the same Principles, by the Alteration of the Texture only. Note, I do not find any Saltness natu∣rally
and considerable in Plants; but only externally, from the Sea-Water: And there∣fore, do not reckon That a Taste amongst Plants, because the Natural Salt of Plants tastes only Pungent. Diverse Tastes are compounded of a Sim∣ple  Taste, and a Compound: As, 1. Acrid is compounded of a little Oyl, and a great deal of Salt; being Hot, Pun∣gent, and Burning. 2. Acerbs are compounded of Acid and Astringent; being partly of Angular, and partly of a rough Figure. Tastes arising from Compounded Tastes  mixed, are, 1. Nauseous, which is compounded of Bitter-sweet, or Bitter-slimy; and of a Tex∣ture deterging and smoothing. 2. Austeres are compounded of Bitterish and Astringent; and are of a very rough Texture. 3. Nitrose is compounded of Cool and Bitter: Plants of this Taste are Watry, Slimy, and Bitterish; as Beets.
Tastes compounded of other Compound  Tastes, and a particular Smell, are, 1. Aromaticks, which are compounded of Acrids, Bitterish or Sweet, with a Fra∣grant Smell. 2. Fetid Tastes are compounded of Bit∣ter, Acrid or Mucilaginous Tastes; with a Fetid Smell. 3. Cress-Tastes are compounded of a Bit∣terish and Acrid Taste, and a quick Pun∣gent Smell, which flies from the Tongue into the Nose; as Mustard-seed, &c. And we find many Plants Tasting as they Smell. To describe the different Affections of the Organ by Taste, I think unnecessary: For the Eyes know particular Colours, without discerning and distinguishing the manner of their Impression; and by the Feeling, we know many Things, though we distinguish not all the Qualities we feel: So the Taste, whose Sense is like the touch∣ing of an Object, knows (Watry, Earthy, Acid, Greety, Astringent, Mucilaginous, Oyly, Bitter, Sweet, Resinous, Gummy, Te∣rebinthinate, Aromatick, Abominable, Pun∣gent, Corrosive, Hot and Cool, Crude, Mel∣lowy, Nauseous Tastes, and Pea-Tastes) im∣mediately, without considering the parti∣cular
Mode by which they affect. And because these are the common known Tastes, out of which other Tastes are made; therefore these respectively may be call'd Simple Tastes, because the Compound Tastes of Plants are produc'd by a Mixture of these. And these Compound Tastes are ob∣servable, either in the same Liquor; as in Turpentine, Bitter, Slimy and Acrid may be Tasted; and in many Milks of Plants, Bitter, Acrid and Gumminess: Or else the Compounded Tastes are lodg▪d in different Vessels and Liquors; as in the Lympha∣ticks, is a sweet Lympha; in the Muciducts, a Mucilage; in the Lactiferous Vessels, a Milk, which is either Bitter-Acrid, or Bit∣ter-Smoaky, or Sweet; in the Balsam Ves∣sels, a Turpentine; in the Parenchymous Parts of Plants, a crude Juyce; in the Ligneous Parts, a Lympha; in the Skins of Fruits, and the Stones and Seed, a different Taste from the Juyce of the Pulpy Part. The Roots, Stalks, Leaves, and Fruit of some Plants, have their different Tastes from the different Digestion, Mixture, Texture and Colature of the Juyces of those Plants▪ in their several Parts.
CHAP. II. Of the Virtues of Tastes, and the Principles by which they are produced. IF we use the Testimony of our Senses for the discovery of the Principles or Ingredients, out of which the Juyces of Plants, by different Mixtures, are pro∣duc'd; they will inform us of Earthy, Wa∣try, Oyly, and Acid Principles; and a Pun∣gency, which is a Salt. Earthy Parts are in Mosses and Woods;  from whence arise dry Tastes. Water in all Plants; which is sufficient∣ly  evident in Distillations of them, and in their Juyces. The Watry Part is supplied by Rain and Dew; whose great quantity this Year, (1685.) has made many Plants prodigiously great: But in the two last dry Years, the want of them either dwarft them in their Growth, or hindred their Production, or preserved them not suffici∣ently from the scorching Heat. This is
the Vehicle of the other Principles, in which the Acid swims readily, as also the Pungent Particles, and combine together; as Acid and Alcali: In this the Oyls are mixed, by means of the Acid and Earth. From these Two Principles of Plants, these following Tastes arise: From much Earth in Plants arise, First,  A dry Earthy Taste, as in Mosses; Secondly, A Woody Taste, as in Trees and Barks. From much Water mixt with Earth and  Acid, arises a crude or raw Taste, as in Spi∣nach, Chick-weed, &c. From much Water mixt with Acid and  Oyl, or from smooth Oyly-Earthy Parts, like Marle, or Bole diluted, and some A∣cid, arises a Mucilaginous Taste; which I refer to the Watry Tastes, because Water most abounds in it.
CHAP. III. Concerning Mucilages. THat Mucilages in Plants depend on the Oyl much diluted, is manifest from the following Instances. Linseed affords an Oyl by Expression, and a Mucilage in Decoction. Almonds afford an Oyl by Expression, and a slimy Mucilaginous Milk in Emul∣sions. Poppies are very Mucilaginous, and con∣tain an Oyl, as appears by a Milky Juyce; and an Oyl is pressed out of Poppy-seeds. Henbane smells Oyly, and is Mucilagi∣nous, and feels Oyly, and Clammy; and the Seed yields an Oyl by Expression. These Plants that smell of a rank Oyl, as Goss-Flowers, and most of the Pea-Taste, are Mucilaginous: So that from these In∣stances, I may infer, that a crude Oyl dilu∣ted well with Water, makes a Mucilage; which may be farther proved by the ef∣fects of a Mucilage, compared with the effects of Oyl. Mucilages cause a smoothness in the Pa∣lat, and outwardly are Emollients, as Oyls
be, and ripen Imposthumes; inwardly they are more cool than Oyl, though of a con∣gruous Nature: They defend the Throat from the sharpness of Rheums; the Sto∣mach from corrosive Humours or Medi∣cines; the Ureters from sharp Cholerick or Acid Urine; and smooth the passages for the Stony Gravel; they cool the hot scorbutick Blood, by their crude and ropy Parts, stop its violent Motion, and invis∣cate its Acrid Saline Particles. Oyls have a Mucilage joyned with them. I distill'd some Gum-Arabick in an open Fire, and in an Earthen Retort, and found an Acid Spirit of a smoaky Smell, and a good quantity of Oyl; but the Earthy parts exceeded all, Gum-Arabick being a clammy Mucilage. But I cannot but think the Mucilage in Comphrey, which tastes as if Meal and Wa∣ter were mixed together, depends upon a mixture of some Farinaceous Parts, which are the immediate Causes of Mucilages, (which Farinaceous Particles are resolvi∣ble into Oyl and Water chiefly, and have the same Principles as other Mucilages) and which are proper nourishment for the Parenchymous Parts of Plants: These being in plenty mixed with Water, cause a slimy Slipperiness, observable by rubbing in the
Fingers, as well as by the Taste: Such is the Mucilage in Althaea, Mallows, Typha, &c. which also being dryed to Powder, produce a sort of Mealy Powder. All the Farina∣ceous Plants, as Barley, Oats, Wheat, do yield an Oyl. And Bonetus gives us an In∣stance of Roots of Althaea, which applied in the form of a Pultis, raised Blisters; and Comphrey-Roots discuss Gouty Tumors: So that these crude Mucilages have more Volatile parts frequently mixed with them. Those diversities of Taste that arise from Mu∣cilage Compounded, are either Cool or Hot. §. I. Cool Mucilages, With much Water, called the Watry  Mucilages, as in Purslain, &c. these have the effects above described, being the most Simple Mucilages. The Earthy Mucilages, such as in Mush∣rooms;  and these repel, and cool Inflam∣mations outwardly. If the Water be little, the Mucilage is  thick, gummose, clammy, or Mealy; as in Comphrey, and Watery Gums: They stop Fluxes, and correct sharp Humours.
§. II. Hot Mucilages. Mucilages with a rank Oyly Smell, as in  Goss-Flowers, and the Pea-Taste, are pro∣per for Anodyne Oyntments. Mucilages with an Aromatick Smell, ei∣ther  in Leaves or Flowers, as in Erigerum, and the Lily-kind: These Mealy Mucilages, with a Lily-Smell, digest, ripen and suppu∣rate Tumors. The Bitter Mucilages outwardly soften,  and discuss inwardly; are Vomiters and Purgers, being the truest Character of Nauseousness in Plants. Mucilages with Pungency Acrid, as in  Lysimachia; and these are properly Diure∣ticks: By the Mucilage, they smooth the passages of Urine; and by their Acrid Salt, they dissolve Acid Tartareous Concretions in the Kidneys. Mucilages with a Narcotick Smell, by  their hot Narcotick Parts discuss, and allay pains; by their Mucilages, they soften and are Arodyne.
Mucilages with Astringency, have their  Taste from the different parts of Plants; as in Plantane-Seeds, the Husk is Astringent, the Pulpy part of the Seed Mucilaginous. CHAP. IV. Concerning Acid in Plants. THE Third Principle our Senses dis∣cover in Plants, is Acid; percei∣vable by Taste and Smell, in Sor∣rel, &c. This seems to affect the Taste with a cool Sharpness, not unlike the Spi∣rit of Sulphur; and is probably supplied Vide Sulph. from the Mineral Kingdom: This Acid has not the Bitterishness of Nitre, nor the Saltness of common Salt, nor a Vitriolate Relish from any Mineral; but is pure cool Acid. The Crystals of Tartar are sowre. Vide Tartar amongst Salts. Crystals of Wood-Sorrel are also sowre, like Tartar: The Essential Salts of Plants differ not from Tartar. Vinegar is more Spirituous than the former, being a Winy Subacid Liquor.
The Acid is obvious in the most bitter Plants, as in Extracts of Worm-wood and Horehound, and in all Extracts: In the Plant they are not perceived, because of the Strength of the Bitterness that affects the Palat most; though the Acids temper the Bitter, and the Bitter the Acid. Acids are never alter'd in the Plant, so as to lose their Nature, though they un∣dergo divers Mixtures; but when they are reduc'd into Volatile Salts, by being com∣pounded with Oyl and Earth. Acids mixt with much Water, are the  purest Acids. Acids mixt with a little Water, and much  Earth, produce an Astringent Taste. Acids with Water and Earth more loosly  mixt, produce a rough Taste; as in Sloes, which is a greater degree of Astringency: And in this Taste the Acid and Earth are in equal quantity. The Fourth Acid Composition is Acid  Oleose, as in Terebinthinates; and these al∣ways have an Astringency joyn'd to the Bitterness, which arises from the Oyl and Acid in Turpentine.
Dr. Grew asserts, That many stillatitious Oyls, digested with any strong Acid, will acquire a bitter Taste: And therefore, Myrrhe, Gentian, and all bitter Gums distil∣led, yield Acid Liquors. I shall hereafter deduce the Bitterness of Plants immediately from Turpentine; but remotely from the mixture of Oyl and Acid. Acid-Acrid, as in Rosa Solis; In these  the Volatile and Acid combine. And since Rosa Solis is accounted a Caustick, 'tis pro∣bable, other Caustick Plants may have the same mixture. These are proper for Treacle-Water to cool by their Acid, and sweat with their hot Parts, or to provoke Ʋrine. Mixed Salts, and hot Herbs, tempered by the mixture of Acid, are profitable in Fevers. Acid sweet, such as in all Ripe Fruits, as  Cherries, ripe Grapes; these make the Acid more easie to the Stomach, and less fretting, as in Spiritus Salis Dulcis: These excite Appetite, and cool the Blood. Acid and Bitter; these promote Ʋrine,  as in Alkakengi-berries, and Quicky-berries, and have an Anti-Febrile vertue from Acid and Bitter; as in Bezoardick mixtures, which are Bitter-Acid.
The Effects of Acids in the Body are to coagulate, and fix Choler, and the Volatile Salts in the Blood, by uniting with the Salt, and rendring them like common Sal Ammo∣niack; and so Acids become Diuretick; as also, by dissolving the gritty Matter of the Stone, and mixing with it, by coagulating the Serum of the Blood; as Serum Sanguinis turns white by the mixture of the Spirit of Nitre, and by thickning its Consistence, which is a less degree of Coagulation. A∣cids hinder the rarefaction of the Blood, and its Extravasation; as also, all Heats and Sweats, Cholerick Loosenesses, and Thirsts: Rough Astringents do the same thing, but more weakly, having the Acid ob∣tunded by the Earthy Parts; but by that they are more proper for Loosenesses and Fevers. Acids do also excite the Appetite, by stimulating, and hinder the over-quick Fermentation of the Chyle, and separation of its Spirituous parts, in Windy Exhala∣tions: And for that reason we mix Vine∣gar with Hot Meats and Herbs, and eat cool Fruits after Meat. Vinegar is the best Antidote against any Poyson, from Acrid Herbs.
CHAP. V. Concerning Astringents. ASTRINGENTS are, Either Watry-Astringents, in which Wa∣ter  is most plentiful; which are convenient in hot Diseases, with Fluxes of Blood, or Stools; as Plantane, Knot-Grass. I distill'd the Roots of Flaggs in an open Fire, and had a great deal of Acid, and very little Fetid Oyl, and much Caput mortuum: This was like the distill'd Liquor of Woods. Bitter-Astringents; where the Astrin∣gency  is mitigated by the Bitterness, which depends on a crude Turpentine: These, by their Bitterness, make the Astringent Fa∣culty more agreeable to the Stomach and Blood: By their Bitterness they help and preserve the mixture of the Blood; and by their Astringency, which is an Acid in po∣tentia, precipitate some Feverish parts, which are separated from the mixture of the Blood; so Jesuits Powder works; and Tormentil-Roots have been us'd for the same purpose; and so may the Barks of That
taste. 'Tis manifest, that upon giving the Jesuits Powder, a sharpness of Ʋrine is sometimes observable; and when it suc∣ceeds, the Water, which at first look'd like Strong Beer, high colour'd, and reddish, turns after a while muddy; the separable Feverish Sediment is precipitated, and the top of the Ʋrine is thin and clear, by the separation of Parts: So that, after the use of the Jesuits Powder, whose Vertues are evident to the Taste, being bitter Astrin∣gent, the prevailing Bitterness preserves the mixture of the Blood, and the Astringency separates some easily-separable Parts; which not continuing in their right equal Mixture with the rest of the Blood, cause the Fever, as being Heterogeneous, and raise a Fermentative Commotion for their Segregation. And it is usual with Practi∣sers, to guess and assert the Alterations in the Blood, to correspond to those observa∣ble in the Water. It may be, our Country cannot afford such an exact Mixture of Bitter and Astringent, as in the Jesuits Bark; but I believe it does. It may be, we cannot mix Bitter and Astringent Tastes, in the same Proportion, as Nature has done in the Cortex: How∣ever, it's evident, that these Qualities of Bitter-Astringent are in the Cortex; and we
cannot imagine any other so probable to work those Effects which it does; for Tor∣mentil-Root and Cinquefoyl have been tryed and approv'd in putting off Agues. Sweetish Astringents, or the Fern-Tastes,  which have a slight Bitterness also. These Ferns are good Vulneraries, stop Fluxes, and abate the Fermentation of the Blood in Hypochondriack Scurveys, by their Cru∣dity and Astringency: So Chalybeats, as Vi∣triol of Mars, taste sweet Astringent; the Sweetness is most perceptible in the Poly∣pody-Root. In the Female Fern the Muci∣lage is great; the Astringency is evident in the Male, and in Lonchitis; but in the Leaves of Osmunda, the Mucilage; in the Root, the Astringency, Bitterness, and Orris Smell. Maiden-Hair is Sweet-Astringent, which seems to me the true Character of a Fern-Taste; though some Varieties are ob∣servable, as I have noted. The Aromatick-Astringent must be con∣sider'd  amongst the Aromaticks.
CHAP. VI. Concerning Bitterness in Plants. THe Fourth Principle our Senses dis∣cover in Plants, is Oyl, which produces Bitterness, and Aromatick Tastes, plain Turpentine, and Fetid Smells, with a Taste contrary to an Aromatick. The most crude state of Oyl Vegetable, is in Mucilages and Sweetness; the next is in Bitters, which have their Taste from a Turpentine mixed with much Earth, and fixed by an Acid; as the following Instan∣ces will convince. Hypericon Leaves, the Roots of Valeri∣an, Herb Robert, and especially the Leaves of Chamaepitys, or Groundpine, taste Bitter, and smell of Turpentine: The Taste of Turpentine it self, is Bitter; and so is the Taste of most Gums, which are the product of Turpentine Trees, and Plants; as Myrrh, Ammoniacum, &c. If we consider how many Plants are A∣romatick, arising from Turpentine, how many are Resinous, and the constant
Greenness of many Trees and Plants, which depends on Turpentine (which did not Freeze in the hard Winters); It will seem more probable that Bitterness depends on Turpentine, which is Compounded of Oyl, Acid and Gumminess. Bitters yield a great deal of Oyl by Di∣stillation, as Wormwood, Centaury, Bitter Almonds; Olives have also a Bitterness. The Milk of Bitter Plants, as Sonchus, Jacea, and Celandine, is exceeding Bitter; and it must needs be allowed, that the Milk is Oyl, diluted by much Water. Bit∣ters have generally some Fetid Smell, or Aromatick Odour: which shews us, that Bitter Plants abound in Oyl, from whence Odors chiefly arise. The Flowers of O∣range and Elders, are Bitter; and so are the Fragrant Flowers of other Trees, as Sloe-Trees, Jessamy, Roses, Hawthorne, Lilies of the Valley. The Turpentine in Bitters, is fixed by an Acid, which readily coagulates the Oleous Parts, if it be a strong Acid; but a mild Acid only detains Oleous Particles in their mixture with Water; as it appears by Milk; for in the making of Butter, the Oyl is visibly separated in the form of But∣ter; and the Acid, which kept it fluid, is apparently in the Butter-milk. This Acid
by dividing the viscous Oleous parts of the Butter, rendred it fluid in the Milk; and from thence its Whiteness depends. In Distillation of Fats and Oyls, an Acid appears; as also in the Distillation of Gums, which may artificially be produced, by the mixing of Oyl and Acid. On this Acid in Bitters, joyn'd with much Earth, an Astringent Faculty de∣pends, which is eminent in many Bit∣ters. That much of Earth concurs to the production of Bitters, and fixing of Tur∣pentine, appears, in that all Bitters produce much Salt, which we call Fixed (this being nothing probably, but the Union of Acid and Earth by calcination) but the Oyl in which the Bitterness resides, is easily dri∣ven away by the Fire, and remains not in the Salt or Earth; whence it is also proved to be an Oyl, fixed by its crude Associates, Acid and Earth. I distilled half a pound of Gentian Roots, in an Earthen Retort, in an open Fire; from it was 'stilled an Acid Liquor, with the Water, and a Bitter Oyl, without any Vola∣tile Salt; which confirms my Hypothesis, of Bitterness being an Oyl fixed by Acid: and the Caput Mortuum exceeded all the Liquor in the Receiver.
CHAP. VII. The Table of the Varieties of Bitter Tastes, Compound∣ed, and their Vertue. They are either, §. I. Cool Bitters. BItterish Astringent in the Dock kind,  Hydro-Lapathum, Sorrel, Tormen∣til, &c. These cool Inflammations inwardly and outwardly; they check the Paroxysms of Agues, by their Astringency, (which is a latent Acid, Associated with Earth): By their Bitterness adjoyned, they cleanse the Stomach, excite Appetite: By their Astri∣ction, and their Bitterness, they preserve the Blood from Putrefaction: In short, they imitate the effects of Bezoartick mix∣tures, consisting of Bitter and Acid. Watry-Bitter; when the Bitter is much  diluted by Water, as in Fumitory, Succory, &c. which cool the Blood, and dilute it
by their Waterishness; and by their Bitter∣ness amend the Acidities, and cleanse the Choler, by taking off the coagulating Acid, which coagulates its Lymphatick Vehicle; therefore these Tastes are Chola∣gogues, and Diuretick, cooling also in Fevers. Bitter-Acid, which works stronger than  the Bitter-Astringent; they are Diuretick, and Antifebrifick, by their Acid Bitterness. Bitter-Sweet, as in the Pea-Taste; by the  Sweetness they lenifie the sharpness of Hu∣mors; by the Bitterness they cleanse the Stomach, Kidneys, and Lungs. §. II. Or Hot Bitters. A middle state of Vegetable Oyl, is ob∣servable  in Turpentine Plants, as in Hyperi∣con; and their Smell and Taste will evince them to be pure Turpentine; their Taste is Bitterish and Astringent, and their Smell Terebinthinate: in these the Acid fixes much on the Earthy Parts, and produces an Astringency; whereby the Oyl is more loosned from it. It's well known, that all Vide Sulph▪ Turpentine and Gums have a latent Acid, whence they are more easily distilled by additions of Absorbents; and their true
Vertues best Extracted by Tinctura Satis Tartari. The Vertues of Turpentine Plants depending on the Oyl, are Pectoral, Clean∣sing, and Diuretick; and by their Astringent Faculty stopping; but by both Vulnerary: for what better Vulnerary can there be, than that which is Cleansing, and Astrin∣gent, and smells Balsamick, as Turpentine Plants? These Plants do bear the name of Balsamick, which are Terebinthinate and A∣romatick; as Botrys, Mecha-Balsam, Juniper, Ladanum segetum; and these are more a∣greeable to the Stomach, than ordinary Tur∣pentine; and besides, their Vulnerary Fa∣culty may be Cordial, they being also Aro∣matick. To these I must add another Class of Balsamicks, which having Turpentine in their Smell, give a Smell like dead Nettle; so in red Lamium there is a Turpentine flavor, but another Smell is perceived also. In Pa∣nax coloni, and Sideritis, there is the same Dead-Nettle Smell; and in Galeopsis both Smells are perceivable. A third degree of Balsamicks is in the Geranium Moschatum, and Geranium Columbi∣num, which taste Astringent, & smell of Musk; and since other Geraniums smell of Turpen∣tine, but these of Musk, I do suppose that the highest state of the Oyl Vegetable, is a
rarefied Turpentine, which thereby becomes Odoriferous: Hence Terebinthinates taken inwardly, after a farther separation from their Acid, by the Salts of the Blood, cause a Violet Smell in the Ʋrine, because Aro∣maticks produce the same effects in the Ʋrine; therefore Aromatick Odors, and Tur∣pentine, are of an agreeable nature. Many Turpentine Balsams are of an Aromatick Smell, as Balsam de Tolu, Balsam Mechae, Balsam Peruvian, Benjamin, Storax; and many Herbs, as Ladanum segetum, and Bo∣trys, which have a Fragrant Terebinthinate Smell; and so has Juniper, Cedar, and Sas∣safras; besides Oyl of Turpentine will easi∣ly extract these Fragrant Oyls from Vege∣tables, and is frequently mixt with them by Sophistications; whence I may argue, that they differ only as Turpentine is mixt with a latent Acid; and as the other are more pure from Acid; and therefore more Aethereal or Odoriferous: The Roots of Va∣lerian smell like Turpentine, and the Flow∣ers like Jessamy a little dryed. Strong Bitters, with a Fetid Odor, as  Ballote; these by their Bitterness correct Acids in the Stomach and Blood, and by their Fetidness amend the Acid in the Nervous Juyce, and cause an equal expan∣sive
motion of the Spirits, and prevent their unequal distribution into some Nerves, as in Fits of Convulsion. Strong Bitters, with a Pungency, or A∣crid  Bitters, as in Celandine; these correct Acids, and open Obstructions also, by giving a quick motion to the Blood, which is done by their Volatile Bitter Oyl, and Vo∣latile Pungent Salt, on which their Taste and Vertue depend. Strong Bitters Aromatick, as in Wormwood  and Eupatorium Cannabinum, they work by their Volatile Oyl and Salt on the Blood, and Stomach; whence they are accounted Antidotes against Coagulations, Venoms, and Pestilential Infections. Strong Bitters only, or pure Bitters, with∣out  any Aromatick or Fetid Odor, or Pun∣gency; such is the Bitterness in Bitter Al∣monds, and Centaury, their parts are more fixed than any of the other Strong Bitters: These cleanse the Stomach from Acid Phlegm; open the Liver, by correcting the coagulating Acids in the Blood; they mix with Acids, and pass by Ʋrine; they pre∣serve the Blood from coagulation, and help the office of the crude Bile in Hydropical
Cachexies; they have an Astriction by their Acid and Earthy Parts, which abounding in Bitters, help the Oyl in correcting Acids. The Principles of Bitters united by the Fire, produce fixt Salts, which correct Acids better than Bitters; which also act as fixt Salts in all their effects. Elder-Bitters and Smells, as in Scorphu∣laria;  these have a discussing Faculty out∣wardly, by their Fetidness and Bitterness. Nauseous Tastes, which are, 1. Nauseous-Bitter, which depends on a composition of Mucilage and Bitter, as in Bryony-Roots, Squills, Berries of Spina Cer∣vina, and Fox-Gloves; the Mucilage in the Stomach relaxes the Fibres, and causes the Bitter to stick longer on them; and so to act more strongly in Vomiting and Purg∣ing; the same Taste is in Polygala and Sena. 2. A Nauseous Taste depends on a sweet Bitter, mixed with Mucilage and Pungency, as in Aloes, Agarick, Rubarb: And Docks want only the Sweetness; but have Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringency.
3. Too much Sweetness is Nauseous; so is Manna, Honey, Polypody-Root; a Sliminess or Gumminess is in Honey and Manna. 4. Too much Bitter is Nauseous: Thus, in sweet Gall, the over-much Sweet or Bit∣ter, over-impregnates the Papillae in the Mouth and Stomach, and cause an aversion in the Stomach; as too much Light offends the Eyes, and makes them Water. 5. An ill Smell gives a Nauseousness; as in Aron Pouches, whose Smell will make any one vomit: And such have been the Smells of many Herbs which I bottled with warm Water, as Henbane and Spurge. In Tastes depending on a Volatile Oyl of Vegetables, (with which is mixed a Pun∣gent Volatile Salt) this Oyly Salt produces either an Aromatick or Fetid Smell, and a pleasant Aromatick or Offensive Taste. The Taste is Aromatick, when the Sense is briskly affected, and a pleasing Agitation of Spirits produced. Aromaticks affect both the Smell and Taste gratefully; they have a motion of Particles and Texture, agreeable to the Motion and Texture of Spirits: Spirits of Vegetables differ nothing from their Oyly Salts▪ but by their being largely diffused
in a Vehicle; and an Oyly Salt is a Spirit contracted, and without a Vehicle. The effects of Aromaticks on the Body,  are to warm the Stomach, and discuss Wind; and these constitute the Class of the Sweet Aromaticks, or Fennil-Tastes: These are ac∣counted Carminatives, because they rarefie the flatuous exhalations from the Chyle, in the primae viae, and so discuss them. These by their Sweetness allay the sharpness of Rheums, and lenifie their Acrimony: They are full of an Oyly Salt, by which they open the Passages of the Lungs and Kidneys: They extraordinarily discuss Tumors out∣wardly, by opening the Pores, and attenu∣ating the matter included: The same Taste is spread through all the parts of the Plant, by the Oyly Salt: These Plants are umbel∣liferous. An Oyl may be distilled from these Plants, which has the Taste, Smell, and Ver∣tue of these Plants: Whence I conclude, the Taste and Smell to proceed from the Oyl and Volatile Salt associated. The Second Class of Aromaticks, is the  Bitterish Aromaticks, as Rosemary, Marjo∣ram, Basil, Calamint, and Penny-Royal: By their Bitterness adjoyned to their Volatile
Oyl and Salt, they correct Acids in the Stomach, cleanse the Lungs, and open Ob∣structions in the Glands, caused by coagu∣late Serum. The same effect is produced by the Saline Pungent Oyl, in altering the Acids in the Glands of the Brain, in cor∣recting and attenuating its Lympha, and Succus Nervosus; which, as all other Glan∣dulous Humors, are prone to Stagnation, and Acidity: These Aromaticks by exciting their Motion, correcting Acidities, and thereby rendring the Succus Nervosus more Volatile, deserve the name of Cephalicks; and it's not improbable, that the Volatile parts dispose the Medicine to circulate towards the Brain, as Windy Liquors disturb the Head, and no other part. These Medi∣cines evacuate Serum from the Blood, pro∣mote its circulation, and attenuate all the Humors of Chyle, Serum, Lympha, and Suc∣cus Nervosus; these agree in Virtue with the Fennil Class, except that these work more by their Bitterness, as well as by the Pungent Oyl. The same Taste in these is spread through the whole Plant; only the Bitterness de∣pends on a fixt Oyl or Terebinth; but the Aromatick on the Oyly Salt. Aromatick-Acrids, as Pepper, Ginger; these
have a very Acrid Volatile Salt and Oyl. All Aromaticks are Cordial, by rarefying the Blood by their Volatile Parts; but the Acrid-Aromatick is the highest, having most Volatile Salt in it; whereas the former have more Oyl than Salt. These Acrid-A∣romaticks have either a Sweetness, or Bit∣terness; and may be referred to the for∣mer Classes. Aromatick-Astringents: As Aromaticks,  they are Cordial; and from their Astrin∣gency, they strengthen the Fibres of the Stomach and Membranes, and all Nervous Parts; and by an Acid evident in their Astringency, they hinder the greater Ra∣refaction of the Blood by their fragrant pungent Oyl.
CHAP. VIII. Of Tastes joyned to Fetid Smells, making them con∣trary to Aromatick. WHEN the Oyl and Salt of Plants are in very great Proportion in any Plant, so as to emit vio∣lent Steams, offending the Organ of Smel∣ling, but chiefly (forcibly) repelling the Spirits towards the Brain, (which creates an Aversion to it) a Fetid Smell is per∣ceived. That a Fetor proceeds from Oyls, appears by the Smell of Rancid Oyl, and all distill'd Oyly Substances; as Fat, Butter, and Oyl-Olive distill'd. That a Fetor, in the highest Degree, has also a Volatile Salt admixt, is proved by the Excrements of Animals, putrefied Flesh, Ʋrine, Blood, and putrefied Vegeta∣bles; which yield a Volatile Salt. It does appear by divers Herbs bottled with Wa∣ter for two Months, that a Fetor is pro∣duced; from the Mucilaginous, as Mallow-Leaves; from the Bitter, as Artichoak-Leaves;
from the Narcotick, an exceeding Fetidness, as Henbane-Leaves; from the Excoriators, as Spurge: These smelling like the Excrements of Animals. Horse-radish smelt like Garlick; Sorrel like Horse-dung. Putrefaction concurrs to produce these Fe∣tors, by Separation of a Volatile Oyl and Salt, from the Acids and Earthy Parts of the Plants: So Spirit of Soot has an Oyly Salt; and the Fetid Oyly Salt is easily se∣parated from Ʋrine and Blood, after Pu∣trefaction. Many Acrid Plants are Fetid; so Sophia Chirurgorum, and the Pouches of Aron, are abominable. Cotula Faetida, Net∣tles, Garlick, and Onyons, have an Acrid Taste, and are very Fetid:. So is Galba∣num, Assa Faetida, and Sagapenum. Divers Bitters are Fetid, as stinking Horehound; and all Elder-Smells, as Scrophularia, are Bitter-Fetid: So the stinking Gums are Bit∣ter, as well as Acrid and Fetid. The Mucilaginous are also Fetid, as in Atriplex olida. That there is but a Dif∣ference in degree betwixt Aromatick, and Fetid Plants, appears by many Instances; as Galeopsis smells Fetid at first handling, afterwards Aromatick. The Flowers of Va∣lerian are very strong, and offensive at first getting; after a little drying, they are Aromatick: So in the Preparations of Musk
and Civet, if in a great quantity, or while fresh, they stink; afterwards, in a small quantity, they are more grateful: So the Leaves of Coriander stink; but the Seed is Aromatick. Elder-Leaves are Fetid, yet the Flowers are very Fragrant; so are the Flow∣ers of Saponaria, though the Leaves re∣semble Elder. The Blossoms of most Trees are Fragrant, though the Leaves smell Crude. From the afore-mention'd Instances, Fetids are 1. Bitter. 2. Acrid. 3. Mucilaginous, which are generally Narcoticks. From the afore-mention'd it may be in∣ferr'd, that Fetids inwardly are of a very hot Nature, discussing Tumors outwardly, and opening the Pores. Inwardly, Fetids, by their Volatile Parts, do pierce the Chan∣nels of the Nerves, mend the Crudity of their Nervous Juyce; and by their Faetor, they excite a different Motion from that in Hysterick Fits, and in Convulsions; and do remove the Cause of that tumultuous Mo∣tion in the Spirits, by correcting Acidities, and Stagnation in the Succus Nervosus, which is disposed to them, as all other Glan∣dulous Liquors be.
Narcoticks have all of them an heavy offensive Smell, like Poppies, or Solanum; or have a sweet heady Smell, like Roots of Bears-Ears. Milky-Narcoticks taste Mucilaginous, Bit∣ter,  and Acrid; as Poppies, and Lettice: The Milky Juyce is an Argument of an Oyl, and the Acrid of a Volatile Salt ad∣joyned. Opium is a Bitter-Acrid, has a Re∣sin, and Gum inflammable: Though it's ea∣sily extracted by the Spirit of Wine, yet the Bitterness and Acrid, in which its Ver∣tue is founded, is most corrected by Spi∣rit of Vinegar, Juyce of Lemons, Juyce of Quinces, or any other Acid, as well as by drying it, and evaporating some Part of the Narcotick Fume. The Second Class may be of Bitterish,  Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous Narcoticks; as So∣lanum Lethale, Bacciferum, Stramonium, Cy∣noglossum: Besides the Pungency, Solanum Lignosum has a Bitterness: The Roots of Cynogloss boyl'd, smell like Spirit of Harts-Horn. Fresh Tabaco smells Narcotick about the Flowers, and is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid: It much resembles Henbane by its Figure, Oyl and Clamminess to the Touch;
but by its Bitterness and Pungency, Sola∣num Lignosum. The Third Class of Opiates, is Sweetish,  Acrid, and Fetid, differing from Poppy smell, as Cicutaria, Napellus. The Roots of Hen∣bane are very sweet. These produce Giddiness, with a stupor; and their best Antidote are Acids, as Vi∣negar. The Fourth Class has a Bitterish Acrid  Taste, as Cowslips; and these have also a Fragrancy very heady, being of a low de∣gree amongst Opiates: The Roots of Cow∣slips are very Acrid and Bitterish. By the afore-mentioned Instances it ap∣pears, that Opiates have very hot Effluvi∣ums, which offend the Smell. By the same, Opiates inwardly produce Sweat in so small a quantity as one or two grains; and are very Fetid by their Oyly Acrid Salt, which runs through all the Classes of Opiates. The Bitterness and Sweetness in some Opi∣ates, no way conduce to encrease their So∣porifick quality, but are different in many Opiates. Narcoticks taken inwardly, immediately affect the Nerves in the Stomach, and pro∣duce an heaviness there; which I have been
sensible of, in tasting the Solanum, and Pop∣pies; and they cannot pass a Digestion and Separation, nor by a circulation arrive at the Brain, so soon as their effects are pro∣duced therein: Therefore Narcotick Fumes must pass through the Pores of the Nerves, and begin to fix the Spirits in the Membranes and Nerves of the Stomach; by which a stu∣por is communicated to the rest. Something of the Opiates passes a Digestion, and af∣terwards a Circulation through the Blood; where it makes no alteration by its Narco∣tick quality; but being Bitter and Acrid, it produces a Diaphoresis, as others of that Taste do. In the Nerves these Narcotick Fumes weaken the brisk expansion of the Spirits, (which causes waking) and their too great Agitation, (which causes pain) and likewise stops their Tumultuous mo∣tion in Convulsions, and the violent motion of the Heart and Pulse, as well as any Flux of Humors whatsoever, by abating the violent contractions of the irritated Fibres. Hu∣mors that are Acid are corrected by the Acrid Taste and Bitterness; but Choler can no other ways be helped, but by abating the Acid combined with it, and making it corrosive, as well as by stopping the motion, and evacuation of it. From the Symptoms allayed by Narcoticks, I argue, That they
work not as Oyls and Volatile Salts, though they have them; for they rather produce an expansion, agitation, and tumult in the Spirits: And I also conjecture, that the Narcotick Faculty is best deducible from such a combination of the Volatile Oyl and Salt, with a Mucilage, as to gain thereby a particular Figure, Motion, or Texture; by reason of which, it weakens the motion of the Spirits, and in too great a quantity de∣stroys their fluidity. Burnt Alum mixt with Gun-Powder, de∣stroys its Elastick force, and weakens the burst of a Gun. Water loses its fluidity by the small Particles of Cold: And Mer∣cury is made Solid, by the Fumes of Lead. Nothing can be more easily fixt, by di∣vers additions of other things, though in it self it has a greater Agitation of parts than other fluids, which being stopt in their internal motion, become Solids; and if Opiates do weaken or deprive the Ner∣vous Juyce of its Internal Agitation, from thence all their Phaenomena may be ex∣plain'd. All Narcoticks have offensive Smells, by which we are taught by Nature to avoid them; and this Antipathy can proceed from nothing, but the disagreeable Texture and Motion of the Narcotick Fumes to our
Spirits: Opiates cause not Sleep, unless in great quantity, in Consumptive Bodies; for in them, a little quantity troubles the Head, and disturbs the Spirits with Giddiness, because their Spirits are very hot and fiery, and their motion, for want of a serose Ve∣hicle, very violent; but it seems not pro∣bable, as some conjecture, that one grain of Opium should force so much Serum to flow to the glandules of the Brain, as to fill them, and produce Sleep, by too much diluting the Spirits: Whereas we frequently drink a full Gallon of Water, or other Liquors, which supply a greater quantity of Serum, without causing Sleep. Opiates by their sharp Acrid Salt stimulate, as Venereals; and by their Bitter Sliminess and Acrimony, they purge. A slimy Mucilage attends Opiates, which outwardly has a good effect to temper Heat in Inflammations; whilst the Effluvi∣ums that are Narcotick, abate the Agitati∣on of Spirits. By their Mucilage; Opiates may repel, and also inwardly given, by the same they allay sharpness of Coughs, and corrosive Salts; whilst their Narcotick Fumes fix the motion of Humors, by robbing the Spirits of their Activity; by their Bitter-Acrid they discuss; and by their Mucilages mollifie
Tumors; as inwardly, their Bitter-Acrid corrects the Acid; the Mucilage tempers the Choler; and for this end the Poppy-Sy∣rups and Waters, are the best; having more Mucilage than Acrid or Bitter. But Opium more Bitter and Acrid, than Mucilage; wherefore it is more convenient in Acid Humors. CHAP. IX. Of Volatile Salts, and the Tastes and Vertues de∣pending on them. IN many Plants, there is a Volatile Salt, discernable by the Acrid Pungency, pro∣duced on the Tongue; as in Aron-Roots. That this Pungency is a Volatile Salt, though it has no Saltish Taste, appears by the fol∣lowing Experiment. I distilled some Mu∣stard-seed in a Retort, which afforded both Oyl and Spirit; which being rectified, turned Syrup of Violets green; though this Salt, in its natural state, will not so readily turn Syrup of Violets, as Animal
Salts do. The Infusion of Aron-Roots in Water, did a little green the Syrup of Vi∣olets, after some time. Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, or Aqua Raphani composita, would not turn Syrup of Violets; nor Horse-Radish-Roots, infused in Water; tho' the leaves bottled with Water, turned the Syrup af∣ter some time. Juyce of Aron-Roots would not turn it; the Leek-Roots sliced into Water, mixt with Syrup of Violets, turned it after a long time. The mixture of other Principles with the Salt, hinder its greenning of the Sy∣rup of Violets: So a Decoction of Harts-Horn for the same reason, will not do what the Spirit does in turning the Colour. It's well known that Vinegar, and other Acids, as Lemmon, Citron, Sorrel, do best correct the Pungent Acrimony of the Ve∣getable Salts; and therefore Vinegar is u∣sed in Sallets; Oyl is used for the securing of the Stomach from their corrosive Acri∣mony: Yet the Acrid Salt of Vegetables will not ferment with Acids, as the Ani∣mal Salts do. Juyce of Aron-Roots, and Spirit of Scurvy-Grass, will not ferment with Oyl of Vitriol. These different Classes, I have observed in the Volatile Salts of Plants.
The Watry-Acrid having a pungent Smell,  like Mustard or Scurvy-Grass, and the Cres∣ses: These have a tolerable Pungency, and but a little Oyl with their pungent Salt. The Vertue of these Cress-tasted Plants, is first from their Salts, which excite Appe∣tite, and volatilize the Acid Ferment in the Stomach, and therefore are Stomachicks: In the Blood they amend the coagulating Acids, open Obstructions in the Spleen and Brain, and all the Glandules; and therefore are Antiscorbutick, Splenetick, Di∣uretick, and Sudorifick; outwardly they dis∣cuss, and have the Virtues of Volatile Salts, in Pains, and Scald-Heads, and Scor∣butick Spots. By the Watry crude Parts adjoyned, they temper their own Acrimony, and make it more agreeable to hot Bloods; as in Brook∣lime. I distilled Colewort-Roots, which tasted like Horse-Radish; and had an Acid mixt with Pungency, which would not turn Syrup of Violets; this distillation was in Sand, in a glass Retort. There are ma∣ny degrees of Pungency in this Class; so that choice may be made for particular Constitutions. There is a Bitterness in many of this Class, which helps the Operation of the Acrid: if the Acrid prevails, they belong
to this Class; if the Bitter, they are refer∣rible to the Bitters with Acrimony. The second Class of Volatile Salts, is in rank Tastes, and smells like Garlick▪ and  Onyons, whose Smells are rank Fetid, and their Tastes very pungent Hot. From Horse-Radish Leaves, bottled up with Wa∣ter two Months; and from their smelling like Garlick, as well as from their pungent Taste, and quick flying up the Nose and Eyes, like Sal-Ammoniack, I conclude, that the Cepaceous kind, would very properly constitute a second degree of Volatile Salts, and a much stronger than the former. They correct Acids, and Phlegm in the Stomach; and excite Appetite by their Pun∣gency: they attenuate the Phlegm in the Lungs, and open Obstructions there, by their Volatile Salt; and therefore are good Pectorals and Stomachicks: They alter the Blood, as Volatile Salts; and are good a∣gainst Infection, and the Scurvy; and as Diureticks, by their Salts they are good for the Dropsie: outwardly they discuss more than the former Class; and their Mu∣cilaginous Roots are emollient, and ripen A∣postumes; and by their Salt they draw forci∣bly, and discuss and attenuate. Thlaspi tastes like Horse-Radish, and smells like Garlick.
The third, and highest degree of Vege∣table  Acrid-Salt, is in the Exulcerators, Ve∣sicatories, or Corrosive Tastes: These have an Acrimony that destroys the Organ of Tasting; as among Animals a fierce Vola∣tile Salt is in Cantharides, which is Vesi∣catory: And strong Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack blisters the Tongue. So in the first Class of Exulcerators, there is a very Acrid Taste, and quick pungent Scent, depending on the Salt only; the Plant being Watry, having no strong Oyly Smell: and these may be called Watry Exulcerators; as the Ranun∣culus, Anemone, Aron, Dragons, Ranunculus flammeus: Vesicatories pierce the Pores, and by their pungent Acrimony irritate the Glandules in the Cutis, to send forth their Serum, and separate the Cuticula into a Blister. The Corrosives have a higher degree of Acrimony; they pierce the Cuticula and Cutis, with Pain; they alter and tear their Pores, drive out their Serum, and thereby induce an Ʋlcer, and corrosion of the Cutis. Note, That the first Class is Vesicatory,  or Corrosive Watry. The second Class is where the Volatile
Salt is mixt with a hot fiery Oyl; as in Euphorbium, Ivy-Gum; and these Plants have a strong Smell, with an Acrid Taste. The Milky or Resinous Exulcerators, have an Oyl more fixt, joyned to an Acid-Acrid Salt; as Tithymalus, and Esula; and these smell Acid, rather than of any hot Scent. Mezereon, and Laureola, have a faint Lily-Smell; in these the Oyl is not much con∣ducing to any Corrosiveness: But that de∣pends on the Volatile Salt alone, made more Volatile by addition of some Oyl. The third Class of Corrosives, is in the  Acrid-Acid; as Rosa Solis, which is accoun∣ted Vesicatory, but very mild, the Acid being contrary to Volatility. Acids mixt with Minerals, as in Cry∣stals of Silver, and Aqua Regia, become Cor∣rosive; and divers other Minerals, which are not in themselves very sharp, by their mixture, become Corrosive; as appears by Sublimate. Lime has a mixed Salt. This sort of Corrosiveness happens in the fixt Salt of some Plants; as in the Salt of Ash-Tree. Acids become Corrosive in the Fire, by their separation from Earthy Parts; as in Salt-Peter Spirit; Oyl of Vitriol, Aqua
Fortis, and Spirit of Vinegar; but this way I know no Plants Corrosive: The Acid of Plants cannot be so attenuated by Digesti∣on in the Plant, as that of Minerals is in the Fire. Fixt Salts in Soap-Ashes, by being uni∣ted in a solid form, act all together, and so corrode. So a Vesicatory is made out of Ashes of Ash-Tree; but this way cannot happen in Plants, because there is naturally no fixt Salt in them, but what is made by Fire. Oyls of themselves cannot be Corrosive; they pierce by their tenuity, but cannot corrode; their Pungency is from the Salt only, though their Heat and Smell is from the Oyl; but generally the Corrosives have no Smell, or inconsiderable; where it would not happen, if the Oyl were Corrosive: whence I conclude, that such a Taste de∣pends on the Volatile Salt diluted with Water, or sharpned by the addition of Oyl, though crude, as in Tithymalus; but espe∣cially by a Volatile Oyl, as in Euphorbium.
CHAP. X. Of Sweet Tastes. THIS Taste depends on an equal Mix∣ture of the Principles of Plants: The Acerb, Austere, Woody Fruits become Sweet, Fragrant, and Spirituous, when ripen'd by the Heat of the Sun, like a Chymical Digestion, that separates the Principles, and produces a looser Mix∣ture; and the Sweet Fruits, by Distillati∣on, afford a Spirit; so that, an Acid from the Crudity, and Spirituous Oyl and Salt from the Ripeness, are evident in Sweet Tastes. A Mucilage appears in Liquorish, and an Oyly Smell in the Flowers of the Pea-Taste. Sugar has both Oyl and Acid: So that from different Sweet Tastes, you will find all the Principles of Plants to be latent in a Sweet Taste; which will appear from the Classes of Sweet Tastes: 1. Sweet-Watry-Crude, in Grass and Corn. 2. Sweet-Aromaticks, in Carrotts and Parsneps.
3. Sweet-Acrid, in Rapunculus. 4. Sweet-Mucilaginous, in Figgs; or Oleose, as in Nuts. 5. Sweet-Subacid, in Strawberries and Grapes. 6. Bitter-Sweet, in Aloes. 7. The Pea-Taste, in Fitches, &c. Pea-Tastes are either 1. Sweet and Rough, 2. Sweet and Bitterish, or 3. Sweet, and compounded with a Bitter-Acrid, and sometimes a Mucilage. The Watry-Crude are Cooling, in distill'd Waters and Decoctions. The Sweet-Aromaticks are Nourishing, and very grateful to the Stomach. Sweet-Acrid are also Esculent and Diu∣retick; by their Acrimony and Sweetness they are Pectoral, lenifying sharp Rheums, and opening the Breast. Sweet-Mucilagi∣nous are both Pectorals and Diureticks, de∣fending the Membranes both by their Sweet∣ness and Mucilage, and making them more slippy for Phlegm and Gravel, as well as allaying the Sharpness of Saline Humors by the Mucilage. Sweet-Subacid are cooling Cordials. Bitter-Sweets are Nauseous Purgers.
Pea-Tastes are of a crude Juyce, hin∣dring the Fermentation of the Blood, dul∣ling its Salts; especially if a Mucilage be adjoyned. If Astringency, they bind also. If Bitter, or Acrid, or Both, they are opening, and outwardly discussing; as in Melilot. CHAP. XI. Concerning the Smells of Ve∣getables, their Differen∣ces, and the Vertues depen∣ding upon them. THE Smells of Plants are either Cool, Temperate, or Hot. §. I. Of Cool Smells in Plants. Earthy, which smell of Earth; with  which is joyn'd a Mucilage, as in Mushromes: Or else they are dry Plants, as Mosses. And this Smell of Earth must needs argue a Crude Plant.
Sorrel-Smells, or Acid, or Sowre: These shew the Acid to abound in a Plant, and the Vertues depending thereon; as in Sor∣rel, &c. A Crude or Grassy-Smell, resulting from III. an indigested Mixture of Acid, and Earth, and Water; as in Plantane. A Crude Smell indicates a cooling Quality, fit for infla∣med Blood, and over-fermented Humors: And outwardly these Plants are repelling, and of a cooling Quality. In the Plants which have the Smells a∣bove-mentioned, there is not so great a Digestion of their Juyce, as to attenuate it, and rarefie it, so far as to emit brisk Particles to affect the Senses, like Oyl or Volatile Salts of Plants. §. II. Of Temperate Smells. Temperate Smells of Plants are mixt of Hot and Cold, being Mellowy-Sweet; such as is in Ripe Fruits, as in Apples, &c. This Smell arises from an higher Dige∣stion of the Crude Juyce in Fruits, by the Heat of the Sun; which produces that e∣qual Mixture of Principles, which is most agreeable to the Body of Animals, for their Food; and by this Smell, and the A∣romatick,
they choose it naturally. Most Fruits may, by a farther Fermentation, be prepar'd to yield an inflammable Spirit; and therefore, Fruits fermented in the Stomach, yield a brisk Spirit to the Blood. And by their Acid, (which appears to the Taste and Smell after Fermentation) they cool the Blood and Choler, and ex∣cite Appetite. A grateful Acid may be smelt in the Stomachs of Birds, which feed on Hips; from which I have made a very grateful Spirit, by Fermentation. In Sur∣feits of Fruits, the Fermentation of them is carried on to a Putrefaction; which hap∣pens frequently, when Fruit is eaten by a∣ny Person when he is very hot; or else the Fruit lies in the Stomach crude, and un∣fermented, very Acid, and Griping, as it happens to cold Stomachs. §. III. Of Hot Smells. Hot Smells are either Agreeable, or Of∣fensive. Agreeable Hot Smells are 1. Terebinthinates; in which the Oyl of Plants is more rarefy'd, than in any other of the former Smells; but yet it is mixt
with, and fixt by an Acid: And this Smell indicates a Vulnerary Quality, by resem∣bling the Smell of Turpentine. A Balsamick Smell depends on a State of the Oyl of Plants, betwixt a Turpentine and Aroma∣tick Smell; as in Botrys, Ladanum sege∣tum, &c. 2. Aromaticks; in which the Oyl is less fixt than in the former, there being less Acid mixt with it, (which appears in the Aroma∣tick Astringent:) In Aromaticks, there is a Bitterness, or Sweetness, with an Acrimony. All Aromaticks are Cordial. 3. Fragrant Smells; in which the Sense of Smelling is highly pleas'd, by the Odor de∣pending on the highest rarefy'd Oyl of Plants; and therefore very little affects the Taste, the Oyl not being fixt in the Juyce of the Plant so much as in the former, by an Acid, as in Jassemin-Flowers, Orange-Flowers, &c. These Plants afford the best Cordial-Wa∣ter; and are only an higher Degree of A∣romaticks. Hot Offensive Smells are 1. A Quick Pungent Smell; which is in Horse-Radish, or Mustard-Seed, or Ranuncu∣lus: These Plants have a Volatile Salt,
and the Vertues depending on it. The pro∣per Smell of Vegetable Salts, is a quick Pungency. Animal Salts have also a Smoa∣ky or Urinous Smell, by which they dif∣fer. 2. Fetid Smells; which arise from a Salt and Oyl very Volatile; and therefore have outwardly a most discussive Quality, and inwardly an Anti-Hysterick Quality. 1. Fetid, like Elder; and those Plants have the same Vertue; as Scrophularia. 2. Rank, like Garlick, as Onions and Leeks; and these have the same Vertue as Garlick. 3. A Rancid Oyly Smell, which many of the Pea-Taste have; as Goss-Flowers, &c. and these are fit for Oyls, and Oyntments. 4. Narcotick Smells, like Poppy; and all these Plants have an Opiate Faculty. 5. Nauseous Smells, such as is in Aron-Pouches; which Smell is most Abo∣minable. In Bryony-Berries the Nauseous Smell in∣timates a Vomitory Faculty. Those Smells which do resemble other Plants, have the same Vertue; but not al∣ways, when they resemble other Things.
Rocket, have a Mustard-Seed Smell. Scurvy-Grass, Horse-Radish, Water-Cresses, &c. St. John's-Wort, have a Turpentine-Smell. Herb-Robert, Firr, Pine, Juniper, &c. Germander, smell like Hopps. Wood-Sage, Scordium, like Garlick. Leaves of Primroses, smell like Marmalet of Quinces. Pansies, smell like Orange-Flowers. Milkwort, Siliquose-Willow-herb, like Codlings. Ballote, have all of them a dead Nettle-Smell. Ironwort, Galeopsis, Chickweed, with Ivy-Leaves, Ground-Ivy-Leaves, Clowns-All-heal, Cardiaca, &c.
Hare-Bells, smell all like Lily-Flowers. Daffadills, Dog-stones, Marsh-Marygolds, Violets, &c. Solanum Bacciferum, have all a Poppy, or heavy, strong, Fe∣tid, Opiate Smell. Lignosum, Lethale, Circaea, Tobaco, Papaver album, Papaver rhaeas, Mirabile Peruvian. Lactuca Sylvest. Opium, Argemone, Stramonium, Primroses, have a strong, fra∣grant, heady Smell Bears-Ears, Love-Apples, Anemone, affect the Eyes like Sal-Ammoniack. Onyons rub'd, and put to the Nose. Calamint, like Penny-Royal. Dictamnus, Cat-mint,
Gromwell and smell like the Excre∣ments of Mice. Hounds-tongues, Ʋlmaria, have a Pea-Taste and Smell. Trefoile, Rest-harrow, &c. Ʋlmaria, smell like Walnut-Peels. Fresh Peony-Roots, Filipendula, &c. Mugwort, smell like Wormwood. Yarrow, Sneezwort, Southernwood, Lavender-Cotten, &c. From the 'fore-mention'd Instances, it appears, First, How much the Vertues of Plants may be known, and how easily distin∣guish't by their Smell: Which will ap∣pear more clearly, in my New Method of Plants. Secondly, I may inferr, That the Smell of Hot Plants depends on their Oyl, though the Volatile Salt gives it a quick Pun∣gency.
Thirdly, That the Acid and Earthy Parts, are smelt as well as the Volatile. Fourthly, That Fetids, and Aromaticks, differ only in Degree,; the Fetids being strongest; both of them being produced by an Oyly Volatile Salt, which separates the Oyl from the fixing Acid. In the Sense of Feeling, (by which the Impressions on the Tongue are explain'd) Pleasure arises, à blando & molli affrictu, by which the Spirits are drawn into the Part. In Pain there is impulsus fibras convellens & corrugans, by which the Spirits are di∣stracted and dissipated: So in Aromaticks, the Papillae are gratefully and gently rub∣bed; in Fetid Tastes, more violently, and the Sense of Smelling is also offended by a violent Impression, but pleas'd with a gentler.
CHAP. XII. Of Occult Qualities. THat there are many Textures in Plants, which we shall never be able to describe; and some Inter∣nal Agitations of Particles, which we can never explain, is undeniably true; though we observe the Tastes and Smells produced by each particular Texture; and the Qua∣lities of Hot and Cold, depending on the motion of Particles. So in Narcoticks we taste Mucilage and Acrimony, and smell a Foetor; which sensible Qualities we find in Narcoticks; though we know not their particular Texture and Motion, by which these particular Compositions of Tastes act, nor the manner by which they stupefie. Purgers have their particular Composi∣tion of Tastes, resulting from a particular Texture, on which their Irritation depends; their Textures being not describable other ways, than by their several Tastes depending on them, and the Nature of the Principles, which produce their several Tastes; and are the Ingredients constituting that Parti∣cular
sort of Texture. Seeing therefore, that the particular Compound Tastes of each Plant, are the Effects of particular Textures; where we find the same Com∣binations of Tastes, the same Textures must needs be inferr'd. Therefore, we know also the Textures of Plants, by their several Tastes and Principles, though not directly, and immediately by our Senses. The Figures of minute Particles, are too small to be visible; and the manner of their Internal Motion doth not affect our Feeling, or other Senses; and therefore the Tex∣tures of all Plants, and all other Bodies, will ever be Occult Qualities as well as the Ef∣fluviums of all Bodies, not affecting our Sen∣ses. The same Occult Qualities are in the most known and evident things; as Fire, whose Heat we feel, but cannot describe the Figure and Motion of its Particles; neither can we describe the Texture of Mucilages, Bitters or Turpentines, &c. yet we can di∣stinguish the Tastes and Smells, and Princi∣ples, which constitute each particular Tex∣ture: Therefore, I conclude, that the Tex∣ture and insensible Effluviums, are alike ob∣scure in all Bodies, as well as Vegetables; and nothing is more Occult in one Vege∣table, than in another; but because we
know not the Nature of Animals, on which Plants produce their Effects; we cannot so clearly give an Account of the Opera∣tion of some Tastes and Smells, as of others. So in Opium, we cannot explain the manner of its Stupefaction, because we know not the Nature of Animal Spirits, on which it acts; yet we perceive the Gumminess, the Acrimony, the Bitterness, and Fetidness, by which it acts; and by which its manner of stupefying will be explain'd, when the Na∣ture and Motion of Animal Spirits is suffi∣ciently understood. Not only the Nature of Spirits, but also the Nature of some Humors in the Body, are yet unknown; and the Use of some Parts too; as the Spleen, and divers Glan∣dules, which may make the manner of the Operation of many Medicines less evident to us: For since the discovery of the Mus∣cular Fabrick, and use of the Heart, by Dr. Lower; and the Circulation of the Blood, by Harvey; and the Insertion of Nerves into the Muscles of the Heart, by Dr. Willis: a more rational and evident Account may be given of the Operation of Cordials, by their particular Tastes and Smells; as in A∣romaticks, which abound with a Volatile Oyl and Salt; whereby they quicken the Circulation of the Blood, and excite a brisker
Motion in the Animal Spirits, by which the Muscles of the Heart are moved. It is not only the unknown Nature of Hu∣mors, and the undiscover'd Use of some Parts of the Body, which makes the manner of the Operations of some Medicines obscure; but also the want of examining the Nature of the Medicine it self, and the particular Compositions of Tastes which are in it. I hope, I may give a further light to the Ingenious Enquirers into the manner of the Operations of Vegetables, by observing these two things: That Plants have Compounded Tastes,  by which they act; as Rubarb purgeth by a Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Astringent Taste. St. John's wort is a Vulnerary, by being Bitterish, Astringent, and having a Turpen∣tine Smell. Liver-wort is Hepatick and Diuretick, by being Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Mucilaginous, and having a Turpentine Smell, (as in the Second part of the Book, you will find all the Plants after this manner de∣scribed.) And therefore I infer, That though each particular Taste hath a Vertue, as considered by it self; yet divers Tastes be∣ing Compounded in one Plant, every Plant hath a particular Effect depending on the
Action of all the Qualities together; from all which the Vertue of a Plant is deduced, and not from one only Taste: But we shall better apprehend the Effects of Vegetables produced on Animals, if we consider That every Animal contains divers  Humors, separated by particular Parts into distinct Vessels; and that these Humors have different Tastes, Natures, Digestions, and particular Motions given them by the Mechanical Structure of an Animal Body; and that the Organical Parts have such an agreeable contrivance, as by the acting on One Part, the Whole may be di∣sturbed and variously moved; which ap∣pears in Smells that are offensive to Hy∣sterick Persons.
CHAP. XIII. Of Specificks. THat Notion of Specificks, I think most rational, differs much from what is usually describ'd by Au∣thors, by whom Medicines are call'd Spe∣cificks; because they act principally upon the account of some Property or peculiar Virtue, which is unknown, and not by any manifest Qualities of Bitter, Acrid, Acid, &c. But I will not dispute those Au∣thor's Notions, but propose my own to the Ingenuous and Candid, to be examin'd by them. I therefore define a Specifick Me∣dicine to have a particular Taste, or Com∣position of Tastes or Smells, whereby it acts on some Humors of an Animal, more peculiarly and effectually than other Me∣dicines. There are three sorts of Specificks; First, Specifick Purgers. Secondly, Specifick Al∣terers, which are of a contrary Taste to the Humors corrected. Thirdly, Specifick Alterers, which are of the same Nature,
and of the same Taste, as the Humors they correct. First, Specifick Purgers: Purgers are called Specifick, because they evacuate a particular Humor; and if they be consi∣dered as Alterers, they have the same Taste as the Humors they Purge; by which Taste they dispose that Humor to a separation from the Blood: And Purgers are also most peculiarly suited to the nature of the Hu∣mor they Purge, by the different degree of Acrimony, which irritates. So Cholagogues, as Dock-Roots, and Rubarb, are Bitter and Slimy, like Choler; and also Sub-acrid, which is the lowest Degree of Irritation. Phleg∣magogues are also Cholagogues; as Aloes, and Agarick, which have a Bitter-sweet, like Cho∣ler; and have a Mucilage or Gumminess, like Phlegm; and also a greater Degree of Acrimony than the former Cholagogues; which seems necessary for Phlegmatick Hu∣mors, the Choler being more fluid. Hydro∣gogues are also Phlegmagogues; for Phlegm is but an inspissate Glandulous Lympha; and the Resinous Purgers have the Gumminess of Phlegm, and a greater Degree of Acri∣mony to mix with the Serum of the Blood, and also to stimulate the Glandules of the Guts and Stomach: This strong Acrimony
in Resins, resembles the Saltness in the Blood, it being also a Salt. Melanagogues differ not from Phlegmagogues, and the mild Hy∣drogogues; as Sena, which is Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid. Note, That black Hellebore is very A∣crid, by which it is of a contrary Taste to Melancholick Humors; and corrects Acids, as well as purges Phlegm and Choler. Secondly, Specificks, which are of a con∣trary Taste to the quality of the Humors, to be corrected. So Acid-Medicines are contrary to Bitter Choler, and Acrid Salts, and destroy their Tastes. Earthy-Salt and Bitter Medicines, are contrary to Acidity and Acerbity in the Lympha, Serum, and Chyle: as also Sulphurs and Oyls are. Watry Muci∣lages, and Crude Juyces, are contrary to the inspissate Serum of the Blood, by diluting it. Astringents are contrary to the Laxity of the Fibres, and Oyly Medicines are contra∣ry to their roughness and dryness. These Contrarieties of Qualities, and also the Spe∣cifick Purgers, are mentioned in the Speci∣fick Class, to which I refer the Reader. Thirdly, Specifick Alterers (which are appropriated, and call'd Friendly to some part) by being of the same Taste and Na∣ture,
as the Humors that are prepared and separated by that particular Part; the Na∣ture of which will more plainly appear by the following Comparison, betwixt the Tastes of Animal Humors, and the Tastes of those Medicines which respect particular Parts. The Natural Taste of Choler, is Sweet, Bitter, Slimy; in Birds Acrid: from this Taste of Choler, it is natural for us to argue, That a Medicine of the same Taste, will act like Choler in the Body, and supply the defect of it when wanting, and restore it to its natural Taste and state, when wea∣kened, dull'd, or coagulated by Acids; or wants a perfect Digestion and Separation from the Blood: Therefore, by reason of a Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Taste, in Choler; Gentian-Root, which hath that Taste, is ac∣counted an Hepatick; and also Carduus, with all others of the same Taste; upon the account of a Bitter Sub-acrid in Choler, Celandine and Turmerick-Roots are Hepa∣ticks also. Upon the account of Bitterness only, all Bitters are Hepatick, as Succory. Upon the account of Sub-acrid only in Choler, all Acrids may be accounted Hepa∣ticks, on the account that Choler hath a sweet Oyliness in the Taste, and that Sweets become easily Bitter. Therefore all sweet
Spices and Aromaticks, are Hepatick: Choler is also Fetid; and therefore the Fetid Gums, which are Bitter, Acrid, and Fetid, are good Hepaticks: And all Plants abounding with an Oyly Pungency, and their distill'd Oyls, are Hepatick, because the same Prin∣ciples are in Choler. Sweat and Ʋrine have the same Salt Taste; and therefore the same Salt Medicines are both Diuretick and Diaphoretick. This Salt in the Serum of the Blood, is of the nature of Sal-Ammoniack; therefore mixt Salts are the best Diureticks and Diapho∣reticks. All Medicines of a Salt Taste, as fixt Salts, pure Volatile Salts, or Vegetable Oyly Salts, in Aromaticks, Fetids, and A∣crids, and many Salso-Acids, promote both Sweat and Ʋrine; and all Volatile Salts smell Ʋrinous. Note, That Testaceous Medicines be∣come Diuretick, by getting a Salt Taste in the Stomach, by reason of the mixing of its Acid with them. The Saltness of the Blood preserves its Mixture, and prevents Putrefaction; and so do all the Salts above-mentioned; and therefore they are Antifebrifick, and Alexi∣pharmliick. The Lympha of the Conglobate Glandules, is also Salt, like the Serum of the Blood;
and therefore in Arthritick pains, requires the same Salt Medicines, which move Sweat and Ʋrine, with a cool Watry Vehi∣cle: for the use of this Lympha is not only to mix the Chyle and Blood, but to dilute both; the defect of which Lympha is best supply'd from the Watry Sub-acrid Plants. The Lympha of the Conglomerate Glan∣dules, is Watry, Slimy, Sub-acid; this con∣stitutes the Ferment of the Stomach, and is separated into the primae viae, not only by the Salival Glandules, but by these also of the Stomach, Pancreas, and Guts. This Lympha is supply'd by spirituous Acids, and Slimy, Watry Sub-acids, as Lemmons, Oranges, and dulcified Spirit of Salt; these excite Appetite, and help the Fermentation of Meats. So Leaven, which ferments Dough, is Sub-acid and Salt. Salt Tastes are also pleasing to the Stomach, because they are Sub-acids. The Lympha, which moistens the Cavity of the Lungs and Wind-pipe, is Slimy, Sweet, and Milky; in Hecticks this is deficient, and is therefore supplyed with Milks, and Watry Sweet Mucilages. The use of the Spleen is yet unknown, but it certainly separates a Glandulous Hu∣mor, whose Taste is probably Sub-acid; and therefore many Astringents, which are
produced from Acids, as Vitriolum Martis, and the Fern-Astringents, help the prepa∣ration, and supply the defect of the Sple∣netick Liquor: All Medicines altering the Depravation of it, must be contrary to Acids. The Menses have a particular Smell, not unlike Flowers of Marigolds, or Saffron, which are Fetids; and so is Atriplex Olida, and therefore esteemed an Ʋterine; and for their agreement in Smell, all other Fetids, though they have not the same sort of Fae∣tor, are accounted Ʋterines; as Volatile Oyls, Salts, and Fetid Gums. Aromatick Smells are grateful and plea∣sing to the Spirits, and therefore are used as Cordials and Cephalicks; we cannot Taste the Spirits, though we could meet with the Succus Nervosus, because they are the Instruments of Taste; but there seems nothing fitter than Smells to explain their Natures, which work much on the Spirits, they being subtle and invisible Ef∣fluviums, like them. Narcoticks have a Fetid Smell, by which they stupefie the Spirits, by stopping their Motion and Elasticity, and the Fluidity of their Glandulous Vehicle. Amongst Plants, those are esteemed fit∣test for Food, which have a sweet Taste;
and such hath been accounted the Taste of Chyle: Sweet things breeding the greatest quantity of it, and most nourishing; for Chyle, like sweet Tastes, contains an Oyl and Acidity, well digested and diluted with Water. Therefore, all Medicines of a sweet Taste are agreeable in Taste, Temper, and Digestion to Animal Bodies; and all those Plants, which are of a lower Digestion than Sweets, are, in respect of the Humors of an Animal, crude and cooling; as Ear∣thy, Watry, Acid, and Mucilaginous Tastes; which are therefore used in the too high Fermentation of the Blood. Those Plants which have a higher Digestion than Sweet, are also of a higher Digestion than the Na∣tural Temper of Animal Humors, and are therefore Heating, Opening, Cordial, as Bit∣ter, Acrid, Aromatick Tastes; and Causticks, which have the highest excess above sweet Tastes, and consequently above Animal Hu∣mors, are therefore Corrosive and Poysonous to them. Plants do not only consist of some cer∣tain Principles, but they receive also a dif∣ferent Digestion and Fermentation in each Plant; which is very manifest in the Fruits of Plants; which at the first taste Acerb, and afterwards become Sweet and Sub-acid: and in those Seeds, which whilst unripe
taste Austere, but afterwards become Sweet Oyly. This particular Digestion in Plants, may be observed by their several Tastes, and predominant Principles, which pro∣duce them. CHAP. XIV. Of the different Ways of know∣ing the Vertues of Plants; but most particularly, of the Natural Method of dedu∣cing them from the several Modes of Taste, and from Experiments. ALL the Knowledge we have of Na∣ture, is grounded on our Senses; they first inform us of certain Qualities produc'd by their Objects; into whose Natures we afterwards enquire, by trying Experiments about those sensible Qualities; and also, by examining the Prin∣ciples which produce them.
I have mention'd the Principles on which Tastes depend; and those Vertues which all Authors allow them upon the Account of that Dependence. This Knowledge of the Vertues of Plants, by their Taste, is much improved by di∣vers Experiments made about particular Tastes; which I will mention; and also, those Vertues which are known by the Modes of Tastes. But I will first take no∣tice of some other more general Hints of the Vertues of Plants, we have from other Senses. Nature seems to have been very much sollicitous for our Knowledge of the Vertues of Plants, by exposing them to so many of our Senses. By the Touch we feel Mucilages, and the Gumminess of Turpentine Plants, and the Waterishness of all Juyces, and the Acri∣mony of the Vesicatory. By the Eye we observe the Signatures of Plants; in which Nature has given us an Hint of enquiring farther into their Natures, for Remedies in particular Distempers; and therefore, the Character of some Diseases is fixt on the Plant: Pulmonaria has the Marks of cor∣rupted Lungs, Scrophularia, Chelidonium minus, and Fabaria, have knobbed Roots like the Piles. Spots are observ'd in Aron,
and Dragon-Leaves, like those in Scorbutick Persons. Other Plants resemble the External Cause of a Distemper; as the Stalks of Dragons do the Skin of a Serpent; the Roots of Doronicum, and the Tops of Echium, re∣semble a Scorpion; against whose Venom they are us'd. Where Distempers have no outward Fi∣gure, there the Plant bears the Figure of the Part affected. So Nutmegs, Walnuts, Poppy-heads, and Peony, have some Resem∣blance of the Head of Animals, and are use∣ful in different Distempers of it. The Eye also observes the Likeness of the Yellow Colour in Saffron, Turmerick, Ce∣landine-Roots, and the Gall of an Animal. The Likeness of slimy Mucilages to many Glandulous Humors, is obvious; and the Colour and Smell of Ʋrine in Lixiviums, is manifest. I have already described the Similitude betwixt the Tastes of Medicines, and Ani∣mal Humors; by which the Friendly Spe∣cificks may be known. I have also given an Account of the dif∣ferent Smells of Plants, and the Vertues in∣timated by them.
I will now consider the different Modes of Tastes; from whence we learn what sort of Affections Plants will produce in our Bodies; and also those which are produc'd externally: For as the Tongue is affected by the Taste, so are the Parts and Humors of an Animal, by the same Plant, when us'd for a Medicine. But, besides these Vertues known by the Modes of Taste, other Ver∣tues are proved by Experiments; which we could never have inferr'd to have be∣long'd to a particular Taste, by any Modes of it: And therefore, though we know the particular Tastes of Plants, and the Composition of them; yet we cannot know what Vertues may belong to them by that Taste, until we throughly have try'd and examin'd the Nature and Effects of each particular Taste; and also, what Tastes may produce in Composition, more than Simple Tastes. Acids taste Cool, Sowre, and Pungent, or Sharp, and a little Rough: From the Cool∣ness on the Tongue we inferr, that Acids will cool the Blood, Choler, hot Salts, and the Stomach, and Thirst; and that out∣wardly they will repell and cool Inflam∣mations.
From their Pungency we believe them Aperitive, Penetrating, and also cutting Phlegm. From their Roughness we conclude they may stop Loosnesses and Haemorrhages, as Astringents do, but more weakly. The Experiments which have further illustrated the Efficacy of Acids, are these. The Coagulation of Milk, Choler, and the Serum of the Blood, shews their cool∣ing Vertue more efficaciously. Acids are contrary to Volatile Salts, and combine with them into a Mixt Salt; by which Acids are Diuretick. Acids joyn'd with Minerals, produce Vi∣triolate Tastes; and the same Taste ob∣servable in Scorbutick Spittings of Blood from the Gums: The Blood tastes like Vitriolum Martis, as I have often found t. A particular Acid, with a Volatile Salt, (which the Honourable Mr. Boyle menti∣ons) produces a cool Effervescence; from whence Shivering may be explain'd. Acids commonly produce hot Efferve∣cences; from whence flushing Heats may be explain'd, upon the Use of Vinegar, in ome Persons. Acids are contrary to Oyls, and make a asting Effervescence with them; as Oyl of
Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol mixt: From whence we shall hereafter deduce the Natu∣ral Heat and Effervescence of the Blood, and the Colour of it, and the Separation of the Fat from it. Acids are contrary to Melancholick Con∣stitutions, because they abound with A∣cids. They are contrary to Cephalick Distem∣pers, because these require Volatile Salts to cure them. They corrode the Teeth, make the U∣rine sharp, cause all Obstructions; and therefore, there is no pure Acid found in any Humors of Animals: For the Acids are either joyn'd to the Salts, or Oyls of Animals. Of these I shall say more in the Account of the Original of Animal Hu∣mors, and their Tastes. To those, many other Experiments may be added out of Chymical Authors, to shew many yet-unknown Properties of Acids as their Concurrence in the Production of Volatile and Fixt Salts, and the Part they have in Aurum Fulminans, and Gun-Pow∣der: All which Experiments are applica∣ble to some Alterations made by Acids in Animals. Astringents taste Rough, Cool, and con∣tract
the Lips; and they have the same Effect on the other Parts. The Roughness stops Loosnesses, fastens Loose Teeth, heals Wounds, and cicatrizes Ulcers; repels outwardly; and, by con∣tracting the Fibres, strengthens them both outwardly and inwardly. By the same Roughness, and cool Taste, the Humors are contracted, thickned, and cooled; and therefore, Astringents stop Loosnesses, and Haemorrhages, as well by the Contraction of fermenting Humors, as by strengthening the Fibres. The other Effects of Astringents, may be deduced from this Roughness, though at first they were discover'd by Experi∣ments. So Feavers have been cur'd by A∣stringents, by reason of the Qualities above∣mention'd: And because we find that Galls, which have a rough Taste, will al∣ter the Texture of Chalybeat Liquors, we believe by this Effect we may illustrate the Operation of Stypticks, in curing of Fevers; which Effect we could not clearly deduce from the contracting Taste. Earthy Tastes are dry and gritty. They affect the Taste but little; so that, from thence we cannot learn much of their Ver∣tues, more than to dry and imbibe Humi∣dity,
and thicken the Blood, and outward∣ly to dry Ulcers. But by Experiments we learn, that Ear∣thy Particles absorbe Acids; and both com∣pound either a Salt of an Aluminous, Ni∣trous, or Vitriol Taste, or Corrosive Sul∣phurs; as shall hereafter be particularly mention'd. Watry Tastes are cool, and moisten the Tongue; for which Qualities we use them in Medicines. Mucilage tastes Smooth, Cool, Slimy, and Watry. It therefore smooths the Rough∣ness and Dryness of the Throat in Catarrhs, abates the Sharpness of Urine, cools and thickens all sharp Humors, and outward∣ly allays Heat, Roughness, and all Inflam∣mations in any Part, and the hot Rheums in the Eyes. Oyl differs from Mucilage, by being more hot; and therefore digesting, and Anodyne, by the gentle Heat outwardly. Oyl lenifies sharp Humors, and inwardly defends the Gutts by a Sliminess, from the Acrimony of Poysons. The Sharpness to the Eyes, the Nause∣ousness to the Stomach, the not Mixing
with Water, and Coagulation by Acids, and the yielding some Acid in Distillation, are Effects which (with many others) are only known by Experiment, though appli∣cable to Animals. Bitters are unpleasant to the Taste, and inclining to an Acrimony; whence they are accounted hot: Their other Affections of the Palat are not very evident; but be∣cause they deterge Ʋlcers outwardly, they are esteem'd of a deterging Taste: For Ga∣len says, Bitters are the same as Nitrose Tastes, but stronger; and from the clean∣sing Nature of Nitre, Bitters are said to de∣terge the Palat, and cleanse the Stomach and Liver. Because an Astringent Taste is joyn'd with Bitter, therefore Bitters are of an Ex∣asperating Taste; and by this Roughness, strengthen the Viscera and Fibres. The Vertues of Bitters in killing Worms, preventing Putrefaction in Fevers and Ʋl∣cers, their Diuretick and Sudorifick Ver∣tue, and their Contrariety to Acids, are the Consequences of known Experiments, and not deducible from the Modes of Taste. Nauseous Tastes immediately indicate a Purging or Vomiting Quality; and are ge∣nerally
Bitter-Sweet or Bitter-Slimy, by which we perceive when the Tongue is con∣trarily affected; and by the same Object an unpleasant Taste is produced. Acrid Tastes are Penetrant and Pungent, and bite and heat the Mouth: They there∣fore heat and rarefie thick Humors, and the Blood and Chyle, and open Obstructions; outwardly they discuss Tumors, and draw in Plasters. By Experience these are known to cor∣rect Acids, and coagulate with them into a Mixt Salt, which is Diuretick and Su∣dorifick; and, by correcting the Acids of the Spleen and Nerves, become Antiscor∣butick and Cephalick. Caustick Tastes vesicate both the Tongue, and outward Skin, and Vomit and Purge. Sweet Tastes have a grateful Oyly Smoothness, by which they lenifie Coughs; and are outwardly digesting, by their Mo∣derate Heat. They are no less grateful to the Stomach, than pleasing to the Palat. That Sweet will become Bitter, we know only by Experiment; and by the same we know, that all very Sweet Things are hot, and that they are Laxative.
Aromatick Tastes are Acrid, and Pleasing to the Taste and Smell; therefore by their Acrimony they rarefie the Blood, open Ob∣structions, please the Stomach and Spirits; and therefore are Cordial, Stomachick, and Cephalick; and, also, outwardly comfort and strengthen Weak Parts, by their agreeable Heat. I have set down these known Modes of each Taste; and shewn, that by their means we know, that Earthy, Watry, Acid, and Mucilaginous, are cool Tastes, and cool the Animal Humors; and have also other Ef∣fects, which depend not on Coolness: And I have also demonstrated, that Bit∣ters, Aromaticks, Acrids, and Causticks, are hot Tastes, and have hot Effects on Ani∣mals. From the same Modes of Tastes, and from Experiments made on Particular Tastes, we may examine all Compound Tastes: But we must consider; as Colours mixt are a different Colour from the Sim∣ple Colours; so it is in Tastes Compound, as appears in Bitter-Sweet, and Bitter-Sli∣my; neither of which, alone, are Nau∣seous.
CHAP. XV. Of the Degrees of Taste. GALEN makes Four Degrees of the Vertues of Plants, reducing them to Hot, Cold, Moist, and Dry. 1. That is Hot in the First Degree, which does not evidently heat, but we find it by some Reason about the Nature of it. 2. Those that manifestly heat, are of the Second Order. 3. Those which vehemently heat, are of the Third Order. 4. Those which burn, or induce an E∣schar, are of the Fourth Degree. But seeing the Vertues of Plants are so evidently deduced from their Tastes, and those Tastes so well experimented by ma∣ny Chymical Distillations and Mixtures; and since the Nature of the Humors of the Body, and all Diseases, have been better
observ'd than in Galen's Time; I have not confin'd my self, in describing the Natures of Plants to Hot, Cold, Dry, or Moist; but have added all the Compositions of Tastes, and sensible Effects of their Modes; whereby I might particularly express the Nature of each Plant: And according to the experimented Vertues of Tastes, I have added those which belong to each Parti∣cular; and, I think, I need add no more, but the several Degrees of Taste; which may most easily be understood, and which may have a different Degree of Vertue. I therefore have observ'd Three Degrees in Tastes: As for Instance; In Bitters the First Degree is a little Bit∣ter or Bitterish; which does but just sen∣sibly affect the Taste; and therefore have the lowest Degree of Vertue, as Bitter. The Second Degree is Bitter absolutely; which considerably affects the Taste, and is of a Moderate Bitterness. The Third Degree is very Bitter; which much offends the Taste, and has the high∣est Degree of Bitters. The same Degrees are observable in A∣cid,
Sweet, Mucilaginous, Acrid, Aromatick, Watry, and Earthy Tastes. By these Degrees of Tastes, we express that a little of a Taste, or a moderate De∣gree of Taste, or else a greater Quantity of each Taste, is to be found in each par∣ticular Compound Taste of a Plant. Note, That Acrid is the Cause of Biting and Heat; and therefore, I have us'd them in the SECOND PART, as Aequiva∣lent Terms. The End of the First Part.
A Phytological Essay, &c. The Second Part. THE Tastes and Vertues OF Spontaneous English Plants. A. THE Firr-Tree. The Bark and Abies. Leaves are Bitterish, Rough, and have a Turpentine Taste and Smell. It is a good Vul∣nerary; and therefore works, as Turpen∣tine, by Ʋrine in the Stone and Scurvy.
The Leaves are most Rough in Taste, and therefore most Vulnerary. This is to be referr'd to the Turpentine Class. The Young Leaves of Firr and Pine are Sourish and Rough. Southernwood is of a very Bitter, Acrid, Abrota∣num. Hot Taste, and Strong Smell. Outward∣ly it is good against Convulsions and Pal∣sies. In its Bitter, Acrid Taste, and Fetid∣ness, it seems to resemble Sea-Wormwood, and to belong to the same kind. It hath something Aromatick in the Smell, like Chamaemel. Common Wormwood is very Bitter, A∣crid, Absinthi∣um Com∣mune. and Hot in Taste, with a grateful Smell. As it has a Bitter and Acrid Taste, it cleanses the Stomach, and excites Appe∣tite, provokes Ʋrine, and opens the Li∣ver; therefore it is good in the Jaun∣dice and Dropsie. By the afore-mention'd Qualities, it outwardly discusses Tumors, inwardly kills Worms, and is good in long Tertians, by rectifying the Acidities in the Cholerick Blood. The Roots are not Bitter, but Sweet, Aromatick, and Hot, like Chervil; and are Diuretick, Carminative, and Stoma∣chick. Dr. Grew says, There is a Tur∣pentine
in Wormwood-Roots, and also an Astringency in Wormwood, and in all strong Bitters. Sea-Wormwood hath a less Bitterness, Absinthi∣um Seri∣phium. but more unpleasant; of the same Ver∣tue as the former, but weaker. The Sycomore-Tree: The Bark is a Acer ma∣jus, Syca∣morus. little Mucilaginous, Bitter, and Rough; the Juyce which runs upon Tapping, is Sweet, Nauseous, and Astringent; the Leaves taste very Rough; the Vertue lies in the Astringency, with a little Bit∣terness. Common Maple: Its Bark is very Rough Acer mi∣nus. and Bitterish; the Vertue depends upon the Astringency. Common Sorrel: Its Leaves are Acid Acetosa vulgaris. and Astringent; by which it cools in Fevers, excites Appetite, and is Diu∣retick. The Root is Bitter, Astringent, and Nauseous: There is an Anti-febrile Ver∣tue in it, by purging Choler from the Blood. The Root is Yellow without, and has a Dock-Bitterness; to which I refer it.
Wood-Sorrel is the same: If the Juyce Acetosella. be thicken'd, the Crystals that settle in the Bottom, taste like Cream of Tartar, Gritty and Sowre. The Sheep-Sorrel, and Acetosa Rotundi∣folia, Acetosa Lanceolata have the same Taste and Vertue. Wild Basil tastes Bitterish and Sub∣acrid, Acinos. with an Aromatick Smell: It is a Cephalick, by that Taste and Smell. The Aromatick Reed: The Root tastes Acorus ve∣rus, seu Ca∣lamus Aro∣maticus. Bitterish, with an Aromatick Taste and Smell, by which it discusses Wind. It is Cordial, and provokes Ʋrine, and works as an Aromatick. It savours something of a Balsamick Turpentine. Wall-Rue is Sweet-Astringent, like the Adianthum album. Ferns; by which it is a Splenetick, check∣ing the Fermentation of the Blood; and it's a Vulnerary for the Lungs and Kid∣neys. Golden Maiden-Hair is Astringent, like Adianthum aureum minus. the Ferns; with an Earthy Smell, by which Mosses and Ferns differ most, being of a very like Nature.
Holly-Tree: The Bark tastes Mucila∣ginous, Agrifolium a little Biting, and Bitterish: The Leaves are Bitterish; by which it doth good in the Colick, if boyl'd in Posset-Drink. Holly hath an Acrid in it, joyn'd with Bitterish, and a Mucilage; therefore, the distill'd Water may help the Stone. Red Berries of Holly-Tree taste Sweet, Agrifolii Baccae. Bitterish, Acrid, and Mucilaginous; by which they are Purgative. Agrimony is moderately Bitter, Sub∣acrid, Agrimonia vulgar. and Astringent, with an Aromatick Smell: By its Bitterness, it's good for the Stomach, and Obstructions of the Liver; by its Astringency, it is Vulnerary; and by its Aromatick Smell, is Cordial: Its Astringency makes it good for stopping involuntary Pissing; and its Bitterness corrects the Acidity of the Ʋrine, which stimulates too much. Vervain-Mallow is Mucilaginous, like Alcea vul∣gar. Common Mallows, and of the same Vertues. Ladies Mantle is moderately Astrin∣gent, Alchimilla vulgar. without any Heat; by which Qua∣lity it's good in all Fluxes of Blood, and in Wounds.
Jack by the Hedge: Its Smell is Rank, Alliaria. like Garlick; and it is Bitterish and Acrid in its Taste: Its Vertues are like those of Garlick, and are good for the Cough. It is Diuretick, and resists Infection; and is good in Sawces. It is outwardly us'd in Gangreens, and fordid Ʋlcers, in the form of an Oyntment. Ramsons: They smell like Leeks, and Allium Ur∣sinum. their Taste is the same: The Roots re∣semble Leeks. They are very Mucilagi∣nous and Acrid, with a Garlick Smell, and of the same Vertue as Leeks. Common-Alder: The Bark is Astrin∣gent, Alnus vul∣gar. and a little Bitter: The Leaves are of the same Taste, but less strong, and feel Gummy. Black-Elder: The Bark is Bitter and Alnus Ni∣gra Bacci∣fera. Slimy; the Berries Sweet, Bitter, and Mu∣cilaginous; the Leaves are Mucilaginous, and Bitterish: They all Purge and Vo∣mit. Outwardly the Bark is good for the Itch in Oyntments, by its Mucilagi∣nous Bitterness. Chickweed: Its Taste is Watry, Crude, Alsine Te∣nuifolia. and feels Mucilaginous: It therefore cools Inflammations.
Speedwell-Chickweed is Bitterish-Astrin∣gent; Alsine Fo∣liis Vero∣nicae. and therefore no Chickweed; but, by its Taste, is a Vulnerary. Marsh-Mallow Roots, Leaves, Flowers, Althaea vulgar. and Seeds are very Mucilaginous: Whence it is good in Decoctions for the Stone and Cough; as also is the Syrup. Out∣wardly it mollifies and allays Pains: It is put into Baths and Cataplasms; and is an Emollient. The Mucilage is good for Chops in the Breast, and Pains by Vesi∣catories. Brook-lime is a little Acrid, with much Anagallis Aqu. seu Becabun∣ga. Waterishness, and great Astringency: By which Tastes it stops Bleeding, cools the Inflammations of the Blood; and is good for the Scurvy, by its pungent Parts. Male-Pimpernell: It tastes like Sorrel; Anagallis mas flore Phoeniceo. and afterwards it heats and bites, by its Acrimony. This Acrid-Acid is good in Pestilential Waters; by its Acrimony it provokes Sweat, and by its Acidity, Ʋ∣rine. Pimpernell with Yellow Flowers, smells Anagallis Lutea. like Sorrel when rubb'd, and tastes Rough and Astringent; therefore a good Vul∣nerary.
Tutsan, or Park-Leaves, hath a strong Androsae∣mum vul∣gar. Turpentine Smell; the Taste is a little Sowre-Astringent, and Bitterish: There∣fore it is an excellent Vulnerary, and Diu∣retick; and though the Turpentine is in the Smell very much, yet it tastes but a little Bitter. Wood-Crowfoot is very Acrid, or Cau∣stick; Anemone Nemorum. flies up into the Nose, if rubb'd: Is a sort of Ranunculus, and Bitterish. The Root of the Garden-Anemone tastes Watry, Sweet-Acrid, and a little Slimy. Angelica the Lesser, or Gout-wort, smells Angelica minor seu Podagraria like Angelica, and tastes like it, but no∣thing so strong: It hath the same Ver∣tues in a lower Degree. It is called Poda∣graria, from its knobbed Joynts on the Roots, rather than from any Vertue for the Gout. Wild Angelica is Sweet, Bitterish, and Angelica Sylvestris. Aromatick; like the Garden sort in Taste and Vertue; but not so strong. Common Rest-Harrow, with Purplish Anonis Spi∣nosa flo. Purpureo. Flowers: The Roots and Leaves have a Pea-Taste, Sweet and Mucilaginous; the Leaves feel clammy, and smell strong. The
Vertues are from the Mucilage, good for the Stone; and from its strong Smell, Diu∣retick and Aperitive. Kidney-Vetch hath a sweet Pea-Taste, Anthyllis Legumi∣nosa. and a little Bitter; being rubbed, it smells rank Oyly; and therefore is accounted Vulnerary. Snap-Dragon tastes Bitterish and Muci∣laginous, Antirrhi∣num. with an Elder-Smell: So that it is Discutient, Anodyne, and Emollient, like Linaria, and of the same Virtues. Clivers hath a Hot, Acrid, Bitterish and Aparine Vulgaris. Sub-Astringent Taste; and therefore is a good Diuretick, either boyl'd in White-Wine, or its Juice, or Powder, or distill'd Water. Outwardly applied with Hoggs-grease, it may discuss Scrophulous Tumors. It is a Madder. Wild-Smallage is like the Garden sort, Apium. in Taste and Vertue; Bitterish, Sweet, Hot, and Aromatick in the Root, Seeds and Leaves: It is therefore Carminative, Diuretick, and a good Aperitive. Smal∣lage has a Bitterishness in the Leaves and Roots, which makes it ungrateful.
Columbines: The Leaves and Flowers Aquilegia Sylvestris. taste Bitterish-Sweet; the Roots are Wa∣terish, and a little Bitter, and Sub-acrid. It is therefore a temperate Plant, rather Hot than Cold. The Roots are Diure∣tick; the Leaves are used in Gargles for Sore-Mouths. Columbine is of the Pea-Tribe. Bastard-Poppy is of an Opiate Smell; in Argemone. Taste, Mucilaginous: It is Opiate, as Pa∣paver Rhoeas. Wild-Tansie: The Leaves are Rough-Astringent, Argentina. and dry; the Roots Bitter-A∣stringent, like Cinquefoyl. It stops Fluxes, and Hemorrhages; and is Vulnerary and Antifebrile, by the Bitterish Roughness. Deptford-Pink: If rubbed, it smells Armeria Sylvestris. Sweet, tastes Sweet-Bitter, and is nause∣ously Bitter-Astringent, like Garden-Pinks in Taste. Meadow-Pink, or Wild-Williams, is Armerius Pratensis. Waterish and crude like the Lychnis. Mugwort tastes Bitterish and Aroma∣tick, Artemisia Vulg. with an Aromatick Smell: It is Ce∣phalick and Uterine. It is inwardly used
in Syrup of the Juyce, in Water for Fits of the Mother, and driving out the Menses, but it doth that weakly. Outwardly it is used in warm Baths: The Smell resembles Wormwood, and is of that kind. Wake-Robin: It is strongly Acrid, Pun∣gent, Arum vul∣gare. and Vesicating the Palate and Tongue, by its Volatile Salt; it is not perceived till after some time. By that Salt, it is good for the Scurvy; it is Diu∣retick, Antisplenetick, Pectoral, and Cepha∣lick; the Salt flies away being long Pow∣dered. The Red-Berries are Biting and Slimy. The Leaves rubbed have no con∣siderable Smell, in respect of their Acri∣mony: Vinegar corrects the Acrimony, and therefore the Acrimony is Saline, and not Oleous: But the Pouches stink ve∣ry nauseously, which stink depends upon an Oyl and Salt. St. Peters-wort smells and tastes (like Ascyrum vulgare. St. Johns-wort) of Turpentine, and is Bitter∣ish and Astringent; and therefore is Vul∣nerary. Asparagus: The Roots have a Pea-taste, Asparagus. Bitterish, Watry, and Acrid; which, as in other Diureticks, affects the Throat, and
therefore it is a great Diuretick, and Opener of Obstructions. The Grassie Leaves of Asparagus, have a Pea-taste, and if rub∣bed, they smell like Peascods: The Faetor they give to the Ʋrine, proceeds from an Oyliness; which is observable in many of the Pea-tastes: to which Faetor also the Acrid hot parts of the Asparagus, which are perceptible in eating of green Sparagrass, by burning the Throat, do much conduce: The Berries have a sweet Taste. Woodroof is Bitter and Acrid, with a Asperula. Fragrant Smell: It's therefore a good opening Hepatick; and by its Taste and Smell, appears to be a Madder. The Fra∣grancy of it argues a Cordial Vertue. It is usually infused in Beer, or distilled. Ceterach is sweet and rough like other Asplenium. Ferns, good against Fluxes, and Bleeding, and Splenetick Fermentations of the Blood, by its rough Astringency. There is an obscure Acrimony in all Ferns, by which they are Aperitive. Wild Orach: The Root, Leaves, and Atriplex Sylvestris. Seeds are Mucilaginous, and of a crude Fetid Scent. Outwardly in Fomentations
and in Clysters, it's Emollient, Cooling, and Anodyne: It seems not proper for inward use by its ungrateful Smell, and nauseous Mucilage. Stinking Orach tastes Mucilaginous, Atriplex Olida. and is Fetid in Smell, by which it is An∣tihysterical. Oats: The Green-Corn tastes sweet and Avena. crude; the Oats are Mucilaginous-sweet. Mouse-Ear is Bitterish and Astringent, Auricula Muris seu Pilosella. therefore good in Fits of Agues, and in Fluxes; and is a Vulnerary: It may be re∣ferred to the Hawk-weeds. Outwardly, by the Astringency, it cures the Herpes. It Tastes of an ill Fusty Taste towards Winter, by lying near the Ground. B. STinking Horehound is of a Dead-Nettle, Ballote. strong, stinking Smell, and very Bitter in Taste; by which it is Antihysterick, and Antihypocon∣driack; and outwardly cleansing in Ʋl∣cers. It is a little Acrid, and belongs to the Lamium-Class.
Winter-Cresses is of a Cress-Taste and Barbarea lutea Lati∣folia. Vertue: It cleanses Ʋlcers outwardly, by its Cress-Pungency. Great Burdock: The Root tastes Watry, Bardana major. Slimy, Bitterish, and Smoaky; by which it is Diuretick, and good in the Gout, Stone, and Cough. The Seed is Bitter, and of the same Vertue with the Root: The Leaves are very Bitter, like Carduus Benedictus, and may be used for Sweating and Vomiting, instead of it. This Plant, by its Prickly head, and Purple Flower, is like to the Carduus kind, as well as by the smoaky Taste, and Bitterish Slime. Spatling Poppy has a crude Taste and Behen Al∣bum. Smell, like other Lychnis's; and is of the same Vertue. Great Dasie: The whole Plant is sweet Bellis ma∣jor. like Liquorish, and therefore of the same Vertue in Coughs; it is also a little Pun∣gent (discernible most in the Stalk.) This Acrid makes it useful in an Ortho∣pnoea. I use it as Thea, and sweeten it with Syrup of the Juice of Horehound. The sweet Smell of it is Fragrant, like Erigerum, and the Leaves resemble it; but in Taste it is most like Rampions.
Little Dasie: The Leaves and Roots Bellis mi∣nor. are Acid; and therefore are Cooling and Diuretick, when boyl'd in Broth for Children. I took three spoonfuls of the Juyce of the Leaves, for divers Mornings, and found no Purging quality in it. I judge it is of the Sorrel-Species and Ver∣tue; and I think the Juyce is proper for Spitting of Blood; but do not think it properly Vulnerary, tho' Authors call it Consolida minor. The taste of the Root is Bitterish and Pungent-acid; wherefore the Acidity in Dasies is like the Pungent Acidity of Vinegar; and then it may be accounted a Sorrel: Or else it hath an A∣crimony joyned with the Acid, like Rosa Solis; for it doth a little blister, though without Heat. Water-Betony is nauseously Bitter, and Betonica Aquatica. of an Elder. Smell; it has the Taste and Vertues of Scrophularia: It is most used in Oyntments, for Tumors, Burns, and Ʋlcers. Wood-Betony is Bitterish, and a little Betonica vulgaris. Hot, with an Aromatick Smell, but some∣what resembling the Lamiums. By the Taste and Smell it is Cephalick, Diuretick, Pectoral and Vulnerary. It is used in
Powder, Juyce, and Conserve of the Flowers. The Roots are very Bitter, like Peach-Kernels, and may cause Vomiting or Purging. It seems to belong to the Lamium-Class, the Root tasting like Veravin-Root. The Birch-Tree: The Bark is very Betula. Rough and Bitter, and so may be Vulne∣rary; and as such, will act inwardly: It will make a good Extract. The Leaves are Mealy, Mucilaginous, and a little Bit∣ter, and so may be good in Baths for the Itch. They smell a little Sweet; the fresh Juyce of the wounded Tree is Sweet, which will turn Sowre: It will make a good Wine for the Stone with Spices. The crude Juyce is too raw for the Sto∣mach: If it be Distilled or Brewed with Malt, it may be good for Hecticks. Tway-Blade: The Taste is Sweet, Mu∣cilaginous, Bisolium Slyvestre. and a little Acrid or Biting. It is probably of the Orchis kind: Its Vertue lyes in the Mucilage, or Acrid Biting; by both which it may be out∣wardly Emollient, and inwardly Diuretick. Bistort: The Root is rough, and bit∣terish Bistorta vulgaris. like Sorrel; and therefore stops
Fluxes, abates Praeternatural Fermentati∣ons, and so is Alexipharmack, and not Su∣dorifick; but it abates too much Sweat∣ing, as well as Acids: The Leaves are Crude and Mucilaginous. It seems a kind of Sorrel. Blite is Mucilaginous, and Crude in Blitum mi∣nus album. Taste; therefore its Vertue is Cooling and Mucilaginous; of the nature of Beets or Atriplex. English Mercury: It's Sorrel-tasted in Bonus Henricus. the Roots, Leaves and Seeds, exasperating or corroding the Throat: The Leaves are also Mucilaginous, and of a Grassy Smell: It is therefore accounted Emolli∣ent; and its Acid outwardly cools Inflam∣mations. It has Sandy, Globular parts on the backside of the Leaves; which may work as Testaceous Powders, and be Diuretick. The exasperating Quality may irritate in a Pessus, and make it Laxa∣tive in Clysters, as well as its Mucilage; from the same also is its Diuretick Quali∣ty. I think it like Atriplex or Beets: It is good for Warts outwardly; and dis∣cusses in Cataplasms, as appears by the burning Quality in the Throat. Mr. Ray says, The Root is Acrid and Bitter.
White-Bryony: The Root tastes Sub∣acrid, Bryonia Alba. very Bitter, and Mucilaginous; and therefore Vomits and Purges, as other Bit∣ter Mucilages do. Outwardly, by the same Qualities, it cures Warts, Struma's, Pains of the Hips, Bruises, Pains of the Sides, and Gout-Pains; and is laid to the Feet in Cataplasms, for Distempers of the Head. If the Root be dryed, and the Muci∣lage afterwards drawn out by Infusing in Wine, and then again dryed, it Purges and Vomits much less. Mr. Ray. The Leaves of Bryony have the same Taste and Vertue; and some have used the Decoction of them for the Stone; but ten spoonfuls thereof Purged and Vomited a Dogg strongly. The Red Berries have a most abominable Taste and Smell; Country-men give them for the Hoost to the Cows. The Faeculae of the Root are Purgative; and, as Fetids and Bitters, they work in Hysterick Cases. The Sprouts boyl'd like young Asparagus, I found most nauseous, and not fit to Eat. The Roots are pounded into a Con∣serve for Fits; but I cannot believe any Stomach can hold them. Black-Bryony: The Leaves are Muci∣laginous, Bryonia Nigra.
Bitterish, and a little Biting, and therefore Diuretick; the Root is A∣crid, and (as a Physician told me) bli∣sters the Hands. It is as Diuretick, but not so Purgative as the White-Bryony. Small Wild-Bugloss: The Leaves and Buglossum Sylvestre minus. Roots are Cool, Watry, and Mucilagi∣nous; in Juyce and in Decoction it cools Hecticks, Inflammations, Heats, and Thirst, and stops Rheums: The Flowers have a little Cordial Heat in them, besides their Watry Mucilage. Bugle is Bitter and Rough in Taste, Bugula Cae∣rulea. and therefore Vulnerary: I suppose it may be a Veronica or Lamium. Bugle, Scabiose, and Sanicle, make a good Oynt∣ment, with Bores-grease, for Wounds. Earth-Nuts are Sweet, Hot, and Aro∣matick, Bulbo ca∣stanum. and belong to the Fenil-kind, by Taste and Vertue: The Roots are Sweet and Mucilaginous; the sweet A∣crimony and Mucilage makes them Di∣uretick and Venereal. Shepherds-Purse is of a Cress-Smell and Bursa Pa∣storis. Taste, tho' in a low degree: The Astrin∣gency is but small, and deserves not the
Character of an excellent Astringent. Box-Tree: The Leaves and Bark are Buxus. very Bitter and Rough, therein resembling Guaiacum by its Taste; and therefore used in its stead, in drying Decoctions. I can∣not perceive any Narcotick quality in it. It is given to Horses for the Botts. Some account it Antiscorbutick. C. CALAMINT is of a Bitterish and Calamin∣tha vulga∣ris. very Acrid, Aromatick Taste, and of a strong Aromatick Mint Smell; and therefore is an hot Cephalick, Uterine, Pectoral, and Stomachick, by its Bitter∣ness and Acrimony; thereby giving a quick motion to the Spirits, and also heat∣ing the Nervous Fibres. Marsh-Marigold: The Flowers smell Caltha Pa∣lustris. like Lilies; the Leaves are Mucilaginous, and a little warm or pungent. By its Acrimony it is a Marigold, or rather a Crow-foot.
Bell-flowers; The Leaves are Biting, Campanu∣la rotundi∣folia. and sweet like Rampions. Bastard-Hemp is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Cannabis spuria. and of an Aromatick smell: It is accoun∣ted a Lamium. Hemp is Bitter and Acrid, of a sweet Cannabis Sativa. Aromatick Smell, like Agrimony, but more strong: It is not fit to be taken inwardly; for by that Smell it produces Giddiness; and probably kills Fish: It has a more offensive Smell after it is gathered and dryed. By its bitter Acrimony it is most fit for outward use in discussing and dis∣solving Kernels, and easing Pains. The Seeds have a Mucilage, and are used in Emulsions, as Diureticks and Openers in the Jaundice, by the bitter Acrimony and strong Smell. No Diuretick can be an Antivenereal, as Hemp has been accoun∣ted; unless it destroys the Animalcula in Semine, as it does Worms, and other In∣sects, and Fishes in the River. An Oyl may be expressed from the Seed for Burns. Ladies Smock is a Biting-Acrid, like Cardamine the Nasturtiums, and of a Cress-Smell and Vertue.
Mother-wort is very Biting and Bitter, Cardiaca. therefore good in Hypochondriack Faintings, and Fits of the Mother, to provoke Ʋrine, and the Menses, and to Expectorate: And it is also a Cephalick in Convulsions and Palsies; but is chiefly an Hepatick, as Bitter-Acrids are. The Smell of it is like Dead-Nettle, and belongs to that Tribe. It is also rec∣koned amongst Bezoardicks, for its Bitter-Acrimony. Thistles: They taste Watry, Mucila∣ginous, Carduus vulgaris Lanceola∣tus. Bitterish, and Smoaky, by which they are Diureticks; but also very nau∣seous. Ladies-Thistle: The Leaves are Bit∣terish Carduus Mariae. and Slimy, and may be Eaten boil'd. The Root is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Smoaky; by which it is Diuretick, but very offensive; as any other Carduus is to the Stomach; and therefore may be Vomitory, as Carduus Benedictus is. Carline-Thistle: The Roots taste Bit∣terish, Carlina. and a little Acrid, of a Mithridate flavor. It may be therefore used as an Alexipharmack, and Hepatick, and Diu∣retick, because of its Bitterish Acrimony. It
is Sub-acrid, and a little Aromatick, mixt with an unpleasant Smell. Avens: The Leaves are Astringent, Caryophyl∣lata vulga∣ris. nd therefore given before the Fits of a ertian Ague. The Roots smell and taste ke Cloves; and are therefore Cordial, Ce∣alick, Stomachick, and Alexipharmack. The Root has also an Astringent Taste; nd therefore good in Fluxes of the Belly, nd Weakness of the Stomach; given in owder, or Infusion in Wine: the Vertue es in being an Aromatick Astringent, itterish and Acrid. By the Taste and mell it is a Clove-Gilliflower. Chesnut-Tree: The Bark is very Rough, Castanea. nd a little Bitter. The Leaves are a lit∣e Sowre, Slimy, and Hot; they smell moaky. The Bark is used as an Astrin∣ent in Loosenesses, and the Whites. The ruit is Sweet-tasted, fit for Food, with n Astringency, which lyes in the Skin s the Fruit. Hedge-Parsley: The Leaves, Root, and Caucalis. owers are Hot, Sweet, and Aromatick nd its Taste and Smell is like Daucus nd therefore is Diuretick and Carmina∣ve.
Lesser-Centaury has a very strong Bit∣ter Centauri∣um minus. Taste, like a Peach-Kernel, with an evident Astringency, but no Acrimony or Pungent Heat; therefore it may be used as a good Hepatick, Ʋterine, and Anti∣febrifick, in Extract, Decoction, or Pow∣der, in the Jaundice, Gout, and Fevers. Outwardly, it is a cleansing Vulnerary and Cicatrises. It is not unlike a Bitter Lychnis. Quaere, Whether there be any Sweetness in Centaury, besides the Bitter? Birds-Cherry: The Bark is nauseously Cerasus A∣vium race∣mosa. Bitter and Astringent, and of a Peach-Kernel-Taste. The Leaves are of the same Taste and Smell, resembling the Leaf of a Cherry-Tree. The Flowers smell very Fragrant. Cherry-Tree: The Bark is very Bitter Cerasus vulgaris. and Astringent; but it makes a whiter Powder than Jesuits Powder: The Bark may be given for the Fits of Convulsion, as well as Black-Cherry-Water, which has the Virtue from its Bitterishness. Acid-Cherries cool and excite Appetite. The Sweet nourish, and may loosen the Belly. The Black are Bitterish; their Water, Spirit, and Wine are good for Convulsions.
Cherry-Tree Gum is good for Hoarsnes∣ses, and Ʋlcerations of the Kidneys, by its Mucilage. Black-Cherry-Tree-Leaves are Bitterish and Mucilaginous. Chervil: The Roots, Leaves, and Seeds Cerefoli∣um Sylve∣stre & Hor∣tense. are Sweet, and sensibly Hot, Aromatick and Diuretick, Carminative and Pectoral. Outwardly it is used in Fomentations for the Stone, Colick, and Swelling of the Breasts: The distilled Water and Juyce are most used; the Juyce is good for Ver∣tigoes. Germander tastes very Bitter and Acrid, Chamae∣drys Sylve∣stris & Hor∣tensis. and smells like Hops; it is accounted a Diuretick, Splenetick, Hepatick, Ʋterine, Antifebrifick, and Arthritick. It seems referible to the Lamiums by the Smell; and is Sub-aromatick like Betony; and so are some of the Lamiums. Outwardly it is good in Gangreens and sordid Ʋlcers. Chamomile tastes Bitterish and Acrid; Chamae∣melum vulgare. and is Aromatick in smell; therefore it is chiefly Cephalick, Diuretick, Sudorifick, and Ʋterine. Outwardly it is discussing▪ the Juyce is given before Fits of the Ague, and for pains of the Stomach. The Flow∣ers
Infused in White-Wine, taste Saltish, and are used for the Stone. Mr. Ray. Groundpine tastes very Bitter, and has Chamaepi∣tys vulga∣ris. a Terebinthinate taste and smell: It is good in Arthritick cases, by its Bitterness and Turpentine; and also for cleansing of the Womb by the same quality; and is very Diuretick. The Greater-Celandine is extreamly Chelidoni∣um majus. Bitter and Acrid; by which it is accoun∣ted good in the Jaundice, and Obstructions of the Liver: The Juyce is outwardly used to the Eyes, but chiefly the Water. By the same Quality it is Diuretick and Alexi∣pharmack. Outwardly it is good for the Herpes; and is a cleansing Vulnerary. Lesser-Celandine tastes Waterish, Crude, and a little Pungent, resembling Scurvy-Grass; Chelidoni∣um minus. good for Hot Scorbutick Blood, and Inflamed Piles. The Stalk tastes Acrid like Ranunculus, rather than Scurvy-Grass. The Roots have knobs like Piles; it may be a Ranunculus. Tho' the Pun∣gency be very weak, the distilled Water is Sub-acrid. Lesser-Celandine outwardly discusses Scrophula's.
Corn-Marygold: The Leaves are Slimy, Chrysan∣thenum Segetum. Bitterish, a little Biting, and of a strong Scent, like common Marygolds. It is a nauseous Plant, not fit for inward use. Succory is Watrish, Bitter, and Smoaky; Cichore∣um Sylve∣stre. by which it cools the Blood, opens the Liver in the Jaundice, and Cholerick Ca∣chexies; and is Diuretick. It is like the Hieraceum-kind. Hemlock is of a Fetid Opiate, and virose Cicuta. Smell; it tastes very Acrid and Sweetish, like the Parsly-kind, but especially Cicuta fatua. Hemlock-Root causes Frensie and Stupidness, as if the Persons who take it were Drunk; and also a Giddiness; which happened to my Man, who grew Sleepy, and Giddy after his chewing of the Root, and swallowing some of it. I gave a Glassful of the Juyce of the Leaves and Roots to my Dogg, which made him ve∣ry Sick, without any other alteration. Vo∣miting is necessary after the taking of Hemlock. It may be outwardly used in Anodyne, and Discussing Emplasters for Tumors, or for the Spleen. Water-Hemlock: The Root smells most Cicutaria Palustris alba. offensively Fetid, when broken.
Wild-Cicely, or Madneps, have a Sweet, Cicutaria vulgaris. Sub-acrid, Aromatick Parsnip Taste and Smell in the Leaves and Roots: They cause a Stupidity and Frenzy. Give a Vomit after them, and aftewards Alexipharmacks. Inchanters Night-Shade, tastes a little Circaea Lu∣tetiana. Acrid, Sweet and Astringent, and has a Solanum smell. The Leaves may be out∣wardly used as an Anodyne, and repelling Medicine: It is a Solanum by its smell. Periwincle has a Laurel Bitter, and a little Clematis Daphnoi∣des. Acrid without any considerable smell: It is accounted a Vulnerary, and may be referred to the Laurel Bitters, and is not so proper a Styptick as Authors write. The Roots are like the Leaves, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent. Scurvy-Grass; The Flowers, Leaves and Cochlearia Roots are extreamly Acrid. By its Vo∣latile Salt, it is good against the Scurvy, in Spirit, Juice, and Aqua Raph. composit. The Seeds yield most Oyl, being most Bitter. The Juice is used to the Gums, with Burnt Alum for the Putridness of them. Crowsilk is of a cool Taste. Conserva Palustris.
Bacchar, or Plowmans Spikenard, is Bit∣terish, Conyza major Mat∣thioli. Acrid, of a little Aromatick-Scent, like Spikenard; and is a Cephalick Herb, and has a Resinous, Fragrant, and Tere∣binthinate Smell. Common-Fleabane is very Bitter and Conyza media. Biting, of a strong, and somewhat Fetid Smell, like Marygolds; and probably an Hysterick and Uterine; outwardly discus∣sing in Medicines for the Eyes; and good in Oyntments for the Itch: It feels clam∣my, and smells like Soaped Cloaths. Sweet Purple-Fleabane is Aromatick, Conyza caerulea a∣cris. very Acrid and Bitterish. Comphrey is Clammy, Mealy, and Consolida major. Mucilaginous; by which it is good in Sharp Rheums, and Ʋlcers of the Lungs and Kidneys, and in Fluxes of Blood. Out∣wardly it lenifies the Pains of the Gout, especially the Roots Pounded, and applied. It comes near the Virtue of Bugloss. Bind-weed Greater and Less: The Convolvu∣lus major & minor. Leaves are Mealy, Mucilaginous, and Bitterish; and the Root a little Acrid, Slimy, Bitter, and Milky, as all the Bind∣weeds are: By its Taste it appears to be a
Purger or Vomitory. The Decoction of the Leaves have a nauseous sick Smell; but it purged not my Dogg. It is a sort of Bryony. Note, The Bind-weeds are Milky, like Scammony. Sea-Coralline tastes Gritty; by its sharp Corallina. Grittiness, it frets the Worms; as Spar powdered does, which is also given for them. It has also a strong Earthy-Smell, like Moss: And Authors say, That it has a Salt-Taste; but I could not perceive it. Many Sea-Plants have that External Saltness from the washing of the Sea-wa∣ter, and not from a Saltness in their Juyce: From this accidental Saltness, fresh Cora∣line is good for the Worms. Bucks-Horn Plantane is like ordinary Coronopus vulgaris. Plantane, Watry and Astringent. Swines-Cresses is Biting, and of a Cress-Taste Coronopus Ruellii. and Vertue. Hasel-Tree: The Catkins, Leaves and Corylus Sylvestris. Bark are very Rough; and therefore are great Astringents. The Nuts are Sweet and Oleous; and loosen the Belly, while fresh.
Stinking May-weed is very Biting, Bit∣ter, Cotula foe∣tida. and Fetid; of the same Vertue as Cham∣momile, but stronger; and fitter to make Oyls and Oyntments of, for Pains, Tumors, and Scrophulae. Inwardly it is good for Hysterick Fits in distilled Water. Marsh-Pennywort: The Leaves are Cotyledon aquatica. Sweet, Hot, and Sub-aromatick, and smell like Water-Parsnip. I found it in Dorstil-Moores. Eye-bright-Cow-Wheat is moderately Crataeogo∣non Eu∣phrasynes facie. Bitter and Astringent, and Sub-acrid. It is accounted to be of the nature of common Eye-bright, but Hotter. Samphire is Sweet, Acrid, and Aroma∣tick; Crithmum. the Leaves have their Saltness from the Salt-water; and it is only External; for the Roots have it not, but taste as is above described; by which it is referible to the Fennil-Class. Wild-Saffron-Flower: The Flower is Crocus Sylvestris. of a strong Fetid Smell; and of an Hot, Biting, and Mucilaginous Taste: By its Acrid, it is Cordial and Aperitive in the Jaundice, and good in Pestilential Fevers. By its strong Odor, it is good in Diseases
of the Womb, and Hysterick Passions. Out∣wardly, by the Mucilage and Acrid Fetor, it is Anodyne; and inwardly good for Asthmas. The Root is Sweet and Slimy; the Green Leaves are Sweet and Acrid, like Saffron-Flowers. Cross-wort is a little Hot, Bitterish, and Cruciata. Astringent; it is a Vulnerary, and of the Nature of Gallium Luteum, or Madder. The Roots are Yellow, Bitter, and Acrid. Dodder is Bitter and Astringent, and Cuscuta. good against the Itch, Black-Jaundice, and Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen. Blue-Bottle tastes Bitterish, Smoaky, Cyanus. Sub-acrid▪ and Mucilaginous; It is of the Nature of Jacea, by its Taste. The Wa∣ter of the Flowers is good for Inflammations of the Eyes; lenifying by the Mucilage, and discussing by its Sub-acrid-Taste. Dogs-Mercury has a dry Taste, and is a Cyno∣crambe mas & foe∣mina. little hot: It is vulgarly boyled in Cream for an Erysipelas. It has an Elder-Smell, and is a crude Plant: By the Elder-Smell it may be Purging; and has a nauseous Bitter-Taste.
Great Hounds-Tongue: The Taste is Bit∣terish Cynoglos∣sum vulga∣re. and Mucilaginous in the Root, Leaves and Seed; they smell strong like the Excrements of Mice; being boyled, they smell like Spirit of Harts-horn. It is used as an Opiate inwardly; and out∣wardly applyed as an Anodyne, it dis∣cusses all Tumors, and the Scrophulae. An Oyntment made therewith, and Hoggs∣grease, heals Wounds like Tabaco-Oynt∣ment; and is good for the Pains of the Piles: It is used most for Cataplasms, in Scrophulous Tumors outwardly. A strong Decoction of the Leaves and Roots being given to a Dogg, made no sensible alte∣ration: It is good in Scaldings. In Pills, the Seeds are used for Catarrhs, Fluxes, and Spitting of Blood. The Roots, by their Odor, hung about the Neck, kill Lice. Dr. Grew says, The Root is sweet. D. WIld Carrot tastes Sweet, Hot, and Daucus. Aromatick in the Seeds, Leaves, and Roots: Therefore it is of the Sweet-Aromatick Fennel-Class; and has the same Vertues, being Diuretick in
the Stone and Strangury, in the Carmina∣tive Colick externally and internally; good in Hysterick Fits: All which Ef∣fects it has from its Aromatick Oyl, and Sweet Tastes. Dandelyon: The Roots, Leaves, and Dens Leo∣nis. Milk taste Waterish, Bitter, and Smoaky. It is good in great Quantities of Choler in the Blood, and in putrid Fevers: By its Bitterishness it cleanses Choler, by Ʋrine and the Choleduct; by its Waterishness it cools the Blood. It is for the same rea∣son good in Consumptions. Fox-Gloves: The Flowers, Seeds, and Digitalis Purpurea. Green-Leaves are Mucilaginous and Bit∣ter, with Astringency; the Roots are Rough, and Nauseously Bitter; the Seeds are Bitter-slimy and Astringent. It Vo∣mits and Purges strongly: The Green-Leaves or Roots are boyl'd in Ale, for the Falling-Sickness. The Flowers are good in the King's-Evil Sores: They are A∣nodyne, by their Slime; and Cleansing and Healing, by their Bitter-Astringency. The Green-Leaves have a strong Smell, like Elder; which intimates their Purg∣ing Faculty.
Teasle is Bitter and Smoaky, like other Dipsacus. Thistles, both in Leaves and Roots. The Flowery Heads of it shew it to be a Car∣duus. Oak-Fern is of the Taste and Vertue of Dryopte∣ris. Common Male-Fern; Sweetish, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent. E. DWarf-Elder: The Leaves are ve∣ry Bitter and Slimy, and of a strong Elder-Smell; the Roots are Bitter, Rough, and Roapy, and of an Elder-Smell. It is of the same Vertue and Taste as Common Elder. The Bark and Seeds are great Water-Purgers in the Dropsie and Gout. The Juyce of the Root makes a good purging Syrup, and works as Buck-thorn Syrup: The Leaves are us'd in Diet-Drink for the Dropsie; and outward∣ly in Fomentations and Oyntments, for Tumors, Scalds, Burns, Gout, and Ʋlcers. Vipers-Bugloss is Cool and Mucilagi∣nous, Echium vulgare. with a little Waterish Bitterness, like Bugloss. It is equal in Goodness with
Bugloss, in Inflammations of the Blood, and may be profitable against the Bitings of Serpents. Quaere, Whether it has any warm Parts in it, which may be Cordial and Alexi∣pharmack, as Bugloss. It causes Milk by tempering the hot Blood, and by its Wa∣terishness: Sweet Gaul is very Nauseously Bitter, Elaeagnus Cordi. and a little Astringent, with a strong A∣romatick Smell. In Baths it is good for the Itch, and for Worms in Oyntments. It will Vomit by its Nauseous Bitterness, as Carduus, being Bitter like Gall. Wild-Parsnip differs but little from the Elapho∣boscum. Garden-Parsnip in Taste and Vertue. Fluellin is Bitter, Sub-acrid, and A∣stringent: Elatine Fo∣lio subro∣tundo. Therefore a good Vulnerary. Elecampane-Roots and Leaves are ve∣ry Enula Campana. Acrid and Bitterish, and smell some∣what like Angelica. The Roots are good in Oyntments, and Baths for the Itch; as also for the Lungs, Stomach, and Liver, as a Bitterish Acrid. It is a good Cepha∣lick, Ʋterine, and Diuretick, by its Vola∣tile Salt; and by the same, it is outward∣ly
useful for the Sciatica and Palsie; and is a good Antidote against Infectious Air. This by its Taste, strong Smell, and Shape of the Flowers, is referible to the same Class as Flos Solis and Marygolds; but is more Aromatick. Horse-Tail is a little Astringent; and Equisetum. therefore good in all Fluxes. Galen says, It is Bitterish. It seems referible to the Grasses, or else to Polygonum. Common-Heath is very Rough, and Bit∣terish; Erica vul∣garis. the Flowers have a Sweet Honey-Suckle Smell; by which they are discus∣sing in Oyls, and Diuretick; and by the Astringency, repelling in Inflamed Eyes, and the Herpes. Boyl'd in Drink, it is good for all Fluxes, and over-fermented Blood. It is like Tamarisk. Water-Rocket is of a Cress-Taste and Eruca A∣quatica vulgaris. Vertue; and is Bitterish and Acrid. Hedge-Mustard is of a Cress-Taste and Erysimum vulgare. Vertue. In Syrup it is good for the Asthma and Hoarseness, by its Bitterish and Acrid Taste. Common-Sea-Holly, or Eryngo: The Eryngium vulgare.
Leaves taste Sweet, Aromatick, and Hot; and smell something like Chervil: There∣fore it is Diuretick, Pectoral, Carmina∣tive, and Venereal. Spurge is of a burning and exulcera∣ting Esula. Taste and Vertue, like Tithymals; and is inwardly Vomitory, and Purgative of Watry Humors by the Acrid Salt. Prickwood: The Seeds are Nauseously Euonymus vulgaris. Bitter and Astringent; therefore may Purge. The Bark is Slimy and Bitterish. My Dogg eat Ten of the Seeds in Butter, and drank the Decoction of the Leaves in Broth after them; and yet was bound Two Days after. It has an Elder-Smell in the Leaves; and the Wood is like El∣der: The Leaves are Sub-acid, of a Bit∣ter Elder-Taste. The Leaves and Berries look Red, as many Acid Plants do. Common Hemp-Agrimony: The Flow∣ers Eupato∣rium Can∣nabinum. and Leaves are very Bitter, and a little Acrid. The Roots taste like Hemp: The Flowers and Leaves smell Strong and Aromatick. The Roots may Vomit by their Bitter and Acrid Sliminess. The Leaves are Hepatick.
Eye-Bright is Bitterish-Astringent, a Euphrasia vulgaris. good Vulnerary, and Eye-Medicine. F. BEANS: The Leaves have a Bitter-Sweet Faba vul∣garis. Pea-Taste. The Bean has the same Taste; but the Skin of it is Astringent. The Flowers smell Sweet, and the distill'd Water takes away Frec∣kles. Old Beans in Flowre or Meal are ve∣ry discussing in Tumors of the Breasts, and Testicles. A Water is distill'd from Bean-Stalks for the Stone, which, by its Sweetness and Bitterness, lenifies and clean∣ses the Kidneys. The Beach-Tree: The Bark which I ta∣sted Fagus. in September, was Bitterish-Astringent, and the Leaves Rough. The Vertue of it is the same with the Oak, viz. Astringent. The Fruit I could not find this Year; but I am told, That it is Sweet and Rough. Buck-Wheat: The Seeds taste Mealy, Fegopy∣rum. and the Leaves Mucilaginous. It's good for Food, and Pultisses.
Common-Dropwort: The Root is Bitte∣rish, Filipendu∣la. (Quaere, Whether Sweetish?) Astrin∣gent, Warm, and very Aromatick; of a Burnet-Smell, or like Meadow-Sweet. It is good in all Fluxes, and in the Stone, by its Bitterish and Sub-acrid Astrin∣gency. Female-Fern: The Root and Leaves Filix Faemi∣na. are Bitterish, and Mucilaginous; and good for Burns, by their Mucilage: And there∣fore, are of a different Nature from the Male, and other Ferns. Male-Fern: The Leaves taste Rough, Filix Mas & Osmun∣da. the Roots Bitterish and Rough; and smell like Orris. The Leaves of all Ferns rubb'd, smell like Tallow. The Roots, by their Bitterish-Roughness, are Splenetick, and good Vulneraries, and Openers of Ob∣structions by their Aromatick Bitterness, in Rickets, Worms, and in the Stone. Strawberries: The Leaves are Muci∣laginous, Fragaria. and very little Bitter; the Roots are Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent. The Leaves are good in Mouth-Waters, and in the Stone: The Roots are also Vulnerary, like Cinquefoyl; and of the same Class. The Fruit is Sweet, Sub∣acid-Vinous,
and Fragrant in its Flavor; therefore Cooling and Cordial: and a distill'd Water is made of it. Note, That the Leaves of Astringent Plants, which bear a Pulpy Fruit, have a Slime in them. The Ash-Tree: The Bark is Bitter, A∣stringent, Fraxinus. and of a Laurel-Bitter Taste: The Seeds are Bitter, Astringent, and A∣crid; and so are the Flowers and Buds, when made into Conserve for opening the Spleen and Liver, and for the Scurvy and Dropsie. The Bark is a good Vulnerary, and Antifebrifick by its Bitter Astringency. The Seeds are a good Diuretick in the Stone; and I think, they much resemble the Taste of Jesuits Powder. They sweat in Quartanes, in which I have us'd them. The Wood of Ash, by its Taste, may be us'd instead of Guaiacum; it has a Bitter and Acrid, to cause Sweat. Fumitory is Bitterish, Watry, and Smoa∣ky: Fumaria vulgaris. It is good against Cholerick Blood in Juyce and Syrup; is Diuretick; and in distill'd Water cleanses the Face. It be∣longs to the Pea-Tribe. It is good for the Itch in Oyntments.
Climbing-Fumitory: This has a Wa∣try Fumaria cum Ca∣preolis. Bitterness, and is also Acrid. This is of the same Tribe and Vertue with com∣mon Fumitory; but more manifestly A∣crid. The Common-Mushrome: The whole Fungus E∣sculentus. Substance is Mucilaginous. The Smell is very Earthy; therefore outwardly a very cooling Anodyne. Quaere, Whether Mushromes do not spring from the putrefied Mucilaginous Paren∣chyma of other Plants, and the Fibrous Parts growing into Length? The noxious Mushromes cause a Stran∣gulation in the Throat, for which Oyl and Vomiting are necessary; or else a Cholera Morbus, in which case Hens-Dung may be good. Wood-Mushrome: This smells like Rot∣ten Fungus Ar∣borum pu∣trescenti∣um. Wood, and is Slimy and Mucilagi∣nous; and evidently arises from Rotten Wood, whose putrefied Bladders, with some Fibrous Parts, spring into a Mush∣rome. Jews-Ears are very Mucilaginous; by Fungus Sambuci∣nus. which they relax and cool Inflammations in the Throat; and they have a strong
Earthy-Smell; by which they may dis∣cuss Glandulous Tumors. It is not good to swallow any of the Decoction of them. G. HEdge-Nettle: The Taste of the Galeopsis. Leaves is Bitterish and Aroma∣tick. It stinks at first like Dead-Nettle, in the Leaves; but has an Aroma∣tick Turpentine in the Flowers; by which it is a Vulnerary, as well as by its Bitter∣ish-Astringency. It is a great Discusser, by its strong Smell. It is good in the Scrophula, and other Tumors. Inwardly it is an excellent Vulnerary; and outwardly good in Oyntments. By the Smell it is a Dead-Nettle or Lamium. Common Ladies-Bedstraw: The Taste Gallium Luteum. is Bitterish and Astringent: The Flowers are of a Fragrant Sweetish Smell. It is plainly, by the yellow Root, a Madder; being Bitter, Acrid, and a little Astringent: and therefore it is an error to think it can coagulate Milk; but it is rather mixt with the Rennet, to preserve the Cheese from Corruption, or to give it a Flavor.
Gentian yields an Acid, as well as Gallium, in Distillation: and yet none will think it fit to coagulate Milk: Which Mr. Ray intimates to be the effect of Gallium. Common-Broom: The Leaves and Stalks Genista. have a Sweet-Bitter Pea-taste: The Seeds are like Pease, a little Bitter. All the parts of it are good in the Scurvey, Jaun∣dice, and Dropsie: They keep the Body Soluble. The Flowers and Leaves re∣semble Pease: so that Broom belongs to that Class. A distilled Water of the Flowers, is good in the Stone, by their Mucilage and Bitterness; by which Taste the Flowers vomit. Furze: The Flowers smell like Rancid Genista Spinosa. Oyl, and are Mucilaginous: The Root and Bark have a Sweet, Bitterish Pea-taste. Yellows hath a Bitterish, Mucilaginous Genistella Tinctoria. Pea-taste. The Flowers smell like Oyl of Linseed, as most of the Pea-taste do. The Root is strong tasted, like Rancid Oyl: It is fit for Oyntments. Petty-whin has a Bitter Pea-taste. Genistella Aculeata.
Centaury-leav'd Gentian tastes in the Gentia∣nella fu∣gax minor. Leaves Mucilaginous and Bitter; and smells strong like Elder. Herb-Robert tastes Bitterish and Astrin∣gent; Geranium Robertia∣num. and smells strong of Turpentine: It is an excellent Vulnerary inwardly and outwardly. The Juyce of it is mixt with Honey, for Cankers of the Mouth, which it cures very well. Crow-foot Cranes-Bill smells of Turpen∣tine, Geranium Batrachoi∣des. like Herb-Robert. The Root tastes Bitterish and Rough, and feels Clammy. Musk Cranes-Bill smells of Musk; feels Geranium Moscha∣tum. clammy, as other Turpentine Plants do: and is also Bitterish and Rough. Dove-foot Cranes-Bill smells of Musk; Geranium Columbi∣num. and is Rough in Taste. It may be observed, that all the Cranes-Bills are Astringent; the Musky are least Bitter, the Turpentine most; on which the Bitterness depends. And from hence it may be conjectured, that a small de∣gree of Turpentine produces the Musky-Smell; for the Geraniums are all of a kind
and Vertue, though the Smell distin∣guishes them into the Musky, or Turpen∣tine Plants: And there are other Gerani∣ums, which want either Smell; as Gera∣nium inodorum, which is Astringent. The Turpentine Crane-Bills are Diu∣retick and Pectoral: and by the Bitterness and Astringency, they are the most exact Vulneraries; Cleansing and Healing in Wounds and Ʋlcers. Water-Flagg, or Water Flower-de-luce: Gladiolus luteus Pa∣lustris, sive Iris lutea Palustris. The Roots and Flaggs are Rough, A∣stringent, and very Burning, like Orris. The Root is successfully used inwardly, to prevent an Hydrophobia, with the Root of Devils-Bit. And they are boyled in Milk, and given for a Week to them that are Bitten by a Mad Dogg. The Yellow-Flowers are Mucilaginous, and burn the Mouth; and therefore are an Orris. The Astringency of the Root hinders the Fermentative Vertue of the Animal Venome from producing a Fever in the Blood, and probably dulls the Acti∣vity of the Venome, which consists in a Volatile Salt; and the Acrimony pre∣serves the Blood from Coagulation.
Woad is Astringent, Bitterish and Acrid. Glastum Sativum. Indigo is of the same Taste and Vertue. Woad abounds in a Volatile Salt, and is a good Hepatick in the Jaundice. Wedelius makes a Volatile Salt of it without Fire. It belongs to the Cress-Tastes, by its Cods and Taste; and may be placed with Che∣lidonium majus Luteola. The Yellow-Flow∣ers smell like Cresses. Wild Liquorish-Vetch is much more Glaux Vulgaris. sweet in the Leaf than common Liquo∣rish. Common Liquorish: The Leaves are Glycyrrhi∣za vulgaris Bitterish and Rough; and feel clammy, like Oyly Mucilaginous Plants. The Roots have a very sweet Taste, and a little Mucilaginous. This belongs to the Sweet Pea-Taste. It is a Lenient, Ne∣phritick, and Pulmonick; good in Acri∣mony of Ʋrine. The Juyce Inspissate is good in the same Diseases. It is the Mu∣cilage in the Liquorish, that stops the vio∣lent motion of the Corrosive Salts in Catarrhs, and covers the Membranes of the Throat with a Slime. And also the sensible Membranes are saturated by its Lusciousness: So that the Corrosive Rheum is not perceived.
Cud-weed smells somewhat Aromatick, Gnapha∣lium. like Wormwood: It tastes Bitterish, Dry, Astringent, and a little Hot. It is Vul∣nerary, and good in all Fluxes. It is Sto∣machick. It renews the Cud, being given to Beasts, because it is like Wormwood in Effects and Taste. Quich, or Couch-Grass: The Root is Gramen Caninum. Watrish and Sweetish: It cools by the Taste, and lenifies the sharpness of Ʋrine; but where the Excellency therein for Worms lies, I know not, nor wherein its opening Faculty resides. Parnassus-Grass is Rough and Bitterish, Gramen Parnassi. a Vulnerary and Diuretick, like white and yellow Saxifrage. Small Hedge-Hyssop is nauseously Sweet, Gratiola angusti∣folia. Bitter and Acrid: It is therefore a strong Purger.
H. IVY-Tree: The Bark has a Rancid Hedera Ar∣borea. Oyly taste, Biting, and of a strong Scent. It may be used in Baths; but it is improper for the Rickets, being not fit for inward Use. The Gum has an unpleasant Offensive Smell, therefore an Enemy to the Nerves: It is of a Burning Caustick Taste. The Leaves are Bitter, and of an unpleasant Balsam-Smell; by which they draw Issues, and Slime out of Gouty Feet. The Leaves boyled yield a good Mucilage; which being boyled with Diapalma, makes a good Plaster for Issues. The Leaves may be used in Bal∣sams outwardly: and are good for Burns, by the Mucilage. The ripe Ivy-Berries are Sweet, Bitterish, Aromatick, Slimy, and very Acrid. I refer the Ivy-Tree to the Fetid Tur∣pentine-Class. Ground-Ivy is Rough, Bitterish, of a Hedera Terrestris. strong Balsamick, and Resinous, but more plainly of a Dead-Nettle Smell; which is very apparent by its Infusion in Ale. Gill-Drinks are Famous for the Scurvy, and Rheums and Ʋlcers in the Kidneys; for
which it's also used in Syrup, Juyce, Pow∣der, and distilled Water. The Juyce is outwardly used for the Pin and Web in the Eyes. It is put into Oyntments for Burns, as a good Vulnerary by its Bitter-Astrin∣gency. The Juyce is good for the Worms, and used as an Errhine in Cephalick Di∣stempers. Water-Ivy is of a burning Taste, like Hederula Aquatica. other Ranunculus's. Black-Hellebore: The Root is Bitter∣ish, Helleborus niger. and very Acrid, of an ill Smell, and is a strong Purgative: It caused a Pain in my Tongue to the Throat; the same it may cause in the Stomach. In the Shops, the black Root tasted Bitter, Sweet, and Acrid. The Smell of the Root is very Offensive. The Acrimony is an useful Corrector of the Acid in Melancholick Constitutions. An Acrid joyned with Bitter heats more than a simple strong Acrid; and the Taste lasts longer on the Pallat. Bears-foot; the Leaves taste nauseously Hellebora∣ster maxi∣mus. Bitter and Acrid, and smell like Elder. The Black Root smells strong, and is of the same taste.
Three spoonfuls of the Juyce of the Leaves pounded with White-wine, Vomits and Purges strongly: It is used for the Worms. Herb-Paris, or One Berry: The Leaves Herba Pa∣ris. have a Solanum Smell; the Berries are sweet and nauseous; and therefore is a Narcotick, like the Night-Shades. Hawk-weed is very Bitter, like Scabious Hieracium or Dandelion, but more strong; it cleanses the Stomach, is Diuretick, and an opening Hepatick. It is of the same kind with the Smoaky Bitters. By its Bitter-Astrin∣gency it is accounted a Vulnerary. Alisanders is like the Parsly-kind, in Hippeli∣num. Taste and Vertue: It is Sweet, Hot, A∣romatick and Bitterish. Stitch-wort: The Smell of the Leaves Holosteum, sive Caryo∣phyllus Holosteus. rubbed is crude: Its Taste is Sweet and Grassy; and is of the Lychnis-Tribe. Barley tastes Sweet and Slimy, as all Hordeum. Esculents do; the Meal is used in ripen∣ing Pultesses. Mault has a Sweet Taste, which it gives to new Drink.
Wild-Clary is of a like Taste and Smell Horminum Sylvestre. with the Garden-Clary: The Seeds are Mucilaginous; and by that means they take the Dust out of the Eyes. It is re∣ferible to the Class of Lamiums. Hare-Bells are Mucilaginous in the Hyacin∣thus Angli∣cus. Roots and Leaves, and have a Lily-Smell in the Flowers: They are of that Tribe; and have the same Vertue. The Gar∣den Hyacinths have the same Taste and Vertue. Henbane: The Roots are sweet like Hyoscya∣mus albus. Parsnips: The Leaves smell Offensively, Oyly, Strong, and Narcotick. Outward∣ly the Leaves are Anodyne, and Emol∣lient in all Pains and Inflammations. The Seed is used in Spitting of Blood; it is Mucilaginous, and Narcotick in Smell: It is used in Epilepsies, to the quantity of a Scruple, for many Nights together; and in the Morning give a Drachm of Rue powdered for a Month. Out of the Seed is made an Oyl by Expression. I gave to a Grey-hound half an ounce of Solanum Lethale Root powdered, be∣twixt two pieces of Bread and Butter; and at least an Ounce more boyled, to which I put an equal quantity of Milk, to make
him take it; which produced no sign of Sleepiness, nor any Evacuation. The next day I gave him a large quantity of Henbane-Leaves and Roots in Broth, without any alteration. The third day after, I gave him a great quantity of Hem∣lock boyled; and repeated a second Dose, without any considerable alteration. Two days afterwards I gave him a Cake of Nux Vomica, which made him dosie, and gave him Convulsions, and shortness of Breath; but he recovered well again. The Nux Vomica smells like Opium, and has the same Effect. Afterwards I gave him a great quantity of Hounds-Tongue-Leaves and Roots boyled; but without any alteration: So strong are the Spirits of Doggs, in resisting Opiates. I Vomited these Opiates off by Bryony-Juyce, given to him: and some days after, I gave him Thirty Berries of Solanum Lignosum, with which he presently run Mad and Dyed; and I found the same in his Stomach. Saint John's-wort: The Leaves taste Hyperi∣cum. Bitter and Astringent; and are of a Tur∣pentine-Smell: It is therefore Vulnerary and Diuretick, as Turpentine. The Flowers colour the Fingers Purple, and yield a
Balsamick Tincture, with Spirit of Wine. It is given in Melancholy; but is fitter for the Stone. The Roots taste Bitter and Astringent. An Oyly Balsam is made of the Flowers, by Infusion in Oyl. In St. John's-wort Powdered there remains only the Bitter-Astringency, and the Turpentine is lost. By the Bitter-A∣stringency it is good for Agues. This, and Ascyrum, and Androsemum, have a Laxative Quality by their Turpentine: and as Diureticks, are good for the Sciatica. An excellent Balsamick Oyl may be drawn from the Seeds by Expression. I. KNap-weed is very Bitter, Astringent, Jacea. and Smoaky: It has the Vertues of Scabious, and is of the same Class. Outwardly it is Vulnerary, and good for Scabs, Itch, and Ʋlcers; the Root is Milky. Ragwort tastes a little Bitter, Rough, Jacobea. and Hot: It smells Sub-acid, and a little like Erigerum; and belongs to the same Class, or rather to the Hawk-weeds.
The Walnut-Tree: The Bark of the Juglans. Walnut-Tree is Bitter, Biting, and Rough. When it is dry, it looks black within; and for that reason, and its Purgative Fa∣culty, it is not like Jesuits-Bark. The Green Husk of the Walnuts taste very Bitter, and very Acrid; by which, in di∣stilled Water, it is good for the Head and Worms: The tender first Sprouts of the Leaves are kept dry, and boyled in Milk, to Purge Children for the Worms. And the Green Walnuts preserved, Purge. The Bark and Iuli Vomit. The Infusion of Walnut-Leaves drives Worms out of the Ground, if sprinkled thereon. The Wal∣nut-Kernel is of an Oyly Nut Sweet-Taste. The Oyl is good for the Stone. Rushes: The Roots taste Rough Juncus vulgaris. and Brackish, like Steel, from the Boggs they grow in. The Leaves are Rough, Raw, and Moorish, and smell Raw. The Flowering-Rush has the same Taste Juncus flo∣ridus, seu gladiolus palustris. Juniperus. and Vertue. Juniper-Tree: The Wood, Leaves and Berries, smell of an Aromatick-Turpentine, and taste Bitterish and Astringent; are Diuretick, Vulnerary, Carminative, Ute∣rine,
and Antiscorbutick. The Berries are used in Diet-Drink; the Spirit and Oyl of the Berries are good in the Stone. The Wood may be used instead of Sassa∣phras-Wood. The Ashes are good for the Dropsie in Lixiviums. Juniper-Ber∣ries have a Sweet, Bitterish, and Aroma∣tick Taste; and are therefore Pectoral and Diuretick, as Sassaphras. Instead of the Bark, which is but small in the Juniper-Tree, add the Berries with the Wood, in drying Drinks, for Catarrhs. L. LAmbs-Lettuce: The Leaves taste Lactuca Agnina. Cool, Bitterish, and Slimy, like ordinary Lettuce. It's fit for Sallets. Wild-Lettuce smells strong, like Opium; Lactuca Sylvestris. tastes Mucilaginous and Bitter: It is of a Narcotick Vertue. It Purges, as an Opiate; and makes a good Oyntment for Burns and Inflammations.
Narrow-Leav'd All-heal: It smells very Ladanum Segetum, sive side-ritis flore rubro. Fragrant, like a sweet Gum: It tastes a little Mucilaginous, Rough, and Bitterish. It is an excellent Vulnerary. It belongs to the Species of Sideritis, by the Figure; but this has more plainly Turpentine in it. Hares-Foot tastes a little Dry and A∣stringent; Lagopus vulgaris. and in that lies its Vertue for stopping Fluxes, repelling, and of being Antifebrifick. Arch-angel, or Dead-Nettle: The Flow∣ers Lamium Flore Albo. and Leaves are Bitterish, Mucilaginous, and Sub-Astringent; with a strong Fetid smell. Red Arch-angel smells plainly of Tur∣pentine; Flore Ru∣bro. and tastes Bitterish, Sub-Astrin∣gent, and a little Slimy. Lamium, with a Yellow-Flower has the Flore Flavo. same Taste and Smell as Lamium flore albo. All Lamiums are Vulneraries, and discus∣sing Kings-Evil-Tumors, by their strong Smell. Henbit smells and tastes like Ground∣Ivy; Lamium folio cau∣lem am∣biente. which is a Lamium: as is also Be∣tony, by its Smell.
Nipple-wort: The Leaves are a little Lampsana. Bitter and Astringent; and therefore it is used in Oyntments for the Nipples. The Root is Bitterish, Rough, and Acrid, like the Cresses; and it is eaten boyl'd. It has a Bitter Milk; and by that, and the Flowers and Seeds, it should be a Hawk-weed. Sharp-pointed Dock: The Roots look Lapathum acutum. Yellow, like Rhubarb, and taste Nauseously Bitter and Astringent, with a little Heat and Sliminess. It is used in Diet-drinks, as Antiscorbutick, Laxative, and Hepatick. Common Dock is of the same Vertue Lapathum vulgare fol. obtuso. as the former, but seems stronger: It is Bitter, Slimy, Astringent, and more Acrid; by which it is Purgative; and therefore the best for use. English Rhubarb tastes of a Dock-Bit∣terness, and is very Rough and Acrid, like common Dock-Root. Water-Dock: The Root is very Rough, Hydro-Lapathum. and but little Bitter, and not Acrid. It is used, by mistake, for the other. This is best outwardly for the Itch, as an Astrin∣gent; and in Spitting of Blood. The Root is more Red than other Docks, and seems to be a Sorrel.
Red-Dock: The Leaves taste Rough; Lapathum Rubrum. and the Red Stalks, Acid; the Root, Bit∣terish, Rough, and Nauseous, like other Docks. The Seeds of the Docks are Astrin∣gent, and good for Loosnesses, and Fluxes of Blood. The Leaves of Docks also taste Acid and Astringent, or Rough: They are us'd in Baths for the Itch, and smell Crude and Acid. The Red Dock-Root is (like the Yellow Roots of other Docks) of a purging Faculty. Pease-Everlasting has a rough Pea-Taste. Lathyrus major per∣ennis. Spurge-Lawrel has the burning Taste of Laureola. Spurge; and purges Hydropical Humors violently. The Leaves are also Slimy. Ducks-meat is Crude and Watry, and Lens Palu∣stris. good for outward Inflammations: Inward∣ly it may cure inflamed Cholerick Blood; but not the Jaundice proceeding from Ob∣struction; as Authors affirm. Dittander tastes very Acrid, Exulcera∣ting, Lepidium latifolium, seu Piperi∣tis. and Bitterish, like Radish, but strong∣er: The Roots therefore provoke the Birth, and the Plant is Antiscorbutick. It is us'd for Pains of the Teeth and Hips.
It belongs to the Cresses, by its Taste and Smell; which is thought to resemble Pepper, as the Name imports. Wall-Gilliflowers are Mucilaginous and Leucoium Luteum sive Cheiri. Biting; therefore an Oyntment of the Flowers is us'd for the Gout. The Flow∣ers are also us'd in Cordial Waters. Leu∣coium, by its Face and Seeds, belongs to the Cress-Class. The Seeds are Bitterish, and very Acrid. The Conserve of the Flowers is a good Antiscorbutick and Cephalick. Ground-Liverwort, being rubbed, smells Lichen sive Hepatica vulgaris. of Turpentine, and tastes Mucilaginous, and a little Biting, like Turpentine: It is there∣fore a good Diuretick in the Stone and Dropsie, and Antiscorbutick. Outwardly it is good for Tetters, Ʋlcers, Wounds, and Itch; being Bitterish and Sub-Astringent, as other Turpentine Plants. Tree-Lungwort is Bitterish and Astrin∣gent; Lichen ar∣borum Pul∣monarius. good in Fluxes, and to stop Coughs, in Syrup. Boyl one handful in a Pint of Beer to half. Ash-colour'd Ground-Liverwort tastes Lichen ci∣nereus ter∣restris. Sweetish and Rough, smells Earthy like Mosses; and is us'd for Coughs.
Privet: The Leaves smell like Lawrel Ligustrum. when bruis'd, and the Vertue of it seems to be the same as of Lawrel; which may be an outward Vulnerary, for that the Leaves taste Bitter and Astringent. The White Flowers smell Sweet. The black Berries have a purplish Juyce within them. The Leaves may be good for Ʋlcers of the Mouth. Lily of the Valley: The Flowers taste Lilium Convalli∣um. very Bitter and Biting; the Roots are Mucilaginous. The Flowers smell very Fragrant, and are therefore Cordial; and by being Bitterish, Acrid, and Aromatick, are Cephalick in Apoplexies, Palsies, Ver∣tigoes, and Epilepsies: And the Flowers powder'd, make a grateful strong Sneez∣ing-Powder. The distill'd Water, and a Conserve of the Flowers are most us'd. The Roots are very Mucilaginous; and by them it is of the Lily-kind. Toad-Flax: The Green-Leaves are Bit∣terish, Linaria lu∣tea vulga∣ris. Mucilaginous, and Sub-acrid, and of an Elder-Smell; the Flowers are like Snap-Dragon, Sweet, Bitterish, and Muci∣laginous. It is an Anodyne for the He∣morrhoids, in Oyntment of the Flowers.
It is not fit for inward Use; but fit out∣wardly for Cataplasms. The Water may cool the Redness of the Eyes. Common-Flax: The Seed is very Oy∣ly Linum Sa∣tivum. and Mucilaginous, and of a Rancid Smell. The Expressed Oyl is Anodyne and Emollient in Clysters, and in Pleure∣tick Coughs. Outwardly it discusses and mollifies Tumors. Green Flax is Bitterish and Mucilaginous. Gromwell: The Root and Seeds taste Lithosper∣mum sive Milium So∣lis. Sweet and Mucilaginous. The Seed-Ca∣ses are Stony, by which they are Lithon∣triptick. The Leaves and Roots of Grom∣well smell like Hounds-Tongue. There is a little Heat in the Taste; but I cannot find the Sudorifick Quality. It seems to be an Opiate, like Hounds-Tongue. Rough Spleenwort: The Roots and Leaves Lonchitis aspera. taste Rough and Sweet, like the Ferns; and are of the same Vertue. It has no Sliminess. It is Splenetick, Astringent, and Vulnerary. Hops: They are very Bitter and A∣crid, Lupulus. and of a strong Lamium-Smell. They are Diuretick, Hepatick, and Sudorifick.
Outwardly they discuss Tumors, and cure the Itch. The Root has a Thick, Rough, and a little Acrid, and Bitterish Bark; by which it seems to be Splenetick, Diu∣retick, and Sudorifick. Take a Pound of Roots, and boyl them in a Gallon of Wa∣ter to half or three Parts, adding Parsley-Roots and Raisins; give half a Pint of it to Sweat, as you give Sarsaparilla, in the Itch, and Lues Venerea. Diers-Weed: The Root and Leaves Luteola. are Mucilaginous, and very hot on the Tongue: It is of a strong offensive Smell. Outwardly it is Anodyne and Emollient: If inwardly us'd, it is Diuretick. It may be of the Cress-Taste. Wild White and Red Campians are of a Lychnis Sylvestris flore Albo, Rubro. crude Taste, Watrish, and smell crude; therefore are good for Inflammations, or Hemorrhages outwardly. There is also a Sweetness in the Taste of Lychnis-Root. Purple-Spiked Willow-Herb is Watrish, Lysimachi∣a Purpurea Spicata. Mucilaginous, and a little Hot; but of a crude Smell. Quaere, Whether it be a La∣mium? Codded-Willow-Herb is Mucilaginous, Lysimachi∣a Siliquosa.
Hot, and Acrid; therefore it is a good Diuretick. It seems to be a Leucoium, by the Cods, Mucilage, and Acrimony, and by the Flower. It is a little Bitterish; and of the Vertue of Leucoiums, Diuretick. Hooded-Willow-Herb is very Bitter and Lysimachi∣a Galericu∣lata. Acrid, and a kind of Gratiola; and there∣fore may be Purging. Yellow-Willow-Herb is Mucilaginous, Lysimachi∣a lutea vul∣garis & Hortensis. and a little Biting; and of the Vertue of the Codded. M. ORdinary Mallowes: The Leaves, Malva vul∣garis. Flowers, and Roots are Watry and Mucilaginous; and therefore Emollient and Anodyne externally: In∣wardly the Conserve of the Flowers, and distill'd Water with Syrup of Violets, are good for the Stone and Cough. The Seeds are useful; and the Stalks, cook'd like A∣sparagus, are scarce distinguishable from it. Out of Mallow-Root, Barley-Meal, and Oyl boyl'd in Water, is made a good Pul∣tess for Inflammations.
The Crab-Tree: The Bark is Sweet∣ish, Malus Syl∣vestris. Bitter, and Styptick. The Juyce of the Crab is Bitterish, Sowre, and very Rough. It cools outward Inflammations with Barm. Verjuice is inwardly good in Fevers, and Cholerick Loosnesses, with Su∣gar or Milk. The Crab-Bark is less Sweet than the Apple. White Horehound is very Bitter, and of Marrubi∣um Album. a strong Lamium-Smell, and a little Plea∣sant. It is a good opening Hepatick in the Jaundice, and a Cleansing Pectoral in Water, and Syrup of the Juyce; especi∣ally in an Asthma: And in Juyce I have us'd it. It is outwardly good in Oynt∣ments for sordid Ʋlcers, and in Baths. By the Foetor it may be a good Hyste∣rick. Water-Horehound is moderately Bitter Marrubi∣um Aquati∣cum. and Astringent: The Smell is neither strong, nor unpleasant; but like Sideritis, and therefore Vulnerary. Common Melilote tastes Slimy, Bitter, Melilotus vulgaris. and Biting, or Acrid; and is therefore Anodyne, and discussing by its Acrimony. In the Emplaster it is most us'd. It smells, when rubb'd, like the Pea-kind. By the
Taste it should be Purgative; which is not yet tryed. Water-Mint is of a Bitterish, Hot, Pun∣gent, Mentha Aquatica sive Sisym∣brium. and Aromatick Taste, and smells like Calamint or Penny-Royal. It is a good Diuretick, Antiscorbutick, and Carmina∣tive. It has some Astringency; by which it strengthens the Stomach. Horse-Mint has a Bitterish, Biting, Mint-Taste, Menta∣strum A∣quaticum. with a strong Mint-Smell. It is of the same Vertue as common Mint. Common Millefoile or Yarrow: The Millefoli∣um vulga∣re. Roots are very Acrid, and Blistering the Mouth. The Flowers and Leaves are Bit∣terish and Hot, without any considerable Astringency; and therefore improperly given for Hemorrhages. It smells like Southern-wood in the Flowry Part, or like Chamemel-Flowers: And therefore is to be reckon'd amongst Cephalicks, by the Bitterish Acrimony, and Aromatick Smell. The first Sprouts of Millefoile are very A∣crid. Small Mountain Bastard-Madder is Bit∣ter Mollugo Montana. and Acrid, like Madder.
Devils-Bit: The Leaves are very Bit∣ter, Morsus Di∣aboli. like Scabious; the Root is Bitterish, Biting, and Burning in the Throat; and therefore accounted Alexipharmack, and may be us'd instead of Contrayerva; for it is accounted good against the Bitings of Mad Doggs, with Flagg-Root boyl'd in Milk. The Leaves are of the same Ver∣tue as Scabious, Cleansing, Vulnerary, Pe∣ctoral, and Hepatick. The Moss of an Oak-Pale smells Strong Muscus ex ligno Quer∣cino. and Earthy, flies quick up into the Nose, and causes Sneezing, like Volatile Salts; and has somewhat of an Orris-Smell, like the Ferns. It tastes Bitterish, Sweet, and Rough, and a little Hot; by which it is Pectoral, and expectorating the thick Phlegm, and strengthening the Glandules: By the Astringency it hinders the Deflu∣xion of thin Rheum. This is the Basis of sweet Pulville-Powders, vid. Zwelfer. Of Tabaco, Primrose-Roots, and this Moss, I made a Sneezing-Powder. St. Winifred's Moss, (brought me from Muscus O∣doratus. Holy-Well) if rubb'd, it smells like Orris, as some Ferns do; and tastes like Orris, Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatick: But by the Stalks in it, it is rather a Fern, than a Moss.
The Moss of Trees differs according to Muscus Arboreus Ramosus. the Taste of Trees: The Oak-Moss tastes Rough and Bitterish, and smells Strong, Earthy, and Acrid; especially being pow∣der'd. Boyl it in Beer for Coughs, or in Thea. The Moss of Alder has a Bitterness and Muscus Alni. Roughness, like Alder, with the Scent above-mention'd: It tastes a little Brack∣ish, like Steel. Pear-Tree Moss has a Rough, Steely-Taste; Muscus ex Pyro. and smells Strong, Earthy, and Acrid. I tasted these Mosses in the Win∣ter, when the Rain might lodge in the Moss; but how they come to taste like Steel, I know not. I cannot but take notice, that the Misle-Toe has the like Taste as Mosses, Bitterish, Acrid, and Astringent; and branches like Tree-Mosses; and therefore is bred out of a like Juyce of the Tree. Apple-Tree-Moss tastes Rough, Bitter∣ish, Muscus ex Malo. and Sub-acrid; and is of the same pungent Scent. Moss of a Mans Skull is like common Muscus ex Cranio. Moss, of an Earthy-Smell, and of a Rough
Earthy-Taste. It is much commended for stopping of Hemorrhages: Applied to the Nose, it may help the Congealing of the Blood, and work as an Astringent, and offend the Spirits by the Earthy-Smell: And it may disturb the Fanciful, by holding it in the Hand; and by occa∣sioning some Terror, may stop Bleeding. Firr-Tree-Moss tastes and smells like Muscus ex Abiete. the Oak-Moss. Cup-Moss is not very Rough; it seems Muscus Pyxidatus. a little Slimy. I tasted it in the Shops, and expected an Acrimony in it. It is of the Vertue of the Lichen Hepaticâ fa∣cie. It is us'd for an Astringent in Coughs: And I believe, the Fresh is Sweet and A∣stringent. The Ground-Mosses and Tree-Mosses are Muscus Terrestris. of different Tastes and Natures; the com∣mon Green Ground-Moss, most Astringent and Earthy; used in Stopping of Blood. Mouse-Ear Scorpion-Grass is Mucilagi∣nous, Myosotis Scorpi∣oides. and a little Acrid; by which it is inwardly and outwardly good in Bitings of Venomous Beasts▪ And is referible to the Class of Echium▪  Bugloss.
Mouse-Tail is Cooling and Astringent, Myosuros. as Plantane; and therefore of the same Vertue. Hemlock-Chervil smells of Hemlock, and Myrrhis Sylvestris Seminibus Asperis. is also Strong and Terebinthinate, with an Hot, Pungent, Sweet, and Bitterish Taste; a good outward Discusser and Vulnerary; smelling like an Oyntment, as the Name imports. It may be placed amongst the Fetid Ʋmbels, being Sweet, Acrid, and Fe∣tid; or else refer it to the Terebinthinate-Fetids. N. YEllow Daffadil: The Flowers smell Narcissus. Strong, and are Mucilaginous: The Roots are Mealy and Muci∣laginous, like Lilies. They Vomit, as Bulbous-Roots do, very violently. Out∣wardly they are good for Burns, and hard Tumors; to break Imposthumes, to agglu∣tinate Wounds, and cleanse Ʋlcers. Water-Cresses: The Leaves and Seeds Nasturti∣um Aqua∣ticum. are Acrid, like vy-Grass, and other Cresses; and sme  Scurvy-Grass, but
milder. It is Diuretick and Antiscorbu∣tick, by the Volatile Salt. Outwardly it is good in Scald-Heads, if infus'd in Hoggs-grease; and it is put into Pultesses, to ripen Swell'd Breasts, and discuss Is∣chiadick Pains, and those of the Spleen: And it is put in Medicines Antihydropick, with Liverwort. Catmint is of a Strong, Aromatick, Nepeta. Mint-burnt-Scent; and of an Hot, Acrid, and Bitterish Taste: The Scent is mixt of Aromatick and Fetid, and a little like Penny-Royal; which is also an Hysterick. It has quick Parts to pierce into the Nerves, and rectifie the Motion of the Spirits, by a very Volatile Oyly Salt. By these mixt Scents it is evident, that Aromaticks and Fetids differ only in De∣gree. Money-wort has a Terebinthinate Smell, Nummula∣ria. and a Bitterish and Astringent Taste; by which it is an excellent Vulnerary in Ʋl∣cers of the Lungs, and an Antiscorbutick; and good in all Fluxes, us'd as an Astrin∣gent. Yellow Water-Lily: The Flower smells Nymphaea flore Luteo like Mustard-Seed; the Leaf tastes Watry
and Rough: the Root smells like Walnut-Peel; and tastes Bitterish and Acrid, like the same Peel. White Water-Lily: The Leaves of the Nymphaea flore Albo. Flowers are Mucilaginous, and a little Hot; by which they are Diuretick. They are most us'd in Conserves. The dried Roots smell like Mustard, and taste a little Acrid and Mucilaginous, with an Astringency. How it is useful in the Diabetes, and in all Fluxes, and in Syrup to act as an Hypnotick, I cannot clearly apprehend; but rather think it to be an excellent Diuretick. I cannot perceive any Poppy or Opiate-Smell. The Acrimony provokes Ʋrine, as much as the Slime and Roughness can stop it. O. WAter-Dropwort tastes Sweetish, Oenanthe Aquatica. Bitterish, and Hot of the Fen∣nil-kind; and smells like Wa∣ter-Parsnip, Aromatick; and therefore is a good Diuretick. Adders-Tongue: The Taste is Mucila∣ginous, Ophioglos∣sum.
ginous, Bitterish, and a little Biting; the Smell is Strong, Oyly, and Unpleasant. Infus'd in Oyl, it makes the Oyl green. It cures green Wounds, Burns, and Ʋlcers. It is not fit for inward Use, being very Nauseous, and not Astringent. Quaere, Whether it be not, by its Smell and Taste, and colouring Oyl green, re∣ferible to Luteola? The Male Fools-Stones: The Leaves Orchis Mo∣rio Mas, fol. Macu∣latis. taste nauseously Bitter, and, rubb'd with the Stalk, smell a little Rank: The Flow∣ers smell Sweet, like Lilies. The Root tastes Sweet, Mealy, and Mucilaginous; and is of the Vertue and Class of Lilies. It is hard to believe the Venereal Vertue, because this Bulbous-Root will Vomit, and seems most proper outwardly for Pultesses; as Lily-Roots: Yet the Rank Smell shews some Venereal Vertue. English Wild-Marjoram is Bitterish, Hot, Origanum vulgare. and Aromatick, like Marjoram. It is a good Cephalick. Broom-Rape tastes extreamly Rough and Orobanche Bitterish: It almost choaks the Taster by the Roughness; and therefore too much a Styptick for inward Use; but is rather
a good external Vulnerary. It grows fast in the Root of Broom; of which the In∣genious Walter Chetwynd, of Ingestry, in∣form'd me: and I found it to grow out of that Root. In Figure and Vertue it is like Hypocistis. Barberies: The Bark is Bitter, Astrin∣gent, Oxyacan∣tha. and a little Slimy, Pungent, and A∣crid; by which it purges Choler, if the Bark be steeped in Beer; as I tried it in a Cholerick Person. The Berries are A∣cid, Astringent, and good in Fevers and Fluxes from Choler: And they excite Appetite. Hawthorne: The Leaves are Mucila∣ginous; Oxyacan∣thus. the Fruit is Pulpy and Mucilagi∣nous; and therefore good for the Stone. The Stones joyning with the Animal A∣cids, become Diuretick. The Bark is Rough and Bitterish; and the Flowers smell Sweet and Faint. Pyracantha has the same Taste and Vertue.
P. COrn-Red-Poppy: The Flowers have Papaver Rhoeas. a heavy Narcotick Smell; and taste Mucilaginous, Sweet, and a little Warm: The Syrup and Water are most used; which last has a Narcotick, Offensive Smell, and carries much of the Vertue. The Root and Milk are Bitter, and extream Acrid. The Syrup and Wa∣ter are mild Opiates. A stronger Prepa∣ration may be made out of the Roots. The Leaves are outwardly Opiate; and cool Inflammations. The Seeds are said to loosen the Belly (which Opiates do) in great quantiy. Pellitory of the Wall: The Taste is Parietaria. Watrish, Cool and Bitterish, like Bugloss; and therefore is accounted Nitrous. It is used inwardly to cool Heats in Hecti∣cal Coughs. It is but a Cool, Watry Diuretick, used in Clysters as an Emol∣lient: Externally it is cooling in Erysi∣pela's, Inflammations, Burnings, and Tumors. Quaere, Whether the Diuretick Ver∣tue depends not much on the Sandiness, of the Leaves? The Vertue of the Herb
is best in Syrup for Coughs. I refer it to Bugloss. Common Whitlow-Grass is of an Acrid Parony∣chia vul∣garis; Rutaceo folio. Cress-Taste and Vertue. Rue Whitlow-Grass is Bitterish, and of an Astringent Rough Taste, and a little Sweetish; by which it checks the Putre∣faction in the Kings-Evil. I tasted it de∣caying, and not fresh. Common Garden-Parsnep: The Root is Pastinaca latifolia sativa. Sweet, Mucilaginous, and Aromatick; very Nutritive and Diuretick. Carrot: The Roots are very Sweet and Pastinaca sativa te∣nuifolia. Aromatick; and the Seeds are the same; being like Daucus-Seed, Carminative and Diuretick. Water-Parsnep is of an Aromatick Pastinaca aquatica. Smell, and pleasant Parsnep-Taste. The Distilled Water is Diuretick, and a little Hot, as the Leaf tastes. Venus-Comb is Sweet, Hot, and Aro∣matick; Pecten Ve∣neris. like Chervil, in Taste and Smell; and of a Diuretick Vertue.
Red-Rattle seems to be of the nature of Pedicularis Rubra vul∣garis. the Pea-tribe, tasting Sweet; and smelling like Green Peascods. It is as good for the Scurvy as Fitches, and is Diuretick. Great Red-Rattle has the same sweet Pedicula∣ris Rubra palustris elatior. Taste, and is a little warm; therefore it is a good Diuretick. Yellow-Rattle is Sweet, Mucilaginous, Pedicula∣ris fl. flavo. very Biting and Acrid. I rather believe this Plant would kill Lice, as Staphis agria does, by its Acrimony, than produce them. And for that reason Staphis agria is called Pedicularis. It seems to be a notable Diuretick, by the Mucilage and Acrimony. Cinquefoyl: The Leaves taste Rough; Pentaphyl∣lum. the Roots Bitterish and Rough, like Tor∣mentil. The Roots of either are usefully put into the Bitter Draught, without Se∣na, and given before Ague-Fits. It's good in all Fluxes of Blood, and other Humors; being a good inward Vulnerary. The Roots of Cinquefoyl are Sub-acrid; by which they are Diaphoretick in Fevers. Petty-Spurge is of a burning Taste, and Peplus sive Esula ro∣tunda. of a Purgative Faculty, as all the Spurges are.
Honey-Suckle: The Berries are Sweet Periclyme∣num. and Slimy. Ten or Twelve squeezed in∣to Beer, purge. The Leaves have a Bit∣terish, Grassy, a little Mucilaginous, and Bit∣ing-Taste: This is a great Diuretick in the Flowers, of which a Conserve is used in an Asthma. The Flowers are Mucilaginous, Biting, Burning, and of an Aromatick Smell. An Oyl for Palsies is made of the Flowers. The Juyce of the Leaves is Diuretick. Quaere, Whether the Wood may not be used, instead of Lignum Nephriticum? By the Figure of the Flower, and the Bitterish, Slimy, Acrid Taste, I refer this to the Pea-tastes. The Green-Leaves rubbed, smell like Green-Pease. And the Flower is like a Bean-Flower. Spotted-Arsmart: The Roots taste Persicaria Maculosa. Rough; the Leaves Acrid, Rough, or Acerb: Good in all Fluxes, and Cooling. Biting-Arsmart: The Taste is very Hot Persicaria Acris. and Burning. The Distilled Water is good in the Stone. Outwardly in Cataplasms, it discusses and dissolves hard Tumors. By the strong Acrid, it is a Ranunculus. Butter-bur: The Root and Leaves Petasites. taste much like Angelica, Sweet, Bitter∣ish,
and very Acrid, but more unpleasant, and smells like it; with a Headiness or Foe∣tor; of a Mithridate-Flavor; and therefore used as a Sudorifick in Pestilential Fevers, and in the Cough. Harts-Tongue has a Rough Taste, like Phyllitis. Fern; and therefore useful for Ʋlcers, Fluxes, Splenetick Fermentations of the Blood, and Disorderly Motions of Spirits, in Fits of the Mother, and in Hot Consti∣tutions. It has a Fragrancy which is Cor∣dial, when it is Infused in Drink. A Fern-Smell is in the Green-Leaves, like Tallow. But the Orris-Smell is more evident in the dryed Leaves. Common-Burnet, Great and Little, have Pimpinella vulgaris, Sanguisor∣ba. an Aromatick Cordial Smell, infused in Wine. The Root is very Rough and Bit∣terish; and therefore good in Fevers be∣fore the Fits. The Green-Leaves are very Slimy, and Rough after that Taste is over: The whole is a good Styptick and Vul∣nerary; and is good for Spittings of Blood. Burnet-Saxifrage: The Roots, Seeds, Pimpinella Saxifraga major & minor. and Leaves, are of a Sweet, Aromatick, Hot, Parsley-Taste, and Diuretick Vertue; but much more Hot and Pungent than Parsley.
Butter-wort: The Leaves are very Pinguicula Mucilaginous, Bitterish, and Acrid. The Flowers have a Fragrant Smell; by which they may purge; and outwardly make an Oyl like Adders-Tongue: It seems to be a sort of Violet. The Mucilage makes it fit for Chops in the Breasts and Hands, and colours Yellow. Field-Pease: The Leaves have a Sweet, Pisum Ar∣vense. Slimy, Raw Taste. It will make a cool distilled Water, and is Diuretick. The Juyce cools Hot Bloods. And Scorbutick Persons, who have Lived on Salt Meats at Sea, eat Green-Pease, and other Raw Fruit. Water-Plantane is of an Astringent and Plantago aquatica. Cooling Taste, and used as such. Common-Plantane: The Leaves are Plantago vulgaris. Acid and Astringent. Outwardly they cool Inflammations and Burns. Inwardly the Juyce is Cooling, Astringent, and Di∣uretick. The Seeds are Mucilaginous, but the Husks are Astringent. In Pow∣der it is used for Fluxes. The Juyce is good outwardly in Ʋlcers of the Leggs. Quaere, The Bitterness of Plantane.
Plantane-Rib-wort is boyled in Posset-Drink, Plantago quinque∣nervia. and given before Agues, which it cures by the crude Astringency. Milk-wort is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Polygala. a little Pungent; and smells Fragrant, like Pansies; and is Purging. Violets, Pansies, Butter-wort, and Milk-wort are of an agreeable Smell, and all Purging more or less; being Bitterish, Mucilaginous, and a little Acrid. Solomons-Seal: The Roots and Leaves Polygona∣tum vul∣gare. are Mucilaginous, and a little Biting or Pungent, without Astringency. It is used boyled in Wine, or Powdered for Ruptures. Outwardly it is Agglu∣tinative, and Cosmetick; the Berries are Vomitive. I did not observe the Bitterishness nor Astringency (as Galen did) which joyn∣ed to a Mucilage and Acrimony, will certainly render it Purgative. Quaere, Whether the Berries be Sweet, Bitterish, and Nauseous? The Flowers and Leaves are like Lilies. Knawell: The Taste is Bitterish and A∣stringent. Polygo∣num Ger∣manicum. It is of the same Vertue as the ordinary Polygonum.
Parkinson says, The Seeds are Acrid, as Herniaria is, and Diuretick. Common Knot-Grass tastes Acid and A∣stringent: Polygo∣num vul∣gare. It is therefore good in all hot Fluxes inwardly; and outwardly for In∣flammations. Polypody: The Roots are lusciously Polypodi∣um. Sweet and Astringent; of the Fern-Taste and Class; but by the great Sweetness it is Laxative. The Leaves are Bitterish, Sweet, and Astringent. It is accounted a Lenient Purger; but is most fit for Sple∣netick Distempers, in Powder or Decocti∣on. White-Poplar: The Bark is Bitter, A∣stringent, Populus alba. and of a Laurel-Taste. Abele: The Bark is Bitter, Astringent, Populus alba fol. minoribus. and of a Laurel-Taste. The Aspen-Bark is very Bitter, and of Populus Lybica. a Laurel, Bitter and Astringent Taste. Black-Poplar: The Bark is Bitter and Populus nigra. Astringent. These Poplars come the nearest to the Jesuits-Bark of any English Trees.
Narrow-Leaved Pond-weed is of the Potamo∣geiton Per∣sicariae fo∣lio. same Taste as Spotted Arsmart, Acid and Astringent; and both have the Nature and Vertue of Polygonum. Cowslips: The Flowers smell Fragrant. Primula veris ma∣jor. The Roots are Bitterish, very Hot, and Biting. The Leaves Sweet and Muci∣laginous. The Syrup and the Water are a little inclining to Sleep; but they have no Narcotick Foetor; therefore act little as such, by their Smell refreshing the Spirits more than Stupefying; or rather by a sweet headiness, overcoming the Spirits. Common Primrose: The Leaves smell Primula veris vul∣garis. like fresh Marmalade. The Roots taste Bitterish and Acrid; and smell of the Plant in Powder; which I use for Snush: and it works as much as Hellebore. The Roots may be put into Waters for the Head. The Leaves are Sweet and Mucilaginous. The Juyce of them is Snuffed into the Nose with Milk. The Juyce of the Root, with equal quantity of the Juyce of Marjoram, put into the Nose with a Thimble, purges the Head strong∣ly; and by Irritation in the Throat, Sali∣vates and helps the Kings-Evil. Primrose has a Mucilaginous and Acrid
Taste; and a strong tho' pleasing Smell; by which it operates, in causing Sleep. Self-Heal: The Leaves taste Watry Prunella. and Mucilaginous; by which it cools the Mouth in Gargarisms. Quaere, Whether Lysimachia Purpurea be of the same kind, and both be La∣miums? It is Bitterish, Sub-astringent, Slimy, and good in Hecticks: It is also Vulnerary. Sloe-Tree: The Leaves and Bark are Prunus Sylvestris. very Rough and Bitter, by which they stop Fluxes. The Syrup is most used, made of the Sloes, to stop any Evacuation, and for Gargarisms. The Flowers smell like Orange-Flowers, and taste Bitterish. They will make a Purging Syrup, and yield an Aromatick Water very Cordial. Cockle: It is a little Biting, and of the Pseudo∣melanthi∣um, lychnis segetum. Ptarmica. Vertues of Nigella. Sneezewort is Bitterish, very Acrid, and Aromatick, like Millefoile in the Scent; and therefore a good Cephalick. It pro∣motes Sneesing; and chewed, it draws forth Rheums like Pellitory.
Penny-Royal is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Pulegium. and Aromatick; flying quick into the Nose; having in it a Volatile Oyly Salt, as all Cephalicks have; by which it is good in Hysterick-Fits, Obstructions of the Womb, and Convulsive Coughs, in Syrup; and in Hoarseness, made as Thea. The Smell of it is mixt of Aromatick and Fe∣tid, as many other Hysterick Medicines be; as Matricaria, &c. Spotted Lung-wort is Watry and Muci∣laginous, Pulmona∣ria macu-losa. like Burrage or Bugloss; and is a little Bitterish, like them. It cools Hectical Heats, and Thirst; and supplies a cool Lympha. Pasque-Flower is Burning like other Pulsatilla. Crow-foots. The Root is said to be Sweet. Pear-Tree: The Bark and Leaves are Pyrus. very Rough; therefore great Astringents. Burgamo-Pears are Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy; and the outward Rind Styptick.
R. CRowfoot: The greatest part of Ranuncu∣lus. Crowfeet are Exulcerating and Blistering the Tongue. I boyled the Common-Crowfoot in Hoggs-Grease; but it would not blister without Cantha∣rides. The dryed Roots promote Snee∣zing. It cures Marks of the Skin, and Warts, by raising a Blister, and after∣wards a Crust; and therefore hath a Cau∣stick virtue. The round Root of Crow∣foot rubbed, flyes quick up into the Nose, like Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack, which shews the Corrosiveness to be in Volatile Salt: And the Crowfeet smell a little like Scurvy-Grass. Quaere, Whether any Sweetness be in Ranunculus, besides the Acrimony, be∣cause the Root of Ranunculus Bulbosus tastes Sweet after drying? And there is a kind of Ranunculus, called, Pratensis e∣rectus dulcis, which may be eaten. Spear-wort is very Caustick, if brui∣sed Ranuncu∣lus Flam∣meus. and put upon the Skin with a Walnut-shell, where the pain of the Gout is, or where any pain of the Head lyes in a small compass, by letting
out some of the Stagnating Serum. Quaere, Whether any Bitterness be in it? I did not taste any Bitter. Horse-Radish: The Leaves, Seeds, Raphanuss Rusticanu and Roots, are of a very Biting Cress-Taste and Vertue; and therefore Diure∣tick, Antiscorbutick, Stomachick, Splenetick, and Antihydropick. The Leaves may be used in Medicines, as well as the Roots or Seeds, being Bitterish and very Acrid. The Lymphaeducts have a Sweet Juyce; Dr. Grew. And a Sweetness may be tasted as well as a Bitterish-Acrid, in the dryed Root, when used in Diet. Chadlock is of a Cress-Taste and Ver∣tue, Rapistrum like Mustard. Turnep: The Seeds and Leaves taste Rapum sa∣tivum. Acrid. The Root boyled is Sweet and Mucilaginous: The old Root is Bitterish. It is of the same kind as Sinapi or Cresses, and therefore has a Volatile Salt in it, which makes it Diuretick, Pectoral, and Antiscorbutick. But it is Windy, from the Mucilage and Volatile Salt combined together; as in Garlick, Leeks, &c. The Roots being roasted, are used in drawing Pultesses for Scorbutick Tumors,
the Scrophulae, Swelled Breasts, and Gout. The Green-Leaves smell, when rubbed, Acrid, like Horse-Radish, or Cresses. The Seeds of the Wild-Turnep yield Rape-Oyl, which with Sugar cures the Aphthae in Children. Syrup of Turneps is very Sweet, and has a strong Smell; by which it is an excellent Pectoral in Pleu∣risies. The Broth of Turneps sweetned with Sugar, is a pleasanter Medicine than Rape-Oyl, for the Aphthae. Rampions: It is a Milky Plant, Sweet Rapuncu∣lus. and Sub-acrid. It is good for Diet: And, as Physical, it is Pectoral and Diuretick, by the Acrimony. Sheeps-Scabious: The Taste is Sweet Rapuncu∣lus Scabio∣sae capitulo and Hot, both in Leaves and Root: It has a Smell a little Mellowy. Buckthorn: The Berries taste Sweet at Rhamnus catharticus first; then Mucilaginous, Bitter and Rough. The unripe Berries in Alum∣water colour Yellow; when ripe, Green. The Syrup made in B. M. so that the Colour and Vertue in the Skin may be Extracted, looks of a Red colour, and purges very strongly, from one Spoon∣ful to four. The new Syrup purges vio∣lently,
and loses of the strength after two Months. It gripes least, if made of Ripe Berries: The Berries are taken from Fif∣teen to Twenty-Five, to Purge. The Bark of the Tree is a little Rough, Bitter, and Mucilaginous; and may be put into Diet-Drinks, with Dwarf-Elder Roots and Orris, to purge; to which add Daucus, Juniper-Berries, and Wormwood. The Bark smells something Fragrant. The Syrup is proper for Hydropical Persons. Sun-Dew: The Taste is Rough, Acid, Ros Solis. and Acrid, and has a Sorrel-Smell: The Acrid is not tasted till after a while. If applied outwardly, it exulcerates like Ranunculus. It is put into Cordial-Wa∣ters, gives a Yellow colour, and has an Anti-Pestilential Vertue. The dryed Ros Solis tastes very Acid, like Sorrel, and Rough; for which reason, some may give it in Spitting of Blood; but the la∣tent Acrimony is to be suspected; which makes it to be a Crowfoot. Eglantine-Rose tastes as the Dogg-Rose, Rosa Syl∣vestris o∣dora. but smells more Sweet and Fainty. Dogg-Rose: The Flowers are Bitterish, Rosa Syl∣vestris ca∣nina. Slimy, and Astringent: If they be boyled
in Whey, they will purge as Damask-Roses. The Fruit tastes Acid, and so does the Conserve; which therefore will quench Thirst, and cool the Cholerick Blood. I have distilled a very Fragrant Spirit from the Fruit, after Fermentation. The Dogg-Rose transplanted into Gardens, loses the Smell. The Fruit must lye and putrefie, before the Conserve be made: The boyl∣ing in Water takes away the Acid from it. The taste of the Spongy Excrescency is Bitterish and Astringent; it smells like the Rose, is Pungent or Warm, and is given in Spitting of Blood. The Root is very Bitter and Astringent, and may cure the Biting of Mad-Doggs, by those quali∣ties. All the Rose-Roots are Bitterish and Astringent, but the White seems the most Astringent. I did not perceive any Acri∣mony in them. The Leaves are Slimy, Mealy, Bitterish and Rough. Madder-Roots are Yellow at first get∣ting, Rubia tin∣ctoria. and then turn Red. They Taste Bitter, Astringent and Acrid; and there∣fore are a good Hepatick by both Tastes: When dry, they are most Astringent and Vulnerary. They are Styptick in all Fluxes, and Dye Red. The Flowers smell pleasant, as Gallium Flowers do.
Rasberry: The Berries have a Fragrant, Rubus I∣daeus. Violet or Orris-Smell; and a Sweet, Sub∣acid and grateful Taste. They make a pleasant Cordial Wine, Syrup, and distil∣led Water; which are all Cordial and Cooling. The Leaves are Astringent. Bramble: The Leaves and Flowers are Rubus vul∣garis. Bitterish and Astringent. The Ripe Ber∣ries are Sweet, Sub-acid, Slimy, and a little Rough. They are good for Sore-Mouths, and used in Dysuries, and for the Scurvey. A grateful Wine is made out of the Juyce of the Berries. The Root tastes Bitterish, a little Acrid, and very Rough, by which it may be Diuretick. The Sprouts from the Roots taste sensibly Hot, and very Rough. The distilled Water from the Leaves and Flowers of the Bramble is Fragrant. S. ARrow-Head is Sweetish, and a little Sagittaria major. warm, like Water-Parsnep; and therefore may be Diuretick. It is accounted like Water-Plantane and Sparganium: If so, Water-Plantane and
Sagittaria may be placed in the same Class of crude Plants. Sallow and Willow: The Leaves are Salix lati∣folia & an∣gustifolia. Mucilaginous, and of a Sorrel Smell. Osier: The Bark, Leaves, and Juyce Salix folio longissimo. of all them are Bitterish, Rough, and good for all Fluxes. Sweet-Willow tastes very Bitter and Salix Odo∣rata. Rough; and smells Fragrant, if rubbed. The Bay-leaved Willow is very Bitter Salix folio utrin{que} gla∣bro viren∣te, sive lau∣reo, sive a∣mygdalino Salvia a∣grestis. and Rough, and tastes and smells like Laurel; and therefore fit to be tryed, in∣stead of the Cortex Peruvianus. Wood-Sage smells strong like Hops, tastes very Bitter, and is of the Vertue of Scordium, viz. Diaphoretick, Diuretick, Sple∣netick, Vulnerary and Cleansing. It may be used in Drink like Hops, which has been tryed by my self, and others. A double quantity is to be put into the Drink, viz. as much again as the usual quantity of Hops. It is to be referred to the Lamium-Class. Water-Elder: The Bark tastes nause∣ously Sambucus aquatica.
Bitter, and is fit to vomit. The Berries are Bitter, Acid, and Mucilaginous. I made a Syrup of them very nauseous. The Leaves are also nauseously Bitter; and smell like Currain-Leaves. I gave my Dogg of the Juyce of the Berries, three or four Spoonfuls; and of the Leaves and Stalks Decocted, one handful: but they neither purged nor vomited him. The Flowers smell Sweet. Common-Elder: The Bark is Mucila∣ginous Sambucus vulgaris. and Bitter; and is used for a Vo∣mit. Three handfuls of the Inner-Bark, boyled in Two Pound of Milk and Wa∣ter, to One Pound; give half of it in the Morning, and the rest at Night, to vomit and purge: (Sydenham of the Dropsie.) The Leaves are Slimy, Bitter, and Nauseous; and are not good inward∣ly, but outwardly in Baths, for Inflam∣mations; in Pultesses, and in Oyls and Oyntments for the Piles and Gout. They discuss much, and are good for Burns. They have a strong stinking Smell. The Flowers put into Ale, make a good Drink for the Scurvy and Dropsie, as well as the Berries. A Spirit made of Elder-Berries or Flowers, is good in the Scurvy: The Ber∣ries
are Mucilaginous, Sweet, and Sub∣acid. The Syrup is best made of them in a Jugg set in Water; by which Infusion, the Vertue is taken out of the Skins and Stones, and looks more Red, and tastes less Nauseous than the Apothecaries Sy∣rup, made by Expression. The Syrup made by Baking is more Heady and Spirituous. The Flowers make a plea∣sant Fragrant Water, like Orange-Flowers, Bitterish, Acrid, and Aromatick; where∣by they are Cephalick, Diuretick, and Carminative. The Water is good for Freckles of the Face; for which the Infusion of the Green-Leaves is also good. The Syrup is good in Hot Scurvies, Sore-Mouths, and Hot Dropsical Cachexies. Sanicle is Bitterish, Astringent, Sub∣acrid, Sanicula. and like Turpentine in Taste; and smells of Balsam, and is a Resinous Tur∣pentine Plant; and therefore Vulnerary, externally and internally; and it is used as a Styptick. Common Soapwort is Mucilaginous, Bit∣ter, Saponaria vulgaris. and a little Acrid: and therefore may be Diuretick and Sudorifick. The Leaves may be laid on Issues: It may be good
for Ʋlcers, as it is Healing and Cleansing, by the Mucilage and Bitter. Outwardly it discusses strongly like Elder, and is like in Vertue to it. The Flowers smell Sweet, and very Strong, by which it seems to be a Lychnis. White-Saxifrage is Bitterish, Astringent, Saxifraga alba. and a good Vulnerary: It has also a little Heat, by which it is Diuretick. Golden-Saxifrage is Bitterish, Hot, and Saxifraga aurea. Astringent, with a Rellish like Meadow-Saxifrage; of the Vertue of the former. Meadow-Saxifrage: The whole Plant Saxifraga Anglicana. tastes Sweet and Hot; is Aromatick both in Taste and Smell, and strongly Diure∣tick. It is of the Fennil-Class. Scabious is very Strong, Bitter, and Scabiosa. Astringent; and in the Flowers a little A∣crid. The Syrup and Decoction of the Juyce cleanse the Breast, are Sudorifick and Alexipharmack. Outwardly it is good for the Itch, Tetters, and Dandriff of the Head. Inwardly it is good in Jaundice, and helps Digestion. Water-Germander is very Bitter, Astrin∣gent, Scordium.
Hot, and Acrid; and therefore Su∣dorifick and Alexipharmack in the Plague, and Pestilential Fevers, in distilled Waters. Externally it cleanses Ʋlcers, and is good for Gangreens in Fomentations. Scordium smells like Garlick, and is therefore Diure∣tick, good for Worms, and a strong Pectoral. Scordium is good in Sordid Ʋlcers, and is Vulnerary. The Acrimony of it is like a Garlick Pungency. By the Taste and Fi∣gure it is referible to the Lamium-Class. Fig-wort: The Leaves taste very Bit∣ter, Scrophula∣ria. and smell like Elder. The Roots are Rough, and less Bitter, and have Knobs like Kernels or Piles; for which they are used in Oyntments, discussing them, as the Elder-Smell shows. The same Oynt∣ment is good in a Malignant Scab, and in Cancrous Ʋlcers. Rye Tastes Sweet, as other Corn does: Secale. It is more Mucilaginous than Wheat; and therefore less easie for Concoction: And the Meal is more moistening than Wheat-Meal in Pultesses. Great-Housleek tastes Waterish, very Sedum ma∣jus vulgare Rough, and Astringent. The Syrup of it and the Water are very Cooling and A∣stringent
in Fevers, especially in Hecticks, and in all Fluxes. The Oyntment cools all Inflammations, Cancers, and Erysipelas's; and cures Tetters, and Burns. If the bruised Leaves be applied, they cure Corns. Prick-madam, or Stone-crop, tastes Wa∣terish, Sedum mi∣nus Vermi∣cular. Acid, and Rough. The Root Bit∣terish and Astringent. It is of the nature of the former, Cooling and Astringent. Wall-Pepper: The Taste is burning Sedum parvum a∣cre fl. luteo. Hot, and Exulcerating. Outwardly it blisters: Taken inwardly it vomits strongly. By the great Acrimony, the distilled Water is Diuretick; and if it be made into an Oyntment, it discusses Tu∣mors, and the Scrophulae. The Decoction of it with Alum and Honey, cures putrid Flesh, growing in Scorbutick Gums. Groundsel: The Leaves taste Bitterish, Senecio vulgaris. Sweet, Hot, and Mucilaginous; and smell Sweet, like Parsnep. The Root tastes Nauseously Bitterish and Acrid. The Juyce or Decoction vomits. The Syrup of the Juyce purges Sucking Children. Outwardly it is of a discussing Faculty, and emollient in Inflammations, Tumors, Itch, Gout, and Wind. It's given Horses for the Botts.
The Greater Erigerum smells Strongest Senecio major odo∣ratus visci∣dus. and Pleasantest, and is of a Bitterish, Hot, and Slimy Taste; the Smell resembles Angelica or Parsnep. It is very Discussing and Emollient. Mother of Thyme is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Serpyllum. and Aromatick; and therefore Cephalick, Stomachick, Carminative and Ʋterine. Smooth Broad-Leaved Ironwort tastes Sideritis arvensis la∣tifolia. Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-astringent; and smells like Dead-Nettle or Betony. Out∣wardly and inwardly it is Vulnerary, by the Mucilage and Bitter-Astringency. Clowns All-heal is Bitterish and Rough, Sideritis Anglica strumosa radice. like Betony; smells like Dead-Nettle; and the Taste is the same. It is accounted a Vulnerary. Common-Mustard is a great Diuretick Sinapi vul∣gare. in Dropsies. If three spoonfuls of the powdered Seed be put into a Bottle of Ale, it will sometimes put by a Fit of a Quartane Ague in the declination. It is also a great Antiscorbutick. The Taste is Bitterish, very Hot and Acrid; yielding a Volatile Salt in Distillation. Out∣wardly it is good for Scorbutick Pains,
and Foul Ʋlcers; and inwardly it is a cleansing Pectoral, and fit for a Gargle in the Lethargy. It is Sternutatory; it excites an Appetite, and helps Digestion. All which it does by the Acrid, Volatile Salt, which will blister a little. Water-Parsnep has the taste and smell of Sium a∣quaticum. Parsnep, and is of the same Vertue; Diu∣retick in the distilled Water, and good in Tumors of the Breasts, that are Scrophulous. Common Night-shade: The Leaves Solanum vulgare. taste Waterish and Slimy, with a little Biting or Heat, and a little Rough; when pounded they smell like Green-Sauce; which shews their crudeness. The Ber∣ries taste Sweet and Mucilaginous. The Leaves pressed in the Hand, have a strong Smell, not unlike Chocolate. I gave a Dogg twelve Spoonfuls of the Juyce of the Leaves, he was Sick after it, and Dull; but not Stupid, as by a Nar∣cotick. An Oyntment may be made of the Leaves, like Stramonium Oyntment; Cooling Inflammations and Erysipelas, and Healing Tetters and Scalds. The Root is Mucilaginous, Strong, and Offensive, like other Solanums. The Berries are Green within, and taste Nauseous.
Deadly Night-shade: The Leaves are Solanum lethale. of a strong Narcotick Smell, and are Mealy, Slimy, and Hot, (Parkinson says, Bitter. Quaere.) The Root is Mealy, Mu∣cilaginous, and of a strong Offensive O∣piate Smell. An Oyntment is made of the Leaves for Cancerous Pains; and the Leaves are applyed whole to Cancers. The Berries have a Purplish-Juyce, and are accounted Poysonous to Children. Dr. Grew says, The Root is Sweet. Quaere. Bitter-Sweet, or Woody Night-shade: Solanum lignosum. It hath a Smell like other Solanums; and therefore is Narcotick. The Bark is very Hot, Bitter, and Slimy. The Leaves have the same Taste, and therefore may be Purgative. The Bark is used for Hydro∣pical Persons, to purge and provoke Ʋrine: It works churlishly. The Leaves are out∣wardly used in Inflammations, and Itching Tumors of the Hands and Feet. The Ber∣ries are Sweet, very Nauseously Bitter and Slimy; and therefore are Purgative and Vomiting, very violently. The Roots smell like Hounds-Tongue. And the other Solanums seem to me to resemble that Smell rather than Poppies. The Dogg to whom I gave Thirty of
the Berries, neither vomited, purged, nor slept, but dyed Mad, within three hours. Sea Bind-weed: I tasted it in the Soldanella marina. Shops, and it was Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Acrid; and therefore as other Bind-weeds, very Purgative in Hydropical Per∣sons. The Plant has a Milk as other Bind-weeds have. Sow-Thistle is in the Root and Milk Sonchus. Bitterer than in the Leaves. It is of the nature of Dandelion. The Leaves are most Cool and Bitterish; and the Root most Aperitive. The Leaves are good for Hot Tumors: And boyled, it is good to give Nurses to increase Milk. The di∣stilled Water is good for Freckles, and the Root is a good Diuretick. Flix-weed hath a Cress-Smell, when Sophia Chi∣rurgorum. rubbed, but stinks at first. It has a Cress-Taste, and a Diuretick Vertue. It is erroneously recommended as Astrin∣gent; but may be a good Discutient and Antihysterick by the Foetor, and Diuretick by the Acrid Salt. It is good to cleanse Ʋlcers. The Sorbe-Tree is Bitterish, and Astrin∣gent Sorbus syl∣vestris tor∣minalis.
in Bark and Leaf. The Fruit is Acid and Rough; and both are good for Fluxes: For which a Rob may be made out of the immature Fruit. Quicken-Tree: The Bark is Bitter and Sorbus Syl∣vestris au∣cuparia, si∣ve Fraxi∣nus Bubula Astringent, like Laurel-Bitters. The Berries are Bitter and Acid. They are good in the Dropsie in Diet-Drinks, as they are Purging. This is rather an Ash, by the strong-Bitter. Burr-reed is Astringent. Spargani∣um ramo∣sum. Speculum Veneris. Codded Corn-Violet has a crude slimy Taste and Smell. I tasted it in a Garden, it being the great Venus Looking-Glass. It is Milky, like Rampions. Spurry is of a crude Juyce, like Chick-weed; Spergula. and is referible to the Chick-weeds. Cow-Parsnep: The Root is Sweet, Bi∣ting, Sphondy∣lium. and of a Parsnep-Taste. The Seeds are Hot and Acrid, and of a strong Smoaky Smell, but very little Aromatick; and therefore accounted an Hysterick. Bladder-Nut: The Leaves taste Rough, Staphylo∣dendrum. and the Nuts Sweet and Nauseous.
T. TAnsie tastes Strong, Bitter, and Tanace∣tum. Acrid, and is of an Aromatick Smell, like Feaver-few. The Juyce is given for the Worms. The Con∣serve is Hepatick in Dropsies, and good in Colicks. The Seed is given for the Worms, and is Bitter, Acrid and Diuretick. Yew-Tree: The Berries are Mucilagi∣nous Taxus. and Sweet, and are eaten Innocently; but the Seed in them is very Bitter and Nauseous; and therefore causes a Diar∣rhoea. The Leaves have a bitterish, crude Taste, without any Narcotick Smell. It is like the Turpentine-Trees by the Green∣ness; but the most crude and fixt of all that kind. The Wood hath no offensive Taste, but seemed a little Hot on my Tongue. The Leaves are not unlike Firr. A poor Woman at Elford in Stafford∣shire, gathered up the cuttings of the Bows of the Yew-Tree, in the dry Year, and gave them to her Cow; upon the eating of which she dyed. But it may be the dryness of the Leaves made them offensive to the Stomach or Wind-pipe.
Orpin is Mucilaginous and Watry, like Telephium. Purslain. A Syrup of it cools and heals the Exulcerate Guts, in a Dysentery. Roast∣ed in the Embers, and pounded with Swines-Grease, it cures White-Flaws. It is outwardly good for Inflammations, Burns and Scalds. The Leaf bruised may be laid to any Green Wound. The Roots are knobbed like the Piles. And a cool∣ing Oyntment of them is better than an Amulet for the Piles. Meadow-Rue is of a Dry, Bitterish, and Thalictrum Sweet Taste, and of a strong Scent. It may loosen the Belly, and seems to be like Columbine of the Pea-Class. Galen makes it a Vulnerary. Treacle-Mustard is of the same Acri∣mony Thlapsi. as Common-Mustard, but more Bit∣ter, and smells like Garlick. It is Diu∣retick and Pectoral. Outwardly it is good for the Sciatica, and Foul Ʋlcers. The Seed is very Acrid. Lime-Tree: The Bark is Mucilaginous, Tilia. and good for Burns, and Sore-Mouths; There is an Acrimony, and also a Bitter∣ishness in it. The Flowers are of the same Taste, and very Fragrant, Cordial,
and Antepileptick; for which we use the distilled Water. The Berries are ac∣counted Astringent. Spurge: All Spurges have a Milk of a Tithyma∣lus. Bitterish and Exulcerating Taste. They are Purging and Vomiting; and by the Acrimony they blister the Skin. Twenty Seeds given in Bread and Butter to a Dogg purged him but little. This that I gave him was of the Wood-Spurge; but Thirty Seeds of Sun-Spurge, and after∣wards a handful of Leaves steeped in Milk and Water, purged nothing. The Milk is good for Warts. The Milk dropped into Water diffused it self immediately, like Tincture of Benjamin. The Milk mixed with Vinegar huft a little; with Spirit of Harts-horn it mixed readily, but turned of a brown colour. The pounded Herb smells Acid, and not of any strong Scent. Drop three or four drops of the Milk into a Figg, and dry it, give two or three Figgs. The Juyce takes off the Hair: mixed with Oyl it cures Warts; and re∣moves the Callus of Fistula's. The Milk is strongest, the Leaves and Seeds next, and the Root least. The Lixivium of Spurge has a Caustick
Quality. There being but little Smell in Spurge. The Volatile Acrid is coagu∣lated into a Gum, with the Oyl, by an A∣cid; and this Gum mixt with Water, gives a Milk as other Gums do. The Acrimony depends not on an Acid, because Vinegar corrects the Acrimony: And another Ar∣gument, of the Gummosity is from the Purging Faculty in all Spurges. Tormentil: The Root is Rough, Bitter∣ish Tormen∣tilla. and Sub-acrid: It stops all Fluxes by the Astringency. It stops the violent Fermentation of the Blood in Malignant Fevers, joyned with Fluxes. It is a good Styptick in Vulnerary Potions; and a good Antefebrifick, resembling the Taste of the Jesuits Powder. Throat-wort has a Bitterish Milk, thick Tracheli∣um majus. like Curds; and is called Throat-wort, be∣cause the Decoction is good in Sore-Throats, and Ʋlcerated Mouths. It tastes Mucilaginous and Sweet, and is a Rapun∣culus. Goats-Beard is Sweet, Waterish, and Tragopo∣gon. Milky: and is good to eat, being dressed like Parsneps; or the crude Root in Sallets.
Black Maiden-hair has a Ferne-Taste; Trichoma∣nes. and is good for Ʋlcerations in the Lungs and Kidneys, by the Astringency, Sweet∣ness, and Bitterness. Wood-Sorrel tastes very Acid. The Trifolium acetosum. Syrup, Conserve, Juyce, and distilled Wa∣ter, cool Thirsts in Fevers. Vide Ace∣tosella. Honey-Suckle-Trefoyl: The Roots and Trifolium pratense purpure∣um. Leaves are Bitter and Hot, with a Pea-Taste. White Honey-Suckle-Trefoyl is of a Pea-Taste, Trifolium flore albo. and Rough. The Flowers are sweet as Honey-Suckles in Smell. Clover-Grass is like the Honey-Suckle∣Trefoyl. Trifolium purpure∣um majus sativum. The Leaves have a sweet Pea-Taste, and are very Biting and Acrid. The Root is Sweet and Acrid. Yellow-Trefoyl tastes Rough in the Trifolium luteum. Leaves, but resembles Pea-Tastes in the Flower and Root; and tastes Hot or Acrid at the last. Hop-Trefoyl has a sweet Pea-Taste, Trifolium lupulinum. and is Rough.
Yellowish Meadow-Trefoyl is very Rough in Taste, with a Pea-Smell. Trifolium hirsutum lago poi∣des. Trifolium siliquosum. Small Codded Trefoyl has a very Rough Taste, and is of the Pea-kind. Purple-wort has a sweet Pea-Taste, and Trifolium fol. purpu∣reo. is very Rough. It is good in the Bleed∣ings of the Purple Fever. The Acrid Tre∣foyls are Diuretick. Buck-Bean: The Leaves are very Bit∣ter, Trifolium palustre. and taste like a Peach-Kernel. It is good in Diet-Drinks for the Scurvy; and for Arthritick Pains. And I have heard them commended for a Cure of the Drop∣sie. There is no Acrimony in the Taste, yet it is much commended in the Scurvy. Wheat tastes Sweet and Slimy, and is Triticum. of good nourishment. The Flower is good in Small-Beer, to stop Overflowings of the Blood, and other Hemorrhages and Fluxes. Mace or Indian-Wheat is as sweet as Sugar. Tower-Mustard is of the same Taste and Turritis. Vertue as ordinary Mustard. Colts-foot tastes Watery, Bitterish, Tussilago.
Rough, and a little Hot; and therefore is a good Pectoral and Vulnerary. It smells somewhat like Enula campana. Out∣wardly it cools Inflammations. The Flowers smell and look like Groundsel. By which it may be of the same Class. Cats-Tayl: The Root is very Clammy, Typha. Mucilaginous, and Cooling. The Muci∣lage may be good in Plasters, but not in∣wardly; it being thick like Bird-lime. V. BIlberries are Sweet and Sowre; Vaccinia nigra. the Quiddany is used for Loose∣nesses. The Leaves taste Sowre and Rough. The Root Bitterish and Rough. The Berries are boyled with Alum and Galls, for a Blue Colour. Red-Whorts are Acid and Astringent Vaccinia Rubra. in Taste, and Astringent in Fluxes; Vac∣cinia and Rubus, are of the like nature. Valerian: The Root is of a Turpentine Valeriana silvestris major, mi∣nor, hor∣tensis. Smell, like Balm of Gilead; and tastes Bitter, Acrid, Slimy, and of Turpentine.
The Leaves are Bitterish and Mucilagi∣nous. And the same is the Taste of all sorts of Valerian. The Root is an excel∣lent Pectoral and Diuretick: And the Leaves are Cleansing and Agglutinating in Wounds and Ʋlcers of the Mouth. Va∣lerian Flowers at first smell Fetid; after their lying a while to spend their Foetor, they smell like Jasmin. Wild Valerian Flowers have a Strange, Fainty Lily-Smell. The Root is so like Serpentaria Virginiana, that I believe it a Substitute. It is used in Convulsious and Epilepsies. Dioscorides describes the smell of the Root to be Fragrant, like Nardus, with some Foetor: By which it may be Ante∣pileptick and Purgative like Asarum, in the quantity of an Ounce and half. White Mullein: The Leaves are Watry, Verbas∣cum flore luteo vul∣gare. Bitterish and Cool. The Flowers are Mu∣cilaginous and Bitterish, and Anodyne in Oyntments for the Haemorrhoids, or in Pultesses with Yolks of Eggs, white Bread, and Leeks juyced. The Root is Waterish, Bitterish, and Astringent. Mul∣lein is used in Coughs, as Bugloss. The Flowers smell a little Fragrant, which argues a little Heat with the Waterish∣ness. But because of the Astringency
and Pectoral Vertue, I refer it to the La∣miums. Vervain is very Bitter, Astringent, and Verbena. Sub-acrid, like the Lawrel-Bitters; and therefore Vulnerary. It is good in Ob∣structions, Jaundice, Coughs, and Nephritick Pains; and good against Tertians and Ar∣thriticks. Outwardly it is Vulnerary, and a Cleanser in Putrid Ʋlcers, and Garga∣risms. It is also Splenetick and Cephalick, having the same Bitterness as Black Cher∣ry-Trees; by which, Pains of the Head, depending on Fevers, are stopt. Tree-Stone-Crop, (I found it in Sir Ri∣chard Vermicula∣ris Frutex. Nudigate's curious Garden, to whom I am oblig'd for most of my Rarities:) The Taste is Watrish and Crude; and it is of a crude Smell, and of a cooling Ver∣tue. Speedwell, or Fluellin, is Bitterish, Sub∣acrid, Veronica pratensis minor. and Astringent inwardly and out∣wardly. It is a Vulnerary, and good a∣gainst Fevers, Ʋlcers of the Lungs and Kidneys. Outwardly it cures Wounds, Ʋl∣cers, and Scabs: And seems to be of the Dead-Nettle-Class, having the same Ver∣tue.
Common Vetch, or Tare, is of a Pea-Taste, Vicia. and Rough: The Juyce is given in the Scurvy, to hinder the great Fer∣mentation of the Blood. Purple-flower'd Vetch has a very sweet Vicia flore Purpureo. Pea-Taste. Yellow-flower'd Vetch is very Astrin∣gent, Vicia flore Flavo. and has a little sweet Pea-Taste. Purple-Violets: The Green Leaves are Viola Mar∣tia Purpu∣rea. Mucilaginous; and therefore Cooling and emollient in Pultesses for Inflammations. The Flowers are Mucilaginous, and a little Acrid, and of a Fragrant Smell. The Sy∣rup purges a little, cools and lenifies Coughs, and is Diuretick. The Seeds are Mucilaginous, Acrid, and Diuretick in E∣mulsions; and sometimes purge and vomit. The Cordial Faculty lies in the Fra∣grancy. Pansies: The Leaves are Hot, Acrid, Viola Tri∣color. Mucilaginous, and Mealy; and therefore Emollient: The Smell is strong, like O∣range-Flowers; the distill'd Water smells like them, and is Antepileptick. Out∣wardly the Leaves mollifie, discuss, ag∣glutinate, and cure the Itch in Baths. The
Mucilage helps Gripes, by the Purging Quality; and helps Expectoration, by the Mucilage and Acrimony. The Great Wild-Climber: The Seeds, Viorna sive Clematitis Sylvestris latifolia. Bark, and Root, and also the Flowers, have a burning Taste: The Flowers smell Sweet. Golden Rod tastes Sweet, Bitterish, and Virga Au∣rea. Aromatick (like Juniper-Berries) in the Leaves and Roots; by which it is a good Diuretick, and Carminative. Misletoe grows on the Maple, Crab, Viscum. Apple, and Hawthorn: Mr. Ray says, On the Nut, Elm, Willow, Buckthorn, Lime-Tree, and Service. I could find no Dif∣ference in Taste in Misletoe growing on the Four first; these Barks having a Bit∣terness like Misltoe, and also being A∣stringent; but no ways Acrid. But it grows on the Mucilaginous Trees, men∣tion'd by Mr. Ray. The Vertues of the Tree and Mislletoe so much differ, that it cannot be better on one Tree, than ano∣ther. I have tasted That on the Oak dry, but could find no Excellency in it above others. The Leaves and Wood taste Bit∣ter, Astringent, Hot, and Acrid; by which
it is good for the Epilepsie: It must be given for Forty Days. It may cause Sweat∣ing in a Pleurisie. The Bitter-Astringen∣cy makes it good before Ague-Fits. The Green Roots of the Misletoe go into the Bough a good way. Mr. Placston, of Sheriff-Holes in Shrop-shire, told me, That Misletoe-Berries laid on the rubb'd-Bark of a Tree, will grow there. The Muci∣lage of the Berries put into Plasters, mol∣lifies with Rosin and Wax, and ripens and draws much. Meadow-Sweet: The Flowers, Leaves, Ulmaria. and Roots, are Bitterish and Astringent; with a strong Fragrant Smell. By the A∣stringency, it is Styptick in all Fluxes; by the Fragrancy, Cordial in Wine and distill'd Waters; and by the Bitterish Roughness, it is Antifebrifick, much of the Vertue of Burnet, and tastes like it. Fili∣pendula, Burnet, and Ʋlmaria, are all of a like Nature. Elm: The Bark and Leaves are Muci∣laginous, Ulmus. and Healing in Mouth-Waters; and in Burns, Anodyne and Cooling. There is a little Bitterish Astringency in Elm.
Navel-wort is Watrish, Slimy, and Bi∣ting; Umbilicus Veneris. by which it is Diuretick, cures and discusses Inflammations, Erysipelas, and Strumas. There is also in the Flowery Heads a Bitterish Astringency. Nettle: The Yellow Roots are Sweet, Urtica U∣rens. Watrish, and Biting, and good Diureticks; the Seed is Slimy, a little Hot, and Pecto∣ral. The Leaves juyced, are good in Hae∣morrhages, carrying off by Ʋrine a great deal of Serum; and, by the Acrimony, o∣pening Obstructions, which are the Cau∣ses of Haemorrhages. Outwardly Nettles cure Tumors, sordid Ʋlcers, and Gangrenes.
THE Tastes and Vertues OF Plants in Gardens and Shops. A. LAVANDER-COTTON tastes Bit∣ter-Acrid, Abrota∣num Foe∣mina. with a Sea-Worm∣wood Smell; therefore it has the Vertues of a Wormwood, and is of the same Tribe. It's accounted good for the Stomach and for Worms. Roman-Wormwood is of the same Taste, Absinthi∣um Roma∣num. Smell, and Vertue, as the Common-Worm∣wood; but more Pleasant, and less Earthy or Crude.
Tree-Wormwood: The Smell and Taste Absinthi∣um Arbo∣rescens. are like Common-Wormwood. Acacia is Bitterish, Styptick, and good Acacia. in Fluxes. It is the Juyce of a Siliquose Plant. Bastard-Acorus is Hot, like Ginger: It is Radix Aco∣ri. an Acrid-Aromatick. Agarick tastes Sweet-Bitter and Muci∣laginous; Agaricus. it is piercing, by a little Acrid. It yields a Resin; and is gently Purgative of Choler, by its Bitterness; and of Water or Viscous Phlegm, by its Resin. Agarick▪ is the Fungus of a Turpentine-Tree; but dif∣fers much from the Taste of Turpentine. Maudlin is Bitterish, Aromatick, and Ageratum. Astringent; and therefore Cephalick and Vulnerary. The Chast-Tree is Bitterish, Rough, A∣romatick, Agnus Ca∣stus. Acrid, and of an Agrimony Smell. It is Aperitive, Diuretick, and Vul∣nerary. Ladies-Mantle: The Root tastes Bit∣terish Alchimilla. and Astringent, like Potentilla; and looks of the same Colour.
Winter-Cherries: The Leaves taste Bit∣ter, Alkakengi. Mucilaginous, and Biting; and there∣fore are an excellent Diuretick. The Ber∣ries are Acid and Bitter, and infus'd in Wine, or in Powder, are very Diuretick. The Leaves and Berries resemble Solanum Lignosum; the Bladders taste most Bitter. Opiates are Diuretick, by their Acrimony and Sliminess. The Smell in this Plant is not much. Garlick is of a strong rank Smell, very Allium. Acrid in Taste, and abounds with a Vo∣latile Salt; by which it is Diuretick, Pe∣ctoral, Stomachick, and good against In∣fection of the Plague. It blisters the Soals of the Feet, if laid next to the Skin; and cures the Dropsie, infus'd in Beer. It is laid to the Soals of the Feet in Chin-Coughs and Small-Pox. Aloes is Bitter, Sweet, and Mucilagi∣nous Aloes. or Gummy. Its Bitterness is like the Bitterness of a Peach-Kernel: By this it purges Choler, and opens Obstructi∣ons of the Viscera; cleanses away Vis∣cid Phlegm from the Intestines, and cor∣rects Acidity: For Purgers both stimu∣late, and act as Alterers. Outwardly A∣loes cleanses by its Bitterness; and by its
Gumminess, stops Bleeding. The Green Leaves of Aloes taste Acid. Aloes smells like Myrrh. Flower-Gentle: The Seeds and Leaves Amaran∣thus. are Astringent, and a little Acid. This seems to me a Dock-Taste. I observ'd an Acrimony in Amaran∣thus, (in all the kinds thereof:) Which makes me infer, That it may be of the Nettle-kind, rather than of Blites or A∣triplex: But it is like English Mercury. It is very ungrateful to the Stomach. Bishops-Weed: The Seeds are Sweet, Ammi. Bitter, Hot, Aromatick, Carminative, Diu∣retick, and Cephalick. It belongs to the Fennil-Class. The Bitter-Almond-Tree: The Bark Amygda∣lus Amara. tastes very much like the Jesuits-Bark, Bitter and Rough; and has a Gum in it. The Leaves are Bitter, Mucilaginous, and Rough, like the Peach-Tree. It is pro∣bably of the same Purgative Faculty, or gently Laxative. Bitter Almonds have the same Taste, and an Oyliness: The Oyl is good for Ʋlcers, cleansing and kil∣ling Worms. 'Tis also good in Pains of the Ears, and Sun-Spots.
The Sweet-Almond-Blanch'd tastes Sweet Amygda∣lus Dulcis. and Oyly; and yields an Oyl, which is good in the Stoppage of Ʋrine, for Expe∣ctoration of Phlegm, and in Pains of the Belly, with Juyce of Limon. Bean-Trefoile: The Leaves taste Muci∣laginous, Anagyris. Bitterish, and a little Biting. The Country-People use it as Sena; and it tastes like it. This has a Pea-Taste, and smells Oyly, as a Bastard-Sena does; which therefore Vomits much. Alkanet: The Red Roots are Bitterish, Anchusa. Astringent, and a little Warm; by which, and by its thin colouring Parts, it is Diu∣retick and Aperitive; and by its Astrin∣gency, 'tis Vulnerary. It is a Madder, ra∣ther than a Bugloss. Dill: The Leaves and Seeds are Bit∣terish, Anethum. Sweet, Hot, Aromatick, and (like Fennil in Taste, Smell, and Vertue) Car∣minative, and Diuretick: The Seeds are the same. Tree-Angelica neither tastes nor smells Angelica Arbore∣scens. so strong as Ordinary Angelica.
Garden-Angelica: 'Tis Sweet, Bitterish, Angelica Hortensis. and Aromatick in Taste and Smell; there∣fore Cephalick, Carminative, Cordial, Pneumonick, and Sudorifick. The Root, Leaves, and Seeds have the same Taste and Smell. Aniseed: The Seed is Sweet, Hot, Bit∣terish, Anisum. and Aromatick in Taste and Smell; therefore Pectoral and Carminative; the Powder of the Seed being given to Chil∣dren for the Colick, or the Decoction of it in Posset-Drink. Smalledge is Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, A∣romatick, Apium Hortense. Diuretick, Pectoral, and Aperi∣tive. It is of the Fennil-Class. Smalledge is stronger than Parsley: The Seeds and Roots are most us'd, and of the same Taste. Arba Venenosa Indica: This Tree smells Arba vene∣nosa Indi∣ca. Fetid, as most Poysons do. Birthwort: The Root tastes nauseously Aristolo∣chia rotun∣da & lon∣ga. Bitter, and Mucilaginous: It smells like Bryony; and is of the same Vertue, Hy∣sterick. Outwardly it is good for the Itch, cleanses Wounds and Ʋlcers; and is us'd in a Pessary. The Round is the hottest.
Double-Sweet-Williams are Sweet and Armerius Hortensis. Bitter. Asarabacca: The Leaves are Hot, and Asarum. very Acrid on the Tongue. The Powder of the Leaves makes a strong Sternuta∣tory. If Nine Leaves be infus'd in Wine, and the Juyce squeez'd out, they Vomit strongly, and irritate the Mouth of the Stomach, as the Powder does the Nose. The Root is Bitterish, very Acrid, Tere∣binthinate, and Aromatick. One Drachm of it Vomits very well; a lesser Quanti∣ty is us'd, as a Diuretick; because Asarum-Roots smell of Turpentine, and have also something Fetid, like Hellebore: By This they Purge. The Leaves are like Cyclamen. Swallow-Wort: The Leaves smell a little Asclepias. like Solanum. Asphodel: The Leaves taste Sweet and Asphodelus Slimy. Star-wort is in the Leaves Mucilagi∣nous. Aster Atti∣cus. Blue-Starwort, tastes Slimy, Bitterish, and Aster Sero∣tinus Fru∣ticescens Caeruleus. Acrid; and smells Fragrant.
Bacciferous-Orach tastes Mucilaginous, Atriplex Baccifera. and, like Sorrel, sowre in the Red Buttons: That Colour of Red will fail, though A∣lum be added in the Decoction. The Ripe Berries taste very Sweet. Garden-Orach tastes somewhat like Sor∣rel, Atriplex Hortensis. and smells like it. Note, That Redness in the Leaves or Stalks of any Plants, is a Sign of Acidity in the Plant. Bears-Ears: The Flower smells Sweet, Auricula Ursi. as Cowslips: The Green Leaves are Mu∣cilaginous: The Roots are Hot and Acrid, like Cowslips, and Bitterish; with an Aro∣matick, Heady, and Opiate Smell. Oranges: The Flowers are of a very Aurantia Malus. Fragrant Smell, somewhat like the Lily in Flower and Smell. They taste Bitter∣ish, Pungent, and Sub-acrid; and there∣fore are Cordial and Cephalick. The Green Leaves are Bitterish and Astringent, with an Aromatick hot Taste and Smell; and are good strengthening Stomachicks.
B. COst-Mary hath a Bitterish-biting Balsamita major. Taste, with an Aromatick-Balsam Smell; from whence it's accoun∣ted Vulnerary. It is us'd in distill'd Wa∣ters. By its Taste it is Cephalick, being Bitterish, and a little Acrid. It is us'd in outward Balsams. Jupiter's Beard tastes Rough, and a lit∣tle Barba Jo∣vis. Hot; and seems to be of the Vetch-kind, by the Leaves, Flowers, and Taste. Basil is Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatick Basilicum. in Taste and Smell; which last is very strong, and therefore it is a very hot Ce∣phalick. The Smell is compar'd to Citrons, or Clovegilly-Flowers; but very Heady; and is accounted hurtful, producing a Phrensie. Jerusalem-Artichoak: The Root is Bastatus de Cinada. Sweet, Astringent, and Watrish; the Leaves are Watry and Mucilaginous: By which Sweetness it is Esculent.
Pomegranate-Flowers are Bitterish, Sty∣ptick, Balaustio∣rum Flores and very great Astringents: The Flowers will colour Red. They are boyl'd in Claret with Myrrh, for putrid Gums, and loose Teeth in the Scurvy. Spatling-Poppy: I tasted it at Chelsey, Behen Al∣bum. being Sweetish and Crude, like Lychnis. White Beets have a Crude Juyce, Sli∣my, Beta Alba vel Rubra. and a little Astringent: The Red is most Astringent. I suppose that it is ac∣counted Nitrous by its Bitterish Coolness, which is the Taste of Nitre. Both sort of Beets are Cooling, by their Crude Muci∣lage, and their Watrish Parts; and Deterg∣ing, by the Bitterish Nitrous Coolness. I have put the Root into my Nose, without Sneezing, or any Irritation. Beets, Blites, Atriplex, and Bonus Henricus, seem to agree in kind: And these are by Authors call'd, Saporis fatui vel oleracei. Cotton-Seeds: They are Mucilaginous, Bombacis Semina. and chiefly us'd for their Mucilage. Borrage: The Leaves, Flowers, and Borrago. Roots are Cool, Watry, and Mucilaginous. The Root is a little Bitter, and so comes near the Taste of Nitre: But I cannot
think that to be in any Plant call'd Ni∣trous; because it resembles Nitre, which is Cool, Bitterish, and Acid. There is, be∣sides the former Tastes, a little grateful Acrid in Borrage; by which it is Cordial. The Mucilage is good for Heats and Thirsts in Hecticks, as Bugloss is. It is us'd in Decoction, and Juyce. But the Cordi∣al Vertue is in the Flowers, and in their Conserve. Oak of Jerusalem: The Leaves are Bit∣terish, Botrys. Aromatick, and Watrish. The Seeds are most Balsamick, smelling like Balsam of Tolu; and therefore Cleansing, Aro∣matick, Terebinthinate, and Vulnerary in Syrup of the Juyce, and in distill'd Wa∣ters, for Coughs and Consumptions. Bear's-Breech is a Thistle; and for the Brancha Ursina. bitter Slime, is us'd in Clysters; and may be us'd outwardly for the same, in Plasters against the Gout, and Burnings. There is a bitter Smoakiness in all Thistles; which inwardly makes them Nauseous and Pur∣gative, and outwardly Discussing and Cleansing. Cabbage: The Roots of the Cabbage-Plants Brassica vulgaris. are Acrid, and bite like Horse-Ra∣dish.
The Leaves of the Plants bite less, when full grown; and by this latent A∣crid, they stimulate when applied to Bli∣sters. The full-grown Leaves are also Cool, Watrish, and a little Bitterish; by which Tastes it is Laxative; and for these it is also accounted a Nitrous Plant. The Ashes are very Caustick: The Seed is Bit∣ter and Acrid. The Juyce cures Warts. Colli-Flowers have the Flowry Part and Brassica Multi-flo∣ra. Leaves very Acrid; and therefore are An∣tiscorbutick, as Mustard-Seed, and Horse-Radish. Satin-Flower smells and tastes like the Bolbonach sive viola Lunaria. Cress-Plants, and is of the same Vertue. The Seeds are most Acrid and Bitter. Butchers-Broom: The Root is Sweet, Bruscus. Bitterish, and Acrid; by which it is Diu∣retick, Pectoral, and Aperitive. It belongs to the Pea-Class; and is like Asparagus. The Berries are sweet, and the new Sprouts are a little Aromatick. Ox-Eye is Bitterish and Sub-acrid, like Buphthal∣mum. Chamaemel; and is of the same Vertue.
C. MArygold: The Flowers are Slimy, Calendula. and very Hot and Burning in the Throat; by which they are Cordial, and expel Measles and Small-Pox, and cure Fits of the Mother, and Obstructi∣ons of the Menses. They smell strong and unpleasant. The Green-Leaves are Mu∣cilaginous and Acrid; and the Root Bit∣terish. Gum-Cambogia is an Inspissate Juyce, Cambogia. more Gummy than Resinous: It Purges and Vomits Watry Serum violently. I cannot discern the Taste; but in the Stomach the latent Acrimony of it imme∣diately appears, because it works in so small a Dose; and is corrected by Acids. It is generally thought to be a sort of Tithymal; and by that Caustick Quality it purges. Caper-Bark tastes very Acrid, by which Cortex Ra∣dicis Cap∣paris. it is Diuretick, and outwardly discussing in Tumors of the Abdomen. I cannot taste the Bitterness and Astringency, by which it is said to have many effects.
Pepper is very Burning and Hot in the Capsicum Indicum. God, and Acrid and Aromatick when ripe. Grains of Paradise are Sweet, Hot, A∣romatick, Cardamo∣num majus Acrid, and Bitterish. Lesser Cardamoms are Hot Aromaticks. Cardamo∣num minus Carduus Benedictus: The Leaves are Carduus Benedictus of a Smoaky Bitter Taste, like the ordi∣nary Carduus, with some Mucilage; by which it is fit to produce Vomiting. It cleanses the Stomach, and is good for Fe∣vers in the Bitter Drink. The Roots have no Bitterness: And that there is a Bloody Juyce in it, is observed in Mr. Ray. Carpo Balsamum is said to be Acrid and Carpo Bal∣samum minus. Aromatick. Seed of Bastard Saffron is Bitterish, a lit∣tle Carthami Semen. Acrid and Mucilaginous; by which it purges a little. It is used in the Diseases of the Breast, joyned with other Purgers. Carraways: The Roots and Seeds taste Carum. and smell Sweet and Aromatick, and are Carminative and Diuretick. The Green-Leaves smell like Parsneps. Carum be∣longs
to the Sweet, Acrid, and Aroma∣tick-Class. Clove-Gilly-flowers: The Flowers are Caryo∣phyllus A∣romaticus. Hot and Mucilaginous, and of a grateful Odor: The Flowers taste Bitterish, Sweet, and Acrid in the Throat; in which the Cordial Vertue consists. The Root is Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, and Slimy, like the Clove-Flowers. Cloves are Bitterish, Acrid, Hot, and Caryo∣phylli. Aromatick in Taste and Smell. They are Cordial and Cephalick. And are the Fruit of a Tree. Pinks: They are Bitterish, Sweet-tast∣ed; Caryo∣phyllus Hortensis minor. and have in the Flower an Aroma∣tick Smell. They are of the nature of Clove-Gilly-flowers. The Bark of Cassia Lignea is Acrid and Cassia Lig∣nea. Aromatick in Taste, like Cinnamon, and of the same Vertue. Cassia: The Pulp is most used to keep Cassia Fi∣stula. the Body Laxative. It is very Sweet and Mucilaginous; by which it is good in a Cough: And is thereby also a Lenient purge in the Stone and Hemorrhoids.
Cedar has a Fragrant Turpentine-Smell; Cedrus Virginiana and it tastes Bitter, Astringent, and Acrid. The Greater Centaury: The Stalk tasted Centaure∣um majus. Sweetish, Bitter, and Sub-aromatick. The shape of the Leaf, and Taste, resemble Jacobea. Onion is Biting, Mucilaginous, Acrid, Cepe. and of a rank Smell, like Garlick; Fu∣ming up into the Eyes, like the Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack: therefore it is full of a Volatile Salt, with a rank Oyl. Onions are Roasted for breaking Apostemes; and are Infused and Distilled in White-Wine, for the Stone. Pounded with Salt, they are good for Burns, and the Biting of a Mad-Dogg. The Juyce is good for Pains in the Ears, and for Shortness of Breath. All these Effects are produced by the Taste and Smell above-mentioned. China has no considerable Smell in the China. Root. It is of a dry Taste, a little Warm or Acrid. It is accounted a Diaphoretick, but is most properly an Astringent and Absorbent of Acids. In the Decoction, China is a little Aro∣matick, Astringent, and Bitterish; but these Qualities are very obscure. It is a
climbing Plant, as well as Sarsaparilla; and Thorny and Bacciferous. China China: The Stalk of the Peruvian-Tree China Chi∣na. has a Terebinthinate-Taste. The Leaves are a little Slimy and Terebinthinate. This I found in the Physick Garden at Chelsey. Cicers have a sweet Pea-Taste; and Cicera ru∣bra. are Diuretick, and Lenifying the Passages by the Mucilage. They are a little Bit∣terish. Artichoak: The Leaves are very Bit∣ter, Cinara. Slimy, and Smoaky, like the Carduus. The Juyce cures Wounds. The Leaves are good in Oyntments for the Worms, and are great Cleansers of Ʋlcers. Cinnamon-Bark is Sweet, very Hot, A∣romatick, Cinnamo∣num. and Astringent. It is a good Stomachick and Cordial. Gummy-Cistus has a very Rough Taste, Cistus Le∣don. feels Gummy, and has a crude Smell. Ladaniferous Cistus, or Holy Rose, feels Cistus La∣danifera. clammy in the Leaves, and smells like Labdanum. It tastes Terebinthinate, and therefore is an excellent Vulnerary, put
in Balsams; and inwardly in Distempers of the Nerves: It has the same Vertue as Labdanum. Sage-leaved Cistus is only very Rough Cistus sal∣viae folio. and Bitterish, without any Gumminess; and is a Vulnerary. Broad-leaved Cistus feels Clammy, and Cistus folio lato. tastes Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatick, Resi∣nous and Rough. It smells like Labda∣num; and therefore is inwardly and out∣wardly a Vulnerary. Shrub-Trefoyl has a sweet Pea-Taste, Cytisus. and smells of the Pea-kind. Those Plants which have this sweet Pea-Taste, are fit for feeding Cattle, and breed most Milk. Citron: The Leaves are Bitterish, Acrid, Citria ma∣lus. Aromatick, Astringent, and of the same Fragrancy as a Citron; and are good Sto∣machicks. The Fruit and Pulp is very Acid and Aromatick. The Peel has the taste of the Leaf; and is Cordial, if distilled with Sack. The Syrup is a cooling Cor∣dial, by its grateful Acidity. The Peels are kept Candied. Citrul-Seeds are Cool and Mucilaginous, Citrullus.
and so are the Leaves and Fruit, which is also Sweet. Virgins Bower is Bitter and very Acrid. Clematitis. Coloquintida is extreamly Bitter, and Colocyn∣this. affects the Mouth with that Taste, when it is pounded; it is also very Acrid: By these Tastes it purges vehemently. It contains a Resin; and therefore has a Sli∣miness, as other Purgers. Bastard-Sena is Sweet, Bitterish, Slimy, Collutea. and smells Pea-like, which the Cods and Flowers resemble. By the Oyly rankness, it vomits much, and purges churlishly. Saracens-Consound: The Leaves smell Consolida Saracenica like Elder, and are Mucilaginous, Bitterish, a little Acrid, and Astringent; by which it is Diuretick and Vulnerary in Decoctions and Oyntments. This is mistaken for Virga Aurea, and is very different. This seems to be some sort of Aster, and not Consolida. It is that which is described in Mr. Ray, Hot and Aromatick. This is used for Virga Aurea amongst us. Lark-Spur is Sweet, and a little Acrid. Consolida Regalis. The Seeds are in Cods, and taste of a Pea-
Taste; and may be something like Colum∣bine, in Vertue. Contryerva: The Roots have a very Contrayer∣va. Acrid, and Bitterish Taste; and smell like Figg-Leaves. It is Alexipharmack and Sudorifick. The Bitterness is very ob∣scure. Dioscorides mentions the Smell. Coriander-Seed is Sweet, Hot, Aroma∣tick, Coriandri Semen. and Carminative. The Odor of the Plant is like the Cimices, Fetid: Mr. Ray. From the Foetor it is esteemed Malignant, and is corrected by Vinegars. Buckshorn-Plantane: I tasted it in the Coronopus Garden at Chelsey, Watrish and Rough, like Plantane. Jesuits-Bark: Besides a Woody and fusty Cortex Pe∣ruvianus. Taste, it has a Laurel, Bitter, and Styp∣tick Taste, without any sensible Acrimo∣ny. The Taste is very discernible in the Infusion; and it resembles a Bitter Al∣mond, especially its Peel, and the Bark of that Tree. All other Trees of a Laurel-Taste, cannot but answer its Vertue; and are Antifebrifick by their Bitterness, pre∣serving the mixture of the Blood from Pu∣trefactive Fermentations; which are also
considerably checked by the Astringency; which also causes a separation of those parts that are loose from the mixture of the Blood, and passes them off by Ʋrine. Ale-Cost is Sweet, Bitterish, Hot, and Costus dulcis & amara. Aromatick, and smells like Orris; and is very Acrid, especially the Bitter. Garden Crocus, Yellow and Purple, have Crocus Hortensis purpureus, & luteus. Cubebae. Sweet, Slimy Roots, like Saffron. Cubebs are very Hot, Acrid, Aromatick, Cordial and Carminative. Wild-Cucumber is very Bitter, Slimy, Cucumis Asininus. and Acrid, by which it purges violently. The Leaves and Roots are of the weakest Vertue. The Juyce lasts long, and is In∣flammable; by which it's Resinous. Ordinary-Cucumber: The Leaves, Flow∣ers, Cucumis Hortensis. Fruit, and Seeds, are Watrish, Slimy, and Cooling; which is used in Emulsions. Gourds are Watrish in the Leaves, Sli∣my Cucurbita. in the Seeds, and Sweet in the Pulp and Fruit; all Cooling. Cummin-Seed is Sweet, Bitterish, Aro∣matick, Cuminum.
and Acrid; with an Aromatick, unpleasant Smell. A good Carminative, Pectoral, Diuretick and Ʋterine. Turmerick is nauseously Bitter and Curcuma. Acrid, like Ginger; good in the Jaundice, as an opening Hepatick. It colours Yellow. Galingal long and round, or sweet Cyprus, Cyperus longus & rotundus. have a Bitter, Aromatick Taste, like Ga∣langa; and therefore are good for the Stomach and Nerves: Both of them are Aromatick, like Cedar. Cypress has an Astringent Bitterish Cypressus. Taste; and Turpentine Smell in the Leaves and Nutts; by which it is Vul∣nerary. D. DIttany is of an Hot, Biting, Bitte∣rish, Dictamnus Creticus. and Aromatick Taste; and a strong quick Scent, like Penny-Royal; but stronger, and therefore is of an opening Cephalick Vertue, like Penny-Royal; and is to be referr'd, with Penny-
Royal, to the Cephalick-Class of Bitterish Aromatick-Acrids. It is chiefly us'd to force Labour, it abounding with Volatile Oyl and Salt. Tarragon is Sweet, Hot, and Acrid; and Dracuncu∣lus Horten∣sis. smells like Fennil, and is of the same Class and Vertue; and is eaten in Sallats. Dragons: The Leaves taste at first Draconti∣um. Sweet; after a while very Acrid, like A∣ron; therefore it may be accounted good, as Volatile Salts, in Infectious Distempers. It is most us'd in distill'd Water. It is like Aron in its Vertues, being Diuretick, Pecto∣ral, Alexipharmack, and Antiscorbutick; and has Spots in the Leaves; but is more A∣crid than Aron, coming nearer to Ranun∣culus in its burning Heat. Outwardly it is good for Fistula's. Its Sharpness is cor∣rected by Vinegar. Galen says, That it is Bitter and Astringent; and prescribes it for Ʋlcers.
E. THE Juyce-of Wild Cucumber is Elaterium. extreamly Bitter, and burns easi∣ly: It purges violently. Dodder of Thyme tastes Bitterish and A∣romatick, Epithy∣mum. like Thyme; and has the same Vertue. Garden-Rocket is very Acrid and Bitte∣rish, Eruca Sa∣tiva. and of a Strong, Acrid, Pungent Smell, and a little unpleasant. It is a Cress in Taste and Vertue, and is useful in Drop∣sies, and the Scurvy. F. FEnnil-Giant: The Plant tastes Bit∣ter, Ferula. like Gum-Ammoniack, smells a little Fetid, and has the same Ver∣tue. The Sweet Taste is not very evident in the Fetid Ʋmbels. Fennil-Giant is an Ʋterine by the Foetor, and by the Bitter-Acrimony. The Figg-Tree: The Leaves are of a Ficus.
burning hot Taste. The Ashes of the Figg-Tree, of Spurge, and of Ash, are more Caustick than ordinary Ashes of Plants; therefore there is a great difference in the Lixiviums of Plants, and in their Salts. It purges by its Caustick Quality. Figgs are Sweet and Luscious: They are us'd in the Small-Pox, and Diseases of the Lungs; and outwardly in Pultesses, for their Pulpy sweet Mucilage. The Tree being so Acrid, the Fruit probably par∣takes of it; whereby it becomes Diapho∣retick, Diuretick, and Purgative. French-Marigold is of a strong, heady, Flos Afri∣canus. Marigold-Smell; and tastes Bitterish, Sli∣my, Acrid, and stronger than ordinary Marigolds. The Sun-Flower smells like a Marigold, Flos Solis. tastes Bitterish and Acrid, and feels clam∣my, like Marigolds; and out of the Stalk and Flowers, a Resin sweats. In Taste, Colour, and Smell, it is like Turpentine; Mr. Ray. Adonis-Flower tastes very Acrid, as an Flos Ado∣nidis. Anemone or Ranunculus; and is call'd Ado∣nis-Flower, or Pheasant's-Eye,
Fennil: The Leaves, Seeds, and Roots Foenicu∣lum. are of a Sweet, Acrid, Aromatick Taste, and of a strong Aromatick Smell. The Plant is Diuretick, Pectoral, Carminative, and good for the Eyes inwardly and out∣wardly; as also for discussing of Milky Tumors. The Fennil-Taste being most known of this kind, I call the whole Class by that Name. Fenugraec: The Seeds are Mucilagi∣nous, Foenum Graecum. Bitter, and of a Pea-Taste: It smells strong, oyly, and loathsom. It mollifies Scirrhosities, and lenifies and discusses the Inflammations of the Eyes. An Oyl may be press'd out of the Seed, and a Muci∣lage drawn by Decoction. It is Fetid, and the Meal of the Seed is us'd in Ca∣taplasms. Bastard-Dittany has a Bitterish and ve∣ry Fraxinella. Acrid Taste, and strong Aromatick Smell, like Rue.
G. GAlangale is Biting and Hot, like Galanga major. Ginger: It is a good Aromatick, Carminative, and Cordial. Galbanum: The Plant tastes Bitter, like Galbanum. Gum-Galbanum; smells a little Fetid, and has the same Vertue. Goats-Rue is Mucilaginous, Bitterish, and Galega. a little Hot, and tastes of a Pea-Taste, with an oyly strong Smell. It is useful outwardly against Gangreens, and foul Ʋl∣cers. It seems to be an Anodyne. It is im∣properly us'd inwardly for Infectious Di∣stempers, being very nauseous to the Sto∣mach, and by its Taste a Purgative. Gauls are very Rough and Bitterish: Gallae. They are given in Drink to stop Blood, and all Fluxes. Outwardly they are good in Ʋlcers and Tetters, and are strong Re∣pellers and Driers. Spanish-Broom has the Taste of Ordinary Genista Hi∣spanica. Broom: Though the Flowers smell well, yet it is of the Bitterish Pea-Class.
Gentian-Root is very Bitter; it is good Gentiana. infus'd in Wine, or in Powder, for the Sto∣mach, and in Obstructions of the Liver, and Intermitting Fevers, to preserve the Mix∣ture of the Blood, and to hinder Putre∣faction. It is a good Ʋterine. The Root is also Slimy, and a little Acrid. It may belong to Aristolochia; and therefore La∣xative. By the Bitter-Acrid, it is Alexi∣pharmack, and good in the Biting of a Mad Dogg. Gentianella: The Leaves are Bitter and Gentianel∣la. Mucilaginous; by which Taste, and the Flower, it seems to belong to the Ari∣stolochiae. Tree-Cranes-bill has a Fragrant Tur∣pentine-Smell, Geranium Arbore∣scens. like other Cranes-bills. Spanish-Cudweed is of a Bitterish Astrin∣gent Gnaphali∣um Hispa∣nicum. Taste, like the Ordinary Gnaphali∣ums: It smells strong, somewhat like Oyl of Amber; therefore Cephalick, and a good Vulnerary. The Pomegranate-Tree: The Bark is Granata Malus. rough-tasted, hot like Orange-Peel, and biting. The Pomegranate-Leaves taste Rough, and a little Aromatick, with a
fusty Savor, resembling Hounds-Tongue: When rubb'd, the Leaves smell Fusty, like Catts-Piss. Hedge-Hyssop tastes Sweet, Bitterish, Gratiola. Sub-acrid, and Slimy; and is very Pur∣gative. Goosberries: The Bark is very Rough, Grossula∣ria. Bitterish, and Astringent: The Berries are Sweetish and Acid, and the Leaves Acid and Rough. Guajacum-Wood: The Bark is Bitter Guajacum. and Astringent. It is us'd in Sweating Decoctions for the Pox. Authors say, It has an Acrimony, by which it produces these Effects; which is probable, because it is Resinous, and like Ash-Tree in Leaves and Virtue. If the Gum be extracted by Spirit of Wine, the Wood yields only an Acid Spirit in Distillation. H. SPanish Hony-Suckle tastes Rough, of Hedyso∣rum Clype∣atum flore Purpureo. an Oyly Pea-Taste. It is a Legu∣minous Plant.
White-Hellebore: The Root is very Helleborus Albus. Bitter and Acrid; by which it is Sternu∣tatory, and vomits violently, and causes a Strangulation, and great Flux of Spittle and Convulsions, and Vomiting of Blood. It is best given on a full Stomach, to defend the Membranes. It is given to Mad Men by Quacks, for a strong Vomit. This is bitterer than Black Hellebore; and the Malignity is best corrected by Vinegar. Both Hellebores are us'd outwardly for the Itch, Scald-Heads, and Fistula's. Noble-Liver-wort: The Leaves are Hepatica Nobilis. Rough, and a little Sweet. It is rather an Astringent, than an opening Medicine. It is useful, as a Vulnerary; and may be put into the Pea-Class, being Sweetish and Rough, like some Trefoils. Doria's Wound-wort tastes Bitterish, A∣stringent, Herba Do∣ria. Terebinthinate, and Aromatick, like Solidago Saracenica; and therefore is Vulnerary and Diuretick. Rupture-wort is Bitterish and Astringent, Herniaria. like Polygonum; and is a Vulnerary in Rup∣tures. It has some Acrid, by which it is Diuretick; Mr. Parkinson.
Hermodactyls: The Roots are with∣out Hermoda∣ctylus. Smell, of a mealy Taste, and a little Hot. They purge Phlegm in Diet-Drinks, and compounded Powders. They are Bul∣bous Roots; which are generally Mealy and Mucilaginous, and therefore very Nauseous. It is described to be Milky, and to be the Syrian Colchicum. That there is an Acrimony in the Milk, it is pro∣bable; for some sort of Colchicums are venenate, and strangulatory: And I sup∣pose this to have some Heat or Acrimo∣ny, like Orris-Root; by which it purges. Dames-Violets: Their Taste is like Roc∣ket, Hesperis Pannonica. and the Vertue the same. Clary: The Leaves are Watrish, and a Hormi∣num Scla∣raea dict∣um. little Bitter and Hot. The Flowers are also a little Glutinous and Bitterish; but have a strong, piercing, Aromatick Scent; whose Parts are so thin, and fine, that they scarce sensibly affect the Taste, unless it be with a Smatch, like Frankincense. The Seed is slimy. Clary is a very good Ce∣phalick and Ʋterine in Fits of the Mother. It is infus'd in Wine, for Distempers of the Eyes and Head. It is a Vulnerary, and good for Weakness in the Back.
Hyssop is Bitterish, Aromatick, and A∣crid Hyssopus. in Taste: It is, by the Taste and Smell, of the Cephalick-Class; but is chief∣ly us'd as a Cleansing and Opening Pecto∣ral. It is Diuretick, as most Pectorals be, evacuating the Lympha. I. THE Roots of Jalap taste clammy Jalapium. in the Teeth. The Resin smells Sub-acid. It purges Water and Phlegm. Vide the Class of Purgers. This Resin is best ground with Oyl, to make it dissolve better in the Body, and stick less to the Gutts. Jalap irritates the Throat and Mouth; Dr. Grew. Jasmine: The White Flowers are Bit∣ter, Jasminum vulgare. and very Acrid; the Green Leaves are the same, but less Bitter and Hot. The Flowers have a great Fragrancy. It is of the Pea-Class, by the Taste of the Root; and the Seeds are said to be like a Lupin. Indian-Jasmine: The Leaves have a Jasminum Indicum. Laurel-Taste; but the Yellow Flowers smell very Sweet.
Sciatica-Cresses has a pungent Taste, Iberis. like Cresses; and is of the same Virtue. Master-wort is Bitterish, and extreamly Imperato∣ria. Acrid and hot in Taste. It smells some∣what like Angelica. It is Alexipharmack, Carminative, Cephalick, and a good Ma∣sticatory. Crown-Imperial: The Leaves have a Imperialis Corona. little sweetish Taste: It smells like a Fox; and may be referr'd to the Lily-kind. It may be put into Nervine Oyntments. Indigo is prepar'd out of a Plant, which Indigo. is of the Leguminous kind; and tastes Bit∣terish, of a Pea-Taste; by which it is Diu∣retick, as Dr. Lister hath experienc'd it. Orris: The fresh Root tastes Sweet, Iris. Bitterish, and Burning; and smells most Fragrant, when dry; but fresh, like Li∣quorish. Powder'd, it is Hot, Aromatick, and Bitterish. The Juyce hath a very hot Acrimony; half an Ounce is given to purge in the Dropsie. The Powder of the Root is Pectoral, and Cephalick. Outward∣ly it is us'd for the Scaling of Bones. The Roots of Orris give a Fragrancy to Beer; and the fresh Roots are boyl'd
in Broth for the Dropsie. Chamaedrys has the same Taste. Jujubs have a luscious sweet Taste, like Jujubae. Raisins; and are Pectoral by their sweet Mucilage. L. LEttuce: The Root is Milky, Bitter, Lactuca. and Acrid; the Leaves are Watry, Bitterish, and Mucilaginous. The Root smells something like Poppies. The whole Plant is Anodyne externally in In∣flammations. The Seeds are good in Spit∣ting of Blood, and Sharpness of Ʋrine. The distill'd Water cools much; it loosens the Belly by the bitter Slime. Job's-Tears tastes Sweetish, like Grass: Lacryma Jobi. The Stony-Seeds are Diuretick, like Grom∣well-Seeds, by their Stoniness. Lesser-Burdock tastes Bitter, Acrid, and Lappa mi∣nor. Aromatick, like Elecampane; and is of the same Virtue, Hepatick, Diuretick, Pe∣ctoral, and Sudorifick, by the Bitter-Acri∣mony.
Laser-wort smells Aromatick, tastes Laserpiti∣um. Sweet, Acrid, and Aromatick; and has the Virtue of the Fennil-Class. The Bay-Tree: The Berries are very Laurus. Bitter and Acrid, and of an hot Aroma∣tick Smell and Taste. The Leaves are of the same; but Milder, Bitterish, and Aro∣matick. The Leaves are us'd in Baths, for Distempers of the Nerves, and in hot Oyntments. The Berries are Carminative, Hepatick, Diuretick, and Ʋterine. The Bark of the Root is Bitterish, Astringent, and lesser Acrid; but very Rough. The Bay-Tree may be placed amongst the A∣romatick-Turpentines. The Laurel-Tree: The Bark of the Laurus Ce∣rasus. Root tastes very Bitter and Astringent, like Bitter-Almonds. The Leaves have the same Taste. I boyl'd the Leaves of Lau∣rel, and a great piece of the Root in Pot∣tage; but it neither purged nor vomited my Dogg. A little Heat may be perceiv'd in the Leaves. The Leaves, when rubb'd, smell like a Peach-Kernel. There are ma∣ny Trees of this Taste. The Leaves of the Triumphant-Laurel are Rough, Bit∣terish, and of a Laurel-Taste and Smell. Laurel is not us'd in Physick; but the
Leaves seem proper for Wound-Oyntments, by their Bitter-Astringency. Lavander tastes very Hot, Bitterish, and Lavandu∣la. Aromatick in the Flowers and Leaves. The Spirit is most us'd as a Cephalick; and the whole Plant outwardly in Baths, for Paralytick Cases. The Seed is us'd in Difficulty of Labour. The Mastich-Tree Wood rubb'd, smells Lentiscus. of Mastich, and tastes Dry and Woody. The Decoction is us'd in Catarrhs, as Ma∣stich. It is reputed to be very Astringent, and good in all Fluxes. There is a Gum∣miness in Mastich, besides the Resinous Turpentine-Smell. Snow-Flower: The Root is Bitter, A∣crid, Leucoium Bulbosum Praecox minus. and Slimy; and of an Elder-Smell, in the Leaves. The Garden-Stock Gilliflower is Bitter∣ish, Leucoium Sativum. Acrid, and Mucilaginous; and belongs to the Cress-Tastes. 'Tis a good Diure∣tick and Antiscorbutick. Lovage tastes Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, Levisticum and Aromatick; especially in the Smell, it is a very strong Aromatick. It is Diu∣retick,
Pectoral, and Carminative; out∣wardly in Baths, as an Ʋterine; inward∣ly an Opener of all Obstructions; and us'd for Cramps, and expelling the Secundines. Herb-Frankincense has a Sweet, Bitte∣rish, Libanotis. Acrid Taste, and Aromatick Smell, as other Ʋmbells; and has the same Vir∣tue. Blue-Pipe is very Bitter and Acrid, and Lilac. of an Aromatick Smell; belonging to the Jasmins, and differing in Taste from the Syringa. Common White-Lilies: The Flowers Lilium Commune. smell Sweet, but Fainty. The Flowers, Roots, and Green Leaves are Mucilagi∣nous and Bitterish. The Flowers are Ano∣dyne and Mollifying, by the Mucilage; and by the strong Smell, discussing. The Roots are us'd in Pultesses, for ripening A∣postems by the Mucilage, and by the strong drawing. It has some strong hot Parts, discernible in the Smell of the Flowers. The Limon-Tree: The Leaves are Bit∣terish, Limonia Malus. Aromatick, and Acrid, like the Peel. As pleasant a Cordial-Water may be di∣still'd from them, as from the Peels, with Wine.
Lupines have a Sweet-bitter Taste, like Lupinus. Pease. The Meal is us'd in Pultesses and Cataplasms, for the Worms; and in a Pes∣sary, mixt with Hony and Myrrh. Out∣wardly by their Bitterness they are Cos∣metick, cure Ʋlcers and Scabs, and discuss Scrophulous Tumors. Rose-Campions are very Rough, Astrin∣gent, Lychnis Coronaria. and Vulnerary in the Leaves; the Root is Bitterish, Pungent, and a little Sweet; by which it may be referr'd to the Class of the Caryophylli. The Seed is very Acrid, as Galen observ'd. Catch-Fly is of a crude Taste and Smell, Lychnis Viscosa. Bitterish and Slimy. M. MAce is of an Aromatick Smell, Macis. and of a Bitterish, Aromatick, and Hot Taste; yielding an Oyl very Stomachick and Cordial. It is like Nutmeg, but not so strong. Marjoram is Bitterish, Hot, and of an Majorana. Aromatick Taste and Smell. Its Chymi∣cal
Oyl is Stomachick and Cephalick. The Juyce, with the Juyce of Primrose-Roots, put into the Nose with a Thimble, ex∣ceedingly evacuates from the Nose and Throat, in the King's-Evil, and other Di∣stempers of the Head. Holy-Hock: The Flowers are Biting, Malva Ar∣borea. Mucilaginous, and of a stronger Vertue than Mallowes; fit only for outward Mol∣lifying and Discussing. The Apple-Tree: The Bark is Bitter-Sweet Malus. and Astringent. The Codling-Bark is more Sweet than Bitter. Citron hath a fragrant and grateful A∣cidity Malus Ci∣tria. in the Fruit, which is Cooling in Fevers. The Peel is Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatick; and so are the Leaves. The Syrup of Citron is most us'd; and the Spirit distill'd with Sack, from the Peel. Quince-Tree: The Bark and Leaves are Malus Co∣tonea. moderately Astringent; the Quince Rough and Acid. It is good, as an Astringent; and may be us'd, instead of the Mastich-Tree, for the Astringency. The Fruit hath an Aromatick Astringency, for the Stomach. A Quiddany is made of the Fruit;
and a Wine as pleasant as Canary, of the Juyce. Apricock-Tree: The Bark is Rough Malus Ar∣meniaca. and Bitter, the Leaves are Rough and Sourish, and the Fruit somewhat Aroma∣tick. Peach-Tree: The Bark is very Rough Malus Per∣sica. and Bitter, the Green Leaves are Bitter and Slimy, with Astringency, and the Flowers Bitter and Slimy. The Syrup of them is us'd for the Worms; and so are the Green Leaves, boyl'd in Milk. Peach is of a Laurel-Bitter, like the Bitter-Al∣mond-Tree; and has a Gum in it. The Fruit tastes Watrish, Slimy, and Grateful. Mastich-Thyme flies up, with an Aro∣matick Marum Syriacum. Pungency, into the Nose, like Spi∣rit of Sal-Ammoniack. The Taste is Bit∣terish, and very Acrid; and therefore an excellent Cephalick. By the Oyly Volatile Salt, it is a good Sternutatory. Feaver-few is very Bitter, Biting, and Matricaria of a strong Aromatick Smell. It is out∣wardly us'd in Baths for the Womb, and for Pessaries. It smells like Camphore; and the distill'd Water is us'd for Freckles,
and Hysterical Women. The Juyce is us'd for the Shingles, and Agues; and is boyl'd in Posset-Drink, to promote Sweating; and in Pultesses, to hard Breasts. By its Bit∣terness, it is Emmenogogue; and by its A∣crimony, and being Aromatick, it is Diu∣retick and Cephalick; as well as, by its strong Smell, Hysterick. Mechoacan is Gummy and Clammy in Mechoa∣canna. the Teeth, like Jalap; but of no consi∣derable Taste. The Root looks like Bryo∣ny; but is not Bitter. It purges Phlegm and Water, as Jalap does, by the latent Acrimony of the Resin, and the clammy Gumminess. The fresh Stalk cut, yields a Milk; and the Root, a Resin. Mar∣gravius. American Fennil-Flower: I tasted the Melanthi∣um Ameri∣canum Pimpinellae folio. Liquor in the Flower, which had the ex∣act Taste of Honey. This Liquor sweats from the proper Vessels of the Plant, and is its proper Oyly Juyce: And from such Juyces, Bees gather Honey. Melon: The Seeds are Cool and Mu∣cilaginous; Melo. the Pulp, Slimy, and some∣what Aromatick, like Musk in Musk-Me∣lons; and of a sweet Taste. This Crude
Nourishment is good for Hectical Bloods, which cannot bear Acids. These Pulpy Fruits are apt to putrefie in the Stomach, and to produce a Cholera: An Emulsion of the Seeds is safer in Fevers, Coughs, Sharpness of Ʋrine, and Hecticks, by the Crude Sliminess and Oyliness tempering Acrid Salis. Balm is Bitterish, Acrid, and of an A∣romatick Melissa. Taste and Smell, like Citron: It is therefore Cordial in Spirit, Syrup, Wine, distill'd Water, and Conserve. Drunk like Thea, it is good for Melancholy. Spear-Mint is Bitterish, Acrid, Aroma∣tick, Mentha Spicata. Astringent, and a good Stomachick in Juyce, Spirit, distill'd Water, Wine, and Conserve. The Hart-Mint smells most Cordial, and tastes most Aromatick; and yields a pleasant Water. The Oyl is ex∣tracted in Distillation of the Simple Wa∣ter. The Astringency is useful to streng∣then the Stomach, and stop Loosenesses, the Whites, and Vomiting. The Acrid-Aro∣matick outwardly discusses coagulate Milk, and inwardly is Cordial. Garden-Mercury is of a Crude Juyce, like Mercuria∣lis. Blites; by which it is Cooling and Emol∣lient.
Medlar-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Mespilus. are Astringent and Bitterish: The Fruit is Acid and Astringent, and good in all Fluxes. Spignal: The Roots are Bitter, Sweet, Meum A∣thamanti∣cum. and Aromatick, with a Mithridate-Fla∣vor, like Petasitis. It is us'd as an Alexi∣pharmack, Diuretick, and Hysterick. It's like Dill in Vertue, Carminative and Pe∣ctoral. Mezereon-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Mezereon. are very Hot and Burning; and therefore Purgative. The Flowers have a sweet Lily-Smell, but the Bark an Elder-Smell. The Heat lasts long in the Mouth. Marvel of Peru is of a Solanum-Smell Mirabilis Peruviana. and Vertue. The Root purges as strong∣ly as Jalap; but differs from it, by the Opiate Faculty. The Root tastes Slimy, Acrid, and Bitterish. Moly smells strong, and tastes like Gar∣lick; Moly. and therefore has the same Vertue. Mulberry-Tree: The Bark is Bitterish, Morus. Astringent, and Hot; the Leaves Muci∣laginous and Bitterish. Mulberries smell
Strong, and taste Sweet, Acid, and Sli∣my; and are therefore good for Sore Mouths in Syrup. The Bark of the Root is accounted Purgative. Ripe Mulberries make a good Wine. Myrobalanes are Sweet, Bitterish, Styp∣tick, Myrobala∣ni. and Slimy; by which they purge Choler, as Bitter-Styptick Slimes do. Myrtle-Tree: The Leaves are Bitterish, Myrtus. Rough, Aromatick, and Acrid; and of a strong Fragrant Smell. It is Stomachick, Cordial, and Diuretick; and outwardly Vulnerary. The Astringent Oyl is made by infusion. The Flowers have the same Smell and Taste. N. HElmet-flower, or Monks-Hood tastes Napellus. very Acrid, and burns the Mouth. It is accounted a Poyson, causing Straitness of Breath, Pain at the Stomach, Loss of Sight, with Giddiness, and a Deli∣rium. I gave an handful of Leaves and Roots boyl'd to my Dogg, which made no sensible Alteration in him. This is an Aconite; and has Black Roots.
Indian-Cresses: The Leaves are very Nasturti∣um Indi∣cum. Biting, like Mustard-Seed, and Slimy; and so are the Flowers; which, eaten with Meat, are Antiscorbutick. The Seeds are pickled, like Capers. An Antiscorbutick Oyl may be made by Infusion of the whole Plant in Oyl, for Scald-Heads, and Scor∣butick Pains. Tobacco: The Leaves are Biting, Acrid, Nicotiana. Bitter, and Mucilaginous; by which it vomits and purges violently. It cleanses Ʋlcers, and heals Wounds and Burns, dis∣cusses Tumors, and allays Pains, by the Solanum-Smell, which I perceiv'd about the Flowers: But it produces Giddiness, by its Acrimony; by which it causes Sneezing in Powder, and evacuates a Lym∣pha from the Glandules of the Mouth, if chew'd. It's useful to Hydropical Persons. An Oyntment is made of it. The Infu∣sion of the dry Leaves in Water, cures Tetters. Fennil-Flower tastes Sweet and Hot, like Nigella Romana. Fennil, but of no Aromatick Smell. We call it Ruffling Dick. By the Taste it is Diuretick.
Nutmeg is of a Fragrant, Oyly, Tur∣pentine-Smell; Nux Mos∣chata. and yields Oyl by Expres∣sion and Distillation. It has a Biting, A∣romatick, Bitterish Taste; and is Diure∣tick, Cephalick, and Cordial. O. ROse-Bay is of a crude Smell, and Oleander. very Rough and Bitter, like Lau∣rel. I cannot perceive any Lethi∣ferous Quality in it. Rice yields a Nutritive, Slimy, and Sweet Oriza. Meal. It is us'd in Diet; and is something Astringent in Fluxes, by the Meal. P. CHRIST's-Thorn is like Haw∣thorn Paliurus. in Taste, in the Diuretick Vertue of the Berries, and in the Astringency of the Bark. The Garden-Poppies Milk is very Bit∣ter Papaver. and Acrid, and of an Offensive, Fe∣tid,
and Heavy Smell; from which Opium is made. I believe a Tincture of the Pop∣py-Roots may be useful: And an Oyl may be Expressed from the Seeds. Pompions are of a Mellowy Smell, and Pepo. of a Watry, Slimy Taste; which is also the taste of the Seed and Leaves. They cool Inflammations. A Water may be distilled from them. The Flesh of the Fruit is Sweet, of a Cool, Crude, and Waterish Nourishment. The Seeds are Diuretick by the Oylyness. Thorow-Wax tastes Terebinthinate, Perfoliata. Rough and Bitterish, feels Clammy, if rub∣bed; and is of a low Terebinthinate Smell. The Root tastes Terebinthinate, Bitterish, and Astringent. It is an excellent Vul∣nerary; and is most us'd in Ruptures. Parsley is Sweet, Hot, Pungent, Bit∣terish, Petroseli∣num. and Aromatick. The Seeds and Leaves have the same Taste. The distilled Water and Seeds are good for Wind; and are Carminative, Diuretick, and Pectoral. Macedonian-Parsley: The Seeds are Bit∣terish, Petroseli∣num Mace∣donicum. Sweet, and Acrid; and of a Parsley-Taste and Vertue.
Sow-Fennil is Pectoral by its Sweet∣ness; Peuceda∣num. but by the Acrimony, Bitterness, and Foetor, very Cleansing; and by the same, it is Hepatick, Ʋterine, Diuretick, and Nervine. A Conserve is made of the Roots. Sow-Fennil is outwardly a good Cleanser and Discusser in Ʋlcers and Tu∣mors. Kidney-Beans have a sweet Pea-Taste; Phaseolus. and are for Nourishment chiefly. Mock-Privet and Alaternus are of a Lau∣rel-Taste Phlliryea. and Vertue. The Pine-Tree: The Leaves are of a Pinus. Terebinthinate-Smell and taste Bitterish, Rough, and Sub-acid. The Pine-Kernels taste Acid and Terebinthinate; the Nuts are very much Astringent in Taste, and Terebinthinate in Smell: They are ex∣cellent in Spittings of Blood in Powder, and boyl'd in Drink. Pepper is very Acrid, Aromatick, Hot, Piper. Burning, and Bitterish. A Tincture with Spirit of Wine, heats the Stomach, and is Ʋterine. If Fourteen Corns be given be∣fore the Quartane Ague, they throw off the Fits sometimes. It has a very hot
Oyl in it, and Volatile Salt, by the Pun∣gency. Pistache-Kernels are Bitterish, and of Pistacia. an Aromatick, Turpentine-Taste and Smell: They are good Pectorals and Diu∣reticks. The Wing'd-Pea has a Bitterish Pea-Taste. Pisum. The Sensitive-Plant tastes only Sweet Planta Sen∣sitiva, sive Herba viva and Rough; so that the Motion of it de∣pends on the Fibrous Contexture of the Plant, and not on any Spirituous Particles. It contracts it self at any Touch, and at Sun-Set. The Humble-Plant tastes Mucilaginous Planta Hu∣milis. and Sweet: I tasted It and the Former at the latter End of the Year: They both are of the Pea-Class; and are said to be Siliquose. The Plane-Tree: The Leaves and Bark Platanus. are very Rough, like a Maple, and Bit∣terish. Poeony: The Green Leaves are Bitte∣rish Poeonia Mas. and Astringent: The Fresh Roots are
Sweetish, Hot, and Unpleasant in Taste, and smell like Green Wallnut-Peels; the Dried are Bitterish, with great Astringen∣cy, and somewhat Fetid: By which the Plant is useful in Convulsions, in Syrup of the Flowers, in which the Foetor is most, and in distill'd Water of them. The Seeds are Bitter and Rough, and of an hot Taste, of some Fetid thin Parts. The hard Husks may do some good to Acids in Convulsi∣ons, as Absorbers. I cannot think Poeony-Root fit for After-Pains, tho' it is com∣mended by Dioscorides, and some Practi∣sers: He makes it Diuretick and Hepa∣tick. An Emulsion may be made of Poeo∣ny-Seeds, for Children. Mountain-Poley tastes Bitterish and Sub∣acrid; Polium montanum and smells Aromatick. It is put amongst the Anti-pestilential Antidotes. It opens all Obstructions of the Spleen, Womb, and Liver; and is chiefly an Hepatick, as Wormwood. Outwardly it is fit for Ʋl∣cers. It is most properly put into the Class of the Bitter-Sub-acrid-Aromaticks, and not amongst the Cephalicks. Love-Apple is of a strong heady Smell; Pomum Amoris. and a little Grateful, much like French-Marigolds. It was very offensive to my
Head; and, by the Fruit, seems a Sola∣num. I did not taste it. Leeks: The Taste and Smell are strong Porrum. and rank, like Garlick, abounding with a Volatile Salt. The Pottage of Leeks is good against the Scurvy, and the Quar∣tane-Ague in the Declination of it. They discuss the Piles, being fry'd with Butter, or boyl'd; and so does the Fume of Gar∣lick, laid upon the Coals. It is a strong Diuretick and Thoracick; but troubles the Head. Purslain is Watry and Mucilaginous, Portulaca. and of a crude Smell. It is good against Spitting of Blood, in Syrup and distill'd Waters, and for Hecticks. It is much us'd for both. The Plumb-Tree: The Bark is very Prunus. Rough, Astringent, and Bitterish. It has a Gum, which is Watrish. Fleawort: The Seeds are Mucilaginous, Psyllium. and they are us'd as such to cool Inflam∣mations. The Plant is said to be Nause∣ous, Bitter, and Offensive to the Stomach. It is Purgative and Venemous. It feels Viscid.
Pellitory of Spain is of a burning Acrid Pyrethrum Taste; by which it is a good Masticatory: And if it be infus'd in Oyl, it is very good for Paralytick Lameness and Coldness. Q. (Belonging to the Spontaneous Plants.) THE Oak Leaves are Crude, Sub∣acid, Quercus. and Rough: The Bark is very Rough, with little or no Bitterness: The Shells of the Acorn have the same Roughness: The Kernels of A∣corns are Sweet and Rough: The Acorn-Cups and Bark are good in all Fluxes. Out of the Leaves is distill'd a cooling Water; and out of the Bark is made a Decoction for Vulnerary Baths in the Stone, and Mouth-Waters. The Bark is boyl'd in Ale for the Strangury, with Bloody Water. Beach, Oak, and Maple, differ little in Taste and Vertue.
R. RAdix Rhodia: The Leaves of this Radix Rho∣dia. Plant are Slimy; and the Stalk is Bitterish and Rough: It resem∣sembles Orpin. Monks-Rhubarb: The Roots are Mu∣cilaginous, Rhabarba∣rum Mo∣nachorum. and Bitter; and the outward Rinde is a little Astringent. It is most us'd in Diet-Drink for a Cholagogue in the Scurvy; but very gentle. True Rhubard has a Dock-Taste, is Rhabarba∣rum. Bitter and Astringent, with a very little Gumminess, or Resin; in which is a lit∣tle Acrimony, which is easily lost by a∣ny Heat. It purges Choler gently by the Bitterness, and Acrid Gumminess, as Docks do. The Leaves are Acerb, as Docks be. The Root colours the Spittle Yellow, and resembles Choler somewhat in Taste, as well as Colour. Lignum Rhodium is of an Hot, Bitterish, Lignum Rhodium. Sub-astringent, Aromatick Taste; and smells like a Rose.
Curriers Sumach is very Rough and Rhus. Bitterish; on which the Vertue depends in stopping Fluxes. The Currain-Tree: The Bark is very Ribes. Astringent, and a little Bitter. The Fruit is very Acid. It is made into Quiddany, and not a Syrup. A Tart Wine is made of it; which is boyl'd first, to take away the Windiness. The Leaves are Rough and Sowre. The Black Currain is like the other; Ribes fru∣ctu nigro. but is of a strong, stinking, and nauseous Smell. The Red-Rose-Tree: The Flowers are Rosa Ru∣bra. Bitterish and Astringent, without any considerable Mucilage, and smell Fragrant. They stop Fluxes, and yield a Cordial Water and Spirit. Damask-Rose-Tree: The Flowers taste Rosa Da∣mascena. Mucilaginous, Bitter, and Astringent; and therefore are Purgative. The Astringen∣cy is least in these Flowers. A Syrup is made of them to purge: An handful of the Flowers boyl'd in Whey, does the same. The White-Rose has the same Vertue: Ten Ounces of the distill'd Water there∣of, purges.
Roses smell either like Musk or Cinna∣mon; or Fainty, like Lilies; or very Grate∣ful and Fragrant; or are inodorous; or Fetid, as the Yellow Rose. The strong Smell of Roses, shews an Acrimony in them; which helps the bitter Mucilage in purg∣ing. Red Roses have the same Acrimony; yet for want of Mucilage, and a greater degree of Bitter, the Astringency prevails. From whence it is evident, how much the Vertue of Herbs depends on divers diffe∣rent Principles of Plants; and the absence of one, or a difference in Degree, alters the Vertue considerably; and therefore all Compositions alter the Nature of the Simples much. Rosemary: The Green Leaves and Flow∣ers Rosmari∣nus. are Bitterish, Acrid, and Aromatick in Taste and Smell. Rosemary was call'd Libanotis, from the Smell like Thus: It is therefore an excellent Cephalick in Pal∣sies and Apoplexies, us'd in Conserve of the Flowers, Spirit, or Queen of Hungary's Water; or the distill'd Oyl, or Decoction of the Wood. Garden-Rue is Bitter, Acrid, and Hot, Ruta. and of a strong rank Smell; by which it is accounted an Hysterick Medicine. A
Volatile Salt and Oyl may be distill'd out of it in Sand; and by that it is Alexi∣pharmack in Plague-Waters, infus'd in Vi∣negar, and eaten with Butter. It is boyl'd in Milk for the Worms, and us'd to the Belly in Oyl. The Conserve of the Leaves, or Powder, is us'd in Convulsions. Give half a Spoonful of the Powder for Nine Days in the Morning, in Drink; and at Night take Twenty-four Grains of the same. Take White Henbane-Seeds Two Ounces; powder it; adding half an Ounce of Sugar: Take in a Spoonful of Syrup of House-Leek a Scruple, for Forty Days, at the Full and New Moon. Bathe the Feet in this following Decoction, and wash the Temples and Forehead. Take Rue, and Roots of Henbane, of each an Handful; boyl them in Spring-Water a Quarter of an Hour; then make a Bathe. Take White Wine Two Pound, Juyce of Rue, inward Bark of Elder, and the Leaves, of each, Two Ounces; boyl them in the Wine to half the Quantity, then take Two or Three Spoonfuls in the Morning fasting. This is accounted Sir Theodore Mayhern's Receipt; who says, It has cured many. The whole Vertue of it lies in the Opi∣ate Faculty, and the Rue.
Rue is Diuretick, Emmenagogue, and Ce∣phalick; but exceeding Hot in Taste and Smell. I have seen it blister the Lips upon chewing. It discusses Wind strongly. S. SAvin is of a biting Turpentine-Taste, Sabina. Strong, Bitter, a little Mucilaginous and Astringent; and of a Turpen∣tine-Smell, when rubb'd; but before, more Fetid: By which it is Ʋterine, provoking the Menses, and driving out the Foetus, and After-Birth. Outwardly it is a strong Cleansing Vulnerary, and Diuretick in∣wardly by the Turpentine-Smell. You may make a Cleansing Oyntment of it, with Axungia Porci. Sage is Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatick Salvia. in Taste and Smell. It is a Cephalick in Decoction, and Conserve of the Flowers; and us'd in Cephalick Waters; and a Chy∣mical Oyl drawn from it, is in use. It pro∣vokes Ʋrine, baked in Paste, and put into a Vessel of Beer; and therefore is us'd in Dropsies; and is boyl'd in Posset-Drink, for Sweating; and 'tis us'd as Thea. It is Cleansing in Gargles, and in Nervine Baths
and Oyntments discussing. The Aroma∣tick Oyly Turpentine of Sage, is strain'd through the Pores of the Tops of it; and feels Clammy, or Glutinous. Elder-Rose: The Flowers are Mucila∣ginous; Sambucus Rosea. and smell neither considerably, nor like Elder. Yellow-Saunders is Bitterish, Astringent, Santalum Citrinum. and Aromatick; and of a Musky, Fra∣grant Odor; and therefore is Cordial, Astringent, Aperitive, and Cephalick, by the Bitterish Aromatick Taste. Prickly-Bindweed is of a Mealy, Dry Sarsaparil∣la. Taste: The Decoction soon turns sowre. Quaere, Whether there be any Acrimony in it, by which it sweats? Tile-Tree is Mealy and Acrid: Quaere, Whether That may not be a Substitute of it? though no Root, that I know of, is in any Shrub, but Periclymenum-Root, which has any considerable Acrid. Hop-Roots are like it in Vertue. Quaere, Whe∣ther it be not Bitterish like them. Sassaphras is a Wood of a Fennil and Sassaphras. Aromatick Smell; and tastes Sweet, Hot, and Aromatick; and therefore is Diure∣retick,
Carminative, and Pectoral, like Fen∣nil; and yields an Oyl. It is good in Sweating Decoctions, Catarrhs, and the Gout. It yields a Resin, if extracted by Spirit of Wine, as Cinnamon does; and both will praecipitate with Water. The Bark is the strongest. Savory is very Biting, Hot, and Bitte∣rish; Satureia. and of a strong Aromatick Scent, flying strongly into the Nose. It is a Cephalick and Diuretick. When pickled it tastes like Sampire. It is of the Na∣ture of Hyssop: By their great Acrimo∣ny, both of them act like Volatile Salt, which is evidently in them. Scammony-Bindweed: It yields a Resin, Scammo∣nia. like Jalap, is Milky, if wet, and is at first like Milk running out of the cut Root, as Dioscorides says; and therefore has at first some Acrid, Tithymal-Taste, by which it purges; though when it is kept in the Shops, it has no Acrid Taste, but smells somewhat Acid, as Resin of Jalap does. It purges strongly. It is thought to be a sort of Bindweed. The dried Juyce of the Root is call'd Scammony. The Resin, dis∣solv'd in Spirit of Wine, is put into Sy∣rup to purge. By the Milk and Acrimo∣ny,
it may be referr'd to the Class of the Tithymalus. It has no Bitterness; and for that Reason, I think it is not a Convol∣vulus, though the Figure makes it so. Chives taste of the same Acrid, as Gar∣lick; Schaeno∣prassum. and of the same rank Smell and Ver∣tue, exciting Appetite; and therefore us'd in Sauces. Camels-Hair is Astringent and Aroma∣tick, Schoenan∣thus. smelling like a Rose. Squills is Bitter, Mucilaginous, and A∣crid; Scilla. and of a rank Smell: When fresh, if rubb'd on the Skin, it will make it smart. The Wine of Squills is best for Vomiting: But Vinegar corrects the Vo∣latile Salt in Squills. Oyl heals their Sting∣ing of the Hands. Cater-Pillars, with the Leaves of Bu∣pleurum, Scorpioi∣des bupleu∣rifolia. are of a Pea-Taste and Flavor. Vipers-Grass: The Roots, Leaves, and Scorzone∣ra. Flowers have an Insipid, Watrish, and Sweet Taste. It is Cooling, and fit for Food: But where the Sudorifick, Cordial Quality lies, I cannot find. The Milk is Sweet.
Assyrian-Plumbs are Sweetish, Slimy, Sebestens. and Pectorals. Tree-House-Leek tastes Watrish and A∣stringent, Sedum Ar∣borescens. like the Ordinary House-Leek. Sena is Mucilaginous, Slimy, Bitterish, Sena. and a little Hot or Acrid; and of a strong Herby-Smell, like New Hay. It purges Serum gently in Decoction or Powder; but gripes by the Viscid Slime, which may be corrected by Tartar. Sea-Wormwood: I describ'd That I found Seriphium. in the Garden, under the Letter A, as I have done others. Mr. Ray found it Wild: But I find by this Instance, that Wild Plants are stronger than those of the Gar∣den. Sea-Wormwood is less Astringent than the Common, and more Hot. It has a nau∣seous Taste, being very Bitter and Acrid; and therefore is very Diuretick, good for Worms, and less agreeable to the Stomach, than Common-Wormwood. Snake-Weed smells of Turpentine strong∣ly, Serpenta∣ria Virgi∣niana. like Valerian-Roots; and tastes Bit∣ter and Acrid. Half a Drachm of the Pow∣der is given before an Ague-Fit. It is A∣lexipharmack and Diuretick. I have given
it very successively for driving the Gout from the Stomach. Seseli-Seed is very Bitter, Sweet, Acrid, Seseli. and Aromatick in Taste and Smell. It is of the Fennil-Class, being Diuretick and Pectoral in Asthma's, and Carminative. Skirrets: The Taste of it is Sweet and Sisarum. Aromatick, like Parsnep. Smilax: The Leaf tastes Bitterish and Smilax. Rough, smells Crude, and looks like an Ivy-Leaf. Tree-Night-Shade smells strong of a So∣lanum-Smell, Solanum fruticosum Amomum Plinii. like Solanum Lignosum; and therefore is Narcotick. Quaere, Whether the Solanum-Trees are not stronger Narcoticks, than the Herbs. Saracen's Consound tastes Bitterish, A∣stringent, Solidago Saracenica and Terebinthinate; by which it is a Vulnerary. It is Terebinthinate, and smells a little like Angelica. Celtick-Nard is very Bitter, Hot, Aro∣matick, Spica Cel∣tica. and Astringent: It resembles Va∣lerian in Taste, Smell, and Vertue; and is a Turpentine-Plant, being Diuretick.
Spikenard is very Hot, Aromatick, and Spica In∣dica. a little Bitter. It is of the Vertue of the former, Diuretick and Cordial. Spinache is Watry, Mucilaginous, and Spinachia. Acid; and of a Crude Juyce, cooling in∣wardly and outwardly. Spiked-Willow of Theophrastus has a Spiraea The∣ophrasti. Crude Smell; and is Bitter, Rough, and of a Crude Taste. Stinking-Gladdon has a strong Smell, Spatula foetida. like Roast-Beef. Base-Horehound tastes Bitter and Acrid, Stachys. is of a Fetid Lamium Smell, and of a Mar∣rubium Vertue. It is Anti-hysterick, pro∣voking the Menses, and expelling the Af∣ter-Birth. French-Lavander: The Flowers, in the Stoechas Arabica. Shops, are Sub-Astringent, Bitterish, Hot, and Aromatick, like our Lavander; and is a Cephalick. The Syrup is in the Shops, and is given in Cephalick Diseases. Thorn-Apple: The Smell is Strong, Un∣pleasant, Stramoni∣um. and somewhat Narcotick, or like Elder. An Oyntment of the Leaves cures
Scalds and Burns; and is a good Ano∣dyne in Cancerous Breasts. The Leaf boyl'd, and drunk by mistake, caus'd a Phrenzy, like Narcoticks. It is a Solanum in Vertue. The Cork-Tree is Bitterish and Astrin∣gent. Suber. Sumach tastes Bitterish, Astringent, and Sumach. Acrid; and yields a Milk. Sycomore: The Bark is Bitterish and Sycomorus Rough; the inside of the Bark is a little Slimy. It is Astringent, like Maple. White-Pipe is of a Bitter, Sub-acrid Syringa alba. Taste. T. TAmarinds are Sweet, Slimy, and Tamarindi. Acid Plumbs; by which they loosen the Belly, correct hot Cho∣ler, as Acids, and abate Thirst. Tamarisk: The Bark is Bitterish and Tamariscus Astringent; and therefore accounted a Splenetick, stopping the irregular Fermen∣tation
of the Blood. It is good for Ʋlcers of the Mouth, and Pain of the Teeth. The Turpentine-Tree. The broad Leaves Terebin∣thus. smell plainly of Turpentine, and taste Bit∣terish and Astringent. Meadow-Rue: I tasted it in the Gar∣den. Thalic∣trum. The Yellow-Root is of a Sweetish, Bitter Taste; and so is the Leaf, by which it may be Nauseous and Purgative. This and Columbine I refer to the Pea-Class, for their Sweetness. Meadow-Rue is not of a Rhubarb-Taste; but may purge Choler, as Fumitory does. Candy-Tufts are Acrid, Bitter, and Sli∣my Thlaspi Creticum. in Taste. Thyme is Bitterish, Hot, Acrid, Aroma∣tick, Thymus citratus mastichi∣nus & Ser∣pillum. Carminative, Stomachick, Cepha∣lick, Cordial, and Uterine. It is us'd in After-Pains. Thyme has divers Aromatick Smells, in the different Species; as of Ma∣stich, or Citron, or Limon; or like Balm, as Serpillum. Snail-Trefoile is of a Pea-Taste in both Trifolium Cochlea∣tum. the kinds which I tasted.
Sweet-Trefoile or Balsam: The Herb Trifolium odoratum. smells Balsamy; but squeez'd, smells of a Pea-Smell. The Taste is of a Mucilagi∣nous Pea-Taste; and very Hot or Acrid, like Melilote. The Flowers infus'd in Oyl, make a warm Vulnerary Balsam, discussing hard Tumors. The whole Plant is boyl'd in Hoggs-Grease. The Flowry Part boyl'd in Posset-Drink, sweats, given after Brui∣ses, and does not purge. Tulip-Roots are Sweet, Mealy, Muci∣laginous, Tulipa. and of the Lily-Vertue. Turbith is Burning and Acrid, like Ti∣thymalus. Turpe∣thum. See the Specifick Classes. V. THE Vine: The Leaves and Ten∣drils Vitis. are Acid and Rough; they are good for hot Ʋlcers in the Mouth, and us'd boyl'd in cooling Broths. The Ripe Grapes are Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy. The Stone tastes Austere, Bitterish, and Rough. Unripe Grapes taste like the Leaves, Acerb, Acid, and Rough. The Root of the Vine tastes Bitterish and Rough.
W. WInters-Bark is very Pungent, Bi∣ting, Wintera∣nus Cortex. Aromatick, and Hot, like Cinnamon: It is good for the Stomach, and Cold Scurvy, by the Oyly and Pungent Salt. Z. ZEdoary is Bitter, Hot, and Aroma∣tick, Zedoaria. like Ginger. It is Carmina∣tive, good for the Stomach, and Alexipharmack by the Bitter-Acrimo∣ny. Quaere, Whether the Smell be like Cam∣phore; as also, the Smell of Lesser-Carda∣moms? as Dr. Grew. Ginger is very Acrid, Hot, Aromatick, Zinziber. Bitterish, Carminative, Cordial, and Ce∣phalick, by the Volatile Salt. The End of the Second Part.
The Third Part. THE Tastes and Vertues OF THE Products of Vegetables, (Viz.) Gums, Resins, Turpentines, &c. CHAP. I. Of Watry Gums. WAtry Gums will dissolve in cold Water; but will not melt nor dissolve in Oyl. They burn without Fla∣ming, and taste Slimy and Clammy. They were originally Mucilages, which dry in∣to Gums.
Gum-Arabick is Clammy and Mucila∣ginous: Gum Ara∣bicum. It is the Gum of Acacia. It is ob∣servable, That not only this Tree, but all other Trees yielding a Watry Gum, are Astringent. Whence I do inferr, That Watry Gums are Mucilages coagulated by an Acid, the Astringency depending on an Acid. Gum-Arabick yields a Fixt Salt. All Gum-Resins, as Myrrh, Aloes, Opium, and Euphorbium, have a Fixt Salt upon the Account of the Gumminess. Gum-Dragon is a Clammy Mucilage of Gum Tra∣gacanthi. a Thorny Plant. Half a Drachm thereof is good in Powder in Sharpness of Ʋrine, and Coughs. All Watry Gums are of an Em∣plastick Nature, cooling, sticking, and glewing Parts together. They allay A∣crimony, thicken the Humors, and smooth the Passages; having the Vertue of Mu∣cilages, and of an Acid dull'd thereby. The Plant from whence this Gum is ga∣ther'd, is describ'd amongst the Legumi∣nous Plants. Cherry, Peach, Almond, and Plumb-Tree Gum Ce∣rasorum, Mali Persi∣cae, Amyg∣dalae, Pru∣norum. Gums, are all Watry Gums; and have the same Taste and Vertue with the for∣mer.
Dragons-Blood is the Watry Gum of a Sanguis Draconis. Tree dissolvible in Water, and tastes Gum∣my and Astringent; and therefore is a good Agglutinative in Spitting of Blood, and it stops all Fluxes. White Starch comes near the Nature Amylum. of Watry Gums; being prepar'd of Wheat-Flowre, which is Mucilaginous: For by the Mucilage it smooths the Hands and Face, and allays the Acrimony in Coughs. Sarcocol has a very sweet Gummy Taste; Sarcocolla. though the true Sarcocol is said to be Bit∣terish, like Frankincense, and very Nau∣seous and Purging; but without any Smell. It is dissolvible in Water. It is out∣wardly us'd as an Agglutinative, cleansing and allaying any Sharp Defluxion into the Eyes. Manna is very nauseously Sweet, and Manna. Gummy. It is the Gum of a Tree; and by the very sweet Gummosity, it is Purging. It also contains a very Acid Spirit; by which it is injurious to the Hypochondria∣cal, and good for the Cholerick. Acids are given with it, to abate the luscious Sweet∣ness.
Honey: By the Sweetness it is Diure∣tick Mel. and Pectoral. It is partly Vegetable, and has an Animal Digestion. In Distil∣lation it yields an Acid Spirit; by which it is offensive to the Hypochondriacal. Ho∣ney contains also an Oyly Spirit, by which it is Vinous in Liquors, after Fermenta∣tion; and, by the Acid, outwardly clean∣ses Ʋlcers. It seems to partake of the Na∣ture both of Watry and Turpentine Gums. Sugar is a Salt very Sweet and Oleous; Saccharum and therefore inflammable. It melts with∣out Water at the Fire, mixes with Oyl, and, by Fermentation, yields a burning Brandy Spirit: Therefore the use of it is very inflaming to the Blood, by the Oyly Part; and by the Acid, corrosive; which it yields in a strong Fire. It is like the Acid of Tartar, as all Essential Salts be, which are more or less mixt with the Oyl of the Vegetable. From this great Quantity of Oyl mixt with the A∣cid, the Sweetness arises. And because Sugar is dissolvible in Water, as the Gums be, and may easily be turn'd into a Gum∣my Consistence, as happens in boyling of Sugar with Acids; I think it fit to place it here amongst Gums, whose Taste it resembles more than the Tartarous Salt of Vegetables.
CHAP. II. Of Fetid Gums. FEtid Gums were originally Milky Liquors: They are strongly Bit∣ter, or Bitter-Acrid; and have a Mucilage, whereby they soften; and a Vo∣latile Oyly Salt, whereby they discuss. By an Acid the Mucilage is coagulated into a Watry Gum; and the Oyly Vola∣tile Salt, which gives the Foetor, is coa∣gulated into something of a Resin: whence the Gum is dissolvible into a Milky Li∣quor, by Water; and the Oyly Salt is best extracted by Spirit of Wine Tarta∣riz'd. These Gums are frequently dissolv'd in Wine or Vinegar, and put into discus∣sing Emollient Plasters; but the Vinegar abates their Acrimony. Opopanax is from the Root of Panax; Opopanax. and tastes Gummy, very Acrid, and Bitter, and smells like Garlick. It is Emollient, and discussive outwardly; inwardly it is Carminative, loosening the Belly, Pectoral, and Diuretick.
Sagapenum smells Rank, and tastes Bi∣ting, Sagape∣num. like Garlick; and is of the Nature of Opopanax. Bdellium is Biting, very Bitter, and Bdellium. Gummy; and of the same Vertue with the former. Opium is very Bitter, Acrid, and Gum∣mose; Opium. and of a Poppy-Smell. It is Inflam∣mable and Resinous; and is the greatest Opiate. It is Diuretick, Venereal, Diapho∣retick; and sometimes it vomits and purges. Euphorbium is very Burning and Exul∣cerating Euphorbi∣um. in Taste, and of a Fetid piercing Smell; not to be us'd inwardly, but exter∣nally in drawing Plasters, and for Carious Bones. The Acrimony may be corrected by Acids. It is said to be a Tithymal; and all Tithymals have the same Vertue. Euphorbium is the Gum of a Milky Plant, purging violently, and sneezing strongly. Gum-Ivy is of an offensive Smell, and Gum. He∣derae. very Biting and Exulcerating in Taste. Camphore is a Gum out of a Tree like Camphora.
Poplar: It has a strong Smell, and tastes Bitterish, Acrid, Hot, and Pungent. It is an Antihysterick inwardly; and outward∣ly it opens the Pores in Inflammations, and so cools. It is us'd as an Alexipharmack. It dissolves in Spirit of Wine or Oyl, ha∣ving a great deal of Oyl and Volatile Salt in it. A good Tincture is made of it, with the Spirit of Wine Tartariz'd. Assa Foetida is the most offensive Fe∣tid, Assa Foeti∣da. like Garlick, and very nauseously Bit∣ter: It is therefore the greatest Antihy∣sterick. Galbanum is very Fetid, and smells like Galbanum. Garlick. It is very Gummy, Bitter, and Sub-Acrid; and therefore very Emollient and Discussing; and inwardly Antihyste∣rick. It burns like Resin; and is Soft and Gummy, like Wax. Gum-Ammoniack is a Gum of a Ferula. Ammonia∣cum. It smells strong, and but little like Castor. It is very Gummy and Bitter; by which it opens all Obstructions, cures the Asth∣ma, and Fits of the Mother; and by the Gumminess and Bitterness, is Laxative and Carminative. Outwardly, by the same, it discusses and softens Scirrhous Tumors.
Soot: I place it here, because it has Fuligo. a Smoaky Fetidness of Burnt Wood, and an Oyl and an Acid in it; by which it is ma∣nifestly Bitter and Acrid. It is very Su∣dorifick inwardly, and seems a State of Vegetable Principles, betwixt Bitter and Salt. A great Quantity of Earth rises with the Oyly Acid Particles; by a strict∣er Union whereof, a Volatile Salt is pro∣duced from Soot, in Distillation. I could not find much Difference in the Taste of Soot of Wood, from that of Coals. The Last is more Fetid and Saltish, the First more Acid. Wood distilled yields a Fetid Oyl, and Smoaky Acid: The same separated, by a Fire, from Wood, carries Earthy Ashes with it, and consti∣tutes Soot; which is not very Bitter. The Soot of Coal and Wood being almost the same, I suppose the Oyl and Acid in the Principles of Vegetables and Minerals are nearly related.
CHAP. III. Of Turpentine Gum-Resins. REsins melt with Heat, burn with a Flame, and will be easily dried to Powder: They dissolve in Oyl, or Spirit of Wine. They generally taste Brittle, and smell of Turpentine; or else are more Aromatick, or Fetid: And some have a Gum joyn'd to the Resin, and are call'd Gum Resins. Resins are Oyls, and Volatile Salts, coa∣gulated by an Acid, which all Resins yield in Distillation: They are Acid-Oleous Li∣quors at first, being originally Turpentines; Dr. Grew. Fine Frankincense tastes Gummy, Hot, Olibanum. and Bitterish; and smells of Turpentine. It stops Rheums by the Gumminess, and is Diuretick by the Turpentine-Smell; and by the Heat dries much; and provokes Sweat in a Peripneumonia. Mastich has a Turpentine-Smell, and Mastiche. tastes Hot, Gummy, and Brittle. It is us'd as an Astringent: By the Gumminess it
stops Rheums. The Mastich-Wood is Bit∣terish and Styptick. This is a Terebinthi∣nate-Tree. Common Resin tastes Brittle, and is of a Resina. Turpentine-Smell. Resin, Mastich, and O∣libanum have no quantity of a Fixt Salt; but yield a Salso-Acrid Spirit or Salt, as Succinum. Colophonia is Resin of the Firr-Tree boil∣ed. Colopho∣nia. Resins digest by their moderate Heat, and agglutinate by their Gumminess. Gum-Juniper is a Gum-Resin, of a sort Gum Ju∣niperi. of Cedar, and smells strong of Turpen∣tine. Pitch is of the Nature of Resin. Pix. CHAP. IV. Of Gum-Resins. MYrrh is of a very bitter Taste, Myrrha. Gummy and Resinous. It dis∣solves best in Spirit of Wine. It agglutinates and cleanses in Ʋlcers. In∣wardly
it is an Ʋterine, Pectoral, and An∣tifebrifick. It is the best cleansing Ʋterine, given to half a Scruple. Amber tastes Brittle and Resinous, and Succinum. has a Fetid, Turpentine-Scent, as other Bi∣tumens have. The Tincture of it, with Spi∣rit of Wine, and the Volatile Salt and Oyl, are good Antibystericks, by their Foetor. Lacca is a Brittle Resin, without Smell Gum Lac∣cae. or Taste, and is dissolvible in Spirit of Wine. It is not of that opening Vertue Authors give it, unless because it colours the Spittle. It is accounted good for the Jaundice. It is the Gum of a sort of Plumb-Tree. Boyl'd Turpentine becomes of a Resi∣nous Terebin∣thina Cocta. Nature, by losing the Spirituous Oyl in boyling: And so Resins differ from Turpentines, and Natural Balsams, by ha∣ving less Oyl than they; but more of an Acid and Gumminess. Wax tastes Gummy, Oyly and Hot, and is Cera. of a very grateful Smell; by which it is Mollifying, Digestive, and Emplastick. It is the Gummy Terebinth of Plants gather'd and prepar'd by Bees; and differs from
Honey, as Turpentines do from Gum-Re∣sins. It yields an Oyl, which is discussive in Tumors, if distill'd by an open Fire. CHAP. V. Of Sweet-scented Gum-Re∣sins. LAbdanum is of an Hot and Resinous Labdanum Taste, and of a Fragrant Scent: It is dissolvible in Oyl; and is the Gum of Cistus, which easily grows soft. It is us'd outwardly in Perfumes, and Pla∣sters for Nervous Distempers, heating and mollifying them; and inwardly is us'd for Coughs, and Cephalick Distempers; which are the general Effects of all Sweet∣scented Gum-Resins. Gum-Animi is of a grateful Turpentine-Smell, Gum. Ani∣mi. and dissolvible in the Spirit of Wine. It is accounted Nervine. Benzoin is of a grateful Smell, resem∣bling Benzoin. Xylo-Aloes. This Resin dissolves in the Spirit of Wine, into a Tincture; and
the Flowers of it are good opening Pe∣ctorals. Gum-Caranna is Resinous, and smells like Caranna. Tacamahacca: It is us'd in hot Plasters, to warm the Nerves. Tacamahacca is an Odoriferous Gum-Resin: Tacama∣hacca. Outwardly it is us'd in cold Di∣stempers of the Nerves; and is very sticking. Balm of Tolu is Gummy in Taste, and Balsamum de Tolu. a little Hot and Bitterish. It has an Aro∣matick Scent, like Limons. It is dissolv'd in Barley-Water for Syrup, and in Spirit of Wine for Tincture; and may be given in Pills or Powder, for stopping Coughs. It is a little Cleansing, and very grateful to the Stomach, more than any other Tur∣pentine. Styrax-Calamita is a Gum-Resin of a Styrax Ca∣lamita. sweet Scent, tasting Gummy. Burgundy-Pitch is Clammy and Gum∣my, Pix Bur∣gundica. and of a sweet Turpentine-Scent. It is dissolvible in Oyl. Gum-Elemi is of a sweet Turpentine-Scent, Gum Elemi
Gummy, and Resinous. It dissolves in Oyl, and is us'd in Wounds of the Head. It is the Resin of Cedar; which has the most Acrid Turpentine. Gum-Guajacum tastes Brittle, Gummy, and Gum. Guaici. a little Hot; and smells Sweet and Resi∣nous. It is dissolv'd in Spirit of Wine; and is Diaphoretick by the Gumminess. Resins of Scammony and Jalap are Arti∣ficial Resina. Scammonii & Jalapii. Resins, containing an Acrid Salt, which the Acid of the Plants has coagu∣lated with the Oyl. These Resins work most, when dissolv'd by an Oyl; and then gripe least. They smell Sub-acid, as Spurge pounded does. The Tithymaline-Milk is no way dif∣ferent from a Resin, but by being dissolv'd with Water. Hence Scammony and Me∣choacanna yield a Milk, when fresh. Resins of Sassaphras and Cinnamon: Such Resina lig∣ni Sassa∣phras, & Cinnamo∣mi. warming Resins may be extracted out of Aromaticks. The sweet Aromaticks are most of them Umbelliferous; in whose Roots Dr. Grew observ'd Balsam Vessels. These sorts of Resins do not purge, ha∣ving neither a violent Acrid, nor a Fetid∣ness, but an agreeable Texture of both;
whereby they please, and do not irritate our Spirits, and Fibrous Membranes. These Vegetable altering Resins, act on the Red Part of the Blood, by their Suitableness of Texture and Principles; supplying their Quantity, raising their Di∣gestion, and quickning their Motion. These Resins are the immediate Mat∣ter of hotter Effluviums in Vegetables; and produce Smells. CHAP. VI. Of Balsams. BAlsams have a more Liquid Con∣sistence, because of a greater Plen∣ty of Oyl; which is therefore less fixt by the Acid: And also a more di∣luted Gumminess is observable in them, with an Acrimony. Turpentine tastes Bitter, Hot, and Gum∣my; Terebin∣thina. and is of a grateful strong Smell, by the Bitter-Acrid, being Diuretick. It cleanses the Kidneys; and by the Gum∣moseness, stops Rheums; and by both, is
Laxative, Cleansing, Agglutinating, and Digesting in Ʋlcers. Balm of Gilead has a Turpentine-Taste, Balsamum Mechae. Bitter, Hot, and Gummy, with an Aroma∣tick Flavor; by which it is more Grate∣ful to the Stomach; and is good in the Stone, Gout, Cough, Scurvy, and all Ʋlcers. It helps the Dissolution of the purging Re∣sins in Pills; and is counterfeited by mix∣ing Turpentine, and Oyl of Juniper. Balm of Peru is Bitter, Hot, Aroma∣tick, Balsamum Peruvia∣num. and of a Fragrant Scent. Liquid-Amber is an Oyly Resinous Li∣quor: Liquida Ambra. It is of an excellent sweet Smell, given for Coughs, and outwardly us'd for Palsies. Liquid-Storax is like Liquid-Amber. Storax Li∣quida. Tarr is of a Fetid strong Smell, and Pix liquida. of a Bitter, Hot, Acrid, and Gummy Taste; by which it Cleanses and Heals, and by the Gumminess Agglutinates. It is an ex∣cellent outward Vulnerary; and inwardly is a Pectoral, given in Pills with Powder of Liquorish, and Sugar-Candy. Petrolaeum is a Fetid Bitumen, and of a Petrolaeum
strong Turpentine-Smell. It yields an Oyl and Colophony in Distillation, and is used outwardly for Palsies. It is of the Na∣ture of Saccinum; which seems to be a thickned Petrolaeum. Amber-Grise is a greasy Bitumen, and Ambra grisea. of an excellent Scent; whereby it is Cor∣dial, and agreeable to the Spirits. It is found in the Sea. A Tincture is made of it with Spirit of Citrons. Dos. Gr. XV. ad XX. in a dry Form. It is powder'd with Sugar in a double Quantity; and some Drops of Oyl of Cinnamon are added, for an high Cordial. Oyl-Olive, or Sallet-Oyl, is smooth, in∣sipid, Oleum O∣livarum. and roapy: It is moderately hot, and mollifying by the Mucilage. It con∣tains an Acid, offensive to the Eyes. It is Pectoral, and relaxing the Passages, and defending them against sharp Humors and Poyson. Oyl procures Vomiting. Much of it is offensive to the Stomach. But the Oyl of unripe Olives is Astringent. Pickled Olives are Bitterish, and the distill'd Oyl is Fetid, Penetrating, and Dis∣cussing. The Olive-Tree is Bitterish and Styptick.
Outwardly Oyl smooths the Skin, and stops the Pores; and thereby hinders Transpiration, as it stops the Pores of a Filter. By its Mucilage it mollifies, and is A∣nodyne. The Oyl and Acid in it make it Inflam∣mable; as Turpentines and Resins be, on the same Account. Oyl has a Sliminess in it, and Turpen∣tines have a Gum: It is offensive to In∣sects, by stopping their Lungs; but it will not kill Earth-Worms. I will here give the several Tastes of Oyl in Vegetables, which I have observ'd, viz. 1. A Slimy Oyl, which is express'd from Linseed, and other Mucilaginous Seeds. 2. A Sweet Slimy Oyl, such as is ob∣servable in Oyl of Almonds, Walnuts, and other Nuts; and is the Product of an high∣er Digestion. 3. A Bitter Oyl, as in Liquid Turpen∣tines; or express'd Oyl of Pistache-Nuts, and Seeds of St. John's-wort; and the Oyls of some Kernels, as Bitter-Almonds, and Peach-Kernels: These differ from the for∣mer, by having the Texture of the Oyl and Acid alter'd; by which Alteration
Sweet becomes Bitter through an higher Digestion. 4. Aromatick-Acrid Oyls, such as are express'd out of Nutmeg, Mace, and Anni∣seed: In these a Volatile Pungency joyns with the Oyl, and renders it Aromatick. 5. A Fetid Oyl is expressible from Fe∣tid Seeds; and is evident in Leguminous Plants. 6. A Coagulated Oyl in Resins; or else mixt with a Gumminess, in Gum-Resins. None can rationally suppose Vegetables to have so many sorts of Oyls essentially different; but only distinguished by the several Mixtures of the Principles, by Di∣gestion differing in one Plant from ano∣ther. Vegetables receive not only their Acid, but also Oyl from Minerals.
CHAP. VII. Of Wine and Fermentation. FRom Water and Earth mixt, and an outward Heat digesting them, no Fermentation can be produced, but the Water is evaporated, and the Earth powder'd: Therefore we must exa∣mine the other Two Principles of Vege∣tables; and from them we may deduce all the Phaenomena of Vegetation, Fermen∣tation, and also the particular Vertues pro∣duced by them. It is a known Experiment, That Oyl of Turpentine and Vitriol will effervesce, and continue the Heat produced by that Ebullition for a long time. Spirit of Nitre, and Spirit of Wine al∣so produce a great Heat. From these Experiments, a Contrarie∣ty betwixt Oyl and Acid is very manifest; and this is not so soon over, as the Ebul∣lition betwixt Alkalies and Acids. I shall endeavour to explain all the Ef∣fects above-mention'd from these Two, Oyl and Acid, and their Effervescence;
and I do wholly reject the Effervescence of Alkalies and Acids, because That soon ceases by an Union of both into a Salt; which is not found to happen upon Fer∣mentation: And we could never yet find, that a Spirit or Salt could be separated by any gentle Distillation, from New Wine, or New Ale, unfermented. A great Acid put to Fermenting Li∣quors, hinders the Fermentation of them: And also a Fixt Salt is found to hinder their Fermentation. From these Reasons mention'd, I am convinced, that Alkali Volatiles are no ways the Efficient Causes of Fermentati∣on; but only the Products of it, by a Composition of Oyl, Acid, and Earth. The Seeds of Plants are very full of an Oyl, which differs only from the Oyl in Turpentine, by a different Digestion: For Turpentine has a Mucilage, or Gum∣miness in it; which chiefly appears in Mucilaginous Plants. Those Trees which yield a Watry Gum have a bitterish Bark; which therefore resemble Turpentines by both Tastes. The Seeds of Alder have the Figure of Pine-Apples, and the Leaves a Gummi∣ness; from whence I thought it had a sort of Turpentine.
The bitter Milks of Vegetables are on∣ly like dissolv'd Turpentine; and they dry into a Gum or Resin. The Laurel-Bitters, such as Almonds and Peaches, have a Bitterness, and also a Gumminess, like Turpentine: And those Trees have a lasting Greenness, like Tur∣pentine-Trees, as Firr and Pine. The number of plain Turpentine-Trees and Plants are very great. That Plants of a sweet Taste have their Oyl from Turpentine, is not improbable; because we find a great Sweetness in the Taste of Ripe Ivy-Berries and Juniper-Berries, which are manifestly Turpentine-Trees: And the Roots of Fennil have a Balsam, and taste Sweet. That all Aromatick Oyls and Resins in Aromaticks are pure Turpentines, I sup∣pose is evident enough, by comparing them together, and for the Reasons I have mention'd in the First Part. And for the same Reason, all Fetids are like∣wise Turpentines; which are Fetid as well as Aromatick. I cannot but believe, that all Effluvi∣ums in Vegetables, which produce a Smell, have their Volatility, by which they are carried from the Vegetable, and act on the Sense of Smelling, from some
Oyliness. Hence Earths are smelt by a Sulphur in them. Acids have also an Oyl mixt with them, as in Tartar and Vine∣gar. Sweet Tastes smell Mellowy, from an Oyl and Acid digested with Water and Earth. And Terebinthinate-Smells are from Turpentine Particles evaporating: And all Aromaticks and Fetids, from Resins. For the clearer Proof of which, I shall men∣tion what Dr. Lister writes: Illustre ex∣emplum de ligno Cedrino Bermudensi olim dedimus, scilicet id apud me multos annos nec jam desinere resinam suam totâ substan∣tiâ vaporare. And I cannot believe, that Salts could give any Smell, but from their Oyly Part, which is one of their Ingre∣dients: Therefore Vegetables affect the Sense of Smelling, by Oyl joyn'd with Earth or Acid, and with Acid and Earth in Salt, or Resins: All which act on the Organ in the Form of Effluviums. And this Sense is therefore Quaedam tactus spe∣cies, as well as Taste. And from this Likeness of Impression, and also the Likeness of the Object, we often find Tastes and Smells very much alike; the Plant tasting as it smells. I did omit this about the Nature of Smells in the First Part; and therefore have here added it, as not very imperti∣nent;
because Smells are the Effects of Fermentation, and are most observable, and also deducible from Turpentines. And I also forgot There to observe, That ma∣ny Smells are compounded; as Bitter and Sweet Tastes are frequently in the same Plant joyn'd, because Sweet easily become Bitter. So Fetids and Aromaticks are frequently joyn'd in Smells; as Galeopsis, Valerian, Pulegium, and Nepeta, have both Fetid and Aromatick Smells: From whence I argue, That they differ but in Degree, as Sweet and Bitter do. I have taken notice in the First Part, That the Acid of Vegetables tastes like A∣cids of Sulphur; and from thence it will appear, that it arises, in the Discourse which I shall annex about Minerals. I shall here only observe, That Tartar is Inflammable, like Brimstone; and when it is distill'd, it is very Fetid, and an Oyl is separated from it: Such is the Composi∣tion of Sulphur and Acid. An Oyly Part is closely lock't up in it; as in common Tartar. Upon the Mixture of Oyl of Sul∣phur per Campanam, with Oyl of Turpen∣tine, a Redness was immediately precipi∣tated; as it happen'd in the Mixture of the same, with Oyl of Vitriol. Spirit of Salt only turn'd Yellow: Sweet Spirit
of Nitre did not change. From these In∣stances it appears, That an Oyliness is lodg'd in Sulphur and Tartar: So that the Ingredients which compound the A∣cid of Sulphur and Tartar, which is the Acid of Plants, are very much alike; as well as the Taste of both the Pungency of the Acid in Vinegar depends on the Oyl of Wine, and the Pungency in Spirit of Sulphur on the Sulphur latent in the A∣cid. The Roughness in Acerb Plants de∣pends on Earthy Parts, mixt with the A∣cid; and the Roughness in the Acid of Sulphur, from some Mineral Earth joyn'd with the Acid. I find it confidently affirm'd, That one Acid will correct another; which I be∣lieve a Mistake: For Spirit of Vitriol and Nitre make a stronger Menstruum, than either of them alone; and so does Spirit of Salt and Nitre mixt, which make an Aqua Regia: So far are these from cor∣recting one another. But the ground of this Opinion, I suppose, is from the Ef∣fervescence, caus'd by mixing of Acid Spirits, which happens by reason of some Earth or Mineral, joyn'd to every diffe∣rent sort of Acid Spirit; from whence the difference of Acid Spirits is deduci∣ble. Hence some Acid Spirits mixt, dis∣possess
one the other from the Earths or Minerals joyned with their Acid; and from thence comes the Conflict and Effer∣vescence. For the same reason, Spirit of Vitriol is mixed with Calcined Salt, to seize on the Earthy part of Salt, and to make the Acid of Salt loose from it, and fitter for Distillation. I think I have here said enough to prove, that the Oyl of Vegetables is like Oyl of Turpentine; and the Acid of Vege∣tables like Sulphur, which differs nothing from Vitriol; but by being Impregnated with a Mineral, it becomes a vitriolate Acid. So that from the Experiments about the contrariety of Oyl and Acid, above-men∣tioned, I may conclude, that there may happen the same kind of Effervescence in Vegetables, which we call Fermentation. When a Seed is placed in the Earth, the Oyliness of it is agitated or moved by the Acid Watry Juyce; soaking into it thro' its Coats, by the Effervescence of both, Ve∣getation is begun; and the Coats burst, and the Vessels of the Plant inlarged, for receiving new Nourishment. This con∣sists of an Oyliness from the Bitumen and Sulphur; and also an Acid from the same; and also a Water and Earth mixt and digested together in the Pores of the Earth:
All which concur to produce a Nutriment for Plants. This is not promiscuously admitted thro' the Glandulous Paren∣chyma of the Root of the Plant: but it is probable, that each Parenchyma has diffe∣rently figured Pores, for the admittance of Oyly parts chiefly, or Watry parts, or Earthy parts, or Acid chiefly; which may be very probable, because Oyly parts are thought Ramose, Acid Angular, Watry Round, and Earthy very Irregular. We may very easily believe, that the Seeds of Plants, and their Roots, have Pores suited for the admittance of one, two, or more of these: And these are pressed into the Seed by the force of the Airs Spring, when a Plant begins to swell by the rare∣fying of its own Juyces, thro' the Effer∣vescence of its own Oyl and Acid; which is much promoted by the External Heat of the Sun, or an hot Bed, and the admit∣tance of an Acid from the Earth. This Fermentation is very slow, and never highly raised in Earthy, Acid, and Mucilaginous Plants; and therefore in such, the Oyl, Acid, Earth, and Water, are never much separated; but in sweet Tastes the Fermentation separates a little, and loosens the Oyl and Acid, from the Watry and Earthy Particles. In Bitters the same are
more separated; in Aromaticks the Oyl is most rarefied; in Acrids the Oyl and Acid compound a Salt, with an Earthy part: From these Instances we find, that by Di∣gestion the Principles of Plants are sepa∣rated, and now Compounded into Salts, Resins, Gums, and Turpentines. This Di∣gestion differs not from the Effervescence betwixt Oyl and Acid; which differs ac∣cording to the several Oyls which are contained in the Seeds of Plants. One Oyl ferments with Acid more than ano∣ther; and each Oyl in the Seed produces that which is most suitable to the nature of the Plant to be produced. From the Rarefaction of this Juyce of Plants, by the Effervescence of Oyl and Acid, the rise of the Sap, and the shootings of Plants, may be deduced. And the wonderful force mentioned by Mr. Boyle, in lifting up a great Weight by Ferment∣ing Beans; and from hence Wines burst their Vessels: So that the force of Fer∣mentation equals that of Explosion. If we consider the many Compound Tastes of Plants, we cannot believe, that they can rise from the same kind of Fer∣mentation: Some Plants taste Rough, and ve∣ry Acrid, as Chelidonium minus. Others Sli∣my, and Acrid, and Bitter, as Leucoium. And
there is a different Taste in many parts of Plants, which proceeds from the diffe∣rent Digestion of the Juyce, in different parts. So in Cherries, the Taste of the Bark is Bitter Astringent: The Leaf differs from it by a Sliminess: In the Fruit there is a Slimy, Sweet, Sub-acid Taste, with∣out any Bitterness or Astringency. The same difference is observable in the O∣dors of Plants. The Leaves of Elder are Fetid; but the Flowers Fragrant; which is a sign of a different Digestion. There are the same Varieties of Tastes and Odors in Animals; tho' Choler be separated by the same sort of Glandules, yet it has a Bitter, Sweet Sliminess. The Serum of the Blood has serose parts, and Watriness, and a Saltness: The Semen has a thin, and also a viscid part: The Liquor Nervosus has an Oyly Salt, dissolved in a Lympha. The diversity of Tastes in Choler does not depend on different Strainers, but dif∣ferent Digestions of Chyle; and the new supply of it; which flows continually in∣to the Veins: From hence it will fall out, that one part is perfectly Digested, and another less; and therefore some part of the Choler tastes Sweet, and another part Bitter; and a crude Lympha is the Vehi∣cle of both, to help their separation: these
being mixt together, give the Variety of Tastes, observable in Choler. The same thing happens in Plants; which, du∣ring their growth, receive fresh Nourish∣ment, which is differently Digested; and therefore gives those Varieties of Tastes, observable in the same Vessels, and the same Liquor, as in Milks, Turpentines, and Fetid Gums. But I cannot well understand, how such Particular Liquors as Milk, Gums, Tur∣pentines, and Lympha's, can be produced and kept in particular Vessels, which are really different from the crude Juyce of the same Plants, without allowing such parts in Plants, as Glandules in Animals, which separate the Milk, Semen, Spirits, Choler, and Lympha from the Blood. I therefore cannot think it improbable, that the Parenchyma of Plants is wholly Glandulous, and the Woody Fibres are Vessels; some of which are Lacteals, Lymphaticks, Muciducts, Gums, or Balsam-Vessels. An Animal Body is composed of Vessels and Glands. The Vessels are branched into the different parts of both alike, and receive a prepared Juyce from the Glandulous Parenchyma: and the same may be the preparation and distri∣bution of the Juyces in Vegetables, be∣cause
the same Tastes and Odors are ob∣servable in both Kingdoms. And Vege∣tables digested by an Animal, undergo the same Separation and Preparation, as is manifest in Animals. When one Tree is grafted on anothers Stock, the Fruit is the same as the Branch Ingrafted. The Juyce in the Glandules of it, giving such a particular Fermenta∣tion to the Juyce of the Stock, as to alter it into the nature of the Graft: and if the Seed be a perfect Plant, there may lodge such an Original Juyce in each part of the Plant, as may change the nature of the same Juyce in the several parts. So in Chelidonium minus, the Acrimony is very manifest in the Stalk, but neither in the Leaves or Root: but I rather believe, that if the Juyce of a Plant is the same in the whole Plant, different alterations of the same Juyce may happen by a higher degree of Fermentation. So the Roots of Wormwood are Sweet-Aromatick: The Leaves very Bitter-Aromatick. The Bark of Ash is Bitter-Rough: The Flowers have also an Acrid. These Alterations happen by a higher degree of Fermentation in the same Juyce. So Fermented Liquors acquire a Ripeness by long keeping, and by the difference of Vessels, in which
they are kept. Upon this account, the Juyce in Roots is kept more cool: But in the Leaves, the Stalks more exposed to the Agitation of the Air, and Heat of the Sun; whence will arise a difference of Tastes and Digestion. It is most probable, that the difference of the Digestion hap∣pens not only by Original different Juyces in Plantulâ Seminali, but also by the dif∣ference of Vessels; which seems very e∣vident in Seeds and Fruits; where, with∣out an addition of a Ferment, the same Fruit becomes Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy, which at first was Acid, and very Rough. And Nuts become Sweet and Oyly, which were at first Austere. The Root of Vines tastes Bitterish and Rough; The Leaves, Acerb; The Ripe-Grape, Sweet, Sub-acid, and Slimy; The Seed, Austere as the Root. So that these different Tastes shew the Alterations which happen in the Juyce of the Vine: From Austere it comes to an Acerbity in the Leaves; and from thence to a Sweet Sub-acid in Grapes; but the Stone or Seed returns to the Austerity of the Root. Wine is made out of the Sweet Sub-Acid Vinum. Juyce of the Grape: And the same is the nature of all the Juyces of Berries
of the same Taste. The Acid is evident to the Sense; and an Oyl produces the Sweetness. This is the Taste of New-Drink, Metheglin, and Sugar dissolved in Water; and most other Liquors usually Fermented; and this Sweetness is a cer∣tain sign of an Oyl and Acid; for these may be distilled out of Honey, Sugar, New-Wine, and Beer, by a strong Fire. And there is no other eminent Principles in Sweet Tastes but these. Therefore from them, the Fermentation of these Liquors must be deduced. The Acid of Fermenting Liquors can∣not produce the heat of the Liquor, by acting on the Earthy parts, because they are already mixt with the Acid, and kept fluid by it; otherwise the Earth would wholly precipitate. But this Heat pro∣ceeds from the Effervescence made be∣twixt the Oyl and Acid, which will cause a considerable Heat; as is manifest by the Artificial mixture mentioned. All Fluids have an Internal Agitation of parts, which produces their Fluidity; which being supposed, and also a con∣trariety of particular Figures betwixt Oyl and Acids, the first being Ramose, and the last Angular: It may easily be conceived, that a difference of Motion will be natural
to these two Principles; which two Mo∣tions meeting, give a disturbance to their natural Tendencies; and from thence proceeds the Effervescence, which is al∣ways promoted by some external Heat, as of the Sun; or else the Liquors are boyl∣ed before Fermentation; as in Metheglin, Beer, and some Wines. The effect of a great deal of Acid up∣on Oyl, is to coagulate it; but a smaller quantity Fermented with it, expands, o∣pens and rarefies the Oyl. This is evident∣ly done in the Butter of Antimony, where the Acids of Sublimate open the close Tex∣ture of the Sulphur, and gives it the form of Butter. The same is the effect of Fer∣mentation; the Acid acts on the Oyl by degrees, and mixes with it; and because their mixture happens in a Fluid, the Wa∣ter is also intermixt with them, and there∣by the Oyl is dissolved in the Liquor, and produces a Winy Spirit; which diluted in much Water, is called a Wine; and if it be distilled from it, a Brandy Spirit, which is Inflammable like Oyl: If the greatest quantity of Oyl be evaporated out of Wine, a Vinegar is produced by the remaining and prevailing Acid, which has its Pun∣gency from some Oyly parts, which are still mixt with the Tartar of Vinegar; and
which will yield a burning Spirit, if Vinegar be distilled from Saccharum Saturni. The Agitation which happens from the Effer∣vescence of these two Principles in Fer∣mentation, shakes all the parts of the Li∣quor Fermenting; whereby the most Fe∣culent parts in Wine, and the greater Fari∣naceous parts in Beer subside; but the more light, rise to the top of the Liquor in an Effervescence. These Heterogeneous parts being separated, the remaining Li∣quor is clear, and consists of a Winy Juyce, in which the Oyl is most prevalent; and has also an Acid mixed with it. And in Beer the Farinaceous parts are much ra∣refied, having their Oyl very much loosen∣ed and sharpened by the Acid; and from hence proceeds the quickness and brisk∣ness of Liquors. Dr. Willis in his Pharmaceutice menti∣ons a way of distilling an Oyl from Spirit of Wine, by means of a strong Spirit of Vitriol: Therefore Acids help the Sepa∣ration of Oyls, from the mixture in Plants. For this end, we put Tartar or Salt into the Vesica with Seeds, which are to be distilled; for the separation of the Oyl is thereby promoted. The Oyl of Wines is sufficiently proved by Dr. Willis's Experiment, and the Acid
by Tartar: but it's not improbable, that some Salt is also produced by this mix∣ture of Oyl and Acid, with a little Earth; Which is most clearly proved by the Salts, which are described by Mr. Lewenhock in many sorts of Wine; which, as I remem∣ber, differ not much from the Salts of Vinegar. The Oyl, Acid, an the Volatile Salt united in Spirit of Wine, are much of the nature of a dissolved Resin, having the same Principles; and therefore easily Ex∣tract Resins, and Oyls of Vegetables, and turn Milky, if put to a Watry Vehicle. By the means of an Acid in the Spirit of Wine, Spirit of Sal Ammoniack coagu∣lates with Spirit of Wine, into an Offa Alba. A Slimy Oyl such as is in the Yelk of an Egg, makes distilled Oyls to dissolve easily in Watry Liquors; and therefore there is found a Mucilage or Gumminess attending most Vegetable Oyls, whereby the Oyls are mixed with their Juyces. Sugar is an Oyly Acid, like Tartar; with this a distilled Oyl easily mixes, and is by this means dissolved in Water. The Spirit of Vegetable Liquors Fer∣mented and Distilled, is nothing but an Oyl rarefied, and loosened from the mix∣ture
of the Juyce, by means of the Acid; and by their mixture, also some Volatile Salt is produced; therefore these Spirits are Inflammable, like Resins; and they are no Simple Principles, but compounded of others. This Spirit is produced by Fer∣mentation; and therefore can be no Cause of it, as is ordinarily supposed. Spirit of Wine is, by reason of its Resinous Com∣position, agreeable to the Red part of the Blood, and is a familiar Specifick to supply its Defect, and excite its brisk motion; whereby it is Cordial, Refreshing, and sup∣plying new Spirits by its Similitude of Texture. The long use of it brings a Phthisis, by too much rarefying the Blood into Salts, or a Dropsie, thickning the Serum of the Blood; whereby the Viscera are obstructed, and Sanguification destroy∣ed, by the unaptness for mixture with the new Chyle. Spirit of Wine tastes Sweet, very Hot, and Pungent; the Sweetness is from the Oyl, and the hot Pungency from a Vola∣tile Salt. Leaven smells strong of Dough, and Fermen∣tum pani∣ficum. tastes Salt and Sowrish; by the addition of common Salt to Dough, the Oyly parts of the Meal are loosened from the mix∣ture;
for the Acid of Salt is Pungent, whereby it breaks the Texture of the Fa∣rinaceous parts, and sets the Oyl more free, by combining with the Earthy Par∣ticles; with which, all Acids readily mix. When the Oyl is loosened from its mix∣ture with Earthy Particles, by the Acid of the Ferment, it is easily agitated by the Air; and by the Contrariety of parts, the Oyl and Acid act on one another, and cause a Heat, and make the whole mixture swell; as it happens in Electuaries, in which Con∣traries ferment. Leaven is kept a good while; whereby it is made more Sowre, and thereby fitter to begin a Fermentation in other Dough. The Oyl of the Leaven being more loosen∣ed by Fermentation, is moderately Hot, and also Salt and Sowre, which temper the Heat. And Leaven is used outwardly in drawing Plasters. Wheat and Barley, considered in their perfect State as Vegetables, taste Sweet and Slimy; when prepared for Bread or Beer, they are reduced into Meal, which still has the Principles unaltered; which in both were an Oyly Acid, with a Slime, which is a more fixt Oyl. When these Plants are fermented, the Mixture of these Principles must be destroyed, the
Oyl must be rarefied, and the Acid freed from Earthy parts; whereby its Pungency may give a quickness to the Liquor: The Sliminess is attenuated by the Oyl and A∣cids commotion; and by that the Oyl and Acid are dissolved in the Liquor; or else huff the Farinaceous Mass in the making of Bread. Barme is the fine part of the Farina Flos Cere∣visiae. decocted, which wants room in the Fer∣menting Liquor; and therefore by the Agitation of parts (during the Fermenta∣tion) is displaced, and by its lightness is car∣ried to the top of the Liquor; and it tastes Slimy; without any manifest Acidity: By the Bubbles it is probable, that some Spirituous parts are mixed with it, which consist of an Oyly Acid; and therefore it is used to excite a new Fermentation in other Liquors. Such frothy Bubbles are ob∣servable in Bottled Liquors, from a Windy Spirit flying up to the top of the Liquor, which is inclosed with Froth. Sugar Ferments all Liquors and Electu∣aries: Saccha∣rum. It consists of an Oyl and Acid; which being dissolved in Water, ferment toge∣ther, and obtain a looser Texture, where∣by a Windy Spirit is produced. And
from this Instance it appears, that an Oyl and Acid are sufficient to produce a Fer∣mentation, which must be continued by the same, by which it was produced; that is, by the Agitation of an Oyl and Acid; and the effect of Fermentation is a looser Texture of the Oyl and Acid of the Body, which is Fermented; which Oyl and Acid give the Winy Taste to Liquors Fermented. The Contrariety of an Oyl and Acid may more evidently appear by the mixture of Sulphur, which contains an Oyl and Acid; and for that reason is the immediate mat∣ter of Fire. The Oyl and Resins of Vege∣tables, and Fats of Animals, burn as rea∣dily as Sulphur, and have the same distur∣bed Flame: From whence, a Contrariety of parts, and an Agitation depending on that Contrariety, may be inferr'd; which is yet more manifest in the detonation made betwixt Sulphur and Nitre; and the explosion by the mixture of both with an Alkali. If Oyl and Acid produce a Flame by a violent motion given them by Fire, it seems probable, that the same having a gentler Agitation from the parts of a Fer∣ment, or the external heat of Fire or the Sun, produce in Vegetable Juyces a brisk
Agitation of parts; which Agitation is promoted by the Contrariety of parts in Oyl and Acid: As Acids help the producti∣on of Flame from Oyls, and make it burn with some noyse; so in Fermentation, the Oyl and Acid of Vegetables, as soon as the Sliminess natural to Oyls, is dissolved in Water, are set free, and are the chief active Principles, which may easily be agitated by a Ferment; whose parts have been put into motion by a former Fermentati∣on (whose effects, viz. an Oyl and Acid, it also contains.) The great force of Vegetation, and the breaking of Bottles and Vessels by Fer∣mented Liquors, can no way be explained but by some Effervescence, which comes near the nature of Explosion. Such is the Contrariety of Oyl and Acid, briskly agi∣tated by an External Heat. The effects of Sulphur and Oyl are con∣trary to Acids, and correct them; and A∣cids fix Sulphurs, and coagulate Volatile Oyls; and therefore they act one on the other, and are contrary. I do not affirm, That all Oyls and Acids mixt, will presently ferment; but there must be an actual-Heat given them by External Fire, or Internal Fiery Particles lodged in Oyl of Vitriol, or by a Ferment
in Artificial Fermentations, or the Sun in Vegetation of Plants; which grow not till an External Heat excites the Motion of the Oyl and Acid, natural to all Plants: and in the mixtures I have mentioned, the Heat is not immediately perceived, but after some time; so in Fermentation im∣mediately produced by a Ferment, but in some space of time. CHAP. VIII. Of the Preparation of Ve∣getables. SInce the Vertues of Vegetables may be known by their Tastes and O∣dors, I may also affirm, That the truest way of judging what Preparations are the fittest for each Vegetable, is, by the Taste and Smell; and that is the best Preparation, in which the Taste and Smell is preserved. Nature it self has Prepared our Medi∣cines by Mixtures, Strainings, and Di∣gestions; and given to each Plant a parti∣cular
Composition of Tastes, and some∣times Compounded Odors, designedly suited and fitted for the particular vitiated Humors in Animals. For Plants were not only designed for our Nourishment, but likewise for our Physick; and those that were for Food, are found out by their pleasant Sweet Taste, and grateful Odor; but those for Medicine, by the Offensive or Nauseous Taste and Smell. If we should torture our Nourishment by the same degrees of Fire, as Medicines are Prepared, we should destroy that na∣tural Sweetness of our Food; which is a fitter Taste for Aliments, than those of Spirits, Oyls, Salts, Tinctures, &c. So it happens in Medicines, when we distill Oyls, Ferment the Juyces into Spirits, and make Tinctures, we make new Mixtures, and destroy the natural Tastes and Ver∣tues of Vegetables. This appears evidently in Gentian and Myrrhe, which are strong Bitters, and correct Acids. If they be distilled in Re∣torts, they yield a great deal of Acid, and a Nauseous Oyl; neither of which can have the effects of Gentian, nor the Taste; which is Bitter, Slimy, and Sub∣acrid.
I may instance in Purgers, as Rhubarb, which will yield a fixt Salt by Calcina∣tion, but that will not purge; and the greatest of Vegetable Medicines, Cortex Peruvianus will not have so good and cer∣tain effect in Extract and Infusion, as in Powder; but its Vertue is perfectly de∣stroyed by Chymistry, which dissolves its Texture, and alters its Taste. Acid of Tartar, or Vegetables distill'd, yields a Fetid Oyl, and becomes of a Smoaky Taste, less agreeable to the Stomach of an Animal than the Tartness of Fruits, and the Juyces of Sowre Vegetables. The Foetor is inseparable from it, which is very disagree∣able where Acids are necessary. Spirit of Tartar has not the nature of an Acid, but in mixt of Acid and Volatile; and there∣fore neither the Sowreness nor Vertue of Tartar remains in the Spirit; but a new Texture of its Principles is produced, and new Vertues. If from Aromatick Plants, as Wormwood or Mint, we distill an Oyl; that will have the Bitterness and Acrimony of the Plant, but will want the Astringency of it; and besides the Empyreuma, which makes it ve∣ry Burning inwardly, the Oyly Salt is more Burning and Hot than our Humors, Spirits and Membranes can indure; there∣fore
when it is thus Prepared, we find it necessary to remix it with gritty Pow∣ders, and take them in a cool Vehicle. These distilled Oyls are not therefore much used, unless for outward Applications. I cannot deny that some Preparations are necessary for Medicine, as well as Food; but these must be suited to the na∣ture of each particular, so that thereby the natural Taste be not destroyed. These Preparations seem rather necessary, upon the account of being put into a more con∣venient Form or Dose, than for the Im∣provement of the Medicine, or separation of noxious parts from it. A Resin is extracted or dissolved out of its Vessels, by a Menstruum; but this al∣ters not its Nature nor Taste; it has a stronger Irritation if it be a Purger, than four times the weight of the Plant it is drawn from. In Resin the Dose is less; but it seems very doubtful, Whether the Vertue of the Resin equals the Root of Jalap? which tastes Gummy, and not Brittle, as Resin. This also smells Sowre, and the Root Acrid, if fresh. It is certain, that the Extract of Rhubarb works not so much as the Powder; and the Resin will not work on some Persons, whom the Powder of Jalap purges very well.
The most natural Preparations, are Decoctions, Infusions, Juyces, Syrups, Pow∣ders, Expressed Oyls from the Seeds, Emul∣sions, and Conserves. In all these the Taste is preserved, which depends on certain Principles; and by preserving the Taste, we are sure of that Texture of Principles, on which the Ver∣tue depends: But if any Preparation se∣perate the Principles, it destroys the Tex∣ture, on which both the Taste and Vertue depend. Tinctures, Distilled Waters, Chymical Spirits, Oyls, Extracts, and Mucilages, contain but some of the Vertues of Plants, and not the whole Taste and Smell. Tin∣ctures have the Resins, Distilled-Water the Odoriferous Resins. Spirits have the Oyly Salt diluted in Water. In Oyls there is most Oyl, and less Salt. In Extracts a little Oyl, and a great quantity of Tartar, and much Earth. Digestion alters the nature of the Plant a little, but Putrefaction most; Fermen∣tation in a way betwixt both. Calcina∣tion perfectly destroys a Vegetable Taste and Vertue. These Preparations are most genuine, in which the whole Composition of Tastes and Smells is evident.
The next is to be esteemed good, which has one Principle or more, or some Compound Juyce; as Milks, Resins, Tar∣tar, Gums, and Turpentines well Extracted. Those are of least note, which destroy the nature of a Plant; as Putrefaction, Cal∣cination; for these do not improve or ex∣tract its Vertue, but produce new mixtures, which may be useful; but they have not the Vertue of the Plant. A Catalogue of Tastes of Vegetables, which are best Preserved in the Pre∣parations following: Gritty Tastes are best preserved in Powder. If any Acid be added, they lose their Taste and Vertue. Woody Tastes are fittest for Decocti∣ons, and are destroyed by Distillation in a Retort. And also for Powders. Watry Mucilages are well Prepared by Decoction, Infusion, Expression of the Juyce; and indifferently by cool Distil∣lation; for Borrage-Water is Slimy. The Mealy Mucilages may be powdered.
Acids yield a good, and most Essen∣tial Salt, or Tartar: They are best used in Juyce, Syrup, and Quiddany. Distillation and Fermentation alters the Taste, and makes it Spirituous. Stypticks are good in Powder, De∣coction, and Syrup. Distillation carries off no Vertue, if it be in cool Stills; if in an open Fire, it changes them into Acids. Sweet Tastes appear most in Pow∣der, Juyces, Syrups, and Decoction, and but little in Distillation. Watry Bitters are fittest for Juyce and Decoction, and yield an insipid Wa∣ter by Distillation. Strong Bitters are fit for Decoction, Extract, Infusion, and Powder; but yield little in Distillation. Bitter-Acids and Bitter-Aromaticks yield their Volatile Acrid and Smell, only in the distilled Water; but the Bitter by the ways mentioned.
The Terebinthinates give their Tur∣pentines in distillation, and their Bit∣ter-Astringency in Powder or Decoction; but a close Infusion extracts all. Acrids are fittest for Distillation and Infusion, but are lost by Powdering and Boyling. All Compound Tastes are to be Prepa∣red according to the several Tastes; but because these will not admit many times of the same Preparations, we ought to take that Preparation in which the fewest Tastes are altered; or else mix different proper Preparations of the same Medi∣cines, which are contrived according to their several Tastes. Aromaticks are good in Powder, Infusion, and distilled Water; but lose much by Decoction. The Odoriferous Smells of Plants is best obtained in Distilled-Water, Infusi∣ons, and in Oyls. The Narcotick Smell of Plants rises in Poppy-Water. And we extracted by Spirit of Wine, Opium very well. The Hysterick mixt Fetids yield good Water, and all other Fetids.
By the particular Instances I have given, it does appear necessary, that before we prepare any Medicine, we ought to taste it; because, if we find the same Taste in the Medicine when prepared, we may con∣clude, that it has the whole Vertues of the Plant: This is therefore, the most rational way, whereby all our Simple Medicines ought to be examined; and for this reason, Compounds ought to be rejected; for tho' we know the Vertues of the Simples, yet the resulting Taste of Compositions is not certain; and therefore the Vertues of all great Compositions is very uncertain, and only found out by Experience, which alone teaches us the Vertues of Mithridate, Treacle, &c. In these confused Compo∣sitions, the Taste of the Simples is altered, and no particular Taste is discernible; therefore each particular Taste has its Na∣ture and Vertue altered by the Fermen∣tation, which happens in such Mixtures; and also by the Contrariety of one Taste to another. The End of the First Volume.
ADVERTISEMENT By the Publishers. THus much of the Third Part (rela∣ting more nearly to Vegetables) was thought proper to go along with the Part that treats of them. The next Volume (now in the Press, and which will be Publish'd next Michaelmas-Term) shall begin with the Remainder of the Third Part, which treats of Salts, and the Mineral Kingdom. The Animal Kingdom will be also considered. Specificks shall be Classed. Plants shall, according to their Tastes, be reduced to their Summa genera: and, according to the Compositions of their Tastes, and distinguish∣ing Smells, they shall be sub-divided into Species. And as to usefulness, What follows That which is here hinted, will ex∣ceed what you have already. The AU∣THOR's absence from the Press must entitle him to an Excuse from its Errata; but especially, his late desperate Sickness is his sufficient Apology: In his Recovery from which, as he himself has reaped the Benefit of his own Art; so let it be the good Wishes of the Sons of Art, and of all good Men, that he may long survive his Danger; and live to have the Satisfaction, while the World has the Advantages of his great Learning, Skill, and Industry.
ADDENDA. ASphodelus, according to Galen, is Bitter in the Root, like Squills; and Acrid, like Dragons: But in the Botanicum Monspeliense, it is describ'd to be Acrid, with a Nauseous Sweetness. I only tasted the Leaf. I have given the Taste of Veronica, in∣stead of Elatine; which, as Mr. Ray says, is a Linaria. Fraxinella is like the True Dittany in Vertue, being Alexipharmack and Ʋterine; and not like Rue: The Roots are chiefly us'd. Nummularia is not of a Terebinthinate-Smell, as I at first thought it; for since I could not observe it to be so. Prunella is Bitterish-Astringent in the Root. Pseudo-Melanthium is rather a Lychnis, than Nigella; the Black Seeds tasting Sweet and Acrid. Radix-Rhodia: The Root smells like a Rose. Ʋmbilicus Veneris is not Biting; but may be accounted a Sedum.
ERRATA. What hath been already said, we hope, will oblige the Reader, to Amend or Excuse these Errors, and all others that shall oc∣curr herein to his Observation. PAge 13. Line 11. for discuss inwardly; are read dis∣cuss; inwardly are. p. 22. l. 19. f. Trees r. Plants. Ibid. l. 20. dele Lilies of the Valley. p. 27. l. 5. for Ʋrine, r. Ʋrine; p. 29. l. f. Agarick, Rubarb: And r. A∣garick: Rubarb and. p. 32. l. 16. f. Windy r. Vinous. p. 82. l. 1. del. by. Ib. l. 3. for Object an r. Object, an. p. 87. l. 5. r. It is therefore a good Vulnerary, and works. p. 92. l. 14. f. Alder r. Elder. p. 120. l. r. f. Carminative Colick r. Colick Carminative. p. 164. l. 19. f. Acrid r. Acid. p. 178. l. 3. del. and Willow. Ib. l. 5. r. Osier and Willow. p. 181. l. 17. f. Strong, Bitter r. strong Bitter. p. 207. l. 19. f. Arba Venenosa r. Arbor Venenosa. p. 222. l. 5. f. Ale-Cost r. Costus (as the English Name.) p. 235. l. 1. del. Chama∣drys has the same Taste. p. 241. l. 16. f. Mastich-Thyme r. Syrian-Mastich. p. 257. l. 11. f. the same r. the following Powder. Ib. l. 14. f. a Scruple r. Twenty-four Grains
An Advertisement of some late Books: Prin∣ted for Robert Clavel, at the Peacock in St. Pauls Church-Yard. 1687. GRammatica Anglo-Romana: or, a Syncritical Gram∣mar, Teaching English Youth the Latin Tongue, by few and easie Rules, comparing English with Latin. With a Comment for the Use of Riper Years; containing the Elegancies, and explaining the difficult Phra∣ses and Idioms, which are peculiar to the Latin. Fitted to the Sense of the Learned Oxford-Commentators upon Lilly's Grammar. By Samuel Shaw, Master of the Free-School in Ashby-de-la-Zouch, in Leicester-shire. A Discourse concerning a Judge of Controversies in Mat∣ters of Religion: Being an Answer to some Papers assert∣ing the Necessity of such a Judge. With an Address to wavering Protestants; shewing what little reason they have to think of any Change of their Religion. Written for the private Satisfaction of some Scrupulous Persons: And now Published for Common Use. With a Preface concerning the Nature of Certainty and Infallibility. By an Eminent Author. An Historical Description of the Glorious Conquest of the City of Buda, (the Capital City of the Kingdom of Hungary) by the Victorious Arms of the Thrice Illustri∣ous and Invincible Emperour, Leopold the First, Under the Conduct of His most Serene Highness, the Duke of Lorrain. In 9 Sheets. The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest from Scrip∣ture, Answered by an English Protestant. Seasonable and Useful for all Protestant Families. The Plausible Arguments of a Romish Priest, from An∣tiquity, Answered by the Author of the Answer to the Plausible Arguments from Scripture. A plain and familiar Discourse (by way of Dialogue) betwixt a Minister and his Parishioner, concerning the Ca∣tholick Church. In Three Parts. I. Shewing what's the Nature of the Catholick Church. II. That the Church of Rome is not the Catholick Church. III. That the Scrip∣tures, and not the Church, are the Rule of Faith. Which may serve as an Answer to some late Tracts upon that Ar∣gument. By a Divine of the Church of England.
A Discourse of DUELS; shewing the Sinful Nature, and Mischievous Effects of them: And Answering the u∣sual Excuses made for them, by Challengers, Acceptors, and Seconds. By T. Comber, D. D. Of the Authority of Councils, and the Rule of Faith: With an Answer to the Eight Theses, laid down for the Tryal of the English Reformation, in the Book that came lately from Oxford. The Law and Equity of the Gospel, in two plain Ser∣mons, &c. By Tho. Pierce, D. D. and Dean of Sarum. The History of the English Monarchy, shewing the be∣nefit of Kingly Government, and inconvenience of Com∣mon-Wealths, &c. An Historical Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, from Scripture, Reason, and the Opinion and Practice of Jews, Gentiles, and Christians in all Ages, designed to supply the Omissions, Answer the Objections, and rectifie the Mistakes of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes, Part I. A further Vindication of the Divine Right of Tithes, proved by Scripture and Antiquity, and Illustrated by the Solemn Consecration, and great Conveniency of them; with an Answer to the Objections of other Authors against them, Part II. To which is added, A Discourse of Excommunica∣tion. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Precentor of York. —A Church Catechism, with a brief and casie Ex∣planation thereof, for the help of the meanest Capacities, and weakest Memories, in order to the Establishing them in the Religion of the Church of England. Sir William Dugdales Summons to all Parliaments, since the 49th. Year of King Henry the Third. The Dean of Durham's Counsel and Directions (Divine and Moral) in Letters of Advice to a Young Gentleman, soon after his Admission into a Colledge in Oxford. Arch-bishop Stern's Logick. The Pope's Bull concerning the Damnation, Excommu∣nication, &c. of Queen Elizaheth, with Observations and Animadversions thereon. By Thomas Lord Bishop of Lin∣coln. There is also Printed with it the Popes Bull, for the Damnation and Excommunication of King Henry the Eighth. The Catholick Balance, or a Discourse determining the Controversies concerning, 1. The Catholick Doctrines. 2. The Primacy of St. Peter, and the Bishop of Rome. 3. The Subjection and Authority of the Church in a Christian State: According to the Suffrages of the primest Antiquity. Written with most Impartial Sincerity, at the Request of a Private Gentleman.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. VOL. II. Containing Four PARTS. Part the Third, Of the Tastes and Virtues of Minerals, and the similitude of their Principles, to those of Vegetables. Part the Fourth, Of the Tastes and Virtues of Animal Me∣dicines, and the Origine of Animal Humors. Part the Fifth, Containing the Classes of Specificks, distinguished by their Tastes, and the Hu∣mors which they Correct. Part the Sixth, Contains a new Method for distinguishing Plants into Classes, by their Tastes and Smells. In the Appendix, The Animal Medicines are reduced into a Scheme by their Tastes. The Minerals are also di∣gested under their several Tastes, and many Observations are added, which were omitted in the preceding Parts.
TO THE Right Honourable WILLIAM Lord Digby, Baron Digby OF Geashil in IRELAND. My Lord, I Designed the subject of this Essay at Coleshil-Hall in Warwick-shire, whilst I attended there as a Physician: And therefore I humbly ap∣ply my self to your Lordship, for the Patro∣nage of it. The great Favours I have received from your Honourable Family, oblige me to make this Dedi∣cation; but especially your Lordship's curiosity in reading the Philosophy of this Age, and your Inge∣nious Studies, which have given your Lordship the advantage of judging of a greater Subject.
I am much obliged to many Gentlemen of your Country, who have Tasted many Plants with me; and I desire to make this Tract more acceptable to them, by this Dedication of it to your Lordship, whom they justly Honour and Esteem, for your Zealous concern, for the Preservation of our Church and State. I will give your Lordship this short account of the design of this ensuing Book. I shall assert, that Minerals, Animals, and Vege∣tables, have Water, Earth, Oyl, and Acids, for their Principles: Of these they are compounded, and in∣to these they are ultimately resolved: Generation being the mixture of Principles, and Corruption the separation of them. This Opinion agrees with, and illustrates the Antient Hypothesis, That all Bodies are compounded of Moist, Dry, Hot, and Cool Principles. The Humidity depends on the Water, the dry∣ness on the Earth, the Oyl is Inflammable, and the Matter of Fire in Vegetables: In Minerals, the Oyly Sulphur burns; in Animals, the Oyly Fat is Inflam∣mable: The Oyls, Fats, and Sulphurs are the same Oyly Principle, but they differ by their several States, Mixtures, and Digestions. The Acid Principle produces Coldness in Animal Humors, according to Hippocrates's Observation, : And it is observable, that Nitre, which is Acid, tastes very Cool; and the Sulphureous Acid, which abounds in the Air, is esteemed the Principle of Cold.
The Oyly Principle is the Hot Principle in Ani∣mals, as Hippocrates affirms, . Because the Ancients observed these Qualities to abound in Earth, Water, Fire, and Air, they called these Elements, and supposed all Bodies to be com∣pounded of them. Those Constitutions they called Dry, in which Earth abounds; those Moist, in which Water prevails; the Oyl high digested makes the Constitution Hot, and a great Acidity renders the Constitution Cold. Galen describes Choler as Bitter, Acrid, and Deter∣gent; Phlegm, as Crude, Slimy, and Cool. The Atra bilis is described as Acid, which Galen says, is evacuated into the Stomach, and there becomes Styptick. Hippocrates affirms the Atra bilis to be Viscid, , so that by Atra bilis the Ancient Physicians understood the Slimy Acid of the Spleen, which, when the Spleen is obstructed, is carried by the Arteries of the Stomach into its Cavity; where this Slime and Acidity abounding, produce the Flatus Hypochondriacus; and this Aci∣dity descending into the Guts, turns the Choler it there meets into a black Colour, from whence it has the name of Atra bilis. From the taste of these Humors, Bitter, Acrid, Choler, Acid, Lympha, and Viscid Slime, the Famous Sylvius deduces his Notions of all Diseases, as the Ancients did from Choler, Phlegm, and Atra bilis. But I will, in this Treatise, present your Lordship
with a larger Scheme of Animal Humors. I shall endeavour, in this Tract, to explain the Virtues of Mineral and Animal Medicines by their Tastes and Smells, as I have done that of Vegeta∣bles: Though Galen did exactly describe the Tastes of Vegetables, yet he was wholly perplexed about Minerals; and the same is the general fault of the Chymists, who attribute wonderful Effects to their Gold Medicines, but observe no Taste, though the sweet Stypticity is evident in Tincture of Gold, from whence it has its Vertue. That Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals have the same kind of Taste at first, may seem strange, but we must consider, that Vegetables receive their Juices from Minerals; (to prove this, I need only instance in Hepatica Terrestris, which smells of a Petroleum) and Minerals have their Acid, Sweet, Slimy, and Bitter Tastes: Out of these the Juices for Vegetables is prepared by Fermentation, and the dissolving Power of the Sulphur-Acid in the Air: If this Nourishment be ill prepared, it keeps its Mineral Nature, and petrefies Plants, hence Stoney parts are observed in Oaks, whilst growing; and Coral smells Earthy and Sulphureous, like a Flint, if two pieces be rubbed together. I must farther observe, that Animals have their Sweet, Bitter, Salt, and Acrid Tastes from Vege∣tables, which, by Putrefaction acquire an Animal Nature, yielding Urinous Spirits; and all Vegeta∣bles become fit Nourishment for Animals, by their Fermentation in the Stomach.
Many Marine Plants, such as Sponge, have a mid∣dle state of Principles betwixt Vegetables and Ani∣mals, and therefore yield a Volatile Salt, like Ani∣mals, and Fixt, like Vegetables. I will give one Instance from the greatest of our English Physicians, Dr. Willis, to shew his O∣pinion of the usefulness of a Rational, from the taste of an Empyrical Medicine in the Chincough, from whence he framed his Methodical and Rati∣onal Cure of it. He examined the Virtue of Cup∣moss by the Taste, and says, Virtutis astrictoriae est, at{que} particulas nonnihil acres salis volatilis copi∣am redolentes in se continet, unde conjectari licebit usum ejus esse sanguinem figere, seri{que} fluxiones se∣dare, ac insuper succum nerveum volatilizando, dia∣thesin spasmodicam tollere. The Virtues of Medicines were first known by the Tastes of our Diet, which vitiates the Humors of our Bodies, by its Bitter, Acrid, Salt, and Aro∣matick Tastes (the most natural Diet being of a Sweet Taste): And by these Tastes also, the preter∣natural Humors were observed to be rectified. These Tastes were well known to Mankind, whilst they fed most on Vegetables; and this Age therefore knows less of them, because they are lit∣tle used in our Diet: For which reason, I believe, the Virtues of Plants have been esteemed occult Qualities, which were discovered by Experience, and not by our Senses. But this Tract will satisfie the Sceptical, in giving them a sensible Testimony
of the nature of Animal Humors, and the operation of Medicines on them, by their suitableness to their Tastes, Principles, and Digestions. This Design will thwart the Opinion of Astrolo∣gists, who fetch the Virtue of Plants from the Planets; and also the Opinion of the Helmontian Archeus, and the spirituality of occult Qualities in many Minerals and Stones; and all the sympathe∣tical Conjurations in Amulets, which have no sen∣sible Qualities. My Lord, I have given you an Account of my Design, and hope you will accept it, as a Testi∣mony of my being, My Lord, Your Faithful Humble Servant, John Floyer.
THE PREFACE. NOT only Aristotle, but most Philosophers since, have compared the Taste to the feel∣ing of an Object: And since the Taste di∣scerns all its Objects by their Contact, and the Organ of Feeling has the same Nerveous Papillae covered by a Membrane, it may not improperly be called so. I think it necessary (for the distinguishing of Tastes) to observe a diversity in their Contact of the Organ; for some Tastes only superficially touch the Membrane of the Tongue, and therefore they chiefly affect the exterior Skin of it; as those things we Feel, touch only the superficial skin of the Fingers, the Papillae feeling through the Skin, as we do through our Gloves. Other Objects we Taste, insinuate their Particles into the Porous skin of the Tongue, and immediately affect the Papillae Nervosae, which Malpighius describes, as the Fingers whereby we feel the Figure and motion of some minute Particles we Taste, and by this we chiefly distinguish the Organs of Feeling and Tasting. The Taste is properly a more curious and exquisite touching of the minute Particles of an Object: Hence
it is, that we discern those Qualities we Feel, by the Taste also; but we Taste more than we Feel. We both Feel and Taste, 1. The hardness in Woods, Stones, Metals, and Bones of Animals. 2. The softness in Pulps, and the Parenchymous parts of Plants and Animals. 3. The driness in Woods, Stones, and Minerals. 4. The humidity in Juices. 5. The viscidity in Gums, Glews, and Turpentines. 6. The toughness or stringiness in the Muscular Flesh, and the Wood of Plants. 7. The Friability in Resins. 8. The Roughness in Astringents and Vitriols. 9. The Smoothness in Slimes and Oyls. In these Tastes the Object chiefly affects the skin of the Tongue, and the Papillae Nervosae immediately through that: Because we both Feel and Taste these Qualities, these are most improperly called Tastes; and the Antients did not commonly allow them all to be Tastes, but since they allowed of Astringent Tastes, why not of Hard, Soft, Dry, Humid, &c. and since we discern them by the Tongue, which is the common Organ of Taste; and that does more certainly and exquisitely discern these Qualities than the Fingers▪ I have called them Tastes, and I find both Hippo∣crates and Galen speak of some of them, as Tastes sometimes.
By the Taste only we discern most clearly and per∣fectly, 1. The Sweetness of an Object, which is only smooth to the Touch. 2. The Bitterness, and this is only drying and de∣terging in the Skin of the Fingers. 3. The Aromaticks and Fetids affect the Taste, and are not at all discerned by the Feeling. 4. Saltness is perceived by the Taste only, but it dries the Skin of the Fingers, as well as the Tongue. 5. The Acrids and Corrosives, if long applied, fret the Skin of the  Body as well as the Tongue. 6. Sowreness is not perceived by the Organ of Feeling, but only the Roughness attending it. These are called most properly Tastes, because they affect the Papillae Nervosae immediately, and not only through the Skin of the Tongue, as it is in Feeling, by other Parts. By these Tastes we perceive the minute Particles of Bodies; but by the former, we observe only the su∣perficial Textures of them. I will next give some Instances of the usefulness of Tasting our Medicines; for by the Tasting of them we observe, 1. Their Consistence, as Hardness, Softness, Driness, Humidity, Viscidity, Toughness, Friability, Roughness, and Smoothness of their Superficies.
II. The Figures of their small Particles. 1. The cutting edges in Acids. 2. The sharp Pungency in Acrids. 3. The pungency and driness in Salts, being like the Panes of Glass. 4. The pungent, hot, crooked Particles in Corro∣sive Tastes. These stick long on the Tongue, and probably have an Acidity joyned to their Volatile Oyls or Salts, whereby their Figures are made irregular, tearing, and corrosive. So in Minerals, the Acid joyned to a Vola∣tile Sulphur produces a burning Acid Corrosive. And in the Roots of Pellitory in the Shops, we first observe a burning Pungency, and afterwards a sowre cool Taste; and these Tastes, like that of Aron's Pungency, appear not till after some time. Some fixt Salts have vari∣ous Figures, and I may suppose that Volatiles have also a diversity. Acrids have streight, pungent Parti∣cles like Needles, but the Corrosive may be crooked Hooks, tearing and vesicating. III. We discern the motion of the small Particles of Bodies by the Taste. 1. Hot, from the Pungent, Penetrant, Acrid, or Corrosive Tastes. 2. Coolness in the sowre, slimy, watry, crude Tastes. 3. A pleasing Titillation in the Aromatick Tastes.
4. Offensive impressions in the fetid nauseous Tastes. IV. By the Taste we observe the Dose of our Me∣dicines; for if the Heat be great on our Tongue, we give the less; and if the Taste be not very offensive, we give the greater Dose. V. By the taste of the Medicine we observe, what Preparation is most fit for it, which I have mentioned in the first Volume. VI. By the Taste we observe the suitableness of the Medicine to particular Humors in Animals, which have the same, or a contrary Taste. VII. By the Taste we observe the agreement of one Medicine with another, whose Vertues we know; and from thence examine the Vertue by this general Touch∣stone, viz. Those things which agree in Taste, agree in Vertue. I will therefore recommend this, as the chief Sagacity in Tasting, to discern the similitude in Tastes, and when we have given all the sensible Modes of Tastes, we ought, if possible, to compare it to some known Tastes: So in the Chermes there is a Bitter Astringency; but besides that, it has a similitude to the Taste of the Cortex Peruvianus, and they have both the same effects in Fevers. This similitude must be allowed a great latitude; for one thing may be like another in Taste, but yet have some difference, but not .
VIII. By the Taste we observe the Alterations made by Fire in Chymical Preparations, and those made in Vegetables, by ripening of Fruits. Though by Chymistry we extract the Principles of Bodies, yet the Taste only or chiefly shews their Fi∣gures, Motions, and Effects on the Body; and also that which we can no otherwise observe, the Figures, Motions, and Effects which depend on the mixtures of the Prin∣ciples; therefore it is not sufficient to observe the Acid in Oyl of Vitriol or Sulphur, and the hardness in Steel; but we must observe the Vitriolick Taste produced by their mixture and dissolution: Therefore Chymists ought, after every Preparation and Mixture, to examine their new Products by their Tastes and Smells; and from thence, and the Tastes or Smells of the Ingredients, to∣gether with due reflections on the manner and nature of their Operations, to give their Rationale of the Vertues of their new Medicine. Whereas, at present, we have too much Hyperbole in the Descriptions of Chymical Medicines and their Vertues, and no Taste. IX. I shall affirm, That it is very necessary for the making of an Experiment on any Medicine; for before we try any thing on the Body of a Man, we ought to take the best Information our Senses can give us, about the Taste and Smell of it, by which we shall know the consistence of the Medicine, the Figures and Motions of its Particles, the quantity of its Dose, the Preparation of the Medicine, the agreement with other Medicines of the same Taste, the Tastes of its Chymical Principles, and their alteration by Mixtures, and its suitableness
to the Digestion, Temper, Tastes, and Principles of some particular Humour of an Animal, which indicate pecu∣liar Tastes for their Preservation in Health, or altera∣tion in Sickness. X. By the Tastes we shall more fully understand the Ancient Authors of our Faculty, as Galen, who quotes the number of Tastes out of Plato: Diosco∣rides mentions many Tastes of Plants, and Galen transcribed them from him. Hippocrates has groun∣ded his Aphorisms on Tastes: And Galen uses them in his Methodus Medendi, and gives an account of some Medicines from them; so that it is impossible to un∣derstand either Hippocrates, Dioscorides, or Galen, without a full information about the Tastes of Plants. Hippocrates gives us these general Rules about Tastes. All Hot, Acrid, and Fragrant Herbs, are more Diuretick than Purgative. . Sweet, Acrid, Salt, Bitter, Austere (such are here meant as the Laurel-Bitter Astringents) and Fleshy Fruits (such as Oyly Nuts) do Heat. . All Acerb and Austere Plants are Binding. . Acids extenuate, and are Diuretick.
These Instances from Hippocrates are sufficient to prove, That the Tasting  of Medicines is no novel Design, nor thought unuseful by the best of Physicians in the purest Ages of Physick, when the knowledge of Medicines and Animal Humors was deduced from sensible Qualities. XI. By the Taste we may distinguish Plants into Classes, as I have done; and also remark some de∣fect in the Classes of our Plant-Anatomists; and also observe the difference of the Specifick Juices in Plants, and the difference also of their Vessels, in which the different Tastes are lodged. I. In Vegetables, 1. We taste the Woody part, and that may be called a ligneous, dry, hard Taste. 2. The Juices of Vegetables which taste humid, and these are either the Watry Juices, which lye in the Bladders of Plants, or else the Juices of Plants, which are well digested, and I call them the Oyly Specifick proper Juices, lodged in the Turpentine Vessels of Plants. If we describe both the Watry and Oyly Juices of Plants, we may easily discern the Vertues of the Medicines. The Smell very much conduces to the discovery of the particular degree of Digestion, which each Specifick Juice of Vegetables has, by the Efflu∣viums they emit.
Galen advises us to Taste each particular part of a Plant; for in the Root is not the most crude Juice of a Plant, as is vulgarly believed: He says, The Leaves are less Acrid in Aron, Dragons, Squills than the Roots; and that Althaea-Roots discuss Tumors, by a latent Acrimony which the Leaves do not; and Garlick, Onion, and Radish-Roots are most Acrid. We must taste Vegetables in the Soyl in which they na∣turally grow in their perfect state; some best while fresh, but others dryed, juiced, or in decoction; and observe, not to Taste many at one time: Some Plants are best smelt when bruised or rubbed; but if they be very O∣doriferous, I only draw them through my Hand. I believe that all the Criticisms about the Tastes of Vegetables cannot be settled in the space of half an Age; therefore I hope for Pardon where I have erred or omitted some Modes; and beg the Assistance of all my Profession in this useful design; for this design must be undertaken by Physicians, and not Herbalists, who cannot judge truly of the Vertues, without the assistance of our Art, and the knowledge of the Humors of our Bodies. II. In Animals we taste, 1. The toughness or tenderness of the Muscular Fibres and Viscera. 2. The Serose Juice, (which is the Bloody Gravy) with an Animal savour of Fetid; and also a Smell resembling the same Taste: So in Rabbits Flesh we taste and smell a strong Rankness.
In the hard Parts of Animals we smell a Foetor, as in Horns and Hoofs, from whence they have their Ver∣tue, (and this Foetor differs not from the Spirits of Animals, which being collected in the liquor of the Nervous, it becomes lucid); hence it is that Fetid Sulphurs, Animals and Vegetables are Nervines; being strong or fetid, like the Spirits. I will here only give a Scheme of Animal Humors, that the Taster may observe what is to be Tasted in Animals. Chyle is the first and original Humor prepared in Animals. From Chyle all the other Humors arise, either by Digestion or Percolation, mediately or immediately. First, From Chyle is prepared, I. By Digestion, 1. The Serum of the Blood, and from thence the Fibrous Cake or Part. II. By Percolation from Chyle. 1. The Fat, which is the Butyrose part of Chyle. 2. The Milky Lympha glandularum conglo∣meratarum, like Spittle, and the Pancreatick Juice, and that of the Stomach and Guts. 3. The Semen, which is also Milky, Slimy, and Fetid. 4. The Milk of the Breasts.
From the Fat returning into the Veins is chiefly produced the red part of the Blood. From the red part, 1. Choler. 2. The Spirits of Animals. From the Serum of the Blood by Percolation, 1. The Sweat. 2. The Urine. 3. The Lympha serosa Glandularum con∣glomeratarum, which is observed in the Lymphaticks. All these I have more fully described in the ensuing Book, together with the original of Saltness, and Aci∣dity in Animal Humors. The Taste of Infects is also to be observed, for in Millepedes is an Acrid Taste; in Chermes a Bitter Astringency, like the Ilex on which they are bred: So that it is probable that Insects taste of the Plants on which they are bred, each Plant having its particular Insects and Galls; and I believe the Acid in Pismires is from some Vegetable on which they feed. And I must here remark, that Insects have their Acrid, and also the Choler of Animals, which is pungent, both like the Acrimony of Vegetables, and not of a Salt-Taste.
III. In Minerals we must observe, 1. The dry gritt in Stones and Metals, and their Calces. 2. The saltness in Mineral Salts of divers kinds, and in the Salt of Lime. 3. An Acidity in the Acid Spirits and Sulphurs. 4. A Vitriolick Astringent Taste in all the Vitriols of Minerals and some Earths, as Bole, &c. 5. A sweetness in Sugar of Lead and other Vitriols. 6. A bitterness in Nitre, and North-hall-Waters, and the Crystals of Silver. 7. A burning Corrosive Acid in Arsenick and Calx viva Tastes, burning with a Saltness, from whence the Corrosiveness depends. By the Smell we observe the Sulphurs of Minerals, and some Authors mention the Odoriferous Smells of the Preparations of Antimony, as Ettmuller; and in Bonetus we find this Arcanum Vitrioli nocte intem∣pesta instar Carbunculi lucet, cujus{que} odor omnia alia odorifera antecellit. Tilingius. The different Pungency of the Sulphur-Smells must be observed; but these are sometimes so lockt up by the preparation and addition of Acids, as not in that state to give a manifest Taste; but by being in the Stomach, the Acid is taken off, and the Sulphur becomes Pun∣gent, Vomitive, or Diaphoretick; therefore in judging of some Antimonial Preparations we consider the Taste and Smell during the Preparation; and when we find a Sulphur evident in that, we must allow that some of
it sticks to the Calces; and from thence we must de∣duce part of the Vertue of the Mineral Calces: So the Oyls of lants are not perfectly separated from the Fixt Salts, from whence they have their different Ver∣tues. If we reflect on the Actions of our other Senses, they may be imposed on as well as our Tastes, and not di∣scern that object in one state which they did in another: so we both See and Feel Salts and Sugar when dry; but if they be dissolved in Water we shall only perceive them by our Tastes; therefore we use the testimony of all our other Senses to supply the defect in any one. We may rationally infer from the sulphureous Smells in the Preparation, as well as the effects in the Sto∣mach, that Sulphur abounds in Antimonial Vomi∣tories; and it is enough, that both Taste and Smell can discern the Antimonial Sulphur (which is not un∣like common Sulphur) in more loose Preparations, wherein it is more separated from the Earthy Particles, (as in Sulphur Antimonii combustibile, the Clyssus and Tinctures.) Vegetables and Animals are the most proper ob∣jects of Taste; but most of the Mineral Sulphurs are better Smelt than Tasted: and in the judging of our Medicines we must consult both Taste and Smell. It is necessary to prepare some Bodies that they may give their Smells; so Pearls and other pretious Stones must be long ground in a Mortar before they will give their fragrant smells; which, by D. Olaus Bo∣richius is observed to be like Violets; he mentions o∣ther
Stones struck with a Hammer smelling like Musk, others like burnt Horns, or the Excrements of Ani∣mals: And our Flints and common Stones smell like Sulphur, being struck against one another. These varieties of Smells in Stones sufficiently evi∣dence, that their Vertues are no occult qualities. I must confess that some Medicines acquire new Vertues in the Stomach, from the Animal Acid; so Boles are made Aluminous, Salts Vitriolated, and the Testaceous Medicines made Salt and Styptick by it. therefore we must allow those the same Vertues, as if they had been prepared by an Acid, and thence de∣duce them. Mercury and other Minerals acquire a Vitriolick Taste in the Body, as they do by Preparation with Acids; without this alteration Mercury crude can have no considerable Vertue, as other Minerals have not. I have tryed Mercury decoctions in Water, and put Worms into it, but found it not to kill them; whence I may justly doubt of its Vertue. Half an Ounce of crude Mercury injected into the Veins, made no alteration in a Dogg, neither by Vo∣miting, Purging, or Salivation. Bonetus. Two or three pounds of crude Mercury are given sometimes inwardly, and pass through the Guts, with∣out Injury. These Instances suffice to shew the small Vertue as well as Taste of crude Mercury; but the Fumes of Mercury taste sweet, as the Gilders inform me: And Doleus mentions the Stypticity of the Fumes of Mercury in the Throat.
During the long neglect of the Press in publishing this second Volume, I added the Appendix, which contains a more exact Method, being a Scheme both of Minerals and Animals, according to their Tastes; and many particular Tastes were added, which were omitted in the other Parts. Many Errata's have been committed; for the Cor∣recting whereof, I have affixed the Errata's observed by my self, and desire the Reader to consult them.
Errata in Vol. I. PRef. p. 6. l. 8. r. Ray's Methodus. 57. for Daffadils, r. Pseudonar∣cissus. p. 276. l. 4. Acid. 282. l. ult. dele of both. 292. l. 23. Sul∣phur, an Oyl and Acid is closely lockt up. 293. l. 7. both. The. 296. l. 6. new. 303. l. 10. an Efflorescence. 310. l. 7. so neither is it in. Errata in Vol. II. PAg. 4. l. 20. & 125. l. 1. Acid. 17. l. 18. Volatility, it. 24. l. 9. Lapis bufon. p. 41. l. 1. Nitre inflammable. Spirit. p. 58. l. 14. Sponge distilled. 124. l. 5. Aloes is Bitter. l. 6. dele Aloes. 161. l. 10 Sweet Acrid. 166. l. 15. set Mastiche close to Olibanum. 171. l. 3. §. 1. Hot Cephalicks. 176. l. 13. after juglandium add Faeculae bryoniae, pulvis de gutteta, which dele in l. 20. 190. l. 19. for Corallina r. Carlina. 193. l. 16. dele nummulariae. 195, set pulv. Cornathin. close to Scam∣monii. 205. l. 3. dele 6. Bitter-Acrids. 239. l. 25. Animal-bitter. 281. l. 12. Plants Anato. 294. l. 27. and sub-acid. 301. Fraxinus bu∣bula is omitted before this. 304. l. 21. has an. 316. l. 21. Ballatis r. Battatos. 317. Opium r. Apium. 343. l. 2. or without. 349. l. 24. of a Perch. 352. l. 21. These. 353. l. 27. conglomerated. 354. l. 20. r. Colon. 362. l. 13. red; l. ult. it unites readily. 369. l. 10. the Acrid. 373. l. 1. Spleen-Acid. 378. l. 10. Aluminous. 384. l. 23. . wiped. 390. l. 2. Peat-Turfs. 394. l. 10. r. are not Nitre.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. The Second Volume. OF THE Tastes and Vertues OF MINERALS. An Appen∣dix to the Third Part of VOL. I. Of Vegeta∣bles, &c. CHAP. I. Of the Principles of Vege∣tables, which are deduci∣ble from Minerals. AS the best of Physicians (speaking of Man, the Principal of the Animal Kingdom) says, We are that very Thing by which we are nourished; so, without a Paradox, every Vegetable may be said to be a Mineral,
as being nourished by something Mine∣ral: And a Treatise of Minerals may ve∣ry aptly be joyn'd to One of Vegetables, without any Fault in Coherence, or Ab∣surdity in Method. For Vegetables receive their Earth, Oyl, and Acid from Mine∣rals. And I must further observe, That the Soyl from which Vegetables receive their immediate Juyce, is a Congeries of Mineral Bodies, viz. Sand, which looks like Gems in a Microscope; Clay, Marle, Chalk, Flints, Lime-stone, and divers other sorts of Earths, in Distillation, yielding an Acid Spirit; which is the Product of some Sulphur in them: And the same Sulphur gives an Oyly Fatness to many Earths, as Marle, Clay, Bole, &c. It is ob∣serv'd, that Salt-Petre abounds in all Fer∣tile Earths, and has a Mineral-Acid in it: So that, if it any ways conduce to the Production of Plants, it must be al∣lowed, that in the Production, Vegetables receive some Acid from it. Sulphureous Damps are most evident in some particu∣lar Places arising from the Superficies of the Earth; and Boggy Grounds have al∣ways an offensive Air, which is not vi∣tiated by the Water only, but also by some Sulphureous Effluviums; which, upon standing Water, shoot into a bluish Cream,
like that on standing Vitriolate Waters. I cannot but mention those Bodies which have a middle State betwixt Mi∣nerals and Vegetables; from whence I inferr a great Analogy betwixt their Prin∣ciples, and a gradual Transmutation of Mineral Principles into Vegetable Oyls, A∣cids, and Earths: (Water is a common Vehicle, necessary for the Mixture of those Principles in both Kingdoms, and it may be, the Earthy Part is the same in both.) Vegetables are changed towards Minerals sometimes. Coral grows as a Plant; and afterwards has the Hardness of a Stone, when full grown: to which the Astringent Liquor, observ'd in it, conduces; for from a drop of it, new Coral is said to spring. So in other Vegetables, some Seed-Ca∣ses become Stony, which lie in the mid∣dle of an Acid Pulp; as in Cherries, Plumbs, &c. Gromwel-Seed is Stony, though it have no exterior Acid Pulp; and the Seeds of Apples and Lemons, which have an exterior Acid Pulp, are not Stony. Pears have a Stonyness in them. Patrification in Vegetables depends on an Acerb Juyce, in which the Acid and Earth are mixt in a certain Proportion; for all Acids will
not produce it, for want of the due Pro∣portion of Earth to them, and of that particular Texture of both, which is ne∣cessary for Stones. So that, when Coral, and the Cases of Fruits, become Stones, there is no Change of the Principles; but the Vegetable Acid and Earth acquire a new Texture. The Bitumens in the Mineral Kingdom, are in a middle State betwixt Minerals and Vegetables: They are produc'd from Mineral Principles, otherwise mixt than in Minerals, and in a near Disposition to become Vegetable: For the Bitumens in Minerals, and Turpentines in Vegetables, are very like in Smell and Taste; and yield the same Chymical Principles in Di∣stillation. The Soot of Coal is of a smoaky Smell, and tastes Bitter and Acrid; in which it is like to the Soot of Wood; and also both of them yield the same Volatile Salt and Oyl. The Narcotick Quality of Sulphur A∣nodyn. Vitrioli, resembles the Fetid Nar∣coticks in Vegetables. The Ashes of Minerals and Plants may be Vitrified alike by a strong Fire; and therefore there is no great Difference be∣twixt them.
The Fixt Salts of Plants have the Na∣ture of Mineral Salts; as appears in Lime-Water, which tastes salt; and both are the Product of Fire: for neither Mine∣rals nor Vegetables have any Natural Fixt Salt. It is not improbable, that these Fixt Salts of both Kingdoms, agree in the Fi∣gure of their Crystals; and both may be Cubical, as Common Salt; or of some Ir∣regular Figure, near to a Cube. The Reason why all Minerals cannot be calcin'd into Salts, as Plants be, is the indissolvible Texture of their Parts; which not being perfectly destroyed by the Fire, they cannot thereby acquire New Mixtures, as it happens in Plants for the Production of Fixt Salts. But this Dissolution of Principles, and Re-mix∣ture, happens in Lime, in the Producti∣on of the Fixt Salt, evident in Lime-Water. I have mention'd the most known Bo∣dies, which have their Rise from Mine∣rals, and afterwards become Vegetables, as Bitumen; and those which from Vege∣tables become Minerals, as Coral, and the Stones of Fruits: And I might here add the Petrification of Vegetables, by petri∣fying Waters, which contain a Nitrum Calcarium, (as the ingenious Dr. Lister
has evidently prov'd) by which Plants are petrified, having the Nitrous Lime-Stone Particles closely united with their Earthy Parts. I shall have a further Oc∣casion of comparing the Nitrum Calcari∣um with the Tartarous Earth in Plants, by both which Plants are petrified; by the last, Naturally; and by the former, Artificially and Externally. Minerals are produc'd out of Juyces, like Vegetables; which sometimes grow into Figures resembling perfect Plants, and have Branches and Joynts like them, as if they had been petrified Plants; but are really Natural Stones. From this Like∣ness of Stones and Plants, it is not im∣probable, that there is a great Similitude in Principles, and a propensity to change from one to the other. In the Discourse about Fermentation, I have more fully compared the Oyls and Acids of Minerals with Vegetables. Vide.
CHAP. II. Of the Similitude betwixt Mineral Principles, and those of Vegetables. THE Principles of Minerals are of the same Kind and Number, as those of Vegetables. Water is distilled from Salts and Mi∣neral  Earths; and is necessary for the mixing of the other Principles: There∣fore Liquors are found in Mineral Stones; and Stones had at first a Liquid Form. Water is the same in all Bodies; but, if extracted by Distillation, it retains some Tincture from that particular Body from whence it is distill'd. An Oyly Principle is manifest in Sul∣phureous  Bodies, as Antimony, which may be reduc'd into a Butyrose Form by Di∣stillation: And all the Mineral Sulphurs may be easily extracted by Oyl of Tur∣pentine, with which they readily mix, be∣cause of the Similitude of Oleous Parts.
The Oyliness of Mineral Sulphurs is more evident in the Distillation of Coal, which yields a black Oyl, Fetid, like Harts-horn, and as black and smoaky. The Bitumens which have the Nature of Turpentine, do most clearly convince us of the Oyliness of Mineral Sulphurs: So that I need add no more, to prove this Principle of Minerals. The Third Principle of Minerals is an Acid; which is acknowledg'd by all, be∣ing evident in the Distillation of Sulphur, and the Clyssus of Antimony. This Acid adheres to the Oyly Sulphur in Minerals, and locks it up, thereby making it ap∣pear in a dry Form; and therefore this may be compar'd to the Tartar in Vege∣tables, which has always some Oyl in it. By means of this Acid, the Oyly Sul∣phur, and the Earthy Parts are readily u∣nited in Mineral Bodies; and therefore This is that the Chymists call the Mercu∣ry of Minerals, when they distinguish it from Mercurius Corporum, and common Quick-Silver. The Fourth Principle of Minerals is an Earthy Part; which in perfect Mi∣nerals,
is a Lime-Stone or Spar, which adheres to the Ore of Metals. The Mi∣neral Fumes coming from the lower Parts of the Earth, fix in such Stones, and are intimately united with them into the Na∣ture of a Metal: These Mineral Fumes are Sulphureous and Acid, which readily fix and combine with Earthy Parts; which the Chymists call the Alkaly of Mine∣rals. From the number of Principles, I have excluded both Volatile and Fixt Salts, they being the Products of other Prin∣ciples combin'd by Nature or Art. The Volatile Salts in Vegetables being evident to our Senses, and produc'd na∣turally, I did, in the First Part, call them one of the Principles evident to our Sen∣ses; but because they are compounded of the other Principles, I cannot think they deserve the name of a Principle. From the different Proportions, and perfect Mixture of all the former Princi∣ples, all the perfect Metals are produc'd; and from a different imperfect Mixture, all other Minerals arise; as Earths, Bitu∣mens, Regular and Irregular Stones, Gems, Salts, Vitriols, &c.
In Vegetables, Trees have a Mixture of the Principles analogous to Metals; which their Solidity, Weight, and Apt∣ness to be petrified sooner than Herbs, sufficiently manifests. The Texture of Gums, Resins, Turpen∣tines, Mucilages, and Stones of Fruits, a∣grees with the imperfect Minerals above∣mention'd; as will appear by a particu∣lar Analogy observ'd betwixt the Products of both Kingdoms, which differ only by their several Digestions and Mixtures: but yet manifestly agree, as the Chymists speak, in radice; that is, in their Prin∣ciples. CHAP. III. Of the Principles, Tastes, and Vertues of Metals, and their Preparation. GOLD has the Sulphur and Acid Aurum. most digested, and intimately mixt with some Stony-Earth, like Flint or Spar; such as visibly adheres to Gold-Ore. In this the Sulphur-Fumes, which
are Sub-acid, intimately fix themselves with that Stone which is fittest for a strict Union with them. Some Stones are not moved by Acids, and others very violent∣ly: And hence does happen so small a quantity of Gold, and other Metals, in a great quantity of Ore. Fire cannot diminish the Weight, nor separate the Principles of Gold, because of their perfect Union. Gold will not rust, nor colour the Fin∣gers, unless mixt with other Metals; and then the Rust is Blue. The Vapor of Sulphur colours it; and therefore Tartar, Salt, and warm Water cleanse it. Aqua Regia dissolves it, which is com∣pounded of Salt and Nitre; whose Spi∣rits have the greatest Pungency of any Acids, and the least Roughness and Sowre∣ness; and also a strong Pungent Smell. By the united Pungency of both Spirits, the Body of Gold is broken or corroded into small Parts; which, joyning with the Menstruum, produces a Vitriol; by the Precipitation of which, Aurum Ful∣minans is prepared: which therefore Pur∣ges and Vomits, and gives Blackness of Stools, as other Vitriols do.
The Tincture and Flowres are said to have some Sulphur in them; at least, they may have somewhat of a Vitriol; which being alter'd by Addition of Salts, does not Purge, but sometimes Vomit: And they have the Effects like Tincture of Steel, in Curing Acids; which is also the Ver∣tue of Crocus Solis; which in the quan∣tity of a few Grains, may correct a con∣siderable quantity of Acid; since one Grain of Gold may be extended into a∣bove Fifty Inches square in Leaf-Gold. Gold may be best compar'd to Aromatick Trees; which have an Oyly Salt of the same Cordial Vertue, that Chymists allot to the pure Sulphur of Gold; of which Gold has more than other perfect Mine∣rals. So these Aromatick Trees agree with Gold in their Principles, by having more Oyl, and that better digested than other Trees. Silver has the Sulphureous Acid in Argentum. smaller quantity than Gold; and that not so highly digested, as in Gold, yet so closely united, that the Principles can neither be separated by Fire, nor Spirit of Nitre, which only breaks the Silver into small Particles, and therewith constitutes a
Bitter-Acrid Vitriol, Purging and Vomit∣ing violently. The Blue Colour of the Tincture of Sil∣ver, is from Copper, and vomits; but the true Tincture is Purple, (as Ettmuller af∣firms;) and it has some considerable Vir∣tue, as containing the Sulphureous parts of its Vitriol, or rather of the Acid Men∣struum, which made the Vitriol. The Crystals of Silver are very Cau∣stick; the Acid becoming more Corro∣sive, by being fixt in the Mineral. Silver may be compared to those Plants which are Purging, abounding with Earth, Acid, and Oyl, united into an Acrid Salt; to which is joyned a Bitter Taste. Such is the Taste of Hellebore, and Colocynthis, which are Bitter-Acrid Purgers. Silver is easily mixt with Copper, and is scarce separable from it; to which its Purging Virtue is much attributed by many Authors. Copper is called a crude Silver; for in Cuprum. this the Sulphur and Acid are not so strongly united to the Earthy parts, as in the former; but are easily dissolvible by Volatile Salts. Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack, dissolves it into a Green Tincture; Spirit of Sulphur into a Blue Vitriol, which is
the most purging of any Mineral Vitriol, because of its Sulphureous parts, easily separated, and making it Corrosive. Cop∣per melted, smells most of Brimstone; and a Preparation of Copper is made by Mr. Boyle, which is inflammable. The Acrid Purgative Resins of Plants may be best compared to Copper for their equal Purging Faculty, and their most remarkable Principles, Oyls and Acid, which in Plants produce a Salt; and also in some Preparations of Copper, which Becher mentions. Copper has an Acid Sulphur in it, which makes it easily extracted by Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack; and Copper is easily turned in∣to a Vitriol, which will vomit by Stimu∣lation of the Membranes, as Aqua Fortis does. From the Nauseous Brass-savour Taste, the Purging and Vomiting quality proceeds. Tinn has much Sulphur in it, whence Stannum. Jovial Medicines have a Purple Colour. It will not so easily dissolve by Acids as Lead, and therefore not so much used for Medicine; neither have I observed its Taste, nor any Virtue proper to it. It is easily melted, and it burns with Nitre; both which argue a Sulphureous Nature in it.
Lead is something of the Nature of Plumbum. Silver, for Silver is mixt in all Lead. Tinn differs from Lead, by having more Sulphur. Lead-Fumes give Colicks, Palsies, and Shortness of Breath, to the Miners. They say, The Smoak of melting Lead smells Sweet. The Preparations of Lead do outwardly cool, because of its Density and Weight. It has the least Internal A∣gitation of any Metal, and will vitrifie. Red-Lead is Calcined Lead to a Red Minium. Colour, very Cooling and Drying in Ʋlcers. White-Lead is Prepared by the Fumes Cerussa. of Vinegar, by which it is made White, and the Cooling quality increased by the Vinegar. Burnt-Lead turns Black by the Fumes Plumbum ustum. of Sulphur; and some Salt is produced by it, which makes it drying. All these Preparations may be reduced into Lead again; so that it cannot be re∣duced into its Principles, no more than Silver, Gold, or Tinn. Lead may be compared to the Austere Plants, which cool much, and have little
Oyl, but much Acid and Earth. So Lead has little Sulphur, but much Acid and Earth. Iron abounds with Sulphur, and gives Ferrum. Fetid Fumes in melting. The Sulphur is extracted by Volatile Salts, where it is turned into Steel by Horns, with which it is Calcined; but because of that Sulphur, Iron is preferible to Steel: for by that Sulphur, and the Earthy parts, Iron cures the Animal Acids, and thereby removes Obstructions. Salt of Iron is made by the Acid of Sal Martis. Vitriol, dissolving the Iron. It tastes Sweet and Rough; the Roughness is from the Mineral mixt with the Acid, as A∣stringency is produced in Plants; the Sweetness is from the Sulphur and the Acid Menstruum, as the Oyl and an Acid produce Sweetness in Plants. This Salt may be precipitated into a Crocus Martis, and that melted into Iron; and therefore this Salt is no Principle of Iron, but a Composition betwixt an Acid, and the Particles of Iron; and it will absorb Acids, and also acts as a Salt by its Figure; and by its Roughness cooling the Blood, and stopping all Fluxes in the same manner,
as the Sweet Astringent Ferns do; and both of them are accounted Splenetick. The Tincture of Steel tastes Vitriolick Sweet; as also the Preparation with Tar∣tar and Sulphur. Ens Veneris smells like Spirit of Salt, and tastes Rough, and not Sweet like Iron, but is a Composition of Iron and Salt; it has not any Taste of Copper. The Loadstone hath the nature of Iron; and so hath Smiris, which is used for Polishing Gems. Iron may be compared to the Fetid Plants, by its Sulphur-Smell, and also by its Ʋterine Vertue. Common Quicksilver is very fluid, from Mercurius. the roundness of its parts, by reason of its Volatility. It contains Sulphur in it; for it is usually found in Gold and Silver Mines, mixt with Sulphur, in the form of Cinnabar; from whence it is distilled. We observe the Acidity of Quick-sil∣ver, in corroding the Teeth and Iron, and by its Salivation. And we prepare it with more Acids, to make it salivate in a smaller quantity. Quicksilver seems to be a fluid Amal∣gama of some Metal, and looks like mel∣ted Lead. The Chymists seem most con∣fident
of their Extraction of Quicksilver out of Lead; and Quicksilver is easily mixt with it, and fixt by it, and equals its great Weight; and both soften the Metal they are mixt with. Quicksilver seems compounded of a Metallick Sulphur, Acid, and Lead. The Sulphur contained in Quicksilver, seems Arsenical, because Quicksilver is found in Silver Mines, in which Arsenick is found also. Arsenick colours other Me∣tals White, as well as Quicksilver; both of them are very Corrosive, and of a White Colour, and easily sublimed. It may be observed in Minerals, and other Bodies, That Nature often decom∣pounds a Mineral with one of its Princi∣ples or two. So Vitriols are compound∣ed of Acid, and a perfect Metal. Sulphur and Mineral Stones in Marchasites. And sometimes two Compounds are re-com∣pounded, as in Cinnabar, which contains Quicksilver and Sulphur. Quicksilver easily coagulates by Acids, (as Lead is dissolved by them) by reason of its Sulphur and Earth; but these can∣not destroy it, but it revives again. All Metals by their Sulphur fix it, Spit∣tle by its Sub-acid Salt kills it; and so Turpentine and Oyls, by their latent Acid, destroy its fluidity.
A Solution of Mercury Precipitated By Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack, is White. Oyl of Tartar, is Red. Lime-Water, is Yellow. Mercurial Medicines have the Nature of Alkaly; but in Preparations are disgui∣sed by Acids, and by them made very Noxious and Corrosive. The Mercurial Particles, tho' without an Acid, if only by an Ʋnguent or Fume, they pierce through the Pores of the Skin into the Blood, there they imbibe the Acid Salts, and from their Mixture act like Sublimate, coagulating the Serum of the Blood, and by that means produce Salivation; the thin parts of the coagulate Serum running off by the Glandules of the Mouth. The Ammoniack Salt of Ani∣mals may dispose the Mercurial Particles into Corrosive pointed Figures, as the Acid of Common Salt does in the Prepara∣tion of Sublimate. Sublimate has the Acid of Spirit of Mercurius Sublima∣tus. Salt, joyned with it by Sublimation; and I believe something of a Vitriol Taste is produced by the Mixture; for Sublimate
has a Brass-savour Taste, which is very Nau∣seous; and also a Roughness, by which it coagulates the Blood, and outwardly re∣pels strongly, and resists Putrefaction in Gangrenes and Ʋlcers. Sublimate is a kind of Vitriol, produced by the Acids and Mercury: And by its Brass-savour Taste, purges and vomits violently. Spirit of Vitriol, distilled from Quick∣silver, tastes Aluminous. Turbith Mineral is a Mercurial Vitriol, produced by Oyl of Vitriol; and Vomits violently, and also Salivates. Mercurius Vitae, after the use of it, a Vi∣triolate Mercurius Vitae. Taste is in the Mouth, like Copper; from whence its Vomitive Vertue arises from the Quicksilver, as well as Antimony. Mercury is Precipitated from its Solu∣tion by Lime-Water, and is thereby ren∣dred Sweet and Innoxious: Therefore Fixt Salts are good, when any Body is Poysoned by Sublimate. White Precipitate Purges gently, as well as Mercurius Dulcis; both are of a mild Vitriolick Nature, having less Acid in them. Red Precipitate is Corrosive, by the Spirit of Nitre, by which the Quicksilver is Vitriolated.
CHAP. IV. Of Imperfect Mineral Prin∣ciples, and their Tastes and Vertues. THE Principles of Minerals appear most evidently in these follow∣ing Minerals; in which one Principle appears more evidently than in others; and sometimes two Principles are Compounded, as in Sulphur; and some∣times the three Principles are very loose∣ly mixt, as in Antimony and Marcasites; in others most closely united by Fire, as in Salts; and the last sort is a Composi∣tion of Acid, and a perfect Mineral, as in Vitriols. Mineral Earths are Compounded of a Terrae Mi∣nerales. greater quantity of Earthy Parts, Impreg∣nate with Fumes from a particular Mine∣ral; by which it obtains the Vertue of that Mineral, whose Fumes it receives, and becomes Astringent by the Acid of the Sulphur joyned to the Earthy Parts; and the Oyly Part of the Sulphur gives it a Fat Oyliness, and also a strong Earthy Smell.
Fat Earths, are like the Mucilages of Ve∣getables, Cooling and also Astringent. Vid. Bolus Armena, &c. Gems have their Originals in Mines, Lapides Pretiosi. and their Colour from Minerals. The Green Colour of Smaragdus is from Iron. Rubines, Granates, and Hyacinths, have their Colour from Gold. The Blue of Lapis Armenus and Lazuli, is from Copper. Topasius and Chrysolithus have their Tellowness from Iron. Gems are at first in the form of Liquors, and then shoot into Plates, like Salts; and of divers Plates is made the Gem. This is the Opinion of the Honou∣rable Mr. Boyle. This Salt which Compounds Gems, seems like to Cream of Tartar in Vege∣tables, which consists of Acids and Earthy Parts, tasting Gritty, and shooting into Crystals. So in Minerals, the Sulphur A∣cid joyns with a Stony Grit, and consti∣tutes the Nitrum Calcarium; which, if Crystalized by it self, constitutes Trans∣parent Stones; which may (during its Crystallization) receive the Fumes of some Mineral; or else the Sulphur in the
Acid appears, when the Acid is fixed on an Earth, and gives it a colour. Such is the colour of Red Precipitate, from the Red Sulphur in Nitre. Vid. Lapi∣des pretiosi, Crystallus, &c. Common Stones have the same Princi∣ples Lapides Commu∣nes. as the former; and besides, a great deal of Mineral Earth or Bole with them; which hinder the regular shooting of the Nitrum Calcarium, and the Transparency; and from those Mixtures, Stones have their Colours. Lime, Marble, Alabaster, and Shells of Animals, have a great deal of Earth and Acid, and not much Sulphur: They are easily Calcined into Salt, by reason of their dissolvible Texture. So Astringent, Mucilaginous and Bitter Plants have much Acid and Earth, little Oyl, and yield much Salt. But those Stones which have much Sulphur, and a close Texture, yield little Salt, like Resins in Vegetables; but by addition of Salt, these Stones are fusible into Glass; such is the Nature of Osteocol∣la and Flints. Those Stones which have an indissol∣vible Mixture of Oyl, Acid, and Earth, and probably an equal proportion, are ve∣ry
easily fused, as Metals be; as in Spar, and Mineral Stones. Lime-stone cannot turn into Glass, because its Sulphur is separated by the Fire, and the Acid of the Stone joyns with some Earthy Particles, upon the wetting of the Stone; from whence the Effervescence in Lime pro∣ceeds. Aetites is a Flint, and so is Lapis Bubo∣nius; by which we may be assured no Vertues can be expected from them. Vitriols are made by Metalline Bodies, Vitriola. Compounded with a Sulphureous Acid. From Copper a Blue Vitriol. From Iron a Green. From Silver a White. From Lead a White Sugar of Lead. From Mercury an Aluminous Brass-savoured Vitriol. Quaere, The Colour and Taste of the Vitriols of Tinn and Gold? A Fire Stone or Marcasite: It consists Pyrites. of a Stone, Mineral Ocher, and Sulphureous Acid. Out of the Marcasite both Vitriol and Sulphur may be made. There are as many Marcasites, as sorts
of Metals; These they add to the Metals, to make them more fusible; which Spar, and all other Sulphureous Stones do. The Fire-stone which was sent to me from Wedgebury, was black on the out∣side, and Silver-coloured within: This I put into a Glass of Fair Water, which after a little time had a Vitriolate Taste, and the Water turned Purple with Galls; but, after a long standing, it turned Green again. From such sorts of Stones, Chalybeat-Wa∣ters receive their Imperfect Vitriol. There appeared a Blue and Yellow Scum on the top of the Water, in which the Fire-stone was put; as there does in all Chalybeat-Waters, when they stand a while. I burnt some Grey Iron-stone, with a Sulphur-role in a Crucible; some edges of it melted: I put that part of the Iron-stone, which looked black, and was not melted, into some Fair Water, with Galls; and thence arose a Purple Colour, and a Sulphur Scum. From whence I infer, That Chalybeat-Waters have their Vertue both from Sulphur and Iron. The Fetids in Vegetables are of agree∣able Principles and Vertues to Marcasites; being like the Fetid Gums, which are con∣tained in Plants, and, like them, are used
outwardly in Plasters; in which Pow∣dered Pyrites is good for the Sciatica. Common Brimstone is a Compounded Sulphur vivum. body of an Oyly part, and an Acid; both which, in the Burning of Brimstone, strike the Nose with a Pungency, like Volatile Salts. Nothing is Volatile in Minerals, but Sulphur; and this gives the Volati∣lity to Quicksilver; where I can com∣pare nothing in Minerals to Pungent Vo∣latile Salts, but Sulphur-Fumes, which in distillation of Pit-Coal compounds a Vo∣latile Salt. And a Volatile Salt is made out of Soot, which is a compounded Bo∣dy of Oyl and Acid, as Brimstone is. I have tryed some Flowre of Brimstone gathered from the Fires in Wedgebury Coal-Pit, which differ not from Ordinary Flowres of Brimstone; for it burns Blue, and looks and smells like ordinary Sulphur, but something stronger, it being the Sulphur of Coal. Common Brimstone, given inwardly with Milk, purges very conveniently in the Piles, and dryes them. Vid. fl. Sulph. infra, & Sp. Sulph. per Campanam. Vid. Antimony infra.
Arsenic is like common Sulphur, the Arsenicum Soot of Metals, and is compounded like it, of an Oyly part (which in Arsenic is more piercing) and an Acid; and it is naturally joyned with a Mineral, from which it is separated by Sublima∣tion. The best Orpiment is of a yellow Co∣lour, and smells strong of Sulphur; but by putting it into a Pot over the Fire, it becomes a Sandaraca. Arsenic sublimes like Sulphur; and may be changed into a Butter by Subli∣mate, which shews its Oyly part. Arsenic given inwardly Vomits vio∣lently, corrodes the Stomach, causes Thirst, Heat, Faintings, Convulsions, and at last Death. The Sulphur in Arsenic may be fixt by Spirit of Nitre; and Salt of Tartar alters its Corrosiveness, by imbibing its Acid; therefore the Corrosiveness de∣pends not wholly on either Acid or Sul∣phur, but on a Proportion and Texture of both; which makes it a strong Cau∣stick outwardly, for eating Proud Flesh. Acids have pointed Figures, by which they are Pungent, and corrode; and when they are Compounded with Sulphur, they are Figured into pointed Particles; which,
by reason of the Activity of Sulphur, tear and corrode stronger, than when they are compounded with Minerals or Earths. The Poysonous Acrids of Napellus and Aconite, and the Caustick Milks in Vege∣tables, may be compared with Arsenic, for its Poysoning quality, which is its Corrosiveness. The Principles of Mine∣rals cannot so easily be united into Vola∣tile Salts as Vegetables are; but the Oyl and Acid in Sulphur want only an Earth to give them the nature of a Salt; and they sometimes may acquire that Tex∣ture, as appears in the Volatile Salt of Coal. The high degree of Acrimony in Mineral Sulphurs, makes a Poyson; tho' a lower degree makes only a Purger, as appears in Antimonial Medicines, which have their Stimulus from the like Tex∣ture of Sulphur and Acid; and in many sorts of Vitriols which purge; especially in Copper-Medicines, in which is manifestly a Sulphur, and an Acid: and from the mixture of Copper or Arsenic, which is mixt with the Mineral of Silver, the Preparations of Silver purge so violently. Common Sulphur is not corrosive, be∣cause there is too great a quantity of Acid mixt with the Oyly part in it self; by which means the Oyly part is less Vola∣tile.
In Antimony the Acid is less than in Sulphur; and therefore the Sulphur Oyl is more Volatile, and purges. In Arsenic, the Acid is in a lesser proportion, and more intimately mixt with each Particle of Sulphur; as it happens in the Butter of Antimony, from which the Corrosion proceeds: So that Arsenic is corrosive, not only by the Volatility of Sulphur, but also by the particular Mixture of each Particle of Acid, with a like Particle of Sulphureous Oyl; and therefore the Butter of Arsenic is extreamly Corrosive, in which the Acid is mixed with the Oyl; as in Milk, the Butter and Acid are uni∣ted, and the Acid opens the Sulphur, and gives it the form of Butter. The Bitumens of the Earth, arise from Bitumina. the Sulphur of Minerals, when it is Buty∣rose, or less Coagulate by the Acid. If then it be mixt with Clay, or Bole, or Earth, which is fat and soft, like a Mu∣cilage; it produces a Composition like Turpentine in Taste, Smell, and Vertue: All Turpentines having an Oyl and Acid in them, besides a Mucilage or Gumminess. The Mineral Bitumens may be divi∣ded, as Turpentines be, into,
Fetid Bitumens, like Resins; as Succi∣num,  which is a hardened Petroleum. Asphaltus is as hard as Pitch. Gagates is like Succinum; both stink when burnt, and yield an Oyl and an Acid Spirit, like Resins. Pit-Coal distilled in an Earthen Retort, yielded a Volatile Smoaky Salt, which made a great Effervescence with Spirit of Nitre, and tasted Pungent; and also a black Oyl Fetid, like Oyl of Hartshorn. I thought this a considerable Experiment, to prove, that a Volatile Salt and Oyl may be made from Minerals, as well as Vege∣tables; and confirmed my opinion about the Similitude of Principles. Other Fetid Bitumens are more Liquid, as Naphtha and other Bitumens Swimming on Water. There are Bitumens plainly like com∣mon  Turpentine, as Petroleum, which di∣stilled, yields an Oyl like Oyl of Turpen∣tine; and a Colophony remains, which is a Resin. The Petroleum swims on Waters, and gives them a Healing Vertue, like Oyl of Turpentine. Petroleum is either White or Red. Oleum terrae is more Sweet and Fra∣grant than Petroleum.
Some Bitumens are more Fragrant  than the rest. Ambra Grysea is a Greasie, Soft Bitu∣men, of a Fragrant Cordial Smell, found in the Sea: and it is not improbable, that the Salt of the Sea may render this Bi∣tumen Fragrant, as the Salts of the Blood give Turpentine a Violet Smell. From the Similitude of Taste, Smell, and Principles betwixt Bitumens and Turpentines, I could not but infer the Production of the Vegetable Turpentine was from the supply of the Mineral Bi∣tumen, which is dissolved, and swims on many Waters; and in the Spring-time may easily be rarefied, and the Fumes of it lodged in the Surface of the Earth, to give an Oyl fit for Vegetables. The Acid of Vegetables is from Minerals, and therefore the Oyl comes thence also; for the Oyl and Acid in both Kingdoms are usually associated, and go together, and produce the chief effects in both, consti∣tuting Salts and Resins in Vegetables, and Sulphurs in Minerals, &c. The Oyls and Resins of Vegetables are Inflammable, as Sulphur. The Antherae ex pino, Junipero & Musco terrestri Clavato, are observed to be very Inflammable; but especially those of Club-Moss, which yield
an Oyl by Extraction, with Tincture of Salt of Tartar; and afterward by distil∣lation, as it is mentioned in Mr. Ray's History of Plants. And the Learned We∣delius says, That the Lixivium of Woad, being Precipitated by an Acid, yields the same Sulphureous Smell, as appears in the Preparation of Sulphur auratum Antimonii; and a yellow Sulphur is Precipitated, which has the Smell, Colour, and Inflam∣mability of Sulphur: Such is the Artificial Sulphur I will mention hereafter, made by Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol. Vid. Flores Sulph. CHAP. V. Of SALTS. Salts are either Simple, from one Principle; or Compounded of many. THE Acid of Sulphur is the uni∣versal  Acid, spread thro' Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, in each Kingdom; varying only by the several Mixtures, Compositions, and Decompo∣sitions
which are mentioned hereafter: and there is no other Simple Salt, but the Acid of Sulphur. Compounded Salts are either, First, Artificial, as, 1. Volatile and Fixt Salts, which are made by Distillation or Calcination. But the Composition, necessary to produce a Volatile Salt, is made Naturally in Vege∣tables: and the same is made Artificially out of Vegetables, by putrefying any Ve∣getable, and then distilling it. Fixt and Volatile Salts may be termed Simple Salts, because they may be Com∣pounded again by an Acid; as, 2. In Vitriolate Salts, Ammoniac Salts, and Nitrose Salts. Secondly, Compounded Natural Salts are either compounded, 1. Of an Acid and Mineral; as Vitrio∣late Salts. 2. Of an Acid and Earth; as Alum, Nitre, Sal-gem, and Sea-Salt. 3. Of two Salts; as the Ammoniac Salt in Animals, evident in Blood and Ʋrine.
4. Of an Oyl and Volatile Salt; as in Aromatick Vegetables, and other Acrids. Or, 5. Of an Oyl and Acid; as in Tartar, and the Sulphureous Acids of Minerals. Of all these Compositions, I will give divers Instances; but, first, I will collect out of Dr. Grew's Anatomy of Plants, what he observed about the proportion of Fixt Salts, in the different tastes of Plants; and give some reflections on them: One pound of Marjoram affords a scruple of Lixivial Salt; which is an Aromatick Plant. Of Oak-Bark, which is Astringent, one pound yields half a drachm. Of Liquorish, which is Sweet, one pound yields half a drachm. Of Anniseeds, which is Sweet, Acrid, and Aromatick, one pound yields two scruples. Of Sorrel, which is Sowre, one pound yields a drachm. Of Garden Scurvy-Grass, one pound yields two drachms and half a scruple. Of Sea Scurvy-Grass, one pound yields nine drachms; which proportion is greater than in any other Plant, and more than in the Garden Scurvy-Grass.
Of Mint, which is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Aromatick, and Astringent, one pound yields five drachms and a scruple. Of Agrimony, one pound yields five scruples, and six grains of Salt; the Taste of it is Bitterish, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, with an Aromatick Smell. Of Mugwort, which is Bitter, Sub-acrid, and of a mixt Smell, one pound yields two drachms and two scruples. Of Rosemary, one pound yielded five scruples. Of Mallows, which is a Watry Muci∣lage, one pound yields five drachms and two scruples. Of Resins and Turpentine Gums, very little Salt is collected; as out of Mastich, Olibanum, and Assa Foetida. Gum-Arabick yields a little Salt. Euphorbium yields two scruples of Salt. Myrrhe, the same quantity; which is strange, the one being very Acrid, and the other Bitter. Opium yields near a scruple of Salt, and is Bitterish, Fetid, and very Acrid. Aloes, which is Sweet, Bitter, Gummy and Sub-acrid, yields one scruple of Salt. Scammony yields half a scruple of Salt, in two scruples of Caput Mortuum. Gutta gamba, in one scruple of Caput
Mortuum, has five grains of Salt. Rhubarb yields very little Salt. Jalap, one pound yields one drachm and fifteen grains of Salt. Jalap is Clam∣my or Gummy in Taste. Senna, one pound yields four scruples and a half of Salt; the Taste is Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-acrid. Colocynthis, one pound, which is ex∣treamly Bitter and Acrid, yields one ounce; which is more than any Plant ex∣cept Sea Scurvy-Grass. Of Ash-Bark, one pound yields thirty two grains; this Bark is Bitterish and Rough. And Bark of Black-Thorn yields one scruple and five grains. I have transcribed the Instances men∣tioned, to confirm my Hypothesis, about the Nature of Salt, That it is a composi∣tion of Oyl, Acid, and Earth, in different proportions in Volatile and Fixt Salts; in the latter of which, the Fire makes the Composition: And these Plants, which have a due proportion of Oyl, Acid, and Earth, yield the most Fixt Salt; therefore Sea Scurvy-Grass yields the most Volatile and Fixed Salts, and all other of the Cress-Taste; and also amongst Gums, Euphor∣bium and Opium.
Bitters have less Oyl, and more fixt by the Acid and Earth; therefore Mint, A∣grimony, Mugwort, and Rosemary, have less Salt, than the Acrids above-mention'd: But where there is an Acrid joyn'd with a strong Bitter, as in Coloquintida, those have more Fixt Salts, than pure Bit∣ters. Mucilaginous Plants, as Mallows, yield a Proportion not inferior to Bitters; be∣cause of a great Quantity of Oyl, Acid, and Earth: And these Principles in Mu∣cilages, are not suddenly driven into Smoak; but are united in the Fire into Salt. Sweet, Astringent, and Acid Tastes yield least Salt, for want of a due Proportion of Oyl for its Composition: And Watry Gums have little Salt, for the same Rea∣son. Marjoram and Anniseeds have too little Acid for producing a Fixt Salt. Resins want Earths for the Composi∣tion of Salt; and the Oyl and Acid burns away too soon. The various Figures of Salts, Marine and Essential, (but I cannot allow it that Name, because it's made by the Fire) are described by Dr. Grew, and Fracassatus in his Epistle to Malpighius; of which
variety of Figures we cannot give any probable Reasons, but from the various Proportions of Oyls, Acids, and Earths in Plants; and the re-mixtures of them in the Fire, for the compounding of a Fixt Salt. The change of a Lixivial Salt by the Air, is an undeniable Argument of the Composition; for it will turn from a Salt Lixivial, to Nitrose and Marine Salt; and, at the same time, precipitate an Earth. The Separation of the Oyl from the Acid and Earth, gives this Nitrose Salt a Bitterness; but, after the Evaporati∣on of that Oyl, the Acid and pure Earth remain, and make a Marine Salt: Which I think may be the clearest Solution of this great Experiment. I find this Experiment in Dr. Willis, That Volatile Salts, though very white, turn into a red Liquor by being expos'd to the Air; and then taste not very salt, but smell smoaky, from the Oyl which is loosened from the mixture with the Acid and Earth. Since therefore the Fixt and Volatile Salts may be resolv'd by the Air into Oyls, Acid, and Earth; I do conclude, That they are Bodies mixt in the Fire by Di∣stillation,
and Calcination only, which makes Fixt Salts. But I cannot omit the Modes of Tastes in Salts; for from the Acids, which are pungent, the Volatile Salts have their Pungency; and from the Volatility of di∣still'd Oyls, the Volatile Salts have a Vo∣latility, and smoaky Smell. The Fixt Salts have their Pungency from the Acid, and a Lixivious Smell from the Oyl; and from the Earth, both Salts have a dry Taste, very considerable in Salts. We find many Alkalies mixt with an Acid, as Crabs-Eyes and Vinegar, which taste Salt. So that, from many Experiments, and likewise from the Taste, I affirm, That Salts are Compounded Bodies. CHAP. VI. Of the Tastes of Salts. ALƲM is of a rough Acid Taste; Alumen. by which it coagulates Milk, Se∣rose Humors, and Choler; and therefore it becomes a good Febrifuge, and stops all Hemorrhages from the Kid∣neys
and Womb, by giving an Astriction to the Fibres of the Membranes, as well as by the Coagulation of Humors, and checking the Fermentation. Outwardly it cools, repels, and cicatrizes. In Sup∣positories, the Acid stimulates; and given inwardly, in a great quantity, it purges and vomits. Out of a black calcin'd Slate, is made a Lee; of which is made Alum. The Alum is precipitated by a Lixivium, and Ʋrine: So that Alum has a Compositi∣on of Salts, besides the Acid and Earthy Parts. The Alum-Stone in the Air pro∣duces a Copperas. Alum has not so much Acid, as Vitriol; and therefore is more Rough. Nitre is Cool, Bitterish, Pungent, and Nitrum. Saltish in Taste: It is Inflammable, and seems to be a mixt Salt, having a great Acid, by which it cools, and has the Ef∣fects of an Acid; but it will not curdle Milk or Choler, neither the Blood, nor Serum; but the Spirit of it will coagu∣late all these Liquors. The Bitterness ar∣gues some Oyly Sulphur in it; and the Saltness, the mixture of some either Vo∣latile or Lixivious Salt with it; and there∣fore it is Diuretick. Spirit of Nitre joyn'd
to an Alkaly, becomes a new Nitre. In∣flammable Spirit of Nitre fixes Volatile Salts most; and is the strongest Acid, in dissolving Minerals and Stones; and there∣fore a great Acid-Diuretick. Sweet Spirit of Nitre is made more Sp. Nitri dulcis. grateful to the Stomach by the Spirit of Wine; Spirituous Acids being more a∣greeable than sowre Tastes, or Acid-rough. The Sweet Spirit of Nitre is us'd in Co∣licks, Windiness, Tympany, and all hot In∣flammations; the Acid of the Nitre coa∣gulating with the hot Volatile Oyls, and Salts in Animals. Spirit of Nitre distill'd from Nitre and Lime, turned the Serum of the Blood black, as in black Vomits and Stools. Sal Prunellae tastes Cool, Nitrous, Acid, Sal Prunel∣lae. Saltish, and a little Sharp or Pungent; by which it cools Thirst and Heat, and is Diuretick. It will not Ferment by the addition of any Acid, nor curdle Milk or Choler. Borax tastes Cool, like Nitre, and Sal∣tish-pungent, Borax. having a Fixt Salt added to it, to purifie it: If it be Factitious, it is mixt of a Volatile Salt and Nitre. It
is most us'd as a Diuretick; and for Ʋl∣cers of the Mouth, it seems not to be ve∣ry Aperitive, nor proper for forcing La∣bour, otherwise than as a Diuretick. Sal-Ammoniack is Salt, Pungent, Sub∣acid, Sal Ammo∣niacum. and a good Diuretick; being com∣pos'd of a Volatile and Acid Salt. By grinding it with an Alkaly, it flies quick into the Nose. Sal-Ammoniack is also us'd as an Antifebrifick. An artificial Sal-Am∣moniack may be produced by mixing Vo∣latile Salt with Spirit of Salt; and is a good Medicine. Volatile Salt of Hartshorn tastes Cool, Sal Vola∣tile Cornu Cervi. Saltish, Pungent, with an Urinous, quick, smoaky Smell: It corrects Acids, and gives a quick Motion to stagnating Spirits and Blood. It is a good Diaphoretick and Diu∣retick, and preserves the mixture of the Blood. Fixt Salt tastes Salt, Pungent, and Sal Fixum. smells weakly Urinous; it corrects Acids, and is Digestive and Diuretick. I observe, that Fixt Salts agree in Smell and Taste with Volatile; and therefore are of a like Nature and Production.
Salt of Ash: I tasted it in the Shops Sal Fraxini cool and saltish; but, I believe, it was alter∣ed by the long keeping of it in the Air, the fresh being very Corrosive. Salt of Wormwoood unpurified, tastes Sal Absyn∣thii. Cool, Saltish, Pungent, and Bitterish. Salts unpurified, taste of the Oyl of the Vege∣tables; and therefore are better than clear Salt. Salt of Scurvy-Grass tastes only very Sal Coch∣leariae. Saltish. All Fixt Salts are of a Salt Taste; but those Plants in which is most Acrid, give the strongest Saltness; but this may be altered by the dryness of the Plant, and the degrees of Fire, or quantity of Oyl, joyn'd with Acid and Earth. By the Acid in the Air, Fixt Salts turn Ni∣trose, and get a cool Taste. Sea-Salt tastes Salt, Sub-acid, and Pun∣gent; Sal Mari∣num. it hinders Putrefaction by the Acid, and is Diuretick; helps Digestion, but is not altered by it. Spirit of Salt put to an Alkaly, produ∣ces a Sea-Salt. Dr. Grew says, That the Marine Salts of Plants taste like Sea-Salt, and have a Cubick Figure. The Nitrose Salts
of Plants, he says, taste Bitter, and have Figures a little corresponding to their Ni∣trose Taste. Salt of Amber tastes Saltish and Pun∣gent, Sal Succini and smells of Amber: Spirit of Vi∣triol will not Ferment with it; but Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack will. All Gums, Resins, and Bitumens yield a great deal of Acid, and some Volatile Salt mixt with it; by which this Salt is Diuretick; and by the Smell, like Amber: It is also Cephalick. A Volatile Salt may be distilled out of the Salt of Amber, by an addition of a Fixt Salt. Vitriol tastes Sweet and Styptick. White Vitriolum. Vitriol gives a pale Blue, with Galls and Water: It is used in Distempers of the Eyes; and inwardly for a Vomit. Blue Vitriol gives a Purple colour, with Galls and Water. Green Vitriol gives a deep Purple, with Galls and Water. The Stypticity of Vitriols makes it good for the Itch, and for Proud Flesh in Ʋlcers. Some Vitriols have an Acritude in the Taste, besides the sweet Astringency, says Dr. Grew. This Acrimony is from the Sulphureous Acid.
Irish Slate: This put into fair Water Lapis Hi∣bernicus. with Galls, gives a Purple Colour. The Taste of it is Vitriolick, Rough, and Acid: It is therefore most proper to stop Bleed∣ing and Overflowings; but not to cleanse Child-Bed Women, as the Midwives use it; and thereby occasion a Stoppage, and Fe∣ver. Tartar tastes Sowre and Gritty: It is Tartarus. precipitated from the Wine, by the Earthy parts adhering to the Acid; by which it is Cooling and Diuretick. All Acids in Vegetables are of this nature, and are cal∣led the Essential Salts: Some of which are thought to be Nitrose, because of a Bitterness, which is produced by the Oyl of the Plant adhering to the Acid. Tartar and Essential Salts distilled, yield a Volatile Salt, which is a little Acid; and such a mixt Spirit is the Spirit of all Woods: A Fetid Oyl arises with this mixt Spirit of Tartar; and the Caput Mortuum has a Fixt Salt, the Acid of the Tartar being wholly de∣stroyed: part, fluxing with the Earth, produces a Fixt Salt: part of it ascending with the Oyl, carries some Earthy Parts with it, by its Acidity; and produces a Volatile Salt, and Sub-acid Spirit of Tartar; The rest of the Acidity adheres to the
Fetid Oyl, which yields a further Volatile Salt, by addition of Salt of Tartar; which affords new Earth to the Oyly Acid, for production of a Volatile Ʋrinous Salt. The same is produced by an addition of Burnt Alum or Lime. The Salt of the Juyce of Wood-Sorrel Sal Essen∣tiale Ace∣tosetae. tastes Sowre, like Tartar; and has a Gritt, or White Vitrious Earth, with which the Fixt Parts of the Acid, being melted in the Fire, produces a Fixt Salt. The Acid of Vegetables contains an Oyl in it, but very Fixt. This Acid in the ripen∣ing of Fruits, and in Fermentation of Acid Juyces, fixes upon some Earthy Parts, and then the Oyl appears; which, by vertue of a little Acid mixt with the most Volatile Oyl, fixes on some Gritt or Vitrious Earth, and produces a Volatile Oleose Salt; which being much diluted by Water, a Spiritu∣ous Liquor is produced. Wood-Sorrel yields most Essential Salt; by which it's inferred, that all of them are pure Tartar. Vitriolated Tartar tastes Gritty and Tartarus Vitriola∣tus. Saltish; and is Diuretick both by the Acid and Fixt Salt: It will not Coagulate any Liquor: It is an Aperitive, without any Heat.
Oyl of Nitrated Tartar, made by Deli∣quium, Oleum Tartari Ni∣trati per deliquium. curdles Choler and Milk; and is Di∣uretick, as a mixt Salt; and tastes Salt and Sub-acid, like Nitre. Spirit of Vitriol tastes Sowre and Rough, Spiritus Vitrioli. by which it cools, and is a good Astrin∣gent. The Oyl of Vitriol is strongest; but has an offensive burning Heat upon the Tongue, from the Fire. The Spirit is best in Fevers and Hemorrhages. Spirit of Nitre tastes Sowre, very Pun∣gent Spiritus Nitri. and Rough: The Sowre and Rough are less in this, than other Acid Spirits: It fixes Mineral Sulphurs; and therefore condenses all Animal flatuosities: The great Pungency makes it Diuretick, and fitter to dissolve, as a Menstruum. Spirit of Salt tastes Sowre, Saltish and Spiritus Salis. Pungent, from the Sea-Salt; and differs only from it, by being more Acid and Cooling: It is an opening Diuretick, and Stomachick Vertue; and good against the Putrefaction of the Gums. Spirit of Salt, from the Pungency, is Aperitive; and it has a Roughness to strengthen, as well as Sowreness to cool.
Spirit of Sulphur tastes Sowre, and a lit∣tle Spiritus Sulphuris per Cam∣panam. sharp; for so I think it most proper to call the Pungency of Acids, for the bet∣ter distinguishing of it from the biting of Acrids. The Acid of Sulphur is more a∣greeable to the Stomach, than any other Mineral Acids. There is also a Roughness in Spirit of Sulphur, but less than in Vi∣triol. Vinegar tastes Sowre, Sharp and Winy; Acetum. and is of a Sharp Winy Smell; by which it appears to be a mixt body of the Vola∣tile Spirit of Wine, and the Tartareous A∣cids of the same. When Acid Liquors are decayed, they taste flat, without Pun∣gency, but yet Sowre; therefore the Pungency is from the Oyl, and not the Figure only. Saccharum Saturni tastes Sweet and Saccha∣rum Satur∣ni. Styptick; by which it Cools, Repels, and Cicatrizes Ʋlcers: This Sweetness is from the Winy Spirit in Vinegar; for Chalk with Vinegar gives the same Taste: and a Vinous Spirit may be distilled from the Sugar of Lead. The Acid of the Vinegar fixing on an Alkaly, lets the Oyly Parts of the Wine loose, on which the Sweetness depends, and not on the Lead. So the Bitterness in the Pilulae Lunares
depends on the Sulphur in the Nitre; which appears, most when the Nitrous Acids are fixt in the Silver; so that in the Spirit of Vitriol, mixt with the Oyl of Tartar, some Authors have observed a Bitter. The Oyly Acid in Saccharum Saturni has a Smoothness of Parts, produced by the fixing of the Acids in the Lead; and the Bitterness in the Crystals of Sil∣ver come from a Rough▪ Texture of the Compounded Parts, resembling the Texture of Bitters. The Acid in the Composition of Sac∣charum Saturni makes it cooling. CHAP. VII. Of Minerals, and Mineral Earths and Stones. FLowres of Sulphur taste Dry, Sub-acid, Fl. Sulphu∣ris. and smell strongly Fetid. There is a great Acid in Sulphur, and an Oyly Part: By the Acid it cures the Itch, corrodes Minerals, and fixes Vo∣latile Salts: By the Oyly Part it is a Bal∣samick
Pectoral, and cures the Acid stag∣nating Lympha. Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol mixt, and distill'd, yield a Sulphur vivum: And being the Bitumens and Petroleum are so like Turpentine in Taste and Smell, I thence argue, That there is a great Agreeableness in Sulphur and Turpentine; which last seems to be only the Oyly Part of Sulphur, depriv'd of much of its Acidity, and therefore less coagulate by it. Which Opinion I shall farther confirm, by observing, that Tur∣pentine is compos'd of the same Princi∣ples, as Sulphur, of an Oyly Part, and an Acid; and, besides, has a great deal of Water, to make it fluid. Sulphur easily mixes with the Oyl of Turpentine; both are Inflammable, have the same Physical Vertues, and are the Causes of all Smells; the One in Mine∣rals, and the Other in Vegetables. Ett∣mullerus says, Anthrax distill'd, yields an Oyl like Petroleum; therefore out of Sul∣phur, Turpentine-Bitumens are produc'd: And I have instanc'd above, that out of Turpentine, Sulphur may be produc'd: Which are convincing Experiments, that Turpentine and Sulphur have the same Oyl and Acid, only in different States and Mixtures.
From hence it is evident, that Chy∣mists speak not much amiss, when they call the Oyl of Vegetables their Sulphur; but I do not think it proper to explain the Nature of Vegetables, by Mineral Prin∣ciples; though Galen calls all Bitter Plants Nitrose: because they resemble the Bit∣terness of Nitre, and not for having any Nitre in them. For the same reason I might call Acerb Tastes Aluminous, be∣cause they resemble that Taste; but none will allow, that any Alum is in the Plants of that Taste. I will give an Instance of Sulphur's Fer∣tility, in producing all the Salts in the Earth, as well as the Acids in Vegetables, which I have above intimated; the Sul∣phur-Acid being one Part of the Compo∣sition of Mineral-Salts. Vitriol is known to be the Product of the Fumes of Sulphur, which corrode Iron into an imperfect Vitriol: But the perfect Vitriol is only made in the Air, out of a Pyrites. Spirit of Sulphur put upon Iron, produces a Vitriol; and so does the melting of Brimstone with it; and likewise the mixing of Flowre of Brim∣stone with Filings of Iron, and sprinkling them with Water; this put into fair Wa∣ter, with Galls, turns Purple.
Alum is produc'd from the Acid Fumes of Sulphur, dissolving some Stony Mat∣ter; for Spirit of Sulphur will, with Chalk, constitute an Alum; and Alum-Stones are full of Sulphur, as Dr. Lyster informs us; and where there is most Vitriol and Sul∣phur bred, Alum abounds most. Sea-Salt is compounded of an Alcali∣zate Body, or Vitrious Earth, and a Sul∣phureous Acid: Hence Flowres of Sulphur are sometimes gather'd in the Neck of the Retort, in distillation of Spirit of Salt, as Ettmullerus intimates. Spirit of Salt be∣ing re-affus'd upon an Alkaly, becomes perfect Sea-Salt again, and shoots into Cubes after the distillation of Sal-Ammo∣niack, with Salt of Tartar. All Sulphure∣ous Waters have a Sea-Salt in them; which is an Argument of the Acidity of Sea-Salts being the same as Sulphur-Acid, which coagulates with a Stony Matter in∣to a Fixt Salt. Sea-Salt will be fused in a strong Fire, by reason of the Alkaly. Nitre consists of a very Sulphureous Acid; which, in Places impregnated with the Ʋrines or Dungs of Animals, has a Volatile Salt for its Alkaly. In Old Walls, and Stony Places, Nitre has some of the Stone or Lime for the Alkaly. In the
Springs of the Earth, the Sulphureous A∣cid fixes on Sea-Salt; whence, after the burning of Nitre, a Sea-Salt remains. Cinnabar corrects Acids by the Sulphur Cinnabaris Nativa. and Quick-silver, of which it is made. It smells Sulphureous, and tastes Gritty. The Acid of the Sulphur fixes the Mercury; which happens also in the making of all Amalgamas; in which the Quick-silver is fixt by the Sulphur of the Metal. Cinna∣bar is given inwardly for all Distempers depending on Acids, and outwardly dries Ʋlcers, and cicatrizes. Antimony is compounded of much Sul∣phureous Antimoni∣um. Acid, and Vitreous Earth. Antimonial Medicines have either Sul∣phur-Flowres in them, of which the Tin∣cture plainly smells; or else an Acid in them, most manifest in the Clyssus; from a mixture of both the Flowres, and Acid of Antimony, the Vomitory Faculty arises: For Sulphur in Minerals answers the Re∣sin in Vegetables, having both an Oyly Pungency; and both may be produc'd from the Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol. Verdegrease is very Corrosive, good for Aerugo.
stopping Putrefaction in Ʋlcers, and for cleansing them; and is produc'd from the Acid of Grapes, corroding and giving a Green Colour. The Ʋrine added in the Preparation, gives a Blue Colour, and helps the Dissolution of Copper. Ettmul∣ler. Lapis Lazuli, Armenus: They partake Lapis La∣zuli, Arme∣nus. of the Nature of Copper, and very little of Silver; by which they are purging: The Sulphur-Acid in Copper being offen∣sive to an Animal Body, and most of the Preparations of Silver, which are purg∣ing, have their Vertue from Copper mixt with it. Lapis Lazuli, besides the Copper, contains some Gold. Ettmuller says, They have their Earthy Part from Marble, and are found in Copper-Mines, and Gold-Mines. Tutia and Pompholyx are the Products Tutia & Pompho∣lyx. of Copper, and very drying in Ʋlcers. They are the Soot of Copper. Lapis Medicamentosus is of a Salt A∣stringent Lapis Me∣dicamen∣tosus. Taste, by which it cleanses and heals Ʋlcers. The Pumice-Stone, burnt and quenched Pumex.
in Vinegar, is a good Dentrifice: The vertue of Stones that have neither Taste nor Smell, are only absorbent of Acids, and drying in Ʋlcers: But Pumice yields a Green Tincture, with Spirit of Vinegar; and therefore contains Copper. Lime-Water tastes Saltish, and is of a Calx. mixt nature, partly Alkaline, because it gives a Volatility to Sal-Ammoniack, which is a Salso-Acid; and it precipitates Mine∣rals, dissolved by Acids: But it has also an Acidity, and coagulates Oyls into But∣ter: So Oyl of Roses grows Thick and Bu∣tyrose, if mixt with Lime-Water. Spirit of Salt, distilled from Lime, yields a Volatile Ʋrinous Salt, like Spirit of Ʋ∣rine; which shews the little difference betwixt Volatile and Fixt Salts; and that an Acid is an Ingredient of both sorts. An excellent and useful Salt may be drawn from the Caput Mortuum: Ettmuller. Quenched Lime is very cooling and dry∣ing in Ʋlcers, though the unquenched be Caustick; which proceeds from the mixt Salt of Lime. The Oyly Part of the Sulphur is lost by the Fire; the Acid mixes with the Earthy Parts into a mixt Salt.
Flint has no Lixivial Salt in it. Silex. When Burnt and Quenched in White-Wine, it is used as a Diuretick. Flint has a Sulphureous Smell, and communicates somewhat of a Sulphureous Acid, to the Liquor it is quenched in. Chalk has a Gritty Taste, and a strong Creta. Earthy Smell; it corrects Acids. Outward∣ly it corrects Acids in Ʋlcers, and has something of the nature of Lead. Crystals and Precious Stones: I cannot Crystallus & Lapides pretiosi. find any thing in them, but a Grittiness, for curing Acids. The Mineral Tincture is too little to have any effect; and Efflu∣viums are not to be expected from such Solids, of any force. Coral has a Gritty Taste, and a Musky Corallium. Smell, when ground to Powder; by the former it absorbs Acids, and by the latter is Cordial; which Cordial Fragrancy, I believe, depends upon the Milky, Acrid, Astringent Liquor, observed in Corals. Corals Calcined effervesce upon the affu∣sion of Water, like Lime. They yield an Acid Phlegm in distillation, and are of a middle nature betwixt Minerals and Ve∣getables. Ettmuller says, The Tincture
and Salt of Coral, are compounded of Coral, and a Menstruum, which is Acid. Pearls taste Gritty, and have the same Perlae. Musky Fragrancy when ground; and the same Cordial Vertue as Coral. They have their Origine from a Milky Liquor, somewhat Saline, which is bred in the Animal, and (as Stones in the Bladder) becomes a Mineral. Oyster-shells yield but a little Volatile Testae O∣strearum. Salt in distillation, but much Water. There were some Volatile Salts, which turn∣ed the Syrup of Violets Green; therefore Oyster-shells have little of Animal Sub∣stance in them, and are not of the nature of Bones; for Shells have a Lixivial Salt in them, like Lime. I doubt, whether the Volatile Salt obtained from them, was not from some part of the Oyster sticking to the Shell. Burnt Oyster-shells absorb Acids, are drying in Ʋlcers, and are good Dentrifices, if burnt with Common Salt; and Cure Putrid Gums. The curious Observers of the Crystallization of common Salt, tell us of a white Sand, which settles to the bot∣tom, distinct from common Salt: It may not improbably be supposed, That the
Shells have their Original from such like Sandy Coagulations in the Oyster, that lives on Salt-Water; the Water in the Shells being perfect Sea-Brine, as was manifest to my Taste, when I had evapo∣rated the Liquor; and therefore it is not Antiscorbutick, as is supposed. Such an insipid Earth, Dr. Grew observed to fall out of the Lixivium of Ash-balls; and the like Earth is Precipitated upon the Vitri∣olating of the Salt of Tartar. From such a Principle, I suppose, Petrisication does proceed. Sponge-Stone distilled, yields a Volatile Lapis Spongiae. Oyl and Salt, like Animals: for which reason the Calcined is used for Scrophula's, to absorb Acids. Crabs-Eyes are of a Gritty Taste, and a Oculi Can∣crorum. strong Chalky Smell; if dissolved in Vine∣gar, they taste Bitterish Salt: and there∣fore are Diuretick, having a latent Vola∣tile Salt. Crabs-Claws have a strong Fetid Smell, Chelae Cancro∣rum. and act as a Gritt in absorbing Acids; and by their Foetor (which intimates a Volatile Oyly Salt) they are a little Dia∣phoretick. A Solution of Sea-Shells, or
other Stones in Spirit of Salt, produces a Saltish Taste, and so becomes a Diuretick. All Marine things Calcin'd, are like Calx viva. All Alkalizate Medicines change their Taste and Nature in the Stomach. The Fixt and Volatile Salts, by the Animal Acid, turn Sal-Ammoniack or Common Salt. Testaceous Medicines become also Saltish. All Earths change to Aluminous and A∣stringent Tastes. And Minerals, especially Iron and Copper, become Vitriolick in the Stomach of an Animal. Marble is of the nature of Lime, and Marmor. yields the same Salt. Alabastre: The Lixivium of it differs Alaba∣strum. not from Aqua Calcis. The Powder of Alabastre is taken against the Dysentery; and a cooling Oyntment is made out of it, for the Head. Blood-stone is of the nature of Iron, and Lapis Hae∣matitis. may be used instead of Crocus Martis for Hemorrhages; and is a good Ophthalmick Cicatrizer. The Flowres of it, Sublimed with Sal-Ammoniack, are of an Orange Colour and Saffron Smell; and therefore make an excellent Medicine.
Calamin-stone is of a Martial nature, Lapis Cala∣miniaris. easily absorbing Acids, and cicatrizing very well; it becomes Astringent by the mixture with Acid. Ochre has the nature of Iron, and is a Ochra. Styptick Earth in Taste, because of some Copper that Ochre has mixt with it: The use of it is most externally, as an Astrin∣gent. Bole Armenick, Sealed and Lemnian Bolus Ar∣mena, Ter∣ra sigillata, Lemnia. Earth: They stick to the Tongue at first; which shews their Astringency, where∣by they are fit for all Fluxes: They taste also Fat and Mucilaginous; by which they allay Sharp Acrid Salts; and the Earthy Parts absorb the Acid. They have also a strong Earthy Sulphureous Smell, whereby they may be also Dia∣phoretick in Ʋlcers. They cicatrize, and in Fevers resist Putrefaction. By their Astringency, and by their Mucilage, they conglutinate Wounds. Bole-Ar∣menick has something of the nature of Iron, and its Sulphur, and yields an Acid in distillation. Earth of Japan is Bitterish and Astrin∣gent; Catechu. whereby it stops Catarrhs, in Lozen∣ges:
It is a little Sweet and Perfumed, and Fat like Bole, and Gritty. From these Tastes it seems a Composition of Juyce of Liquorish, Bole, and some Perfume, and not a natural Earth. Ettmuller says, It is compounded of Sang▪ Draconis, Gum Arabick, and Glycyrrhiza. Marle tastes Rough, and feels Oyly, Marga. and has very small Sandy Parts; it will not burn in the Fire, nor melt. It im∣proves Ground, by furnishing a Slime for Plants. It is used outwardly for the Acid in Ʋlcers; and corrects the same, given in∣wardly to half a drachm, in Sharpness and incontinency of Ʋrine, depending on the Acidity of it. Raddle: It has the nature of Iron, by Rubrica. which it is Aperitive; but most like other Earths, Astringent; good in Fluxes, like Crocus Martis Astringens; in Ʋlcers Cica∣trizing; and it cures the Acid in Humors.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. The Fourth Part. OF THE Tastes and Vertues OF Animal Medicines. CHAP. I. Of the Origine of Animal Humors, and their Natu∣ral Tastes. IT is very probable, that Animal Hu∣mors and Tastes have the same Prin∣ciples, Mixtures, and Tastes depend∣ing on them, as the Juyces of Ve∣getables have; because Animals are fed
out of Vegetables, and thence prepare their Humors. Plants prepare their Juyces by Fermentation, reducing them from the State of Mineral Mixture, to a more rarifi∣ed condition: So Animals, by their Digesti∣ons in their Stomach, rarify and ferment Ve∣getables into a looser Texture, and an high∣er Degree, to fit the Vegetables for the pro∣per Nature of Animals. Therefore the same Principles are observable in Minerals, Vege∣tables, and Animals, and differ only by dif∣ferent Digestions and Mixtures: And I shall also prove, That from Animals the same Principles turn into Minerals again. Because Vegetables are but a middle State betwixt Minerals and Animals, and are design'd for the Food and Medicines of Animals, I think it very necessary to discourse of Animals next, and to give an Analogy betwixt the Principles of Both Kingdoms; and from thence the Opera∣tion of Medicines will be more evident; especially of the friendly Specificks, which so much resemble the Animal Humors in Taste, Principles, and Mixture. When a Vegetable is taken for Food, and chewed by the Animal, it is through∣ly mixt with the Saliva of that Animal; which, when the Pulpy Nourishment is heated by the Stomach, begins, by its Na∣tural
Acid, to work on the Oyly Part of the Vegetable; as also, the Acid Relicks of the former Digestion do; and, by their Contrariety, a Fermentation is produc'd, which loosens the whole Texture of the Plant. Whence the Plant is dissolv'd by the Liquor, which is drunk; as also, by the Lympha of the Stomachick Glands, in∣to an Alimentary Tincture. From this Efficacy of the Saliva, it ap∣pears, how much Spirituous Acid Medi∣cines conduce to the promoting the Fer∣mentation necessary for the Dissolution of Aliments in the Stomach: And we find by Experience, that Testaceous Medicines, by destroying the Natural Acid, abate the Appetite, and hinder Digestion. I have affirmed, That the Effervescence betwixt Oyl and Acid, is the cause of Fer∣mentation in Vegetables; and the same is the cause of Digestion in Animals: Which therefore is not any ways different from Fermentation; in which the Acid acts on the Oyl chiefly, and not on the whole Mass, as a Menstruum. Acids are most manifest in the Stomachs of Animals, and in their Chyle, which is Milk; and also in their Ʋrine, Sweat, and Salts; of which I will give Instances hereafter. Acid Smells are manifest upon the Artificial Fermen∣tations
of Vegetables. This Alimentary Tincture smells Sub-acid; but that is cor∣rected, by coagulating with the Choler in the Duodenum: Whence the Mass of Nourishment there, seems to be huft and coagulated; and therefore yields the thinner Part like Milk, which is strain'd into the Lacteals. Bitters and Bitter-Acrids are Stoma∣chicks, and help Digestion; because they have an Oyly Acid in them, which, by Digestion, is easily separated in the Sto∣mach: And for the same reason, Vinous Medicines are Stomachicks, helping Fer∣mentation. Chyle, in the Lacteals, has only the State of Milk; and therefore Meats are not immediately dissolv'd into perfect Oyls, and Volatile Salts, as is commonly thought, no more than when Wines are fermented, no Inflammable Spirit is produc'd, till a full Fermentation has preceded. In this Milky Chyle the Oleose Parts are kept Fluid in the Serum, by Mixture with the Acid naturally mixt with all Oyls and Fats; and the Caseous, or viscid Parts, which also naturally attend Oyls, are in∣termixt with the former, and make the Oyls Dissolution more easie in Watry Li∣quors.
The Nature of Chyle being not diffe∣rent from Milk, that is rationally us'd to supply the defect of it. This Milky Liquor runs into the Rece∣ptacle of Chyle; and there, from the Lym∣phaticks, and also the Glands of the Mesen∣tery, meets a Saltish Serum, which gives the Milk a Saltish Taste, and preserves it from Coagulation. Whence we observe the use of Salts, in attenuating Chyle, and helping its Distribution. This salt Serum, added to the Chyle, cor∣rects the Acid of the Chyle, dilutes its Thickness, and disposes it to turn into the Serum of the Blood. But this abound∣ing Acidity in the Chyle, is fully absorbed by the Salts of the Blood; and the Oyly Parts of the Blood imbibe the same; and therefore the Milk immediately turns of a clear Limpid Colour, like the Serum of the Blood. I have frequently turn'd the Serum of the Blood into a Milky Liquor, by Spirit of Nitre, which must be stirr'd after the Mixture: And I have reduc'd the same into Serum again, by Spirit of Sal-Ammoniack. From whence I conclude, That Milky Liquors have an Oyly Acid in them; and Milk is turn'd into Serum, by the Sepa∣ration of its Acid, as the fore-mention'd
Experiments sufficiently prove. And for this Reason we use Volatile Salts to help Sanguification, and Oyly Vegetables, which absorb the Acidity of Chyle. This Milky Chyle does not suddenly change its Nature into Blood, but circu∣lates with it; and is observ'd swimming on Blood, if lett out after a full Meal. Whilst it continues in this State of Milk, it produces the Lympha of the Glan∣dules; which are Conglomerate, and are design'd for the use of the Chyle: This Lympha being like Barm, which is sepa∣rated from a Fermenting Liquor; and is therefore fit to raise a new Fermentation in other Liquors. The new Chyle circulating with the Blood, has only its thin Part separated by the Salival Glands, and also the Pancreas: And this has a Milky, Sub-acid Taste. The thicker Viscid Part is separated by the Glands of the Stomach and Guts; which I have gather'd in the Guts by their Li∣gature: And this in the Guts serves for a Sliminess natural to the Guts, and is of the Nature of Mucilages; and its defect may be supply'd by them: But the de∣fect of the Conglomerate Glands, by Milk; which supplies them with a Milky Sub-
acid Lympha, which is the proper Fer∣ment for Digestion. The greatest Portion of the Oyly Part of Chyle, turns into Fat, which tastes not unlike Butter. This being full of an A∣cid, is easily separated from Milk by a long Agitation; which also happens in the Chyle of Animals, whose Butyrose Parts are separated from it by a long Circula∣tion with the Blood, and thence separa∣ted into proper Vessels. Some Part of the Oyl and Acid of the Chyle, being much cleared from the Ca∣seous Parts, (which is not separated from Fats, but gives Suet its Gumminess) is digested by long and frequent Circulati∣ons into the Red Part of the Blood; which looks Florid on the top of the Blood. From this Mixture of Oyl and Acid, the Redness is produc'd; so by the Mixture of Oyl of Turpentine, and Oyl of Vitriol, a reddish Colour is produc'd; and a clear Red, by Mixture of the same Acid with Oyl of Anniseeds: Therefore this Red Part of the Blood may be compar'd to the Resins in Vegetables, and the Sulphur in Minerals, which give the same Red Co∣lour; which is evident in Tinctures from Resins, and in Tinctures of Sulphurs. Resinous Plants and Sulphurs supply the defect of it,
and rarefy the Blood, and increase its Red Colour. The Blood appears most Florid in Scurvies and Hecticks, where the Oyl and Acid are most exalted and fermented. Wormwood and Bitter-Acrids have the same Effect on the Blood, and heat it; and many times rarefy it too much, by their Analogous Mixture of Oyl and A∣cid. From this Effervescence of Oyl and Acid, the Heat of the Blood arises; to the increasing of which, the Circulation of the Blood much conduces; for in the mix∣ture of Oyl of Turpentine and Vitriol, the Heat increased, as I stirred it with a Stick; and this Heat is more lasting, than any Effervescence made by contrary Salts. This Opinion may be confirmed by the mixture of fresh Oyl of Turpentine, and Spirit of Aqua Fortis, which will produce a Flame. We may not improbably con∣jecture, That the Ferment is of the same nature in Epidemical Fevers, which de∣pends on the Air. And all Infections may be produced by the like Combina∣tions of Oyl and Acid, which are very Volatile, and subtilly insinuate them∣selves into the Blood by the Lungs or Saliva. This Oyly Acid, or Red part of the
Blood, produces Animal Spirits, which may be fitly compared to the Effluviums of Aromatick Plants; which are small, Oyly, Acid, Acrid Particles of the Resins, or Turpentines of Plants, lighter than the Air, and therefore continually spent by Effluviums. This Opinion may be confirmed by the Vertue of Aromaticks, which refresh the Spirits; and of Narcotick Fetids, which offend them; but by both it is plain, Smells work most on the Spirits. This Oyly Acid, whilst it is less digested, has a Viscidity attending it; and then produces a Sweet-Taste in the Serum; and by a higher Digestion, a Bitterness; both which Tastes of Sweet and Bitter, are evident in Choler, with a mixture of a Glutinose Serum, which makes Choler Ropy. This being separated by the Li∣ver, acts like Fixt Salts, in correcting the Acidity of Chyle. The same is the use of Bitter Hepaticks; and some of them taste Bitter, Sweet, and Slimy. The Caseous, or thick Viscose Parts of the Chyle, by a long Circulation through the Pores of the Flesh, are drawn into Fibres; which are the immediate Nou∣rishment of the Fibrous Parts in Animals; but the Glandulous Viscera of the Body
taste Slimy, and not Fibrous; and there∣fore are nourished by the Caseous Parts, before they be digested into Fibres, and whilst it remains in the state of Viscidity. The Fibrous Sediment in the Ʋrine is from hence; and therefore is a sign of a good Digestion in the Blood. The Oyly Acid of the Blood, when it has arrived to a perfect Digestion, and is in a disposition to breed Spirits, supplies matter for the Semen in the Testes; and from hence arises the Foetor of it, when it is further digested, than was necessary for Spirits. So in Vegetables, the Seeds are Oyly, and Slimy; and the Smells of Fetid and Aromatick, differ only in degree; and both arise from Resinous mixtures. The Oyly Acid of the Blood, being far∣ther rarefied and digested, fixes on some light Earthy Parts in the Blood, and unites into a Volatile Salt. So Plants Putrefied, yield a Volatile Salt from the same kind of mixture. This production of Salt is the ultimate Resolution of Chyle and Blood. This fixing on the Acid of new Chyle, be∣comes an Ammoniack Salt, which is natu∣ral to the Blood, and preserves it from Pu∣trefaction; and supplies the Salt, observa∣ble in Sweat and Ʋrine; and therefore all mixt Salts are Diuretick and Sudorifick.
The Honourable and Learned Mr. Boyle mentions an Experiment of putting Oyl of Vitriol upon Sal Ammoniack; from whence a cold Effervescence is produced, tho' it be a violent one: The same Effects happen to the Blood, whose Salts are fix∣ed; and Coolness is produced in the whole Animal, by the use of Acids: And such a kind of Acid mixing with the Salts of the Blood, may cause irregular Chilness in Fevers, and the Scurvy. This Ammoniack Salt always swims in the Serum, and gives a Salt-Taste to the Blood, and to the Lymphatick Liquor; which tastes Salt, and will inspissate by the Fire; by which it differs from the Liquor of the Conglomerate Glands, which is Milky, Sub-acid, and not naturally Salt; but it is Salt in Catarrhs, because the Lymphatick Juyce is stopped in its proper Vessels: It is forced upon the Conglome∣rate Glands, and the Salt Serum is evacu∣ated by them, which irritates so much in Catarrhs; for the Cure of which, the Se∣rum of the Blood must be restored to its Circulation, thro' the Lymphaticks, (from the habit of the Body) by Cephalick and Arthritick Medicines; the quantity of it evacuated, and the thickness which stops its Circulation, diluted; or the Coagulati∣ons
dissolved by Salts, which are natural to it. From the great Use of this Ammo∣niack Salt in Animals, I think an Artificial Ammoniack Salt, made of Volatile Salt, and Spirit of Salt, a very useful Diuretick, Diaphoretick and Digestive Medicine, help∣ing Sanguification. Note, All Volatile and Fixt Salts are made Ammoniack, by the Stomach's Acid. Of the Ʋse of the Spleen. Malpighius has describ'd the Glandules of the Spleen; and thence inferred, That some Liquor is separated by them, which is immediately remixt with the Blood, and carried to the Liver, to help the se∣paration of Choler. The Choler is like the Turpentines in Ve∣getables, very Bitter, from an Oyly Acid digested into a particular Texture. And there is also a Gumminess or Sliminess in Turpentine and Choler. The Bitterness of Choler is from the Oyly Acid of the Blood; but the Ropy Slime of Choler comes from the Glandules of the Spleen: Tho' some part of its Slime is separated by the Glandules of the Vesica Bilaria, and Porus; yet it is impossible, that those few Glands could furnish the Slime observed
in Choler; which is more than the Bitter Part, very considerably. The Glandules of the Pancreas were too many, to have their situation in the Guts; for by that thickness of the Glandulous Coats, their motion would have been hindered; there∣fore the Pancreas was placed near to the Guts, to supply that quantity of Lympha, which was necessary for the Chyle: And such is the Use of the Spleen, which sup∣plies the Liver with a sufficient quantity of Ropy Slime; which inviscates the Bitterness of Choler, and disposes it for Percolation through the Liver. Volatile Oyls may be mixt with Watry Liquors, by means of the Sliminess in the Yolk of an Egg; and by means of its Gumminess, Turpentine is dissolved in Water; and in Vegetable Seeds, the Oyl and Slime are generally joyned; the Oyl without it being indissolvible in Water. There being so great a Congruity betwixt the Slime and Oyliness of Vegetables, it is very probable, that the slimy Juyce of the Spleen mixes readily with the Oyly Acid of Choler; and therefore it was ne∣cessary, that the Succus Glandulosus of the Spleen, should be immediately remixt with the Blood, for to associate with the Oyliness of Choler.
If we consider the Use of the rest of the Branches of the Coeliack Artery, the like Juyces are carry'd through the rest, to be separated in their proper Glandules: That Branch which goes to the Omentum, carries the Oyly Fat of the Animal; which Oyl has a sort of Gumminess mixt with it: That Branch which goes to the Sto∣mach, carries a Slimy Lympha thither; and the other carry the same to the Pan∣creas, and Guts, and Glandules of the Me∣sentery: Therefore, that Branch which goes to the Liver and Spleen, carries some analogous Slimy Liquor: That to the Liver, carries a Sliminess sufficient to pre∣serve the Coats of the Gall-Bladder and Porus from the Acrimony of Choler. But these are not sufficient, without the sup∣ply of the Slimy Liquor of the Spleen, to give so great a quantity of Slime, as is evident in Choler; at least, three Parts of it are Slime. This Sliminess is not only necessary for the Separation of Choler, but also for the Preservation of it in the Vesica Fel∣lea; for the Slime tempers the Acrimo∣ny of the Bitter in Choler, which would irritate the Membranes of the Bladder, and cause its Expulsion; as it does in the Guts, when it comes in great quantity thither.
This Sliminess causes Choler to descend leisurely, and by parts, into the Guts, that it may be the better mixt with the Chyle descending out of the Stomach. In the Guts, this Ropiness of Choler collects the grosser Parts of the Chyle, as the White of an Egg clarifies Decoctions: And by this means the Acid Tincture of our Food coagulates Choler, with the thicker Parts of the Alimentary Mass, in∣to a Consistence; which grows more thick, as the thinner Part goes into the Lacteals. If we consider, that this Slime is easi∣ly thickned by Acids, we may thence believe, that an Obstruction may happen in the Glandules of the Spleen, as well as in the other Glandules in Hypochondriack Distempers; in which Acids abound in the Blood, and, by coagulating this Slime, produce those Obstructions observ'd in the Spleen, by a Pulsation on that Side of the Hypochondrium. If the Separation of this Slime be hindred in the Spleen, it is carry'd into the other Arteries, neigh∣bouring to it, and is strain'd by the Glan∣dules into the Stomach. Whence a great Appetite is observ'd in Dogs, that have their Spleens cut out; and also in Splene∣tick Persons. And by this Sliminess, the
Stomach is loaded with Phlegm, and the Guts with Slime; and the Pancreas and Liver suffer with the Spleen; and also all the Glands of the Mesentery. And from the slimy Phlegm in the Stomach, the Natu∣ral Ferment is perverted, and Ructus conti∣nually rais'd; and the whole Digestion is vi∣tiated. From whence, and the Obstructi∣ons, all the Hypochondriacal Symptoms are deducible. The Medicines which cure Spleen-Di∣stempers, are Absorbers of the Acids, which produce them; and Openers of Obstru∣ctions, as Bitter-Acrids, and Aromatick-Acrids, &c. A Volatile Salt is not produc'd in A∣nimals by any of the Viscera, neither is an Acid; for the Acid comes from our Chyle, and the Volatile is made by a long Fermentation: Upon a due Mixture of both, an Healthy State of our Blood de∣pends; when the Volatile Salt abounds, hot Scurvies and Hecticks are produc'd; but from the abundance of Acid, a cold Scurvy, and the Distempers of the Spleen. All Authors call the Humor prepar'd by the Spleen, Tartareous; and Galen plain∣ly says, Melancholy is an Acid Humor. Others call the Splenetick Humor, a Fer∣ment
for the Blood. But we may more rationally argue, from the Structure of it, that a Glandulous Humour is separated, which serves for the Separation of the Choler; and such is necessarily Glutinous and Viscid: And this is manifest in the Choler it self. But I cannot find, that the Spleen tastes Acid, as Authors affirm; but rather Slimy; and has the Savor of Blood mixt with its Slime. The Acidity is ra∣ther suppos'd, than manifest to any Sense. The use of the Spleen, in the Sense I have explain'd it, suits with the Opinion of Aristotle; who calls the Spleen, : And is not much disagreeing from that of Galen's; who says, The Spleen cleanses the Limose thick Melancholy Hu∣mor; and he affirms, That it came from the Liver to the Spleen: But I have gi∣ven it its Natural Course. To all which I must add, That the same Distempers af∣fect both Liver and Spleen alike; both are obstructed, and the same Medicines are us'd for both, viz. Openers of Ob∣structions. This Slimy Humor, separated by the Spleen, being the true Melancholy Humor, I must declare, That Melanogogues must be also Phlegmagogues; because this Hu∣mor is separated with the Choler by the
Liver: And therefore Bitter-Slimy must be the Composition of the Tastes of Me∣lanogogues. So Senna is bitterish and slimy; and so is Agaric, Aloes, Colocynthis, and the Hellebores. Besides which Tastes, there is a moderate Degree of Acrimony, for a suitable Irritation in the purging of the Melancholick Humor; which is a Com∣position of Choler and Phlegm, thickned too much by an Acid. And therefore a Purging Medicine, which is Bitter-Slimy and Acrid, is proper and peculiar for the purging of Melancholy, and altering of it; and by the Acrimony, which is a Vo∣latile Salt. CHAP. II. Of the Analogy betwixt Ani∣mals and Minerals. ANIMAL Humors return to the State of Minerals immediately, without passing through the Na∣ture of Vegetables. The Tartar, or Acid of Animals, unites into a Stone in the Kidneys and Bladder;
and the Salt of the Blood shoots into San∣diness, which lodges in the Kidneys; tho' some Salts shoot into Chalky Earths, in the Lymphaticks of Gouty Persons. Of this Nature are the Scales on the Teeth of Scorbutick Persons; Bones, Nails, and Horns are not far from the Nature of Stones: For the Ligaments of Ani∣mals are often found petrify'd; and there is scarce any Part of the Body, in which Stones have not been found. The Nitrum Calcarium is the Princi∣ple of Petrification in Minerals, Tartar in Vegetables, and the Ammoniack Salt in A∣nimals: This has a great Congruity with the Nature of Nitre, which requires Ani∣mal Parts for its Generation, and some Crepitus smells like Gun-Powder, and burns like it. A natural Sal-Ammoniack is bred a∣mongst Minerals, like that in the Blood and Ʋrine of Animals. Hence the Cal∣culus Humanus yields a Volatile Salt in Di∣stillation. The Shells of Oysters have Lime-stone in them, and yield a Salt, by Calcinati∣on, like it: They are also more heavy than Animal Stones; and yield nothing of an Animal Substance, but an abundance of Water, and a little Salt.
Therefore these are undenyable Instan∣ces of Animal Humors returning into the Nature of Minerals. So that Dr. Lyster's Assertion, That Calculus Humanus is a Metallum, is not unreasonable; which he proves by the likeness to the Colour of the Ochre of the Pyrites and Lime-Stone; but especially, by the following of the Load-Stone. The Stony Particles may be supply'd from Stony Parts taken in with the Water we drink: But it is necessa∣ry, that a Salt be coagulate with it, to give it the Nature of a Nitrum Calcarium, which may shoot into Plates; and those compose the several Coats in Stones. The Sulphur of Animals is not unlike the Sulphur of Minerals. Hence Putrify'd Flesh has a Foetor, equalling that of Brim∣stone, especially that of Ʋrine and Blood; which yield those curious Noctilucas, which differ nothing from Sulphur, by their Smell and Burning. A Nidorose Ru∣ctus resembles the Foetor produc'd by the Sulphur of Iron, in its Dissolution by an Acid: And Steel, prepared with Vola∣tile Salts, has the Smell of Marigolds, Saf∣fron, and consequently, the Menses. An Epileptical Person complained to me of an Aluminous Taste in the Spittle, after every Fit.
I have been often sensible of a Vitrio∣lick sweet Taste in my Mouth, by the spitting of Blood from the Head and Gums; which made me think I had tasted Vi∣triolum Martis, or some Steel-Medicine: And by that Taste I perceiv'd the return of that Scorbutick Spitting of Blood. I cannot understand whence this Sweet Taste proceeds, unless from an Acid cor∣roding the Teeth. I have observ'd divers Hysterical Wo∣men, who have vomited an Acid, which would corrode Metals, and set their Teeth on edge, like Vitriol. I have mention'd a Volatile Salt distill'd from Coals; and a Fetid Oyl, like that of Harts-Horn. The Earth of Animals will indure Fire, beyond Minerals; and therefore Cupels are made of burnt Bones: And Becherus mentions the Vitrifying of Animals, as well as Minerals. I shall mention but one thing more, from which the Congruity of Principles is suppos'd; which is, That many Mi∣neral Stones have the Figures of Animals in them; and some resemble Bones, and the Brain, and other Parts of the Body: Which argues the Similitude of Nature,
as the Salts of Plants resemble the Figure of the Plants, from whence they are pro∣duc'd; and the Salts of Vipers shoot in∣to like Figures; and the Salts of Harts-Horn into Figures like Horns. The Spirits of Animals I have compa∣red to the Smells of Vegetables; and if they rise from the Oyly, Acid, Florid Part of the Blood, which I have compar'd to Resins, because the red Part does not dis∣solve in the Serum; it must be acknow∣ledg'd, that the Spirits of Animals are Inflammable, like Sulphur: From whence arise the Flashings before Fits of Convulsions, the Sparkles appearing in the Eyes, and the Flashings observable in Plethorick Bo∣dies, upon the pulling off their Stockings and Cloaths. Nitre and Sulphur are the Cause of all the Explosions, Fires, and Earthquakes a∣mongst Minerals; and such is the Mix∣ture of the Spirits in Animals: From whence strange and great Motions are produc'd.
CHAP. III. The Tastes and Odors of particular Animal Me∣dicines. NAtural Salt of Animals: The na∣tural Sal Ammo∣niacum A∣nimalium. Salt in the Blood and Ʋrine, is a mixt Salt of Volatile and Acid, like common Sal-Ammoniack; the same mixt Salt is in an imperfect state, in the Dung of Animals; from which (exposed to the Air) Nitre is bred, by ad∣dition of a Sulphureous Aerial Acid: And from this Salt, Blood, Ʋrine and Dungs have their Vertue and Saltness. If the Sulphureous Acid of the Air, did by In∣spiration of the Air, mix with the Blood, (as Authors affirm) the Salt of the Blood would be purely Nitrose; which is not apparent to the Taste. Ʋrine smells strongly Lixivious; and by the addition of Calx viva, easily in distillation yields a Volatile Salt; the Acid thereby being loosed from the Volatile Salt, as well as by Fermentation; in which the Acids of
Ʋrine fix upon the Earthy Parts, and give liberty to the Volatile Salt. The higher any Animal Humors are fermented, the stronger is the Salt; as in Salt of Vipers Flesh, Blood, Ʋrine, Choler, and of all Fetid Animals. The Volatile Salts of Insects are most penetrant, and their Bodies smell strongly Fetid. The Oyl of Animals Chymically Prepared, is very Fetid and Anti-hysterick. Ʋrinous Spirits, and Oyls of Animals, are external∣ly good Discussers in Scrophulous Tumors, and allay Arthritick Pains. Chymical Volatile Salts of Animals: Sal Volatile Animalium When Spirit of Hartshorn is distilled, it wants many Rectifications to clear it from that Acid, which is naturally mixt with Animal Humours. Our Dyet being of Fruits, Herbs, Liquors, Bread, and Milk, they all afford a great quantity of Acid; (the Animal Acid being the same which is in Vegetables); from whence they re∣ceive their Sulphur Acid. All Stomachs of Animals being opened, smell something of Acid: In an Acid Ructus it is more evi∣dent, and also in Acid Ʋrine and Rheums, and also in Sub-acid Spittle; yet we can meet with no Humour naturally and pure∣ly Acid in Animals; the most purely Ani∣mal
Acid appears in Butter-milk; which is therefore very cooling in Fevers. The Oyly Part of the Chyle in Animals mixes with the Acid, and obscures it, as in Milk. And the Volatile Salts in the Blood absorb the Acid, as appears by the Fixedness of the Salt in Ʋrine and Blood, being Salso-acid. All Volatile Salts, as well as Fixt, retain some Acid, from whence they have their Salt Taste. They are also easily uni∣ted with Oyls, as is manifest in the Oyls of Vegetables and Animals; none of which are free from a Salt, and some Acidity adhering to the Oyl. In a production of a Fixt Salt by Fire, the crude Acid of a Plant joyns with some Vitrious Earth, and unites into a Salt. So in the production of a Volatile Salt, the Oyly Acid of the Plant carries with it some Earth, and unites into a Vo∣latile Ʋrinous Salt. Sulphurs and Oyls being of themselves naturally Volatile, piercing, and Sub-acid, want only an Earthy Part to give them a Salt Taste. Such a mixture is made in the producti∣on of a Volatile Salt, from Antimony, Ni∣tre, Tartar, and Flints; and in the Soot of Woods, which yields a great Acid Fume, by which it is offensive to the Eyes: And
a Volatile Salt is produced by that Acid and Vegetable Oyl; and some light Earthy Parts mixt with them. A Volatile Salt may be distilled from Oyl of Turpentine, by addition of the Salt of Tartar. Vola∣tile Salts are either produced by a vio∣lent Fire, by which a mixture of Oyly Acid is made with Earth, or else they are produced by Putrefaction: So from Blood and Ʋrine Putrefyed, a greater quantity of Volatile Salt and Oyl may be drawn, than can be by a violent Fire, without Putrefaction. A Volatile Ʋrinous Salt may be distilled from Vegetables Putrefied; as Mint, Worm∣wood, Scurvy-Grass, &c. And these Vegeta∣ble Ʋrinous Salts are much of the same nature, and differ as Animal Salts do, by their Fetid Oyl. Milk: It is Sweetish in Taste, and is Lac. that Chyle, out of which the Serum of the Blood is immediately made: It consists of much Water to dilute the Blood, and to supply the defect of the Lympha in Hectical and Scorbutick Persons; and also of much Oyly Butter, which lubricates all passages, and supplies Fat for the Ani∣mal; and also of Caseous Fibers, which are the immediate nourishment of the Solid Parts.
Asses Milk is the thinnest, Goats is the next, Cows has the most Butter and Case∣ous Parts: Womens is most agreeable to our Nature, having had a like Digestion, and past a Circulation with the Blood, most like to our Natures. Cheese smells like Sweat, tastes Clam∣my Caseus. and Gummy, if new; but the very old has an Acrid, Bitterish, Biting Taste; for which it has been used in Medicine, for the Topha in the Gout: by the Clam∣miness it is Conglutinative. Mouldy Cheese tastes like Moss. Rotten Cheese is Fryable, and full of Insects; of a Livid Colour, offensive Smell, and quick Pungent Taste. Old Cheese distilled with quick Lime, yields a Volatile Salt. Butter has the nature of Oyl or Fat, Butyrum Mollifying and Anodyne; good in the Stone, and for expectoration by the Oyli∣ness. Fat of Animals is of the nature of Adeps Ani∣malis & Pinguedo. Oyl, mollifying and easily melted. Adeps is more like Wax or Gums, more difficult∣ly melted. Medulla is like Pinguedo in Vertue. The Fats or Greases of the most
Fetid Animals, viz. Adeps Ʋrsi, Taxi, Cati, Vulpis, Hominis, Canis, Viperae, as also that of the Males, and that which has been longest kept, is most mollifying, and discussing by the Foetor. Sperma Ceti: It has an Oyly Fat Taste, Sperma Ceti. and is used in Bruises and Pectoral Diseases, outwardly and inwardly, as Oyl, lenifying and making slippery; but because it has a greater Digestion by being a part of an Animal, it discusses more than common Oyl. And it may have some Vertue from the Preparation, with a Lixivium. It does not seem to be the Brain of any Animal: It is best given with Oyl of Sweet Almonds and Sugar. Vipers-Flesh smells Fetid; and I have, Caro Ani∣malium. upon the opening of the body of a Snake, observed it to stink intollerably; which Foetor depends on an higher degree of Fermentation in that Animal. Vipers Wine cures the Leprosie, but causes Thirst. The Broth of Animal Flesh contains a Mucilaginous Juyce, which was not per∣fectly assimliated to the Animal: It is very nourishing, and easily digested; but by the latent Oyly Volatile Salt, it is too high a nourishment for Persons in Fevers.
That Flesh is most easily digested, which is least Fibrous and Tough; as is the Flesh of Young and Fat Creatures. We ordinarily eat Mustard with Beef, to help Digestion; for by the Vinegar and Volatile Salt of Mustard-seed, a mixt Salt is produced, which helps Digestion and Fermentation. The Slimy Parts of Animals are very hardly digested, and are crude, like Mu∣cilages in Plants. But Dr. Lyster gives a remarkable Instance of Glue, dissolved and putrefied, which thereby grew thin, and lost its Viscidity. So that Slimes are digested by Fermentation; and all other Flesh after the same manner. The Liver of an Eele is commended Viscera A∣nimalium. in difficulty of Labour, and is given in Powder. In the Liver there are a great many Bile-Vessels; from whence the Li∣vers taste Bitterish, and smell Fetid. From the Bile therefore, it has this Vertue, as all other Livers, given for Fits of Convulsi∣ons. And Mad-Doggs Liver, is given a∣gainst Madness. Each of the Viscera contains something of the Humors they separate. So the Lungs have a Pituitose Slime; the Brain, the Pancreas, and most of the Glandules, the same. The Stones
have a Foetor from the Semen; which are therefore used in Powder, in hard Labours and as Anti-hystericks. The Spleen has a Sliminess from the Lien. Juyce, separated by it: So that the same Vertue is to be given to each of the Vi∣scera, as to the Humors separated by them; which Humors, being in an Heal∣thy state, may help the separations in each particular Viscera. So all the Me∣dicines which taste like Choler, are pro∣perly called Hepaticks. And all other Medicines resembling the Taste of other Humors, are Splenetick, Diuretick, &c. respecting the separation of that Humor. The inward Skins of the Gizzards of Pid∣geons, &c. have the Taste of the Gall; be∣ing Bitter, Sweet, Sub-acrid, Fetid and Slimy: They are good Diureticks, Sto∣machicks and Hepaticks. All Salts tasting like Ʋrine, are Diu∣retick; and the Kidneys have a Foetor from the Ʋrine, and may be Diuretick. The Lungs of Animals yield, in distilla∣tion, Pulmo Ag∣ninus, &c. a Slimy Water for Hecticks, with some smatch of a Volatile Salt; a Slimy Lympha being separated by the Glandules of it.
Mucilaginous Parts of Animals: The Partes Ani∣malium Mucilagi∣nosae. Decoction of Horns, Bones, and Cartilagi∣nous Parts, as the Feet of Animals, is Mu∣cilaginous, and Emollient in Baths and Clysters; and, by boiling high, becomes a Gelly. Snails have a Slime, which runs into a Syrup with Sugar; if they be boil∣ed in Milk, they give a cold Slimy Nou∣rishment for Hecticks; but the Slime is destroyed by distillation, and becomes of∣fensive and hurtful. Snails will conglu∣tinate a Wound, and discuss Tumors, and stick fast to the Skin. Fresh Earth-Worms have a Sliminess in them, good for Consumptive Persons, if boyl'd in Water-Gruel. The White of an Egg is Slimy, and tempers Sharp Hu∣mors; and outwardly cools Inflammations of the Eyes. I distilled a Volatile Ʋrinous Salt from it. Froggs-Spawn is Slimy, cools inwardly and outwardly. The Yelk of an Egg is Oyly, and yields an Oyl fryed and distilled. Turpentine, and Volatile Oyls mixt with it, will easily dissolve in Water. Icthyocolla is very conglutinative out∣wardly, in Ruptures and Wounds. Blood dryed to Powder is very gluti∣native, and stops Bleeding, and heals
Wounds; therefore warm Pidgeons Blood is put into the Eyes. A distilled Water is made out of Swines-Blood, for to cool and dilute the Hectical Blood. Blood, by its Salt, cleanses the Hands and Face. The Spirit of Blood is good for Convulsion-Fits; for which also, Blood taken fresh into a warm Dish, out of the Arm, to the quantity of four ounces, and immediately drank, is used to cure the Fits, by its Salt, and a new Digestion. The Bones of Carps, Perches, the Jaw Partes Ani∣malium Osseae. of a Jack, the Tooth of a Boar, the Hooffs of an Elke, Horse, Ass, &c. Man's Bones and Skull, Bulls-Pisle, &c. The Vertues of these Medicines depend on the Earthy Part, which absorbs Acids, and on a Vola∣tile; whereby they are Fetid and Anti∣hysterick; all the Parts of Animals yield∣ing a Volatile Salt and Oyl in distillation. Toads, Earth-Worms, and Wood-Lice Insecta. dryed, have a strong Foetor, by which they are Medicinal. All Infects yield a Volatile Salt by distillation; excepting Ants, which yield an Acid, which is Di∣uretick and Venereal; but this Acid Spirit may be turned into an Ʋrinous, by addi∣tion of Calx viva.
Kermes are Bitterish, and of a great Kermes. Fragrancy; and therefore Cordial. Out of these Insects, Confectio Alkermes is made. Gall mixt with Hot-Water, smells Odor Ani∣malium. Sweet and Fragrant, like Musk; which Smell is observable in a Piggs-Eye, roasted. Every Animal has a particular Scent; which Smell is communicated to Oyl, by the boyling of the Flesh in it; or otherwise is perceived in the distillation of the fresh Flesh, in a close Still; or may be drawn from the Dungs of Animals. A Cow, Veal, or Sheep, have a mode∣rate and Milky Smell. A Fox, Horse, Catt, Dogg, or Fitchet, have a very Fetid offensive Smell. A Martin killed, smells Musky; and a Kings-Fisher is also said to smell so. Salt-Fish has a strong offen∣sive Smell. Shell-Fish and Salmon have a different Smell, resembling the Semen; and therefore may be a Venereal Diet. Ducks, Geese, Swans, and divers other Wild-Fowl, have a Moorish Smell and Taste, and are crude and less wholsome Diet. All Fetid Animals have an offensive Flesh: and by the Smell and Taste, Animals are chose for Diet, or left to Medicine. The Taste of the Flesh of Mutton, Veal, &c. is Fresh, Stringy, Watry; the Taste
of the Enterals, is more Soft and Slimy and have an unpleasant Smell. Each par∣ticular sort of Animal, has a particular Scent agreeable to the Food, and the De∣gree of the Digestion of it; and from the particular Odor, a particular Vertue may be inferr'd: But because all these diffe∣rent Scents depend on an Animal Vola∣tile Oyl and Salt, they differ but in De∣gree the one from the other: Fetid Ani∣mals being accounted Medicinal; but the moderate Smells shew what Animals are fit for Food. Choler is Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid, Excremen∣ta Animali∣um. and very Nauseous to the Stomach: It is us'd for an Opthalmick Cleanser; and so is the distill'd Water of it. The Bile of Biras is more Acrid, and less Viscid, than that of Quadrupedes. The Bile of a Bull opens the Piles. The Bile of a Puppy is given inwardly for Convulsion-Fits. Tincture of dry'd Bile, with Spirit of Wine, is us'd for Noise in the Ears. The Wax of the Ears is like Choler. The stronger Foetor any A∣nimal has, the stronger is the Bile. Ʋrine is of a Salt Taste, and quick Lixivious Odor: The Salt of it is like Sal-Ammoniack; and therefore Ʋrine is
Diuretick, good to wash Scald Heads, Pu∣trid Ears, and Oedematous Leggs; and in∣wardly is us'd in Pains of the Stomach, Colick, and Stone, in Putridness of the Gums, and Acidity of the Saliva. Dungs of Animals have an Acid, from the Meat Fermented in the Stomach; and a Bitterness, from the Bile coagulate by it; and also an Oyliness or Foetor, from the Volatile Oleose▪ Salt of the Aliment o∣pened by a Fermentation: Therefore Dungs differ according to the differences of Meat, and the different Digestions of Animals. To which I must add, That Sea-Salt is mixt with the Dungs and Ʋrine of those Animals, who eat Salt-Meats. Dungs cleanse by their Choler; and by their Foetor are discussing: By the Relicks of the Meat, (which is the Substance of the Dung, and) which has undergon a Digestion, and also by the Stomachick Lym∣pha, which promoted the Fermentation, and remains mixt with the Dung, they may rectifie the Ferment of our Stomachs. Horse-Dung is us'd in Pains and Stitches, infus'd in Beer, or distill'd in Milk, with Antiscorbutick Herbs. Album Graecum is Gritty and Fetid: By the Foetor it discusses; and is a good dry∣ing
Medicine in maligne Ʋlcers; and par∣ticularly in Dysenteries, it is given in Milk: By the Grit and Unctuousness it corrects the sharp Humors. Outwardly it is us'd to the Throat, as a Fetid Discu∣tient in the Quinsie. Asses-Dung is an a Astringent in He∣morrhages. Goats-Dung is very Fetid and Discussing. Cows-Dung is moderately Discussing, and Anodyne in the Gout. Sheeps-Dung is accounted good in the Jaundice; for which the White Dung of Hens is us'd. Pidgeons-Dung is us'd in hot Plasters. The Stercora of the Carnivorous are most Fetid. Civet is of a strong Odor; whereby it Zibethum. is outwardly Discussing: A little of it is Sweet-scented; but Fetid in a great quan∣tity; and the more Fetid, the more pure it is. Musk is of a burnt sweet Odor; where∣by Moschus. it acts on the Animal Spirits, in giving them a quick Motion: And therefore is Cordial, and good in the Hickcough, to three Grains in Pills. Musk has a Bit∣terish Taste.
Castor is Acrid-Bitterish in Taste Castore∣um. and of a strong Fetid Scent in Powder, Tincture, and Spirit: It is Hystereck by the strong Smell, giving a different Agi∣tation to the Spirits, from that irregular Motion in Fits; and abounds with a Vo∣latile Salt, and Fetid Oyl. Rennet: I took a piece of the Calves Coagulum Vitulinum. Stomach, which was dry'd and salted; this being washed, was laid in fair Water all Night: By this Water I coagulated Milk. I could not find any Acid in this Rennet, by tasting of it; but only a Sli∣miness. One Spoonful of it would coa∣gulate more Milk, than so much Vine∣gar could. I put some Spirit of Sal Am∣moniack into it, which gave no Efferve∣scence, nor Precipitation: But, notwith∣standing, thirty Drops of it, in a little quantity of the Rennet, curdled Milk. The only Argument of any Acidity in the Rennet, was, That it soon dissolved Filings of Steel, and, in a few Hours, gave a Tincture with Galls. This Acid in the Rennet adheres to the common Salt; and is thereby made less sensible to us: For the Rennet is a little Saltish, from the common Salt with which the Bag is salted. And the Lympha of
the Stomach is naturally Sub-acid, though not much observ'd by our Tastes, because it will fix Quick-silver. Such is the Acid of Rennet; in the making of which, the curdled Milk is thrown away, and only that Part of the Stomach us'd, which is next the Guts; which is lined well with the thick Coat of Glandules. The other Parts of the Calves Maw dried and salted, will not so well curdle Milk: This Rennet I distill'd; but could not find, that the Liquor which came o∣ver, would coagulate Milk. Rennet would not coagulate Gall, or the Serum of the Blood: But Milk is coa∣gulated by Sack, and strong Ale; in which is no apparent Acid, though it be coa∣gulated by it. I cut a piece of a fresh Calves Maw, on∣ly washed clean from Milk, and not salt∣ed; this was boyl'd a little in a small quantity of Milk, which I set by at least 12. Hours: but this fresh Maw did not at all coagulate the Milk. Therefore I thought the common Reason, which supposes the Coagulation of Rennet, to depend on the coagulated Milk, from whence it may have some Sowreness, must be wholly re∣jected; because the fresh Bag has the greatest Tincture of Acid from the Milk,
and yet will not coagulate Milk. And because the Acid-Lympha is most plenti∣ful, and strong in the fresh Maw, and yet that will not coagulate Milk. I therefore doubted of my own Opinion I have men∣tion'd; and rather believe, that the Coa∣gulative Vertue in Rennet, depends part∣ly on the Salt; whose Acid may be loose∣ned, and in part separated by a kind of half Putrefaction by the Maw: The Pu∣tredinous Smell of the Rennet-Beg, and the Nauseous Taste of the Rennet, (from whence Cheese has that offensive Smell and Taste) are some Proof of the Putre∣faction. We observe, that some Acid may be separated from common Salt, when Quick-silver is sublimed from it; and more evidently by Distillation of Spirit of Salt, which coagulates Milk like Ren∣net. What the Fire produces suddenly, may by Digestion or Putrefaction, be attained: So Volatile Salts of Plants are produc'd by a violent Fire; and the same is also produc'd naturally in Plants, by their par∣ticular Digestions and Fermentations, which are tendencies to Putrefaction. Out of Astringents, the Fire immedi∣ately separates an Acid; and the same happens, when the Astringent Juyce in
the Roots of Sorrel, are better digested in the Leaves; in which is an evident A∣cerbity or Acid: But this Acidity is not sufficient to curdle Milk, but is only one Part of a Ferment; which, as I have de∣scribed it in the Discourse about Fermen∣tation, ought to contain an Oyl, and an Acid: This Acid is from common Salt; but the Oyly Part, from the Putrefy'd Membranes of the Calves Stomach, which smells offensively, and gives a strong Taste to Cheese. Rennet therefore acts not like an Acid, by coagulating the Milk; but like a Ferment, in disposing Milk to a Fermentation; by which Milk, which is long kept, coagulates: For, upon the ad∣ding of Rennet to Milk, it is not imme∣diately curdled, which is the Effect of an Acid; but after some time standing; and often the Milk is warmed, to hasten the Fermentation. From this Fermentation Cheese receives from Rennet, it is thought to help Digestion, as all things once fer∣mented, do. The Foetor of Cheese is an Argument, that the Milk was fermented out of which it is made. The End of the Fourth Part.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. The Fifth Part. Specificks Classed, As they are distinguisht by their TASTES, and by the HUMORS, which they correct. The PREFACE. I Thought it very useful, for my own Practice, to reduce Plants into Spe∣cifick Classes, and distinguish them by their Taste and Smell; for by them I can best judge, which Medicine is most suitable to the Nature and Taste of
the Humor producing the Disease, and also to the Constitution of the Patient. By these Classes I can readily find the Me∣dicines of such a particular Taste, suitable to my Intention; and in the same Tables I have set no Medicine, which Experience has not long approv'd of, as Specifick for the Disease. I will only give one Instance, for the better illustrating the Design of these Tables: I want an opening Hepa∣tick in a cold Constitution; in the Table of Hepaticks, I find the Bitter-Acrids to be the most suitable Taste for that pur∣pose, both as Bitter and Acrid. I find also, under that Taste, ranked Celandine and Turmerick, with others of that Taste; which Experience has approv'd of, in the Disease I here mention'd. I might give as many Instances, as there are Classes and Tastes; but I will only ob∣serve, That, by this Method, the Patient may judge, whether proper Medicines are prescribed; and the Physician may, by these Tastes of his Medicines, give a good and sensible Account of the Vertue of his Medicines, and the Effects to be produ∣ced by them. I have set down, first, the Class of A∣cids, and mixt Acids, and the Class of A∣cid Absorbents, as generally mention'd in
every Class: I have set down those Me∣dicines, which evacuate the Cause of the Disease: And after that, the Classes of Hot and Cold Alterers, and those that help some Symptom: Outward Medicines are mention'd last. I find many Purgers to have three Tastes; but because ma∣ny of them are brought dry to us, they are not so sensible to the Taste. In Dia∣gridium, Jalap, and Cambogia, the Acrid Taste is most obscure; and therefore, I judge of them by Analogy to the rest that are Resinous, as Turbith: And if I had these Purgers fresh in the Plant, I could easily demonstrate those Tastes which give them their Purgative Vertue; which I conclude to be Acrid joyn'd to Gum, Resin, or Gummy Mucilage in Cam∣bogia. I find many Plants to have above two or three Tastes; but I seldome mention more than two, because they contain the chief Vertues, and other Tastes are very weak; and if more should be mentioned, the Classes would be too many to be use∣ful. I have referred some of the Dispen∣satory Compositions to particular Classes, as well as they can be done; but the In∣gredients are so many, and so contrary, in some Compositions, as to give no cer∣tain
Taste to the whole Mass; which makes their Vertues less known, and what is to be ascribed unto them. But by this method of Tasting, all Composi∣tions will be best examined and amended. I will, upon this occasion, give this ad∣vice, to imitate Natures Composition of Tastes, in Simple Medicines. First, To Compound those Tastes she does, and no other. Secondly, Not to Compound above three or four Tastes: For when we find so many naturally Compounded, they produce a Nauseous Purging Medicine. Thirdly, If possible to use Simples, ac∣cording to that true assertion, Dolus est uti Compositis, ubi Simplicia sufficiunt. But if Composition be necessary, let us Compound but two or three Tastes: So that the whole may have some certain sensible Taste, which is necessary for cu∣ring the Disease. I cannot but reflect on the humor of jumbling many Tastes together, and often changing of Medicines, as the oc∣casion of unsuccessful Practice; for by that means no certain Quality, or Taste of Medicine is used, to conquer the con∣trary Nature and Tastes of Humors, which have a particular preternatural state in
Diseases: And a contrary Quality and Specifick Taste in the Medicine, is requi∣red to alter and reduce them to a natu∣ral Temper; or else a Medicine of the same Taste as the Humor, is necessary to perform the Office of that Humor, and to help its separation; which sort of Medi∣cines I have called Friendly Specificks: and the Alterers I call, Common Specificks. Vid. Part I. of Specificks. The Physician is to choose a suitable Taste to the Constitution of his Patient, as well as to the Nature of the Disease, to continue it a due time, and to give it in a full Dose; which I conceive to be Rati∣onal Practice: For whosoever knows not the Taste of the Humors in Mans Body, nor understands the prevailing Taste of his Medicine, cannot deserve the name of a Judicious Practitioner; and generally has no Success in his business. I do believe, the Observation of the differences of Taste, and the Contrarieties of one to the other, will give a great Im∣provement to the Practice of Physick, and the knowledge of the preternatural state in Diseases. For Instance, If Acids abound, Bitters are necessary to correct them; and if Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks cure Cephalick Distempers, then the Pec∣cant
Quality of the Succus Nervosus, is in∣clining to an Acid, and to Stagnation; both which, the Taste mentioned corrects. And it ought to be observed, how Hu∣mors in the Body are mixt in some com∣plicate Distempers, and therefore require mixt Medicines; in which, both Tastes seem equal; as Bitter-Astringents in Fe∣vers. Most Authors, under the name of one Specifick, have Classed Medicines of very different Natures; which I have here en∣deavoured to distinguish by their several Tastes: And that the Use of each parti∣cular Taste, in the altering of the Humors, may be observed, I have mentioned, in the following Classes, the Peccant Quality of the Humor, as requiring such a contra∣ry Taste. I will now give a Class of all the Tastes I have observed in the Materia Medica. The Ingenious Dr. Grew, in his Anatomy of Plants, hath computed all the possible Varieties of Tastes in Plants, a∣mounting to 1800. But I thought it not necessary to make some nice distincti∣ons he has taken notice of; and there∣fore, under the name of Acrid, I have comprehended Hot, Biting, Pungent, Pe∣netrant, being they all depend on a Vola∣tile Salt, more or less Oleose; and each
particular Acrid is distinguished by its Composition with other Tastes. These following Tastes are all the Va∣rieties I have observed in these Tables; tho' I have mentioned more, as appears in the last Part of this Essay. The Catalogue of Tastes. First, Dry Earthy Tastes are, 1. IN Woods, Husks of Fruit, and their Stones. 2. In Common and Precious Stones. 3. In Animals; as, Horns, Bones, Hoofs. 4. In Minerals; as, Iron, Lead, Gold, Silver. Secondly, Watrish Tastes. 1. Crude-Watry. 2. Watry Mucilages. 3. Mealy Mucilages, or Clammy Gum∣my Mucilages. 4. Earthy Mucilages.
Thidly, Acid Tastes, And Astringents, which depend on an Acid mixt with Earth. 1. Acid-Watry, or pure Sowre Tastes. 2. Acid-Bitter. 3. Acid-Acrid. 4. Sweet Spirituous Acid. 5. Acid-Astringent, or Acerbe. 6. Earthy Astringents, or Rough Tastes. 7. Styptick, Bitterish, or Austere. 8. Styptick, Sweet. 9. Styptick, Aromatick, or Bitterish. Fourthly, Bitter Tastes. 1. Watry-Bitters. 2. Bitter-Sweet. 3. Strong-Bitters, with an Aromatick Smell. 4. Bitter-Acrids, with a Dead-Nettle Smell. 5. Bitter-Acrids, without any consi∣derable Smell. 6. Laurel, or Bitters Astringent. 7. Elder-Bitters, or Bitter-Slimy. 8. Terebinthinate Bitter-Astringents. And these are either purely Terebin∣thinate, or else Fetid or Aroma∣tick Terebinthinates.
9. Bitterish-Slimy-Astringents, with a Dead-Nettle Smell. Fifthly, Aromatick Tastes. 1. Bitterish-Acrid. 2. Sweet-Acrid. And some of both these are extreamly Acrid. Sixthly, Fetid Odors, joyn'd with divers Tastes, and are contrary to Aromaticks. 1. Bitter- Fetid. 2. Acrid- 3. Bitter-Acrid- 4. Mucilaginous Fetids, or Narcoticks. Seventhly, Acrid Tastes. 1. The Cress Tastes. 2. Acrids, with a rank Smell and Taste. 3. Exulcerators are, 1. Watry. 2. Oyly, Milky, Gummy, Resinous. 3. Corrosive Fetids; which are Ve∣nenate; as Napellus, Aconitum.
Eighthly, Sweet Tastes are, 1. Pea-Tastes; which are, 1. Sweet Pea-Taste, Slimy. 2. Bitterish Pea-Taste, Slimy. 3. Rough Pea-Taste. 4. The Acrid, Bitter, Slimy Pea-Tastes. 2. Watry Crude Sweet Tastes. 3. Sweet Acrids. 4. Sweet Oyly. 5. Sweet, Sub-acid Slimy. 6. Sweet Mucilaginous. Ninthly, Nauseous Tastes of Purgers. 1. Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, Astringent. 2. Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid. 3. Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Slimy, or Strong, Bitter, Slimy, Acrid. 4. Fiery, Gummose, or Resinous Acrids. 5. Extream Bitters Slimy, with Cau∣stick Acrimony. Tenthly, Saline Tastes. 1. Vitriolick, Sweet, Styptick. 2. Aluminous, Sub-acid, Rough.
3. Nitrose, Cool, Bitterish, Pungent, and Saltish. 4. Salso-acid, or Muriatick. 5. Sulphureous Acid. 6. Sweet, Sub-acid, Spirituous, Spiritus Salis Dulcis. 7. Pungent Salt, with a quick Ʋrinous Smell. 8. Pungent Salt, with a weak Lixivi∣ous Smell. 9. Salt, Acrid, Hot, Aromatick, or Oyly Volatile Salts. Eleventhly, Unctuous Tastes, as Fats and Oyls; which are either, 1. Crude Slimy Oyls. 2. Rank Bitterish 3. Penetrant Acrid Chymical
The Names of Specifick Classes, and the Expli∣cation of their Names by the Humors that are to be corrected. §. I. Internal Medicines. EVacuators of the Morbifick Humors,  are, First, Purgers; which are either, 1. Of Choler, or Cholagogues. 2. Of thin Serum, or Lympha from the Blood; Hydragogues. 3. Of Pituitose Serum, from the Glan∣dules of the Guts and Pancreas; Phlegmagogues. Or, 4. Melanogogues; which are the gen∣tle sort of Phlegmagogues, purging Choler; in which is contained a slimy Humor, separated by the Spleen: And therefore all Mela∣nogogues have a bitter slimy Taste, like Choler, and the ropy Splene∣tick Humor.
Secondly, Vomitories; which are gen∣tle, moderate, or vehement; and evacu∣ate from the Stomach the same Humors. Thirdly, Diureticks evacuate by Ʋ∣rine. Fourthly, Diaphoreticks evacuate by Sweat. Fifthly, Emmenagogues drive out the Menses, or Birth. Sixthly, Vesicatories evacuate from the Glandules of the Skin, by Blistering. Seventhly, Sternutatories evacuate from the Nose, by Sneezing. Eighthly, Salivatories or Masticatories evacuate by Spitting. Hot or Cold Alterers, First, Of Choler; and these are call'd Hepaticks. Secondly, Of the ropy Glandulous Juyce of the Spleen; which are Spleneticks. Thirdly, Of the salt Serum, or Lympha of the Blood; which are Arthriticks. Fourthly, Of the whole Mass of Blood; and these respect Sanguification, and the Circulation of it; as Antiscorbuticks. Fifthly, Of the Chyle; and these respect its Fermentation and Distribution; and are call'd Stomachicks.
Sixthly, Of the Succus Nervosus; and they also respect its Motion: These are Cephalicks, Hystericks, and Nervines. Seventhly, Of the Motion of the Blood and Spirits; and these are Cordials. Eighthly, Preservers of the mixture of the Blood, and Expellers of Poyson; and these are Alexipharmacks. Ninthly, Expectorators and Correcters of the Lympha flowing from the Glandules in the Lungs; and these are Thoracicks. Tenthly, Venereals respect the Semen, and its defect, or too great Evacuation; which are Anti-venereals. Eleventhly, Ophthalmicks respect the Humors of the Eye. Twelfthly, Breeders of Milk respect the Glandules of the Breast, and Nourishment of the Woman. Thirteenthly, Anthelminticks are Medi∣cines against the Worms. Fourteenthly, Narcoticks produce Sleep, and allay Pain.
§. II. External Medicines. First, ANodynes, to allay Pains. Secondly, Emollients, to soften, mollifie, and suppurate Tumors. Thirdly, Resolvents, to discuss Tumors. Fourthly, Repellents, which drive back Humors, and cool the Heat. Fifthly, Vulneraries in Ʋlcers; which are, 1. Digestives, to ripen Matter. 2. Cleansers, to deterge it. 3. Sarcoticks, to help the breeding of Flesh. 4. Epuloticks, to skin the Ʋlcer. Sixthly, Vulneraries in Wounds; as, 1. Conglutinatives. 2. Stoppers of Bleeding. Seventhly, Cathaereticks, or Eaters of proud Flesh. Eighthly, Psylothra; which are Takers-off of the Hair. Ninthly, Cosmeticks; which are Clean∣sers of the Face and Skin. Tenthly, Of Poyson'd Wounds; and of Animal, Mineral, and Vegetable Poysons.
The First CLASS. Of Specifick Laxatives, and Purgers, and their Correctors. §. I. Of Laxatives, without any con∣siderable Stimulus. DIluters, which moisten much: Aqua Communis. Serum Lactis. Lac Ebutyratum. Decoctum Hordei. Mucilaginous Laxatives, or Emollients,  making the Guts and Meat Slimy: Malva. Mercurialis. Atriplex. Beta.
Brassica. Spinachia. Lactuca. Violae folia. Oyly Laxatives: Butyrum. Oleum Commune, Amygdalarum dul∣cium. Nuces recentes Oleosae. Laxatives Sub-acid, Sweet, and Slimy: Pruna. Poma recentia dulcia & syrupus. Pyra dulcia. Cerasa. Passulae. Ʋvae dulces. Tamarindi. Baccae Sambuci & Syrupus Mororum, Fragorum. Vina dulcia. Laxatives, very Sweet and Mucilaginous. Radices Glycyrrhizae, Polypodii, Graminis. Manna, Mel, Cassia, Saccharum, Cere∣visia recens.
Compound Lenient Purgers: Diaprunum Simplex. Diacassia cum Mannâ. Abstersive Purgers, which gently sti∣mulate,  and correct the Acid or Acrid Choler in the Primae viae. 1. The Terebinthinates, which are Bitter, Gummy, and Acrid; by which they Stimulate a little, and keep the Body Laxative. Terebinthinae omnes. Balsamus Peruvianus, Lucatellae. 2. Gummose, Bitter, Fetid Acrids, Sti∣mulate, like Turpentine. Sagapenum, Bdellium, Ammoniacum. 3. Nitrose, Sulphureous, Aluminous Waters purge very well, and they taste Bit∣terish and Brackish. Aquae fontanae Sulphureae. Sulphur vivum. Flores Sulphuris are a little Purging.
4. Fixt Salts are Laxative, by their Stimulating Acrimony, and by their Ef∣fervescence with Acids in the Stomach. 5. Acids are Laxative, which are mixt with Earths. Tartarus & Cremor. Sal gem. Sal commune & aquae salsae, Alu∣men, Nitrum. 6. Acids mixt with Salts, are Laxative. Tartarus vitriolatus. Sal Ammoniacum. Polychrestum. Ol. Tartari per deli∣quium Nitratum. 7. Acids mixt with Minerals Stimulate. Lapis Lazuli. Lapis Armenus. Vitriolum Martis. Nitrum Antimoniatum. The Medicines in this, and the former Class, make little Evacuation without an addition of other Purgers.
§. II. Of Purgers. GEntle Purgers, which are accoun∣ted Cholagogues, do not only irri∣tate, and carry the Mass of Nou∣rishment out of the Guts; but have a stronger Irritation, causing more violent Peristaltick Motions; and the Vesica Bi∣laria is thereby Evacuated. The Purgers have a Nauseous Bitterness in them, like Choler, which goes into the Veins, and separates the Choler through the Liver, as other Bitter-Acrids do; whence they act both as Alterers, and also irritate the Intestines to Purge. Cholagogues are Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid,  and Astringent; which stops the Purgative Faculty for acting too violently. Radices lapathi acuti, Rhabarbari Anglicani, Lapathi Communis. Rhad. Rhei, which loses the Acrid by boyling; and, it is said, That fresh Rhubarb flies quick into the Nose. Cortex Berberum tastes Bitter, Slimy, Pungent, and Styptick.
Myrobalanae Citrinae are Bitterish, Slimy, and Styptick. Rad. Polypodii are Sweet, and Styptick; The Leaves have a Bitterness; and Fernes have a Latent Acrimony, discernible in the Roots of some of them. Rosae Damascenae are Bitter, Slimy, and a little Acrid-Astringent. Flores Persicorum are Bitter, Slimy, A∣stringent, and Sub-acrid. The Nauseousness of Cholagogues is best corrected by Acids and Aromaticks. Compound Cholagogues. All the Laxatives and Abstersives be∣fore-mentioned, Syrupus Rhabarbari, Rosarum, florum Persicorum. The Melanogogues seem to be the gen∣tle  Hydragogues: By the Bitter, they Eva∣cuate Choler; by the Slimy Sub-acrid, the pituitous Serum. They are Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Slimy, as Sena, Sem. Cartha∣mi, Decoctum Senae. The Phlegmagogues are stronger Bitters,  Mucilaginous, and have a greater Acrid;
the Bitter makes them Cholagogues also: The great Acrid and Mucilage more a∣gree with Phlegm, Stimulate more, and mix better with it. Bitter, Sweet, Slimy, Sub-acrid. Aloes: It has a Resin, and also a Mucilage, Purging by both. Agaricus has a Resin. Hydragogues: A little Acrimony irritates  the Choler-Bladder, for expulsion of it; a greater Acrimony irritates the Intestinal Glands, for Purging of Phlegm: But the greatest Purging Acrimony irritates not only the expulsion of Choler, and Pitu∣itous Serum, but also a thin Serum out of the Blood; for that Acrimony not only Stimulates the Intestines, but gets into the Blood: It swims readily in the Serum, to the Glandules of the Intestines, where the Irritation is. The moderate Hydragogues are either, First, Resinous, or, Secondly, Bitter, Slimy, Acrid, Nauseous. First, The Resinous have no Bitterness, but a latent Oyly Acrid Salt, coagulate into
a Resin by an Acrid; which being taken off in the Stomach, the Acrimony appears. This Acrimony is evident in Turbith, which burns as the Tithymals do; and this yields a Resin, like Jalap. Jalap tastes Clammy in the Teeth, the Resin of it smells Sub-acid; which Acidi∣ty fixes the Acrimony. Jalap flies into the Nose, when pounded, and causes Sneezing; and when it is fresh, it tastes very Acrid, though it be Insipid with us. And we cannot but conceive all Inflamma∣ble Resins to be of very hot Parts; con∣taining a Rarefied Oyl, very Inflammable, and a Volatile Salt, from whence the Pungency comes; and an Acid, which does abate the Volatility of both, and causes it to purge downwards. The Acrimony of Jalap is also Diuretick, when it is given for a Purge. Jalap is not a Bryony, be∣cause not Bitter, and Bryony has no Resin. Scammony has a Resin like Jalap, which smells Sub-acid, and has no Taste with us; but when fresh, it runs Milky out of the Root, (as Dioscorides describes it) and becomes Milky in Water, as both Jalap and Scammony-Resin, dissolved and Precipitated, do; and therefore I refer them both to a Tithymaline-Acrimony, Stimulating by their burning Heat; for
Agarick has a manifest Pungency, and yields a Resin. Turbith-Roots burn in the Mouth, like Spurge, and yield a Resin, and are Milky. All the Tithymals and Esula's Purge by an Acrimony, like an Acrid Resin, be∣ing Milky. Mechoacan is Gummy and Clammy in the Teeth, like Jalap; and Resinous, and Milky in the Stalk. Hermodactyls: The Roots taste Mealy, like some Mucilages, and of a little Heat. Many of these Plants purge strongly, though they have little Heat sensible to us. A great deal of the Tithymaline Fieriness being spent in the keeping them so long dry; and that which remains, appears not till the Stomach has taken off the Acidity from the Acrid and Oyl, which compose the Resin, and is the chief Pur∣ging Stimulus; tho' the Mucilage help the Nauseousness, by keeping the Purging Acrimony fixt to the Nervous Membranes, a good while. Cambogia is more Gummy than Re∣sinous; the Acrimony may be argued from the Colouring Parts. The Gum∣miness conceals it from the Tongue; it, not being tasted fresh, cannot be so easi∣ly discerned. Bontius says, It has the
Leaves of Wood Tithymal; and pro∣bably, when fresh, is of a burning Taste, in which the Purgative Faculty consists. Cambogia and Scammony have little Fixt Salt. Secondly, The Bitter, Slimy, Acrid, very Nauseous. The First Degree. Polygala is Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, and of a Sweet Fragrant Smell. Viola Martia is Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid, and of a Fragrant Smell. Iris fresh, is Bitter, Slimy, very Acrid, and purges strongly. The Second sort are strong Bitters, very Slimy, and Sub-acrid; as, Cortex Sambuci. Radix Ebuli. Syrupus de spina Cervina. Cortex ejusdem. Cortex & Baccae Alni Nigrae. Baccae Euonymi Theophrastri. Cortex Juglandis & Fructus.
The Third sort, are extream Bitters, Slimy, and very Acrid. Colocynthis yield a Resin, and are all very Bitter, Acrid, and Slimy. Gratiola Elaterium Soldanella Tabacus, Dulcamara, are very Bit∣ter, Acrid and Fetid. Bryonia & Baccae, Helleborus Albus & Niger, Helleboraster Convolvulus is Slimy, Bitter, and Acrid, like Bryony, and seems a Species of it; the former are all of the same kind and Taste, differing in degrees of Acrimony, Bitter∣ness and Sliminess, and so differ in Pur∣ging. I have more particularly set down the Tastes of Purgers; because they have hitherto been supposed to act Occultly, and not by manifest Qualities; of which I have given Instances in all Purgers. Caustick Purgers are Cataputia, Meze∣reon, Esula, Ficus, Ricinus, Euphorbium. Mineral Purgers are Vitriols, Pil. Lunares, Lapis Lazuli, &c. or Sulphureous Acids, as Antimonium, Sulphur vivum; Aquae Sul∣phureae Purgantes.
§. III. Correctors of Purgers. ACids which correct fiery Acrid Salts,  and too strong Bitters: Cremor Tartari. Tartarus Vitriolatus. Succus Limonum. Acetum. Succus Citri. Phlegma & Spiritus Vitrioli, Salis. Succus Cydoniorum. Spiritus Sulphuris. Fumus Sulph. accensi. Oleose, which dissolve the Resins, hin∣der  their Adhesion to the Guts, and tem∣per their Acrimony: Balsamum Peruvianum. Vitellus Ovi. Balsamum Gileadense. Ol. Amygdalarum. Mucilages to correct Acrimony, and to  defend the Membranes from it: Sem. Psyllii, Mastiche. Emulsiones, Amygdalae dulces. Gum Tragacanth.
Cassia, Diaprunum. Conserva Violarum. Pulp. Passularum. Electuarium Lenitivum. Aromaticks, which correct Bitters and  Mucilages, and make them less Nauseous, and expell Wind: Ol. Cinnam. Caryophylli. Zinziber. Galanga. Coriandrum. Ol. Anisi, Carui, Faeniculi, Juniperi, Nuc. Moschat. Semen Anisi, Carui. Spiritus Vini. Astringents, which hinder too strong  Evacuations: Santala. Rosa Rubra. Myrobalani. Cinnamomum.
Fixt Salts, which take away the Nau∣seousness  of the Mucilage, and hinder Re∣sins from sticking to the Stomach, by uni∣ting with their Acid, and making them more fluid. Not only an Acrimony, but a clammy sticking Mucilage, makes Pur∣ges to gripe much; as it happens in Sen∣na, &c. Sal Tartari, Absinthii. The Second CLASS. Of Sternutatories. STernutatories evacuate Rheum from the Nose and Glandules; and are, First, Acrid Purgers: Rad. Hellebori albi, nigri, Turpethi, Jalapii. Fol. Tabaci, Asarae-Baccae. Agarici Pulvis. Secondly, Bitterish Acrids, Aromaticks, and Cephalicks: Rad. Primulae Veris, Iridis, Impera∣toriae, Pyrethri, Zinziberis.
Fol. Mari, Syr. Majoranae, Satureiae, Musci arborei, Salviae. Sem. Cubebarum, Piperis, Sinapeos. Thirdly, Acid Vomitories: Turbith, Sal Vitrioli, Vitriolum album. Fourthly, All Causticks. Ranunculus, Tithymalus, Esula, Euphor∣bium. Caustick Vesicatories, vid. External Medicines. Diureticks, vid. Nephritioks. Diaphoreticks, vid. Infra. Emmenagogues, vid. Hystericks. The Third CLASS. Of Masticatories. MAsticatories are the same as the  Bitterish, Acrid, Cephalick Ster∣nutatories; which, by a pungent Acrimony, stimulate the Glandules of the Mouth to send forth the Saliva.
Fetid Acrids, which have the same Ef∣fect;  Tabaco. Gummy Resins, which stick to the Teeth,  and cause a great Motion of the Teeth and Tongue, whereby the Saliva is eva∣cuated; Mastiche. To these may be referr'd Salivatory Evacuations, by the use of Mercury, pre∣par'd inwardly, or outwardly in Unguent. Mercury joyns with the Salts of the Blood, and coagulates the Serum; and so produces Salivatión. The Fourth CLASS. Of Vomitories. VOmitories differ nothing from Pur∣gers, but in the Degree of Acri∣mony: They stimulate so soon as they be in the Stomach; and therefore irritate the upper Orifice of the Stomach: And for the same Reason, too great a dose of a Purge works upwards, and a gentler Vomitory works both ways.
Vomitories are either, Gentle; which produce Nauseousness,  and evacuate only the Contents of the Sto∣mach; As, 1. Oleose: Ol. Olivarum, Amygdalarum dulcium, Juscula pinguia, Butyrum. 2. Mucilaginous Flowers and Herbs Sub-acrid: Flores Genistae. Fol. Atriplicis. 3. Cress-Acrids, Sweet-Bitterish: Rad. Raphani, & Semen. 4. Strong Bitters, and slimy smoaky: Fol. Cardui, Bardanae. 5. Bitterish, Acrid, Slimy, Sub-Aro∣matick: Rad. Eupatorii, Cannabini. Fol. & Rad. Erigeri. Fol. Theae. 6. Nauseous Watry: Aqua Tepida & Sulphurea.
7. Nauseous Sweets: Mel & ex illo praeparata. Moderate Vomitories; which evacuate  not only the Contents, but the Pituitose Lympha from the Glandules of the Sto∣mach; As, 1. Bitter, Acrid, Mucilaginous, Fetid: Rad. Scillae, Vinum Scilliticum. Rad. Narcissi, Digitalis, Baccae Poly∣gonati, Sambucae Aquaticae. 2. Gentle, Mineral, Acid Vomitories: Sal Vitrioli, Gilla Theophrasti. Strong Vegetable Vomits; which, besides  the Contents, and Pituitose Lympha of the Glandules, evacuate Choler, and the Pan∣creatick Juice from the Duodenum. 1. The Strong, Bitter, Acrid, Slimy: Rad. Bryonii, Hellebori albi. Fol. Tabaci, Cortex Juglandis. 2. Acrid Terebinthinates: Rad. Asari, Valerianae; which, be∣sides the Aromatick, Terebinthi∣nate Taste, have a strong Faetor, like Hellebor a little.
3. Tithymaline-Acrids, Resinous, Gum∣my: Cambogia, Laureola. 4. Caustick-Acrids, Watry: Sedum Minus. The Strong Mineral Vomits have the  same Evacuation as the Vegetable. 1. Sulphureous Acid Antimonials: Mercurius vitae, Crocus Metallorum. 2. Mercurials fixt by an Acid, and turn∣ed into a Vitriol: Turbith, Mercurius Sublimatus. Because Acids, Saline, and Alkalizate Tastes are in all the following Classes ve∣ry much us'd, I have prefixt these sepa∣rate Classes of them.
The Fifth CLASS. Of Acids. SOwre cool Acids, and some Acerbs;  there being no pure Acids without Acerbity. Rad. Bellidis minoris. Fol. Acetosae, Acetosellae, Bellidis, Ber∣berum. Succi Limonum, Citriorum, Aurantio∣rum, Granatorum, Ribium, Cera∣sorum, Prunorum acidorum. Ace∣tum, Succus Mali agrestis fermen∣tatus, Poma Acida, Pyra, Prunellae. Succus Acetosae, Bellidis, Ʋvarum immaturarum. Conservae Acetosellae, Berberum, Pulpa Tamarindorum, Mivae fructuum Aci∣dorum, & Baccarum Oxyacanthae. Syrupi Limonum, Aurantiorum, Aceti, Acetosellae, Acetositatis Citri. Spiritus Salis, Nitri, Vitrioli. Ol. Sulphuris per Campanam.
Mixt Acids. And these are, First, Sweet Spirituous Vinous Acids; which agree better with the Stomach, than Sowre Acids. All Acids taste Sowre, and the most Crude is the Acerb; which, as well as the former, by Fermentation become Spi∣rituous. Acids are more Sharp, than the Sowre; but differ not much in Effects. Baccae Sambuci, Mororum, Rubi Idei, Fragorum, Succus Pomorum dulci∣um, Mivae & Syrupi praedict. Bacca∣rum. Conserva Cynosbati. Vinum Pomaceum, Vin. Rhenanum, Al∣bum. Vina Ribium, Cerasorum, Mororum, Grossularum, &c. Spiritus Salis Dulcis. Nitri Vitrioli Elixir Vitrioli, which is Acid and Aromatick. Spiritus Aceti. Secondly, Acids mixt with Earth; as, 1. Sowre gritty Tastes: Cremor Tartari, Tartarus Albus.
Crystalli Acetosellae, Syrupus Coralli∣orum. 2. Rough Tastes, Sub-acid: But where the Acidity prevails above the Roughness, they are to be referr'd to Sowre Tastes: Fructus immaturi, Rob Prunorum Syl∣vestrium & Syrupus, Acacia, Mespila, Sorba, Cotonea Mala, Alumen, &c. Thirdly, Salso-Acids, which are made by compounding contrary Salts; which compound Salts mix, without any Effer∣vescence, with the Acid or Alkalizate Hu∣mors in an Animal: Tartarus Vitriolatus, Tartarus Nitra∣tus, Spiritus Salis refractus cum Sa∣le Tartari, Sal Ammoniacus Natu∣ralis & Factitius; which are produced by a mixture of Spi∣rit of Salt, and Volatile Salt. Ʋrina, which has the same Salt. Nitrum, which is compounded of a Sulphureous Acid, and an Alkali. Fourthly, Salso-Acids Natural; which are a Composition of Acids, and Stony Particles: Sal Marinus, Sal Gemmae, Muria, A∣qua Calcis.
Fifthly, Chalybeate, Sweet, Sub-acid Sty∣pticks: Vitriolum Martis, Sal Chalybis, Cha∣lybs cum Tartaro praeparatus, Flo∣res Salis Ammoniaci & Tinctura, Aquae Chalybiatae; which consists of much Sulphur; by which a Vitriol is made out of Iron, and that but an imperfect one. Sixthly, Acids compounded with Sul∣phur: Ens primum Sulphuris, Clyssus Anti∣monii, Aquae Sulphureae Font. Flo. Sulphuris, Sulphur vivum. The Sixth CLASS. Of Acid-Absorbers. MEdicines of a Terrene or Grit∣ty Taste, absorbing Acids, and Volatile and Fixt Salts, contra∣ry to Acids, are,
First, Animal Earths or Grits: Oculi Cancrorum & Chelae, Putamina Ovorum, Calculi Animalium, Ʋngu∣lae, Cornua & Priapi, Dens Apri, Mandibulus Lucii Piscis, Os Per∣carum, & Carpionum. Secondly, Animal Flesh powder'd, or their Dungs: Caro Viperarum, Stercora Gallinae, O∣vis, Canis, Capri, &c. Thirdly, Animal Ashes: Testae Ovorum, Ossa combusta, Spodi∣um, Cornu Cervi ustum, Cancri Flu∣viatiles combusti, Cornix aliaeque Aves combustae. These Animal Parts, being burnt, have fit Pores for Acids to enter into: And it is not improbable, that Animal Earths have Parts more apt to coagulate with Animal Acids, (of which they have been depriv'd by the Fire) than any other Alkalies have. Fourthly, Insects, and some Bitter, A∣crid, Animal Parts:
Lumbrici, Cantharides, Apes, Cochi∣nella, Castoreum, Millepedes, Tuni∣cae interior. Ventriculi Gallinarum & Columbarum, Bilis Perdicum, Catuli, Gallinae, &c. Fifthly, Volatile Chymical Salts of Ani∣mals, having a quick Urinous Smell, and a Salt pungent Taste: Sal & Spiritus Cranii Humani, Ʋ∣rinae, Sanguinis, Viperarum, Mil∣lepedum, Lumbricorum, Picarum, Hirundinum: Spir. Salis Ammoni∣aci, Tartari Volatilis: Spir. Bilis: Sal Volatile Ʋrinosum, Cochlea∣riae, Absinthii, Menthae, Glasti, &c. Sixthly, Volatile Oyly Compound Salts; which are either of an Aromatick Taste and Smell, or else impregnate with some Foetor: Sal Volatile Oleosum Sylvii. Spir. Salis Ammoniaci Succinatus, vel cum Gummi Ammoniaco. Seventhly, Fixt Salts, saltish, pungent; as, 1. Lixivial Salts, which are mild: Sal Genistae, Juniperi, Absinthii, &c.
2. Strong and Cleansing Lixivial Salts: Sal Brassicae, Fraxini, Fabarum, Fi∣licis. 3. Acrid, Burning Lixivial Salts: Sal Tithymali, Fici. Eighthly, Fixt Salts made out of a Sto∣ny Matter, and Sulphureous Acid: Aqua Calcis, Lixivium Silicum ignit. Lixivium Testarum Ostrearum com∣bust. Ninthly, Stony or Chalky Earths, and petrify'd Vegetables: Creta, Lapides pretiosi, Testae Ostrea∣rum, Perlae, Corallium, Ossa Dacty∣lorum, Cerasorum, &c. It is observable, that the Stones of Fruits yield an Acid Spirit, like Woods. Tenthly, Mineral Earths, and Minerals themselves: Chalybs, Ferrum, Fol. Auri, Tinctura, Crocus, Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Bezoardicum Minerale, Mercurius vivus & dulcis, Cimabaris Nati∣va,
Bolus Armena, Lapis Haema∣titis, &c. The Minerals and Earths, by their Grit and Earthy Sulphur, imbibe Acids, and produce an imperfect Vitriol in the Sto∣mach, by joyning their Mineral Parts to the Animal Acid. The Seventh CLASS. Of Stomachicks. §. 1. Hot Stomachicks, WHich correct the Acidity of the  Ferment, or Lympha of the Sto∣mach, and so volatilize it; and thereby help the Fermentation and Disso∣lution of the Meat and Chyle. 1. Acrids, vid. Spleneticks. 2. The Saline Taste, Volatile. Fixt.
3. The Terreous or Gritty Stony, Vegetable, Animal, or Mineral-Chaly∣beates, &c. 4. Aromaticks, Sweet-Bitterish-Ol. Cinnamomi & Ca∣ryophyllorum. Acrid. Which deterge the Pituitose Lympha,  sticking to the Coats of the Stomach: 1. Bitters-Vomitory. 2. Purging Bitters. 3. Strong Bitters. Tunicae Ventriculi Gallinae. Which strengthen the Fibres of the Sto∣mach  inwardly: 1. Aromatick Astringents. 2. The Sweet Stypticks and Chaly∣beates. 3. The Bitterish Stypticks. 4. Nervine, or Bitterish, Acrid A∣romaticks.
Which strengthen the Stomach exter∣nally: 1. The Sweet Aromaticks. 2. Aromatick Astringents. 3. The Nervine Bitterish Aromaticks. 4. Terebinthinate Aromaticks. §. II. Cool Stomachicks, WHich cool and dilute the too Acrid  and Bilious Ferment of the Stomach, and temper the Blood, from whence it a∣rises: 1. The Watry Mucilages, and Ear∣thy Mucilages. 2. The Terreous Gritty, which shoot and combine with Acrid Salts, and give them a new Figure. Which cleanse away Choler, and sharp  Salts, by the Liver and Stool; as Dock-Bitters, or Cholagogues. Which cleanse away sharp Salts from  the Blood by Ʋrine; as Watry Bitters. Which coagulate and fix the Choler and
Blood; and thereby abate the Ebullition of it, and correct the putrid Ferment of the Stomach. 1. Acids. 2. Acerbs, and other Watry or Crude Astringents. Spirituous Acids, which supply the De∣fect  of the Spirituous Acid Ferment of the Stomach; as Wines, Vinegars, and Sweet Fruits, which are Sub-acid; and there∣fore the Friendly Specificks for the Sto∣mach. Vid. Sweet, Spirituous, Vinous A∣cids. But slimy Sweets, which are Ole∣ose, abate the Appetite, and destroy the Fermentation; as also too much Watry and Astringent Medicines do; for these Tastes are not easily fermented; but the Sweet Sub-acid are soon fermented, and so are the Vinous. Salso-Acids help the Fermentation of  the Stomach, and are moderate Stoma∣chicks.
Tables of Hot Stomachicks. TAB. I. Of Strong Bitters. SOme whereof are Bitter-Slimy, o∣thers Bitter-Astringent, or Laurel-Bitters. Rad. Gentianae. Fol. Centaurii, Cardui, Trifolii Fibrini, Verbenae. Cortex Fraxini, Ceras. Nigr. Populi Li∣bycae, Guaiaci, Cort. Peruvianus. Fructus, Amygdalae amarae, Nuclei Per∣sicorum. Decoctum & Vinum cum Rad. Gentianae. Fol. Centaurii, Cardui, Trifolii Fibri∣ni, Verbenae, additis Aromatis. Aqua Gentianae composit. Extracta Gentianae, Centaurii, Cardui, Tri∣folii Fibrini. Phlegmagoga, Decoctum amarum, Pil. Ruf∣fi, Stomach. cum Gummi, Mastichinae. Species Hierae Picrae & Tinctura, Elixir Proprietatis Tartarisat. Gummi, Myrrha, Ammoniacum.
Animalium Partes amarae, Hepata & Tu∣nicae interiores ventriculorum Gallinae & Columbarum, Bilis Piscium & Vo∣lucrum. Vomitoria amara, Vinum Scilliticum, De∣coctum Cardui, Bardanae. Note, That the Tables of other Tastes, mention'd as Stomachicks, may be found in the following Tables, amongst other Specificks. I have only placed here Strong Bitters, and Aromatick Astringents; which are most properly esteem'd Hot Stomachicks. TAB. II. Of Aromatick Astringents. RAd. Caryophyllatae, Filipendulae, Pimpinellae, Ʋlmariae, Calami Aromatici. Fol. Agrimoniae, Schoenanthi, Pimpinellae, Filipendulae, Ʋlmariae, Myrti, Menthae. Cort. & Fol. Aurantiorum, Limonum, Ci∣treorum, Excrescentia Spongiosa Cy∣nosbati. Flores Rosarum rubrarum. Ligna, Agallochum, Santala. Conserv. Rosarum rubrarum, Menthae; Spe∣cies, Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diacorallion,
Diamargarit. frigid. Diatrion Santalon, Aromaticum rosatum. Syrupi Myrtillorum, Rosarum siccarum, Cydoniorum. Spiritus Menthae, Vinum Rubrum. Confectio de Hyacintho. Aquae Rosarum, Menthae, Myrti. Aromatick Astringents externally us'd: Ceratum Santalinum, Emplastrum de Ma∣stiche, de Crusta Panis, Stomachicum Magistrale. Aromatick Resins and Balsams: Tacamahac, Caranna, Balsamum Peruv∣anum. Ol. Rosarum, Myrtillorum, Mastichinum, Ʋnguentum Rosaceum. TAB. III. Of Carminatives▪ WHich correct the Rarefaction of the Chyle into a Windy Spirit: Which happens, First, For want of a thorow Digestion▪ And in this Case, the Hot Stomachicks a∣foremention'd
are most useful; as Bitters, Acrids, Aromaticks, and the Absorbers of Acidities, Saline and Terreous. Secondly, Or else Flatuosities arise from too strong a Digestion, and an high Fer∣mentation of the Meat and Chyle, by a great quantity of the Spirits contain'd in them; or the exceeding Heat of the Humors of the Body: And then the Cool Stomachicks cure the Wind best; as Acids, Mucilages, Watry Bitters, Astringents, and Dock-Bit∣ters. Thirdly, If Flatuosities happen by the Inflations of the Fibrous Membranes of the Stomach, occasion'd by the tumultu∣ous Motion of the Spirits in them; then Hystericks and Opiates are most useful. Fourthly, In Hypochondriack Persons there is an Extraneous Ferment, which proceeds from the Acid Humors of the Body, and the putrid Reliques of former Digestions; which produces continual Ru∣ctus: In this Case Vomitories, Cholagogues, Phlegmagogues, Bleeding, Sudorisicks, and Chalybeate Waters are necessary: And outwardly the Bitterish, Acrid Nervines, and Sweet Aromaticks, and Astringent A∣romaticks, are accounted the best Carmi∣natives.
A TABLE of CARMINATIVES, consisting of Bitterish, or Sweet Acrid Aromaticks. RAd. Galangae, Zinziberis, Calami Aro∣matici. Sem. Cardamomi minoris, Piperis, Cube∣barum. Fol. Chamaemeli, Anethi, Foeniculi, Ca∣laminthae. Cort. Winteranus, Aurantiorum, Limonio∣rum, Cinnamomi. Flo. Sambuci, Chamaemeli, Caryophylli. Spir. Menthae, Mirabilis, Carui, Carda∣momi, Vinum Hippocraticum, Spir. Vini. Condita, Zinziber, Nux Moschata, Corti∣ces Aurantiorum, Citri, Limoniorum, Radices Eryngii condit. Lignum Sassaphras, Baccae Juniperi, Lauri. Species Diatrion Pipereon. Ol. Piperis, Carui, Foeniculi, Cinnamomi, Caryophyllorum, Nucis Moschatae, Tin∣ctura Piperis cum Spiritu Vini. Externè, Emplastrum de Baccis Lauri, Gummi foetida, & Resinae Aromaticae Terebinthinatae.
Tables of Cool Stomachicks. TAB. I. Of Watry Mucilages. RAd. Buglossi, Boraginis, Althaeae, Nymphaeae Flore albo. Fol. Malvae, Symphyti, Boraginis, Parie∣tariae, Violarum, Pulmonariae Maculo∣sae, Portulacae, Betae, Prunellae. Conserv. Flor. Malvae, Boraginis, Viola∣rum, Nymphaeae, Symphyti. Aquae Cucurbitae, Melonum, Cucumerum. Cortex Ʋlmi. Sem. Psyllii, Lini, Bombacis, Malvae, Por∣tulacae, Melonum, Cucumeris, Cydonio∣rum, Amygdalae dulces. Gum. Arabicum, Tragacanthum, Ceraso∣rum, Prunorum, Sanguis Draconis. Species Diatragacanthi frigidi, Amylum. Aquae Spermatis Ranarum, Lactis cum Limacibus, vel Sanguine Porcino, vel Pulmonibus Agninis, Aquae Albuminis ovi, Cancrorum fluviatilium. Animalia, Decoctum Ras. eboris, Cornu Cervi, Cancrorum fluviat. Limacum.
Vitelli ovorum & Albumen, Lac Asini∣num, Caprinum, Vaccinum. Aquae Vegetabilium, Flo. Malvae, Fol. Por∣tulacae, Boraginis, Emulsiones ex semi∣nibus 4. frigidis, Decoctum Hordei. Syr. Althaeae, Nymphaeae, Violarum, Por∣tulacae. Terrae mucilaginosae, Bolus Armena, Ter∣ra sigillata. Fructus dulces mucilaginosae laxantes, Passulae, Ficus, Jujubae, Cassia, Manna, Decoctum commune emolliens pro Cly∣stere. TAB. II. Of Cool Stomachicks, Watry Bitters. RAd. Cichorei, Dentis Leonis, Sonchi, Endiviae, Bardanae. Fol. Cichorei, Endiviae, Dentis Leonis, Fumariae, Genistae. Conserv. Flo. Cichorei & Radicum, sum∣mitatum Fumariae; Aqua Cichorei, Fu∣mariae. Syr. Fumariae. Cichorei, & succi eorundem. Sem. Bardanae, Cardui Benedicti, Deco∣ctum sennae, & Syrupus de pomis.
TAB. III. Of Dock-Bitters, or Cholagogues. RAd. Rhei & Syrupus, Radix Rhabar∣bari Monachorum, Lapathi acuti, & vulgaris Folio obtuso. Cortex Berberum, Syrupus de Rosis Da∣mascenis, & floribus Persicorum. TAB. IV. Of Acid-Stomachicks. 1. ACido-dulcia Spirituosa, fructus Co∣rasorum, &c. 2. Acido-salsa, Tartarus vitriolatus, &c. 3. Acido-styptica, Aquae vitriolatae, Alu∣minosae. 4. Acido-tartarea, Cremor Tartari, A∣cetum, &c. 5. Acido-sulphurea, Nitrum, Ens primum Sulphuris. TAB. V. Of Astringents. First, Styptick, Bitterish, or Austeres: RAd. Tormentillae, Bistortae, Quinque∣folii, Acetosae, Cynosbati, Hydrola∣pathi, Orobanchi, Fragrariae, Rubi.
Fol. Summitatum Rubi, Cydoniorum, Po∣tentillae, Tormentillae, Quinquefolii, Al∣chimillae, Summitatum Ericae, Tama∣risci. Cort. Querci, Aceris, Coryli, Prunorum, Mali Cotoneae, Salicis, Betulae, Alni, Cupuli glandium, Gallae. Flo. Balaustiorum. Sem. Lapathorum, Acetosae, Iüli nucum, Alni. Secondly, Acerbs, and Crude Watry A∣stringents: Rad. Plantaginis, Gladioli. Fol. Acetosae, Lapathorum, Plantaginis, Polygoni, Equiseti, Semper-vivi, Ver∣micularis, Quercûs, Persicariae macu∣losae, Vitis. Fructus, Mespila, Sorbi, Cydonia, Ber∣beres, Ʋvae immaturae, Malus sylvestris, Pruna sylvestria, Acacia, Hypocystis. Syrup. Prunorum sylvestr. Cydoniorum, Syrupus de Agresta. Rob. Fructuum praedictorum. Externè, Alumen, Vitriolum.
The Eighth CLASS. Of Hepaticks. §. I. Hot Hepaticks, WHich open the Passages of the  Liver, and volatilize the Cho∣ler, by absorbing the fixing Acid from it; or by supplying its Defect, as the two first Tastes do: But the fol∣lowing Tastes correct the Acid chiefly: First, The Strong Bitters. Secondly, Bitter Acrids. Thirdly, Absorbing Gritts: And these are, 1. Testaceous, or Animal Gritts. 2. Stony. 3. Vegetable. 4. Mineral: Which are, First, Chalybeates. Secondly, Antimonials.
Thirdly, Mercurials. Fourthly, Cinnabarines. Fifthly, Preparations of Gold. Fourthly, Saline Tastes; as, Acid-Ab∣sorbers: which are Volatile, Mixt, or Fixt. Fifthly, Acrids. Sixthly, Aromaticks, Bitterish or Sweet. Which purge away the Choler: As, 1. Vomitory-Bitters. 2. Dock-Bitters. Which strengthen the Vessels and Glan∣dules  of the Liver: Vid. Strengtheners of the Fibres of the Stomach. Which discuss the Tumors of the Liver  externally. §. II. Cool Hepaticks. First, WAtry-Bitter. Secondly, Acids pure and mixt, Salso-Acid, and Chalybeates. Thirdly, Terreous Gritts. Fourthly, Styptick, Bitterish, and Acerbs. Fifthly, Watry-Mucilages.
Sixthly, Externals, Ceratum Santalinum. Vid. Cool Stomachicks. A Table of Strong Bitter Acrids. RAd. Curcumae, Chelidonii, Rubiae, Cap∣paris, Lupulorum, Verbenae. Fol. Chamaedryos, Salviae agrestis, Car∣diacae, Marrubii, Scordii, Ballotis: Fol. Absinthii, Tanaceti, Eupatorii, Cannabis, Matricariae, Abrotani. Sem. Fraxini, Santonici, Tanaceti. Cortex Radicum Capparum. Conservae Flo. Fraxini: Fol. Tanaceti, Absinthii. Extract. Absinthii, Marrubii, Scordii. Succus Chelidonii, Absinthii, Tanaceti, Marrubii. Species Diacurcumae, Dialaccae, Trochisci de Absinthio, de Eupatorio, de Rha∣barbaro, de Capparibus, Elixir Pro∣prietatis cum Spiritu Salis Ammoniaci. Elect. Diatessaron. Gum. Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Sagapenum. Stercora Animalium calidorum, Columbae, Gallinae, Equi, Anseris. Fel Catuli nigri, Lucii Piscis, Gallinae, Hepar anguillae pulverifat.
Purgantia acria, amara, Etract Rudii, Pil. Cochiae, de Duobus, Stomach. cum Gummi, Trochisci Alhandal. Ʋnguent è succis aperitivis. Ol. Absinthii. The Ninth CLASS. Of Spleneticks. §. 1. Hot Spleneticks, WHich take away the Acidities in the Blood and Chyle, and cor∣rect their Coagulations, and Stagnations, by an over-fixing Acid in the Blood: As, First, Earthy Gritts, Vegetable, and Sto∣ny Mineral; which are either Cinnaba∣rines, Antimonials, or Chalybeates. Secondly, Testaceous Gritts or Saline, Fixt, Volatile, or Mixt. Thirdly, Strong Bitter Stomachicks. Fourthly, Bitter-Acrids; Vid. Hepaticks. Fifthly, Aromatick-Acrids, Bitterish; Cortex Winteranus, &c.
Sixthly, Aromaticks Sweet, Acrid; Vid. Thoracicks. Seventhly, Fetid, bitterish Acrids; Vid. Hystericks. Eighthly, Acrids, or Antiscorbuticks. Ninthly, Terebinthinates; Vid. Diure∣ticks. Tenthly, Aromatick Astringents. The Strong Bitters, or Bitter Acrids help the Digestion, and preserve the Mix∣ture of the Blood, and open Obstructions of the Spleen. The Aromaticks Bitterish Acrid, and Sweet Acids, and Fetid Bitterish Acrids, respect Windiness, or the disorderly Mo∣tion of the Spirits. The Acrids are the most proper Hot Spleneticks, call'd Antiscorbuticks. §. II. Cool Spleneticks. 1. A Queous Bitters. 2. Watry Mucilaginous. 3. Acids, pure and mixt; especially Chalybeates, and Salso-Acids, and Sweet Acids. 4. The Cool, Gritty, or Terreous, or Mucilaginous Earths.
Syrupus de Erysimo, de Rapis, Cochleariâ. Infusio. Seminum sinapeos ad lb. ss. in Vin. albi lb. ii. capiat ℥. iv. bis in die. Conserv. Fol. Cochleariae, Becabungae, &c. TAB. II. Of the Garlick Acrids. RAd. Cepae, Allii, Porri, Scordii. Allium conditum, & Syrupus, & in∣fusio in Cerevisia, Spiritus Salis Am∣moniaci cum Gummi Ammoniaco. Gummi Sagapenum, Galbanum, Opoponax, Ammoniacum. Emplastrum de Cicuta cum Ammoniaco. Diachylum Magnum. TAB. III. Of the Sweet Stypticks, or the Ferns. WHich, by their rough Taste, check the irregular Fermentations in the Hypocbondria; and, by their Bitterish∣ness, and Orris-Smell, (which is manifest in Harts-Tongue-Ale) they are Pectoral and Aperitive. Rad. Osmundae, Filicis Maris, Polypodii. Fol. Ceterach, Linguae Cervinae, Rutae mu∣rariae, Capilli Veneris, Lonchitidis.
TAB. IV. Of the Pea-Tastes. WHich, by their crude Juice, check the Ebullition of the Blood, and help the Separation of Choler, and supply the De∣fects of the Spleen-Juice. Succus Viciarum, Pisa viridia, Fumaria, Aquilegia. The Purging Pea-Tastes: Senna, Collutea, Laburnum, Genista. The Tenth CLASS. Of Thoracicks. §. I. Hot Thoracicks, WHich attenuate the Lympha, stick∣ing in the Bladders of the Lungs. They correct its Acidity, and diminish the quantity by Sweat or Ʋrine. They also open the Canals of the Glands,
whereby the Lympha has a more clear Circulation through the Lymphaticks of the Lungs. First, The Acrids, vid. Spleneticks. But those that are most chiefly us'd as Pecto∣rals, are Rad. Ari, Syrupus de Erysimo, Ra∣pis, Allio, Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci cum Gummi Ammon. Secondly, Strong Bitters, of a Dead-Net∣le-Smell: Fol. Marrubii, Chamaedryos, Scorodo∣niae, Cardiacae. Thirdly, Bitter Astringents, Sub-acrid Vulneraries: Fol. Scabiosae, Decoctum Guaiaci, Fol. Tussilaginis, Veronicae, Bugulae. Fourthly, Bitter Acrids, vid. Hepaticks: Ammoniacum in aqua Hyssopi solut. Tinctura Myrrhae, &c. These open the Obstructions made by viscid Phlegm.
Fifthly, Bitterish-Acrid Aromaticks, vid. Cephalicks: Fol. Hyssopi, Pulegii, Calaminthae. Rad. Iridis, Baccae Lauri. Species Diaireos. Sixthly, Hystericks Fetid Acrid in the Convulsive Motions of the Lungs: Rad. Enulae. Tinctura Croci, Castorei, Asae-faetidae, Camphorae. Sulphuris▪ Tinctura, Flores & Sy∣rupus. Seventhly, Terebinthinates, vid. Diu∣reticks; and the Classes of Turpentine-Gums, vid. Mastiche: Olibanum. Bitumens, Succinum. Balsamick Terebinthinates, vid. Aro∣matick Gums and Resins. Syrupus Botryos. Balsamum de Tolu, Balsamum Poly∣chrestum, Syrupus Balsamicus. Resinous Purgers carrying off the greater quantity of Serum. Eighthly, The Bitterish slimy Astrin∣gents,
of a Dead-Nettle-Smell, vid. La∣mium: Hedera Terrestris, Galipsis, Betoni∣ca, Salvia, Syrupus Hederae Terre∣stris, & Succus, & Cerevisia, & Pul∣vis, & Conserva Florum Hederae Terrestris: And these are Cleansing, and also Vulne∣rary. Ninthly, Sweet Acrid Aromaticks, vid. Tabulam: Sassaphras, &c. These, by their Oyly Salt, are Diuretick, and promote the Circulation of the Lym∣pha in the Lungs. Tenthly, Diaphoreticks, especially the Woods: Decoctum Sarsae, Chinae, &c. These diminish the quantity of Serum. Eleventhly, Diureticks: Salts, Volatile and Fixt. These diminish the quantity of Serum, and restore it to a Circulation through the ob∣structed Lymphaticks.
Twelfthly, Externally, Oyly Mucilages: Ʋnguentum Pectorale, Emplastrum de Mucilaginibus, de Meliloto. §. II. Cool Thoracicks, Cooling the Blood and Lympha, and di∣luting of it, and stopping a violent Cir∣culation. First, A Queous Mucilages, vid. Cool Sto∣machicks: Pulmonaria maculosa, &c. Secondly, Aqueous Bitters, vid. Stoma∣chicks. Thirdly, Terreous, Testaceous, and Mu∣cilaginous Earths: Terra Japonica, &c. Fourthly, Bitterish Stypticks. Fifthly, The Pea-Tastes, Sweet and Rough: Glycyrhiza, &c. Sixthly, Sweet Stypticks, or Ferns: Capill. Veneris.
Seventhly, Spirituous Acids, or Sulphu∣reous Acids: Spiritus Salis & Nitri dulcis, Clyssus Antimonii, Ens primum Sulphuris. Eighthly, Oleous Tastes: Ol. Lini, Amygdalarum-dulcium, Oliva∣rum, Butyrum recens, Sperma Ceti. Ninthly, Sweet Tastes: Rad. Liquiritiae, Graminis, Fol. Bel∣lidis majaris & Flores. Pulpae mucilaginosae dulces, Dactylo∣rum, Passularum, Ficuum, Jujubarum, Prunorum dulcium, Succus Glycyrhi∣zae, Syrupus Jujubarum, Liquiriciae, Decoctum Pectorale, Ʋsquebach, Lo∣hoc Sanum, Rotulae Pectorales, Cho∣calata. Saccharum Candum, Mel, Hydromel. These sweet slimy Tastes most resemble the Taste of the Lympha in the Lungs; and therefore are Friendly Specificks to the Lungs. Tenthly, Opiates, which stop the De∣fluxion of Catarrhs through the Glandules in both Hot and Cold Rheums:
Pil. Cynoglos. de Styrace, Laudanum liquidum, Theriaca, Diascordium, Diacodium, Emulsio Seminum Pa∣paveris. Eleventhly, Slimy sweet Purgers: Cassia, Manna. A TABLE of Sweet Acrid Aroma∣ticks of the Fennil-Class. RAd. Petroselini, Foeniculi, Apii, E∣ringii, Cherefolii, Levistici, Ange∣licae, Brusci. Fol. Foeniculi, Cherefolii, Pectinis Vene∣ris. Sem. Foeniculi, Anethi, Carui, Coriandri, Cherefolii, Apii, Petroselini, Dauci, Saxifragiae, Cumini, Seselios, Amnios, Anisi, Angelicae, Lignum Sassaphras, Cinnamomum. Ol. Anisi, Faeniculi, Carui, Cinnamomi, Sassaphras. Spiritus Angelicae, Carui, Anisi. Aquae distillatae Foeniculi, Saxifragiae, Angelicae, Cherefolii, Petroselini.
The Eleventh CLASS. Of Cephalicks. §. I. Cool Cephalicks. THese respect the Liquor of the Nerves, and correct its Acidity; to which all the Glandulous Li∣quors are prone: They give a brisk Mo∣tion to the Spirits, and open the Obstru∣ctions of the Nerves. First, Strong Bitters, Digestive. Secondly, Bitter Acrids, Aperitive. Thirdly, Acrids, Antiscorbutick. Fourthly, Aromatick-Acrids, Carmina∣tive. Fifthly, Acid-Absorbers, Mineral Cin∣nabarines, Chalybeates, Antimonials, Mer∣curials. Animal Fetid Parts, Testaceous: Chelae Cancrorum, Cornua Hirci, Cer∣vi, Ʋngulae Alcis, Caballi, Ossa, Cra∣nium, &c.
Stercora Pavonis, Columbarum. Insecta, Millepedes, Lumbrici. Saline Acid-Absorbers; Volatile, Fixt, Mixt, and Oyly Salts: Sal Volatile Oleosum. Sixthly, Terebinthinates, Aromatick, or Sub-Fetid: Rad. Serpentariae, Valerianae, Hype∣rici Tinctura; Rad. Spicaenardi, Rad. Asari. Baccae Lauri, Juniperi. Balsamum Mechae, Peruvian. Sweet-scented Resins. Seventhly, Laurel-Bitters, hindring the Fermentation of the Blood, and thereby the Flux of Humors to the Head: Cortex Peruvianus, Cortex Cerasorum Nigrorum, Amygdalae amarae, Aqua Cerasorum Nigrorum. Eighthly, Bitterish-Astringents, Aroma∣tick. Ninthly, Bitterish, Acrid Aromaticks, which are the most proper Cephalicks: And because they supply the Nerves with
Volatile, Oleous, Fragrant Effluviums, and they also perform the Office of the Spi∣rits, in quickning the Circulation of the Blood, and the Nervous Juice thorow its small Vessels: Therefore these are Friend∣ly Specificks to the Brain, and Nervines. Tenthly, Opiates, which stop the vio∣lent Motion of Spirits. A TABLE of the Bitterish Aro∣matick Acrids. RAd. Zedoariae, Galangae, Iridis, Con∣trayervae, Imperatoriae, Acori, Ca∣lami Aromatici. Fol. Roris Marini, Lavandulae, Melissae, Majoranae, Thymi, Epithymi, Salviae, Calaminthae, Satureiae, Dyctamni. Flores Lilii Convallium, Sambuci, Cor∣tices Aurantiorum, Limoniorum, Ci∣treorum, Ol. Chymica, & Aquae Spi∣rituosae, & Cortices conditae praedicto∣rum, Cortex Winteranus, Nux Mos∣chata, Macis, Cardamomum, Cubebae, Piper, Caryophylli. Ol. Caryophyllorum, Nucis Moschatae, Ma∣cis, Piperis, Roris Marini, Majoranae,
Salviae, Lavendula; Spiritus Laven∣dulae, Roris Marini, Melissae, Lillic∣rum Convallium: Corticum Aurantio∣rum, Citriorum. Conservae Flo. Roris Marini, Salviae, Be∣tonicae, Liliorum Convallium. Aqua Flo. Tiliae, Sambuci, Aurantiorum, Violae Tricoloris, Melissae; Flo. Cha∣maemeli. Species Diambrae, Diamoschi dulcis, Dia∣galangae. Emplastrum de Betonica, Cephalicum. ☞ Cool Cephalicks are the same as Cool Stomachicks. Vide. LAc Asininum, Emulsiones, Acida Vo∣latilia, & Nitrosa, Decoctum Lactu∣cae, & Aqua; Ʋnguentum Alabastrinum, Populeum & Opiata mucilaginosa.
The Twelfth CLASS. Of Uterines: VIZ. I. Hystericks. II. Emmenagogues. III. Procurers of the Birth. IV. Stoppers of the Menses. §. I. Hystericks. WHich are Cephalicks, and good I. against Convulsive Motions, by their Faetor; being full of a strong Volatile Oyl and Salt. And these are, First, Bitter Fetids; some whereof have a Mucilage, others are of a Dead-Nettle-Smell, and others are Terebinthinate Fe∣tids; and of mixt Smells, Fetid, and Aro∣matick Resinous. Rad. Bryoniae, Aristolochiae, Gentianae, Poe∣oniae, Enulae campanae.
Fol. Rutae, Poeoniae, Ballotis, Sophiae Chi∣rurgorum, Cotulae Foetidae. Flores Calendulae, Hormini, Croci. Sem. Poeoniae, Sphondylii. Gummi Foetida, Myrrha, Assa foetida, Gal∣banum, Camphora, Bitumina, Succinum, Ol. & Sal Succini. Tinctura Croci, Succini, Assae foetidae, Gal∣bani, Castorei. Aqua Bryonae composita, Poeoniae composita, Spiritus Castorei, Hormini,; Aquae Simplices Rutae; Flo. Poeoniae, Ne∣petae, Pulegii, Artemisiae, Juglandium. Terebinthinate Fetids: Rad. Asari, Valerianae; Fol. Sabinae, Ar∣boris vitae. Conserva Arboris vitae; Flo. Poeoniae, Trochisci de Myrrha, Foeculae Bryoniae, Pulvis de Gutteta. Sulphur. Flos Sulphuris, Cinnabarina, Tin∣cturae Sulphur. & Antimonii, Fuligo, & Spiritus Ʋrinosi, Potus aquarum Sulphurearum. Emplastrum de Galbano. Fetid Purgers: Pilulae Foetidae, de Succino, de Ammo∣niaco. Ol. Rutae, & Castorei.
Secondly, Cephalicks: Dictamnus, Melissa, Mentha, Calamintha, Serpillum, Pulegium, Lavendula, Majorana. Cool Hystericks are the same as Cool Stomachicks, and Cephalicks. Vid. Which help the recti∣fying of the Animal Spirits, especially Chaly∣beates. Thirdly, Acid-Absorbers, which offend much in Hysterical Persons. Fourthly, Bitterish and Sweet Aromaticks, Car∣minatives; as, Daucus, Anethum, Angelica, Cuminum. Fifthly, Opiates which compose all irregular Mo∣tions of the Spirits; and are themselves very Fetid. Sixthly, Strong Bitter Hepaticks and Stoma∣chicks; also bitter Acrids, and rank Acrids. Seventhly, Aquarum Sulphurearum potus, & ex∣terné. §. II. Emmenagogues, WHich excite an Effervescence of the Blood, and give it a tumultuous Motion: They also cor∣rect Acids, which fix the Blood, Choler, and Chyle.
1. Bitter Stomachicks; Gentian, &c. 2. Bitter Acrid Hepaticks; Absintbium, Matri∣caria, &c. 3. Bitter Fetid Hystericks; Castoreum, Asa Foe∣tida, Peucedanum, &c. 4. Bitterish Acrid Aromatick Cephalicks; Pu∣legium, Artemisia, Dictamnus, Nepeta, Cala∣mintha, Rad. Zedoariae, Galangae, Cortex Winteranus, Ol. Cinnamomi, Caryophylli, Cassia Lignea. Rad. Asaraebaccae. 5. Sweet Acrid Aromaticks; Sem. Apii, Dauci, Petroselini, Seseli. 6. Acrids; Rad. Ari. 7. Strong Fetid Terebinthinates; Sabina. 8. Terreous Absorbers of Acids, Saline, Volatile; Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci, cum Succino vel Ammoniaco. Fixt Salts. Mixt Salts; Borax. Minerals. Chalybeates. Cinnabarines. Antimonials. Mercurials. Externally Emollient Baths, with Fetid Hyste∣ricks and Cephalicks. Pessus made of Vomiters or Purgers, stimulating the Vagina; Helleborus albus. Acrid Pessus; Rad. Allii, Rhaphani.
§. III. Procurers of the Birth. 1. SPirituous Aromatick Cordials; Aqua Cinna∣momi, Spiritus Alchermes. 2. Hysterick Fetids; Spiritus Croci, Castorei, Spiritus Salis Ammoniaci succinat. Aqua Bryoniae, Tin∣ctura Myrrhae, Croci, Castorei, Asae foetidae. Externally Hysterick and Emollient Fomentati∣ons and Clysters. §. IV. Stoppers of the Menses. 1. BItterish Stypticks; Rad. Bistortae, Tormentil. &c. Gallae. 2. Watry Sub-acid Astringents; Plantago, Poly∣gonum. 3. Watry Mucilages; Sanguis Draconis, &c. 4. Terreous Astringents, and Chalybeates; Bolus Armena, Crocus Martis, Lapis Haematites. 5. Acids; Tinctura Rosarum, Spiritus Vitrioli, Alumen, Sal Prunellae. 6. Chalybeate Acids, and mixt Acids; which o∣pen the Obstructions of the Viscera, and do not heat. 7. Opiates, to stop the Evacuation; to which due Purges and Bleeding must be added, for Re∣vulsion.
The Thirteenth CLASS. Of Cordials. VIZ. I. Hot Cordials. II. Cool Cordials. §. I. Hot Cordials, First, WHich afford new Spirits, and give a brisk Motion to them, and to the Blood. 1. Aromaticks, very fragrant in Smell: Rad. Angelicae, Calami Aromatici, Caryophyllatae. Flor. Tunicae, Sambuci, Liliorum Convallium, Tiliae, Aurantiorum, & illorum Aquae distillatae, Aqua Rosarum. Conservae Flor. Tunicae, Liliorum Convallium. Fol. Melissae, Angelicae, Geranii Moschati, Violae Tricoloris & aquae distillatae. Confectio Alchermes, Nucis Moschatae condit. Cortices Citri, Limonum, Aurantiorum condit. Caules Angelicae, Electuarium Sassaphras. Ol. Cinnamomi, Caryophyllorum, Citri, Nucis Mos∣chatae, Syrupus Florum Caryophyllorum. Species Loetificans Galeni, Diamargarit Calid. Perlae, Corallia, Trochisci de Gallia Moschata, Diaxyloaloes.
Ambra grisea. Zybethus, Moschus. Gum. Resinae odoriferae. Benzoinum. Balsamum de Tolu. Styrax. Aquae Spirituosae, Aqua Caelestis, Cinnamomi, Doctoris Stephani, Imperialis, Mirabilis, Spiritus Citri, vel Limoniorum cum Vino Canarino, Spiritus Angelicae. Secondly, All the Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks and Cephalicks are Cordials. Thirdly, Hystericks are Cordials, by altering the Motion of the Spirits; as Castoreum, Asa foetida, Crocus, Species Diambrae. Fourthly, All Acid-Absorbers are Cordial, by pre∣venting the Coagulation of Humors; as all Salts, and Testaceous Medicines, and Chalybeates. Fifthly, Animal Bitterish Acrid; Cochinella. Sixthly, Aromatick, Bitterish, Astringent; Myr∣tus, Mentha, Rosae rubrae. All Aromaticks being friendly Specifick Cor∣dials, by their similitude to the Spirits, and their Effluvia, pass through the Organ of Smelling, and immediately alter the Motion of the Spirits; as the Sweet Smells evidently do in Hysterical Women: The same inwardly taken, by their Effluviums, pass into the Nerves, and quicken the Motion of the Spirits, and increase their Quantity, as all Vinous Liquors do.
§. II. Cool Cordials. THey temper the Effervescence of the Blood, and give it a due quantity of Serum, and thereby preserve its Mixture. First, Aqueous Mucilages, some whereof have a little Heat in them; Decoctum Hordei cum radici∣bus Scorzonerae, Cornu Cervi. Flo. Cordiales Boraginis, Violarum, Leucoii, Bu∣glossi, Tunicae, & Conservae illorum. Sem. 4. frigida, & emulsiones. Aqua frigida Saxoniae, Boraginis, Ʋl∣mariae, Pomorum. Aqua Fragorum, Cinnamomi hor∣deati. Secondly, Acid Cordials, which abate the Heat of the Blood. 1. Sowre and Spirituous Acids; Succus Lujulae, Aurantiorum, Citri, Limonum, & Syrupi. Spir. Salis dulcis & aceti. Fructus Ribes, Grossulae, Mora, Fragae, Syrupus Rubi Idaei, Acetum Rosaceum. 2. Acrid-Acids, and Bitterish-Acids; Fol. Rosae solis, Anagallidis Flo. Phoeniceo, Acetum Theriacale, Mixtura Simplex, Sal Nitrum depuratum, Sal Pru∣nellae, Sal Volatile vel fixum Vitriolatum; which are Salso-Acids, and preserve the Blood from Putre∣faction, as common Salt does Salt-Meats. 3. Strong Acids, Mineral; Spiritus Sulphuris, Vi∣trioli, Nitri, Tinctura Rosarum. 4. Astringent Cordials, good in all Fluxes, He∣morrhages and great Effervescences.
1. Aromatick Bitterish Astringents; Ʋlmaria, Pim∣pinella, Caryophyllata, Santala, lignum Aloes. 2. Bitterish Stypticks; Rad. Tormentillae, Bistor∣tae, Acetosae. Fol. Quinquefolii, Potentillae, Con∣fect. Hyacinth. 5. Cordial Fragrant Stones; Perlae, Corallia: And Mucilaginous Earths; as, Bolus Armena, Ma∣nus Christ. Perlatae, Diamargarit frig. The Fourteenth CLASS. Of I. Diaphoreticks, II. Alexipharmacks, III. Hinderers of Sweat. §. I. Diaphoreticks, WHich correct the Acids that fix the Blood, and hinder the rarefaction of it. These by their hot Parts quicken the Circu∣lation, and force the Serum towards the Skin-Glan∣dules. First, Bitter Acrids; Rad. Contrayervae, Succisae, Chelidonii. Fol. Chamaedryos, Scordii, Scorodoniae, Saponariae, Lupulorum, Cardiacae.
Lignum Guaiacum, Fraxini, Buxi. Fol. Cardui, Bar∣danae, Scabiosae, Centaurei. Rad. Gentianae, Extract. Cardui, Gentianae, Syrupus Fol. Cardui. All which are either, Laurel-Bitters, or strong Bitters. Secondly, Bitterish Aromatick Acrids; Rad. Ze∣doariae, Imperatoriae, Millefolii, Petasitidis, Angeli∣cae, Carlinae, Dictamni. Fol. Pulegii, Salviae, Calamin∣thae, Aqua Epidemica. Flo. Sambuci, Chamaemeli, Roris marini. Thirdly, Terebinthinate Acrids; Rad. Serpenta∣riae Virginianae, Valerianae, Asaraebaccae & lignum Juniperi. Fourthly, Acid Absorbers are Diaphoretick; as, 1. Woods; Sarsaparilla, China, Sassaphras. 2. Testaceous Powders; Pulvis è chelis composit. Lapis Goae, Bezoar, Oculi Cancrorum. 3. Minerals; Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Cinna∣baris nativa, Bezoardicum Minerale. Flor. Sulphuris. 4. Animal Powders Fetid; Pulvis Viperarum, Bu∣fonum, Cochinella, Sanguis Hirci, Stercus Caballi. 5. Saline Urinous or Lixivial Salts, or Salso-Acids; Flores Salis Ammoniaci. The Saline Tastes are the Evacuaters of the Se∣rum by Sweat, having a Saltness like it. And the Vegetable Acrids are also Salts; so that in this E∣vacuation there is a Similitude betwixt the Medi∣cine and Humor evacuated, as well as in Purgers.
Fifthly, Acid Acrids, Diaphoreticks, and Acid Bitters; Rosa Solis, Annagallis Flo. Phoeniceo, Ace∣tum Theriacale, Aqua Theriacalis, Spiritus Guaiaci, Tar∣tari, Sal Succini, Mixtura Simplex, extractum Theri∣acale, Tinctura Bezoardica cui Spiritus Vitrioli additur. These Cool by the Acid, and Sweat by the Acrid. Sixthly, Acid Sulphureous; Clyssus Antimonii A∣cidus, & Salsus, Ens primum Sulphuris. Sp. Sulphuris. Seventhly, Hystericks Acrid Fetid; Rad. Enulae, Flo. Calendulae, Croci, Fol. Rutae. Gummi Camphora, Myrrha, Guaiaci. Opium. Flos Sulphuris, & Aqua Sul∣phurea. Eighthly, Opiates with Diaphoreticks; Diascor∣dium, Theriaca, Mithridatium, Orvietanum, Tinctura Diaphoretica Anodyna. §. II. Alexipharmacks, First, WHich throw out the Venemous Poyson by Sweat. Vid. Diaphoreticks. Secondly, Bezoardicks, resisting Putrefaction. 1. Acrids; Allium, Thlaspi. 2. Bitter Acrids; Chelidonium, Scordium, &c. 3. Strong Bitters, Stomachicks; Gentiana, Car∣duus, Centaurium.
4. Strong Bitters, Aromatick; Absinthium, Ta∣nacetum, Polium, Eupatorium. 5. Bitterish Aromaticks, Cephalicks; which pre∣serve the Spirits from Venome; Salvia, Zedoaria. 6. Aromatick Astringents. 7. Styptick Bitterish, which preserve the mix∣ture of the Blood, by fixing it; Radix Tormentillae, Pentaphylli, Bistortae. 8. Acids which fix the Volatile Salts and Oyls; Spiritus Salis, Vitrioli, Nitri, Aceti. Thirdly, Bezoardicks, hindering the Coagulation of the Serum of the Blood by Acid Poysons. 1. The Testaceous. Absorbers of Acids. 2. Mineral. 3. Bitter Acrids. 4. Salts Volatile or Fixt. Fourthly, Bezoardicks, supplying the defect of the Serum of the Blood, and hindering too great a rarefaction. 1. Aqueous Mucilages. 2. Acids. 3. Watry Astringents. 4. Terreous Mucilages. 5. Mucilaginous Opiates.
§. III. Hinderers of Sweat, First, WHich hinder the hot Effervescence and rarefaction of Humours. 1. Acids; Sp. Sulphuris, Salis Dulcis, & Nitri Dul∣cis. Succus Acetosus. 2. Bitterish Stypticks. 3. Watry Astringents. 4. Watry Mucilages, and Mucilaginous Draughts. Secondly, Which preserve the mixture of the Blood and Serum, and also cool. 1. Salso-Acids, tart Vitriol; Sal Prunell. Nitrum. 2. Sweet Stypticks and Chalybeates; Lingua Cervina, Capill. Veneris. Rad. Osmundae, filicis Maris, Vitriolum Martis, Aquae Vitriolatae. 3. The Cichory Bitters. 4. The Pea-Stypticks, Succus viciae, fumariae. 5. Testaceous Medicines, absorbing Acidities; Corall. Margarit. 6. Salt Tastes; Tinct. Sal. Tart. Antimon. 7. Acrid Antiscorbuticks. Thirdly, Aromatick Astringents and Austeres, which strengthen the Glands of the Skin; Santala, lign. Aloes. Cortic. Quercus, Prunorum Conserva, Bolus Armen. Tinct. Corall.
The Fifteenth CLASS. Of Nephriticks and Diureticks. §. I. Cool Nephriticks, First, WHich allay Pain, relaxe and lenifie the Urinary Passages, and supply a great quantity of Liquor to wash the Kidnies. 1. Watry Mucilages: Rad. Althaeae, Malvae, Nymphaeae. Fol. Malvae, Althaeae, Portulacae. Conserv. Fl. Malvae, Violarum, Nymphaeae. Sem. Psyllii, Lini, Bombacis, Malvae, Hordei, quatuor frigid. Pulvis Senelorum. Castanearum emulsio. Syr. Althaeae, Viol. Lac Asininum, Aqua Lactis, & serum Lactis & Aquae Chalybeatae. Gum. Arabici, Tragacanth. Ceras. Persicae. Aq. Flo. Malvae, Betulae, & vinum Portulacae, Nym∣phaeae. Juscula cum Diureticis, Mucilaginosis, & Sub-acribus.
2. The Mucilaginous Pea-Taste, Bitter, Sweet or Hot: Radices Ononidis, Asparagi, Aquilegiae. Fol. Ononidis, Genistae. Fl. Genistae, Fabarum, & Aqua distillata. Sem. Fenugraeci, Genistae, Cicera rubra, lupinorum. Aq. Ononidis, fl. Genistae, è Siliquis Fabarum. Syrupus Ononidis. 3. Watry Bitters Sub-acird: Radices Dentis Leonis, Sonchi, Cichorei. Fol. Cichorei, dentis leonis, Endiviae. 4. Sweet Pectorals: Rad. Glycyrrhizae, Graminis. Fructus Ficuum, Jujubarum, Dactylorum, Passul. Pru∣na dulcia, Syr. Jujubarum, Glycyrrhizae. Mel, Saccharum. Cassia. 5. Oleose: Oleum Amygd. dulc. Juglandum, Lini, Olivarum, Butyrum, Sperma Ceti. 6. Opiates: Fol. Lactucae & Aqua, & Sem. & Emulsio, Diaco∣dium, Laudanum, Aq. Solani. Terreous and Lapidose Correctors of Acids: as, 1. Stony Parts of Vegetables: Sem. Millii solis, Lapides Dactylorum, Sorborum, Pyrorum, Persicae, Cerasorum, Senelorum, fru∣ctus Cynosbati.
2. Pure Stones: Lapis Judaicus, Nephriticus, Spar, silices, Crystal∣lus, Lapis Spongiae, Lyncis, Vitrum combustum. 3. Minerals Chalyb. Aq. Chalybeatae & Sulphureae. 4. Decoctions of the Woods, which are Sub-acrid: China, Sarsaparilla, cum ras. Eboris C. Cervi, Santal. Secondly, Nephriticks, Cleansers of the Gravel, which also force a great quantity of Serum to the Kidnies; or else coagulate with the Sabulous Mat∣ter; or by Stimulation of the Membranes cause the expulsion of it. §. II. Hot Nephriticks. First, STrong Bitters, Laurel Bitters, and Smoaky Bitters, which cleanse the Kidnies: Fol. Centaurii, Verbenae, Cardui. Sem. Persicae, Amygdal. amar. Sem. Bardanae. Secondly, Bitter Acrids: Rad. Lupulorum, Mors. diaboli, Corallina, Petasiti∣dos, Rubiae. Fol. Chamaedryos, Salviae agrestis, Marrubii, Absin∣thii, Tanaceti, Scordii, Enpatorii, Lupulorum, Aparines, Asperulae. Sem. Fraxini. Lignum Nephriticum.
Thirdly, Vegetable Acrids: Vid. Spleneticks. Sem. Erucae, Nasturtii Aquatici, Rhaphani. Flores Nasturtii Indici. Fol. Erysimi. Aqua Fol. Erucae, Cochl. Rhaphani Composit. Per∣sicariae acris, Ari. Fourthly, Acrid Mucilaginous: Rad. Ʋrticae. Fol. Lysimachiae, Leucoii siliquosi. Sem. Violarum, Ʋrticae, Brassica, Rapa & jus earun∣dem. Fifthly, Bitter Mucilaginous Sub-acrid. Rad. Bryoniae, Bardanae, Aristoloch. Gentianae, Car∣duorum. Fol. Alkekengi, Bryoniae, Sambuci, Saponariae, sum∣mit. Agrifolii. Conser. Fl. Periclymeni. Cortex Tiliae. Sixthly, Bitter Acid: Sem. Fraxini Bugulae, Baccae Alkekengi. Seventhly, Salts Volatile: Sp. Salis Ammoniaci, Ar. Eighthly, Parts of Animals, abounding with a La∣tent Volatile Salt, being Fetid and Acrid: Millepedes, Apes, Cantharides, Sanguis hirci, Ʋrina Hominis sani. Calculi Humani, & Vesicae fellis Vaccini, oc. Cancr. Test. ovorum, ostrearum, & Chelae Cancrorum.
Ninthly, Fixt Salts: Sal Fraxini, Fabarum, Genistae, Absinth. Ol. Tart. per deliquium, silicum ignitorum extinct. Lix∣ivium, Aqua Calcis vivae, Tinct. Salis Tartari. Sapo ex Sale fixo cum Oleosis componitur. Tenthly, Salso-Acids: Tart. Vitriolat. Sal Prunell. Sal Succini, Sal Ammoniacum, Nitrum, Borax, Oc. Cancrorum cum Aceto decoct. Infusiones Sterc. Columbar. Equorum. Eleventhly, Acids dissolving the Sabulose Matter: Sp. Salis, Sp. Nitri & Sulphuris, &c. Cremor Tartari. Succus Limonum, Acetosae, Vinum Rhenanum, Po∣maceum, Vinum album, Fructus Sub-acidi, Fragae, Succus Plantaginis. Twelfthly, Sweet Aromaticks: Rad. Foeniculi, Petroselini, Brusci, Eryngii, Levi∣stici, Chaerefolii, Filipendulae, Fol. & Sem. Foeniculi, Dauci, Apii, Anethi, Saxifragiae. Ol. Chymica & Aquae distillatae praedictorum, Lig∣num Sassaphras. Thirteenthly, Bitterish Aromatick Acrid. Rad. Iridis, Imperatoriae, Milefolii, Galangae. Flor. Chamaemeli, Sambuci. Fol. Calamenthae, Pulegii, Satureiae, Hyssopi, Be∣tonicae, Salviae.
Fourteenthly, Terebinthinates: The Table of Terebinthinates, Bitterish, Astringent, Sub-acrid. I. ARomatick Terebinthinates; Fol. Lauri, & Baccae Juniperi, Cedri, Virgae aureae, Ladani segetum, Botryos, Balsamitae, Saniculae, Geranii Moschati. Rad. Calami Aromatici. Rob. Juniperi & Spiritus. Sweet Gum-Resins; Labdanum, Benjaminum, Caranna, Tacamahac, Balsamum de Tolu, Mechae, Balsamum Peruvi∣anum, Ol. Juniperi. II. Pure Turpentines; Rad. Valerianae, Serpentariae Virginianae, Asai. Fol. Hyperici, Ascyri, Androsaemi, Perfoliatae, Num∣mulariae, Geranii Robertiani. Pini, Abietis, Chamaepityos, Cupressi. Sem. Nuclei Pinei, Pistachia. Terebinthina, Mastiche, Olibanum, Ol. Terebinthinum & Spiritus, Tinctura Hyperici, Aqua Terebin∣thinata, Balsamum Lucatellae, Capivit.
III. Fetid Turpentines; Sabina, Arbor vitae, Hepatica Terrestris. Fol. Hederae & Baccae. Pix liquida, & Bitumina, Succinum, Sal & Ole∣um, Petroleum. Fetid Gums; Ammoniacum, Galbanum, Bdellium, Sagapenum. Fifteenthly, Acrid Purgers are Diuretick; Pil. de Cambogia, Resin. Jalapii, Diagridium, Tur∣bith. Vid. Hydragogues. Sixteenthly, Caustick Plants; Aqua Ranunculi, Persicariae, Anemones. §. III. Inward Vulneraries in the Ʋlcers of the Kidnies, Bladder or Lungs: I. TErebinthinates, Bitterish Astringent. II. Bitterish Astringents of the Dead-Nettle smell: Fol. Lamii, Galeopsidis, Hederae Terrestris, Pana∣cis, Veronicae, Betonicae, Extract. Hederae Ter∣restris cum Resinâ & Laudano in Pilulis. III. Bitterish Stypticks; Rad. Acetosae, Tormentillae.
IV. Sub-acrid Astringents; Saxifragia Alba, Bec∣cabunga, Chelidonium minus, Tussilago, Scabiosa. V. Sweetish Astringents; Capillus Veneris, Ruta Muraria, Rad. Osmundae. VI. Acid-Absorbers; Sulphur vivum, & Flo. Chalybeata, Cinnabaris Nativa, Antimonium Diapho∣reticum, Tinctura vel Balsamum Antimonii, & Sulphu∣ris, Oculi Cancrorum, &c. The Sixteenth CLASS. Of Arthriticks 1. WHich evacuate the Serum, abounding in too great a quantity in the Blood, and Lymphaeducts. First, Catharticks. 1. Resinous, Res. Jalapii. Scammonii. 2. Mucilaginous Acrid Bitter, Pulvis Cornachinus. Pulvis hermodactylorū compositus. Electuarium Caryocostinum. Succus radicis ebuli. Syrupus de Spinâ.
3. Tithymaline Acrids. Pil. de Cambogia. Secondly, Diaphoreticks, 1. Urinous Sp. C. C. &c. 2. Bitter Acrids: Decoctum Guaiaci. 3. Mineral Absorbents: Antimonium Dia∣phoreticum, Cinnabaris. Thirdly, Diureticks. 1. Terebinthinates: Chamaepitys, Hyperi∣cum, Pinus, Asarum, Juniperus. 2. Salts Fixt, Volatile, or Mixt. 3. Insects abounding in Volatile Salt: Mil∣lepedes, Apes. II. Arthriticks, which correct and alter the Serum and Lympha, are either Hot or Cooling: First, Cooling Arthriticks, WHich correct the Volatile Acrid Salts, and sup∣ply a due quantity of Serum and Lympha. 1. Aqueous Mucilages; Emulsiones ex sem. 4. frig. Aqua Hordeata, Lac distillatum, Asininum, Serum lactis, aqua Boraginis, Radix Consolidae, Succus Portulacae, Lens Palustris, &c. 2. Waterish Bitters, which cool and deterge the Salts by Urine; Cichorium, Fumaria, Genista.
3. Acids which Vitriolate, and Fix Animal Salts Spiritus Salis Dulcis, Nitri Dulcis, &c. Sulphureous Acids, not only Fix Salts, but are also Diaphoretick by their Sulphur; Clyssus Antimo∣nii, Ens primum Sulphuris. 4. Terreous Mucilages, which act as Astringents and Mucilages; Bolus Armena, &c. 5. Bitterish Stypticks, Sub-acrid; Radix Penta∣phyl. Tormentillae, fol. Ericae, Tamarisci. Secondly, Hot Arthriticks. I. HOt Arthriticks, which correct the Acidity of the Serum and Lympha. 1st. Splenetick Acrids, Radix Ari, fol. Cochl. Porrum. 2dly. Volatile and Fixt Salts. 3dly. Mineral Acid-Absorbers. 1. Cinnabarins. 2. Chalybeates. 3. Antimonials. 4. Testaceous. 5. Animals, Millepedes. Lumbr. terrestres. II. Nervines, which open the Obstructions in the Nerves and Glandules; (vid. Bitterish Acrid Aro∣maticks) the chiefest of which are, Rad. Dictamni, Iridis, Angelicae, fol. Calaminthae, Betonicae, Salviae, Rorisarini, Artemisiae.
Fl. Chamaemeli, Sambuci, Rorismarini, Lavendu∣lae, Liliorum Conval. & illorum aquae distillat. III. Hysterick Foetids, which open the Nerves, and alter the motion of the Spirits; Radix Poeoniae, Enulae, Castoreum, &c. IV. Bitter Stomachicks, which help the Digestion, Radix Gentianae, fol. Centaurii, Verbenae, &c. And Laurel Bitters, Viscum, Cortex Peruvian. Guaiaci, Buxus. V. Bitter Acrids, Hepaticks, and Diureticks; Semen Fraxini, Rad. Succisae, fol. Chamaedryos, Sco∣rodoniae, Scordii. VI. Arthriticks, which strengthen the Nervous Fibres of the Limbs. 1. Aromatick Astringents; Rad. Caryophyllatae, fol. Myrti, Rosar. Santal. &c. 2. Externally Aromatick Gums and Nervine. VII. Arthriticks, which stop the Pain and Flux of Humors, are Narcoticks. Internal Arthriticks, Slimy, Fetid, or of a heady Smell, Aqua Papaver. Rubri, Lactucae, Solani, Para∣lyseos, syr. Papaveris Rubri, Diacodii, Paralyseos, Sem. Hyoscyami, Papaveris albi, Cynoglossae, Milii solis, & emulsiones praedictorum, Baccae Herbae Paridis, Alkakengi, Solani Hortensis, Pomum Amoris.
The Seventeenth CLASS. Of Opiates. I. Bitter Acrid Narcoticks: GƲm. Opium, Tincturae cum Succis Cydoniorum, Limonum, vel Sp. vini Tartariato, Lauda∣num liquidum, Opium Pulverisatum. Pil. de Styrace, Mithridatium, Theriaca. Rad. Paralyseos, Auriculae ursi, have a heady Smell. Rad. Lactucae, Papaveris, which have a Fetid Smell. II. Mucilaginous Narcoticks Fetid: Aq. Papaver. rhoead. Lactucae, Solani, Syr. Papaveris rubri, diacodii, sem. Hyoscyami, Papaveris albi, Cyno∣gloss. & emulsiones semin. pil. de Cynoglossâ. Vid. External Narcoticks.
The Eighteenth CLASS. Of I. Breeders of Milk, II. Lesseners of it. §. I. Breeders of Milk. First, WAtry Nourishments: Lac, Emulsiones, Serum lactis, de∣coctio limacum, aq. lactis distillata, Rad. Scorzon. tragopogi decoct. Secondly, Watry Bitters, cooling the Blood, and cleansing it from Choler. Fol. Cichorei, dentis leonis, Sonchi, & radices. Thirdly, Bitterish Acrids, opening the Obstructi∣on of the Glands in the Breasts, by promoting Sweat. Fl. Chamaemeli, Sambuci. Fol. Salviae, Betonicae. Fol. Menthae. Fourthly, Sweet Aromaticks, discussing Wind, helping Digestion. Rad. fol. & Sem. Foeniculi, Chaerefolii, Carui.
Fifthly, Testaceous Medicines, and all other Ab∣sorbers of Acids coagulating the Milk. Crystallus, oc. Cancr. Sp. C. Cerv. Sixthly, Externals, which are, 1. Emollients; as, Althaea, Malva, Sem. lini, hordei farina. 2. Sweet Aromaticks, joyned with the Emol∣lients, relaxe the Skins of the Breast, and make the Glands more apt to receive Milk. Fol. Angelicae, Faeniculi. §. II. Lesseners of Milk. First, BY Abstinence; Sudorificks, Diureticks, and Purgers. Secondly, Outwardly, by resolving Medicines, Fe∣tid Gums: Galbanum, cum Sperm. Ceti & Cera, Camphora, Diachylum cum Gummi, Sp. Salis Ammonia∣ci, Balsamum Sulphuris. Thirdly, By Repellents, Acid, or Bitterish Stypticks. Alumen decoctum, & cum Linteis applicatum, Plantago aquatica. Repellents and Discutients are best mixt.
The Nineteenth CLASS. Of Venereals which respect the Semen. I. THose that supply an abundance of Nou∣rishment, which is Slimy: Juscula Gelatinosa. 1. Slimy Sub-acrid Vegetables: Orchides, Fabae, Asparagi turiones, Castaneae, Avellanae. 2. Aromatick Nourishments and Wines: Confectio fructus Coco, Piperata, Vinum Hippo∣craticum, Pastinaca. Rotulae stimulantes Minsychti. 3. Rank Nourishments, resembling the Smell of the Semen: Astaci, Ostreae, Cancer, Cancri fluviatiles, Salmo, Sturgeon, Pisces Marini, Scincus. Testes Gallorum, Agnorum, &c. The Stones of all Animals contain some Relish of the Semen, as the Liver does of the Gall; which being good as an Hepatick, I think there is the same reason for the Stones of Animals to be Vene∣real Medicines by supplying Matter.
II. Those Medicines that stimulate the Ʋrethra, are Venereals. 1. Diureticks, which cause a sharpness of Urine, as the Sweet, Hot, Acrid Aromaticks: Rad. Eryngii, Apii, Sceleri, foeniculi, Sem. Dauci, Petroselin. 2. Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks: Piper, Zinziber, Confect. Alchermes cum Moscho, Ol. Cinnamoni, Majoranae, Nux Moschata, Mentha, Horminum. 3. Acrids: Sem. Erucae, Rhaphani, Sem. Fraxini, Ʋrticae, Sinapi, Nasturtii, Flores Croci, Calendulae. 4. Terebinthinates: Sem. Pini. Pistachia. 5. Animal Acrids: Cantharides. Animal Parts Fetid: Priapus Cervinus, Taurinus, Millepedes, Apes. 6. Salso-Acrids: Muriatica, Haleces, Borax, Aq. Magnanimitatis, & formicarum Spiritus Salso-Acidus. 7. Opiates are also Acrid. Externally: Ol. Formicarum, Moschus, Zibethus, Ol. nuc. Mosch. Spicae, Axungia hirci.
Antivenereals good against the Gonorrhoea, Fluor albus, & Pollutio Nocturna. 1. Mucilages, correcting the Acrid Serum, and Opiates: Rad. Althaeae, Nymphaeae. Sem. 4. frigida, & emulsiones, Lac. Aq. Lactucae, Portulacae, Nymphaeae, & Syrupi. Cassia, Sem. Cynoglossae, & Opiata. Gum. Mastich. Terebinthina coct. 2. Astringents Bitterish Styptick: Rad. Tormentil. Bistort. Fragariae. Fol. Salicis, Plantag. Polii, Fl. Balaustiorum. 3. Acid Absorbers: Terrae Mucilaginosae, Lapis Haematitis, Decoctum Lignorum. Chalybeata Styptica, Crocus Martis. Astringents or Testaceous: Corall. Os. Sepiae. Sacch. Saturni. Injectiones ex Aq. Calcis Vivae, Sacch. Saturni, &c. 4. Coolers of the Acrid Salts and furious Spirits: Sp. Vitrioli, Decoct. Tamarindorum, Sp. Nitri, Lapis Prunellae, Acetosa, Mercurius dulcis. 5. Cleansing and drying Diureticks, Bitter A∣crids, killing the Animal in Semine: Millefolium, Mentha, Ruta, Agnus Castus, Radi∣ces Iridis, Sem. Cannabis, & emulsio ejus∣dem, Camphora,
Absinthium, and other Medicines for the Worms, act by their Vertue, as Bitter Acrids. 6. Bitters Acrids: Gum. Succinum, Mastiche, Resina, Olibanum. 7. Vulneraries: Vid. Diureticks. The Twentieth CLASS. Of Ophthalmicks. Internals, opening the Obstructions of the Nerves, and those that give a quicker Motion to the Spirits. 1. BItterish Acrid Aromatick Cephalicks: Fol. & Flores Betonicae, Salviae, Rorisma∣rini, & Conservae florum, Fol. Majoranae, Rad. Iridis. 2. Hysterick Fetid Acrids respect the Motion of the Spirits. Rad. Peoeoiae & Semen, & Flores, Crocus, Hor∣minum, Ruta, Rad. Enulae.
III. Sweet Aromatick Acrids: Rad. & Sem. Foeniculi, Sem. Carui. Aq. Foeniculi, Chaerefolii. IV. Cleansing Aperitives, and cleansing Vulne∣raries: 1. Strong Bitters, Bitter Acrids: Fol. Verbenae. Succus Chelidonii Majoris & Aqua, Myrrha, Aloes. 2. Bitterish Astringents, which are also Vul∣neraries, Cleansing and Healing: Hedera Terrestris, Euphrasia. V. Aromatick Astringents, strengthners of the Membranous Fibres and Nerves: Lignum Aloes, Cinnamom. Agrimonia, Caryophyl∣lata. VI. VII. VIII. IX. Chalybeata. Testacea. Salina. Volatilia. Fixa. Absorbers of Acids. Salina Oleosa. Acria. Internal Coolers are the same as in Cool Cephalicks.
External Ophthalmicks, Discutients, and Detergents. 1. BItter Acrids; Chelidonium & Aqua, Myrrha, Aloes, Sarcocolla, &c. Fel Lucii, Gallinae, Perdicis. 2. Bitterish Astringents. Vid. The Internals. 3. The Sweet Acrid Aromatick; Aqua Foenicu∣li, & Succus. 4. Terebinthinates; Hypericon, Thus. 5. The Bitterish Acrid Cephalicks; Flores Sam∣buci, Chamoemeli. 6. Hysterick Fetids; Crocus, Camphora. 7. Sweet Detergents; Mel, Saccharum Cand. 8. Ophthalmick Gritty Powders; Tutia, Os Se∣piae, & Saccharum. External Coal Ophthalmicks. 1. MUcilaginous, allaying the sharp Rheums: Sem. Lini, Psyllii, Cydoniorum, 4 frigidorum, Foenugraeci, Papaveris, Album. Ovi. Gum. Tragacanthi, Sanguis Draconis, Lac, Panis albus. Aqua Malvae, fl. Nymphaeae, Portulacae, Lactucae, Pulp. Pomorum Putridorum. Ʋnguentum Rosatum, Ophthalmicum, Pomatum. Anodyna. Aqua Solani, Papaveris. 2. Watry Astringents, Bitterish Repelling: Ros. Rubrae, flores, & albae, & Aquae Distillatae Rosarum. Aqua Plantaginis, fol. Quercus, sem∣pervivi, Conserv. Rosarum.
3. Watrish Bitters, Cooling and Cleansing: Aqua Cichorei, fl. Cyani, fl. Fabarum. 4. Acid Absorbers: Pulv. Coralliorum, Perlarum, Tutia, Cerussa, Sief Album cum Opio, Lapis Calaminaris, Os Sepiae. 5. Acid Waters repelling: Vitriolum Solutum, aes viride, Saccharum Sa∣turni solut. The Twenty first CLASS. Of Medicines against the Worms. 1. BItter, Slimy, Sub-acrid Purgers, which car∣ry away the stagnating Chyle, from whence the Worms are produced: Helleborastri Succus cum Vino expressus, Sene∣cio, Aloes, Elixir Proprietatis, Myrrha, Species Hierae Picrae, Syr. Florum Persicorum. Rhabarbarum, & Syrupus. 2. Bitter and Bitter Acrid Hepaticks, which hin∣der the Corruption of the Chyle, and open the Ob∣structions in the Lacteals, and disturb the Worms: Rad. Gentianae, Aristolochiae, Faeculae Bryoniae, Cen∣taurium.
Scordium, Abrotanum, Tanacetum, Absinthium, Marrubium. Sem. Santonici, Tanaceti. Ol. Absinthii, Fel Tauri, Colocynthis, Oleum Ra∣taceum, Laurinum. 3. Acids disturb the Worms much, but increase the Obstructions: Sp. Salis Vitrioli, Clyssus Antimonii, Succus Li∣monum, Sp. Nitri Dulcis. 4. Acrids disturb the Worms, and open Ob∣structions in the Lacteals: Allium, Caepe, Cochlearia. 5. Salso-Acids: Sal commune, Sal Ammoniac. & Plantae Mari∣nae salsâ Aquâ aspersae, ut Corallina. 6. Salia Volatilia disturb the Worms, and open Obstructions. 7. Fixt Salts: Lixivium cujusvis Plantae & Sal Fixum. 8. Fetids: Radix Enulae, Fol. Rutae, Sabinae, Matricariae. Flores Sulphuris, Ol. Succini, Camphora, Bal∣samum Sulphuris, Cinnabarina. 9. Mercurials: Infusio & Decoctio Mercurii, Mercurius Dulcis. 10. Oleosa, praesertim Chymica, Ol. Absinthii, & Spirituosa, Vinum Rubrum, Spiritus Vini. Sweet Tastes, Sugar, Honey. Externals: Ol. Rutae, Laurinum, Fel, Hiera Picra.
The number of Medicines for the Worms is in∣finite, but there are few which will kill them: And Worms that live constantly in the Guts (where Choler is mixed with their Meat) are not much offended with Bitters; as will appear by the following Experiments; viz. I put divers Earth-Worms into divers Glasses full of Water, and into each Glass put a different Medicine. Coloquintida put into the Glass, disturbed them much, as appeared by their violent Motions; but the Worms did not dye, till after a long time. Rhubarb disturbed the Worms much, but did not kill them. Spirit of Salt did most disturb the Worms, and put them into furious Motions, and killed them. The same effect had Salt, put into the Glass. Elixir Proprietatis, Prepared with an Acid, did much offend the Worms, and killed them. Spirit of Harts-Horn did disturb the Worms as much as Spirit of Salt. Sugar put into the Glass, made them very un∣easie. I put some Worms into Quicksilver-Water, in which they lived well; but sometimes they would creep out: but they would not be offended at the Quicksilver in the bottom: Therefore when Quick∣silver is used inwardly, it must acquire some Vitriolick
Taste from the Acid in the Stomach, otherwise it cannot be excellent for the Worms. Mercurius Dulcis did very little disturb them, but would not kill them. The Worms would creep out of the Water, in which Walnut-leaves were infused. Corallina did very little disturb them; neither did burnt Harts-Horn. Wormseed is an excellent Medicine, for that, by the Acridness, did very much disturb them; but above all, Claret-Wine killed them presently, and they never recovered. Wormwood and Sena did but little disturb them. Scammony, added to Mercurius Dulcis, did not stir them. Oyl of Olive did not offend nor kill the Worms. From these Experiments, I infer, That we cannot give any Bitter to kill Worms; but if by Bitter things they be for divers days driven into the Co∣lon, then a Purge or Clyster will carry them away. And for the prevention, the Obstructions of the Lacteals must be opened, and the Diet alter'd; and Plasters to the Belly may offend the Worms, and open the Obstructions in the Belly.
External Medicines. The First CLASS. Of Cosmeticks, First, WHich clear the Pores of the Skin from the Humors or Worms stag∣nating in them. 1. Medicines abounding in Volatile Salt: Faecula Radicis Ari & Aq. Foliorum. Camphora, Spiritus Vini, Ʋrina Pueri. 2. Lixivious Medicines, cleansing the Skin, and absorbing Acids: Ol. Tartari per Deliquium, Saponata Lavacra. 3. Sulphureous Medicines: Sulphur Vivum. 4. Bitter Medicines, Oleous or Mucilaginous; and these Smooth and Cleanse: Oleum Amygdalarum amararum, & Emulsio. Radix Bryoniae, aq. Fabarum, fl. Aurantiorum, fl. Sambuci, aq. Dipsaci. Secondly, Repelling Cosmeticks; they stop the flux of Humors towards the Skin.
1. Acids: Acetum, Phlegma Vitrioli, Succus Limonum, Lac ebutyratum. 2. Mercurials Vitriolick: Aq. Sublimati, Mercurii dulcis. 3. Astringents: Aq. Argentinae, Lac Virginis, Alumen cum lacte decoct. 4. Smoothers of the Skin. The Mucilaginous: Emulsiones ex Amygdalis dulcibus, Rad. Sigilli Solomonis in Vino infusa, Aqua Albuminis Ovorum, Aq. Fragariae, Aq. Solani Lethalis, Aq. Cerasorum, Sperma Ceti, Pomatum, Pin∣guedo Viperina, cum Bals. Peruviano. Liquor ex Cochleis cum Sale Tartari, Aq. Sper∣matis Ranarum. 5. Cooling Oyntments: Ʋnguentum ex calce lotâ. 6. Psilothra, taking off the Hair, 1. By fretting it, as Woollen Fillets. 2. By Corrosive Salts; Lixivium forte, & Calx viva. 3. By Acids; Ol. Vitrioli, Sulphuris. 4. By Poysonous Corroding Sulphurs; Auri∣pigmentum, Arsenicum, Sandaracha.
The Second CLASS. Of Vesicatories which evacuate Serum from the Skin-Glandules. I. VEsicatories abounding with a Volatile Salt, or Corrosive hooked Salt. Rad. Ari, Allii, Ranunculi, Dracontii. Sem. Sinapi. Fol. Ranunculi Pratensis & Flammei. II. Acid-Acrid Vesicatories: Ros Solis, Anagallis Flore Phoeniceo. III. Vesicatories from Acrid Animal Salts: Cantharides, Emplast. Vesicatorium. IV. Lixivial Salts: Cineres Fraxini, Vitis.
The Third CLASS. Of Causticks, WHich make an Eschar, and afterward an Ʋlcer, by which Tumors are evacuated; and if kept open, become Issues. First, Mineral Causticks which Burn, and make a Black Eschar, are Lixivial Salts; as, Lapis Corro∣sivus: or Mineral Salts; as, Calx viva. Secondly, Mineral Causticks which burn, and make a White Eschar. I. Acids with a Fiery Sulphur; as, Butyrum An∣timonii, Ol. Vitrioli, Arsenicum, which is com∣pounded of a strong Sulphur, and Acid Salt, whereby it is Corrosive. II. Acids mixt with Minerals; Mercurius Subli∣matus, which hath the Acid of Spirit of Salt; Crystalli Lunae, which have the Acid of Spirit of Nitre. Vegetable Causticks are the strong Vesicatories: 1. Acrids, above-mentioned, abounding with a Volatile Salt; as, Ranunculus Flammeus. 2. Milky, Gummous, Acrid Plants; Tithymalus, Esula,-Ficus, Euphorbium.
The Fourth CLASS. Of External Narcoticks, WHich allay Pains, and discuss and soften Tumors: Sweet and Bitterish, Slimy, Sub-acrid Narcoticks. Rad. Solani, Cynoglossi, Hyoscyami. Fol. Solani, Cynoglossi, Hyoscyami, Tabaci, Stra∣monii, Papaveris, Lactucae, Cicutae. Ʋng. ex Stramonio, Tabaco, Ʋng. Populeon, A∣nodynum, &c. Ol. Solani, Ol. Express. ex sem. Hyoscyami, Pa∣paveris. Suc. Solani, Lactucae. Aqu. distillat. Solani, Lactucae, Papaveris. Gum. Opium in Sp. Vini solutum.
The Fifth CLASS. Of Anodynes, WHich, by their Mucilage, allay Pain, moi∣stening and cooling the dry Fibres, re∣laxing the tense; and also, by their warm Heat do please the Spirits irritated by Pain. Emollients and Suppuratives have the same Muci∣lage and gentle warm Parts, by which they cherish the Natural Heat of Animals, relaxing the Skin, and thereby soften and suppurate Tumors. I. Slimy Sub-acrid: Rad. Malvae, Althaeae, Liliorum, Symphyti, Si∣gil. Solomonis. Fol. Malvae, Althaeae, Erigeri, Tiliae, Ʋlmi, Vi∣olarum, Atriplicis, Mercurialis, Parietariae. Sem. Lini, Psyllii, Malvae, Faenugraeci, Hordei, Tritici, Panis Medulla. Cort. Ʋlmi, Tiliae. Flor. Malvae, Liliorum, Nymphaeae, Meliloti, Genistae, Croci. Fruct. Passulae, Ficus, Dactyli, Baccae Taxi, Visci, Agrifolii, Oxyacanthi. Animal. Lumbrici, Cochleae, Vitellus Ovi, Sperma Ranarum, Lac, Brodia Pinguia. Decoctum Capitis & pedum Vervecis.
Ol. Liliorum, Lini, Amygdal. Nymphaeae, Pedum Bubuli, Ovorum, Olivarum, Violarum, Lum∣bricorum. Pingued. & Adip. Ʋrsi, Porcl, Gallinae, Homi∣nis, Vulpis, Butyrum, Medullae Vituli, Cervi, Bovis, Sperma Ceti. Empl. De Mucilaginibus, Diachylum. Ʋng. Dialthaeae, Basilic. Pectoral. Resumptivum. II. Strong Emollients, which are Mucilaginous, and have an Oyly Acrid to discuss and attenuate, as well as a Gum or Mucilage to soften. Rad. Caeparum tostarum, Bryoniae. Fol. Porri, Digitalis, Bryoniae, Sambuci. Gum. Ammoniacum, Bdellium, Galbanum, Saga∣penum. Empl. Diachylum cum Gumm. de Cicuta cum Am∣moniaco, de Ranis, de Galbano. The Sixth CLASS. Of Discutients, WHich open the Pores, and discuss by at∣tenuating the Humor collected in Tu∣mors. I. Bitterish Acrid Aromaticks, or Nervines. Rad. Iridis, Imperatoriae, Angelicae, Calami Aro∣matici, Zedoariae.
Fol. Majoranae, Salviae, Lavendulae, Calaminthae, Hyssopi, Satureiae, Matricariae, Artemisiae. Flo. Chamaemeli, Sambuci, Stoechados, Lavendulae, Rorismarini. Bac. Lauri. Ol. Chamaemeli, Laurinum, Lavendulae, Rorismarini Ʋng. Martiatum. Empl. Diachylum Ireatum, de Baccis Lauri, Ce∣phalicum. II. Fetid Acrid Discutients: Rad. Enulae, Poeoniae, Bryoniae, Aristolochiae. Fol. Rutae, Ballotidos, Cotulae Faetidae, Conyz∣mediae. Spirit. Fuliginis. Gum. Camphora. Ol. Tartari, Guaiaci, Succini. Ʋng. Agrippae. III. Discutients of an Elder Smell being Bitter. Rad. Ebuli, Scrophulariae. Fol. Ebuli, Sambuci, Saponariae, Scrophulariae, Digitalis, Linariae. Ol. Sambuci. Ʋng. Corticis Sambuci & Cataplasm. ex foliis. IV. Sweet Acrid Aromatick Discutients: Rad. Levistici, Apii. Fol. Faeniculi, Apii, Levistici. Sem. Cumini, Faeniculi, Anisi. Ol. Anethinum, Foeniculi Chym.
V. Acrid Discutients: Rad. Raph. Ari, Allii, Porri. Sem. Erucae, Sinapeos. Fol. Alliariae, Thlaspi, Erucae, Nasturtii, Ari. Sp. Cochleariae. Ʋng. è Foliis Nasturtii Aquat. VI. Terebinthinate Discutients: Fol. Sabinae, Cedri, Hyperici, Virg. Aureae. Bacc. Juniperi, Hederae. Ol. Terebinthin. Hyperici, Bacc. Juniperi Chym. Bitumina, Oleum Terrae, Petroleum, Album, Ru∣brum. Ol. Succini Chym. Gum. Aromatic. Tacamahac, Styrax, Ladanum. Fetid Gums, Ammoniacum, Sagapenum. VII. Bitter Acrid Discutients: Fol. Chelidonii, Absinthii, Tanaceti, Eupatorii, Scordii, Chamaedryos, Marrubii. VIII. Animal Discutients having a Faetor: Stercora Caballi, Columbarum, Hirci, Hirun∣dinis Nidus cum Stercore. Sal. Volatil. Spir. Salis Ammoniac. cum Sp. Vini, Sp. C. C. Ʋrinae. Ol. Viperarum, Scorpionum, Bufonum, Lumbrico∣rum, Vulpinum, Catellorum, Hirundinum. IX. Discutients from Fixt and Mixt Salts and Minerals: Lixiv. Absinthii, &c.
Ʋrina, Aq. Calcis, Solutio Nitri, Aluminis usti, Sal. Marin. usti, Sal. Ammoniac. Sapo & Ol. Saponis. X. Mineral Sulphurs: Aq. Chalybeatae & Sulphureae. Cinnabaris, Antimonium, Pyrites, Flor. Sulph. Empl. Diasulph. & Balsam. Sulphuris, Balsamum Antimonii. The Seventh CLASS. Of Cooling External Repellents, which temper the Hot Humor. I. AQueous Mucilages, and crude Juices, and externally cooling Minerals: Rad. Symphyti, Althaeae, Fungi Mucilaginosi. Fol. Nymphaeae, Cucumerum, Melonum, & fructus & aqua; Lens Palustris, Alsine. Aq. Frigida, & Portulacae, Lactucae, Nymphaeae. Animal. Albumen Ovi, Sperma Ranarum. Ol. Violarum, Nymphaeae. Ʋng. Alb. Camph. Popul. Alabastrinum. de Calcelota. Gum. Tragacanthi, Sanguis Draconis. Empl. de Minio.
Mucilaginous Earths; Bol. Arm. Amylum. Mineral Coolers; Minium, Cerussa. II. Repelling Acids, and Mixt Acids: Succus Limonum, & Malorum Sylvestrium. Fol. Plantag. Lapath. Polyg. Semper-Vivi. Acetum, Lac Virginis, Sacch. Saturni, Vitrio∣lum & Phlegma, Alumen. Sal Prunel. & Nitrum, Borax, Sal Ammoniacum. Aq. Sublimati. Empl. Diapalm. Ʋng. Nutritum. III. Astringent Repellers, which give an A∣striction to the Fibres, and stop the Humor out of the part. 1. Austeres: Rad. Tormentil. Bistortae, Hippolapathi. Cort. Querci, Aceris, Fagi, &c. Fol. Rubi, Equiseti. Sem. Lapathorum, Sumach. Flor. Balaustiorum, Rosarum. Ol. Rosarum, Myrtillorum. Ʋng. Comitissae, de Bolo. Empl. contra Rupturam. 2. Minerals: Ochra, Crocus Martis astringens, Bolus Ar∣mena, Saccharum Saturni. Gum. Mastiches, Sanguis Draconis.
The Eighth CLASS. Of Vulneraries Internal and External. First, CLeansing Vulneraries. 1. Strong Bitters Slimy: Rad. Gentianae, Aristolochiae, Scrophulariae, fa∣rina Lupinorum, Fabarum. Fol. Saponariae, Sambuci, Gum. Myrrhae, Aloes. Ʋnguentum Apostolorum. 2. Bitter Acrids of a Dead-Nettle Smell, and those have an Astringency also: Fol. Scordii, Chamaedryos, Salviae Agrestis, Mar∣rubii, Ballotidos. 3. Bitter Acrids Sub-Astringents: Fol. Absinthii, Abrotani, Rad. Rubiae. 4. Cephalick Cleansers, Bitterish Acrid Sub-Astringents: Rad. Zedoariae, Iridis, Fol. Chamaemeli, Menthae, Hyssopi, Dictamni, Millefol. Empl. De Betonicâ, Ʋnguentum Enulatum. 5. Sweet Acrid Aromaticks: Radic, Apii, Foeniculi, Petroselini, Chaerefolii.
Lignum Sassaphras. Sem. Dauci. Ʋnguentum ex Apio. Secondly, Sarcoticks. 1. Laurel-Bitters; these cleanse by the Bitter∣ness, and heal by the Astringency: Fol. Verbenae, Centaurii Minoris, Vincae Per∣vincae, Trifolii Palustris, Fol. Lauri, Cerasi, Ligustri, Ol. Laurini. Cortex & Lignum Guaiaci, & Fraxini. 2. Bitterish Slimy Astringents: Fol. Lamiorum, Galeopsidis, Panacis, Syderitidis, Veronicae, Bugulae, Hederae Terrestris. 3. Strong Smoaky Bitter Astringents: Jacea, Scabiosa, Hieraceum, Auricula Muris. 4. Bitterish Aromatick Astringents: Filipendula, Pimpinella, Myrtus, Agrimonia. 5. Terebinthinate Bitterish Astringents: Vid. Diureticks. Rad. Valerianae, & Enulae Campan. Consolida Saracenica, Fol. Hyperici, Saniculae, Gera∣niorum, Androsaemi, Nummulariae, &c. Ol. Terebinthinae, Hyperici, Balsami Peruviani, Bals. Sulph. Petroleum. Ʋnguent. Basilici, de Gummi Elemi. Gum. Resina, Olibanum, Colophonia. Bitumina, Succinum. Cortex Thuris.
Thirdly, Epuloticks: I. Which make the Cicatrix by Astringency. 1. Bitterish Stypticks, or Austeres: Rad. Tormentil. Bistort. &c. Cortex Quercin. Aceris, Betulae, Gallae, Alni, &c. Vide Astringent Repellents. 2. Gritty Earths, which imbibe the Humidity of an Ulcer, and the Acid in those which are sor∣did, and thereby become Styptick. Creta, Oc. Cancrorum, Testae Ovorum combust. Ostrearum, C. Cervi ustum, & Ossa combusta, Corallium, Crocus Martis, Lithargytus, Os Sepiae, Spodium, Suber ustum, Cerussa, Mini∣um, Plumbum ustum, Terra Vitrioli dulcis. Amalgama Mercurii cum Plumbo, Lapis Cala∣minaris, Tutia, Ʋnguentum album, desicca∣tivum rubrum, de Tutia, Diapompholyge. 3. Astringent Earths: Bolus, Ochra, Empl. de Bolo. 4. Sweet Stypticks as the Ferns: Rad. Osmundae, Filicis maris, Saccharum Satur∣ni, Lac Virginis, Lac Aureum ex Gallis, & Solutione Lythargyri. 5. Rough Acids: Vitriolum, Alumen, Lapis Medicamentosus.
Fourthly, Conglutinatives for fresh Wounds. 1. Bitterish Stypticks Cicatrisers. 2. Terebinthinates. 3. Laurel-Bitters, Astringents; and these Two last cleanse as well as Cicatrise. 4. Earthy Astringents. 5. Mucilages very Clammy or Gummy, stick∣ing the Wound together; and those are the only proper Conglutinatives. Rad. Symphyti, Sigill. Solomonis, Typhae, Cyno∣glossi, Fol. Symphyti, Cynoglossi, Tabaci, Fa∣rinae Tritici, Hordei. Gum. Arabici, Tragacanthi, Gluten, Sanguis Draco∣nis, Mummia, Resina, Pix, Cera, Terebinthina. Albumen Ovi, Gelatinae ex Ras. C. C. Decoct. Sarsae, interné. Empl. Gryseum, Stypticum Crollii. Ol. Ophioglossi, Hyperici, & Balsama Vulneraria, Empl. contra Rupturam. Fifthly, Digestives in Ulcers. 1. Oleose or Fats: Ol. Rosarum, Batyrum, Ol. Olivarum. 2. Terebinthinates: Gum. Elemi, Olibanum, Resina, Terebinthina cum Vitello Ovi, Mastiche, Cera, Mel, Ʋnguen∣tum▪ Basilicum.
3. Mucilaginous Herbs and Meals: Farina Hordei, Fenugraeci, Tritici, Lini. Rad. Liliorum, Malvae, Althaeae, Cynoglossi. Fol. Digitalis. Flores Croci, Liliorum. Sixthly, Cathaereticks, or Eaters of Proud Flesh. 1. Burnt Minerals very Drying: Vitriolum ustum, Colcothar, Cinnabaris, Alumen ustum, Pumex ustus, Pompholyx, Sal ustum, Aes ustum, Lapis Calaminaris, Antimonium ustum. And Burnt Vegetables, Gallae ustae. 2. Mixt Salts: Aqua Calcis, Lapis Medicamentosus, Acetum. 3. Minerals mixt with Acids, or Vitriolick Acrids: Ʋnguentum Aegyptiacum, Aes Viride, Mercu∣rius Praecipitatus, Aq. Sublimati, Vitriolum. 4. Acids: Ol. Vitrioli, Sp. Salis, Nitri, Aq. Fortis. All Acids and Mixt Acids (as well as Bitters and strong Stypticks) hinder the Putrefaction in Ul∣cers, and correct the Acrid Volatile Salts which corrode: for where any Putrefaction is, there is a Salt very Volatile; therefore in putrid Ulcers the Acid does not abound, but most chiefly in undi∣gested, thin, gleeting Ulcers it abounds.
4. Strong Bitters Acrid: Pulv. Sabinae, Radix Aristolochiae, Aloes, Cucu∣mis Agrestis. 5. Strong Stypticks: Gallae, Fl. Balaustiorum, (hence a Decoction is made for sordid Ulcers) ex Gallis, Alu∣mine & Vitriolo. Seventhly, Medicines against the Caries of the Bones. 1. The Strongest Bitter Acrid Cephalicks: Rad. Iridis, Ol. Caryophyllorum, Succini. 2. Strong Acrid Causticks: Gum. Euphorbii. Eighthly, Stoppers of Bleeding, inwardly and outwardly, in Wounds. I. Inwardly. 1. Watry Mucilages incrassating: Rad. Symphyti. Albumen Ovi. Gum. Arabicum. Limaces, Lac, Bolus Armena. 2. Acids Coagulating the Blood, Serum and Lympha, and fixing Acrid Salts: Tinctura Rosarum cum Sp. Vitrioli, Succ. Limonum, Lac ebutyratum, Sp. Salis Dulcis, &c.
3. Watry Bitterish Astringents, and Acid A∣stringents: Fol. Plantag. Polygoni, Succ. Acaciae, Hypoci∣stidis, Rad. Bistort. Tormentill. &c. II. Outwardly. 1. Acids and Cool Astringents, applied as Fron∣tals: Oxycratum. 2. Fetid Smells: Stercus Porcinum, Muscus Terrestris, Opium. 3. Amulets causing Fear: Bufo exiccatus, usnea ex Cranio. To those must be added Revulsions by Bleeding, Cupping in the Neck, Purging, Compression of the Arteries, near to the Bleeding. 4. Causticks put upon Tents: Colcothar, Crepitus lupi, Fungus Quercinus, Gyp∣sum ustum, Alumen ustum, Lapis infernalis. 5. Vitriolicks applied with Tents: Atramentum, Fuligo Cacabi aenei, Vitriolum Caeruleum solutum. 6. Powdered Gums, which help the thickning of the Blood, and therewith stop the Orifices: Terra Sigillata, Thus, Mastiche, Aloe, Telae Aranearum, Pili Leporini, Ossa & Lintea calcinata, Amylum, Resina.
Of Poysoned Wounds by Animals. I. THe Venemous Poyson must be extracted and destroyed. First, It is destroyed by 1. Fire, or actual Cautery, which is applied to the Bites of Serpents. 2. By Medicines contrary to Fermentation and Putrefaction. 1. Acids; as, Spongia aceto madida. 2. Mixt Salts: Sal commune, Halec. 3. Oyls: Ol. Scorpionum, Succini, Caryophyllorum. 4. Bitters: Gentiana, Aristolochia, Centaurium, Verbena, Ruta, Theriaca, Mithridatium, Myrrha, Aloe. 5. Acrids: Cepe, Allium, Sinapi, Piper. Secondly, It is drawn out 1. By Cupping-Glasses. 2. By the Oyls mentioned, with which all Oyly Acrids (as the small active Particles of Poysons seem to be) easily mix. 3. By Vinous Spirits, which easily imbibe such Particles. Sp. Vini, Sp. Rorismarini, Aq. Vitae.
4. By some parts of the Animal applyed, with which the Poyson readily mixes. Pulvis Serpentum calcinatorum, Bilis Ser∣pentum & Capita. 5. By Fomentations of Cephalicks. The Wound, after the Poyson is removed, is to be treated as in Ordinary Wounds; but because in∣ternal Antidotes are necessary, and they cannot be known without some general Notions of Poysons, I shall next discourse of Poysons. Of POYSONS. THere is observed to be Poysonous Minerals and Animals, as well as Vegetables. Poysons either corrode the Stomach, or coagulate the Serum of the Blood, or putrefie the whole Mass, or else act most on the Spirits. I. I will mention Mineral Poysons first, which taken inwardly corrode the Stomach, and gripe, vomit, and cause Hiccoughs and Faintings, and at last gangrene it, and give a blackness to it. 1. Arsenic is corrosive, by a particular Texture of Sulphureous Particles and Acids. The proper Antidotes for it, are those which destroy its Tex∣ture;
as Fixt Salts and Acids, as Nitre: But first we must endeavour its Evacuation, and the securing of the Stomach, as is hereafter prescribed against corrosive Poysons. 2. Antimony is less corrosive, by a particular Texture of Sulphureous parts, and Acid, and pro∣duces violent Evacuations with Convulsions. This Texture is also destroyed by Acids, which fix the Sulphur; and Fixt Salts, which take off the Pun∣gent Acid. 3. Mercury sublimate is corrosive, by a parti∣cular Texture made by the particles of Quicksilver, dissolved by an Acid: And this vomits, corrodes, and produces Convulsions; but this going into the Blood coagulates it, and produces Salivation: This Acid is absorbed by Fixt and Volatile Salts, and so the corrosive Texture is destroyed. 4. Aqua Fortis corrodes and vomits by its Acid pungent Figures: The Acid must be altered by Ab∣sorbents; as, Earths, Steel, Alkalizate Salts. And the same serve for Oyl of Vitriol, Spirit of Salt and Nitre; and for all other Mineral Preparations made by Acids; as Vitriol, which corrodes and vomits, Aes Viride, Squama Aeris, which is vitriolated in the Stomach. The particular Texture of all these is altered by Absorbers and Precipitaters of Acid; but the Brass∣savour taste is best cured by Spirit of Salt. 5. Calx viva and Gypsum are corrosive to the Stomach, by a fiery Fixt Salt, which is corrosive;
and produces Pain, Thirst, and a Dysentery. Acids temper the fieriness of Fixt Salts; and Fat Earths, Mucilages, and Slimy Oyls do the same. Ale will not cause Lime to effervesce. 6. Lead, Ceruss, Red-Lead, and Litharge, produce Pains, Gripes, and Dysenteries; and Litharge binds the Belly. The Sulphureous parts in Lead being corrosive, these are best cured by fixing them with Acids; and the dryness of the Lead is corrected by Oyls. Lead is turned into a Salt by Spirit of Vinegar, which will more easily pass off the Sto∣mach; to which that is also observed to be very hurtful, causing Nauseousness by its Sweetness. 7. Glass and Diamonds are only Poyson by their sharp edges which fret the Guts; and these cannot be altered, wherefore they are very dangerous Poysons. II. Minerals are Poysonous by their Fumes, which pass through the Organ of Smelling, and im∣mediately act on the Spirits; as the Fumes of Ar∣senic and Antimony which kill suddenly, by destroy∣ing and fixing the Spirits: Or Quicksilver Fumes, which cause Palsies, by coagulating the Succus Nervosus: Or the Fumes of Lead, which smell sweet, and produce a Convulsive Asthma, and also dry the Lungs. Oyls, Mucilages, and Watry Medicines are used to cure this Asthma.
II. Vegetable POYSONS. First, VEgetable Poysons corrosive. I. The pure Acrid Volatile Salt in the Cress-Tastes, are a little corrosive by their pointed Fi∣gures; but in the differing kinds of true Corro∣sives, there is some difference in the Figures of the Volatile Salt, which is given it by a particular Texture of Oyl and Acid, which are Ingredients in the making of this Salt of a hooked Figure. 1. This Corrosive Salt is mixed with much Wa∣ter in Ranunculus, &c. These cause Vomitings, Gripes, and Pains in the Stomach. 2. This Corrosive Salt is mixt with a well-di∣gested Oyl, in Clematis and other Fragrant Corro∣sives; and this also burns, blisters and vomits. 3. This Corrosive Salt is mixt with a little Sli∣miness and Elder-smell, in Hellebor, Colchicum. 4. This Corrosive Salt is mixt with much Water, and a Resinous Oyl; as in Spurge, they burn, bli∣ster, purge and vomit violently; as Spurge, Cam∣bogia, &c. 5. If this Corrosive Salt is joyned with a great Foetor, it produces a Venemous Plant; as in Aconi∣tum, Napellus, Cicuta: Nature has marked these Plants, by the black Roots, and given them a con∣siderable Foetor to offend our Smelling, and thereby
cause an Aversion. These last produce Giddiness, Delirium, burnings in the Stomach, Inflations of the Body and Fever. They first corrode the Stomach, then pass into the Blood, and at last affect the Spirits. Acids change and fix this Corrosive Salt and Fetid Smell. 6. Because Fetid differs but in degree from Aro∣maticks, therefore there are some Corrosive Poysons of a Smell mixt of Aromatick and Fetid; as Ci∣cutaria, Madnep, and Coriander; and these have a strong heady Smell, Sweet and Offensive, with sweet Roots, by which their Acrimony is allayed: And they act by a Vapour which passes through the Stomach and Blood without much trouble; but they cause a Vertigo in the Spirits and a slight Delirium. These have their Volatile Oyly Salt fixt and changed by Acids. Secondly, Vegetable Poysons, which have a Faetor producing Sleepiness; as all Narcoticks, Hyoscya∣mus, Cynoglossum, Solanum, Mandragora, Nux Vomica. Solanum Lethale produces a Suffocation by its Sli∣miness, as the Mushroms do; but the Fetid part of all the Opiates mentioned, produce an Itching in the Flesh, which is a sign of a Volatile Salt in Opiates, and a Giddiness, Delirium, Stupor, and in too great a quantity Convulsions, low Pulse, and Breathing slowly, and at last Death.
Some Opiates which are very Slimy, Bitter, and Acrid, purge and vomit violently; as Tabaco, and Solanum Lignosum, and Marvel of Peru. Mandragora has a strong Narcotick Foetor, but something Aromatick in the Fruit. And there are poysonous Narcoticks which have an Aromatick mixt Smell; as Pomum Amoris, and Flos Africanus. Opiates were accounted cold, because of their Mucilage, but their Foetor makes them hot. The proper Antidotes for Narcoticks, are, 1. Those things which correct the Bitter, Acrid, and Foetor of Narcoticks, as all the Acid Alexi∣pharmacks, Sp. Vitrioli, Sulphuris, Aceti, Succ. Li∣monum. 2. Those Fetids which excite the Motion of the Spirits, and promote their Agitation; as Asa Foeti∣da, Castoreum, Crocus. 3. Those fragrant Aromaticks which supply new Spirits, and give a quick and brisk Motion to them: And therefore large quantities of Wine are recommended by Galen against Opiates. 4. Those Medicines which correct the Sliminess of Narcoticks; as Sal Tartari, and the Lixivia, these open Gums, by taking off the Acid which coagu∣lates the Mucilage into a Gum. Thirdly, Vegetables become Poysonous by a very indigested crude Mucilage, as in Mushroms, from whence there is produced in the Stomach a crude Juyce, which not being digested by a Fer∣ment,
like other raw Meat, it produces a violent Cholera, and, by the Earthy Foetor, (observable in Mushroms, a Strangulation, Gripes, and sometimes a Stupor is produced. Acrids, Aromaticks, and Carminatives are here most useful against Mushroms, with which there∣fore they are pickled to give them a Taste, and also to help their Digestion, as with Spice, Pepper, Dill, &c. we use also Vinegar, and austere Pears are commended to stop Vomiting, and to correct the Fetid part of Mushroms. To this kind of Poy∣son may Cucumbers, Melons, and other crude Plants be reduced, which are Poysons to some Persons, not being easily digested by them. I have mentioned Vegetables as Poysons to Men, tho' Insects and other Animals feed on them safely; and Dogs cannot be Poysoned by any of our Coun∣try Narcoticks. And I find this observed in Sen∣nertus: Multa sunt Animalia, quae cibis nobis venenosis pascuntur, sicut Sturni cicutâ, & Coturnices veratro, Anates bufones aquaticos devorant, Ciconiae Serpentes, Gallinae Araneas, quae tamen Animalia homini in cibum veniunt. III. Animal POYSONS. First, COrrosive Internal Animal Poysons; as Cantharides, which have a fiery Vola∣tile Salt, which frets the Passages of Ʋrine, and
sometimes produces bloody Ʋrine. This effect is best corrected by Milk, Oyl, and Emulsions: And also Acids fix the Volatility of those Salts. These hot Insects corrode the Guts, and produce a Dysen∣tery; but if they pass into the Blood, they there cause Heat, Fever, Delirium, Vertigo, or swellings of the Face or Skin, and sharpness of Ʋrine. These are the Effects of Animal Poysons taken Inwardly; their Poysons being from a fiery Volatile Salt; as in Toads, Spiders, and other Insects. Secondly, Corrosive Animal Poysons which hap∣pen externally, I. By the sting of a Bee; these are also a very Acrid Salt; as it appears by the Experiment men∣tioned in Wedelius, Si ictus Apum vel Vespae ungue excipiatur, & degustetur, salinum aut hujusmodi quid manifestè deprehendi potest. This Acrid Salt will kill a Viper if a Wasp sting him. This Animal Liquor being instilled warm into the Vessels of a∣nother Animal, there ferments the Humors of the Animal which is stung; and by this new Fermen∣tation a Putrefaction is produced, which destroys the natural Crasis of all the Humors. Such is the nature of the Stinging of Common and Roman Nettles, which send out a Saline, Acrid Liquor, which enters into the Pores of an Animals Skin, and there instills that Venome cold, which is the cause of Itching, Burning and Blistering of the Skin. I find the same Acrid in the Root of
the Nettle; and there is also a Sweetness in Nettle-Roots. The stinging Acrid Juyce is the Juyce of the proper Vessels of Nettles; and therefore it is not improbable, that the proper Vessels of the Plant constitute those Spikes which prick the Skin, and convey the Venomous Liquor into it: And by this we find that Plants and Animals agree in their Stings and Poysons, as well as in their Principles, which I have mentioned. II. The Corrosive Animal Poyson which happens Externally, by the Biting of another Creature which is either naturally Venemous, or else made Vene∣mous by a Disease. 1. The Bitings of a Viper, or other Serpent, pro∣duce Pain, Swelling, and make the part Black, Livid, or Red. The Animal, after a few hours, vomits, faints, has cold Sweats, and Convulsions, and then dies. The Blood of the Poysoned Animal is Black, and coagulates; as it appears upon Dis∣section, and that gives the Vomiting and Blackness to the Intestines: From the Coagulation the Pain and Lividness of the part proceeds; and from thence also the Faintings, cold Sweats, and Convul∣sions arise. So that all the Symptoms in an Ani∣mal Bitter proceeds from the Coagulation of the Blood. The cause of this Coagulation cannot be from any Acid in the Viper, for we find no considerable Acid but in the Stomachs of Animals: And we find
all the Acids in Animals, either joyned with the Salt or Fats of Animals, and no Acid is naturally pure in the Humors of Animals; therefore the Coagulation must be deduced from some other reason. We observe that Rennet coagulates Milk, and we find no Acid in it sufficient to coagulate so great a quantity of Milk, as one spoonful is used to do. We find that Rennet will not immediately coagu∣late the Milk, but after some space. The White of an Egg thickens and curdles Milk, by fermenting with it, and not by an Acid. And we find that in the Stomachs of Animals Milk is coagulated by its Ferment. Blood being produced out of Milk, it may well be supposed, that Blood may be coagulated the same way as Milk is. I will therefore compare the manner of Opera∣tion of Rennet on Milk, and Poysonous Ferments on the Blood of Animals. 1. The Milk is warmed before its Coagulation, by which the Rennet is sooner dispersed through it, and the Fermentation is promoted. So in Poysons: The Saliva of the Animal is not Poysonous, unless it be instilled Hot from the living Animal into the Wound of another living Animal; for then the Poysonous Ferment has the greatest activity and agitation of parts: And a Dead Ani∣mal receives no alteration by a Poysonous Bite. 2. The taste of Rennet is Slimy, Sub-acid, or Saltish; and this slimy Liquor dissolves from the putrefied Skins of a Stomach.
The taste of the Saliva of a Viper (as Monsieur Charras describes it) is not Bitter, but tastes flat, like Oyl of Almonds, and leaves, after a little while, some Acrimony in the Mouth, such as may be di∣scerned in all kind of Spittle. The Yellowness of the Saliva, argues that it has some Tincture from the Gall; and if it be like other Spittle in Taste, it is Sub-acid and not Acrid, as Charras says. A Putrefaction is necessary to produce Rennet, and a high Digestion in a particular Animal is requi∣site to produce a Poysonous Saliva; and we find Dogs to have a Poysonous Saliva when their Di∣gestions are raised, and Humors putrefied by a Fever, which occasions the Madness. Tho' the Saliva taken from the Viper cannot Poyson another Animal, yet the same fresh and warm instilled amongst the Juices of an Animal, will readily ferment them, and putrefie them. It is observed that the Bite of a Mad-Dog does not venome the Wound considerably, if the Bite be upon any part covered with Cloaths; but if it be up∣on a bare place, the Bite is generally fatal. It is evi∣dent, That the Saliva in one is more insinuated into the Wound, than in the other; and therefore the Wound is more Fatal. From whence I believe the Saliva to be the Animal Ferment, coagulating the Blood of any bitten Animal. The sliminess of the Saliva makes it more certainly stick to the Wound; and this Slime we observe in Barme, which is a Ferment as well as Spittle and Rennet: with this
Slime is usually joyned some more active Spiri∣tuous, Brisk, Oyly, Acid Particles, which give the first motion to Liquors which are Fermentiscible. This Slime helps the dissolution of the aery Par∣ticles in Liquors; and by this those fine parts are preserved; as in the Bubbles of Barme. These brisk spirituous Particles are more brisk in some Ferments, than in others; and therefore produce different degrees of Fermentation; and the one kills quicker than the other. 3. Rennet, after a small time, thickens and co∣agulates the Milk; and a small quantity of it coa∣gulates a great quantity: one Spoonful coagulating some Gallons of Milk. The Poysonous Bites of Vipers, after a few hours, coagulate the Blood, and produce the Symptoms I have mentioned. The quantity of the Poysonous Ferment is very small, and we find all Ferments to work in a little quantity; as in the use of Barm∣leaven; and many Medicines, as Opium, produce great Effects, by the quantity of one Grain: And amongst the corrosive Animal Poysons, a grain of Cantharides produces violent Symptoms. Milk and Blood attain their natural Crasis by a Fermentation in the Stomach, and receive their per∣fection by divers Circulations; but if after they have attained their perfect Mixtures and Texture, they be further fermented, they are then putrefied; the Acid being then separated from its Texture with
the Oyl and Earth, it precipitates and coagulates the whole Mass of Milk or Blood: So when we ferment Wines or Beer, which is perfectly clear and spiritu∣ous, this second Fermentation makes it eager or Acid, and destroys its natural sweetness and brisk∣ness. We generally observe Acid smells after the Fermentation of Vegetables, and in Animal Sto∣machs; so that Acidities in putrefied Bodies, are the effects of Putrefaction, which separate that from the Oyl and Earth, and thereby cause Coagu∣lations in those Liquors which have Viscid and Fibrous Parts. The most proper Antidotes against Animal Poy∣sons, which are the Bites of Venemous Crea∣tures, are, I. The Poyson must be destroyed in the Wound, or drawn out, as is mentioned in Poysoned Wounds. II. The coagulation of the Blood must be pre∣vented by those Alexipharmacks which hinder and stop the Fermentation; as, 1. Volatile Animal Salts; as, Sal Volatile Viperarum, &c. 2. All the Alexipharmacks which resist Pu∣trefaction. Vide. 3. Diaphoreticks, which discuss the Venemous Ferment by Sweating. Vide.
4. All absorbers of Acids do prevent the Coa∣gulation of the Blood. 5. Cordials which strengthen and supply Spi∣rits, during the coagulation of the Blood. 6. At last when the coagulation is prevented; the cool Cordials are necessary to allay Heat, Thirst, and Fevers, arising from the Coagulation, or the long use of hot Anti∣dotes. The Bite of a Mad-Dog is cured after the same manner, as those of Vipers. The Bite of a Dog not being Venemous, the Fever renders his Spittle Venemous; and then it causes Trembling and Fear at present; and after a Months time, or such a space, it occasions a little Fever, Vo∣miting, Delirium, Quinsie, and Convulsions of the Breast and Throat. And the same Symptoms I ob∣served in a Woman who dyed by the Bite of a Mad-Cat. This Woman was afraid of Liquids; and those that are bit by Mad-Dogs have a Hydrophobia from their Delirium, or else from a difficulty of swallow∣ing Liquids. And to these, Antidotes are to be given in a solid form, which they will take well. I put a large quantity of Diascordium into Milk, and after some Rennet, which turned it presently; and therefore these famous Antidotes do not hinder the coagulation of Poysons. I boyled Garlick in Milk, but that would not hinder the Coagulation by Rennet.
I mixed Sal Volatile Oleosum with Milk, and put Rennet to it, but it would not curdle; therefore this is a good Medicine against Venemous Bites. I mixed some Lixivium of Ferne with Milk, and put Rennet to it, but it would not turn; and there∣fore Fixt Salts are good against coagulating Ve∣noms. I mixt some Lobsters-Claws, burnt and powdered, with Milk and Water, and put some Rennet to it, but it turned immediately; and therefore neither Testa∣ceous Medicines nor Vegetable Acrids (as appears by Garlick and Diascordium) can be confided in, but only Volatile and Fixt Salts; and therefore these are the best Antidotes against Venoms, which act on the Blood by Fermentation and Coagu∣lation. The Symptoms of Malignant Fevers are so like those of Fermentative Poysons, that the occasion of them seems to be some Animal Humors Putrefied, and coagulating the Blood: And the same Medicines cure Poysons and malignant Fevers. In malignant Fevers the strength is immediately gone without much Fever; but a lightness in the Head and Deli∣rium, with Faintings, cold Sweats, and Convulsions, are ordinary Symptoms attending it. The Infection of malignant Fevers is communi∣cated by Effluviums, which are only the Humors of the Diseased Person in the form of a Vapor; and therefore Effluviums may propagate Infection as well as the Humors of the Body. These Effluviums, by
which the Infection is propagated, pass (like Fetid Smells) thro' the Organ of Smelling, and mix with the Succus Nervosus, and with it circulate into the Blood, out of the Nerves, whither the Succus Ner∣vosus runs, as all other Glandulous Lympha's do. These Infectious Fumes may mix by Inspiration with the Lympha in the Lungs; and with it pass by the Lymphaticks of the Lungs into the Blood, which is coagulated by them. It is not so probable that Infection is propagated by the Spittle, being Infected, because the Digestion in the Stomach alters the Texture of Animal Li∣quors; and consequently their Poysonous quality: and thereby Oyl of Vitriol, Milk, and other Liquors, which Poyson an Animal, being injected into the Veins, are made Innocent by passing thro' the Di∣gestions of the Stomach. The Cure of Corrosive Poysons in general, is, 1. To Vomit up the Poyson immediately by Oyly Vomits; as, Ol. Olivarum, Amygdalarum, Bu∣tyrum: And those Poysons which dissolve in Water, may be Vomited up by warm Water plentifully taken, as in Sublimate; but Oyls best dissolve Cor∣rosive Sulphurs. 2. Oyly Mucilaginous things are necessary to purge downwards the Poyson, if it be in the Guts; as Cassia, and lenitive Emollient Oyly Clysters.
3. Mucilages, Oyls, &c. temper the Acrid Cor∣rosiveness: Lac, Juscula Pinguia, Emulsiones, Mucilago sem. Cydon. in aq. hordei, decoctum ficuum, Oryza cum lacte, Mucilago Althaeae, sem. Cydoniorum, & Gum. Tragacanth. extract. cum aq. Ros. & Melle, misceantur in Electuarium, Gargarismatae ex Mu∣cilaginosis; fotus emollientes Stomacho applicen∣tur. 4. Absorbers of Acids; as, Sal Tartari, Crystallus, & Testacea, & Lixivia. 5. Proper Antidotes which destroy the Texture on which the Corrosiveness depends, and those I have mentioned. The End of the Fifth Part.
ΦΑΡΜΑΚΟ-ΒΑΣΑΝΟΣ: OR, THE Touch-stone of Medicines, &c. The Sixth Part. A New Method for distinguishing VEGETABLES Into several CLASSES, By the Taste and Smell and their Several Iuices. Quot Plantarum Species extant, totidem peculiares Succi inveniuntur. Malpighius Anatom. Plan∣tarum. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.
A new Method for distinguish∣ing Vegetables into several Classes, by the Taste and Smell, and their Oyly Juices. CHAP. I. Of the Anatomy of Plants and their several Juices contained in their proper Vessels. I HAVE mentioned many Varieties of Com∣pound Tastes in Plants, and have intimated, That they depend on their different Juices, and the particular Digestions of them. I think therefore my self obliged to give some further account of the Original of these Juices, and the di∣stinct Vessels in which they are prepared and con∣tained, but must refer the Reader to the Anatomy of Plants, Written by the curious Malpighius, and Dr. Grew; from whom I have collected what I thought necessary for the Explication of the Vessels, and Juices of Plants.
Plants consist of Two Parts, Vessels and Juices; and in this they resemble Animals, which are con∣stituted of the same parts. First, The Ligneous Pipes which run all the length of the Plant, and constitute the Woods. These Ligneous Fibres are described by Malpighius, as hollow Tubes. These are placed in parcels, and by their Inclination to each other, they make a Net, whose spaces are filled by the Bladders, which are inserted Horizontally towards the Pith; and these Bladders are open into one another, and receive their Juice from the Ligneous Fibres or Pipes. The Sap rises most apparently by those Ligneous Pipes, which stand in a ring betwixt the Wood and the Bark, and others standing near the Pith; these are called the Lymphatick Vessels, from the crude Juice they contain. The Wood consists of these Antiquated Lympha∣ticks, which grow every Year; and by the woody Pipes, the Sap rises only in the Spring, but more constantly and plentifully by the Lymphaticks. These Lymphaticks are in all Plants, because there are Ligneous Parts, which are hollow Pipes. The Juices of these Lymphaticks may be gathered in the Spring, by tapping of Birch-Trees: this may be collected in great quantity, in a small time; and that quantity of Sap was necessary for the Increase of the Tree, the Leaves and Julus, which annually grow.
This Sap is not the proper Oyly Sap of the Birch, because this rises in the Spring, and has not had sufficient time to be digested into an Oyly Gum or Resin: Such as is that Juice which gives a Bitter∣ness to Birch-Bark. Neither is this Sap of Birch a pure Elementary Water, because it tastes Sweetish, and looks Milky as Chyle does. In this Sap is a mixture of the Vegetable Prin∣ciples; and therefore after the Distillation of Birch-Water, a Resinous Sediment is left, as Etmuller observes. This Liquor turns sowre with keeping; and by Fermentation it becomes Vinous. This Sap is the most crude Juice of Vegetables, as it is separated from the Earth by the Ligneous Pipes, which perform the Office of Lacteals in Vegetables; and therefore this Sap may be called the Lymphatick Chyle of Vegetables. The Lacteals in Animals, are properly Lympha∣tick Vessels, in which both Chyle and Lympha are contained. The Coats of the Root strain this Juice from the Earth. This ascends by the pressure of the Air external∣ly; by the Spring of the Air included in all Liquors; by the Fermentation of the Juice, or Rarefaction of it by the heat of the Sun: and the ascent of the Sap is much facilitated by the Inclination of the Fibres. The Principles of Vegetables must be looked for in this sweet Lymphatick Liquor; for from this
all other Juices are Fermented and Digested, and they can therefore acquire no other Principles than those contained in it. 1. This Lympha has Water very plentiful to di∣lute the Oyly and Gummy part. 2. By the Sweetness an Oyly part may be obser∣ved, which may be further digested into Oyls, Gum, Resins or Turpentines; for all other Tastes in Animals arise from sweet Chyle, and the same may be asserted to arise in Vegetables, from a Lympha which is in all Plants sweet, more or less. 3. The Acid appears in this Juice, by keeping of it; and this may be called the Tartar of Vegetables; in Acerbs it is most crude, in the Acid Acrid most Volatile. 4. The Viscidity or Mucilaginous Sliminess helps the dissolution of the Oyl in the Lympha, and hence is the nutriment of each Plant prepared, to increase its solid parts. These are therefore the Four only Principles of Vegetables, differently digested in their several Spe∣cies, and varied by the Oyly Juices of the Seeds, which ferment the Lympha into a particular Vege∣table nature, and raise the Oyl of the Lymphatick nutriment, to the same state of Volatility, and the same Texture as the Seed has. Secondly, The soft Cortical Pulpy part of Vege∣tables is a heap of Bladders, and into these the Ligne∣ous Fibres or Pipes empty their Lymphatick Juice,
where this crude Juice is deposited, that it may be Fermented into the Taste of that particular Plant. These Bladders are like the Stomachs in Animals, which, by Fermentation, change the nature of Ve∣getable Food into the Texture of Animal Juices; so the Bladders in the Seeds of a Plant, and all o∣ther parts contain some digested Juice, which Fer∣ments the new Lymphatick Liquor of Plants, and prepares it for its change from a Mineral Juice, in∣to the nature of a Vegetable. In Malpighius's description of Galls, there is an ex∣act description of the rise of the Bladders from the Ligneous Pipes; and we may observe that the Pa∣renchymous Bladders contain the most crude Juices: So in unripe Oranges and other Fruit, as Berries and Nuts, whilst unripe, there is an austere Juice, and this austerity may be observed in all the parts of the Plant. Whence we may observe, That the same Juice is received into all the Bladders at first; but by ripening, which is a long digestion by the heat of the Sun, the Juice in the Bladders of Fruits ferments, by which the austerity or Bitterness turns into Sweet∣ness, as in Nuts; and the acerbity, as appears▪ in Plumbs, into a Vinous Sub-acrid Taste. Malpighius observes, That the Bladders are reti∣cularly inosculated, and open into one another; from whence we may conceive how the Sap which rises by the Ligneous Pipes, may sink or descend by the Bladders towards Winter, when the heat of the Sun is wanting, for the keeping it up in its higher Vessels.
The reason why the Roots, Seeds, and Bark taste differently from the Leaves of some Plants, as in Barberry-Tree, Vines, &c. is, because the bitterness of the Bark depends on the Oyly Vessels, which are there very plentifully, and probably obscure, or else change the acerbity of the Juice in the Bladders; but in the Leaves the Oyly Specifick Vessels are few, and cannot therefore change the Taste of the Sowre∣ness in the Leaves. When the Juices of Vegetables, contained in the Bladders, have fermented, by the Virtue of their original Liquors, contained in the Seed, or by the relicts of the former digestion in the Bladders of the Plant, then the Oyly Juice is prepared for the Spe∣cifick Turpentine Vessels, and the remainder of the Juice in the Bladders is Acerb: So Wines deposite their Tartar by Fermentation; and an Acidity is produced in the Mass of Meat fermented in the Sto∣mach; and Acerbity differs from Tartar by being of a greater Astriction, and a cruder sowre Taste. From hence it appears, That we find all Acerbity only in the Juices contained in the Bladders, and not in the Specifick Vessels: So in Animals, we taste the Acid most evidently in the Stomach, but obscurely in other places. As to the austere Taste of Plants, it is a compo∣sition of a low Bitter, which is mixed with an Acer∣bity; and this compound Taste is lodged in the Bladders, when there is a higher Bitter in the Spe∣cifick Vessels, but in austere Plants, the Acerbity
is in Bladders, and the low Bitterish Taste is in the Specifick Vessels. A crude Juice is observed in the Bladders of Chickweed, &c. and from thence is the crude Taste, from the Indigestion of its Lympha. A Mucilage is observed in the Bladders of Mallows; and therefore, thence a Sliminess may be tasted, as well as from the Muciducts. The great Sweetness in the Fennil-Class shews that the Bladders are full of that Juice: and since the Lympha of Trees tapped is Sweetish, it is probable that this Lympha in Plants is Sweetish, and that it is immediately carried into the Bladders. Thirdly, The Bark contains other proper Vessels, which are called the Specifick Vessels, and may be called the Oyly or Turpentine Vessels, because Tur∣pentine is that Oyly part of Vegetable Juices which is digested or changed from the Mineral Bitumen. And we find in Turpentine all these Tastes, as a Gum or Slime, a Bitterness, an Acrid, and out of it is pre∣pared an Oyl or Resin; and in Aromatick Turpentines, as Juniper, there is a Sweetness; and in Cedar there is a Corrosive Acrid. Because all these Tastes are observable in Turpentine, and that is the most com∣mon Oyl of Vegetables; I take the liberty of naming these Vessels the Turpentine Vessels, or Oyly Vessels; but for distinction sake, I will give more particular Names to each Vessel, from their Juices.
1. The Muciducts, in which a Mucilage or Watry Gum is contained; and these differ only in con∣sistence, Gums being thickned Mucilages: These Vessels are observed in Mallows; and it is digested from a Slime in the Bladders. 2. Sweet Sap Vessels, such as is in the Pea-Tastes, as in Liquorish; this is digested from a Slime, ob∣servable in all Leguminous Plants, by rubbing them. 3. Vessels containing a Bitterish Acrid Milk, which dries into a Gum, as in Cichory, and then it burns like Turpentine, which is a sign of their Oyliness. 4. Vessels containing Acrid Juices, Bitterish, as Celandine, and the Cresses. 5. Corrosive Acrid Milk Vessels, as in Spurge, which inspissate into a Gum, as Cambogia; or a Resin, as Jalap, Scammony. 6. Balsamick, Aromatick, or Fetid Milk or Bal∣sam Vessels, in the Ʋmbelliferous Plants. 7. Common Turpentine Vessels, in Pine and Firre. 8. Resinous Turpentine Vessels, in Rosemary and Sage, and other Bitterish Aromaticks. Malpighius has very clearly described these Ves∣sels, as mutually inosculated; which evidently ap∣pear by the bloody colour in those of an Artichoak: And in another Plant he shews the Specifick Vessels spread over the Bladders, and mutually inosculated; and from the structure it appears, that the Speci∣fick or Turpentine Vessels receive their Juices from the Bladders, and terminate in the Seeds; the Chives
and Terebinthinate Fungi globuli, or Papillae of the Plant. He observes, That where the Juices of Ve∣getables are very clear, and do not inspissate into a Gum, they cannot well be discerned by his Glasses: but they may be described by the Taste and Smell, (as I believe.) When the Juice in the Bladders is fully digested, it is strained into the proper Oyly Terebinthinate Vessels: for by digestion it acquires a particular Tex∣ture fit for Secretion; and the Bladders resemble the Glands in Animals, which are Folliculi membra∣nosi. The Juices in the Bladders are like the Blood in Animals, from whence other Humors are strained; and these Oyly Juices may be compared to the Hu∣mors separated from the Blood, as, Spirits, Seed, Choler, &c. by the Glands or Bladders of Plants. These proper Oyly Juices are designed for the production of the Oyliness manifest in all Seeds, which have the same Taste as these Juices: and as Seeds have their Vessels and Juices from the Vessels and Juices of Plants; so Plants have these Juices and Vessels originally, from the Vessels and Oyliness of the Seed; and also the other Juice of the Bladders, which is the lowest digested in the Seeds. These proper Juices are nothing but the Oyl, Acid, and Viscid part of Plants, under several Di∣gestions and Mixtures. As the Blood makes Blood in Animals, so in Plants the original Juices digest or ferment the new Nourishment into particular states.
1. In crude Plants there is little or no Digestion, and therefore little distinction of Juices; and there∣fore it is not improbable that there are no Turpen∣tine Vessels, unless for the strength of the Plant. 2. In Mucilaginous Plants the Oyl is a little sepa∣rated, but yet continues diluted, by much Water; in Gums the Water is less, and the Earth most. 3. In the sweet Leguminous, the Oyl is still mix∣ed with much Mucilage. 4. In the Aromatick Sweet the Oyl and Acid is well digested, and diluted with Water into a smooth grateful Texture in the Bladders; and from thence is separated a Milk or Balsam in the Umbels. 5. In bitter Plants the Oyl is coagulated into a Gum; in Austeres most, but less in the strong Laurel-Bitters. 6. In Acrids the bitter Oyl is compounded with a Salt; and a Bitterness is observable in the Bladders, from whence the Acrid is digested. In Aromaticks and Fetids, the Volatile Oyl and Salt are compounded; and these are digested either from a sweet or a bitter Juice in the Bladders. In Turpentines the Oyl and Acid are most loosely mixt; whence there is an evident Acid, and also a great Astringency in Tutsan, Perfoliata, and other Turpentine Plants. The Seeds of Turpentine Nuts, as Pistacheos, are Sweet; and therefore Turpentine seems to be digested from sweet Juices, Sweet easily becoming Bitter.
From these descriptions of the several Juices of Plants, the variety of their Tastes, and their several Compositions, are evident, The Vessels of Plants can give no Taste, but that of Wood; but the several Juices afford us all the Compositions. The Juices in the Bladders may be either Crude, Acerb, Austere, Mucilaginous, Sweet, or Bitterish. The Juices in Oyly or Turpentine Vessels may be either Slimy in crude Plants, Sweet in the Pea-Tastes, Bitter, Acrid, Aromatick Acrid, Fetid, or Corrosive. These different Juices being always tasted in Plants, Two of them at least, must render the Tastes of all Plants compounded; but the same Juice may also have a compounded Taste, as some Milks of Vegetables are Bitter, Acrid, Gummy, and Fetid, as Sagapenum; and others Bitter, Acrid, Aromatick, as the Balsam in Angelica. Sweet and Bitter are frequently in the same Juice, because Sweet easily becomes Bitter. Bitter and Acrid are usually compounded, be∣cause Acrid rises out of Bitter. Aromatick and Fetid are frequently mixt, both in Taste and Smell: And both Fetid and Aroma∣tick have generally an Acrid Taste. The Fruits of Vegetables and their Seeds, have usually the most compounded Tastes: So in Ivy-Berries, the Taste is Sweet, Bitterish, Slimy, Aro∣matick, and very Acrid.
The Bitter, Acrid, and Aromatick appears in the Rind of an Orange, from the Oyly Juice observed in it; but the Pulp is Sweet and Sub-acid: This last is from the Juice in the Bladders; but the first from the Juice of the Oyly Turpentine Vessels. In Barberry-Tree a great variety of Tastes may be observed in its different Parts: The Bark is Bit∣ter, Slimy, and Sub-acrid, from the Juice of the Turpentine Vessels, but from the Sap of the Bladders it is Astringent; which Astringency being further digested in the green Leaves, it produces an Acer∣bity; and in the Fruit, the same Acerb Juice is mix∣ed with a Slime in the Bladders, of the Fruit (for the Fruit will boyl to a Jelly) and it tastes more pleasantly Acerb, but the Seed is Bitterish Astrin∣gent: So that the Pulp of the Fruit has the Juice of the Bladders, but the Seed the Oyly Juices; the Oyly Juice seems the same in all parts, and gives the general Taste of the Plant; but the Juice of the Bladders is most alterable in the Leaves and Pulp of the Fruit, where it is most exposed to the Sun. In some Plants there are more than Two Oyly Tur∣pentine Vessels; for in Thistles there are Muciducts and Lacteals; and we taste in Thistles a Slime be∣sides the Bitterness: in these both the Juices in the Bladders supply proper Oyly Juices; and by these several Juices, different Tastes arise. From the Instances I have given, it appears how many Tastes may be observed in one Plant; for,
The Lymphaticks may give one Taste, as Sweet∣ness or Waterishness. The Juice in the Bladders, one or two, as Acid-Astringent, Austere, or Slime, or Sweet and Bitter. The Turpentine Vessels may give four Tastes, as Bitter, Sweet, Acrid-Aromatick, Gummose: So we find in Angelica, a Turpentine Balsam, which tastes Bitter, Sweet, Aromatick-Acrid, and Gummy; the Bladders furnish an Astringency, and the Lym∣phaticks have a sweet Waterishness: So that Plant has seven Tastes, or seven modes of Taste. And these are the most that can be observed in one Ve∣getable, but all need not be so nicely described; for its enough to discover its Vertue, by observing its Aromatick Acrid Taste, for that shews it to be a Diuretick, Cephalick, and Cordial Medicine, by its Volatile Oyly Salt. Fourthly, Air Vessels. There are none of them in the Bark, but in the Wood, and therefore they are framed by the growth of the Tree, whose Wooden Pipes or Fibres, by be∣ing closely compacted by the growth of the Tree, do stop the flowing of the Sap into some Bladders, which therefore shrink and break into hollows. As the Lymphaticks lose their Office when they grow into Wood, for then the Sap rises not con∣stantly by them, but only in the Spring; so it is with the Air Vessels, which are only broken Blad∣ders, having lost their first use, like the Pith of
Trees, they remain empty, and only transmit a Lympha in the Spring, when the Woody part is full of the same. Mr. Leuvenhock describes the Air Vessels as a large Tube filled with Bladders; so that they may be esteemed a small Pith, incompassed with the Wooden Pipes, and are necessary for the growth or bending of the Plant. The Leaves of Plants have the same constituent Parts, many Bladders and Ligneous Pipes, which, with Air Vessels, constitute the great Fibres. The Globulets found on the Leaves, seem to be the Turpentine of Plants, which transpire from its Specifick Vessels. Malpighius calls them Papillae; and he observes a Turpentine in Laurel, Cherry, Vine, Medlar, Poplar, and Quince-leaves. These Plants being all Bitter, I may hence confirm my Opinion, That Bitterness depends on a Terebinth, which may be seen on these Leaves. In dictamno albo, the Terebinthinate fungi are nu∣merous in the Flower. He observes a Turpentine on the Hairs of the Spunge of Dog-Rose. Pulvis croceus in Antheris Cy∣nosbati est Sulphur Vegetabile. He observes Turpentine in the Stylus of Fennil; and in Nettles, Loco styli vesicula Terebinthinâ re∣fertur. In Horminum there are Fungi or Papillae, which send forth that clammy Juice which is felt. From these Observations I infer, That though
the Specifick Oyly Juices differ much in their na∣tures, yet it may properly enough be called a Tur∣pentine, because it appears like it in the Glasses, and gives a Bitter Taste. The Stalk of a Plant consists of divers Lympha∣ticks, and Ligneous Fibres, Air-Vessels, Bladders, and Specifick Vessels, whose Juice is more evidently tasted in the Stalk than in the Leaf. The Fruit of some Plants consists of large Paren∣chymous Bladders, and of divers branched Ligneous Fibres, of a Core, Stone, or Calculary. The Stones of Fruits are the Bladders filled up with an Acerb Juice, and that is coagulated into a Stone. The Stones of Fruits are the two Membranes of the Seed, and are like the Skins of the Ova in Ani∣mals; the Juice separated into the inner Coat of the Seed, is from the proper Oyly Vessels of the Plant, whence it is Milky, and the Seed always tastes much of the Oyly Juice. Malpighius says, The Seed is bred in the Stylus of Plants, which he calls the Ʋterus, as this dilates the Bladder in which the Colliquamentum lies, appears in a cavity, from whence proceed Tubes which re∣semble the Cornua of the Womb. The seminal Matter being abundant, affords the Semets or Eggs which stand upon the Chives in the Flowers; these Globuli are of a white, red, yellow, blue, black Co∣lour, and are like Eggs for the Food of Insects, ha∣ving the Oyly Seminal Juice of the Plant.
In the Seed the Ligneous Pipes, the Bladders, and the Oyly Specifick Vessels are only the elongation of the same Vessels in the Plant; and all these Vessels are filled with the Juices from the original Plant: These are always bred in August, when the Juices of the Plant are fully digested, and they shoot next Year from the Bud. The Seeds of Plants have two Skins besides the Seed-Case, in which is contained a Plantula Semi∣nalis, consisting of two Lobes, which grow into Se∣minal Leaves, and also a Radicle and Gemma; and there is in some Seeds another Pulpy Substance, which supplies the first nutriment to the Seed. I have mentioned (in other Papers) the Equi∣vocal generation of Insects, from rotten Wood, and putrefied Animals; and I find many Equivocal ge∣nerations in Plants. In the production of Misletoe the Juices and Vessels shoot into a new Plant of a different Taste and Figure from the Crab-Tree, on which it commonly grows; for the Misletoe tastes of a Laurel-Bitter-Astringent, with a great Acrimony. Moss seems to be produced from the Fibrous parts of Plants, as appears by the Roots which are Fibrous. Mushroms have Membranous Roots, which con∣sist of a Congeries of Bladders. Both of these arise from the corrupt Juices of other Plants: Mosses grow on rotten Wood, as Mouldiness does on Flesh Meat putrefied; and that is described as a Plant.
The Juice which produces Mushroms, seems to be the fresh Nourishment which Plants receive in Autumn, which never arises to a higher digestion in Plants decaying, than to an Earthy Slime; and this is confirmed by an Observation in Botanicum Monspeliense, Eryngii demortui radicibus elegans in∣nascitur fungus, post pluvias Autumnales. I have observed a corrosive Acrid, like the Crow∣foot-Taste in the common Mushrom we eat; by which it produces all its virulent Effects: And this Vinegar corrects in its Pickle; the Acrimony is best perceived in the Stalk of the Mushrom; the Acrid Earthiness is the Specifick Juice of the Mushrom, and the Slime is in the Bladders. From the Acrid Taste of Mushroms, I may con∣jecture that it springs from Crowfoot, which is plen∣tiful in all Pastures. The Fungus Pipereus may arise from Hydropiper, but Agaricus from the Terebinthinate Vessels of Trees, and such kind of Fungi, containing a Terebinth. are described by Malpighius in sound Plants. The Woody Mushrom is from the Woody Juice of the Tree; and the highly Fetid from Fetid Plants, or their putrefied Juices. Galls, and other Excrescences of Plants, arise from the Insertion of an Egg of an Insect, by a hole made by its Terebra, whose Liquor ferments the Juices of the Plant, and thereby causes the great swelling of that part where the Egg is lodged; so the Eggs of Flies seem to putrefie Flesh Meats, on which they are left by the Fly.
CHAP. II. Of the several Classes of Plants, as they are distinguished by their Tastes and Smells. SInce all the Juices of Plants, and their several Compositions, may so easily be discerned by the Taste, and the several states of their Di∣gestion by the Smell, I will endeavor to reduce them into a few Classes, by those Tastes and Smells I have observed in Plants. The Taste of the Juices in the Bladders of Plants is most apt to vary, and to be higher digested in the Fruit and Leaves, than in other parts; and there∣fore I shall not distinguish Plants by any of the Juices of the Bladders, but by that of the Oyly Specifick Terebinthinate Vessels, which are constant∣ly of the same kind in all the parts of Plants; tho' in some they are in a small number, and in those the Juices of the Bladders obscure the Oyly Juice as to its Taste. It may be that the Juice may receive some little alteration by being exposed to the heat of the Sun, in some parts more than others, tho' this would appear unusual, that a different Juice should be in the same kind of Vessels. This Oyly Juice is the most constant, and the
highest digested Juice in Vegetables, containing also the chief Vertues, and the highest Smells. I shall endeavor to distinguish Plants by the tastes of these Oyly Substances, and I will therefore make no distinct Classes of the Watry Juices and Tastes, because their Specifick Juice is a Slime or Sweetness, to which Tastes they must be referred. Neither will I make distinct Classes of Acids, A∣cerbs, and Astringents, because they are compoun∣ded with a low Bitterness in their Taste; and the Bitter or Austere is their Oyly Juice. The taste of Acid, Acerb, and Astringent, are from the Juices in the Bladders. I therefore refer the Acid, Acerb, and Astringent Tastes to the Class of Austeres, which are Bitterish; and by them I may sub-distin∣guish some of the Bitters. The distinction of Plants into Arbores, Frutices, and Suffrutices, is sufficiently confuted by the Ana∣tomy of Plants, which discovers the same Woody Vessels in all alike. I will not make any Objection against any Me∣thod used by any other Author, lest I reflect un∣warily upon their Opinions, who are better Skilled in Botanicks than my self; and to whose Writings I am very much obliged. I will therefore only in∣timate the usefulness of my Method. I. I refer all Plants to the same Class which have the same sort of Oyly Juices, and thereby their Ver∣tue will more readily appear: and Plants of diffe∣rent
Natures will not be placed together, as Bellis Major and Minor, which extreamly differ in their Tastes, as Docks and Hellebore do, and Blitum and Botrys; neither can Valerian be placed with the Ʋmbels. This Method of Classing by the Taste, will de∣cide many disputes about the placing of Plants; as for Example: Nasturtium Indicum, by the Flower, is like Lark∣spur; by the Leaf, Navelwort; by the Climbing, Convolvulus; by the Seed, Heliotropium: By these accidents an Herbalist doubts to what Class to re∣fer it: but the Taste soon decides the Controversie; for by that it is a Cress, and properly belongs to that kind by its Vertue. Bardana is a Thistle by its Taste; but Eryngium is none. II. By this Method the Classes of Plants are but Seven summa genera, and to them I will add one Class of Imperfect Plants, which have but one Taste, and no distinction of Juices considerable; as, 1. The Gritty, the Woody, and the Woolly Tastes, which I call Earthy Tastes, because that Principle prevails most in them; and from that, they taste dry and hard. I refer Mosses and Mushroms to the same Class, because they have a strong Earthy Taste and Smell, though they have a distinction of Juices, very pro∣bably, as appears by the Astringency which fills the
Bladders, and the Acrimony which may be in Spe∣cifick Vessels of Mosses: And in Mushroms the Slime fills the Bladders, and the Acrimony is in the Spe∣cifick Vessels; and therefore Mosses and Mushroms might most properly be referred to the Fetid Class; but I place them here, because their Earthy Taste is very remarkable; and in this I follow the usual Method. In the Woody Tastes, the Acerb Juice in the Bladders, which tastes Astringent, is turned into Wood; and therefore Wood distilled yields an Acid Liquor, and very little Oyl, if the Resins and Tur∣pentines be dissolved from the Specifick Vessels be∣fore distillation. The First CLASS. Of Plants of an Earthy Taste or Smell. First, OF those which taste dry and hard, and have but one Taste. Secondly, Of those which have a distinction of Juices, with a savour of Earth. The Sub-alternate Species of Earthy Tastes, are, I. Gritty Vegetables.
II. The Woody. III. The Woolly. IV. The Mossy, having the savour of com∣mon Mould, or the Mouldiness of Woods. V. Very Fetid Earthy. First, Gritty Tastes in petrified Plants; as, 1. Corallium, which smells of Moss, being ground to Powder, and before petrification it has an Astrin∣gent Milk; and therefore Coral was a perfect Plant, having distinction of Juices before Petrification, but the Acerb Juices are easily petrified. And Malpighius has mentioned the Acerb Juices of an Oak and Poplar, coagulated into a Stone in the Bladders of those Plants; and that these Stones are of the Figure of a Die. By this we observe how little Wood and Stone differ, both being made out of the same Juice. The External accident whereby Coral may be distinguished from the following Plants, is the branching of it self like a Tree. 2. Pori which, as Mr. Ray mentions, differs by the Porosity from Corals. 3. Eschara Marina which resembles Leaves. 4. Fungi Lapidei resembling Mushroms. 5. Corallina which has a strong Mossy and Earthy Smell; the inward part is Ligneous. I have mentioned the several accidents whereby the Individuals under Gritty Tastes might be di∣stinguished, that my designed Method might be
better apprehended, for I would have Plants in ge∣neral, first distinguished by their manifest Tastes and Smells; and then the Individuals distinguished by their external accidents of Colour, Figure, number of Seeds, &c. And hence the Reader may be satisfied, That if Plants were clearly distinguished by their Taste, where there is but one, or by the Oyly Spe∣cifick Taste, where there is a distinction of Juices: a long description of external Accidents is not ne∣cessary, but some one obvious Note may distinguish each Individual, under each Species. Secondly, Woody Tastes; as, Flabellum Marinum. Thirdly, Woolly Tastes, as in a Sponge, which has a Fistulous Substance, and grows on Stones, and is a Mushrom according to Mr. Ray, Mucagine qua∣dam Membranea vestita; by which it is Conglu∣tinative in Wounds, when fresh: Galen says, It smells of the Sea, by which it is discussing; the old Sponge has not the same Vertue; burnt Sponge smells like burnt Bones. Dr. Grew affirms, That Sponge has no Ligneous Fibres, but only the Pithy Bladders; and therefore it is but half a Plant. Fourthly, Plants of an Earthy or Woody Smell and Taste. I. Of a dry Earthy Taste as Mosses, which have other Tastes mixt with their savour of Mould.
1. A Bitterish Astringent Acrid Taste, with a pungent Smell; as, Muscus arborum, Querci, Mali, Alni, &c. Muscus Pyxidatus, which has a Red Flowre in the Cups. 2. A Sweet Rough Taste; as in Lichen cinereus terrestris, and Adianthum aureum. These two first Species smell of Wood. 3. A very Crude Rough Taste, with a smell of Mould very strong; Muscus communis viridis, and Muscus ex Cranio. 4. With a Bitter Sub-acrid Taste Terebinthinate; and also a smell of Mould: Hepatica Terrestris. II. Of a stronger and more violent offensive Fetid Earthy Smell, which is produced from some Oyly Specifick Juice in Mushroms, different from their o∣ther Tastes, by which they must be sub-distinguished. 1. Mushroms of a Slimy Taste, and also of a Cor∣rosive Acrid, with an Earthy Smell; as, Fungus esculentus. 2. Of a Pepper Acrimony in its Milky Juice; as, Fungus pipereus. 3. Of a dry Dust, which is Corrosive to the Eyes, and stops Bleeding: Fungus pulverulentus. 4. Of a Woody Taste; as, Fungus Quercinus, Betulaceus, Fraxineus. 5. Of a Sweet Bitter Acrid Slimy Taste: Agaricus.
6. Of a Sweetish Taste and Goatish Smell: Tubera edulia. 7. Of a Sweet and Rough Taste: Tubera Cervina. 8. Of a Slimy Taste, with a mixt Smell of Earth and Wood: Fungus arborum putrescentium. 9. Of a Carrion Putrid Smell: Fungus Phalloides. Dr. Plott. 10. Of a Slimy Fetid, with an Elder-Smell: Auricula Judoe, five Fungus Sambucinus. The Second CLASS. Of Plants which have a Watry Gum or Mucilage, for their Specifick Oyly Juice. MUcilaginons Plants have their Lympha di∣gested in the Plant-Bladders, into a Sli∣miness, which is thence separated into the Muciducts; which Dr. Grew has described in Elm and Mallow-Roots: but there is a Bitterness in many Mucilaginous Plants; the Vessels in which this Bitter Gum is contained, he has not described:
in Holly and Elm he has mentioned the Muciducts and Lymphaticks only; but in Carduus three sorts of Vessels are described; Milk Vessels, which are the Bitter Gum Vessels, and give the Bitterness in its Taste; and two sorts of Lymphaticks, the one con∣tains the common Lympha, but the other probably the Mucilage; for Carduus has a Slimy Taste. The Mucilage is evident in the Bladders of Mal∣lows; and less of it in the Bladders of Borage; by which Instances it is evident, that the Mucilage is there prepared before it be strained into the Muciducts. The Mucilage in these Plants exceeding the other Oyly Juice, being also a Gummy Bitterish Milk pro∣bably: I refer these Slimy Bitterish Plants to this Class. Mucilage contains these Principles, much Water, some Oyl, Acid, and Earth, and these have a low state of digestion; in which, though they be of a looser Texture than in the former Class, yet they are not generally so far volatilized, as to send out Effluviums for affecting the Smell. Mucilaginous Plants taste Slimy, and there are these Subordinate Species of Slimy Tastes. 1. Crude Watry Slimes. 2. Sub-acid Slimes. 3. Bitterish Sub-acrid Nauseous Slimes, or Orach-Slimes. 4. Nitrose cool Slimes. 5. Pure Mallow Slimes. 6. Borrage Slimes.
7. Elm Slimes. 8. Melon Slimes. 9. Sweet Slimy Bulbes. 10. Lily Slimes. 11. Nauseous and very Acrid Slimes, or Her∣modactyl Slimes. 12. Slimes with a Walnut Flower, or Cress Slimes. 13. Violet Slimes. 14. Bindweed Slimes. 15. The Pea-Taste. I. Watry Slimy crude Plants, with a raw Smell: Alsine vulgaris, Spergula, Lenticula Palustris. These are Chickweed Slimes. II Watrish Slimy Sub-acid Plants, or Spinage Slimes: Spinachia, Blitum, Atriplex Hortensis, Baccife∣ra, Mercurialis Hortensis. Spinage has sweet Roots, fit for Physical use. III. Mucilaginous, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Nauseous, or Orach Slimes: Atriplex vulgaris, Bonus Henricus, Amaranthus. IV. Watrish, Slimy, Cool, or Nitrose Slimes: Beta alba, rubra. V. Pure Watry Mucilages in the Leaf, Flower, Seed, and Roots, with a little Sweetness in the Flower, and a latent Acrimony in the Plant. These may be called Mallow Slimes. Alcea, Althaea, Malva Arborea, Althaea arbo∣rescens.
VI. Grateful Bitterish Sub-acrid Slimes; or Borage-Slimes: Echium, Buglossum, Borago, Pulmonaria macu∣losa, Parietaria. Symphytum, whose Taste is more Gummy and Mealy. VII. Mucilaginous Barks a little Bitterish and Astringent; as Elm-Slimes. Ʋlmus, whose Seed is Sweet; Ʋlmus latiore folio is Wych-Hasle, which is an Elm in Taste and Vertue. Tilia, which is Bitterish, Sweet, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, besides the abundant Slime: The Fruit is said to be Sweet, and the Flowers are Fragrant. VIII. Crude Slimy Flowers, Leaves and Seeds, with a Bitterish, Sweet, Slimy, Mellowy Fruit, or Melon-Slimes: Cucurbita, Pepo, Citrullus. Melon has a Smell of Musk; also Cucumis has a Bitter Sweet Stalk. The small green Cucumbers smell like Tallow. Melon Stalk is Bitter Sweet, very Nauseous, and Sub-acrid and Purgative. Wild Melons, Pompions, Wild Gourds, &c. are said to be very Bitter, like Coloquintida, and Cucumis Asi∣ninus. Quaere, Whether they are referible to the Class of Bitters, or here to be placed as Sweet, and strongly Bitter Slimes? IX. Sweet Slimy Bulbes, which seem to belong to the Sweet Grassy Class. 1. Crocus, with Fetid, Slimy, Sub-acrid Flowers; and Grassy, Sweet, Acrid, Green, Slimy Leaves.
2. Crocus Fl. Caeruleo, is Sweet, Slimy, and Sub-acrid; the Flowers inodorous, and the Leaves have a Grassy Smell and Taste. 3. Tulipa, it has sweetish Leaves and Stalks, with a great Slime: Ornithogalum luteum is described as Sweetish Slimy. X. Mucilaginous Bitterish Roots, with a Lily-Fragrant Smell in the Flowers, or else a Fetid. 1. Lilium commune with Leaves of an Elder-smell, and fainty sweet Flower. 2. Pseudonarcissus with the green Leaves of an Elder-smell, and Flower smelling like Jasmin. 3. Hyacinthus Anglius, whose green Leaves smell like Elder, and the Flowers have a Lily sweetness. 4. Hyacinthus Botroides is Slimy and Bitter in the Root. 5. Orchis has Leaves of a Goatish Smell; and the Flowers smelling somewhat like the Lily kind. 6. With a Fetid offensive Smell in the whole Plant; as, Martagon, Corona Imperialis, which smells like a Fox. Frittillaria, which is very Fetid. XI. Mucilaginous, Bitter, Acrid, Nauseous, and Fetid Roots: Leucoium praecox minus, Asphodelus, Ornithoga∣lum vulgare, Scylla, Hermodactylus. Anglicum Colchicum is very Acrid in the Stalk, and the Root is Fetid Milky; by its strong Acrid it vomits, and causes a Strangulation. It is used by
the Country People, in Powder, for Scald-Heads and Lice. Helleborine and some other Orchides are Sweet, Bitter, Nauseous, Slimy, and Acrid. Quaere, Whe∣ther white Hellebor be of this Class? XII. Slimy, Bitterish, Sub-acrid Roots, of a Walnut Flavor, whose Flowers smell of a mixt Smell, of Lily and Cresses: Nymphaea fl. luteo & albo. Quaere, Whether these may be referred to the Cress-Taste? XIII. Mucilaginous Bitterish Leaves, with Flow∣ers of a Fragrant Smell, and Sub-acrid Taste. The Violet-Roots taste Bitterish Sub-acrid, with a Violet Flavor; by which they are Diuretick and Purgative. Quaere, Whether this ought not to be referred to the Bitterish Acrids of a Fragrant Smell? These are the Violet-Slimes: Violà Martia, Tricolor, Polygala, Pinguicula. XIV. Mucilaginous, Bitter, Sub-acrid Roots, which are Purging. Convolvulus major, minor; Soldanella. Bryony seems to belong to this Class, and Ari∣stolochia, or to the Bitter. Note, If Mucilages be only Bitterish and Sub-acrid, they may be Classed here, or else amongst the Bitters, according to the Taste which prevails in the Specifick Juice.
XV. The Pea-Tastes, or Slimy, Sweet, Legu∣minous Plants. These Plants bleed slowly upon cutting; they have Lymphaticks, from whence their Waterishness is tasted; and they have a Sliminess in the Bladders, from whence a sweet Liquor is digested, and an Oyliness, which is evident in the Smell of the Flowers of that Class. The Pea-Tastes are in a state of digestion, betwixt Mucilages and sweet Tastes; for their Taste seems to partake of both Sweet and Slimy. I can observe very little from these Plants; Anato∣mists, about the proper Vessels of Asparagus, observe only the Lymphaticks, and the large Parenchyma; but it is certain that there are some proper Gum Vessels or Milks, which give the Bitter Acrid Taste in the Roots; and therefore the Pea-Taste is from the sweet Mucilage in the Bladders. The Rough∣ness in this Class is from the Juice in the Bladders, as in other Classes; and the Pea-Taste in some of these Plants, is the proper Specifick Oyly Juice; but in others it is higher digested into a rancid Oyl, or a Bitter Acrid Taste, which is compounded with the Pea-Tastes. Malpighius observes, That in cutting the Stalk of the Seed of Fermenting Beans, Conclusi utriculi humorem fundunt Terebinthinae analogum. And he also observes, That there are proper Vessels in Peas. The Mucilaginous Sweet, or Pea-Taste have much of a Linseed Oyly Smell in the Flowers, or a great Fragrancy.
Gum Tragacanth is the Gum of a Leguminous Plant; and the Mucilage in this Class is not unlike it. The Species of the Pea-Taste, are, 1. The Mucilaginous, Sweet, or ordinary Pea-Taste. 2. The Bean-Tastes. 3. The Rough Pea-Taste. 4. The Fumitory Bitter Pea-Taste. 5. The Asparagus Pea-Tastes. 6. The Lily Pea-Tastes. 7. The Broom Pea-Tastes. 8. The Fetid Pea-Taste, or the Aromatick. 9. The Acrid Pea-Taste. I. The Mucilaginous sweet Pea-Taste: Pisum arvense, Cicer, Lathyrus, Glycyrrhiza, City∣sus pedicularis, rubra, Herba viva. II. Mucilaginous, Sweet, inclining to Bitter, or Bean-Taste: Faba, Phaseolus, Lupinus, Orobus, Anthyllis le∣guminosa. Trifolium Palustre tastes Sweet and Bitter, like a Bean, inclining to the Laurel-Bitters; by its Bitter Astringency it cures Putrid Gums, and Ʋlcers in the Scurvy, if it be used in Decoction or Syrup. Trifolium Fibrinum, in Bonetus, is said by Tilin∣gius, ipsam aloen resipere; but by Ettmuller it is described, Saporis acris instar Piperitidis; therefore
these Authors mean different Plants by Trifolium Fibrinum. III. The Rough Pea-Taste: Hepatica nobilis, Barba Jovis, Vicia vulgaris, Arachus, Ornithopodium, Trifolium lupulinum, Trifolium hirsutum, Lagopoides, Lagopus, Tri∣folium foliis purpureis, Trifolium siliquosum, Trifolium pratense, Fl. albo & luteo. Herba humilis, Acacia is a leguminous Astringent. IV. With a Bitterish, Sweet, Sub-acrid Pea-Taste in the Roots and Leaves. Aquilegia, the Leaves have a Roughness. Consolida Regalis, Fumaria, Thalictrum. Meadow-Rue smells Fetid, something like Rue; in the Root it is not unlike a Dock-Bitter; in the Leaves it is Sweet and Rough. V. With Sweet, Bitter, Acrid Roots and Berries, of a Sweet Slimy Pea-Taste, as Asparagus and Ruscus. VI. Sweet, Slimy, Bitterish, Sub-acrid Roots, with Berries of a Sweet, Slimy, Acrid Pea-Taste. Polygonatum, whose Berries are Sweet and Slimy, like the Pea-Taste, and Sweet Sub-acrid in the Seeds, the Leaves are Rough, the Roots taste Sweet, Acrid and Slimy: This is therefore of the Pea-Class, as well as the following: Ʋnifolium. Lilium Convallium, whose Flowers are Fragrant; but the green Leaves of the Taste and Smell of the Pea-Class.
VII. The strong Bitter Sweet Pea-Taste, with a manifest Linseed Oyly Smell in the Flowers, as Genista vulgaris & spinosa, Spartium, Genista acule∣ata, Anonis, which has a Goatish Smell in the Leaves, &c. and the Roots taste like Brome. These are the Brome Pea-Tastes. VIII. Bitter Sub-acrid Pea-Taste, Fetid. 1. With an Oyly Smell like Linseed: Sena, Collutea, Anagyris, Foenugraecum, Linum; Psyllium, de quo quaere. 2. With an Elder-Smell: Linaria, Antirrhinum. IX. The strong Acrid Pea-Taste. 1. Of a Pea-Smell: Melilotus, Trifolium luteum, Galega, Pedicularis fl. flavo & Palustris rubro. Persicaria siliquosa is of the Pea-Class, Sweet and Acrid. Trifolium odoratum has a mixt Smell. Trifolium Bituminosum smells like Bitumen. 2. Of a sweet Smell in the Flowers: Jasminum, Periclymenum, Lilac, Syringa, fl. albo, Trifolium purpureum, pratense. Jasminum, the Leaves taste Sweet and Bitter, like the Pea-Class. Lilac tastes Sweet and Bitter, and has Cods, whereby it is of the same Pea-Class. Jalap is said to be an Indian Jasmin; and there are many other Exotick purging Legumens, as Siliqua arborea, which is of a sweet Pea-Taste, Purging.
Collutea Vesicatoria Purges. Cassia Fistula is of the Pea-Taste; the Pulp is described to have some Aromatick Acrid, besides the sweet Acid Prune-Taste; and the Bark is Bitter Astringent. Tamarinds is a Siliquose-Tree, of which we use the Fruit. The colouring Exotick Legumens are of this Class. Lignum Nephriticum is described of the Pea-Class, and it tastes Bitterish and Acrid, by which it is Diuretick. Acacia tinctoria, Logwood is a Bitter, Acrid, Le∣guminous Tree, and the Flowers of a sweet Odor. Brasilea arbor is of the Pea-Taste Astringent. Indico is also of the Pea-Class, by its Slime. Our Native colouring Plants are also of the Pea-Class, as Yellows. I doubt whether Woade, Ophi∣oglossum, and Luteola ought not to be placed here. Ophioglossum colours Oyl green; it tastes Sweetish and very Acrid; it feels Slimy being rubbed. Pin∣guicula colours, and is Bitterish, Slimy, and Sub-acrid. Since there is so much Oyliness in the Plants which are of this Class, it is most likely that the colors these produce are from their different Oyly Particles. Curcuma has a Bitterish Acrid Slime, and Colors. Sarsaparilla has a moderate Acrimony to cause Sweating, and also a Mealiness to temper Humors: This seems to make it of the Pea-Class, for Mealiness is a dryed Mucilage, and many Mucilages taste Mealy.
The Third CLASS. Of Plants of a Sweet Taste. THe Plants of this Class have their Lympha somewhat Sweet, as in Parsneps, which being farther digested in the Plant-Blad∣ders, into a more Oyly Juice, is separated into the Turpentine or Oyly Vessels, though those are not yet observed by the Anatomists. In the sweet Juices of these Plants the Oyl and Acid is well di∣gested with the Water and Earth into a smooth or pleasing Texture: These Sweets give a small Fra∣grancy from the Oyly Juice in their proper Vessels. And by this degree of Fragrancy we know that the Plants Oyly Juice is but moderately digested, and is most temperate, like Sweet Tastes themselves, which are most agreeable to Animal Humors. Malpighius has observed in the Flowers of Corona Imperialis, Lilium Persicum, and Digitalis, a Sweet∣ness, like Honey. And the like I tasted in the Flowers of Melanthium, and other Flowers; so from the like Specifick Juice, Sweetness may be produ∣ced in all Plants: And he affirms, that, Melleam hanc Substantiam non exterius advenire, sed ex succo interius concocto provenire. Anat. Plant. p. 41.
Honey tastes Sweet, Slimy, Sub-aromatick, Sandy, and a little Rough; it may be the Juice of Vege∣tables, gathered from the Globuli in the Flower. It yields too much Acid for an Animal Juice, and no Volatile Salt like the Animal Humors, which are not so sweet as Honey. It may be boyled into a Gum. That Sweetness may be a Specifick Juice, appears by Manna, which flows from the Leaves of a Tree. Sarcocolla has a Sweetness, and is a Gum: And like∣wise Sugar, which is the Juice of a Reed. The Species of Sweet Tastes, are, I. Grassy Sweets, or Astringent Rush Sweets. II. Corn Sweets, very Slimy or Mealy Sweets. III. Sub-acrid Sweets, like the Rampions. IV. Aromatick Sweets, like Parsnep. V. Sweet Fernes. VI. Sweet Turpentines. VII. Orris, or Fragrant Sweets. VIII. Sweets of a Fetid Smell. 1. Of a Grassy Sweetness, with a crude Astrin∣gent Taste. Juncus vulgaris. Equisetum which is sweetish and brackish in the Stalk, and Astringent in the Leaves; by which it seems a Rush, which has the same brackish Sweetness. Gramen Leucanthemum is Sweet and Rough.
Arundo, Typha. Sparganium tastes Sweet and Rough, like a Rush. 2. Corn Sweets, which are also Slimy Seeds, with the green Leaves of a crude Smell. Avena, Hordeum, Triticum, Maza, Oriza, Fegopy∣rum, Phalangium, Lachryma Jobi. Gramen Caninum has Sweet Slimy Roots. Galen mentions the Acrimony of Gramen Parnassi, and attributes a little Acrid to all Grass; by which it is opening and Diuretick. Lolium is very Acrid and Sweet, affecting the Head. Aegylops and Pha∣laris are described as Acrid. Blasted Corn stinks like Carrion, and contains a black Dust. 3. Sweet Sub-acrid Milky Plants: Rapunculus, Campanula rotundifolia, Rapunculus Scabiosae capitulo. Trachelium has a thick bitterish Milk. Speculum Veneris seems of this Class. 4. Sweet Sub-acrid Astringent, and a little Aro∣matick, like Parsnep. Plantago aquatica, the Flowers and Seeds taste Sweet, Hot, Aromatick, like Parsnep: The Leaf is Sweet, Sub-acrid, of a crude Smell. Plantago aqua∣tica habet sal Causticum. Etmuller. Juncus floridus, the Stalk tastes Sweet, as Rushes; the Flowers smell Fragrant, and taste Sweet and Acrid. Polygonum Germanicum is Sweet and Sub-acrid. Sagittaria is of this Class.
5. Sweet Fernes being Astringent and Bitterish, Sub-acrid in the Roots: The green Leaves smell like Tallow. 1. These are most Astringent. Osmunda Regalis, whose Leaves smell like the snuff of a Candle. Filix mas, Lonchitis, Asplenium. 2. These Fernes have the most Mucilage. Filix faemina, whose Roots are very Mucilaginous. Capillus Veneris, Adianthum album, Trichomanes. Polypody Leaves and Roots taste Sweet, Bitter, Sub-acrid, Nauseous, and therefore Purgative. I did not discern the Fragrancy in dryed Harts-Tongue; but Dr. Willis asserts it. The Roots of Polypody dryed, are given for the Rickets to Children, in Powder. 6. Sweet, Bitterish, Aromatick, Acrid, like Odo∣riferous Turpentines. Calamus Aromaticus, which has the Cones of Pine. Cyperus longus, Schaenanthus. 7. Sweet Bitterishes of a burning Orris-Taste, or Fragrant Sweets, with a Fragrant Smell and Bitterish Acrid Taste. Iris, Costus dulcis & amarus, Iris palustris, Zinziber, Zedoaria, Galanga, Contrayerva, which is said to be Aromatick and Acrid, like Orris. Cardamomum is a Reed. 8. Acrid Sweets of a Fetid Smell; as, 1. Spatula foetida, which smells like Roast-Beef. 2. Poeonia, which is Bitterish, Sweet, Fetid, and Sub-acrid. These are the Fetid Sweets.
Quaere, Whether some of this Class may not be referred to the Bitters, because they have more Bitter than Sweet? and some a high Acrid Aroma∣tick, and seem to belong to that Class; as Zinziber, Galanga, Zedoaria? The Sweetness in many of this Class, is evident only in the fresh Plants. The Fourth CLASS. Of Plants of a Bitter Taste. BItter Plants, if they be Austeres, have their crude Tartareous Lympha digested in the Plant-Bladders; and from thence is separa∣ted some little Oyl, Gum, or Milk into the Speci∣fick Vessels, which gives the Bitterness; and the re∣maining Juice in the Bladders is Acerb, which being tasted with the mentioned Bitterness, they produce an Austere Taste. Malpighius mentions some of the Ʋtriculi, con∣taining a Tartareous Stony Matter, of the shape of a Die in Oak and Poplar, &c. from whence I may infer, That an Acerb Liquor is contained naturally in the Bladders. Malpighius calls the proper Speci∣fick Juice of the Oak, a Shining Gluten, which preserves
its Fibres, and makes it durable. Dr. Grew supposes it to be a Resin; but it is most probable that this Bit∣terness is a Gum: for Resins have less Bitter than Gums; and the Oak Sap is too crude to be digested into a Resin. There is some Muciducts in Hasle and Oak, be∣cause the one bears Nuts, and the other Acorns, which have a Slimy Milk from the Oyly parts of the Plant: And the same Mucilage is observable in all Plants which bear Fruit. In Plumb-Tree, which is an Austere, there are Muciducts, besides the Milky Gum Vessels. Because the Oyl and Acid in Vegetables can ne∣ver be perfectly separated, therefore there is no Astringent Plant without some Bitterness; for as the Acid fixes on the Earth, the Oyl appears and gives a Bitterness, which is separated into the Tur∣pentine Vessels. The number of Vessels in Bitters may be con∣firmed by the Vessels in Carduus, which is Bitter, from Milk Vessels; and Slimy, from Muciducts. Burdock has the same Milk Vessels, and is Bitter and Slimy. These are the Bitter Smoaky. The Smoaky taste is a sign of an imperfect Acrid; such as is in the Oyly Acid of Soot and Smoak. All Bitters are of a higher Digestion than Sweets, because these are digested into Bitters. The Bitter-Sweet, as in Apple-Tree Bark, seems in a middle state betwixt Sweet and Bitters: for Sweets are not made Bitters immediately, but the
Juice must pass a gradual alteration; therefore in the Spring we taste a Sweetness in many Bitter Barks. The Bitter-sweet may be in the same Ves∣sels, as we find Choler tasting of both: or else the Sweet is in the Bladders, and the Bitter in the Gum Vessels; there are also Muciducts in these, because they bear Fruit. In the Laurel-Bitters the Oyl is less coagulate, and the Bitterness is greater than in Austeres (where it is most coagulate by the Acerb Juice) and the Astringency is much tempered by the Bitterness in the Laurel-Bitters; and from the Muciducts in these, the Bark sweats a clear Watry Gum, which is a thickned Mucilage: their Leaves are Slimy, as in most Fruit Trees, as Peaches, Cherries, Almonds, &c. and in most Bacciferous Trees, as Mulberries, Haw∣thorne, Barberries; and in the Nuciferous, as Beach, Chesnut, &c. which have Oyly Slimy Nuts. Malpighius (Anat. Plant. p. 69.) mentions in the Pericarpium of Almonds, Turpentine Vessels, quae secta copiosum fundunt hujusmodi succum. In Ash there is a Laurel-Bitter, and therefore both Bitter, Gum, and Mucilage; though these Vessels are but obscurely described by Dr. Grew, as two Rings of round parcels of proper Vessels. In Mulberry-Tree, Malpighius observes the Bitter Milk Vessels. In Cherry-Tree he mentions a Red Liquor in the Fibres of the Bark. In the Laurel-Bitter-Acrid, as Walnut, there are
two Rings of special Sap Vessels described by Dr. Grew, which are like the two Rings in Ash. Sumach, which is a Bitterish Acrid, has Milk-Ves∣sels, and the Milk gives the Bitterness, and it dries into a Gum. From these Instances it appears, That Bitterness depends on a Milky Gum, like that in Cichory. The Bitter Acrid Taste in Holly must depend on some Milk Vessels. Dr. Grew has only described the Muciducts and Lymphaticks: He observes the Milk Vessels in Dandelion to stand in a Ring; in Figgs they stand in arched parcels, and these some∣what represent Rings; therefore I may suppose that the Rings he mentions in Oak, Hazle, Barberry-Bark, and the arched parcels in Apples and Pear-Tree are Milk Vessels. The Muciducts in Mallow and Elm, stand in round parcels; and therefore it is probable that the same round parcels in Oak, Walnut, and Ash, are Muci∣ducts: but in some Plants, as in Holly, the Muci∣ducts and Lymphaticks are so mixt as to be obscure, and are less observed by the Plant-Anatomists. I could wish we had a Cut of some Plant in each Taste; and that the several Juices of Plants were tasted, before they observed the varieties of Vessels; for by the Taste they might know what Juices and Vessels are to be observed in each Plant. Barberry is a Bitter Slimy Acrid, having a yellow Gum of that Taste, contained in Vessels which stand in a Ring; and from that Gum, is its Purgative
Vertue; but by the Juice in the Bladders is its Astringency. Turpentine-Bitters have large Turpentine-Vessels; the Juice in the Bladders is Acerb, very considerably. In Turpentines, the Oyly part being separated, it leaves this Acerbity; from whence comes the A∣stringency in Terebinthinate Plants. The taste of Turpentine, is Bitter, Acrid, Gummy, or Slimy: the Acid is loosely mixt with the Oyl; and therefore it sends forth strong Effluviums for Smells. The Bitter-Acrid seem in a middle state betwixt Bitter and Acrids; all Acrids arise out of Bitters. In Wormwood Dr. Grew observes Turpentine-Vessels, which, I believe, give the sweet Aromatick Taste to the Roots of Wormwood, and also Sap Vessels in par∣cels, which are arched as the Bitter Gum-Vessels; and these give the Bitter Taste to Wormwood Leaves: the Astringency in Wormwood is from the Juice in the Bladders. Plants of a Bitter-Taste are either Bitterish, or of a strong Bitter Taste; and these Tastes are observable in Herbs, or in the Barks of Trees. I. The first Species of Bitters are the Austeres, which are Bitterish Astringents in the Roots of Herbs. First, Bitterish Astringent Roots, with Crude, A∣stringent, and Sub-acrid Leaves: 1. Plantago vulgaris, Quinquenervia, Coronopus vul∣garis, Myosuros.
2. Polygonum vulgare, Persicaria maculosa, Pota∣mogeiton, and these have knobbed Stalks. 3. Sempervivum majus, Vermicularis, Bedum arbo∣rescens, Vermicularis frutex. Sempervivum-Leaves are of an Acerb Taste; and the Roots taste and look like Sorrel, and therefore may be of the same Class. There is an Acid in Vermicularis, and it is used in Sauce, like Sorrel. Anagallis flore luteo, and Nummularia are of the same Class, being Acerb in Leaves; but more crude and indigested than Sorrel. I have used the Juice of Sempervivum in Hecticks, to cool the Salts, and Volatile Oyl of the Blood. Secondly, Sub-acrid Austeres. 1. With Acerb Leaves: Saxifragia fl. albo, aurea, Polygonum Germanicum, Herniaria. 2. With Slimy Leaves: Portulaca, whose Roots taste Bitterish, Sub-acrid, and Astringent, and turn Reddish, and colour the Spittle; the Stalks taste Saltish, like Sal Prunellae; and by this Taste it it is probable they were first chose for Pickle. Purstain-stalks taste Saltish from the mixture of two Tastes, Bitter in the Roots, and the Acid in the Leaves. Chamomile-Flowers, and other Bit∣ters, are said to make a Salt Diuretick Infusion. Herba Kali is described Saporis salsi instar urinae: but I never tasted any but the Saltness in Purslain.
Purslain is good for Spitting of Blood, both by the Slime, and the Astringency of the Leaves; but the Root seems to be of a contrary Vertue. Orpin is Slimy in the Leaves, and Bitterish Sub∣acrid in the Roots, but these are white Roots; yet is of the same Class as Purslain. 3. With a Sweet, Sub-acid, Slimy, Fragrant Fruit, having three Leaves: Fragraria. 4. With Bitter Astringent Leaves. 1. Quinquefolium, with five Leaves. 2. Tormentilla, with seven Leaves. 3. Argentina, with creeping silver-coloured Leaves; the Juice tastes a little like Tansie. 4. Alchimilla, with Mallow-Leaves. The external accidents are here noted, to shew how unnecessary a large description appears, for the distinguishing of Plants. Thirdly, Aromatick Austeres. 1. With an Aromatick Smell, like Roses: Rosa alba Damascena. Rosa Canina, which has a pulpy, sweet, sub∣acid Fruit. Radix Rhodia smells like a Rose; and the Root tastes Bitter, Acrid, Astringent. China-Root has an Aromatick Acrid Root, whereby it sweats. Cistus has a Rose-Flower, and is Bitterish A∣stringent.
2. With an Aromatick cool Smell, like Burnet: Filipendula, Ʋlmaria, Pimpinella, Sanguisorba. Fourthly, Acerb Austeres, being Bitterish Astrin∣gent in the Root, with Acerb Leaves; and these are the Vine-Austeres. 1. With Sweet Acerb Fruit: Vaccinium nigrum & rubrum. 2. With Slimy Sub-acid Fruit: Grossularia, Ribes, Vitis. Ribes fol. nigro, it smells strongly of Turpentine, and is Diuretick; if Infused in Wine, it gives the Rhenish-Taste. 3. With Sweet Watrish Acerb Berries, and Rough Leaves: Rubus vulgaris, the Flowers smell like Roses. Rubus Idaeus has Fragrant Berries, more Slimy, and less Acerb. Austere Barks of Trees. 1. With Sweet Slimy Fruit, which contains a Stone: Ziziphus, Sebesten. Gum laccae grows on the Jujuba Indica; the He∣patick Vertue is from the red colour; the Insects bite the Bark, and probably give the Colour and Vertue; as the Insect in the Kermes. 2. Or Acerb and Sweet Slimy Fruit; as, Prunus Damascena Sylvestris. Palma is Sweet and Rough in its Fruit, but A∣stringent in all its other parts, as Galen describes it.
Lotus is described Astringent in the Leaf, and of a Sweet Astringent Fruit. 3. With Sweet Slimy Berries, in which are Stones. Pyracantha, Paliurus, Oxyacanthus. Viburnum has Astringent Leaves, and Sweet Sli∣my ungrateful Berries. Smilax is a Thorny Plant, with red Berries, like Paliurus. 4. With Acid Acerb Fruit: Mespilus, Sorbus torminalis, Alpina. Cornus is of an Austere Taste, with a Styptick Taste, like Medlars in the Fruit. The ripe Fruit of Services, is Sweet and Rough. Rhus obsoniorum is referible to the Sorbes; the Skin of the Berries being Acid, and the Leaves very much Astringent. Oxyacantha with Sorrel-Leaves, it Purges. 5. With Slimy Gummy Leaves, and Astringent Cones. Alnus vulgaris, Betula. 6. With Membranaceous Seeds, and Angular Leaves of an Austere Taste. Acer minus, Sycamorus; which last has a great Sweetness, and the springing Buds seem to smell like the Pea-Class. Platanus has Rough naked Seeds. 7. With Sweet Astringent Nuts or Fruit: 1. Corylus in a Shell. 2. Staphylodendron in a Bladder. 3. Castanea in a prickly Husk.
4. Fagus in a Rough Cup. 5. Ilex, Quercus, Suber; these are glandiferous. Chesnuts Roasted eat Mealy and Sweet; the Raw are more Sweet and Rough. 8. With Juli of an Austere Taste: 1. Salix latifolia, with Sorrel-tasted Leaves. 2. Salix angustissimo & longissimo folio, have Austere Tastes in the Leaves. Spinea Theophrasti is a Willow. The Catkins of Withy smell sweet at first; but by much rubbing, very strong and Bituminous. In hâc arbore pinguis quidom humor crescit Terebinthinae non absimilis; nam ex salicis serraturâ humida vernix confici solet. Goe∣dartius de Insectis. 9. With a Pulpy-sweet Fruit, and a Bitter-sweet Taste in the Bark. Malus hortensis, sylvestris. Apples have their different Tastes from one ano∣ther, according to the different mixtures of Sweet and Acid; and so have Pears: The Seeds of Apples, Pears, and Plumbs, are of the Laurel-Bitter. 10. With a Pulpy-sweet Fruit, having a Stoni∣ness in the middle: Pyrus. 11. With a very hard, acerb, fragrant Fruit: Malus Cotonea. The fresh Buds of Quince-Tree taste Acrid, and smell like the Laurel-Bitters; which, with the Fra∣grancy, may refer them to that Class.
12. With slimy Leaves, and fetid, sweet, slimy, fub-acid Berries. Morus, whose Bark is Acrid, and it is Juliferous. Plants of a stronger Bitter Taste, whose Species are, 1. Laurel-Bitters. 2. Smoaky-Bitters. 3. Bitter-Acrids Aromatick. 4. Bitter-Acrid of a milder Taste. 5. Elder-Bitters, or Bitter Slimy. 6. Dock-Bitters. 7. Hemp-Bitters. 8. Turpentine-Bitters. 9. Dead-Nettle-Bitters. 10. Bitter-sweet Barks and Herbs. The Species of Bitters I have mentioned, are all Austeres; as, First, Austere Herbs; 1. The Crude. 2. The Sub-acrid. 3. The Aromatick. 4. The Acerb, or Vine-Austere. Secondly, Austere Barks, which are sub-distin∣guished by the Taste of the Leaves or Fruit, or some compound Taste, as I have mentioned above.
II. Plants of a strong Bitter Taste, with an Astrin∣gency or Laurel-Bitters, which have a Taste of a Laurel-Leaf, which is the Taste of a Kernel of a Peach, or like it in the Bark or Leaves. I. With Bitterish Acerb Berries; this, in the first Buds, smells like a Peach-Kernel. In Cornus faemina, the Flowers are Fragrant, the Bark Fetid, the Berries Acerb, Bitter, Sweet, Nau∣seous. II. With Cherries of a sweet, slimy, sub-acid Taste, or bitterish: Cherries have different Mix∣tures of Acerb and Sweet, and Sub-acid or Slimy. Laurus Cerasus has a slimy sweet Fruit. Cerasus fructu nigro & rubro. Cerasus avium racemosa. Myrobalanes have an Acidity with a little Acri∣mony. III. With bitterish and nauseous sweet slimy Berries, and little Leaves of a Laurel-Taste. Ligustrum, Philyrea, Alaternus. Lignum Colubrinum is said to be Bitter, like a Peach-Leaf, with Berries, like Elder: It is used a∣gainst Fevers and Poysons, by that Taste. IV. With fragrant Leaves and Flowers. 1. Gelseminum Indicum fl. flavo. 2. Laurus, whose Berries are Bitter, Acrid, Aro∣matick. The Clove-Tree is described with Laurel-Leaves; and our Bays has the smell of Cloves.
Cinnamon-Tree has Leaves and Berries like Laurel. Lignum Sassaphras has a Laurel-Leaf, and is Bac∣ciferous. Piper Jamaicensis has the rellish of Cloves. 3. Myrtus, with bitterish, astringent, sub-acrid Berries. Myrtus Brabantica with a Myrtle-smell, and Myr∣tle-leaves, but more Bitter: It has the Juli of Wil∣low; the Seeds are observed to smell like Stoechas. 4. Salix odorata with Willow-leaves; the Leaves, when young, are very Fragrant; and, if long rubbed, they smell like Laurel. Vitex must be placed with sweet Gaul. A Fragrant and a Terebinthinate Smell are ob∣served in the Blossoms of many Trees: The Juice of the Plant being kept close all Winter, becomes more Vinous, Odoriferous, and higher Digested; like the Juice of Grapes, and other Liquors bottled up; and therefore the Blossoms of Trees have an odoriferous Smell, which depends on the Oyl of Plants well digested. Most Aromatick Trees are of this Class; as Ben∣zoinum is the Resin of a Tree with Citron-leaves. Tacamahac is Bitterish Aromatick; this and Ca∣ranna are of the Laurel-Aromaticks. 5. Thea is a Bacciferous Frutex; the Berries Bitter-sweet; the Leaves Bitterish, Aromatick, and Sub-acrid, whereby they are Cephalick; the Ber∣ries are nauseous and very hot.
V. With fragrant Fruit, whose Pills are Bitterish, or Sweet Aromatick, and the Pulp Acid. 1. Malus Citria, whose Pill is Sweetish Aroma∣tick, and the Pulp sweet Acids. 2. Malus Limonia is more Acid in the Fruit, and more Bitter and Acrid in the Pill than Citrons. 3. Malus Aurantia has a Pill of the greatest Bit∣terness, but of the same Aromatick Acrid as the former. 4. Malus Granata has either Sweet, Vinous, or Acid Fruit, with a Pill, having some Stypticity; and the Leaves have a mixt Smell of Fetid and Aro∣matick. VI. With Oyly Nuts, Sweet or Bitter: Amygdalus amara or dulcis; Almonds have a Watry Gum, and the sweet Almonds have some Bitterness. Palma Indica nucifera; the Coker-Nut tastes Bit∣terish, Sweet, Oyly, and a little Fetid; the Fruit yields Oyl, Vinegar, Milk, and Sugar. VII. With sweet Nuts and acrid Barks: 1. Juglans, whose Leaves smell and look like Laurel. 2. Ilex glandifera, whose Bark tastes Bitterish, A∣crid, and Astringent; the Leaves are of a Laurel-greenness, and the Acorn is Sweet. Some of this Tree was sent to me by my Inge∣nious Friend Mr. George Anthrobus of Tameworth, who has tasted many Plants with me. VIII. With Barks of a Bitter Acrid Laurel-Taste, with Berries.
1. Agrifolium, whose Red Berries taste Sweet, Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Slimy, and the Leaf has a Lau∣rel-Bitterness. This is our English Laurel. 2. Viscus, which tastes like the Laurel-Bitters, and it grows out of other Trees; the Berries are Slimy and Acrid. IX. Plants of a Laurel taste Acrid. Clematis daphnoides, whose Root is Bitter-Acrid: And this clasps about other Plants. Pyrola is said to be Bitter-Astringent. X. With Acrid Gums, or Milk. 1. Guaiacum has Laurel-leaves; it is said to be somewhat Fetid, but the Gum tastes Acrid, and smells somewhat Sweet in Burning. The Bark of Guaiacum seems to resemble the Bitterness of Box. 2. Draco arbor is a Laurel-Acrid; the Gum tastes Acrid as well as Gummy; by which it is good for those Haemorrhages which come from Obstructions: It dissolves in Water and Oyl, and melts at the Fire, as Resins do. 3. Rhus Virginiana has any Acrid Milk, the Milk dries into a Gum: It seems a Laurel-Bitter Acrid. XI. With a strong Foetor in the Leaves: 1. Buxus which is a Laurel-Bitter, and Baccife∣rous: The Foetor makes it a Narcotick. 2. Hedera arborea whose Leaves smell Oyly Fetid; and the Berries are Sweet, Acrid, Aromatick, Slimy, and Bitter; the Berries are Diuretick, Su∣dorifick, and Purgative.
Coffee; the Berries are Bitterish, Nauseous; the Skin of them Sub-acid and Rough; the Kernel Bitterish and Hot; the Leaves are perpetuo virentes: by this description of Mr. Ray's, it appears to be a Laurel-Bitter; the Acrimony hinders Sleep, and makes Coffee Diuretick. Quaere, Whether Ivy-Berries, or Juniper-Berries would not make good Coffee? XII. With a crude Smell in the Leaves. Oleander with long Laurel-Leaves, and a Nause∣ous Taste: This is Siliquose, and referible to Apo∣cynum. XIII. With a large Watry Pulpy Fruit, whose Kernel is of a Peach-Bitter Taste; as also the Bark of the Tree. Persica, Nucipersica, these have a Vinous Taste, a little Bitterish. XIV. With Juli, of a Laurel-Bitter Taste: Populus alba, nigra, Lybica, alba foliis minoribus. Salix folio Amygdalino. The Catkins of the Asp taste like the Bark. Populus Lybica is fragrant in the Buds, if rubbed. The Buds of Poplar have a yellow, fat, resinous Juice, from whence they have their Vertue. Quinquina is described by Mr. Ray, to have the Leaves Prunorum rubrorum; the Flower of Tunicae; the fresh Bark is a little Purging, like the Bark of Cherries, Peaches, Almonds, which purge, and re∣semble the Taste of Quinquina. The Chelsy-Tree
is not the Quinquina, because it tastes Terebinthi∣nate, and not of the Laurel-Bitter, like Quinquina: And in this I have Mr. Wats's concurrent Opinion. XV. With Bitter Acrid Seeds in Keys: Fraxinus. XVI. With an Oyly Fruit: Ripe Olives are Black, Acrid, Bitter, and Nause∣ous; the Leaves of Olives are Bitter Acrid; the Oyl is the Mucilaginous Juice, observable in Lau∣rel-Bitters; the Amurca is Bitterish. II. Smoaky Bitters. 1. Watry Bitters, Smoaky, Sub-acrid, and Milky. Dandelion, whose Roots taste Sub-acrid; and therefore like Choler by the Bitter and Acrimony. Sonchus, Cichoreum, Endivia, Scorzonera, whose Roots dryed taste Slimy and very Acrid, by which they sweat. I could not taste it in the fresh Roots. Tragopogon belongs to the same Class. 2. Smoaky Bitter Astringents: Hieraceum vulgare, Pilosella, Chondrilla, Pulmo∣naria Gallorum, Lampsana. 3. Bitter, Slimy, and Smoaky: Carduus vulgaris, Mariae, benedictus, lanceatus, Dipsacus, Bardana, Carthamus, Branca ursina. The Roots of Burdock have a Bitterness like Soot, which I call a Smoaky-Bitter; the Leaves are much bitterer. 4. Bitter, Astringent, Sub-acrid, Smoaky: Jacea, Stoebe, Cyanus.
Serratula. Scabiosa succisa. 5. Bitter, Sweet, Astringent, Smoaky, with Sli∣my Leaves, a little Fragrant, like Parsnep. Bellis major, it tastes Bitterish besides the Sweet; and therefore of the same Class as Jacobaea. Jacobaea, Centaurium majus, Erigerum majus, To∣mentosum, Tussilago. 6. Bitter Acrid with a mixt Smell of Aromatick and unpleasant; as Carlina. III. Wormwood-Bitters, or Aromatick-Bitters, Sub-acrid, Astringent, of a Sea-Wormwood Smell, or mixt unpleasant Smell. Absinthium commune, Romanum, Seriphium, San∣tonicum, Gnaphalium, Polium montanum. Tanacetum, Millefolium, Ageratum, Ptarmica, Chamaemelum, Buphthalmum, Cotula, which is Fetid. Artemisia, Matricaria, Abrotanum mas & foemina. By the resemblance of Smell and Taste, Millefoil, Chamomel, Bupthalmum, Cotula, are Wormwoods. Tansie smells not unlike Matricaria. And Balsamita smells like Tansie, with a Balsam Smell; and it has a Wormwood Bitter, Acrid, Astrin∣gent Taste. IV. Madder-Bitters, being Bitter, Sub-acrid, A∣stringent.
Gallium, Mollugo, Asperula, which is very Fra∣grant; and Gallium has some Sweetness. Aparine, Cruciata, Rubia, Anchusa. Celandine seems to be a Madder by its Bitterness, and colour of the Root; but it has too much Acrid. Rubia colours the Urine Red, as Gerard observed, all colouring Plants have Oleose Acrid Particles, which act on the colouring Particles in Animal Humors; such is Choler, and the red part of the Blood; therefore they are accounted Hepatick; and because they are Acrid, they are Diuretick. V. Dock-Bitters, or Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid, A∣stringent in the Root. 1. With Acerb Watry Leaves: Lapathum vulgare, acutum, Rhabarbarum verum, Ponticum & Monachorum, Lapathum rubrum. 2. With Sorrel-Leaves more Acid: Acetosa vulgaris, Lanceolata, rotundifolia, Aceto∣sella. 3. With Acerb Leaves, and very Astringent Roots: Bistorta, Hydrolapathum. VI. Hemp-Bitters, with Bitter, Acrid, Aroma∣tick Leaves, with a strong heady Smell. The Hemp-Taste is in the Root most; the Agrimony smells most in the Leaves; the Roots are Sweet. There is a Stinging Taste in common Hemp. Cannabis, Eupatorium Cannabinum, Eupator fl. flave. Agrimonia vulgaris has but little of the Hemp-Taste in the Root; as Eupatorium Cannabinum has.
Eupatorium fl. luteo smells Sweet like Parsnep, and is of a Bitter-Acrid Taste. Eupatorium Cannabinum smells like it, but stronger. Marrubium aquaticum smells like Agrimony. VII. Elder-Bitters, being Bitter, Acrid, Muci∣laginous Purgers. Sambucus vulgaris, & aquatica, Ebulus, Euony∣mus Theophrasti. VIII. Bitter, Sweet, Sub-acrid Tastes. 1. Of a little Bitterness, with a low degree of the Clove-Smell in the Flower, but crude green Leaves. Lychnis fl. albo, rubro, viscosa, Calcedonica, Behen album. Paronychia fol. rutaceis has a Bitterish Sweet Roughness, and a Flower like Lychnis, and it feels viscous. Lychnis sylvestris, Calcedonica, Behen album, have all a Bitterish Acrid in the Roots. Lychnis viscosa is Bitterish, Astringent, Slimy in the Leaves, and Sub-acrid in the Stalk, which feels Gummy. Lychnis segetum is Bitter Acrid in the Seed. Lysimachia purpurea spicata tastes Bitterish and Sweet in the Cups of the Flowers (the Flowers rubbed smell of Codlings) and Roots, but Slimy in the Leaves; for which reason I think it a Lychnis, or else a Prunella. 2. Of a very Nauseous, Bitter, Sweet Taste, with a Clove-Smell in the Flower. Armerius pratensis, Armerius, Saponaria.
Or without any Clove-Smell nauseously Bitter Sweet. Centaurium, Gentiana, Gentianella. Scrophularia, Digitalis, which have a Bitter Sweet∣ness in the Flowers, and in the green Leaves a smell of Elder. Cynocrambe in the Root is Sweet, and Bitterish Sub-acrid, of an Elder-Smell. Quaere, Whether of the same Class? The Leaves boyled, and taken inwardly, purge strongly. 3. Of a strong Aromatick Smell, like Cloves: Caryophyllus, Caryophyllata, Lychnis, Coronaria, in the Root is like Cloves. IX. Species of strong Bitters, is Turpentine-Bitters. First, Bitter-Astringent, with a Turpentine-Smell. 1. Plain Turpentine-Trees: Abies, Pinus, Picea, Lentiscus, Cupressus, Tere∣binthus, Pistachia. Larix, Taxus is a crude Turpentine-Tree. Venice-Turpentine is from the Larix, Cyprian from the Terebinthus. Burgundy-Pitch is the Resina Picea; the common Turpentine from Pinus Montana. Lamp-black is, Fuligo resinae aut picis concrematae. Sarcocolla is a Gum, Ex arbore Thuriferâ, which is a Pine. Frankincense is a Firre-Resin; Manna thuris is the Powder of it. The Myrrhe-Tree is like Lentiscus; Stacte is a Li∣quid Myrrh: Myrrh is Bitter, Sub-acrid and Gummy.
Bdellium smells pleasant, like Myrrh, and is the Gum of a Tree. 2. Turpentine-Herbs very Styptick: Hypericum, Ascyrum, Androsaemum, Perfoliata, Bupleurum. Secondly, Bitter Astringent Turpentines, with an Aromatick Smell. Lignum Aloes, which is Bitterish, Astringent, and Acrid; by which it is a Cordial. Lignum Rhodium is like the Laurel-Class. Santala they are Aromatick, Bitterish, Astringent, and Sub-acrid, of a Rose-Smell; the Leaves are de∣scribed like the Mastick-Tree. Opobalsamum is the Turpentine of the Balsam-Tree. Carpobalsamum is the Seeds of Terebinthus. Xylobalsamum the Wood of the Balsam-Tree. Balsamum Capaivae tastes Bitterish-Terebinthinate, with a smell of Lignum Rhodium. Styrax sicca is a Gum-Resin of an excellent Scent; the Tree has a Resinous, Acrid, Oyly Nut. Terebinthus is Bacciferous, and has Laurel-Leaves, which shews the similitude of Nature betwixt Lau∣rel-Bitters and Turpentines. Turpentine in Plants is of a pale, a reddish, a yel∣low, and a purple Colour. Juniperus whose Berries make the Urine smell of Turpentine. Cistus ladanifera, Botrys, Sanicula. Cedrus Virginiana is of an Acrid burning quality, Odoriferous.
Styrax, Nux Moschata; Mace is the Skin cover∣ing Nutmegs; the Nutmeg-Tree is described as a Laurel. Thirdly, Fetid Turpentines. 1. Fetid mixt with a smell of Turpentine in Trees and Leaves. Sabina, Arbor vitae. Fetid mixt with a smell of Turpentine in the Roots. Nardus Celtica, Indica, Asarum, Valeriana, Ser∣pentaria Virginiana. Camphora is described like Juniper, it is a natural Sal Volatile Oleosum cut out of the Tree. Fourthly, Bitterish Acrid Leaves and Flowers of a Smell of Fetid Turpentines. Flos Africanus, Calendula, Chrysanthenum segetum. Fifthly, Bitterish, Acrid, Astringent, Terebinthi∣nate, Sub-aromatick Plants. Consolida Saracenica, Virga aurea, which is very Acrid; by which it is Diuretick. Herba Doria, Stoechas Citrina. Quaere. Conyza caerulea, acris; the Conyza media, in the Roots smells of Turpentine. Enula Campana evidently tastes of Turpentine in the Root; by which it is Pectoral and Diuretick. Dr. Grew observed a Citrin-Balsam in Enula. Flos Solis, if it be broke, smells of Turpentine, and it sweats it forth in the middle of the Flowers; which colours the Fingers Purple. Lappa minor is of the same Class.
Aster serotinus fruticescens savours of Turpentine. Malabathri folium is Canellae folium, tasting like Spikenard, and of the same Vertue. Sixthly, Bitterish Astringent, with a Musk, or Terebinthinate Smell. Geranium Robertianum, Batracoides, Geranium Moschatum, Columbinum. Some Geraniums have little Smell. X. Species of Bitters. Dead-Nettle Bitters being Bitterish Astringent. First, With a smell of Fetid, such as is in Dead-Nettle. Secondly, Bitterish Astringent. 1. With a Sliminess in the Leaves: Lamium fl. albo, rubro, flavo, Syderitis, Panax Coloni. 2. Fetid Resinous: Hedera terrestris, Morsus gallinae, Galeopsis. 3. With a Lamium Smell, and mixture of Aro∣matick Resin: Ladanum segetum, Betonica, Horminum, Sclarea, Melissophyllum. 4. In which there is a high degree of the Bitter Acrid: Ballote, Marrubium, Cardiaca, Scorodonia, Cha∣maedrys, Teucrium, Stachys, Lupulus, Scordium. XI. Bitterish Astringents agreeing with the La∣mium in Taste, and of the same Vulnerary quality; but the Lamium-Smell is wanting.
Verbena, Bugula, Euphrasia, which tastes like Ver∣vain, and has no considerable Smell; it has there∣fore the same Cephalick Vertue as Vervain, which seems to be a Lamium. Alsine Veronicae facie, Veronica, Prunella, which, by its Bitterish Astringent Root, is a Veronica, Cra∣teogonum, Cuscuta. Verbascum is a Lamium by its Bitter, which is like Murrubium; the Roots taste Bitter-Acrid; the Flower smells a little Sweet. Quaere, Whether Tapsus barbatus be a Lamium by its Bitter Astringency? it has the same Nauseous Bitter Astringency as the common Verbascum, which is not unlike the Vervain-Bitter. Digitalis seems to come near to the Mullein Bitter∣ness, as I perceived by tasting the Root. Scrophularia, Betonica aquatica, seem Lamiums by the Flower, and the squareness of the Stalk, by the Bitter Astringency; but they have the Fetid Smell of Elder, not Dead-Nettle. These may therefore be placed as Bitter Astrin∣gents with a Fetid Smell: Verbascum, Tapsus, Digitalis, Scrophularia, Beto∣nica aquatica, & Cynocrambe. XII. Strong Bitter Sweet Tastes in the Bark and Berries, being Purgers. Rhamnus catharcticus, whose Bark is very Acrid or burning in chewing. Alnus nigra baccifera of the same Taste and Vertue.
XIII. Herbs of a bitter, sweet, slimy, sub-acrid Taste, and Purging. Aloes: Quaere, Whether this is referrible to the Grasses; it is Astringent in the Leaves. Gratiola, Lysimachia galericulata. Quaere, Whe∣ther these be not referible to the Lychnis Bitter-Sweets. The Fifth CLASS. Of Aromatick Plants. PLants of an Aromatick Taste, are either Sweet-Aromaticks, or Bitterish-Aromaticks. There are some Aromaticks both Bitterish and Sweet; and there are also mixt Smells of Aro∣matick and Fetids. The Sweet-Aromaticks have their Sweetness from the Juice in the Bladders, which is of a smooth Oyly Nature; but their Acrid-Aromatick from a Milk; which, in Fennil, may be dryed into an Oyly Balsam, in which is a Volatile Salt mixt with the Oyl: And hence all the Aromaticks are Acrid, and Hot in Taste. All the Umbelliferous Plants are Milky; and in Angelica the Milk dryed looks like Blood-clutters; which is observed by Dr. Grew.
The digestion is higher in the Bitterish Aroma∣tick than in the Sweet, which I call of the Fennil-Class, because that is most known; and a savour of it is observable throughout that Class: boyled Fennil-Roots savour of Parsneps. The Oyly Salt is spread through the whole Plant, and gives the same Taste to each part: This also produces the Effluviums which affect the Smell and Taste. In the Bitterish-Aromatick, as Rosemary and La∣vender, the Balsamick Turpentine is like a Resin, which gives the Bitterish Acrid Taste, and is lodged in Oyly Vessels; but an Astringency is in the Bladders. In the Aromaticks of a mixt Smell, the Oyly Juices are highest digested. First, Sweet Acrid Aromaticks. 1. Of a Parsnep-Smell: Pastinaca latifolia, tenuifolia, Aquatica, Sisarum, Sium, Sison, Oenanthe aquatica. Ballatis, Sisarum Peruvianum, whose Roots taste Sweet and Mealy, Slimy, and so fit for Food; the Flowers and Leaves smell Fragrant, like a Parsnep. Daucus, Pimpinella, Saxifrago major, minor. Or of a mixt Smell of Parsnep, with Fetid: Sphondylium, Cicutaria vulgaris. 2. Of a Fennil-Smell Aromatick: Foeniculum, Anethum, Dracunculus hortensis, Ani∣sum, Carum, Crithmum, lignum Sassaphras, by the taste is of this Class.
Or of a Fennil-Smell mixt with Fetid. Peucedanum has a Sulphur-Smell. Ferula, Panax, Libanotis, Cuminum, Meum, Cori∣andrum, Ammi, Levisticum, Siler montanum, which smells like Lovage, and tastes Acrid: by the Taste and Smell arising from a Volatile Salt and Oyl, these are Ʋterines, as Strong, Fetid, Diuretick, Pectoral, and Carminative; as all other of this Class are. 3. Of a Parsley-Smell. Caucalis, Petroselinum Macedonicum & Sativum, Bul∣bocastanum, Smyrnium, Percepier, Hipposelinum, Opium, and the last has a strongness or Fetid. 4. Of a Chervil-Smell: Chaerefolium, Pecten Veneris, Gingidium, which is described Bitter-Aromatick. Seseli Hartwort of Candy, smells like Chervil; as Gerard affirms. Of a mixt Smell of Chervil and Fetid: Myrrbis Sylvestris Seminibus asperis. 5. Of a Sweet, Aromatick, Acrid, Astringent Taste, as Cinnamon, Cassia Lignea, but these I have placed with the Laurel-Aromaticks; but by the Taste they are of this Class. 6. Of a Sweet, Bitterish, Acrid, Aromatick Taste, with the Smell of Angelica. Angelica hortensis, Imperatoria, Herba Gerardi, Petasitis, which sweats out a Balsam, instar Balsa∣mi Capaivae.
7. Sweet Acrid Aromatick in a very high degree: Cubebae, Cardamomum. Amomum is reckoned like Cardamomum or Acorus. To this Class the Aromaticks in the Sweet Tastes are most properly referible. Secondly, Species of Aromaticks are Bitterish, A∣crid Aromaticks, Sub-astringent. 1. Of a Mint-Smell pure or mixt: Mentha spicata, Calamintha, Mentha crispa, Mentastrum, Sisymbrium. Fetid mixt with a Mint-Smell: Nepeta, Dictamnus, Pulegium. 2. Of a Smell of Citron: Melissa, Ocymum. 3. Of a Marjoram-Smell: Marum Syriacum, Origanum, Majorana, Clinopo∣dium, Acinos. 4. Of a Sweet Resinous Smell: Rosmarinus, Lavendula, Stoechas Arabica. Thymus, Serpillum, Epithymum. Of a mixt Smell with Fetid: Hyssopus, Satureia. 5. Of a very great Acrimony: Zinziber, Galanga, Acorus. Vide, The Class of Sweet Tastes, where they are placed more by their external similitude to the rest of that Class; but must here be placed by the Taste. Cortex Winteranus is referible to the Laurel-Bitters.
Of a mixt Smell: Zedoaria, Camphora. Vide, Bitter Astringent with a Burnet-Smell. Bitter Sweet Astringent with a Clove-Smell. Laurel-Bitters Aromatick. Terebinthinates Aromatick. Aromatick Austeres. I generally find the Roots of Bitterish Aromatick Plants to be only Bitterish Astringent; the Aroma∣tick is more evident in the Leaves, as in Balm, Mar∣joram, Clary, Sage. The Roots of Mint taste not so Acrid and Aro∣matick as the Leaves; therefore the Juices are higher digested than in the Root, which taste only Bitterish Astringent; and the Acrid Aromatick is produced from the Bitter of the Root. I compared the Taste of Mint, which had been long kept growing in Water, with fresh Mint; it was not so strong in Taste and Smell as the fresh Sprig got out from the Garden; there was some difference, but not much. The growing of Herbs from Water, shews that Water is no pure Element, but a compounded Body, having some mixture of Oyly, Acid, and Earthy Particles, which are contained under the form of Wa∣ter, and nourish both Plants and Fish. Water long kept tastes Acid, and is Fetid, which are sensible proofs of an Oyl and Acid dissolved in it. In many Bitters, as the Smoaky, the Roots taste
stronger than the Leaves, because of the greater plenty of the Bitter Milk Vessels; but in the Leaves there are the same Milk Vessels; and besides them, in the Bladders of the Leaves, is contained a crude slimy Juice, which is not capable of any farther di∣gestion by the heat of the Sun; and hence it is that the Leaf tastes most of that crude slimy Juice, with a mixture of Bitter, from the Milky Bitter Gum in the Specifick Vessels. The Root of St. John's-wort, tastes Bitterish Astrin∣gent, with a lower savour of Turpentine than in the Leaves; in which the Oyly Juice is more exalted and Volatilized, and smells more of Turpentine. The Wormwood-Bitters, as Feaverfew, Mugwort, Chamomile, have less Bitter in the Roots than in the Leaves; they have a sweetness like the Root of Worm∣wood, which sweetness is digested in a bitterness in the Leaves. The Sixth CLASS. Of Fetids. I Find that the Fetids will not easily be distin∣guished from the Aromaticks, because of the likeness of the Plants in Figure and Taste, of Sweet or Bitter; and the mixt Smells of Fetid and Aromatick are to be placed in the same Class.
I mentioned many Fetids which are placed in o∣ther Classes, by other remarkable Tastes, with which they are joyned; as, 1. The Fetid Earthy-Tastes. 2. The Fetid Rank Oyly in the Pea-Class. 3. Fetids of a Lamium-Smell. 4. Elder-Fetids. 5. Terebinthinate-Fetids. 6. The Laurel-Fetids. 7. The Sweet-Fetids. But these Fetids will be mentioned in the fol∣lowing Classes. 8. The Garlick-Fetids. 9. The Cress-Fetids. 10. The Corrosive-Fetids, Venemous Plants. I shall here only mention the Narcotick-Fetids, which are Mucilaginous: To which I will add the strong heady Opiates; tho' rather Aromatick than Fetid. The strong Aromaticks have a nature inclining to Fetid, and something mixt of both in their smells; and they are accounted something Soporiferous. 1. Fetids with Mucilaginous Leaves, with a mixt Smell of Aromatick and Fetid, being Opiate, and very heady, bearing Fruit. Mala insana, Syriaca. Mandragoras has an Aromatick Fruit; and the Bark smells Narcotick. Pomum amoris, Flos Africanus.
2. Mucilaginous Leaves, with Bitter Acrid Roots of a sweet heady offensive Smell. Auricula Ʋrsi, Primula veris. 3. Mucilaginous Bitterish Leaves, with Bitter, Acrid, Milky Roots, of a Poppy Fetid Smell. Lactuca hortensis, sylvestris, Lactuca agnina. Papaver rhoeas, Papaver hortense, Argemone. 4. Mucilaginous Bitterish of a Solanum Fetid Smell: Solanum lignosum, Amomum Plinii, Mirabilis Peruviana, Solanum lethale, Herba Paris, Circaea, Asclepias, Tabaco, Hyoscyamus. 5. With a Fusty Smell, like Mouse-Turds: Lithospermum. Cynoglossum, whose Roots have a Sweet Slimy Pea-Taste. Quaere, Whether referible to that Class. Nux Vomica smells like Opiates Fetid, and is of a Bitter Slimy Taste; it cause Trembling, Convulsi∣ons, and Shortness of Breath; these Symptoms de∣pend on the Poysoned Spirits; for I find no altera∣tion in the Stomach of a Dog poysoned by it, or the Solanums. Coculus Indi is very Bitter and Acrid, and a Nar∣cotick; by which it offends Insects and Lice. Opiates have a great Slime in the Bladders, and a Bitter, Acrid, Fetid Gum or Milk, like Opi∣um, which is their Oyly Juice; and therefore by the Gummy, Bitter, Acrid, Fetid they must be Clas∣sed, and not by the Slime; by reason whereof, the Antients esteemed Opiates Cool; tho' the Foetor and Acrimony shew them to be Hot Plants.
Opiates yield much Oyl by distillation; ℥i. of Opium yields ℥ss. of Oyl, ʒiii. of Earth, ʒi. of Water. lbi. of Poppy-Seeds yields ℥ix. of Oyl, of Water, and Earth ana ℥iii. in a distillation, in Sand, as Bonetus mentions. The Narcotick Faculty lies in the Foetor, which depends on the Volatile Oyl; which being Fetid, like the Animal Spirits, it acts on them, and is of∣fensive to them, being too much Fetid for them; it extinguishes their Lucidity, as a Candle is put out by the Fumes in Mines, or the Fumes of strong Li∣quors in Cellars; or else the Mucilage passing into the Nerves, with the Fetid Particles, it may clog the motion of Spirits, and produce a Stupor, by obstructing the Nerves. The Seventh CLASS. Of Plants of an Acrid or Cress-Taste, which are Bitterish or Sweet, and Pungent Acrid. ACrid Plants have a great deal of Volatile Salt Pungent, from some Bitter Watry Gum in its Oyly Vessels; this Gum is both Bit∣terish and Pungent. The Bladders in Horse-radish-
Roots give a Sweetness, which is digested into a Bitterness with Acrimony, which may resemble the Gum of Bdellium, which tastes Bitter Acrid; and Celandine, which is of this Class, bleeds a Bitter Acrid Milk. Malpighius observes in the description of Onions, That the Specifick Vessels being cut, Ichorem quasi lac fundunt. We want Cuts of this Taste, more than any, to describe their Milky Gum-Vessels. If Plants were described according to their several Tastes, by the Classes, I would advise it to be done by a slice of the Stalk, where the Specifick Vessels appear best, because the Bladders are least; for when I have doubted of the Oyly Tastes, I have found them evident in the Stalk, where I have per∣ceived an Acrid which could not be tasted in the Root or Leaves, as in Chelidonium minus. The Oyly Balsams may be always tasted in the Seeds of Plants. The Acrid Salt is tempered by the Oyl in Aro∣maticks; but it is more Pungent in Acrids, where there is less Oyl. I suppose the Acrid Salt has some pointed Figure like other Volatile Salt. All Salts are compounded of Oyl, Acid, and Earth; but this Pungency in Plants seems to be the Oyl and Acid of Plants only: and because of its want of Earth, or sufficient Acid, does not taste Salt.
This Composition of Oyl and Acid in Plants, spends the Oyl of Plants, and turns it into another Taste, and a long Figure, on which the Pungency depends; and the quick pungent Smell, different from the Smells of Resins and Turpentines. The Pungency in Choler is the ground of the Animal Salt; and if Acrid Plants, as Woad be pu∣trefied, it yields a Volatile Urinous Salt: The Pun∣gency therefore in Plants is the Embryo of a Vola∣tile Salt, and may be esteemed an imperfect Salt, wanting either the Acid part or Earthy to give it a Saltness; as the Acid of digested Meat gives a Salt∣ness to Cholers Acrid; so, by Putrefaction, a Vo∣latile Acid is produced to give a Saltness to the Pun∣gency of Plants. The Species of Acrids may be the Aromatick-Acrid, the Cress-Acrid, and the Corrosive; but I think fit to make distinct Classes of these. The Species of Cress-Acrids; are, 1. The Fragrant-Cresses. 2. Pure Cress-Acrids. 3. The Colouring-Cresses. 4. The Sweetish-Cresses. 5. Fetid-Cresses. 6. Pepper-Cresses. 7. Garlick-Cresses. 8. Garlick Slimy-Acrids. 9. Gummy-Acrids.
1. Acrid Tastes, with Mucilaginous Leaves and Fragrant Flowers, and Bitter Acrid Seeds: Leucoium sativum, luteum, Viola lunaria, Hes∣peris, Lysimachia siliquosa, Thlaspi Creticum. 2. With a Cress Pungent Smell, without any Aromatick: Erysimum, Barbarea, Nasturtium aquaticum, hor∣tense, Cardamine, Paronychia vulgaris, Cochle∣aria, Bursa pastoris, Nasturtium Indicum, Si∣napi, Draba, Iberis, Rapistrum, Turritis, Mya∣grum, Coronopus Ruellii. 3. Bitter, Acrid, Slimy, Colouring Plants: Luteola, Glastum, Ophioglossum. Chelidonium majus, the Bitterness is like the Mad∣ders, but the first seem to be of the Pea-Class. 4. Acrid joyned with a Sweetness in the Leaves or Roots, besides the Bitterishness. Rapum, Rhaphanus, Brassica vulgaris, & multiflora. Ʋrtica has Sweet Acrid Roots. Nettle-Juice tastes Bitterish, like Cresses, and is Diuretick like them, and Acrid. 5. Acrid, Bitter, and Fetid: Eruca, Sophia Chirurgorum, Ruta, Fraxinella, which smells like Ruta, upon rubbing. Gerard supposes it to be called Tragium, from its smell of a Goat. I refer Rue to this Class, by its Acrimony, and similitude of Figure to the Cresses. The Seeds of Fraxinella grow in Cods; and by its Bitter-Acrid I have placed it here. Fraxinella
has a sort of Turpentine Fragrancy at first, but up∣on rubbing, a Rue-Smell. Dentaria is described, by Mr. Ray, to be Gustu fervido. Gerard describes it of an unpleasant Sa∣vor, and sharp in Taste, whose Flowers are shaped like Stock-Gilliflowers; and the Seed contained in Corniculis, like Hesperis. The Coralloides is described of a Bitter and Hot Taste, having Seeds like Rocket. For these Reasons I take these Plants to be of this Class. 6. Acrid with the Taste and Odor of Pepper. Lepidium vulgare. Piper sive Capsicum Indicum. Jamaica-Pepper has a savour of Cloves. 7. Acrid, with the Odor of Garlick. Thlaspi, Alliaria. 8. Acrid, Bitterish, Fetid, Rank, Slimy Roots: Allium ursinum, Corvinum, vulgare, Porrum, Scorodoprassium, which has a mixt Smell of Garlick and Leeks. Moly, Cepe vulgare, Cepe Ascalonicum, which is a Leek. 9. Bitter, Acrid, Gummy Plants, which being Umbels, are referred to them; but I place them here because of their smelling like Garlick: if they have a Sweetness, they are Umbels. Panax Herculeum, whose Seed is of a pleasant Savour: This Plant yields a yellow Gum, called Opo∣panax, tasting Acrid, and smelling like Garlick.
In Ammoniacum I perceive a Fennil-Taste; and therefore it is the Gum of an Umbelliferous Plant. Gum Elemi is Bitterish, Sub-acrid, Gummy, of a Fennil-Smell, very offensive; and it is also Tere∣binthinate and Resinous, dissolving in Oyl, and burn∣ing: it is said to be the Gum of an Olive-Tree, which is a Laurel-Bitter. Asa is the Gum of Laserpitium, and comes also from a Shrub, like Salix. Liquid Amber is a Resin of a Tree, like Ivy, and to be Classed with it. The Eighth CLASS. Of Corrosive Tastes. THe Corrosive Salt is of some hooked Fi∣gures, because their Acrimony tears, cor∣rodes, and sticks long on the Tongue, and burns the Mouth. It is not improbable that there is a difference in the Figure of their Volatile Salts, since there is so great a one in the Fixt Salts of Plants, which are described by Fracassatus de lingua, in his Epistle; and there is also a great variety in Mineral Salts.
Sal communis, cubicus, octoedricum Alumen, Vitriolum Rhomboicum, Sal Ammoniacum in hexagonas cu∣spidulas abeat. Mr. Leuvenhock gives the Figures of the Acid Particles of Wine and Tartar, pointed at both ends, which easily crystallize into other Figures, as into square Figures, by addition of Crabs-Eyes, and then they taste Salt. If these Corrosive hooked Salts are joyned with an Elder-Bitter-Slime, they purge violently in the Hellebors. If with an Oyl they constitute the Oyly Corro∣sives, as in Euphorbium and the Spurges. If with Turpentine they make the Corrosive Acrid Turpentines, as in Cedar, and Persicaria acris. If an offensive Foetor be joyned with these hooked corrosive Salts, they produce a Poyson, as in the Ace∣nites. The Species of Corrosive Tastes, are, 1. Watrish mild Corrosives. 2. The Acid Acrid. 3. The Acrid with Slimy Berries. 4. The Crowfoot Corrosives. 5. Fiery Fragrant. 6. With an Elder-Smell. 7. Terebinthinate Causticks. 8. Sweet and Fetid Acrid Poysonous. 9. Milky, Resinous, or Spurge-Corrosives. 10. Laurel-Causticks.
1. Watrish Corrosives in a low degree burning Acrid. Chelidonium minus. Ranunculus pratensis, erectus, dulcis, & nemo∣rosus dulcis, Aquaticus Hepaticae facie, Caltha palustris, Cotyledon aquatica. Ranunculus globosus, Sedum minus. 2. With Sub-acrid Acid Leaves, whose Roots are also Acid Acrid. Bellis minor, Anagallis flore Phoeniceo; this as well as Bellis hath a Bitterness as well as Acid Acrid, by which it is good in Fevers. Rosa Solis smells Acid, and tastes so, with an Acrimony. Pyrethrum-Root is Acid Acrid, which is reckoned a Volatile Tartar; and it is used in making Vinegar. 3. Sweet Watrish Corrosives, with slimy burning Berries. Aron, there is a Milky Juice in Aron-Root; and therefore the Corrosive lies in a Watry Gum, very Acrid, like Euphorbium. Dragon-Flower is Fetid; and Aron green Leaves smell of Elder. Arisarum is more Acrid than Arum. Arisarum, Dracontium. 4. Watry Corrosives, with a Pungent Acrid Smell; these are the Crowfoot-Corrosives, or Anemones. Ranunculus pratensis, flammeus, flos Adonis, Pul∣satella, Anemone sylvestris. 5. Bitterish Caustick, with a fragrant fiery Smell, Clematis sylvestris, latifolia, flammula Jovis.
Anacardiums are Causticks and Aromaticks. 6. Very Bitter Causticks, with a Fetid Elder-Smell in the Leaves, but of a more Virose Fetid Root. Helleborus niger, ferulaceus, Helleboraster, Sta∣phys Agria. Cyclamen, which is described by Galen, Slimy and Acrid, Purging violently, a Sternutory, Pessus; and discusses Scirrhose Tumors. 7. Terebinthinate Causticks. Cedrus, Persicaria acris, maculosa; this smells strongly of Turpentine in the Leaves and Seeds; and therefore by that, and its Caustick Acrimony, it is the strongest Diuretick. Walter Chetwind of Ingstreny, my Honoured and Ingenious Friend, gave me this Observation: The Leaves of Persicaria acris in Powder, or De∣coction, in Posset-Drink, are excellent in a suppressi∣on of Ʋrine. 8. Causticks with Sweet Acrid Roots, very Fetid, being Poysonous. Cicuta, this is usually reckoned amongst the Um∣bels, and supposed to have a Milk or Balsam, as the rest have. Oenanthe Cicutae facie, succo croceo, viroso; it is of a strong Fetid Smell, and the Juice is Exulcerating and Acrid, which is at first Milky, afterwards Yellow. The Foetor produces Giddiness, like Hemlock. The Acrid causes burning in the Mouth and Stomach, and purges violently, with Convulsions; as Mr. Ray, and Vander Wiel observe.
Thapsia Deadly-Carrot is described to be Fetid, Milky, very Acrid and Bitter; by which it vomits, and is Poysonous. Christophoriana, Napellus, Aconitum hyemale, au∣tumnale, Lycoctonum, seem to be of this Species. Apocynum is described by Galen very Hot and Fe∣tid; there is a Milk in it, and it is Poysonous by its strong Acrid and Fetids; for the Foetor of Poy∣sonous Herbs irritates the Spirits, or else fixes them as Narcoticks do; the Acrimony corrodes the Mem∣branes, and causes Anxieties and Inflations, or im∣moderate Evacuations and Inflammations of the Blood. 9. Milky, Resinous, Spurge-Corrosives: Tithymalus Characias, Cataputia, Peplus, Turpe∣thum, Esula, Cambogia, Euphorbium, Scammoniū. Ficus; the Juice of Figs burns; the Leaves rub∣bed incline to the smell of Rue; and its Milky Juice curdles Milk, by dropping it into Milk in a Spoon. 10. Bitter Astringents of a burning Acrimony, with fragrant Flowers and Berries; these seem to be of the Laurel-Class. Laurestinus which burns the Mouth. Laureola is Acrid and Bacciferous. Thymelaea. Chamaelaea, Mezereon have also sweet Flowers and Berries, as many of the Laurel-Class have; and a Tithymaline Acrimony in the whole Plant. Apocynum may be placed here, and Oleander, which killed some Rabbits, who eat the green Leaves:
It has Cods like Apocynum; and is described Odor foetido & acuto instar Raparum in which its Poyson lies; but I could not observe that smell in the Gar∣den-Oleander. All Poysonous Herbs are made milder by transplanting them from the Field into Gardens. Mr. Ray describes a Yew, Odore noxio & viroso; and this Yew is a Poyson by that smell. Arbor venenata; it has a Caustick Milk exulce∣rating the Skin, and by that it is a Poyson. Fungi venenati; they are Fetid and Acrid, as other Poysonous Plants; the Acrid causes a Strangulation and Vomiting, and their Fetid produces a Stupor, fixing the Spirits; the crude Slime lies indigested in the Stomach. Mushroms, and other Plants, may be made Poy∣sonous, by touching of Poysonous Animals. These Tables I have made, manifest the distinct Classes of Plants, as they are distinguished by their Terebinthinate or Oyly Juices; and in them I have distinguished the Species, by the several compositi∣ons of Tastes, and the difference of Tastes, and dif∣ferent parts of Plants: Where the Taste can go no farther, I have mentioned the Smells to sub-distin∣guish; but the external accidents must be admitted to distinguish the particular Plant in each Species. I will Instance in some more of the advantages of this Method. The Antients, as Dioscorides, described the Tastes and Smells of many Plants: And Galen thought that
Method so useful, that he used it for the examining Medicines; and transcribed out of Dioscorides the Tastes of many Medicines, and on them grounded his Methodus Medendi; therefore by this Method we shall more fully understand the Plants described by the Antients, and those excellent Notions which were grounded upon Tastes; but our Moderns have neglected Tastes, and rambled into Chymical and Mathematical Notions, which can never explain the Humors of Animals, and the Vertues of Medicines; for Chymistry only shews us the Principles of Bodies, but not the Qualities arising from their Mixture and Texture: And from the Mechanical Qualities we demonstrate what may be the Figure and Motion of Particles, but prove nothing of their real existence in Bodies. This neglect of Tastes gave Helmont a just rea∣son of complaining, Nihil fere ab ipsius Dioscoridis tempore accessisse rei Herbariae. By this Method we may know a Plant at any time, when the Seed, Fruit, Flowers are not in Sea∣son; for their Taste and Smells are obvious in the Bark, Root, and Leaves. It is a great advantage to Physicians to have Plants of the same Taste and Vertue ranked toge∣ther, who cannot but allow of the Rule mentioned by Mr. Ray, Quaecunque Plantae saporibus conveniunt, facultatibus convenire consentaneum est: therefore, if a Physician knows the Vertue of one plant of a particular Taste, he will easily understand that they
are all of the same Vertue, which have the same Taste; and he need not put so many of them into a Medicine as is usually done, to trouble the Apo∣thecary, and also inflame the Patient's Bill. The Specifick Juices are the most useful part of the Plant to Physicians, according to that Remark Mr. Ray has given of them: Esse quintessentiam Plantae, ejusque odorem & sa∣porem reddere, viresque veluti concentratas in se con∣tinere, non diffiteor. I conceive this Method of distinguishing Plants by their Oyly Specifick Juices, to be much to be preferred by Physicians to any other Method; be∣cause by the Taste of Plants we discover their Ver∣tue, and by placing all of a Taste together we are sure to have them all of the same Vertue, and no other. I suppose our Ingenious Herbalists will consider the easiness and shortness of this Method, which contains only Eight summa genera, and those obvi∣ous to our Senses; and they will observe that the description of the Taste and Smell of a Plant will give a better distinction of one Plant from another, than a whole Page of external accidents; and it will be more satisfactory than the Picture of the Plant it self. It seems impossible to remember all the external accidents, unless a Man reads nothing but Herbals all his Life; and Galen says, There were more writ in his days than any Person could ever read; but the general Tastes are but few, and the
particular Tastes are obvious in every Plant I meet with, and desire to know. I find a common Objection against this Method, That Plants have different Tastes in divers parts; but this I have answered already, by intimating, That the Oyly Juice does give the chief Taste, by which Plants ought to be distinguished; but the Juice in the Bladders is altered in the Fruit and Leaves only. The taste of the Oyly Juice is always the most prevailing Taste in Plants, as the Taste of the Barks of Trees is the most general Taste in the Tree, but the Leaves and Fruit may differ, after a long di∣gestion, but before it they had the same Taste, while unripe, as the Bark and the Skin of the Fruit; and the Seed retains usually much of the Taste of the Bark, as in Peach-Kernels and the Peel of Oranges is most evident; and in their Seeds the same Taste is usually found in all the parts of Sweet Aromatick Plants, and in Acrids, and the Corrosive; but more strong in the Seeds than other parts. The Bitters are most inclined to alter their Tastes from Austere to Acerb, or Sub-acid, Slimy, and Sweet Tastes, and Acrid. Therefore in distinguishing of Plants by the Taste, we must first observe the most prevailing Taste in all the parts of the Plant, which is the Oyly Juice: Secondly, We must describe the Juice in the Bladders, and the alteration it receives in the Leaves and Fruit; for Astringent Roots bear Acerb
Leaves, which obscure the Taste of the Oyly Juice in the Leaves; as in Sorrel. Some sweet Roots have bitter Leaves; as Worm∣wood. Sweet and Bitter differ not in Principles, but in their Texture; which is altered, from a smooth one to an unequal rough Texture in Bitters, by a farther Digestion. In Wormwood, Dr. Grew observes Turpentine-Ves∣sels, which give the Sweet Aromatick Taste to the Roots. And he also observes Sap-Vessels in parcels, which are arched like the Bitter Gum-Vessels: And these may give the Bitter Taste to Wormwood-leaves: The Astringency is in the Bladders. Where Two Specifick Vessels happen in a Plant, the highest Taste is to be considered; and that which prevails most in the Plant, is to be esteemed the highest Oyly Juice for the distinguishing the Plant. If the Juices in the Bladders of the Root, become Bitter in the Bladders of the Leaves; yet the same Aromatick Acrid appears in the Specifick Vessels, in both Roots and Leaves. The Seeds of the Cresses are more Bitter than the Leaves, because of the abundance of the Oyly Juice in them. And the Stalk is Bitter also, be∣cause the Juice of the Bladder is higher Digested, than in the Roots; where it tastes more Sweet and Acrid; as in Horse-radish: So that we may allow the Juice in the Bladders of the Leaves, to be higher digested into a Bitterness, when they are only Sweet in the Root: But notwithstanding this change of
Taste, the Specifick Juice in Cresses, is the Milky Acrid Gum; and in Wormwood, the Aromatick Acrid Balsam. The Second Objection is, That Plants have diffe∣rent Vertues in their several Parts; and so, by the Taste, we cannot reduce them of the same kind of Vertue, into the same Classes. To this I Answer, That we usually allow many Vertues to the same Taste; and the Juices of Ve∣getables may have different degrees, of the same Taste, in their several Parts; and to that difference, several Effects are to be attributed: So in the Bark of Elder, and in the Leaves, there is the same kind of Taste; but of a different degree of strength, to Purge and Vomit: The Flowers, and Pulp of the Berries purge not so much; but they both purge a little: One handful of the Flowers boyled, purge: The Seed has more of the Elder Taste and Vertue, to vomit and purge; and all Purgers are also Diu∣retick; and if it be given in a great Dose, it vomits. I could wish, That a few proper Vertues were allowed to each Plant, which it most eminently and constantly produces, by its peculiar Taste; and that other Vertues were rejected, which are more certainly produced by Plants of a more Spe∣cifick Taste. The Third Objection may be, That the same Plant growing in the Garden, differs in Taste, from the
same growing in the Field, and its native Soyl; as in Scurvy-Grass, Wormwood, and all the Poysonous Plants, is most evident. To this I Answer, That the Tastes differ in the Wild and Field Plants only in Degree, and not in the Kind, or Species of Taste; so Sea and Garden Scurvy-Grass have the same Cress-Acrid, but the Sea is strongest: The Wild Hemlock poysons in a higher degree than the Garden; but both have the same Fetid Acrimony. The fat Soyl in the Garden gives a greater Mag∣nitude, and alters the crude Juices, towards a sweet∣ness in the Bladders; as appears in Carrots. In some Plants, the Smells do plainly Characte∣rize the Class or Species; as in Aromaticks, Fetids, and Narcoticks, there is a Bitter Smell also, though Galen denies it; for we may plainly smell a Peach-Bitter, or Laurel-Bitter, in the rubbing of the Flow∣ers of Peaches and Cherries: And in the green Leaves of Laurel and Walnut, we smell a Bitterness, which may be a note of the Laurel-Class; but the Species of Plants is not to be multiplyed, where they have the same Taste, though some alteration happen in the Smell; for we may observe various Smells, in the different parts of Plants; and in some Plants, a compounded Smell. I have not excluded the external Figure, from any consideration in the Classing of Plants, but al∣low it no farther, than as marks of distinction of
the several Individuals, under the same Taste; and a great help, for the better sorting of Plants, where the Taste is obscure. I observed, That many Plants had Leaves of other Plants, which agree with one another in Tast; as, Pulsatilla Anemones facie, Quin∣quefolium Tormentillae facie; and by such similitudes of parts, I was directed to compare their Tastes and Vertues. I have Classed all the Plants I have mentioned, according to such Tastes as I have observed my self, or borrowed from Galen, Mr. Ray, and others. I hope the Reader will not expect any exact Methodizing of Plants, but will correct all those Mistakes I am guilty of in this Design; in which, all I pretend to, is, To have proposed a useful and rational Method for distinguishing Plants; but this I shall leave to be perfected by Time, and those who have a bet∣ter Skill in the general Botanicks, than I can pretend to, who live so far distant from any of our Famous Gardens; where I might, upon any doubt of a Taste or Smell, consult the Plant it self. And I cannot desert the Imployment of Physick, to pro∣secute throughly this pleasing Study, of the Tastes and Smells of the Juices in Plants, which renders Botanicks very useful to a Physician. The End of the Sixth Part.
AN APPENDIX TO THE Second Part OF THE : Containing Two Parts; I. A TABLE of the Tastes of Animal Humors, in their Natural States: With many Observations omitted in the Second Part. II. The Tastes and Smells of many Minerals, in their several Classes; which were not fully described in the Second Part. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1690.
A TABLE of Animal Tastes. I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste; these are Chyle, Milk, and the Milky Lympha's. II. Animal Humors of a Slimy Sub-acid Tartareous Taste; as the Slimes of the Stomach and Guts. III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitrio∣lick Taste; as Blood and Spleen-Juice. IV. Of a Fetid Animal Taste, as Spirits. V. Of a Fat, Greasie, or Unctuous Taste; as Suet, Fat, Marrow. VI. Of a Bitter, Acrid, Slimy Taste; as Choler. VII. Of a Salso-acid Taste, like com∣mon Sal-Ammoniack; as the Serum of the Blood, and Salt Lympha's, and Sweat and Ʋrine.
An APPENDIX to the Second Part, &c. I. Animal Humors of a Sweet Milky Taste, are either, First, Of a Milky Smell, or of no considerable Smell. Secondly, Of a Fetid Smell. First, THE Humors of a Milky Smell, and Milky Taste, without any Smell considerable. 1. The Milk of the Breasts, which is not different from Chyle, but by its being depu∣rated from Saltness, by the Glandules of the Breasts. Milk has the Smell of the Animal from whom it is drawn; and therefore the stronger the Blood, and Smell of each Animal is, the more offensive is the Milk: that Animal Savor of Milk, is the Vola∣tile Oyly part, and may be called the Spirit of Milk, which is more Fetid in Goats, Asses, and Mares, than in Cows; but that of Women has the most agree∣able
Animal Smell, being most like the natural Temper of those of the same kind. The Sweetness of Milk shews, that it is very ca∣pable of Fermentation in the Stomach of Animals. And Rennet curdles it by Fermentation, and not by its Acidity. In Milk we distinguish Four Parts. 1. The Serose Whey. 2. The Buttery, or Oyly Part. 3. The Cheesie, or Viscid Part. 4. The Acidity, evident in Butter-Milk. These several Parts of Milk have their uses in Physick. The Serose or Whey Parts are useful in diluting of Animal Humors; but especially the distilled Milk Waters. The Buttery Part of Milk, by its Oyliness, allays the Acid sharpness of Humors; and, by its Viscidity and Sliminess, it tempers the Acrids; whence Milk is Anodyne in Clysters, Eye-Medicines, and all In∣jections. Butter is emollient by its Oyliness, and is something Hot or Discussing: The Oyl of Ani∣mals being the Matter of Heat. The Cheesie Part in Milk, which Hippocrates calls , is very nourishing; and, by rea∣son of its Gummy Viscidity, it conglutinates Wounds.
The Acidity in Butter-Milk is cooling, as all Tartar-Acids be; and it is like the Sowreness of Vegetables. 2. The Chyle in the Thoracick-Vessels, tastes of a Milky Sweetness, with a manifest Saltness, and a strong savor of that particular Animal; which I call the Animal Taste and Smell. Tho' Dr. Glisson affirms, That Chyle has neither the Bitterness, nor the Savor of the Guts, nor the Saltness; yet I find the Judicious Dr. Lower affirms its Saltness. I tasted the Chyle of a Dog, Fed with Flesh, before it came to the Receptacle, by cutting one of the Lacteals near the Guts, and I found the Chyle Sweet and Saltish, and of an Animal Savor: The same was the Taste of the Chyle, in the Tho∣racick ductus. There is the same Parts in Chyle, as in Milk. 1. A Buttery Oyl. 2. A Serose Whey. 3. A Cheesie Viscid. 4. A Saltish-Acid, and Tartar-Acid. The Slimy Sweetness of Chyle, shews it to agree with Milk, as well in Nature, as in Taste: This Sweetness of Chyle is tasted in the Urine, in a Di∣abetes; where Chyle either wants its Sanguification, or else is diverted by some unknown Lymphaeductus to the Kidnies, from the Glands of the Mesentery.
This Sweetness of Chyle is evident in the Blood, which is spit from a broken Vein in the Lungs; and from hence is the Sweet Taste of Blood. This Sweetness is tasted in the Saliva, and the Milk of the Breasts; and therefore these, and all other Sweet Slimes arise from the Chyle. The colour of the Chyle was White and Reddish, or Rosie, in the Chyliduct of the Buttery Oyl of Chyle, becoming Red by the mixture of the Acrid of Choler, which produces the Saltness: So Salt of Tartar, by digestion with Milk, turns it Red: And a mixture of Crabs-Eyes, Vinegar, and White-Wine, looks Reddish. Hence I infer, That the Acrid of Choler helps Sanguification, by turning the Chyle of a colour mixt of Red and White, it becoming wholly Red upon a perfect Sanguification. From the different parts of Chyle, all the several parts of Blood, and other Humors, are prepared; and therefore all the parts of Animals have the principles of Chyle only altered by a higher Dige∣stion, and new Mixtures, and different Textures: And therefore I think it very impertinent for Phy∣sicians to look after any other Principles of Animal Bodies, than what occur to our Senses, in Chyle and Milk; for these are sufficient to explain all the Phaenomena observable in Animal Humors, without any Supposition of the Mathematical qualities of Atoms, or the Products of the Fire, by Chymistry; these are the curious Thoughts and Experiments of Philosophers; but the Physician needs none o∣ther
Notion, but what occurs by an obvious de∣duction from sensible objects: neither need we assert any other Principle, than a Serose, a Viscid, an Oyly, and an Acid Principle in Animal Humors. These are easily understood, and we need not consi∣der the farther Resolution of these Integral Parts, (which I call sensible Principles) what sort of A∣toms compose them; And what their insensible Mo∣tion is: Nor whether all these may be resolved in∣to one Principle. For in these particulars, every Philosopher has a different Hypothesis, and asserts what he pleases. 3. The Saliva resembles thin Milk, well diluted, and tastes Sweetish, like Milk. Milk is most like Chyle, and thicker and sweeter than the Saliva: therefore it is the first Humor separated from Chyle; for the Nourishment of Nurses, after Eating, immediately goes to the Breasts. The Saliva is increased by the use of Milk-Meats; and is therefore of the same Nature with it. 4. The Milky Slime of the Glandulous Coats of the Wind-Pipe and Nose: This returns out of the Bladders of the Lungs into the Thoracick ductus of the Chyle: And with this Lympha, I think it very probable that the Air passes into the Chyle-Vessels, for the better mixing of it with the Blood; and this is the only way I think the Air can pass into the Blood-Vessel. 5. The Glandulous Milky Slime of the Thymus, seems to be of the nature of the Saliva; and is e∣vacuated
either into the Oesophagus, or Chyliferous Vessels of the Embryo, for the supply of a suffici∣ent Lympha for the Chyle. Secondly, Animal Sweet Slimes, of a Fetid Smell, arising from Chyle highly digested. 1. The Male-Seed, which is Milky, Spumose, Viscid, and full of Volatile Fetid Oyly Particles, which are the Spirits of Animals: All the Seeds of Plants are Oyly, with a Slime adjoyned; these fer∣ment the Bituminous Juices (which are imbibed by their Coats, out of the Earth) into the Nature of each particular Seed, for the Growth and Increase of the Plantula Seminalis, contained in the Pulpy part of the Seed: So Impregnation of the Female, is by the Seminal Ferment, which alters the new Chyle in the Veins of the Female, into an albumi∣nous Nature, fit for the Nourishment of the Embryo, contained in the Female Egg. 2. The Glandulous Slimy Lympha of the Vagi∣na, and the Womb, and of the Female Testicles; all which resemble the White of an Egg: This is the Female Semen; it becomes Milky by boyling, like the White of an Egg; if the White be hard boyled, it smells very Sulphureous: These Sulphu∣reous Particles are the active Ferment of the White of an Egg, which ferments both Bread and Milk, which it thickens and curdles; but swells and ra∣refies Bread, or Puddings.
The Seminal Milks of both Sexes are Fetid, like putrid Fish; and therefore have a greater quantity of Animal Fetid Particles, fit for the nature of a Ferment; which is generally in Animals a Slime; in which Fetid Particles are lodged. Stum, which is the greatest of our Vegetable Ferments, has a Slimy Sweetness; and also a Sul∣phureous Smell and Taste, on which its great Acti∣vity depends as a Ferment. The two Masculine and Female Slimes mix in the Vagina or Womb; the Spirituous Male Seed al∣ters the Female Slime into that digestion, which is peculiar and fit for preparing the Nourishment of the Egg to be Impregnated, and for the Embryo contained in the Cicatricula. The Impregnate Slime passes through the Lymphaticks of the Womb, in∣to the Females Blood; and, by acting on the Slimy Chyle, therein it prepares a fit Nourishment for the Foetus in the Egg: That Nourishment is determined to the Ovarium, by the Act of Coition, which heats the Back, and opens the Passages to the Eggs, and determines the motion of the Blood and Spirits to those parts. The Sperm of a Pearl, dropt into Vinegar, is presently Coagulated; hence may be explained how Acids hinder Impregnation, when given for Medi∣cine, or abounding in the Female Blood; for it is ne∣cessary that she have a sufficient Chylose Matter for the nourishment of the Egg; and that also of a sweet nutritive temper, neither too Salt or Acid, which
destroys the Male Ferment, or the Embryo's Nu∣triment. 3. The Glandulous Milky thin Slime of the Brain-Glands, being full of Fetid Oyly Particles; for the Brain tastes Oyly and Slimy, and of the A∣nimal Fetid; from whence, I suppose, a Liquor is separated of the same Taste; for all the Glands have a Taste of their Lympha's. The Animal Fetid Particles being very high di∣gested, and of an Oyly Nature are the Animal Spi∣rits, diluted in the purest pellucid Lympha which can be separated from Chyle. This Lymphatick Slime preserves the Spirits, as our Noctiluca's are preserved in Water; and I sup∣pose the Spirits to be like them, having a lucid Na∣ture, by the admission of Air through the Nervous Canals of the Nose; as that Phosphorus which is made of Blood, by pulling out the Stopple and ad∣mitting Air, it becomes an innocent Flame: And the different tempers and motions of the Spirits may most intelligibly be explained, by comparing them with different sorts of Flame. Blood it self is very Inflammable, and burns like Resin, with a yellow Flame; from the different tempers of the Blood, a different Luminosity in the Spirits is pro∣duced. Light is a thin Flame, and that is produced naturally in Animal Bodies, by Putrefaction, as in the shining Shells of Lobsters: And this is the ultimate Resolution, or Rarefaction of the Animal Oyl; which, like Sulphur, becomes more lucid, by being
cleared from its Acid. Acids are the most Injuri∣ous to the Nerves, because they are prejudicial to the Light or Flame of the Animal Spirits; and hence, I suppose, the Spirits to be of an Oyly Nature, and Fetid, as all the Noctiluca's be. 4. The Lympid Humors of the Eyes, are not improbably the Lympha of the Nerves; especially the Vitreous Humor which is next to the Optick Nerve. The Aqueous Humor probably is derived from the Glands about the Eye; and if it be empti∣ed by puncture, it fills up again, and is a Serose Lympha. This Vitreous Humor tastes Slimy, and so does the Crystalline; and these two only differ in Consistence. The Vitreous Humor becomes more Limpid, by beating it in a Spoon, and then it has some little Saltness, which did, after some time, turn Syrup of Violets green; as all Animal Humors do, in which there is a Salt. This Vitreous Humor did not turn thick, by Oyl of Vitriol; nor altered, with Spirit of Harts-Horn; but it becomes White by boyling, and a little White by the Acid. It appears very pellucid, like Crystal; and in it seems to be lodged the furious hot Spirits of Dogs, Cats, and Lyons, which appear lucid in the dark; for which reason, I suppose it to be the Nervine Lympha, and the hollow of the Eye to be the dilata∣tion of the Nerve, whose Membranes and Fibres are manifestly spread in the hollow of the Eye; and therefore the Humors of the Eye flow from the Ner∣vose
Fibrillae. The external Light, which is re∣flected from an Object, cannot move the Fibrillae, to cause Vision; but more probably, it acts on the Luminous Spirits of an Animal, modifying them in∣to the same Figure and Motion which they have from the Object. II. Animal Humors of a Slimy, Sub-acid Taste, and Viscid Con∣sistence. THese have little Sweetness, but only the Slimy part of the Chyle, and the Tartar-acid of it, which remain after the Spiri∣tuous Sweetness is separated by the Brain-Glands, &c. or digested into other Tastes. 1. The Mucous Sub-acid Slime of the Glands of the Stomach and Guts. 2. The Lympha of the Pancreas is of the same Nature, Slimy and Sub-acid, and designed for the same use as the Lympha of the Guts, viz. The Fer∣mentation of our Meat. Those Slimy, Viscid, and Sub-acid Humors, arise from the Chyle, which is long digested with the Blood, till it becomes Viscid and Sub-acid, like the Tartar-acid of Butter-Milk.
All Ferments are Slimy, as Barme, and Rennet; they have also hot, strong, or fetid Particles, lodged in the Slime, and preserved by it. These Fetids are the active Principles of Fermentation in Rennet, and likewise in all Animal Ferments, as in the Semen, and the Slimy Lympha's of the Stomach and Guts, which ferment the Nourishment received into the Stomach. This Fetid, in the Slimy Lympha of the Stomach, is communicated from the Nerves; and is that I call the Animal Fetid. The Sub-acid helps the Oyly-Fetid in its Fermentation; as Nitre helps Sulphureous Minerals in their Conflagration, and Explosions. I could not coagulate this Slimy Lympha, by the Acid of Spirit of Salt, or by the Fire. I gathered it by two Ligatures, made in the Guts of a Rabbet; and emptied the space betwixt them, for the recep∣tion of the Slime. 3. The Slimy Sub-acid Humor, separated by the Spleen, which helps the separation of Choler by the Liver. This is the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, which, joyning with the Bitterness of Choler, pro∣duces the Acrid observable in it: So, by the mix∣ture of Bitter and Acid in Plants, a Salt taste is pro∣duced: And from Acrid Plants, as Horse-radish, I have distilled an Acid Liquor. Note, That all the Conglomerating Glands look white like their Milky Slimes: And though some of their Lympha's be Sweet, yet these last mentioned are less Sweet, and are either naturally Sub-acid, or
else turn so immediately upon Stagnation in the Stomach. All the Slimy Sweet Lympha's are properly sup∣plyed by sweetish Slimes, or Milk Diet, when they are deficient. These Slimes being naturally produ∣ced from Chyle, which is Sweetish, and like Milk. The Slimy Sub-acid Humors are best supplied by Tartar-Acids, which quicken the Appetite, and help Digestion, especially the well digested Acids of ripe Fruits, and Wine it self, which is Sub-acid. There is a Volatile Acidity in the Contents of the Stomach; for all digested Vegetables smell and taste Acid, with a mixture of Fetid; such is the Smell of the same Vegetable, if it be artificially di∣gested: And the Acidity is generally more evident to the Smell, than the Taste, which is a sign of its being fermented. When the Spirituous Oyly Particles of Chyle are carried off into the Lacteals; the remaining con∣tents have the Acidity of Vineger in the Colo; and therefore the Ascarides are bred there, which resemble the Eels in Vineger: This Acid has a putrid Savor joyned with it, which is produced by a precedent Fermentation. This Acid is produced from the Tartar of Vegetables; which being Fer∣mented or Distilled, it appears Acid Oleose. The Contents of the Jejunum are Bitter, from Choler; of the Duodenum Salt; the Choler being turned to Salt, by the mixture of the Acid Contents of the Stomach; and the Excrements have the Colour, but not the Bit∣ter of Choler.
III. Animal Humors of a Sweet Vitriolick Taste. THE Blood of all Animals taste naturally Sweet Vitriolick, with a Saltness, and a savor of the Animal Fetid. I observed this Vitriolick Taste in the Blood of a Carp, and in that of a Chicken, and in the Blood of a healthful Woman: And I have often found this Observation confirmed, by the Tryals made by divers other Persons, to whom I communicated it, both Physicians and Chirurgeons, who agree with me, in asserting the Steel Taste of Blood. This Vitriolick Stypticity in Blood, probably a∣rises from the Tartar-Acid of Chyle, fixing on the Terreous or Osseous parts of the Succus nutritius, swimming in the Blood after its full digestion; for all Stypticity arises from the mixture of an Earthy part, and an Acid. If we mix common Tartar, and Steel Filings, a strong Vitriolick Salt is produced, like the Taste of Blood. I did not perceive any Steel Taste in Chyle, nei∣ther will Chyle turn Syrup of Violets green, as the Serum of the Blood does; and therefore I believe the Vitriolick Taste is produced in the Blood; but the sweetness in the Blood is from the Chyle mixt with it.
The use of this Vitriolick Stypticity is very evi∣dent, and necessary to the Blood. 1. From the effervescence of this Vitriolick A∣cid, with the red Oyly part of the Blood, the Heat of the Blood depends: So, by the mixture of the Oyl of Human Blood, with the Oyl of Vitriol, Mr. Boyle produced a lasting and burning Heat. 2. This Animal Vitriol may be called the proper peculiar Acid, or Tartar of the Blood. This sup∣plies the Acidity for the Spleen, whose substance tastes Slimy Vitriolick, and abates the high Ebul∣litions of Blood, as other Stypticks do; and there∣by preserves the Consistence of it, and precipitates the Choler from the Blood. This Steel Taste in Blood, may probably be the first occasion of using Steel Medicines, for the strengthning of the Blood; for in all the Humors of Animals, for the increasing or helping their Prepa∣rations and Secretion, we use Medicines of the same Taste as the Humor. Vitriolum Martis does not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, tho' Alum does curdle it into a white Curd; therefore the natural effect of this Steel-Taste in Blood, is only to preserve the Consistence, as Stypticks do, but not to coagulate, which would be injurious to all Animal Humors. Common Vitriol Powdered, coagulates the Serum and Lympha's of the Blood. This Steel-Taste in Blood, gave me a hint of putting Galls into the Serum of the Blood: And I
did thereby, divers times, turn the Serum black; but at other times the Experiment did not succeed, which I attributed to a certain proportion of Galls, or else too much or too little of the Bloodiness in the Serum. I made a strong decoction of Oak-Bark, and put to it some Bloody Serum out of the Chirur∣geons Dish: I let them stand Twelve hours, and then found the red Colour turned blackish, and the Serum was precipitated or curdled: This shews the precipitating Faculty of Stypticks: And also, that the preternatural blackness in Urine and Stools de∣pends on an Acid, which is called the Splenetick Humor: So Vineger turns the red part of the Blood black. This Decoction of the Oak-Bark had stood Two days before I used it, but it did not taste Acid, but Austere Styptick. This must stand long mixed with the Serum of the Blood, at least 12 hours. Jesuits-Powder would not turn the Serum black, but I put some of it into a Solution of green Vitriol, and it turned the Solution greenish, which it was not before. Therefore the Jesuits-Powder operates on the Blood, most by its Bitter, but yet something also by its Stypticity. Abele-Bark, which I call a Laurel-Bitter, turned the mentioned Solution green, as the Jesuits-Powder did. Tormentil-Roots made the Solution of a deeper green; but Galls which are a high strong Austere, turned it purple. Bole could not turn the Solution, though it be Styptick. By these Experiments it is evident, That Styp∣ticks, if Acerb, like Alum, coagulate the Serum
of the Blood; but if Austere, they precipitate and alter the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood. I put some Syrup of Violets into the Serum of the Blood, which turned green upon stirring of it; That this greenness did not proceed from the Am∣moniac Salt of the Blood, I was convinced, by the following Experiments. Common Sal Ammoniac dissolved in fair Water, and mixed with Syrup of Violets, did not turn the Syrup, neither did strong Ʋrine turn it green, in which there is a greater quantity of the Ammoniac Animal Salt, than in the same quantity of the Serum of the Blood; therefore I believe the greenness in the mixture of the Serum of Blood; and the Syrup of Violets did proceed from the Steel Taste of Blood; for Steel Liquors turn Syrup of Violets green, and all Chalybeate Waters. I observed a Vitriolick Steel Taste in fair Water, in which I quenched heated Pebbles; but this would not ferment with Acids, nor turn with Galls: This Steel Taste was from the Sulphureous Martial Acid of the Flints: And I suppose the Animal Steel Taste to be of the like Sulphureous Acid nature. This Steel Taste does plainly demonstrate the similitude betwixt Minerals and Animals, and the circulation of Principles; as I have asserted in the Second Part. The Mixture of Choler, and Syrup of Violets looks Green, because Yellow and Blue mixed, produce that Colour; not upon the account of its Acrid Salt
contained in it, as I did upon the first tryal suppose; and that the Animal Salt cannot turn the Syrup, is proved by this, because Chyle will not turn that Syrup, tho' it taste very Salt. The Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, if it be Eva∣cuated into the Stomach, upon the Obstructions of the Spleen-Glands, it therein produces all the Hy∣pochondriacal Symptoms. The abundant quantity of this Vitriol in the Blood, produces the Stone, Gout, Scurvy, and all the Hypochondriacal effects in the Nerves. It may be objected, That it is impossible that the same Vitriolick Acid should both serment and hin∣der the Ebullition of the Blood; but this may clear∣ly be answered, by asserting, That a very Sulphu∣reous Acid ferments the Humors, by acting on the Oyly part, and agitating of it; but if the Vitriolick Acid be very Styptick, it stops Fermentations. This is evident in the different Preparations of Steel: The Sulphureous Acid Preparations raise the Blood, but the more Styptick, as Vitriolum Martis, fix the Humors, and stop their irregular motions. Vitriolum Martis, and all Steel Acid Preparations in∣crease the Styptick Vitriol of the Blood; as also all Acerbs, and Styptick Spleneticks; but the Sulphu∣reous Filings of Steel, and especially the Preparati∣ons of Steel, made by Animal Salts, ferment, agi∣tate, and rarefie the Oyly parts of Blood, and all its viscid Slimes.
IV. Animal Humors of an Ʋn∣ctuous Taste. 1. THE Fat of Animals, which is a mixture of the Chylose Butter, and Acid, which coagulates it, as Oyl Olive, coagulates by Spirit of Nitre; and this will melt like it. Fat is very Inflammable, like Oyls, and I can most aptly compare this to the Turpentines of Vegetables. 2. The Marrow in Bones is Oleose, and more Fluid than Fat; it preserves the Bones from dryness and brittleness. Bones were, at their first growth, like a Jelly; as appears by the Teeth of young Crea∣tures; other Bones are Ligamentous, and by addi∣tion of much Earthy Nourishment, become hard: The immediate Nourishment of the Bones is a Viscid Serum, such as constitutes the Jelly boyled from Bones, and Ligamentous Parts: And it may be ob∣served, that the shaving of old Bones, smells not un∣like old Cheese; and therefore Bones are nourished by the Caseous parts of Chyle. The Marrow is like the Balsams of Vegetables, in consistence and use. 3. The Suet is of an Unctuous Gummy Taste, having a viscid Slime, coagulate with the Oyly Fat, and resembles the Gum-Resins of Vegetables. The Fat of Animals is first consumed in Emaci∣ating
Fevers; and therefore is probably the matter resorbed into the Veins (as Malpighius has obser∣ved by his Glasses) necessary to supply the red Oyly part of the Blood, as it spends by the genera∣tion of Spirits, or Evaporations. V. Animal Humors of a Fetid Taste, having the peculiar Savor of each Animal. THE Oyly Acid red part of the Blood (like the Resins of Vegetables) gives the highest Smells and Tastes; from this red part is the highest digested Oyl, which gives the Animal Taste and Smell to the Bodies and Humors of each Animal. This Fetid Savor we taste in the Flesh of the Muscles. This Fetid is evident in Eggs, which smell like their several Birds to whom they belong. This Foetor is evident also in Horns and Hoofs, in the highest degree. From this red Oyl of Blood, is the natural Spirit of it, which is distilled and separated into Ani∣mal Spirits, as it becomes more Rancid or Fetid; which also returning from the Nerves into the Blood, it gives the Animal Fetid to each Humor, separated from the Blood, and this constitutes the active Fe∣tids in all the Animal Slimes. This Animal Fetid
circulating from the Blood into the Nervous Juice; and, returning with that into the Blood again, be∣comes more Volatile, Fetid, and at last Inflammable and Lucid. All Vegetable and Mineral Fetids increase this Animal Fetid Spirit; and also help the production and motion of the Fetid Animal Spirits; as all Anti∣monial Sulphurs, and Fetid Gums, as Assa foetida. lbi. of Blood yields, by distillation, ℥iss. of Oyl; and the Oyl of Blood is both Mr. Boyl History of Blood. red and yellow, by distillation. Spirit of Wine extracts a yellow Tincture, as it does from some Resins; but Volatile Spirits, a red Volatile and fixed Salt dropt on Blood, increases the Floridity, and so does Choler, which is very Acrid, and also the Acrid Juice of Scurvy-Grass; but Vineger, Juice of Lemmons, and all Acid Spirits, abate the Florid, and coagulate the Blood. The Florid part of the Blood se∣parates from the Serum, unless it be long stirred with it, as some Watry Gums do; as Aloes, Opium, &c. From these Experiments I conclude, That the red part of the Blood is Oyly and Gummose; for these dissolve by Spirit of Wine, and Salts, but are coagulated by Acids. The red colour remains after the Evaporation of the Serum, in the dryed Cake; and this redness is not lodged in a Volatile Oyl, but is fixed by an Acid, as the Oyls in Gum-Resins. The Animal Fetid may be distilled in the cold Still; and therefore is Volatile: It vomits readily
with Oyls, which argues its nature to be from the red Oyliness of the Blood. The Spirit of Blood, by Fermentation, is very Fetid; and therefore a good Anti-hysterick. It is also Salt, correcting the Acids of the Glands, and stagnation of Humors. It is Diuretick, and Diapho∣retick, as all Salts be. The Cake of Blood in a healthful Person, exceeds the Serum, as I have often observed by weighing of both in ordinary Scales. VI. Animal Humors of a Bitter, Sweet, Acrid, and Slimy Taste; as Choler. THE sweetness in Choler shews its original Rise from Chyle; and sweet Chyle becomes bitter by a farther digestion. The red part of the Blood may become yellow by digestion: And out of Blood, an Oyl may be distilled of both Colours. I have observed Choler of a red, yellow, green, and blue Colour in different Animals; so we may observe in the same Animals, a diversity of Colour, when the Choler comes into the Stomach, and is there mixed with Acids: The same varieties of colour we observe in Turpentines; a green Oyl may be distilled from Turpentine-Trees; and a red
and yellow Oyl from Turpentine; there is a bluish Turpentine, in the middle of the Flowers of Flos Solis, which, like the Conyza's, is a Turpentine Plant. Since Turpentine varies its colour, like Choler, and has the tastes of Choler, as Bitter, Slimy, Sub-acrid. I think it an excellent Hepatick; and it is also Clean∣sing and Laxative, like Choler. The Acrid Pungency of Choler, is the ground, and one of the parts of the Animal Salt; for when it is united with the Tartareous Acid, produced by di∣gestion in the Stomach, and also with the natural Acid of the Glandulous Slimes, and that of the Lympha of the Pancreas, the first Ammoniac Salt is produced; for if we taste the Chyle, strained from the Contents, we may taste it Salso-acid in the Lacteals. This Acrid in Choler, like the Acrid in Plants, after a perfect Putrefaction, turns into a Volatile Urinous Salt; as is evidently proved by Wedelius, in the Preparation of Woad, which tastes Acrid; and without any Fire, it sublimes a Volatile Urinous Salt, in its Preparation by Putrefaction; yet the fresh Woad tastes only Acrid, and not Salt; but the Fermentation turns it to Salt. The Slime of Choler is from the Spleen; and the different Colour is from a diversity of digestion of the Oyl in each Animal, and the diversity of the Spleen-Acid joyned with the Choler. The Juice of the Spleen is Vitriolick and Slimy; the black Co∣lour of the Spleen, is a true sign of the Acidity of
its Juice; for all Acids give a blackness to the Blood. The colour of the Spleen is more florid Red in young Creatures, and blacker in the old, by rea∣son of a greater quantity of the Vitriolick Slime produced in them; which blackens the Blood, and that gives the Colour to the Spleen. VII. Animal Humors of a Sal-Ammoniac Taste, being Salso-Acid. THis Sal-Ammoniac shoots into Feathers in frozen Blood, and may be easily observed, like the Teeth of Combs. Dr. Grew men∣tions the Figure of the Animal Salt like Crosses; but I can more certainly describe any Salts by my Taste, than by any Glasses; and their Nature and Vertue will more clearly be apprehended, by their manner of affecting the Organ of Taste, than by consulting their Figures; tho' these may explain the Modes of Taste, and the operation of the Salt on our Humors. 1. The Serum of the Blood being only the Whey part of the Chyle, dissolves most of the Animal Salt: This is the Vehicle of the thick Mass of Blood, ren∣dring it diluted and fluid. In the Serum there is little Oyl, but much of the Viscid and Cheesie Par∣ticles:
These may be observed by Inspissating the Serum by the Fire, and by curdling of it by Acid Spirits, or Alum. Vineger whitens the Serum, and Oyl of Vitriol; but Spirit of Nitre throughly coa∣gulates it into a white Curd, like Alum. If we let the Blood run from an opened Vein into a Dish, containing Spirit of Salt, it will presently coagulate, look black, and it will have no Serum. Spirit of Sal-Ammoniac makes the Serum more clear; and therefore we may suppose the Salt of the Blood promotes its fluidity. If the Blood be re∣ceived in a Dish, in which Spirit of Sal-Ammoniac is put, it will not coagulate. This shews the effects of Volatil Salts on the Blood. I mixt Oyl of Turpentine (and Oyl of Aniseed did the same) with some fresh Blood, but it looked more black, and not more florid, as I expected; and common Oyl made the Florid rather darker, which I could not well explain; there being no Acid nor Volatile Salt in the Oyl Olive, tho' there be in Oyl of Aniseeds and Turpentine. Mr. Boyle and Bonetus affirm, That the fixt Chymical Salt of Blood, made by Calcination, tastes more like Sea-Salt, than a Lixivial; but, by its Precipitation, after the manner of Lixivials, and not like Sea-Salt, it is a Lixivial, made from the Tartar, or Vitriolick Acid of the Blood, in which there is a mixture of Earth, Oyl, and Acid; these, by being united more closely by the Fire, become a fixt Salt. But this is the product of Art, by the
Fire, and is not naturally found in the Humors of Animals; and therefore no effects can be imputed to it, tho' many Authors suppose it. 2. From the Serum of the Blood, all the salt se∣rose Lympha's are produced; and separated by the conglobate Glands; and this returns into the Chyle Vessels and Veins: There is a Saltness in this Lym∣pha, which shews its origine from the salt Serum of the Blood. There are Caseous parts in the salt Lympha, and therefore it may be inspissated by the Fire; and, of it self, being exposed to the Air, it turns to a Jelly in the Spoon; for which reason, it may be esteemed the proper Nourishment of the Ligamentous parts of the Animal, because such like Jellies are boyled from them: The Serum of the Blood will not become a Jelly, like the salt Lympha; but this may be imputed to the longer digestion a Humor has had. This salt Lympha has a higher digestion than the Serum, because it is separated from it. Chyle will not exactly inspissate by the Fire, so soon as the Serum; but will more easily be coa∣gulated than the Serum: Notwithstanding this dif∣ference, Chyle is digested into the Serum, and like∣wise the Serum, after some alteration, by digestion it becomes of a nearer consistence to the nature of a Jelly: And so it is made more fit for the Nou∣rishing of the Animal. This Gelatinose Serum be∣ing well diluted, constitutes the Lympha salsa, se∣rosa Glandularum conglobatarum. Besides this useful Lympha, there is an Excremen∣titious,
serose, salt Lympha, separated from the Se∣rum of the Blood, when, by digestion, it becomes very thin, salt, and putrid: And this is the Matter of Sweat and Ʋrine. These different salt Lympha's may be observed in divers parts of the Animal; but they are useful, and not excrementitious. 1. The Lympha in the Pericardium, distilling from the Glandules of the Pericardium; this is ne∣cessary for the motion of the Heart, and tastes Salt, and inspissates by the Fire. 2. The Liquor in the Amnion, which tastes Salt, and is the first Nourishment taken into the Stomach of an Embryo. This seems to be the Succus Nu∣tritius of the Female, separated by the Glands of the Womb, for the use of the Foetus: The Saltness shews it to be a product of the Serum of the Blood, which being digested into a certain degree, and of a consistence fit for Nourishment, it is made capa∣ble of a Secretion, by its particular Glands. The Serum of the Blood is of a mixt Nature, containing the fresh Chyle, newly turned into Serum; it also contains some of the old Serum, which grows very putrid and salt by long digestion. In the Serum is also contained the Lympha Salsa, returning out of the Lymphaticks: Out of all these, there is made one common Fluid, which we call the Salt Serum of the Blood. This Serum containing different Li∣quors, and acquiring different States in its crudity, perfect digestion, and also its putrefaction, it may
very well produce a difference of Lympha's; and they may also differ much from the common Serum, after their Secretion. It will not be amiss, to observe the different States the Aliments pass, before they make the highest perfect degree, in which they become fit for the Nutriment of Animals. Our Meat contains a sweet Slime: This is fer∣mented into the nature of Chyle, and that defaeca∣ted from its Acidity in the Guts, by the Acid mix∣ture of Choler; it acquires in the Lacteals, the state of salt Milk; from whence it is changed into a salt Serum. From thence, by digestion, it becomes the salt Lympha; and by often circulating into the habit of the Body, the gelatinose Lympha becomes Fibrous, which constitutes the highest state of the Animal nutritious Juice: And I believe we must allow three different states of the Succus nutritius in the Blood. 1. Whilst it is Chylose, it may nourish the conglomerate Glands, which look Milky. 2. The Lympha salsa may supply fit Nourish∣ment to the conglobate Glands; and also to the Ligaments and Bones. 3. The Fibrous Cake of Blood seems the fittest Nourishment for the Fibrose Muscles of the Body. 3. The Lympha separated by the Glandules of the Brain, being probably the super-abundant Li∣quor
Nervosus; too much of which would drown the active Spirits, or clog their motion. 4. The Tears which are a Glandulous salt Lym∣pha, naturally moistening and cleansing the skins of the Eyes; and for that end, we use salt Ophthal∣micks to cleanse away the Gumminess of the Hu∣mors from the Eyes. Tears are violently forced out by a Passion, which stops the motion of the Arteries in some other parts, and quickens them towards the Eyes, for the supply of Tears. 5. The conglobate Glands of the Mesentery taste Saltish; and therefore separate a salt Lympha from the Blood, which passes to the Receptaculum commune, but some Lympha may be separated from the Chyle, which goes towards the Kidnies, as is probably con∣jectured; for the Ʋrine could not appear so thin, and pass so soon in great quantity through the Blood and Kidnies: And if there were not provi∣ded such diversions for the quantity of Liquors we drink, the Blood would wholly be destroyed in its mixture, and the Vessels over-distended; but by this Passage the abundant Serosity of the Chyle is evacu∣ated, and many Injuries to the Blood prevented; and by the dilatation of these unknown Vessels, the Diabetes happens, after Drinking of Waters, or other Liquors in great quantity: And in that Di∣stemper, the Ʋrine is pale, but sweet like Chyle. 6. The Lympha separated by the Glandulae Re∣nales is Salt; for the Glandules taste Salt, and there∣fore
seem to have the nature and use of conglobate Glands. These Glands separate a salt Lympha into their Cavities, and return it immediately into the Cava or emulgent Veins, where the secretion of the salt Urinous Serum, by the emulgent Arteries, has made it deficient. These Glands were made for the use of the Foetus, in whom they equal the Kidnies; for the Urine Membranes of the Embryo would be too much filled, if too much of the salt Serum of the Blood passed the Kidnies. The Blood would want its due dilu∣tion, if none of it returned by these Glands into the Cava: Therefore the use of these Glands is to pre∣serve a due quantity of the salt Lympha in the Blood, and to hinder the Urine-Membrane from too great a fulness in the Embryo, whose Water tastes but little of Salt. Malpighius has described the structure of the Renes succenturiati to be like that of the Kidnies; and therefore they separate the same sort of Lympha salsa. He mentions a Diaphanous salt Lympha to be separated by the Peritonaeum, pleura, tunica vaginalis, which is of the same nature. Those Lympha's which will not coagulate by powdered Vitriol, have least of the Gelatinose Particles. The Excrementitious salt Lympha's are Sweat and Ʋrine. 1. The Sudor, which is a Glandulous Lympha, very Salso-acid. Galen says it is Bitterish: It smells Sowre.
2. The Ʋrine, which is separated by the Glands of the Kidnies. Both Sweat and Ʋrine have Fetid and Lixivial Smells. The Salt is from the Serum of the Blood, of a Salso-acid nature, like common Sal-Ammoniac. The Ʋrine yields a Spirit less Oyly than any other Hu∣mor of an Animal. The Contents in the Ʋrine are the superfluous parts of the Succus Nutritius, which turn the Ʋrine muddy by Cold. The Ʋrine will effervesce with the Oyl of Vitriol, which is a sign of its Volatile Salt. Ʋrine long kept, is said to burn like Brandy, and to colour Silver yellow as Brimstone does. And also it certainly conduces to the production of Nitre. By these Instances I may confirm my former assertion, That the Principles of Animals do na∣turally return into a Mineral State, and produce real Sulphurs, Salts, as Nitre and Stones. The colour of Ʋrine is from the Contents, and also from Choler, which readily passes by Ʋrine; and dissolves readily upon mixture with it. The Salt of Ʋrine is produced by the mixture of the Volatile Acid of digested Meat, and the Bitter Acrid of Choler, (which is the reason why Chyle tastes not Acid, Bitter, or Acrid) for the Acid corrects the Bitter Acrid of Choler, and curdles Choler, and both unite into the Animal Salt; which is evident in Chyle. The bitterness in Choler is produced by the
Spleen; Acid mixing and uniting with the red Oyly part of the Blood, which it precipitates from the Blood; and thereby prepares it for its separation through the Liver. I dropt some Oyl of Vitriol into the Blood about the Liver, and found it to look yellow like Choler: By the Acid of the Spleen, the red colour of Blood may be turned yellow. The red Hepar Sulphuris has less Acid than the yellow Flowers. I must also observe, That Bitter in Ani∣mals must have the same Principles as Bitterness in Plants, which have much Earth and Acid, and Oyl digested into a rough ungrateful Texture. I have transcribed these Remarks about Animal Humors, from a larger account, in a Discourse about the tastes of Diet: And I have grounded some As∣sertions on Experiments I have mentioned in those Papers; but I think these Observations sufficient to explain the Operations of Medicines by their Tastes on Animal Humors; and to justifie that As∣sertion, I have made, as a general Rule, That all Medicines and Meats which have the same Taste and Smell as the Humors of Animals, do increase, digest, prepare, and help the Secretion of those Hu∣mors they resemble. And for that reason, such Medicines may be called the Friendly Specificks; but the contrary Tastes to them, may be used as Alteratives in the diseased state of the Humors. The Slimy, the Acid, or Styptick Tastes, are the crudest Animal Tastes, and are produced by the lowest digestion. The Sweet and Oyly Tastes are
most Temperate and Nutritive; and therefore have a natural moderate digestion. But the Bitter, the Acrid, the Salt, and Sulphureous Vitriolick Acid, are the Hot Animal Tastes; and are produced by the highest digestion of Humors in Animals. I cannot observe naturally any Fermentation of Humors in any part of the Animal, but in the Sto∣mach, where the first preparation of our Diet is made: And there it was necessary to turn the Ve∣getable Principles into an Animal nature; and to change the slimy sweet Juices of the Aliment, into a sweet milky Chyle. From the sweet Chyle all other Juices in an Animal are prepared, by digesti∣on, mixture, or secretion, without the help of any Ferment. So we observe the tastes of Plants to alter: The Sweet becomes Bitter; the Bitter, Acrid; the A∣crid, Salt; and the Salt Corrosive. All these Tastes are produced successively, by a degree of a higher digestion; by which only, the Texture of Principles is altered into a new one. So in Cheese, which is an Animal Product, we observe a sweet Gumminess or Slime, whilst new; in the old, a Bitterness, and a biting Acrimony, which alteration happens with∣out any new Ferment. The Glandules separate each Humor, when they have acquired that Taste and Texture which is suitable to the Pores of each Gland; and there is no need of a particular Ferment in each Gland, for their Secretion.
Animal Humors are circulated, and have also an Internal motion from the activity of their Particles; they have also an Effervescence betwixt contraries; but neither these Ebullitions, nor the external Mo∣tion are properly Fermentations, for that requires a slimy fetid Ferment in Animals: And all Fermen∣tation tends to a very great change of a Liquor, which has once been fermented, as we observe in Wine, which becomes Vinegar, by a new ferment: And in Animal Humors, a Fermentation in the Blood excites a Fever, or produces the Scurvy. All Animal Humors given inwardly, retain some∣thing of their original Textures, till they arrive at the Blood, whereby they readily pass their original Glands; so Ʋrine is a great Diuretick. Milk breeds Chyle, and the milky Lympha's. The Gall of Ani∣mals is a good Hepatick, and opens the Liver. The Decoction of the Spleen, is used for Spleen-Obstru∣ctions, and seems to be useful where the Juice is defective. The Menses are given by some absurd Practisers; they produce the Menses, but also a great Anxiety at the Stomach, and a Phrensie; as is observed by Vanderwiel. The Lungs afford a milky Slime, in distillation for Hecticks; wherein that is continually eva∣cuated. The Fetid Parts of Animals, as the Horns, Hoofs, Volatile Chymical Oyls and Salts, readily pass into the Nerves, where those high Fetids are bred.
The Liver tastes like Choler, and helps its sepa∣ration by that Taste. The Heart has much of the Animal Fetid in it; and therefore the decoction of it is used for a Cor∣dial. The Stones are fit nourishment to supply the Semen. The Grits of Animals are used for the Stone, as Crabs-Eyes. Jellies are used to supply the Succus Nutritius. I cannot observe any necessity of using more Principles in this Discourse of Animals, than those four I have mentioned. In Vegetables I call them a Water, an Oyl, an Acid, and an Earth. In Minerals they may be called an Earthy, a Bituminous Oyly, an Acid, and a Watry Principle. But in the explication of Ani∣mal Humors, I will not use the Names of the Prin∣ciples of either Vegetables or Minerals; but I have described them by a viscid or caseous part, an Acid or Sowre, an Oyly or Fat Principle, and a Water or Lympha. These Principles are the same in all the Parts and Humors of Animals, but in different Proportions and Digestions. I. Oyl is capable of these different States in Ani∣mal Humors. 1. In Slimes it is crudest, as in the Vegetable Mucilages. 2. It is like Butter in Chyle, which is Sweet.
3. It is Oyly in Fat, and Red upon longer digestion in the Blood, and yellow in Choler, and Bitter. 4. It is Fetid in the Spirits. II. The Acid of Animal Humors has these dif∣ferent States naturally. 1. In milky Chyle it is Sowre, like Tartar, as is evident in Butter-Milk; and the sowreness is some∣what perceptible in the milky Lympha's. 2. The Volatile Acid in the Stomach, is a Volatile Tartar, like the Spirit of Vinegar: This is the effect of Fermentation in all Acid Vegetables, and is a combination of Oyl and Acid. 3. The Vitriolick Acid in the Blood, which is a Sulphureous Acid. 4. The Acid in the Ammoniac Salt of Animals, like the Spirit of Salt. The Acid in the salt Taste of Chyle, is from the sowre Tartar of Chyle; but the Acid adhering to the Volatile Salt produced in the Blood, by putre∣faction, must needs be from the Vitriolick Acid of the Blood. III. The Viscid Principle has these Successive Changes naturally. 1. It is a Slime in the Meat; but a caseous Vi∣scid in the Chyle. 2. It is like Glew in the Serum, when inspissate by the Fire.
3. It is like Jelly in the salt Lympha's. 4. It is Fibrous in the Mass of Blood. 5. It is Bony, or Calculous, or Sandy, upon its last resolution, by a long circulation or digestion. IV. The Water is only altered into a thinner Consistence, and much rarefied to pass the several Glands, and to dilute the several Humors. Many other Tastes might be added to these; but they are the effects of a preternatural state of Humors. 1. An Albuminous Styptick Taste in the Spittle of the Convulsive. 2. A corrosive Acidity in Colicks, Heart-Burn∣ings, and Ʋlcers: This is Oleose-acid, like Acid-acrid in Rosa Solis, and Bellis minor. 3. The corrosive Saltness, such as is that of Lime-Salt, being burning and Salso-acid. 4. A viscid Taste is produced by the Inspissation of the milky Slimes; such is the vitreous Pituita in the Lungs, and the white Skin, or Pleuritick Blood. 5. A nauseous Taste in the Saliva, by Choler; and by that Mixture, a bitter, sweet, and slimy Taste is produced, which is nauseous. 6. A Fetid nauseous Taste, from some putredi∣nous Fetid, communicated from a stagnating Hu∣mor, or the nidorose Contents of the Stomach, like rotten Eggs, or the Womb in a dead Child, or the putrid Gums in the Scurvy. But these Observations belong to the preterna∣tural state of Animal Humors.
A Scheme of Animal Smells, naturally observa∣ble in Animal Humors, or the solid Parts. 1. The smell of Milk in the Flesh of young Creatures, and in Milk it self. 2. The stronger Spirits any Animal has, the stronger is the Smell of that Animal; so that by the Animal Smell we discern the height of the di∣gestion in each Animal; for the Spirits give the particular Smell to each Animal, and the Spirits are the high digested Oyly parts. 3. There is a Nitro-Sulphureous Foetor in the Guts: I cannot observe any Nitrous Taste or Smell in any other parts of an Animal, but in the primae viae, where it is evident, after over-digestion, by this Smell. 4. A putrid Smell of Cheese may be observed in Sweat, and in the Pisle of a Sea-Horse scraped, and in Horns. 5. A Lixivial piercing Smell is in the Ʋrine. 6. A smell of Marigolds is in the Menses. 7. A virose ranck Smell is in the Semen, like pu∣trid Fish. 8. A high degree of Fetid is in the Hoofs, and in the old Bones and Nails. 9. A Fetid Oyly offensive Savor is in melted Fat or Grease. 10. An Acid piercing Smell mixt with Fetid in the Stomachs of Animals, after the digestion of their Meat.
Preternatural Smells. 1. A Sowreness in the Stomachs of Children, when they vomit Milk, and in their Stools. 2. A Nidorose Sulphureous Smell in the over∣digestion of some Meats. 3. A putredinous Smell in some Fevers, and in the Small-Pox. 4. A higher degree of the putrid Smell in Gan∣grenes and foul Ʋlcers, like Carrion, and in the Scurvy. 5. An Earthy Smell in dying Bodies. Of the similitude betwixt Plants and Animals. The great similitude betwixt the natures of Plants and Animals; and the transmigration of Principles, from Plants to Animals, might be the cause why Democritus and Plato attributed Sense to Plants: And Anaxagoras esteemed them sensible of Pleasure and Pain. The similitude of their Principles is evident, and the number is the same. 1. Water distilled from Milk and Blood, if con∣sidered without the smatch of the Oyl, is very lit∣tle or nothing different from the water of Vege∣tables, as to their Physical use. 2. The sowreness of Buttermilk exactly resem∣bles that of Tartar. The Sulphureous Acid of Mi∣nerals, with the Earth of Plants, turns to a pure
Tartar; but with the Oyl and Earth of Animals, it produces a Vitriolick Acid; as from the Acid of Sulphur we produce a Vitriol from Steel. 3. The Oyl of Animals is the matter of Heat, and ferments with an Acid like that of Vegetables; and it, like Resins, yields all the varieties of Animal Smells, when it is associated with the Volatile Salt; and there is as great a variety of Animal Tastes and Smells, as there is in Vegetables. I have In∣stanced in the similitude of the tastes of Animal Humors, and their Vegetable Medicines. The pun∣gent Acrimony in Choler, and the Cress-Tastes in Plants is very much alike; and some Marine Plants, as Sponges, yield a Volatile Urinous Salt by distilla∣tion; and also a fixt one, like that of Plants. The sweet Tastes in Plants contain much Oyl, and feed much, by supplying Chyle; the Vegetable Oyl turning into an Animal Fat. I have compared the Fat, Marrow and Suets of Animals, to the Ve∣getable Balsams, Oyls, Resins, and Turpentines: And we usually find Oyls of Vegetables, and the Axungias to mix well together, as being of a like nature. Though the Ingenious Writers upon Insects have given us many Instances of their production from Eggs, which former Ages esteemed to proceed from Putrefaction (for they demonstrate how Insects in∣sert their Eggs into Stalks, Roots, Fruits, and the Leaves of Plants, and also into putrid Substances of Animals, and into the Bodies of other Insects,)
yet there remain so many particulars which they have not solved, that I cannot but approve the ancient Opinion, which affirms, That Insects are produced both from Plants and putrefied Animals. There is necessary for the ordinary production of Creatures, 1. A fit nourishment prepared for the Embryo. 2. The first rudiments of it produced from the Vessels of Parents. Vegetable Juices, by putrefaction, may be changed into the nature of Animal Humors; and when they are digested in the Stomach, they change their Vegetable nature; and if we artificially putrefie Vegetables, they will yield a Volatile Salt, which is of an Animal nature. In putrid Vegetables, Insects are always observed: The contrary opinion allows, That putrid Bodies are fit nourishment for the young Insect: And I may probably affirm therefore, it is fit for its ori∣ginal constitution at first, as Eggs serve other Ani∣mals for Food, as well as the production of the Foetus: And if the Juices of Vegetables turn into the nature of Animal Humors, it is also probable, that these may also cause the Vessels of Vegetables to shoot, and branch themselves into some Animal Vessels, necessary for the constitution of the Embryo's solid parts. It seems not improbable, that the Ves∣sels of Plants should become fit Vessels for Animals;
for the Plant-Anatomists have described those Vessels of Plants to be as curiously wrought as any in Ani∣mals: And we observe the Vessels of Plants and Animals shoot into Mould upon Putrefaction, which therefore alters both Vessels, and the Juices in Plants: And if Mould (which is described like a Plant) can grow out of Animals, we cannot believe it un∣reasonable to assert, That Animals should grow out of Plants, from whence they are constantly nou∣rished. Malpighius gives an Instance of Plants growing out of the dried Serum taken out of Hy∣dropical Tumors; Minimae Plantulae quasi pulmonariae vel coralloides eleganter attolluntur. De struct. gland. conglobat. pag. 15. We find that a Plant of a different nature may grow out of another Plant, without a Seed, as is evident in Misletoe, Mosses, Mushroms, Hypocystis, Orobanche; why may not an Insect of another Spe∣cies grow out of the living and dead Bodies of the Erucas, without the insertion of an Egg? The Worms in Animals are very different from all the other Insects in the World. It is impossible that Insects should insert their Eggs into the Horns, Guts, Liver, and Bones of Animals, in which In∣sects have been observed. I have taken the broad Worm out of the Guts of the Embryo, upon the dissection of a Cow with Calf; I am sure it is highly improbable that any Insects Egg should be con∣veyed thither.
The Ingenious Dr. Tyson has observed a difference betwixt the long Worm in Animals, and the ordi∣nary Earth-worm; and therefore they are not of the same nature. Insects are not only superficially changed, but many also of their Internal parts are changed also; they alter their Diet, for the Eruca and Papilio have different Food and Actions. These changes from one Species of Insects to another, shew the change from the Fibrous parts of a Plant to the first Line∣aments of an Insect, not to be improbable. The Tastes and Smells of some Insects. 1. Insects of a slimy Taste, as Snails; the Slime of Snails, supplies the Milky Slime, being like the Saliva. The threds of Spiders and Silkworms is bred of a slimy viscid Humor, which is used to stop Bleeding, as viscid Gums be. Frogs have a cool Slime for Oyntments; and their slimy Spawn yields a cool Water, which may be given to cool the glandulous Juice of the Womb. I have taken an hundred of Grass-snails in a Morning, and swallowed them whole in May, after they are mixed in a Napkin. Other Snails are better boyled in Milk for Hecticks; for distillation destroys their Slime. 2. An Acid Odor is observed in Ants; and an Acid Spirit is distilled from them.
3. An Acrid Taste may be observed by chewing live Millepedes, with a savor of the rotten Wood on which they feed. This Acrid passes by Ʋrine, and makes them Diuretick, and also Hepatick and Cephalick. The dryed Millepedes are Fetid, and thereby discuss Scrophulous Tumors. 4. There is a bitter Astringency in the Kermes, which is the Nest or Gall of the Insect. The In∣sect is supposed to be Fragrant and Acrid; from whence its Cordial Vertue may depend: And its Antifebrile Vertue from the taste of Galls, which resemble the taste of the Cortex Peruvianus; and therefore the Cortex of the Ilex coccifera ought to be tryed for the Jesuits-Bark; it grows in Italy, Spain, and France, and is described, as having green Leaves, like the Laurel-Bitters. Coccus Polonicus grows on the Roots of Polygo∣num: It contains a Worm which turns into a Fly, and that leaves a Skin which smells of Musk: It is used for Convulsions. Bonetus. The Syrup of Kermes has a Fragrancy from the Juice of Apples, and Rose-water. 5. The Cimices smell Fetid: The Insects bred in the Body of the Willow are said bircum olere. 6. A corrosive Taste is in Cantharides: Their Acrid Salt affects the Kidnies and Bladder; and they offend the Nose by pounding, as Acrids do:
And if they be ground to Powder, they turn Sy∣rup of Violets green. 7. Of a Salt Taste: This is observed in the Venomous sting of a Bee: And the Venome of a Scorpion is, Guttula aquae candidae, as Redi informs us. The same corrosive Acrid, or salt Ferment is in all Venoms. A burning Coal applyed to the Bite or Sting immediately, prevents all Mischief. And Volatile Salts most successfully prevent the coagulations of the Blood by poysonous Bites.
A TABLE of Mineral Tastes. I. Gritty Tastes of Earth, Stones, Minerals, and their hot Calces. II. Styptick fat greasie Earths. III. Vitriolick Tastes. 1. Acerb Aluminous, of Alum and Quick-silver. 2. Sweet Vitriolick in Steel, Gold, Tin, and Lead Vitriols. 3. Bitter Vitriolick in Silver-Crystals. 4. Nauseous Brass-savored Vitriols in Copper. IV. Bituminous bitterish Tastes, either Fe∣tid, Aromatick, or Terebinthinate. V. Fetid sulphureous Tastes. VI. Acid Tastes of Spirit of Sulphur, Vi∣triol, Salt, Nitre. VII. Salt Tastes, Volatile or Fixed, or Vitriolated or Ammoniack. VIII. Marine Salso-acids, as Sal Gemmae, or else Nitrose cool Salts. IX. Caustick burning Tastes, and Styptick.
The First CLASS. The Tastes and Smells of Earths. WE call those Mineral Earths, which dis∣solve or soften by Water, and taste and smell Earthy. 1. Earths of a sandy or gritty Taste, such as common Earth, and of a smell of Mould. This common Earth is produced from the minute Parti∣cles of Stones, worn off by Rain, the current of Springs, Rivers, and the Sea, where Sandiness most abounds; or else by the Airs motion, or the sul∣phureous Acid in it, arising from the hot central parts of the Earth: With this the common Earth seems to be Impregnate, and not to be the pure Ele∣ment of Earth, which I suppose to be like Glass or Ashes, since most Bodies are reducible by Fire into one of them. And that solid part in Minerals which is Alkalizate, and serments with Acids, seems to me the true Element of Earth; and this also yields the Alkalizate parts both to Plants and Animals. I distilled in an Earthen Retort, and an open Fire, some common dry Earth, and sifted it clean from Vegetables: It was taken half a Foot or more deep under the green Turf: It yielded a great deal of
Water, and I observed a burnt Smell of Smoak: I mixed Syrup of Violets with the Water, and it turned it green. From this Experiment I suppose I may conclude, That the common Earth contains Water and some Oyl, and Volatile Salt is made out of it. By the Fire, the Caput mortuum turned white, like burnt Ashes. All gritty Earths ferment with Acids, as Chalk. 2. Earths of a Styptick Taste, sticking to the Tongue, and feeling Unctuous, with a sulphureous Earthy Smell. These are Metallick Earths, taken from Mines; and their Vitriolick Stypticity is from the Metal. Bole has its Stypticity and colour from Iron, be∣cause it yields a green Tincture with Spirit of Salt; and is Aluminous, by mixing with Spirit of Nitre. Terra sigillata contains some Particles of Gold, and ferments with Acids; but Bole does not, it be∣comes Aluminous by Acids. Raddle distilled, smelt a little Acid; but the Phlegm which was in great quantity, tasted like pure Water: The Raddle lost not its colour, but turned deep Purple in the Caput Mortuum. Raddle is given to ʒss. for two or three Doses in the beginning of the Small-Pox, to stop and prevent Looseness, and too great Putrefaction. It tastes like Bole, and has the same Virtue as an Antidote against Infectious Fevers. 3. Earths of a bituminous fetid Taste, which give a bitterness to some purging Springs, as North-hall-Waters.
The Fires made of Boggy Earths smell Sulphu∣reous and Fetid, as in our Pea-Turfs. Hence it appears that Sulphurs are lodged in Earths, as well as other Minerals. Bituminous Earths are of a discussing nature, be∣cause Fetid. 4. Aromatick Earth, Samos Earth mentioned by Dr. Grew. 5. Acrid Earths, and sweet Earths, and bitter sweet, are mentioned by Kircher. 6. Salt Earths may also be observed as well as Salt Springs; for all Physical Waters have their Tastes from Mineral Earths. I observed a white Salt on new Brick-Walls, which tasted cool and saltish, like Nitre: This seems to come from the Burnt-Brick, whose Vola∣tile Salt is made Nitrous, by the Acid of the Air. I distilled Marle, and Clay, but had nothing but Phlegm, but they turned Syrup of Violets green, which is a sign of a Volatile Salt. And Bartholin mentions an argilla flava, which yields a Volatile Salt in Glass Vessels, but it is lost in Earthen; which caution I did not observe. And Le Mort affirms, That Argillae variae species praebent sal volatile me∣diante distillatione. The Phlegm of the Marle look∣ed Oyly, and smelt very strong of a particular Smell, not unpleasant. From hence I suppose some Oyli∣ness is latent in Marle, as well as because it improves Sandy ground. By these Experiments I found how difficult it was
to resolve the common Earths into their Principles by the Fire; but nature easily dissolves all her own mixtures, by a gradual Fermentation, by the Sul∣phureous Acid in the Air: And the constant agita∣tion of the Materia subtilis, which flowing from the Sun gives motion to Fluids, and vegetation to Plants. Tho' Plants spread their Roots in common Earth, yet thence neither their Oyl, Acid, or Earth is drawn, but only from the Rain-water, impregnate with the Sulphureous Acid of the Air; and also sa∣turated with the Bituminous Fumes, lodged in the common Earth. The bituminous Oyl, and sulphu∣reous Acid unite in the Water, and are capable of the Vegetable Ferment, which changes the Mineral Principles into a Vegetable State, and the particu∣lar nature of each Plant. The stronger the Oyl of the Plant, the higher is the Fermentation of this bituminous Nutriment of Plants, and the weaker Fermentation depends upon a crude Oyl: When the Nutriment of Plants, which is a Mineral Juice is become of a Vegetable nature, it receives no new Fermentation in any part of the Plant, but in the Bladders of the Root; all the alteration which hap∣pens afterward, is only from its digestion by the heat of the Sun, the agitation of the Plant by the Wind, and the long conservation of its Juices in large Vessels, as in the Bladders of Fruits, and the Leaves of Trees.
Of the Taste and Smell of Stones. STones may be observed in Animals, Vegeta∣bles, and Minerals. I. Animal Stones of a chalky Substance, and of a dry gritt in Taste, and earthy Smell: These fer∣ment with Acids, like Chalk, and thereby become Styptick; but with Spirit of Salt they acquire a saltish Taste, and are Diuretick. And by their un∣equal rough Particles they cleanse the Teeth in Den∣tifrices, and probably rub off the Gravel in the Kid∣nies. Crabs-Eyes is a chalky Animal Earth, and smells like Chalk, when powdered. Egg-shells and Oyster-shells have the same chalky Substance. Egg-shells burnt taste Saltish, and burning like Lime; and Oyster-shells burnt have a Saltness. Bezoar-Stone tastes Gritty, and ferments strongly with Acids. Since petrified Animal Substances are dissolvable by Acids, as Spirit of Nitre; by this they resemble the Gypsum or Lime-stone. Petrified Animals also burn into a Caput mortuum, like Lime, and have a little ebullition like Lime, upon the ef∣fusion of Water. I may hence conjecture, That the Stony Particles which petrifie Animals, is from the Lime-stone; which joyning with the natural Vi∣triolick Acid of Animal Blood, produces the petri∣fying
Principle, which is like Nitrum calcarium in petrifying Waters: Petrified Lime-stone Icicles hang naturally on Lime-stone Rocks. Petrified Animal Parts distilled, as Pearls, Bones, Crabs-Eyes, and human Stones, yield Volatile Salts and Oyls, and have a Lime for their Caput Mortuum; which being intermixt with their Animal Principles, petrified them. The Calculus humanus contains little fixt Salt, but much Volatile; and therefore it is not bred out of Tartar, but the Lime-stone Particles associated with the Ammoniac Animal Salt, coagulates into a Stone, which is much lighter than Minerals, but heavier than Animal Bones. II. Vegetable Stones petrified, as the Stones in Fruits, of Dates, Haws, Peaches, &c. These Stones distilled, yield an Acid Spirit, like the Spirit of Wood: This Acid combining with the Lime-stone Earth, constitutes the petrifying Principles in Vegetables. The Stones of Pears ferment with Acids; therefore these Vegetable Stones may imbibe the Animal Acids, and become Diuretick. So the Seed-cases of Grom∣wel ferment by Acids. Malpighius has observed some Turpentine-Vessels in the Stones of Peaches, whence their Diuretick Vertue may be increased. Petrified Vegetables, as Coral, ferments with A∣cid; and the Powder of it smells Earthy, like Moss. If it have any Fragrancy, it may resemble that of
some Mosses, or is ground by the Apothecary, with fragrant Waters. Coral distilled yields a smoaky Acid Spirit, like that of Wood, and an Empyreu∣matick Oyl, which are its Vegetable Principles; and the Caput mortuum is like Lime, which equalled the quantity of the Acid Spirit; but it did not ef∣fervesce with Water, as Lime. From the distillation of petrified Animals and Vegetables it appears, That their Principles are not changed by petrification, but only Nitre mixt with a Lime-stone, or chalky Stone, by which they acquire a greater hardness and solidity. And it is observed in Bonetus, That Coral may be dissolved in Rubicun∣dissimam mucilaginem, by reason of its Vegetable Principles, which I believe remain unaltered by pe∣trification. III. Mineral Stones: These are either of the nature of Lime-stones or Flints, or Metalline Stones, or Bituminous. I call all those Lime-stones which burn into a kind of Lime; and these may be divided into Stones of a chalky Substance, or those of a harder Substance, as common Stone, &c. 1. Stones of a chalky Substance, as Lapis Spongiae, which smells like Chalk, and dissolves with Spirit of Salt: This grows in Sponges. Osteocolla: It looks like the inward part of a Bone, Spongy and Porous; and therefore the Pow∣der of this was given to supply the petrifying
Earthy part, necessary for the solidity of Bones, which are not far from the nature of Minerals. Knitbone grows like a Plant, and branches it self in the Earth, and has a chalky Pith: It is esteemed a petrified Marle. Dr. Grew observes, That a fat pu∣trid Substance, like rotten Wood, is found with it, which he thinks the Mother of it. Lapis Judaicus is Flinty, but by rubbing it looks like Chalk: It ferments with Spirit of Nitre, and is of the nature of Chalk, being used as a Diuretick. 2. Stones of a greater hardness, as Lime-stone, Marble, Alabaster; all which burnt yield a Lime. I have seen a Lime-stone finely polished, which, in its coloured Veins, resembled Marble, and is plenti∣fully found in Hereford-shire, and there Lime is made of it. I burnt a piece of building-Stone into Lime, which is used in many places both for Stone and Lime. Gypsum ustum is Styptick, and dries Ʋlcers in the Mouth; and is used for sore Horse backs. Calx viva has a Styptick, burning, and corrosive Taste: From the common Lime-stone a Sulphureous Acid may be distilled. The Lime-stone is burnt half away in the Fire; and an Oyl is observed to sweat out of it in burning. This Sulphureous Oyly Acid unites with the Earth into a Salt, and gives the Stypticity to burnt Lime. These Experiments shew the natural composition of Stones, that they have both Oyl and Acid in their Bodies.
Spirit of Vitriol makes Lime-water Bitterish, by separating the Oyl from the Earthy part, with which it unites: From this mixture, evaporated by addition of Salt of Tartar, a Volatile Salt may be distilled, which smells Urinous. This Experiment shews the Volatility of the Salt of Lime; and hence it has its Urinous Smell; and some of it passes over in the distillation of Sal Ammoniac, which makes it somewhat Corrosive. This Volatile Earth of Lime seems to be the terrene part, necessary in the composition of Salt, by the addition of an Oyly Acid: And this may be the Alkalizate part in all Plants. The Ashes of Plants and Calx of Lime a∣gree in their Saltness; and both are used for the Improvement of Land. 2. The Second Species of Stones is of those glassy Stones which have the hardness and nature of Flints: These being ground to Powder have angular edges like broken Glass, whereby they cleanse and scowre the Kidnies from Sandy coagulations. Sand is of the nature of Flints, and seems to be the product of Sea-Salt, being plentifully produced in the making of Salt. And Le Mort observes, that Arenae masticatae salsum, blandum gustum linguae communicant. And Sand is also produced from the Animal Salts coagulated in the Kidnies. Black Sand is from Iron, yellow from Ocher, green from Cop∣per, golden from Gold intermixt with it in its coa∣gulation. The Nitrum calcarium is the chief part
of Flints, which coagulates either with the Lime-stone Particles in common Sand, or else with some Mineral in coloured Flints. The gritty Stones used for Building is nothing but a congeries of Sand. This grows soft in the Fire, but will not burn into Lime; the Clay which unites the Sand is dryed by the Fire. No flinty Stones will burn into Lime. Lapis Nephriticus is flinty, and ragged like the Stones of the Kidnies; it looks Oyly without, and is of a pale green colour: It is a kind of Jaspis, having its Tincture from Iron; and all its Vertue is to be deduced thence. Common Flints, and common Pebbles, which are Flints, smell Sulphureous if knocked together, and strike Fire, by a brisk agitation of the Sulphu∣reous Particles. When they are burnt in the Fire, and quenched in Water, they crack, and give a Sulphureous Taste to it. The Water will not fer∣ment by an Acid, neither would it turn with Galls, though the Water tasted very much of Steel. Flints and Pebbles have divers Metals mixed with them, as Iron, Gold, Silver, Copper, &c. and sometimes divers Earths, or Boles, which colour the Stones. Gems seem not to differ from Flints, in which Diamonds are bred. Crystal is the softest: It is used in Powder to a∣bate the Acid in Colicks, and the poyson of Subli∣mate, which is a corrosive Vitriol. I cannot believe that Gems can be dissolved in
the Stomach, because Pebbles pass through the Guts of Hens undissolved; and also Fruit-stones, which are less hard. The coloured Gems are coloured Flints. Rubines Granates, Hyacinth, have their Tincture from Gold, and likewise their Vertue, Aq. Regis ex∣tracts the Tincture from Granates, like that of Gold; to which a Cordial Vertue is attributed, because it is made like a Vitriol, by dissolution, by a Men∣struum, and that raises the Fermentation of the Blood; but it is impossible that the Liquors in the Stomach should dissolve Gold; and therefore they cannot extract a Tincture from these Stones. The Smaragdus and Jaspis have their green co∣lour from Iron, and that Astringency and Chaly∣beate Faculty which is attributed to them in Bleed∣ing and Fluxes; but a little powder of Steel is more efficacious; for though Iron is dissolvable by Acids, yet Iron Ore, such as is in the Stones, cannot yield to them. Saphires have their Sky-colour from Copper, and are used as Vitriol in Eye-Medicines. Topazes have their Vertue, and Saffron-colour from Iron. The Salts of precious Stones are only a compo∣sition of the Acid and the Stone. Some precious Stones are said to smell fragrant when ground, but I could not observe the Fragrancy in some which had been long powdered. I will mention what I find in the Illustrious Kircher, Geodes
Misenus violae odorem refert: It has the Vertue of Aetites, and is a Stone of the same nature. Lapis Marieburgicus moschum olet, ser∣pilli Kircher Mundus subter. de lapidibus. odorem Turingicus, musti odorem o∣phites, vinum olet echites, lac galactites, sulphuris odorem marchasitae, & silices, succinum, & gagates resinae odorem. The Sulphur in some precious Stones, is like a Flame, and shines in the dark, by rubbing, or warm Water, as some Diamonds. These are the natural Mineral Noctiluca's, which, like those made of Ani∣mal Humors, are shining and Sulphureous. This Sulphur gives the Violet Fragrancy in some Stones; and thence some effects may be produced on Ani∣mal Spirits. 3. Stones of a Metalline hardness, and something Vitriolick, from the Metals they contain. All Me∣tals are fixed in some Stony Mineral, as Spar, Lime∣stone, or such like. I distilled some Iron-stone in an Earthen Retort, it yielded a Phlegm, which smelt Sulphureous, and tasted Vitriolick Sweet, and turned Syrup of Violets green. This Iron-stone burnt in the Furnace was a pure Flint. This I had from my Worthy Friend Mr. Humphry Jennings's Furnace in Warwick-shire, near Aston. Lapis haematites: I distilled a red Liquor from Lapis haematites and Sal Ammoniac, of an Alumi∣nous Taste, fit for Fluxes, and of a Saffron Smell; and therefore called Aroma Philosoph. by Zwelfer.
The Tincture made of Vitriolum Martis, and Sac∣charum Saturni, looks of the same colour, and is an extraordinary Styptick in Fluxes; and is called the Tinct. Antiphthisica. An artificial Blood-stone is pro∣duced by the Sublimation of Vitriol. Martis, and Saccharum Saturni; for which reason, the haematites is supposed to partake of both Metals, and its Ver∣tue lies in the Astringency. The Magnet is used in Wounds, and all Martial Medicines; but neither this, nor the haematites, nor the Ore of Iron ferment with Acids. Amber, and other Bitumens, attract by their Sulphureous Steams; for rubbing increases their Electrical Vertue, by exciting the motion of the Sulphureous Effluviums. The Load-stone being Iron must attract by its Sulphur Effluvia, of which Iron smells strongly: And those circulate through the Stony matter, with some respect to the Poles, to which the Materia subtilis determines it. The Pyrites tastes Vitriolick, and smells Sulphu∣reous: It is the Mysy Diascoridis. The Copper-stones are of a Sulphureous burning heat, and Vitriolick Taste. Lapis Lazuli and Armeni are Vitriolick Purgers, and vomit sometimes: They are washed to abate their Acrimony: They are sensible of Acids; and Urinous Spirits extract a blue colour; by which it appears, That Copper may be dissolved in the Stomach; and thereby those Stones purge. Smiris contains Iron; and its Tincture turns black with Galls. Mr. Boyle.
Pumex is a soft Stone, but out of it a Copper Tin∣cture may be extracted, whereby it dries and ci∣catrises. 4. Stones of a Bituminous Smell, as Gagates, Li∣thanthrax. The white Belearnites is mentioned to smell like Amber, but the Ash coloured, like Cows-Horn, as Dr. Grew observed. Lapis Lyncis tastes Fetid, and smells Sulphureous; and therefore is not fit for inward use, as a Diu∣retick: It is described of an Electrical Vertue. There are some Stones indissolvable by Acids, nei∣ther melt by the Fire; and therefore they consist of an Earthy Principle alone, without the mixture of Oyl or Acids, as Talc, and Selenites, or Specular Stone, both are used only as Cosmeticks. Burnt Minerals and Stones retain the Particles of Fire, whereby their weight is increased, and they acquire a heating and drying Faculty. Magisteries of Stones ferment neither with Alka∣lin or Acid, and therefore are little esteemed. Stones dissolved by Acids are Styptick, and Coral Austere. The Tincture of Coral is binding, and rough in Taste; and no other Vertue can be expected from a petrified Substance in Tincture, though the Chy∣mists unjustly boast of it, and have writ so much about its Tincture. Lead-spar burnt, yields a Lixivial Salt, as Dr. Grew affirms: The Powder of it unburnt, is good
for the Stone and Gravel; as I have observed, all gritty Powders pass by Ʋrine, as Crabs-Eyes, &c. These are the chief parts of Salt, to which an Oyly Acid joyns it self for compounding a Salt. Of the Tastes and Smells of Metals, and Metallick Bodies, and their products, as Vitriols, Calces, Sulphurs, and Bitumens. ALL Metals taste something Vitriolick, by reason of their Sulphureous Acid. In their Composition there is little Water, much Earth, and Sulphur, which last is compounded of an Oyl and Acid. All Metals have the same Principles, but in diffe∣rent proportions and mixtures of them: And we may evidently smell the Sulphur in all Metals, except in Gold, which does not smell Sulphureous. Metals have little Taste or Vertue of themselves, but by their Preparation. First, Of Vitriols. 1. Of the Taste and Vertue of Gold Medicines. Le Mort in his Pharmacia Rationalis, gives the
taste of the Tincture of Gold, and says, It is a little Styptick, and afterward very Sweet; the sweetness following the Vitriolick Taste. This Vitriolick sweet Taste agrees exactly with the Steel-Taste of Blood; and therefore may be a great Medicine for the strengthning of the Blood, as all Steel Medicines be, which have also a sweet Vitriolick Taste. Mr. Molt, an Ingenious Chymist, informs me, That his Tincture of Gold tastes like Spiritus nitri dulcis; therefore this Preparation is different from the former. The Volatile Alkali which extracts the Tincture, acquires the nature of an Ammoniac Salt, by mixing with some of the Acid Menstruum, adhering to the Calx of Gold; and that Salt may render the Tincture Diuretick and Sudorifick. There is in the Blood an Ammoniac Salt, besides the Vitriolick Taste: And in all these the Tincture of Gold, and the Flowers of Sal Ammoniac Martiale, agree with the natural Taste of Blood; and there∣fore very much help its digestion, and the sangui∣fication of Chyle. The Sulphur of Gold cannot be extracted, but may produce some effects like Sulphur; so the Sul∣phur of Flint and Iron may appear burning, by striking both together, which excites a brisk moti∣on: And Iron looks of different colours, by different degrees of Heat. The detonation of Metal, their smell of Sulphur, and also their burning are plainly
effects of their extraverted Sulphur, though that cannot be divided from the other Principles. Aurum fulminans has a Vitriolick Taste, and purges if unwashed, and colours the Stools black: It yields a purple Sublimate, like the solution of Gold; this colour proceeds from its Sulphur, but that is not separable from the Earthy parts; for the Tincture of Gold may be reduced into Gold again. The fulminating Vertue depends on a new Nitre, regenerated by a mixture of the Salt of Tartar with the Menstruum; and this is lodged in the Pores of the Gold, and thence exploded. 2. Silver Medicines: The Crystals which are the Vitriol of Silver, are accounted very Bitter: In the Pil. Lunares they purge violently. The blue Tincture of Silver tastes Bitterish; by which, and the Volatile Alkali of its Menstruum, it is Antiepileptick, and it tastes also Styptick; for which it is used in the Gonorrhoea. 3. Copper Medicines are Vitriolick, Bitterish, of a Brass-savour Taste, very Nauseous. The Roman Vitriol is most Acrid. Copper Ore, and all Copper Medicines have a strong Sulphureous Smell; by which they discuss and deterge, and eat proud Flesh, as Aerugo does; but the Vitriolick Taste cicatrizes. Galen mentions the Acrimony of Copper Vitriol, with a suffocating Smell. Spirit of Verdigriese has a strong Acid pungent
Taste, by which it is a great dissolvent, and smells of a quick Acid. Sal Vitrioli vomits, by its Brass-savored nauseous Vitriol-Taste. White Vitriol will not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, neither will burnt Vitriol; I mixed both with it: but Roman Vitriol curdles it. Aes ustum must be drying, and Astringent in Taste. Sulphur Vitrioli narcoticum tastes Vitriolick. The Sulphur in all Vitriols, when it is precipitated from the Acid, smells Fetid, as in Oyl of Vitriol; and thereby it becomes Narcotick, or Anodyne. Copper has a very strong Sulphur, whereby it be∣comes inflammable, and very prejudicial to the Miners. A Copper-Farthing swallowed by a Child, caused a large Salivation. The Lunar Caustick tastes of a Brass-savored burn∣ing Vitriol, as a Chirurgeon informs me. Burnt Alum and Lime have also a burning Stypticity, and are thereby also very Corrosive. Common Verdigriese coagulates the Serum of the Blood, into which I put some of it; and there∣fore it acts the same on the Succus nutritius, which is bred from the Serum, and flows from Ʋlcers; and therefore by this Vitriolick coagulative Vertue it dries and cicatzes, stopping the Vessels, and coa∣gulating the Serum. Burnt Alum coagulates the Serum very much; and therefore is very drying: It tastes extreamly Styptick, with some Heat and Acid.
4. Iron Medicines: They taste all Vitriolick Sweet; and Iron smells Sulphureous; the Vertue depends on the Vitriol, and also on the Fetid Sulphur. Iron may be dissolved into a Crocus, by Spirit of Hartshorn; but it will not taste so Vitriolick as other Preparations. Sal Chalybis calcined, tastes Aluminous, and very Styptick; and then is most fit for outward use. Sal Chalybis will not coagulate the Serum of the Blood, nor Choler. 5. Lead Medicines are Vitriol, Sweet, and Styp∣tick Aluminous. The great Stypticity of Lead makes all its Pre∣parations Offensive to the Guts and Stomach, where Lead leaves an indelible nauseousness, as Wedelius informs us. Borellus assures us, That the Salt of Lead produced the Palsie. Bonetus affirms, That the Fumes of Lead produce pains in the Bowels, stoppage in the Belly, and trembling of the Limbs, pains in the Head, and blackness of Teeth. I have often observed the dry Cough, and shortness of Breath, which he mentions, in the Miners. These affects are deducible from the Stypticity acting on different parts, and most particularly on the Ner∣vous Juice. Since the Fumes of Quicksilver and Lead affect us after the same manner, I have sup∣posed them to have some similitude in their natures. For these Symptoms Bonetus commends Oyly Medicines, which have a contrary effect to Styp∣ticks, as Sperma Ceti, Soap. Milk, after Evacuation,
and fresh Butter used, prevent any ill effects of Lead-Medicines. Tinctura Antiphthisica, which is made of Saccharum Saturni, and Vitriolum Martis tastes extreamly Styptick, by which it heals the Ulceration of the Lungs, stops the putrefaction of the Blood, and pre∣vents Loosnesses; but Stypticks make the Breath of Hectical Persons very short and strait, as I have oft observed by use of Stypticks, after Spitting of Blood. Cerussa is Styptick and Cooling, being Lead cor∣roded by Vinegar. 5. Tin Medicines: The Vitriols of Tin are de∣scribed as Insipid and Rough. Mr. George Molt communicated these Tastes to me. Sal Jovis is sweet on the Tongue at first, and goes off with a Rough unpleasantness at last. The Sulphur of Jovial Medicines make them Anti-hystericks: And Tin smells very Sulphureous and burns. The Stypticity of Jovial Medicines outwardly heals all Ʋlcers and Tetters, if they be mixed with Pomatum. 6. Mercurial Medicines: Mercurial Vitriols are of a Brass-savored Taste, and Aluminous Styptick: Divers Persons have complained of that Taste after Purging with Mercurius dulcis; by this Aluminous Vitriol they cicatrize and resist putrefaction; and then coagulate the Serum of the Blood to produce a
Salivation: And Alum it self does coagulate it. The Fumes of Mercury produce the Palsie and Giddiness, by coagulating the Nervous Juice. Fumus Mercurii ob aciditatem hostilem laryngem statim prae∣cludit, & constringit. This is Doleus's Observation: So that Mercury unprepared has as evident qualities as other Metals. That Mercurial Fumes pass through the Nerves into the Brain is not improbable; and also all other Smells act immediately upon the Spirits, and not on the Membranes or Fibrillae nervosae. This may be proved by the effects of Charcoal Fumes, which kill by their Fetid Oyly Acids. And new Aqua Fortis will strike them down who smell to it, and cause a Giddiness. These Mercurial Fumes which get into the Blood, acquire some Vitriolick Acid thence, and thereby are more Vitriolated to coagulate the Serum, and produce a Salivation. Turbith Mineral seems of little Taste at first, but leaves, after a few Minutes, an exceeding Rough∣ness, with much Spitting; by which Tastes it sa∣livates and vomits. Mercurius dulcis, and Praecipitatus albus dulcis leave a Vitriolick Taste, a little Brass-savored; but Sublimate has the strongest Styptick, curdling the Serum of the Blood. Red Precipitate is a corrosive Styptick, but it would not curdle the Serum of the Blood, though I stirred it with it. Mercurius vitae after some time tastes Rough, and
leaves a Brass-savored Vitriolick Taste. The Anti∣monial Sulphureous Acid makes it vomitive, espe∣cially being joyned with a Brass-savored Taste, which this, as well as all other Mercurial Purgers, leave, after their Operations. Salt of Tartar imbibes the Acid, and makes it milder. Spirits that are Acid correct the Antimonial Sulphurs, and take away its violence. A scruple of Diaphoretick Antimony does well cor∣rect all Poysonous effects by. Quicksilver, ill prepa∣red; and so does Salt of Tartar, and Lime-water. Mercury has some Acid in it, whereby it corrodes Iron, the Teeth, and offends Worms. Spirit of Sal Ammoniac makes Mercurius dulcis black, by separating some Sulphur from the Acid Salts. Mercury dissolved in Aqua Fortis, and precipitated by Lime-Water, is of a yellow colour: Salt Water precipitates it into a white: Ʋrine to an Incarnate colour, as Oyl of Tartar to a Milky; but if Subli∣mate be precipitated, the colours vary, as at Pag. 19. Second Part of the Pharmaco-Basanos. 7. Antimonial Vitriols, which consist most of Sulphur; but in Antimony some Lead is supposed to be, from whence it has its Alkali; which, combi∣ning with the Acid, is commonly added in the prepa∣ration of Antimony: It thence receives its Vitriolate Astriction, which is perceived by the Taste; as my Ingenious Friend, Dr. Edward Betts, has intimated to me: And he also informed me, That Crocus Metallorū had some Taste like Vitriolum album. Common Cin∣nabar has the Ceruss of Lead mixed with it, and there∣fore is noxious. Le Mort.
Secondly, The Taste of the Mineral Calces. These dry Earthy Calces imbibe Acids, and they are Diaphoretick, by retaining something of their Mineral Sulphurs; for diaphoretick Antimony becomes again Vomitive, if long kept; for the activity of the Aerial Acid dissolves the Sulphur out of it, as other Acid Spirits will do. This Instance is sufficient to shew that in Mineral Calces some Sulphur is contained, as well as some Oyliness in the Fixt Salt of Plants. Antimonium Diaphoreticum, Antihecticum, Bezoardi∣cum Solare, Lunare, Joviale, Minerale, are pure Calces, having some heat from the Sulphur, or the Fire, or the Spirit of Wine burnt on them. Bezoardicum Minerale stirreth not with the Alkalies or Acids, and therefore acts chiefly by the latent Sul∣phur; and these Calces may be given in Milk. The Antihecticum has the Calces of Antimony, Steel, and Tin, to absorb the Animal Acids; and some of each Mineral Sulphur adheres to their Calx, and there∣fore it Vomits, and is given till it becomes nauseous, by increasing the Dose. It corrects all Acids in Lues Venerea, in Ʋlcers, and the Hectick; but I must ho∣nestly confess, I could never observe any Cure to be done by it in Consumptive Cases, in which I have often tryed it. The Acid in the Stomach may give these Calces either a Saline Taste, or else a Stypticity, and so advance their Vertues, and help the separation of their Sulphur, which was before locked up with the Alkali, as appears in the Glass of Antimony, and other Calces which vomit.
Thirdly, The Taste of Mineral Sulphurs. 1. Sulphureous Acid, as in common Sulphur, which is evidently both Acid and Sulphureous upon burn∣ing it, and pierces the Nose strongly. Ens primum Sulphuris smells strongly of Sulphur, and tastes much of the Acid, by which it cools Hecti∣cal Blood, and coagulates Choler in the Colick. Sulphur is a good Preservative against all Infectious Fevers, and especially the Small-Pox, and all Epide∣mical Distempers depending on the Air, and as a Fe∣tid it is Antihysterick. The Flowers taste both Fetid and something Vitriolick, and dry the Piles, in Pills or Lozenges. 2 Stronger Sulphurs and less Acid. In the Clyssus of Antimony the Acid is small, but the Sulphur is strong∣er than the smell of Sp. of Sal Ammoniack, which makes it an excellent Antihysterick, being strongly Fetid. Emetick Tartar has a pleasing Acidity, but the Sulphur of the Antimony vomits. Sal Antimonii has the taste of a dulcified Acid. Ettmuller mentions a Salt Clyssus of Antimony as a good Diuretick: And he affirms, That Antimonial Sulphur may be prepared to smell like Musk. Dr. Needham says, Antimonial Sulphur smells and burns like Brimstone. Cinnabar of Antimony smells Sulphureous. 3. Sulphureous, hot, burning or Corrosive Acids. Arsenick tastes of a burning heat, and is also Acid. So the Butter of Antimony, which is Corrosive, smells strong of Sulphur, and has an Acid in it. Oleum Stanni
is very Corrosive, and Acid, and is not to be distin∣guished from Butyrum Antimonii; but, by its conti∣nual Smoaking, both being very Corrosive. This Corrosive quality in Minerals depends on a Volatile active burning Sulphur, edged with an Acid. Ar∣senick did not mix with the Serum of the Blood, nor curdle it: Neither would common Sulphur Flow∣ers either mix or increase its Floridity. The Mi∣neral of Arsenick causes shortness of Breath, and Pal∣sies in the Miners, by its great Foetor: The Spirits, like the Flame of a Candle, are wholly extinguished by Sulphureous Damps. Crocus Metallorum dissolves well in the Serum of the Blood; it gives it a yellow colour, but does not coagulate it, and therefore works more on the Mem∣branes than Humors. The chief Vertue of Antimony lies in the Sulphur, which may be strongly smelt, by rubbing two pieces together; and by this Sulphur Antimony discusses, and dries in common drying De∣coctions; but I must confess, Sulphurs are much more evident to the Smell than the Taste in all Minerals, and therefore by that Sense are most to be observed. Fourthly, The Tastes or Smells of the Bitumens. 1. Bitumens taste Bitter, like Turpentines, as Petro∣leum, and smell like it, with addition of some Earthy Fetid. Asphaltum tastes like Pitch, as I am informed, and it burns into a Cinder. 2. Some are Bitter and Fetid, as Succinum; the Tin∣cture of Amber tastes Bitterish, and is Antiepileptick like other Fetids.
3. It is not improbable that Amber-griese is a Bitu∣men, and of a fragrant Smell, very Cordial. It yields the same Principles as Amber by distillation, both Oyl and Salt. If the consistence of the Bitumens be con∣sidered, they are like Oyls, Turpentines, or Resins. Ebenum fossile is said to be of a sweet scent & Cordial. An Account of the Tar-Bitumen in Shropshire. A Bitumen is called by the Famous Kircher, Sulphur liquidum, and Sulphur Bitumen fixum: This is plainly proved by some Bitumens which smell plainly of Brim∣stone, as the Tar-Bitumen or Pici-Bitumen, and have also a Tar Smell; for by both these Smells a Sulphur, and a Turpentine Bitumen are evidently known to be nearly related or compounded. I received this Bitu∣men from my Worthy and Ingenious Friend, Mr. G. Plaxton of Sheriff-Hales in Shropshire: And these following Observations were made at Aston, in War∣wick-shire, in the Laboratory of my ever Honoured and Learned Friend, Sir Charles Holt, Baronet. The smell of the Bitumen was like a mixture of Tar and Brimstone, which shews the middle state Bi∣tumens have betwixt Minerals and Vegetables. This Bitumen tastes Bitterish and Smoaky, & swims on a Spring, which rises about the middle of a Hill in a Wood, near to Rowton, in the Parish of Brosely, in Shropshire. We mixed this Tar-like Bitumen with Sand, and distilled it in a Sand Furnace, out of a Retort. At first a Phlegmatick Water came over, then a black Oyl, which we rectified with Water, and then it ap∣peared like a yellow Oyl; in Colour, Smell, and Taste
like Oyl of Amber, and therefore I believe it to be of the same nature. By this Experiment it appears, That Amber is no Vegetable product, as a Gum-Resin, but truly a Mi∣neral Bitumen, which is in some places dug out of the Earth, and that this Tar is a Petroleum or liquid Amber. It seems probable to me, That this Tar is the Oyl of Coal, for such an Oyly substance sweats from our Pit-Coal, in burning, and also comes from it by di∣stillation; and also the Sulphur-smell in this Tar ap∣pears to be like Coal smoke. Many other Bitumens have a mixt smell of a Terebinthinate and Smoaky, or Sulphureous Smell. The taste of Petroleum is Bitterish, and it smells of a mixt smell of Turpentine, and Fetid Sulphur, by which it discusses Tumors; and the Country People cure Ʋlcers and Swellings in their Cattle by this Tar. All Bitumens are discussing by their Fetid Smell, Con∣glutinative by their Gumminess, and Detergent by their Bitter Taste. North-hall Water tastes Bitterish, and smells of a Sulphureous Smell, upon keeping; it seems therefore to have something Bituminous. The Sediment after Evaporation, tasted very burning and hot, and that Taste continued long on my Tongue: By this Acri∣mony it is Purgative and Diuretick. Spirit of Harts-Horn precipitated the Water white, like Alum-water; and it curdles Milk like that. As an alterative it has the Vertue of Alum in curing Itch, Scab, and all Fer∣mentations, and fixes the Volatile Salts and Oyls, and
coagulates the Lympha's, and Serum of the Blood, which may sometimes occasion Rheumatick Pains, as I have observed it in some Persons. Of the Tastes of Salts. I. SAlts properly so called, of a salt, hot, pungent Taste, and a Lixivial Smell, as all fixt Salts; these feel Unctuous to the Fingers, from some Oyl adhering to them; and these are strong Diu∣reticks and Sudorificks. II. Volatile Alkalies; these are of a burning pun∣gent, salt Taste, with a smoaky urinous Smell; the smoakiness and burning is from the Oyly Particles in Salts: By the addition of an Acid the Heat and Burning and Fetids are abated, for Acids correct all Oyls, and fix them. III. An Acid sulphureous Salt, for so we impro∣perly call all Figured Bodies, though they have no salt Taste; and Acids are the principal Ingredients of all other Salts: This sulphureous Acid is the aeri∣al Salt, which mixes with all Fluids, and then fixes in the Earthy Particles, by which it is made evident to the Taste: It cannot be tasted in Snow or Ice, for want of an Alkali: All Acids we taste have a rough∣ness; and therefore an Earthy part to make them act on our Taste is necessary. This aerial sulphureous Acid rises from the sulphureous Fumes of the Earth, or the sulphureous lucid matter of the Sun. IV. Mixt Salts tasting Salso-acid. 1. Urinous Salso-acids, made of a Volatile and A∣cid,
mixt as Sal Ammoniack, which most resembles the salt of the Blood, being Diuretick and Sudorifick. 2. Vitriolated Salts, consisting of a Fixt and an Acid. 3. Nitrous Salts, consisting of a sulphureous Acid, and a Volatile Salt, tasting Cool and Saltish. Arcanum duplicatum is esteemed as a mixt Salt; and Ettmuller says, It is Bitterish, it is Diuretick, a Digestive, and a Febrifuge. Spirit of Nitre ferments with the Sand in the Ʋrine, and is esteemed the best Lithontriptick by Dr. Grew. V. Salts compounded from some Acid and Mineral. 1. Aluminous Tastes, tasting Acerb or Acid-rough. Burnt-Alum tastes Sweetish, Sub-acid, Hot, and very Styptick, whereby it coagulated the Serum of the Blood, and stops its extravasation in Ʋlcers, but it did not change the florid of the Blood, as Vineger does. 2. Vitriolick Salts, so called from their shooting into particular edged Figures, like Salts, and they have a Styptick Taste. 3. Marine Salts, as Sea-Salt, Sal-Gem, are Salso-acid. Sal Anaticum is of a Salso-acid Taste, and is used for Eye-Medicines to supply the saltness of the Tears to cleanse the viscid Lympha in the corrosive Acidity. We use Tutty and Calaminary Stone to absorb the Acid, for they ferment with them. VI. Of a burning, corrosive, salt Taste, as in the Lixivium of Soap-ashes: It tastes burning, and smells of Lime. I put some of it into the Serum of Blood, and it turned it higher coloured, but did not coagulate it. Alumen scissile urit instar urticarum, Ettmuller. FINIS.
