F1586 E377_16 R201365 99861888 114034
The Kings Majesties PROPOSITIONS TO THE LORDS and COMMONS assembled in PARLIAMENT; CONCERNING His Majesties comming to White-Hall, and giving His Royall assent for setling of the Presbyteriall Government, within the Kingdome of England, and Dominion of ƲƲales. Also, His Majesties Desires, concerning the Li∣turgie of the Church of England, and Episcopacie. Published by Authority. Febr. 22. Printed, Anno Dom. 1647.
Another MESSAGE FROM HOLMBY. Most honoured Sir. HAving long expected the arrival of his Maiesty, whose Royall person, is now come neer us, I cannot chuse, but give you a salutation of my real affection, both in re∣spect of the great favour, which (formerly) you were pleased to vouchsafe unto me, and
likewise (in part) to answer your expecta∣tion, in things of high concernment, and the whole Kingdoms Object. Sir, Since the coming of the Kings Ma∣iesty to Holmby, there hath been a great dispute between his Maiesty, and the Eng∣lish Divines, strong Arguments were held by the King, in defence of the Liturgie and Episcopal Government; but many gallant Reasons were propounded to his Maiesty, (for convincing of his conscience, and clee∣ring of his Judgment) by that Reverend Di∣vine, Mr. Stephen Marshal; giving many learned and strong Reasons, in defence of the Government, now established within the Kingdome of England, by the Authority of both houses of Parliament: But (as yet) the businesse lyes in dispence, and his Maiesty hath further declared, that hee cannot give his Royall assent, for the confirming and enacting of the Presbyteriall Government; until such time, as he hath conferred with some of his own Chaplains, about the same, his Conscience being tender (in every re∣spect) for the preservation of the Protestant Religion; And to that end, hath sent a Let∣ter
to both houses of Parliament, signifying his Maiesties gracious will and pleasure therein; wherein be propounds, several Pro∣positions, concerning his Desires in Religion. viz. 1, That they would be pleased, to grant, that a competent number of his Maiesties Episcopall Divines might be sent downe to Holmby, for the exercise of his Maiesties Conscience, and clearing of his judgment, concerning the present differences in Reli∣gion. 2. That his Maiesty desires the honoura∣ble houses of Parliament, that they will bee pleased to condescend, to these his Desires, & grant, that any two of the Episcopall Di∣vines, which he hath formerly mentioned, may be sent to Holmby. 3. His Maiesty conceives this to be the best and likelyest meanes of giving him sa∣tisfaction; without which, he supposeth, the distractions of the Church of England, can∣not be setled. Thus, according to your expectation, I have briefly given you the substance of His
Maiesties Propositions to both houses of Par∣liament. In the next place, I shall endeavour to sa∣tisfie your desires, concerning the manner of his Maiesties entertainment at Holmby, and his welcomming into that County, by the Gentry of Northamptonshire, which I will briefly intimate, as followeth: There were great tryumph at Northam∣pton upon Tuesday last, when the tydings were, brought, that his Maiesty were neere Holmby, the Bells rang, and the great Guns went of, insomuch, that a gallant eccho made its appeal at Holmby, and the sound thereof did much reioyce his Maiesties heart; who little thought, that the joy of his subiects would have beene so great at the arrivall of his Royal person. Multitudes of people resorted to wel∣come his Maiesty, the Road from Harborow to Holmby being adorned with thousands, and thousands of spectators, crying with a loud voyce (God blesse your Maiesty) the King smiling upon them, passed along cheer∣fully, saying, he hoped this Journey would
prove a prosperous voyage, both to him and his Posterity. Many hundreds of the Gentry of North∣hamptonshire, me this Maiesty two miles on this side Harborow, and accompanied his Maiesty to Holmby. The bells rang in every town that his Mai. passed through, which annexed a double ioy to his Royal heart, causing many a smile from his Princely countenance. At his arrivall at Holmby, there was a gallant guard appointed for his Maiesty to passe by, who entred in at the great Court Gate, being accompanied by the Commissi¦oners of both Kingdoms, who deport them∣selves with much gallantry, performing the trust reposed in them faithfully, and their o∣bedience to their Liege-Soveraign most loy∣ally. He entred the house in great tryumph, and in a most sumptuous maner, taking some delight in conferring with the Commissio∣ners about some points concerning the Di∣rectory; they leave no meanes unassayed, that may any wayes prove effectual, for the per∣swading and gayning of his Maiesties Roy∣all assent, to signe the Propositions, and take
the Covenant; which we hope, will, ere long prove effectual, desiring to hear that tryum∣phant sound, and comfortable eccho, of the uniting both of Prince and Subject, that so peace and truth may flourish within his Maiesties Dominions. His Maiesty is very pleasant and chearful, only he desires to come to, or neare the City of London. But he hath gallant quarrers, and excellent accommodation, there being plenty of provisions, both for his Maiesty, and his attendants. Sir, no more at present, but that I subscribe my self, Yours, to his power. W. FORNACE. Holmby-house, Feb, 19.
