F1876A 45789315 172624
A Paper to Friends, and Others, AGAINST THE POMPS of the WORLD, Followed and Used by many Tradesmen in their Vocations, Contrary unto many of their Suerties PROMISES and VOWS. FRIENDS, stand in the Eternal Power of God, Witnesses for the Eternal God against the Devil and his Works, and the World, and the Lusts, and Pomps, and Vanities of the World, which World the Devil is God of. Now, there is a saying by the God∣fathers and Godmothers (so called) that they do promise and vow, &c. to forsake the Devil and all his works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinfull Lusts of the flesh, and vow for Chil∣dren, that they will not follow them, nor will be led by them; but forsake them all. But do not we see, that many that say so, run into all or many the lusts, and Pomps and Vanities of the World? And are not such offended at those Tradesmen that cannot trim their Cloaths and Apparel according to the Pomps and Lusts, and Fashions of the World, which pass away? But such Tradesmen that stand as witnesses in the Power and Truth of God, against such Pomps, Lusts and Vanities of the World, cannot fulfill the peoples minds, in them: And therefore they are offended at them. But did God make man and woman with these Pomps Vanities and Lusts of the World? Or how came they into them? No, God did not make man & woman with these Pomps Vanities & Lusts of the World. But when man and woman forsook the living God, and disobey∣ed him, and followed the Serpent, Satan & the Devil; then he filled them with these Pomps, and Lusts and Vanities of the wicked World, which the Devil is God of. So they fell from the Righteousness, and Holiness and I∣mage of God; and disobeying and transgressing the Command of God; and going from God, and following the Serpent, he hath filled them with Pride, Envy, Malice and hatred one against another; and with the Lusts and Pomps of the World. And they are grieved and vexed one against another, when they cannot have such Pomps and Vanities, as others have, and think much at such, and Envy them that are in Pomp and Pride, beyond them or above them. And this Pride, Pomp and Lust, the Devil, hath begotten into man and woman, in the fall from God. And so it had a beginning in man and woman, and must there have an End, if ever they come to God. And they that stand faithfull witnesses for the Eternal God, in his Eternal Power and truth, are witnesses against all this Pride and Pomp and Vanities of the World, and Lusts of the flesh, and the Devil and his works, and cannot please them, nor satisfy them in their Pomps Pride and Lusts of the World, which are of the Devil, and not of God, though it might bring them in much gain; yet they in their Pomp and Pride are offended, and very angry with them, that cannot satisfy their minds in them. For, the Apostle saith, the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of life, is not of the Father (mark, not of the Father) not of God the Father, the Creator of all, that takes care for all, who is the Lord of all. Now if the Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of life, be not of the Father; who is it of then, but of the Devil, the God of the World which lyes in wickedness? Now how comes this Lust of the Eye, & Pride of life, and Lusts of the flesh into man and woman? seeing it is not of the living God the Father, it came by the Devil, when man and woman transgressed the Command of the living God, and obeyed the Serpent, and so fell from their Innocency, and the I∣mage of God in Righteousness and Holiness. So then the Devil the God of the World, filled them with the Lust of the flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of life, which is not of the Father. So this had a beginning in man and woman when they went from God, and disobeyed him, and transgressed his Commandment, and not before. So they stand in the Eternal Power of God, and Christ, who hath renewed them up into the Image of God, that man and woman was in, before they fell; they stand witnesses against the Lusts of the flesh, and the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of life; and the God of the World, that hath filled man and woman with these things, and hath begot∣ten these things into them. So these Tradesmen that are Gods witnesses, and cannot satisfy, nor fulfill, nor please, the Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of life, nor Lust of the flesh, which is not of the Father, but of the God of the World, the Devil, whom Christ destroyed and his works; who through death destroyed death, and the Devil the Power of death. And so Christ's wit∣nesses and followers do stand witnesses in his Power and Truth against the Devil and his works, and the Pomps and Vanities of the wicked World. These are sealed certain witnesses in Gods Eternal Power and Truth, a∣gainst all that which is not of the Father, but of the Devil: And also are wit∣nesses for that which is of God the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and for his Glory, and for his Honour, and his Praise. But they that are in their Pomps and Vanities, and followers of the God of the World and his works, & the Lusts of the Flesh, the Lusts of the Eye, and the Pride of Life, do hate and persecute them that stand witnesses against such things. And they who are in their Pomps, will hardly imploy those that stand witnesses against them in their Pride and Pomps. So that these Tradesmen can hardly get any Trading amongst them, whilst they stand witnesses in God the Father's Pow∣er and Truth against those who are in those Pomps and Vanities, and in that which is not of the Father. And in so doing they know that they keep clean Consciences to God; and know, and are assured that his blessings rest upon hem, who will bless them with blessings from above, and the blessings be∣neath. And they are witnesses for God, who hath his upper springs, and his nether springs to refresh them, which enables them to stand Faithfull Wit∣nesses for the Living God their Father: To whom be Glory for ever; Whose Glory is over all the works of his Hands; who is worthy to be Served, Worshipped and Honoured for evermore, Amen. London, the 2d. of the 11th Month, 1682. G. F. AND Therefore it is good for all, to wait patiently upon the Lord; For some of you do know, when Truth first broke forth in London, that many Tradesmen could not take so much money in their Shops for some time, as would buy them Bread and Water; because they withstood the Worlds ways, Words, Fashions and Customs; Yet by their patient wait∣ing upon the Lord, in their good life and conversation, they came to answer the Truth in People's Hearts and Consciences. So there rises a belief in Peo∣ple, that Friends would not wrong them in any thing: So that at last the Lord did increase his Blessings, both inwardly, and outwardly upon his Peo∣ple. And therefore, let none murmur nor complain; but wait in Patience and Faithfulness, upon the Lord, who is both God in Heaven, and in the Earth, and all is the Lords, who can fill you both with his Temporal and Spiritual Blessings. Therefore all walk worthy of them in Truth and Righ∣teousness; That whatever ye do in word or deed, it may be done to the Praise and Glory of God. G. F. LONDON, Printed by John Bringhurst, at the Sign of the Book in Grace-Church-street, 1682/3.
