F191 E317_17 99861263 158991
Sir Thomas Fairfax LETTER TO Both Houses of Parliament; More exactly and fully relating the Storm∣ing and Taking of DARTMOƲTH, with the Castle, Forts, Officers in chief, and Souldiers therein: Sent by Mr. Peters. Together with a LIST of the Name; of the se∣veral Commanders, Officers and Souldiers ta∣ken in the said Town, Castle and Forts. ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, That this Letter and List be forth∣with printed and published: Joh: Brown, Cleric. Parliamentorum. H: Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. Printed at London for John Wright, at the Kings-Head in the Old-Baily, Ian. 24. 1645.
For the Right Honorable the Speaker of the House of Peers pro Tempore. My LORDS, AFter my coming to Totness, the Enemy rising in great disorder from their Siege at Plymouth, leaving their Guns and some Ammunition behind them; I considered with those about me of Attempting upon Dartmouth; and it being concluded affirmatively, I caused two Regi∣ments of Foot to march to Ditsam, and two to Stoak, Flemming, being on the West side of Dart River. I having Summoned the place before, resolved upon Sunday night to Attempt it by Storm, which was agreed to be done in three places: The first Post was on the West Gate by Colonel Hamond; on the North end of the Town by Lieut: Col: Pride; and on Tunstall Church and Works by Col: Fortescue. The time resolved on, was in the Evening; our men fell on with great Resolution (to whom Colonel
Lamberts Regiment was a Reserve, and to Alarm the Enemy elsewhere. Colonel Hamond entring the West Gate, where four Guns were planted, and two upon the Mill-Pool upon his Flank; The Enemy firing his great Guns but once, his men that had the Forlorn-Hope did very gallantly (as indeed they did all) and went freely on, and beat off the Enemy, and possessed one Fort after another; viz. Mount Flag∣gon, the West Gate, Paradice Fort, and beat off the main Guard; where were taken four Lieutenant Colo∣nels: and so possessed the Town from the West Gate to little Dartmouth. In the Interim, Lieutenant Co∣lonel Pride attempted the North part of the Town, called Harness, where beating off the Enemy he entred it, and took about Eighty Prisoners in it, and by it possessed all the North part of the Town unto the Draw-bridge, which divided the North part from the rest of the Town; where Colonel Hamonds men and his met Colonel Fortescue with his men, at∣tempted Tunstall Church, which was very well man'd with above One hundred men, and having in it ten Guns: His men, after some Dispute, with good Resolution entred the place and possessed it, so that by this time the Enemy was beaten out of all, except the great Fort in the East side of the River, called Kingsworth Fort, and the Castle with the Fort which lay over the Castle at the mouth of the Harbor, cal∣led Gallants Bower; to which last the Governour with the Earl of Newport, and as many as escaped us fled. After they were forced from their strengths out of the Town, the Governor coming back from the Castle to see in what posture the Town was, had a
remarkable shot; as he was in the Boat, one sitting by him, a Musket shot was made at the Boat, which pierced the Boat, and through both the thighs of one that was next unto him, and about three inches into his own thigh, upon which he retreated to the Castle. Our Dragoons, with two Companies of our Fire∣locks, and some Seamen, were Ordered only to A∣larm Kingsworth Fort, wherein was Sir Henry Cary with his Regiment, having in it twelve Guns, and twelve Barrels of Powder, and convenient propor∣tion of Ammunition. This was a very strong Fort, with about four good Bulwarks, strong enough to have made a troublesome resistance; but the Enemy came willingly to terms; and to save time, I willingly condescended to let Sir Henry Cary march away with the rest, leaving the Arms, Ordnance, Ammunition, with all Provisions in the Fort to me, and all engaging themselves never to take up Arms more against the Parliament, which was accordingly performed. Next morning, being thus Master of all but the Castle, and Gallants Bower, I Summoned that, the Governor was willing to listen unto me, but I held him to those terms upon which after some dispute he yielded, which was, to deliver himself, and all Officers and Souldiers upon Quarter: He sent me out Colonel Seamor and Mr. Denham for Hostages, with whom came out the Earl of Newport, and all was this day performed ac∣cordingly. In this Fort and Castle were Eleven Guns, with proportion of Ammunition and Provisions. We have taken in the Harbor two men of War, one belonging to the Governor of Barnstable, with twelve Guns, Burden Two hundred Tuns; the other be∣longing
to Newcastle, formerly Captain Johnsons, of ten Guns; In the Town, One hundred and three pieces of Ordnance, and about Six hundred Pri∣soners, and One hundred Horse, with good propor∣tion of Arms and Ammunition, an Exact particular whereof I am not able to give Your Lordship at pre∣sent an account thereof; There being many of the Inhabitants of this Town Souldiers in Plymouth, and some Officers. And understanding that that Town hath Two thousand five hundred in Garrison, besides Townsmen, I have sent thither for Five hundred Foot for this place, who quickly will increase to more; and to this I desire Your Approbation; for having found more work to do, I held it not fit to weaken my Ar∣my, especially considering the Recruits designed by You, I doubt will be too long before they come. I have given Your Lordship a brief Accompt of this Service, which I desire may be accounted a sweet mercy of God in a very fitting season, and only ascribed to him who truly did direct and act it, and made all the preparation to it, both in the ordering our hearts, and giving health to the Army, which la∣boured two moneths ago extremely of sicknesse, but is now in good disposition generally to health. I can say, I finde it to be in the hearts of all here, in all Integrity to serve You: And that it is so, is still the mercy of God; for surely the successe of Your Affairs, only Depends upon the ordering of a graci∣ous Providence, which is no lesse visible in Your Councels (which we congratulate) then amongst us; that being the common Root and Spring of all, and which can and will carry You through the
greatest Difficulties, and us in serving You, un∣till God hath finished his own work: Wherein to professe the Obligation and readinesse of my self and the Army, by the same good hand of God is all the undertaking of Dartmouth, Jan. 20. 1645. Your Lordships most humble Servant, Tho. Fairfax. FOr a further Relation of particulars, I re∣fer you to this Bearer Mr. Peters, who was present upon the place, and did much encourage the Souldiers to do their Duties.
Prisoners taken at Dartmouth, Ianuary 19. 1645. SIr Hugh Pollard Governour. Earl of Newport. Collonel Seamor. Leiutenant Collonels. Codrington. Blunt. Wadland. Searle. Majors. Fulford. Hooper. Captaines. Pollard. Woodly. Sampson. Duke. Powell. Colefin. Ford. Blewet. Start. Downing. Horton. Conway. Raynolds. Lee. Phillips, Lieutenants. King. Pollard. Hunt. Duncalfe. Kigan. Eston. Bee. Labull. Slanner. Iohnson. Drew. Williams. Hinly. Searle. Ensignes. Garret. Richard. Vpton. Read. Dode. Waggin. Vichering. Fitch-Iames. Coome. Cornet Lamot. Many Country Gentlemen, Ministers, and inferiour Officers. All the Common Souldiers being betwixt eight hundred and a thousand are set at liberty to repaire to their dwellings. Ordnance about a hundred and twenty mounted, two men of War in the Harbour. FINIS.
