F2291 E730_1 99862564 166839
A full and perfect RELATION OF The great PLOT AND Terrible Conspiracy, of divers Lords, Knights, Citizens, and Apprentices, against his Highness the Lord Protector. With a List of the Conspirators Names; the exact Particu∣lars of their bloody Engagement, Vow, and Covenant; and the manner how they were apprehended in the Old-Bayley, and Covent-Garden, and carryed to James, on Tuesday and Wednesday night last. Likewise, their Examination and Confession before the Right Honourable the Council at White-Hall; and the Names of the LORDS that were taken, with their Examinations before his Highness, and the Orders and Resolution passed thereupon. Together with the taking of a ParchmentScol and List of 500 men, and he going of the L. Hastings, and divers othes frm LONDON feb▪ 18 LONDON, Printed for G, HOR, 1654.
A full and perfect RELATION OF The great PLOT, and unparalleld Conspiracy of divers Lords, Gentlemen, and Citizens, against his Highness the Lord Protector. GEntlemen, Had it pleased the su∣pream Disposer of all things (who changeth times and sea∣sons, and doth with the Nati∣ons of the World as he plea∣seth) to have united Amity and friendship between the Royal party, and the As∣sertors
of the present Government (which by his Highness no means have been left unassayed) it would have been matter of great content to the whole Nation: But since they seem to chuse Distractions rather then Peace, and to involve this Nati∣on into new Divisions; notwithstanding the great tender∣ness of his Highness and his honorable Council to avoid every thing that might lead to a Rupture, saving the un∣doubted Rights and Dominion of this Nation, and the ju∣stice they are resolved to administer to the People. In con∣sideration whereof, I am sorry the Design of the Royal Party should be so secret and cunning, as to wind about the judgment of some good men amongst us, undiscerned and unobserved of them, under the pretences of publike service, loyalty, and freedom, rejoycing (though obscurely) that they can put on our own party to prosecute one another; try∣umphing to themselves, that they can meke us lop off our own Branches, and act that upon our selves in their be∣half, which they themselves cannot do upon Us: But I cannot but here publish to the World, that this was the grand Artifice, and Design of the Enemy, both abroad, and at home, within the Common-wealth of England, Scot∣land, and Ireland, working in secret to make Us the sad and fatal instruments of undoing and destroving one another, and dashing in pieces this happy and glorious Govern∣ment, now established under his Highness the Lord Prote∣ctor. But I hope we shall discern and embrace one ano∣ther, to the destruction of their stratagem; as already ap∣pears by that happy and timely Discovery on Tuesday night last at the Ship-Tavern in the Old-Bayley, where a com∣pany
of Gentlemen being drinking two pair of stairs high, and having called for as much Sack as came to eight shil∣lings and six pence, before▪ they had put a period to their quaffing Glasses, in came a company of Officers and Soul∣diers, with their Swords and Pistols cockt, and went imme∣diatly up staires, where they demanded the Names of the Persons, their Residence, and their present business; which they answered: But it being not satisfactory: the Officers told them, they had an Order from his Highness to appre∣hend them, and commit them to custody, during the plea∣sure of his Highness: Whereupon the Drawers were all called up, and examined, VVhether or no, they knew those Gen∣tlemen, they answered, They knew not one face there, except Mr. Dutton's. Whereupon they secured them all, and con∣ducted them to Iame's; upon the Ordinance for Treason, for contriving and conspiring against his Highnesse the Lord Protector. And withall, took away Mr. Amps the Master of the house; but upon examination, he was ac∣quitted. This party is said to be very numerous, there being at the least five hundred, as we hear, confederated together in an Oath and Covenant, to strike at the very Root of this present Government, and to use the utmost of their en∣deavors to take off his Highness. Which is a thing most unparallel'd, seeing that we are but as the first ripe fruit to this flourishing Harvest, wherein the Sickle of Providence will be put into the hands of our present Governors, to ac∣complish that glorious Prophecie, of Gods cutting down Monarchs, his Adversaries, and making way for restoring of his Judges as at first, and his Councellors as at the be∣ginning.
A List of the Names of the chief Conspirators and Actors, taken in the Plot against his Highness the Lord Protector, Mr. Dutton of Grays-Inn, an eminent Gen∣tleman. Mr. Amp at the ship-Tavern in the Old-bayley; but upon examination released. Cap. Smith, M. Jacob, M. Peterborough, M. Johnson, Mr. Bunch. Mr. Rolston, Mr. Switzer, A Goldsmiths Prentice in Lumbard-street, And divers others, who were suddenly apprehended at the aforesaid place in the Old-Bayley, and by his Highnesses command condu∣cted to St. James's: from whence, on Thursday ltst they were brought to White-hall, being guar∣ded by a company of souldiers; and in the after∣noon
they were brought before the honourable Council, where they were examined by his High∣ness, touching their Meetings, and their private Negotiations and Consultations, for to raise insur∣rections, commotions, and to involve this Nation into another bloody and intestine war, &c. But many of them stood like so many Smithfield Ly∣ons, being not able to speak a word for them∣selves. Others, spake with great dexterity of spirit, yet some of them confessed their Errors, and laid themselves so low at the feet of his Highnes: and his honourable Council, that by their confession it is conceived they may find remission; in order whereunto they have already impeached divers, and many brave Birds, bedeckt with dainty fea∣thers, begins now to flutter: Beware ye Citi∣zens! Ay, twas an old Proverb of King James, that he loved the Treason, but hated the Traytor. Which saying has been verifyed for a century of yeers: But let me not deviate nor center too much upon circumstances; but re-mind you, that after much time spent in examination, his Highness, and the Council ordered that they should be remanded back to the place from
whence they came, till the further pleasure of his Highness were known; and accordingly they were conducted by a strong Guard of souldiers. About twelve of the clock on Wednesday night last the Lord of Newport, and the Lord Vaus were both ap∣prehended and committed to custody; but not upon the Ordinance for Treason; but upon the Act against Duels; having challenged each other: but on Thursday last they were both examined by his Highness, and upon engage∣ment, ordered their liberty. The Lord Hastings of Loughborow is said to b gone, With divers other young Lords, Knights, and Citizens, Divers Apprentices were engaged in this horrid, and wick∣ed Design, amounting to five or 600, as appeares as re∣ported) by the Scroul taken in the Pockets of those that were apprehended. A little before which time, appeard a STAR in the East, which Astrologers interpret, to be the onely Signal of a cleer Discovery of any black or foul Conspiracy. depiction of a star FINIS.
