F900 E445_22 99864245 161753
THE FIGHT in KENT Betweene The ARMY and the Kentish men. ALSO The Lord Generals Message; And their Desires to the Parliament. AND The Castle taken at CHEPSTOW: VVHERE Sir NICHOLAS KEMISH was slain, all his men taken prisoners at mercy: 20 Piece of Ordnance taken, 30 barrels of Powder, and above 1000 Armes. May. 31. 1648. Imprimatur, Gilb. Mabbott. LONDON, Printed for H. Becke, and are to be sold in the Old Bayley. 1648.
A LETTER from GREENWICH Dated the 30 of May. 1648. Concerning The Desires, and proceedings of those that are risen in KENT. Right Honourable, YOu may (out of common sense) suppose what a sad condition we are in here, eve∣ry way encompassed with dangers; and can∣not look over one gulph, before we see our selves surprized with another. If there be any Inhabitant here that refuse∣eth to comply with the Petition of the Coun∣ty, he is invironed with the scorn of all his Neighbours.
And those who doe joyne with them for defence thereof, they are in danger of the censure of the Parliament, and lash of the Army. The desires of the Country are, to Petiti∣on the Parliament, that the King may come to London, and that they will treat with His Majesty, that both Kingdomes may be set∣led in peace; Money be raised to pay the Souldiery, and the Army to be disbanded. This is the summe of their Petition, which they so strive to send to the Parliament. There are divers persons of considerable quality that joyne in these desires: Some Lords, nigh 20 Knights, Gentlemen, Free∣holders, Farmers, and other Inhabitants in a∣bundance. And many Seamen comply also. The intent was to have met together at Black-Heath yester day, And there to have drawn themselves into Brigades, or other∣wise as should have beene concluded at Ro∣chester the night before, where they thought to have left a sufficient strength, Many, came to Rochester that night from Canterbury, and other parts further in Kent,
And the Towne was very full, their reso∣lutions being to march the next morning as aforesaid. But they had advertisements that night, that the Lord Generall was in his march to∣wards them with divers Regiaments, intend∣ing to fall upon them that night, the Army being much inraged against them. Hereupon the Gentlemen that manage the businesse consulted what to doe, and finding it not safe to march, least the Army should destroy them, as they supposed they might if they should fall upon them, They resolved not to march to Black-Heath, as they thought to have done. And whereas they thought this day to have sent their Petition to the Parliament by 20 Gentlemen chosen for that purpose, And the body to have staied at Black-Heath: they upon hearing of the Armies drawing thi∣ther declined it, and resolved first to send to desire leave for such Gentlemen as they should send, to passe to and fro, in safe∣ty. Here are many come to joyne with this
County in their Petition, both from Surry, Es∣sex and other parts, many come daily from London, the number increaseth to many thou∣sands, so that they are more troubled for Armes and Provision then men. Some Inhabitants have complained to the Gentlemen that they have had their goods taken from them, whereupon Proclamation hath been made, that none presume to plun∣der or take away any thing from any man, Magazeenes and Armes being the cheifest things they take now: But I doe not see how they can subsist so long. I pray God that some way may be found out, that there may not be that great blood∣shed and slaughter which is so much feared. Do but consider what must of necessity follow if one party kill and destroy the o∣ther to a conquest in blood, If the Army prevaile, will they not (thinke you) bee as high as ever, and inrage not only this Coun∣ty, but many more. And on the other side if they defeate the Army, how then will the Parliament and the City of London be tram∣pled on, and all authority slighted and con∣temned,
no better event can be expected to follow if this quarrell be ended in blood, which God forbid. Greenwidge this 30 of May 1648. A Letter from the Quarters of the Army at Black-heathin Kent, concerning the late engagement: And News come thither from Wales. SIR, AFter a speedy march we arrived here safe and shall stoppe all disturbances to the Parliament this day. The Kentish men have some knowledge of our comming to this place, so that they march not hither to day. Yet there are very full about Rochester. Things go on very well about Dover, so that those Forces will be ready (I suppose) to our assistance. There were some Country men comming this way, who seeing us upon the heath, came towards Shouters-Hill, we discovered them, and ambuscadoed the way; not knowing but they had been a Forlorn, to some Body
approaching (but it seemes it was onely a mistake in them.) We marched up to them to seize on them as prisoners: but one of them shot one of our Troopers, who is dead, as gallant a stout man as any is in the whole Army. Wee neither killed nor wounded any of them, but took about 30 prisoners, And them the Souldiers changed cloathes with, and brought them away bound with matches. Some Gentlemen have been taken on both sides, of whom there have bin some exchan∣ges. His Excellency the Lord Generall, is sending to them, to offer them, that if they will lay down their Arms and go home, their Petition shall be presented to the Parliament, and that his Excellency will mediate to the Parliament for them. We have received Letters from Wales, that Collo. Herbert hath taken Chepstow Castle in Wales, Sir Nicholas Kemish and his Lieutenant slain, many wounded, and all the men pri∣soners at mercy. There were in the Castle a∣bove 20 piece of Ordnance, 30 barrels of gun∣powder, and above 1000 Armes Shooters hill May 30. 1648. Finis.
