G1155 E849_1 R207377 99866432 118706
CATA-BAPTISM: OR New Baptism, waxing old, and ready to vanish away. In Two Parts. The former Containes LVIII. CONSIDERATIONS, (With their respective Proofs, and Consectaries) Pregnant for the healing of the com∣mon scruples touching the subject of Baptism, and manner of Baptizing. The latter, contains an Answer to a Discours against Infant-Baptism, published not long since by W. A. under the Title of, Some Baptismall Abuses Briefly Discovered, &c. In both, sundry things, not formerly insisted on, are Discovered and Discussed. By J. G. a Minister of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. —And were all Baptized into Moses, &c. 1 Cor. 10. 2. I indeed Baptize you with water Unto Repentance. Mat. 3 11. Baptismus est lavacrum regenerationis, sed non ita, ut regenerati tantùm illo debeant obsignari, sed etiam Regenerandi. Musc. in Mat. 22. 41. 42. Baptizantur Infantes in futuram poenitentiam & fidem. Calv. Instit. lib. 4. c. 16. §. 20. London, Printed for H Cripps, and L. Lloyd, and are to be sold at their shops neer the Castle in Cornhil, and in Popes-head-Alley. 1655.
To the Sons and Daughters of God walking in the Way, best known by the Name of Ana-Baptism; growth in Grace, and the knowledg of Jesus Christ our Lord. BELOVED, I speak it as in the§. 1. sight of God: I am in a great straite how to temper my speech for your best advantage, in this my solemn▪ address unto you. Very loth I am on the one hand to deal so unfaithfully or un-Christianly with you, as, upon such an opportunity, not to speak the truth unto you in such things, wherein I either certainly know, or else have weigh∣ty grounds to judge, that it most neerly concerns you to know and to consider it: and on the other hand, very unwilling I am also to speak any thing, for which, either weakness, or uncharitableness it self, shall be able to judg me your enemie. I well know it becomes me not to say of you, as Nabal' servant spake of his Master; He is so wicked that a man cannot speak to him. 1 Sam. 25. 17. [meaning, without offending, or pro∣voking him] yet my Experience importunes me to speak this, that some of you, yea some of those, whom I have cause to judge the strongest amongst you, are so weak, that words as innocent, as inoffen∣sive, as the greatest Christian tenderness, or caution,
can lightly indite, have notwithstanding, been a bur∣then and offence unto them. I could readily instance in sundry particulars, as well of words, phrases, and passages of this harmless import, as of persons among you, who nevertheless have turned their innocencie into guilt, and made themselves agrieved at them; but that I fear lest this also should be an offence un∣to you. I call God for a record upon my soul, that I have§. 2. not the least touch of any malignancie or froward∣ness of spirit against any of you, but can freely serve the meanest of you in love, yea, and stoop to loose the latcher of his shoe, who is the most jealous amongst you of the candor and simplicitie of my heart towards you. Yea I have upon occasion, and this more than once, given a very passeable ac∣count of my unpartiall respects unto all of your way and practise worthy the repute of godliness, by gird∣ing my self, and ministring with all my might to some particulars of you. But I know how hard a thing it is not to be offended with him, that shall touch the Apple of a mans eye, or that shall attempt to change the glorie and height of his confidence in∣to the shame of guilt and errour. And the truth is, that you have much obstructed the way of your re∣turn, and regainment unto the Truth, by an impor∣tune and undue magnifying of your errour. If you could have been content, in estimating your new Baptism, and the want or non-practise of it in others, to contain you selves within those bounds of Reason and Truth, which the Holy Ghost prescrib's in a like (or rather indeed in a far better) case, saying, That Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the Commandments of God; 1 Cor. 7. 19. and again,
In Jesus Christ, neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncircumcision, but Faith, which worketh by Love, Gal. 5. 6. and yet again, If the circumcision keep the righteousness of the Law, his un-circumcision shal be counted for cir∣cumcision; Rom. 2. 26. See these passages ar∣gued and o∣pened. Wa∣ter-Dipping, p. 78. 79. 80. &c. If, I say, you could look upon your Baptism as availing you nothing, without Faith working by Love, and keeping the Commandments of God; and again, upon the want of your Bap∣tism, as no wayes prejudiciall unto those, who under another Baptism beleeve unfeignedly in Jesus Christ, and walk holily and humbly with their God, this would be an effectual door of hope opened unto me, that you were yet within call, and might be redu∣ced and brought back again in your judgments unto the truth (as some of the best of those, who through humain frailty, and immaturity of consideration, had embraced your way, from time to time have done.) What a man moderately or soberly valueth, may§. 3. be purchased of him at a reasonable rate. But whilst God's Nothing (yea that which is less then that No∣thing of his we now speak of) is your, All things; whilst you judge your tything of mint, anise, and cummin (or rather indeed of nettles, thistles, and unprofitable weeds) to be the practise of mercy and judgement, and the weighty things of the Law, your reconcilement with the Truth, though advancing in the front of my desires, yet keeps in the reer of my expectations. For when a man prizeth any thing he possesseth, at an unreasonable rate, he is so much the more like to keep possession of it still; unless (haply) the thief digs through the house, and vio∣lently takes it away. Some of your Churches esteem all others no better then Heathen and Publicans, who refuse to cast in their lot with them in their venturous
practise of new Baptism Ad forum fcto concur∣cu, clamorem tollunt, & omnes non baptizatos jubent inter∣fici▪ tanquam paganos, & impios. Joh. Sleidan. de Anabaptistis Comment. lib. 10., refusing all Christian com∣munion with them, though otherwise they be the glory of Christ, and of the Gospel, when as many of themselves are the shame and reproach of both. And if my intelligence faileth me not, other of your Churches are lifting up their hearts to a like zealous exaltation of your way, as by proscribing or evacu∣ating all the Faith, Love, Zeal, Holiness, Meekness, Humility, Wisdom, and Knowledge, shining in the Christian world, which shall not approve themselves unto you, by falling down before the golden image which you have set up. But in this your humour of making such sacred§ 4. treasure of your new Baptism, you declare your selves to be the true heirs and successors of those in all ages, who have unduly, and without cause, bro∣ken the bands of Unity, Love, and Peace, wherein they had somtimes been bound up in the same bun∣dle of Christianity with other Churches, to walk in some by-way of particular choyce by themselves, to the offence, grief, and reproach of those Churches from which they rent themselves, and renounced Communion with, upon such an account. It hath alwaies been the manner of persons of that character, to magnifie above measure that opinion, or practise, of what slender consequence, nay of what evil con∣sequence soever it was, wherein they dissented from, and for the non-profession, or non-practise whereof, they rejected the communion of other Churches. The History of the Church since the Apostles days affordeth us instances without number of that im∣port we speak of: some of these are presented to the Readers consideration in the ensuing discourse pag 8, 9, 10.. By these instances, and many more of like significa∣tion,
which might readily have been added to them, it clearly appears, that when men make any defecti∣on, or rent, from the main body of sound Christians, in any thing, whether opinion, or practise, they are strongly tempted by the spirit of this separation, to speak, how extravagantly or causlesly soever, glori∣ous things of that, wherein they differ (be it opinion or practise) lest otherwise their departure from the houshold of Faith, should seem causless, and (so) highly censurable. And that men of your judge∣ment and practise have not been behind the Patrons of the Errors specified in the said page and section of the present Discourse, in crying Hosanna in the highest to your way, appears sufficiently from the best records that are extant, of those times, wherein this way first got footing in the Europoean parts of the Christian world. John Sleidan in his historical Commentaries, amongst many other sad relations of your Predecessors, reports of one, who ran up and down the City of Munster, as if he had been inspired from God, crying out, Repent, and be re-baptized; if ye will not, the wrath of God will presently overwhelm you. Here∣upon the common sort of people began to make a tumult: and whosoever was re-baptized, clamour'd out the same things which the other did, and after the same manner. Many, fearing the wrath of God, which these men so loudly boasted [would fall upon all those that would not be re-baptized] being through their simplicity circum∣vented (men otherwise not evil) did as they would have them [and were re-baptized] some also, that they might keep their estates. For the Anabaptists, having first contumeliously handled their adversaries, threw them out of possession of their estates, &c. Ex ipsis quidam ve∣lut afflatus numine, per Ʋrbem dis∣currit, & poenitentiam (inquit) agi∣te, & reba∣ptizamini: sin minus, jam ira Dei vos obrut. Hinc coeptum est vulgò tu∣multuari: & quicun{que} re∣baptizaren∣tur, eadem, quae ille, co∣dem{que} modo declama∣bant. Multi, quod iram Dei metue∣rent, quam i∣sti tantopere jactabant, simplicitate circumventi, homines alio∣qui non mali, iis morem ge∣rebant: alii etiam, quo suas fortunas conservarent: adversarios enim Anaba∣ptistae malè mulctatos, possessionibus dejiciebant. Joh. Sleid. Cm. l. 10 an. 1535. And there are at
this day amongst us not a few of your judgement and way, who speak not much short of these Munster-Anabaptists, concerning the high necessity of your way of baptizing. This passage extant p. 18. of the Discourse examined in the ensuing Treatise, [That both Repentance, and the declaration of it by Baptism He mean∣eth only that kind of Ba∣ptism which himself own∣eth: other∣wise the pas∣sage relateth little to his purpose., is required on mans part, to interess him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the Spirit, the things cove∣nanted or promised on Gods part, is too evident to be de∣nied by any, but those that will not see, from Acts 2. 38, 39.] This passage (I say, which hath several other confederate with it in the Discourse) is of the same inspiration with the Munster-Divinity lately recited, exposing all those to the eternal wrath of God, who shall not be baptized, secundum modum Authoris, af∣ter the manner of the Authors own Baptisme. And if your Scribes and Wise-men speak thus gloriously of your way, can we think that your vulgar prose∣lytes are beneath them in their thoughts about it? But I look upon these high thoughts which you take unto your selves, as also those great words, wherein you express your selves unto others, concerning your way, like the men of Ephesus concerning their Diana, Great is Diana of the Ephesians; not as argu∣ments or grounds of any regular or rational convi∣ction upon your judgements and consciences, that there is any such either weight or worth in your way; but rather as studied and strained Apologies, to ex∣cuse your selves, as well unto your selves, and your own consciences, as unto others, for your otherwise inexcusable separation, and offence hereby given un∣to the Churches of Christ. But what, or how high soever, or how occasioned§ 5. soever, your thoughts are concerning your Baptisme,
I trust you retain so much savour of that anointing with the spirit of wisdom and meekness, which you received under that Baptisme (for so we judge of it, and as yet are not apprehensive of any sufficient ground to judge otherwise) wherewith you were ba∣ptized after the manner practised in other Churches, as not to stumble at that stone which the Apostle hath faithfully endeavoured to remove out of your way, by demanding thus of the Galathians, Am I therefore becom your enemy, because I tell you the truth? Gal. 4. 16. Doubtless this Apostle did not bewray the least touch or tincture of any enmity, either against the Church of the Philippians, or against the persons themselves of whom he spake, when he said; Many there are, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are enemies of the cross of Christ, &c. Phil. 3. 18. And my hope is, at least concerning you whom I stile the sons and daughters of God, that what I shall out of an unfainedly compassionate soul towards you, with truth speak unto you, whether relating to your selves, or others of your judgement and way, only in order to your spiritual good, shall not be wrested or drawn aside by you to any sinister or hard Interpretation, as if I were a man, who rather sought your discredit and disparagement in the world, then your edification in the truth. I well un∣derstand that the dear interest of my comfort and peace standeth, not in the pulling down, but in the building up the comforts and peace of other men. Nor have I any Tower of Name or Reputation to build for my self in the world, that I should stand in need of the ruines, or demolished stones, either of yours, or any other mens, to advance my building.
As I have none, so neither do I seek or desire any other honour, then that which cometh from God only. I have given sufficient hostages unto the world, that I shall never war upon it, or be trouble∣some unto it, for neglecting me, or laying my ho∣nour in the dust. He, who (it seems) believeth that I was tempted into a way of Schisme, by mens in∣temperate zeal against my Treatise of Justification, is a stranger unto me, and thinketh accordingly. But that which he calleth Schisme, is schisme only so cal∣led; unless to separate from iniquity, be schism. But however, the most intemperate zeal of men against me, Person, Name, or Books, is a temptation of a very faint influence upon me to turn me out of any way of Truth, yea, or to make me their enemy. Only when the Truth is offended, I confess I burn; and in case I find any strength in my hand to redress the injury done to it, I have no rest in my spirit un∣til I have attempted the Vindication. By Truth, I do not mean mine own opinion (as you seem frequently to understand the word, in reference unto yours) for as for that which is no more then so, I shall neither trouble my self much, nor any other man at al, about it. But by Truth I mean, such a doctrine or notion, one or more, which I certainly know that I am able to demonstrate either from the Scriptures, or from clear principles and grounds in Reason, or both, to be agreeable to the mind of God. And of this sort is the Doctrine concerning the subject of Baptisme, and the mode of the administration thereof, avouch∣ed in the Aphorisms, and vindicated in the An∣swer ensuing, against the most plausible Arguments (I believe) that have yet appeared on your side. Some particulars there are, relating to your judg∣ment§. 6.
and practise about Baptisme, which, as you de∣sire to be judged loyal and faithful unto Jesus Christ, true to the dear interest of your own comfort and peace, friends to the comforts and peace of the Churches of Christ throughout the world, I earnest∣ly desire you will please to take into your closest and most Christian consideration. As, 1. Whether, in your rejecting all children from the Baptisme of Christ, you do not forsake the du∣cture and guidance, as well of the fair and goodly stream of religious and learned Antiquity, as of the main current of the signal abilities, gifts, parts, judg∣ment, piety, zeal, practise of modern times, to turn into the by-notions, conceits, and ways of men, who are, and still have been, children in understanding, (at least comparatively) inexpert in the word of righ∣teousness, through the weakness of their sight not able to see things afar off, or to discern or discover the minde of Christ, if it be but spiritually expres∣sed; I mean, in such phrase or words, wherein the holy Ghost delighteth, and not put into terms and words of their prescription, and such as they judge meet it should have been, had he intended to con∣vey it unto men by the Scriptures? Or whether any one man, of any considerable note, or name, for might in the Scriptures, in all the golden Regiment of Reformed Divines, or amongst persons of any other capacity, since the Reformation, hath given the right hand of fellowship unto you in the way of your judgement (such only excepted, who upon se∣cond and better thoughts withdrew it again from you) yea or hath so much as at unawares, or in any traverse or debate of any other subject in Christian Religion, asserted any thing, or let fall a
word, in countenance of that your judgement, of which I speak? Yea, whether they have not (gene∣rally) upon occasion, most solemnly and seriously declared against your opinion and practise, shewing and proving the inconveniences, and evil consequen∣ces of them; And whether, the affirmative in all their demands supposed, it doth not plainly argue, 1. That your opinion about Baptisme, is of a very ignoble and obscure race and parentage. 2. That it carrieth nothing at all in it, standeth upon no principles or grounds any ways necessary or useful, either for the proof, illustration, or clearing of any Doctrine in Christian Religion? 2. Whether Errors and Heresies have not their§ 7. certain seasons of growth and infection, as wherein they are with greater diligence and industry disper∣sed, and more readily learned and drunk in by the generality of people; even as some hurtful PlantsSee Patri∣mony of Christian Children, by M. Robert Clever, with the joynt con∣sent of M. John Dod (Printed an. 1624.) in the Preface to the Reader. have their set moneths for springing up, budding, blooming, seeding, whereas before they lay hid in the earth, and afterwards have their stalks dryed up and withered? Or whether mens minds are not in this case subject to be seduced, as their bodies are to be infected with contagious maladies, some yeers, and in some places, the small Pox raging, in others, the Pestilence, somtimes one disease being general, somtimes another? And whether the errors and he∣resies of the Nicholaitans, of Cerinthus, Manes, Ma∣cedonius, Arrius, Eutyches, and others both of for∣mer and of later times, have not prevailed (respe∣ctively) in those times and ages, for which the righ∣teous Providence of God judged them meet tryals and scourges for his Churches? And further, whe∣ther, as once the Christian world, was on a sudden,
and to its own admiration, under a deluge of Arri∣anisme,Miratus est Orbis se fa∣ctum Arria∣num. which notwithstanding was, through the gracious Providence of God, not long after dryed up again; so it be not extremely probable, that the face of these parts of the Christian world, at present overspread and covered with a Land-flood of Ana∣baptisme, to the wonderment, not only of intelligent and considering men, but (I suppose) of the persons themselves also led aside with the error, will, not∣withstanding the great prevailing of these unwhol∣some waters hitherto, through the merciful Provi∣dence of God towards his Churches and Servants in this Nation, be discharged of them, and that he will cause them to return and fall back again into that Mare Mortuum, or lake from whence they, and all other waters of like danger and annoyance with them, issue forth into the world. 3. Whether the generality, or far greater part of§ 8. those, who take upon them to be guides and teach∣ers in your Congregations, and Assemblies, be not utterly incompetent and unmeet for such an under∣taking, as being deplorably ignorant of the mysterie of Christ, not able to divide the word aright, nor to wield and manage the Scriptures, especially where the deep things of God are treasured up, but with unspeakable detriment and loss to the Faith and Ho∣liness, and consequently to the solid peace and com∣fort, of those who depend upon them. 4. Whether the Doctrines, or at least the great∣est part of the Doctrines, that are handled and taught in your Congregations, be not rais'd upon mistaken senses, and perverted meanings of the Scriptures, unto which they pretend; yea, and ma∣naged upon weak, irrelative, and impertinent
grounds, and either wholly mis-applyed, or else so weakly and loosely applyed, that they leave no weighty, no effectual or lively impression of their truth, or import, upon the spirits and consciences of the hearers? 5. Whether, the now-named deficiences, with§ 9. several other disorders too frequent amongst you, considered, there be any great presence of Jesus Christ at any time in your holy Assemblies, or such as is frequently manifest in the assemblies of other Churches, or whether you have any countenance from heaven, either in gifts, or graces, comparable to other Churches of the Saints? And whether the principal, if not the only cement and band, that keeps and holds your Churches and Congregations together, be not the simple conceit that you are, by means of your new Baptisme, gotten neerer to God, and deeper in his favour then other men, how holy or worthy soever otherwise above your selves? 6. Whether the bulk and main body of persons, whether men, or women (for I hope better things of some of you, and which accompany Christian sobri∣ety, and true mortification) but whether the genera∣lity or far greater part of persons of your judgement and practise, in the Nation, be not so far from that Christian sweetness, humility, and meekness of spirit which becometh those, who profess themselves ba∣ptized into the death of Christ, & buried with him in Baptism, towards all men, that they scarce retain the moral principles of common Civility; but are hea∣dy, rash, fierce, despisers of others (yea of good men) self-conceited, arrogant, quarrelsome, cla∣morous, captious, vain boasters, unjust defamers of men dissenting in judgement from them, still up∣on
all disputes between men of their judgement, and others, about Baptisme, how weakly soever their cause hath been pleaded by her Patrons, and how potently and manifestly soever overthrown by her Adversaries, yet ringing the great Bell of Ephesus for joy of the victory, Great is Diana of the Ephesi∣ans, Great is the Doctrine of Ana-baptisme and prevaileth; Cum{que} passim isti [Anabapti∣stae] de victo∣riâ ab Oeco∣lampadio re∣portatâ gloriarentur, edidit ille Colloquii cum Anabaptistis habiti acta. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. An. 1625. Ʋt primum Constantiam venit [Balthasar Anabaptista] apud ministros verbi sic nos calumniatus est, victoriam{que} suam de Catabaptismo jactavit, ut nesciam an nillos in odium nostri traxerit. Ibid. In disputatione autem suprà modum erant vehementes, parati mori potius quàm cedere. Balthazar quidam Anabaptista, literis ad Senatum. Tigurinensem polli∣cetur se Zuinglium suis Scripturis superaturum de Baptismo. Ibid. Anabaptisme (it seemeth) being more hardy, then God supposed the King of Tyre would be (Ezek. 28. 9.) and daring to say in the hands of him that slayeth her, I am God, I am a divine Truth? 7. Whether any person, man or woman, who§ 10. have turned Proselyte to your way, hath ever given, or at this day can give, any competent satisfaction unto men, by any sensible growth in grace, in knowledge, in faith, in love, in humility, in fruit∣fulness, &c. that their Proselytism in this kind hath added so much as one cubit, nay so much as one hairs bredth, to their spiritual stature, or that their souls have prospered to any degree, by means of their new Baptism? Nay, 8. Whether a very great number (at least) of those, who have done homage to your way, and have bowed down their judgements and consciences unto it, have not been spiritual losers by the change,
sensibly declining and decaying in their graces, in those Christian and worthy principles and dispositi∣ons, which at first they brought with them unto your way, waxing much worse after their new Baptizing, then they were before; as if their new Baptisme had not been into Christ, or into his death, but ra∣ther into old Adam, and into his life? And whether you your selves, in several of your Congregations, are not experimentally sensible of such a frequent declining and putrifying of your Members, as this, casting out, and cutting off, great numbers of them from day to day? I was somwhat more particularly re-minded to put you upon consideration of these two particulars (last mentioned) by occasion of some of my acquaintance formerly, who since have stum∣bled in the dark into your way. These (I confess) are not many: only this I have observed concerning them (and must needs upon this occasion testifie) that not any one of them, as far as an estimate can be made by what is visible, or discernable in point of conversation, profecit hilum, hath gained so much as the making of one hair either black or white, by the exchange of his Baptisme: but sundry of them have lost many degrees of that sweet Christian sa∣vour, and love, wherewith they excellently adorn∣ed the Gospel before, I will not positively say, by, but upon, after, and since, the translation of their judgements into your way. 9. Whether amongst men and women, whose§ 11. Consciences have at any time been surprized with a conceit of more goodness in your way then in the contrary, and so have betaken themselves unto it, such who have been either the most Christianly meek and humble on the one hand, or the most judi∣cious,
sober, learned, and best composed on the other hand, have not upon a little experience of your way, grown cool, and very indifferent in their thoughts about it; yea, and many repented of their weakness and surprisal, and forsaken your tents, as (about Luthers time) Oecolampadius, Johonnes Ga∣ster, Pfistermeierus, Johannes Denkius (persons of great learning, worth, and humility) with several others; and of late yeers, many of like character among our selves, whom, if I judged it convenient, I could name. Only I may be free (I presume) to mention that concerning Mr. Richard Baxter (a man as like as any man I know, to make a crooked generation streight, if it be possible) which himself hath published of himself, viz. that his foot was once very neer to be taken in this snare. Huldericus Zuinglius a man of most signal worth likewise in his times, maketh the like acknowledgement, in these words: Wherefore I my self (that I may ingenu∣ously confess the truth) some yeers ago, being deceived with this error, thought it better that childrens Baptisme should be delayed until they came to full age. 10. Whether since the first invention and practise of your way in later times, which according to Sculetus, who wrote the History of the Reformation of Christian Religion by Luther, and other his Assi∣stants (partakers of the same grace with him there∣in) was in the yeer 1521. Origo fa∣naticae na∣baptistarum sectae ic Anno deb∣tur. Scultet. Annal. Dec. 1. in Anno 1521. Nicolaus Ciconia, Marcus Stubnerus, Martinus Cell∣rius, Thomas Muntzerus primi hujus sectae nominantur Authores. Ibid. men of your judgement, wherever (almost they have come, have not obstru¦structed the course and proceedings of the Gospel, opposed, troubled, defamed, the most faithful and worthy Instruments of Christ, in the work of Re∣formation,
and upon this account been complained of by them. Cursum Evangelii remorata sunt in Germaniâ, & extra Germaniam, bellum rusticanum & Sacramentarium: in Helvetiâ & Moraviâ, secta Ana∣baptistica. Scltet. Annal. Dec. 1. Anno 1525. Sangallensis Ecclesia va∣variè per Anabaptistas fuit excercita. Idem pag. 262, 263. In Sueviâ, Ʋlmensibus & Augustanis vel maximè molesti erant Ana∣baptistae. Dolet mihi (ait Zuinglius) fideles à Cata-baptistis esse seductos. Et paulò pòst. Efficient [Anabaptistae] ut aliquandiu rem Christianam re∣morentur: at nihil solidi ad maturitatem perducent. Idem Annal. Dec. 2. p. 92. Vicessimo septimo Anno fervent Bella Anabaptisticum & Sacramenta∣rium, magno Ecclesiarum Evangelicarum malo. Idem in initio Anni 1528. Jhannes Leydensis, Anabaptista vehemens, privatim rga ex Evangelii Doctribus initio, cum in eorum sermn familiariter se insinuasst, num ar∣bitrtr pavuls rectè baptizari? Cum affirmaren, ill, qui totus erat dediu contrariae opinioni. coetire, & contemnere. Joh. Sleidan. Com∣ment lib. 10. Plopst. Snaus interea, priusquam è ss illi [Ana∣baptist] latibuldnuo prodient, onia tema cladit, uno solu aperto. Nam metus erat ne Anabatist, quorum ide aues cbat nuerus comi∣tati suis doctoribus. Evangelii praecones è templ extrbarnt. Jam nemini sobrio ambiguum sore arbitror, quàm temerè Ecclesiam Christi cnturbent, qui rixas ac contentiones movent ob paedo-baptismum. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 16. §. 32. Hypocrisi veritas ac sinceritas Evangelicae pietatis insensiorem hostem non habet. Tria hominum genera sunt, in quibus hoc apparet; Pharisaei, Monachi, Anabaptistae. De nobis nots lquor. Musculus in Mat. c. 16. 6. Ita solent & hodie Adversarii veritatis, Papistae & Anabaptistae. Idem in Mat. c. 17. Anabaptistas aliquot punierunt nostri Principes, non quod ea dicerent quae sentirent, ne{que} ut vi cogerentur ad veram amplectan dum Reli∣gionem, sed quod totius humanae sccietatis vinculum abrumperent, quod per∣fidiosi essent Apostatae, quod verbum Dei manifestissime corrumperent, quod Ecclesiae Authoritatem haberent ludibrio, quod civium consensum factiose la∣cerarent. Beza de Haereticis a Magistratu puniendis. p. 163. Minime ergo Audiendi sunt Anabaptistae, quibus non satis est Ecclesiae ordinem turbasse, nisi Rempublicam quo{que} adorti, Magistratus omnes ex solis deturbent &c. Sunt hi, non solum Reipublicae & Magistratuum hostes, verum etiam pestes humani generis &c. Lavater. in Fsther. c. 10. 1, 2, &c. Meum ergo fuit (testor) con∣silium, pis omnes non satis adhuc excercitatos admonere, quàm lethale vene∣num sit dogma Cata-baptistarum, & adverss illud verbo Dei tanquam cer∣tissimo antidot eos praemunire, ne misere pereant. Calvin adversus Anaba∣ptistas in praefat. Nunc vero (ut jam dixi) sufficiet omns veritatis studisos, monuisse, quicquid miseri isti homines communi consensu pro inexpugnaili fun∣damento fidei suae habent lethalem imposturam esse, à quà, tanquam à pst, omnes cavere oportet. Ibid. Ex quibus omnibus manifestum est, impugnatio∣nem poedo-baptismi non esse leve erratum, sed impium dogma, verbo Dei & consolationi Ecclesiae adversum. Quo magis vitanda sunt haec & similia dli∣ria Sectae Ana-baptisticae, quae sine dubio à Diabolo est excitata, & monstrum est execraile, ex variis haeresibus & blasphemiis conflatum, Ʋrsin. Catech. Part. 2. Qu. 74. De poedobaptismo. These Quotations are (for the most part) englished in the fiftieth of the Considerations ensuing.
11. Whether those great enemies of the Prote∣stant§ 12. and pure Religion, and of the true Worship of God, the Papists, and many subtile Agents for the advancement of the Interest of the Romish Religion, have not from time to time, upon all oc∣casions, insinuated themselves into persons of your opinion and practise, secretly incouraging you in your way, in order to the sore disturbance, and, if possible, the utter ruine and subversion of the Prote∣stant Religion? Anaba∣ptistae, cum disputationi∣bus, nihil pro∣fici viderent, & non de es∣sent à quibus Evangelii Doctrinam prorsus ex∣terminatam volentibus, in furore suo confirmaren∣tur &c. Scultet. An∣nal. Dec. 1. p. 257. Yea have there not been of late in this Nation; nay, are there not at present, men of that character at work amongst you, who by the op∣portunity of that troublesome and fiery spirit, which haunteth your way, hope to create some mischief of distraction and confusion, either in the Religious, or in the Politique affairs thereof, or in both? 12. Whether it be not a matter of frequent obser∣vation and report amongst Protestant Writers of best authority and credit, that persons carried away with your error, about Baptism, have still embraced and been infected with several other erroneous opi∣nions, of a worse and more dangerous consequence then it? See proof made of the affirmative. Consider. 51. yea and whether this observation of former times be not attested by the experience of the pre∣sent?
13. Whether it can be proved out of any good Author, that there ever was a society of your way, which proved not wicked, and this within no long time, after their first knotting? See page 85. Yea, and whether any person of note, and active for the promoting of your way, unless he either repented hereof, or died very timously, ever went out of the world, without some visible character of Gods dis∣pleasure on him? Or if it can be proved, or found, that any such person died upon terms of more grace, then so, as I am glad for his sake, whoever he was, who obtained that mercy from God, so am I sorry for all those, if any such were, or now be, who have been confirmed and hardned in their way by such an example. Brethren, (though many of you will not recipro∣cate§ 13. the salutation with me) I desire to shew all ten∣derness in Christian respects unto you; and, if it be possible, to relieve, without offending you. And therefore I most earnestly, and with an enlarged heart entreat you (for your own sake) that you will seriously ponder the particulars now presented unto you, until you find your judgements and conscien∣ces charged home with the just and full weight of them. Let not your confidence of the goodness of your way be a snare unto you. Paul, when a Phari∣see, THOUGHT VERILY within himself, that he ought to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus of Nazareth and did accordingly. Acts 26. 9. You also know, who they were, that demanded of the Lord Christ, ARE WE ALSO BLINDE? And who againd Jon, 9. 40. demanded, SAY WE NOT WELL, that thou art a Samaritan, and hast a Divel? Joh. 8, 48. And yet again who He was that demanded of the Prophet, Which way
went the spirit of the Lord from me to speak unto thee? 2 Chro. 18. 23. You very well know likewise, of what sort of men he is, of whom the Apostle gives this Character, , rashly [or, con∣jecturally] puffed up by his fleshly mind. Col. 2. 18. Nor are you ignorant, that they were not the worst of men, to whom the Apostle said, your glorying is not good. 1 Cor 5 6. Truth is seldom, or never, forsaken, but upon a strong presumption and conceit, in those who for∣sake her, of being an error; nor is an errour at any time embraced, but upon a like presumption of be∣ing a Truth. Your keen pertinacy, and high re∣solvedness in your way, the grounds on which you build, duly considered, is neither in any Christian, nor in any rational construction, any argument that you are in the Truth, but rather of the contrary. For as the Apostle upon his experience of men, said, All men seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christs, Phil. 3. 21. so is it matter of daylie observation, that when men have notions and conceits of their own, they exalt these upon Thrones, and charge men with an high hand, to give homage and reverence unto them, as Divine Truths; and in the mean time suf∣fer the truths of God, and of Christ, to shift for themselves as well as they can in the world. Yea it were wel (comparatively) if they did not fight against the truths of God in the quarrel of their own fond opinions and conceits. For my self, if my satisfaction touching the Do∣ctrine§ 14. and practise asserted in both parts of the en∣suing discourse, were not rich indeed, and built up∣on such foundations of evidence and Truth, which I certainly know cannot fail, either me, or any other, that shall build on them; yea if I did not see quite
through and through all that yet you have shewed unto me for the support of your cause, I should much rather have chose my lodging in the Chambers of death, then to have touched it by way of opposition with the least of my fingers. To fight against truth, being interpreted, is little less then to fight against God: and a madness it is for any man to think that ever his soul should prosper by such wars. My God and my conscience, have deeply engaged me in a warfare very troublesome and costly, even to con∣tend (in a manner) with the whole Earth round about me, and to attempt the casting down of high things, and imaginations in men, which exalt themselves against the knowledge of God. And dayly expe∣rience sheweth, that mens imaginations, as well those which lift up themselves against the know∣ledge of God, as those of a better and more blessed import, are their darlings, and that he that toucheth them, toucheth the Apple of their eye, and appear∣eth, upon the account, in the shape or likeness of an enemy unto them. The truth is, that to bear the hatred and contradiction of the world, as God hath made it my portion to do, is no whit more pleasing unto me, then the drinking of that cup, which the Lord Christ prayed thrice unto his Father might pass from him, was unto him. Notwithstanding as that, which was (in it self) bitter and grievous un∣to him, in this respect was not grievous at all, but acceptable, viz. that by suffering it, he might open an effectual door of life, and salvation unto the world; so doth the vehemencie and zeal of desire, which possesseth my reins, heart and soul, of doing some service to the world, whilest I am a sojourner in it, in making some of the crooked things thereof,
streight, and leaving it at my departure from it, up∣on somewhat better terms for the peace and comfort of it, then I found it at my coming to it, swallow up much of that offensiveness and monstrousness of tast, wherewith otherwise the most unreasonable and horrid measure, I receive from many in it, would affect and afflict my soul. But to bear the burthen of the hatred of men out of an affection of unfeigned love to them, is nothing more then what I know is my duty to do: and for his sake, who bear the burthen of my sins upon the Cross, out of an unfeigned love to me, and through his grace, I shall willingly do it. I know not whither you will vouchsafe a perusal§ 15. of the papers here presented to you, or no. It is not long since I heard of some stirrings and mutterings of that perverse spirit amongst some of you, which about the time when your way first began to be oc∣cupied in Germany, tempted men to burn all their other books and writeings, but the Bible onely. Post hc Idem prophe∣ta [Johan∣nes, Marthe∣us, Anaba∣tista] man∣dbat, ne quis ullum deinceps li∣brum habe∣ret, aut sibi servaret, prae∣terquam sa∣cra Biblia: reliquos om∣nes in publi∣cum deferri jubet & a∣boleri: hoc se mandatum divinitùs ac∣cepisse dicebat. Ita{que} magno numero libri comportati, flammà fuerunt om∣nes absumpti. Joh. Sleidan, Comment. l. 10. If you be resolved to read no other book but the Bi∣ble, and judge your selves wiser then he, who be∣ing demanded whether he understood that which he read [in the Scriptures,] made answer, How can I, except some man guid me Act. 8. 31.: I confess that by such a resolution, you will make an escape from me, and convey your selves out of my reach. But if you willfully turn your back upon those means which God affordeth you, for the knowledge of the truth, take heed lest this turneth to a root of bitterness unto you in the end. They who measure themselves by
themselves, (saith the Apostle) and compare them∣selves with themselves, are not wise 2 Cor. 10. 12.. Yet if you will make it matter of conscience to read the Scriptures with a single eye, and not bring your way with you, unto them, you will never find it here. Luther, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Musculus, Zuinglius, Me∣lancthon, Ursin, Zanchie, Perkins, Dod, with a thousand more of like diligence, faithfulness, and sharpness of discerning, who have search't the Scrip∣tures every whit as throughly, as narrowly as you have done, yet could never find your way here. The Consideration whereof (me thinks) should give you some stop in your carrier, and cause the greatest confidentiary amongst you, to turn himself about, and enquire of himself: Is there not a lye in my right hand Isa. 44. 20.. It will be no good account in the day of the Lord Jesus, to pretend, or say, we verily thought, we were highly confident, that we did both Thee, and thy Gospel, service, in opposing Infant-Baptism, in disturbing, rending and tearing thy Churches to promote our way of Rebaptizing in the world; especially considering that God sent so ma∣ny Scribes and wise men unto you, and this in a way of righteousness, to establish you against those puffs of new Doctrines, which notwithstanding have driv∣en you like unballassed vessels, quite off from the truth. Our Saviour foretelleth his Disciples of a generation of men, who when they should put them out of the Synagogues, yea, should kill them, would THINK that herein they did God good service Joh. 16. 2.. There is little question to be made, but that these men had as high thoughts of that wicked thought of theirs here mentioned, as you have of yours touching, Rebap∣tizing; yea and that they pretended the same divine
Authority for the justification of it, which you pre∣tend for yours. You have no more express Scrip∣ture for your thought, then they had for theirs: and as it appears that they were not infallible in arguing or concluding from the Scriptures, so neither (I pre∣sume) will you assume to be. They miscarryed, because they hearkened not unto them, who plainly declared the truth unto them: Oh, stumble not you at this stone. I have detained you with somewhat an over-long Epistle; but I trust there is nothing in it, except it be the length, that can offend you. My hope is the same concerning the treatises ensuing, drawn up with equal respects, to the regaining (at least of some) of you, from your errour, as for the establishing of others in that way of truth, wherein they stand. On∣ly I was willing to cast the honour of the Dedication (if there be any such thing as honor in it) appropri∣ately upon you. If you wil please to read them with a like candid and Christian minde, as that wherewith they were drawn up for your service, I little questi∣on but that through the blessing of God, they will recompence your time and labour bestowed on them. If their access to your judgements and con∣sciences be obstructed with prejudice and conceit, you will will have much more reason to complain of your selves, then of them, in case your reading turn to no account of satisfaction unto you. Disin∣genuity is the great partition wall, which at this day separates between a world of men, and a world of truth. That Mr. Baxter's book of plain Scripture Proof for Infant-Baptism, should have been so long extant in the world, and yet Anabaptism still alive, is to me a plain demonstration that the world is sadly
defective in point of Christian ingenuity. Weakness of capacity, slowness of apprehension, darkness of understanding, aversness to consider, might be all (at least to a very great measure) redeemed by an ardent love unto the Truth. But it is the coming of Daniels 1335. days that will bring this blessedness upon the world. In the mean time, they who through the Grace of God are prevented with the great happi∣ness of an ingenuous spirit, and have an heart given them willing to lie large and free before the truth, must be content with patience to bear the heavie burthens of the importunity and waywardness of other men. You are all heartily recommended to the Grace of that God, who is light, and in whom there is no darkness at all, to be made by him like unto him, ac∣cording to your capacities of so glorious a simili∣tude, by Your Servant, and Fellow-Servant in the Gospel, JOHN GOODVVIN. Coleman-street, London, May▪ 29. 1655.
To the Reader. GOOD READER, JT is a true Observation of worthy Mr Baxter, that the opinion of Re-ba∣ptizing,In the Pre∣face to his Admonition to Mr Eyre, &c. or not Baptizing Infants, hath been strangely followed with spiritual judgements. The main cause hereof he supposeth to be, because it openeth a door to separations, contendings, and so to contempt of the Ministry that is against it. It is considerable likewise which he further addeth: It is hard to see in the nature of the meer opinions, such hain∣ous evils, as we have seen attend them. Notwith∣standing I conceive that the reason of the mischiefs at∣tending these opinions, lyeth not, or not so much, in the nature, or natural tendency, of the opinions themselves, but rather in the unhappy conjunction between the opini∣ons, and the injudiciousness and conceitedness of the far greatest part of those, who entertain them. For as amongst men walking in the way of Presbyterie, we find a clear ground for that distinction, which divideth them into high, and low, or modest Presbyterians; the latter be∣ing a passable and harmless generatio (at least▪ compara∣tively) the other, next to insupportable: so amongst those of the Anabaptismal persuasion, some there are, the ill∣ness of whose temper teacheth them to make fire and sword of their perswasion; others again, the soberness and
sweetness of whose spirit preserveth them from annoying the world, or Churches of Christ, with any misuse of their opinion. This obvious difference between men and men, of the same perswasion (as to the point of Ana-Ba∣ptism) induceth me to beleeve, that the great evils which so frequently attend it, are not so much sourced in the na∣ture or complexion of the perswasion it felf, as in the mo∣ral constitution of the greatest part of those who are in∣tangled with it. Such of the perswasion, who 1. Are inclin'd to gratifie and please others, that are pre-in∣gaged to other tenents or practices beyond the said per∣perswasion. 2. Who are over tender in conscience, through weakness in judgement, and apt to fear sin, whereno sin is, or to suspect duty, where no duty is. And 3. Who count it an honor to them to put to rebuke the gifts and abilities of worthy men, by dissenting from them, and pretending to see where they are to seek. 4. (And lastly) who take pleasure in Magistrality, and had rather make heads for Images of wood, then arms or legs for Statues of gold; all these char∣acters of men (I say) being Anabaptismally engaged, are apt to imagin and conceit, that they hear their opinion, say unto them; Ascend yet higher, make me but your foot∣stool to conveigh you up to such a Throne of glory, and perfection, from whence you shall behold the whole Christian world under you, walking but as shadows, and the greatest of them not worthy to come under the Roof of the meanest of your Sanctuaries. Whereas other per∣sons, free from those impressions of weakness and un∣worthyness, although of the same Anti-pedo-paptismal faith and engagement, pretend not to hear so much as the least ayr, or whisper, of any such exhortation, from such their perswasion. It is not long since my thoughts stood within me never§ 2. to meddle (in print) with these Baptismal controversies.
I was deeply engaged in others, which were of a much more desireable resentment with my genius, and in which I judged my labours might have served the world upon terms of better advantage. Nor had I (I beleeve) ever taken Pen in hand for the defence of Infant-Baptism, had not the untimely birth of that discourse, unto which I give answer in the latter part of the book now in thy hand, imposed a most unhappy necessity upon me thereunto. Not∣withstanding herein I am a little relieved under this so un-acceptable an ingagement (for the kind of it) that I shall deal with my adversary (Anabaptism) in the glory of his strength; and consequently upon sucb terms, that (I trust) he will never be able to recrute more, or take the field again with any force considerable. For (doubt∣less) Mr Tombs, and Mr Fisher, who are counted Pil∣lars of that way, have (comparatively) but trifled in their undertakings for the Rebaptizing cause. W. A. in his Baptismal Abuses, what execution soever he hath done upon his Adversaries, hath quite foyled the pens of his fellow-combatants, by overarguing their line: yea and in his discourse against Infant-baptism, hath overargued his own line, in what he hath written against Church-commu∣nion with Churches, or persons by him called, unbaptized. But the truth is, that the former cause wil much better take colours of artifice and wit, then the latter. And our Rebap∣tizers (I presume) would willingly enough give a bill of di∣vorce unto this cause, did they know how to exalt and mag∣nifie to their minds, the cause of Rebaptizing, without it. Amongst many other unhandsome and unpleasing streins wherein (generally) the Anabaptismal spirit uttereth it self in the world, I have both formerly (in part) and more particularly of late, observed in persons led by it, a kind of tedious and effeminate tenderness, or frowardness, which disposeth them to exceptions and complaints, even
where there is not so much as the least appearance of any just cause given for complaining. They cannot allow un∣to sober men, and those who are far from wishing, and much farther from doing, them the least harm, their natural genius, or gift of expression, which they have received from God, without quarrelling and censuring them for it, if it doth but touch, though never so lightly, the co∣py-hold (as the common Proverb is) of their way. This Grashopper of expression (in the Title Page of my Water-Dipping) after the new mode of dipping, was (it seems) an heavy burthen to the wisdom and patience of some in that way, who for the word mode, made me a a transgressor of no light demerit. Some Grandee's of the way made themselves agrieved, that p. 19. of that discourse, I term a certain water, or pool, commodiously contrived, and much frequented and delighted in, by many about the City, dip-wise minded, by the name of a watry Paradise. Yea, and in their Sermons, repre∣sent it to their Disciples, as an high strain of persecution, that p. 31. of that discourse, I mention them by this expression, Brethren of the Dip; yea and exhort them very zealously to stand to their tackling, notwithstanhing such affronts and horrid indignities put upon them. Whereas the truth is, that in that expression I intended them not the least touch of disparagement; but having spent my store of other expressions whereby to distinguish them, and wore many of them thrid bae, by an over frequent use of them, by reason of the (all most) con∣tinual occasions I had to mention them, the sid expres∣sion did occur my pen in the course of it; and being con∣cise and short, I gave intertainment to it without seeking further. But touching the inoffensiveness of this, and worse expressions then this, I am content to appeal to Mr Sam. Fisher, (who I am confident) will justifie me in
it: or if he will not, I am certain that twenty pages and ten in his Baby-Baptism, will. Some of them, are not (I confess) so much offended, as triumphantly apaid, yet quarrelsom-wise too, that because Mr A. my Antagonist useth the word, Such, where he hath occasion, yea and a kind of necessity to use it in his writing, I do not use it in mine where I have no occasion at all to use it, yea, where it would make little better then non-sense to insert it. And because I charge the six Booksellers with dis-ingenuity in transcri∣bing a passage of mine without the word, Such, being a word of an emphatical import in the sentence, the men I speak of, admire the just hand of providence lifted up against me, that I should be left to omit the word, Such, not in transcribing the words of my Antagonist (for here I express it, as oft, and as plainly, as himself; but in a passage of mine own, where (it seems) they fancy, I should have expressed it; when as to a man of ordinary understanding, and who knows any thing belonging to the regular structure of a sentence, the mention of it would have been needless, frivolous, and importune. The Reader, if he please, may see all that is to be seen, of the hand of Providence lifted up against me in the case specified, pag. 82. of my Water-Dipping &c. in the two last lines of the page. Nor is it true, that I quarrelled or censured the Booksellers simply, for leaving out the word, Such, in their transcription of my words, (for this might have been only an oversight) but that being privately informed by me of such their omission, and desired to repair me by a pub∣like acknowledgement of the same, they, instead here∣of, gave me Gall and Vinegar to drink, in an answer in writing, full of bitter, and un-Christian Invectives, and forged Imputations. So that in case I had omitted
the word, Such, in transcribing the words of my Adver∣sary, yet unless upon admonition, I should have justified it, or upon request, refused to acknowledge it, in order to his vindication, there had been no ground for the par∣rallel, which these men make between me and the Book-sellers. Some great doers for the way in Ireland, where Ana∣baptism hath, or at least of late had, its Throne, are (I understand) offended at this innocent passage, p. 37. of the same discourse, There is a strong tide of report both from Ireland and Scotland, that as far as the interest and power, so far the insolency and impor∣tune hautiness of that generation we speak of, extend∣eth in both these Nations. Yet this report (so far as it concerneth Ireland), hath since, by sober and grave Authors (worthy credit in greater matters then this) who have liv'd for several years upon the place, and have had (with many others) too much experience of the truth hereof, been confirmed over and over. So that they that go about to wash their hands from the guilt specified in the report, do but wash in foul water. Mr W. A. himself in his Answer to my fourty Queries about Church-Communion, &c. maketh it matter of exception and complaint, that I sometimes stile his way of Rebaptizing, New Baptism. And yet heretofore in discoursing with a grave Minister of Mr A's. judgement in the point of Rebaptizing, and the most ancient that I know walking in that way, finding him not so well satisfied that his way should be stiled Ana-baptism, I desired to know of him what other term would please him. His answer was, New Baptism. So hard a thing is it for him that shall speak or write against the way of these men, not to offend them in terms and expressions, when as the best and most sober of them scarce know how to speak among themselves
without offending one another. Mr Tombs upon this account, picks holes without number in Mr Baxters Coat, which occasioned him to say, that men are so tender of their own names, through pride, that they think him a railer, that doth but name their faults: and they look to be stroaked, and smoothed, and reve∣rented, whilest they speak most wickedly: so did the Popish Bishops when they were condemning the Martyrs. Plain Scri∣pture proofs for Infants Church-member∣ship, &c. Page 201. This strain of spirit in the men we speak of, fully sympathizeth with the observation of a learned man, which giveth us to understand, that the way of Ana-baptism seldome or never prospers or thrives, but only when it is indulged, countenanced, and made much of, especially by the Powers of this world; whereas the Truth on the other hand hath flourished most under oppo∣sition and persecution from the world. But so critically and capriciously tender are these men over their way, that they judge it criminal in those that shall call it Ana∣baptism, or by any other name then Anti-pedo-ba∣ptism; by which (it seems) Mr Tombs hath baptized it, as it were to amuze the common sort of people, and to put it out of their reach so much as to name it amongst them. But though Anti-pedo-baptism be a name of a suffici∣ent length, yet is it too short in signification for that pra∣ctise, or way, on which Mr Tombs, like a Parens ustricus, hath imposed it. For whereas there are two grand errors, or evils, in this way; the one, an opposing the baptizing of children; the other, a second baptizing of those baptized already; the Name, Anti-pedo-baptism, expresseth it only by the former, and so is but a kind of half-name to it. Whereas the word Ana∣baptism, although it formally signifieth only the latter, yet it doth withal connotare, or implicitly import the former also. For he that perswadeth to re-baptize at age, consequently perswadeth that Baptism in Infancy is.
or was, a nullity, and so a practise not warrantable. Therefore Ana-baptism, of the two, is not only a word of a more easie and ready pronunciation, a word by rea∣son of the long accustomed use of it in the Baptismal controversies, more passable with men, but more com∣mensureably significant also of that practise or way, which is sufficiently known amongst us by this name, and super-sufficiently otherwise. Besides, though it should be sup∣posed that the word Anabaptism, is not a name or tearm so properly at first imposed on their way; yet the use and end of names and words, being to convey things from one mans minde and understanding to anothers, the word we speak of, best performing this service, in reference to the matter or thing signified by it, ought not to be stumbled at, or excepted against, unless men desire that it should not be understood, when their way is spoken either for, or against. Loquendum ut vulgus, sentiendum ut sapientes, was an old rule: and I know no sufficient reason why it should be antiquated, or cashiered: and some wise men have said, that in civil affairs, malum benè positum non debet moveri. When Mr Fisher, with his fellow-subscribers, in their late representation, stile themselves the baptized Churches of the Nation, no man can tell by the signi∣fication, or import of the word Baptized, what Churches they mean: onely by the importune assuming and arrogant appropriating of the word to themselves, the meaning of the men may be conjectured. For in calling themselves and their Churches, The baptized Church∣es in this Nation, they represent and call (in effect) all the rest of the Churches of Christ in the Nation, by the odious and reproachful Epithites, of Pagan and Hea∣then. Yea, the truth is, that the expression, as it is arrogant in the highest, and swelling with vanity, so it is very exasperating and provoking to all sorts of people in
the Nation, and enough to alarm both Magistrate and people to stand upon their guard, and to await the conse∣quence of so bloody and threatening a charge. But the very self same spirit, which wrought so effectually in the Donatists of old, worketh at no whit a lower rate in these men. For they importunely affirmed that the Churches of Christ, and true Baptism was amongst them onely, and not to be found in all the world besides Donatistae volebant la∣titudinē reg∣ni Christi coarctare in Angulum Affricae, ita ut extra sec∣tam suam, quae obtinue∣rat in Africa, negarent esse uspiam Christianos. Musc. in Mat. 8. 11. Donatistae à multis Patri∣bus & ab Augustino praesertim coarguuntur, quod Eccle∣siā Catholi∣cā in angulū Africae ad se contraxsent affirmanes a∣libi Ecclesiā non rperiri. Pet. Mart. Lc. Clas. 4. c. 6. § 6. Donatus capitis sui somnium sequutus, solùm Christi Ecclesiam in Africa esse dicebat, ne{que} usqùam alibi, nisi isti, veram esse baptismum: cujus vesanie multi adhaerentes, magnam calmit Africanis Ecclesiis attulerunt, quum impii & crud les homines, non minus ferro, quàm impiis vcibus circunqa{que} in obsistentes desaevirent. Pratolus de Haeresibus, pag. 149. Item dicere so∣letis, quod nos Christi baptismum non habeamus, & quòd praeter vestram communionem nusquam sit▪ August▪ Epist. 172. Ad Crispinum Dona∣tistam.. But where∣as, both in the front, and in the rere of this their repre∣sentation, they give the preheminence to their Messen∣gers (a kind of Officer of their own, for such they seem to make them, and which Christ, when he Ascended up on high, never gave Eph. 4. 11. 12.) above their Elders, the Elder being an Officer given and appointed by Christ, do they not prefer the Officers of their own Election, above the Officers of Christ. We read onely of two, (for ex∣positors generally make their number no more) who are stiled , Apostles, Legates, or Messen∣gers of the Churches, when as now a considerable part of the world was planted with Christian Churches, where as Mr Fisher, and his, salute us mith a greater number of their Messengers, then Elders,, and name unto us no fewer then thirteen, belonging to I know not how few of their Churches. Besides, it cannot be proved that these Messengers, though the Apostle (as Musculus upon the place well hinteth) for modesty sake, dth not insist upon his Apostolique Authority, or term them his Messengers, but cast's honour upon the Churches, calling them their
Messengers; yet it cannot (I say) be proved that the Churches did by any power or Authority vested in them, erect such a kind of ordinary or standing Officer amongst them, as a Messenger is, especially that should be more honourable then their Elders and Teachers (Officers expresly given and appointed by Christ) or that they ever met together about the business of such a choyce. It is much more probable that the Apostle himself, accord∣ing to the emergent exigencies of the affairs of the Churches, with which, upon occasion, he conversed, did commend unto them the two persons, termed by him, the Messengers of the Churches (which are spposed to have been Barnabas, and Luke) to serve them in the nature of Messengers, or Internuncii, and that the Churches did generally accept and approve of them for such services, as recommended unto them by their great and faithful Apostle: and that in this respect only they are termed, the Messengers of the Churches. But these men can fancy any thing, and practise these fancies accordingly, to be deemed singularly Primitive, and Apostolical. Many both judicious, learned, and godly, have pub∣liquely§ 5. appeared in the maintenance and defence of In∣fant-baptism: but not many of these characters, against it, although it be true, that much ink and paper have of late been levied by some in opposition to it. What Mr J. Tombs hath essayed for the support of Ana∣baptism, hath been examined by many, and upon proof, found all face, and no heart. That of his Writings which escaped the sword of the Spirit in Mr Baxters hand (whose memorial throughout all Ages may well be Malleus Anabaptismi, The Maul of Anabaptism) hath been since slain by the same sword in the hand of Mr J. Horn. Mr Fisher is the last man I know,
whose thoughts have tempted him to believe, that the Ethiopian may yet be made white by washing, and that water enough of his drawing will do the feat. But the man in his Baby-baptism is too indulgent to his Wit and Fancy, to do any great service to his Cause. Affectation in Writing, affects only those that are weak, except it be to the disparagement of the Wri∣ter, and disadvnatage of his cause. I confess that at some turns he doth out-wit his Ashford Disputants, at least, if he deals honestly in his Transcriptions, and not like Mr Kendall, or Mr Underhill (with his fiery squadron of Book-sellers, who instead of Firing a Beacon, would set both City and Country on fire, if they should meet with a Parliament of no wiser an in∣spiration, then their own.) But when he cometh to grapple with Mr Baxter, the encounter seems to be like that of young Troïlus with Achilles, Infoelix per, at{que} impar congressus Achilli! Unhappy stipling, no meet combatant For Great Achilles!— For in this encounter, he betakes himself to that un-hal∣lowed Refuge of evil speaking, as men being over-mated with the truth are wont to do. Arbitror te (said Je∣rome of old to an Opposer of the Truth, and who with∣al gave ill language) à veritate superatum, ad male∣dicta confugisse. i. I suppose that being vanquished by the Truth, you flee for succour to opprobrious language. VVhen mens intellectuals are too short or scant, they commonly piece and ecke them out with their patheticals. There is no man that understands any thing of Mr Bax∣ters worth, for parts of learning, and Christian ingenu∣ity, that can hear such sayings as these concerning him, but in the notion of contumelies and revilings. A shril
sound, but an empty barrel: such is Mr Baxters Book indeed, especially his two-fold Fardle, about Murder and Adultery, in which, whether there be more noise, or non-sence, I know not: but sure I am, that there is ten times more twittle-come-twattle, then Truth. Mr Fishers Baby-ba∣ptism, page 408. If the man by twittle-come-twattle, means any thing contrary to the Truth (as his opposing it to the Truth importeth) he falls altogether as foul and heavie upon himself and his own sayings, and these near at hand, in charging ten times more of it, then of Truth, upon Mr Baxter, as upon him. For in the very next page he chargeth him, and this over and over, that in all his Discourse (which he makes to be very large) to prove naked-dipping to be a breach of the seventh Commandment, an intolerable wickedness, an immodest action, &c. He proveth nothing but what is acknowledged by himself, and uni∣versally by all his party: Yea, he demands; Quorsum haec? to what purpose doth he with such prolixity proceed to prove, what no sober minded man of either party doth deny? Is that which he and his party hold, twittle-come-twattle, or that which is contrary to the Truth? Another charge of a like contradiction to his former of twittle-come-twattle, he presently sub∣joyneth, as viz. where he challengeth him, as most sim∣ply and sinisterly concluding against them, in a mat∣ter of four or five Arguments, that the chlidren of Christians may not be baptized when they come to yeers, professing himself and his to be of the same mind. As for us (saith he) we say as much, &c. A little after the shame of the former words, he subjoyneth those which are worse, and more maledictory: I must needs confess (saith he) that this is matter of weight in∣deed, and a stone is heavie, and the sand weighty,
but a FOOLS wrath is heavier then them both. This SOON SHOT-BOLT is big enough to hurt, where it hits, &c. Afterwards he insinuates his reports to be empty of Truth; and ful of falshood: and a little after this, his arguings against them to be silly Sophistry, his discourse against their dipping naked, to be a piece of paultry, a mess of balder dash, &c. But the best is for matter of report, Mr Baxters yea, is of as good (if not better) Authority, as Master Fishers, Nay. Page 206. He vilifieth him with a being so childish. In the same page, he tells him that he abounds and sinks himself over head and ears in absurdities: and again, that he thinks the man had not his wits well about him, Page 208. He sayth Mr Baxter dreams, and page 210. O the wisdom! He that being in the fire would not come out to hear how bravely Mr Baxter brings about, and about again his business—'tis pitty but he should be burnt. Pag. 79. He tells his Reader, that he cannot but note by the way how egregiously Mr Baxter peddles in a long prate to Mr Ts. &c. Pag. 362. and 363. (to let pass many other vilifying and reproachful expressions) speaking of Mr Baxters Book, and indeed (saith he) the whole is but a certain three-legged stool, which he hath made for people to sit at rest upon in their vain worships and servings of God, &c. And again, p. 419. the truest verdict which he can give (as he saith) of this book, is, that it is a three-footed Stool, the legs of which are all lame add decriped, made by Mr Baxter for the people of Kederminster and Bewdly, to sit at ease on, in that popish posture and practice, &c. A little after, p. 363. He driveth on beyond the bounds of modesty, truth, sence and reason, as far (I dare say) to the ful, as God would suffer the Devil
to direct, and drive him. Soon after: And so it seems to me, he [God] hath left Mr Baxter, as god∣ly as he is; or else there could never have issued from him such inconsiderate crudities, such rank, vene∣mous, viperous, ulcerous fluxes of folly, flesh, fierceness, fictions, falseness, fiery invectives, to the madding of the very Magistracy, if it would be any longer blinded by the bawling of a mistaken Mini∣stry, &c. Domine, Deus meus! Anne haec est lo∣quela filii tui? Ah, Lord my God, is this the language of a Son of thine? But alass! all this is but a small first fruits of that large Harvest of those rank, venemous viperous, ulcerous, fluxes of folly, flesh and fierce∣ness, (expressions of his own Genius) which out of the abundance of his heart he hath poured forth upon the head of a person, of signal worth and honour, and who is a shining and burning light in his generation; yea and hath done (I verily beleeve) more real service unto Je∣sus Christ, and the precious souls of men, then all the Anabaptists, as such, and whilest such, in the Land; that I say not, in the world▪ But with such stuff as this, he evinceth Mr▪ Baxters reports to be full of falshood, and his arguments to be sophistical and silly. And as for the notions, grounds and principles upon which he assert∣eth his Ana-baptismal cause against him, are they not ve∣ry importune and burthensome to any intelligent and con∣sidering man? Or are not these some of them, and their fellows like unto them? 1. That the true way of Baptism (which we must suppose to be that way of Baptism, wherein Mr Fisher§ 6. Mr Fishers Principles. and his party are ingaged) is the strait and narrow way which leadeth unto life, and which few find Pag. 414.. Doth not this evidently imply, that Mr Fs. sence is, that when our Saviour admonished his Disciples and others to en∣ter
in at the strait gate, yea to strive to enter in at it▪ because wide is the Gate, and broad is the way which leadeth to destruction, &c. his meaning was, that men should strive to be water-baptized, and this by dip∣ping; and that by the wide Gate and broad way, he meant, either baptizing by washing without dipping, or want of baptizing at all▪ It is a wonder of the first Mag∣nitude unto me, how such a conceit as this should ver clime up into his facy, that by the strait and narrow way, which leadeth unto life, and which few find, should be meant his way of baptizing; Considering 1. That no man needs strive at all to be thus baptized: all comers are entertained by the men of this way, and all are freely admitted to walk in it who desire it. 2. That this way can in no respect lightly imaginable by a sber man, be termed strait, or narrow. Not 1. In respect of any great trouble or offensiveness to the flesh, in the entrance into it; at least not in reference to many constitutions, especially in the hotter seasons of the yeer, when both men and boys are wont to disport themselves by ducking▪ and diving under water; least of all in the hotter climates of the Earth, where going into cool waters, is matter of solace and pleasure, as some of Mr Fishers own party do inform us. And (doubtless) the narrow and strait way of which our Saviour speaks, is one and the same in, and unto all Nations, and their respective Inhabitants. Nor 2. Can this way be termed strait or narrow, in respect of any disparagement or civil danger, or disadvantage, that is like to attend it, at least, when and where it is more generally practised, as it was in our Saviour, and John Baptists days: when Jerusalem and all Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, came unto John, and were baptized of him. Which notwithstanding, it seems that Christ made and baptized more Disciples
then John; yea John's Disciples themselves complained unto him, that all men came unto Christ [meaning to be Baptized.] Least of all can it be attended with any matter of dishonour or dis-esteem, when, or where it is countenanced by the Civil Magistrate, and places of honour, trust, and profit, indifferently, if not more frequently, conferred upon men of this way, as well as upon others; which lately was, and still is (in part) the condition of it in this State and Nation. Considering 3. that it cannot be said of Mr Fisher's way of Baptism, that few there are that find it, at least if it be supposed to be the same way with that wherein John and Christ baptized. For we lately heard, that about the time when Christ spake the words, Jerusalem, and all Ju∣dea, and all the Region about Jordan, with vast multitudes besides, had found the way of their Bapti∣zing. 4. That neither doth this way lead unto life, otherwise then in conjunction with, and by the mediation of Faith and Holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord: and in conjunction with, and by the initiation of these, Infant-Baptism and Baptism without Dipping, will lead to life, as well, if not better, then Mr Fisher's way of Baptizing. Therefore (however) his way is not the strait and narrow way, which leadeth unto life, and which so few find. Besides, by his asserting such a principle as this, he adjudgeth the whole Christian world ever since the days of Christ, and his Apostles; (a very inconsiderable number only excepted) unto the vengeance of eternal fire. For how few of all that love∣ly and blessed generation, I mean, of Saints, and holy men, Martyrs, and others, have found, entred, or walked in Mr Fisher's way of Baptizing? But it is no new thing for men, who have a fancy of their own, to lift up to Heaven, to throw down whatsoever standeth in
their way unto hell. But the saying of Mr Baxter to Mr Tombs is very considerable at this turn: It is (saith he) no small degree of evil that a man is fallen to, when he dare slander or make infamous, the whole or greatest part of all the holy Churches on Earth, to maintain the reputation of his opinion. Plain Scripture Proof of In∣fants Church mmbership, &c. p. 199. 2. Another Principle or Notion, upon the credit§ 7. whereof, with importune confidence, he builds his Ana∣baptismal Fabrique, against Mr B. and whosoever, is this That the children of the unbeleeving Jews are not broken off, and excluded with their parents [from Church and Covenant] upon the account of their pa∣rents unbeleif only, but for want of faith in their own persons, &c. Baby-Baptism. p. 110. How little truth, yea, or reason, or sence there is in this Assertion, especially if he intends it (as he pretends to do) in opposition to his Adversaries argument, drawn from the Consideration of the break∣ing off of the Jews Children from the Covenant, is evi∣dent from hence, viz. that the children [i. e. the In∣fants or young children, for of these only his Adversaries speak] of the Iews, who were dis-covenanted by God, had no more want of faith in their own persons, then either Isaac or Iacob themselves, whilest they were In∣fants like unto them, and all the the children generally of this Nation, whilst it remained upon the best and firm∣est terms in Covenant. Therefore if their children were not cut off from Church or Covenant by God, for want of Faith in their own persons, neither is it Christian∣ly reasonable to think, or say, that children of the lat∣ter Iews, whose parents were dis-covenanted for their unbeleif, were dis-covenanted with them for want of faith in their own persons. Besides, want of Faith, (in Mr Fishers sence) in Infants, is no sin: how then should God punish it, or deprive of any priviledge inconsi∣deration of it?
So that what he subjoyns for proof of his assertion, is extreamly impertinent. And children (saith he) when at yeers, are the natural seed of their Parents, I hope, as well as in Infancy it self, if being the chil∣dren of such or such Parents alone, would either in∣graft, or exclude; if I say, unbeleeving Jews chil∣dren do beleeve, the promise is so made to them that their Parents unbelief cannot exclude them, &c. Quorsum haec: The question between him and his Ad∣versaries, neither is, whether children at years be not the natural seed of their parents, as well as in Infancy, or yet whether the promise be so made, that the unbelee∣ving Iews children, when they come to beleeve, shall not∣withstanding be excluded through their parents unbelief, but whether the unbeleeving Iews children in their In∣fancie, were not together with their parents, excluded through these their parents unbelief. Mr Fisher gives this question ago-by, as being too hard for him to resolve with the honour and safety of his cause. 3. Another Notion or ground, by the Authority§ 8. whereof he sentenceth Mr Bs. Book, for being a three∣footed stool, the legs of which are all lame and de∣creped,  Pag. 419. is this, that the greater depth of Hell men fall into, that fall from them, proves the height of their Churches to be neerer Heaven, then that of those Churches, which Mr Ba. or any other Anti-pedo-baptist approveth. But this principle or Notion, that the greater wickedness found in an Apostate, argueth the greater height of excellency in that Order, or way, from which he Apostotizeth, is a Notion or ground, like unto the rest, on which the An baptismal faith is founded. Or if it were true, the height of that Christian Church, of which Iulian was a member before his Apostacy, whether it was the Church of Constantinople, or of Nicomedia (for
of both these the Ecclesiastical History makes him a mem∣ber, though of the latter more immediately before) should have been neerer to the Heavens then Mr Fishers, or any the Anabaptismal Churches; for that either of these were in Julians days Anabaptismal, I suppose was never yet so much as dream't by any man. So also the height of that way, and of that order of men, from which Nero fell, when of a sober and moral Pagan Idolater, he be∣came the first born Son of Belial, and justified all the workers of abominations under the whole Heavens in his days, must needs be supposed, according to Mr Fishers principle, to have been much neerer the Heavens, then his way of Baptism, or any of those Churches to which he signs his Magnificat. For I cannot think, that any who have fallen from him, or his way of Churchship, have fallen into a greater depth of Hell, then these Monsters of men. For my part, I have both read of some, and know some others, who have fallen from his way, that I presume took no spiritual harm at all by their fall, however they might inconvenience themselves in world∣ly respects hereby. Yea I wish for the honour of the Gospel, and prosperity of the souls of the persons them∣selves, that the generality of those, who at present con∣tinue walking in his way, were as neer to Heaven as ma∣ny that have fallen from it.§ 9. Such Notions and principles as these, are the Oracles which strengthen Mr Fishers hand against Mr Baxters Doctrine of Infant-Baptism. Doubtless there was ne∣ver ab urbe conditâ, nor yet ab orbe condito, a ge∣neration of men, in whom confidence upon such contemp∣tible terms, ever raged at that tedious and importune ra and height, as it doth in these men, for the asserting  appropriating of all Baptismal glory and acceptation ∣to themselves, and their way of baptizing. All th
yet they have proved substantially from the Scriptures, or (I fully beleeve) ever will be able to prove from them, against Infant-Baptism, is, 1. That such Beleevers, who had not been baptized in their Infancy, were bap∣tized at more maturity of yeers. 2. That ordinarily the Scripture Baptists did admonish those who came unto them to be baptized, to repent and beleeve. But nei∣ther of these are denyed by their adversaries: nor have either of them the least shadow of an inconsistencie with the lawfulness of Infant-Baptism; Their conjectures that no children were baptized in Christs, Iohns, or the Apostles days, are so inconsiderable, that even before they be weighed in the Ballance, they may be discerned to be too light; although if this also▪ were given in unto them, they could make small earnings of it for their cause (as I demonstrate in the second part of the ensuing trea∣tise, § 15. 16. &c.) Reader, I might acquaint thee with more of the crazy and shaken pillars of Mr Fs. Anabaptismal faith; amongst which he layeth the greatest stress, and (upon the matter) the whole, weight of his cause upon this, that circumci∣sion under the Law, was nether signe nor seal of the righ∣teousness of faith unto any man, but unto Abraham onely. Pag. 18. 19 24. 154. 369. The crookedness of this principle I detect in the ensuing Treatise, by applying to it a streight rule. Part 2. § 61. 62. 63. &c. He makes a like treasure of this Notion, that Baptism is in∣deed a signe, but not a seal. Pag. 154. 155. 156, &c. The absurdity and self-inconsistencie of this conceit, together with the fiery con∣tradiction it carryeth in it to the general sence of the wis∣est of his own party, I likewise make evident in the ensu∣ing discourse. Sundry other the Apochryphal secrets of his faith and§ 10. practise, in the point of Baptism, are discovered briefly and discussed in the tract now in thy hand, especially in
the latter part of it, where I have to do with several the best colours (I beleeve) with which the face of that cause hath yet been painted, and set forth unto the world. In the former part of the discourse, I do not levy a Methodical or formal dispute, either for the necessity, lawfulness or validity of Infant-Baptism, nor yet against the Tenet or practise of Ana-baptizers, many discourses of this nature being already published; but onely lay down and briefly prove certain Theses or Considerations, which (I conceive) are of a leading import, towards sa∣tisfaction in, and about the Baptismal controversies. However, as when several hills lye round about a City, there is no part or quarter of this City, but may be view∣ed from one or other of them: In like manner, I sup∣pose, the intire prospect of the Baptismal controversie in all the respective parts or branches of it, may be taken from one or other of these Considerations. I have di∣gested them under six several heads, according to the notice given in the Marge, against the first under every head (respectively.) I cannot promise unto my self the satisfying or regain∣ing of many that are wandring in, or wondering after, the Re-baptizing way, by any thing argued or offered to them in these Papers. Non est medico semper relevetur ut aeger. Interdum doctâ plus valetarte malum. The best Physician cannot always give Health to his Patient sick: the malady Oft-times surmounts his skill, and to relieve His learned Art he finds but vanity. The name of the evil spirit that haunteth that way (es∣pecially in England) may be called in greek , and
in English, Self willed, or Self affecting; which kind of spirit is very stubborn and stiff-necked, and (for the most part) hath▪ Pelidae stomachum cedere nescii; Achilles stomack stout, who knew not how to yeild. For in Germany I read of several companies or soci∣eties of Ana-Baptists, who being in publique disputa∣tions, convinced by learned and grave men, of the er∣rour and evil of their way, abandoned it immediately, and retreated with honour and peace. But the genera∣lity of our English Ana-baptists may (I fear) too truly say: Aetas Parentum, pejor avis, tulit Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Our Parents age, a bird full bad enough, Yet brought forth us a worser Progeny, Who ('tis no otherwise like) shall leave behind A see yet greater in impiety.§ 11. Some few I know amongst us and have heard of more, who within the compass not of many years, have outliv'd those great and high thoughts of this way which were the Ora∣tors that once perswaded them into it: and finding little but formality and pretence in it, excepting pride, conceit and contention faced about towards that good old way of the Churches of Christ, which they had, upon an unjustifiable accompt, forsaken. But these are a veine of men▪ Queis meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan: but the farre greater part of them, are of that kind, which David likeneth unto a deafe Adder that stoppeth her eare: which will not hearken to the voyce of the charmer, charming never so wisely a But as Aaron did good service by standing between the dead, the living
with his censer, and incense on it, in staying the plague from spreading further▪ although he did not restore unto life any of those that were dead; so if by the inter∣posure of these papers between persons drown'd in Ana∣baptism, and those whose heads are yet above water, I shall be able (through God) to preserve these from sinking, although I be not able to workmiracles in recovering any of the other, yet shal I do service acceptable unto my dear Lord and master Christ, and to many of his Church∣es, and servants. Or however God shall please to dispose of my labour herein, as to matter of success or event, liberavi animam meam, I have discharged my con∣science. Notwithstanding I confesse, that consulting with my Genius and spirit, I am apt to think that I should not have appeared in print in these Baptismal controversies, had there not been a fire of Anabaptism kindled in that house of God, which he hath committed to my inspection and charge, and this by one of the houshold; a man I ac∣knowledge of a sober and grave temper, but of somewhat too passive a disposition from melancholique and supersti∣tious impressions, and upon which his company (it seems) had, and hath, a stronger influence, then his Teachers. So hard a thing is it to watch Satan so narrowly, but that at one time or other he will insinuate and convey himself in the likeness of an Angel of light into the Temple of God. It is an observation of Luther (as I remember) that no Church of Christ ever continued in the native purity and intireness of it for twenty years together. But opor∣tet esse haereses, &c. and the Christian Commonwealth is no loser upon the whol, by the disturbances occasioned in it by Sects and Schisms, & by opinions at enmity with the Truth. For (as the common saying is) ex malis moribus bonae leges nascuntur, evil manners beget good Laws; in like manner, many the truths of God have been
more fully discovered, and commended to the judgements and consciences of men at the higher rate of beauty, love∣lyness, and worth, by occasion of those engagements with her competitors (I mean, errors) unto which she hath been necessitated from time to time, & in which she hath always sooner or later, triumphed, or wil triumph, in due time. Nevertheless I could very heartily have wished to have been excused from serving in that warefare, whereunto my friendly Adversary hath compelled me by his Baptis∣mal Abuses, as well practised, as Printed. For I had rather be at the expence of seven years labour and tra∣vail in an expedition against those, who will not suffer the Lord Iesus Christ quietly to inherit the glory and praise of his ever blessed work of Redemption in the just compass and extent of▪ it, who presume to set bounds and bars to the grace of God, which he never set, who preach this (in effect) for Gospel unto the world, that God never bare any good will to the far greatest part of them, but decreed peremptorily from eternity, eternally to torment them with the vengeance of eternal fire, how innocently, blamelesly, spotlesly soever they should live in the world all their days; who preach also, that those whom they call Elect, though they prove the first born Sons of Be∣lial, and provoke the God of Heaven to his face with the height of all abominations, may yet be true beleevers in God, may, nay do, abide all this while in his love of Election, and by means hereof are in no danger, no pos∣sibility of miscarrying in the high concernment of sal∣vation (with twenty things more of a like hideous con∣federacie with these) yea and reproach those, who are any otherwise minded then themselves in these matters, with names of an odious and hateful import, as▪ Arminians, Socinians, Pelagians, with other Apochryphal diabo∣lisms, which the great enemy of the truth puts between
their lips, whilest they sleep with their mouths open; I had much rather (I say) serve seaven yeers hard service against the Notions and Conceits of these men, so broad∣ly and importunely injurious both unto God and men, then serve so many weeks, though with more ease, and less hardship, against the lighter dreams of persons led aside by the Ana-baptismal spirit. But the Providence of God must be complyed with by men, whether that com∣ports with men, or no. In the mean time. , , i. e. Well may King Priam, and his Sons e jolly, When they shall hear of your contending folly. Mr Kendal, and Birds of his feather, make mirth of these sad differences and distractions raised by Satan in that Church, where both their Interest and his, were like to have sustained so much damage, had not the danger been, in part, reprized by those unhappy and unkind breaches, that have been made upon it. But I trust that he that was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil, will in due time be above him in that, wherein (I beleeve) he much magnifieth himself; and build up again in this Church of his, with advantage, what the other hath pull'd down with both his hands. But not to over-charge thy patience (Good Reader) with the burthen of an Epistle (if it be not too much dis∣courtesied already) I here take my leave, most heartily and humbly beseeching the God of all grace to anoint thee with a rich anointing of a discerning spirit, and to give thee a sound understanding in all things which con∣cern thine own peace, and the peace of the Churches of Christ, and the whole Israel of God; that thou mayst
find a way to thine eternal rest and glory, without tread∣ing and trampling under thy foot, as thou goest along, the peace and comfort of thy Brethren, partakers of like precious Faith with thee, and who with much single∣ness of heart and soul, love, worship, and serve the same God, and the same Lord Jesus Christ, whom thou serv∣est; although thou shouldst suppose that God hath not re∣vealed unto them the truth in all those matters of doubt∣ful disputation, wherein thou presumest that he hath re∣vealed it unto thee. He that fervently prayeth this Pray∣er for thee, is Thy assured Friend in Christ, JOHN GOODWIN. From my Study in Swan-Alley, December. 21. 1654.
An Admonition to the remainder of the Flock and Sheep of Christ, yet under my hand and charge. DEar Souls, for whom I exspect none other but to be called, and this very shortly, to give an account to the great Shepherd of the Sheep, for the time you have already been, and shall yet con∣tinue (respectively) under my hand; that I may give this account, with joy and not with grief, is the sum of all that either now, or ever hereafter, I shall desire of you. Nor do I, nor shall I, desire this great thing of you, so much (by many degrees) for mine own sake, as for yours. For as the faithful Mini∣sters of the Gospel are (in the Apostles Doctrine) unto God a sweet savour of Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish; so is God unto them a sweet savour of reward through Christ, as well for their labour, care, and faithfulness towards those who pe∣rish from under their hand, as towards those that are saved. Every man (saith the same Apostle, speaking of the same men) shall receive his own reward, , i. e. according to his own labour, not, according to the success or fruit of his labour. Nevertheless this very Apostle, was very richly apaid and highly pleased with the
Christian towardliness and tractableness of those, to whom he preached the Gospel, and as much affect∣ed the contrary way, when the children of his nur∣ture and teaching, behaved themselves frowardly, and unworthy the Gospel in any kind. Unto the Thessalonians he writeth these things: Therefore Bre∣thren, we are comforted over you in all our affliction and distress, by your faith: For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord. For what thanks can we render unto God again for you, for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God 1 Thes. 3. 7, 8, 9.. Not long before, he had said unto them; For what is our hope, our joy, or Crown of rejoycing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our glory and joy [meaning, in respect of their constant ad∣hering to the Gospel, as he had delivered it unto them, and their conversations excellently answering hereunto.] On the other hand, how great a sufferer in spirit was he, under the weaknesses and undue deportments of the children of his Ministry? Who is weak (saith he) and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not? 2 Cor. 11. 29. meaning, that when any professor of the Gospel did bewray any doubtfulness of the truth of it in any material point, or did shrink aside from the profession of it, for any carnal end whatsoever, he was weakened in his comfot and peace thereby, and much pained & aggrieved in his soul, until they were strengthened and recovered. To the same persons elswhere, thus. And lest when I come again, my God will abase me among you, and that I shall bewail many which have sinned already, and have not repented, &c. 2 Cor. 12. 21. import∣ing. 1. That the sinful miscarriages of this people, amongst whom he had preached the Gospel, were
just matter of sorrow unto him, and were like, through the wise permission of God, to turn to his great disparagement in the eyes of many, To the Galathians, having charged them with the supersti∣tion of observing days, and months, and times and years, he professeth thus unto them; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you labour in vain Gal. 4. 11. Fear (the Apostle John saith) hath torment. And though perfect love unto God, casteth out the fear of rejection or condemnation by him, yet thm or e perfect and sincere our love is unto men, the great∣er is both our fear and torment for them, when we apprehend them in any great danger. Concerning my self, what my behaviour and conversation hath been among you from the first day of your gathering under my hand, you well know, and are ready (I doubt not) upon all occa∣sions, to testifie. What my heart hath been to∣wards you, my heart it self knoweth; but he that is greater then my heart knoweth much better, and will declare in due time. I have spent the best and most serviceable part of my days with you, and have endeavoured with all my might (humane infirmities excepted) to train you up like Saints, and Heirs appa∣rant to an Heavenly Kingdom. And now not being like long to continue with you in the world, (the keepers of my house, in Solomons phrase, beginning to tremble, and they that look out at the windows, to be darkned) nor to publish many, if any, more Books then this before my change; I was desirous (the argument and subject matter of the work in hand, so well comporting with the design) to take the present opportunity, whilest I am yet with you, of being your Remembrancer of some
few things, a conscientious minding and observing, whereof (I question not) will do you Christian and worthy service, and help to bless you, when I am gone. 1. Remember, and I say again, Remember oft§ 3. and seriously, that it is much more easie to begin in the spirit, then to continue, end, and be perfected in the spirit; to run well for a time, then perseve∣ringly to obey the truth; to interess your selves in the love of Christ, then to continue in his love unto the end. There were four several grounds that had good seed sown in them, and three of them bare pro∣fession; but onely one of them yeilded perseverance. It is the observation of an Hebrew Doctor, that they were six hundred thousand men that came out of Egypt: but there were only two of this vast number that entred into the Land of Canaan. So (saith he) shall it be in the days of the Messiah. Afterwards, when God set har∣vest men on work to cut down and gather this Nati∣on, being now (in all likelyhood) much more nu∣merous, there were very few eares of the corn that escaped them, their vintage afforded few Grapes for the gleaner: their Olive Tree, though full of fruit, being shaken, all the berries thereof dropt off to the ground, two or three onely excepted in the top of the uppermost bough, and four or five in the outmost fruitful branches [meaning, that there were very few found amongst the great ones, & not many amongst the ordinary or meaner sort amongst them, whom God could judge meet to be spared in the judgement.] The New Testament likewise gives frequent notice, that the generality of persons, who should for a time ingage solemnly in a Christian profession, would be like unto the Prophets Fig-Trees
with their first-ripe Figs: if they be shaken, they will even fall into the mouth ef the Eater. Nah. 3. 21. Many that are first (saith our Saviour himself) shall be [or will be] last. So again, (speaking of those, who should be professors of the Gospel, as well as others) he foretells that when times of persecution should come MANY would be offended: And again: that many false Prophets should arise, and would deceive MANY: and that, because iniquity should abound, the love of MANY should wax cold. Mat. 24. 10. 11. 12. A little before he had declared, that many would come in his name, and would deceive MANY. The Scriptures of the New Testa∣ment, are full of such Items and forewarnings as these, as likewise of Instances and examples of hot and zealous professors for a time, who in the pro∣gress of their course, turned aside, some into one by∣way, some into another, and so lost the things which they had wrought, and perished eternally. Such as these may be fitly compared to such horses, which are fierce and full of mettle at the Stable door, ca∣pering and prauncing, as if no ground would hold them; who yet after a few Miles travel, either tyre or founder, grow jadish or resty, and neither by fair means nor foul, can be gotten anend. Yea, how many of your selves (I mean of your Church∣body, though for number of members but small, not to mention the like deplorable doings in other Churches) have within the compass of a few years (for you have not been imbodyed many) broken their ranks, and turned aside, some on the right hand, and others on the left, into dark and dange∣rous by-ways, where the light of life either shineth not at all, or very malignantly, like unto a dusky twilight, wherein many travellers lose their way?
Yea, how many are there not yet separated from your Body, whose spiritual pulse beats very faintly, and concerning whom the ground of jealousie is great, that they have fallen, and are falling daylie more and more, from their first love. What be∣tween spiritual wickednesses (I mean, Sects, ways, and opinions, pretending to the Truth) on the one hand, and fleshly wickednesses, the love of ease, pleasure, and other the contentments of this world, on the other hand, the trees of Christs forrest (in his respective Churches) are made few from day to day, that (in the Prophets phrase) a childe may tell them, and the glory of his Carme is consumed. Therefore if you mean so to run, as to obtain, it mightily con∣cerneth you, not only, or simply, to take care how to believe, or how to live holily, but (that which is of a far greater undertaking, and more difficult at∣chievement) how to do both perseveringly. You must imitate those, who intending a long Voyage by Sea, fraight their Ship with provisions accord∣ingly. A little oyl will serve to make your Lamps blaze and burn for a while; but it must be a full Vessel that will keep them burning till midnight, or until the time of the Bridegrooms coming. 2. The Apostle Paul re-minds the Corinthians in§ 4. his time, that the ends [or latter times] of the world were come upon them; and withall informs them, that God, in consideration of the dangerous∣ness of these times through the extraordinary active∣ness of Sathan (perfectly fore-known unto him) had caused many transactions and passages of former times to be recorded; by the study, knowledge, and due consideration whereof, they might be admonish∣ed to look about them with so much the more care
and watchfulness, and thus be able to redeem the sea∣son, how evil soever the days should be. Brethren, I may say to you, that the ends of those ends of the world are come upon you, and that you, with the present generation of the Saints with you, and if there be another yet future, are like to feel the pow∣er of the wrath of Sathan, for the endangering of your eternal peace (and most probably, your tem∣poral and civil peace also) above what all former ages have done. You must expect to be tempted, and tempted ten times over, to be very violently and restlesly haled and importun'd by him, to turn aside out of, and to exchange that good and safe way of God, wherein at present you walk, for some or other of those crooked and by-paths, which he hath devi∣sed, and prevailed with some unstable and unlearned, with some proud and self-conceited men, who think they know more then all the world besides, and that the spirit of revelation hath forsaken all flesh besides, to invest them, to broach and set on foot in the Chri∣stian world. Yea you must expect that the Enemy of your peace will knock with Authority, and after the manner of an Angel of light, yea, or of the Spi∣rit of God himself, at the door of your hearts and consciences, imperiously commanding that it be opened unto him, thundering and threatning, like God himself, the loss of salvation, the vengeance of eternal fire, if it be not opened unto him. Be therefore (I beseech you) admonished, and know for a certain, that importunity of an inward solicitation is no argument that the perswasion, unto which you are solicited, cometh from God.§ 5. 3. You may reasonably expect, that before se∣ven yeers more shall have passed over the head of the
world, sundry of those Sects, and by-ways of Pro∣fession, which at present lift up their heads on high, and reigne both in credit, and numbers of Prose∣lytes and followers, will be crest-fallen, and be∣come like Bottles in the smoak (in David's phrase) wi∣thered and mis-seasoned, and which few, or none, will (in those respects) care to use; but withal, that Sathan will soon recruit himself, and build up his wast places, and raise up new Sects and by-opinions amongst Professors, instead of those that are fallen. For as the wisdom of God is  (Eph. 3. 10.) i. e. Various, or manifold, so is Sathans cunning also: He knowing (at least in the general) the tem∣pers, humors, weaknesses, and great instability in the judgements of the generality of men and women, is still forging and forming new opinions and conceits, new methods and ways of worshipping and serving God, such as he knows are likely to fall in, and take with the hearts and fancies of some or other of them, if he can but find Instruments or Factors (who are seldome far to seek) to publish and commend them unto the world. For as Livie reports it to have been the policie of the old Romans, to make many other shields like unto that, which fell from heaven (as they supposed) in the days of Numa Pompilius, with this Oracle accompanying it, that in what City soever that Shield should remain, it should be the most flourishing and prosperous in the world, that so this fatal Shield might not easily be discerned from the rest, in case any person should attempt to steal it away: in like manner the Divel knowing that God hath revealed from Heaven, and com∣mended unto the children of men one way of life and salvation, he sets his wits on work to invent and
form many other methods and ways of some sem∣blance with this, that so he may amuse, distract, and confound the reasons, judgements, and consciences of men (at least of the generality of them) and cause them strongly to imagine, that one or other of those ways, which he hath devised, and procured a recommendation of, by some Pretenders to Reli∣gion, or others, unto the world, is that only true and living way, wherein God himself hath com∣manded men and women to walk, if ever they mean to be saved. This is evident in that late Diabolical Sect, commonly known amongst us by the name of Quakers, and so likewise in the Sect of high Ana∣baptism, and several others. And the truth is, that the Truth can by no Artifice or Method be more dangerously resisted or undermined, then by setting up counterfeit Tenents and practises by it of some plausible similitude, and correspondencie with it. Jannes and Jambres are said to have withstood Moses, (2 Tim. 3. 8.) because, by sorcery they wrought false miracles, yet like unto those, which Moses wrought by the finger of God. Exod. 7. 11. 22. After the same manner (saith the Apostle) do men resist the Truth. Thus because the true Messiah was, according to the Scriptures, and the common belief of true Christians, born of a Virgin, therefore Si∣mon Magus (the first-born of Sathan, as one of the Fathers stiles him) who affected the honour of being reputed the Messiah, gave out to his followers (as the Ecclesiastical history reporteth) that he also was born of a Virgin. 4. Take heed of minding or looking too narrow∣ly,§ 6. on that which is pleasing and taking in a new way, or Sect, without minding and considering altoge∣ther
as narrowly, that which is dangerous and threatning in it. For as Wine hath that in it, which is very pleasant and enticing, as viz. his colour in the cup, and his sparkling and springing motion in the glass (Prov. 25. 31.) and yet again, hath that in it also, which is baneful and terrifying, viz. that it bites like a Serpent, and stings like an Adder (ver. 32.) and he that only mindeth the former, without think∣ing seriously of the latter, is apt to be ensnared by it to his ruin: in like manner every Sect and by-way, Anti-nomianism, Ana-baptism, Seeking, Quaking, Ranting, &c. have somwhat in them (respectively) of an insinuating nature into the minds and affecti∣ons even of pious and well-meaning men, as on the other hand they have that also which is spiritually dangerous, and portending much evil to the soul: and they that only mind and consider the former, with∣out laying their reasons, judgements, consciences, and considering abilities as close to the latter, are in dan∣ger of being carried away with them, some with one, and others with another, to the eminent endanger∣ing, if not to the utter undoing, them in their spiri∣tual estate. 4. Remember (and remember it again) that the§ 7. holy Ghost as well reckoneth , i. e. contentions, emulations, divisions, sects, [or heresies] amongst the works of the flesh (yea amongst such works of the flesh, which are mani∣festly so) as he doth adultery, fornication, wanton∣ness, idolatry, drunkenness, &c. Gal. 5. 19, 20. yea the lusting, following after, and taking up, new forms and ways of worshipping and serving God, by the people of God, or (which differs little) the following after new and strange Gods, is by a fre∣quent
metaphor in the Scriptures, termed fornicati∣on, whoredom, and adultery. The reason may be (and probably is, at least in part) because a man or woman never forsaketh the true and right way of worshipping God, to worship him in a false, but it is to gratifie the flesh, or some sensual principle or other; yea, although this new and by-way seems never so grievous or afflicting to the flesh. The Apostle pronounceth such a person , rashly, or vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind, who teacheth men a voluntary humility [i. e. any such way of worshipping God, which carrieth an outward shew of humbling, mortifying, or abasing the flesh, and yet is not prescribed by him] as the worshipping of Angels, abstinence from certain meats, from Mariage, &c. Col. 2. 18. 21, 22, 23. The Popish penances, of going bare-foot, wearing sack-cloth, whipping themselves, &c. as ill-pleasing to the flesh as near at hand they seem to be, are notwithstanding remotely subservient unto it, and very indulgent to the Interest of it, by strengthning the hand of those who practise them, to take up sin with more bold∣ness upon a new score, as having discharged the old. 5. Take heed of Sathan turning himself into an§ 8. Angel of light. When he shall say unto you, Lo here is Christ, or, lo he is there (inwardly pointing you to one way, or another, differing from that wherein at present you walk, and have found Christ with you) know for certain that he doth it to delude you, either by seeking to draw you from Christ where he is, by putting you into a fools paradise of hoping to find him, where he is not; or else by tem∣pting you to conceit more highly of your selves,
onely for putting on a new garb or outside of pro∣fession. By this artifice he draws many into the like sad inconveniences, which Eutrapelus in the Poet projected to bring those into, against whom he in∣tended mischief, by presenting them with costly and gorgeous apparrel to put on and wear. When (saith he) men see themselves richly and gorgeously attired, their thoughts will importunely work and swell, they will be lifted up to hopes of great mat∣ters, and will put themselves upon great and high projects, the prosecution of which will be their ru∣ine. I fear that Satan hath drawn many into a like snare of misery, by investing them with new habits of Religion, specious (it may be) and rich to an undiscerning and injudicious eye: as of Seeking, Quaking, Anabaptizing, Super-Ordinancing, with sundry other forms and fashions of professing Christ, which he hath devised to please the humours and fancies of unstable persons in these latter days. 6. Beware especially of the Notions and§. 9. Doctrines of those, who to magnifie (as they sup∣pose) the inward teachings, enlightenings, and work∣ings of God, or of the Spirit of God, in, or upon, the hearts and minds of men, vilifie his Ordinances and outward administrations, judging these to be but impertinencies, and things which may without loss; yea and (as the prophane madness of some uttereth it self) with no spiritual disadvantage, be layd aside. For though neither he that planteth be any thing, nor he that watereth, any thing; and so neither preach∣ing any thing, nor hearing any thing viz. compa∣ratively, or in respect of God, who giveth the in∣crease] yet he that speaketh this, saith also (though with a modest expression) to Philemon, that he owed
unto him even his own self. Philemon v. 19. And elsewhere, giveth thanks unto God, who al∣ways caused him to triumph in Christ a [meaning in respect of the great success of his Ministry in the conversion of men unto Christ, where ever he came preaching the Gospel] yea and ascribeth unto Ti∣mothy the saving of the souls of those, who should hear him, 1 Tim. 4. 16. All which (with very many more like unto them) clearly assert a Soveraign ne∣cessity of the Ministry. Yea where he that planteth and he that watereth, are despised, it is not God, but the Devil that giveth the encrease. For we read of no increase, at least ordinarily, given by God, but upon, and by means of the planting and watering by men. Yea if there were nothing but meer sacra∣mentality in the preaching of the Gospel and other Ordinances, the teachings and inspirations of God and of his Spirit, cannot upon any competent ground be expected without them; no more then Naaman had ground to expect a cleansing from his leprosie, without washing seven times in Jordan; or Moses and the Israelites, that the waters of the Red Sea, would have been divided, and afforded them a pas∣sage thorough on dry Land, had not Moses lift up his Rod over them, as God had directed him, and so divided them, Exod. 14. 16. 21. 7. If you shall at any time be by the Providence of God, seated and setled under such a Ministry, where the words of eternal life are preached unto you with power, and (as the Apostle speaketh) in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit, know that you cannot better your selves by changing your Station; but you may by such a change endamage your selves in the things of your eternal peace ex∣ceedingly.
Lord (saith Peter) to whom shall we goe? Thou hast the words of eternal life, Joh. 6. 68. There is no removing or going from before the face of the Gospel, where the glory of it, from time to time shines out in the face of the inner man, but with im∣minent danger of spiritual loss upon the remove. For though there are that are called Preachers of the Gospel, whether in one form of a Religious pro∣fession, or of another (as there are Preachers of the Gospel many, and Teachers many) yet to those who have a true and lively tast of the Gospel, and of the spirit thereof, the able and faithful Preachers thereof, are very few. Nor will, nor can, the practise of any carnal Rite or Ceremony, one, or more, (especially by others, least of all when not onely the necessity, but even the lawfulness of the practise of them, is matter of doubtful disputation) ballance the loss that is like to be sustained by exchanging the Sun for the Moon; I mean, a light∣some, spiritful and lively Ministry, for that which is cloudy, flat, and of small execution. 8. You can hardly enter into, and walk in any of§ 11. those many by-ways, or new-devised forms of pro∣fession, which are at this day occupyed and used by men and women pretending highly to Religion amongst us, but there is signal cause of fear that your spirits will receive some ill tincture or other even from the best of them, and that your hearts wil be disordered, and levened with some un-Chri∣stian impression by means of them. Amongst those known by the name of QUA∣KERS, who are at present the rising and growing Sect, or Faction, and whose way hath in a short time (welnigh) swallowed up quick the way of
Ana-Baptism, which till of late magnified it self above all its fellows, there is little question to be made but that the Devil dwelleth , bodily, and subjecteth the Proselites of this way unto his own most inhumane tyranny, under the pretence and shew of mortification, self-denyal, austerity of life, &c. teaching them to give heed unto, and fol∣low the light (as they term it) which is within them, without any examination or search, whither this light be darkness or no, which the Lord Christ sup∣poseth it may very possibly be. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness! Mat. 6. 23. Such a Doctrine as this, viz. to for∣bid all examination or tryal, when as God expresly counselleth us to try all things, is the express Cha∣racter of the great enemy of the precious souls of men. Another Sect we have amongst us (borderers upon the former) whom I know not yet how to call by any appropriate name; but the way of their folly is, to cast behind their back, or trample under their feet, all the Ordinances of God, unless it be such a kind of preaching which strengthens their hand thereunto; teaching that God, or the Spirit of God, doth all; with a total exclusion of mans care, study, thoughts or endeavours whatsoever. A Doctrine exactly calculated for the Meridian of Hel, and serves with an high hand, for the advance∣ment of the Devils Kingdom amongst men. Amongst these men you wil learn to honour every Spirit, that shall at any time enter into you, though never so frantique, and fanatique, though never so lying or unclean, with the worthy name of the Spi∣rit of God. Yea, you wil learn negligence, sloath∣fulness,
and prophaneness, as matters of duty, and regular submission unto God. Amongst the Ana-Baptists (I mean those of the§ 12. Ana-Bap∣tists. high form) you wil be tempted to build upon the water, instead of the Rock, and to rejoyce in a thing of nought. You wil be apt to learn pride, pe∣remptoriness, self-conceitedness, unquietness and turbulency of spirit, the despising of those that are good: the magnifying of a minute of wil-worship, against, or above, the divine Nature it self in men, above Faith, Love, Holiness, Humility, Mortifi∣cation, Self-denyal, Fruitfulness in wel doing, and whatsoever do most unquestionably commend both men and women unto God, and sober men. Antinomianism, is a Schole of Lawless Liberty, wherein is taught how without the least regret of conscience, to turn the grace of God into wanton∣ness; and where the progymnasmata, or impure Ele∣ments of Ranting (the dregs and retriment of all Sects, and where men and women are taught to turn head upon conscience; yea and upon whatsoever is commendable in Nature it self) are plainly laid un∣der the Notions and names of most worthy Truths, and such wherein the glory of the Gospel confisteth. The truth is, that a Ranter is nothing but an Anti∣nomian sublimated. Amongst the Virgin-Livers, you wil be taught, or§ 13. Virgin-Li∣vers. tempted to stop the course and current of Nature, un∣til it breaks over, not onely the dam wherewith you shal obstruct it, but even all the banks and bounds which God himself hath prefixed to it. Here also if you be easie of belief and tractable under a spirit of delusion, you wil be provoked to make a breach upon al the Laws and Precepts of God, which con∣cern
the Christian management of Relations, and this under a pretext of sovereign devotion, and of signal sequestration from the world. Those commonly known by the name of Seekers, are a generation who think they do God a mostSeekers. choice service in overlooking all that is written, upon pretence of looking after somewhat higher, more mysterious, and sacred, then any thing that is writ∣en; as if God, who (as the Apostle teacheth us) hath in these last days spoken unto the world by his Son, intended to reveal unto, and speak by these men somewhat beyond, and of greater import then any thing he hath spoken unto the world by him. Amongst these this snare of death wil be spread in your way, you wil be tempted to seek after another Jesus, with the neglect and contempt of him, be∣sides whom there is no Saviour of souls. Amongst the Quinto-Monarchians, or persons§ 10. best known by the name of the fift Monarchie men,Quinto-Monarchi∣ans. not so much from their opinion touching the said Monarchie, as by that fierce and restless spirit which worketh in them, to bring it in into the world by un∣couth and unhallowed methods and ways, and this before the times of the other Monarchies be fulfilled, you wil learn to speak evil of those that are in dig∣nity, to curse the Ruler of your people, to enter∣tain darkness in stead of a vision, , i. e. to advance your selves with confidence in∣to the things which you have not seen, and to please your selves most, when you neither please God, nor sober minded men. Amongst the Behemites, or Mysterialists, youBehemites, or Mistery∣al wil learn little but uncouth and affectate words and phrases, under which you may intend and mean
what mysteries you please, but nothing to the edi∣fication of any man, nor scarce of your selves; to∣gether with an art or faculty to allegorize quite away the vivifique spirit, power and Authority of the Scriptures, and this under a pretence of teach∣ing Repentance, Mortification, Humility, Self-de∣nyal, Resignation, &c. after a new and more ex∣cellent way, then hath been formerly taught or known. Here though you shal meet with strange and unheard of terms and expressions in a sufficient number to fil the world with new notions and se∣crets of truth, such as the hearts and minds of men, have been strangers unto until now; yet wil the whole Encyclopedy of this learning hardly bless or enrich you so much, as with one distinct notion, veyn, or streyn of truth, which is not already abroad in the world amongst intelligent men, yea and this in a far more scientifical garb or habit of ex∣pression. Here you wil be taught to comment upon the light with darkness. Contra-Remonstrancie (as it is commonly taught§ 14. amongst us) is a model of divinity, or of ChristianContra-Re∣monstrants. Religion, drawn quite besides the platform, or pattern in the Mount, I mean, the mind of God revealed in the Scriptures. The appropriate prin∣ciples of this way may reasonably be conceived to lead unto most (if not all) other sects, and those evils, whether of opinion, or of practise, that are found in them. Amongst the sons and daughters of this Divinity, you wil learn such a Faith, which instead of working by love, wil work by careles∣ness and security, and which wil give such large quar∣ter unto the flesh, that its own Life and Being, wil be sorely endangered, if not utterly overthrown there∣by,
besides many most unworthy and hard thoughts and sayings of him, who is Grace, Love, Goodness and Bounty it self, and who is not willing that any should perish, but that al should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3. 9. and be saved 1 Tim. 2. 4.. Among the Arians, and Anthropomorhites, the life of godliness in you, if you carry any such thing withArians and Anthropo∣morphites. you unto them, wil be in danger of poysoning with dunghil notions and conceits of God, and of Christ. For here the abominable Idolatry of the old Hea∣then, who changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image mae like to corruptible man, which (as the Apostle informeth us) God most severely pun∣ished, is in the clear and plain pri les o it taught as a great and unquestionable truth. And He, who the Holy Ghost stileth, God blessed for ever Rom. 9. 5., (I mean Christ the Lord) is allowed this God-head in a di∣minutive sence onely, and such, which dissolveth the glory of the mystery of the Gospel into a piece of odd and savour-less projection, without any length, or breadth, depth, or height of wisdom in it. Amongst the High-Presbyterians, and men bap∣tized into their spirit, you must submit your faith to the test of men, and be content to be at a classical, or Synodical allowance for what you shal beleeve. And yet here you wil be taught to sacrifice the peace liberties, and comforts of other men, and these (it may be) better, more righteous, yea and sounder in the faith, then your selves, upon the service of such a faith, which is form'd and model'd by the fancies, or weak understandings of men, and these superintend∣ed (for the most part) and influenced by some po∣litique or corrupted interest or other. These are the principal Sects, and by-ways of
Christian profession at this day on foot amongst us (as far as my knowledge and memory at present serve me to recount them unto you) into which (I mean, into one or other of which) if you be not throughly established with the knowledge of the truth, and of the good word of God, and withal, watchful in prayer unto God to keep you in the good old way of truth and peace, your foot wil be in danger of sliding, and in so much the more danger, because these ways of errours (at least some of them) have deceived great, numbers of men and women, and are at this day occupyed by many; according to that of Christ to his Disciples themselves: Take heed that no man deceive you: For MANY shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive MANY. Facilè transitur ad plures (is the saying of Seneca) i. A little consideration serves a man to make one in a multitude, or throng. Besides, there are reports abroad very credible, and not without arguments otherwise to confirm the truth of them, that there are cunning Emissaries of the Romish faction, Jesuites, and others, and these not a few, who secretly, and in a disguise, insinuate themselves with all, or most, of the prementioned Sects amongst us. These being the most exquisite and expert Artists in the world in glosses and colours, know how of plausible Argu∣ments and Pretenses, to make fair faces to set upon every Sect and by-opinion, whereby to allure the fancies of injudicious and inconsiderate people unto them, and to set every party agog with a conceit of their own way, and notions; their most wicked and dangerous design being to distract, rend, and tear the Nation, into factions, parties, and sects, especi∣ally all those in it, who seem to pretend with any
zeal to conscience, or Religion, that so they may upon better terms of advantage commend the Ro∣mish Church and Religion for that unity which is found in them, unto the generality of weak and carnal men amongst us (being the bulk of the Nati∣oan, and whose Sovereign grievance it is not to have a National or State Religion, wherein all must gree) and hereby have the bro ader and larger op∣portunity, either to work the Nation back again unto Rome, or otherwise to bring the misery of confusion, if not ruine it self, upon us. 9. As the English Proverb, that a rowling stone§ 16. gathers no Moss, importeth, that persons who oft re∣move, and change either their dwellings, or im∣ployments, do not (ordinarily) prosper, or thrive in the world; so neither do the souls of such persons (usually) prosper, who are of desultory and light dispositions, easily and without great weight and evidence of argument, perswaded out of one form or way of worpshiping God into another, or out of one Church into another. Upon this account it is that the Apostle makes an opposition between being carryed about with divers [or various] and strange doctrines, and having the heart established with grace: Be not carryed about with various [] and strange Doctrines; for it is good that the heart be established with grace, not with meats, which have not profited them who have been occupyed therein Heb. 13. 9., clearly implying, that such professors, who are apt to be hurryed or carryed round from one opinion to ano∣ther, which are various and strange, not depending on, nor consistent with, one the other, or such, wherewith the Church of Christ have not been ac∣quainted (for these are properly strange Doctrines)
are never like to attain the great blessing of having their hearts and consciences wel ballanced or esta∣blished, either with any excellent work of grace or holiness in them, or with the sence or sound belief of the rich Grace of God in the Gospel. The rea∣son whereof might be given, but that the Law of brevity forbiddeth it. It was the confession of one who had some years before turned aside into the way of Ana-Baptism, at the time of his execution for the horrid sin of murther committed in this City (of which confession one of you, if I mistake not, was an ear witness) that from the time of his going under water, he sensibly found God departing from him. 10. If it be a duty solemnly charged by God up∣on§ 17. you, as far as lyeth in you, and if it be possible, [i. e. if you can compass or admit of it, without sinning; for unto Saints, all sin by the Law of their profes∣sion, is made and declared an impossibility Joh. 3. 9. Rom. 6 2. 2 Cor. 13. 8. G 39. 9.] to have peace with all men, how much more ought you to judge your selves bound by ingagements of the highest, to have and keep peace amongst your selves, and one with another? your Church and Christian fellowship, wil be as a first fruits of that New Jeru∣salem, which is now coming down apace from Hea∣ven unto you, if you be careful and diligent to knit your selves together in love, standing fast in one spirit, with one mind and one judgement, and so continue. Be of one mind: live in peace: and the God of love and peace shall be with you, 2 Cor. 13. 11. your God shall be your glory, and you shall be the glory of all the Churches of the Saints round about you, if you shall carefully endeavour to keep the uni∣ty of the spirit in the band of peace. Behold, how good,
and how pleasant it is for Brethren to dwell together in unity! It is as the Dew of Hermon, yea as that which descendeth upon the Mountains of Sion: for there the Lord commanded the blessing and life for evermore. Psal. 133. 1. 3. As on the contrary, where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work (Jam. 3. 16.) and consequently, God must needs behold persons and societics of this unworthiness, a far off. And to those, whom he thus beholdeth, misery and ruine must needs be neer at hand. Therefore if differences at any time arise amongst you. 1. Let every man remember that he knoweth but in part, and consequently that the errour, or mistake, may possibly lie on his side. 2. Let him candidly, and with an unfeigned de∣sire of being over-ruled, though contrary to his present sence, into the truth, especially when love and peace are like to be gained and maintained withall, weigh and consider the grounds and reasons of him, or them, who dissent from him. 3. Let him that hath any thing suggested to him, under the notion of a truth, contrary to the present sence of his Brethren, not over-hastily entertain it, but rather suspect, and expostulate with the suggestion. And if he cannot thus satisfie or free his conscience, let him argue and debate with himself the grounds of it upon such terms, as he would oppose or coun∣terargue the Tenent of an Adversary. If this wil not yet deliver him, let him by frequent and fer∣vent prayer, seek an intemerate and chast judge∣ment at the hand of God. If this notwithstanding, he shall remain doubtful and unsatisfied. 4. In case the matter of his suggestion supposed
to be a truth, be somewhat about the verge, or out∣works of Religion, and not near the center or heart, (as matters of doubtful dispute amongst Christians, for the most part, are) let him (as the Apostle ad∣viseth in somewhat a like case) either have his faith to himself, and not trouble his Brethren, or the Church with it; Or else, let him declare and pro∣pose it like it self, I mean, with an acknowledgment that it is a point of inferiour concernment, and for which he shall contend with no man to the breach of love or peace; especially let him not strayn or bend himself, , to hyperbolize or over-speak the consequence or concernment of it. In which kind of misdemeanor, the high Ana-Bapist is the first-born of offenders, yea though his notion for rebaptizing, or (as himself would fain have it pass) for baptizing, should be yeilded unto him for a truth. He that contendeth not as well, yea and as much, for love and peace, as for truth, is no good souldier of Jesus Christ, or of the truth. 5. If such a person cannot be delivered from his conceit of , some great thing in his new noti∣on,§ 20. or private opinion, let him declare himself be∣fore his Brethren in publick, simply and plainly, that such is his judgment. By this means he shal give testi∣mony unto that, which he conceiveth to be a truth, and so acquit himself in point of conscience both to∣wards God and man, without making a breach upon the Church of Christ, or his godly Brethren, by separating or rending himself from them; as Peter Martyr, sometimes here in England did, and several other worthy and conscientious men have done else where in like cases. 6, (And lastly, for this) because men of unsound
and strange notions, and separating principles, have frequently as the Apostle gives warning, Eph. 4. 14.) a slight and cunningness of craft, whereby they lye in wait to deceive, and the generality of professors are weak, and easie to be ensnared, where the snare, especially with a plausible bat, is spread in their way; therefore admit not, without some special cause or providence leading you unto it, of much fami∣liarity or intimateness of converse with such men, no not though they seem conscientious, yea or high, or hot spirited for God, and be of plausible behavi∣our otherwise. For as the Tragoedian said long since, venenum in auro bibitur, Poyson is commonly drunk out of a cup of gold; so is an errour, or by-notion, soonest taken into the judgement and consci∣ence of a well-meaning person, from persons of fair carriage, and smooth conversation, especially when they are familiar and frequent with them, and of their bosome acquaintance. And if the ways of an angry man, which at first must needs be harsh and unpleasing to a person of a quiet and meek spi∣rit, are yet apt by the advantage of a familiar con∣verse with such a man, to insinuate themselves in∣to him; much more are the principles and practises of men seemingly religious, and of loving and friend∣ly behaviour, otherwise like to gain upon the minds and affections even of well-disposed persons, if they converse intimately and frequently with them. As for your occasional communion, let it be Christian, honest, fair, and civil towards all men. 11.  (as the Apostle exhorts. Heb. 12. 15.) i. Act ye every man (respectively) the part of a Bishop, Watchman, or Overseer, one towards, or over, another, lest any man fail of, or
fall from, the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness spring up amongst you, and many be defiled. The exhortation implyeth, that a member of a Church body, cannot lightly putrifie or miscarry, but through the negligence of the body it self, or of its fellow members, as well as through the weakness or unworthyness of the member miscarrying. It is reported as the frequent saying of Matthias the Apostle in his days, ; If the neighbour of an Elect person [meaning of a Christian or Beleever] sinneth, it ar∣gueth that the Elect person himself hath sinned, [meaning in being wanting unto him in such means, which might have preserved him.] Let every mans heart therefore be deeply set within him to take all his present company all along with him (if it be pos∣sible) in his way to Heaven, not suffering any per∣son to straggle, or wander from his fellows in any by-way of sin or vanity. For it seldom happeneth, in case so much as one member in a Church Society breaketh his rank, or turneth after Satan in any way of ungodliness, but that the example wil propagate, yea and occasion many fruits of bitterness and di∣sturbance in the body otherwise. Therefore let every man of you labour to possess his soul with this apprehension, that it very narrowly concerns the in∣terest of his own comfort and peace, to look dili∣gently about him, and to bestir himself, that every member of his Church-brotherhood keep a Christi∣an decorum all along his race, as well as himself. 12. Take heed of falling in your esteem of any the ways and Ordinances of God; and so of cool∣ing§ 19. or languishing in your zeal towards the enjoy∣ment of them. You can want none of them, if
the want be voluntary, but with certain detriment and loss in your spiritual estate. They are like the hollow Trunks or Pipes, which lying between the full fountain or River, and the dry and empty Cistern, joyn them together, and supply the emp∣tyness of the one, out of the native fulness of the other. God is a fountain full of all grace, goodness, light, life, strength, wisdom, knowledge, &c. And his good pleasure is to derive and communicate of his fulness in all these, unto the poor, barren indi∣gent creature, man. But his pleasure is withall to make this derivation (at least, ordinarily) by cer∣tain Ordinances and Administrations, which lye like golden Pipes fastened in the one end to his own heart and soul, and in the other, to the heart and soul of man. And as they dissolve and destroy the com∣munion between the fountain and Cistern, who ei∣ther obstruct, or cut off the Pipe, by which the wa∣ter is conveyed from the one unto the other: so do they estrange themselves from God, and stiffle their Communion with him, who without necessity or justness of occasion, forsake his Ordinances, and separate themselves from them. Most certain it is, that he that hath appointed them for the sons and daughters of men, hath not appointed them in vain: therefore they who forsake them, sin against, and forsake, their own mercies. The best means to preserve you in honourable and worthy thoughts of them, is to use and improve them conscientiously and carefully, and upon every enjoyment of them respectively, to take a steady account what you have spiritually gained by them. The loose and negli∣gent use of them, deprives men of the benefit and blessing of them: and when men and women find
themselves no ways blest by them, they are at the next door to a despising and forsaking them. I have hitherto been your remembrancer of such§ 13. things, which more particularly relate to the keep∣ing of your judgements sound, and untainted with errour, and to the regulation of your behaviour and deprtment in your Church Communion. I shal onely subjoyn (with much more brevity) a few directions, more proper for the manageing of your private and secret converse with your selves and your own souls. Therefore 12. When you reason, or commune, with your hearts, either about the worth, or worthlesness, of of the world that now is, or the good things hereof, or about the worth and consequence of the things of that world, which is to come, let the discourse both of the one, and the other, be managed, maintained and carryed on, as much as may be, in the language, phrases and term of the Scriptures. For God (doubtless) hath sanctified the words and expressions of the Holy Ghost, to make both more adequate and lively impressions of the things sig∣nified by them, upon the hearts and spirits of men, then any other. 13. Amongst such Scripture terms and expressi∣ons, wherein the Holy Ghost speaketh either of Earthly, or Spiritual and Heavenly good things: delight most (in your said secret discourses) to use those which are most emphatical, and neerest to Hyperboles. Such words and exprssions as these frequently used in your Soliloquies, will by degrees habituate your minds to think very indfferently and meanly, of temporal good things, and most high∣ly of the things of Jesus Christ, and of the world
to come. The Scripture in some expressions maketh the greatest and most desireable things of this world next unto nothing, yea nothing it self, and appro∣priates reality, substance, truth, worth and ex∣cellencie of being, unto the things of the world to come. Let such expressions as these, be of choice esteem, and of dayly use with you. It is the observa∣tionAmat tals compositione Paulus Hug. Grot. In Rom. 5. 20. of one, that the Apostle Paul delighteth much in words compounded of the Preposition , the im∣port wherof is to advance and raise the signification of the word compounded with it, as  ▪to omit many others.) The use of such words, or of the notions imported by such words, in your meditations of spiritual and Heavenly things, will be of rich concernment unto you to work in time and by degrees, your judge∣ments and apprehensions of matters relating to both worlds, to a steady conformity with the judgement of God himself, concerning these things, as it is de∣clared in the Scriptures; and so to mold and form your lives and ways accordingly. 14. Know no accommodation, no gratification§ 21. whatsoever to the flesh against the lightest or softest motion of the spirit within you, nor against the least jot or tittle of any the commands of Christ. If you shall deign to take any knowledge of them, you will run an extream hazard of being ensnared and overcome, and so dtawn into greater inconveni∣ency and danger in the end, then you can readily imagine in the beginning. 15. You have opportunity of a four-fold variety of Christian imployment. You may meditate that which is good with your heart: You may do that
which is good with your hand: You may speak that which is good with your tongue: You may hear that which is good with your ears. It is pitty but that one or other of these ploughs should stil be kept going: you can hardly be cast under any such dis∣advantage at any time, but that you may serve the dear interest of your souls, and better your accounts and reckonings at the great day, by exercising your selves in one or other of these worthy engage∣ments. 16. Remember that all time lost, or mispent, though never so truly repented of by you, though never so freely and fully pardoned by God, yet will (occasionally, and in a sence not to be despised by considering men) turn to loss unto you all the days of eternity. For though God, upon the said sup∣positions, will not punish you in the least for your miscarriages in either kind, nor once mention them unto you, yet you cannot expect that he will reward you for them. The highest priviledge that sin, or any unworthyness, is capable of, is pardon: re∣ward is appropriate unto righteousness, Whereas had the time, which you spend idly, or mis-imploy, been sown with the good seed of righteousness, and well-doing, he that giveth to every seed its own body, would have made your harvest of blessedness and glory in the world to come, so much the great∣er and more plentiful. Therefore be diligent and careful to improve the smallest shreds, or broken ends of time. And what shall I say more? For the time would§ 22. fall me to set before you, or to recommend unto you, all that is in my heart for the Christian, com∣fortable, and safe steerage of your course through
the world. I trust that without any recognition, through the grace of God that is given you, you re∣tain in mind many things more of this blessed con∣cernment, which God hath heretofore at several times given in (direction-wise) unto you, by my Doctrine; and that having so much Heavenly light shining round about you, you will not venture your dear souls upon any peradventure, upon any light or loose presumption whatsoever. Ye are in our heart, as the Corinthians sometime were in Pauls, to dye and live together: and I trust I am not upon upon inferior terms in yours. And my hope is rich and precious concerning you, that you will fulfill my joy in being like minded, having the same love, being of one accord▪ and of one mind, in doing nothing through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind each esteeming others better then themselves, looking not every man upon his own things, but every man also on the things of others, &c. Phil. 2. 2. 3. If you shall continue walking in this way, you will find the issues of it, life and peace: And the God of all grace will dwel amongst you for ever. Farewel my Joy, and Crown of rejoycing, in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming; at whose right hand my hope is to meet you all at the Great Day. Yours to serve you freely and faithfully, in the work of an under Sheep-heard. JOHN GOODVVIN. From my Study in Swan-alley, Colman-steeet London. April 3. 1655.
The Contents of the former Part. 1. COlourable arguments for the defence of Error, are more likely to take with men, then solid arguments for the truth, together with the reasons why, pag. 1, 2, 3 2. God requireth both faith and practice, upon grounds more re∣mote, yea upon secrt insinuations, p. 3 3. Many practices may be lawful, yea necessary, for which there is neither expresness of precept, nor of example, in the Scri∣ptures, 5, 6, 7 4. The greatest part of such actions, which ougt out of conscience to God, be to performed, are not either enjoyned by expresness of precept, nor commended by expresness of example, 7, 8 5. Schismaticks alwaies have been extravagantly excessive and importune in magnifying their private opinions, and practises, 8, 9, 10, 11 6. No practise or example in Scripture is obliging unto imitati∣on, but such as are grounded pon some precept or law, 11, 12 7. The less experienced, or skilful persons are, in drawing or framing regular consequences, the more ignorant they are like to be of the mind of God in many things, yea and in the grea∣ter danger to oppose it, 12, 13 8. To multiply bands of conscience above what God hath made them, is (constructively) to dny the Scriptures sufficiency, &c. 13, 14 9. Things plainly taught in the Old Testament, are more spa∣ringly delivered in the New, 14, 15 10. To reject good consequences drawn from the Scriptures, is to reject the authority of the Scriptures themselves, 15, 16 11. One sound argument is sufficient for the eviction of a truth, 16 12. That way of worshipping God wherein a mans soul hath pro∣spered, and prospereth yet daily, is not lightly to be forsaken or exchanged, 17, 18
13. To make any thing necessary which God hath not made such, is to Lord it over the consciences of men, and to usurp divine Authority, pag. 19 14. The subject of an Ordinance is no part of this Ordinance, 19, 20 15. The Law of Nature and personal accommodation, is to su∣per-intend and over-rule Ordinances and Institutions, 20, 21 16. Some things being exra-essential to the nature, and end of an Institution, though observed in the first administration, may be lawfully (yea and commendably in some cases) omitted in after administrations, 21, 22 17. Every defect in the administration of an Ordinance doth not voyd the effect of it, 23, 24 18. The same ground which giveth right to an Ordinance unto any one person, or persons, giveth the same right unto all, in whom it is found, 24, 25, 26 19. It is not necessary that Signs, Seals, or Sacraments should correspond in any natural similitude, 26, 27, 28 20. Institutions may be regularly used and observed, without the observation of any circumstance not enjoyned, 28, 29 21. He is superstitious and a wil-worshipper, who placeth Reli∣gion in any circumstance, or observationont prescribed by God, 29, 30 22. Sacramental engagements the more early imposed, or taken up, are so much the more improveable, & binding also, 30, 31 23. Adult Baptism a seminary of contentions in constituted Churches, 31, 32 24. Infant-baptism more edifying both to the Church, and to the baptised themselves, when come to years of discretion, 32, 33 25. Children admitted unto Baptism in the daies of Christ and of the Apostles, 33 26. Baptism a Seal under the Gospel of the righteousnesse of Faith, as Circumcision was under the Law, 33▪ 34 27. Church-membership a gracious priviledge vouchsafed by God unto Children under the Law, 35 28. The Children of the Jews were involved together with their Parents in their rejection from God, 36, 37 29. The Jewish children were baptized into Moses, as well as their Parents, 37, 38, 39
30. The door of entrance into the Christan Church is more easie and accommodate for children, then it was into the Jewish Church, pag. 39 31. The Baptism of Children born of Christian Parents, was not deferred until adultness of yeares in the Apostles daies, 40, 41 32. Infant-church-membership was no Levitical ceremony, nor abolished by Christ, 42, 43, 44 33. Infant-baptism was practised by such Christians, who con∣versed, if not with the Apostles, yet with their disciples, 46, 47 34. The word , to baptize, frequently signifieth any kind of washing, or rinseing even where no dipping is, 47 35. The derivative verb , is never in the New Testa∣ment used to signifie the act of dipping, but the primitive  only, pag 47, 48. As on the other hand the Sacramental act of baptizing is never expressed by the primitive , but by the frequentative or derivative, , ibid. 36. The administration of water-baptism is very frequently ex∣pressed by a baptism with water, seldom, or not at all, by a baptizing into water, 48, 49 37. No Baptismal administration can regularly be performed, either in whole, or in part, by the person who is baptized, 50, 51 38. The water wherein the Eunuch was baptized was not deep enough for dipping, 51, 52 39. Baptizing with the Holy Ghost, and baptizing with Water, expressed in the Scriptures by one and the same preposition, 52, 53 40. To pour water on the body of the person baptized, doth more significantly resemble burial, then the dpping into water doth, 53, 54 41. The nature of Baptism representeth the gracious act of Christ applying himself unto us, 54, 55 42. No kind of washing is performed or made onely by the appli∣cation of the thing to be washed, unto the water, but of the water unto it 55, 56 43. Dipping, either naked, or cloathed, inconvenient 56 44. To dip or wash all over, was the practice of Idolatrous na∣tions, 58
45. It cannot be proved that any Baptismal Administration re∣corded in the Scripture was performed by dipping; but is ex∣ceeding probable that many were performed without it, 59, 60, &c. 46. The baptizing children of Christians (ordinarily) at years of discretion, is inconsistent with the Gospel rule for baptizing, 70, 71 47. The custom of adult Baptism amongst thse born in the Church, first entered into the Church by unhallowed door, and was entertained, when practised, upon unwarrantable and Popish grounds, 73, 74 48. The generation of men commonly known by the name of A∣na-baptists, have alwaies been injurious to the Gospel, 75, 76, &c. 49. The wrath of God hath been from time to time revealed from heauen against the way of Ana-baptism, and those who unre∣pentingly have walked in it, 80, 81, &c. 50 It hath very seldom been known, that any opinion or practise, though never so wicked, uncouth, or absurd, was ever set on foot amongst Christian Professors, but that it gathered a considera∣ble number of Proselytes to it, 89 51. By-opinions and practises, which bear, or seem to bear, hard upon the flesh, are apt to take with four sorts of persons, 90 91 52. No kind of Sect have (more generally) been more hardened in the way of their errour, or more un-perswasible out of it, then those who have been able to pretend the plain Letter of the Scripture, though misunderstood, for their opinion or practise, especially when a letter of like plainess cannot be produced a∣gainst them, 91, 92 53. When men and women are inordinate in valuing or prizing an erroneous, whether opinion, or practise, there is the less hope of reclaiming them from either, 92, 93 54. A the Scripture sometimes under the word MEN compre∣hendeth Women as well as Men, yea and sometimes Children also, so under the expression MEN AND WOMEN, it more frequently comprehendeth Children, 94 55. It is lawful, yea commendable for beleevers to devote, sepa∣rate, and design their children, whilst it is yet early with them, even from the conception and the womb, to the service of God
and Jesus Christ, pag. 95, 96 56. The truth of an Ordinance, or Gods approving, or allowing of an Ordinance, as his, cannot better be estimated, or known, then when he blesseth it unto those who receive it, 96, 97 57. Baptism received in Infancy, and this without dppig, is neither a nullity, nor device, or institution of man, 97, 98 58. Baptism, as all types and typical Ordinances, is one of those things which are , and not , i. e. which are instituted and given for some greater things sake than them∣selves, 98, 99.
The Contents of the latter part of the ensuing Discourse, according to the respective Sections thereof. 1. STicklers about Baptism now, and about Circumcision of old, compared, Sect. 2 2. The present controversie not properly about Bapism it self, sect. 3, 5 3. The present contest relating unto Baptism, better laid aside by the party's contesting, then weak consciences disturb'd with it. 5 4. Mr. A. doth nt state his question clearly so much as to his own sence, 6 5. Mr. A. and his Scripture-proofs divided about the way to sa∣tisfaction, 7. 9 6. God hath authorized the Lw of Nature to over-rule admi∣nistrations of Institutions, 8 7. Persons not truly repentant may be duly baptized, 10 8. Primitive practises may be lawfully varyed from, upon exigen∣cie of circumstances, 11 9. eer matter of fact, no good foundation to prove, eithr the lawfulness or unlawfulness, of a practise about an instituted Ordinance, in all cases, 13 10. Conclusio sequitur deteriorem partem, 14. 48 11. No particular Administration of an Ordinance, can answr the whole mind or counsel of God in, or about, the said ordinance, 14 12. Wy the Apostles might omit, though not neglect, the baptizing of children, notwithstanding they might lawfully have done it, 15 13. How the reasons, upon which the Apostles might forbear In∣fant-baptism, may, and may not be binding to the like for∣bearance now, 16 14. Two reasons why the Pastors of Churches now, may be in a better capacity of baptizing Infants, then the Apostles or their Assistants, were, 18, 19, 20
15. How Christ and the Apostles to be imitated in what they did, and did not, sect. 21 16. The total silence of the Scriptures about baptizing Infants, what kind of proof, and how it may be construed, 22, 23 17. How the baptizing of Housholds in the Scripture proveth Infant-baptism, 24 18. How Christ's laying on hands on Children, &c. proveth In∣fant-baptism, 25, 40, 132, 157, 158 19. Augustin, a frequent and constant assertor of Infant-bap∣tism from the Apostles, 26 20. The testimony of Antient Writers for the practise of In∣fant-baptism by the Apostles, upon what grounds, authentique, 27 21. No History recordeth the original of Infant-baptism, 28 22. Auxentius an Arrian, the first opposer of Infant baptism; and Ludovicus Hetzer (another Arrian, and somwhat worse) the first reviver of the opposition in Germany, 29 23. Mr. A's Baptism a nullitie, according to his own principles, 29 24. No contests heard of from the Jews against the Apostles, for excluding their Children from Baptism, an argument that they were baptized, 30, 31 25. No reason imaginable why the Precept or Ordinance of Christ about the subject of Baptism should be changed by the Primitive Fathers, 32 26. Practise of Ana-baptism, standeth onely upon foundations, that are either loose, or irrelative, 33 27. A submission unto Baptism no argument of the great suc∣cesse of the Gospel, 35, 36, 38, 39 28. The Holy Ghost at librty in drawing up his own records, 36 29. Ʋnder the expression of Men and Women, in the Scriptures, children also are sometimes comprehended, 37 30. Baptizing of Men and Women no proof of the success of the Gospel, 38, 39 31. Suffer little children to come unto me, how proveth that Infants were baptized in the Apostles daies, 40, 41, 158 32. A non-scriptum proveth not a non-factum, 42 33. Neither the qualifications, nor the persons described of all
that were baptised, 42 34. No firm arguing from order of expressing, 43 35. To teach, and to make Disciples, how widely differ, 44 36. When a mans grounds for his opinions are insufficient, and so evicted, answering of some objections, though never so substan∣ially, will not relieve them, 45, 168 37. Mr. A's second argument, as much against the counsel of God in circumcision, as against the opinion of his Adversaries in the point of Baptism▪ 46, 49 38. The greater serviceableness of a thing in one case, proveth not the unlawfulness of it in all others, 47, 48, 53, 118 39. The manifestation of Christ to the world, no end of Bap∣tism, 50. 51. nor yet to the baptised themselves, 53 40. When Baptizing is customary and in fashion, it is no sign or proof of any mans Faith or Repentance, 54 41. Infant-baptizing, as much, or rather more, instructing, e∣difying, quickning, &c. unto spectators, as men-baptizing, 56, 73, 159, 160 42. How the Priests and Elders rejected the counsel of God a∣gainst themselves, not hauing been baptized of John, 57, 58 43. Persons duly baptized, do not alwaies take up the Ordinance out of a principle of Repetance, 60 44. Remission of sins to be looked for, upon Repentance, without, or before Baptism, 61, 131, 175 45. Circumcision, not a sign and seal of the righteousnesse of Faith, unto Abraham only, 61 46. The Verb substantive oft used in a declarative sence, 62 47. What it was that properly constituted Abraham the father of all that beleeve, 62 48. Rom. 4. 11. thoroughly understood, gives a great light into the Question about Baptism, 64 49. Children in a capacity of engaging to the practise of Repen∣tance, as wel as men, 64, 65, 68, 69, 182 50. One end of Baptism better answered or provided for by mens-baptism, doth neither prove the baptizing of children unlaw∣ful, nor yet that another end thereof, may not be better provided for hereby, 67, 98 51. The end of planting not made frustrate, by the non-fructifi∣ation of the tree immediately upon the planting of it, 69, 152
52. Baptism how needfull for children, Sect. 71. 53. No profession or declaration made unto the world by Mr. A's. Baptizing, 72. 75. 73. 54. Profession made by Parents at their childrens baptizing, a available unto others, as by other men at their Baptism, 73. 55. A person duly baptized, is not an Agent, but a patient, in his Baptism, 76. 56. Whther a man be to sign and seal the Articles of his Cove∣nant with God at the time of his entring hereunto, before wit∣nesses, &c. 75. 76. 98. 57. Baptism not to be taken up in order to rmission of sins, 77. 61 58. Mr. A most unchristianly taxeth the whole Christian world, 79. 59. Arguments, proving that a Declaration of a mans Re∣pentance by Baptism is not required on his part, to interess him in remission of sins, 80. 81. 82, &c. 60. Faith and reptance, according to Mr. A, but dead works, until Baptism quickeneth them, 81. 89: 61. Submission to a carnal commandment is not of more ac∣cepration with God, then unto a spiritual, 80. 62. Mr. A. adjudgeth the whole generation of Christians (a very fw only excepted) both ancient and modern, as well Fa∣thers, Martyrs, and Reformers, as others, unto eternal condemnation, 81. 63. Baptism can be no Declaration of any mans Repentance. 82. 52, 64. The Apostle Paul no where interesseth Baptism in justifi∣cation, or in the obtaining of remission of sins, 83. 65. The remission of his sins, who truly repenteth, or beleevth, is not suspended upn what another man may possibly refuse to do unto him, § 83. 18. much less upon what would be sinful in himself to yeeld unto, 84. 88. 66. Abrahams spiritual children are justified after the same manner ith him, 85. 67. Baptism may relate unto salvation, as some other of the Commandments of God may do, and yet not unto justifiction, or remission of sins, 86. 87 68. Salvation not suspended by God upon any modality of acting not expresly and precisely determined by himself, but obtruded
by men, 87. 69. Mr. A. cannot substantially prove, that baptizing, Mark 16. 16. is to be understood of water-Baptism, 88. 70. What remission of sins understood, Act. 2. 37. § 90. and what Bap∣tism, §. 91, 92, 93. 71. Protestants (generally) against remission of sins by Baptism; Pa∣pists generally for it, 94. 72. A particular or personal injunction under some circumstance, not ge∣nerally obliging upo the same terms, or in order to the same end, 95. 73. The promise of remission of sins, was made unto faith and repentance long before Baptism was in being, and so could not be suspended upon it, 95. 148. 74. The prescription of one means for the obtaining of an end, is not ex∣clusive of this attainment by all others, 95. 75. The order of things▪ as well that of time, as that of nature, is oft in∣terchanged in the Scriptures, 97. 76. No mans publique assent unto the terms of the Gospel is entred by Baptism, 98. 77. The justification of God in the sight of the world is no effect of Bap∣tism, 99. 100 78. Infant-Baptism contributes as much, or more, to the justification of God in the world, as the baptizing of men and women, 101. 102. 79. Baptism no part of the Gospel, 102. 80. Gal. 3. 24, 25, 26 opened, 104. 105, &c. 81. Faith under the Gospel different from that under the Law, 105. 82. When a thing may be dont after don after different manners, they that do it not after one manner, may d it after another, 107. 83. Baptism doth not characterise men to be truly Christs, 108. 84. Whether, or how, Baptism makes visible Saints, 109. 113. 52. 85. Baptism is no partition wall between Saints and the world, 112. 86. Saints visible before baptized, 113. 114. 87. Mr. A's. similiude to prove that men and women receive a relative being n Christ by Baptism, lame, and halting right down, 115. 116. 88. To put on Christ in Baptism, dth not signify, to make an actual declaration or profession unto the world, that men own and acknowledge Christ to be come in the flsh &c. 118. 89. Infants ith as much propriety and truth of speaking, may be said to put on Christ in Baptim, as men, 119. 90. It cannot b proved rom the Scriptures, that men put on Christ, or are said to put on Christ, by Baptism, 119
91. The Analogy or proportion between Infant-Baptism, and Infant-circumcision maintained, 120. 121. 122, &c. 92. Whether the remaining of circumcision in the flesh, any ground of a disproportion, &c. 121. 122, &c. 93. The validity of the testimony of Parents, Neighbours. &c. concerning mens Baptism, 123. 124. 94. The Jews had no knowledge of their being circumcised, but from their Parents or others, &c. 123. 95. Little or no inconvenience in being deceived by Parents, or others, touching a mans having been baptized, 124. 125. 96. Mr: A's. children left at more uncertainty touching their Baptism, in case of their parents death, &c. then those baptized in their Infancie, according to the received manner of the Churches, where they were born, 125. 97. Circumcision, not profitable without keeping the Law, 126. 127. 98. The Gospel requireth as strict and absolute obedience, as the Law; but exacteth it not upon the like terms, 128. 99. Children void of understanding not more capable of holy things, or of the ends or benefi of them under the Law, then under the Gospel, 129. 100. How the Answer or rather, demand, of a good conscience towards God, saveth us, 130. 101. The services of the Law of no better acceptance with God, without Faith and Repentance, then the services of the Gospel, 130. 102. That which is promised, and given, upon the Antecedent, cannot be suspended upon the consequent, 131. 103. Circumcision was not therefore weak or less spiritual, because ad∣ministred unto children. 132. 104. Weakness and unprofitableness, comparatively onely, imputed to the Law, 133. 105. Infant-Baptism as well reacheth the ends of Baptism, as Infant-circumcision the ends of circumcision, 134. 106. What is less edifying, is not therefore more sutable to the Legal mi∣nistration, 136. 107. The principal Arguments for Infant-Baptism, are not deducted from the example of circumcision, 137. 108. Mr. A. buildeth as well upon the rudiments of the world, as Pedo-Baptists, 137. 109. Circumcision ordered by God in the administration of it, to the best advantage for the Churches edification, that such an Ordinance or ser∣vice could be,
110. In what respect the Gospel-Ministration, before the Legal, 139. 111. The guidance of the Holy Ghost, whether, or in what sense, at any time, or in any person fallible. 141. 112. Christ and his Apostles are to be imitated in the methods and grounds of their arguings, 142. 113. Things of a moral consideration, and of ready perception from the Scripturs, need not the voucher of the extraordinary Authority of the Speaker, 143. 114. Baptism supposed, with the ends of it, the baptizing of Infants is of a moral consideration, 144. 115. Whether Infant-Baptism be agreeable, or disagreeable to the Gos∣pel-Ministration, 145. 116. Whether Baptism be a part of the Gospel Ministration, 146. 117. Baptism no contributer towards the receiving of the Spirit, 147. 118. The mention of two things for the obtaining of a third, doth not all∣ways suppose a necessity of both for this attainment, 148. 119. The promis of receiving remission of sins, and the Spirit, is an old, Testament promise, and so not made at all unto water-Baptism, 148. 149. 120. A comparative sence oft expressed in a positive form, 150. 121. A subsequent consent as valid to all ends and purposes, as an An∣tecedent, 151, 164. 122. Whether men baptized in unbeleef, ought to be rebaptized in case of their beleeving afterwards, 151. 123. Words and actions at present not understood, may do service, and obtain their ends afterwards, 152. 124. Why, and how, children capable of Baptism, and yet not of the Lords I able, 153. 125. Faith not put Gal. 3. 23. 25. for the whole Ministration of the Gospel, 154. 126. Infant-Baptism, to whom an apparent breach of the Laws of the Gospel miistration, 155. 127. That none ought to be baptized, but such who appear voluntarily willing, &c. refuted by sundry arguments, 156, 157, 158, &c. 128. Imposition of hands in what respect a greater Ordinance, then Bap∣tism, 157. 129. Infant-Circumcision was more edifying, then men-circumcision would have been, 159. 160. 130. Infant-Baptism how comporteth with the exhortation, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, 161.
131. Baptism, in respect of the baptized, no action, or service performed, though a submission unto Baptism may be, 163. 132. Profession of Baptism, and perseverance herein, more rewardable by God, then the act of being baptized, or of once submitting unto Bap∣tism, 164. 133. No argument of any pregnant import, to disable Infant▪ Baptism, 167, 171. 134. Any thing is sufficient to satisfie some, in some cases, 16. 135. A cause is not made good by aswering an objection. 168. 136. Sonship unto God how accrueth unto Children, 169. 137. Mr. Tombs, nd Mr. Fisher, yea the Rebaptized Churches themselves, at ods in points neerly relating to the question of Rebaptizing 170. 138. How all children are capable of Baptism, and how nt, 171. 139. Baptism why described, or termed, the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, 176. 140. Baptism whether administrable unto Repentants only, 177. 141. Baptism the more for the good of man, because Infants capable of it, 178. 142. Baptism how beneficial without faith, 179. 143. What it must be that qualifieth for it, 180. 144. What love of God, and in what respect, immediately qualifieth for Baptism, 181. 145. The faith which was in Christ, was not of the same kind with the faith of other beleevers, 183, 184. 146. The sameness of expressions, doth not prove the sameness of thins, 184. 147. Whether Christ was baptized upon the account of his beleeving him self to be the Sn of God, 185. 186. 148. That faith qualifieth for Baptism, as it is dclarative of spiritual Sonship, § 188, 189. and this by the will▪ or appointment of God, 190. 149. Christ did not make a dedication of himself to the sevice of the Go∣spel, by the solemnity of Baptism, 191. 150. The reason of Christs choice of the season, wherein he was baptized, in reference hereunto, 193. 151. Persons may be baptized in conformity to a Law of righteousness, and yet not to that Law, by which Christ was baptizd, 192. 152. Christ was not baptized in conformity to the common Law of Bap∣tism, 194.
CONSIDERATION. I. Clourable Arguments and Grounds levied and insistedThe first head of Considera∣ion, being of  more gene∣al import, & elatng unto her case▪ & Controversie, as wel as those about Ordi∣nances, or Baptism. upon for th defence of Error, are more likely to take with ordinary capacities and apprhensions, yea and with those that are somewhat pregnant and ripe, esp∣cially at first, and fr a season, then those which are sound and substantial, and dmonstrative of truth. Proof. Error befriendeth mens corruptions, comporteth with their lusts, justifieth them in their carnal and sensual ends▪ and consequently in such ways and practises also, which are pro∣per and likely to advance and procure them. Upon this ac∣count it cometh to pass, that men and women (more gene∣rally) having several corruptions to gratifie, worldly▪ and car∣nal ends to pursue, &c. have a secret and inward proneness and propension unto Error, as that which under the name of Truth pretends to bless them in their way. Now when a person, man, or woman, secretly wisheth that such a Doc∣trine, or Opinion, were a Truth, or may be sound to be a Truth, a very slender and weak argument in favor of it easi∣ly fills and satisfies them, and disposeth them to cry out with the High Priest, What have we any more need of winesses? Mat. 26. 65. especially when their judgments and under∣standings, are but ordinary and weak. Yea men and women, for the maintaining of themselves in peace, in ways and prac∣tises that are corrupt and sinful, are of a listening and har∣ening disposition, as well after Teachers, as grounds and ar∣guments
which will strengthen, comfort and support them therein; and when they meet with either, they rejoyce over them, as if they had found great spoils. Whereas the Truth is a most severe enemy to all worldly lusts, to all sinister and corrupt ends of men; and consequently to all such methods, ways and practises, which are calculated for the compassing and obtaining of them, giving men no countenance, rest or peace in such ways. From whence it comes to pass (neither can it in reason be otherwise) that persons generally are pos∣sest▪ with a marvellous aversness and frowardness of spirit a∣gainst the Truth, extreamly unwilling that such an opinion should be owned or acknowledged for a Truth, especially by them, the face whereof is set, and which peremptorily threa∣teneth, to separate between them and their beloved lusts, or otherwise to shame, trouble and torment them in the fulfill∣ing of them. By means of this great aversness in men to be convinced of the Truth, it cometh to pass (as frequent expe∣perience teacheth) that Arguments and Grounds of greatest evidence and power, for the eviction, manifestation, and de∣monstration of the Truth, are but as the shadows of the mountains unto them, clouds without water, and words with∣out weight. And so the Truth it self, though mightily evinced, is by them respected under the reproachful notion and name of Error. Both these particulars, as well the incredible avers∣ness in men to admit of Truth, though coming to them in the clearest▪ light of Evidence and Demonstration, as that strange propenseness towards the entertainment of Error (lately mentioned) are plainly asserted by the Apostle, 2 Tim. 4. 3. For the time will come, when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts will heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears. The metaphor of itching ears, implies, 1. The unclean distempers in the hearts and spirits of men, as the itch (properly so called) is to the flesh or bodies of men. 2. It implies also the great and impatient desire and propenseness which is in such persons to be spiritually scratched, i. e. to have these distempers of theirs, only so touched and handled by Teachers, that it may be matter of pleasure and gratifica∣tion unto them; as indeed it is, when such things are deli∣vered in the Name of God, and as from the Scriptures,
whereby they are really comforted, and seemingly and to their own sence, justified in their evil ways. Consectary. If colourable and light arguments, levied and managed for the defence of Error, be more apt to take and satisfie ordi∣nary capacities and persons unskilful in the Word of Truth, then arguments of greatest pregnancy and weight, raised and held forth for the vindication of the Truth, then need it not seem strange unto any man, that such multitudes should be ensnared and carried away in their judgments, as dayly are, unto the opinion, which fighteth against the Baptizing of Children, with such arguments which have little weight, worth, or substance in them. CONSIDERATION II. GOd requireth and expecteth from men, as well to beleeve, as to practise, not only upon Grounds plain and near at hand, (such, I mean, which as it were at the first sight, and by plainness and palpableness of inference, enforce, either the truth to be beleeved, or the thing to be practised,) but even upon grounds somewhat more remote, yea and secret insinuations, and from which, neither can the truth that is to be beleeved, nor the action or thing that is to be practised, be evinced, or inferred, but by a diligent exercise and close engagement of the reason, judgment, and understanding of a man. Prof. When God spake thus unto Moses, out of the midst of the burning bush, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, (Exod. 3. 6.) he expected that men should beleeve the Resurrection of the dead upon the account of these words, (and practise accordingly.) This is evident from that of our Saviour to the Sadduces, (Mat. 22. 31, 32.) But as touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read what was spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, &c. clearly implying▪ that these men (and others) stood bound in duty, and in conscience towards God, upon the account and ground of such words as these, to have beleeved the rising again of the dead, and that it was their sin, having such a ground of proof for it, not to beleeve it. Yet could not the truth be gathered or inferred from the
said words, but by a diligent, close and intense working of the rationative faculty and understanding, as is evident. No nor can our Saviours own demonstration it self (in the place men∣toned) of the said truths from the words, be apprehended, without some considerable engagement of the mnd and in∣tellectual powers of the Soul. So likewise he expected that from the example of David and his men eating the Shew∣bread, the Pharisees should have understood and known that it was lawful for men to pluck ears of corn on the Sabbath day, (Mat. 12. 23.) yet the argument here was not of so ready a perception. The Apostle saith that God hath exhi∣bited faith, or given assurance unto all men that he will judg the World in righteousness by the man whom he hath or∣dained [meaning Christ,] in that he hath raised him from the dead, (Acts 17. 31.) Yet it is a matter of no obvious concep∣tion, how to conceive or make the act of God in raising Christ from the dead, a sufficient ground of assurance that he will judg the World in righteousness by him. So when Moses avenged the Israelit▪ by smiting and slaying the E∣gyptian, who oppressed him, he supposed and expected that hs Brethren would have understood, and beleeved, tht God by his hand would deliver them, Acts 24. 25. His supposition and expectation in this kind▪ cannot be judged unreasonable; nay certainly they were regular and agreeable to the mind of God himself▪ Yet was this fact of Moses in vindicating the Israelite, and smiting the Egyptian, no such pregnant argument at the first sight, no ground of a ready or easie conviction unto his Brethren the Israelites, that God by his hand in∣tended to effect that great Deliverance from the Egyptian Bondage, which afterwards (we know) he did effect by him. Nor did his Brethren the Israelites, no not so much as any one of them (as far as can be gathered from the Scriptures, and as is most probable) apprehend or understand any such thing thereby. The Apostle Paul expected that the Corinthi∣ans (and so, other Christians) should hear, know, and under∣stand, that it was their duty to afford competent maintenance to the Ministers of the God, from and by means of, this Mo∣saical Law, Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox, that treadeth out the corn, 1 Cor. 9. 8, 9, 10. See also, 1 Tim. 5. 18.
And yet this Law was nothing so obvious and clear a ground for such a duty and practise, as the Command of God for the Circumcising Children under the Law, is for their Bap∣tizing, the Commandment of Baptism, or the change of the Ordinance only supposed, under the Gospel. Consectary. If God requireth of men, as well to beleeve, as practise, not onely upon plain and express grounds, such as from whence, that which ought to be beleeved, or practised, may readily, and without the mediation of a Consequence, be in∣ferred, but upon grounds also more remote, and from which the thing to be beleeved, or practised, cannot be inferred or drawn, but by force of argument, & by a narrow and through debate of the understanding; then it roundly followeth that Infant-Baptism may be a duty, and necessary to be practised, though the grounds evincing it should lie much deepe in the Scriptures, then now they do, and not be so obvious to persons uncapable (whether through passion, and shortness of spirit, or through weakness or scantness of under∣standing) of a narrow sifting of, and through searching into, matters of a more difficult consideration. CONSIDERATION III. MAny practises may be lawful, yea and necessary, which are neither enjoyned by any expressness of recept, nor yet countenanced or warranted by any expressness of Example, in the Scriptures. Proof. 1. By expressness of Precept, I mean a Precept or Command of such a Tenor of words, which doth plainly, and accord∣ing to the literal and grammatical sence of the words, and without the mediation of any inference, or deduction, re∣quire such or such a practice. So likewise by expressness of example, I mean, an action or practise every ways, or in all circumstances, semblable unto, or parallel with, the prac∣tise in question. As for example: Children are com∣manded to reverence or honor their Parents by expresness of precept in the fift Commandment; but they are not upon the like terms (I mean, by expresness of precept) here com∣manded to relieve them, when they stand in need, with
their substance; though it be granted, that this may rea∣sonably be understood, to be here commanded also; be∣cause to regard those that are in want, so as to relieve and support them, is a casting of honor or respect upon them. See 1 Tim. 5. 3. 17. Judg. 9. 9. 2. By necessary, I mean, that which ought to be done, or which a person stands bound in duty and conscience unto God to do. These terms explained by the way, we pro∣ceed to the proof of the consideration. It was lawful (yea and in a sence necessary) that the Di∣sciples passing through the corn fields, though on the Sab∣bath day, should, being an hungry, pluck ears of corn,Mat. 12. 1, 2 &c. and eat; otherwise our Saviour would not have justified them in this action, against those which reproved them. But certain it is, that the Disciples were not able to pro∣duce, either expresness of precept, or example from the Scrip∣ture, whereby to warrant such an action: Nor doth our Saviour himself produce either the one or the other, upon this account. So also it was necessary and matter of duty, from the beginning of the preaching of the Gospel by men, for those that were instructed and taught therein, to supply their Teachers with things necessary, and to make them par∣takers of all their goods Gal 6. 6. 1 Cor. 9. 14, &c.. Even so (saith the Apostle) hath the Lord ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel: yet had they no expressness either of pre∣cpt or example, to engage them hereunto, until afterwards; as viz. when this Apostle declared the Ordinance or Institu∣tion of God in this behalf (in the words now cited) and else∣where; Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teacheth, in all good things. Again, when Davd, and they that were with him, being an hungry, ate the Shew∣bread, they did nothing herein, but what was very warrant∣able, yea and (in a degree at least) necessary, as our Saviour himself supposeth, Mat. 12. 3, 4. Yet had they neither plain∣ness nor expressness of precept, nor yet of example, to warrant them in the action; nor doth Christ plead or alledg either of these for the justification thereof; but only such an ex∣ample, the warrantableness whereof stood upon the same or like grounds of reason and equity with this. Many other in∣stances
and cases of like consideration, might easily be added from the Scriptures. Consectary. If many actions may be warrantable, and necessary, for which the Scripture holdeth forth, neither expressness of precept, nor of example, then must the grand Argument and Plea against Infant-Baptism, viz. that it hath neither plain∣ness of precept, nor of example in the Scriptures, to justifie it, needs be impertinent and weak. For that the premised Conclusion holds good in matter of Institution (at least so far as concerns the Baptizing of Infants, and the main design of this brief discourse) shall be shewed afterwards. CONSIDERATION IV. THe far gratest part of such actions, which men and women perform out of conscience towards God, are not enjoyned, or commended unto them, by God, either by expressness of precept, or particularity of example, in the Scriptures, but only, eiter by some general Precept or Rule, or by some example (one, or more) carrying in it some rational proportion thereunto. Proof. When a Minister of the Gospel preacheth unto his people out of the Gospel according to John, seasonably (for exam∣ple) and faithfully opening and applying unto them, the 27 or 28 verse of the sixth Chapter (or any other,) he per∣forms this work out of conscience towards God. Yet hath he neither expressness of command, nor of example, to ju∣stifie or commend this action or exercise unto him. But that which he doth in this kind, is sufficiently warranted, partly by those general and indefinite precepts, which are given un∣to Ministers, to preach the Word, to preach the Gospel, &c. [2 Tim. 4. 2. Mark 16. 15. &c.] partly by those examples of worthy and faithf Ministers of the Gospel, and of the Lord Christ himself, who are reported in Scripture to have preached accordingly. When a Beleever gives a shilling, two, twenty, or more, either by way of alms, or to promote some charitable and good work, he may well be presumed to do it out of conscience to God, and according to the exigen∣cy of his duty: yet is not such an act, I mean the giving of a shilling, two or more, upon that particular occasion, on
which he giveth it, either imposed upon him, or warranted unto him, either by any express Command from God, or any particular example in the Scriptures. There is the same rea∣son of our eating, drinking, sleeping, recreating our selves, buying, selling, marrying, building, &c. There is none of all these, but a man and woman may do, yea and ought to do, according to exigency of circumstance and occasion, out of conscience towards God: and yet most certain it is, that none of all these actions, with all those circumstances under which they are, and ought to be performed by men and wo∣men, are any where expresly commanded by God, or war∣ranted by any parallel example in the Scriptures. But the lawfulness, yea and necessity of them in case, is left by God to be infer'd, gathered and concluded by men, by the exercise and engagement of their judgments, consciences, and under∣standings, from such general precepts and directions as like∣wise from such examples upon Scripture record, which con∣cern and relate unto such actions. Consectary. If far the greater part of all we do out of conscience to∣wards God, be not in all particularities of circumstance, war∣ranted, or enjoyned, either by particular expressness of pre∣cept, or example, in the Scripture, but only by the generality of either, it clearly follows, that the application or administra∣tion of Baptism unto Infants, may be warrantable, yea and necessary, and to be performed out of conscience to God, although it hath not the warranty of any express precept, or particularity of example. CONSIDERATION V. JT hath still been the manner and practise of men, who have turned aside from the Communion of other Churches, or from the sence of the generality of Saints, into any by-way of opinion, or practise, to be extravagantly excessive and impor∣tune in magnifying, iter the necessity, or beneficialness, or both, of those opinions and practises, for which they have ex∣changed the Christian Communion of the Churches and Saints of God. Proof. Eunomius, the Heretick, maintained this Doctrine, (by
way of dissent from orthodox Christians) That the Son of God is altogether unlike unto the Father, and the Holy Ghost unlike unto the Son. And notwithstanding the groundlessness (indeed the manifest and dangerous erroneousness) of this opinion, yet he attributeth this high Priviledg unto it, that Whosoever beleeved it, could not possibly perish, how wickedly soever he lived Eunomius desendit anc haeresiu, dissi∣milem per omnia Patri asserens Fili∣um, & Filio Spiritū San∣ctum. Fertur etiā us{que} ad∣eo fuisset bo∣nis moribus inimicus, ut asse▪ veraret, quod nihil cui{que} obesset quorumlibet perpetratio ac perseve∣rantia pecca∣torum, si hu∣jus, quae ab illo doceba∣tur, fidei par∣ticeps effet. Aug. de Hae∣res. c. 54.. Jovinian a Monk (with his followers) ascribed such virtue to that which they call'd true Baptism, that they who were baptized herewith, could sin no more A Jovinia∣no quodam Monacho ista haeresis orta est aetate nostra—Hic omnia peccata, sicut Stoici Philosophi, paria esse dicebat: nec posse peccare hominem Lavacro re∣generationis accepto, &c. Aug. de Haeres. c. 82.. The Donatists ascribed all Christian worth and excellency (upon the matter) to their Sect and Opinions, in denying that there was any true Church of Christ in all the world, but only amongst them, and despising all other Christians, but themselves; and yet giving entertainment to most vile and wicked men in their Communion Nam illi (Donatistae) dicebant universum rbem Christianum Ecclsiam non habere—Deinde qui praese omnes alios Christianos condemnabant, severitatem censura in suos re∣laxaverant, & in suis Caetibus homines impurissimos, ut Optatos, Gildonia∣nos, Primianos{que} patibantur. Pet. Martyr. Loc. Class. 4. c. 5. sect. 15., as if the giving the right hand of fellowship unto them in their way, rendred them men holy and religious in the midst of the practise of all wickedness. Even as some of the Rebaptized Congregations (for I cannot say it of all) judg no better of the best and worthiest Christians, who refuse to do homage to their opi∣nion and practise about their new Baptism, then as persons unclean, and with whom they should pollute themselves to hold Christian Communion in any part of Gods Worship, though otherwise they be persons countenanced from Hea∣ven both with gifts and graces, far above themselves: and yet in conjunction with this their Samaritanizing better Jews then themselves, they reward with the honor and re∣pute of their Society, persons of unworthy, infamous and scandalous deportment, if their consciences will but serve them to bow down (or rather, to be bowed down) before
them in the water. Theophanes attributed so much to the use of Images in Religious Worship, that he censured Con∣stantine the Emperor, by-named, Copronymus, as an Apostate from God, for opposing Images and Idol-worship Theophanes Missel. l. 21. c. ult. Et Jo∣seph Mede, Apostacy of the latter times, p. 131.. Some Jewish Teachers labored to possess men with such an high opinion of their Tradition and practise of washing hands be∣fore meat, as that they ought to look upon him that should neglect or not observe it, as one that lieth with an harlot Ainsworth in Levit. 15. 12.. The Authors and Abettors of that hideous Doctrine, That God seeth no sin in persons justified, pronounce all those Tray∣tors to the Blood of Christ that hold the contrary P. Gunter Sermon of Justification, printed An. 1615. Pre∣face to the Reader, p. 3.. The Monks, who generally were the Compilers of the Histories of this Nation in former times, placed so much of the very essence (as it were) of Religion in reverencing the Bishops and Monks of those times, that (as Daniel, a late English Hi∣storian observeth) they personated all their Princes, either religious or irreligious, as they humored, or offended, the Bi∣shops Rochet and Monks belly. Mr Joseph Mede reports out of the Records of that Idolatrous Council (the second atg Sectym∣nus Vindica∣tion, p. 8. Nice) that one Theodore an Abbot gave this advice to a Monk, who (as himself informed him) was threatened by the Devil, that he would never cease vexing and molesting him by temptations unto fornication, until he left worship∣ing the Image of the Blessed Virgin; that the said Abbot (I say) gave this advice to this recluse; that it were better he frequented all the Stews in the City, then not to worship Christ and his Mother in an Image Apostacy of the latter times. p. 140.. Which plainly shews how highly conceited this Abbot was of his opinion and practise of Image-worship. The Papists are so intoxicated with a conceit of the Popes Supremacy, and their Subjection untoSubesse Roma∣no Pontifici est de necessi∣t. te salutis. him, that they make it no less then the loss of Heaven and of Salvation, for any person to refuse subjection unto him. Even as many of the Contra-Remonstrant perswasion amongst us, with others of their fancy in the Doctrine of Predestination, and extent of the death of Christ, the efficacy of Grace, &c. although their opinions in these Points be most anti-rational, anti-Scriptural, and (though they consider it not) as neer un∣to Blasphemy as Faith is to belief, or a reasonable creature to a man, yet do they begin, and this with an high hand, to lift
them up so neer unto Heaven, as to affirm, that there can be no true work of grace in any man, who is not perswaded of the truth of them. And thus many Anabaptists of late (as some have done formerly) commend the practise of theirSee the Epi∣stle Dedica∣tory, sect. 2. 3. way of Baptizing upon such terms, that they profess them∣selves jealous and doubtful of the Salvation of all those, whose judgments and consciences do not jump with theirs in the said practise; yea and seem▪ to suspect themselves as over-charitable, for doubting only, and not determin∣ing, in the case. Consectary. If it be, and always hath been, so extreamly incident unto by-way men, to please themselves with high thoughts of the excellency of such opinions and practises, wherein they chuse to walk alone by themselves apart from the Community of Saints, and holy men, then is it a strong presumption (at least) against the way (best known by the name) of Ana∣baptism, that it is a by-path, and none of the ways of God, because it hath this fatal Character engraven upon it: it is above all measure magnified by those that have separated themselves into it. CONSIDERATION VI. NO practise, or example in Scripture is obliging unto imi∣tation, or conformity, but such, which were grounded upon some Precept, or Law. Proof. Neither need ther any great light of argument, whereby to see the truth of this Consideration. For if there should be any thing done by any person, commendably, or worthy imi∣tation, not commanded, or commended, unto men by some divine Precept, or other, the Law of God must needs be im∣perfect and defective, as not comprehending in it the whole duty of man. But the Law of God is perfect, Psal. 19. 7. 2 Tim. 3. 16. Therefore there is no commendable or worthy action in one kind or other, which is not in some part or other hereof required of men. Consectary. If no example be obliging unto conformity or imitation, but what is otherwise, as viz. by some Precept, Exhortation
or Command of God, commended unto us, then are not the Scripture-examples of baptizing in Rivers, or by dipping the whole body under water (in case any example in this kind could be produced) or of baptizing Beleevers only, necessa∣rily binding to like practises, in as much as these practises are not commended unto Christians by any Precept or Com∣mand of God. CONSIDERATION VII. THe more dull, the less experienced and apprehensive mn are, in arguing, debating, and evincing proper inferences, deductions and conclsions, from their principles and grounds, they are so much the more like to remain ignorant of the mind and will of God in many things; yea and in so much the greater danger to oppose them. Proof. The truth of this Conclusion shines sufficiently with its own light: yet to that which hath, let it be further given. The Sadduces being dull, and little exercised in drawing Con∣clusions out of Premisses, were not only ignorant of the Re∣surrection of the dead, notwithstanding this was sufficiently enough declared, or held forth, by God himself in those words (formerly mentioned) I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, &c. but even vehemently, and with the derision of those who asserted it, denyed it: Even as many in these days are not only ignorant of the duty of bringing children unto Baptism, notwithstanding the grounds of such a practise lie large and fair enough in the Scriptures; but with all their might, and with an high disdain and contempt of those who judg it necessary, do oppose it. In like manner the Pharisees being unexpert in regular argumentations, and less able to discern legitimate consequences and deductions from such grounds, which naturally bear them, were ignorant of the lawfulness of plucking and eating ears of corn on the Sab∣bath day, for those that were an hungry; although the justi∣fiableness of this practise was evident enough in that exam∣of David, and those that were with him, when being an hun∣gry, he went into the House of God, and did eat the Shew-bread, which was not lawful for him to eat, neither for those that were with him, but for the Priests only, Mat. 12. 23. And the Rea∣son
of this Conclusion is evident. For if the far greater num∣ber, both of matters of Faith, or things to be beleeved, and likewise of matters of practise, or things to be done, be mat∣ters of inference, consequence, and deduction from the Scrip∣tures, and not of literal or express assertion (which is an un∣questionable truth▪ and hath in part been proved already,) it follows with an high hand of evidence and truth, that they who are more defective, less experienced, less understanding then others, in drawing Conclusions from Premisses, must needs be more ignorant then others, as well of the one, as the other; I mean, of the mind of God as well in matters of faith, as of practise. Consectary. If the more dull, less experienced, and apprehensive men are, in drawing regular deductions and conclusion out of their premises, they must needs remain so much the more ignorant of the mind and will of God in many things, and so be in the more danger also of denying them; then need it not seem strange unto any man, that the generality or far greater part of those who oppose Infant-Baptism, should be ignorant of the mind of God, as well concerning Baptism, as many other things, considering that they are inexpert in the Word of righteousness, and have not through use their senses exercised to discern both good and evil; I mean, neither legitimate and sound deductions from the Scripture, on the one hand, nor those that are spurious and mistaken, on the other. CONSIDERATION VIII. TO multiply precepts or bands of Conscience, whether nega∣tive, or affirmative, above the number of those, wich God himself in his Word hath imposed in either kind, is (constructive∣ly) to deny the sufficiency of the Scriptures, the perfection of the Law of God, and to usurp his Authority. Proof. The truth of this Consideration, is (I presume) every mans notion and sence. For additionals are not wont to be made to things which are perfect, but to that which is imperfect. Nor if it be supposed, that the conscience of a man be suffi∣ciently bound by the Law of God, in all cases whatsoever,
need there be any additional obligations in this kind. Consectary. If the binding of mens Consciences with more bands, then those wherewith God himself hath bound them, be a sin of that evil import, which the Consideration expresseth, then do they, who impose it as matter of conscience upon men, to refrain the baptizing of their Infants, and again to baptize, when they baptize, with all under water, transgress that great transgression; in as much as God hath no where in Scripture either prohibited the baptizing of children by any Law, or commanded the baptizing of any person by forcing, thrusting, dowzing, ducking, or dipping, the whole body un∣der water. CONSIDERATION IX. WHat is more fully and plainly taught by God, and de∣livered unto the world in the Old Testament, or which may by clearness of deduction be evinced from this, is more spa∣ringly, and with less expressiveness, delivered in the New. Proof. It is a word of soberness and of truth, though found a∣mong Philosophers; that Natura, sicut non deficit in necessa∣riis, sic ne{que} abundat in superfluis. As Nature is not wanting in things necessary, so neither is it abounding in things super∣fluous. This regularness in Nature, being neither penurious on the one hand, nor prodigal on the other, discovers an an∣swerable property and perfection in him, who is the God thereof, and hath formed her in his own likeness. So then, what he hath with sufficient evidence and clearness, declared unto us in one part of his Word, he doth but like himself, in not making a like declaration of it the second time. Nor is the New Testament less perfect then the Old, because such duties, which are to be practised under this Testament, as well as they were under the Old, are not as plainly and ex∣presly enjoyned in this, as they are in that. For both Testa∣ments being parts of one and the same Scripture, and of equal Authority, that which equally respecteth the times of both Testaments, and is plainly and without parable, taught in the former only, is as sufficiently, and to all ends and purposes, taught, as if it were taught with a like plainness in the latter
also. Thus the qualification of Magistrates, as that they be chosen out of the people [viz. over whom they are to bear rule] able men, fearing God, men of truth, hating covetous∣ness Exo. 18. 21; being thus plainly taught and declared in the Old Testament, there was no occasion why they should be again thus largely and distinctly mentioned or required in the New, neither hath the Wisdom of God done it. There is the like consideration of several other Subjects, as concern∣ing the punishment of Adulterers, some special duties of Kings, the regulation of Wars in sundry particulars, Oaths before Magistrates, &c. Concerning which, enough being de∣livered, and this with clearness enough, in the Old Testament, we hear little of any of them in the New. Consectary. If there be no ground, either in Scripture, or in Reason, why the mind of God about any particular subject, when discernable enough by the writings of the Old Testament, should be again particularly revealed in the New, then is there a plain account to be given, why the New Testament speaketh so sparingly, concerning the mind of God touching the admission of Children into Church-membership, consi∣dering that his mind herein was so sufficiently declared in the Old. CONSIDERATION X. THey who reject, or refuse to be satisfied with evident Con∣sequences, or Arguments, drawn by reason from the Scrip∣tures, reject the Authority of the Scriptures themselves, and his that speaketh in them. Proof. The reason hereof is plain; viz. because whatsoever is substantially deducible from, or out of, the Scripture, must needs be contained in the Scripture, before the deduction of it made from thence; otherwise it could not be truly and substantially deduced from hence. For nothing can be drawn out from thence, where it never was, nor had any being. Now whatsoever is contained in the Scripture, is Scripture, and of Scripture Authority. Thus our Saviour himself teacheth us to call that Scripture, not only which is expresly, and in so many words, either affirmed or denyed in the Scriptures, but
that also which is the fair and clear result of the Scripture. He that beleeveth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living waters John 7. 38., the Scripture no where affirming this, but virtually or consequentially only. So again he chargeth the Sadduces with ignorance of the Scriptures, because they held and taught, that there was noSee Mr Baxter Plain Scripture proof, &c. p. 8 Resurrection of the dead; notwithstanding the Scriptures then in being affirmed no such thing in expressness of terms; especially not in that place, which yet our Saviour judged most pertinent and pregnant for the conviction of their er∣ror, Mat. 22. 31, 32. Suppose the Scripture had only said (as it doth, Mat. 1. 2.) Abraham begat Isaac, and had no where said, that Isaac was Abrahams son, yet he that should deny this, should deny the Authority or Veracity of the Scriptures, as well, or as much, as he that should deny the other. Consectary. If to reject solid and clear consequences or deductions from the Scriptures, be to reject the Scriptures themselves, then may they, who oppose Infant-Baptism, because it is not in so many words taught or asserted in the Scriptures, as much oppose and deny the Authority of the Scriptures, as they should do, in case it were in so many words here assert∣ed, and they oppose it notwithstanding. CONSIDERATION XI. IF any man should levy, three, seven, ten, or any number of Ar∣guments, to prove the truth of a Doctrine or Tenent, and only n of them be found solid and unanswerable, all the rest upon consideration or debate proving fallacious and empty, the truth of this Doctrine ought to be acknowledged upon the account of this one Argument, as well as it ought to have been, in case all the Arguments besides had been of equal weight and conviction with it. Proof. The reason hereof is plain, viz. because an error, or a false doctrine, hath no more communion with any Truth, then light hath with darkness, nor can it be justified or sup∣ported by it. No Truth hath any right hand of fellowship to give, but unto its fellow-Truths only. Therefore what Opi∣nion
or Doctrine soever hath so much as one Argument, made of clear and shining Truth, to stand by it, is hereby suf∣ficiently justified. Notwithstanding variety of Arguments for the eviction of one and the same Truth, is not superfluous; because the capacities and apprehensions of men being vari∣ous, that Argument which corresponds with one mans appre∣hension and satisfieth him, may be less comporting with the capacity of another, and so not so convincing unto him, though both may be in themselves of equal pregnancy and strength. Consectary. If any one Argument, solid and clear, be sufficient to esta∣blish an Opinion, or Doctrine, though many others insisted on to the same purpose, should be detected of insufficiency in this kind, then may the Cause of Infant-Baptism stand ho∣norable and just, although it should be granted, that many Arguments, which have appeared in the defence of it, have been disabled, or taken tardy by her Opposers. CONSIDERATION XII. WHen a mans Soul hath prospered, and is yet prospering, in such a way of worshipping and serving God, wherein by his Providence he hath been educated, and in which he hath walked from his youth, it is no wisdom for him to forsake it, unless it be upon the clearest conviction that is lightly imaginable, that God is displeased with this way, or that he better approveth ano∣ther contrary to it. Proof. The Sun is not more visible by his own light, then the truth of this Consideration discernable by the very substance of the matter and purport of it. For when God hath graci∣ously and savingly discovered himself to a person, walking in such or such a way of serving him, and is still revealing him∣self in this way further and further from day to day unto him, this cannot reasonably be interpreted, but as a Signal Confirmation from God of his approbation of this way. The Apostle Paul, to reduce the judgments and affections of the Galathians to the way of the Gospel, from which they began to decline, remembers them of those spiritual vouchsafe∣ments, which they had received from God▪ whilest they
walked in this way Gal: 3. 2, 5., hereby clearly implying, that having experienced the rich Grace and Bounty of God in this way,. 4. 14. 15. they acted contrary to all principles of reason and sound un∣derstanding, in suffering themselves upon such slender grounds, as they were, to be turned out of it, especially to walk in such a way, wherein they could have no assurance of being alike graciously entreated by God, but had rather (indeed) cause to fear his high displeasure. So the Holy Ghost from place to place insisteth upon it, as an aggrava∣tion of the sinful folly of men, to forsake the worship and service of God, of whose Goodness, either themselves, or their Fathers, had had experience, and to fall to the wor∣ship of a strange God, whom neither of them had known: yea and frequently mentioneth the ignorance, or non-know∣ledg in men of that God, whose service they are about, or in danger to addict themselves unto, as a grand disswasive from such a practise. See eut. 2. 6, 13. And Jer. 19. 4. Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burnt incense in it unto other Gods, whom neither they nor their Fathers have known, nor the Kings of Israel, &c. Consectary. If it be repugnant to the principles, not only of sound rea∣son, but of Christian prudence also, to relinquish such a way, wherein a man for a long time together hath walked with God, to the great enriching of his Soul with sound comfort and peace, to walk in a new and strange path, wherein he is ignorant whether he shall find the presence of God with him, or no; if (I say) it be folly to relinquish a way of a long experienced peace, otherwise then upon the clearest and highest conviction, that the way for which he exchangeth, is a way wherein his Soul shall prosper more then in the for∣mer, then are such persons children of great folly, and in∣considerateness, who having for many years together thriven spiritually, and enjoyed much of God, under their Infant-Baptism, shall notwithstanding abandon this Baptism, to take up another, which is (at least experimentally) unknown to them, and whereof, no not so much as in point of lawfulness, the greatest Patrons of it are not able to give any competent account to intelligent and considering men; being other∣wise also a way, which in all places where it hath been occu∣pied,
hath been obstructive to the course of the Gospel See Epist. Dedic. sec. 11, and wherein more shipwracks, then returns, as far as experience can judg, have been found. CONSIDERATION XIII. THey who make such or such a thing necessary, or matter ofThe second head of Con∣siderations, which concern Odinances & Institution▪ in general, and are applicable unto Baptism. conscience, in or about an Institution, or the Administration hereof, which God nither by any general Law, nor special, hath determined, make themselves Lords over the consciences of men, and assume the Interest of God himself. Proof. The truth of this Consideration also lieth neer at hand. For it is a royalty appropriately belonging to the Throne of Divine Majesty, to impose Laws upon the judgments and consciences of men. And they who attempt to bring men in∣to bondage, where God hath left them free, pretend to more, either wisdom, or righteousness, or both, then they are willing to allow unto God. Consectary. If it be a sinful incroachment upon the Divine Preroga∣tive, to determine or bind the conscience, where God hath left it free, then are they inexcusable, who press it upon men as matter of conscience, either to withhold their children from Baptism, or having themselves been infant-baptized, to be baptized again, or to baptize, or to be baptized, by a total submersion of the body under water; in as much as God hath not determined any of these things by any Law, either general or special. Nor hath any such Law, either in the one hand, or the other, been as yet produced. CONSIDERATION XIV. THe Subject of an Ordinance, or Institution, [i. e. the person unto whom the Ordinance is administred, or ought to be ad∣ministred,] is no part of the Ordinance it self, but really and essentially distinct from it. Proof. This Position is sufficiently evident without proof. For if if the Subject of an Ordinance, were a part of this Ordinance, then in every administration, one part should be administred unto another. The child appointed to be circumcised under the Law, was no part of the Ordinance it self of Circumci∣sion.
For then when men were circumcised, the administra∣tion should have been defective or maimed, wanting an es∣sential or requisite part of it. Besides, if the Subject of an Ordinance were a part thereof, it could not be (for example) the same Baptism, or the same Ordinance of Baptism, which is administred unto a man, and which is administred unto a woman. For that which hath parts essentially differing from the parts of another, cannot be essentially the same. Nor (upon the same ground) should it be the same Baptism, which is administred unto an hypocrite, or pretended be∣leever only, and which is administred unto a Beleever indeed. For what communion hath light with darkness? &c. Consectary. If the Subject of an Ordinance be not part of the Ordi∣nance, but somewhat really distinct from it, then is Baptism, or baptizing only, the Ordinance of God, not the baptizing of any determinate Subject, whether Infant or Beleever: The baptizing of the one, or of the other, according to cir∣cumstance, may be the Will of God, but the Ordinance of God, if we take the word, Ordinance, properly, neither the one, nor the other, is, or can be. CONSIDERATION XV. THe Law of Nature, and of personal accommodation and safety, is, by the Will of God, to super-intend and over-rule Ordinances and Institutions, and all things appertaining to these, and to supersede whatsoever in them shall at any time be found threatening, or destructive, either to the lives, healths, or well-beings of men. Proof. The truth of this Consideration we have sufficiently pro∣ved from the Scripture, and otherwise, partly in the latter part of this Discourse, Sect. 8. partly also, and more largely in a Treatise not long since published, entituled, Water-Dipping, &c. p. 5. 6. 7. of the said Treatise. We shall not need to add any thing upon the account of proof here; but de∣sire the Reader to repair for his satisfaction in the point, if he needs any, to the places now directed unto. Consectary. If the Law of Nature, and personal accommodation and
safety, be according to the Will of God, to umpire and over∣rule all things in any Institution, wherein it is concern'd, then, could it be proved, that the Baptismal Administration was constantly transacted by the Apostles, or other Baptists in their days, in the warmer Climates of Judea, and the Countries adjoyning, by dipping over head and ears in rivers or ponds of cool waters, &c. yet will not this prove that therefore the same Administration is to be performed upon the same terms, or after the same manner, in cold Countries, or under the frozen Zone, nor (indeed) any where, when the person to be baptized, is, either in a way of reason, or ac∣cording to experience in like cases, likely to suffer in his health or life, by being dowz'd in the water. CONSIDERATION XVI. EVen in matters themselves of sacred Institution, some things, extra-essential to the nature and end of the Institution, have been observed and done, according to the tenor of the Institut on, in the first Administration, and (haply) in some few more imm∣diately succeeding, which have been, and may be, not only la∣fully, but commendably and of conscience, omitted in after Ad∣ministrations. Proof. In the Institution of the Passover, besides the eating of the Lamb at the time appointed, these particulars were enjoyned (and accordingly observed in the first Administration.) 1. That the Lamb intended for the Passover, should be taken and brought home from the flock on the tenth day of the Month. 2. That it should be here kept till the fourteenth day of the Month. 3. That it should be eaten in their several houses dispersed in Egypt. 4. That the blood of it should be struck on their door posts. 5. That they should eat it in haste. 6. That they should eat it with their loyns girded. 7. That they should eat it standing. 8. With their staffs in their hands, &c. But all these circumstances were appropriate to the first Administration or Observation of it only; and were not required of the Jews in after generations, when they they came to possess the Land of Canaan. Neither were they, nor could they (at least the greatest part of them, as is evi∣dent without proof) be performed or obeyed by Christ and
his Apostles, at that Passover, which he kept with them a little before his death See Mr Ainsworth n Exod. 12. 6. & 11.. And yet it became him (as himself ac∣knowledgeth, Mat. 3. 15.) to perform all righteousness: yea and most assuredly he did perform it. So in the first Instituti∣on of the New Passover (the Supper of the Lord) only men were admitted unto it: it was kept , in an upper loft, or chamber, and towards the evening: yet these particulars, though recorded in the Institution, and observed in the first Administration, being extra-essential to the main end of the Service, were very lawfully, all of them, the first conscienciously, and as matter of duty; the two latter, pru∣dentially, and for convenience sake, waved and layd aside by Christians afterwards. Consectary. If in matters of Divine Institution, some things have been both commanded in the Institution it self, and accordingly observed in the first Administration, which notwithstanding, being less relative to the standing and main end of the Insti∣tution, have been lawfully, yea and some of them conscienti∣ously, declined or forborn afterwards, then doth it not at all follow, that Baptism must, or ought, to be always, and in all places, administred in rivers, or with a total submersion of the body under water, though it be granted that at first it was administred in rivers, yea and though it should be grant∣ed (which yet never was sufficiently proved, nor ever will be, by the Scriptures now in being) that it was at first, and for a time, administred with such a submersion; (although I find this to be the judgment both of many ancient, yea and mo∣dern Writers also, who notwithstanding are constant Asser∣tors of Infant-Baptism.) The reason of this non-sequitur is, because as well a baptizing in rivers, as with a total submer∣sion, are particularities extraneous to the main end of Bap∣tismal Institution (of which afterwards,) although they might have (and questionless had) their weight and worth of Con∣sideration, for a season, and whilest they were continued; at least if we suppose them, or either of them, in respect of what was determinate and particular in them, to have been prac∣tised for any season, by vertue of an Institution, or Command. For Baptism may be commanded, and yet not commanded to
be practised in rivers (no more then not prohibited) or with a total submersion of the body. CONSIDERATION XVII. EVery defect or mistake by men, in the Administration of a Divine Ordinance, or Institution, doth not so pollute this Ordinance to him that receives or partakes of the Administra∣tion, as to render the Counsel or gracious Intendments of God in the said Ordinance, voyd, or of no effect, no not in relation nto such a man. Proof. That Table of Divine Ordinances, which God hath spread for the benefit and blessing of the World, for the filling of the children of men with righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost would either prove a Snare, or at the best but as such a dream unto them, which an hungry man dream∣eth (as the Prophet Isaiah speaketh) and behold he eateth, but he awaketh, and his soul is empty Isai. 29. 8.; if every defect, or mistake, in these respective Administrations, should either pollute those that are partakers of them, or render them as a meer nullity unto them. For are not the Ordinances and Insti∣tutions we speak of, appurtenances of the Gospel, and so of the same consideration with the Gospel it self, and the Ministry thereof? Yea is not the Preaching or Ministry of the Gospel, one of these Ordinances, yea the first-born and principal of them? And yet the great Apostle expresseth himself in this (whether bemoaning, or admiring) interroga∣tion; and who is sufficient for these things 2 Cor. 2. 16.? (speaking of the managing of the affairs of the Gospel by men:) And ele∣where he affirmeth, that we know but in part, and prophecy in part 1 Cor. 13. 9. If then every defect, error, or miscarriage in the preaching or hearing the Gospel (and there is the same rea∣son of other Ordinances) should render the Ordinance of Preaching sinful, or unprofitable unto men, in vain had this great and blessed Ordinance been vouchsafed by God unto the World. Nor can they who live under Ordinances, and partake of their Administrations from time to time, have any sufficient or substantial ground of reaping comfort or edifi∣cation by them, if every defect in these Administrations were of such a malignity as to destroy their usefulness. For
what assurance can any man have that he that performs the Administration, performeth the service with all requirements necessary, and appointed by God thereunto? They who preached the Gospel out of envy and strife in Pauls days, sup∣posing thereby to add affliction to his bonds [meaning, that they conceited that he would be much troubled and grieved, that they should gain credit, and draw away his Interest amongst Christians to themselves by preaching, whilest he was layd aside by imprisonment, &c.] did service to the world notwithstanding by their preaching, although they preached upon such unworthy terms as these; otherwise he would not have rejoyced in such their preaching, which yet he professeth to have done Phil. 1. 18.. The prayer of Hezekiah for those that are the Passover (in his days) otherwise then it was written [i. e. then God had appointed] was; The good Lord pardon every one that prepareth his heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purisication of the Sanctuary: and upon this prayer, it immediately followeth; And the Lord harkened unto Hezekiah, and healed the people Chron. 30. 18. 19. 20.. How much more will he pardon such irregularities in holy Administrations, which have been committed through igno∣rance or want of light, in the Administration, so as not to make the persons partaking of these Administrations, suffer∣ers or losers by them, upon their faithful applications of themselves in prayer unto him, on that behalf? Consectary. If every defect, or mistake, in the Administration of a Di∣vine Institution, depriveth not him, that partakes of such an Administration of the benefit or blessing thereof, rendreth not the Administration null or voyd, then may that Baptism which hath been administred unto, and received by men in their Infancy, be available unto them for all gracious intents, ends, and purposes appropriated unto Baptism, though it should be made never so plainly to appear, that some irregu∣larity cleaved unto, and attended the said Administration. CONSIDERATION XVIII. WHatsoever right or title unto an Ordinance or Privi∣ledg, acrueth unto any person upon a special considera∣tion or ground, the same right and title appertaineth unto all
those, in whom the same consideration or ground taketh place, or is to be found. Proof. The Apostle Peter justifieth this principle, Acts 10. 47. and by the Authority of it, pleadeth the Lawfulness of bap∣tizing those, on whom the Holy Ghost fell, whilest he was preaching unto them at Cornelius his house. Then answered Peter, Can any man forbid water, that these should not be bap∣tized, which have received the Holy Ghost as well as we? So if any person among the Jews had right to Circumcision, meerly as he was, or because he was, lineally descended in a way of natural propagation from Abraham, it unquestionably fol∣lows, that whosoever in all the world was thus descended, had the same right to Circumcision also. It is upon the account and credit of this Maxim, or Conclusion, that beleeving wo∣men are, and ought to be, admitted with men-beleevers unto the Lords Table, for whose admission hereunto there is nei∣ther precept, nor example (I mean, express, in either kind;) For whereas a late Defender of the Faith of new Baptists, pre∣tends, by the grammatical indulgence of the word, , 1 Cor. 11. 28. to find a precept for womens admission in this kind, his finding (according to the Greek Proverb) is no Trea∣sure, but Coals. The tenor of the place, according to the origi∣nal, is this: , &c. translat∣ed thus: But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat, &c. The word,  (saith this Critique) is of the epicoene gender, and signifieth both Sexes, either man, or woman; and therefore signifieth so here. His premisses are strong, and not to be withstood; but his inference is weak and contemp∣tible. For though, , doth in the general signifie ei∣ther, man, or woman, yet doth it not always signifie both; nay very frequently it signifieth the male sex only: Witness Mat. 8. 9. c. 8. 9. 32. Mat. 11. 8. 19. c. 12. 10. Joh. 1. 6. c. 3. 1. &c. in all which places (to omit others without number of like import) the word , precisely and determinately, signifieth, man, or a person of the male sex only. Therefore if Mr D. will prove, that the said word includes both sexes in the Text now under consideration, he must produce some better argument, then the grammatical signification of the
word at large. Otherwise he might with as much reason ar∣gue, and undertake to prove, that because the word , pneuma, signifies both the wind and the spirit, that therefore it signifies both in all passages where it is used; and so raise a storm of blasphemy, horrid i one respect, and ridiculous in another, in twenty places. Besides the pronoun  himself, relating in construction to the word  being not of the epicoene, much less, foeminine gender, but of the masculine (determinately,) plainly sheweth that the Apostle did not intend the female part of the signification of the word  but the masculine only. Notwithstanding it is not to be denyed, but that the precept or direction in hand, doth relate unto and concern, women also, though not by force, or any express signification of the word , yet by virtue of that capacity, which is in this sex, as well as in men, to perform the terms here required of men, in order to their partaking of the Ordinance here spoken of. So that the Conclusion last specified is unquestionable; being (in∣deed) nothing in substance, but that common Maxim in Rea∣son, A quateus ad de omni, efficax est illatio. Consectary. If the same right, or title, which accrueth unto any person upon a special consideration, accrueth unto every person without exception, in whom the same consideration is found, it undeniably followeth, that if persons of riper years have a right unto Baptism, by vertue of that interest of grace or f∣vor in God, which they obtain by repenting or beleeving, and declare to have obtained by the profession of this their repentance or beleeving (which we have at large evinced for truth in the subsequent Answer) that then (I say) Children and Infants have the same right also (I mean unto Baptism) in case it be proved, and found true, that they have the like interest in the said grace and favor of God. CONSIDERATION XIX. JT is not necessarily required, either in Signs, Seals, or Sacra∣ments, that they should correspond in any natural similitude or likeness, with the things, signified, sealed, or Sacrazd by them.
Proof. First, (not to speak of natural Signs, between which, and the things signified by them, nothing is more evident then that no such similitude intercedes, as between smoke and fire, between a fiery red morning, and a rainy day, &c.) in Instituted Signs, an agreement, either in quality, or in form, be∣tween them, and the things signified by them, is not at all (at least, in many cases) regarded or looked after. A bush hanging down from a sign-post, is a sign of wine to be sold in the house: but what similitude or agreement is there be∣tween the bush, and the wine? A garment of divers colours was a sign of a Kings daughter in her virginity, 2 Sam. 13. 18. What similitude was there between the sign, and thing signified, here? It were easie to instance many particulars of like kind. Secondly, It is yet much more evident, that between Seals, and the things sealed, or confirmed by them, there is no need of any such correspondency, or agreement, as that of which we now speak. The impression made upon wax, affixed to an Indenture, or Conveyance, may be of any figure, or form, what ever the conents of the said Indenture, or Conveyance, may be. The great broad Seal of a State, or Prince, is one and the same, notwithstanding the great variety of Commis∣sions, Grants, or matters, sealed and confirmed by it. In which respect there cannot be a similitude or resemblance between this Seal, and all the respective particular things that are sealed or ratified by it. Thirdly (and lastly) Concerning Sacraments, or such sa∣cred Ordinances, whereby God is pleased to signifie and confirm matters of Grace, of one kind, or other, unto us▪ neither is it necessary that these should be any pictures, pourtraictures, or resemblances, of the particular things sig∣nified or confirmed by them. The reason is, because God, in the appointment and vouchsafement of them, graciously in∣tending to apply himself unto men in such ways and me∣thods, which were familiarly practised amongst themselves, was no wayes necessitated, or occasioned, to make any other calculation of them, then only to answer the manner of men in the calculation, institution or appointment of their signe
and seals; wherein (as was lately said) they are not won much to mind similitudes or correspondencies. Indeed in Types or Ordinances meerly Typpical, Analogy or confi∣guration is requisite and proper: but in Ordinances proper∣ly and purely Sacramental, it is not necessary, although it be not denyed, but that in some cases, and in some of these Ordinances, it may be expedient, and hath been accord∣ingly observed by God. But that sundry Sacramentals have been appointed by God without any Typpical resem∣blance in them of the things signified by them, or intended to be effected by them, might be proved from the Scrip∣tures. The Tree in the midst of Paradise, Sacramentally signified and confirmed unto Adam, that whilest he obey∣ed God, he should live (and in this respect, haply, was call∣ed, The Tree of Life, Gen. 2. 9.) yet was there no similitude or resemblance between this Tree, and the Life Sacramen∣tally signified and sealed by it. There is a like considerati∣on of the Tree of Knowledge of good and evil: and so of the Rainbow: and again of Moses his smiting the Waters of the Sea with the rod in his hand; of the Priests compassing the City of Jerich seven dayes together with blowing Trum∣pets made of Rames horns (to omit many others.) Consectary. If it be not necessarily required, either in signs, seals, or Sa∣craments, that they should correspond in any similitude or likeness, with the things signified, sealed or Sacramentized by them, then may Baptism by sprinkling, or any other kind of ablution, as well as by dipping, be a signe, seal and Sacrament of a being buried with Christ in, or into, his death. However, CONSIDERATION XX. VVHat is not expresly mentioned, in an Institution, nor particularly commanded, in, or about the admini∣stration of it, is not of the nature or essence of the Institution; but the administration hereof may be lawfully and regularly made without it. Proof. The reason of what is layd down and endered in this Consideration, is: because the Law or nature of an Insti∣tution, which in all things essentially requisite to the due
Performance, or administration of it, dependeth upon the sole Will and pleasure of God, requireth that this his Will and pleasure thus far (I mean, in all particulars essential to it) be cleerly made known unto men. Otherwise (as the Apostle argueth in a like case) If the Trumpet give an un∣certain sound, who shall prepare himself to the Battel? In like manner, if the Tenor of an Institution be imperfect, and some things only appertaining to it, be expressed, and other things of a like relation, suppressed or concealed, how shall men either prepare themselves to a due observation of this Institution, or know at any time, whether it be duly admi∣nistred, observed, or received, or no? Consectary. If an Ordinance or Institution, may be duly and regularly administred without any such ingredient, whether of Cere∣mony, or Morality, which God himself hath not prescribed or injoyned, in the Tenor of the Institution, nor otherwise, then may the Ordinance of Baptism be duly and regularly administred, and received, without a Total submersion of the body of the person baptized, inasmuch as this is no where expresly prescribed or injoyned by God. CONSIDERATION XXI. JN what circumstance or modality soever (in, or about, the Administration of an Ordinance) not prescribed by God himself, any person shall place Religion, or think that in the ob∣servation thereof, he performs an act of worship unto God, he is (in this point) Superstitious, and a will-worshipper. Proof. To evidence the truth of this Consideration, the descrip-of Superstition, and will-worship is sufficient.  sive superstitio (as Cameron well describeth it) Camer de Eccles. est cultus Dei, sed qualem sibi praescribit ingenium humanum, i. e. Supersti∣tion is a worshiping of God; but such a worshiping of him as the wit [or wisdom] of men prescribeth unto it self. Ano∣ther defineth it to be, Cultus, seu modus clendi Deum arbi∣trio humano, sine Dei praecepto susceptus Rivet. in Exod. 20., a worship, or manner of worshiping God according to the will and plea∣sure of men, taken up without any precept of God. If this be the nature of Superstition, or will-worship, to worship
God, or rather to conceit that a man doth worship God, by any ceremony, gesture or action, which himself hath not prescribed, it is a plain case, that whosoever placeth re∣ligion in any ceremony, circumstance or modality in the ob∣servation of any divine Ordinance, which God hath not enjoyned, is in this behalf a son of Superstition, and a will-worshipper. Consectarie. If they who think they do God service, and truly wor∣ship him by the observation of any rite, circumstance, or action in the administration, or reception, of an Ordinance which God himself hath not prescribed, be upon this ac∣count will-worshipers, and Superstitious; it roundly fol∣lows, that they who administer Baptism by dipping all-over, and think that by this mode of that Administration they worship God, are in the said condemnation of will-worship and superstition, inasmuch as God hath no where in his Word prescribed this mode of the Administration. From the same ground and principle it likewise followeth, that they, who having been once baptized (as suppose in their Infancy) shall conceit they honour or worship God aright by a second or after Baptism, are children of the same error, inasmuch as God hath no where prescribed a Baptism upon Baptism, nor yet declared Baptism received in Infancy to be null. CONSIDERATION XXII. SAcramental ingagements the more early imposed, are so much the more improveable, and the more binding also. Proof. This Consideration also, is hereafter asserted, and the truth of it cleered, §. 161. 163. and elsewhere, in the second part of this discourse. Doubtless Circumcision under the Law, was never the less, but rather the more, both im∣proveable by, and binding unto the Jews, because received by them in Infancy. Otherwise (as hath been formerly ar∣gued) there is little question but God would have imposed it, not upon Infancy, but upon maturity of years; nor is it to be beleeved, that He that hath made this order for men (as we lately heard) Let all things be done unto edifying, would
impose a service, or action upon men, upon such terms, ac∣cording to which it should either not not be edifying at all, or less edifying. Consectary. If Sacramental Ingagements, be both so much the more binding upon those, who are under them, and likewise so much the more improveable by them, by how much the sooner they are imposed, then must Infant-Baptisme needs be more effectual for all baptismal ends and purposes, then after Baptism. The Consequence is apparent. CONSIDERATION XXIII. ADult Baptisme standingly administred in constituted Chur∣ches, and amongst Believers, cannot lightly but prove a root of bitternesse, and occasion perpetual quarrels, contests, and emulations amongst them. Proof. The reason hereof is, because the want of a positive and certain rule, whereby to adjudge, issue, and determine such cases and questions, which are frequently incident to any So∣ciety or Body of men, must needs, the ordinary temper and weaknesse of men considered, ingender strife, contention, and discontents amongst them. If a Church shall passe by the time of Infancy, and not baptize the children of her Mem∣bers under this age; by what rule will they baptize, them afterwards? To say they are to be baptized when they shall believe, and make known their faith to the Church by their lives or works, and withall desire Baptism, is to speak very inconsiderately, and to prescribe a rule every whit as dark and questionable, as the case it selfe that is to be measured and adjudged by it. For who knoweth not that the members of a Church are commonly of different judgments & appre∣hensions, as about other matters, so about nothing more then about the signes and properties of a true Faith? So that when a person shall come to desire Baptism, who (it may be) hath satisfied one part of the Church touching the soundnesse and sincerity of his Faith, another part hereof will remain dissatisfied▪ In this case, here will be Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manasseh against Ephraim; and both (indeed) against Judah, I mean the truth▪ The judgements
even of sober and able Christians, for the most part, are about nothing more divided (nor in reason more like to be divi∣ded) then about the , or demonstrative effects of a sound Faith. I confess it is an easie matter for Master Tombes, or Master Fisher here to interpose their sence, instead of a rule, to decide such cases, as that specified, and to tell us Magiste∣rially what they judge meet to be done: but whether their Churches will agree about the sence and interpretation of what they shall prescribe for a rule in such cases; or if they shall agree in this, whether they will own and consent unto the sufficiency of this rule, is very questionable. Yea, rather it is no question, but that there will be a battail fought by yea's and nay's, if not by more angry and fierce souldiers, about it. See this Consideration more amply propounded, and fully vindicated by Master Baxter in his Discourse for Infant-Baptism, p. 130, 131. where likewise he substantially proveth that the ordinary practise of baptizing the children of Christians at age, must needs run all into confusion. Consectary. If the practise of baptizing Christian's children at age in constituted Churches, be such a method or course of bapti∣zing,The third Head of Con∣siderations, which more immediately relate unto Infant-Bap∣tism, and ar∣gue the law∣fulness of it; yea, and more then lawful∣ness (ordina∣rily.) which is apt to fill these Churches with perpetual con∣tentions and strife, then is it not a Method allowed, much less prescribed, by Christ. CONSIDERATION XXIV. THe ordinary practise of baptizing Infants in the Church, is much more edifying, both to the Church, and to the persons also baptized, when come to years of discretion, then the baptizing of men, and women, only. Proofs. This Consideration, as to point of truth, is demon∣stratively argued and asserted, more then once in the latter part of this discourse: and so needs no traverse here. The Reader is desired for his satisfaction in this to peruse Sect. 56. 73. 159. 160. of that part. Consectary. If Infant-Baptism contributes more towards the edifica∣tion, both of the Body of the Church, and of the persons
themselves also baptized, then the baptizing of men and wo∣men only, then is it the unquestionable Will of God that Infant-Baptism should be practised in the Churches of Christ, in as much as his order & appointment is very express in this; Let all things be done to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 26. And again, Seek, that ye may excel to the edification of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 12. (of which Scriptures in the second part of this Discourse, Sect. 159. 48.) CONSIDERATION XXV. CHildren were admitted unto Baptism in the days of Christ, and of the Apostles. Proof. For proof of this, the Reader is only desired diligently to peruse the 22, 23. and so the following Sections of the lat∣ter part of this discourse, to the end of the 32 Section; as also the 40. 132. 157. 158. Sections, with several other pas∣sages hereof. Consectary. If Children were admitted unto Baptism in the dayes of Christ, and his Apostles, then can there no sufficient reason be given why water should be denied unto them in these dayes that they should not be baptized. CONSIDERATION XXVI. AS Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness of Faith under the Law, so is Baptism a Seal of the same righte∣ousness under the Gospel. Proof. That Circumcision was a Seal of the righteousness menti∣oned under the Law, and this simply and indefinitely, and not with any appropriation unto Abraham, or the righteous∣nesse of his faith onely, is demonstratively proved in the lat∣ter part of this Treatise, Sect. 61, 62, 63. &c. That Baptism is a Seal of the same righteousnesse under the Gospel, cannot reasonably be denied: and is granted by the more considering persons of the adverse party. The Au∣thor of the Treatise entituled, ▪Of Baptism, having said, pag. 4. That the righteousness which Abraham had by Faith, the acceptation he had, was sealed up to him▪ by the signe of Cir∣cumcision, &c. immediately subjoyneth, Now what Abra∣ham
had by Circumcision, that the Saints have by Baptism: for so the Apostle intimates, in Col. 2. 11. 12. Again (pag. 18.) speaking of Baptism, We shall find (saith he, beating it out as far as the Scripture gives light) that as it seals and confirms our union with him, so it also seals and confirms to us the most desirable thing in the world, which is the pardon of all our sins. Now we know that the remission or pardon of sin, and the righteousnesse of faith, are Termini convertibiles sive aequiva∣lentes, words importing one and the same thing: And yet again the same Authour and Book, pag. 20. Now for this God hath formed an Ordinance on purpose to confirm and ratifie unto us the remission of sins, and this is baptism: therefore be not a∣mazed, but repent, and be baptized. The same Author deliver∣eth the same Doctrine in the same discourse ten times over; yea, Master W. A. himself in his Treatise, stiled some baptis∣mal Abuses, &c. (as the Reader will find in the latter part of this Treatise) is not tender of breaking with his Tutour, (Mr. Fisher) in this point; although in the mean time he contradicts himself, as well as his Teacher herein. For if Bap∣tism be a Seal of remission of sins, it cannot be required on mans part for the obtaining of remission of sins: it is not the property of a Seal to procure, unlesse it be the ratifica∣tion and confirmation of what is already procured, or done. And indeed, Mr. Fishers notion, which alloweth Baptism to be a Signe, but denieth it to be a Seal, is (upon the matter) contradictions to it self. For certainly God signifieth no∣thing, but what hath reality, and truth of being. If so, then by what means soever he signifieth a thing; he must needs seal, ratifie, and confirm the being of it. But for the truth of the Consideration before us, were it not granted by our adversaries, (in which respect it needeth no proof) it might be clearly argued and evinced from that known Scripture Discription of Baptism, wherein it is stiled, The Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins. Consectary. If Circumcision under the Law, was a Seal of the righte∣ousness of Faith [or, of the remission of sins,] and Baptism under the Gospel, be a seal likewise of the same righteous∣ness, then must children under the Gospel needs be as capa∣ble
subjects of the latter seal, (I mean, Baptism,) as they were of the former, (Circumcision) under the Law. CONSIDERATION XXVII. JT was a gracious priviledge vouchsafed by God unto children under the Law, to be admitted members of that Church-body, which was most highly favoured, and respected by him, and amongst whom (besides many other most great and pretious promises made unto them) he promised to dwell for ever. Proof. Neither should we need to levy any proof of this Consi∣deration, if we had to do only with reasonable and consi∣dering men. For if it were not a gracious priviledge unto children to be admitted members of such a body as that de∣scribed, then was the Ordinance of God, enjoyning men the Circumcising of their children, by which they became formal and compleat members of this Body, either a kind of Idol Ordinance, which did neither good nor evil to those who received and enjoyed it; or else such an Ordinance, wherein or whereby God intended evil unto them. But as well the one, as the other of those conceits, are the abhoring of every Christian and considering Soul. Ergo, If it be said, that Crcumcision might benefit children in some other way: though not by immembring them into the Iewish Church? I Answer, 1. It is not easie to conceive in what other way it should benefit them. 2. What way soe∣ver may be thought upon, wherein it should profit them otherwise; Baptism must needs be conceived to be as pro∣fitable to them in the same. 3. (and lastly) it is very un∣reasonable and importune, and not worthy a sober man, to af∣firm or think, that children had no priviledge or benefit, by being taken into communion and fellowship with that Church or people, to whom God bare, and shewed from time to time, more and greater respects of Grace and love, then to any other people under Heaven; especially, consi∣dering that the Apostle having demanded thus, What advan∣tage then hath the Jew? or what profit is there of Circumcisi∣on? returneth this answer to his question; much every ways, Rom▪ 3. 1.
Consectary. If it were a priviledge of Grace unto children under the Law, to be incorporated with the holy People, and Church of God then in being, then must it needs be a priviledge of like Grace unto children under the Gospel, to be in like man∣ner incorporated with Gospel Churches. And consequent∣ly such Parents, who are in a capacity of procuring this pri∣viledge, or blessing unto their children, by causing them to be baptized, and yet shall neglect or refuse to do it, must needs be looked upon as Parents of hard bowels, and un-Christianly injurious to their Children. And if God should interpose by any prohibition of his against children in this be∣half, under the Gospel he also should be found by many degrees estranged in his care and affection from children, since the comming of his own Son Jesus Christ in the flesh, in comparison of his respects towards them under the Law; especially considering that under the Gospel, he hath not invested them with any other priviledge of like Grace and fa∣vour, with that in-Churching them under the Law: neither (indeed) are they investible with any like to it. CONSIDERATION, XXVIII. VVHen the Jews through the just judgement of God, were for their Sins cast off from being a Church, or people any longer unto him, their children were involved in the rejection, as well as themselves (I mean, as well as their men and women, and those who were Parents) and had from hence∣forth no right to any Church Ordinance, unlesse (happily) it be unto Baptisme, and this in such cases, and upon such terms one∣ly, as those specified. Part. 2. of this discourse. §. 171. Proof. This consideration also may well be numbred amongst those, which carry self-evidence enough in themselves, and need no labour of proof to commend their truth: and some of our Re-Baptizers themselves do acknowledge it: How∣ever, most certain it is, that circumcision, with the whole retiue of the Mosaical or Levitical Ordinances depending hereon (Gal. 5. 3.) is abolished by the death of Christ, and promulgation of the Gospel: in which respect, no person, whether Jew, or Gentile, whether Parents or children, are
in any regular capacity of any of these. Therefore if the Jewish Children, under the rejection of their Nation, or Pa∣rents, be not in a capacity of Baptism, they are in no capacity of any Church Ordinance whatsoever. Consectary. If the Jewish children were, together with their Parents, dis-franchised, and deprived of their former rights and pri∣viledges, in respect of Church-membership, and Church-Ordinances, when their Parents were rejected by God, and their Church▪ state dissolved and abolished, then can it not reasonably, nor with any tolerable accord to the righteous∣nesse and goodnesse of God, be imagined, but that in case their Parents should repent and return unto God by Faith, & consequently be re-inchurched by him, they also (the chil∣dren I mean) should partake of this Grace, and be toge∣ther re-invested with them: and consequently hereunto, should by Baptism be members of the same Christian Chur∣ches (respectively) with them. Yea it is the judgement and sence of some of our Adversaries (and these not incon∣siderable in their tribe) that when the Jews shall return by faith unto him, whom they have crucified, and imbrace Christian Religion, they will expect, and demand Baptim for their children also. Now there is no reason to think, that the children of Jewish Beleevers, as such, should have any priviledge in Church affairs, above the the children of Gen∣tile Beleevers, who by faith are the children of Abraham, a well as they. If so, then are the children of these [beleeving Gentiles] regular subjects of the Ordinance of Baptism at the present. as the children of the other [the Jews] will be when their Parents shall beleeve. CONSIDERATION, XXIX. THe Jewish children were baptized into [or unto] Moses as well as their Parents, in the cloud, and in the Sea. Proof. This Assertion is the Apostles expresse Doctrine. More∣over, Brethren▪ I would not that ye should be ignorant, how that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed thorough the Sea. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10. 1, 2. Now 1. That by all our Fathers, he
means all the Jewish children at those times in being, whereof he speaks as well as their Parenrs, is evident. Because, those who were now children at the time of the Baptizing here spoken of, were Fathers to the Jewish generation in Pauls time, as well as those who were then men, in as much as this generation descended from them, who were then children, as well as from their Parents. Besides, if the Jewish children now in being, were not Baptized into Moses, as well as their Parents, by the Cloud, and by the Sea, then were they no whit ingaged to obey Moses in his conduct, or government over them during their passage thorough the wildernesse, up∣on the account either of the miraculous protection, or direct∣ion of the cloud here spoken of, or of their miraculous deli∣verance through the red Sea, both being vouchsafed by God unto them under Moses his conduct for the confirmation of it unto them, as being from himself (I mean from God.) But this I presume is no mans thought, therefore the children of the Jews, as well as their Parents, are affirmed by Paul to have been baptized into Moses by the means specified. Consectary. If all the Jewish children were baptized into Moses, by the cloud and by the Sea, then may all Christian children be by water baptized into Christ. There can be nothing considera∣ble objected against this consequence. For 1. Moses was a typical Christ, and his conduct or leading of the people unto Canaan, was a typical leading of men to Heaven. 2. The chil∣dren of Christians are altogether as capable of being bapti∣zed by water, into the true Moses [I mean Christ] as the children of the Jews were of being baptized by the cloud, and by the Sea, into their typical Christ [I mean Moses] nor can any material difference be shewed between the one case, and the other. If it be objected, that the Jewish children are metaphori∣cally onely, and improperly said to have been baptized into Moses, when as the baptizing into Christ is literal and pro∣per; I answer let this difference be admitted, yet it no waies disableth the consequence in hand. For what can there be required to give a capacity of a literal or proper baptism, more then is required to give a like capacity of a metapho∣rical,
typical, or mystical baptisme? Nay, in reason more should be required to qualifie for this, then for the other. For things literally and properly such, are more readily ap∣prehended and conceived, then things figuratively and mysti∣callya M. Baxter affirmeth & proveth this kind of bap∣tizing to be no Ordi∣nance of God, but an heynous sin; yea and flat murther and no bet∣ter, and up∣on this ac∣count judg∣eth that the Civil Ma∣gistrate ought to re∣strain it, as being de∣structive to the lives f▪ their people: See this, and much more t like pur∣pose, p. 134. 135. 136. in his Plain Scripture Proof for Infants Church-member∣ship. &c. such. Therefore if children were capable of a metapho∣rical or typical baptism, much more are they capable of that which is literal and proper. So that the Scripture now ar∣gued, is on the behalf of Infant-Baptisme, like Solomons King upon his Throne, against whom there is no rising up. CONSIDERATION. XXX. THe ceremony or dore of entrance or admission into the Christi∣an Church, is lesse grievous or offensive to the flesh, and more accommodate to the weaknesse and tendernesse of children, then the ceremony of like import was under the Law. Proof. The Proof, or evidence rather, of this Consideration, is neer at hand. For the entrance into the Jewish Church un∣der the Law, was by blood; which occasioned Zipporah to tell Moses, that he was an Husband of blood to her. Then she said, A bloody Husband thou art, because of the Circum∣cision [which, it seems, she was necessitated to administer unto her child, to save her Husbands life,] Exod. 4. 26. Whereas the ceremonial entrance into the Christian Church is by water, and the washing of the flesh herewith. Indeed as some form, and obtrude this Ceremony upon the con∣sciences of men, the entrance into the Christian Church is made more bloody in many cases, I mean, more prejudicial unto health, and more threatening life, then that under the Law. For though Circumcision was smarting and painful, yet it made no breach upon the health, nor endangered the life of any that came under it. Whereas Bptizing in Rivers by plunging or dipping the whole body under water, in cold climates and seasons, must needs threaten not the healths onely; but the lives also of many infirm and tender consti∣tutions . Yea I am all thoughts made, that upon the ac∣count of this kind of Baptizing, many amongst us at this day are sick and weak, and many also have fallen asleep. Seve∣ral instances of persons who have suffered in these kinds, have been reported unto me, and this upon tearms sufficient to secure the truth of the reports.
Consectary. If God admitted Infants into his Church, when the en∣trance hereunto was more grievous, and not without blood, it is very unreasonable to conceive that he should now ex∣clude them, having made the entrance hereinto more accom∣modations unto them and much better comporting with their weakness. CONSIDERATION, XXXI. IT cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that the Baptism of any child born of Christian Parents, or Belevers, was de∣ferred to adultness, or years of discretion: much less can it be provd that the Baptism of all such children was thus deferred. Proof. If that which in this Consideration is implicitely denyed (the deferring of Baptism to the persons specified▪ can, or could be proved from the Scriptures, the proof must be, ei∣ther first, by some example of an Infant, one or more, of the relation mentioned, who was not baptized untill mans estate. But evident it is that no such proof as this can be found in the Scriptures. Or else 2. the said proof must be made, by producing some prohibition of Divine Authority, by which Beleeving Parents are restrained, from desiring Baptisme for their children, untill maturity of years. But as certain it is that no proof in this kind neither, can be found in the Scriptures. Or 3. and lastly, the proof we speak of must be made by producing some reason, or ground other∣wise, from the Scriptures, by which the necessity of such a Dilation is substantially evinced. But neither do the Scrip∣tures afford any proof of the point in question, in this kind, as our Adversaries themselves, upon the matter, as far as I understand, do confesse, in that they never yet produced any. If it be objected and said; though there be no particular or special prohibition in the Scriptures restraining Christians from desiring Baptisme for their children, whilest they are yet children, yet are their prohibitions in general laid as well upon them, as others, to restrain them from will-worship, and so from using the Holy things of God, in any manner not directed or prescribed by himself: and consequently, to restrain Beleeving Parents from offering their children,
whilest such, unto Baptisme, in as much as Infant-Baptisme is will-worship, or an act or kind of worship not prescribed by him? to this I answer. That every usage of the Holy things of God, after a man∣ner not particularly prescribed by him, is not will-worship. To read a Chapter, two or three daily, is no will-worship; yet is it an using of the Holy Scriptures, nor particularly pre∣scribed by God. To give the Holy things of God in the Ad∣ministration of the Supper unto women, is an usage of these Holy things not particularly directed or prescribed by God himself, yet it is far from Will-worship. To pray about a quarter, or half, or an whole hour every day, is an usage of the Holy Ordnance of prayer not particularly prescribed by God, yet is it not Will-worship: many instances in this kind might be added. Therefore neither is the Baptizing of In∣fants any strein of Will-worship upon any such account as this, viz. because it is an usage of an Ordinance not parti∣cularly prescribed by God. 2. Will-worship properly consists in this, when men ex∣hibit or perform that in the name of worship, or for wor∣ship, unto God, which he hath not prescribed as any part of his worship. As they who conceit they worship God by be∣ing baptized men and women, having formerly been bapti∣zed infants, do most properly commit the sin of Will-wor∣ship, because it is certain that God hath not prescribed any such things, especially not in the nature of worship. Yea it is a kind of Will-worship, if Parents-place worship in offering their children unto Baptism, because God doth not require this of them in the nature of worship, but of obedience and duty otherwise. All duty is not worship: neither is every act not warrantable by the Scriptures, though supposed such, an act of Will-worship. 3. (And lastly) it hath been proved by many arguments and grounds, both in this discourse and in several others by o∣ther men, that the mind and will of God is, that Christian Parents should devote and consecrate their children by wa∣ter, unto his service, upon the first opportunity from the beginning of their daies. Which arguments and grounds, have (it may be) some of them, been replied unto, instead
of answered, or had something said to them, which empha∣tically considered amounts to nothing: and others of them may (probably) in time, be triumphed over in the same kind. However, evident it is in the mean time, that no Chri∣stian Parent is restrained, by any prohibition in the Scrip∣tures, whether general or special, against will Worship, from desiring Baptism for his infant, whilest such. Consectary. If it cannot be proved from the Scriptures that the child of any beleeving Parent remained, or was kept unbaptized, untill years of discretion, then do such Beleeving Parents who thus practise in these days, herein act besides, and with∣out, Scripture warrant or example. CONSIDERATION. XXXII. JNfant-Church-membership, was no Levitical, or legal Ceremony, nor was it ever repealed, or abolished by Christ. Proof. The former part of this consideration is unquestionable, That Infants were Members of the Church of the Jews, is gi∣ven in by our Adversaries with both hands: otherwise it is ready of proof, and hath been substantially proved by others. M. Baxter Plain Scrip∣ture Proof, &c. pag. 26. 27, &c. That it was no Levitical ceremony, at least no more a ce∣remony in this kind, then the membership of men and wo∣men in this Church was, is too evident to be denied, but onely in the case of despair. For what Communion was there between Infant-church-membership, and a Levitical cere∣mony, more then between such a ceremony as this, and the Church-membership of men? Or was there some mystical or spiritual thing signified by the former, and none signified by the latter? Or was the former appointed, or ordained by God amongst the Levitical observations, or rites, more then the latter? Or was the former Church-member-ship some part of the worship or service of God, and the latter none? Doubtlesse none of these things can be affirmed, but with a brow, either of Lead, or Brass. If then the Church∣membership of Infants was no Levitical, no legal ceremony, by whom shall we judge it hath been abolished? We cannot either with reason, or with truth, judge it to be abolished by Christ, since it was no part of the hand-writing of Ordinances
that was against us, and contrary to us; which is that, which he took out of the way nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2. 14 If it hath not been abolished by Christ, it must needs be Sathan who so fu∣riously attempteth the abolition of it. Would the Lord Christ have taken little children up into his arms, laid his hands on them, and blessed them, if his heart had been set with-in him to cast them out of his Church? Imposition of hands is no ceremony of excommunication, or casting out of the Church: nay it is practised at this day by many Anabaptists in their Churches, as a ceremony of receiving into the Church. To say that the whole policy and frame of the Jewish Church is now dissolved and taken away, and so Infant-Church-membership is ceased with it, is to say somewhat, but nothing to the purpose. For by this reason, as well men-Church-membership, as Infant-Church-membership, should be ceased, in as much as both were alike dissolved and taken away in the desolation of the Jewish Church and Nation. Secondly the dissolution or taking away of the policy or frame of a particular Church, in a way of judgement or pu∣nishment for sin (which was, and is, the case of the desolati∣on of the Jewish Church, and Nation) proveth not that the species or kind of policy, according to which this Church was constituted and framed, is hereby declared unlawfull, either to be introduced, or continued, by other Churches. For by this reason it should not be lawfull for Christian Churches in these daies, to admit of that Church-constitution and frame, according to which the seven Churches of Asia were consti∣tuted, these, with their Church constitution, being long since ruin'd and laid wast. If it be here replied; But the Jewish Church-constitution, should, and would, have been dissolved by Christ, and quite abolished out of the world, although the Members of this Church had not provoked God by sin, either to dissolve it, or to destroy their Nation; and consequently no part or piece of this constitution ought to be admitted or entertained under the Gospel, upon the account of the former establish∣ment of it under the Law, I answer; 1. By concession, That that which was Mosaical, and so ad∣ditional and accidental, in the constitution and frame of this
Church, would (doubtlesse) have been abolished, and ta∣ken away by Christ, whether the Nation had provoked him to its own ruine and destruction, or no. But 2. By way of exception, I answer further that the Jews were a Church not onely before the daies of Moses, and before the setting up of the Levitical Priesthood among them, but even before Circumcision it self; and consequently were under some Church-constitution, or other: Now it cannot be pro∣ved, nor is it in it self probable in the least, that Christ by his comming did abolish this original constitution or frame of the Jewish Church, in any part or branch of it. Somewhat (indeed) of this fundamental Constitution was, for the ease and benefit of the Church, altered by God, when the Mo∣saical and Levitical additions were made to it, according to what we find, Numb. 3, 12. And I, behold I have taken the Levites from among the children of Israel, instead of all the first born that openeth the Matrice among the children of Israel: therefore the Levites shall be mine. Under the first constituti∣on of the Church we speak of, the first born male in every family executed the Office of Priest (as Mr. Ainsworth ga∣thereth from, and noteth on, Exod. 24. 5.) This in the super-additions of the Mosaical Oeconomy was altered; the first born in all the other tribes being discharged from this service, and an intire tribe (viz. that of Levi) substituted in their stead. But whatsoever of that primitive constitution of the Jewish Church, was not changed by the Ministry or Law of Moses, neither have we any competent ground to judge that it was changed, or taken away by Christ. Now then Infant-Church-membership being a special branch of the fundamental constitution of the Church of the Jews, and not being altered or changed by Moses, nor having any thing typical or significative in it, but constantly practised under him, and during his Oeconomy, it is a groundlesse conceit to think it was changed by Christ. No marvell if circumcision were changed and taken away by him, considering that it was a super-added ceremony to that original constitution mentioned, and so of the same nature and consideration with the Mosaical Rites and Ordinances. 3. And lastly, suppose the Nation of the Jews had not
provoked God by their unbelief, and rejection of the Mes∣siah, but had received him, and beleeved on him, as a rem∣nant did, though their Mosaical Church-constitution should have been dissolved, and had ceased, yet they should have passed from under this constitution, into that which is now ordained for Christian Churches. And what? is it so much as tolerable to imagine, that coming hither, they should have left their children behind them? especially considering that they had injoyed this great consolatory priviledge of having their children fellow-members with them, in the Church of God, even from before the dayes of their Father Abraham. And if they had been informed, or had apprehended, that in case they should beleeve, themselves (indeed) should be numbred amongst the people of God, and be received as members into his Church, but they must expect no such thing for their children, these must remain in the condition of aliens and strangers, notwithstanding their (the Parents) beleeving, would not this have been a sore stumbling block in their way, and grand dissuasive and discouragement unto them from beleeving; especially considering (as was former∣ly observed from Act. 21. 21.) how mightily the hearts, even of those, who had begun to beleeve, was set upon the cir∣cumcising of their children, and how highly they were offen∣ded upon an information, that Paul taught the Jews, who were among the Gentiles, not to circumcise their children? If it were so great a grievance and offence to the beleeving Jews, that circumcision should be denied unto their children, how irreconcilable may we reasonably think, the spirits of the rest of them must needs have been with Christian Religion, in case they had understood that according to the principles hereof, their children must neither be circumcised, no nor yer baptized; nor have any Character or badge of any rela∣tion unto God, more then the children of Heathen Idolaters, or of those Nations that knew not God. That we hear of no murmuring or complaining in all the Scriptures of the New Testament, from any Jew against Christians, or their Religion, about the non-baptizing of their children, whereas we do hear of complaint made by them, for their opposing the cir∣cumcising of their children, it is an argument to me of a like
unquestionable proof, that children in the times of the New Testament were as ordinarily baptized, as they were kept from being circumcised. Consectary. If Infant-Church-membership was no Levitical ceremony, nor repeal'd or abolished by Christ, then is it presumption in men, yea and would be in Angels, to attempt the abolishing of it. What God hath sanctified, that call not thou common, was an Item given unto Peter by an Oracle from Heaven, Act. 10. 15. CONSIDERATION, XXXIII. BY the best and most Authentique Records of Antiquity, it ap∣peareth that Infant-Baptisme was practised in the Christi∣an Church, by those, who lived and conversed, if not with the A∣postles themslves, yet with their Disciples, and familiar ac∣quaintance. Proof. The truth of this Consideration hath been so lately, and so substantially proved by others, and this in our own lan∣guage, that I shall onely need to refer the Reader, desirous of satisfaction therein, to these writings; which I do §. 26. 27. of the latter part of this discourse. Consectary. If Infant-Baptisme was practised by Christians, who either conversed with the Apostles themselves, or with their Disci∣ples and familiar friends, then 1. It cannot be reasonably imagined, but that it was practised by the Apostles themselves also, inasmuch as 1. Their disciples could not be ignorant what their practise was about Baptisme. Nor 2. Is it in any degree probable, but that had they seen, or known, any pra∣ctise, which had been Anti-Apostolical, rising up, or be∣ginning to be set on foot, (especially of so high a nature as that in question) amongst their Christian friends, they would have disswaded and deterr'd them from it. 2. It follows from the same consideration, that they do very unworthily and un-Christianly, who seek to delude sim∣ple ignorant people, who are not able to confute them, by telling them that the Baptizing of children is the Popes com∣mandement, and that Pope Innocent, by his Decree first
brought it into the Christian world; whereas it is evident by substantial record, that Infant-Baptisme was practised in the Church some hundreds of years before he was born. See more of this §. 32. of the 2d. Part of this discourse. CONSIDERATION. XXXIV. THe word, , to baptise, frequently signifieth any kindThe fourth Head of Con∣siderations concerning the rite of dipping in Baptisme, proving the non-necessity, and in some cases the non∣lawfulnesse of it. of washing, rinsing, or cleansing, even where there is no dip∣ping at all. Proof. For the proof of this I desire to refer the Reader to Mr. Edward Leigh his Critica Sacra, in the word ; where he proveth it, by a numerous quotation of Texts of Scrip∣ture; and withall affirmeth, that Hesychius, Stephanus, Sca∣pula, and Budeus, the great Masters of the Greek tongue, make it good by very many instances and allegations out of Classique Authors, that the said word  importeth no more, then ablution, or washing. Consectary. If the word , to baptise, ordinarily signifieth any kind of washing or cleansing, even where no dipping is, then can there no argument of value be built upon the significa∣tion of this word to prove the necessity of a Baptismal dip∣ping. Yea it follows that the Baptismal Administration may be regularly made by any kind of washing. CONSIDERATION. XXXV. WHen the Holy Ghost in the New Testament, hath c∣casion to signifie or express the act of dipping, he never useth the frequentative, or derivative Verb, , but always, the primitive, : as on the contrary, whenso∣ever he hath occason to specifie the Sacramental act of Bap∣tism, he never useth the primitive word , which pro∣perly signifieth, to dip, but constantly the frequentative, . Proof. The truth of the former part of this Consideration is evi∣dent from these three places, Luk. 16. 24. Joh. 13. 26. Rev. 19. 13. to which we may add, Mat. 26. 23. where the com∣pound, , is found. The act of dipping is not any where in the new Testament mentioned, but in these four
places onely; and in all these it is expressed (as hath been said) by the word  onely, never by the word . The Original may readily be consulted. The truth of the latter part of the Consideration, is evident by an in∣duction of all those Texts or places in the new Testament, where the Sacramental act of baptizing is spoken of, which in none of these places is expressed by the verb , or the word, , which properly signifie (as was even now noted) the one to dip, the other, a dipping, but still by the words  and : which when the Holy Ghost expresseth common actions by them, never signifie to dip, or dipping, but to wash or washing, constant∣ly; witness these places, Mar. 7. 4. 8. Luk. 11. 38. He. 9. 10. which I suppose are all the places in the new Testa∣ment, where the said words, or any of them, are used to signifie common actions. For brevities sake, I omit so much as to point at the Texts, wherein the Sacramental act of baptizing is mentioned, because they are many, and withal ob∣vious to be found by the guidance of a concordance. Consectary. If the Sacramental act of baptizing be never in Scripture expressed by a word, which properly signifieth dipping, but constantly by a word, or words, which in common accep∣tion, and when applied by the Scripture it self unto other acts, signifie washing (indefinitely) then have we no ground to beleeve that the Sacramental transaction of baptizing, es∣sentially consists in dipping, or plunging the whole body under water; considering 1. That the tearm or word, where∣by this transaction is held forth by God in the Scripture, doth not properly, at least not determinately, import or signifie, dipping or plunging. 2. That no other thing re∣lating to this transaction, mentioned in the Scripture, doth enforce us to such a notion or conception of it (as will be shewed ere long.) CONSIDERATION. XXXVI. THe administration of water-baptism is frequently in Scripture expressed by a baptizing with water, seldom or not at all by a baptizing INTO water.
Proof. Luk. 3. 16. John answered, saying unto them all, , i. e. I indeed baptize you WITH water. Act. 11. 16. But I remember the Word of the Lord, how he said, , i. e. John indeed baptized WITH water: but you shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. And in all those places where baptism is said to be adminis∣tred, , as Mat. 3. 11. Mar. 1. 8. Joh. 1. 26. 31. 33. the proposition▪ , signifieth, with, and is accordingly so translated in all these places, and is of like signification in many others, and must be so rendred likewise. As for that expression  (Mar. 1. 9.) 1. The Preposition , is (as is else where observed) frequently put for , he dwelt IN a City called Nazareth. Mar. 2. 23. , and it was noysed that he was IN the house. Mar. 2. 1. (to omit many others.) 2. If we make any diffe∣rence between baptizing,  and , we must of necessity grant, that there were several ways or man∣ners of baptizing. For it is expresly said (Mar. 1. 5.) that all the people that came unto John, were baptized of him, , in the River Jordan. Therefore, , and , are but the same. Consectary. If Baptism may be truly and properly said to be admini∣stred, or performed WITH water, then may it truly and properly be administred, or performed, without dipping, or plunging, as viz. by washing, or any application of water to the body of the baptized: Yea it is altogether uncouth and improper, to say that a man is dipped, or, is to be dip∣ed, or plunged WITH water; and so to make John say, I indeed baptize you with water, if by baptizing, be meant, dipping or plunging. CONSIDERATION. XXXVII. THe Sacramental Act of baptizing, cannot be cmmdi∣ously, for the understandings of men signified or exprest, by the verb, , if it be supposed that it properly sig∣nifieth to dip.
Proof. The reason of the truth of this Consideration is, because dipping, if this be requisite in Baptisme (as it must be, at least ordinarily, and where the Law of mercy doth not inter∣pose, if , properly signifieth to dip) doth expresse but the one half of the Sacramental transaction of Baptism, For he that onely dippeth a person, man or woman, in the water, can hereby perform but one part, or the one half of the Sacramental act or transaction of Baptism; because this transaction is not finished or compleated, until he who hath dipped, hath again undipped, or raised & lifted the person dip∣ed out of the water. Now it being certain that , doth not signifie to undip, or heave out of the water, it is in no degree probable that the Holy Ghost should expresse that Sacramental transaction, which we call by the name of Bap∣tism, by this word, in case it be supposed, that un-dipping, or lifting out of the water, be a part of it, and this as materi∣al and necessary, and significant as dipping it self is; which I presume is the sence of those, who are baptized into the con∣ceit, of a necessity of water-dipping. Consectary. If the Sacramental transaction of Baptisme, cannot be commodiously, nor with any tolerable conveniency of im∣port, signified or expressed, by the word , in case it be supposed that it properly signifieth to dip, then cannot this be the proper signification of it, or at least it cannot be the signification of it, when this transaction is expressed by it. For it is in no wise to be beleeved, that the Holy Ghost, should give a lame or defective appellation, to so great an Ordinance or institution, as Baptism is, or such a name, which should signifie or import but the one half of it. CONSIDERATION, XXXVIII. NO part of the Baptismal Administration, or transaction, ought to be performed, or can be performed regularly by the person himself, who is Baptized, but he is to be passive un∣der the hand of the Baptist, and the Baptist onely to act in the service. Proof. All the Baptismal Administrations mentioned and record∣ed
in the Scriptures, are here represented unto us as mana∣ged and performed upon these terms: nor is it any where to be found, where any party baptized, baptized himself, either in part, or in whole, but onely that they came to be baptized, desired, and submitted unto Baptism. Consectary. If no part of the Baptismal Administration can regularly be performed by the party himself, who is to be baptized, but the whole businesse of the Administration is to be the work, or act, of the Baptizer onely; then cannot dipping, or plunging the body all over in water, be the regular form or manner of this Administration. The reason is, because he that is baptismally dipt, dippeth a good part of his body him∣self by going into the water, and by standing▪ there up to the knees, middle, or neck, before the Baptist layeth hand on him. So that that which the Baptist dippeth of his body, is onely a part of it, and this (ordinarily, I suppose) but a small part neither. He that properly dippeth, must of ne∣cessity hold some part of that which is dipped in his hand, or with some instrument in his hand. Therefore he that is bapti∣zed by dipping, cannot be reasonably thought to be regular∣ly baptized, unlesse he be with clean strength heaved and lif∣ted up into the air by the Baptist, and so gently let down in∣to the water, the hand of the Baptizer not taken off from him all the while. CONSIDERATION, XXXIX. THe water wherein, or wherewith the Eunuch was baptized by Philip, Act. 8. 36. was not so deep, as wherein he could be dipped or plunged all over. Proof. Hierome, who lived several years at Hierusalem (then it seems called Aelia) and was well acquainted with the coun∣try of Judea and parts round about, and accordingly wrote a book intituled, De Locis Hebraicis, in this Book repor∣teth, that in the Tribe of Juda, about twenty miles from Hierusalem in the Road towards Hebron, there is a village or Town called Bethsoron: near unto which there is a Mountain, at the bottome or foot whereof, there is a certain spring or Foun∣tain, where the Acts of the Apostles relate that the Eunuch of
Queen Candace was baptized by Philip. Et est hodie Bethsoron vicus eunti∣bus nobis ab Aeliâ Che∣bron vicesi∣mo lapide, juxta quem fons ad radi∣cis montis e∣bulliens, ab eadem in qua gignitur, sor∣betur humo. Et Apostolo∣rum acta re∣ferunt Eu∣nnchum Can∣dacis Reginae in hoc bapti∣zatum â Philippo. Eusebius before him had affirmed the same, and Bed some hundreds of years after him reporteth the said village then remaining; consen∣ting with the two former touching the baptizing of the Eu∣nuch in the said spring, or Fountain. Our Country man Mr. Sandys, who travaild through these places, mentioneth his passage by Bethzur, being in the upper way between Jerusa∣lem and Gaza. Where (saith he) we saw the ruines of an ample Church: below that, a Fountain, not unbeholding to art, whose pleasant Waters are forthwith drunk up by the earth that produced them. Here thy say that Philip baptized the Eunuch, whereupon it retaineth the name of the Ethiopian Fountain. And no qustion but that th adjoyning Temple was erected out of de∣votion to the honour of the place, and memory of the fact. Sandys Travails, lib 3. p. 142. The Holy Ghost himself seems to point out the inconsiderableness of that Fountain, or water, after which we are now inqui∣ring. And as they went on their way (saith he, speaking of Philip and the Eunuch travelling together) . i. e. They came unto ACERTAIN WATER, or (as our English Dialect would best expresse it) unto a kind of water. (Act. 8. 36.) The description or expressi∣on here used, , imports the water spoken of, not to have been any river, much lesse any deep River, nor other water known by any name, but some small spring, or fountain onely. Consectary. If the water wherein the Eunuch was baptized. (Act. 8. 36.) was so small and shallow, that he could not be dipped over head and ears in it, it undeniably follows that then such dipping is of no necessity in, or to, a regular baptizing. CONSIDERATION XL. BAptizing with water, and baptizing with the Holy Ghost, are expressed by one and the same Praeposition in the Scrip∣ture. Proof. Mark 1. 8. John, speaking of the difference between his Baptism, or rather of that administration of Baptism, which he exercised, and the administration of that Baptism, which is
poropriate unto Christ, expresseth himself thus, , i. e. I indeed have baptized you WITH water; but he shall baptize you WITH the Holy Ghost. See also Mat. 3. 11. John. 1. 33, were we find both Baptisms in like manner ex∣pressed Tit. 3. 56. God is said to save us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, which is said to be poured out upon us; fol∣lowing the resemblance of water poured in the washing of Baptism. Nor can that phrase rationally admit another construction Act. 1. 5. when our Saviour promiseth hs Disciples they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days after, as John baptized with water. As they were baptized by the Spirit, so they were baptized with water: for so the proportian requires. And therefore it is an utter mistake to think that  implies the dipping into the water, when the Preposition [] as most frequently with the Hebrews, and generally amongst the Grammarians, notes onely the cause or instrument, &c. Mr. h: Hooker Survey of summe of Church Discipline. Part 3. c. 2. p. 31.. Consectary. If both Baptisms, the one with water, the other with the Holy Ghost, be expressible, by one and the same Preposition, which importeth one and the same manner of their respec∣tive transactions, then is that Baptism which is with water, performable, as well (or rather) by pouring water on the baptized, as by dipping into the water; considering▪ that they who are baptized with the Holy Ghost, are no where said to be dipt, or plunged into the Holy Ghost, but to have the Holy Ghost poured on them. Act. 2. 17. 18. Act. 10. 45. CONSIDERATION XLI. TO pour water upon the body, or flesh of the person baptized, carrieth in it a more significant resemblance of the act of burying, then a dipping into water doth. Proof. Mr. Thomas Hooker, appeals unto the judgment of sence it self, whether this Consideration be not a truth. The ap∣plying (saith he) and casting the water upon the body, best re∣sembles the nature of burial, as sence will suggest: the dipping of the body into the dust, doth no way so lively resemble burial, as the casting dust and mold upon it Suruey of the summe of Church dis∣cipline Part. 3. c. 2. p. 32.. And the evident truth
is, that the thrusting, or putting, of the body, under or into the Earth, as (suppose) into the dust, or, into a grave, hath little or nothing of the nature or property of a burial in it, in comparison of a casting earth upon it. A corps is not properly buried by being put into a grave, but by having Earth cast upon it, whether it be put into a grave, or not. Burial doth not consist in an application of the body to the Earth, as in an application of Earth unto the body. Consectary. If the pouring of water upon the body of the person to be baptized, carryeth in it a more significant resemblance of the act of burying, then the dipping it into water doth, then is that baptismal administration, which is made by dipping, less representative of a beleevers being spiritually buryed with Christ, then that which is performed by pouring, or cast∣ing water upon it. CONSIDERATION, XLII. THe nature of Baptism, and the Administration hereof answers, or represents, the gracious Act, or work, of Christ, in his application of himself unto us. Proof. It is acknowledged on all hands (at least vertually and consequentially, if not formally and expresly) that the great end of Baptism, and of the administration of it, is to confirm and seal the Covenant of grace by Christ. For he that granteth, that Baptism, signifieth the death of Christ, and so the Covenant in his blood, and yet denyeth that it saleth this death, or Covenant, speaketh contradictions. For God cannot signifie any thing unto me or any man, but what hath reality and truth of being: and therefore his ve∣ry signifying of a thing unto me, is in the proper tendency or import of it, a confirmation or seal of the reality, truth, and certainty hereof. Now if the nature and end of Bap∣tism be to seal and confirm unto men the Covenant of grace by Christ, it must needs be conceived to answer, signifie or point out the gracious Act or Work of Christ in applying him∣self unto them. And look upon what terms, how, or af∣ter what manner, this Covenant and the Grace in it, is communicated or imparted unto us, it is reasonable to con∣ceive,
that it is sealed or confirmed unto us accordingly. Consectary. If the nature of Baptism, and the Administration there∣of, answers and represents the gracious Act of Christ in ap∣plying himself unto us, then ought water, by which Christ with his washing, cleansing and purging grace, is represent∣ed, be first applied unto the body, or person of the baptized, and not this to it; in as much as Christ first comes in his pro∣mise and grace unto the soul, and not the soul unto him. So that such an administration of Baptism, wherein the water is first applyed unto the body, as it is in sprinkling, or pouring water on the baptized, is much more agreeable to the na∣ture and import of it, then that wherein the body is first ap∣plied unto the water; which is done by dipping. CONSIDERATION XLIII. NO kind of washing, if we speak properly, is performed or made onely by the application of the thing to be washed, unto the water, but by the application of water unto it. Proof. A man is not said to wash his hands when he onely dip∣eth or putteth them into the water, but when he applyeth water to the one hand with the other, until the soil be dis∣solved, whether he plungeth them into the water, or no. The spiritual washing, as well from the guilt, as from the de∣flement, of sin, is not accomplished or made by the appli∣cation of the heart or soul unto Christ, or his bloud, but by the applying of Christ, and his bloud, unto these, Let us (saith the Apostle) draw near with a true heart in full assu∣rance of faith, having our HEARTS SPRINKLED from an evill conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. Heb. 10. 22. The sprinkling of the book and the people, menti∣oned, c. 9. v. 19. and so the sprinkling of the Tabernacle, and all the vessels of the Ministery. v. 21. was not effected by any application of the Book, People, Tabernacle, or vessels, un∣to the bloud wherewith they were sprinkled, but by the appli∣cation of the bloud unto them, by way of sprinkling. Sem∣blably when the heart is sprinkled from an evill conscience. [i. e. is washed, or cleansed, from the guilt, or stain, of sin] this is not to be conceived as done, by applying the heart
unto the bloud of Christ, but on the contrary by an applica∣tion of this bloud unto it. And (to note this by the way) some conceive (and this not improbably) that the sprink∣ling with bloud under the Law, did typically prefigure, or correspond with, the Baptismal sprinkling with water under the New Testament. Consectary. If no kind of washing, properly so called, be performed onely by the application of the thing or person unto the wa∣ter, but of the water, unto these, then is that administration of Baptisme, which is made by dipping onely, Heterodox and unproper, there being no washing of the body, in or by such an administration. CONSIDERATION. XLIV. Dipping naked, and without garments, especially of women, by, or amongst men, is not onely un-Christian, but uncivil also, and repugnant to the Law of nature. Again, Dipping with gar∣ments is repugant to the Law of Health and Self-preserva∣tion. Proof. Nature it self teacheth us the truth of the former part of the Consideration: and that it is a far greater shame for wo∣menTum quo∣que cum ca∣deret partes velare te∣gendas. Cura fuit, casti{que} decu servare pu∣doris. Ovid. Met. to be seen of men, naked, then it is to be shorn, or sha∣ven. Reason and frequent experience teach in like manner, the truth of the latter part. To persons of weak, sickly, and tender constitutions, to be dowzed in cold water, must needs be as the shadow of death unto them: how much more when the coldnesse of the water shall for a time be (as it were) close bound unto their bodies, by their cloaths full of water. How many are there, who cannot so much as put their hands into cold water, or touch a wet▪ linnen cloath, without cer∣tain prejudice to their health? And however Baptists of the new order abhominate the saying, as the Jews did the impu∣tation of murther charged upon them by the Lord Christ, yet it may truly, at least beyond all reasonable contradiction be said, that unto many, their burying under water, hath hast∣ned their burial also under earth. Instances not a few, may be given of persons, who in all probability, laid the founda∣tion of their approaching death in the waters of a Baptismal
dipping, and of many more, who sew the seeds of many af∣ter sicknesses, weaknesses, and distempers, as of coughs, Catarrhs, Squinancies, Appoplexies, Consumptions, &c. in the same waters. Nor is it pertinent here to alledge, that some upon their Baptismal dipping, have not onely been ree, but freed from bodily maladies, &c. For, 1. The common saying is true: That which is one man Physick, may be another mans bane, or poison. I easily be∣leeve, that as the constitution and condition of the body may be, going into, and under, water, may be a natural and proper means to cure some infirmities thereof. But this pro∣veth not but that the same course, or means may be threat∣ning, yea destructive to the healths and lives of others. So that in respect of this different habitude of dipping, in refer∣ence to bodies of different tempers and constitutions, it is e∣very whit as necessary to consult the Physitian, as the Mini∣ster or Divine, about the receiving it. But whatever bodi∣ly cures may be wrought (or rather be conceited to be wrought) by Baptismal dippings, certain I am that Baptism was and is,—non hos quaesitum munus in usus, never intend∣ed by the great Founder and Father of it, God, to work the work either of Chirurgian, or Physitian. Therefore 2. The fancy, or imaginative faculty in many (I might say in most) of those, who are now upon the brink of the Bap∣tismal waters, and ready to be cast into them, being extra∣ordinarily affected, raised, and provoked, in case some sen∣sible alteration in the state and condition of the body, whe∣ther for the better, or the worse, follow hereupon, it is no more then what is ordinarily seen, and felt by men & women upon a like occasion; I mean, some high acting or working the imagination. 3. (And lastly) the practise of Baptismal dipping, being (as was formerly argued and proved) especially after In∣fant-Baptism, superstitious, and will-worship, it is not o∣therwise like, but that He, who labours to uphold and che∣rish all the superstition in the world, will stretch out his arm to the full length of it, and do his best, to cause signs, and wonders, bodily cures, and other strange effects, to be
wrought by it, or accompany it, or however to be ascribed unto it. Consectary. If dipping naked, and without garments, and again, dip∣ping cloathed, and with garments, be both repugnant to the Law of nature (in the cases and respects specified) then dipping cannot be the regular or right manner of the Baptismal Administration. The reason is, because God hath not subjected the Law of nature, to the Law of a∣ny eremony or institution whatsoever, but on the contrary, hath subjected the respective laws of all ceremonies and insti∣tutions unto this, See §. 8. of the secnd part of h discourse and Watr-dip∣ping p. 5, 6, 7 CONSIDERATION. XLV. T was the manner and practise of Heathen Nations, and Pa∣gan Idolaters, before Christs time, to dip, or wash all over the bodis of those, who desired to be initiated into the superstitious and Idolatrous services of their Idolods. Proof. The truth of this Assertion, is asserted by several Authors as well of the Pagan, as Christian perswasion. They who de∣sire a more particular information hereof, may please to consult the Commentaries of Hugo Grotius, upon these words Mat. 28. 19. , Baptizing them: where having himself first affirmed, that the custome we speak of was practised among the Jews, when any person turned from the worship of false Gods, unto the true; and again, that it was used among prophane Nations likewise of old, S O∣stendius a∣pud Judaeos moris isse, ut Bapti∣renu qi se à falsorum Deorum cul∣tu, ad cultum unius Di convertebant Sed apud Gentes etiam prophans usurpatum antiquitùs fuit, ut qui iitiari vel∣lnt, toto cor∣pore prius ablueentur, &c. he subjoins the testimony of sundry Authors, for the confirmati∣on of this latter. Consectary. If Dipping, Religion-wise, was by the Jews practised up∣on their own account, and without direction, and command from God, and much more if it were practised by Pagan I∣dolaters, and those who worshipped the Divel, and this be∣fore Baptism was practised among Christians, then is it at no hand probable that God should prescribe, or enjoin the same practise unto those that▪ should worship him, and be∣leeve in his Son Jesus Christ. The reason of this consequence is, because God hath never been wont to learn of men, much
lesse of Sathan, or his followers, how to be worshipped him∣self, or what services to prescribe unto his worshippers. It hath indeed been observed long since, that the Divel is Gods Ape, and borroweth many things from him, for the regu∣lating, adorning, and compleating of his own worship: but it never entred (I suppose) into any Christian mans heart to think that God should borrow any rite or ceremony from Sathan, wherewith to accomplish his worship. Yea we read in the Law, that God expressely forbad his people the use of several rites and practises, used by Idolaters, and this for this very reason, because they were used by them. Lvit. 18. 3. Deut. 12. 30, 31. Deut. 18. 14. Herewith compare, Mat. 6. 31. 32. CONSIDERATION. XLVI. IT cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that any Baptismal Administration recorded there, was performed by dipping: but it is exceeding probable that many of these Administrations were performed without it. Proof. Concerning the first part of this consideration; I freely acknowledge that it is the sence and opinion of many learned men, both of ancient and modern times, that in Christs and the Apostles days, the Administration we speak of was ordi∣narily in Judea, and the hot countries neighbouring there∣unto, performed by dipping the whole body under water: Yet I am all thoughts made, that whatever ground they have or may have otherwise for this opinion, they have nothing demonstrative or firmly concluding from the Scriptures to e∣vince it. That those metaphorical expressions of the Apostle, Buried with him by Baptisme, Rom. 6. 4. Col. 2. 12. amount to no such proof, hath in two of our preceding Considerat∣ons been argued. That neither of these expressions about the baptizing of the Eunuch, , translated, they went down both INTO the Water, And when they were come up OƲT of the Water, Act. 8. 38, 39. prove the Eu∣nuch to have been dipt under water in his baptizing, hath been in part, if not sufficiently proved already, where by the testimony of more then two competent witnesses, as likewise
by Scripture insinuation it self, we found the water, wherein he was baptized, to have been too shallow, to entertain him up∣on such terms. But besides, when it is said, they both went down, , the preposition , doth not always, or necessarily in this place, signifie into, but sometimes unto; which significa∣tion is as proper here as the other: so that the clause may be rendred, and they both went down, to, or ƲNTO the wa∣ter, i.e. to the waters side. The preposition , oft sig∣nifieth to, or unto, and is accordingly translated. , &c. i. e. I am not sent but TO [or ƲNTO] the sheep, &c. Mat. 15. 24. So, , ƲNTO himself. Colos. 1. 20. So also, That you may be filled  with, [or rather, unto, as Beza rendreth it] Ʋt implea∣mini A D omnem us{que} plenitudinem illam Dei. all the fulnesse of God, Eph. 3. 19. Again, , They went unto Lydia, as Beza again translateth. Introierunt A D Lydi∣am. Act. 16. 40. Once more, every Scribe which is instructed,  ƲNTO the Kingdome of Heven. Mat. 13. 52. (to omit many other places.) Again for the latter clause, And when they were come up, , OƲT OF the Water, the preposition , might be as as well translated, FROM as, out of. For this signification of it is most frequent and obvious in the New Testament, and our English Translation accordingly owneth it in very many places. They who doubt hereof, may consult the original in these Texts (with many others) for their satisfaction. Luk. 1. 71, and again v. 7 8. Luk. 20. 4. (twice) Joh. 19. 12. Joh. 21. 14. Act. 14. 8. Act. 15. 21, (as Beza rendreth) and v. 29. Act. 17. 3. and 31. Act. 22. 6. and v. 17 Act. 27. 34. Rom. 1. 17. Rom. 4. 24. Rom. 6. 4. and v. 9. and v. 13. and v. 17. &c. It would be tedi∣ous and needlesse, so much as to point at all those places, where the preposition, , are found in the signification & import of our English particle from. And being so transla∣ted in the clause in hand, as very commodiously, and without any hardnesse at all of construction, it might be, (for it is as proper to say, when they came up from the Water, as when they came up out of the Water) here would be no footing, nor colour of footing, whereon to argue the Eunuchs dip∣ing when he was baptized.
Yea, own we the two English translations of both the clauses now under consideration, yet can there no convin∣cing argument be drawn from them, either divisim, or con∣junctim, to prove that Philip dipped the Eunuch when he baptized him. For supposing the water to have been very shallow (for the proof whereof more, I beleeve hath been said, then ever will be to prove the contrary) and the up∣permost part of it to have been somewhat lower then the level or surface of the verge or bank about it (which is not unusual in many waters) there might be some necessity, or at least a convenience, as well for Philip, as for the Eunuch, to go down together into the water, that so the former might take up water with his hand to put, or pour, upon the head or face, of the other. Besides it is as well said of Philip, as of the Eunuch, that he both went down into the water, and came up from, or out of, the water. But no man (I presume) imagineth that Philip at this turn dipped himself. Therefore from the said phrases or expressions, nothing can be concluded for the dipping of the other; both expressions being indifferently used of, and applied unto, both these persons. Again, if the Eunuch went down into the water, he could not be dipped all over by Philip, and consequently could not regularly be baptized, if it he supposed. 1. That a regular baptizing consisteth in a total submersion, or dipping of the whole body under water: And 2. That it is wholly to be transacted or performed by another. For he that goeth into the water dippeth himself in part: neither can another be said to dip him all over, except he first heaves, or lifteth him up out of, and above the water; and then, still holding his body in, or between his hands, gently convey, or let it down, into the water again. To pretend, that the Eunuch might have been duly bapti∣zed, without going down into the water, and without Phi∣lips going down likewise, if Baptisme could have been duly administred, either by sprinkling, or by putting a small quantity of water, upon his head, or face; as viz. by sending a servant to the Fountain, to fetch a Bason, or like vessel of water from thence, &c. to pretend thus (I say) amounts to little satisfaction. For,
1. It cannot be proved that either a bason, or like vessel was now at hand; Basons are not usually carried about in tra∣vell, especially not in long journies. 2. Suppose there had been the opportunity of a Bason, or the like, yet might there be several reasons (though unknown to us) why Philip, being at liberty, whether to baptize, at, or in, the Fountain, or otherwise, might prefer the former. So that there is nothing in the pretence specified, nor in any thing expressed or recorded in the Scriptures, about the Eu∣nuchs baptizing, which makes it so much as probable, much lesse demonstrable, or certain, that he was dipped under water, when baptized. Nor is there any whit more in John's baptizing in Jordan, or in Aenon near Sali, because much water was here (Joh. 2. 23.) to prove that John dipped when he baptized. For 1. There is nothing recorded by the Holy Ghost touching the particular external manner, according to which John baptized. Which (by the way) is an argument of much sa∣tisfaction unto me, that no one determinate external manner in baptizing, or of managing, ordering, or using the water in Baptism, is essential unto the Ordinance, or the due admini∣stration thereof. For it is the first-born of things incredible unto me, that God should prescribe unto men so great and weighty an Ordinance, as Baptism (more generally at least) is conceived to be, yea and which our Adversaries be∣gin of late to say, is absolutely necessary unto justificati∣on (and consequently unto salvation it self) and yet not signifie or declare, and this in the most plain, ex∣plicit and distinct manner, how this Ordinance ought to be administred, in case it be supposed that there is onely one de∣terminate manner of the administration, which is regular and legitimate; yea and which is so essential unto it, that with∣out it nothing but a meer nullity, or humane device, can be administred; especially this determinate manner being such, which the clearest and sharpest understanding of men of grea∣test worth in the Church of Christ, and most diligently and conscienously exercised in the Scriptures, have not been able for many generations together, to discern or discover. 2. Neither is there the least intimation any where given
in the Scripture, that the reason why John made his first choice of the River Jordan for his Baptismal station, or resi∣dence, or his second of Aenon (where much water, or ra∣ther many waters, was,) that he might have water enough to dip all those, that came to be baptized of him, over head and ears. Therefore this is but a matter of humane conjec∣ture onely, and this not very probable neither. For 1. It is not like that a reason of this consequence would have been left to humane divination, being so worthy of God's own pen, were it, or had it had been, a truth. 2. Though it be said that in Aenon, where John last baptized, there were , mny waters, yet this proveth not that there was any place within the compasse of these waters of a sufficient depth for the dipping of a mans body all over. The expression (probably) importeth a confluence or meeting together, of several rivelets or small currents from several springs near adjoining; which (it is like) did over-spread a great sur∣face of ground, and yet were not so deep in any place, as to reach up to the knees of a man. We know there are many places not very far from the City, where there are , many waters, in such a sence and consideration as this; and more particularly in the ordinary Road to , where in several places, when springs are open, there is a larg confluence of waters, which spread themselves thin over a great planities or flat of ground, for several furlongs toge∣ther, without being so deep in any place as to afford an op∣portunity to a travelling horse to drink. But in many other places of the Nation, there are such prospects of waters, as those we now speak of, which are to be seen all the year long, and where the waters run continually. Therefore many waters do not import so much as one mans dipping. Mr. Fisher is much mistaken, if learneder men be not, in concei∣ving Aenon to be a river. (Baby-Baptism p. 334.) Calvin (with some Lexicographers) maketh it a Town, (and Sa∣lim another) scituate in the tribe of Manasseh. Mr. J. Deo∣date, maketh them both Cities. Hugo Grotius and Junius, conceive Aenon to be a Fountain. But Mr. Fisher it seems, though by swimming against the stream, will have it a deep River, lest his cause, like a crasie vessel wanting water, should strike upon the ground and founder.
Some who have travelled in those parts, report this Aenon to be a little run or brook, over which a man may almost step at ordinary times. 3. If John dipped, when he baptized, either in Jordan or in Aenon, he must be supposed to have dipped both men and women, either naked, or in their cloaths. In some Authors (I confesse) I meet with both sexes naked in their baptizing: but the greatest part of writers judge it more Christian, and meet to allow them their apparel for a covering to their nakednesse at such a time. And if it could be proved that John baptized both men and women, na∣ked, and both in the presence and sight of either▪ the very retriment and dreggs of all sects at this day amongst us (the Ranters I mean) might take a plau∣sible occasion to glory in a very honourable Father and Founder of their Order. Nor can it reasonably be thought that John should baptize all that came unto him, with their garments upon them, in case it be supposed that he dipped them all under water, when he baptized them. For we do not read of any spare garments brought a∣long with them, by those who came to be baptized (nor yet of any shifting or changing garments, either before, or after baptizing) nor is such a thing in it self in any degree proba∣ble: and yet more improbable it is (of the two) that men and women, how weak and tender soever, should travel se∣veral miles in their cloaths soaked and steeped, and as wet as water could lightly make them. 4. It apposeth my reason, yea and imagination it self, to conceive how so many thousands, such vast multitudes of peo∣ple, as the Sciptures overtureth had recourse unto Jon, day after day, to receive baptism from him, could be baptised of him, if it be supposed that they were singly and apart, , man by man, and woman by woman, dipped by him. If Andrew reasonably judged 5 Barley loaves and 2 small fishes so insufficient & disproportionable a provision for 5000 men, as to demand, but what are these among so many? much more have we reason to demand concerning John, what was John among so many thousands of men and women as came unto him to be baptized, if he could not baptize them, with∣out
dipping them? Upon this supposition, the task which he performed in baptizing, required the strength not of a man, but of stones, or of Mountains, to overcome it. Besides must he not be supposed to have stood deep in water, from morning untill night, for several days together? which that he did, or was able to do, and yet live, I must borrow the Faith of some easie Beleever, to beleeve. Other circumstan∣ces there are (too many to be insisted upon at present) which make it an invinceible difficulty to my Faith, to beleeve that John put under water the whole bodies of all those whom he baptized. That may be remembred by the way, that neither do we read, that John's Disciples ever baptized, though the Disciples of the Lord Christ did; nor that John, in or about his entrance upon his work of baptizing, when it seems his labour in this imployment lay heaviest upon him, had any Disciples (in that notion and relation of which we now speak) at all. Nor is this latter in it self so much as pro∣bable. 5. And lastly, we read Joh. 3. 22. that the Lord Christ continued some space of time baptizing in Judea. Now if we may beleeve the Geographical descriptions of this land, which are presented unto us from several hands, there were few or no rivers or waters in it of any considerable depth, but onely brooks, or smaller rivers: Therefore it is not like (much lesse certain) that the Disciples of Christ here had the opportunity of dipping men, when they baptized them; much lesse that they made the Administration by dipping. Thus we see how weak and faint the conjecture is, which presumeth, that the reason why John made choice first of the River of Jordan, and then of Aenon, where many waters are said to have been, for his Baptismal station, was, that he might have a convenience of deep waters, for the dipping of those, who came to be baptized. Nor doth the preposition , where Christ is said to have been baptized of John,  Mar. 1. 9. at all prove that he was dipped by him into Jordan. For 1. , v. 9. signifieth no more then  v. 5. and Mat. 3. 6. where all the people that came unto him are said to have been baptized of him , in the river Jordan; unlesse it shall be said, that Christ was
baptized after one manner, and the rest of the people after a∣nother: and so, that Baptism may be administred, & this law∣fully, and without breach of any rule, after more waies then one, in respect of ordering or using the element of water, in, or about the said Administration. 2. The preposition  is very frequently (and so acknowledged by Mr. Fi∣sher himself) Mr. Fisher Baby-Bap∣tism. p. 332. used in the sence and signification of the preposition 'EN  &c. he dwelt in a Ci∣ty called Nazaret. Mat. 2. 23.—That this is the true grace of God,  IN which, or wherein, ye stand. 1. Pet. 5. 12, Again, Thou wilt not leave my soul, , IN Hell, Act. 2. 27. Yet again, my children are, , IN bed with me, Luk. 11. 7. (to omit others.) Now John's baptizing men IN Jordan, is no more a de∣monstration of his dipping them over head and ears in Jor∣dan, then a mans being in a bathe, or in a river, proveth him to be over head and ears in either. So that the reason as∣sign'd why John was drawn to baptize in Aenon, by reason of the many waters there, and so why he baptized in Jordan, (viz. that he might have sufficient dippage) is a very un∣certain, yea improbable conjecture. But 3. And lastly for this, the reasons of greatest probabili∣ty (in my understanding) why John chose to baptize, where plenty of water was, were these two (haply amongst others) the one respecting the commodiousnesse of the ex∣ternal work or act it self, of baptizing; the other, to ac∣commodate the spiritual design, or purpose of God in Bap∣tism. For the first, It may well be presumed, that before John entred upon the work of Baptizing, it was made known to him by God (or otherwise, that he apprehended the thing very likely to come to passe) that vast multitudes of people from several parts would from day to day have recourse unto him to be baptized. In this respect it concerned him to pro∣ject and find out the best method and means he could, to ac∣commodate himself in so great a work, as well in point of ease, as of expedition or dispatch. Now the work of Bap∣tizing being to be performed with, or by, water, and the num∣bers very great of persons to be baptized by him, it was very
proper and expedient for him to make choice of such places for this work, where many persons might with convenience be so postured and disposed of, that he passing along by them in the water, might, whether with his hand onely, or with some instrument for the purpose, cast water upon them. In such a way as this, where there are tracts of water com∣modious, for any considerable space together, for people so to stand, whether in the brink or verge of the water, or else near to it, that a person going along by them in the water, may cast water upon them▪ many thousands may be baptized within the compasse of a day, or lesse: Whereas to dip e∣very person apart, when there are several thousands to be baptized, and but one to baptize, is (in the ordinary phrase) an endlesse work. The common exception which Mr. Fisher, and others of his judgement insultingly make against this method, or man∣ner of baptizing, in terming it a rantizing, not a baptizing, is pedantique, and makes onely a sound without substance. To argue, that sprinkling with water, is not a baptizing, be∣cause it is a rantizing, is such a kind of reasoning as this: Socrates cannot be a living creature because he is a man: Bu∣cephalus is not a beast, because he is an horse. These are strange kinds of arguings wherein the genus is denied, upon the ac∣count of the species, or because the species is affirmed The Sacramental rite or Ordinance, best known by the name of Baptisme, is therefore in the Scriptures ordinarily thus called, I mean Baptism, and the administration of it, a Baptizing, because it is a generical term, and more comprehensive, then rantizing, or, sprinkling, and importeth as hath been shewed, any kind of washing, whether by sprinkling, or by pouring on water, or by applying water to the thing, or person to be washed, after any other manner. And washing being that externality which was chiefly minded by God, in the ad∣ministration of Baptism, it is not material by, or with, what species, or particular kind of washing it be performed. And Calvin accordingly, though his opinion be, that at first it was administred with the submersion of the whole body under water, yet placeth little in this modality of it, and supposeth the administration of it in another manner [as suppose by
sprinkling, pouring on water or otherwise] to be no digres∣sion from the institution and rule of Christ. Ex his ver∣bis colligere licet Baptis∣mum fuisse celebratum a Johaune et Christo toti∣us corporis submersione. Quanquam de externo ritu minus anxie labo∣randum est, modo cum spirituali ve∣ritate ac Do∣mini institu∣to ac regulâ congruat. Calvin in Joh. 3. 22. 23. But besides what the Scripture exhibiteth in favour of Baptismal sprink∣ling or pouring on water, as the typical applications of bloud, as well to persons as things under the law, which were made for the most part by sprinkling it, and sometimes by putting it on, or anointing with it, Exod. 12. 7. Exod. 29. 12. 20. Levit. 4. 7. Levit. 8. 23. 24. Levit. 14. 14. Levit. 16. 18. So again those prophetical expressions found in those two great Prophets, Esa, and Ezekiel, the former prophecying of Christ that he should SPRINKLE many nations, Esa. 52. 15. the latter, that God would sprinkle clean water upon the Church, Ezek. 36. 25. [or as the former translation read it, I will pour clean water upon yu] which expressions are unquestio∣nably allusive unto, or rather expressive of the manner, where∣in Nations should be baptized into the obedience and service of Christ, besides (I say) all the Scripture affordeth upon such accounts as these in countenance of sprinkling, or pour∣ing on water in baptizing, the difficulties which attend Baptismal dippings are so insuperable and irreconcileable with the Law of nature, and in this respect with the written Law of God it self, at least in many cases (formerly specifi∣ed) that either sprinkling or pouring on water, must be al∣lowed in the Administration of Baptism, or else no Baptism administred at all. This for the first reason why John made choice of such places for his Baptismal quarters, where plen∣ty of water was to be found: Herein he consulted expedition and dispatch in his work of baptizing. The latter reason of such his choice might respect (as we said) the spiritual and great end of Baptism, which was, and is, to set forth, commend, and confirm the abundant Grace of God in cleansing men as well from the stain and filth, as from the guilt of sin, by Jesus Christ. Now this grace of God being Sacramentally signified or represented by the element of water in Baptism; the sight or beholding of a fair and large prospect of this element at the time of their baptizing, might occasion or raise, so much the greater, and more live∣ly apprehensions within them of the great aboundance of this grace of his towards them.
Whether these, either one or both, be the true reasons, or no, of John's pitching his Baptismal Tent, so near unto rivers or currents of water; most certain it is, that both the one, and the other, are of a more reasonable and probable calculation, then that which maketh conveniency of dipping the ground hereof. This is a dull and spiritlesse conceit, as hath been shewed. And thus we have given a large and full account of truth in the former part of the Consideration last propounded, which affirmeth, that it cannot be proved from the Scriptures, that any Baptismal Administration recorded here, was performed by dipping. For I know nothing pleaded by any man to prove the contrary, beyond what hath been now answer∣ed. We shall not need to insist upon any proof of the latter part of the Consideration, which onely beareth, that it is ex∣ceeding probable that many of the said Administrations were performed without dipping. For if so be, there be so little probability, as hath been argued, that so much as any one of these Administrations were performed by dipping; there must needs be a like (or rather a far greater) degree of probability, that some of them (at least) have been per∣formed without. More especially where we read of great multitudes or of several thousands, baptized together, or at one and the same time, it is hardly reconcilable with the low∣est terms of probability, to imagine that they were all dipt. And those arguments and reasons, by which the dipping of the Jaylour and his house, when they were baptized, is in∣deavoured to be salved, are not worthy reasonable or consi∣dering men. It was about midnight when they were baptized. Act. 16. 33. with v. 25. and this , straiway or immediately upon the washing of Paul and Silas their wounds, or stripes. It is but an hungry shift to suppose, that the Jaylor might be provided with some vessel fit for bath∣ing and washing the whole body. If this be supposed, it must yet be super-supposed that there was a sufficient quantity of water at hand to fill it, or else the former supposition will not do the feat. If this also be supposed, it must yet further be supposed likewise, that they were dipped, either naked,
or with their garments on them. The former of these is an hard supposition, and will not (I suppose) down with so∣ber men. If the latter be supposed, it must be supposed yet again that either they shifted themselves out of their wet garments into drie, before they spread a Table, and set meat before Paul and Silas; or else that they performed this Christian service with their garments full of water, and drop∣ping. To suppose this latter, requires zeal without know∣ledge: to suppose the former, requires the faith of those that can beleeve what they please, without asking any question for conscience sake. For the context will hardly allow them so much time between their being baptized, and the perfor∣mance of this service, as was necessary for their shifting. However, we clearly see what a long story of uncertainties yea of improbabilities, must be compiled, and beleeved, be∣fore we can reasonably come to beleeve that the Jaylor, and all his, were dipped, when baptized. Nor is it easie to con∣ceive where so much water should be in or about Hierusalem which might suffice for the baptizing of 3000 persons within the space of about half a day (probably in a lesser time) if this be a true saying, no dipping, no baptizing. How slender and faint the appearance of truth is in that Doctrine, which teacheth the dipping of the Eunuch by Philip, when he bap∣tized him, was lately under consideration. The amount of the whole is, that it is by many degrees more probable, that no Baptismal Administration mentioned in the New Testa∣ment was performed with dipping, then that all the said Ad∣ministrations here recorded were performed after such a manner. Consectary. If this be the fairer probability of the two, then can there no firm argument, no, nor yet any competently probable, beThe fifth Head of Con∣siderations, rising up a∣gaist adult Baptism, or∣dinarily ad∣ministred, & re-baptizing. drawn from the Scriptures, to prove dipping essential to baptizing. CONSIDERATION. XLVII. THe Baptizing of the children of CHRISTIANS ordinarily at years of discretion, is utterly inconsistent with the rule of the Gospel for baptizing.
Proof. The rule of the Gospel concerning the time and season of Baptizing, is, that Baptism be administred without delay un∣to persons, when they are first made Disciples. This to be the Gospel rule for the regulation of the time of baptizing, is so evident from many expresse and clear passages of the Gospel it self, that it is, (I presume) owned in this capaci∣ty, and subscribed, by Ana-Baptists themselves: Or how∣ever, it is abundantly evinced by others to be such. Mr. Baxter Plain Scrip∣ture Proof for Infants Churchmem∣bership, & p. 126. 127. Now that that practice of baptizing, which the Consideration spe∣cifieth, is utterly inconsistent with this rule, is above all reasonable contradiction made good by this argument, viz. because it cannot ordinarily be known, or however, is not ordinarily known, when, or at what time, the children of Beleevers are first made Disciples, unlesse that they will grant that they are Disciples from the womb; which will altoge∣ther as much, and as manifestly, endamage their cause. That the children we speak of do ordinarily professe a beleeving in God, and so in Christ, long before they come to any a∣dultnesse of years, many of them at 3, 4, or 5 years of age, yea and some sooner, is generally known to us; but when, or at what time a principle of Grace, or Faith, is first wrought in them, is altogether as unknown. Therefore if the chil∣dren we speak of ordinarily be not baptized untill years of discretion, it is impossible that the Gospel rule concerning the time of baptizing, should be observed, or obeyed, in their Baptism. The Scripture it self gives large and frequent testimony unto this argument, yea and experience it self su∣per-sufficiently ratifieth it. If any man yet questioneth the truth of it, he may please to repair for satisfaction to pag. 127, 128, &c. of the Discourse lately mentioned, where there is plenty of it to be found. Consectary. If the Baptizing of Beleevers children, ordinarily at years of discretion, be utterly inconsistent with the observation of the Gospel rule, concerning the time and season for Bapti∣zing, then is the practise unquestionable sinfull, and displea∣sing unto God.
CONSIDERATION XLVIII. THe way and practice of Re-baptizing, or of baptizing up∣on those terms, on which those, who are best known amongst us by the name of ANABAPTISTS, do baptize, and are baptized, and do most importunately injoin others to be baptized also, cannot be justified or evinced, so much as lawfull, much lesse, necessary, by the word of God. Proof. It neither yet hath been proved, nor is there in the Scriptures, whereof to make any competent proof, that persons once initiated or consecrated by water unto the obedience and ser∣vice of Jesus Christ, ought to be by water consecrated to the same service the second time. That passage Act. 19. 3. 4. 5. which some would draw to such a sence as this, is of quite another interpretation, as hath been substantially argued and evinced by many. M. Rogers Treatise of Sacraments, Part. 1. p. 13 Franciscus Junius. ad. Act. 19. 5. Georgius Konig. Vin∣diciae Srae. Disput. 30. p. 534, 535. Those words, v. 5. And when they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus, are part of Paul's speech to the Ephesine Disciples, in which v. 4. he openeth unto them the purport of John's Baptism, which it seems they understood not, although they had been baptized by him. And that which he declareth to them in these 2 ver∣ses, is this; that John before he baptized those, who came unto him for that end, admonished them, that his Baptism was the Baptism of repentance, [i. e. a baptism, or washing, instituted by God to ingage or oblige men to repentance] and that they should beleeve not in him, but in another, who was immediately to follow, or come after him, viz. Christ. And (saith Paul) when they [i. e. the people, who came to John to be baptized] heard this [i. e. had been instruct∣ed by John concerning the nature and intent of his Baptism] they were baptized [by him] in the name of the Lord Jesus. This to be the unquestionable sence of the passage, is by sun∣dry arguments from the context it self proved by several lear∣ned men, who have laboured in the interpretation of it, whose discussions are too large to be here inserted, and are extant in their respective Authors. And if it should be supposed, that the Disciples here said to have been baptized by John, or with the Baptism of John, were now by Paul, or by his ap∣pointment, baptized, it would rather have been said, that they
were re-baptized, baptized again, or the like, then simply, that they were baptized; as the Galathians returning to Juda∣isme, from which they had been delivered by the Gospel, are said to return AGAIN to those weak and beggarly Elements, and to desire to be AGAIN in bondage unto them. Gal. 4. 9. So those Professors spoken of, 2 Pet. 2. 20. relapsing to the pollutions of the world, which they had escaped thorough the knowledge of the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, are said to be AGAIN intangled therein. To pretend or say, that a consecration of Infants to the service of Christ, especially by sprinkling, or pouring water upon it, is a nullity, or that a person is never the more con∣secrated unto this service, for his being sprinkled, or wash∣ed with water, in his infancy, and that in this respect a per∣son comming to maturity of years, and beleeving, ought to be consecrated to this service, as▪ if nothing at all had been done unto him upon this account formerly; thus (I say) to pretend or plead, is to dictate a mans own notion and conceit, not to speak the words of sobernesse and truth, or any thing that can be proved from the Scriptures. These no where determine Inant-Baptism to be a nullity, neither in respect of any incapacity in the person baptized, nor in respect of any mis-application of the element, whether ap∣plied by sprinkling, or affusion. Yea it hath been proved elsewhere (I suppose above all reasonable contradiction) that infant-baptism, whether administred by sprinkling, or affu∣sion (although for my part I never knew any administration in this kind made by sprinkling) is for all Baptismal ends and purposes, as efficacious and valid, as the baptizing of men af∣ter what manner soever. See Water-dipping, &c. Considerati∣on 16. p. 24. 25. &c. Consectary. If the practise of Re-baptizing cannot be justified by the word of God, then must it needs be either an humane device, or delusion of Sathan. CONSIDERATION. XLXIX. THe custome or practise of adult Baptism, or of deferring Baptism unto maturity of years amongst those, who were born in the Church, and amongst whom Baptism was used, as in the case of Constantine, Austin, and some others (mentioned
in Church History) first entred into the Church by an unhal∣lowed dore, and was entertained upon unwarrantable and Popish grounds. Proof. The truth of this Assertion sufficiently appeareth by the light of the records of Antiquity. So that whereas some of the Anti-pedo-Baptistical party, ridiculously, and contrary to the main current of all sound Ecclesiastical Records of pri∣mitive date, bear poor ignorant people in hand, that I know not who, what, or which Pope Innocent, should be the first who commanded children to be baptized, the truth is, that they were Popish grounds (haply) in conjunction with some others no whit better, which made the first▪ breach up∣on infant-Baptism (formerly practised, and this generally in the Christian Churches, as is elsewhere proved) and pre∣vailed with some to put off the bapting of their children, and with others, their own baptizing, untill maturity of years; yea with some, untill the apprehended approaches of death. Much might be gathered and cited from the writings of the fathers upon this account. Tertullian seems to have been the first, who perswaded Christians to delay Baptism, especially the Baptism of their children until afterwards; Ita{que} pro cujus{que} con∣ditione ac dispositione, e∣tiam aetate, cunctatio Bapismi u∣tilior est, prae∣cipue tamen circà parvu∣los.—Quid festinat inno∣cens aetas ad remissi nem peccatorum. Tertul. de Baptismo. c. 18. which (by the way) clearly proveth that Infant-Baptisme, was ordinarily practised in his times. But the grounds upon which he per∣swadeth to such a practise, are very sandie and loose: and the principal of them, viz. that Remission of sins, whereof children being innocent, have no need, is obtained by, or at least conferred in, Baptism, is at this day by those (at least, the generality of those) who are reputed Orthodox amongst Protestants, adjudged Popish and erroneous: and be∣sides, seemeth to suppose, that there is no other end of Bap∣tism, but onely the obtaining forgivenesse of sins, or that Baptisme ought not to be administred, except onely in such cases, where all the ends thereof may presently be ob∣tained. Besides this motion of Tertullian for the delay of Baptism, was (in all likelihood) much promoted amongst Christians, by means of some impressions which the consciences of some had taken of the Novatian error, fearing, lest in case of sin
after Baptism, they should be uncapable of Repentance, and consequently of salvation it self. The opinion also which many Professors about these times had drank in, that all their sins should be remitted in their Baptism, in conjunction with a corrupt desire, to injoy the pleasures of sin as long as they could without danger (as they supposed) together with a perswasion that they were onely once to be baptized, contributed much towards the entertainment of Tertullians Doctrinal advice, with many; as may be plainly gathered from several passages in Basil's Exhortation unto Baptism. But whatsoever his grounds or reasons were for this his Doctrine of Baptismal delaies, the pious and learned fathers after him, especially Basil and Nazienzen, adjudged them altogether insufficient, zealously exhorting to a contrary practise. Hast thou an Infant (saith Nazienzen) let nt impi∣ety be gratified with an opportunity: let it be sanctified from its infancy, let it be consecrated unto the Holy Ghost from the very first sprouting of the nails of it: Infans tibi est? ne occa∣sionem impro∣bitas arripi∣piat: ab in∣fantia sanc∣tificetur, ab ipsis ungui∣culis spiritui consecretur. Greg. Nazi∣enzen. Orat. 40. in Sanc∣tum Baptis∣ma. (with much more to the same purpose.) And Basil expresly taught his hearers, that the whole life of a man was a time for Baptism; Baptismi verò tempus, vita horinis tota Basil in Exhort. ad Baptismum. meaning, that it might be administred, and received at any time from the womb to the grave. Yea Tertullian himself clearly ap∣proveth of the Baptizing of infants in case of necessity. Consectary. If the custome of adult Baptism, where children were born of Christian Parents, was first brought into the Church, and entertained upon Popish and unwarrantable grounds, then was it not practised by Christ, or his Apostles, but is rather Popish and Anti-Christian. CONSIDERATION. L. THat Generation of men best known amongst us by the name of ANA-BAPTISTS, have alwaies been inju∣rious to the Gospel, and obstructive to the course and free passage of it in the world. Proof. Peter, speaking of Christ, saith, To him give all the Pro∣phets witnesse (Act. 10. 43.) As all the ancient Prophets, give testimony unto Christ, so do all, or very many of the latter Prophets, (I mean those worthy instruments, by whom
God hath inlightned the world, in, and since the Reforma∣tion began by Luther) given testimony against that generati∣on of men we speak of, as men by whose unworthinesse in se∣veral kinds the interest of the Gospel hath deeply suffered in the world. The course of the Gospel (saith Scultetus, Decad. 1. Anno. 1525.) was this year hindered and obstructed in Zuitzerland and Moravia by the Anabaptistical sect. Else∣where speaking of the Church of Saintgal, he saith, it was variously exercised [or disturbed] by the Anabaptists. Elsewhere he writes, that these Anabaptists were extreamly troublesome to the Christians in the two Cities of Ulme, and Augusta, or Auspurg in the lower Suevia. Again writing of the year 1527. he saith this year, the Anabaptistical and Sa∣cramentary wars or quarrels, were very hot, to th great damage of the [Reformed, or] Evangelical Churches, and that the Anabaptists acted the parts of mad, or furious men, in the Cities of Worms by the Rhine in Silesia, Bavaria, Zuitzerland, and Sue∣via. John Sleidn reports how John of Leiden, a fierce Anabap∣tist, derided the Ministers of the Gospel for affirming, That chil∣dren ought to be baptized. And a little after; that the Senate, fearing that the Anabaptists, daily increasing in their numbers, should, accompanied with their Teachers, thrust the Preach∣ers of the Gospel out of their Churches, to prevent them of such a disturbance, caused the dores of al the Churches in their Cities, except one, to be shut up. Zuinglius in an Epistle to Conradius Somius, Minister in the City of Ʋlm▪ expresseth the grief of his heart, to see Beleevers seduced by the Cata∣baptists; and declareth how that by their lies, their queritations, [wailings, or complaints] their Hypocrisie, which, he saith, is more proper to this sect of men then any other, they had drawn great numbers of men to a most bitter hatred both of him, and o∣thers. He addeth, they will so act their parts, that for a tims they will obstruct the work of Christ [amongst us] but they will never go through with any great matter. For they are the most profligate and debauched persons, that fall in with them, and when their businesse doth not succeed, they fall off again from their sect, and then bear men in hand, that all the businesse of Christ [so much contended about] is but a fable. I think (saith Calvin) it can be no sober mans doubt, how inconside∣rately
they disturb the Church of Christ, who set on foot quar∣rels and contentions because that children are baptized. The truth and sincerity (saith Musculus) of that [Religion, or] piety, which the Gospel teacheth, hath no more deadly ene∣my then Hypocrisie. There are three kinds of men in whom this appeareth, the Pharisees, Monks, and Anabaptists. I speak nothing but what I know▪ Musculus in Mat. 16. 6. And elsewhere he joineth, the Aabaptists with the Papists, and terms them both, the Adversaries of the Truth. Beza hath this passage: Our chief Magistrates have punished some Adversaries, not because they speak what they thought [or beleeved to be true] nor to compel them by force to imbrace the true religion, but because they brake in pieces the band of al human society, because they were per∣fidious Apostates, because they most notoriously corrupted the word of God, because they made a laughing-stock of the authority of the Church, because they factiously rent and tare the [concord or] consent of the Citizens. The Anabaptists therefore (saith Lavater) are not to be heard, to whom it is not enough to di∣sturb the setled order [and peace] of the Church, unlsse they fall soul upon the Commonwealth also, and down with all Ma∣gistrates frm their Thrones [or seats] &c. These men are not onely enemies to Commonwealths and Magistrates, but even pests [or plagues] also to mankind. Calvin (in his Tract against the Anabaptists) professeth that it was his purpose and intent, to admonish all that were Godly, and yet not throughly versed [in matters of Christian Religion] how deadly a oi∣son the Tenent of the Catabaptists is, and to arm and fortifie, them with the Word of God, as with a most certain Antidote, lst they miserably perish. Again [in the same discourse] But now (as I have said) it shal suffice, that I have admonished all tht are stuaious of the truth, that what these wretched men by com∣mon consent hold and maintain for an impregnable ground of their Faith, is a deadly imposture, of which it becomes all men to take heed, as much as of the plague or pestilence. Ʋrsin declares his sence also in conjunction with the for∣mer, touching the persons and opinions of the men now un∣der censure. From all which (saith he, having argued many things for Infant-Baptism) manifest it is, that to oppose Infant-Baptism, is no light error, but a wicked opinion, contrary both to
the word of God, and to the comfort of his Church and people.a All, or al∣most all, of these quotati∣ons, the Read∣er may find in the words of their res∣pective Au∣thors, in the Epist. Ded. in the margnt relating to § 11. And he that desireth more testimo∣nies of like import, I mean to prove that the Sect we speak of hath alwayes been a back-friend to the Gospel, may plentifully furnish him∣self by a per∣usal of the 13. ch. of the second par. of Mr. Baxters plain Scrip∣ture Proof, &c. p 139, 140, &c. By so much the more are these and other the deliriums [or phrensies] of the Ana-Baptistical sect to be avoided, a Sect which without doubt hath been raised up by the Devil, and is an execrable Monster composed and made up of various heresies and blasphemies.  Bullinger reporteth that the Anabaptists did quite root out the Gospel from Waldshut, where Hubmer was Teacher, by banishing many of the Citizens that were good men and sincere, and drove them from their possessions (this was their liberty of Conscience) by which means, the Gospel which did there excellently flourish, was utterly rooted out. The ve∣ry same they wanted but a little of doing at Worms. How deplorable a scandal, to Religion and the Gospel, the generation we now speak of, have been in England, and how much Sathan is beholding to them and their unworthy de∣portments, that it hath not run, and been glorified amongst us at another manner of rate, then hath been seen hitherto, I can better (I conceive) expresse in a few of Mr. Ri. Baxters words and passages, then in many of mine own; although his soul (it seems) was so full of the bitternesse we speak of, that in the uttering of it, it abounded to a large discourse▪ Nay I desire (saith he in one place) any sober Christian but to look unpartially through all the land, and tell me where ever a∣ny such Teachers lived, but the place in general was much the worse for them. Where the Gospel before prospered, and Chri∣stians spent their time and their conference in the edifying of each others souls, and in heavenly duties, and mutual assistance, and lived together in unity and love, according to the great command of Christ, they ordinarily turn all this to vain janglings, and empty windy unprofitable disputes, which he that is most graci∣ous doth taste least sweetnesse in; and they turn their unity into divisions and factions, and their amity into jealousies and con∣tentions; one is for this, and another for that, and they seldom meet but they have jarrings and contendings, and look one on the other with strangenesse, if not with secret heart-burnings and en∣vyings; studying all they can how to undermine each other, and e∣very man to strengthen his own party. And these are the usual fruits of the Doctrine of Anabaptistry where it comes. Plain scrip∣ture Proof for Infants Chu. member-ship, &c. p. 146. He had said before (and proved it accordingly) that Ana∣baptistry
hath never helped on, but hindred the work of God, where it comes. Nor hath God ordinarily blessed the Ministery of the Anabaptists to the true conversion of souls, as he hath done other mens, but rather they have been instruments of the Churches scandal and misery. Pag. 138. Afterwards, But alas! what need we look into other Kingdomes to enquire, whether the fire be hot, when we are burning in it? or to know the nature of that poison, that is working in our bowels, and which is striving to extinguish the life of Church and State: England is now the Stage where the doleful tragedy is acting, and the eyes of all reformed Chur∣ches are upon us, as the miserable objects of their compassion. Pag. 143. A little after; I have had opportunity to know too many of these cal∣led Anabaptists, and to be familiar with them. And having first examined my heart, lest I should wrong them out of any dis∣affection through difference in judgement, as I clearly disco∣ver that, I bear no ill-will to any one man of them, nor ever did, nor find any passion, but compassion moving me to say what I do; so I do impartially and truly affirm concerning the most of them, that I have conversed with, as followeth. 1. That I have known few of them so much as labour after the winning of souls from sin unto God—but the main scope of their indeavours in pub∣lick and private, is to propogate their opinions. And if they do preach any plain wholesome Doctrine, it is usually but subser∣vient to their great design, that the Truth may be as Sugar to sweeten their errors, that they may be the easilier swallowed, &c. Pag. 144. Afterwards he compares the Doctrine and practise of those Anabaptists, who indeavour to perswade the people that it is sinfull for them to hear, or join with their Teachers be∣ing unbaptized men, with the most mischievous Doctrine and insinuation of the Papists, whose onely strength (he saith) amongst us is, to make the people beleeve it is a sin to hear us, or join with us, and then they are out of all waies of recovery; they may make them beleeve any thing, when no body contradicteth it. Pag. 145. A little after this: Moreover that very scandal of these mens opinions and practises, hath been an unconceivable hin∣drance to the successe of the Gospel, and the salvation of multi∣tudes of souls. Oh, how it stumbleth and drives off the poor ig∣norant people from Religion, when they see those who have seem∣ed Religious, prove such! And going on, he sheweth how the
Papists are hardned, the Episcopal party confirmed, the Kings party, which began to stagger at their cause, now perswaded of the lawfulnesse of it, meerly from the miscarriages of these men. All this, with much more, the worthy man reporteth (be∣wailingly) out of his own knowledge and experience of the way which is called Anabaptism, together with those who walk in it, and occasionally all along sheweth the imperti∣nency and weaknesse of whatsoever (can with any colour of Reason) be pretended to ease the burthen laid upon them. So that there is little question to be made, but that the progress of the Gospel in those parts of the European world, where the late Reformation of Christian Religion, ever set foot, hath been more obstructed and retarded by the unsound Doctrines, and extravagant practises of Rebaptizers, then by the irregularities or disorders of any other sect. Consectary. If the way of Ana-baptism, with those who uphold and walk in it, have alwaies been injurious to the Gospel, and ob∣structors of the course and passage of it in the world, it is at no hand to be conceived to be from God; because then God should be divided in, and against himself. CONSIDERATION, LI. THe Wrath of God hath been from time to time revealed from Heaven against the way of Ana-baptism, and those who un-repentingly have walked in it. Proof. The wrath of God is commonly revealed with an high hand, in one, or more, or all, of these waies. 1. By delive∣ing men and women up to an injudicious mind, or to be∣leeve lies and untruths. 2. By delivering them up to vile af∣fections and practises suitable. 3. And lastly by pursuing them with ruinating judgements. That God hath plainly witnessed from Heaven, against the way and practise of Anabaptism, in all these several ways may be sufficiently evinced from the reports and testimonies of many witnesses (beyond exception) yea (I suppose) by all persons of worth and conscience, who in all places, where any considerable numbers of men have been ingaged in this way, have been diligent observers of what hath passed
between the providence of God, and them, and withall have had occasion to record what they observed in this kind, for the use of present and future ages. For the first, that Anabaptism hath been, and is, the ordi∣nary harbinger to other fond, fantastick, uncouth, and perni∣cious opinions, and prepares their way into the minds and judgements (or fancies rather) of men and women, who suf∣fer themselves to be insnared with it, hath been the obser∣vation of former times, and is the experience of our own. Calvin in his Preface to his Brief Instruction for the forti∣fying of Beleevers against the Errors of the common sect of the Ana-baptists, gives this account of this his writing, vz. that many religious persons came unto him and told him, that there was a book sent from remote parts, which required his answer, unlesse th ruine of many souls were pleasing to him. Nisi mul∣tarum ani∣marum inte∣ritus mihi gratus esset. The Treatise it sel he begins in these words. If I should in∣tena to write against all the errors and opinions of the Anabap∣tists, I should undertake a long work, and enter a gulf, from whence I should nver get out. For this rabble of men herein differ from [all] ther Sects of Hereticks, that they do not erre in some certain points onely, but are a kind of immense [or vast] sea of portentuou phrensies: insomuch that it is hard to find the Head of any one Anabaptist, which differs not in some conceit or other from all the rst. S that thre would be no end of my dis∣course, if I meant t examine, yea or so much as recite, all the impious Doctrines and opinions of this Sect. Si adver∣sùs omnes er∣rores & fal∣sas opiniones Anabaptist∣rum scribere vellem, lon∣gum opus su∣sciperem, at{que} ingrederer a∣byssum ude mihi exitus non pateret. Nam ista▪ colluvies ab alijs haerti∣corum sctis in eo diffrt, quòd non tanum c∣tis in rbus erravrit▪ verum sitim∣mensum quod am st∣pendor de∣lirirum ∣re: adeò ut∣vix nius A∣nabatista caput reperiri possit, quod non sit imbutum aliqu opinione diversa a reliquis Ita{que} nullus esset operi finis, si ipias omnes huus Sectae▪ Doctrin excutere, aut etiam recitare vellem. Soon after di∣stinguishing this sect into two sorts, and acknowledging the one, though full fraugt with many impious and pernicious errors, yet to retain more simplicity then the other, concern¦ing this other he saith, that it is as it were a most intricate and perplexed labyrinth of mad conceits, so absurd, that strange it is that creatures in the shape of men should be so far berest o reason and sence, as to fall into those imaginations, which the
bruit beasts themselves would abhorre. Altera est velati impli∣catissima La∣byrinthus de∣liriorum, & quidem adeò absurdorum, t mirum sit creaturas fi∣guram hu∣maam ge∣rntes ita ra∣tione & sen∣su destiti ut in as inci∣dant imagi∣nationes a quibus bestiae ipsae mutuae abhorrerent. He that desireth to know some of the more horrid and execrable opinions and Doctrines, held forth and maintained by these men, needeth onely to peruse the sequell of the said discourse. That sort or kind of Anabaptist, in which he observeth somewhat more ingenuity and simplicity of heart, then in their fellows, con∣sisteth (I suppose) of such of them, who are green (com∣paratively) in this profession, coming more lately from un∣der the Ministry of sober and sound Teachers, and from the ac∣quaintance and converse of good and worthy Christains. For (as the saying is Nemo repente fuit turpissimus. No man comes to the height of impiety all at once. And (according to ano∣ther saying.) Quo semel est imbuta recens, servabit odorem. Testa di.— The cask a long time will retain the scent, Which was at first by seasoning to it lent. An Anabaptist is not to be estimated by what he is, or con∣tinues to be (ordinarily) for 5 or 7 years space next after his proselytism (Neronis quinquennium was proverbiall a∣mongst the Romans; Nero's goodnesse held out very com∣mendably for the first five years in his Empire) for the most part he reteins somewhat of the spirit of that Christian inge∣nuity, with which he was seasoned under the propitious in∣fluence of his former (his best, and most benedict) Baptism, and comes not to his natural Genius, or to be an Anabaptist in∣deed, untill he hath out-worn all the candor and simplici∣ty of his former profession, and comes wholly to set∣tle upon the lees and dregs of his latter. But this onely by the way in this place. Ʋrsin (as we formerly heard) des∣cribing the Anabapistical sect (as he termeth it) saith, that without doubt it hath been raised up by the Devil, and is an ex∣ecrable Monster composed and made up of various heresies and Blasphemies. Melchior Adamus in the life of Zuinglius, wri∣teth to this effect. In the mean time as the Divel alway usth to sow his tares, the Heresie of the Catabaptists crept in, whilest Zuinglius was carrying on the work of Reformation. At first they forbad the baptizing of Infants, and rebaptized themselves. Afterwards they brought in a puddle of all the Heresies that ever were, &c. At Augusta, Basil, and in Moravia, there were Anabaptists (as Bullinger reporteth) that affirmed that
Christ was but a Prophet, and that the Divels and wicked men should be saved. This last most dangerous and pernicious errour, viz. that the Divels and all men without excepti∣on, shall at last be saved, hath lately taken the Fancy of a great Female Teacher, and Actress in the cause of Anabap∣tism, not far from this City, as I have been lately informed, by a person of her own Baptismal perswasion. The same grave and pious Author (Mr. Henry Bullinger) further speaking of this sort of men, saith: This no man can deny, that most of them do forsake their wives and children, and laying by all labour do live idly, and are fed by other mens labours; and when they abound with filthy and abhominable lust, they say it is the command of their Heavenly Father, perswading women and honest Matrons that it is impossible they should be partakers of the Kingdom of Heaven, unlesse they filthily prostitute their bodies, alledging that it is written that we must renounce all those things which we love best, and that all kinds of infamy are to be swallowed by the Godly for Christ's sake, and that Publi∣cans and Harlots go first into the Kingdom of Heaven. A while after, having challenged any man to deny the truth of these things, and affirmeth that all he hath said may be be proved by signed letters and certain testimonies, he addeth: For my part I have in prudence silenced their crimes, and speak lesse then they have committed, so much the more doth it grieve me, that men are so blind they do not observe these things, nor lay them to heart; yea that a great part of men do imbrace and follow these erroneous men even as though they came down from Heaven, and were Saints among mortals, who preach nothing but what is Divine and Heavenly, when as they farre exceed the Nicholaitans and Valentinians in filthinesse. It were endlesse to recite all that which approved Authors and of unquestionable credit, have recorded concerning the most absurd, horrid, and blasphemous Doctrites and opini∣ons, which in all forreign parts, where that generation of men we speak of, have had to do, have been held, maintained, and importunely propagated by them. It is wel known that the gravest and most judicious writers since the late reforma∣tion, as Calvin, Bucer, Zanchy, P. Martyr, Musculus, Beza, Chemnitius, Scultetus, Aretius. (with many others of like
note) do in their writings commonly stile the sect of Ana∣baptists, furious and fanatique, in respect of the wild, uncouth, and mad opinions held and vented by them. But it may be our English soil is more proper for the way, and breeds a more composed and better-headed kind of A∣nabaptist, lesse obnoxious to fumes and fancies, to strange notions and erroneous conceits, then other countries, or that God intreateth the Anabaptists amongst us more graciously, then to deliver them up to such enormous and vile opinions, as those found amongst persons of the same denomination, in other places of the world. The truth is, that Nec lacte lacti, nec ovum ovo similius, milk is not more like unto milk, nor one egg to another. Whether this be true, or no I am content shall be adjudged by the Native result and con∣clusion, arising from those unquestionable premises, which are delivered and asserted by Mr. Ri. Baxter, in his book of Baptism (so oft-mentioned) pag. 147, 148, 149. In the beginning of that part of his discourse, to which I now refer, he writeth thus: And as Anabaptism hath been no greater friend to mens salvation with us, so every man knows that it is the ordiary inlet to the most horrid opinions. How few did you ever know that came to the most monstrous Doctrines, but it was by this door? And how few did you ever know that entred this dore, but they went yet further, except they died, or repent∣ed shortly after. I confesse that of the multitudes of Anabap∣tists that I have known, at the present I cannot call to mind any one, that hath stopt there, &c. Afterwards he subjoins ma∣ny instances for the proof of these things, from the very books and writings of several persons, after they had been initiated in the mysteries of Anabaptism. If I judged it con∣venient, I could out of mine own knowledge, furnish his stage with more Actors, and name some others, men of re∣nown amongst the Professors of the Anabaptismal Faith, whose judgements since their bowing down to take up Ana∣baptism, have been ridden by many other corrupt and noi∣some opinions, unto which they are in bondage to this day. So that it is a thing too evident and manifest to be denied, that God hath from time to time witnessed, and doth wit∣nesse
at this day, against the Doctrine and practise of Anabap∣tism, by delivering up those who entertain them▪ to spirits of error and delusion. The equitableness of which judgement on Gods part, may be considered in this, that it is a righteous and just thing with him, to leave those, through want of wisdom and man-like understanding to depart from Christ and the truth, who will not suffer children to come unto him, when he calleth for them. Concerning those two other kinds of Divine Testimonies, whereby God hath witnessed against the way of Anabaptism, (yea and doth witnesse) as well in forreign parts, as in our own land; the one, by delivering up those that will not be reclaimed from it in time, unto shamefull, hatefull, and vile practices and waies; the other, unto ruinating jugdements, in one kind or other, I shall not burthen the Readers patience with any long discourse; partly because these two latter judge∣ments or testimonies from God, must needs follow of course the former; (erroneous and vile opinions naturally issuing foul and vicious practises; and these again calling for ruine and destruction from the righteous God) partly also because various and large stories may be read in many Authentique Authours for the confirmation of the truth as touching both. Onely thus briefly; Of the lying, Treachery, and sedition (saith Bullinger, speaking of the Anabaptists) wherewith, these disobedient people every where do abound, there is no end, or measure. A little before: This no man can deny, that most of them do forsake their wives and children, and laying by all la∣bour do live idly, and are fed by other mens labours. Some∣what after in answer to an objector: Nor can you shew me ONE MAN of them, who i not blemished with some of the for∣said wickednesses; I mean lying, rachery, perjury, disobedi∣ence, sedition, idlenesse, desrtion, filthinesse, &c. Mr. Tombs himself (it seems) being pressed unto it by Mr. Baxter, could not name unto him any one society of Anabaptists, (out of any good Author) that proved not wicked. But it may be the Anabaptists in these days, do not praise the sayings of their fore-fathers in the ages past, by imita∣ting them in the evill of their waies, but are an holy, humble,
and harmlesse generation, they resist not evill, but when a man smiteth them on the one cheek, they turn unto him the other also: when they are reviled, they revile not again: they love their enemies, and blesse those that curse them, and do good to those that hate them, and pray for them that des∣pitefully use them, and persecute them: they are poor in spirit, and peace-makers; they cause no rents, divisions, or offences amongst Saints in Christian societies: they are not overcome of evill, but overcome evill with good: if their enemies hunger they feed them; if they thirst, they give them to drink. Their fore-fathers indeed were a wicked genera∣tion, heathen-like, filled with all unrighteousnesse, fornicati∣on, wickednesse, &c. but these their posterity, have made all their [forefathers] crooked things, streight, and their rough things, smooth and plain; and with both their hands build up the truth, honour, and peace of the Gospel, which their forefathers pulled down. O that they were the chil∣dren of such a testimony as this! or that the one half thereof were true concerning them! How would it be as a resurrecti∣on from the dead unto the world round about them! How would the Churches of Christ put off their sack-cloth, in which they mourn for these men, and for the great evills they suffer from them, & gird themselves with joy and gladness for their sakes! But alasse! we cannot say, ; this blessednesse hath prevented us. The sad complaints made against those men with whom we have all this while to do, by the Churches and faithfull servants of God in former days, are taken up upon the same account amongst us in our days also. For the most part of them I know (saith Mr. Bax∣ter) this is the most discernable judgement upon them of all the rest: what a multitude do I know that are most notorious for pride, thinking themselve: wiser then the ablest Teachers, when they have need to be catechized. Some of them ran up into the Pulpits to preach, and challenge the ablest Ministers to dispute, and openly contradict, what Ministers preach, when they neither understand themselves, nor others: and no man can perswade them that they are ignorant, though it be as palpable as the E∣gyptian darknesse, to all knowing men that know them. A lit∣tle after; in a word (saith he) let them that have tried them
judge how many of Paul's characters appear upon them. 2 Tim. 3. 1, 2, 3. In the latter days perillous times shall come: For mn shall be lovers of themselves, covetous, boastars, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, unthankefull, unholy, without natural affectin, Truce-breakers, false-accusrs, in∣continent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, Traitors, hea∣dy, high-minded, lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God, having a form of Godlinesse, but denying the power thereof. The Apostle (I suppose) did not intend to predict any such times, which should produce any such generation or body of, men, in all and every of whose individual members, all and every of these characters of impiety should be found. No, I do not find my judgement much inclin'd to think, that in the description specified, he pointed at any determinate Sect, or sort of persons, that should in the times he speaks of rise up in the world: but rather that the spirit by which he spake, gave notice how dangerously and desperately the great body of Christian Professors in the world, would in time degenerate and be corrupted; so that amongst them, all manner of impieties and abhominations would be found. But if I should be perswaded to judge that any one particular Sect of men in the Christian world, were here eyed by the Apostle, I could not but single out, and pitch upon that, which re-baptizeth; because I know no other, amongst whose proselytes there is such an universal confluence of al the enormities here specified by him. And (doubtlesse) the times would be lesse perillous then they are, or are like to be if the persons we speak of would so far ease the danger and burthen of the Christian world, as to distribute the Apostle black characters amongst them, not by two's or three's, or greater proportions, to a single person, but resolve every man and woman of them apart, that it is more then enough that a∣ny one of the said characters be found upon them, and that more then one shall not be found. By the way, because I would not be mistaen in any thing asserted by way of proof, either of the present or former Consideration; I here declare, 1. That whereas there are two kinds of Anabaptism, the one simple, the other com∣pounded (I mean, by the former, that which rejecteth not
the Christian Communion of Beleevers, because not re-bap∣tized, nor placeth either justification, or salvation in its own appropriate way of baptizing, but contenteth it self with a meer exchange of its own Baptism; by the latter, that which separateth it self from faith and holinesse themselves, as im∣pure and unclean, if they cannot stoop to their prescript a∣bout baptizing) I declare (I say) that what hath been said, either concerning the sad sufferings of the Gospel from Anabaptism (in the former Consideration) or concerning Gods witnessing from Heaven against Anabaptism, in this, I desire to be understood onely of the latter sort of Anabap∣tism, and not of the former. For though the former be an errour or mistake, yet being simply and meerly such, &c. not accompanied with pride, or malignity, against the ho∣nour or peace of the Churches of Christ, 1. The Gospel may run and be glorified without any considerable interrup∣tion or disturbance by it. 2. Neither is the God of all grace wont to inflict any exemplary or signal judgement upon the simple errors or mistakes of men, but covereth a thousand of these, with a covering made of his love and great com∣passion in Christ towards men. 2. I declare further, that notwithstanding any thing de∣livered either in this, or in the former consideration, yet my sence and belief is, that there are, or may be, many un∣der the form of the latter and worser kind of Anabaptism, who are at present the sons and daughters of God. Onely my belief is withall, that they are in a way full of danger unto perseverance, and of enmity unto all growth in grace, or in the true knowledge of Jesus Christ the Lord, and which frequently corrupteth and imbaseth, yea for the most part un-Christianizeth the hearts and spirits of those, who for a∣ny long time walk in it. Little do they know (saith Mr. Bax∣ter, speaking of good men entred into the way of Ana-bap∣tism) whither that way leads, nor where it will leave them, unlesse they return. And elsewhere (viz. p. 244.) For my part having diligently obsrved what hath be∣come of those f my acquaintance who have been re-baptized, I have seen them fal to so many desperate opinions and practises, & some to mak a Religion of Swearing and Blaspheming, none to
grow better, and most to grow presently worse, as if a visible judgement of God did follow that action, that I cannot believe that men shall be cut off by Christ from his people, for want of be∣ing Re-baptized. Concerning the third and last testimony, wherein (as it hath been said) God declareth himself from Heaven against high Anabaptism; I shall onely transcribe a few lines from Mr. Baxter (pag, 143. of his Treatise for Infants Church∣member-ship and Baptism.) Leaving the Reader to peruse at his leisure, what other Authors have observed and recor∣ded upon that account. And how they (saith he, meaning the Anabaptists) have withered every where, and come to naught, is too evident to need proof. So that when the light of the Gospel once brake forth, and the true work of Reformation was set on foot, [wherein Infant-Baptism was both taught and practised] God prspered it so mightily to the astonish∣ment of the very nemies, that in a short space it overspread a great part of the Christian world. But Anabaptistry which setThe sixth and last head of Considera∣tions, shewing how and why the opinion and practise of Anabap∣tism may pre∣vail and spread a∣mongst Pro∣fessors; not∣withstanding so little, ei∣ther from the Scriptures, or sund princi∣ples of reason can be plad∣ed for thm. out near the same time and place with Luther's Reformation, did onely make a noise in the world, and turn Towns and Coun∣tries [where it came] into seditions and misery, and so died in disgrace, and go out with a stink. And I am all thoughts made that the same doom is written in Gods books against the high Anabaptism in this nation, which doth little less then magnifie it felf, against all that belong to God amongst us. Consectary. If God hath time after time witnessed from Heaven, against the way of Anabaptism, and those who have walked in it, by all those three kinds of judgements which have been now mentioned, then is it not a way of divine prescription, or ap∣probation, nor doth he take pleasure in those, who imbrace it, and pertinaciously adhere to it. CONSIDERATION, LII. JT hath very seldome or never been known, that any opinion or practise thogh never so uncoth, importune, wicked, or ab∣surd, ever brake forth, or was set on foot in any prt of the Chri∣stian world, but that it gathered considerable numbers of prose∣lites both men and women unto it.
Proof. There needs be no other proof made of the truth of this consideration, but onely by enquiry into the Church records concerning the rise and progresse of those ancient errors, Nicholaitisme, Ebionisme, Eutychiaisme, Manicheisme, Eunomianisme, Nestorianisme, Arrianism, (with others more without number) on the one hand, and by a recogni∣tion of those prodigies of opinions with their practises, which our own daies have in great numbers brought forth amongst us, as viz. the opinions and practises of the Familists of the Antinomians (diversified into several sects and opinions) so again of those called Seekers, Ranters, Quakers, Ada∣mites, Anti-Scripturists, Enthusiasts, Anti-Ordinancers, Su∣per-Ordinancers, Anthropomrphites, Pneumatomachists, E∣rastians (with their Antipodes) High-Presbyterians, The∣ro Johnnians, Coppian, (with other names of a like dolefull sound almost without end) all which, though several of them are most broadly irrational and absurd, yea beneath common sence it self, and some others, of very pernicious, wicked and hellish consequence, have yet taken the fancies of great multitudes both of men and women, (all pretenders to religion, yea to the most excellent way of worshipping God) who at this day go wondering after them (respec∣tively.) Consectary. Then need it not seem strange unto any, that the opini∣ons and practise of persons known amongst us by the name of Anabaptists, should heap up disciples to themselves amongst us, as they do. CONSIDERATION. LIII. BY Opinions and practises, which bear, or seem to bear any thig hard upon the flesh and outer man, are apt to take with four sorts of persons. 1. With thse that are melancholily de∣vout. 2. With those that are vain gloriously devout. 3. With those who through a spiritual unthriftinesse, are behind hand with the things of their eternal peace. 4. (And lastly) With those who secrtly hanker after a fleshly liberty otherwise, without check of conscience.
Proof. The reason why the first sort of these persons are apt to fall in with such opinions, and practises, is, because their temper being over-obnoxious to jealousies, and fears, they seek to fortifie and arm themselves against them, or to qua∣lifie them, by a conceit that they do more to please God, then the ordinary sort of Christians do. The reason why the second sort are propense or apt to be inclined the same way, is, because any strein of devotion which is singular, is a wind proper to fill their sails, and to gratifie that fleshly humour which worketh in them. The reason why the third sort are alike obnoxious with both the former, is, because they fin∣ding themselves straitned in their inward comfort and peace, by doing lesse in religion then ordinary men, hope to reco∣ver themselves by a contrary course, viz. by doing more then ordinary men. The reason why the fourth and last sort are apt to be taken in the same snare with all the former, is, be∣cause they who look upon themselves as doing more to please God then other men, are apt to claim a liberty, as it were by a kind of right, to please themselves likewise more then other men. Consectary. The Premises considered, together with the great numbers both of men and women ingaged in a profession of the Gos∣pel, who fall under one or other of the four heads or sorts of persons mentioned, it needs be no cumber or trouble at all to any mans thoughts, to see the way of Anabaptism so pestered and throng'd with Professors. CONSIDERATION, LIIII. NO kind of Sects or Opiners, have (more generally) been more hardned in the way, or found more imperswasible out of the way, of their errour, then those wh have been abl to pr∣tend the plain letter of the Scripture, though mis-understood, for their opinion or practise, especially when a letter, of a like plainnesse, is not to be found, or cannot be produced against them. Proof. The Papists (we know) mis-understanding these words of Christ, Hoc est Gorpus meum, this is my body, ar so tran∣sported
with confidence of truth in their most absurd and blas∣phemous Doctrine of Transubstantiation, it being no where in Scripture said, concerning the same thing, Hoc non est Cor∣pus mum, this is not my body, that they resolve with fire and sword to maintain it against all opposers. So likewise because they find it written. Ye see then ow that by works a man is justified, and not by faith only (Jam. 2. 24.) and no such words as these, ye see then that a man is not at all justi∣fied by works, but by faith onely, found to contradict the other, therefore there is no removing them from their dan∣gerous Doctrine of justification by works. Thus also the Arrian goeth a way rejoicing with an high hand over his ac∣cursed Doctrine, wherein he denieth the God-head of Christ, because (Jo. 14. 28.) he findeth Christ himself speaking thus, My Father is greater then I, and cannot be opposed in this his rejoycing with any such words as these found in the Scrip∣ture, I am as great as my Father. I shall not need to multi∣ply instances. Cnsectary. This Consideration being unquestionably true, it needs the lesse trouble or offend any man, to meet with that enor∣mous confidence in many Anabaptists touching the goodness of their Opinion and practise, wherewith they amuse the con∣sciences of many weak, unlearned, and unstable souls; al∣though the truth is, they can no more find any such words as these in the Scriptures, infants are not to be baptized, then we such as these, infants ought to be baptized; nor yet a∣gain, any such words as these, beleevers onely ought to be baptized, more then we, such as these—Beleevers onely are not to be baptized. CONSIDERATION. LV. WHen men and women are inordinate in valuing or pri∣zing an erroneous, whether opinion or practise, there is the lesse hope of reclaiming them from either. Proof. The reason hereof is ready of apprehension. What a man possesseth with contentment, and with an opinion of recei∣ving good by it, or from it, he is carefull, and indeavours to fortifie and secure himself in the possession of it. And the
greater the contentment and expectation of good is, in, and from, that, which a man possesseth, he is the more studious and industrous to make good his possession hereof, and the more unwilling to part with it. Now there is nothing, which any man, who is not of a meer Atheistical perswasion, pos∣sesseth, of which he maketh greater treasure, then of his principles, notions, and apprehensions in things appertaining unto God, and the saving of his soul; especially of such of these notions and perswasions, without which, or without the practique of which, he conceives that he cannot, or very hardly, be saved. That which made the Jews of old so im∣portunely, yea even desperately tenacious of their opinion and practise of circumcision, that all the Apostle could say, or argue against them in these things, could not make them to relent in the least, was their conceit of the absolute necessity of this ceremony to salvation, according to that Act. 15. 1. And certain men, which came down from Judea, taught the Brethren, and said; except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses, YEA CANNOT BE SAVED. Consectary. If there be lesse likelihood or hope, of recovering men out of the snare of an errour, or erroneous way, when, and whilest they value either at an excessive rate; then need it not seem strange unto any man, that that spirit, which wor∣keth in men and women of the new baptismal perswasion, should (generally) be so stiffe▪ necked, peremptory, and resolv'd, that though the truth should arise upon them like the Sun in his might, yet they would see nothing to make them so much as to doubt, considering their overgrown, yea monstrous and prodigious conceit of the worth and goodnesse of their way.
Postscript. These two Considerations following were omitted under the third Head of Considerations. Postscript CONSIDERATION. I. AS the Scripture sometimes under the word MEN com∣prehendeth women as well as men, yea and sometimes chil∣dren also; so under the expression, MEN AND WOMEN, it more frequently comprehendeth children. Proof. The truth of this discourse is sufficiently evinced §. 37. of the latter part of this discourse; and repetitions, where ori∣ginals are so near at hand, are altogether needlesse. Onely that may here be added, that as threescore and fifteen souls, (Act. 7. 14.) importeth women and children as well as men; so the three thousand souls which are said to have been added [viz. to the Lord] Act. 2. 41. and implied to have been baptized, consisted of women and children, as well as men (as Cajetan observeth upon the place.) Nor doth it hinder that in the former part of the verse it is said, Then they that gladly received his word were baptized: For this doth not necessarily imply that onely they, who thus received his word, were baptized, or that the three thousand souls pre∣sently said to have been added, did all receive the word gladly; but may (with much probability) import onely this, that the number of those who did thus receive the word, and were upon this account baptized, did with their families, who were together baptized with them, make up the number of three thousand. But though this be very probable, yet the cause of Infant-Baptism aboundeth in strength without it. Consectary. This Consideration being true, it plainly followeth, that the frequent mention found in the Scriptures of men and women
baptized, without any expresse mention of any children baptized with them, doth no ways prove that therefore no children were baptized with them, but the contrary ra∣ther; because more usually, where men and women are onely named, children are also understood and comprehended; at least when those things, which occasion the mention of Men and Women, and are attributed unto them, are such, whereof their children also, are naturally capable, as well as they. Postscript CONSIDERATION. II. IT is lawfull, yea commndable and worthy, for beleevers to devote, separate, and design their children, whilst it is yet early days with them, even from the conception and the womb, to the service of God and Jesus Christ. Proof. That which is offered in this Consideration, needs no proof with intelligent and considering men. For by devoting and designing our children from the womb, to the service of God and of Jesus Christ, we mean nothing but our purposing and intending, as soon as God giveth us children, that as far as in us lieth to procure and effect it, they shall be the faithfull servants of God, and of Christ. And what can with reason be imagined why such a purpose as this should not be lawfull, yea of good acceptance with God? Hannah purposed and vowed, whilest as yet she had no son, or child, that if God would vouchsafe her the blessing of a son, she would give him unto him all the daies of his life, 1 Sam. 1. 11. when the Lord said that he knew Abraham, that he would command his children and his houshould after him, and that they should keep the way of the Lord, &c. it implieth, that even then A∣braham had a real purpose and intent, in case any more chil∣dren should after this be born unto him, to procure as far as he was able, that they also should keep the way of the Lord. The like is to be conceived concerning Joshua, Jos. 24. 15. So that there is little question to be made, but that for Chri∣stian Parents to devote their children even from the womb, unto the service of God and Jesus Christ, is a devotion well becoming them, and approved of God accordingly.
Consectary. If it be commendable and Christian for Christian Parents to devote their children from the womb, to the service of God and of Christ, then is it lawful (at least) to make known or manifest this their act, or councel, of devoting them, unto the world. If so, I demand by what means, they can manifest or make such a thing known unto the world, better or more Christian-like, then by that, which Christ himself hath ap∣pointed for a special cognizance of persons devoted unto his service, I mean, Baptism? Postscript CONSIDERATION. II. Omitted under the third Head. THe truth of an Ordinance, or Gods approving or allowing an Ordinance, as legitimate cannot be estimated or known better, or to more satisfaction, then when he blesseth it unto those who receive it, and causeth it to prosper to the producing of those gracious ends, or effects for which it is appointed. Proof. The reason hereof is because the Scripture from place to place, maketh this signal difference between the Ordinances of God, with their regular Administrations, and the devices and inventions of men; that whereas the former are bene∣dict, of a gracious and happy influence upon the hearts and souls and consciences of men, the latter are alwaies, either noxions and destructive, or else vain and fruitlesse at the best Peruse, and compare diligently for your satisfaction herein these texts of Scripture (with others of like Consideration without number) 1 Sam. 12. 21. Levit. 20. 23. Deut. 5. 33. Deut. 12. 13. 25. 28. 30. Deut. 30. 16. 17. &c. Jos. 2. 5. 1 King. 13. 33. 34. Jer. 2. 5. Jer. 19. 13. 14. &c. Jer. 10. 3. Ezek. 20. 11. 13. 25. Ezek 33. 25. Hos. 12. 1, 2. 11. Hos. 13. 1, 2, 3. Mat. 15. 9. Nor is it (indeed) reasonable to con∣ceive, that God, whom the Scripture calleth a God of judge∣ment, and who will not suffer the ungodly to stand in the Con∣gregation of the righteous, nor make the wicked equal in fa∣vour, or reward, with the just, should make the faces of hu∣mane inventions, shine with that oil of joy and gladness, which he hath prepared to anoint the faces of his own institutions. So that Gods blessing, either accompanying or following an Or∣dinance,
is his countenancing and owning it from Heaven: and in vain do men labour to abase that, which he will exalt. Consectary. If the blessing of God upon an Ordinance, or Admini∣stration, or the prospering of a soul under, and by means of either, be a sufficient and satisfactory argument, that both the one and the other are legitimate, owned, and attested by God accordingly, then is that Baptism, with the admini∣stration of it, which hath been dispensed unto many in their infancy, regular and legitimate, and attested by God for such; inasmuch as thousands of souls have spiritually pros∣pered, and this to an eminent degree, under it, yea and by means of it, at least with as much or more likelihood and proof, then it can be proved that ever any soul thus prosper∣ed, under, or by means of, that after-dipping, which is ob∣truded by many upon the Christian world, as the onely Bap∣tism. Mr. S. Fisher with his fellow∣con-subscri∣bers. Postscript CONSIDERATION IIII. Omitted under the 4th. Head. BAptism received in infancy, and this without dipping, is neithr a nullity, nor dvice or institution of man. Proof. The rule which our Saviour delivereth (Mat. 7.) for the dijudication of good and corrupt trees, and so of true and false Prophets, By their fruits ye shall know them, is of like service for the discerning of true Baptism from false. A corrupt or false Baptism cannot bring forth the fruits of a true. For in as much as no baptism, no more that which is true, then that which is false, can operate or yeeld any spiri∣tual or saving fruit, but by the gracious interposure of God with it, which is the seal of his approbation; it clearly fol∣lows, that in case it appears that Baptism received in infancy, and this without dipping, yeeldeth spiritual & saving fruit, yea such which is proper for true Baptism to yeeld, this must be true Baptism, and so approved by God. A corrupt Tree (saith our Saviour) cannot bring forth good fruit. Now that the Baptism we speak of, and for which we plead, yeel∣deth all the real fruits of true Baptism, yea and richly accom∣modates
all ends and purposes, which can reasonably, or up∣on Scripture grounds, be either expected from, or ascribed unto, true Baptism, hath been demonstratively argued and evinced by us elsewhere. Water-dip∣ping no firm footing for Church-com∣munion, pag. 25, 26. Experience likewise informeth us, that great numbers of those, who walk under their Infant-Baptism onely, do altogether as conscienciously both own & discharge, all Baptismal engagements, and withall in every whit as ample manner injoy all Baptismal comforts and pri∣viledges, as those who glory and please themselves most in their way of re-baptizing. Yea experience further teacheth, that very many of those, who have gone under water upon an hope conceived of finding more grace and peace there, then their infant Baptism had conferr'd upon them, have lost much of the former by the voyage, and it is exceeding much to be feared have not at all increased the latter, if not susteined losse in this also. Consectary. If Baptism received in infancy, though without dipping, be neither a nullity, nor an institution or device of man, then must after-baptism unto those, who have been infant-bapti∣zed, be either the one or the other, I mean either a nullity, or an instituted device of man. The reason of this conse∣quence is, because the Scripture, which onely hath power originally to declare the reality and truth of a divine Ordi∣nance, hath declared nothing in this kind, on the behalf of a second or after-Baptism. Postscript CONSIDERATION. V. Omitted under the fifth Head. BAptism, as all types and typical Ordinances, is one of those things, which are , and not , i. e. which have been instituted and given by God for the sake of, and in re∣ference unto, some other thing of greater and more weighty con∣cernment unto men, then themselves. Proof. This Consideration is greater in evidence then exception, or doubt, even without proof. For that Baptism is a typi∣cal Ordinance, and according to the counsel and intention of the great father and founder of it, given in subservience to ends and purposes of higher consequence then it self, is (I
suppose) the sence and joint consent of those, who disturb the peace of the Christian world about it. Or however, the thing is fully evident from that known description of it in the Gospel, wherein it is termed the Baptisme of Repentance for the remission of sins, (of which more largely in the latter part of this discourse.) Now all typical Ordinances are ap∣pointed or prescribed, and given by God unto men, either 1. For the teaching and instructing them in something that is more spiritual and secret, or 2. For the confirming and se∣curing them, touching, either the certainty and truth of things already past, or the injoyment of good things, accor∣ding to the promise of God yet to come; or 3. For the re∣minding them of something that is absent: or 4. (And last∣ly) for the ingaging them to some future action, kind, or course, of acting. There may possibly be other ends of ty∣pical institutions, besides these: but these onely at present come to mind. However, when the end, or ends, for which any such Ordinance, as those of which we now speak, was appointed, be once obtained and injoied by men (whe∣ther by the use of this Ordinance, or without it; for God is at liberty to work his good pleasure in men, and for men, without any Ordinance, though men be not left at liberty to omit them in their respective seasons, nor to neglect or despise them at any time) the use, or further use of such an Ordinance, is not required by God: nor can it in the use of it, be of any consequence, benefit, or concernment unto men. Now concerning Baptism, let the ends of it be sup∣posed, what men reasonably can suppose or imagine them to be, they are all obtained and enjoyed by many, by means of that Baptism, or Consecration unto Christ by Water, which was administred unto them in their infancy, and which they stil own, and in the strength and conscience whereof they still walk, without any other Baptism received by them afterwards; as I have fully demonstrated, pag 24, 25, 26, 27. of my Discourse, intituled, Water-dip∣ping, &c. Consectary. If Baptism was not ordained by God for it self, or for the
bare letters sake of it, but for ends and purposes, spiritual∣ly beneficial unto men, then cannot the receiving of it af∣terwards be any waies commodious unto them, who by means of their Infant-Baptism, or otherwaies, are actually possessed of these ends; nor doth God require a subjection unto it of such men.
The Second Part. BEING A modest Examination of Mr. William Allen's Arguments, pretending clearly to prove (as himself expresseth it) the Invalidity of the Administration of Bap∣tism to Infants. Sect. 1. I Trust that Mr. A. notwithstanding the great disservice he hath done (I presume not out of a worse Conscience, then what want of light in the particular, rendreth it) unto God, in the affaires of Je∣sus Christ, and the Gospel, by publishing his Baptismal abuses, hath yet so much interest in him, as to be heard by him in that Christian and worthy Petition (in the close of his Premonition) viz. that God will give unto his Reader, so much light, as to discern that which is of him, from that which is but of men. Nor am I without all hope, but that this prayer of his will unto many of his Readers, turn to a soveraign Antidote against the dan∣ger and infection of his following discourse. For if God shall vouchsafe so much light unto any man, as to dscern that which is of God in this piece, from that wich is but of men, there is not much fear that his judgement will be over-ruled by the arguments, to espouse the conclusion commended by
them. It is a saying too hard for my spirit, nor of any good comportment with my respects to the Author, yet was it the saying of a judicious and sober Christian, both in my hearing and in the hearing of some others, that they never met with, so many Scriptures within so narrow a compasse, more abu∣sed, then those levied by Mr. A. to fight the battel of that cause, which he laboureth to assert in his book. But though I cannot with confidence rise up to the height of such a say∣ing, or censure, yet very possibly they who spake the words, might speak them with truth. Sect. 2. He enters his Discourse with this Observation; that, That which boh busies the minds, and takes up much time among the servants of God in debates, is that question about Baptism, viz. which Administration is most agreable to the mind of God whether that which is made to Infants—or whether that which not made but unto persons, who either ideed beleeve the Gospel, or make profession so to do. I confesse that the businesse of Baptism doth (indeed) much (if not much too much) busie the minds of many in these days, as Circumcision also did the minds of many of old. But as the great Apostle Paul, though circumcised himself according to the Law of God, yea and upon occasion, an Administrer of it unto others, yet severely rebuked, yea and wished the cutting off of those, that stickled for the practise of it by Christians, because of the great disturbance occasio∣ned hereby in the Churches of Christ: Yea and threatned those with no lesse then losse of Salvation by Christ, who should submit to it upon the terms, on which it was impor∣tunely commended, and obtrued upon them by those who taught it: So if he were now alive amongst us, there needs be little question but that he would walk in the same steps of Apostolical severity against those, who are importune and restlesse in unsetling the minds, and troubling the Conscien∣ces of the people of God, in kindling fires of contention and strife, and making breaches and divisions in Christian Chur∣ches, by their vehement urging and pressing their new, cap∣tious, and insnaring Doctrines about the adequate subject, the precise mode or manner of the Administration of Baptism,
&c. Yea and would caution all those also, who should en∣tertain these Doctrines upon these high terms, on which the necessity of their practise is urged and imposed by their Factors, with the hazard and danger (at least) of miscar∣rying in the two grand concernments of men; justification, and salvation. For the reason why the Apostle fell so heavy upon the fierce Advocates of circumcision, was not for cir∣cumcisions sake, as if he bare any peculiar hatred against this; or because it was now an obsolete ceremony, and as good as out of date; we do not find any such reason as this of his be∣haviour in that kind, so much as whispered, but because be∣ing an external rite and ceremony, they sought to enthrall the judgements and consciences of Christians to the practise of it, as if they could not have been justified or saved without it. This was that which made these mens Doctrines as fire and sword among the Churches of Christ. For otherwise the Prophets of God even under the Old Testament, when Mosaical Ceremonies and Observations were in the strength of their obligations, yet poured contempt upon them, as if God little regarded them, when the observers of them plea∣sed themselves inordinately in them, and upon a confidence of pleasing God in the practise of them, lift up their hearts to commit much iniquity otherwise. When ye come to appear before me, who hath required this at your hand to tread in my Courts? Bring no more vain Oblations, incense is an abhomi∣nation unto me—your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my soul hateth: they are a trouble unto me: I am weary to bear them, &c. Esa. 1. 11, 12, 13, &c. If Mr. A. were as infalli∣ble in his judgement, in all externalties of Baptism, as Paul, or Peter themselves, or were able to give an account 7 times more passable, then that which he hath yet given, of his o∣pinion touching the appropriate subject of Baptism, yet if he shall idolize his judgement in this kind, or (which is the same) obtrude a conformity in practise to it upon the Con∣sciences of men, as necessary for obtaining remission of sins, and justification in the sight of God (as he doth over and over, as will appear in the progresse) or for the bringing of men into the honour and esteem of visible Saint-ship, as if an holy and blamelesse conversation of the longest continu∣ance,
yea though joined with the deepest sufferings for Christs and the Gospels sake, did not intitle any man to this honor▪ if (I say) he shall obtrude this his judgement upon Christ∣ian Churches upon such terms as these, he will certainly be judged by God, yea and by all considering men, as the Au∣thor of al those evils and inconveniences, whatsoever they shal prove to be, wherewith the Churches of Christ shall be infest∣ed and molested hereupon. He discovers (as he suppofeth) many other abuses of Baptisme, which, if such, certainly are of the smallest moment; whereas himself in the mean time becomes guilty of one of the highest prophanations of it, that can lightly be imagined, I mean, of idolizing it, or rather (indeed) of that which is least considerable in it. Thus whilest he espieth a moat, (or rather the shadow one∣ly of a moat) in the eye of his Brethren, he seeth not the Beam that is in his own eye. Sect. 3. But that question about Baptism, which he meaneth, rather then expresseth (though immediately he maketh it, not pro∣perly a question about Baptism, as indeed it is not, but about the administration of Baptism, which is a thing essenti∣ally distinct from Baptism; no nor yet is it properly a questi∣on about the Administration of Baptism, but about the subject of this Administration, which is really also distinct from the Act it self of Administration) but the question he means, with which men of his opinion in the point, have unhappily distur∣bed the peace of the Churches of Christ, and obstructed the course of the Gospel (for this is the loud complaint almost of all the faithfull labourers in the Lords Vine-yard, especi∣ally beyond the seas since the Reformation) doth not onely busie the minds of the servants of God at present, but according to all that can reasonably be judged, or expected in the case, without some very extraordinary interposure of God to pre∣vent it, is like to busie them to the worlds end, or at least un∣till his coming, who will do a way (as the Apostle speaks) that which is unperfect, and bring perfection, and face to face with him. For those of Mr. A's judgement are neither able by the Scriptures, or otherwise, to satisfie the judgements and consciences of those, who are considering, and understand
themselves, in their dissent from them, nor yet capable of such arguments and grounds from others, which are preg∣nant and of strength, sufficient in themselves to reduce them. Many of his perswasion boast indeed as if they had scattered the darknesse of the question, with that light which they have shined unto the world; and are neither ashamed nor afraid to say, that all those who in these days do not Anti-paedo-baptize with them, must needs sin against their own light, yea and are come to the very brow and brink of this precipitate cen∣sure, that those who gather not with them, are like to scat∣ter; I mean, who are not baptized with their baptism, cannot be saved. Poor men! the shadows of the Mountains seem men unto them, and men indeed seem but shadows. But this hath been the genius of by-way men in all ages, to make no lesse then matter of life and death of their opinions. Sect. 4. But what is the Question, which thus busieth the minds, and takes up so much of the time of the servants of God in debates? It seems it is this: Which Administration is most agreeable to the mind of God, whether that which is made to Infants, or wh∣ther that which is not made, but unto persons who either do be∣leeve the Gospel, or professe so to do. [I suppose that neither Mr. Allen, nor men of his mind; busie their minds at all a∣bout the Question here propounded, unlesse it be in washing the Blackamore side of it, to make it look white, and dis-co∣louring the other into blacknesse and deformity. For (doubtlesse) they are all thoughts made that the latter Ad∣ministration is not onely most agreeable, but onely agreeable, to the mind of God. And for those that are contrary minded to them, at least the greater part of them, neither are their minds much busied about the said Question, unlesse it be in making streight, what the others have made crooked, and n drawing out the mind of God in the Question into the light, which the other labour to bury under darknesse. For these also are fully perswaded, that the former Administration, not made irregular by circumstance is altogether as agreeable to the mind of God, as the latter; yea and much more agree∣able hereunto then the latter, as (generally) practised and performed amongst us in these days; yea that this, the cir∣cumstances duly considered under which it is performed, hath
neither footing, nor foundation in the Scriptures. There∣fore the Question he speaks of, which Administration, &c. doth every whit as much, if not much more, busie Mr. A's mind, and the minds of his party, as the minds of any of those servants of God, who dissent from them. But that it should busie the minds either of the one, or of the other, or take up so much of their time in debates, as it doth, is of no good a∣bode to the affairs of Christ Jesus in the world: therefore they who have kindled the fire of the contest, have the great∣er sin. Sect. 5. But Mr. A. somewhat handsomely covers the nakednesse of those, as well who at first occasioned the said contest, as those who importunely keep it still on foot, by terming his question, a Question about Baptism. If it were (indeed) a Question about Baptism▪ i. e. about the nature or essence of Baptism, or about any thing much considerable in relati∣on to it, as the necessity, end, benefit, &c. it might rea∣sonably be put to consideration amongst the Churches of Christ; yet with this proviso too, that the sence of the pro∣pounders in any the said questions, be not imposed upon the Churches, as necessary to be imbraced upon the sore penalty of being for ever excluded from Christ, or of being un-chur∣ched. This would be to threaten, not to argue, or dispute. But Mr. Allens Question is not about Baptism it self, nor a∣bout any thing much considerable relating too it, but onely about the precise, adequate, and appropriate subject of the Administration of it. It is true, the will and mind of God, even about Tythingmint, Anise, and Cummin, yea though sparingly discovered, and hard to come at, is not to be des∣pised, nor the knowledge of it neglected; but he, or they that should spend much of their time in hammering out such a notion  with colourable arguments and grounds to com∣mend and set it off) wherein they can please themselves, as if it were the unquestionable mind of God in the case, and then adjure all Christians to be of their mind, either upon pain of damnation, or of losing their Church-ship, or the like, such persons certainly would not approve themselves unto God, or unto Jesus Christ in so doing; no not though
their notion; which they should obtrude upon the Christian world in this case, and upon these terms, should prove to be the truth. The mind and will of God was, that by the com∣ming and suffering of Christ in the flesh, the Mosaical diffe∣rences of meats should cease, and that Beleevers should be at liberty, (and so judge themselves) to eat what kind of meats they pleased. Yet was it expressely contrary to the Will of God, that they who knew the truth and will of God in this case, should be either troublesome, or insnaring unto other Christians, so much as by the exercise or acting of this their liberty before them. Hast thou Faith [i. e. beleevest thou, that thou now lawfully mayest eat meats, that were prohibi∣ted by Moses Law!] have it to thy self before God; a mean∣inga Rom. 14. 22 that he should be content with the use and benefit of this his liberty, in private, and not by any importune use or ven∣ditation of it before others, who were yet weak and unsatis∣fied in the point, trouble or insnare them. And yet the knowledge of the mind and will of God in this case, was by many degrees (I wis) of greater moment and consequence then the knowledge of his mind touching the precise subject of the Baptismal Administration, whatsoever it shall be found to be. For either to doubt, or to be ignorant, whether a man or woman ight lawfully eat meats prohibited by Mo∣ses Law, was (constructively) to doubt, or to be ignorant, whether Christ was come in the flesh, or no, and conse∣quently, whether he was not to be expected afterwards; an errour which occasioned the destruction of many thousands of the Jews temporally, yea (as is greatly to be feared) e∣ternally also (not to mention many other Christian accom∣modations, which accompanied the knowledge of the truth in the case.) Whereas the knowledge of the mind of God touching the proper subject of the Baptismal Administration, especially if it be that, which Mr. A. and his party contend for, is by this (to omit many other arguments) evicted to be of very slender consequence, viz. that since, and where, it hath been discovered, and a practise corresponding with it submitted unto, the State of Christianity hath little advan∣ced (if not retreated rather) nor any thing more of God, or of Christ, been seen or known in the world, then was be∣fore,
yea and still is in such places, and amongst such per∣sons, who do not acknowledge or own the said subject. But of this probably we may speak more at large elsewhere. In the mean time let not Mr. A. nor men of his opinion, any more call the Question argued in his book, a Question about Baptism, nor yet about the Administration of Baptism, but onely about the appropriate subject of this Administration; which being truly interpreted, is (as hath been proved) a Question of smal consequence; not of much greater, then the question about Melchizedek's Father, which also is very so∣lemnly, with much devotion and gravity, argued by some. Sect. 6. Nor doth he state his Question with any clearnesse to the sence of his Adversaries. For they do not hold or teach, that an Administrator of Boptism made to infants, is more agreeable to the mind of God, then a like administration made to some, who beleeve, and professe the beleef of the Gospel. They acknowledge that Baptism is administred to such persons, who newly come out of Judaism or Paganism, and professe the Gospel, with as much agreeablenesse to the mind of God, as unto Infants. 2. Neither do they hold (at least some of them) but that Baptism may be administred to those who have lived loosely and prophanely in a profession of the Gos∣pel, upon their repentance, at least in case they have not been baptized formerly, and this with as much agreeablenesse also to the mind of God, as unto Infants. Nay 3 some of them (for I know not the sence of them all in this point) are not positive, but that the said administration may be made, and this with as much agreeablenesse unto the mind of God as un∣to infants, to such Beleevers, though formerly baptized, whose consciences cannot be satisfied without it; according to the saying of the Apostle in a like case, It is better to mar∣ry then burn; though if the burning could be healed without marrying, it were better then either. But that which they ge∣nerally hold in the Question about the subject of Baptismal administration, is, that this administration may with good agreeablenesse to the mind of God, be made unto infants. And this (indeed) is that against which Mr. A's discourse is directly bent in the first part of it; and if his reasons and ar∣guments,
by which he opposeth this, be disabled by a fair and rational answers given to them (respectively) there will be no need of any further inquiry after either of his underta∣kings in the latter part. Sect. 7. In order to the advance of his first argument, he prescribes us the best way (as he conceives) to come to satisfaction a∣bout the said Question, and this (saith he) is to observe theMr. A. p. 1. footsteps of the Flock of Christ in the first setting forth of this Or∣dinance, &c. (he means, in the practise of Christians, in John the Baptists, and Apostles times.) To prove this to be the best way, he refers us to what the Apostle did in one case, 1 Cor. 11, 23. and to what Christ did in another, Mat. 19. 4. 8. But first Mr. A. prescribes us one way to come to the said sa∣tisfaction, but his Proofs and Texts brought to commend this way unto us, lead us to another way. This way which his proofs and texts lead us, unto is (indeed) absolute and compleat, and could he guide our feet into this way, in the case and question in hand, we should without asking, or ma∣king any more questions for conscience sake, walk together with him in it. But this way consisteth not in the footsteps of the flock of Christ, nor in the practise or example (one, or more) no not of the greatest Saints, but in the expresse letter of an institution. In the latter of the two places cited, our Saviour, for the reducing of marriage, and matters relating thereunto, to their primitive intent and use, doth not send the Jews to the practise either of Abraham, Isaack, or any of them that came nearest in practise to the Law, or institu∣tion of marriage, but to the institution it self. So likewise in the former, the Apostle, to make streight, what the Corin∣thians had made crooked, in the Administration of the supper, doth not send them to the practises of such and such Chur∣ches, who possibly in their administrations, came nearest to the institution, but to the institution it self. Which way of the two shall we take for our satisfaction? that which Mr. A. prescribes and follows, or that which the Scripture cited by him leads us unto? If he would have us to follow the for∣mer, we have no authority or rule of Scripture from him (if at all) so to do; if the latter, then he counsels us against his
own practise, and prevaricates with his cause, and with the foundation on which he builds his first argument, viz. mat∣ter of fact (as himself calls it, p. 2.) And indeed it is the foundation of all the rest of his arguments, and of the argu∣ments of all of his way, upon the subject in hand. Nor do we deny matter of fact to be a foundation in its kind; but in what cases, and how far, we own and reverence it in such a relation, may be shewed in due time. Sect. 8. But 2. His more probable meaning and intent is (though his words fall short) that both together, practise and insti∣tution are the best way or means whereby to receive satisfaction in the Questin before us. If so, then is it but reasonable to desire of him, either 1. To produce or shew unto us an ex∣presse institution for Baptism; this (probably) would soon comprimise the difference between us: Or else 2. To prove substantially (for, as the saying is, old Colts are not to be taken with chaffe, nor considering Christians to be satisfied with light or loose conjectures) that an usage or practise, though immediately following an institution, yea and this with good correspondency and conformity to the institution, is notwithstanding commensurable to the whole councel and intent of God in the institution, or holds forth and expres∣seth adequately and compleatly all that, which the institution comprehendeth. Nay the certain truth is, that not onely no practication of an institution, though with never so good conformity hereunto; but that not the letter it self, or Grammatical sence of the words of an institution, do express hold forth, or comprehend, the whole mind or counsel of God in any institution whatsoever. For God himself hath authorized the law of nature, and humane accommodation, to Umpire in the practise or administration of all institutions, and to over-rule the letter of them, See this more lrgely opened and proved, Wa∣ter-dipping, &c. p. 5, 6, 7, &c. in these and such like sayings; I will have mercy and not sacrifice: Mat. 9. 13 12. 7. So again, The Sabboth was made for man, and not man for the Sabboth. Mar. 2. 27. Again, Which of you shall have an Asse, or an Oxe fallen into a pit, and will not straightway pull him out on the Sabboth day? Luke 14. 5 See also Josh. 5. 5, 7. 1 Sam. 21. 6. Mat. 12. 3, 4. Luke, 13. 15. Mat. 5. 23, 24. (with some others.) This heing
so, how far is Mr. A. out of the way, in his Doctrine to∣wards the close of his discourse, where neither I, nor he, can truly say, for an institutions sake, but for a disputable circumstance or punctillo's sake, about the administration, nay about the subject onely of the administration of an insti∣tution, he not onely teacheth a lawfullnesse, but importune∣ly urgeth and presseth a necessity upon men, to abandon Churches, as unclean, & so to break that faith, which they had formerly given unto Christ, and unto his Saints, touching the performance of all Christian services of love, for the edifica∣tion, comfort, and well-being of those Churches, which they thus abandon, and separate from, having formerly been members of them. But to make disputable and uncer∣tain notions, grounds of forsaking or omitting, evident and undisputable duties, what is it but to make the night an over∣seer of the day? But this by the way. Sect. 9. To this I cannot but adde one thing more upon the same account. Mr. A, knows very well, that his Brethren, from whom he dissents in the present controversie, deny that there is any institution at all of Baptism upon record, either in the New Testament, or the old; yet takes no notice at all of it. And though it be matter of so great consequence to the busi∣nesse in hand, though he had so fair an opportunity, yea though the Scriptures cited by him imposed a kind of necessi∣ty upon him, to speak concerning it, as either to prove that there is such an institution, or otherwise to shew how we may come to satisfaction in and about, the use and practise of Baptism, though there be no institution, yet he waves the consideration of it altogether. Whether this omission was casual, or prudential, shall be no part of our present enquiry. However by the light of what hath been said, we plainly see that Mr. A. knoweth not, or at least, that it doth not ap∣pear that he doth know, how to clear up unto us a way, or rule, how to receive satisfaction in the particular in hand. His Scriptures produced lead us to the institution of God; but his best way, to the practises of some men. The institution would be satisfaction unto us without the practises of men: but the practises of men without the institution, do but satisfie us
in part, touching the institution, viz. how it may▪ or ought, in such and such cases, under such and such circumstances, to be administred. Yea the truth is, that for Mr. Allen's prae∣tises themselves, as far as he is able from the Scriptures to de∣clare and argue them unto us, they are not, no not to such a degree, so compleatly satisfactory, (as there may be oc∣casion to shew afterwards,) When the institution of circum∣cision was given, if an estimate should have been made of the mind of God, concerning the adequate or proper subject of this Ordinance, by matter of fact, or by the first administra∣tions of it, evident it is that such an estimate would have led men into errour, notwithstanding he that managed and or∣dered these first administrations, was as faithful, and as good a friend of God, as either John, or the Apostles themselves. For no administration was at first made of this Ordinance (at least we read of none that was made) but onely unto persons that had out-lived the eight day of their lives by ma∣ny years, as unto Abraham himself, being now 99 years old, unto Ishmael, being 13 yeers old, aad unto every male among the MEN in Abraham's house, Gen. 17. 23, 24, 25. And yet we know that the primary intent of God concerning the subject of this administration, respected children onely of the eight day, Ger. 17. 12. He proceeds to tell us, That it is no mans douht who beleeves the Scriptures, but that Baptism was administred to beleeving and repentant persons in those times; but that it was admini∣stred to Infants, divine History, no where reports, nor can it be duly collected, from any part thereof. We answer, Sect. 10. 1. As it is no mans doubt indeed (in which respect Mr. A. might have spared the asserting it, without any detriment to his cause) but that Beleeving and Repenan persons were baptized, so neither needs it be any mans doubt, but that persons, neither bleeving (I mean, truly, unfeignedly, and to justification) nor Repentant, were baptized also. For who can think that the inhabitants of Jerusalem and all Ju∣dea, and all the Region round about Jordan, were all beleeving and repentant persons, (who yet were all baptized. Mat. 3. 6.) consi∣dering that when the Apostles met before God about so so∣lemn
and weighty a businesse, as the chusing of a new Apo∣stle, the whole number of Disciples present with them were but about an hundred and twenty? yea that whole multitude which John calls a generation of vipers, were all baptized of him, Luke. 3. 7. compared with verse 21. Nor do I suppose it to be any mans doubt, but that Simon magus was an hypocrite, and consequently no Repentat person, when he was baptized. Yea Mr. A. himself seems to suppose (pag. 15.) that men may lawfully te up the Ordinance of Baptism, onely to in∣gag themselves to the practise of Repentance and Mortification afterwards. 2. Neither is it any mans doubt now (or the doubt of some few onely) but that Baptism may, and ought, to be administred to beleeving and Repentant persons, in such cases, and under such circumstances, in, and under which it was ad∣ministred unto them in the Apostles times. But▪ Sect. 11. 3. No waies, no not with so much as the face of a conse∣quence, doth it follow; that because it was administred then in such particular cases, or under such and such circumstances determinately unto Repentant persons and Beleevers, oughtIf Mr. A. could shew us such a command as this, for the baptizing o elevers or Professors onely, we shd not de∣clin to prac∣tise accord∣ingly. it now to be administred in cases altogether differing, or un∣der circumstances of a quite contrary nature and import, unto the like. It was Mr. A's opinion very lately (whether it be still alive, or since dead, I know not) that the anointing the sick with oyl by the elders of the Church, in order to their healing and recovery, ought not now to be practised by them; yet I suppose he will not deny but that it was practised by the elders of Churches in the Apostles daies, and this by expresseness of command, Jam. 5. 14. This his opinion touching a necessity of varying from a primitive practise, and and this imposed by an expresse command, he can upon no other account tolerably justifie, but onely by alledging that the case, in reference to such a practise is different in these days, from what it was in the days of the Apostles, when the gifts of healing were vested in persons of that relation in Christian Churches. So again, while he declines that primitive practise of greting his Christian Brethren with an holy kise, so oft, and so expresly commanded by God, Rom. 16. 16 1 Cor. 16. 20 2 Co. 13. 12. 1 Thss. 5 26 1 Pet. 5. 14. and withall
so religiously observed by Christians for several ages after the Apostles (as appears from Justin, Martyr, Tertullian, Cle∣mens of Alexandria, Origen, and others) he can give no competent reason but onely the difference of the case, or of circumstances between those primitive times, and ours, or ra∣ther (perhaps) between those countries or parts of the world, and ours. There is the same consideration of our common custome (at which Mr. A. is no more scrupled then others) of prophecying [i. e. of being present at the exercise of prophecying, or of preaching or opening the word of God] with our hads covered; which notwithstanding is expresly contrary to the practise, which the Apostles ordered and in∣joined in the primitive Churches, 1 Cor. 11. 4. 7. Yea the Prophets or Ministers themselves in the French Churches, prophesie with their heads covered, and (for ought I know to the contrary) are therein blamelesse. Again Mr. A. takes, or at least allows a liberty to vary from the practise of Christ himself in his primitive administration of the Supper. He administred it unto men onely; Mr. A. pleads the title of women also to the administration, page 11. Doubtlesse he cannot justifie an administration so far differing from that of Christ in respect of the subjects of it, or persons administred unto, but by pleading that the case is otherwise with us, in reference to the ordinary administration of the supper, that ought to be practised amongst us, then it was with Christ, after this, or some like manner: Christ judging it meet to solemnize the first administration of the Supper, with his Apostles onely, by whom he intended to erect the said admi∣nistration in all Churches thoroughout the world, had no occasion to interess women therein; and besides, the admi∣nistration being yet unknown and unheard of amongst Chri∣stians, no women more then men, could so much as desire part and fellow-ship therein. Whereas amongst us, and in our Churches, we have women-members, as well as men, who are in the same capacity with men to partake in the Or∣dinance, and who desire it with as much desire as they: and besides, we have no such motive or occasion, to confine our selves unto men in our Administrations, as the Lord Christ had in his. If then difference of case, and diversity of cir∣cumstance,
one or more, will justifie a different practise in all the particulars now mentioned, from those, which were most regular and worthy in other cases, and under differing circumstances, is it not most rational to conceive & conclude, that the ordinary practise of the Apostles in Baptizing Be∣leeving and Repentant persons, (supposing it to have been such) doth no waies argue or prove, but that the ordinary practise of baptizing children now may be more justifiable▪ then such a practise would be, considering that the case of Christianity and circumstances relating unto Baptism, are so much altered, and differing as they are, from what they were in the Apostles days. In the Apostles days, the Beleeving and Repentant persons whom they baptized, had not been trained up in the knowledge of Christ, or in the profession of Christian religion, but were newly converted unto Christ, either from Ju∣daism, or Gentilism. In the like case, and under the same circum∣stances, we also judge that Beleeving and Repentant persons, at least professors of both, and these onely, ought to be bapti∣zed. But in our daies, and amongst us profession of the name of Christ being made by persons from their childhood, and it being difficult for men and women to determine the time of their effectual conversion; we, in regard of this great change of circumstances, and considering that Baptism is ve∣ry improper to be administred after many years profession, and having no ground or warrant in the Scriptures, for the administration of it in this case (least of all for the ordinary and constant administration of it) judge it much more a∣greeable to the mind of God, and to the requirement of those circumstances, which lie before us, (in conjunction with other reasons and grounds, which we shall account for in due time) to make the administration unto children, then to defer it until after years. But, Sect. 12. 4. (And lastly) whereas he addeth, It cannot duly be collected from any part or circumstance of divine History, thatMr. A. p. 2. Baptism was administred to infants in the Apostles days; we Answer: 1. That here he boasteth, whilest he is onely girding on his Armour, and triumpheth before the Battel. 2. That though the administrntion he speaks of, cannot be collected
from any part or circumstance of Divine History; yet it ma∣keth every whit as much against him, if it can be collected from any other passages of Scripture, though not Histori∣cal. Mr. A. himself, onely upon grounds delivered in the Scripture for the doing of many things, presumeth them to have been done, both by the Apostles and other Christians, although the Historical part of the Scripture recordeth not their doing, as in the matter of womens admission to the Lords Table, of the baptizing of many Christians, yea and of the Apostles themselves, whose Baptisms are not report∣ed in the Scriptures. 3. We affirm and say, that what he saith cannot be duly collected from Divine History, may be du∣ly collected from hence, especially other passages of Scrip∣ture being allowed to prompt the History i the case. This we are confident we shall be able to make good in due time and place. 4. (And lastly) Neither cat be duly collected from Divine History, that Baptism was not administred to In∣fants in the Apstles days, which yet (it seems) is Vena Ba∣silca the master vein in the body of Mr. A's Faith about Bap∣tism. Sect. 13. After this Harbingery, his first argument, which (by the way) he tels us is drawn from mattr of fact, advanceth. Meer matter of fact, is somewhat a strange principle or foun∣dation▪ from whence to prove either the lawfulnesse, or un∣lawfulnesse, of a practise about an instituted Ordinance, es∣pecially in all cases. Nor is such a reasoning as this meet to make a pillar of any mans Faith: Such or such a thing was neither done by Christ, nor his Apostles. Ergo it ought not to be done by any others. For if the ctions and practises of Christ and his Apostles, be such ees and so far bind∣ing to us, that we are wholly bound up to them, in res∣pect of acting, and non-acting, then they are thus binding either universally, and without exception; or else particu∣larly, and with limitation onely. That they do not bind universally, is evident from the con∣sideration of the many absurdities, which will unavoidably follow hereupon, and which are obvious to every mans thought: In particular it would follow, that we should be
bound to forswear, to deny our Lord and Master Christ, not to beleeve his resurrection, unlesse we should see in his hands the print of the nails, thrust our hand into his side, &c. with se∣veral other things of like notorious consideration.) If they bind us particularly onely, I mean, if onely some of them be binding unto us, and not all, then is Mr. A's argument, drawn from matter of fact, of little value, until he hath proved, that whatsoever Christ and the Apostles particularly did in the administration of Baptism, is of that kind of action, which bindeth both negatively and affirmatively all persons, in all ca∣ses, and circumstances whatsoever. When he shall have proved this substantially and work-man like, I shall be his Proselyte without any more ado. Sect. 14. His first argument, which is spe gregis, the argument that must stand to it, and fight for all his fellows, is this: If Baptism were not administred to Infants in the daies ofMr. A. first Argument. John the Baptist, nor of Christ, nor of the Apostles, then ought it not to be administred unto infants now. But it was not admi∣nistred then, &c. Therefore it ought not to be so administred now. Because Mr. A, doth his businesse logically, and draws  up his argument in mood and figure, syllogism-wise; I shall (by the way) desire the Reade, who it may be) is no Artist to inform himself, that if either, the major or the minor proposi∣tion in a syllogism be disabled, and disproved, though both be not, yet the whole argument falls to the ground, and becomes null; and that, according to the common saying in Logick, Conclusio sequitur detriorem partem, i. e. the conclusion is never better then the worst of the propositions, by which it is proved; as a affe, anchor, cable, or the like, re not to be esteemed stronger, then what their strength is in the wk∣est parts. I confesse there is no great need of delivering this Item here, because we shall find both propositions tardy. Onely it may possibly be, that the weaknesse of one, will be made more manifest unto some, then of the other: and in this respect the notion now presented may be of use. But, 1. To the major proposition in the argument, we answer
dy benying it, and give this account of our denial. First no particular observation, or administration of an Ordinance, or institution, doth, or can, answer or expresse, the whole mind or counsel of God therein (I mean in the said Ordi∣nance or institution.) When Abraham circumcised his son Isa∣ack the eight day, (Gen. 21. 4.) he did not act or expresse the whole counsel of God in the institution of circumcision. For the mind of God was, that men Jews should be circumci∣sed, as well as children at eight days of age, in case their cir∣cumcision was omitted, whilest they were children. In like manner when Joshua circumcised men (Jos. 5. 5. 7.) nei∣ther did he expresse herein, the full mind of God in the Or∣dinance, as is evident: nay he herein acted expresly contra∣ry to the letter of the institution, which confined circumcisi∣on to the eight day, and yet was blamelesse. When the Priests and their families observed the Ordinance of God in eating the Shew bread, they did not herein expresse the whole counsel of God in this Ordinance: For this extended to a lawfulnesse even for others also, who were not of any Priestly family, to eat of this bread, in case of much hunger, and defect of provisions otherwise; as is evident by what David, and those that were with him, did in the daies of A∣biathar the Priest. Mar. 2. 26. When the Jews observed the instituti∣on of the Sabboth according to the greatest precisenesse of the letter that can be imagined, as when neither themselves, son nor daughter, man servant, nor maid servant, cattel, nor stranger within their gate, did any work at all, they did not by such an observation as this, expresse the whole coun∣sel of God in, and about the Sabboth. For his counsel and intent herein further was, that they should do good on the Sabboth day, as well as on any other day, as in ministring unto the sick, in helping an Oxe or an Asse out of a ditch or pit, whereinto they were fallen, &c, Our Saviour himself in his administration of the supper, did not act to the extent or compasse of his own counsel and intendment in the institu∣tion. For he did not administer it unto women, when as notwithstanding, we generally beleeve (and this upon suf∣ficient grounds) that his intentions in the institution reach∣ed unto these also. From hence then it evidently follows,
that John's, and so Christs, and the Apostles, administring Baptism unto Beleevers or Repentant persons onely, and not unto Infants, is no sufficient argument or proof, that there∣fore it was no part of Gods intent in the institution of Bap∣tism, that it should be administred unto infants. God (as hath been said, and shewed) alwaies intends more in an in∣stitution, then any administration of it doth expresse. Sect. 15. If it be here replied; that in case it had been any part of the mind of God, in the institution of Baptism, that infants should partake of it, it is no ways likely but that either John, or Christ, or one or other of the Apostles, would first or last have made the administration unto them; I answer. 1. It hath not yet been proved, (nor I beleeve, ever will) that none of these ever made an administration of Baptism unto infants. But more of this in our answer to the minor proposition. 2. Why is it not as likely, supposing the counsel of God in the institution we speak of, to stand as well for the bapti∣zing of Infants, as of men, that yet neither John, Christ, nor any the Apostles, should baptize infants, as that Paul should baptize onely so few, as himself reporteth he did, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 15, 16. when as according to the counsel of God, he might have bapti∣zed twenty times as many, yea and (doubtlesse) had oppor∣tunity to have done it. 3. (And lastly) As the reason why Paul baptized so few as he did (and I suppose he had not sinned, in case he had not baptized these, yea or any at all) was, because he had another work of far greater weight, worth, and con∣cernment unto him, to lay out himself upon (viz the prea∣ching of the Gospel) then baptizing was; in like manner, John, Christ, and the rest of the Apostles, probably did con∣ceive and judge, that it did more principally in those times, concern them to look after, and provide for the baptizing of men and women, then of children; and upon this account might, though not neglect, yet omit, the baptizing of chil∣dren. Yet this doth no waies prove, but that it might be lawfull for them to have baptized children; as (question∣lesse) it was lawfull for Paul to have baptized a thousand
more then he did baptize, the baptizing of whom notwith∣standing he omitted without sin. Again. 2. We deny the consequence in the said major Propositi∣on, upon another account also, which is this. Circumstan∣ces, and aspects of probable inconveniences, may render, not onely things that are lawfull, but even such, which in some cases are necessary, in expedient in some others, and conse∣quently, better and fitter for the servants of God to let a∣lone, during the said posture of circumstances, then to prac∣tise. This is so evident, both in the Scriptures, and in reason it self, that I suppose I may without losse, spare the proof of it. Therefore John, Christ, &c. might upon consideration of some circumstance, one, or more (possibly unknown unto us) forbear the baptizing of infants in their daies, though a practice lawful enough, and ordinarily, in Churches con∣stituted, necessary. And whereas Mr. A. pleads the cause of his proposition, or consequence, which, upon the grounds now specified, we deny, by this reason, viz. That that which was a reason to them then to forbear baptizing infants, and upon which they did forbear it, is, or ought to be a reason to all men now to forbear it likewise, we answer, that this rea∣son hath but a very waterish and faint taste of reason in it. For, Sect. 16. 1. It proceeds ex non concssis, takes that for granted, which is denied by his adversaries, viz. that John, Christ, &c. did forbear the practise in question. 2. If they did for∣bear it for a time, it followeth not that they did forbear it perpetually or altogether. 3. If they did forbear the said practise altogether, and never baptize any infant, in the next place we deny that the reasons of their forbearance are bind∣ing unto us, until 1. They be declared and made known to us what they were; and 2. Untill it be proved that those reasons, upon which they forbear, (in case they did for∣bear) have the same influence upon, or relation unto, us, which they had upon, and unto them. For it is not reaso∣nable that we should suspend, or forbear, the doing of that, which we conceive to be a duty, and that upon such grounds,
which were never yet (at least to our judgements) suffici∣ently answered, or disproved, onely because it was not done (or rather because some conceive it was not done) in the days of Christ, and the Apostles; especially considering that we are able to give a competent account, (at least) to our selves; yea and (we suppose) to others also, who are not too deeply baptized into a spirit of prejudice and partiality (which in such a case as this we judge sufficient) why they did, or might forbear, in case it should be proved that they did for∣bear in this kind. This account we briefly mentioned, §. 15. and may somewhat inlarge upon it in place convenient. In the mean time we clearly see that hitherto Mr. A. hath one∣ly cleared doubts by darknesse; and by the reason or proof exhibited, hath mediated no good accord between the con∣sequent and Antecedent in his major proposition. For were both these granted. 1. That John and the Apostles did for∣bear infant-baptism in their daies: and 2. That that which was a reason unto them to forbear it, ought to be a reason unto all men now to forbear it, (viz. in case all men had the same reason now, I mean, were under the influence or command of the same or the like reason) yet doth it no waies follow from hence, that therefore if they forbear infant-baptism, all men ought to forbear it now. The reason of the non-sequi∣tur is, because God may subject one man, or some men, to a necessity of some forbearance, by such a reason, in indivi∣duo, or in actu excercito (as the School-men speak) by which all men are subjected to the like forbearance, in specie, or in actu signato, who yet may never actually, or in indivi∣duo, be subjected hereunto, by this reason. As for example, the command of God, o the motion of the spirit of God in men, to forbear such or such a practise, is in specie, and in the general, equally binding unto all men as to this forbearance. All men are alike bound (I mean, one man is bound, as well as another) to obey every com∣mand of God, that shall be directed to him, or imposed on him. But in case such a command be directed and given un∣to some particular men, and not unto others, (and there is the same consideration of an inward motion of the spirit) it
doth not follow, that because the former are bound by it to the supposed particular forbearance, that therefore the latter, viz. to whom this command is not given, should be bound likewise, though the command of God, simply considered, be alike binding unto all. Therefore in case John, and the Apostles, were moved by the spirit of God to forbear the baptizing of Infants, (which I presume Mr. A. himself will not deny) and upon this motion did forbear it, it doth not follow from their being moved hereunto, that those who are not moved, as they were, are, or should be bound by their motion, to the like forbearance. Particular motions of Gods spirit unto actions (and there is the same reason of forbearances also) either besides, or contrary unto, stand∣ing and known rules, or laws, bind no man, but onely those particularly inspired and moved by them, either to the acti∣ons or forbearances, unto which these persons are moved or led by them. But that as well John the Baptist, as the A∣postles, did forbear the baptizing of infants, in case it be sup∣posed that they did forbear it (which was never yet sub∣stantially proved, nor I beleeve ever will be) by special and particular direction or motion of the Holy Ghost, and not otherwise, is clearly demonstrable by this argument. Either (upon the said supposition) they did forbear it by particular and expresse motion from the Holy Ghost, or else by some standing order, rule, or direction, recorded in the Scriptures or else by the motion or guidance of their own spirits. But they forbear it not upon either of these latter accounts. Therefore their forbearance (upon the supposition mention∣ed) was by extraordinary and particular motion of the Ho∣ly Ghost. If Mr. A. will say, that their forbearance was grounded upon any general or standing law or rule of Scrip∣ture, let him produce such, whether law, or rule, from hence, whereby men are prohibited or restrained from baptizing infants. If he shall do this, the controversie between him and his Antagonists about Infant-Baptism, will soon be at an end. That the said persons (John, and the Apostles) did not forbear Infant-Baptism, out of the private dictate or moti∣on of their own spirits, Mr. A. (I presume) will not affirm, in which respect it needs no proof.
Sect. 17. But whereas we might here regularly have expected to see the reasons, why, as Mr. A. pretends, Baptism was not ad∣ministred unto infants in the daies of John, &c. behold quite another vision. He turns another way, and falls upon in∣quiry, what reasons, we should, or can, have to baptize in∣fants, which they had not; as though he would imply, that he had shewed what reasons they had, and would go some∣what further, viz. to see whether we had, or possibly might have any other. And thus whilest we were in expectance of some arguments from him to confirm his argument, he hath slidden from us like a Serpent over a rock, and we find him again creeping in at a whole on the other side. But let us follow him at this turn also, and draw him forth into the light. He makes an enumeration or recital of five reasons, which may be pretended for infant-baptism now, and which some may think were not obligatory unto them (John, the Apo∣stles, &c.) and closeth (with confidence more then e∣nough, as if he had surveyed the round world, and all that is therein.) Other [reasons] then these cannot lightly be suppo∣sed, or imagined ever to come up into the minds of men. Mr. A. was not comprehensive enough at this turn, there are seve∣ral reasons here, which lie without the verge or circle of his imagination here; two of which have been already mentio∣ned, and shall (upon this occasion) be again repeated, and a little further opened. Sect. 18. 1. We may be in a better, and more convenient capacity for baptizing infants now, then they were, because the Apo∣stles, yea and Christ himself, had a businesse of far greater weight and moment lying upon their hand, then baptizing, not onely infants, but even beleevers themselves, viz. the planting of the Gospel in the world, the constituting and in∣spection of Churches, &c. in comparison of which, the bu∣sinesse of baptizing, whether one sort of persons, or other, was but of an under consequence. And that de facto, they many times did, upon the account we speak of, omit other
things as necessary as this (yea by many degrees more neces∣snry) sufficently aippears in that for the Gospels sake, & mini∣stry thereof, they frequently exposed themselves to all kinds of hazards, neglected their healths and lives, the preservation of which (being a work of mercy) was of more consequence, then any such sacrifice as the Baptism of infants is, yea or of beleevers themselves. The Apostle Paul in saying, that he was not sent to baptize, but to preach the Gospel (though yet he did baptize, as lawfully he might by his comission) clearly implies, that baptizing, in comparison of preaching the Gospel, was but an inferior imployment, & which he ought at some turns to omit, viz. when it fell nor in conveniently with his greater occasions (as will further appear afterwards) yea baptizing, whether one or other, was of so smal a consideration in the eys of the Lord Christ, in comparison of the preaching of the Gospel, that at the first sending forth of his▪ Apostles to preach the Gospel (Mat. 18. Mar. 3. Luke 9.) yea and when a while after, he sent forth seventy other Disciples about the same work, he spake not a word either to the one, or the other, about baptizing any. So then this is one reason, not reducible to any of Mr. A's five, why that Ministers of the Gospel, and Pastors and Elders of Churches in these days, may be reputed in a better capacity for the baptizing of children, then the Apostles, and those that were assistants unto them in their daies, were. Sect. 19. 2. As Paul and Silas, were once forbidden by the Holy Ghost, to preach the Gospel it self, for a time in such a place, where otherwise they were then minded to have preached it, Act. 16. 6. yea and where they did preach it afterwards, Act. 19. 10. 26. by the di∣rection of the same spirit, so why may we not conceive, that in case the Apostles, and other Baptists in their times, did forbear the baptizing of infants, they might receive a secret prohibition of the Holy Ghost in that behalf, not because the practise was any whit more unlawfull, then the preaching of the Gospel was in Asia, when Paul and Silas were restrai∣ned from it, but because the will and pleasure of God was, that they should forbear it for a time? And I beleeve we are
able to give as reasonable an account of such a will and plea∣sure in God, as this, as Mr. A. is to give a reason of that will of his, by which Paul and Silas were testreined from preaching in Asia. Besides, if they were taken off from a prac∣tise or course, wherein they had ingaged, or exercised them∣selves for a time, (as viz. from ministring unto or serving ta∣bles, as themselves expresse it, Act. 6. 2. That they might give themselves continually to prayer, and to the ministry of the Word, v. 3.) if (I say) they were taken off from the im∣ployment of serving Tabls, upon such an account as this, by the motion or suggestion of the Holy Ghost, why is it not most reasonable to conceive, that upon the like, or rather the same account, they might by a like motion of the Holy Ghost, be disswaded from entring upon, or ingaging themselves in a course of baptizing children; I suppose that neither Mr. A. himself, nor any considering man of his way, will deny, but that the Apostles, and those that were directed by, and as∣sistants unto, them in the affairs of the Gospel, in their daies were acted and led by the special guidance and motion of the Holy Ghost, in their forbearing Infant-baptism (in case it must be supposed that they did forbear it) as well as in any other course or practise, wherein they walked in order to the advancement of the Gospel. If then John, the Apo∣stles, &c. by special order, advice, or admonition from the Holy Ghost, refrained the baptizing of infants in their daies, it followeth not, but that we, who in these daies, have re∣ceived no such order, advice, or admonition from the Holy▪ Ghost, neither by any word from the Scriptures, nor by any inward motion or inspiration, may lawfully practise in∣fant-baptism, notwithstanding their forbearance; especially considering that we judge our selves incouraged, yea obliged hereunto, by the Holy Ghost speaking unto us as he doth, in the Scriptures. Sect. 20. This is a second consideration (over and above those five suggested by Mr. A.) proving that we in our daies may be in a regular, yea in an obliging capacity for baptizing in∣fants, although John, the Apostles, &c. in their daies were
not. We do not in all this imply, or suppose, that the A∣postles or other primitive men, did alwaies, or altogether omit baptizing infants; our judgement is (as we shall fur∣ther declare in our examination of the minor proposition) that infants were, even in the Apostles daies baptized; but onely shew and prove, that in case it could be proved that they did never baptize infants, yet this doth at no hand lead us to the like forbearance, much lesse impose a necessity up∣on us by way of duty, of the like. So that Mr. A's argu∣ment or proof of his major proposition, from enumeration of some particulars, is not altogether so good, as the young mans proof of his integrity, from his observance of several of the commandements of God was. For our Saviour chal∣lenged him with the lack of one thing onely: yet lackest thou one thing: Luke 18. 22 But Mr. A's argument lacketh two things at least, and who knoweth how many more? And in the con∣clusion of this his argument, he windeth up much more, then he had spun in the premises. For thus he concludes: And therefore what ever the reasons, or considerations were up∣on which they (the primitive Baptists) did forbear to bap∣tize infants, the same are binding to all men in these daies to forbear it likewise. Will you please to consider how this hath been proved? Because (saith he) we have no other reasons for the doing of it then they had. This reason stands by the said conclusion, as David's friends stood by him, when God (as he complains) had put them far from him. Psa. 88. 18. For what though it were granted (which yet hath been denied, and a good account given of the denial) that we have no other reasons to baptize infants, then they had, yet is it no legiti∣mate consequence from hence, that therefore their reasons of forbearance, are to be our reasons, or reasons unto us, why we also should forbear such a practise. For they might have all the same reasons for baptizing infants, which we have; and yet their reasons might possibly, as to them, be overballanced with others of a contrary import, upon which they might forbear the said practise. But such reasons as these not lying before us (as there is no necessity why they should) we may stand bound to the practise in question, by
those very reasons, from the bond or obliging force where∣of, the Apostles might be discharged by others of a preponde∣rant consideration. Therefore the arm of Mr. A's reason is too short to reach his conclusion. Sect. 21. In the upshot of his proof of his major proposition, he tells us, that it might be backed (if needfull; he might more truly have said, bellied, or made more bulky, then backed, or strengthned) from Philip 3. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 1, 2. From which Texts he would prove, that we ought to follow Christ and his Apostles, in what they did, as being rules and ex∣amples to us what to do, and what not, in all manner of wor∣ship or actions, which they did, or did not. Either this must be his inference from these Scriptures: or else his cita∣tion of them is no waies relative to his purpose. But evident it is from what hath been already argued, neither these Scrip∣tures, nor any other of their calculation, do require any fur∣ther, or any other imitation, either of Christ himself, or of the Apostles: then 1. In such waies and actions, which are prescribed unto us by some Commandement or other of God: and 2. In such cases, when we are ingaged by, or are found under the same circumstances to follow, by which they were ingaged to go before. But the said Scriptures do at no hand, nor with any tolerable face of probability, impose it as a duty upon us, to refrain all actions or practises, which, for ought we know, they refrained; especially not to refrain all such actions or practises, which in case they did refrain, they had ground and reason to refrain, and we not. Yet unlesse Mr. A. can tamper these Scriptures to speak this, they will (in effect) say to him and his cause, for which he seeks their advocation, Depart from us: we know you not. Thus we see by a light as clear as any the Sun shines at noon day, that the major proposition in Mr. A's first argu∣ment is very crazie, and so no competent material to make a pillar for any mans Faith or practise. And if this proposi∣tion be shaken, the whole strength and glory of the Argu∣ment (according to the rule mentioned, §. 14.) is already in the dust. Notwithstanding, lest any man should be so ig∣norant
or weak, as not to give credit to the said rule, but think that if either of the propositions in an Argument, will stand, the Argument may by vertue hereof, be authentique and in force, let us bring the minor proposition, which he calls, The assumption, to the touch-stone also. The tenor of this proposition, is this. But Baptism was not administred to Infants, neither in the daies of John the Baptist, nor of the Apostles. If this propo∣sition were true, and could be demonstrated, yet it comes too late to salve the credit of the Argument (as was lately said.) But being carefully weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary, it will be found too light, as the former also was. For, Sect. 22. 1. It is no where said or affirmed, that Infants were not baptized by John, the Apostles, &c. Therefore unlesse it can be proved by some light, and pregnant consequence, from somewhat that is written, that they were not baptized, (which to do, would make a new thing under the Sun) the proposition before us, is no proposition of Faith, nor stands any man bound to beleeve it. 2. Mr. A's proof from the total silence of the Scripture herein, is as good as total silence, or the speaking of nothing. For it is a common and true rule; that Argumentum ab au∣thoritate ductum negativè, non valet, a negative Argument from Authority proves nothing. And Mr. A. from the to∣tal silence of the Scripture, may as well prove that neither hus∣band men, nor Merchants, nor Taylors, nor Shoe-makers, (nor persons of twenty other callings besides) were bapti∣zed, as well as that infants were not baptized. There is alike total silence of the Scripture, concerning the baptizing of the one, and the other; or if there be any difference in this kind, the silence is not so perfectly or absolutely total concerning the baptizing of children, as of the others (as will appear pre∣sently.) Sect. 23. 3. That total silence of the Scriptures, which he pleadeth to prove the non-baptizing of children in the Apostles days,
may with as much reason be construed, as an argument, that they were baptized constantly and of course. For matters of common and known practise, the knowledge whereof doth not much concern future times, especially when these practi∣ses may beevinced otherwise, are frequently, and as (it were) of course pretermitted in Historical narrations. There is very little mention made of children circumcised in the old Testament: the reason (questionlesse) is, because their Circumcision was so common a practise. There is much more notice taken of the Circumcision of men (see Gen. 17. 23, 24, 25. Gen. 34. 24. Jos. 5. 7. 8.) because this was a practise besides, yea and contrary to, the letter of the institu∣tion. I conclude therefore (saith Mr. Baxter, p. 116. of his Discourse for Infant-Church-membership, and Baptism) that it is a most evident truth, that Christ did not speak a∣bout Infants-Church-membership, because it was a known truth beyond controversie. Nor was there any one man found in those days (that we read of) that ever denied it: and all the Jews, yea and all other Church-members were in actual possession of it, and Christ never questioned their pos∣session. Upon the like account it very well may be that there is so much spoken in the New-Testament of the baptizing of men and women, and so little (or nothing at all, in so many words) of the baptizing of children. The frequent mention of men and women baptized, may with as much probability (if not more) argue, that the first administra∣tions of Baptism were out of course, and contrary to the or∣der setled by the institution, made unto them, as that they should be exemplary or binding unto future ages: As the recording of so many men circumcised, about the first insti∣tution of Circumcision, was not intended to make these ad∣ministrations standingly or in ordinary cases, exemplary, or obligatory unto after-times, because this had been to defeat the express letter of the institution; but rather to shew that in like cases, and under like circumstances, viz. when male Jews, or Proselites had not been circumcised the eight day, they might be circumcised afterwards, when ever they had oppor∣tunity. And prbble it is, that the circumcising of so ma∣ny
men, Jos. 5. was warranted unto Joshua by the record of those examples. In like manner, the reason why the Holy Ghost maketh such frequent report in the New-Testament of men and women baptized, may (with greatest obability) be, not to leave these examples for patterns, or rules, in all (no nor yet in ordinary) cases, but onely in such cases which parallel those, wherein the said administrations are reported to have been made, viz. when men and women should at any time be converted from an idolatrous and false Religion, and not have been baptized before. Much more might be added in confirmation of what hath been now asserted: but the thing it self hath so much face, as well as heart and strength, of reason in it, that untill I hear whether that which hath been already said, will satisfie, or why it should not, I shall forbear any further ingagement for the proof of it. Sect. 24. If children were not baptized by the Apostles, or in their daies, it is at no hand to be beleeved, that the Holy Ghost would have cast any such snare upon the Christian world in af∣ter-times, as so frequent a report of housholds and families baptized, made in the New-Testament, and this without any limitation, or exception of persons, amounteth unto; espe∣cially considering that it both was, and is, a thing generally known, that under the Divine dispensation immediately pre∣ceding (I mean, that of Moses) children in families were the more appropriate subject of that Ordinance, which was a seal of the same Covenant with baptism [viz. of the righte∣ousnesse of Faith, i. e. of remission of sins upon beleving, Rom. 4. 11. as we shall evince and prove in due time] and did perform the same, or like service (in the main) unto the Church of God under the Law, which Baptism now per∣formeth under the Gospel (as some of the Doctors of the way of Ana-baptism themselves do acknowledge; though Mr. A. following his over-confident and sufficiently-ignorant leader, weeneth otherwise.) For what though that which Mr. A. laboureth to prove pag. 10. (though his enterprize be too hard for him) should be granted, viz. that there
were no children in those families, which are reported to have been baptized by the Apostles, or by their order, yet from the very tenor of this expression, that they baptized Housholds, it is evident enough that they did baptize children; or (that which is every waies equivalent hereunto) that the mind of the Holy Ghost is, that children should be bap∣tized. For it being left upon sacred record, simply and in∣definitely, that housholds were baptized, and it being the ordinary dialect and language of the Scriptures, by the word, houshold and house, to understand and comprehend as well children, who are very considerable parts or members of an houshold, where they be, as persons of riper yeers, There∣fore we may conclude that the Apostles did baptize children or infants, and not onely men of lawful age and that the house or houshold is taken for man woman and child, is manifest in the 17th. of Genesis, and also in that Joseph doth call Jacob with all his house to come out of the land of Ca∣naan into E∣gypt. Mr. J. Philpot Martyr, in a letter direct∣ed unto §. 27. it can∣not reasonably be thought, but that the Holy Ghost did in∣tend that housholds simply and ablolutely▪ as well those which have children in them, as those which have none, yea and these children themselves, being (as was said) parts of these housholds, might be baptized. And if so, doubtlesse the Apostles, who complied with the mind and intent of the Holy Ghost in their sacred administrations, did baptize chil∣dren. And if Mr. A. and his, from the simple and general reports of beleevers being baptized, argue and conclude, that therefore all beleevers may be baptized, why from the like report of housholds being baptized, where the grown mem∣bers did beleeve, may not we infer, and conclude likewise, that all housholds where the grown members do beleeve, may be baptized also? Or if the intent of the Holy Ghost had been, that onely actual Beleevers in an house should be baptized, would he have informed the Christian world, that housholds, whole housholds, or all in an house, were baptized, without giving some intimation at least, that children in every house were, & ought to be excepted? He that is so careful and desirous above measure to way-lay and prevent every sin and every transgression in men, even to the speaking of an idle or vain word, yea to the conceiving or tolerating of a vain thought, doubtlesse would not have neglected at that turn we now speak of (especially not having done it elsewhere) to insert some word or other, by which so great a sin as the baptizing of children, if it be a sin, might be prevented;
much lesse would he have ministred such an occasion unto his Saints, as that specified, to draw and incourage them to the perpetration of such a sin. Sect. 25. 5. To me it is one of the Congregation of the first born of Probabilities, that the Children brought to Christ, with a desire in them that brought them, that he should lay his hands on them and pray (Mat. 19. 13. &c.) had been already bap∣tized. For it is expresly said Mar. 10. 16. that he put, or laid his hands upon them. Now we never read in the New-Testament, of the laying on of hands upon any unbaptized person, unlesse (haply) it were in order to the working of some miraculous cure on him, on whom they were laid, See Mar. 5. 5. 8. 23. Mar. 16. 18. Luke 4. 40. Luke 13. 13. Acts 9. 17. Acts 28. 8. In all other cases imposition of hands was practised upon baptized persons onely, Acts 6. 6. Acts 8. 17. Acts 13. 3. Acts 19. 6. 1 Tim. 4. 14. 2 Tim. 1 6. And more usually this imposition of hands was practised on those that had, either formerly, or lately, been baptized, and this in order to the receiving of the Holy Ghost, the Apostles (it seems, haply with some Elders of Churches besides, in those daies) having received this gift from God, viz. by laying on of hands and prayer, to obtain and impart the gift of the Holy Ghost unto Christians. Yea several Churches of the Ana∣baptists themselves amongst us, glory in the outward cere∣mony of laying on hands upon their proselytes newly bapti∣zed, as if they were the Apostles heirs, and by descent inhe∣rited all their spiritual royalties, and heavenly prerogatives; herein much resembling that ridiculous effeminate Emperor, who out of a foolish desire to be thought Hercules, or a man of strength and courage like unto him, would needs attire himself with a Lyons skin. But now it no waies appears, nor is it in it self a thing likely, that the children we speak of were brought unto Christ, to obtain any cure of any malady or disease from him. Besides if Christ had performed any miraculous cure upon them, there is little question but that this would as well, yea much rather, have been mentioned
by the Evangelists, at least one or other of them, as his lay∣ing of hands upon them. Therefore (in all likelihood) they were baptized before they were brought to Christ, to obtain the laying on of his hands upon them. Or if we shall say that Christ layed hands on them that they might receive the Holy Ghost (supposing them at present un-baptized) yet being made partakers of the Holy Ghost, by, or upon, the laying on of Christs hands, they were hereby put into an im∣mediate capacity of receiving Baptism, according to that of the Apostle Peter, Acts 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptized, which have received the Ho∣ly Ghost, as well as we? And what other benefit or accom∣modation the Lord Christ should intend to these children, or conferre by laying hands on them, but the gift of the Holy Ghost, when Mr. A. demonstrates unto me, I shall demur upon the place. Sect. 26. 6. It is a law or rule established by God himself (repeat∣ed several times both in the Old, and in the New Testament) and that for the deciding of cases and questions of far greater moment, then whether children were baptized in the Apo∣stles daies (I mean cases and questions about life and death) that In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word should be established. 2 Cor. 13. 1 Our Saviour more briefly reports it thus (speaking to the Jews) It is also written in your law, that the testimony of two men is true. Joh. 8. 17. If Mr. A. and men of his judg∣ment, wil be content to be over-ruled by this law of God, and this so interpreted and, understood, as the Scripture it self useth and interpreteth it, the Question depending about childrens Baptism in the Apostles days, will soon receive a clear issue. For who from amongst men can (lightly) be found a more competent witnesse in the case, then that great and famous light of the Christian world in his daies, whose testimony in matters of fact, was never (to my knowledge, or hearing) so much as questioned or suspected (Augustine I mean.) In one place (speaking of childrens Baptism) he saith: If any man ask for divine authority in the matter, although we most rightly beleeve that what the universal Church holdeth, and was
not instituted by councels, but hath been ever held, was not de∣livered but BY APOSTOLICAL AƲTHORI∣TY; yet we may truly conjecture what the Sacrament of Bap∣tism performeth to Infants, by Circumcision, which the for∣mer pople did rcive. Et si quis∣quam in hac re authorita∣tem divinam quaerat, quan∣quam quod universa te∣net Ecclesia, nec concilijs institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi au∣thoritate A∣postolicâ tra∣ditam rectis∣simè creditur; tamen veraciter continere [potiùs conjicere] possumus quid valeat in par∣vuls baptismi Sacramntum, ex circumcisione carnis, quam prior populus accepit, &c. Aug. de Bapt. Contà Donatistas. l. 4. c. 23. In another place, reporting what Cyprian (who lived within an 150 yeers after John) with many other learned men, Bishops, and Pastors of Churches in his time, had resolved concerning the lawfulnesse of bapti∣zing children at any time, as well before the eight day, as on it (which was the doubt of one Fidus a Bishop) he affirm∣eth, that Cyprian with his fellows, did not in this their re∣solution of the case, make any new decree, but kept to the most constant [or setled] beleef of the Church. Beatus qui∣dem Cyprianus, non aliquod decretum cndns novum, sed Ecclesiae fidem firmissimam servans, ad corrigendum eos qui putabant ante Octavum diem nativitatis non esse parvulum baptizandum, non carnem, sed animamidixit non esse perdendam, et mox natum ritè baptizari posse, cum suis quibusdam coepiscopis censuit. Aug. Ep. 28. ad Hieronymum. A little after, he calls the practise of baptizing infants, Ecclesia fundatissi∣mum morem, the best [or most] grounded practice of the Church. This passage of Cyprian, is by this famous Author report∣edc Quid sen∣serit [Sanc∣tus Cypria∣nus] de bap∣tismo parvu∣lorum, imò quid semper Ecclesiam sensisse mon∣straverit, paululum accipite. in several places of his works, De verbis Apostoli. Serm. 14. Contrà duas Epist. Pelag. ad Bonifacium. lib. 4. c. 8. Item E∣pist. 222. ad Marcellinum. Immediately before the former of these quotations, he affirms that Cyprian in that passage, did not so much declare what his own judgement was about the baptizing of children, as what the Church had ALWAIES held concerning i▪ Elsewhere speaking of Infant-baptism he saith that the Authority of the Church maintaineth or possesseth it, the well-grounded Canon [or rule] of truth (I suppose he means the Scripture) obtaineth [or evinceth] it: whoever runs at Tilt against this strength, against this impregnable [or
inexpugnable] wall [or fortresse] will be broken to pieces by it. Hoc habet Authoritas matris Ec∣clesiae, hoc fundatus ve∣ritatis obtinet cann; con∣trà hoc robur contrà hunc inexpugna∣bilem murū quisquis ari∣etat, ipse con∣fringetur Aug. de ver∣bis Apost. Serm. 14. In another place he saith, that by the ancient Canoni∣cal and most grounded usage of the Church, children baptized, are called faithful [or beleevers.] Nam i∣deò & consu∣etudine Ec∣clesiae, antiquâ, canonicâ, fundatissimâ, parvuli baptizati fideles vocantur, ibid. In another, that that which made him solicitous, was not the opinion it self (mean∣ing of Infant-baptism) which had been now long since founded, by the highest authority that is in the Catholick [or universal] Church, but the disputes of some men, which attempt the publick and the subversion of the minds of many. Solicitos autem nos facit non ipsa sententia jam olim in Ecclesiâ Catholicà summâ authoritate fundata, sed disputationes quorundam quae modo crebresce∣re, & multorum animos evertere moliuntur, ibid. Yet again he saith, that the custome of the Church in baptizing little ones, is not at any hand to be despised; nor yet were it at all to be belee∣ved [or received] were it not an Apostolical tradition, Consuetudo matris Ec∣clesiae in baptizndis parvulis nequaquam spernenda est, ne{que} ullo modo super∣flua deputanda, nec omnino credenda, nisi Apostolica esset traditio. Aug. de Gen. ad lit. l. 10. c: 23. [i. e. a practise handed over by, and from, the Apostles to the suc∣ceeding Church of Christ.] To adde onely this one testimo∣ny more from this worthy friend and Factor of Christ Jesus in his daies: Let no man (saith he) buzze abroad any strange Doctrines. This [of Infant-Baptism] the Church alwaies had, alwaies held, this it received from the Faith of its Ances∣tors; this will it with perseverance keep unto the end. Nemo susurret Doctrinas alienas. Hoc Eccle∣fia semper habuit, semper tenuit, hoc à majorum fide percepit, hoc us{que} in finem persevranter custodit. Aug. de verbis Apost. Serm. 10. Much more might be cited from this worthy Author, for the attestation of this truth, that Infant-Baptism was practi∣sed in the Apostles times, and from thence continued in Christian Churches until his daies. Nor is it to be beleeved, the unparallel'd integrity, ingenuity, wisdom and gravity of the man considered, that ever he would have opened his mouth, or lift up his pen, to assert such a thing, had he not known the truth thereof very perfectly, yea and been able to
give a satisfactory and demonstrative account of what he af∣firmed in the case, unto all that should have opposed, or questioned him about it. Origen likewise, who lived about 200 yeers nearer to the times of the Apostles, then Austin, and not much above an 100 yeers after the death of the A∣postle John, and consequently being a very learned, industri∣ous, and inquiring man, could not but know what was done in a businesse of that publick nature in the Apostles times; this Author I say expressely affirmeth, that the Church FROM THE APOSTLES had received a tradition [or practise] to administer Baptism even unto little ones. Pro hoc & Eccl sia ab Apostolis traditionem suscepit eti∣am parvulis Baptismum dare. Scie∣bant enim illi, &c. Ori∣gen. ad Rom. c. 6. v. 5, 6, &c. Yea and subjoins a reason, which (as he conceived) induced the Apostles to this practice. However this Author was not so sound in many points of Doctrine, as some other of the Fa∣thers (although there was none of them, who did not now and then step besides the way of truth; as neither is there a∣ny amongst those themselves, who are the severest observers of their errors, but are obnoxious also in the same kind) yet as to matter of fact, I suppose him as competent a witnesse, as the Law of God lately mentioned intendeth. He that de∣sireth to see more of the sence of antiquity about the point in hand, may consult the writing of Dr. Holms, and Mr. Ste∣phen Marshal, and especially Mr. Richard Baxter, against Mr. Tombs; the first, in his Animadversions upon Mr. Tombs his exercitation, &c. c. 13. p. 107. &c. the second, in his Defence of Infant-Baptism in answer to two Treatises, &c. be∣ginning pag. 7. to the end of pag. 61. The third and last in his Plain Scripture Proof of Infants Church-member-ship, and Baptism. Part. 2. cap. 15. pag. 152, 153, 154, &c. See al∣so pag. 262, 263, &c. and pag. 374, 375. To which he may please to adde a short Treatise, intituled, Infant-Bap∣tism, published some yeers since by Mr. Robert Ram, Mi∣nister of Spalding in Lincolnshire. In this Treatise the Rea∣der (amongst other things) shall find a breviate drawn out of the Centuries of the Divines of Magdeburgh, pointing at such passages in the said Centuries, wherein the continued practise of Infant-baptism for 1300 yeers together from the Apostles times, is demonstrated from Histories and Authors
of best account. In the two former besides many pregnant testimonies from the most ancient writers, evincing the des∣cent of Infant-baptism from the Apostles, he shall find both the authentiquenesse of the Authors, from whence the said testimonies are cited, fully vindicated against those pretences which are levied by Anti-poedo-baptists against their authori∣ties (respectively) as also such colourable arguments sub∣stantially answered, which are by these men drawn [by head and shoulders] from antiquity. So that nothing needs to be added upon any of these accounts, beyond what hath been done lately by others, and is (I presume) of ready pro∣curement by any, that is desirous of satisfaction in any of the particulars. Sect. 27. To the testimonies and authorities of ancient writers, who are one and all in asserting the lineal descent of Infant-bap∣tism from the Apostles, I shall onely subjoin the sence and judgement in the case of that learned and worthy Martyr in Queen Maries daies, Mr. John Philpot, in a letter written to a fellow prisoner of his at the same time in Newgate, recor∣ded in the book of Martyrs, Vol. 3. pag. 606. of the last e∣dition. A. 1555. together with a testimony from Ro∣bert L. Brook, cited by Mr. Tombs for Anti-poedo-baptism, in which respect I conceive his testimony will be the more passable with Mr. A. and men of his judgement. But first in one place the Martyr saith: Now will I prove with manifest arguments that children ought to be baptized, and that THE APOSTLES OF CHRIST DID BAPTIZE CHIL∣DREN. In another, Since the Apostles were the Preachers of the word, and the very faithfull servants of Jesus, &c. who may hereafter doubt, that THEY BAPTIZED IN∣FANTS, since Baptism is in place of Circumcision? In a third. Therefore we may conclude, that THE APOSTLES DID BAPTIZE INFANTS OR CHILDREN, and not onely men of lawfull age. More of like import might be cited from this letter, if it were needfull. So that unlesse Mr. A. or men of his mind, can produce some negative testi∣mony, or witnesse from the Scripture, which do as expresly
deny the baptizing of children by the Apostles, as these late∣ly produced by me, and many more in far greater numbers produced by others, do affirm it, the affirmative is to be taken for truth, and this by the expresse law of God mentioned, which saith, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. This Law was made by God to o∣ver-rule and issue cases and questions of life and death; and consequently of far greater import, then whether children were baptized or no, by the Apostles. Secondly, for the L. Brook, his words (towards the end of his book concerning Episcopacy) are these: First, for ought I could ever learn, it was the constan custome of the pu∣rest and most primitive Church, to baptiz infants of beleeving Parents For I could never find the bginnig and first rise of this practise: whereas it is very easi to track heresies to their first rising up, and setting foot into the Church. Again, I find all Churches (even the most strict) have geerally been of this judgement and practise: yea though thre hve been in all ages som, that much affected NOVELY, and had parts enough to discusse and clear what they thought good to preach; yet was this scarce ver questioned by men of note, till within these last ages. And sure the constant judgement of the Churches of Christ is much to be honoured, and heard in all things that con∣tradict not Scripture. It may be Mr. A. will object, that the witnesses intended by God in his law, are onely such, who can speak to the case in question upon their own knowledge, as having been either eye-witnesses, or ear-witnesses themselves, of what they testifie; not such who testifie upon the credit or asserti∣ons of others. To this I answer, that Justin Martyr, Ireneus, Origen, Cyprian, Augustine, (with many other studious and learned men about their times) all things considered, had as consi∣derable, as unquestionable grounds, for what they testifie concerning the practise of Infant-baptism by the Apostles, as a witnesse, who speaks or gives evidence, upon the credit of his eyes, can reasonably be supposed to have, for such his testi∣mony. For as it is possible for a man to have a myst cast be∣fore
his eyes, or to suffer such a Deceptio visûs, a deception of his signt, that may occasion him to beleeve with confi∣dence, that he seeth such or such a thing, which (indeed) he seeth not, yet this possibility dis-ableth no mans testimo∣ny, who giveth evidence upon the authority of his eyes; in like manner there being no more then a bare possibility (and this not degreed neither like the other) that the Authors mentioned should be mistaken in the grounds, upon which they build their testimony of the practice of Infant-Baptism by the Apostles, it is very importune, dis-ingenuous, and hardly consistent with a good conscience, for any man to re∣ject their testimony in the case. And if Mr. A. himself, and three or four more of his judgement, of equall repute with him for sober and conscientious men (although I beleeve his new opinion and way hath not at all tenerized, or bettered his conscience, nor any other mans) should report any thing upon grounds as pregnant with evidence of truth unto them, as the grounds upon which the fathers testified the baptizing of children by the Apostles, were unto them, I should with∣out much scruple beleeve him, yea though the thing report∣ed by him in this case, should in it self be much more incre∣dible, then that children were baptized by the Apostles. Nor is it at any hand to be beleeved or thought, that the said Au∣thors (their gravity, wisdom, interest and authority in the Churches of Christ, in their daies, over and besides the most approved goodnesse of their Consciences, considered) would upon conjectural or light grounds, or such which had been liable to dis-proof, asserted any such matter of fact as that. Yea (that which is more then this) their adversaries themselves (I mean the Pelagians, who were great oppo∣sers of Augustine and the Orthodox Fathers about his daies) men of great learning, subtile, diligent and studious in their way, against whose Doctrine and Tenents, the baptizing of infants, was one of the grand arguments or objections, urged and insisted on by the Orthodox Fathers, yet never denied, or so much as questioned the truth of what they constantly affir∣med, touching the descent of Infant-Baptism from the A∣postles.
To pretend, that the writings at this day passing under the names of the fore-named fathers, may for ought we know, be spurious and counterfeit, or else depraved and corrupted, and that upon this account, the authority of any thing found in them, is not much to be valued; thus (I say) to pretend argue, and conclude, is worthy onely such men, whose con∣sciences will serve them rather to say any thing, and to seek out any frivolous or puted evasion, then to yeeld to the truth. However if Mr. A. can offer any thing for proof of the ne∣gative (that children were not baptized by the Apostles) which in the eye of unpartial and considering men, doth any waies, to any proportion, or degree, ballance the weight of what hath been alledged from many competent witnesses for the affirmative, I shall let go the hold I have taken on the credit of their testimony in the case, which untill then I suppose himself will judge meet and Christian that I should keep. In the mean time the premises, together with what we shall upon somewhat a like account, immediately sub∣join, considered; I do with very little lesse confidence be∣leeve, that Children were baptized in the Apostles daies, then I beleeve the Sunne to be up at noon day. There∣fore, Sect. 28. 7. It is very considerable also for the discovery of the truth in the businesse in hand, that the times, when (and for the most part, the occasions whereupon) those additi∣onal ceremonies which for a long time accompanied the bap∣tizing of infants, as God-fathers, and God-mothers (so cal∣led) with some others, had their first rise and original, may from current histories, be shewed and found. Whereas no history whatsoever undertaketh to report, when the bapti∣zing of infants came first into the Church; which is no light argument or proof, that this practise was more ancient then any Ecclesiastical history now extant; and consequently, as ancient as the times of the Apostles. For it is altogether improbable, that any History should take notice of appurte∣nances, or additional circumstances, and record the time of their introduction into the Church, and not withall take and
give knowledge of the time, when the fundamental and main practice it self first began, in case the beginning hereof, had fallen within that compasse of time, which the said History traverseth. What Mr. Tombs impertinently attempteth from the councel of Carthage, hath been sufficiently staved and beaten back by others. Dr. Hosms Animad. up∣on Mr. Tombs his Exercit. p. 167, 168. &c. Mr. Marshal De∣fence of In∣fant-Bap∣tism. p. 40. Nor is there any thing more appa∣rent from History, then the mention of Infant-baptism be∣fore that councel. For the first councel of Carthage (which it is like Mr. Tombs meaneth, though he distinguisheth not, there having been several of the name) was held about the yeer, 217. according to some computations several yeers after; whereas there is mention of nfant-Baptism (as we heard) both in Origen, who died before this councel, as also in Justin Mar∣tyr, Ireneus, yea and Tertullian, who all lived neerer to the times of the Apostles, then Origen. And it may be worth some obser∣vation that Augustine (who as we have heard) so frequently & constantly (upon occasion) asserteth Infant-baptism it self, to have been practised in the Apostles times, yet speaking of the custome of interrogating the infant, to be baptized by the Susceptores, or those that brought it to Baptism (whom we call God-fathers and God-mothers) affirmeth no such thing concerning this, though otherwise he indeavoureth to give the best account of it he can, to his friend and fellow-Bishop Boniface, Epist. 23. Sect. 29. 8. Although no History records either when, or by whom Infant-baptism was first brought into the Church, yet is the first opposing of it ascribed by good History to an Arrian Heretique, named Auxentius with his adherents; as the most learned and worthy Martyr Mr. John Phipot, (formerly mentioned) affirmeth in that letter, whereof we took no∣tice in the beginning of §. 27. The diligent perusal of this letter alone, is enough to make Ana-baptism the abhorring of any intelligent mans soul. This Auxentius I find upon the stage acting the part first of a subtile, and afterwards of an imperious insulting Arrian, about the year 369. So that untill this time the baptizing of Infants (it seems) was never so much as questioned in the Churches of Christ, and he who
first questioned and opposed it, opposed withall the God-head of Christ. So that Mr. A. and his, have no great cause to boast of the founder of their Faith in the Doctrine of Anti-poedo-baptism; as neither have they of one of the greatest defenders of it, since the late resurrection of it from the dead in Germany (Lodivicus Hetzer by name) who with Auxentius denied, the Divinity of Christ, and besides was a notorious Adulterer, and withall was confident that he was able to justifie his adulterous practises by the Scriptures. In∣deed the History reporteth that at last he very seriously re∣pented of all, as well his Anabaptism (for so I understand my Authors, Quorum omnium) as of his Arrianism, and Adulteries. Constan∣tiae, quarta Februarij capite trun∣catur Ludo∣vicus Hetzer Ana-baptis∣tarum Ante∣signanus, vir trium linguarum peritissimus, sed qui de multis fidei capitibus singulares opi∣niones habuit. Negavit divinitatem Christi—Causam supplicij de illo sumpti Blarerus in Anabaptismum rejicit, alij in crebra ejus adulteria, quae nonnunquam è Scripturis defendere sit ausus. Quorum omnium seria ductus poenitentiâ, &c. Scultet. Annat. Dec. 2. circa finem Anni, 1529. Those who of later times, and since the beginning of the Reformation attempted first by Luther, revived this opposi∣tion, whereas before the followers of the Lamb, as well as of the Beast, had continued the practice of baptizing infants time out of mind (as the saying is) without interruption, are known to have been one Nicholas Ciconia (in English Stork) Mark Stubner, Martin Cellar, and Thomas Munster; these in the yeer, 1521. went up and down from place to place in Germany, and insnared many unlearned and simple people, with their pernicious Doctrine (as my Author termeth it.) Their manner was, to boast of colloquies (or private confer∣ences) with God, to talk and inveigh both against Ministers of the Gospel, and men in civil authority: to clamour, that all things in the Church were corrupt and out of order, and therefore must be reduced, that there must be a new Church built, and the Citizens [or members] initiated with a second Baptism. What kind of persons these were, together with the far greatest part of those, whom they drew into their o∣pinion,
how they disturbed both the Ecclesiastical and civil peace in all places (almost) where they came, especially where they grew to any head or numbers considerable, I shall forbear here to relate, referring the Reader desirous of satisfaction in such particulars, to unpartial histories of those times. Or to contract his labour in this kind, I re∣commend unto him (upon this account) the perusal onely of the 14th▪ chapter of the second part of Mr. Baxter's book, intituled, Plain Scripture Proof for Infants Church-member∣ship and Baptism. Onely I shall mention this concerning Martin Cellar, one of the four, and the learnedst man of them, that after he had stood by his sect several years, and had writ much for it, at last perceiving that his party decli∣ned, and matters did not answer his expectation, he went and setled at Basil, married and lived quietly, taught Divi∣nity; and as being ashamed to be known or called by that name, under which he had professed Ana-baptism, he chan∣ged his name from Cellarius into Borrhaus; under which name he wrote learned Commentaries upon the five books of Moses, with some others, which are now extant under this name. By the way, I marvell not a little, upon what ground Mr. A. and his partisans can satisfie themselves touching the au∣thentiquenesse of their new Baptisms, considering that (which I suppose is their own principle also) that no un∣baptized Person hath any right, or is in any regular capacity to administer Baptism; and consequently that Baptism admi∣nistred by, and received from such a person, is a meer nul∣lity, and no true Baptism. For all persons baptized in infan∣cy, being judged by them unbaptized, and there being no other but such in the nation, when their new Baptism was first administred here, it undeniably follows, that the first administration of it was a meer nullity: and upon this account how the second, or third, or thousandth, or ten thousandth administration should become any other then a nullity also, and this according to their own principles, I cannot under∣stand. And to prove that their first administration here, had an immediate Commission from God, as John Baptist had, or
from Christ, as possibly the Apostles had, to erect that kind of Baptism in this Nation, which he administred, is (I suppose) far above the line of their learning: Certain I am, that they must ascend far above that which is written, to prove it. Sect. 30. 9. Had not children as well as men and women been bap∣tized by the Apostles, or in their daies, why do we not hear of exceptions, quarrels, and contests made against them in that behalf, by some or other of their Antagonists, Law∣yers, Sadduces, Scribes, Pharisees, or other Zealots amongst the Jews? This nation (we all know) had now for many generations, even from the dayes of Abraham their Father, been possest by God of an holy priviledge and accommoda∣tion for themselves and their children, I mean, circumcision; yea and were wont to boast, not onely or simply of their pre∣rogative of circumcision, but likewise of their admission unto it, and reception of it in their infancy, and at the eight day, as is clear from that of the Apostle, Philip 3. 4, 5. If any o∣ther man thinketh he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more; CIRCƲMCISED THE EIGHT DAY, &c. Yea Mr. Fisher himself (Baby-baptism pag. 182.) acknowled∣geth (or rather, as making for his cause, confidently avouch∣eth) that the circumcising of their children, was a businesse, which the Jews so doted on, that of all things they were unwilling to let it go. Yea (it seems) they were highly incensed against Paul, upon a rumour that he prohibited the circumcising of their children, Act. 21. 21. Now then if Christ or his A∣postles should by their new Doctrine of the Gospel, against which they sought all manner of exceptions and pretences lightly imaginable, have excluded their children, not onely from circumcision it self, but from all other accommodati∣ons or priviledges whatsoever, that should any waies answer, or counterpoize it, is it to be beleeved that they would have taken no notice of it, or made it no matter of offence and quarrel? Or if they did stumble at it, and disparage or fault the Gospel, or the managing of it in the world upon such an account, can it be thought that the Holy Ghost would have
made no record of such a thing, nor yet of Christs or the A∣postles vindication or justification of themselves and their practice against such an imputation; especially considering that very many things are recorded by him of far lesse mo∣ment, then such a vindication would have been? Yea (doubt∣lesse) the reason why the Apostle Peter immediately upon his exhortation to the Jews to repent and be baptized, subjoi∣neth the mentin of their children, as interessed in the same grace and priviledge with them, was to prevent the offence which they might justly have taken, in case themselves onely had been admitted to Gospel priviledges, and their children excluded. Sect. 31. 10. Whereas the Apostle Paul informs the Colossians, who (it seems) were bending towards the Jewish Circumcision, that they were COMPLEAT in Christ, in whom (he saith) they were circumcised, also with a Circumcision made without hands—Buried with him in Baptism, &c. Manifestly im∣plying, that Baptism was an Ordinance, as much, or as well, if not more, or more significantly compleating them, as Circumcision (with all the retinue of legal observations depending thereon) did, or ever had done the Jews; if it be not supposed that their children, whilest such, had been, or might be baptized, as well as themselves, might they not justly have denied Paul's assertion concerning their being compleat in Christ? might they not have objected and said, we are not as compleat in Christ, or under the Gospel, as we were, or might be in Moses, or by subjecting our selves to the Law? In Moses, or under the Law, we had the great spiritual privi∣ledge or accommodation of Circumcision, as well for our children, as our selves; whereas in Christ, or under the Gos∣pel, we want not onely the Ordinance of Circumcision, but all other priviledges, or accommodations of like import, in respect of our children. For the Baptism you speak of, and which you make the successor of Circumcision, you permit us not to administer unto them. In this respect therefore we are maimed or lame in Christ, not so well accommoda∣ted, not so compleated in him, as we were in Moses, under the Law.
11. Some of the greatest Defenders of Mr. A's faith, in the point of Anti-poedo-Baptism, acknowledge; that accor∣ding to Mr. A's principles, touching the extent of the Grace of God, in the death of Christ, children ought to be bapti∣zed. If (saith Mr. Tombs Exercit. concerning Infant-Bap∣tism, pag. 24.) it should be made known to us that Children are sanctified, I should not doubt that they are to be baptized. He expresseth his sence to the same purpose elsewhere, as viz. pag. 19. Now according to the tenor of Mr. A's faith, the Apostles did know, that Children were sanctified; and consequently (according to the sence of the prime head of his party) that they ought to be baptized. And if the A∣postles doubted not but that children were to be baptized, how can I reasonably doubt, but that they did baptize them? I know some others of Mr. A's sence, in the point of Re∣baptism, who join with Mr. Tombs in his sence touching the meetnesse of baptizing infants, upon a supposal of their being in favour with God. Sect. 32. 12. (And lastly) there an no probable, no nor tolera∣ble reason or account be given, why any such innovation or practice as the baptizing of Infants, should be brought into the Churches of Christ, especially so soon after the Apostles, and in those times, wherein all records of Antiquity mention the use and practice of it. This is another consideration, preg∣nant of proof, that Infant-Baptism was the practice of the Apostles, as well as of later times. If it could be supposed to be any waies gratificatory to the flesh (which yet is a studi∣ed and far-fetch'd pretence) yet such a motive or ground as this, no waies suits with the zeal, diligence, faithfulness, painful∣ness, self-denial, most exemplary mortification of, the chief Pas∣tors of Churches, and Ministers of the Gospel in those times. Non ut nunc, sic & olim; it is a very weak and childish conceit, to imagine that Tertullian, Origen, Cyprian, Jerome, Au∣stine (with many other worthy Agents for Christ, and the Gospel in their times) who were able and ready to be bap∣tized in their own bloud for Christ and the Gospels sake (as  of them actually were) should rebell against so great
an Ordinance of Christ, and Gospel institution, as Baptism, or deprave and vitiate the Administration of it, thorough fear of going into cold water, and of administring it in a River; especially considering, that in those warmer Climates of the world, where they lived, cool waters were rather matter of delight, and refreshing unto nature, then of offence or in∣convenience. Yea Mr. Laurence (for the Treatise intitu∣led, Of Baptism, is generally reputed his, and is none of the worst pieces written in the cause of Anti-poedo-Baptism) to salve his notion of the necessity of dipping, if it may be, out of the hand of the Holy Ghost, recording the baptizing of the Jaylor and his houshold by Paul, to have been in the night, is pleased to suppose, that in those Eastern and hotter Countries, bathing was of great, and continual use; and that in this respect, the keeper of the Prison MIGHT be provided of some vessel fit for bathing and washing the whole body, which might serve for the use of Baptism. Of Bap∣tism, pag. 81, 82. I confesse this is a pret∣ty ingenious conceit to help a lame notion over the wall, that standeth in the way; but in the mean time, we see how the greatest Patrons of Anti-poedo-Baptism are necessitated to Sanctuary their cause under the shadow of their wits and fancies, the Scriptures ever and anon forsaking them, and many times rising up against them. They tell us, that we build onely upon consequences and deductions from Scrip∣ture, wherein we are fallible, and subject to errour: but certainly the weakest of our consequences, are much stronger then such suppositions as this, and more relative to the Scrip∣tures. Yea the very truth is, that themselves hold nothing, that reacheth their cause in opposition unto us, but onely consequences, such as they are, pretended from the Scriptures. They never yet produced (nor ever will) any Text of Scrip∣ture wherein Infant-Baptism is in expressenesse of words de∣clared to be unlawfull. Therefore they who undertake to prove it such from the Scriptures, must of necessity levy con∣sequences to serve in their warfare. But the late mentioned Author, to preserve dipping from drowning in the Jaylors baptism, makes two suppositions, (like two corkes) one upon another, neither of which hath so much as one dust or
grain of sand in the Scripture, for a foundation. First, that the Jaylor had a Vessel in his house fit for bahing and washing the whole body. 2. That this vessel served for the use of Bap∣tism [by dipping.] If his intent was onely to affirm and say, that he MIGHT have such a Vessel; and again, that such a Vessel MIGHT serve for Baptism, he supposeth in∣deed nothing, but what may well be supposed; but withall, saith nothing to his purpose. But this by the way. Onely evident it is upon the credit of my Author, that in the hotter Regions of the earth, going into the water, could be no great affliction to the flesh; as neither is it in these colder Cli∣mates themselves in warm seasons, as well boys as men going into rivers, and dowsing themselves over head and ears for their pleasure. Therefore an unwillingnesse to administer Baptism in rivers, is no likely motive, occasion, or temptati∣on, to have diverted the primitive and worthy Bishops and Pastors of Christian Churches from such an administration of it, to an administration by sprinkling, had they apprehended it to be the onely regular administration. How otherwise the sprinkling of infants should accommodate the interest of the flesh, more then the baptizing of Beleevers in Rivers, is (as far as I can apprehend) of no easie conjecture. And how∣ever, no accommodation whatsoever in this kind, is like ei∣ther to have perverted the judgements, or polluted the con∣sciences either of Cyprian, or, of any other those most zealous and faithfull servants of God, who both before him, and after him, and in the same age with him, unanimously both pleaded and practised Infant-Baptism. It is a memo∣rable saying of this Cyprian, and of a very pregnant import to acquit him in this kind: Whatsoever is instituted by the madnsse of men, whereby any thing of Divine disposition is vi∣olaed [or corrupted] is adulterous, is impious, is sacrile∣gious. Adulte∣m est, ip∣um est, sacri∣lgm est, quicquid hu∣mano furere instituitur, t dspositio dvia viole∣tur, Cypr. l 1. Ep. 8. He that shal at such a rate of severity as this, cen∣sure, condemn, and abhominate all humane institutions whatsoever, whereby any divine institution shall be prejudi∣ced or corrupted, cannot lightly, especially being a person of singular integrity, gravity, piety, and conscience, be an Abettor or Patron of such institutions.
Mr. Tombs hath strained his wits and fancy to invent and devise, what with any colour or shew of probability might first occasion Infant-Baptism in the Church. But what he hath obtruded upon the world upon this account, is so in∣considerable in it self, and besides hath been so fully answer∣ed by others, Dr. Holms Animad. up∣on M. Tombs Excercit, &c. p. 191, 192, &c. that I cannot judge it worth the Readers patience to hear any re-examination of it. That which some pretend should move Pope Innocent to decree the baptizing of children, viz. a desire to propagate and inlarge the Kingdom of Christ in the world, is altogether impertinent to the businesse in hand. For 1. The baptizing of Infants is famously known to have been practised in the Church, some hundreds of years before this Pope was born; therefore no∣thing could move him to decree the first introduction of it. 2. Neither did he decree simply the practise of it, but one∣ly by his decree confirmed the practise of it; or rather (as the Pontifician Historians themselves report) confirmed the practise, or the necessity of the practise of it, for the ta∣king away of original sin; or (which is the same, at least as he seems to have interpreted it) for the inlargement of the Kingdom of Christ. I confesse the practise we speak of (In∣fant-Baptism) is a means very proper for the inlargement of the Kingdom of Christ, though not by taking away original sin, but by a timely ingagement of the persons baptized, to the obedience and service of Jesus Christ (of which, occasi∣on may be to speak more hereafter.) And though it be supposed, that they who practised Infant-Baptism long be∣fore this Innocent, built their practise upon the same mista∣ken ground with him, yet it followeth not from hence, that therefore it was not practisd by the Apostles in their daies; but onely that they who used the practise after them, were mistaken in the grounds, upon which they (the Apostles) prac∣tised it. Nor is the practise therefore to be esteemed, or termed Antichristian, because a Pope decreed the confirma∣tion of it, more then this Doctrine, that Christ is the Holy One of God, is to be esteemed Diabolical, because the Di∣vel preached or avouched it, Mar. 1. 24. Luke 4. 43. Home to this point, is this passage of the most learned and
worthy Martyr Master J. Philpot (formerly mentioned, in that letter of his specified, §. 27. and 28.) These authorities of mn I do alledge, not to tie the Baptism of Children to the authorities of men, but to shew how mens testimonies do agree with Gods Word, and that the verity of Antiquity is on our side, and that the Anabaptists have nothing but lies for them, and new imagi∣nations, which FEIGN THE BAPTISM OF CHIL∣DREN TO BEE THE POPES COMMANDE∣MENT. Sect. 33. I expect none other but that to Mr. A. and men of his in∣gagement, all these arguments and proofs of the baptizing of children in the Apostles daies, will seem poor, pedling, and paltry: For Mr. Fisher (it seems) never had the good hap to meet with any better from any of his adversaries, then such; yea and lest, either he, or his cause, might suffer tho∣rough want of confidence in the highest, he affirms, that God himself knows them to be no better. Baby-bap∣tism, p. 305. However I hearti∣ly wish that some one or other of their perswasion, would exhibit and tender unto the world, were it but the one half (in evidence and pregnancy of proof) against the lawful∣nesse of Infant-Baptism, of what hath been now delivered in the twelve Considerations propounded for the proof of In∣fant-Baptism in the Apostles daies; that so the troublesome and tempestuous controversie about the appropriate subject of Baptism amongst the Saints, might suddenly end in a sweet calm of love and peace. For verily I have gone round a∣bout the whole body and Systeme of that Doctrine, which so much magnifieth it self against infant-Baptism, and have narrowly and with an un-prejudiced eye, observed all the parts, limbs, and joynts thereof, and cannot find so much as one sound member, or clean joynt in it. The whole struc∣ture and fabrique of it stands upon such foundations, which either are sandy or loose, or else irrelative to what is pretend∣ed to be built upon them, and so are indeed no true founda∣tions of this Doctrine, though otherwise Truths. But notwithstanding all that hath been said to prove Infants baptized in the Apostles days, or (as Mr. A. supposeth) can
be said, he judgeth himself sufficiently enlightned to demon∣strate the contrary. But his allegations in this behalf being weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary, how light will they be found to be? Sect. 34. To the first therefore I answer; 1. By denying that theMr. A's arguments for the non∣administrati∣on of Bap∣tism to In∣fants in the Apostles daies, an∣swered. Scripture is totally silent, touching the baptizing of Infants (within the times queried) and that it no where directly, or consequentially, affirmeth or hinteth such a thing. For the ground and reasonablenesse of this denial (to spare repeti∣tions as much as may be) I appeal to the premises in the 24 and 25 Sections. 2. For the rule which he cites from the Civil Law, in these words, that which appears not, is not, this Law indeed holds forth such a maxime is this, Non esse, & non apparere, aequiparatur in jure, i. e. not to be, and not to appear to be, are of the same consideration in Law; meaning, that the Law takes no judiciary or penal cognisance of what appears not by proof to be, more then it doth of that, which simply is not. But this rule maketh not at all for Mr. A. but rather, as far as it relateth to his cause, against him. For 1. In∣fant-baptism doth (as hath been proved) appear, and this by the light of the Scriptures, to have been in the Apostles daies. 2. Mr. A's rule it self (now specified) supposing a pos∣sibility of the real being of that, which yet in Law appears not to be, applied to his cause, importeth a possibility of the practise of Infant-Baptism in the Apostles daies; onely denying that though it were indeed then practised, yet in as much as the practise appeareth not (viz. to Mr. A. and men of his judgement, for to many others it appeareth sufficient∣ly) it ought not to be avouched, or supposed. Those Scripture reproofs 1. Of mens intruding themselves into those things which they have not seen. And 2. Of being wise above what is written, fall more directly upon himself and his Symmysts, then upon his Adversaries. For certain it is, that the non-baptizing of Infants in the Apostles daies, is not written; and yet Mr. A. maketh himself so wise as to know it.
Sect. 11. To his second proof, wherein (with its fellows) he re∣joyceth, as being of a proper and potent tendency, to carry the minds of men that are at liberty [to beleeve any thing] and not under the bands of prjudice and partiality, to think and con∣ceive that no Infants were baptized in the daies mentioned. p. 3. We answer likewise 1. That the Evangelist Luke, did not set himself to expresse and set forth the power and great successe of the Gospel in Sa∣maria,Answer to Mr. A's 2d. consideration to prove no baptizing of Infants in the Apostles daies, p. 3, 4. &c. in those words, They were baptized both men and women; but rather in those (in the former part of the verse.) But when they beleeved Philip preaching the things concerning the Kingdom of God, Acts 8. 12. A cordial and sound be∣leeving of the things of the Gospel by men and women, ar∣gues the power and great successe of the ministry thereof; but a prevailing with them onely to be baptized, is of no such in∣terpretation or import. Jerusalem and ALL Judea, and all the Region round about Jordan, were so far prevailed with by John, as to be content to be baptized. Mat. 3. 5, 6. And yet John himself, speaking of Christ, complaineth that no man [i. e. exceeding few] receiveth his testimony, Joh. 3. 32. [i. e. truly belee∣ved on him.] And notwithstanding the vast multitudes that were baptized by John a very little while before; yea and greater by Christ himself and his Disciples Joh. 4. 1., yet the number of the names of the Disciples at the time of Christs ascenti∣on, amounted onely to an hundred and twenty. Acts 1. 15. Nor was the great multitude that was baptized by John, any argument of the great power or successe of his ministry; because many who in all likelihood had never heard him preach, yet upon the common fame of his being a Prophet, came forth with a desire and intent to be baptized of him. For we read not of his preaching any where, but onely in the Country about Jordan, and in the Wildernesse where he baptized; Luke 3. 3. See §. 177. where∣as, as well Jerusalem and all Judea (as we heard) as all the Country about Jordan, went forth to be baptized of him. Mat. 3. 5. Mar. 1. 5. Therefore a perswasion wrought in men and women to be content to be baptized, is a weak proof of the power or great successe of the Gospel. Thus we see the very basis and ground∣work
(which is but Mr. A's own supposition) of all he pleads, pag. 4. and 5. to be a pure mistake. Sect. 36. 2. The Power and great successe of the Gospel, is expressed by Luke (and this in several places) where he makes no mention at all of the baptizing of any person, man, or wo∣man, but onely of the conversion of persons to the Faith, and of some worthy fruits or testimonies thereof (far great∣er then a willingnesse to be baptized.)—Atd the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified. And many that beleeved came, and confessed and shewed their deeds. Many also of them which used curious Arts, brought their Books together, and bur∣ned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver. SO MIGHTILY grew the Word of God, and PREVAILED. Acts 19. 17, 18, &c. See also Acts 4. 4. Acts 11. 21. 24. Acts 13. 43. 48. Acts 14. 21. Acts 16. 5. Acts 17. 3, 4. 11, 12. 34. In all these places Luke (questi∣onlesse) intended to set forth the power and great successe of the Gospel; yet mentioneth not the baptizing of so much as any one person. Therefore according to Mr. A's principles, if we shall suppose that there were any such thing as baptizing amongst any of the persons recorded in these passages to have been converted to the Faith, we must suppose that the Holy Ghost not recording it, scarcely did that to the one half, which he should have done totally and intirely in relation to his proposed end. These kinds of reasoning are most lamentable grounds whereon to build the pulling down of Churches. 3. Whereas he urgeth the record of Moses declaring A∣braham's obedience to the Word of God, not onely and bare∣ly by his own personal circumcision, but by his circumcising, first himself, after that, his Son, and then his servants also; it seems that if Moses had not been thus punctual and parti∣cular in drawing up this record, M. A. would have blamed him for it, and arraigned him of unfaithfulnesse, had he known that such things had been done by Abraham, and he (Moses) not recorded them. Is it so hard a thing for Mr. A. to al∣low unto the Holy Ghost the liberty of his own understand∣ing in framing his records and reports of matters done? Or must it needs be supposed that because he is more particular &
express in one place, he must needs be so in another, or in all? Or must he be charged, either with superfluity in Matthew, because he, in making the report of the greatnesse of the mi∣racle wrought by Christ in feeding several thousands with five loaves, and two fishes, besides the number of the men who were fed, maketh mention both of women, and of children; Mat. 14. 21. or with deficiency in his two other Evangelists, Mark, and John, because they, in their reports of the same miracle, men∣tion onely the number of the men, but take no knowledge at all either of the women or children Mat. 6. 44 Joh. 6. 10.? Or doth it follow, that because he directed his penman Luke, to record the baptizing of men and women in Samaria, upon their belee∣ving, and did not direct him to make the like record concer∣ning those, who beleeved in Jerusalem, Acts 4. 4. or in E∣phesus, Acts 19. 18. 20. that therefore he was either super∣fluous in the former direction, or defective in the latter? Sect. 37. 4. His marginal instances (pag. 5.) make much more a∣gainst him, then for him. For if Children in the Old Testa∣ment were brought by their Parents before the Lord in their holy Assemblies; is it not a pregnant argument, that then they were Church-members; and consequently in a sufficient and regular capacity of this member-ship? And if God be no ac∣cepter of persons, more under the Old Testament, then in the times of the New, children being every waies qualified alike, and in the same capacity of Church-member-ship, un∣der both, how they should enjoy the priviledge of such a re∣lation under the former, and yet be excluded from it under the latter, I confesse I understand not; especially considering. 1. That Infant-Church-member-ship, was no Mosaical ce∣remony (nor ever hath been so adjudged by any understand∣ing man, as far as I have heard) and so not liable to that a∣brogation or dissolution of ceremonies, that was made by the body of Christ (as the Apostle speaks.) 2. That the grace of God, in the vouchsafement of priviledges and means of Salvation, is not more contracted (no more I mean, in res∣pect of ages, then either of sexes, or of nations) under the Gospel, then it was under the Law, but rather every waies inlarged, where there is place or opportunity for inlarge∣ment
5. There is somewhat alike consideration of his observa∣tion, from Acts 21. 5. where he finds Luke reporting how the Disciples at Tyre accompanied Paul on his way, with their wives and children. For if he grants that the wives of the Disci∣ples here spoken of, were Disciples also (which I presume he will not stick to do) then why he should not grant that their children likewise, who are joyned with them in the same action of service and respect unto the Apostle, were Disciples, I beleeve he is no whit more able then I, to give a reasona∣ble account. Or is it reasonable to suppose, that when Luke saith, that the Disciples accompanied Paul on his way, with their wives and children, that his intent or meaning should be, that they accompanied him with their baptized wives, and unbaptized children? or that the Apostle should accept of a Linsey-woolsey retinue, compounded partly of Christians, partly of Pagans, or little Heathens? But however, though it should be granted to Mr. A. that this act of the Disciples, accompanying Paul with their wives and children, should be lesse [i. e. an act of lesse weight or consequence] then the act of Parents causing their children to be baptized; yet supposing this to have been frequently and ordinarily done (which Mr. A. knows to be the sence of his adversaries) and such acts as that of the Disciples accompanying Paul, with thir wives and children, more exemplary and rare, the reason is apparent enough why there should be mention made of children in the record of this act, though there were no re∣cord at all made of the other. It is recorded concerning Barnabas (Acts 11. 24.) that he was a good man, full of the Holy Ghost, and of Faith; but no mention of his having been baptized. But will Mr. A. upon the account of a non-men∣tion of his baptizing, give us leave to conclude, that there∣fore he was not baptized? If he will not give us leave to con∣clude upon such premises, he must not take it himself. In∣stances in this kind might be produced without number. Sect. 38. 6. Under the expression of men and women in the Scrip∣tures, children are sometimes comprehended; yea some∣times where men onely are named, both women and chil∣dren
are understood. When Mark saith, And they that did eat of the loaves were about five thousand men, he meant, be∣sides women and children; otherwise he must contradict his fellow Evangelist Matthew (who speaking of the same bu∣sinesse) saith, And they that had eaten were about five thou∣sand men, besides women ad children, Mat. 14. 21. Compare also herewith, Joh. 6. 10. again Js. 8. 25. And so it was that all that fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thou∣sand, even all the men of Ai. Here is mention made onely of men and women. Yet evident it is, from v. 26. and from the context of the story round about, that under these terms, both of men and women, children also were comprehended. The Evangelist Mark, recording the other miraculous feed∣ing of multitudes by Christ, and comming to report the number of those that were fed, saith onely thus; And they that had eaten were about four thousand, and he sent them away Mar. 8. 9. Whereas Matthew recording the same miracle, re∣porteth the number of those that had eaten, to have been fore thousand, BESIDES WOMEN AND CHIL∣DREN, Mat. 15. 38. So that it is customary and fre∣quent in the Scriptures, both under the word men, to com∣prehend as well women and children, as men; and again under, men and women to comprehend children. And it is the probable opinion of some, that amongst the three thou∣sand said to have been added unto the Church [or rather, un∣o the Lord, as Acts 11. 24.] there were both women and children. 7. Whereas (p. 6.) he laboureth to prove that the scope and intent of the Evangelist in the words, They were baptized both men and women (Acts 8. 12.) was to set forth the great successe of the Gospel in Samaria, sufficient proof hath been made of the contrary, § 35, 36. the perusal of which two Sections, is upon this account commended unto the Reader. Yet let us weigh the double proof he levieth to get his conceit the vic∣tory. First he argueth from liknesse of phrase and words, Acts 5. 14. used (as he supposeth) by the same Evangelist, to the same purpose, viz. to set forth the great successe of the Gos∣pel, &c. 2. From the scope of the place and context. To the
former of these I answer; 1. That when it is said, Acts 5. 14. And Beleevers were the more added unto the Lord, multi∣tudes of men and wowen, the great successe of the Gospel is not at all set forth by the bare mention of both sexes, men and women but by the BELEEVING of MƲLTI∣TƲDES of both sexes. 2. I wouldly gladly know of Mr. A. whether there be any thing at all in this his parassel place, concerning the baptizing, not of both, but of either men or women. If not, I would gladly learn of him, what likenesse of phrase, or words, here is, to prove that Luke in∣tended to set forth the power and great successe of the Gospel in those words (Acts 8. 12.) they were baptized both men and women, more then there is in these, Jos. 8. 25. And so it was, that all that fell that day BOTH OF MEN AND WOMEN, were twelve thousand. 3. (And lastly, for this) I would soberly ask Mr. A. whether in case there had been no mention at all of women, either as beleeving, or as bapti∣zed, in either of the places compared by him, but onely that so many men more, as the number of the women (whatso∣ever it was) amounted unto, had beleeved in the one, and been baptized in the other, would not this have argued and set forth the successe of the Gospel as considerably, as now the mention of women beleevers, and women baptized, in conjunction with men, doth? If so, then his plea from the phrase, both men and women, amounts to little for his pur∣pose. Sect. 39. To his latter plea from the scope and contxt (p. 6.) I con∣fesse I cannot well tell where to strike with my answer, be∣cause I cannot wel discern where the vein of proof lieth. For though it be granted, that Luke speaketh v. 12. of the same person, of whom he had spoken, ver. 10. 11. and who had given heed from the least unto the greatest, unto Simon the Sor∣cerer, yet what is this to prove, that therefore his intent was to set forth the power and great success of the Gospel, in these words, they were baptizd men and women, considering (as hath been lately observed and proved, viz. §. 35, and 36.) that (in this verse) he speaks of the beleeving of men and
women, as well as of their being baptized; and that if there be any thing intended here to set forth the power and great successe of the Gospel, it is projected rather by the mention of their beleeving Philip, preaching the things of God, and the name of Jesus Christ, then by the mention of their baptism: in as much, as the Evangelist having frequent occasion else∣where in this book to report the great successe of the Gospel, still upon this account mentioneth onely the faith of those who were converted by it, and not their baptism? Besides, Mr. A's supposal (the ground of this vein of his discourse) viz. that Luke speaks of the same generality of the people, ver. 12. of which he had spoken, ver. 10, 11, where it was thus expressed, To whom they all gave heed from the least to the greatest, is not so authentique or clear. For it is hardly cre∣dible that amongst the great numbers of the inhabitants of such a City as Samaria, there should not be found so much as one unbeleever left upon the preaching of one Sermon one∣ly. Certain I am that there can be no instance produced from the Scripture of like nature, or import. Nor is it said v. 12. either that they beleeved Philip, or were baptized, from the greatest to the least: Or if by this expression Mr. A. understandeth simply and absolutely the generality of the inhabitants of Samaria, doth it not follow from his said sup∣position, that as well children, as men and women, were here baptized; unlesse he will either understand this expression, from the least unto the greatest, exclusively, or else say, that children are not to be numbred, either amongst the least or the greatest, nor yet amongst those that are between both? But (for a close of the point now in hand) to give Mr. A. a brief account of his men and women, with whom he hath had so much to do, to so little purpose for his cause, the rea∣son why the Evangelist Luke, having in the beginning of the verse, mentioned the beleeving of the Samaritans, without distinguishing the different sexes of those who beleeved, in the latter part of the verse, speaking of their baptizing, dis∣tinguishing them into their respective sexes of men and women is to shew, that though under the law, the one sex onely (that of men) was capable of, and admitted unto cir∣cumcision,
(which was then the initiating Ordinance, an∣swering in that respect, as in several others, Baptism the suc∣cessor of it under the Gospel) yet now, since the comming and suffering of Jesus Christ in the flesh, both sexes, as well women, as men, were made capable by God of being bapti∣zed. This (I beleeve) is all the mystery, that an intelli∣gent Reader will find, in the clause (so much courted by Mr. A. to be friend him in his cause) they were baptized hoth men and women. Sect. 40. His third proof for his conceit of no Infant baptized inMr. A. p. 6, 7 Christs or the Apostles daies, borrowed from Mar. 10. 13, 14, 15, 16. wherein some are said to have brought young chil∣dren to Christ (p. 6, 7.) hath been already, not onely an∣swered, but clearly argued and proved to make against him. I presume a considering Reader, will be of the same mind upon an attentive re-perusal of the 25th. Section. I shal here adde, that the judgement and conscience of that learned and worthy Martyr, Mr. John Philpot, were so full of conviction and satisfaction touching the pregnant validity of this pas∣sage, for Infant-baptism, that (in that Epistle of his, for∣merly mentioned, once, and again) upon the mention and re∣cital of this clause, Let the babes (so he reads it) come unto me, he breaks forth with an holy indignation into this demand; why then do not these rebellious Anabaptists obey the Commande∣ment of the Lrd? For what do they now a daies else that bring their children to Baptism, then that they did in times past, which brought their children to the Lord, and our Lord recei∣ved them, and putting his hands on them, blessed them, &c. And if Christ judged little children capable subjects of imposition of hand, which (according to some of the most Seraphical Doctors themselves of the faith of Anabaptism) is an Ordi∣nance subsequent unto Baptism, and not to be administred before it, it roundly follows that these children brought to Christ had been baptized. But either for Mr. F. the Mr. or for Mr. A. the Disciple, to put us to prove by whom they were baptized, is such a yoke, as themselves are not able to bear, no not in such cases, where the demand of proof in
that kind is much more reasonable. For if we, in arguing the controversie, whether there can be no true Church of Christ, and with which communion is lawfull, without their baptism by dipping, should put them upon proof by whom all and every the members of the 7 Churches of Asia, were thus baptized, or by whom those Christians mentioned, Acts 5. 14. Acts 4. 4. and in many other places, were after that manner baptized, would they not cry out against such our demands as importune, captious, and unreasonable? ThatMr. Fisher Baby-Bap∣tism, p. 141. evasion of Mr. Fishers, viz. that the imposition of hands here recorded to have been administred by Christ, unto the children brought to him, was another kind of imposition, viz. that which was frequently used in order to cures or heal∣ings, not that which pre-supposed baptism, is magisterial e∣nough (as seventy times seven assertions more in the same book with it are) but altogether proof-lesse. The contra∣ry hereunto is, little lesse, then clearly demonstrable upon these grounds. 1. There is no intimation in the context, that any of these children (much lesse all of them) were ei∣ther sick, or diseased. Now there can (I beleeve) no in∣stance be produced, where, any, young or old, either came, or were brought, to Christ, to obtain any cure or healing from him, whose infirmity or disease was not mentioned and named. 2. Whereas all the miraculous cures wrought by Christ, are either particularly (as when he wrought but onely one, or some few in the same place) or else in the ge∣neral (as when he wrought many in places neer adjoyning) recorded, here is not the least or lightest mention (in one kind, or other) of any cure wrought upon these children by him. 3. Had the children been any waies sick, or diseased, it is at no hand credible that the Disciples would have rebu∣ked those that brought them: it would have argued want of common civility, yea of humanity it self to have done it. 4. The reason given by Christ unto his Disciples (and in them unto others) why they should rather, countenance and fur∣ther, then restrain or hinder the accesse of little children un∣to him, viz. because of such was the Kingdom of God, Mar. 10. 14. or the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat 19. 14. suffici∣ently
declareth, that they were brought unto him upon a spiritual account, or in order to the obtaining of some spi∣ritual benefit, or priviledge, rather then for any bodily cure. 5. The general order of Christ directed unto the Disciples, and in them unto all men, to suffer not those lit∣tle children in particular, that were now brought unto him, but little children in general, to come unto him [Suffer, saith he, little children, and forbid them not to come unto me, Mat. 19. 14.] this general order (I say) and injunction of Christ▪ plainly shews, that his will was, that little chil∣dren should be brought unto him, whether they had any bo∣dily ailment upon them, or no: inasmuch as there is nothing more certain, then that all little children have not bodily ailments or diseases. And if his will be, that little children in general, and whether diseased, or no, should come, or be brought unto him, doubtlesse the reason or end why he ordereth their comming to him, must needs be the receiving of some spiritual grace, benefit, or priviledge from him, and this by means of such their comming. 6. It is said Mar. 10. 16. that Christ did not onely lay his hands upon these children, but that he blessed thm also; , i. e. prayed for them (as the word fre∣quently signifies, and the best interpreters understand it in this place.) Now though Christ frequently prayed, and sometimes preparatively (as it were) and in order to the working of some great miracle, as before the raising of La∣zarus from the dead, &c. yet we never find that he wrought any bodily cure by prayer simply or onely, but very oft by words of a divine-like authority and command. I will, be thou clean, Mat. 8. 3. As thou hast beleeved, so be it done unto thee, Mat. 8. 13. See also Mat. 9. 29. Arise, take up thy bed, and go unto thy house, Mat. 9. 6. Stretch forth thine hand, Mat. 12. 13. Be it unto thee, even as thou wilt, Mat. 15. 28. Lazarus come forth, Joh. 11. 43. (to omit many the like.) 7. Mr. A. himself giving this account why the Disciples re∣buked those that brought these children, viz. that they thought it an impertinent thing to trouble Christ with them, plainly e∣nough supposeth, that they were not brought to receive any
bodily cure from Christ: for then they (the Disciples) could not have thought it an impertinent thing to trouble Christ with them, more, or otherwise, then they judged it impertinent, for any others to come unto him upon the like occasion. And doubtlesse Mr. A. himself doth not judge it an impertinent thing for him to trouble the Physician by re∣pairing, or sending unto him when he is sick, and standeth in need of his help. So then by the fortified light of this great constellation of circumstances, it fully appeareth, that Mr. Fisher casteth out his net on the wrong side of the ship, when he affirmeth that these children came to Christ for ano∣ther kind of imposition of hands, then that asserted by us, which (aith he p. 141) is otherwise called, Touching. I con∣fesse that Touching is another, a new, a strange kind of impo∣sition of hands: but Anabaptism can now sail with any wind And whereas to salve his opinion, he saith, this Ordinance of laying on of hands, [he means, which we plead for] was not LIKELY yet in use and being, although he qualifies the magistrality of the assertion a little, with the term, likely, yet is it ventrous and daring enough to march in the retinue of such notions as these, That Baptism is onely a signing or sig∣nifying not a sealing Ordinance, Baby-bap∣tism, p. 154. 193. that Circumcision was neither sign nor seal of the Covenant of grace, that it was a seal of the righteusnesse of Faith unto Abraham onely, Baby-bap∣tism, p. 153. (with twenty and ten more of a like unhallowed inspiration, confederate in the same warfare against the truth, with it.) Sect. 41. Whereas Mr. A. bestows the greatest part of his seventh page, upon the probat of this, that the children spoken of in the passage represented by him, were not brought to Christ to be baptized (although all he saith upon the account fal∣leth short of such a sum) he laboureth in the fire to make a old purchase, and raiseth a great dust of contest for that, which he might have had of me (and I suppose of others al∣so) onely for the asking. But whether the children brought to Christ, were brought to be baptized, or no, I shall (I question not, God assisting me) in due time manifestly e∣vince the lawfullnesse of Infant-baptism from the said pas∣sage.
In the mean time, I shall take notice of these words (towards the close of Mr. A's third proof of his minor) that if the baptizing of Infants had been AN ORDINANCE OF GOD, the knowledge of it wuld have been of as great, or greater use unto the world, then the knowledge of those other things are, touching Christs imbracing and blessing of infants, &c. In the first clause of this passage, doth he not plainly enough charge, or challenge, his adversaries, as if they held the baptizing of Infants, to be an Ordinance of God? How some of them may at unawares expresse themselves, I know not, but they can with no more truth (in propriety and strictnesse of phrase) affirm the baptizing of Infants to be an Ordinance of God (neither do they I suppose, ordina∣rily so speak or affirm) then their Opposers do affirm the baptizing of un-baptized beleevers to be the Ordinance of God. Well may the baptizing of the one, or the other, be the precept, or will of God: but certainly, the subject of an institution or Ordinance, or the person to whom an Ordinance is, according to the will of God, to be administred, is no part of the Ordinance it self. Neither Abraham nor Isaack were any essential part of circumcision. This is Mr. Fishers Doctrine it self, who (Baby-baptism, p. 211.) complains of the Priests, (I know not well whom he means, at least extensively) for adding other subjects to Gods Ordinaces. In which expression he plainly enough makes an Ordinance a thing by it self, and the subject another by it self. In which respect, he is no more consistent with himself, then with the principles of Christian modesty, when he thus rates his opposers, for their conjectural sin of Infant-baptism: will you imagine and suppose, and dream, and dote, and fancy, and fame a Baptism, which the Scriptures and first Churches never knew? For may they not imagine, &c. the baptizing of In∣fants, and yet not imagine another Baptism, then the Scrip∣tures know, if Infants be no part of the Ordinance admini∣stred unto them. See also, pag. 312. 314. Again, whereas Mr. A. saith, that had infant-baptism been an Ordinance of God, the knowledge of it would have been of as great, or greater use to the world, then &c. I answer,
1. That it doth not follow, because the knowledge he speaks of is not given in this place unto the world, there∣fore it is given no where else. Nor 2. That because this knowledge is not yet arrived at Mr. A's or at Mr. Fishers understanding, it is not therefore sufficiently given unto the world, or not convincingly enough arrived at the judge∣ments and understandings of other men, as considering and conscientious as they. Nor 3. That the knowledge of Christs imbracing and blessing infants, is so inconsiderable as Mr. A. seemeth to represent it unto the world, because he hath no higher esteem of it. Nor 4. (And lastly) Doth it follow, that because Mr. A. makes an opposition between the giving knowledge unto the world, that Infant-Baptism is an Ordinance of God, and, the giving knowledge that Christ im∣braced and blessed infants, therefore the knowledge of this latter, doth not give sufficient knowledge of the former (in his sence of the word, Ordinance, lately expressed.) How∣ever we shall not at present argue the case, whether it be so, or no; but onely leave it to all considering men to judge, whether his minor proposition be preferr'd to any degree of light, by all he hath delivered in this third proof of it, or whether the native darknesse remains not still spread round about it, rather condens'd and thickned, then any waies les∣sened or cleared by all this discourse. Sect. 42. To his fourth proof we answer; 1. That to argue fromAnswer to Mr. A's 4th, proof of the minor propo∣sition of his first Argu∣ment, p. 8. what is not recorded, to what was not, or was not done, in Christs or the Apostles dayes, is extreamly weak and incon∣cluding. It is not recorded that the Eunuch, Acts 8. was baptized either naked, or with his cloaths upon him. Doth it therefore follow, that he was baptized, neither naked, nor with his cloaths upon him? It is not recorded that the spring or water wherein the Eunuch was baptized, was so deep, as to reach or come up to his ankles. Doth it follow from hence, that therefore it was not thus deep? It is not recor∣ded that all the members of the 7 Churches of Asia, were baptized. Is this a sufficient proof that therefore they were not baptized? It is not recorded that John the Baptist, when
he executed his office, and baptised those that came unto him, put off either his Camels-hair garment, or leathern girdle, nor yet that he kept them on. Doth it therefore follow that he did neither, because neither is recorded? Or is it a sufficient proof that no woman was admitted to the Lords Table in the Apostles daies, because the admission of none is recorded? But such arguings as these are the pillars of Anti-poedo-bap∣tisme; which for brevities sake, and not to offend any man, or to reproach the opinion, from hence forth we shall call, Ana-baptism. Secondly: Whereas he saith, that the description which the Scripture every where maks of persons, or qualifications of such, whose Baptisme it recordeth, argues them to be no Infants, the saying is captious and encroaching, taking that for granted which is to be denied, viz. that the Scripture still describeth the persons and qualifications of [all] such [though Mr. A. craftily leaves out this particle All, least his proof should appear to be too narrow and scant for the length and bredth of his position; though the truth is, that to those who un∣derstand the principles and rules of arguing, the omission of the said particle invalidates the processe of his argument] of all such (I say) whose Baptism it recordeth. Yea himself pag. 10, 11. essaying to answer that unanswerable objection a∣bout the Baptizing of housholds, though with much regret and reluctancie of spirit, yet yeeldeth that there is not the same account given of the qualifications [he might with as much truth have added, and then he had done somewhat in∣genously, nor of the persons] of those that were baptised of the family of Lydia. So that himself, with speaking onely a little truth, hath cut the sinews of his fourth proof. Yet Thirdly: Whereas he here supposeth that the Name or Title of a Disciple is incompetible unto children, and cannot rationally be applyed unto them, doth he not condemn the Holy Ghost himself of irrationality, who very expresly, Act. 15. 10. termeth children, as well as their Parents, Disciples; unlesse he will suppose that the yoke of Circumcision▪ in case the Parents had been perswaded by their Judaizing Teachers to subject unto it, would not at all have concerned their
children, or been any yoke unto them. I confesse Mr. Fisher (Baby-baptism, p. 176.) out of the ingenuity and Christian meeknesse of his spirit, terms the citing of this scripture to prove Infants to be called Disciples, a frivolous flim flam: But the best is, that these wild Figtrees (I mean, insolent and uncomely jeers) grow so abundantly in the plain of his book, that ten thousand of them are not worth the price of two Sparrows. But Mr. Fisher knows better how to triumph, than how to conquer: And if you will take his own word for it, Tanquam umbrae volitant alij: solus sapit ipse. All other men like shaddows vain On earth flit to and fro: He, he alone the wise man is: Truth none but he doth know. Yet let me say this by the way (by Mr. Fishers good leave) that the yoke of Circumcision (with all the burthensomnesse of the Mosaical Law attending it) was indeed no yoke at all, in comparison of such a Baptism as Mr. A. or at least many who rejoyce in his light, violently obtrude upon the world, in the name of Christ's Baptism. But I hear there is one wise man amongst them (whose prudence, I suppose, many others will follow) who hath found out a way to conjure the spirit of winter out of the water by an application of fire; a com∣mendable project to reconcile winter-dipping it self with the lives of men, and especially of women, which, without such a mediation, is like to deal very severely by them. He that baptiseth upon such termes as these, baptiseth both with wa∣ter and with fire; and so, in this respect, administreth a more compleat Baptism than either John, or any the Apostles of Christ. But Mr. Fisher disdains all warming of water, unlesse it be with the fire of mens zeal that are to be baptized. This onely by the way. But might not Mr. A. more rationally contest with Christ himself, for giving the Name or Title of a man to a child new born (Joh. 16. 21.) and especially for gi∣ving the Name and Title of a Beleever to a little child (Mat. 18. 5, 6.) than with us, for giving the name and title of Di∣sciple unto a child? Or is it not somewhat lesse to be a Di∣sciple than a Beleever? For that our Saviour in this Scripture,
by, one of these little ones, who beleeve in me, meaneth, any such child, as that mentioned ver. 5. and now pointed at by him, is evident from the context (as Musculus well con∣ceiveth, and expoundeth the place accordingly.) Sect. 43. Against his fifth proof (p. 8.) there is matter of exception enough to make a little volume. For, 1. What if the instructions gvn to those who were commis∣sioned to baptize, and the practise of such persons, who did bap∣tize, argue the persons [i. e. some of the persons, for he was tender of saying all, for fear of after-claps] that were bapti∣zed by them to have been no infants? Doth it follow, because all that were baptized, were not Infants, therefore none that were baptized were such? Or that they who had instructions to baptize persons of ripe years, had no instructions or com∣mission to baptize any others? 2. Whereas he saith, that the instruction which Christ gave those whom he commissined on this bhalf, was, that they should first teach persons, r make them Disciples, and then baptize them; I confesse he mentioneth teaching in the first place, and baptizing after; but this is not to instruct them to teach in the first place, and then to baptize them after; but onely, in the first place to instruct them to teach, and in the second to baptize. And such an expression of Christ, as this is so far from proving, that therefore all that are, or ought to be baptized, ought to be taught first, that it doth not prove that any one person who is, or ought to be baptized, must be first taugt; however it be granted, that this latter, [viz. that some are, and ought to be taught before baptized] may both by other Scriptures, and by ground in reason, be evin∣ced for truth. But there is nothing more frequent or fami∣liar in the Scriptures, then to find such things mentioned or amed n the first place, which according to the order of na∣ture, and sometimes of time it self, should be mentioned af∣ter Gal. 5. 22. love jy, peace, &c. are mentioned before faith▪ 2 Cor. 13. 14. The second person is mentioned before the first, as Revel. 1. 4, 5. the third before the second, Rom. 10 9. confession with the mouth, is named before beleeving
with the heart, Ezek. 14. 14. Daniel is named before Job, who notwithstanding was long after him in time; so Mic. 7. 20. Jacob before Abraham, Levit. 12. 8. The burnt offering, is first mentioned; but the Sin-offering though after-named, was alwaies first offered. In the businesse of regeneration, water is mentioned before the Spirit, Joh. 3. 6. and Mar. 1. 4. Baptizing it self is mentioned before the preaching of bap∣tism. John did baptize in the Wildernesse, and preach the Bap∣tism of Repentance, &c. Therefore from Christs mentioning teaching in the first place, and baptizing in the second, it can∣not be proved that persons must alwaies be▪ first taught, be∣fore they be baptized; no more then from the Apostles in∣forming the Corinthians, in the first place that they were sanctified▪ and in the second that they were justified (1 Cor. 6. 11.) it can be proved, that their sanctification, did in time precede their justification. Sect. 44. 3. Though nothing can be inferred from our Saviours mentioning teaching in the first place, and baptizing after, touching the necessity of teaching to go, alwaies (or indeed at any time) before baptizing, yet if we speak of baptizing nati∣ons (of which it is a clear case that Christ here speaketh) it is granted (upon another account) that teaching alwaies ought to precede baptizing; my meaning is, that no nation, nor any person, or numbers of persons, in a nation, ought to be baptized, untill the Gospel hath been preached unto, or in this nation, and withall received and beleeved. But this at no hand proveth, but that in case the heads of a fa∣mily, one, or more, in a nation▪ shall receive the Gospel, and be baptized themselves, their children also, if they have any, may be baptized likewise. In this sence it is granted that tacing ought alwaies to go before baptizing; the teaching of nations, before the baptizing of nations; and so the tea∣ching of families, the baptizing of families; that is the gene∣rallity of a nation (and so of a family) old and young, men and children, ought not to be baptized, until those who are ca∣pable of teaching in both, have been taught, yea and have learned too (to some degree) the things which have been taught them. But,
4. Whereas he useth these two expressions, as synonymous, or of like signification, to teach persons, and to make them Disciples, he maketh black and white the same colour, and fire and water the same Element. For Stephen taught those (and this with great authority, wisdom, and faithfulnesse) who stoned him to death, yet made none of them Disciples. So Paul taught many Jews at Damascus, and elsewhere, whom he could not make Disciples. To teach, and to make Disciples, differ (upon the matter) as much, as sowing, dis∣fers from reaping, or fighting from conquering. Whereas he addeth; The practise of those who did baptiz, was answerable to this Commission; they first instructed person: in the things Gospel, and then baptized them; I suppose his meaning is not, that they baptized all, whom they first in∣structed in the things of the Gospel, but onely those who vo∣luntarily offered themselves unto Baptism, or desired it, after they had been thus instructed: they compelled no man to be baptized, neither threatned they any man, or delivered any man up unto Sathan, for not being baptized. But that when they first brought the Gospel to a family, City, or Country, they first instructed, before they baptized, is easily granted, and fully accords with our sence and notion in the premises. Sect. 45. And thus we see how much, and to how little purpose much, hath been said by Mr. A. for the confirmation of the minor proposition in his first Argument, viz. that Baptism was not administred to any Infant, neither in the daies of John the Baptist, nor of the Apostles. We have both weighed his arguments for confirmation in the ballance of the Sanctua∣ry, and found them light, or wanting, and given you others for infirmation of them, of sufficient weight. In the Rear of this his first argument (pag. 8, 9, &c.) he fra∣meth two objections against himself, and essaieth a solution of them respectively, but with no better successe then some novice practitioners in the Black Art, who sometimes raise such stubborn spirits, which their skill failing them, they are not able to conjure down. He hath not in either of his an∣swers infringed, nor indeed so much as touched, the spirit or
strength of either of the objections, as they are manageable both against his argument, but especially not as they are ma∣nageable for the cause of Infant-baptism. This we shall (God willing) demonstrate in due time and place, viz. when we come to argue our grounds for the baptizing of In∣fants. However, when the grounds and reasons, which are held forth and pleaded for the justification, either of an opi∣nion, or practise, are evicted of weaknesse and insufficiency, no answering of objections is able to repair their strength, or releeve them. A man may answer, and this very substanti∣ally two, and ten objections (especially fram'd by himself) against his opinion, and yet be never the more solid or sub∣stantial in his grounds, by which he asserteth his opinion. But his first argument being fallen, let us see whether his fellow (the second) will help him up, or supply that, which we found lacking on the behalf thereof, for the support of his cause. Sect. 46. His second Argument he informeth us by the way, shall beMr. A's se∣cond Argu∣ment against Infant-bap∣tism answe∣red. taken from the nature of Baptism, and from the declared ends and uss of it. I wish he thoroughly understood the nature of Baptism: for then I presume he would abhorre himself in dust and ashes, from that un-Christian and needlesse distur∣bance, which he hath made amongst the servants of God a∣bout it. And for the declared ends and uses of Baptism, of which he speaks, it will appear by the management of his ar∣gument, that he is at a losse in himself about them, and un∣certain what they be. But the argument, which he prefa∣ceth, as ye have heard, riseth up before us in this form. If that administration of Baptism, which is made to profes∣sed Beleevers, doth more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that doth, which is made to Infants, then Baptism ought not to be administred unto Infants, but to pro∣fessed belevers. But that Administration of Baptism, which is made to pro∣fessed Beleevers, doth more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that which is made to Infants. Er∣go
By the way, this argument with that strength which it hath magnifieth it self every whit as much (if not more) against the councel and wisdome of God in Circumcision, as against his Adversaries opinion and practice about Infant-Baptism. For may it not altogether as rationally, and with as much truth be pleaded and said; that that administration of Cir∣cumcision, which was made to professed Beleevers, did more conduce to, and better answer the ends of this Ordinance, then that which was made to infants, as it can be pretended, that that administration of Baptism, which he exalteth, more conduceth to, and better answers the ends and uses of Bap∣tism, then that other which he depresseth? For (assuredly) Circumcision was in the ends and uses of it (at least in the cheif and principal ends and uses of it) altogether as myste∣rious, as sacred and holy, as Baptism, yea and very little, if at all, in these differing from it. Sect. 47. But let us partially weigh and consider both the propositi∣onsThe major Proprosition answered. now before us in their order. To the major we answer; that the consequence herein is void of strength and truth, yea and hath scarce so much as a face of probability in it. For the better or greater service∣ablenesse or conducement of a thing to the ends intended by God in it, in some particular cases, is no argument at all to prove, that therefore the use of this thing is in all other cases simply unlawfull. Breast-milk given unto new born babes more conduceth to the end intended by God in this creature, then when it is given unto healthfull and strong men; yet this proveth not that therefore it is simply unlawfull to give this milk unto such men, or for them to use it for food, espe∣cially in some cases. The Ordinance of marriage, more con∣duceth unto, and answrs the ends and use, intended by God in it, when it is imbraced by persons of competent years for the procreation of children, &c. then when it is entertained by men and women who have out-lived such a capacity; yet this proveth not but that persons strucken in years beyond the procreation of children may lawfully marry. The Mi∣nistery or preaching of the Apostle Paul did more conduce un∣to
the ends of preaching (as viz. the glorifying of God, the saving of souls) &c. then the ministery or preaching of some other the Apostles, or however then the ministry or preach∣ing of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, either in these, or in former daies. Yet this no wise proveth, that the ministry or preaching of the other Apostles, or of ordinary Pastors and Teachers, is unlawfull. The administration of Circumcision which was made to infants, did more conduce unto, and better answer the ends of it (as appears by the standing law given by God himself for this administration, Gen. 17.) then the admini∣stration of it made unto men. Yet it followeth not from hence, that therefore the administration of it unto men, was simply, universally, or in all cases unlawfull. 2. When he saith, that that administration of Baptism, wherein he so inordinately pleaseth himself, doth MORE condce to, and BETTER answer the ends of it, &c. doth he not plainly grant or suppose, that the other administration, which is made to infants, and which his soul so greatly ab∣horreth, doth notwithstanding in some degree, both con∣duce unto, and answer the ends of Baptism also? If so, can it be simply and absolutely unlawfull? Or if we suppose, or say, that Paul's ministery or preaching the Gospel, did MORE conduce unto, or BETTER answer the ends of prea∣ching, then the ministery of some other of the Apostles, do we not in so saying, suppose the ministry and preaching of these Apostles, to be (at least) lawfull, and in some de∣gree conducing unto the ends of preaching? More reverence is due to the Consciences of men, especially of the Saints, then to trouble or disturb them with such slight reasonings as these. But Sect. 48. 3. Neither doth he expresse himself so handsomely, when he saith, that the administration of Baptism, whether to the one subject, or the other, doth more or lesse, either conduce to, or answer the ends of Baptism. Baptism is one thing, and the administration of Baptism is another, far differing from i. They differ more then toto genere the one from the other. Now to say that one thing conduceth more or lesse to, or more
or lesse answereth the ends of another thing, which is of quite another nature and consideration from it, makes no plea∣sant harmony in the ears of any considering mans understan∣ding. But (to overlook this oversight.) 4. How impertinently doth he argue the consequence in the proposition now under canvasse, from these Scriptures, (p. 12.) Cursed be the deceiver, which having in his flock a male, and voweth and sacrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing, Mal. 1. 14. And again, Seek to excell to the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. 14. 12. Doth it follow from these texts, either divisim, or conjunctim, that If that administration of Baptism, which is made to professed Beleevers, doth more con∣duce unto, and better answer the end of Baptism, then that doth which is made to Infants, then Baptism ought not to be admi∣nistred unto Infants, &c.? Or is that, which conduceth to a good end, though in an inferiour or lesse degree, then (hap∣ly) some other means or thing may do, necessarily a corrupt thing? That Tree which bringeth forth GOOD Fruit, is ad∣judged by our Saviour, a good tree, though it bringeth not forth the best fruit, or the most fruit, that is possible for a tree, yea or for it self, to bring forth? Or were all the rest of the Apostles corrupt things, because the Apostle Paul la∣boured more abundantly then they all, 1 Cor. 15. 10. and so promoted the end or ends, of Apostolick mission above them all? Or may not he truly and cordially, seek to excell to the edifying of the Church, who sometimes edifieth the Church lesse, by his la∣bours and indeavours in this kind, then at some other time? But when propositions are false, proofs cannot be pertinent. And thus, through a manifest defectivenesse in the major proposition, the glory of Mr. A's second argument against Infant-baptism is laid in the dust. Neither is there any hope or possibility of releef from the minor proposition, though this should be found never so Orthodox. For it is a sove∣raign maxime in argumentation (as hath been formerly said) that Conclusio semper sequitur deteriorem partem, the proof of a conclusion by a syllogism, is never valid or strong, when either of the propositions therein are weak. So that we might wave the examination of the minor proposition in
the argument before us, without any detriment to our cause at all. Notwithstanding to make it evident, even to preju∣dice and partiality themselves, if it be possible, that there is no sound part in the whole body of this argument, let us ar∣raign the minor proposition also, at the Bar of reason and truth. The tenour of this proposition (as we heard) is this. But that administration of baptism, which is made to profes∣sed Beleevers, doth more conduce to, and better answer the ends of Baptism, then that which is made to infants. Sect. 49. That Truth is a sufferer in this proposition also, is to me sufficiently evident from hence, viz. because God himself, who (questionlesse) knows much better then Mr. A. or any of his judgement, what administration of an Ordinance most conduceth unto, and best answers the ends of it, judged the ad∣ministration of Circumcision (an Ordinance of like import with Baptism, as shall upon occasion be shewed, God wil∣ling elsewhere) unto Infants, more conducing unto, and bet∣ter answering the ends of it (the principal of which was to signifie and seal the righteousnesse of Faith, Rom. 4. 11.) then unto Beleevers, or unto persons of ripe years. Otherwise I presume he would not have ordered the ordinary and con∣stant administration of it unto children, but rather unto men. For it is very importune and burthensome to my Faith to be∣leeve, that God should appoint such an administration of his Ordinance, which should be in any degree disadvantagi∣ous or prejudicial to the ends thereof. If therefore the ad∣ministration of Circumcision made unto Infants under the Law, did as much, or more, conduce unto the ends thereof, as this administration made unto men could have done: in like manner, the administration of baptism made to infants under the Gospel must needs more, or as much, conduce unto the ends therof, as it would do, in case it were made unto men. They who think, write, or say otherwise, do they not make themselves wiser then God? How, and in what respect, one, or more, that administration of Baptism, which we prefer, conduceth as much (or more) to the ends of Baptism, as that administra∣tion
which Mr. A. commendeth, might readily here be shew∣ed; and may be in time convenient. In the mean time let us consider how Mr. A. maketh his rope stand right up on the one end. Sect. 50. 1. (Saith he) One end of Baptism is to declare Jesus Christ unto the world, Joh. 1. 31. And (a little after) this mani∣festation of Christ is better made by the Baptism of Beleevers, then by the Baptism of Infants, whether it respects the party, who is baptized, or others, who behold it. For answer; 1. The end indeed of John's sending to the Jews to bap∣tize, was that Christ should be made manifest unto Israel. This the words cited by himself (Jo. 1. 31.) expresly affirm. But this proveth not that therefore the end of Baptism is to declare Jesus Christ unto the world, Baptism and John's sen∣ding to the Jews to baptize, are two very different things; and so are Israel, and the world. Nor was Christ declared unto the world, but unto Israel onely, by John's baptizing. Yea when John himself saith, that he therefore came baptizing with water, that Christ might be made manifest unto Israel, his meaning is not, that the manifestation of Christ, no not to Israel, was the proper end of that Baptism, which he admi∣nistred, but of his administration of it, the manner and terms, upon which he came to administer it, and according unto which he did administer it, considered. For had the same Baptism which John administred, been administred by an or∣dinary person, or a man ignorant who Christ was, or that he was now come into the world; yea or without those or the like additional discoveries, which John made of Christ in his preaching, it would never have produced any such ef∣fect as the manifestation of Christ unto Israel; nor was there any thing in it any wayes proportionable unto such an end, or effect as this. Therefore certainly, the manifestation of Christ unto the world, is no end of Baptism; or however, no such end as this can be proved from John 1. 31. which text not∣withstanding is our whole allowance, for our satisfaction therein.
Sect. 51. By the way, the reason (I conceive) why John, being the messenger of Christ sent before his face to prepare his way [i. e. to awaken the Jewish nation to own and enter∣tain him, being now come unto them, though as yet they knew it not] came baptizing with water, in order to the ma∣nifestation of him unto the Jews, was; because this new un∣dertaking to baptize, was a proper means to occasion the generality of this people to inquire more diligently after him (John I mean) to examine more narrowly his Com∣mission, and authority by which he did baptize. By means of which inquiry, they came to understand that he was a man sent from God unto them; and consequently could not but so much the more reverence and beleeve the words of his mouth; the first born of which was the testimony which he gave of their Messiah, as now ready to discover himself unto such of them, as desired his comming. Upon this account John's baptizing with water, might con∣tribute towards the manifestation of Christ unto Israel, and yet the manifestation of Christ to the world be no end of Bap∣tism, simply considered, or in its ordinary or standing ad∣ministrations. 2. Reason it self interposeth with an high hand against such a conceit, which maketh the manifestation of Christ unto the world one of the ends of Baptism. If Christ be in baptism, he is here onely tanquam in aenigmate, darkly, and as in a riddle; and he that doth not plough with Gods Heifer (the Scripture) will never know or understand this Riddle. In this case, it is not the Riddle, but the heifer ploughed with for the unfolding of it, that maketh Christ manifest. The end of shadows, types, figures, enigma's, parables, &c. is not to make either things, or persons MANIFEST, but ra∣ther to veil and conceal them, at least in part, or at the most to reveal them sparingly and with reservation. And he said unto them, to you it is given to know the mysteries of the King∣dom of God; but to others in parables: that seeing, they might not see, and hearing they might not understand, Luke 8. 10. And certainly Baptism is such a mysterious and profound parable
of Christ, that without an Interpreter it would never be un∣derstood, nor Christ be found in it. Therefore the end of it cannot be his manifestation to the world. Sect. 52. 3. The manifestation of Christ unto the world, is the end of the Scriptures, and more especially of the Gospel, (I mean of the writings of the New-Testament) and of the preach∣ing and publishing of these in the world. Eph. 6. 19. 2 Pet. 1. 16. Rom. 16. 25, 26. Col. 4. 3, 4. So that as the A∣postle reasoneth against justification by works, Gal. 2. 21. If righteousnesse come by the law, then Christ is dead in vain, so may we reason and conclude against the manifestation of Christ to the world by Baptism: If Christ be manifested un∣to the world by Baptism (which must be supposed, if this manifestation of him be the end of Baptism) then is the let∣ter of the Gospel, and the ministry thereof in the world in vain. Yea and Paul whose great work and imploiment was to make Christ manifest unto the world, should rather have been sent to baptize, then to preach the Gospel, if the manifesta∣tion of Christ unto the world had been the end of Baptism. But this notion of Mr. A. concerning the end of Baptism, is so broadly obnoxious, that an over-operous refutation of it would be but an impertinency. And, Sect. 53. 4. Whereas he affirms, that the manifestation of CHRIST is better mad by the Baptism of Belevers, then of Infants, whether it respects the party who is baptized, or others who be∣hold it; 1. It seems then that there is a manifestation of Christ made in or by the Baptism of infants, as well as by the Baptism of Beleevers, although not so good [I suppose he means, not so full or perfect] a manifestation. If then there be a mani∣festation of Christ in the Baptism of infants, although not so pregnant, rich, and full, as in the Baptism of men, how can he judge it to be unlawfull? Is any manifestation of Christ, though in a lower or lesser degree, unlawfull? Or is the mini∣stry of all such Pastors and Teachers unlawfull, who do not, (haply cannot) manifest Christ unto the world therein, with  much power and glory of manifestation, as the most
able, and best qualified Minister or Preacher in the whole world? 2. Upon what account, can he suppose Christ to be mani∣fested to the party baptized, supposing him a Beleever, by his Baptism? I thought that his sence had been, that none ought to be baptized, but onely such to whom Christ was manifested before their baptizing. And if Christ be mani∣festable to a Beleever in some further degree, by Baptism, it must be by the Baptism of others, rather then his own; at least if he be baptized by a total submersion under water. For during the while of his being under water, he is in no good capacity, notwithstanding any former use or exercise of his understanding, to receive any further information or knowledge concerning Christ, being taken up with thoughts about his e∣mersion, and how to recover and come off with the safety of his life from the water. Or if it be said, that Christ may be said to be further manifested by Baptism to a Beleever, al∣though the effect it self of this manifestation doth not take place, till after such his Baptism; I answer, upon this account, may Christ be manifested to an Infant also by his Baptism, viz. when he shall grow up to a capacity of understanding what his Baptism meaneth, and what the counsell of God, was, or is in it. Sect. 54. 3. Whereas he pleadeth (p. 13.) that that end of Bap∣tism, whereof he speaks (i. e. that end of Baptism, which is no end thereof, as hath been proved) is more effectuall unto Spectators, when Baptism is administred unto Beleevers, then when unto Infants, because their Faith in Christ, and re∣pentance, are visible in their willing submission unto Baptism, and their example apt to quicken, &c. whereas there is no∣thing of all this in the Baptism of Infants, who are meerly pas∣sive herein, &c. I answer. 1. That when and where, the baptizing of men and wo∣men, under the notion of Beleevers, becomes customary and in fashion, (which are the terms and state of it amongst us in these daies) the truth is, that there is a very poor and faint visibility of any mans Faith in Christ, or Repentance, in
their willing subjection unto that Ordinance. When all the land of Judea, and they of Jerusalem, and all the Region round about Jordan, went out unto John to be baptized of him, and were baptized accordingly, what exemplarinesse was there in any particular mans subjection unto this Ordinance? or what visibility of any mans faith or repentance, whereas John himself, notwithstanding this voluntary offering themselves unto Baptism, called them a generation of vipers, (Luke 3. 7.) and complaining of the unbeleef of the generality of them, saith; And what he hath seen and heard that he testifieth, and NO MAN receiveth his testimony? John 3. 32. Yea many of those who willingly offered themselves unto Baptism (yea, and were immediately after baptized of him, were so far from beleeving in Christ, that they were doubtfull whether John himself was not the Christ, Luke 3. 15. Therefore there is no such visibility of Faith or Repentance in any mans offer∣ing himself unto Baptism, or in his being baptized, especi∣ally under such a circumstance, as that mentioned. It wasPostquam in tanto cul∣mine nomen coepit esse Christianum crevit hypo∣crisis. the observation and saying of Austine long ago; that When the name of a Christian began to be in honour and esteem, hypo∣crisie increased. Yea all things duly considered, we have reason to judge, that there is a better or clearer light in any one act of charity or mercy, towards the poor, to render a∣ny mans saith and repentance visible, then in a willing offering himself to be baptized. Sect. 55. 2. What religious affection, devout carriage, matter of e∣dification, quickning, or the like, unto spectators Mr. A. can pretend or imagine to accompany the Baptism of Beleevers, may, and this as seasonably, as regularly, proceed from them upon a thousand occasions otherwise, as upon the occasion of their being baptized. When any afflicting hand of God is upon them, as by sicknesse, losse of estate, friends, &c. and so when God lifteth up the light of his countenance upon them, blesseth or prospereth them in one kind or other, (and the like) these are as proper occasions for Beleevers to expresse themselves with devotion, and religiousnesse of ffection, to the affecting, edifying, quickning of by-stan∣ders,
as their baptizing. Therefore if there be any such Christian and worthy doings by Beleevers at the time of their Baptism, as Mr. A. speaks of, they are not the proper fruits or effects of their being baptized, or of their being to be baptized, but meerly accidental hereunto, and so no ends of Baptism, more then of afflictions, or of mercy in any kind received from God. Yea Sect. 56. 3. When the Infants of Beleevers are baptized, there may be (and haply ought to be) the same Christian actings and deportments in every kind, in the Parents, or those who offer them unto baptism. So that the Spectators, may by means, or by occasion of their baptizing also, be as much instructed, edified, quickned, &c. as they can or could be, by the baptizing of these Parents themselves. He that offereth his child to be baptized in the name of Christ, hereby maketh as solemn as serious a profession of his faith in Christ, and so of his Repentance, as he could do by being baptized himself. So that Spectators are no whit greater gainers by Beleevers-baptism, then by infant-baptism. Nay the truth is, that they are, or may be, greater gainers by the latter. For when a Beleever having been himself formerly baptized, shall offer his Child also unto Baptism, this argueth a greater stability and triednesse of faith in him, then his offering himself unto Baptism doth, who newly beleeveth. A testimony given up∣on, and after, a thorough experience, is (coeteris paribus) more authoritative and convincing, then that which is given upon little or no trial. Yea the baptizing of Infants must needs in this respect turn to a better account unto Spectators (if by Spectators, we mean, either the Church, or the world, who may as well the one as the other, if they please, and have opportunity, be present at any kind of baptizing) then the baptizing of Beleevers; because if Beleevers onely be bapti∣zed, the occasions and opportunities of all baptismal edifi∣cation are like to be fewer by many, then they would be, in case Infant-baptism were generally practised. For many in∣fants are taken away by death in their infancy, and so never come to be Beleevers (in Mr. A's sence) in which case, if
they be not baptized, all those opportunities of Baptismal edification are lost, which might have been taken and happi∣ly improved, by their baptizing. I take no notice of the An∣ti-Scriptural notion, upon which he argueth all along this part of his discourse, viz. that Infants and Beleevers are two contra-distinct, or opposite species of men. We may have occasion to touch this hereafter. Onely by the way I cannot but a little marvell, why Mr. A. should ascribe unto his baptism of Beleevers, such great matters of edification in respect of Spectators, when as (as far as I can yet understand) the practitioners of this Bap∣tism seek and take, both times and places of greatest privacy for the administration and practice of it. But the very truth is, that Mr. A. doth but meerly trifle in all that long-some discourse (pag. 12, 13, 14, &c.) wherein he builds upon this supposition (formerly detected of the crime of vanity) that One end of Baptism is the manifestation of Christ unto the world. But Sect. 57. 4. Whereas (p. 14.) he supposeth, that the Faith and Re∣pentance of the Publicans and Harlots was made visible to the Priests and Elders by their being baptized upon their beleeving the Doctrine of John, he sides more with his cause, then ei∣ther with reason, or truth. For 1. We lately shewed, that in that universal and promis∣cuous recourse of people unto John to be baptized of him, of which the Scripture speaks, there could be no visibility of the truth or soundnesse of any mans faith or repentance, in his being baptized; much lesse of any particular species or kind of persons amongst them, more then of others. Nor doth the Scripture hold forth any such thing. For 2. Whereas he saith, that that which Matthew, (c. 21. 32.) calls their beleeving of John, Luke speaking of the same thing (as I conceive) calls it their justifying God, in being baptized of John, I conceive that he cannot lightly conceive that, which here he saith he conceiveth. For evident it is that what Matthew speaketh (in the words cited) he speak∣eth particularly, of the Publicans and Harlots: and as evi∣dent,
that what Luke speaketh (in the words cited from him) he speaketh of all the people. And all the people that heard him [viz. Christ, speaking verily worthily of John] and the Publicans, justified God, being baptized, [or rather, having been baptized, ] of John; not [as Mr. A. again mis-reports] IN being baptized of John. The pro∣position IN, which onely is the smiling lineament upon his cause, in the face of the words as he transcribeth them, is nei∣ther in the original, nor in either the former, or latter, Eng∣lish translation. A little after, he stumbles at the same stone, of mis-alledging the text (whether wittingly, or at una∣wares, let the reader judge) where pretending to represent the sin of the Priests and Elders, in opposition to the Faith and Re∣pentance of the Publicans and Harlots, visible (as he saith, but untruly as hath been shewed) in their baptism, in the words of Luke 7. 30. he saith it was their rejecting the counsel of God against themselves, IN not being baptized; whereas (as was now said) there is not the least appearance of the propositi∣on, IN, either in the original, or translation. The sence and import of the place, is plainly, and without parable, this; that the Priests and Elders in refusing the Baptism of John, hereby discovered the prodigious folly, and wickednesse of their hearts, in rejecting the counsel of God concerning their justification and salvation by Faith in the Messiah, whom John preached, and this with so much the more authority and advantage to have been beleeved in his Testimony or Doctrine concerning him, because he was extraordinarily raised up and sent by God to administer a new Ordinance a∣mongst them. The meaning is not, as if that counsel of God, which they are here said to have rejected against themselves, consisted in this, that he would have had them baptized by John; but in this, that he had purposed to justifie and save them by Faith in his son Jesus Christ. This was the great and blessed counsel of God, which they rejected▪ [frustrated, or made void] against themselves, i. e. to the depriving of them∣selves of the two great blessings, justification by the way, and salvation in the end. Concerning their not being baptized by John, had they otherwise beleeved in Christ, this could
have turned to no such great prejudice unto them. Nor was it the counsel of God, that either they, or any other sort of men, should be baptized of John by way of necessity, either to their justification, or salvation. For if so, then all those who were not baptized by John, although afterwards bapti∣zed by Christ, or his Disciples, must be supposed to have pe∣rished eternally. But certain it is, that all those who reject∣ed that counsel of God, and continued in this rejection, which the Priests and Elders are here said to have rejected against themselves (especially having like means with them to im∣brace it) did perish eternally. Therefore nothing can be more plain, then that they sit down quite besides the mind of the Holy Ghost in this text of Scripture, who conceive the counsel of God here mentioned, to respect Johns baptism, or any mans being baptized by him. Sect. 58. Besides the present unbeleef, and wicked frame of heart, of the Preists and Elders considered, they did not so much as sin in not coming to John to be baptized; as Turks and in∣fidels during their infidelity, do not sin, in not offering them∣selves either to Baptism, or to the Lords Table, among Christians; albeit it is true, that they sin in neglecting to put themselves into a regular capacity of offering themselves both to the one and the other. Therefore certainly it was not the counsel of God, that the Priests and Elders, under that irregularity of heart, which they had at present con∣tracted, should have heen baptized by John, inasmuch as this had been a manifest prophanation in them of this great Ordinance; although I do not conceive that John had sinned in baptizing them, in case they had desired it of him. Nor is it any part of the counsel of God, that men should sin or act any thing to their own condemnation. The result of the late premises, is, that the sin of the Priests and Elders in re∣jecting the counsel of God; [so termed in the words before us] against themselves, did not consist in their not being baptized by John, but in rejecting their Messiah, the Lord Christ sent unto them: and that their refusal of being bap∣tized by John, having been invited and exhorted unto Faith
and Repentance by his ministry, was a sign or evidence of this their rejection. Nor doth it follow, that in case their refusing Baptism at the hand of John, plainly argued their unbeleef; therefore the accepting of baptism from him did in like manner argue the Faith and Repentance of all those who accepted it. A remotione unius contrarij ad positionm al∣terius, non valet argumentum. A continual blaspheming of the name of God, demonstratively argueth a man to be despe∣rately wicked and prophane; but the forbearance of such blasphemies doth not prove a man to be truly pious or religi∣ous. The sin of covetousnesse proveth a man or woman to be in the gall of bitternesse, and band of iniquity, but free∣dome from this sin, doth not argue a man to be in a state of Grace, or in favour with God, Many like instances might be given. We have done at last with Mr. A's first end of Baptism, which he makes to be, the manifestation of Christ unto the world, and have proved. 1. That this is no end of Bap∣tism. And 2. That granting it to be an end, yet it is in all respects as effectually promoted, (as in some more) by In∣fant-Baptism, as by the Baptism of men-beleevers. Sect. 59. He proceeds, and tells us (pag. 15.) of another end or use of Baptism, which he terms, the serving the design of God tou∣ching the great businesse of Repentance for the remission of sins. And having instructed us by the way, that, as he conceives, there are several considerations, in respect of which, or some of which, Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance, for the re∣demption of sins, he undertakes the asserting of this conclusi∣on; that all these considerations are better answered in that said administration of Baptism, which is made to men and women Be∣leevers, then in that which is made to infants. By the way, whereas he here speaks somewhat masculine∣ly, though in a female phrase, viz. that, as he conceives, there ARE several considerations in respct of which, &c. when he comes to deliver out these Considerations in parti∣cular, he bewraies more effeminatenesse, and delivers none of them positively, but under the protection of this particle If, If saith he, If, If, and If, and If.
1. He begins; If it shall be conceived, that it is therefore called the Baptism of Repentance for the Remis∣sion of sins, because such who are at any time duly baptized, do take up the Ordinance out of a Principle of Repentance, upon which they look for remission of sins according to the pro∣mise of God in that behalf (which if it be, the saying con∣tains a metonymie of the cause for the effect, Where, or in what word, or phrase, of the saying he speakes of, his metonymie of the cause for the effect resi∣deth, verily I understand not. a thing not unusuall in Scripture) yet this denomination and use of it is better serv'd in Mens baptism then in Childrens; because Children have no such principle to act in them, as Repent∣ance is, &c. I have much adoe to make any competent sence of this period: but as farre as I apprehend, I an∣swer; Sect. 60. 1. Delivering himself onely thus; IF it shall be con∣ceived, that therefore it is called, &c. doth he not encou∣rage and teach others to doubt with himself, whether Baptism be called the Baptism of Repentance for the remis∣sion of sins, in any such consideration, as here he sug∣gesteth? Or himself onely being in suspence about the truth of the notion, why doth he build castles in the aire, or offer sacrifice to an unknown god? undertaking to assigne us a reason of that, which, for ought he know∣eth, yea or pretendeth to know, may be of the house and lineage of that which is not? He acteth this part of vanity no fewer then five times over within the compasse of two pages, viz. p. 15. & 16. 2. That which he sacrificeth to his unknown God, is a corrupt thing. For they who are duly baptized, do not al∣waies take up that ordinance out of a principle of repentance. Simon the Sorcerer, being baptized by Philip, was (I suppose) in Mr. A's judgement, duly baptized; yet it appears by his story that he took not up this Ordinance out of a principle of Repentance. Or if Simon the Sorce∣rer were not duly baptized, yet certainly the Lord Christ was. But did he take up the Ordinance of Baptism out of a Principle of Repentance? And if none be to be looked up∣on
as duly baptized, but only those, who take up the Ordi∣nance out of a Principle of Repentance, both He, and we, have cause in abundance to demur, and doubt, whether the far greater part of those in this nation, who have lately been dipped, have been duly baptized, or no Yea Mr. A. himself, according to such a principle, cannot up∣on any certainty of knowledge, affirm any person to have been been duly baptized, unlesse (him haply) self. Nor in∣deed doth the regular and due administration of Baptism depend upon any principle of Repentance in the person to be baptized. It is a true saying of Musculus, that Baptism is indeed the Laver of Regeneration; but not so, that only they who are actually regenerate, ought to be sealed therewith, but those also, who are to be regenerated afterward. Baptismus est lavacrum regeneration is; sed non ita, ut regenerati tan∣tum illo debe∣ant obsignari, verùm etiam regene∣randi. Mus. in Mat. c. 22. And Calvin answering an objection against the Baptizing of Infants, affirmeth that they are to be baptized, in futu∣ram poenitentiam & fidem Calv. Insti∣tut. l. 6. c. 14. Sect. 20. 1. in order to that Repentance, and Faith, which afterwards should be found in them. And herein their Doctrine is expresly consonant to the Scrip∣tures. I indeed (saith John the Baptist to those, who were at present a generation of vipers) baptize you with water , for, or, unto Repentance; [1. to oblige or engage you the more effectually to Repent] Mat. 3. 11. So v. 8. Bring forth therefore [therefore, 1. since you have now been baptized] fruits worthy Repentance. 3. When he saith, upon which they look for remission of sins according to the promise of God in that behalf, I do not well understand with what antecedent he intendeth, a match for his Relative, WHICH. If he intends it barely & nakedly with Repentance, that which he saith, nothing con∣cerns the Interest of his cause. If, with this clause, do take up the Ordinance of Baptism out of a Principle of Re∣pentance, so that his meaning be, that upon such a take∣ing up of the Ordinance as this, viz. out of a principle of Repentance, persons look for the remission of sins ac∣cording, &c. Sect. 61. 1. Remission of sins is promised by God unto Repent∣ance,
whether it be accompanied with Baptism or no, (Act. 3. 19. Act. 5. 31. Luk 24. 47. Prov. 28. 13.) And consequently he that truly repenteth, may look for remissi∣on of sins according to the promise of God in that behalf, whe∣ther he taketh up the Ordinance of Baptism, or no. Yea according to Mr. A's. own principles, no person ought to be baptized, untill he believeth: and what is believing, being interpreted, lesse then a looking for remission of sins upon Repentance according to the promise of God in that be∣half? If so, then men may, nay must, or ought, to look for remission of sins upon Repentance, according, &c. before the taking up of the Ordinance he speaks of, and conse∣quently, without it. 2. In the Scriptures I finde neither precept for, nor example of, any looking for remission of sins by any man, simply upon his taking up the Ordinance of Baptism, no though taken up by him out of a principle of Repent∣ance. 4. What he meaneth by his Denomination and use of Baptism better served in mens baptism, then in childrens, I am again to seek. If by this better service, he means any thing meet for the understandings of men, I know no reason why the Denomination and use of Baptism he speaks of, should be either better, or so well serv'd in the Baptism of men, as of children, considering that God himself judged the like Denomination and use of circumcision better serv'd in the circumcision of children, then of men; Other∣wise I suppose he would have ordained by Law the cir∣cumcising of men, rather then of children. And where∣as the Apostle declares the use of circumcision by this De∣nomination, a sign and seale of the righteousness of Faith, (Rom. 4. 11.) is not the Denomination of it, and conse∣quently the use of it, the same in substance, both with the Denomination and use of Baptism? For what is Repentance but Faith in implication, as Faith also comprehends Re∣pentance in it, the Scriptures accordingly by reason of this mutual , making the same promises indif∣ferently unto the one, and the other? Again, what is
Remission of sins, but the righteousness of Faith? Or what is the Righteousness of Faith, but in strictest proprietie of speech, remission of sins? As for that new-fangled conceit, that Circumcision was a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith only unto Abraham (personally considered) it is so ridiculously importune, that an operous and solemne confutation of it would be little other it self. Certainly God did not injoyne two kinds of circumcision, the one specifically differing (in the signification and end of it) from the other; one, to signifie and seale both covenants, as well that which was temporall or carnall, as that which was spirituall; another, to signifie that covenant only which was spirituall. Besides, if circumcision had signified and sealed nothing to the Jewish nation, but only the covenant of God to give them the land of the earthly Canaan, why should God covenant with them (long after Abraham was dead) that he would circum∣cise their heart, and the heart of their seed, to love the Lord their God with all their heart, and with all their soul, that they might live? Deut. 30. 6. Doubtlesse these things im∣port much more in circūcision, then either the signifying, or sealing, of an earthly covenant, unto those, to whom it was given. This appears from many other passages of Scripture, which may be considered at leasure. Rom. 2. 28, 29. Philip. 3. 3. Col. 2. 11. Act. 7. 51. (besides other) As for the great argument in defence of the wild con∣ceit now opposed, built upon Rom. 4. 11. it is built quite besides the clear meaning and import of the place. For because here it is said, that He [Abraham] received the sign of circumcision, a seale of the righteousness of the Faith, which he had yet being uncircumcised, THAT HE MIGHT BE THE FATHER OF ALL THEM THAT BELIEVE, though they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed unto them also; Mr. Fisher See Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism. p. 18. 19, 24, 154, 269. and Mr. A. would infer, from these words, that he might be the Father of all them that believe, that Abraham received circumcision [viz. in his flesh] as a seale of the righteousnesse of Faith, for
this end, that by receiving it upon this account, or upon these terms, [viz. as a seale of the righteousness of Faith] he might hereby be made, or become, the Father of all that believe, &c. Which honour they weakly imagine could not accrue unto him by his receiving of circumci∣sion, if any other of his posterity should receive it upon the same terms with him; I mean, as a seale of the righ∣teousnesse of Faith. This is the strength (or weaknesse rather) of their arguing from this place, that Circum∣cision was a seale of the righteousnesse of Faith unto A∣braham only, For 1. Though Abraham did receive the sign of Cir∣cumcision in his flesh, (Gen. 17. 24, 26.) yet is it not this receiving it, which is here spoken of; but his receiving it in the Law or Ordinance of it [from God] in such a sence as John the Baptist may be said to have recei∣ved Baptism; viz. because he was the first to whom the Ordinance of Baptism was delivered by God. Thus also Moses is said by Stephen to have RECEIVED the lively Oracles to give unto them. Act. 7. 38. In this sense also Christ is said to have RECEIVED of the Father the promise of the holy Ghost, which he shed forth. Act. 2. 33. And if Abraham's RECEIVING Circumcision in this place, signified his being circumcised in the flesh, it must follow, that all his posterity, receiving circumcision in this sense, as well as he, should at least in part, all of them be Fathers of them that believe as well as he; in as much as this prerogative is manifestly by the Apostles suspended upon that receiving of Circumcision, which is here spoken of, not upon the end, for which he re∣ceived it. 2. By the Faith, which Abraham is here said to have had being yet uncircumcised, and of the righteousnesse of which he is said to have received Circumcision, as a sign, and seal, is not meant that individuall Faith, whether act, or habit, which was in Abraham, but the species or kind of Faith, which he had. In such a sense as this, the Apostle saith that that Faith which was in Timothie,
dwelt first in his Grandmother Loïs [2 Tim. 1. 5.] mean∣ing, the same species or kind of Faith, i. (as himself also expresseth it) of Faith Unfeigned. When I call to remem∣brance the unfeigned Faith that is in thee, which first dwelt in thy Grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am perswaded that in thee also. In like manner, by the Faith of Abraham, twice in this very chapter (Rom. 4. 12, 16.) is meant that species or kind of Paith which Abraham had. 3. For the cleare understanding the Scripture before us, it is diligently to be observed, that the Apostle doth not say, that Abraham received circumcision as either sign, or seal of his Faith, but, of the righteousnesse of the Faith, which he had, i. of that justification, or justified estate, wherein by vertue of the counsell, will, and decree of God in that behalf, he was invested or instated, by, and upon, his beleving. Circumcision was neither sign, nor seal, of Abrahams Faith, nor of any other mans Faith how like soever unto Abraham's, but of the righteousnes of his Faith; yet not as his, but as true, and unfeigned, 1. such, as unto which God by covenant and promise, had annexed the Grace and blessednesse of Justification. From whence it follow's, 4. That circumcision could not be a sign or seal of the righteousnesse of Abrahams Faith only, individually or personally considered; but must needs be this sign and seal of the same righteousnesse of the like Faith, in what person, or persons soever it should be found. Yea it was a sign and seal of the righteousness of Faith, simply and indefinitely considered, i. as promised or covenanted by God unto man-kind. So that whether any person a∣mong the Jews had been circumcised, or not, and so whe∣ther any circumcised person had beleeved, or not, yet was Circumcision a sign and seal of the righteousnesse of Faith unto them, as well as unto those, who were both circum∣cised, and believed. i. As God made this covenant with the world, or man-kind in generall, that whosoe∣ver truly believed in him, should hereby become righte∣ous,
or (which is the same) be justified; so likewise upon the same generall and unlimited terms, he gave the Ordinance of circumcision (by the hand or ministerie of his servant Abraham) for a sign and seal of his truth and faithfulnesse in this covenant [i. that he would justifie all those without exception who should truly beleeve] This is evident from these words [in the fall of the verse] in their dependance upon the former; that righ∣teousness might be imputed unto them also [unto them, i. un∣to all] that should believe [whether circumcised, or un∣circumcised] as if he should have said; Therefore A∣braham received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousnes of that kind of Faith, which he had being yet un∣circūcised, that so all those without exception, who should beleeve as he did, might have the same assurance with him, that righteousnesse should be imputed unto them also, as it had been unto him, i. that they should be as cer∣tainly justified by God, as he had been. Mr. Fishers notion, denying Circumcision of old, and Baptism now, to be any sign at all unto children, is very childish, and unworthy a Considering man. Circumcision was the same, i. the same sign, unto children, which it was unto men: nor was there any difference, change, or altera∣tion in it, or in the signifying nature or propertie of it, when it was actually apprehended and understood by these children being now become men. But the present inability or incapacity in children to understand the lan∣guage or signification of a sign, doth not prove that that which is really a sign, is no sign unto them: it onely proves, that it is not apprehended as a sign, or in the signifying relation of it, by them. If signs be no signs unto children, because they do not at present under∣stand their signification, it will follow, that there are none at all in the world unto men, whilst they are asleep, or whilst thorow any ingagement of their minds or thoughts otherwise, they do not actually mind or attend the signi∣fications of them. A sign is not therefore called a sign, because it alwayes actually signifies one thing, or other,
unto any man, but because it is apt to signifie such or such a thing, unto those that are in a capacitie (whether more immediate, or more remote) to understand it, and withall, actually mind the signification. But the conceit we now speak of is so waterish, that there is no tast either of truth, or reason in it. Sect. 62. 5. By the premises levied in the consideration of the Scripture before us, duly considered, it clearly appear∣eth, that when Abraham's said to have RECEIVED the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousnesse of the Faith which he had being yet uncircumcised, THAT HE MIGHT BE THE FATHER OF ALL THAT BELIEVE; the meaning is, that God, by casting this peculiar ho∣nour upon Abraham, to make him, from amongst all the men in the world, the Receiver of, and (as it were) his Great feoffee in trust for, his Great Ordinance of Cir∣cumcision, which he intended for a sign, and seal of that blessed Covenant of Grace made with him and his seed, and in them, with all the world, did characterise and commend him unto the world as the Father of all that should ever after beleeve, i. for the most exemplarie and signall Beleever that ever the world had seen, the worth and transcendent excellency of whose Faith was enough to replenish the earth with a generation of beleevers. The meaning of this expression, That he might be the Father of, &c. according to the frequent use of the verb substantive in the Scripture, is, that he might be decla∣red, or made known, to be, the Father (in the sence men∣tioned) of all that believe. That ye may be the children of your Father, &c. [1. that ye may be known to be so] Mat. 5. 45. And the man whom the Lord shall chuse, shall be holy. [i. shall be owned or acknowledged for holy] Num. 16. 7. So again: And now I beseech thee let the power of my Lord be great, [1. appear, or be disco∣vered to be great] Num. 14: 17. That sin might BE out
of measure sinfull by the commandement, [1. might ap∣pear, or, be known to be so] Rom. 7. 13. Besides many the like This inter∣pretation of the verb Sub∣stantive, BE, Mr. Fisher himself attest∣eth, affirming that Circumci∣sion was a seal to Abraham to honour the greatness of the Faith he had, and to NO∣TIFIE him to be the Fa∣ther of the Faithfull, as is plainly expest, Rom. 4. 11. Baby-Bap∣tism. p. 153. As God by chusing Moses out of all the chil∣dren of Israel, yea out of the whole world, to be the first and immediate Receiver from himself of those lively Ora∣cles (as Stephen expresseth them, Act. 7.) hereby decla∣clared and commended him both unto the nation of the Jews, and then to all the world besides, for a Great Prophet, & Person highly interessed in his favour, &c. and did the like by John Baptist, in making choice of him from amongst all the holy & worthy persons in the world▪ to be the first & imediate Receiver of Baptism from his hand, that s by, and from, him it might be propagated unto all those, to whom it was intended; in like manner by singling, and chusing Abraham out from amongst the ge∣neration of men spread upon the face of the whole Earth, to be the first and imediate Receiver of the Great Ordi∣nance of Circumcision, intended and given for a sign and seal of the Righteosness of such a Faith, or kind of Faith, as he had being yet uncircumcised, by, and from, him to be derived unto all those, that should desire, or be found meet to partake thereof; he did (I say) hy casting the Spirit of this glory upon him, recommend and set him forth unto the world as the Father of all those that should believe, [i. for a person, whose Faith he so highly esteemed, that he invited the world to follow his steps herein] So that Abraham was not properly or formally constituted, or made the Father of all that believe, (in the sence declar∣ed) by his receiving the sign of Circumcision, a seal of the righteousnesse os the Faith, which, &c. but by that great and worthy spirit of Faith acting, and shewing it self from time to time so exemplarily in him in severall cases, upon occasion (as appears, Rom. 4. 18. Who against hope believed in hope, that he might become, the Father of manya) See Rom. 4 18, 19, 20, 21. Heb. 11. 8, 9, 17, &c. nations, according to that which was spoken, So shall thy seed be, &c.) Onely the honour of this Father-hood, which was Abrahams equitable right upon the account now specified, before his receiving Circumcision, God
was pleased to attest and set his seal unto, in the sight and presence (as it were) of Heaven and Earth, by re∣vealing that his mysterious and great Ordinance of cir∣cumcision first unto him, as for his own personall ac∣commodation, and heavenly securitie in matters of highest concernment unto him, so likewise for the like benefit and blessing unto his posteritie, and all those who should incorporate, and make one nation and peo∣ple with them. And that the world might understand and know, that the consignment of this great Ordinance unto Abraham, was intended by God as an honourable cognizance of that signall Faith, which was in him; he was pleased to impose this sence and signification upon the said Ordinance; viz. that it should be a seal, or means of confirmation unto the world, that in whomso∣ever that kind of Faith, which was in Abraham, should be found, he should with Abraham, be justified in his sight, Rom. 4. 11, 22, 23, 24. Gal. 3. 6, 7, 8. 9. Sect. 63. 6. (And lastly, for this) evident it is, 1. that Abraham his being circumcised, or his recei∣ving this Ordinance in the flesh, is not in this Scripture so much as mentioned, or intended, but only his receiving the first discovery and command of it from God, as a Feoffee in trust, for his posteritie, and those who should desire to incorporate with them. 2. That Circumcision, the Ordinance whereof Abraham thus re∣ceived, was not intended, or given by God, as either a sign or seal, either of Abrahams Faith, or of the Faith of any other person; nor yet as either sign or seal of the righteousness of Abrahams personall or individuall Faith, as such, but of the righteousness of the same kind of Faith, in whomsoever, or in how many soever it should be found, during the time assigned by God for the continuance in it in the world. 3. That Abraham was very notably and solemnly declared by God unto the
world to be the Father of all that believe, not by any kind of receiving Circumcision in his flesh, wherein all his posteritie were equally priviledged with him, but by receiving the Ordinance and commandment of it imme∣diately, and before any other person, from God; which was his prerogative alone. 4. (And lastly) That the counsell and minde of God in circumcision, was, that it should be both a sign and seal of the righteousnesse of a true and unfeigned Faith. [i. of that kind of Faith which was in Abraham] in whomsoever it should be found, as well as in Abraham; yea simply and indefi∣nitely so,] i. whether this Faith had ever been found in any man, or no; inasmuch as neither mens beleeving, nor their non-beleeving, do, or can, at all alter the pur∣pose or counsell of God in any of his Ordinances.] Sect. 64. Did I not judge the explication given of the Scripture lately argued, abundantly sufficient to satisfie and con∣vince any man, to whom Paul, being alive, would not say, if he be ignorant, let him be ignorant, that Circumci∣sion was not a sign or seal of the righteousness of Abrahams personall or individuall Faith only, but generally and universally of the righteousness of the same kind of Faith, in whomsoever it should be found, I should adde much more for his satisfaction in that behalf. I trust the Rea∣der will pardon the digression, considering that the text of cripture opened herein, thorowly and distinctly un∣derstood, gives little lesse then a thorow light into the Question about Infant-Baptism. And I am in no de∣gree doubtfull, had but Mr. Fisher, and Mr. A. been both willing, and able to reach the mind of the holy Ghost therein, and withall quitted themselves like men in the consideration of it, they had been preserved in the streight way of God and of the Gospel, and not turn∣ed aside into the crooked path of Ana-Baptism. But let us now return, and hear what Mr. A. hath farther to say,
why God's design touching Repentance for the Remission of sins, should be better served, or answered, by the Bap∣tizing of men, then of children. Therefore 2. (Saith he) If it be called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, because men by taking up that Ordi∣nance, do ingage themselves to the practice of repentance and mortification, as the Apostle supposeth the beleeving RomansMr. A. p. 15. 16. to have done, Rom. 6. 2, to 6. (By the way, what need we an IF, If it be called, &c. if the Apostle hath determ∣ined the case?) then this end is better provided for in the baptism of men, then of Infants. Surely Circumcision under the Law was an ingagement unto men to the pra∣ctise of repentance and mortification, as well as Baptism under the Gospel. And yet God judged this end of it better serv'd, and answered, by the administration of it unto Infants, then unto men; otherwise we presume he would have prescribed the Administration of it unto men, rather then unto children. That men were ingaged by their being Circumcised unto the practise of Repentance and Mortification, I suppose is no mans doubt or questi∣on. If it be, resolution in aboundance on that hand we speak of may be had, Deut. 10. 16. Jer. 4. 4. Rom. 2. 28, 29. Phil. 3. 3. (besides some other places) Therefore unless Mr. A. can give us some better reason, then God him∣self knew any in the like case, why a Baptismall engage∣ment unto Repentance and Mortification, should be better provided for by the baptising of men, then of chil∣dren, it concerns him to retract his assertion in this be∣half, But 3. The reason (or rather, vice-reason) which he gives of such his assertion, is, because an engagement to practise repentance, supposeth, 1. An end of Repentance. 2. A ca∣pacity of performing that, to which they do ingage; neither of which are to be found in Infants, &c. I answer, Sect. 65. 1. An engagement to practise Repentance by those
who were circumcised, supposed as much an end of repent∣ance, as it doth in those who are baptised (and so like∣wise a capacitie to perform that, which was engaged unto) yet these, neither divisim, nor conjunctim, were judged any reason by God why Infants ought not to be circum∣cised. But the wisdom (it seems) of men re-baptized is super-infinite. 2. I confesse, I do not understand what he meaneth, when he affirmeth, that an end of repentance is not to be found in infants, but in men. And therefore reverencing that saying of the wise man, He that answereth a matter before he heareth, [i. understandeth] it, it is folly and shame unto him, I shall make no further answer at present unto it, but this; viz. that when Mr. A. shall enable me to understand how the end of repentance is in men, and not in children, I shall freely give him my sense of his no∣tion. 3. Nor is Mr. A. a friend either unto reason, or to the truth, in affirming, that there is no capacitie in children of performing that, to which they do ingage. For, 1. in such a sense as there is a capacitie in them to engage unto any thing, there is likewise to perform. Children are in as good and proper a capacitie to perform that, which is or ought to be ingaged unto in Baptim, as to make the en∣gagement it self. Secondly, though children be not in a present, actuall, or immediate capacitie to perform that, which Baptism engageth unto, yet are they in a remote and mediate capacity hereof, and which by the use of means, and blessing of God upon these means, may in due time become actuall. Nor can I think that all those, who according to Mr. A's. notion, are, or have been duly baptized, have been in an actuall and present capa∣citie at the time of their baptizing, to perform everyLuke 3. 13. thing they engaged unto by being baptized. They who as yet doubted whether John was the Messiah, or no, were not in a present or immediate capacitie of beeleeving Christ to be this Messiah; yet were they ingaged by their being baptized to beleeve this; and notwithstanding their
actuall incapacitie of beleeving it, were lawfully bapti∣zed. So likewise they, who think they truly beleeve, and are supposed by others to beleeve accordingly, and yet both these suppositions notwithstanding, do not truly beleeve, may and ought neverthelesse to be bapti∣zed; yet are they in no actuall capacitie to perform that to which they engage by being baptized; I mean to be∣leeve in Jesus Christ, and to persevere beleeving unto the end. Yea Mr. A. himself by being baptized, ingaged to a perseverance in Faith and holinesse unto the end of his dayes; yet was he not at the time of his baptism in an actuall capacitie to perform that, which he engaged unto in this kind. For a present standing in Grace, or Faith, is no more an actuall capacitie of persevering in either to the end of a mans life, then a present healthfull state or condition of the body is an actuall capacitie of preserving himself in health untill he dieth; or then the present possession of an estate worth 1000. l. per annum, is an actuall capacitie in the possessor of paying a debt of a 1000. or 2000 l. twenty years after. So then the difference which Mr. A. pretends to finde in the consi∣deration before us, between men and children in refe∣rence unto Baptism, is altogether inconsiderable, and turns to no account at all for the support of his cause. Whether this second consideration, which he supposeth may be the reason why Baptism is termed the Baptism of repentance for remission of sins, be consistent with the first, I shall not trouble the Reader to discusse; but rather de∣sire him to consider. But Sect. 66. 3. He advanceth in his supposals about the businesse in hand, thus, p. 16. If it be called the Baptism of Re∣pentance for the Remission of sins, because God thereby sig∣nifies and SEALS unto men the remission of their sins upon their repentance, this end and use likewise is BET∣TER answered in mens Baptism, who do repent, then in Infants who do not, &c. I answer,
1. His conceit of any End, or Ʋse, of Baptism better answered in the baptism of men, then of Infants, hath been again & again put to rebuke by the conside∣ration of the Counsell of God himself in circumcision. We shall not need to repeat the consideration here. There was everywhit as much reason, why it might have been said in the dayes of Circumcision, that such & such an End, or Ʋse, of Circumcision, is better answered by the circumcising of men, then of infants, as it can be said un∣der the Gospel, that any End, or Ʋse of Baptism is bet∣ter answered by the baptizing of Men, then of Chil∣dren. But 2. When he saith, that the End of Baptism (so with some regret of jealousie supposed by him) is BETTER answered by the baptizing of men, then of children, doth he not very plainly imply and grant, that this End is com∣petently (at least) answered in the baptizing of children also? If so, then certainly the baptizing of children is neither a nullitie, nor yet a thing unlawfull. But this consequence, & the goodnesse of it, have been sufficiently vindicated in the premises. As the Apostle in the case of marriage, affirming that he that keepeth his virgin [mean∣ing unmarried] doth BETTER, granteth with all, that he that giveth her in marriage, doth WELL, 1 Cor. 7. 36, 38. So he that teacheth that any End of Baptism, is BETTER answered one way, undeniably granteth, that this End may WELL and to a commendable degree, be answer∣ed in another. Sect. 67. 3. Whereas he supposeth, that Baptism may be called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, because God thereby signifies and SEALS the remission of sins upon Repentance, &c. he takes the boldnesse to lift up his pen a∣gainst the great Apostle of his Faith (in the doctrine of Antipedo-baptism;) Mr. Sam. Fisher, whose avowed Doctrine it is, that Baptism, as it is not so much as sig∣nifying
unto children, (a) so is it no SEALING Ordi∣nanceBaby-Baptsm p. 154, &c. unto any. In which notion of his he laies the ho∣nour of the Ordinance of Baptism in the dust, unto which notwithstanding otherwise he crieth, Hosanna in the highest. 4. Whereas he gives this for a reason, why the End and Ʋse of Baptism, of which he speaketh, should be better an∣swered by the baptizing of men, then of children viz. Be∣cause men, who have begun to repent, are in a good capacitie to receive confirmation and establishment in their hope and con∣fidence—whereas Infants, whilest such, are uncapable of any such thing, &c. I answer, 1. That which himself here, onely doubtfully, and with proviso, call's one End and Use of Baptism, (viz. the signifying and sealing unto men, the remission of their sins upon repentance) one greater then He in the cause of Ana-Bap∣tism (as we lately heard) denies to be either the one, or the other. Himself being doubtfull, whether there be any such End or Use of Baptism, as that here menti∣oned by him, upon what sober account doth he trouble the world with telling them, that in case there be such, either End, or Ʋse, they are better answered, by the bap∣tism of men, then of children? Is that which may not be, as well as be, better answered by one means, then another? These are strange speculations. 2. Supposing that one End and Ʋse of Baptism should be better answered by the baptizing of men, then of children, what follows from hence? It neither fol∣lows (in the first place) that therefore every end and use thereof is better answered by such an administration; nor (in the second) that Baptism therefore is not to be administred unto children. One end of meats and drinks (as for example, the preservation of the health and strength of men and women come to their just statures and growth) is better answered by the eating and drink∣ing of men and women, then of children: but it followeth not from hence, that therefore eating & drinking are not to be allowed unto children. One end and use of marriage
is better answered by the marrying of persons in the strength and vigour of their youth: but this proveth not, that therefore it is unlawful for persons of more maturitie of years to marrie. This very End and Use of Baptism here suggested, was better answered by the Baptism of men, who had sinned and repented, then by the bap∣tism of Christ himself, who was uncapable of repentance, and of remission of sins hereby; yet this proveth not, that therefore the baptism of Christ was unlawfull. Therefore Mr. A's. reasoning at this turn is to little pur∣pose. Sect. 68. 3. Whereas he attempteth to prove, that the End and Use of Baptism now under consideration, is better an∣swered by the baptism of men, then of children, by this argument; viz. because men WHO HAVE BEGUN TO REPENT, are in a good capacitie to receive, &c. doth he not reason at as loose a tate, as he that should go about to prove that men shall be saved, because righ∣teous men shall be saved? or should infer, that such and such things do belong to a subject simply considered, because they belong to this subject so and so qualifi∣ed? 4. Though Abraham, when he was circumcised, was in a good capacity to receive confirmation and establishment in his hope and confidence, both that God would give unto him (in his posteritie) the promised land of Canaan, and likewise that he would justifie him thorow his beleeving, whereas Isaac, at the time of his circumcising, was in no such capacitie of either, yet was the circumcising of Isaac every whit as regular and lawfull, as the circumcising of Abraham; yea was of the two, more agreeable to the standing Law for Circumcision. In like manner though children be in no such capacity at the time of their bapti∣zing, to receive confirmation and establishment in their hope and confidence of obtaining remission of sins upon their repentance, as repentant men are, when they are bap∣tized,
yet may their baptism be every whit as lawfull, yea and more regular, then the baptizing of such men. Therefore Mr. A's. discourse in the quarters we are now beating up, is without sinews. Sect. 69. 5. (And lastly for this) when he saith, whereas In∣fants, whilest such, are ALTOGETHER uncapable of of any such thing; in respect whereof this end is made frustrate, when Baptism is given unto them, he speaketh truth neither in the premises, nor in the conclusion. For 1. Infants, whilst such, are not ALTOGETHER unca∣pable of that, whereof he speaketh. For although (as hath been formerly argued) they be not in an actuall ca∣pacity of the thing, I mean, in such a capacity whereby they are inabled to receive the Confirmation and establish∣ment he speaks of, at the time of their baptizing, or whilst thy are infants, yet are they in some capacitie, and this proper and direct, (though mediate and remote) of receiving these accommodations in due time, as they are in such a capacitie, as soon as born, of speaking, thinking, apprehending, &c. however this capacity is not ordina∣rily reduced into act till after severall years. Secondly, from hence it follows, that neither is that End of Bap∣tism, of which he speaks, made frustrate, when Baptism is given unto children, any whit more, then the End of planting is made frustrate by the non-fructification of the tree planted immediately upon the planting of it; or the end of sowing made frustrate by reason that the seed doth not yield an harvest-increase, as soon as it is sown. What I do, thou knowest not now (said the Lord Christ unto Peter, and in him, to the rest) but thou shalt know hereafter; Joh. 13. 7. Christs action here spoken of, was not hereby made frustrate unto Peter, because he understood not the meaning or import of it, when it was acted. And many of his sayings to his Disciples, which they un∣derstood not when they were spoken, were under∣stood
by them with advantage afterwards. See Sect. 152. Sect. 70. Whereas he addeth, that there is a greater APPEAR∣ANCE both of the wisdom and goodness of God in vouch∣safing and applying such a means as Baptism is, to streng∣then mens Faith in his promise of Remission of sins upon their repentance, unto such, who 1. have need of this Confir∣mation; and 2. are capable of receiving it, then there is in that application of it which is made unto Infants, who neither have need of it, not yet are capable of receiving it; I answer, 1. What appearance there may be of the wisdom and goodness of God in such a disposition as he speaks of, in his own eyes, or in the eyes of men of his judgement, I shall not prejudge; but certain I am that there neither is, nor hath been, any such appearance in the eyes of many men, as sharp-sighted in matters of this nature, as they. 2. Nor doth it argue, either greater wisdom, or good∣nesse to withhold from a man such supplies, which he may have urgent occasion to make use of, untill the very pang of his necessity in this kind cometh upon him, then it doth to prevent him with such accommodations a∣gainst the time of his need. Suppose that Circumcision was a sign and seal only of the faithfulnesse of God in his promise of giving the land of Canaan unto the Jews, yet did there appear as much wisdom and goodness of God in vouchsafing and applying this means of their confirma∣tion herein unto them, whilst they were yet children, and so at present uncapable of receiving it, as there would, or could have done, in vouchsafing and applying the same means unto them afterwards, when they were both more capable of the said confirmation, and withall stood in more need of it.
Sect. 71. 3. (And lastly, for this) Though children have no present need of that Confirmation he speaks of, yet have they even present need of the application of such an Or∣dinance unto them, by means whereof they may receive this Confirmation with advantage in due time. As the children of the Jews, had need (at least some kind of need, unlesse we shall say, that Circumcision was altogether superfluous unto them) of such an Ordinance to be administred unto them, by which they might be confirmed afterwards, in the truth and faithfulnesse of God for the performance of that promise, whatever it was, which was signed and sealed unto them by circum∣cision, although they were uncapable of any such con∣firmation as this, at the time when they were circumci∣sed: in like manner children under the Gospell, though whilst children, they stand in no need of confirmation in the truth of the Covenant of Grace, yea and are all this while uncapable of it, yet this is no argument to prove that therefore they do not stand in need of being prevented with such an Ordinance from God, by which they may be confirmed herein, when they shall arrive at a capacitie of this confirmation. Mariners, or such who traffique by Sea, whilst they are yet on shore in their own land, or whilst they are sailing upon the seas, may stand in need of many things, of which notwith∣standing they have no use, or benefit, untill they come to another land, whether their course is intended. And though the same things may possibly be procured and had in this other land, whether their voyage is bent, yet if they cannot be had here upon terms equally benefici∣all with those, on which they may be had in their own land, the men we speak of may truly and properly enough be said to stand in need of them before they go to sea, and whilst they are yet in their own land. In like man∣ner though children have no actuall or present benefit by
Baptism, nor are capable of any, until years of discretion & knowledg, yea & though they may be baptized, when they come to be men, as well as whilst they are yet chil∣dren; yet neither of these considerations, nor both to∣gether, argue any thing, but that baptism may be need∣full for children, and that, whilst such, they receive it upon terms of better advantage for their future occasi∣ons, then they could do, in case they should not receive it untill they come to be men. But the truth is that Mr. A. in all these reasonings, on which He insists in his second argument against Infant-baptism, seems to strive to out-wisdom God: and all they who rise up against the same practise with arguments pretending inconveni∣ence, unprofitablenesse (or the like) therein, dash their foot against the same stone. Sect. 72. 4. We have yet (p. 16.) another possible reason proposed to us, why it may be called the Baptism of Re∣pentance for remission of sins, viz. this, Because the persons who are baptized do thereby professe and DECLARE ƲNTO THE WORLD, that they look for remission of sins from God, upon their repentance. If (saith he) it be called, &c, yet this end also is better answered in mens Baptism, then in infants. (I answer as formerly) 1. But what if this be no reason of that Denomi∣nation of Baptism, of which we have heard so much to so little purpose? what then becomes of that, which Mr. A. builds upon it? The air may be afraid of being beaten by it. That the five reasons here suggested by him, should all of them be reasons in realitie and truth) of the said Denomination, is (I suppose) scarce his own thought, or notion: nor are they all well consistent a∣mongst themselves (as was formerly hinted) nor hath he declared his mind which of the five, one, or more, should inherit. 2. The reason or end of the said Denomination here waveringly, and upon supposall, suggested by him, is
(probably) no true reason or end thereof. For how can persons baptized (upon the terms allowed by him, and frequently practised in his way) thereby professe and DE∣CLARE UNTO THE WORLD that they look for remission of sins upon their repentance, when as 1. many are baptized in hugger-mugger, privatly, and in the night, and of whose baptism its self the world (possibly) may have no knowledge whilst they live? Yea I know, and Mr. A. knows, a person not inconsiderable in the Common-wealth of new-baptism, who kept his Baptism to himself for a eleven or twelve years together, before the world, yea or his fellow-dippers themselves, one or two haply present at the solemnitie, excepted, knew any thing thereof. Doubtlesse all this while he made no pro∣fession or declaration unto the world of any thing at all by his baptism. 2. In case the persons baptized should make proclamation in the streets or market-places, that they are baptized, the world is at liberty whether they will believe them, or no. If (saith Christ, Joh. 5. 31.) I bear witnesse of my self, my witnesse is not true, [meaning, legally true, or such, which you, being strangers to me, are necessitated to own] And it is no easie matter for the world to receive testimony of any mans baptism [in Mr. A's way of baptizing] from two or three wit∣nesses present at it. 3. (And lastly) in case the world might be satisfied touching the truth and certaintie of the baptism of all that are baptized, yet do they not un∣derstand any such profession, or declaration, imported or made by it, viz. that the persons baptized look for remissi∣on of sins upon their repentance. Therefore no such pro∣fession or declaration as this is made by baptism unto the world: and consequently this is no end of baptism. To what purpose then doth he pretend, that it is better an∣swered in the baptism of men, then of Infants. Sect. 73. Whreas he saith, that men are capable of making such
a profession and declaration of themselves to the world IN and BY their Baptism, when as infants are altogether un∣capable of doing any such thing; I answer, 1. That men themselves are very ill capable of making that profession he speaks of, or any other, in their Baptism, [1. during the time of their being under wa∣ter] 2. As uncapable altogether are they of making either the one, or the other, BY their Baptism. A man cannot professe or declare that, BY baptism (at least orderly & regularly) which God never intended should be professed or declared by it Now Mr. A. himself speaks doubtingly whether such a profession and declaratin as we now speak of, be any end of baptism, or no. If they be not (a nega∣tive already proved by us, as well as questioned, or doubted, by him) then can they not by any man be made by it. 3. There is very seldom much of the world, for the most part nothing at all, present at the baptizing of those, who Mr. A. here supposeth should make the profession and declaration which he speaks of, in and by their Baptism. In what capacitie then are they of making them unto the world at such a time? 4. (And lastly for this) though they who are baptized men, are able to make what professions or declarations by words they please, about the time of their baptism, which infants at the time of their Baptism, by them∣selves, or in their own persons, cannot; yet he that of∣fereth his Infant unto baptism, and so he that baptizeth it, may at this very time make the same, whether pro∣fessions, or declarations, with men. And how, or why such a profession and declaration as he speaketh of, made by these persons, when an infant is baptized, should not as well answer and accommodate that end of Baptism (if such it be) which he here suggesteth (at least in refe∣rence to the world) as the like made by other men, when they are baptized, I verily understand not. Truly these arguments are no honour or strength to the cause of An∣tipedo-baptism.
5. He yet supposeth once more; If it be called the Bap∣tism of repentance, &c. because it seals and confirms the Co∣venant or promises of God made to men touching the remissi∣on of their sins upon their repentance, yet this end and useMr.] A. p. 16, 17. also is attained upon far BETTER TERMS in the Administration of Baptism to believers, and to men of un∣derstanding, then it is, or can be, when administred unto Infants who have neither. I answer, Sect. 74. 1. This fift (and last) IF, is the same in substance and import (and partly in words also) with the third. Wherefore (to avoid Repetitions) the Rea∣der is desired to re-peruse the preceding, 67, 68, &c. Se∣ctions, where he shall find the impertinencie of the con∣tents of it argued and discovered. And 2. Whereas he here pleads, that If the intent of God in making Baptism a seal of his Covenant and Promise, is not to make his Covenant more sure in it self, but to give it a more sure, stable, and unquestionable being in the minds and apprehensions of men, then this end cannot be attained in in∣fants by their Baptism, because they want the use and exer∣cise of their reasons, judgements, &c. without which the articles and terms of Gods Covenant will never take place, or have a being in the minds of any, by way of beleef; doth he not again put the wisdom of God to rebuke in his coun∣sell and Ordinance of Circumcision? For whatsoever Covenant or Promise it was which he intended to seal thereby, it was no whit more to make it more sure in it self, but only in the minds and apprehensions of men, then his intent is to make that Covenant and Promise sure, which he sealeth by Baptism: and yet we know (and it hath been oft noted) that he judged his end in this kind as wel, or rather better attained, by the application of that seal unto Infants, then unto men. But God, and Mr. A. (it seems) are divided in their respective senses upon the case.
3. (And lastly for this) be it granted, that without the use and exercise of mens reasons and judgments, the Ar∣ticles and terms of Gods Covenant will never take place, or have a being in the minds of any, &c. yet this is no reason at all, why such a Seal, by which [i. by the knowledge and consideration of which] God intends to give being, or a more sure being, to the said Articles in the minds and and apprehensions of men, should not be administred, or ap∣plied, but only where there is an actuall and present use and exercise of these faculties; See more of this, Sect. 71. Especially this is no reason why this administration should not be made in the case mentioned, when there are reasons why it should be made; which is the case in Infant-Baptism, (as it was also in Infant-Circumcision.) What these rea∣sons are, I mean, why the Seal of Baptism should be ad∣minstred unto Infants, we shall (God willing) de∣clare in due time. By the way, Mr. A. seems to be a man of more then ordinary foresight, in delivering him∣self so provisionally, under the protection of so many IFS, touching his sence, why Baptism may be called the Bap∣tism of repentance for the remssion of sins. For hereby he seems to foresee, that by that time he had travelled a little further in his discourse, he should start a better rea∣son of that Denomination, then any of those now offer∣ed by the shaking hand of any of his IF'S. We shall hear of this in due time. 3. Mr. A. in his progresse acquainteth us with ano∣ther SEEMING end of Baptism. Another end of Bap∣tism (saith he, p. 17.) SEEMS to be this; viz. that such who are baptized, might thereby signifie their accept∣ance of, and consent unto, the terms of the Gospel, or Cove∣nant of Grace. But the substance of this seemingness, we had lately under the conduct of the fourth, IF (p. 16.) and in part also, of the first IF, p. 15. And if the Rea∣der desires further satisfaction herein, he is desired to repair back to the rifling of the two said IFS, Sect. 60, 61, &c. and Sect. 72, 73, &c.
Sect. 75. Nor doth he tell us any news, when he addeth: For the Covenant of God with men doth consist of certain articles to be observed and kept by each partie covenanting, as co∣venants among men generally dc. But this old story (it may be) makes way to a new. Therefore he steereth on his course, thus: And as amongst men parties covenanting are wont to signifie their mutuall consent to their respective articles, by some solemn act of theirs in presence of witnesses, as by sign∣ing, sealing, delivering, &c. So God in the Covenant be∣tween him and men, will have something like unto this done by men PƲBLIQUELY, to signifie their consent to the terms of it, as well as what is done by him to declare his readiness to do and perform what he hath undertaken on his part. We are yet in a safe roade; or however, not much beside it. Only a touch upon two things. 1. If by PƲBLIQƲELY, he means, in the sight of the world, or, upon such terms, that all men, or the generality of persons round about, may readily come to know and understand, then his rule condems his practise, and the practise generally observed by persons of his judgement. For neither did himself, in this sence, publiquely, signifie his cōsnt to the terms of the co∣venant by his being baptized, the generalitie of us know∣ing nothing of his Baptism, but only by tradition (whose information in other cases is not very authentique, or authoritative) or by common fame, which is known to be Tàm ficti pravi{que} tenax, quàm nuncia veri. i. As well an hld-fast of hat feigned is, As a Reporter of Truth's certainties. And (as hath been notic'd formerly) that most of those, who are led, as they think, to Christ by the way
of new Baptism, chuse Nicodemus his season, either formally or materially, for their voyage. Therefore what they do in this kind, they do it not so PƲBLIQUELY. 2. The will of God, in the Covenant made with Abraham & his posteritie (whether spiritual or tēporal) was as much that something should be done by mē publiquely to signifie their consent unto the terms of it, as it is that any thing in this kind should be done by men to signifie their consent to the terms of the Covenant of Grace in the Gospel. Therefore how impertinent is that which follows; Now faith in Christ, and an obedientiall subjection to ALL his Laws and precepts, being the condition of this Covenant on mans part, at WHAT TIME SOEVER HE ENTERS INTO COVENANT with God, and un∣dertakes the performance of the condition, he is to sign and seal the same IN THE PRESENCE of wnesses by that solemn ACT OF HIS in being baptized. For answer, Sect. 76. 1. I had thought untill now (and shall think so still, notwithstanding Mr. A's thought to the contrary) that a person in his being baptized, is a patient, or sufferer only, not an Agent, or Actour, much lesse that he performs any Solemn Act herein. For they who act in their being baptized, must needs be Se-baptists, and not baptized after the manner of the Gospell. So that his notion about mens signifying their consent to the terms of the Go∣spell by some solemn ACT, falls to the ground. If he pleads, that men act in offering, or submitting themselves unto Baptism, though not in their Baptism it self, I an∣swer; Be it so, yet mens offering, or submitting them∣selves unto Baptism, are no solemn or Sacramental actings, nor can their consent to the terms of the Covenant, be said to be signified by these actings, unlesse it may be said withall that men may testifie that consent we speak of, without being baptized. For that men may offer them∣selves, and submit unto Baptism, without being actually baptized, is (I suppose) no mans question. 2. Whereas he makes an obedientiall subjection to ALL
Christs laws and precepts, (without any explication, or proviso) as well as Faith in Christ, the condition of the Covenant of Grace on mans part, doth he not make a Law, by which, were it of any force or authoritie, as well him∣self, as all other men, should be condemned, unlesse he can approve himself an exception from that Generall Rule of the Apostle James, In many things we offend all? If no person can claim interest in the good things of the Covenant, but only they, who shall perform the conditi∣on of this Covenant, and this condition be (either in whole or in part) an obedieniall subjection to all Christs laws and precepts (as Mr. A. determines) then in case he doth not obedientially subect to all these laws and pre∣cepts (which I am farre from thinking that either he, or any other person doth, yea or that they do so much as know what all these Laws and Precepts are) he hath fast shut the doore of life against himself. 3. Whereas he saith, at what time soever a person en∣tereth into covenant with God, he is to sign and seal the same in the presence of witnesses by the solemn act of his being baptized; 1. I would demand of him, whether he thinks the Lord Christ was not enered into covenant with God, before his being baptized; or whether he acted besides rule, that at the time of his entering into covenant with God, he did not sign and seal the same by his being baptized. Yea I cannot but think that the Eunuch was entered into covenant with God some considerable space of time, be∣fore his being baptized. Nor is it an extravagant thought to conceive the same of Cornelius. 2. Nor is he able to prove (nor is the thing much more probable, then prove∣able) any presence of witnesses, either at the Baptizing of the Eunuch, or of Paul, besides many others)▪. (& last∣ly) I would gladly learn of him, whether the children of the Jews entered into covenant with God at the time of their circumcising, or not till afterwards, when they were able to make profession of their Faith in God. If he teach∣eth me the former for truth, then would I gladly learn this lesson further, why the children (at least the children
of beleevers) under the Gospell, should not be as capable of entering into Covenant with God, as they: and if so, why they should not be baptized (according to his own principles.) If the latter, then what necessitie was there (& consequently, now is there) that at what time soe∣ver a person entereth into Covenant with God, he should sign and seal the same. Sect. 77. Of his further conceptions about the businesse, he de∣livers himself thus, p. 17. In this respect especially I CON∣ceive it is, that Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins. (Mark 1. 4. Luk. 3. 3.) because men are to take up that Ordinance upon their first beginning to repent, in order to the remission of their sins. For like reason I SƲPPOSE it is called the washing of regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. because men upon ther being born again, are to be baptized according to what was practized in the Apostles times. Hence it is likewise, as MAY WELL BE CONCEIVED, that mens being born of water and of the Spirit (John 3. 5.) the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost (Tit. 3. 5.) are joyned together, not because the Spirit works regeneration, in, and by Baptism, if we respect the beginning of it, &c. The day will fail us to gather up, by animad∣version, what Mr. A. hath scattered here by inadverten∣cie and inconsideratnesse. For, 1. After five severall accompts lately given in by him (as we have heard) with the Imprimis of an IF, in every of them (respectively) why Baptism should be called, The Baptism of repentance for the forgivenesse of sins, now, as IF he had but dallied, and plaid fast and loose with us in these, he delivereth us in a sixth accompt, of the truth whereof he seems to be more confident, then of any, then of all the former; and yet we have this also tendered unto us somewhat tenderly (though with an, especially) viz. with an, I conceive; In this respect especially I CON∣CEIVE, it is that, &c. But
2. Doth not his Comparative term, especially, rela∣ting to all his five former accounts, suppose, that all these had done vertuously, though this last surpasseth them all? And yet are not some of them, at least one of them (if not more) altogether inconsistent with this? The tenor of this sixt and highest-priz'd accompt being this, be∣cause men are to take up the Ordinance upon their first begin∣ning to repent, in order to the remission of their sins, renders it very hardly consistent with that before delivered in the third place, which (as we heard) was this, because God thereby signifies and seals unto men the remission of their sins upon their repentance. If Baptism be therefore cal∣led the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, be∣cause men are to take it up in order to the remission of their sins, God cannot thereby either signifie or seal unto men the remission of their sins upon their repent∣ance. The reason of the inconsistencie is plain; If God seals unto men the forgivenesse of their sins upon their repentance, Baptism cannot be taken up (I mean, regu∣larly &, according to the mind of God) in order hereunto; be∣cause Baptism is not to be taken up (according to Mr. A's own principles) but after repentance, and consequently, after remission of sins (if this be given by God upon re∣pentance) If the remission of sins precedes Baptism (which it must needs do, if it be given upon repentance) then ought not Baptism to be taken up in order there∣unto. Or if it be taken up by any person in order here∣unto, the intention represents the action hatefull and a∣bominable in the sight of God. Therefore another IF would better have become this sixt accompt also, then an, ESPECIALLY. How ill consistent it is with some other of his former accounts, I judge it beneath the Readers edification to examine. But Sect. 78. 3. How lamely doth he plead the cause of his belo∣ved Conceit, that Baptism should especially be therefore
called the Baptism ef repentance for &c. because men are to take it up upon their first beginning to repent IN OR∣DER TO THE REMISSION OF SINS; For like reason (saith he) I suppose it is called the washing of Regeneration, Tit. 3. 5. because men upon, &c. So again: Hence it is likewise, as may well be conceived (but much better not conceived, nor once thought) that mens being born of water and of the Spirit, &c. What can a man reasonably imagine that he should see or notion in any one of, or in all, these passages, to countenance his notion, that Baptism shoud be taken up—in order to Remission of sins? The clause, which in face would best have be∣friended him at this turn, he suppresseth, notwithstand∣ing it was at his pens end. For having cited these words Act. 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized; immediately followeth, And wash away thy sins. Why, being to act the part he had now in hand, he should keep these words behind the Curtain, is a secret that I know not how to enter. All that can with any face or colour of reason be proved from the scripture passages as yet produced, is nothing, but what will be granted unto him without proof, viz. that Baptism, by persons adult and beleeving, and not formerly baptized, ought to be taken up upon the first opportunity after their beleeving. But this, Mr. A's principles considered, ac∣cording to which he was not baptized till many years af∣ter his beleeving, putteth him to rebuke; but concerneth not us, who judg our selves to have been baptized in our Infancie. But for the countenancing of the darling notion mentioned, it is like we shall hear somewhat to more purpose ere long. Mean while 4. It may not be amisse to observe by the way, how full of stonds Mr. A's faith is (or at least seems to be) about the particulars argued in that part of his discourse, which is under present consideration, and how lightly he treads the ground, on which he is now walking. First, he only conceives it is, as he saith; In this respect especially I CONCEIVE it is, &c. Next, he supposeth it is.
For like reason I SUPPOSE it is, &c. Thirdly, he tells us, that it may well be conceived that it is; Hence it is likewise, as may WELL BE CONCEIVED, &c. Lastly, his doubtless it was, though according to the grammaticall import of the particle, doubtless, it seems to imply confidence, yet according to the more pas∣sable sence of this word in ordinarie construction, it notes some degree of hesitance, or question-making; I do not make this observation, as blaming in the least Mr. A's. modestie, or dubitative manner of expressing him∣self in things questionable and obscure; Only herein I judge him to be in no better case then Peter was, when Paul said of him, that he was , to be condemn∣ed, (Gal. 2. 11.) viz. that he should trouble the world, rend and teare Chistan societies, upon the account of such otions or apprehensions, of the truth whereof himself hath no better assurance, then conceit, or dubi∣tation. 5. (And lastly) His respective sences and expositions of Joh. . 5. born of water and of the spirit; and so of Tit. 2. 5. the washing of regeneration, are so much his, that our best Expositours do not own them; nor do either the words themselves, nor yet the scope of the Context in either place require them. Concerning the former of these places, Calvin expresly professeth, that he can at no hand be perswaded that Christ speaketh here of Baptism; adding, that it had not been seasonable for him so to do. Quantum∣veò an hunc locum attinet, nullo modo adducor ut Christum de Bptismo ver∣ba facere cre∣dam: hoc enim fuisset intem∣pestivum. Calv: in Joh. 3. 5. And not long after this; The water (saith he, of which Christ here speaks) is nothing else but the inward purgation and vegetation of the holy Ghost; subjoyning this rule (for the confirmation of his exposition) that it is no unusuall that the copulaive particle should be taken Exegetically, when the latter member is an explication of the former.(b) Ergo nihil est aliud, quam interior Spiritus sancti purgatio ac vegetatio Ibid.
Adde quòd non est insolens copulam exege∣tio sumi, quum scilicet posterius mem∣brum est expli∣catio priris. Ibid Mr. John Deodate, commenteth the place thus; Of water] He seems to intimate two distinct and severall parts of this change: and by water he means the expiation and remission of the sin, and by the Spirit, the whole work of regenerati∣on. Hugo Grotius findeth the figure Hendiadis in the clause, born again of water, and of the Spirit, i. (saith he) of the Spirit, who is like unto water in his working. Est autem . Nam sicut in spiritu & igne, Mat. 3. 11 sig∣nificat per spi∣ritum igneum, ita hic ex spi∣ritu & aqua est, ex spiritu aqueo Neque obstat quòd vox altera quasi limitans hic praecedat. Nam sic Act. 17. 25—Gen. 3. 16. & Gen. 2. 7. & 11.—Col. 2. 8. &c. in Joh. 3. 5. 8 &c. Groti∣us. Of which interpretation he gives a further account upon the place. Concerning the latter place, Tit. 3. 5. Calvin indeed conceives, that the Apostle in the phrase, by the washing of regeneration, alludeth unto Baptism; in which apprehension I judge it not worth a while for any man to dissent from him. Yet neither doth the phrase it self, nor the scope of the Context or subject matter in hand, enforce any such interpretation; much lesse do they, ei∣ther divisim, or conjunctim, so much as invite us to think the Apostle thereby meaneth Baptism. And Marlorat up∣on the place citeth a Protestant Exposition (with whom himself seemeth to accord) who, by the Laver, or wash∣ing of Regeneration, understandeth, the vrtue, or power, of the holy Ghost, because he is the Author of that interral nwness whereby our hearts are purged from the [filth, or] defilements of sin. So that Mr. A. hath sufficient cause for all that tendernesse, with which he cites the said Scripture passages for his purpose. Sect. 79. But let us (in the next place) see how like a man he quitteth himself, and what strength he produceth, in the defence of his golden dream (formerly mentioned) viz. that men do take up the Ordinance of Baptism, about the beginning of their repentance, IN ORDER TO THE REMISSION OF THEIR SINS. For I confesse that if he be able to make truth of this notion (in the sence, which his words bear in ordinarie under∣standings) he will gain the prize which he runeth for in the second part of his discourse; viz. that necessary it is
for persons to be baptized after they believe, their Infant-Bap∣tism notwithstanding. But what he pleadeth in proof of the said notion, the Reader may find p. 18. of his dis∣course, beginning thus: Finally, Believing and being bap∣tized, are conoyned as relative to slvation (Mar. 16. 16.) And a little after; That both repentance, and the decla∣ration of it by Baptism, is required on mans pat to interesse him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the Spirit, the things covenanted or promised on Gods part, is too evident to be denied by any, BUT THOSE THAT WILL NOT SEE, from Act. 2. 38, 39. Repent and be bap∣tized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost: for the promise is to you and to your children, and to all that, &c. For answer, 1. How insupportable is he in that most heavie Sen∣tence, which here he denounceth against many thou∣sands, as holy, as upright, as worthy men, as ever the earth bare any since the Apostles days, yea (in a manner) against the whole Christian world; viz. that they are persons THAT WILL NOT SEE, i. that will fully oppose the light of divine truth shining unto them. For how few are they of this generation of men, but have denied, that the Declaration of repentance by Baptism, as well as repentance it self, is required on mans part to inter∣esse him in remission of sins? Or do they not all (gene∣rally, and as it were with one mouth) professe and teach, and this with the full current of the Scripture, that there is nothing essentially requisite on mans part to ineess him in remission of sins, [i. to put him into a state of salvation] but a true faith in Jesus Christ, which includes repentance from dead works; unto which also upon this account, the said promise of remission of sins is sometimes made. In∣deed, speaking of that full and finall remission of sins, which shall in the hearing of Heaven and Earth be a∣warded by the Great Judge in his day, unto all Belee∣vers, to the obtaining of this they require of men, over and above either the simple act, or habit, whether of
the truest Faith, or soundest Repentance, a perseve∣rance in both, and in the fruits or actings of both, unto the end. The truth is, that as the notion here maintain∣ed by Mr. A. is one of the worst and most dangerous opinions owned by him in his book; so is the morall mis∣demeanour mentioned, simply the worst and most un∣christian strain therein. But 2. To detect the errour of the said notion, or Do∣ctrine, viz. that Baptism is therefore called the Baptism of Repentance, because men are to take it up in order to the remission of sins, (or in the latter edition of it) that the Declaration of repentance by Baptism, as well as Repentance it self, is required on mans part, to interesse him in Re∣mission of sins, and Sanctification of the Spirit, It is to be considered, Sect. 80. 1. That as Remission of sin is no where in Scripture promised unto Baptism apart from Faith, or from Re∣pentance, but unto these (sometimes to the one, and sometimes to the other) apart from Baptism, and with∣out relation hereunto; (see and consider Joh. 3. 16, 18, 36. Lu. 24. 47. Act. 5. 3. Act. 3. 19. Ac. 8. 22. Ac. 11. 18. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Rom. 3. 28, 30. Rom. 4. 3, 5, 16, 23, 24. to omit many other places) so is the sanctification of the Spirit promised unto Faith simply, and sometimes unto prayer, some∣times to the love of God, yea and hath frequently been vouchsafed unto men by God upon their believing, with∣out Baptism. See for this expresse Scripture, Joh. 7. 38, 39. Act. 10 44, 45, &c. Act. 11. 17. Gal. 3. 2. Luk. 11. 13. Gal. 3. 14. Eph. 1. 13. 2 Thes. 2. 13. Act. 6. 5. Act. 9. 17. Act. 15. 7. compared with ver. 8. Therefore certainly Baptism is not required of men (at least in a way of ne∣cessitie) to interesse them either in remission of sin, or in san∣ctification of the spirit. For if so, how could these be ob∣tained without it? 2. If Baptism, or a Dclaration of mens Repentance by Baptism, be required on mans part to interesse him in Re∣mission
of sins, how can men besaid to be justified by faith thorow the blood of Christ? or the blood of Christ be said to cleanse men from all their sins? Rom. 3. 22, 24, 25. 1 Joh. 1. 7. (besides other places without number.) Baptism (without all question) is no part either of Faith, or of the blood of Christ. Therefore justification, or remission of sins, which is attainable by Faith in the bloud of Christ, may be obtained without Baptism. 3. If Baptism be required on mans part to interesse him in remission of sins, and sanctification of the spirit, then hath God suspended both the justification and san∣ctification, of men (and consequently, their eternall Salvation) upon a ceremonie, or carnall Ordinance (as Baptism by some of the most learned of Mr. A's partie, as we formerly heard, is acknowledged to be) as well, or as much, as he hath done upon Faith, or Repentance themselves; and thus men shall be perfected by the flesh (as the Apostle speaketh) Yea 4. If a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism be re∣quired on mans part, to interesse him in remission of sins, or in Sanctification of the Spirit, then is a Declaration hereof by Baptism, or by submitting to an outward and fleshly ceremonie, more accepted with God, then a Decla∣ration made by mortification, innocencie, holinesse of conversation, &c. The reason of this consequence is plain; viz. because a Declaration of a mans Repentance by these, or any of them, is not required by God, nor yet accepted by him, upon any such account, as to interesse him in remission of sins, or to translate him from an estate of sin and death, into a state of justification; no, nor yet to intitle him to the sanctification of the Spirit. For he that is not a justified person before any Declara∣tion be made by him of his repentance, by such fruits or expressions of it, as these, will never be justified after∣wards. Nor can any mā bring forth any such fruits of Re∣pentance, as these, unless he be interessed in the sanctifica∣tion of the Spirit before hand. Therefore Baptism is not required on mans part, nor yet a Declartion of his repent∣ance
by Baptism, to interesse him, either in Remission of sin, or sanctification of the Spirit. Sect. 81. 5. If it were so, then only children of wrath, and per∣sons not yet reconciled unto God, should be the regular and lawfull subjects of Baptism. For if Baptism be re∣quired on mans part to interesse them in Remission of sins, all they who are yet unbaptized must needs be under the guilt of their sins, and so liable to eternall condem∣nation for them. And if the case be thus, Faith and repentance are but dead works, untill Baptism quickens them, and raiseth them up from the dead. 6. If Mr. A's Position now protested, were Ortho∣dox and sound, John the Baptist was in his bloud (I mean, in the guilt and pollution of his sins) when he en∣tered upon the work and ministerie of baptizing with water; yea and (for ought appears to the contrary) so lived and died, and consequently perished eternally: for it no where appears that ever he was baptized; and if he were not baptized by the verdict of Mr. A's Doctrine, he could have neither part nor fellowship in the blessed businesse of Remission of sinnes, and so must pe∣rish. 7. If both Repentance, and the Declaration of it by Baptism, be required on mans part to interesse him in remis∣sion of sins, and Sanctification of the Spirit, then, accord∣ing to Mr. A's judgement and notion about the truth and requisit terms of the administration of Baptism, either all, or far the greatest part of, the antient Fathers of the Christian Church, with the generalitie of Christi∣ans in their dayes; all, or far the greatest part of the wor∣thy Martyrs both in latter, and in former times; all, or far the greatest part, of our late Protestant Divines, whose zeal, learning, labour, and faithfulnesse God was pleased to use about the Reformation, and for the Restauration & propagation of the truth of Christian Re∣ligion,
as Luther, Calvin, Musculus, Bucer, P. Mar∣tyr, Zuinglius, &c. together with our own worthies, Per∣kins, Dod, Hildersham, Preston, Sibs, &c. together with the generalitie of the people taught and instructed by them; against all these (I say) we must write bitter things, and conclude, that whilst they liv'd, they were in the gall of bitternesse, and bands of iniquity, and that they died, and consequently perished in their sins. For most certain it is, that these were not baptized, as Mr. A. and men of his judgement count and call Baptism; and con∣sequently could not make any Declaration of their repent∣ance by Baptism. And if so, they must all to hell, un∣lesse Mr. A's Doctrine be content to be sent thither in their stead. Sect. 82. 8. If no person can make a Declaration of their Repent∣ance by Baptism, then cannot a Declaration in this kind, or that which M. A. calls a Declaration, interesse any man in remission of sins. The reason of the consequence in this Proposition is evident: That which is not, can∣not act: nor can any such thing, or Act, inter∣est any man inremission of sinnes, which may be as well found in those, whose sins are not remit∣ted, as in those, whose are. Now that persons, who are baptized, may be in the gall of bitternesse, and bands of iniquitie, (and consequently not have their sins remit∣ted) their Baptism notwithstanding, is apparent in the case of Simon Mgus; to whom, soon after his baptizing, Peter said, Thou hast neither part▪ nor lot in this matter: for thine heart is not right in the sight of God—For I per∣ceive that thou art in the gall of bitternesse, and bands of ini∣quity, Act. 8. 21, 23. Nor is the Baptism of a very great part of those, who have been of late baptized (and this as Mr. A. calls Baptism) amongst us, any Declaration of their repentance (at least not of any such repentance, which hath any thing to do with remission of sinnes, their unworthy wayes and actions proclaiming them
aloud to be persons void as well of the knowledge, as fear of God. 9. The Grandees themselves of Mr. A's partie, yea and (I presume) himself also with them, beleeve and hold, that amongst the Heathen, unto whom the Name of Jesus Christ was never brought, nor the Gospel ever preach∣ed (orally, or by the mouths of men) and consequently, who were never Baptized, there are or may be found persons interessed in Remission of sins. If so, with what truth can Mr. A. affirm, yea rather with what face can he avouch with a most unchristiā censure of all those who shall denie it, that both Repentance, and a Declaration of it by Baptism, are required on mans part to interesse him in Remission of sins? Sect. 83. 10. In case as well a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, as repentance it self, be required on mans part to interesse him in remission of sins, would the Apostle Paul have thanked God he baptized none of the Corinthi∣ans, but Crispus and Gaius; [i. that he interessed none of them in remission of sins, but these? 1 Cor. 1. 14] Or should he have had cause so farre to underrate the office and worth of baptizing beneath the preaching of the Gospell, as to say that Christ sent him not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel? [i. not to do all that which might interesse men compleatly in remission of sins, but only somewhat, that might somewhat further them in the way thereunto] 1 Cor. 1. 17? 11. Suppose a person truly beleeving in Jesus Christ, and repenting of his sins, being desirous withall to be baptized, but wanted an opportunitie duly (according to the light of his conscience) to partake of this Ordi∣nance, as put case he were not satisfied touching the law∣fulnes of the calling of any person he knoweth, to baptize▪ (which either is, or very possibly may be, the case of many thousands in England) is it Mr. A's sence that this
person is, all this notwithstanding, in the gall of bitternesse, and band of iniquity, only because he hath not been, nor is ever like to be actually baptized? Or is not his act in refusing Baptism at the hands of those, from whom he cannot with the peace of his conscience receive it, of bet∣ter acceptance with God, then a receiving it, with the violation of his conscience, would have been? 12. If a Declaration of a mans repentance by Baptism, be required on mans part to interesse him in remission of sins, then was the oscitancie and forgetfulnesse of the Apostle Paul inexcusable, who in all his discourses about justifi∣cation, or the means of the obtaining remission of sins; and more especially in his Epistle to the Romans, where he professedly undertakes, and more at large then in any other place, handleth the said most important Doctrine of justification, never so much as mentioneth Baptism as any wayes, or in any consideration whatsoever, condu∣cing thereunto, much lesse as required on mans part to interesse him therein; but only finds occasion for the mention of it in the businesse of sanctification. Cer∣tainly a maid may sooner forget her ornaments, and a bride her attire, and a woman her sucking childe, then such an Apostle, in arguing a point of that transcendent nature and import, as justification is, forget any thing of an es∣sentiall requirement thereunto. Sect. 84. 13. The remission of no mans sins, no mans justificati∣on, (least of all the justification of a true Beleever) is by God made dependent either upon the wills or pleasures of other men, or upon any such condition, which (possibly) the person may never have an opportunitie, no nor possibilitie to perform, at least not without sin. Now 1. no person can compell another, how regularly soever qualified for the act of administring, to baptize him. 2▪ It may very possibly be that a true beleever shall, or may, not meeet with a person whilst he lives, from whose
hand he can with the peace of his conscience, and con∣sequently without sinning, receive Baptism. Therefore certainly a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, is not re∣quired on mans part to interesse him in Remission of sins. 14. If a Declaration of Repentance by Baptism, (at least as Mr. A. calls Baptism) as well as repentance it self, were required by God of all men, to interesse them in remission of sins, then should he require of many true Repentants, and true Beleevers, that which would be sinfull in them to perform, to interesse them in this high priviledg of Remission of sins. For there is nothing more certain then that many, who have truly repented, want faith to beleeve that Mr. A's Baptism is so much as lawfull for them to submit unto. And it is the expresse Doctrine of the Apostle, that whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Rom. 14 23. Sect. 85. 15. By the same way, or means, by which Abraham the Father of those who beleeve, was justified, or inter∣essed in remission of sins, are all his children, or spiri∣tuall seed, justified also. Upon this, as a foundation not to be questioned, the Apostle builds that excellent discourse, Rom. 4. all along the chapter. See more par∣ticularly v. 23. 24. of this chapter, and v. 30. of the next precedent Chapter. Now certain it is that circum∣cision was not required of him, (nor yet any other cere∣monie) to interesse him in remission of sins; but he was in∣teressed in this blessed priviledge, whilst he was yet un∣circumcised (as the Apostle expresly affirmeth, Rom. 4. 10, 11.) by means of his faith. Therefore certainly the ceremonie of Baptism is not required of any of Abra∣hams spirituall seed, to interesse them in remission of sins. Yea I am horribly afraid lest they, who joyn water-bap∣tism with faith in Christ as necessary in the business of ju∣stification, or remissiō of sins, incur the same heavie doom with
the Jews (mentioned, Gal. 5. 2, 4.) who judged it ne∣cessary for them to be circumcised in the flesh (& accord∣ingly were circumcised) in order to their justification. For (doubtlesse) that which in this casc abolished them from Christ [or, made Christ of none effect unto them] was not that the precept injoyning circumcision was now exauthorized or abolished by the death of Christ, but because they judging somewhat necessary to their justifi∣cation, besides Faith in Christ, practised accordingly For (questionlesse) their foot had been in the same snare, had they practised circumcision even whilst it stood in greatest force, upon a like account. 16. The Doctrine of the great Apostle of the Gentiles, is much differing from that which Mr. A. delivereth unto us in the point under preset debate He the Apostle Paul) teacheth us, that with the heart mā believeth ƲNTO righ∣teousnesse, Ro. 10. 10 [i unto remission of sins, at least] but Mr. A. teacheth us (in effect) that with the heart man belee∣veth but half way towards righteousnesse; and that he must march the other half of the way by water, or else he will never come there. For is not the tenour of his Doctrine this; men are to take up that Ordinance (speak∣ing of Baptism) upon their first beginning to repent [and consequently, to beleeve] IN ORDER TO THE REMISSION OF THEIR SINS? And p. 18. to the same tune, thus; That both Repentance, and the Declaration of it by BAPTISM, is required on mans part to IN∣TERESSE HIM IN REMISSION OF SINS, and sanctification of the spirit, the things cove∣nanted or promised on Gods part, is too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, from Act. 2. 37, 38. &c. I wish for those Christian and worthy respects, which in great numbers I bear unto him, that, being so willing himself to see, as here, plainly enough, and somewhat more, he intimates himself to be, God will graciously please to give him eyes wherewith to see, that so he may mistake darkness for a visiō no longer. Yet until very now he had eyes to see that truth, which on the suddain (it
seems) is withdrawn from his sight. For 17. The Lord Christ (as was observed, Sect. 18.) at his first sending forth his Apostles to preach the Gospell (Mat. 10. Mar. 3, Luk. 9) yea and when awhile after he set forth seventy other Disciples about the same work, he spake not a word either to the one, or to the other, about baptizing any. If Baptism had been essentially requisite unto salvation (which it must needs be, if it be essentially requisite to remission of sins) can it be any mans thought, or imagination, that Christ would not have so much as once mentioned it in neither of those solemn Commissions, which he gave at severall times for the preaching of the Gospell? Or was that ministerie of the Gospell, which was by the Lord Christ himself commit∣ted unto men, without any order or direction to baptize, ineffectuall effectually to convert those unto God, who should beleeve and receive it and so to save them? Nor can it with any colour of reason, or proof, be pretended, that those, at least all those who were now sent forth to preach the Gospell, had received a commission to baptize before, the scripture no where affirming it, no nor so much as overturing it of them all. Nor can it upon any whit a better account be said, that in the com∣mission which Christ gave them to preach the Gospell, he vertually or consequentially, included a cōmission also for them to baptize. For 1. this is pretended at a single peradventure, neither the Scripture, nor any competent reason persuading it. 2. When Christ gave a cōmission for such a preaching of the Gospel, which he intended should be accompanied with a power to baptize, he maketh particular and expresse mention of baptizing, as well as of preaching, Mat. 28. 19. 3. (And lastly) Neither do we read of so much as any one person baptized, either by the Apostles themselves, or by the seventie, by vertue of that mission, or commission from Christ to preach the Gospel, of which we now speak. 18. (And lastly) doth not himself (p. 16. of his pre∣sent discourse) affirm and teach, that Baptism may
therefore be called the Baptism of repentance for the remis∣sion of sins, because God THEREBY SIGNIFIES AND SEALS unto men the remission of their sins UPON THEIR REPENTANCE? If God by Baptism signifies and seals unto men the remission of their sins upon their repentance, then certainly men are interessed in remission of sins, upon, and by means of their Repentance, and so before Baptism be taken up by them; otherwise God should seal unto men an untruth, and that which is not. Again, doth he not (a little after, in the same page) suppose that Baptism may be called the Baptism of repentance, because the persons who are baptized, do thereby professe and declare unto the world, that they look for REMISSION OF SINS FROM GOD UPON THEIR REPENTANCE? And yet again, that it may be called the Baptism of repentance, &c. because it seals and confirms the covenant or promises of God made to men, touch∣ing the remission of their sins upon their repentance? If it be the covenant or promise of God to give unto men the remission of sins upon their repentance, certainly repentance it self by vertue of this covenant of God, in∣teresseth mē in remission of sins, without the interposure of Baptism, or without any contribution from Baptism thereunto. Sect. 86. But if a Declaration of a mans Repentance by Bap∣tism, be nor requisite to interesse him in remission of sins, as well as repentance it self, what answer is to be given to those two texts of Scripture, which Mr. A. useth (I will not say abuseth) to prove the same, especially to the latter, Act. 2. 38, 39. Wherein (if he speaks truth) that Doctrine of his is too evidently asserted to be denied by any, but those that will not see? The former of the two, is that known place, Mar. 16. 16. He that beleeveth, and is baptized, shall be saved. Here (saith he) Beleeving, and being baptized, are conjoyned,
as relative to Salvation. In which saying he seemeth to imply, that Baptism in the letter, and properly so cal∣led, is as necessary to salvation as beleeving it self. For if he will endure to be understood to speak of Baptism metonymically, or synechdochically taken, [i. for an outward profession of Faith, or beleeving, which is our Saviours sence of the word baptized, in the Scripture be∣fore us, as we shall shew presently] that which he saith is nothing to his purpose. And though Baptism (pro∣perly so called) both in the Institution or precept of it, as likewise in a regular subjection unto it, or reception of it, must needs be conceived to relate, in one kind or degree, or other, unto salvation (as all the Command∣ments of God, and the creatures obedience unto every of them do, and as Circumcision it self, by the Apostles own acknowledgment, sometimes did) yet 1. It is not necessary that it should relate in one kind or other (much lesse with the same kind of relation, wherewith Believing relateth) unto that Justification which consisteth in remission of sins▪ or consequently, that it should interesse men in this Justification? For many things relate, and conduce (and this by way of necessi∣tie) unto salvation, which are no wayes necessarie to invest a man in an estate of justification. 2. Neither is it necessarie that baptizing should be relative to salvation it self, upon the same terms with beleeving For Sect. 87. 1. Beleeving, in persons capable, is universally and indispensably in all cases whatsoever necessarie thereun∣to; as the clause and words immediatly following those under present consideration, do (with the whole current of the Scriptures besides) import, But he that believeth not, shall be damned. But Baptizing, though it be granted to be in ordinarie cases simply necessarie thereunto, yet in the case lately mentioned (and possibly in many
others) viz. when he that truly beleeveth, is not s∣ed in his judgment and conscience touching the regular capacitie of such persons, who are willing to undertake the work, to baptize. Nor can I believe, that, in case the Eunuch baptized by Philip, had, after his beleeving Jesus Christ to be the son of God, been prevented by death before he had come to the water, wherewith he was bap∣tized, he should have perished eternally for want of it. And this (questionlesse) if we understand our Saviour to speak (in the place in hand) of Baptism literally and without a figure, is the reason, why having in the for∣mer part of the verse, included Baptism together with beleeving, condition-wise in his promise of Salvation, thus, He that beleeveth, and is baptized, shall be saved, yet leaveth it out in his opposite threatning of condemnati∣on, denouncing this, not against persons who shall not be baptized, but only against such, who shall not believe; But he that believeth not, shall be damned. Baptism, in conjunction with Faith, may be available, or contribu∣tarie towards salvation; and yet the want of it not ne∣cessarily exclusive of Salvation. When Solomon saith, wisdom is good with an inheritance, he doth not imply, or suppose, that it is evill, or not good, without an inheri∣tance. So when the Apostle saith, it is good for a man not to touch a woman [meaning, not to marrie] he doth not suppose, that it is evill, or inconvenient for him (at least in all cases) to marrie. He that promiseth salva∣tion unto a meaner qualification in conjunction with a greater, doth not hereby threaten this greater qualifi∣cation with the losse of salvation for the want of the company of the lesser, especially if in stead of this it be accompanied with another much better, and greater, and of higher acceptation with God, then it. But 2. Suppose Baptism were every wayes, and in every respect, as necessarie to salvation, as beleeving (which yet is notoriously untrue, as we have proved) yet will it not follow that Baptism in such or such a particular mode, or Externall manner of administration, should
be thus necessary. For certain it is, that the Lord Jesus Christ hath not suspended the eternall salvation of his creature, especially not of those who truly believe in him, upon any modalitie or formalitie of acting, not particularly and precisely determined and injoyned by himself, but only cōjecturally obtruded upon thē by men. For what if any one man, r any ten men should please themselves never so highly, be never so confident of the authentiquenesse, or legitimacie of their inferences and deductions (in one kind or other) from the Scriptures? will their confidence in this kind amount to an infallibi∣litie, yea or to any competent proof, that either the belief or practise of what they upon such terms deduce and inferre from the Scripture, is essentially necessarie unto salvation? Or hath the Lord Christ any where in the Scriptures determinately enjoyned or prescribed the particular mode of dipping as essentiall unto Baptism, or to the regular administration thereof? Therefore (however) Baptism in this form cannot with any toler∣able face of reason, be pretended as essentially requi∣site unto salvation, as beleeving. Sect. 88. 3. Neither can Mr. A. with all his fellow-dogmatists substantially prove, that the Baptizing here spoken of, is to be understood of a Baptizing with water, consider∣ing that there is another kind of Baptism which the Scrip∣ture from place to place makes by many degrees more ne∣cessary unto salvation, then a baptizing with water. This is, the Baptisme of affliction, or sufferings for righteous∣nesse sake. See for this, Mat. 20. 22. compared with Mar. 10. 38. Luk. 12. 50. Rom. 6. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 11, 12. Mar. 8. 34, 35, &c. Act. 14. 22. (besides many other pla∣ces.) Besides, the grounds and arguments of those, who judge water-baptism, at least as to the necessitie of it, to have expired with the Ministerie of John the Baptist, or at farthest, with the destruction of the temple
of Jerusalem, and the dissolution of the Jewish Church, have not been yet sufficiently answered; not yet balan∣ced by any arguments or grounds for Mr. A's opinion and practise, extant (that I know of) in the world. Which grounds and arguments (I mean, for the non-ne∣cessitie of water Baptism) although I do not yet appre∣hend them so demonstrative, as to overrule my judge∣ment that way, yet I judge them nothing so easie of solution, as those, which have served in the warfare of Re-baptizing hitherto. 4. Suppose we the place to be understood of water-Baptism, and that some kind of a necessitie hereof un∣to salvation is here likewise insinuated by our Saviour, yet can it not upon any tolerable account be under∣stood of the actuall or literall perception of Baptism, as if this were necessary to Salvation. But of an inward obe∣dientiall frame of heart to submit unto Baptism, when opportunity serveth; i. when there is a conveniencie of water, and a person, who according to the light of a mans conscience, is regularly capable of administring it, and withall, willing to perform the work. The prepara∣tion of the heart for the performance of a duty, when opportunitie serveth and requireth it, as well as the per∣formance it self, is oft in Scripture injoyned in such terms or words, which properly signifie the Act, or performance it self. See Luk. 14 33. Luk 12. 33. 2 Tim. 2. 3. Mat. 5. 25, 44. For it is against the main current of the Scriptures, and against the sence of all considering men, that God should suspend the eternall salvation of any man, especially of a true Beleever, upon the will and pleasure of another man, or upon the receiving of any thing, especially any externall thing, which may be withheld from him against his will, or which possibly he may never meet with an opportunitie to receive. Therefore however, such a Baptism as Mr. A. and his have taken up, and as he presseth from the Scripture in hand, is not simply or universally, but only in particularitie of case (if this)
in any degree necessarie unto salvation. But 5. (And lastly) the clear and unquestionable sence of the place, is, to understand the Baptism, or Baptising, here spoken of, synecdochically (a form of speech, then which there is none more frequent or familiar, in the Scriptures) viz. for a profession of that Faith or belee∣vings which our Saviour speaks of, Baptism, especially in those times, when, and of which our Saviour now speaks, being a known part, or piece of this profes∣sion. In this figure of speech, to fall by the sword, to die by the sword, with the like, signifies any kind of death by the hand of an enemie, as well as that which is pro∣perly and literally executed by the sword; the sword be∣ing an ordinarie or known weapon, by which men are slain in war, 2 Sam. 11. 25. Psal. 44 3. This interpreta∣tion is every wayes consonant to a master-vein of texts in the body of the Gospell, viz. all such which hold forth a publique and open owning, or professing of the Name of Christ, and of the Gospell, as required of all Beleevers in order to their being saved. See more par∣ticularly upon this account, Rom. 10. 9, 10. (which two verses are a very plain and significant exposition of the clause in hand) as also Mat. 10. 33, 34. 2 Tim. 2. 12. Mar. 8. 38. (to omit several others) whereas Mr. A's sence of the place, who understands it properly, strictly, and literally, of water-baptism, hath neither so much as any one text of Scripture, nor any argument of weight, to stand by it. And how unreasonable is it to conceive or think, that a true Faith in coniunction with a Christian and holy conversation, on the one hand, and with sufferings for righteousnesse and the Gospels sake, on the other hand, should not be as available for all ends and purpo∣ses with God, especially for that great end, Salvation, as a like Faith, only in conjunction with a single act of once going into water to be baptized? All Protestant Expositors that I have had opportunity to consult upon the place, agree in the Substance of the interpretation last asserted: yea some of them parallel it with Rom. 10.
9, 10. which passage (as we lately hinted) is a better commentary upon the clause in hand, then we are like to receive from any person whatsoever in these dayes, dis∣senting from it. Sect. 89. The other Scripture, which (it seems) hath been a snare upon Mr. A. not only to intangle him with this most dangerous Doctrine, that a Declaration of a mans Rpentance by Baptism, is required on mans part, as well as Repentance it self, to interesse him i remission of sins, but also with the guilt of this hard and unchristian saying against his Chrstia brethren, who therein dissent from him; viz. that the said Doctrine is too evident from it to be denied by any, but those that will no see, is Act. 2. 38, 39. The words being these, Then Peter said unto them, repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Iesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. For the promise is made to you, and to your children, and to all that are a farre off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call. I an∣swer, 1. It hath been lately proved by a cloud of impregnable arguments and demonstrations, that to be baptized is not required on mans part to interesse him in remission of sins; I here adde and explain; not in any other sence, or upon any other terms however, then any other act of obedience unto any the precepts of God is. Therefore 2. When Peter exhorts the Jews to Repent and be bap∣tized in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the remissi∣on of sins, if by being baptized, he means, strictly and precisely, a being actually baptized with water, he can∣not by remission of sins, mean the estate of justification consisting in remission of sins, wherein a person is invest∣ed by God immediatly upon his Repenting and belee∣ving; because then (as we formerly argued) there could
none be lawfully admitted to Baptism, but only children of wrath, or such, whose sins were not yet remitted. For that which is necessarily required on mans part to interesse him in remission of sins, must of necessitie precede his being actually interessed in this priviledge: and conse∣quently, persons not yet baptized, how repentant and beleeving soever, are not, cannot be, interessed in remis∣sion of sins, untill baptized; and so must needs be children of wrath, and in a state of condemnation. Sect. 90. If you ask me, but what can we understand by remis∣sion of sins in this place, but only such an estate of justifi∣cation, as that mentioned, and which consisteth in remis∣sion of sins? I answer; We may very commodiously, and without the least straining either word, or context, understand by it that great and solemn Act of absoluti∣on from all sin, which the great Judge shall in the great day pronounce over all those, who shall be found to have lived and died in the Faith of Iesus; or else (taking the word Remission, passively, which I judge the better) the happy effect, or cōsequent of this sentence which is a state of blessednesse and of glory. This interpretation fully ac∣cords with a passage of the same Apostle in the follow∣ing chapter, spoken to the same people (the Iews) and (probably) to some of the same persons. Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. i. When the Lord Christ shall return from heaven, to refresh the bowels, and make glad the hearts of all those, who have been sufferers for his Name in this world, by investing them with a rest glorious and bles∣sed, and which shall never have end; according to what the Apostle Paul writes to the Thessalonians; Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation to them which trouble you, And to you, WHO ARE TROƲB∣LED, REST with us, when the Lord Iesus shall be
revealed from heaven with his mighty angels, in flaming fire, &c. 2 Thes. 1. 6, 7, &c. If it be here replied, and said; be this in∣terpretation of the words, for remission of sins, admitted, still it will follow, there is a remission of sins, and this absolutely necessary unto salvation, which cannot be obtained without being baptized; I answer, True it is, that if we speak of persons living to years of discretion, and under the ministerie of the Gospell, they must be baptized in one kind or other, either with a baptism literally and properly so called (I mean, a bap∣tism with water) or else with a Baptism vertually, or e∣quivalently, so called. Now there are two, or rather three kinds of Baptism, which may be thus called (viz. Vertually, and Equivalently) The first is, an obedien∣tiall frame, or willingnesse in heart and soul, actu∣ally to submit unto a water-baptism, 1. upon a regular conviction of the necessitie of such a submission (neces∣sitie I mean, in respect of the command of Jesus Christ) 2. Upon such an opportunitie for the actuall reception of it, under which it may be received without any re∣gret or scruple in the conscience of a man, as about the regularnesse or meetnesse of an Administratour, about the stength of a mans bodily constitution to bear the burthen of a plunging under water, in case this shall be proved, or apprehended, to be the only lawfull way of Baptizing, &c. Another kind of Baptism, Vertually or in∣terpretatively so called, is an open and free profession of the Gospell, and of the Faith of Iesus Christ in the world. The third (and last) is a suffering persecution for a mans profession sake in this kind. Now both these, divisim, but especially conjunctim, may be termed Bap∣tisms, much in such a sence as John Baptist, is in Scripture termed, Elias, viz. because he serv'd his generation with such a kind of spirit, and upon somewhat the like terms, as Eliah served his. For a profession of the Gospell, es∣pecially joyned with sufferings for the Gospell, serve for all ends and purposes, for which Baptism literally, and properly so called, serveth, yea and this with an higher
hand, then it. Insomuch that this kind of Baptism, (water-baptism I mean, actually received) is the lowest and meanest of all Baptisms. Sect. 91. Now to the Obection, or reply mentioned, we plain∣ly and directly answer, that one or more, of the three Baptisms now specified and described, is indeed necessa∣ry for the obtaining of such a remission of sins, as that meant by Peter in the Text before us; and more par∣ticularly, that mentioned and described in the first place. If it be yet replied; but is it not evident that Peter here spake of water-baptism it self, and that he command∣ed them to be baptized herewith, as well as to repent, for the remission of sins? And was it not in obedience to this his exhortation, or command, that they were according∣ly (many of them) baptized with water-baptism, v. 41. I answer, Be it granted that he speaks of water-baptism, yet it must be granted withall, that he exhorteth no man to be baptized herewith, but upon this supposition, or pre∣sumption, that they should be every wayes and in re∣spect of all circumstances, satisfied in their judgements and consciences touching the lawfulnesse of their act, in yielding themselves to be baptized in this kind. There∣fore that Baptism, which we speak of and allow, viz. a readinesse and willingnesse of mind to be baptized with water, when we are satisfied touching the will of God concerning us in that behalf, and otherwise have an op∣portunitie of a like satisfaction in all points unto us, for the actuall reception of it, is the Baptism, unto which especially, and in the first place, Peter (in the Scrip∣ture before us) exhorteth men sin his exhortation unto them to be baptized. Otherwise we must make the sence and meaning of this his exhortation, to rise thus; Be ye baptized, whether you be convinced of the neces∣sitie,
yea or of the lawfulnesse of it, or no; and whether you have an opportunity for it, which your consciences can in every respect approve of, or no, I suppose that Mr. A. himself will not put such a construction as this upon the Apostles exhortation unto Baptism. There∣fore it is a most unquestionable and undeniable truth, that Peter, in the Text in hand, doth not simply, or in all cases, no nor yet principally or primarily, exhort Repentants unto the actuall reception of water baptism; but only unto such a vertuall, eminent, and constructive Baptism, as that lately described; and not at all unto water-baptism, but only upon the terms and conditions specified; under which indeed he that shall refuse this kind of Baptism, declares himself a rebell against the Lord Christ, (as all Anti-paedo-baptists, in the judgment of that worthy Martyr Mr. John Philpot, do, in not suffer∣ing children to come unto Christ by Baptism) and during this rebellion cannot be interessed in remission of sins. Sect. 92. If it be yet objected, and said, that (questionlesse) the repenting Jews, whom Peter exhorted to be baptized, understood him to speak of water-baptism only, and of none other: and consequently submitted unto his ex∣hortation thus understood, and were actually water∣baptized without any more ado I answer, 1. It cannot be proved, that the Jews, to whom he spake, understood him in such a sencc only, as that spe∣cified in the Objection. 2. In case this could be proved, yet will it not follow from hence, that either they did well in not apprehend∣ing a further sence in his words, or that Peter himself did not intend a further sence (some such as that repre∣sented) in them. 3. Nor doth their ready and speedy betaking them∣selves unto Water-baptism, at all argue, that they under∣stood him to speak of this Baptism simply, or only; be∣cause
they being already, before they came at the water, baptized with that inward Baptism of the heart we speak of, and being under no scruple or doubt, whether it was the mind and will of Jesus Christ that they should be Water-baptized, or no, or whether the opportunitie be∣fore them was in all points legitimate, or no (the Apo∣stles expresse order for their baptizing, either by him∣self, or by others authorised by him, being a sufficient ground for their satisfaction in all these particulars) they were obliged in conscience without any more adoe to be actually Water-baptized: and it is freely acknow∣ledged, that all persons whatsoever being under the same terms of satisfaction with them, both as touching a necessitie, as touching a compleat legitimatenesse of an opportunitie, are bound in conscience to be bapti∣zed with water, as well as they; Only with this proviso, that though persons now be as fully satisfied touching a necessitie of being baptized, as they were, yet if the grounds of mens satisfaction in this kind now, be un∣sound and sandie, (as they must needs be, in case their opinion be true, who judge the date of the necessitie of Water-baptism to be now expired) their submission unto this Baptism, though lesse sinfull, then the con∣trary, yet is it not justifiable. Sect. 93. If it be yet said, that it is no waies probable that Peter himself had any other meaning in his words, when he commanded them to be Baptized, but simply and plainly, that he would have them forthwith to be water-baptized, and consequently that he had no thought of any such Baptism (eminently, or vertually so called) which you put upon him. To this also I answer (as hath, in part, been answered already) That it is somewhat, yea much more then probable, that though Peter did not formally or explicitly mean any thing more in the words in question, then what the
Objection pretendeth, yet he presupposed that kind of Baptism which we plead, and that he would not have exhorted them to be baptized (with water) unlesse he had known them to be baptized already with that other Baptism. The reason is evident, because had he not supposed them, either already satisfied before his ex∣hortation directed unto them, or at least that they would be satisfied by it, that it was the will of Jesus Christ that they should be Water-baptized, and that there was an opportunitie before them every wayes le∣gitimate for their reception of this Baptism, he would in the first place rather have endeavoured to satisfie them, that this was the will and pleasure of Christ concerning them, and that the opportunitie before them for recei∣ving Baptism was every wayes legitimate, and approve∣able, then have either commanded, or exhorted them to be presently baptized. The result of this clear and thorow Examination of Peters exhortation to the Iews to be baptized for the re∣mission of sins, amounteth to this, that the said Exhor∣tation imposeth a necessitie upon no man of being water∣baptized for the remission of sins in the great day, but upon such persons only, who stand under the like terms of sa∣tisfaction every wayes touching the said baptizing, un∣der which he exhorted the Iews to be thus Baptized. If so, then Mr. A's Notion or interpretation of this ex∣hortation must needs fall to the ground, which beareth, that the said exhortation maketh it evident (yea too evi∣dent to be denied by any, but those that will not see) that a Declaration of the repentance by Baptism [he means, by an actuall reception of Water-baptism] is required on mans part [he means, universally, and in all cases, other∣wise he would have distinguished] to interesse him in re∣mission of sins [he means, in such an estate of justifica∣tion, as the Scripture so frequently appropriateth unto true Beleevers, immediatly upon their beleeving] Such an inference or notion as this hath no more communion with those words, for whence it pleads (with such an
unseemly confidence) legitimacie of descent, then shews have with substances, and meer appearances with reali∣ties and truths. Sect. 94. 3. Our Protestant expositours generally leave Mr. A's confidence and conceit upon the Text (in the point in hand) for the Papists to gather up, who fall greedily upon them, and make great treasure of them. Although (saith Calvin) in the contexture of the words, Baptism go∣eth before remission of sins, yet in respect of order it follow∣eth after, because it is nothing else but an obsignation [or sealing] of those good things, which we obtain by Christ, that they may be ratified in our consciences. Tametsi in contextu verborum  re∣missionem peccatorum hic praecedit, ordine tamen sequitur; quia nihil aliud est quàm bonorū, quae per Chri∣stum consequi∣mur, obsigna∣tio, ut in con∣scientiis no∣stris rata sint. Calv. in Act 2. 38. Gualter saith, that Peter admonisheth them of outward Baptism, which he commandeth them to receive for the remission of sins, which words are not to be taken in any such sence, as if Baptism washed men from their sins. And a little after. Unto those who are justified, Baptism is administred, for the remission of their sins, 1. the righteousnesse of God, which he confers upon us by Christ, is sealed i [or by] Baptism. Deinde de baptismo externo ad∣monent, quem ipsos in pec∣catorum re∣missionem accipere jubet. Quae verba non eo sensu accipi debent, quasi baptismus à eccatis abluat. Et posteà: lis qui—justificati sunt, baptismus in remissionem peccatorum datur, id est▪ baptismo obsignatur justicia Dei, quam ita per Christum nobis contulit. Gualter. Homil in Act. P. Martyr saith, that the head [or, principall ground] of the superstition is, that these men (speaking of the Papists) are of opinion that sins are first remitted by Bap∣tism. Sed caput superstitionis illud est. quòd isti homines opinantur, baptismo externo primum condonari peccata: sed vehemen∣ter falluntur. P. Mar. Loc Class. 9. 8, 8. And Lorinus the Jesuit, who speaks the com∣mon and known sence of his fellow Pontificians herein, boldly saith, that Baptism was directly instituted, as an ef∣ficacious sign, AND CAƲSE OF THE REMISSI∣ON OF originall sin, and of other SINS also, if there be any other found with it. Baptismu per se instit, est, ut sig∣num efficax, & causa remission is originalis peccati, & aliorum quque si quae cum il∣lo reperiantur, Lorinus in Act. 2. 38. So also Eugenius the Pope in the Florenine councill, made this an article of Faith, that the effect of the Sacrament of Baptism is the remssion of all sin, both originall, and actuall, and of all punishment
also due unto both. Hujus Sa∣cramenti effe∣ctus est remissio culpae origina∣lis & actualis, omnis quo{que} poenae quae pro ipsâ culpa de∣betur. Concil Florent. Consonant thereunto is the Do∣ctrine of the Trent Catechism. This (saith this) is first to be taught, that sin, whether originally contracted from our first parents, or committed by our selves, although it be so above measure heinous, that it seems to be even beyond all magination, is [notwithstanding] by the admirable vertue of this Sacrament [Baptism] remitted and pardon∣ed. It were easie to shew by an Induction of many Au∣thors of the Romish Credulitie, that they (generally a∣gainstf) Ho primum tradere oportet, peccatum, sive à primis pa∣rentibus origine contractum, si∣ve à nobis ipsis commissum, quamvis etiam adeò nefarium sit, ut recogitari quidem nonposse vidatur, ad∣mirabilis hujus saecramenti virtute remitti, & condonari. Catcehism. Tri∣dent. the Truth) require Baptism of men to the inter∣essing of them in remission of sins; and no whit more hard on the other hand to shew by quotations from Protestant Writers, that they generally hold the con∣trary against them. So that Mr. A. giving sentence, that a necessitie of Baptism for remission of sins, is too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, from Act. 2. 38, 39. condemneth all Protestant Writers (almost, without exception) of a willfull shutting their eyes against the light, and justifyeth all Popish writers as men willing to open their eyes that they may see the truth. But Sect. 95. 4. Suppose it should be granted, that Peter required Water-baptism of those, to whom he now spake, as well as repentance, for the remission of their sins, yet will it make but a loose consequence, to infer from hence, that therefore the like Baptism is required by God of all other persons whatsoever to interesse them in the like privi∣ledge. When Christ injoyned the young man to go and sell whatsoever he had, and give to the poor, promising him upon this that he should have treasure in heaven; if such a conclusion as this could be drawn from hence, that therefore no person shall have treasure in heaven, but he that actually practiseth, what the young man was commanded by Christ actually to do in order thereun∣to, the best part of the world have far more reason to be
astonied at it, then the Disciples had to be astonied at these words of Christ; How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God! Mar. 10. 23, 24. And yet there is much more reason to think that obedi∣ence to a morall command, though particularly, and upon a speciall occasion, given, should be generally re∣quired to the justification, or salvation of men, then that a like obedience to a ceremoniall command of a like particular direction, should be required thereunto. God may upon some particular occasion, under some circum∣stances, require such or such a thing of some men, in or∣der to their obtaining such or such a benefit, or privi∣ledge, without subjecting all men without excep∣tion, and in all cases, to a necessitie of using the same means for obtaining that same or like end; especially when he hath no where declared himself to such a pur∣pose, yea and much more, when he hath declined all declaration of himself in such a way, even when he had an opportunitie inviting him to such a declaration, in case he had been in any degree disposed to it. If his pur∣pose had been to exclude men from salvation for want of being baptized, would he not have expressed as much, when, having said, He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved (by way of Antithesis) But he that believeth not, shall be damned? But of this passage formerly. That which Mr. A alledgeth to prove, that to require Baptism as well as Repentance, for the obtaining of remission of sins, was Gods standing me had through ge∣nerations, and not appropriate to the persons now spo∣ken unto, is not much valuable. The Apostle (saith he) saith, that the promise, [To wi, of remission of sins and guilt of the spirit] which was made on condition of re∣pentance and Baptism, was made, not only to them then, and their children, but to those that were further remote, &c. I answer, 1. It is none of the best advised, sayings in his dis∣course, to say, that the promise of remission of sins, and gift of the Spirit, was made upon condition of Faith and
Baptism. God is not wont to make his promises upon any condition, or conditions whatsoever, but freely, and of himself. Only he makes many of them of such a tenor or form, wherein the performance of them, or the actu∣all exhibition of the good things promised, is suspend∣ed upon the performance of a condition, one or more. 2. Neither can Mr. A. shew us, where God ever made any promise of remission of sins, and gift of the Spirit, upon condition of Repentance and Baptism [I mean, of giving remission of sins, and the spirit, up∣on these conditions] at least any promise with exclu∣sion of those from these priviledges, who shall not per∣form both these conditions. He is not able to shew, where God hath either said, or intimated, that who∣soever is not baptized, shall never have remission of sins. But 3. (And lastly for this) the promise which Peter here saith was to them, and to their children, and to all those that are afarre off, even as many, &c. is a great and generall promise of life and Salvation, and consequently of all things necessarie hereunto, as forgivenesse of sins, San∣ctification by the Spirit, &c. which God hath made un∣to all mankind; but with this proviso, or clause of excep∣tion, that they only shall partake of the good things of this promise, not who shall be baptized, but who shall truly repent and believe in him. For evident it is that the promise asserted by the Apostle in this place to the Jews, their children, to all those afarre off, &c. was delivered by God long before now, even under the old Testament, where there is frequent mention made of Faith and repentance, and of Gods requiring these of men to render them capable of blessednesse from him; but there is altum silentium, profound silence all along, and not a word spoken of Baptism. To him (saith Pe∣ter, Act. 10. 43.) give all the Prophets witnesses that thorow his name whosoever believeth in him shall receive re∣mission of sins. So that the performance of the said pro∣mise
could not be suspended by God, either in whole, or in part, upon Baptism. For as the Apostle Paul rea∣soneth for justification by faith in the promise of Grace, against justification by the Law, which was not given untill a long time after the said promise, And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed be∣fore of God in Christ, the Law which was four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disanull, that it should make the promise of none effect, (Gal. 3. 17.) so may we argue the case in hand; the Law of Baptism, which was given many hundred years after the promise of life and salva∣tion unto those that should repent and believe, cannot disanull this promise; which notwithstanding it should do, if the said terms or qualifications of Repentance and Faith could not interesse men in the said promise; (I mean, in the good things promised) without Bap∣tism. That clause in the latter end of ver. 39. even as ma∣ny as the Lord our God shall call (to adde this by the way) is not so much, (nor indeed, at all) restrictive, but encou∣raging and extensive; importing, that no person, or persons whatsoever, to whom the word of promise, or the Gospell, shall come, need be at all troubled, or afraid, that though they should repent, yet they should not partake of the good things promised, in as much as the promises, be they never so many, be they the whole world, is comprehensive of them all. But about this (I suppose) there is no difference between Mr. A. and me. 5. When two severall means (as here, Repentance, and being baptized) are prescribed in order to the ob∣taining of such or such an end (as the said two means here are spoken of, be, in order to remission of sins) it doth not presently follow, that both these means, no nor yet that either of them, are simply, absolutely, or universally necessary to the obtaining of this end; or that this end is not attainable by any other means what∣soever, in case either of these, yea or both of them,
be wanting; especially when one of them is but of an inferiour import, and hath neither in the nature of it, nor by any institution from God, any essentiall or in∣dispensable connexion with this end; least of all doth such a thing follow, either when a third means of a rich∣er and fuller contribution towards the said end, shall be used in stead of this latter, or when the end is elsewhere declared by God himself, to be attainable, yea and that it shall certainly be obtained, by the former means alone; as remission of sins is oft in scripture secured un∣to Repentance, where there is not the least whisper of any necessitie of Water-baptism to be joyned with it to render it effectuall in this kind. See Act. 3. 19. 2 Pet. 3. 9. Luk. 15. 7, 10. Luk. 24. 47. Act. 11. 18. (to omit other places) When the Apostle Paul saith, that his hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel was, , that they might be saved, Rom. 10. 1. he doth not suppose that it had been impossible for Israel to be saved without such his hearts desire, & prayer, for them. So when writing to the Corinthians, he saith, that they may ALL prophesie one by one, that ALL may learn, and ALL may be com∣forted, 1 Cor. 14. 31. it cannot reasonably be inferred from hence, that unlesse they did ALL (understand we it, ALL that had the gift of prophecying amongst these) prophesie one by one, ALL [i. the whole body of the Church, and every member of it] could not possibly learn, or be comforted. For certain it is, that all might have learned, & so have been comforted, although only some few of the prophets amogst them had prophecied. So when it is said, John did baptize in the wildernesse, & preach the Baptism of repentance FOR the remission of sins (Mar. 1. 4.) it cannot be concluded from hence, that therefore without Johns preaching, there could be, or have been, no remission of sins. Therefore the prescribing of Baptism together with Repentance, for remission of sins, doth not necessa∣rily suppose, that without Baptism Remission of sins can∣not be attained.
Sect. 96. 6. What if there be another sence, which I suppose Mr. A. never thought of, of this Clause, or Phrase, , for the remission of sins; as viz. where∣in the Proposition, , shall not relate to any thing fu∣ture, or which is yet to be obtained, but to something either past or present, and shall signifie as much as, for the sake of, because of, or the like; and so the meaning of these words may rise thus; and be baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus, FOR THE REMISSION OF SINS, i. for the remission of sins sake, which the Lord Jesus, hath upon your repentance bestowed upon? you This interpretati∣on of the place, 1. agreeth very well with the significa∣tion of the Preposition, ; and 2. makes a commodious and worthy sence of the passage, & this without any un∣kindnesse at all to the Context. 1. The Proposition, , is by the Authors in the Greek tongue sometime used for,  (and they are accordingly cited by our best Greek Lexicons) which (as was lately said) signifieth because of, or for the sake of ; for therefore came I forth; Mar. 1. 38: i. for that work's sake (speaking of his preaching the Gospel) meaning, that the work of preaching the Gospel, is of such dignitie, of such transcendent con∣sequence, both for the glory of God, and good of men, that he thought it worthy his coing into the world to be a witnes & preacher of it; according to what he speaketh else where in the same Phrase, , &c. For this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witnesse to the truth. Ioh. 18. 37 And thus the said Preposition might be rendred (and perhaps better then now it is) Mat. 15. 24. Col. 1. 20. vi. Re∣demption re¦deemed. p. 44 and (I suppose) in severall other places, which do not at present occurre. According to this construction of the particle, , the meaning of the exhortation, be baptized in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, , for the remission of sins, ariseth to this effect; Since upon, and by means of, your repentance, you obtain so rich a priviledge, as re∣mission of sins is, thorow the Lord Iesus, be not asham∣ed to be baptized in his Name, i. to own him for your sovereign Lord and master in the face of the world. Now 2. That this interpretation of the clause is savourie and Evangelicall, is of ready demonstration. For what can be more reasonable then that men should publiquely, and without being ashamed, acknowledge and own him for their Gracious Benefactour, for whom they have received favours of high concernment unto them; and this in consideration of these worthy favours received? And unlesse we shal admit of some such cōstru∣ction of the particle , as this, Mat. 3. 11. we must make Baptism as well required on mans part to interesse him in Repentance, (or make impenitents▪ either the only, or the best capable subjects of Baptism) as well as in remission of sins. For here Iohn Baptist saith expresly to the people: , i. I indeed bap∣tize you with water FOR [OR ƲNIO] REPENT∣ANCE. 3. (And lastly, for this) the sence given no wayes disaccommodates the Context any whit more, then Mr. A's interpretation it self doth. Nor can there any account be given of such a dis-accommodation. Sect. 97. 7. Yet once more to the Scripture in hand; these words, for the remission of sins, may be well conceived to relate only to the word Repent, in the beginning of the vere; and the words coming between [and be baptized every one of you in the Name of the Lord Jesus] to be inserted after the māner of a parenthesis, directing the Iews what to do upon their repentance, not for the procuring or obtaining the forgivenesse of their sins (which as we al∣ready
shewed from the current of the Scriptures, is pro∣mised unto repentance, not unto Baptism) but for a sa∣cred testimonie unto the world that at present they were, and as a solemn ingagement upon themselves, ever to remain and be, the true and loyall Disciples of Iesus Christ. 8. Some interpret, and be baptized, figuratively, as if Peter, by the sign, understood the thing signified, or professed by it: of which Dialect there are many in∣stances in Scripture. According to this interpretation, Repent, and be baptized, is no more then, Repent, and be∣lieve; Baptism in capable subjects (as all these were to whom Peter now speaks) signifying and importing Faith, and the profession of it. 9. This clause, for the remission of sins, may be under∣stood in a kind of declarative sence (as many such scripture expressions likewise are) and so signifie, for the secure∣ing or assuring your selves of the remission of your sins. It is a true rule, that words and phrases, which more fre∣quently signifie such or such spirituall priviledges, at present obtained by Faith, are sometimes used to signi∣fie the actuall and reall fruition of these priviledges, and their compleat manifestatiom. Thus Rom. 8. 23.—even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the ADOP∣TION, &c. i. for the full enjoyment or manifestation of our adoption, &c. So Gal. 5. 5. We thorow the Spirit wait for the hope of righteousness by Faith; i. for the actuall and compleat manifestation, and fruition of those good things, which we now expect and hope for upon the account of our justification before God by belee∣ving. Thus also Mat. 6. 12, 14. Forgivenesse of sins, is put for the knowledge, comfort, or assurance of this forgivenesse (to omit other instances of a like dialect.) Some such sence as this of Remission of sins, (in the crip∣ture before us) is very proper for the place, because it so fitly agreeth with this part of Peters exhortation, and be baptized, one speciall use and end of Baptism (as Mr. A. himself acknowledgeth, and this more then
once, if I mistake not, in this very discourse) being to seal, ratifie, or insure unto men the remission of their sins upon repentance. Besides, in emphaticallnesse of language (wherein the holy Ghost much delighteth also) Remission of sins, is not it self, is not what it may be made unto those, in whom it is vested, untill it be known unto them, and so enjoyed by them. This construction of the place, maketh not remission of sins it self (which is Mr. A's sence) but the knowledge, com∣fort, or enjoyment of this remission, to be dependent (at least to a degree) upon Water-baptism in conjunction with repentance. Though some of the interpretations of the passage, Act. 2. 38, 39. now insisted on, and explained, may possibly seem somewhat more hard, and scant of satis∣faction, then their fellows, yet is the hardest of them all better comporting with the generall notion and do∣ctrine of the Gospell, and no lesse with the words and phrases themselves, then that sence which Mr. A. la∣bours in the very fire to fasten on them. Lastly (for this) suppose we that Mr. A's conceit about the meaning of the said Scripture, should (against Scripture light) be admitted, yet would neither his An∣ti-paedo-baptismall conceit, nor his conceit about the necessitie of water-dipping, receive any incouragement, or credit at all hereby. Not the latter, because here is only mention made of being baptized; nothing at all so much as hinted at the greatest distance, touching the necessitie of any determinate manner of the performance or reception of it. Nor yet the former; because, 1. from the order of the two duties, as they are here ex∣prest and named, first, Repentance, and then being bap∣tized, nothing can be concluded for an universall neces∣sitie of the one to precede the other in time, there be∣ing scarce any thing of more common observation in the Scriptures, then that the order of things, as well that of time, as of nature, is here frequently interchanged, and that mentioned in the first place, which in respect
of Order, as well the one, as the other, is latter. Joh▪ 3. 5. Water (which Mr. A. understands of Baptismall wa∣ter) is mentioned before the Spirit, in the work of re∣generation. Baptizing (Mat. 3. 6.) is mentioned be∣fore confessing of sins, yea and ver. 11.) before repent∣ance. Confession with the mouth (Rom. 10. 9.) is men∣tioned before beleeving with the heart. So the Greek is mentioned before the Jew, Colos. 3. 11. as the Jew before the Greek, Gal. 3. 28. So again, joy is mentioned before peace, Gal. 5. 22. and yet peace before joy, Rom. 14. 17. Melchizedeck's act in blessing Abraham, is menti∣oned in the first place, and his blessing the God of A∣braham, in the latter, Gen. 14. 19, 20. So likewise, the burnt-offering is named before the sin-offering, Levit. 12. 8. whereas the sin-offering was in order of time to go before it, as appears▪ Levit. 8. 14, 18. and so again, Levit. 9. 7, &c. It were easie to multiplie instances in this kind, I mean both where there is an interchangable ex∣pression of the same things in respect of prioritie and posterioritie; as likewise where that which precedes in time, is mentioned after that, which in time comes behind it. Therefore from the Order in Peters exhor∣tation between Repentance and Baptism, nothing can be argued to prove a necessitie, that Repentance alwayes ought, in respect of time, to precede Baptism; as nei∣ther did it precede in the Baptism, of which notice was taken formerly. 2. In case it were granted, that from the Scripture yet on the stage, it could be proved (yea, or were so evident, as Mr. A. gloryingly over his adversaries, pre∣tendeth) that remission of sins dependeth in part upon Baptism, and that neither Faith, Repentance, Love, Hu∣mility, Self-deniall, Mortification, with all the heaven∣ly retinew of the Graces of the Spirit, can do any thing to the interessing men in this priviledge, but only in conjunction with Baptism, yet neither from hence will it follow, that therefore Infant-baptism is unlawfull, yea, or not as available in this kind, as Mr. A's after∣baptism
is. Evident it is that there is no rational footing for either of these inferences in either of the pre∣mises. For the lawfulnesse of Infant-baptism supposed, the contrary whereof (as we even now demonstrated) cannot be proved from the Scripture in hand, there can be no reason to dis-interesse it in any priviledge, or bles∣sing, which is vested in any Water-baptism whatso∣ever. Sect. 98. Thus at last we see as by a noon-day light, how un∣advisedly, and upon how slight grounds, Mr. A. hath fallen un-Christianly foul and heavie upon his Christian Brethren dissenting from him in his sence about Bap∣tism, by adjudging the case against them, thus: It is too e∣vidēt to be denied by any, but those that wil not see, from Act. 2. 38, 39. That both Repentance, and the Declaration of it by Baptism, is required on mans part to interesse him in remissi∣on of sins, & sanctification of the spirit. And as touching this latter, the Sanctification of the Spirit, that Baptism is not necessarily, or universally required on mans part, to interess him herein, is of much more easie demonstra∣tion, then the former. But enough upon this account hath been said formerly, considering how point-blank the Scripture lieth in many places against this conceit. Review the eighth Section of this Discourse. Although Mr. A. (for cause best known to himself) waves the impanelling of Act. 22. 16. to serve upon his Jurie as hath been formerly noted) yet because Gehezi thinks himself wiser at this turn, then his Master, and will not lose the opportunitie and advantage (so seeming to him) of such a Scripture, though the other letteth it passe, let us bestow a few lines in the examination of it also. The words are these: And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, cal∣ling upon the Name of the Lord. Paul himself reporteth these words as spoken unto him by Ananias, upon his sight restored, of which he had been for a season de∣prived
by means of the glory of that light, wherein the Lord Christ had appeared unto him from heaven, as he was journeying towards Damascus. Now because A∣nanias expresseth himself unto Paul, thus,—be bap∣tized, and wash away thy sins, some (according to the te∣nour of Mr. A's Doctrine) inferre, that therefore Bap∣tism washeth away sinnes, i. procureth Justification, or pardon of sinne, in the sight of God. But to this we answer, 1. Substantiall proof hath been made, and this by many arguments, that remission of sinnes is the pur∣chase, or procurement, of the blood of Jesus Christ, and is obtained, or received, by such a Faith, which is accompanied with a true Repentance: and that it is not suspended either in whole or in part, upon Water∣baptism. 2. Evident it is that Paul, when, and before, the words in hand were spoken unto him by Ananias, was in an estate of Justification before God, and had ob∣tained a remission of all his sins. For 1. Ananias salu∣teth him, BROTHER Saul, (Act. 22. 13.) before he baptized him: which (doubtlesse) had he judged him to be in an estate of Reprobation, he would not have done. 2. He prayed, and this with acceptation in the sight of God, before he was baptized (Act. 9. 11.) This also evinceth him to have been in favour with God before his said baptizing, and consequently that his sinnes were forgiven him. 3. When Ananias replied unto the Lord Christ speaking unto him in a vision, and injoyning him to seek out Paul, that he had heard by many how much evill he had done to the Saints at Jerusa∣lem, the Lord made him this answer; Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessell unto me, to bear my name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the children of Israel. For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my Names sake, &c. These things sufficiently declare him to have been in favour with Christ, whilst he was yet unbapti∣zed; and so not to have been in a state of condemnation,
or under the guilt of his sinnes, and consequent∣ly, that his sinnes were not for given him, either by means of, or upon, his baptizing. 4. The Lord Christ had in a most extraordinarie and glorious manner revealed himself from heaven unto him, telling him plainly, that he was Jesus whom he persecuted; and Paul belee∣ved him accordingly. Act. 9. 5, 6. Therefore (certainly) by this time he was in a state of acceptation with Christ, and so cleansed from his sins. 5. (And lastly) if his sins were in any such way, or sence, washed away, in, or by his Baptism, as if untill now he had been in a state of wrath thorow a retainment or non-forgivenesse of his sinnes by God, then had Ananias admitted an un∣clean person, and a child of Sathan, unto Baptism, when he admitted Paul: and consequently neither Faith, nor Repentance, nor yet the profession of either, shall be necessarie to qualifie for Baptism, unlesse it be said that Ananias acted contrary to Gospell rule in baptizing Paul. Therefore (certainly) Ananias his meaning, in saying unto him, Arise, and be baptized, and wash away thy sins, &c. was not that by being baptized he should be justified in the sight of God, or obtain the pardon and forgivenesse of his sins (These, as hath been proved, having been forgiven him before his baptizing) but that either, 1. he should wash away his sins, Typically, or Sacramentally; or else (and rather) 2. that upon his being baptized, he should wash away his sinnes, i. (in his own expression and phrase) cleanse himself from all filthinesse both of Flesh and Spirit, serving God in righte∣ousnesse and true holinesse all the dayes of his life. So that these words, and wash away thy sinnes, do not ex∣presse, or relate unto, matter of justification, but of San∣ctification. This latter Interpretation might be abetted by the enlargment and pressing of these, and such like consi∣derations. 1. Men are no where in Scripture commanded to justifie themselves, at least not in that sence, wherein some Anabaptists interpret the words in hand, and a∣gainst
which we now argue) but frequently to sanctifie themselves. See Levit. 11. 44. Levit. 20. 7. Joel 3. 5. 2 Chron. 29. 5. (to omit other places.) 2. The work, or duty of Sanctification, is often ex∣pressed by the Metaphor of washing, Wash you, make you clean: put away the evill of your doings, &c. Isa. 1. 16. O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickednesse, &c. Jer. 4. 14. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, &c. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 3. It hath been proved, that Paul before his bapti∣zing, was in a justified condition; and consequently, could not be exhorted by Baptism to wash away his sinnes in any such sence, which importeth Justification, or remis∣sion of sins. 4. The sence we now plead of the words, and wash away thy sins, well accommodates both the former, and the latter part of the verse; whereas the sence oppo∣sed, falleth in kindly with neither. For the former, thus: Be baptized, and wash away thy sins,] i. be baptized, and then be carefull to observe the holy ingagement, which thy submission unto Baptism imposeth on thee. For the latter, thus: Wash away thy sinnes, calling upon the Name of the Lord] 1. Cast away from thee the evill of thy wayes, depart from iniquitie, so shall thou call upon the Name of God, or of Christ (as some expound the word, Lord) with acceptation; according to that 2 Tim. 2. 19. (as the Geneva Translation readeth it) Let every one that calleth on the Name of Christ, depart from iniquitie. Whereas on the other hand, to make Ananias to speak unto Paul, thus: Arise, and be bapti∣zed, and so ustfie thy self; &c. is to make him speak an uncouth Dialect, and unknown to the Scriptures. Allthough I rather incline to the interpretation of the place now asserted, yet the other, which understand∣eth Ananias to speak of a Typicall washing away of sinne by Baptism, is probable, and of good accord with Scrip∣ture notion, and Phrase. This interpretation supposeth Ananias speaking unto Paul to this effect. Arise, be
baptized, and wash away thy sinnes, &c. q. d. The Lord Christ hath appeared from Heaven unto thee, he hath prevailed with thee to believe on him to the justificati∣on of thy person, and forgivenesse of thy sins. Why then shouldest thou delay the receiving of the seal or confirmation of this thy blessednesse, and not make hast to be baptized, seeing Baptism is a Type or Figure of an Heavenly institution, wherein the washing or cleansing of the conscience from the guilt and defile∣ment of sinne, is shadowed, and Typically, or Sacra∣mentally transacted. In Scripture, things are frequent∣ly said to be done, simply, and without explication, when they are done only in their Type, or Sacramental∣ly. Thus Ezekiel calleth his declaring the destruction of the citie, the destroying of it, simply; When I came to destroy the citie, Ezek. 43. 3. So likewise he is said to bear the iniquitie of the house of Israel, and so to lay siege against it, &c, (Ezek. 4. 3. 5.) when as he did these but in Type and figure only. Therefore WE ARE BƲ∣RIED with him by, or through Baptism, &c. Rom. 6. 4. i. we are Typically, or Sacramentally buried with him, &c. So Col. 2. 12. buried with him in Baptism. Thus 1 Pet. 3. 21. The figure of Baptism is said to save men (of which formerly, viz. Sect. 130.) In this kind of Dialect likewise the Apostle tells the Galathians, that Christ was crucified among them, [meaning, Sacramental∣ly, or representatively only] Gal. 3. 1. (to omit many the like) I finde our Protestant Expositours more gene∣rally leaning rather to this interpretation, then the other. Water (saith Bllinger) doth not wash away sins, but grace which is signified by water. Non enim aqua abluit peccatum. sed gratia qua sig∣nificatur per aquam. Calvin saith; that no such thing is intimated, as if any thing taken a∣way, either from the Holy Ghost, or from the bloud of Christ, were [put into, and] shut up in the element: but that God is willing that the Element should be a prop or support to our weknesse. Therefore in as much as Baptism helpeth our Faith in the receiving the forgivenesse of our sinnes by the blood of Christ only, it is called the Laver or washer of the
soul. Non quod quicquam vel ex Spiritu San∣cto, vel ex san∣guine Christi detractum in elemento inclu∣datur. Sed quia signum ipsum Deus vult infirmita∣tis nostrae ad∣miniculum esse. Quatenus ergo fidem nostram adjuvat Bap∣tismus, ut re∣missionem pec∣catorum acci∣piat ex solo Christi san∣guine, lava∣crum animae vocatur. Cal∣vin. in locum. I forbear pluralitie of quotations. They who make Justification, or remission of sins, to de∣pend upon Baptism, do (as Calvin upon the place in hand aptly expresseth it) Baptismo Christum obruere, overwhelm Christ with Baptism. Nor is there any thing pertinent to the businesse in hand in what Mr. A. subjoyneth in the close of this dis∣course. And (saith he) if this be one End and Use of Baptism, as you see, for persons thereby to enter their publique assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospell upon their cordiall embracing it, then the Baptism of Infants is voided as to this use also, in asmuch as they are uncapable of exert∣ing any act of heart, &. For 1. Every mans assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospell, is not publique. With the heart (saith the Apostle) man believeth unto righteousness. Indeed no mans assent or consent hereunto, is publique, but very secret and private. The Lord [and no other] knoweth [certainly] who are his. Yea, not so much as the pro∣babilitie of any mans assent and consent is publique, untill it be by one means or other made publique. Now then if it must be [made] publique, before it be entered by Baptism, Baptism cannot be the publication or manife∣station of it, at least not the first or immediate publication of it. Nor can the declaration, or publication, of any mans Faith or Repentance, be any end worthy Baptism, in case they be declared and made publique, before Bap∣tism interposeth for this declaration. When the battell is fought and the day won, there is no need of fresh souldiers. 2. If it be one end and use of Baptism, for persons hereby to enter their publique assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospell upon their cordiall embracing it, then is both Mr. A's own Baptism, yea and the Baptism of a very great part of those baptized in his way, voided as to this use, as well as the Baptism of Infants. For 1. Mr. A. him∣self was not baptized upon his cordiall embracing the terms of the Gospell, but long after. 2. If, when he was bap∣tized,
he did thereby enter his publique assent and consent to the terms of the Gospell, I believe he entered that which was publique, very privatly, and in a book legible by very few. 3. It is too too manifest that a very great part of those, who are baptized in his way, nei∣ther cordially embrace the Gospell, nor yet well under∣stand what the terms of it are. How then can they enter their assent and consent unto the terms of the Gospell, upon their cordiall embracing it? Therefore by the verdict of Mr. A's Doctrine, their Baptism also is voided as to that end and use of it, of which he here speaks. Yea 4. (and lastly) no man can certainly tell when, or by whose Baptism, Baptism is not voided as to that end and use, which here he ascribes unto it; because it cannot cer∣tainly be known who amongst those that are baptized, do either assent or consent unto the terms of the Gospell, much lesse who they are, that cordially embrace it. So that he hath brought that end and use of Baptism, by which in this place he endeavours to void Infant Baptism, to a very bad market. 3. (And lastly, for this) suppose that end and use of Baptism, which here he asserteth unto it, were legi∣timate, and really such, yea and that the Baptism of In∣fants were voided as to them, yet it followeth not from hence, that therefore the Baptism of Infants is unlaw∣full. One end of marriage is legitimate procreation; and marriage, as to this end of it is voided unto those, who marry, and never procreate; yet it followeth not that the marriage of such as these, is unlawfull. See more of this, Sect. 67. If any one end of Baptism be competent unto children, this is sufficient to justifie their baptizing, though others be not. Mr. A. advanceth, p. 19. Sect. 99. Another excellent effect, and use of Baptism is, thereby to justifie God in the sight of the world, as touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospell, for so it is said, Luk. 7. 29. That all the people that heard him, justified God, being Baptized with the Baptism of Iohn. And soon after:
They are said to justifie God in being Baptized, because by their voluntarie submission unto that Ordinance, they did declare, that they judged the Doctrine and Precepts of the Gospell, of which Baptism is a part, most worthy belief and obedience, as coming from God. But inasmuch as In∣fants are only passive in Baptism, and not active or volun∣tary, they cannot contribute any thing towards the justifica∣tion of God, &c. Nor is the cause of Infant-baptism like to suffer by any thing that is said here. For 1. The justification of God in the sight of the world, is no effect of Baptism; especially not as taken up, or pra∣ctised by Mr. A. & most of his way. For how can God be justified in the sight of the world, by any such transaction of men, which is transacted by them out of the sight, view, and cognisance of the world? And we have oft had occasion to consider, that most of those baptismall transactions, which are practised in Mr. A's way of Baptizing, are wont to be, little other then clan∣destine, and beheld only by a very few. 2. Neither can God be justified in the sight of the world, by any act, Baptismall or other, which either is in it self doubtfully and disputably good (at the best) or, 2. is in itsself irregular or unlawfull, or 3. which is so apprehended by the world. Now such Baptismall actions, as Mr. A. contends for and practiseth, are 1. doubtfully good, at the best, the farre greater part of men Grave, Sober, and Judicious, judging and condemning them as unwarrantable and unlawfull. And 2. by the generalitie of the world, they are censu∣red not simply and singly as unlawfull, but as actions hatefull, and much displeasing unto God. Therefore the ustifying of God in the sight of world, can be no fruit, or effect, much lesse any excellent effect of such actions. 3. When wicked and unworthy persons are baptized (a kind of traveller too often met with in Mr. A's way) God is so far from being justified hereby, that he is rather dishonoured and reproached. But unto the wick∣ed
God saith, what hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou shouldest take my Covenant in thy mouth, Psal. 50. 16. Therefore however, the justifying of God in the sight of the world, is no effect of Baptism simply, but, at the most, of Baptism, as, and when, regularly admini∣stred unto persons judged by God himself in the Scrip∣tures meet for part and fellowship in that Administra∣tion. 4. Neither doth the Text cited by Mr. A. necessa∣rily prove, that the justifying of God touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospell, in the sight of the world, is any effect or use of Baptism. His glosse upon it is not cogent. For they are not said to justifie God IN being baptized: the words give not this sound: but only that having been baptized with the Baptism of Johhn [] they now justified God, viz. by belee∣ving that testimonie, which God by the mouth of his Son Christ had now given concerning Iohn. See ver. 24. 25, 26, &c. intimating, that their having been baptized of Iohn, inclined them readily to imbrace that honou∣rable testimonie, which the Lord Christ had now given unto him: whereas the Pharisees and Lawyers, , not having been baptized of him, [i. of Iohn] are said to have reected the counsell of God  against themselves [or, concerning themselves] i. by not recei∣ving Christs testimonie of Iohn, to have made frustrate and void as to themselves, the Gracious intention of God towards them therein; which were to have redu∣ced them to an honourable and worthy esteem of Iohn, his Ministerie and Doctrine, that so they might have beleeved in him, whom Iohn in his ministerie so highly magnified, and commended unto the world. Or, Sect. 100. 5. Admit we Mr. A's glosse upon the said place thus farre (which, I confesse, upon second thoughts, I judge not improbable) vi. that all the people that heard Iohn, and the Publicans, justified God, IN, or BY, their being bap∣tized
with his Baptism; yet 1. it doth not follow, that hereby they justified him, as touching the truth of his sayings in the Gospell. For as yet, I mean, whilst the great recourse of people (here implyed) unto Iohns Baptism, continued, the Gospell was not known, nei∣ther had been preached in the world; nor did the world understand what the sayings thereof were, or rather, what they would be, or were like to be. Therefore the justifying of God as touhing the truth of these, could be no such effect, or use, of Baptism, no not of the Baptism of the persons baptized by Iohn, as Mr. A. pretendeth. They are said to have justified God in, or by submitting unto Iohns Baptism, in asmuch as by this submission they did acknowledge his ministerie and Baptism to be from hea∣ven, i. from God, and withall, that the tenour and sub∣stance of his ministerie, (which was, that upon the Re∣pentance of those who had sinned, their sins should be forgiven them) was very gracious and good. 2. Nor doth it follow, that though they justified God, in these respects, by being Baptized by John, that therefore they justified him in the sight of the world, there being little or (perhaps) nothing, of the world present, when they were baptized. They rather justified God [I mean, did that which was proper to justifie God] in the sight of the world, by their publique owning and professing this their Baptism afterwards, then simply by their recei∣ving it. Therefore Sect. 101. 6. Whereas he assumes, that Infants being only pas∣sive in Baptism, and not voluntarie, cannot contribute any thing to the justification of God, &c. he alters the state of the Question between him, and his adversaries; which is not, whether Infants, but whether Infant-Baptism, contributes any thing to the justification of God; although neither is this indeed the state of the Question, no nor yet of any considerable connexion with it. For many things may be lawfull, which do not contribute any thing to the justification of God in the sight of the world.
Yet 2. that Infant-Baptism contributes every whit as much (or rather more) to the justification of God as to the truth of his sayings in the Gospell, in the sight of the world, as the baptizing of men and women, is evident from hence. The Parents, who offer their chil∣dren unto Baptism, are (for the most part, and should be, alwaies) experienced Christians, and of long acquaintance with the Gospell; and conse∣quently cannot reasonably but be presumed, to have better knowledge and assurance both of the truth, and likewise of the goodnesse of the sayings of God in the Gospell, then men and women who are newly con∣verted to the Gospell; who notwithstanding accord∣ing to Gospell rule (in case of a non-pre-baptism) yea and according to Mr. A's principles themselves (whe∣ther in such a case, or otherwise) are the only men and women that ought to be baptized (excepting the case of oversight) Now 1. it cannot be thought, that Pa∣rents, being long experienced Christians, would offer their childrē to be baptized, unlesse themselves were verily per∣swaded both of the truth, and goodnesse, of the sayings of God in the Gospell. And 2. the testimonie of those concerning the truth and goodnesse of things, or say∣ings, who have best known, and had the most experi∣ence of them, amounts to a richer and fuller justifica∣tion of them, and so of him who hath spoken them, then the testimonie of such persons, who are (at least comparatively) strangers to them. Therefore though Infants themselves cannot contribute to the justification of God in the case before us, yet Infant-baptism may, and doth, contribute altogether as much (or rather more) as the Baptizing of men and women, especially if bap∣tized in these years, when and as soon, as by rule they ought. Sect. 102. 3. That which Mr. A's most regular actives and voluntaries in their Baptism contribute to the justifying of God in the truth of his sayings in the Gospell, and sight of
the world, is not so much (as hath been already obser∣ved) by their being baptized, as by their publique own∣ing and professing this their Baptism afterwards in the face of the world. If so, then may Infants themselves living unto the age and years of men, by a like publique owning of their baptism, with the other, contribute as much to the justifying of God in the sight of the world, as they. 4. (And lastly for this) The Infants of the Jews were no whit more active or voluntarie in their circum∣cision, then the Infants of Christians are in their Bap∣tism. Yet God judged himself as much (or more) justified in the sight of the world by the circumcision of those Infants, as he did by the circumcision of men: otherwise he would rather have enjoyned the cir∣cumcision of men only, and not of children at all. 5. Whereas Mr. A. calleth Baptism, a part of the Gos∣pell, he might more properly, and truly, if we respect either the institution, or first practise and administrati∣ons of it, (in which consideration Mr. A. discourseth of it) call it a part of the Law. For Iohns Doctrine was, not that the kingdom of heaven (by which all understand, the state of the Gospell it self, or else the state of the Church under the Gospell) was already come, but only that it was nigh at hand. Mat. 3. 2. Nor were the Legall or Mosaicall administrations abolished, so much as to the precept, or necessitie of them, in John's dayes: and consequently there was no opportunitie for the intro∣ducing or erecting of any Evangelicall Ordinance, whil'st his ministerie continued. Besides, we read (Gal. 4. 4.) that Christ was made under the law; but no where, that he was made under the Gospell. And himself saith that he came to fulfill the law. Mat. 5. 17. which he had in other words expressed before (Mat. 3. 15.) saying, that it became him to fulfill all righteousnesse, (giving this unto Iohn for a reason, why it was meet for him to subject himself unto Baptism, as well as he had done unto circumcision, and other legall observa∣tions) Or however, if we notion Baptism as a Gospell
Ordinance, it is very improperly, yea untruly, term'd a part of the Gospell. The Gospell is the Covenant: Baptism the Seal of this Covenant (as Mr. A. and the Generalitie of Rebaptizers with him, do acknowledge: for in hoc, as it seems, non tenetur Magister Fisher) and therefore can be no part of it, as the seal annexed to a writing, is no part of the writing. But finis unius mali gradus est futuri; and Mr. A. proceedethMr. A. p. 19. 20. Sect. 103. 5. Lastly, Another great end of Baptism, when taken up by persons under due qualifications, is to distinguish and difference them from the world, & to characterise them as pe∣culiarly relating unto God; in which respect (amongst others) al those that are baptized into Christ, are said, to put on Christ▪ Gal. 3. 27. they thereby declare themselves to belong to him, as the servants of great men are known to belong to them, by their badg and livery which they put on, when they enter themselves servants to them. After a little lesse pertinent discourse about the distinguishing use of the Law, he assumse thus: But now this way the differencing men lasted but till such time as Faith came, as the Apostle notes; But after Faith is come (saith he) we are no longer under a Shoolmaster, v. 25. i. no longer known to be Disciples or Scholars, as for∣merly we were by our keeping of the Law. The Mosai∣call dispensation continued till faith came, i. e. untill the time of the gospel dispensatiō: & then faith became of the same use to denominate and distinguish who were the children of God, & who not, which the law & ceremonies were of before. For so the Apostle saith, v. 26. For ye are (i. e. now ye are) all the children of God by Faith in Christ Iesus. By Faith, (which is here said to have come, when the Schoolmastership of the Law ended) is meant, I conceive, the confessing or ac∣knowledging Christ Jesus to be come in the flesh, and to be the Son of God, &c. Upon this, he labours in the very fire to prove this his conceit from the Scriptures.
Sect. 104. The basis of this longsome discourse, (as the atten∣tive Reader may easily perceive) is (as himself termeth it) his conceit, that by Faith, Gal. 3. 25, 26. is meant, the confessing or acknowledging Christ Iesus to be come in the flesh, to be the Son of God, and Saviour of the world. If this conceit will burn, all the fat here is in the fire. Now that by Faith, in the said passages, cannot be meant such a confessing or acknowledging, as is conceited, at least not in both the verses (nor indeed, in either) is as evi∣dent, as evidence it self can make any thing evi∣dent. For, 1. (To speak to v. 25. the former of the two) what eare, that hath any tast of words, can find an Aposto∣licall relish in such a saying as this: But after the con∣fessing and acknowledging Christ Iesus to be come in the flesh, came, we are no longer, &c. It must be by a Me∣taphor of a new and strange foundation, by which Faith shall signifie, the confessing and acknowledging Christ Iesus to be come in the flesh, &c. 2. No Expositor, whether Ancient, or Modern, Po∣pish, or Protestant, that I have consulted upon the place, gives the right hand of fellowship, but the left(b) Postquam venit fides, id est, tempus fi: dei, postquam revelata est fides in Chris¦stum, in quam; &c. of contradiction, to that interpretation. Calvin, by Faith here understandeth, a more clear revelation of Grace, upon the rending of the vaile of the Temple, which was cau∣sed by the exhibition of Christ. Quis sit adventus fides, jam dictum est, nempe clarior gratiae revela∣tio, postquam velum templi scissum est, quod factum esse scimus Christi exhibi∣tione. Upon ver. 23. he had said, that Faith (there) signifieth the full revela∣tion of those things, which were hid under the obscuritie of(d) ] id est, prius quam ve∣niret Evange∣lium, quòd  fides dicitur. the shadows of the Law. Musculus, by Faith here un∣derstands the time of Faith. Hugo Grotius, the Gospell (by a Metonymie) (c) Estius, the time of Faith reveal∣ed. At posti quam advenit tempus revela∣tae fidei, &c. Mr. Perkins, the Gospel, or Doctrine of remission of sins, and life everlasting by Christ, exhibited in the flesh. Doubtlesse the sense of no Commentator upon the place holds any affinitie with Mr. A's notion. Yea 3. Himself contradicteth himself in that sence of the word Faith, which now we oppose. For are not his
words these? The Mosaicall dispensation continued till Faith came, i. e. untill the time of the Gospell dispensation. Are, the time of the Gospell dispensation, and, and the confessing and acknowledging Christ to become in the flesh, of an equi∣valent, or synonymous signification? But 2. Concerning the word Faith, ver. 26. the case is yet more clear, that it doth not signifie Mr. A's significa∣tion, viz. a confessing or acknowledging Christ to be come in the flesh, &c. Because Sect. 105. 1. This Faith, is by the Apostle exegetically termed, Faith in Christ Jesus. Now since the mountains and the hills were brought forth, it was never heard that Faith in Christ Iesus, signified, a confessing and acknow∣ledging Christ to be come in the flesh, &c. 2. Neither can the hardnesse of such a sence, or sig∣nification of the phrase, be any waies mollified, or so much as tolerably acccommodated, by the mediati∣on of any figure, whether in Rethorique, or Gram∣mar. 3. The Apostle here informs the Galathians thus: ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus. Now no mā IS [i becomes, or, is made]  child of God, by confessing & acknowledging Christ to be come in the flesh, &c. especially not by an outward confessing and acknowledging hereof, (of which Mr. A. will needs be understood) but every man becomes, and is made, a child of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus, properly and truly so called. 4. Neither can the necessiitie, no nor yet the rea∣sonable expediencie, of such a declarative sence of the verb substantive, are, as Mr. A. contendeth for, be evi∣cted from the scope of the place, or subject matter in hand. For evident it is from ver. 24. that the Apostle here discourseth of such a Faith, by which men are justi∣fied; not, declared to be justified. Wherefore (saith he) the Law was our Schoolemaster, to bring us to Christ, that we might be justified by Faith [meaning, without the help of the Law, as appears from ver. 25.] But after
that Faith is come, i. after our Faith in Christ as being now come, and having suffered in the flesh] we are no longer under a Schoolemaster [i. we are not under any necessitie of legall observations] The reason hereof fol∣lowes, vers. 26. For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Iesus, [i. by beleeving that Christ Iesus is come, and hath suffered in the flesh, ye are all, who thus be∣leeve, actually made the children of God;] For the words  (to note this by the way) should not be transla∣ted, children of God, but (according to the proper sig∣nification of the word, ) sons of God; the Apostle in this discourse, putting a signall difference, yea make∣ing an opposition between , a child, and ,  son. Compare v. 1. and 3. with ver 5, 6, 7. of the following Chapter: in which passages we find the Apostle using the word , children, to expresse the state and condi∣tion of the Church, and the members thereof, under the Law; and on the other hand, the word , sons, to signifie the condition of Beleevers under the Gospell. Which Observation cuts a sunder the sinews of Mr. A's notion (or, conceit, as himself termeth it, p. 21.) viz. that the Apostle doth not here difference Faith under the gospel, from Faith under the Law. For evident it is that he doth difference the one Faith from the other, saying (in effect) that however Believers under the Law were justified by Faith in him who was to come, as as well as Beleevers under the Gofpell, by Faith in him who is come; yet the former Faith justified them only as , chldre, [or, little children] or (as the Apostle varieth the expression) as servants; i. so justified them, that they still remained under Tutours and Governours (as he speaketh) and Pedagogie of the Law; whereas the latter Faith justifieth them, as , Sons; i. as persons who have out-grown their Pupillage, and received , (translated) the adoption of sons; the word here importeth the priviledge, or accommodation, of Sons, permitted unto them by their Fathers, when they come to maturitie of years, and discretion; which accommo∣dation
chiefly consisteth in an enlargment of their liber∣tie, and exemption from that servile subjection, unto Tu∣tours and Governours; under which they were whilst children. Sect. 106. 5. (And lastly, for this) Nor can I believe that any judicious Expositor, either Ancient or Modern, was ever tempted with Mr. A's declarative sence of the verb substantive, are, in the Text before us. Calvin (upon the place) assigns this for a reason, why the Law should not alwayes detain Believers in bondage, viz. because they ARE the Sons of God. And further saith, that the Apostle evinceth their libertie by this, that they ARE the Sons of God. How? By faith in Christ. For whosoe∣ver believe in him, this prerogative is conferred upon them, that they ARE the sons of God. Probat aliâ ratione iniquum esse ac minimè consentane∣um, ut lex perpetua ser∣vitute astrin∣gat fideles: quia silicet SƲNT filij Dei—li∣bertatem in∣de probat, quod SINT filij Dei. Quo∣modo? per fidē these.] in Christam. Nam quicunque in eum credunt, datur illis haec prerogativa, ut SINT filij Dei. Musclus like∣wise (upon the words) is expresse for this substantive sence, against the declarative. Omnes enim filij Dei estis per fidem in Christo Jesu] Sensus est, quotquot in Christo Jesu estis, filij Dei ESTIS, per fidem. Grotius, you who have believed in Christ as you ought, and continue thus be∣lieving, are the sons of God [viz. adult, or come to ma∣turitie of years] they who are such, begin to enoy their fa∣thers goods. And thus ye have received the Spirit of your Father. Vos qui in Christum credidist is ita ut o∣portet, ac sic credere perseveratis, estis filij Dei (nempe, adulti) tales qui sunt, incipiunt bonis paternis frui. Sic & vos accepistis Patris Spiritum. (d) Omnes filij Dei estis, &c. Q d. Etiamsi per Legem sitis vexati, humiliati & occisi, tamen Lex non fecit vo justos, non fecit vos filios Dei, sed fides. Luther, (to name no more) commenteth this notion on the words, ye are all the sons of God, &c. As if he should say, Although ye are vexed, cast down, slain, by the Law, yet hath not the Law made you righteous, it hath not made you the Sons of God, but Faith [hath done these.] These things considered, how importune is Mr. A's dedu∣ction from these words ver. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. From hence
he concludeth (fidenter satis) So that the Faith, what ever it is, by which they were said to be the children of God, in ver. 26. Must be the same in effect with that, which he calls the putting on of Christ in Baptism. I cannot but marvell, and this not a little, upon what basis he should found this consequence, or collection; or what rela∣tion he can apprehend between the two verses, ver. 26. and ver. 27. which should intice a considering man to this belief, that Faith in the former should be the same thing in effect with putting on Christ in Baptism, in the lat∣ter. The aspect which the latter verse hath upon the former, is plainly this. The Apostle in the former, having delivered this for truth unto them, that they were all, [viz. who truly believed] the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Iesus; (viz. without any Legall observa∣tion, as we formerly expounded) in the latter gives this for a reason, why they should the rather believe it, [I mean, that they were the Sons of God by Faith in Christ Iesus, without the help of any legall ceremonie] because many of them had submitted unto Baptism, had been baptized into Christ; by which act of submission they put on Christ, i. solemnly professed and engaged them∣selves totally to conform and adhere to the Discipline of Christ in the Gospell, where no Law-ceremonie hath place, or is allowed, much lesse imposed upon any man. So that the strength of the Apostles arguing in the place in hand, standeth in this principle, or ground, in reason: what many, according to the will of God, solemnly and publiquely professe that they believe, and ingage themselves to adhere unto, must of necessitie be a truth. The Apostle here supposeth, or taketh for granted, (as well he might) that all those amongst them who had been baptized into Christ, had been thus baptized, by, or according to, the will of God. This interpreta∣tion of his argument in ver. 27. to prove what he had affirmed, ver. 26. viz. that they were all the complete or adult, Sons of God, by Faith in Christ, without the ob∣servation of Moses Law, makes him to speak and argue
like himself, and with pregnancie of conviction. Where∣as Mr. A's comment puts him upon that absurditie in his discourse, which Logicians call, idem per idem, which is, when the conclusion to be pro∣ved, and the medium, by which this proof should be made, are, either formally, or materially, (and to use his own term) in effect, the same. If Mr. Fisher should take any of his Adversaries arguing at such a rate, as Mr. A. makes the Apostle to argue here, he would, tell them that as the wheele-barrow goes rumble to rumble, so their conclusions follow from their pre∣mises. Sect. 107. By the way, when the Apostle saith, that as many of them as had been baptized, had put on Christ, he doth not necessarily suppose, or imply, that such of them, who had not been thus baptized, had, in no sence, or upon no account, put on Christ. For when a thing may be done after severall and different manners, they that do it not after one manner, may very possibly do it after ano∣ther. The same garment may be put on severall wayes; and the same Christ may be put on, i. publiquely profes∣sed and owned in the world, by different forms of pro∣fession. He that eateth, eateth to the Lord, for he giveth God thanks: and he that eateth not, to the Lord he eateth not, and giveh God thanks. Rom. 14 6. He that came neither eating nor drinking, yet came in a way of righteous∣ness, as he also did, who came both eating and drinking, Mat. 11. 18, 19. compared with cap. 21. 32. And (doubtlesse) the Apostle would not have here made those of them, who had been baptized, the same body or Church, with those who had not been baptized (which I have elsewhere proved, I suppose beyond all reason∣able contradiction, that he doth) See wa∣rer. dipping. pag. 85 86 if these latter had not made some publique profession of Christ and the Gospell, as well as the former. But this discourse is a little eccentricall to our present businesse. From the premisses it sufficiently appears how con∣trary
to reason Mr. Alleu reasoneth, when he saith (p. 21. towards the end) Besides, their putting on of Christ in Baptism, would be no reason why they were the children of God by Faith in Christ, if we should understand their being the children of God constitutively, aad not declaratively, unlesse we will suppose that man is the child of GOD in his account, notwithstanding his believing in Christ, untill he be baptized into Christ. This latter clause, unless we will suppose, &c. I suppose is dis-sensed by his Printer, by leaving out the particle, a, before, man; and the ne∣gative particle, not, after, is. But were it thus accom∣modated, & supplied, it would do no feats for the accom∣modation of Mr. A's arguing. For how their putting on Christ in Baptism is no effectuall argument, or rea∣son, to prove, that they were the children of God constitu∣tively, and could be no reason to prove them declara∣tively such, hath been already debated even to evi∣dence. Sect. 108. Whereas he saith (p. 22. in processe of the same dis∣course) that the Apostle supposeth them to be Christs, up∣on that very account of their being baptized into him, and that this appears from ver. 27, 28, 29. compared together; the very truth is, that he rather supposeth them to have been Christs before they were baptized into him; other∣wise he must suppose them to have been infidels, yea strangers and enemies unto Christ, when they were thus baptized, or untill they had been baptized; which doth not look like an Apostolicall supposall. And as touch∣ing any appearance from ver. 27, 28, 29. compared, that the Apostle should suppose such a supposition as he as∣scribeth unto him, I know no man that seeth the appa∣rition, but himself. When the Apostle, ver. 29. con∣cludeth thus; If ye be Christs, then are ye Abrahams seed, &c. his meaning (alas) is not, if ye be, or have been, baptized, then are ye Abrahams seed; but if ye be Christs, i. if ye relate unto him (and so become his) by a true and unfeigned Faith. Thousands have been
Baptized, who yet are none of Abrahams seed. About the middle of p. 22. he draweth us up the up∣shot or result of the Apostles discourse (in the verses lately argued) thus; That persons by Baptism do make such a profession of Christ, as by which they are characterised to be his. If he means, his, by profession only, ad no fur∣ther, what he saith may passe for truth; but certainly this is no part of the result of the Apostles discourse he speaks of. If his meaning be any thing more, and that by Baptism men make such a profession of Christ, by which they are characterized to be his, i. true, or sound beleevers in him, Mr. A. must prove that such a chara∣cterizing vertue is essentiall unto, and inseparable from Baptism, before he can make this passable with any con∣sidering man for a truth. That which follows, is of the same impertinent re∣sentment; If this then be [that which is not, as hath been proved, viz.) the characteristicall mark to distin∣guish the children of God from the world, then it will fol∣low [but as the case is, it will not follow] that no other acknowledgment of Christ without this, or with neglect of this, is to be looked upon as any other then a partiall owning of Christ, and not a compleat putting him on, so as to be esteemed thereby visibly the children of God. But most assuredly the putting on Christ by Baptism, without put∣ting him on by mortification, holinesse of life, &c. is scarce so much as a partiall owning of him, but rather a putting him to open shame (as the Apostle speaketh) and that which may be found in wicked men and of a Pagan conversation, cannot reasonably be thought to adde much unto, or to compleat the visibilitie of a child of God. Sect. 109. But because Mr. A. doth so importunely hammer this nail, here and afterwards, over, and over, and yet over again, contending, that Baptism, and Baptism only, gives visibilitie to a Christian, or Child of God, and that no person whatsoever is to be esteemed visibly a child
of God, by means of all other visibilities in him whatso∣ever, without this (although the winning of this ground would yield him little or no advantage of standing, to fight his battle of Ati-poedobapism) let us briefly consider, how friviolous and emptie, how un∣worthy a considering man such a notion, or conceit is. For 1. Doth not himself, and men of his judgment, esteem those visible Saints, or children of God, whom they judge meet to be baptized, and whom they are now a∣bout to baptize, before, or untill they have baptized them? Or do they judge none but the children of the Divell, or at least such, who for ought they know, may be such, (the children of the Divell) meet to he Bapti∣zed? Or in what capacitie, or relation do they look upon those, whom they are about to Baptize, before they are baptized? Either they must look upon them, as Saints visible, or as Saints invisible, or as no Saints at all, or as persons who may, or may not, be saints for any thing they know, or can judg, in one kind or other▪ and under one or other of thee considerations they must baptize them. If they look upon them, as Saints visible, and in this capacitie baptize them, how then doth Baptism give visibilitie of Saintship unto them, when as they were visible Saints, before baptized? If they say, they look upon them as Saints invisible, what do they speak lesse then a contradiction? taking the words, visible, and invisible, in such a sence, wherein they must of necessitie be understood in the case or que∣stion in hand? For how can I judge a person to be an invisible Saint, whom I have no visible, i. no suffici∣ent or competent ground whereof I am capable, to udge him any Saint at all? Or if I have any such ground, is he not now a visible Saint unto me, or a person whom I ought to esteem such? If they look on them as no Saints at all, and in this capacitie baptize them, then they bap∣tize men, quatenus the children of the Devill, or qua∣tenus esteemed such: and if so, they are bound to admit none to Baptism, but those who can give an account
of their unbelief, and of their relation of Son-ship to the Divell. Or (4. and lastly) if they look upon them, as persons who may, or may not be saints, for any thing they know of them, and in this condition baptize them, then are they bound to receive none unto Baptism, con∣cerning whom they have any testimonie or ground to beleeve that they are the children of God; nor indeed any but only such, who are mere strangers unto them, and of whom they never heard either good, or evill. Therefore Mr. A's conceit about the visibilitie of Saint∣ship by means of Baptism, is evidently overthrown by his own Doctrine and practise of baptizing. 2. How can that give visibilitie of Saintship unto men, which is altogether as visible in men, who are no saints, as in those, who are? Doth the greennesse of the leaves, in a fig-tree, prove this tree to be a fig-tree, when as the leaves of all, or most other trees are green, as well as this? Or doth whitenesse of colour in an horse, prove him to be that kind of creature, which indeed he is (I mean, an horse) when as many Cows, and Sheep, are white of colour, as well as he? These are strange kinds of reasonings from the tongues and pens of sober men. Or were there not many in the primitive times themselves, who wore the liverie of Baptism, and yet were no Saints, or children of God? Or are there not multitudes amongst us at this day, who in this liverie serve Sathan, and consequently, are no visible Saints, unlesse it be of a very late edition, and unheard of untill now. Sect. 110. 3. Baptism gives no visibilitie, or estimation of saint∣ship, no not in the regular or due administration of it: therefore much lesse, simply, or universally. We all presume that John Baptist, and the Lord Christ him∣self with his Disciples, administred Baptism regularly and duly; yet was the Baptism administred by these no argument of Saint-ship in those who received it. For notwithstanding Jerusalem, and ALL Judea, and ALL the region round about Jordan were first baptized
by John, (Mat. 3. 5, 6.) and afterwards such vast multitudes by Christ and his Disciples, that the Dis∣ciples of John repined at it, and with much regret in∣formed him, that ALL MEN came unto him [mean∣ing, Christ, to receive Baptism from him, Joh. 3. 26.] yet how few of these were by Iohn himself esteemed visible Saints, or children of God, by means of their Baptism, sufficiently appeareth from that his complaint in the ears of his own disciples, and other Jews; And what he hath seen and heard, that he testifieth (speaking of Christ) and NO MAN receiveth his testimonie, Ioh. 3. 2. And Iohn the Evangelist had not long before said; He came unto his own, and his own received him not, Ioh. 1. 11. Nor were there any more then an hundred and twenty that appeared at that solemn rendevouz of Saints at Ierusalem (Act. 1. 15.) after the ascension of the Lord Christ, where all the Apostles now remain∣ing were present. All which passages, with severall others which might be laid to them, plainly enough shew, that though the number of the Baptized ones in these times, were as the sand on the sea shore, yet was there a remnant only, and this very small, who were Saints, or children of God amongst them. How then did, or could Baptism prove them to be visible Saints, when as it did not prove them to be saints at all? 4. In respect of whom, or how many, was the Eu∣nuch (Baptized by Philip in a desert) made a VI∣SIBLE saint by his Baptism; Possibly his servants, if there were any number of these with him, did not know what his Baptism signified, nor upon what account he was baptized. And much more probable it is, that in his own countrey of Ethiopia, his baptism was vox non sig∣nficativa, and so no esteem of Saint-ship unto him there; as neither doth Mr. A's baptism, nor the Baptism of any others baptized amongst us upon the same account with him, give any esteem of Saint-ship unto them, in the judgement or opinion of those who know what be∣longs
to Saint-ship, and by what an estimate ought to be made of it. Sect. 111. 5. The Scripture teacheth us to estimate the visibili∣tie of Saintship by other manner of characters and pro∣perties, then by a being baptized; yea and not by this at all▪ as farre as I am able to understand. By this (saith Christ himself shall ALL MEN KNOW THAT YOU ARE MY DISCIPLES, IF YE HAVE LOVE ONE TOWARDS ANOTHER. Joh. 13. 35. Doubtlesse there can be no better character, or ground of satisfaction, whereby to judge or esteem men visible saints, or visible children of God, then that, by which the Lord Iesus himself hath so plainly determined that all men many know who are his dscipls. And whether for Beleevers to have love one towards another, be the same with their being, or having been baptized; yea or whe∣ther many beleevers have not love one towards ano∣ther, who yet never were baptized as Mr. A. calls Bap∣tism, I am content Mr. A. himself shall judge and de∣termine. The Apostle Iohn in severall passages fully ac∣cordeth with his great Lord and Master touching the visibilitie of the children of God, and that which differ∣renceth them from the world. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the Divell: whoso∣ever doth not righteousnesse, is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother, 1 Joh. 3. 10. Again, If ye know that he is righteous, YE KNOW that every one that doth righteousnesse, is born of him, 1. Joh. 2. 29. See also ch. 2, 3, 9, 10. ch. 3, 7, 14. ch. 4, 7, 24, &c. So likewise the A∣postle Paul judged it meet for him to esteem the Philippi∣ans visible Saints, in asmuch as both in his bands, and in the defence and confirmation of the Gospell, they were all partakers of his grace [meaning, aswell of that grace, by which he was enabled to suffer, as of that by which he was called actually to suffer] Phil. 1. 7. See upon the same account, 2 Tim. 2. 11, 12. So likewise he com∣mends Epaphroditus unto the Philippians as meet to be received
in the Lord (and therefore as a Person whom they ought to esteem a visible Saint) because that for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, &c. Philip. 2. 29, 30. The Scripture in very many places speaks of mortifica∣tion, self-denial, love, faith, &c. uttering, & expressing themselves by a sutable conversation; and most fre∣quently, of uffering for Christ and for righteousnesse sake, as things rendering persons meet to be esteemed Saints, and children of God: but as concerning Water∣baptism, it never came into the heart of it to ascribe unto it any such thing. Nor do any of, nor all, those three Texts of Scrip∣tures, which Mr. A. draggs by head and shoulders, to serve him in his warfare, do him the least service herein. For 1. we have elsewhere demonstrated that his first Text, 1 Cor. 12. 13. For BY ONE SPIRIT are we all baptized into one body, &c. maketh notably against that very notion or conceit, which here he attempteth to build upon it, See water∣dipping no firm footing for Church Com∣munion, p. 44, 45, 46, &c. And concerning his two remaining, viz. Rom. 6. 3, 5. and Gal. 3. 27. we have, partly in this discourse formerly, Sect. 104, 105, &c. and partly elsewhere, Water-dip∣ping. Post∣script p. 66. 67 made it plain and evident enough to those that are not loth to see, that neither of them have any right hand of fellowship to give unto him in his said no∣tion. Sect. 112. How bottomlesse then are these, and some other like assertions, and inferences, wherein he so much rejoy∣seth, p. 23? Baptism is a wall of partition between the world & the Saints; as if all that were on the other side the river of Baptism had no communion with the world, & were neither proud, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor deceitfull, nor fornicatours, nor adulterers, nor rai∣lers, nor extortioners, nor any thing, but what it ex∣cellently becometh Saints to be; and on the other hand, as if all on this side the said river, were either one or other, some, or all, of these abominations. If Mr. A. could make good his word, in saying that Baptism
is a wall of partition between the world and the Saints, it should be no longer a partition wall between him and me, but I would either digg thorow it, or leap over it, to make my way unto him. So again having only pointed us to the two places last mentioned, Rom. 6. 3, 5. and Gal. 3. 27. he jollyeth it thus: For can we conclude lesse hence [yes, you might conclude lesse by the whole, if you concluded no more then you should] then that mens visible being in Christ is to be reckoned from the time of their Baptism? that being as it were, the immediate in∣strument or means of their visible ingression into him. For otherwise if they were to be looked upon as having a visible being in Christ, by any act, endowment, qualification, pre∣ceding Baptism, why should their ingression, their entrance into Christ, be attributed unto their Baptism? Here is a great deal of triumph without any conquest: yet were all given up, that in this flourish is pretended to be won, it would be no advance at all to the cause now in pleading. For why may not Infants be baptized, as well as men, although it be supposed, that a visible entrance into Christ ought to be attributed unto Baptism? But Sect. 113. 1. I cannot but marvell a little, why he speaks so much of mens being lock'd upon as having a VISIBLE being in Christ, as if men could be looked upon as having a being in Christ, and yet this being not be visible. Or doth he suppose that any mans being in Christ, is exter∣nally, or to the eye of the outer man, visible? I suppose his understanding stands in his way against such a sup∣posall. If then no mans being in Christ is to the out∣ward sense visible, but only such outward expressions and effects, which by the mediation of discourse, render it visible to the eyes of the inner man, it undeniably follows; 1. that there must be somewhat preceding Baptism that must render a mans being in
Christ, visible; otherwise (as we argued formerly) Baptism must only be administred to those, who are look'd upon as having no being in Christ at all. 2. That there are other fruits and effects of a mans being in Christ, which render it visible (yea more visible) be∣sides Baptism; viz. all such which have a more naturall and intimous connexion therewith, then Baptism, and yet are altogether as visible, yea more visible then it, such as holinesse of life, unblamablenesse of conver∣sation, fruitfulnesse in well-doing, suffering for righ∣teousnesse sake, &c. yea doubtlesse in that very ex∣ample of persons Baptized, which himself so lately traversed, and we after him, Act. 2. 37, 38, &c. their being in Christ was visible unto Peter and the rest, before they were baptized, otherwise (it is like) they would not have Baptized them; yea it was much more visible un∣to them, partly by their being prickt in their heart, manifested by their earnest and zealous inquiring of them, what they should do, ver. 37. partly and more prin∣cipally by their glad resenting and receiving the words which Peter, by way of answer to that their demand, spake unto them (ver. 41.) by these things (I say) which were found in them before they were Baptized, their be∣ing in Christ was much more visible, then it was by their being baptized afterwards. Baptism, as we have once at least taken occasion to prove, and oft met with occa∣sion to affirme, renders no mans being in Christ, visible; visible I mean upon such terms, either as if he must needs have a true being in Christ, who is Baptized; or as if it could not be altogether as visible before, as it can be afterwards by means of it. Therefore Sect. 114. Neither can Mr. A. conclude [workman-like, or with truth] either from one, or both the Texts he points at, that mens visible being in Christ is to be reckoned from the time of their Baptism;
or, that Baptism is the immediate instrument of their in∣gression unto him. These as well for Notion, as Phrase, are exotique to the Scriptures he mentions, and (indeed) to all others: and enough, with a surplusage, hath been argued formerly to cut the sinews of all such de∣ductions as these from the Scriptures, unto which they pretend. Men are said, Rom. 6. 3, 5. to be baptized into Christ, to be baptized into his death, to be buried with him by Baptism. This is all that is here said concerning Baptism, and baptizing. Now which of these is the fig∣tree, from whence this Figg should be gathered, that mens visible being in Christ is to be reckoned from the time of their Baptism? As for that which follows, ver. 5. For if we have been planted together in the likenesse of his death, we shall be also in the likenesse of his resurrection; it is evident from the consequent, or promise in the latter part of the verse, that he doth not speak of Baptism, especially not of Water-baptism, in the antecedent, or former part of the verse. For then it would follow that all they, that are Water-baptized, should be saved, or be partakers of a resurrection alike in perpe∣tuitie of glory unto the resurrection of Christ himself. Water-dip∣ping, &c. Post∣script p. 66, 67 But we have opened & argued the sence of this verse elsewhere, as we have done likewise by the other Text, Gal. 3. 27. in this very discourse. Sect. 104. 105, &c. where we found not so much as the dawning of Mr. A's day in this place. Sect. 115. His similitude and comparisons borrowed from men in their affairs (p. 23, 24.) to prove, that none are to be esteemed in Christ, but those who are baptized, &c. are defective to his purpose, and meere impertinencies. The reason why the Husband and wife receive that conjugall relation, and matrimoniall being, proper to them, from some solemn act done at the time of their marriage, is, 1. because either the Law of nature, or the civill constitutions of the state where men and women live, or both, do appro∣priate and confine the entrance into a conjugall relation,
unto sunch or such a solemn act, one or more, to be done by the parties; so that there can be no entrance into this relation, or matrimonicall being by any other act, or way. Whereas a being in Christ, or the entrance hereunto, is not tied or appropriated unto a being baptized, but unto beleeving: and for the visibilitie of this being, or esteemablenesse of it with men, neither is this, either by any Law of God, nor by any prin∣ciple in reason, annexed unto, or made to depend upon Baptism, so that it should not be lawfull for any person, or Church, to esteem such a man a visible member of Christ, who hath not been baptized; no, it hath been proved over and over that every such person lawfully may, yea and of duty ought to be esteemed a mem∣ber, yea a visible member of Christ, who giveth a sober and sound testimonie of his Faith in Christ, (which, as hath been shewed, may be given severall other wayes besides Baptism) yea and that that testimonie in this kind which is given by Baptism, is but faint, and of little or no authoritie with understanding and considering men; especially being compared with that testimony which is given by a godly, righteous, and sober conver∣sation in the world. Again, 2. Another reason why a matrimoniall being, is, and must needs be computed, or estimated, by such or such a solemn act done by the parties at the time of their mar∣riage, is, because such an act as this (I mean, by which the Husband and Wife receive their matrimoniall being) is not permitted unto, nor is wont to be practised by any others, but unto, and by, those only, who receive this being. Whereas persons may in some case be baptized, and this by the will, and according to the word of God, who have no being at all in Christ, much lesse any visible being, as the case was with Simon Magus baptized by Philip, and with multitudes of those who were baptized by John (as was formerly observed.) Upon this account no mans, either being, or visibilitie of being in Christ, can be reasonably Estimated
by his being Baptized. But this point we argued home lately. Sect. 116. There is the same consideration of Mr. A's other comparison, p. 24. As a man (saith he) receives a re∣lative being, as member of such a corporation, by some solemne act done at the time of his enfranchisement; even so—men and women receive that relative Being, which they have in Christ, and as visible members of that spiritu∣all Corporation, whereof Christ is head and chief, from that solemn act of their being baptized into him. This simi∣litude also halts right-down on that legg, on which it should stand upright and strong, to support the weakness of Mr. A's cause. For the reason why a man must perform such or such a solemn act at the time of his infran∣chisement, to receive a relative being, as a member of such a corporation, is, because it is a by-law enacted in, and by this corporation, that no person shall be, or shall be reputed to be a member hereof, but such, who shall perform this solemn act; and that whosoever shall perform it, shall be thus reputed. Whereas God hath made no such Law or Statute as this, that no man shall be reputed a member of Christ, or a visible member of his, but only they who shall be baptized; we have de∣monstrated the contrary formerly. Nor hath he any where determined or adjudged, that whosoever shall be baptized, how unworthy or wicked soever otherwise he shall be, shall notwithstanding upon the meere ac∣count of his Baptism, be esteemed such a member. Therefore Mr. A. feeds but upon ashes, when he nou∣risheth himself in his notion as well negative, as affirma∣tive, of a Baptismall visibilitie of Saintship, with such similitudes and comparisons as these. But Sect. 117. Having with much ado at last satisfied himself (though no man besides, unlesse pre-satisfied) with spreading this his conceit upon much paper, he maketh this brief apologie by the way, for the lenghth of that dis∣course.
I have insisted (saith he, p. 24.) the more largely upon this particular, to detect the repugnancie of that opinion against the plain current of the Scripture, which holds Baptism needlesse, uselesse, amongst those who have made long profession of the Gospell, though they as yet never were Baptized. How Mr. A. may otherwise acquit himself in detecting the repugnancie he speaks of, I shall not prejudge; But if he hath no better light whereby to make the detection, then what he hath shined from his pen in managing his last particular, I am certain the opinion he speaks of will never be detected of any re∣pugnancie, either against the plain current of the Scripture, or any more retired vein of it. For if the main and principall end of Baptism be to make men visible mem∣bers of Christ, they who already are, and who of a long time have been, as visible members of Christ, as Baptism can make them, yea and more visible, have no need of being Baptized; more then he hath of a candle, who enjoyeth the brightnesse of the Sun at noon day. Upon the ground which he hath bought with a great summe of discourse, although his title to it be crasie (as hath been proved) yet he builds with confidence enough, p. 24. If then (saith he) that publique owning of Christ in Baptism, by which men put him on, and by, & up∣on which they are incorporated into Christ visibly, be another end or use of Baptism, as you see it is, (truly if Mr. A. speaks this to me, he speaks not truly) most clear and evident it is, that this end and use is not to be found in the Baptism of Infants. For further argument sake, give we back again unto him his If, or antecedent in this place, which we have taken from him, and let us weigh the reason he gives for his drawing the consequent here held forth unto us from it. And the reason (saith he, p. 24, 25.) hereof is, because Infants neither do, nor can, put on Christ in their baptism, i. make an actuall de∣claration and profession unto the world, that they own and ac∣knowledg Christ to be come in the flesh, to be the Son of
God, and Saviour of the world, to be their Lord and Lawgiver, as they doe who put him on in Baptism, &c. But Sect. 118. 1. From what quarter of the Scriptures can Mr. A. give us any steady intelligence, that to put on Christ in Bap∣tism, is, or signifies, to make an actuall declaration and pro∣fession to the world, that they own and acknowledge Christ Christ to be come in the flesh, &c. whether doth he think that all those who were baptized by John, made such a declaration and profession as he speaks of, viz. that they owned and acknowledged Christ to have been come in the flesh, &c. considering that the generalitie, (as it seems) or (however) a very great number of these persons were in doubt, and mused in their hearts of John, whether he were the Christ or no, Luk 3. 15? Or doth he think that the three thousand that were Baptized in one day by Peter, or by his advice & order, made every man and woman of them a part such a formall actuall de∣claration and profession as he speaks of? If he thus think∣eth, I must professe that his thoughts are not mine. Or can he find that such a declaration and profession was ever made by any person, man or woman, at the time of their baptizing? yea or can he find where ever the making of such a declaration or profession was required at any mans hand, at the time of his baptizing? For though Philip said to the Eunuch, If thou believest with all thy heart, thou mayest [be baptized] this doth not amount to an injunction laid upon him to professe it, much lesse actu∣ally to declare and professe it unto the world. Nor did the Eunuch, when he said, I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God, actually declare this his belief unto the world, unlesse Mr. A. thinks that Philip here signifies the world. 2. In case it should be granted that such a declarati∣on and profession as that specified by him, was made by those that were baptized in Scripture times, unto the world, I would willingly learn of him, 1. whether
this Declaration was not made by them before their bap∣tizing: 2. whether this Declaration did not make them every which as much (if not more) visible Saints or members of Christ, as their Baptism did. If so, how can Mr. A's Doctrine (lately taught by him as we have heard) stand, viz. that no person is to be looked up∣on as having a visible being in Christ, by any Act, Endowment, or Qualification preceding Baptism? But 3. Gratifie we Mr. A. with this, that a publique owning of Christ in Baptism, by which men put him on, and by and upon which they are incorporated into Christ vi∣sibly, &c. be one end and use of Baptism, yea and that In∣fants neither do, nor can [viz. by themselves, and in their own persons] make such a declaration and profession to the world as that mentioned, yet from all this train of pre∣mises it doth not follow, that therefore the said end and use of Baptism is not to be found in the Baptism of Infants. The reason of this nonsequitur, besides that it is in it self apparant enough, hath been formerly given, Sect. 67, 68, 69, 73, &c. 4. (And lastly, for this) Be we yet more open∣handed to Mr. A. and bestow upon him the grant, that the end and use of Baptism of which he speaks, is not found in the Baptism of Infants, yet neither would this forbid water that Infants should not be Baptized, because there being (according to Mr. A's own principls) severall ends of Baptism, in case any one of these be at∣tainable by the baptizing of Infants, Infants lawfully may, yea and of duty ought to be baptized. See this further argued and proved formerly, viz. Sect. 67. and 98. Sect. 119. Whereas he saith (p. 25.) that infants cannot with any proprietie of truth of speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism; 1. I suppose that neither can men or women, with proprietie of speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism. To put on Christ, whether in Baptism, or
otherwise, is a Metaphoricall or borrowed expression, not a proper. 2. Why may not Infants with as much pro∣prietie, yea and truth of speaking, be said to put on Christ in Baptism, as Infants under the Law may be said to have put on Moses in circumcision? Or did not infants in their circumcision, as properly and truly put on Moses, as men themselves did in theirs? 3. Neither doth the Apostle say, that they who have been baptized, have put on Christ, in, or by Baptism: this is Mr. A's glosse, not the Apostles Text. His words are only these, Gal. 3. 27. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. It is not denied but that persons bap∣tized may with good congruitie of sence, be said to put on Christ in Baptism; only this is denied, that Mr. A. can evince or justifie such an expression, or sence from the said passage of the Apostle. For they who have been baptized into Christ, may very possibly have other∣wise put on Christ, and not by this their baptizing into him. This proposition, They that have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, may be (as Logicians speak) propositio consecutiva, and not, formalis; a proposition, wherein the consequent is predicated of the antecedent, not the thing signified, or typified, of the thing signi∣fying, nor yet the effect of the cause. As when the same Apostle saith, As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God, (Rom. 8. 14.) he doth not suppose, that men are constituted or made the sons of God by being led by the Spirit of God, but only decla∣red to be so: their constitution in this kind is by ano∣ther cause, or means. In like manner a baptizing into Christ may be an argument, or sign, that men have put on Christ, and yet not be that act, by which, or in which, they formally put him on. Nay the truth is, that, to put on Christ, being, or importing, an act, it cannot be transacted, or performed, in, or by, a mans being baptized, because this importeth a passion. If it be said; yea but a submission, or voluntarie offering of a mans self, unto baptism, imports an action, and by
this, or in this, he may be said to put on Christ, I answer, If Christ be put on by a mans offering himself unto Bap∣tism (which for ought I see at present, may be grant∣ed) then is he not put on by Baptism, but before it; yea and they may as properly be said to put on Christ, who never are actually baptized, as they who are. For evident it is, that in the baptizing of men and women, the offering of themselves unto Baptism alwayes pre∣cedes their Baptism it-self: and as evident again it is, that men and women may offer themselves unto Bap∣tism, and yet (possibly) never be baptized: as viz. when there is no person present that is willing to accept of their offer in this kind, or to administer baptism unto them. Sect. 120. Mr. A. having risen up early, and gon to bed late, and eaten the bread of much carefulnesse, to give the best complexion and colour to his second Argument a∣gainst the lawfulnesse of Infant-baptism, which he was capable of giving, and that of receiving, and being loth that what he had so carefully planted, should be presently pluck'd up by the hand of an objection, he pre∣pares and arms himself to discomfit (if it may be) that objection, which (in his apprehensiō) threatned him with this damage. First he takes a view of, and describes his adversarie, and then considers where he may find the best advantage against him, and accordingly encoun∣ters him. Against this whole argument (saith he, p. 25.) which concludes Infant-Baptism unlawfull, because the ends of Baptism, (concerning which we have heard all along the said argument that he is very doubtfull what they are) are better attained in the Baptism of Beleevers (and conse∣quently, are attained also, at least to a degree, and com∣petently, in the Baptism of Infants likewise) it is objected: That this might have been an argument as well against the crcumcising of Infants under the Law, as against the Bap∣tism of Infants under the Gospell; because there is the same
reason to suppose, that circumcision should have lesse answer∣ed the ends thereof when applied to Infants; as there is to conceive, that Baptism should lesse answer its ends, when it is applied to Infants; and yet we well know that this was no barre to Infant-circumcision then, and therefore why should it be any against their Baptism now? This argument, or Objection, is the great dread and abhorring of Mr. A's soul, fearing (it seems) least his second argumēt against Infant-Baptism should die by the hand of it. And the truth is that were it yet alive, he had reason enough for such his fear: but we have seen it a dead corps already, a body of words without any soul of sound reason, or truth in it. And how vain a thing is it to be solicitous about the rescue of a dead mans life from the hand of an ene∣mie? Nor is it so proper, when a man hath lost his life by one hand, for any man to undertake to prove, that had he escaped this hand, yet he would have fallen by another. Notwithstanding since we have, in our can∣vasse of the said argument, now and then intersprinkled somewhat of that notion (I mean, about the propor∣tion between Infant-circumcision, and Infant-Baptism) the disparagement whereof Mr. A. here undertaketh, let us see Mr. A's Objection, and his Answer, play a little before us. Sect. 121. His objection (as ye have heard) pleads, that there is the same reason to suppose, that circumcision should have lesse answered the ends thereof when applied to Infants, as there is to conceive, that Baptism should lesse answer its ends, when applied unto Infants, &c. This Mr. A's answer denieth: and no marvell: for what should it else do, unlesse it meant to be an answer by concession only? But nothing is more easie, then to denie: but in many cases to give a substanticall account of a mans deniall, hic labor, hoc opus est; this will trie the ingenuitie and strength of a man. And at this turn Mr. A. with his Answer faileth. For of all the three Grounds or Rea∣sons, which he commendeth unto us for that his
deniall, there is none competent to justifie it. First be saith (p. 26.) that Circumcision, and the Covenant to which it related, remained in the flesh of him, who was circumcised, all the dayes of his life, as visible to him, and as capable of improvement to spirituall ends many years after it was made, as if it had been but newly acted and done before his eyes.—Whereas Bap∣tism is a transient act, and leaves no such visible impression in the Infant, as matter of memoriall, signification, or in∣struction unto him when he comes to be a man, as that of Circumcision did. So that w see there is not the like rea∣son, but an apparent difference in this respect. But for an∣swer to this▪ 1. The remaining of Circumcision in the flesh of the circumcised, as matter of memoriall, significtion, &c. could be no reason why Infants were appointed by God to be circumcised. Because had men only been circum∣cised, their circumcision would have remained every whit as much, or rather more, in their flesh, and have been altogether as competent matter of memoriall, signifi∣cation, and instruction, unto them, as now it was, being received in their infancie. Nor was it any advantage unto them by way of memoriall, signification, &c. during all the time of their infancie, or untill they came to years of discretion. So that in this respect, the end of Baptism by way of memoriall, signification, instruction, &c. is as well answered, as fully attained, by the baptizing of Infants, as the same or like end of Circumcision was attained by the circumcising of Infants. Sect. 122. 2. Whereas he saith that Circumcision remained in the flesh as visible to him that was circumcised, &c. If he would be understood generally, and with reference to all persons whatsoever that were circumcised, I know not what ground he hath so to affirm. For what thinks he of the circumcisiō in the flesh of Isaac, after his eys were dim, & that he could not see, Gen. 27. 1. & so of the circumcision
of him that was born blind (Joh. 9.) were these visible unto them? There is the same consideration of the Circumcisions of all that were blinde among the Jews. Besides, if it be supposed that there were any men in this Nation as corpulent as Eglon, (Judg. 3. 17.) seems to have been, their circumcision was hardly visible unto them, unlesse (haply) by reflexion in a looking glasse. And yet (doubtlesse) the Circumcision of all these was as competent matter of memoriall, signification, &c. unto them, as the circumcision of those to whom it was visible. Therefore Baptism, though not visible in the flesh to the Baptized, may notwithstanding be as preg∣nant matter of memoriall, signification, &c. unto them as Circumcision was, at least unto many, notwithstanding any such visibilitie in it, as Mr. A. pretendeth. 3. Neither doth the Scripture any where insist upon any such visibilitie of Circumcision, as any such advan∣tage unto the circumcised, as Mr A. conceiteth: nor doth God any where exhort, counsell, or command any circumcised person to look (with the eyes of his flesh) upon his circumcision, either to he put in mind of, or to be instructed in any thing signified thereby. There∣fore an externall visibilitie is no Scripture-difference be∣tween Circumcision and Baptism; nor (indeed) is it in it self any such difference, which should make the former any whit more spiritually advantagious unto the subject thereof, then the latter (Baptism) unto its sub∣ject. So that this difference is only an impertinent shift thought upon, and talked of, by the adversaries of Infant-Baptism to relieve their cause against such an ar∣gument, which grindeth it to powder. 4. Whereas Mr. A. advanceth his discourse in the point in hand, in these words, (p. 26.) Nor can it be truly said, that either the report of Parents, or neighbours, or any Parish, or other Register, is, or can be, equivalent unto the sign in the flesh before mentioned, as to the ascertain∣ing of men and women of their being baptized in their infan∣cie; 1. because there is not the like certaintie nor satisfacti∣on
in reports and hear sayes, as there is in seeing and behold∣ing, which difference notwithstanding we have in the two cases in hand: 2. Because opportunity of such satisfaction, as these reports are capable of giving, may be cut off by the death, or other removall of such from whom it is to be re∣ceived, or else by the removall of such Infants themselves into places far remote, before ever they came to age, &c. he only seweth a few fig-leaves together to cover the naked∣nesse of his cause. For Sect. 123. 1. In the beginning of this transcription, he reproach∣eth that Law of the living God, established by him long since under Moses, and repeated by him over and over upon severall occasions in the Old Testament. Num. 3. 30. Deut. 17. 6. 19. 15. and again revived and confirmed by the Lord Christ himself, and by his Apostles, in the New Testament, In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. Mat. 18. 6. It is also written in your Law, that the testimonie of two men is true. Joh. 8. 17. In the mouth of two or three witnesses every word shall be established. 2 Cor 13. 1. God him∣self having sanctified the mouth of two or three witnesses, to establish, i. to ratifie and confirm, every matter of fact, even those which concern the precious lives of men, so that any thing which shall be attested by these, shall be taken for true, doth not Mr. A. presume to make that common, which God hath thus sanctified, by disparaging the testimonie of Christian Parents, neigh∣bours and others, as insufficient to ascertain the Bap∣tim of a person Baptized in their presence and sight? 2. By another Law of God, the child stands bound to honour his Parents, how much more when they are Christian, and holy? Now whether it be consistent with this Law, or with that honour which children owe, by the tenour and authoritie of it, unto their Parents, to give them the lie, yea or to suspect them of untruth, and not to believe them, when they shall affirm unto them that they have been Baptized, let Mr. A. himself judge,
especially considering that there is no colour or pretence imaginable why Parents should lie unto their children in this kind. 3. Men and women stand bound in conscience to be∣lieve some things, and these of greater moment, yea and to act according to this belief, upon farre weaker testimonies, and grounds, then the reports of Parents, and Neighbours, & the records of registers, for their baptizing. The reason or ground which children of any growth, or years have to believe, that such persons, especially one of them, who are commonly called and reputed their Parents, are so indeed, is nothing so authentique or full of proof, as the foresaid testimonies and grounds of their baptizing. Jealousies and suspicions about the legitimacie of many Children, are (we know) rife in the mouths of men: but (I believe) never did Mr. A. hear the Baptism of any person questioned, which ei∣ther was attested by the Parents, or by any Parish Re∣gister, or Record. And yet persons stand bound by the Law of God, to honour those, as their Parents, and to perform all other duties and respects unto them, which are due from children unto Parents, who are common∣ly called and reputed their Parents, although they have no demonstrative proof of such a relation to them. Therefore much more, if persons be reported, both by their Parents, and others, to have been baptized, and are generally reputed so to have been, they stand as well, and as much bound to look upon themselves, as baptized, and to act and walk accordingly, as if they knew with the greatest certaintie that they had been baptized. 4. The Jews themselves circumcised in their infancie, notwithstanding the sign of Circumcision in the flesh, yet could have no other knowledge or certaintie, that this sign was applied to them, or received by them, accord∣ing to the mind of God, or as the Ordinance of God, but only from the testimonie of their Parents, or others present at their Circumcision. For how could Paul (for
example) tell or say, that he was circūcised on the eight day, (Phil. 3. 5.) but by the testimony and report of his Pa∣rents, unlesse we shall suppose that it was supernaturally revealed to him; which (I think▪ is no supposition wor∣thy a considering man? Or however, it is broadly ridi∣culous to suppose that every Jew, who according to the precept of God was circumcised on the eight day, had this supernaturally revealed unto him, or came to the knowledge of it in any other way then by the testimony of his Parents, &c. Besides, other Nations in the world using to circumcise their children, besides the Jews, with whom God made no such covenant, as he made with Abraham and his posteritie by Jacob, how could any Jew know that he was not circumcised in some or o∣ther of these idolatrous Nations, (and so contrary to the will of God) but only by the affidavit of his Pa∣rents, or others brought up with him? Sect. 124. 5. Neither was Circumcision it self any such sign in the flesh, but that it might be obliterated and defaced, (and so forgotten) according to that of the Apostle Paul; Is any man called being circumcised? Let him not become uncircumcised. 1 Cor. 7. 8. 6. Nor could any circumcised person amongst the Iews know, but by the report of his Parents or others, that he was so much as circumcised. For the Scripture doth nor report or affirm, that every particular person of the male Sex is born with a fore-skin upon his flesh; (I mean with such a superfluitie in this skin, which was wont to be cut off by Circumcision) or that every male, who wants as much, or more of this foreskin, as any other not circumcised, must needs therefore have been circum∣cised. Yea I believe there are males, or men, in this Nation, who though never circumcised, yet have as little of that superfluitie, on which only circumcision wrought, as many of those, who have been circumcised. 7. Neither is the receiving of Baptism by men and women, when come to years of discretion, alwayes ca∣pable
of improvement to Spirituall ends, many years after it is received, as if it had been newly acted and done before their eyes. For why may not the senses of some baptized in these years, be as well sodden into Trapezuntius his temper, as the senses of one of Mr. Fishers Antagonists (it seems) were? See Mr. Fisher Baby-Baptism. p. 367. This Trapezuntius was a learned Grammarian, and great Scholar; but thorow the vio∣lence of a sicknesse, sustained the losse of memorie to such a degree, that he quite forgat, not only all his learn∣ing, but even his own name. 8. (And lastly) In case it should be supposed that a person who is born in hand by his Pa∣rents, Neighbours, or Parish Register, that he hath been baptized, should yet be deceived by all these, and be made to believe that, which was not, what grand incon∣venience, danger, or losse can reasonably be conceived that this person shall sustain, or incurre, hereby? For whils the sence of his conscience bears upon him, that he hath been really and truly baptized, especially being otherwise really and truly willing to be baptized with the first, what greater improvement can they make of the remembrance of their baptism, who have indeed been baptized, then he is capable of making by his appre∣hension and belief of his being baptized? Yea as the Apostle, while Circumcision was yet in some request, speaks of a way or Method, how men might make their un-circumcision turn to as good an account of benefit unto them, as Circumcision it self; Therefore if the un∣circumcision shall keep the righteousnesse of the law, shall not his uncircumsion be couned for circumcision, [i. shall he not be equall in account with God, with him that is cir∣cumcised, though as righteous as he, Rom. 2. 26.] in like manner, if he who verily thinks he hath been baptized, shal as really, & cōsciētiously perform all the ingagemēts which Baptism imposeth upon men, shall not his non∣baptism be counted Baptism unto him? and for any matter of benefit which Mr. A. can pretend should ac∣crue unto a person actually baptized, by means of this
his Baptism; the same, or as much, (questionlesly) shall be conferred by God upon him, in whom he findeth a willing heart, & ready mind to be baptized, and who re∣fraineth from being actually baptized, only out of con∣science towards God, and fear of offending him. Sect. 125. Whereas Mr. A. pretendeth that opportunitie of satisfa∣ction by the means specified touching mans having been baptized, may be cut off, by the death, or other removal of such from whom it is to be received, or else by the removall of such Infants themselves into places fare remote, before they come to age, &c. answer (in part) hath been made already, where it was shewed, that little or no inconvenience ac∣crueth unto any man, by his not having been baptized, in case he be verily perswaded that he hath been bapti∣zed, and with all is inwardly and cordially willing and readie to be baptized, in case he deemed himself unbap∣tized. I here adde, 1. That in case the generall usage and custome of the Church, or People of God, in any place, be to baptize their children, though all ocular witnesses, as Parents, neighbours, kindred, &c. of the baptizing of any person, should be cut off by death, or however, yet the known custome of the place is securitie in abundance to such a person that he hath been baptized. There∣fore Mr. A's supposall in the case before us is impertinent and slight. And 2. The course which Mr. A. himself steers with his children, (I mean, in not causing them to come unto Christ in Baptism) the more generall practise of the Churches and people of God in the Nation (which stands for baptizing children) considered, is farre more likely, in case of his removal by death, or of his childrēs re∣moval into places far remote, before they come to age, to de∣prive them of all means of satisfactiō touching their bap∣tizing, then the baptizing of children in a cōcurrence with the generall practise of the Saints where they were born, is to draw them into a snare of uncertaintie whether
they were baptized, or no, whatsoever may befall to dis∣advantage them in this kind. For in case the Parents of Mr. A's children shall be both dead before they (the said children) come to age, what means is there for them to receive satisfaction, whether they were bapti∣zed, or no? 3. (And lastly) according to M. A's own principles it is little or nothing materiall, wheither a person being come to years of understanding, knoweth that he was baptized in infancie, or no. For in case he were bap∣tized, this Baptism (with Mr. A.) was but a nullitie; and consequently the person remains, notwithstanding this Baptism, unbaptized: and in case he were not then Baptized, he is but in the self same condi∣tion. Sect. 126. All these particulars duly weighed and considered, it is too evident to be denied by any, but those that will not see, that Mr. A. had very small reason to affirm, that there is not as good reason for the baptizing of Infants, as there was for their circumcising, only because cir∣cumcision was no transient thing but permanent in the flesh, whereas Baptism is transient, and leaves no vi∣sible impression in the flesh of the Infant: and that he might with as much reason argue thus, there was not the same reason why Matthew should be an Evange∣list, which there was for Luke, because Matthew had sometimes been a Publican, whereas Luke was a Physi∣tian: or thus: there is not the same reason why May should be saved▪ which there is why Lazarus should be saved, because Lazarus is a man, whereas Mary is a woman. These are very genuine parallels of Mr. A's reasoning in the first point of difference assigned by him, between the Circumcising of Infants, and their bap∣tizing. Nor doth he quit himself any whit more like a man in his second, the tenour hereof being this, (p. 27.) 2. I answer yet further, that the end of Circumcision,
though administred to infants, was better attained, then the end of Baptism can be, when it is so applied; because much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done, without respect to any inward quali∣fication or endowment: whereas the benefit of Baptism doth not accrue meerly upon the work done, but is suspended upon the knowledge, faith, &c. of him that is baptized. This somewhat also, being cast up, amounts to just nothing. For 1. The main hinge upon which this peiece of dis∣couse turneth, is crazie, and crakt quite thorow. For it is a not orious untruth, that much of the benefit of Circumci∣sion did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done. A∣gainst such a notion as this the Scripture riseth up like an armed man. For Circumcision (saith the Apostle) verily profiteth, if thou keep the Law: but if thou be a breaker of the Law, thy circumcision is made uncircumcision. Rom. 2 25 If much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised [meerly] upon the work done, Cir∣cumcision would have profited them, and that to a con∣siderable degree, whether they had kept the Law, [i. the rest of the Law] or no. And Circumcision would have been, not only that in the heart, but that which was out∣ward also in the flesh; which notwithstanding the Apostle (ver. 28. 29.) denieth it to be. Yea 2. It is so far from being true that much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done, that without righteousnesse, and worthy walking, it rendered the Circumcised so much the more obnoxious to the displeasure and judgement of God. And shall not uncircumcision (saith the Apostle) which is by nature, if it fulfill the Law, judge thee, who by the letter and Circumcision dost transgresse the Law? Rom. 2. 27. Yea Sect. 127. 2. Such observations of the Law, from whence there is much more reason and likelyhood that much benefit should have accrued to the observers upon the work done,
then from Circumcision upon these terms, were yet so farre from being beneficiall unto them upon any such ac∣count, that they were an hatred and abomination unto God. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices?—When you come to appear before me, who hath requi∣red this at your hands to tread in my courts? Bring no more oblations: incense is an abomination unto me. The new moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of assemblies, I cannot away with, your new moons, and your appointed feasts my soul hateth, &c. Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. Yea Solomon saith, The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination unto the Lord. Pro. 15. 8. 21. 27. These places (with many more of a like import, that might readily be added unto them (doe with a surplussage of evidence prove, that much benefit did NOT accrue to the doers of the things specified, up∣on the account of the deed done. And yet of the two, there is much more reason, why benefit should accrue un∣to the doers of such things of the Law, as these, upon the work done, then upon their being Circumcised. For 4. Whereas he saith, that much of the benefit of Cir∣cumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done, if he speaks of those that were circumcised according to the standing Law, viz. on the eight day (who were farre the greatest part of the Iewish nation) the work it self of Circumcision was not done by them, but by others to them unknown. Whereas the offering of in∣cense, and of sacrifices, the observation of the new moons, sabbaths, and other feasts appointed by the law, were works done by persons themselves. Now (questi∣onlesse) if there be any benefit accruing unto men upon the work done, it is more like to accrue in this kind upon works done by persons themselves, then upon works done totally by others, and without their knowledge, desire, or consent. Nor doth, nor can Mr. A. give us any substantiall account, either from the Scriptures, or other∣wise, why the benefit of Baptism should be more suspen∣ded upon the knowledge, faith, &c. of him who is baptized,
then the benefit of Circumcision was suspended upon the like qualifications of the circumcised. For Sect. 128. 5. The Texts of Scripture which he cites, prove no such difference as this between the two Ordinances, Circumcision, and Baptism; nor do they, either divisim, or conunctim, prove (or so much as colour with a proof) that much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done. For what though the Apostle saith, and this by way of contradistinction from the voyce of the Gospell, or righteousnesse of faith, The man that doth those things, shall live by them, yet is it no part of his meaning to implie, or teach, that by the li∣terall performance of the Legall ceremonies, men, ei∣ther were, or might have been saved? The Law of which the Apostle speaks, is not the Law of Ceremonies, which Mr. A. understandeth, but the whole system or body of precepts and command∣ments delivered by Moses. Nor is the Apostles doing those things, the same with Mr. A's doing them. The Apostle must needs be conceived to speak of such a doing of the things of the Law, which includes as well the spiritualitie, or perfection of the Law, and of the se∣verall precepts thereof (at least in will, desire, and en∣deavour) as the bare letter or externalitie of it. For God never made any such Covenant with, or promise unto any man, that by doing externals only he should be either justified, or saved; which Mr. A's doing evi∣dently supposeth. Nor doth his second Scripture stand any whit closer to his cause, then the first. For when the Apostle saith (Gal. 3. 12.) The Law is not of Faith, but the man that doth them, shall live in them, his mean∣ing is not, that the Law required not as well the confor∣mitie and subjection of the inward man unto it, as viz. in Love, Faith, Holinesse, Humilitie, &c. as of the out∣ward, consisting of a meere bodily observation of so much of it, as might thus be observed; but that the voice, purport, or tenour of the Law, did exact of all those, who expected justification by it (yea in a sense,
of all men, simply) an universall and constant obedi∣ence and subjection unto it in the whole compasse and extent of it, according to what he had more plainly said a verse or two before; Cursed is every one that CONI∣NUETH NOT IN ALL THINGS which are writ∣ten in the book of the Law to do them; in which respect it is said not to be of Faith, i. not to promise justification unto any act of Faith, or beleeving in another. Whereas the te∣nor of the Gospel, although it simply requireth as perfect and thorow an obedience unto all the precepts of it, as the Law did to all the precepts thereof, yet it exacteth not this obedience upon the same inexorable terms; nor doth it threaten every person, no nor any person, with a curse, who shall not connue in all things which are written therein to d them, in case they shall truly and unfeignedly believe in Jesus Christ. So that these two Scriptures rightly understood, know nothing either of reason, or truth in Mr. A's cause. Sect. 129. His other Scriptures levied upon the same account (p. 27. 28.) do scarce so much as face the design, which they are brought into the field to advance. For what though the ministration of the Law be called, the mini∣stration of the letter, and the Ordinances thereof, car∣nall Ordinances, and such as did no make perfect as pertain∣ing to the conscience? or again, that the Apostle to shew wherein the Gospell or new Covenan, exceeds the Law, or old one, saith, that according to this God puts his Laws in the minds of men, and writes them in their hearts. Heb. 8. 10? Or again, that the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in truth; what is there (I say) in all, or in any of these, or in twenty more of a like import, to prove that much of the benefit of Circumcision did accrue to the circumcised upon the work done; or that the benefit of baptism is any whit more suspended upon the knowledge, Faith, &c. of him, who is baptized, then the be∣nefit of Circumcision was, &c? All that can be inferred from these and such like passages, are only these and such
like notions; That God is more communicative of the clear knowledg of himself, and of the mysterie of his will concerning the salvation of the world by Jesus Christ, under the Gospell, then he was under the Law; that the anointing of the generalitie of the Saints with the Spirit, under this dispensation (the Law) was nothing so rich or full, as it now is under the Gospel; that the instituted worship, especially the publique worship, and service of God under the Law, consisted in a farre greater number and varietie of external rites and observations, then now under the Gospell; that the hearts of the people, yea of the people of God them∣selves, were (generally) nothing so raised, or enlarg∣ed to the obedience of God under the Law, as they are, and especially will be when the time cometh, under the Gospell, &c. But none of these things prove, so much as inshew, that according to the nature of the legal ministra∣tion children void of understanding and faith were any whit more capable of holy things; or of the end and benefits of them in part, upon a literall administration or reception of them, then children now are under the Gospell. For my better information I would willingly sit at Mr. A's feet to learn of him, how, why, in what consideration or respect, children under the Law should be more capable of holy things, or of any part of the ends or benefits of them, then children under the Gospell; or what there was in the Legall ministration, that did accommodate or comport with the naturall infirmitie, or condition of children, above what there is in the ministration of the Gospell. Certain I am that Baptism is an Ordinance more indulgent unto, and better comporting with, the tendernesse of Infants, then circumcision was: and for matter of Spirituall signification, upon the understand∣ing whereof all the materiall and principall ends and bene∣fits of both Ordinances alike depend, children are as much, and as soon, capable of the interpretation, or signification of Baptism, as they could be of Circum∣cision. Therefore Mr. A's cause is no whit beholding
to those Scriptures, which he hath hitherto importuned for the advocation of it. Sect. 130. Nor doth 1 Pet. 3. 21. any whit more befriend him: nor is his introductorie glosse to the words here, so farre as he presenteth them, over-ingenuous, or true. But (saith he, p. 28.) the case is farre otherwise now under the Gospell, [how farre otherwise, and how farre not, we have both lately, and formerly shewed] which is the mi∣nistrationMr. A p. 28 of the Spirit. It is not the work done, but the manner of doing it in knowledge, faith, and fear of the Lord, that entitles men to the benefit, and blessing of Gospel Ordi∣nances. For so the Apostle affirms concerning BAPTISM IT SELF, 1 Pet. 3, 21. where he sayes, that it saves us now, as the Ark did some in the dayes of Noah; not (saith he) the putting away of the filth of the flesh (i. not by the ex∣ternall letter of the ordinance) but the answer of a good con∣science towards God, i. when accompanied with such a frame of mind and conscience, as does answer Gods inendments of Grace in that Ordinance. For 1. He saith that Peter (in the words cited) speaks concerning BAPTISM IT SELF, when he saith, that it saves us now, &c. whereas it is evident, that that Bap∣tism, to which he ascribes salvation, is not Water-Bap∣tism, or Baptism in the letter of it (which any reader will think that Mr. A. means by BAPTISM IT SELF) but Baptism in the Spirit, or the answer of a good conscience towards God, as we have the Originall, , translated; which words notwithstanding were better rendred, but the demand of a good consciēce God-wrd, or, towards God; [or, as some translate, the stipulatio, or promise, of a good cō∣sciēce(a) vi. Groti∣um. in. 1 Pet. 2. 21. unto God.] Yea he expresly rejecteth waterbaptism as insufficient to save men, in these words, not the putting away of the filth of the flesh. Now the demand of a good conscience towards God, [i. of a conscience good and pure in his sight] is said to save us by the resurrection of Jesus Christ (which clause is wholly omitted by Mr. A.) because such a conscience, taking the blessed advan∣tage
of the resurrection of Christ for its incourage∣ment, (as it were) demands, claims, and expects with boldnesse, salvation from God, as due upon promise, and this made upon a valuable consideration, viz. the death and sufferings of Christ. This demand, or claim, may be said to save us, much in such a sence as hope is said to save us, (Rom. 8. 24. For we are saved by hope) viz. as it exhibits and yeilds unto men, a first fruits, and so a kind of possession, of salvation, in abundance of comfort, peace, and joy. The reason (it seems) why Peter mentioneth Water-Baptism as typically saving us, as the demand he speaks of saves us (in part, and to a degree) really, is, because having had occasion to speak of the preservation of Noah and his familie from perish∣ing in the generall deluge, wherein all the world besides perished, by means of the ark, he conceived there was a kind of typical resemblance thereof in Baptism, or rather a typicall overture made herein by God of such a like preservation unto Godly persons, when the whole world of unrighteous ones round about should be destroyed, and perish in their sins. So that Peter in this place, ascribes no other salvation, or salvation in no other sence, unto Baptism it self (I mean, unto Water-bap∣tism) then wherein it was altogether as ascribable unto the carnall Observations, as viz. to the offering of Bulls and Goats, &c. under the Law. For as these did overture, and (after a sort) promise salvation, by the true sacrifice of the Messiah, yet to be obtained and en∣joyed by those only, who believe; (we alwaies in this case speak only of persons capable by years, and discre∣tion of believing) so doth Water-Baptism hold forth pardon and forgivenesse of sins, and consequently sal∣vation, as attainable by all those, and those only, who repent, and consequently beleeve. And as Bap∣tism edifieth, profiteth, blesseth no man, but only those, who repent and believe; so neither did Circumcision (as we formerly heard) nor other externall Observations under the Law. Therefore Mr. A. hath caught no∣thing
at all by fishing in these waters, for the relief of his cause. Nor needed he at all have troubled either himself, or his reader, with quotations from the Scriptures, to prove, that a baptizing with wa∣ter without a baptizing with the Spirit also, makes more against, then for, him, that shall be baptized: nor hath he ministred any thing to the necessitie of his cause hereby. This required at his hand, that which he had not to give unto it, I mean, a substantiall proof, that the nature of the ministration of the Law was such, that the literall and externall performance of the Cere∣monies and carnall Ordinances thereof, were, without repentance or faith, of better acceptance with God, and more available to the salvation of the Performers, then Gospell Ordinances are without the like qualifi∣cations. Sect. 131. 2. Whereas he saith (p. 28.) that Infants, as they are not capable of acting this faith, or making this answer of a good Conscience, so they are not capable of those blessings and benefits intended by God in Baptism, in as much as he hath suspended the donation thereof upon these, in conjunction with Baptism; I answer, 1. It hath been sufficiently proved, that Infants are capable (though with a mediate, or remote capacitie) of acting Faith, as well as men. See Sect. 64, 65, 68, 69. (In which respect also they are capable of making the an∣swer of a good conscience, as well as men) where it was proved likewise, that neither are believers themselves alwayes in a present or immediate capacitie of acting their Faith. 2. Full proof hath been made likewise (and the thing is evidēt enough in it self) that children are capable of those benefits and blessings intended by God in Baptism, as well as men; as the children of the Jews were capable of the blessings and benefits intended by God in Circumci∣sion, as well as men. But 3. (And lastly, for this) whereas Mr. A: saith, saith, that He hath suspended the donation thereof upon these, in
conjunction with Baptism, he only saith it, and this (indeed) is more then enough, being ill consistent with his own sayings elsewhere, and much more with the truth; I would gladly know of him what those benefits and blessings are (or if it were but some of them) the donation of which he conceives is suspended by God upon the acting of Faith, and making the answer of a good Conscience, in conjunction with Baptism. If he supposeth remission of sins to be any of these blessings or benefits, this, both according to his own Doctrine, p. 16. and the clear truth it self, is annex∣ed by God covenant-wise unto Repentance; which being required antecedaneously (at least according to the pleasance of Mr. A's principle) unto Baptism, the donation of it cannot be suspended by God, upon the acting of Faith, or any thing else, in conjunction with Baptism. For the donation of that, which is promised, and given accordingly, upon the antecedent, cannot be suspended, either in whole, or in part, upon the consequent, nor upon any thing in conjunction with it. Mr. A. in the said 16. page, supposeth, that Baptism, either is, or may be, called the Baptism of Repentance for the re∣mission of sins, because God thereby signifies and seals unto men the remission of their sins UPON THEIR REPENT∣ANCE; and not long after; that it is, or may be so called, because the persons who are baptized, do thereby professe and declare unto the world, that they look for remis∣sion of sinnes from God ƲPON THIER REPENT∣ANCE. The Fountain at this hole sends forth the sweet waters of the truth, asserting remission of sins unto, and upon, Repentance: but at that before us, the bitter waters of error, which suspendeth remission of sins (at least, if this be any benefit intended by God in Baptism) upon the acting of Faith, &c. in conjunction with Baptism. I con∣fess there are blessings & benefits intēded by God in baptism: but when Mr. A. shall declare unto me, what blessings and benefits he meaneth, when he saith the donation of them is suspended, &c. in conjunction with Baptism, I shall take his declaration in this kind into further thoughts. In the mean time my sence is, that such
blessings and benefits may be intended by God in baptism, the donation of which is not absolutely, universally, or in all cases, suspended either upon Baptism, or upon any thing in conjunction therewith. Thus we see that Mr. A's second difference, where∣by he seeks to disparallel the circumcising of Infants, and their baptizing, is before the light of the truth, but as chaffe before the wind. The spirituall benefit of Cir∣cumcision did no more accrue unto the Circumcised upon the work done, then the benefit of Baptism unto the baptized. Sect. 132. His third and last difference may be well bound up inMr. A. p. 28 29. the same bundle of impertinencie with the two former. The sum and substance of it as the Reader may find it p. 28. 29. of his discourse) amounts only to this; That the Ordinance of Circumcision was so much the less Spiritual, and so much the more weak, and savouring of the Legall ministration, and suited to the then childish condition of the Church, because administration thereof was made to infants. From whence he soon after inferrs: however such a mean, low way and method of injoying Ordinances, as was accom∣modated to the capacitie of Babes, was not uncomly whilst the Church was in the condition of children, as the Apostle speaks Gal. 4. 3.) no more then it is for a child, whilst he is a child, to speak and act as a child; yet to retain this poor, and low, and barren way of administring a Gospell Or∣dinance to Infants, now the Church is raised both in capa∣citie, and administration to its manly condition, is as in∣cōgruous & uncomely, as it is for one stil to speak & act as a child, when he is become a man. This with the two former particulars, is (it seems) all that Mr. A. hath to say, to de∣stroy the analogy between Infant-baptism, & Infant-cir∣cūcision. How little this analogie hath suffered from his two former considerations, hath been lately shewed; and that it suffers no whit more by this third and last, is a matter of easie demonstration. For 1. The groundwork and foundation of his building here is sandie and loose. For he supposeth that Circum∣cision
was therefore, in that consideration, a weak, or lesse Spirituall Ordinance, because the administration of it was made unto children; and semblably, that Baptism would be, or must appear to be, a weaker and lesse spirituall Ordinance then it is, in case it were to be administred unto children. Whereas the evident truth is, that the strength, richnesse, or spiritualnesse of an Ordinance, doth not so much (if at all) consist in the strength or spiritualnesse of the subject, to which it is administred, or is administrable, as in the intrinsecall nature of it, richnesse of signification, or promised presence of God with it. Circumcision was the same Ordinance, equally spirituall, and no whit more weak, when it was administred unto Isaac, and afterwards unto Paul, on the eight day, then it was when administred unto Abraham himself, and afterwards unto those who were circumcised men, Josh. 5. As suppose we (that which I know Mr. A. supposeth) those members of the Church of Corinth, whom Paul could not look upon as spirituall, but as carnall, and BABES in Christ, (1 Cor. 3. 1.) to have been all baptized, was the nature of this Ordinance altered, or changed, from the greater to the lesser spiritualnesse, by the administration of it unto such babes, as these? Or was it an Evangelicall Ordi∣nance when administred unto Paul himself, and Legal, when administred unto weaker christians? Sect. 133. 2. I would know of Mr. A. whether the Lord Christ, when he laid hands upon the little children that were brought unto him, Mat. 19. 15. Mar. 10. 16. did not re∣tain that poor, and low, and barren way of administring a Gospell Ordinance unto children, (as Mr. A. is not afraid to term it) Or doth he think that that imposition of hands, which he administred unto these children, was not a Gospel, but a Law-ordinance? or doth he not think that children are capable upon the same terms, and in the same respect, of the ends and benefits of Baptism, whatsoever these may be supposed to be, as they were,
or are, of the ends or benefits of imposition of hands, whatsoever these be? 3. To the shame and confusion of those rationall principles (falsly so called, which notwithstanding Mr. A. dares avouch to be consonant to the Scriptures) it hath been proved and evinced, that Baptism is asmuch, or more, spirituall, profitable, and edifying, when applied to children, as when it is administred unto men professing the faith; even as Circumcision was as much, or more, edi∣fying, &c. when applyed unto children, as when it was administred unto men. See Sect. 56, 73. and elewhere. 4. Whereas Mr. A. makes the weaknesse and unprofi∣tablenesse of the Commandemen [i. the Law] for which the Apostle saith it is dsannulled, to stand in this (or at least to comprehend it) that it injoyned an Ordinance, one, or more, to be administred to little children; 1. herein he makes himself wise about that which is written, the Scripture no where placing any degree, or part, of the weaknesse or unprofitablenesse of the Law, in any such thing. Nay, 2. The enjoyning of an Ordinance (circumcisi∣on by name) to be administred unto little Children, was so farre from being any part of the weak∣nesse and unprofitablenesse af the Law, that it was a materiall veyne, or part, of that strength or profitable∣nesse, that was in it. For weaknesse und unprofitablenesse are not simply and absolutely ascribed unto the Law, but comparatively only, viz. in respect of the supera∣bundant strength and beneficialnesse of the Gospell: otherwise, in simple cōsideration, the law was excellently beneficial, & of great power to advance the peace, & cō∣forts, and salvation of men. The Scripture giveth large and frequent Testimonie hereunto. He sheweth his word (saith David) unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgements unto Israel: He hath not dealt so with any na∣tion: and as for his judgments they have not known them. Psal. 147 19▪ 20. The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the Testimonies of the Lord are sure, making wise the simple. The Statutes of the Lord are right, reoycing the heart:
the commandement of the Lord is pure, enlightning the eyes—the judgements of the Lord are true and righteous alto∣gether, Psal. 19. 7. 8, 9. So the Apostle: what advantage then hath the Jew? Or what profit is there of Circumcision? Much every way: chiefly because that unto them were committed the Oracles of God. Ro. 3. 1, 2. Read and consider at your leasure, Deut. 4. 5, 6, 7, 8. Rom. 9. 4. Psal. 119. 72, 98, 111. (to omit other places of the same purport without number.) Now then this is that which I say and affirm; viz. that the administration of the Ordinance of Circumcision unto Infants, or the injunction here∣of, was a part of that wisdom, of that excellencie, of that profitablenesse, which were found in the Law; and did contribute its proportion of efficacie together, with the rest of the branches and precepts of the Law, to∣wards the blessed effect (mentioned by David) of con∣verting the souls of men. And (doubtlesse) there would have been a greater weaknesse and defectivenesse in the Law, in respect of this, and such like gracious ef∣fects, had the precept or commandment of circumcisi∣on been otherwise framed, then now it was, and the standing administration of it injoyned to be made unto men. Sect. 134. The Premises considered, I suppose the Reader can∣not lightly but think, that Mr. A. was farre better con∣ceited, then he, of his late discourse touching the diffe∣rences between circumcision, and Baptism, inasmuch as he concludeth it thus: By this time I hope it appears, that there is not the same reason why Baptism administred unto Infants should reachMr. A. p. 29 the ends thereof, as there was why Circumcision, though applyed to Infants formerly, should attain its end. For the nature of the two Ordinances differ, the terms of their admi∣nistration differ, and the respective capacities of the Church then, and the Church now, differ: and according to that rule in Logick, where the things them selves differ, there the reason of those things differ also. I answer briefly;
It hath been sufficiently proved, and this lately enough, that there is the same reason altogether why Baptism administred unto Infants should reach the ends thereof, which there is or was, why circumcision be∣ing administred unto Infants also, should attain the ends of it. Neither doth any difference found, either in the nature of the two Ordinances, or in the terms of their Administration, or in the capacities of the Church∣es, then and now, diversifie the said reason, or prove in the least, that Infant-Baptism should be lesse suffici∣ent to atchieve and compasse all Baptismall ends, then Infant-circumcision was to attain the ends of Circumci∣sion. Old reliques, and new-made Idols, differ in their natures: they differ, or may differ, in their administra∣tions, or communications, unto the people: Papists and Protestants may be in a different capacitie to understand the evill of them: and yet all these, and ten times more, differences like unto these, notwithstanding, there may be the same reason why the one should occasion, or produce the evill which is proper for it to produce, which there is for the other to do likewise. Nor is it true that the Church, during Circumcision, was, in that part (at least) or in those members▪ of it, who by the standing law were to be circumcised, (I mean, in the children or Infants belonging to it) in a different capacitie from the church now (under Bap∣tism) in the Infants hereof. The Infants of the church, or of Believers, now are as capable of the ends of Bap∣tism, as the Infants of the Jewish church were of the ends of circumcision. Therefore Mr. A. all the while he hath been labouring to overthrow the parallel be∣tween Infant-Baptism, and Infant-circumcision, hath dwelt at the sign of the Labour-in vain. And this is the unhappy end of his second argument magnifying it self against Infant-baptism. His third Argument waits the leisure of this preface. Sect. 135. My next argument shall be taken from the different na∣ture
of the two ministrations of the Old and New Testament,M. A. p. 30. as rendring Infant-Baptism, in that precise consideration of it as APPLIED TO INFANTS, disagreeable to the ministration of the Gospell, but withall more correspondent with the ministration of the Law. Therefore thus I further argue. I suppose we had the strength of what he is able to ar∣gue from the different ministrations of the Law, and of the Gospell, against Infant-baptism, in the prosecution of his former argument. Nor do I apprehend what pur∣chase he hath made with this Preface, unlesse it be of a blot of disparagement, in supposing, that Infant-baptismInfant-Bap∣tism is very unproperly said to be ap∣plied unto Infants. may be considered, as applied to Infants, and in this conside∣ration, to be disagreeable to the ministration of the Gospel. If Infant-baptism, be in no other respect dsagreeable to the ministratiō of the gospel, but only in the precise cōsideratiō of it as applied unto Infants, it will be found sufficiently cor∣responding with this ministration. But though the usherie of the argumēt approaching be but weak, yet it is possible that the argument it self may be strong. A man that stumbles at the door, may behave himself worthily in the house. Therefore let us now see whether Mr. A. doth not gaher up as much, or more, in his argument, asMr. A's third Ar∣gument, p. 30. he scattered in the Introduction. His third argument then is this. If Infant-Baptism be disagreeable to the ministration of the new Testament, then Infants ought not to be bapti∣zed, But Infant-Baptism is disagreeable to the ministration of the new Testament. Ergo, If the minor in this argument had been a meet helper, or match, for the major, they had between them esta∣blished  the throne of Anti-poedobaptism for ever. But Now the Syllogism is like those equivocall and im∣perfect animals bred of the sime and mudd of the great deluge: Atera pars vivit, rud's est pars altera tellus; i.
One part's alive, the other, unform'd earth. And that Proposition which is strong, and which needs no proof, Mr. A. proves very substantially: but that which is weak, he supports with strawes instead of props and pillars; Dantur opes nullis nunc, nisi divitibus; Rich gifts to rich men only given are: What refuse is, falls to the poor mans share. Sect. 136. However, suffering Mr. A. to enjoy his major Propo∣sition, with the proofs thereof, in peace, let us fairly and freely consider, whether there be the same reason, why he should enjoy his minor, with the proofs there∣of, upon the same terms. 1. (Saith he) the Truth hereof (meaning, of his mi∣nor Proposition) in the first place, is conspicuous and per∣ceptible, [i. is fully manifest, & may by a narrow inspecti∣on haply be discerned] by what hath been made good in our former argument. For there we proved, Baptism, as administred to Infants, lesse edifying, as to the severall ends of it, then when administred unto Beleevers: and if lesse edifying, then the more suitable and comformable to the mi∣nistration of the Law, which was a ministation of lesse light and edification: and to the same proportion, disproportion∣ate to the ministration of the Gospell, &c. I answer; 1. If Mr. A. hath nothing else to make good his minor Proposition in this argument, then what he made good in his former, the Proposition must stand upon its own bottom, and shift for it self. For it hath been made good, that in that argument he made nothing good at all, at least nothing relating to his Proposition here.
2. Whereas he bears upon this Principle, that what is lesse edifying is more sutable and conformable to the ministra∣tion of the Law, because this was a ministration of lesse light and edification, doth he not leane upon a broken reed, that will pierce his hand? For suppose we (that which is little questionable, or however, possible) that the ministery, or preaching of Andrew, Bartholomew, or or any other of the Apostles, was lesse edifying, then the Ministerie or preaching of Paul, doth this prove that their Ministerie was in any degree sutable, or conformable to the ministration of the Law; or however, unsuitable unto, or unlawfull under, the Gospell? But this reason we formerly weighed in the ballance, and found it light▪ See Sect. 53. 118. and elsewhere. 3. (And lastly) it hath been sufficiently also proved against Mr. A's notion, that Baptism as administred [i. as it may, and ought to be administred] unto In∣fants, is not lesse edifying, but rather more, then when administred unto men. For this see Sect. 56. Thus we see that Mr. A's first demonstration of his minor Pro∣position, being truly cast up, amounteth to just nothing. Hear we therefore his second. Sect. 137.Mr. A. p. 30 31. 2. I might, in the second place, well suppose Infant-Bap∣tism to savour strongly of the Legal Ministration, because the principal arguments, produced in defence thereof are such as do arise out of, and are deducted from the example of Infant-Circumcision, a principall part of the legall ministration, and from the analogie or proportion, which is supposed to be between them, and not only so, but likewise because such arguments and pleas tend to draw down this part of the Gospell ministration, as applicable to Infants, unto the line and levell of the Legall. For answer; 1. This proof is guiltie of the capitall crime of un∣truth, affirming, that the principall Arguments produ∣ced in the defence of Ifant-Baptism are deducted from the example of Infant-circumcision. A little af∣ter (to the same pur∣pose) he saith, that these argu¦ments for In∣fant-baptism, are as the axle∣tree upon which the con∣troversie on the Poedo-baptists side turneth, & as the wep running all along that piece of that discourse. I beleeve Mr. A. himself knoweth the contrary; as viz. 1. that we do not
at all plead Infant-baptism from the example of Infant∣circumcision: we knowledge and professe, that Infant∣circumcision, under the Law, would be no ground, or warrant of Infant-Baptism under the Gospell, did not the Gospell it self commend the Ordinance of Bap∣tism unto us; and 2. that our principall arguments (as he calleth them) for Infant-Baptism, are founded upon New-testament passages, and Evangelicall considera∣tions; as our writings and arguings do sufficiently testi∣fie. 3. That we do not (however) draw arguments (as he twice chargeth us, in the plurall number, as if, not only our principall arguments, but the greatest part of the whole number of them, were drawn) from the example of Infant-Circumcision. He cannot prove, so much as with colour, that we draw any pluralitie of Arguments for Infant-Baptism from that example. 4. That we do not in our disputes about Baptism, so much mention, or insist upon the example, as the pre∣cept or institution it self, of Infant-Circumcision. There∣fore the very head, ground-work, and substance of this second proof of his said Proposition, is a notorious un∣truth: and consequently, all that he buildeth upon, it (p. 31, 32, 33. I mean, upon this supposition, that our principall arguments for Infant Baptism, are deducted from the example of Infant-Circumcision) must needs be ec∣centricall to his cause. But 2. Suppose we should build our Tenent of Infant-Baptism under the Gospell, upon the example of Infant-Circumcision under the Law, (which notwithstanding we are free and farre from, as hath been shewed) were we not as justifiable as Mr. A. himself in building his Tenent (and practise answerable) concerning the un∣lawfulnesse of Church-communion with persons by him called unbaptized, upon that Legall precept, by which uncircumcised persons were excluded from communion with the Jewish Church in their holy things? See pag. 109. of this his discourse: and pag. 11. of his answer to the 40. Queries. But the rudiments of the world (it seems)
are substantiall and firm ground for Mr. A. to build upon, but Boggs and Quicksands to his Baptismall Ad∣versaries. Sect. 138. 3. Suppose there had been no such Ordinance as Circumcision under the Law, no precept that Infants should have been circumcised; yet upon a supposall of this Ordinance given, or to be given, there would have been the same reason, one or more, which now there was, why it should be administred, & consequently, why God should injoyn it to be administred to Infants. Now that we interesse the mention, either of the example, or of the precept, of Infant Circumcision, in our disputes about Baptism, we do it not so much, if at all, for the letter of either, as for the spirit of them; i. for those reasons sake, upon which we udge them to have been founded by God. For though the letter of the Precept enjoyn∣ing Circumcision, and so the practise of Circumcision conformable hereunto, be purely Legall; yet the reasons upon which the precept was given, and the practise stood, or ought to have stood, were Evangelicall; my meaning is, that the Precept of Infant-circumcision was calculated by God for this end, and with this intention given by him, that by such an Administration, as the precept directeth unto, and injoyneth, the Ordi∣nance might be the more richly edifying to the Church now in being. There is the same consideration of all other ceremoniall precepts and injunctions under the Law. Though the matter of every of these precepts (respectively) or the externall ceremonie it self enjoyn∣ed, was such, that by no form whatsoever put upon it, or by no ordering or disposing it, it could be redu∣ced to an equall serviceablenesse in matters of edificati∣on, with the rich and high discoveries of the Gospell; yet was it so ordered and disposed by God in the use and practique of it, that it might yield to the Church the most spirituall benefit, and best degree of edification, which it was regularly capable to doe. And if any thing appertaining to the manner of any legall service or cere∣monie
enjoyned, had been altered or changed in the command, and so in the practise, from what was now directed and prescribed, it would have been prejudi∣ciall to the benefit and edification, which the Church now received, or might have received, by those ceremoniall services. Otherwise we must say, that men themselves (the Jews) might possibly have bettered their spirituall condition, by altering and changing, at least in some particulars, the Law given by God himself unto them, and this for the advancement of such their condition. The clear amount or consequent of this dis∣course is, that in case there be any ceremonie, or cere∣moniall service, enjoyned by God under the Gospell, of like nature and consideration with any of those, which were prescribed in the Law; unlesse the manner and terms for the use, practise, or administration of it, shall be the same (at least in the main) with those di∣rected for the practise of the corresponding ceremonie under the Law, this Gospell ceremonie must of necessi∣tie be the lesse edifying by means of a variation in this kind. Now that Baptism is a ceremonie, or ceremo∣niall service under the Gospell, corresponding with Cir∣cumcision under the Law, is in it self so manifest, and so generally by sober and considering men acknow∣ledged, that I suppose Mr. A. is too tender of forehead to deny it. If so, then it roundly followeth, that, inas∣much as the Law prescribed the ordinarie administration of Circumcision unto children, the Gospell must allow, or intend, the like administration of Baptism unto chil∣dren likewise; otherwise the administration of it must be lesse beneficiall and edifying to the Christian Church. Therefore Sect. 139. 4. Whereas Mr. A. saith, that such Arguments and Pleas [he means, which are deduced from the example of Infant-Circumcision] tend to draw down this part of the Gospell ministration [he means, the administration of Baptism] as applicable unto Infants, unto the line and levell
of the legall, doubtlesse he understandeth not what he saith. For 1. if Baptism be no part of the Gospell, but an appendix only, (which I suppose was sufficiently proved, Sect. 102.) then is not the administration of Baptism properly any part of the Gospell ministration, but only an administration collaterall hereunto. But 2. grant we the administration of Baptism to be a part of the Gospell ministration, Mr. A. had small reason to complain, that we by applying it unto Infants, draw it down TO the line and levell of the Legall, when as him∣self, and his, by denying it unto Infants, draw it down many degrees beneath the Legall ministration he speaks of. For this (as we lately shewed) made the best improvement of the Ordinances and ceremonies then on foot, for the spirituall benefit and accommo∣dation of the Church in edification and comfort, that well might be; and upon this account ordered the standing administration of Circumcision unto Infants. Nor is the Gospel ministration it self, in any such respect preferr'd before the Legal, either by Christ, Paul, or any other Apostle, viz. that the administration of the Gospel ceremonies is contrived either with more wisdom, or more goodnesse by God, for the accomplishing of the gracious ends intended (respectively) in them, then the Law-ceremonies and services were in reference to their respective ends: but, partly because the ceremonies of the Gospell, are more rich in signification, then those of the Law were, and consequently their respective ends are more rich and gracious; partly because Gospell discoveries of God, and of the mysterie of his will con∣cerning the salvation of men, are much more full and glorious, then the Legal were; partly also because there is a larger donation, or effusion of the Spirit, and so the hearts and consciences of men more effectually dealt with, under the Gospell, then under the Law. So that that administration of Baptism, which Mr. A. cen∣sureth, compared with that which he approveth, is ra∣ther a drawing up, then a drawing down, of the Gospell
ministration, if, and so farre as, this is concern'd in it, to the line and levell of the Legall. Sect. 140. Whereas in processe of his second proof of his minor Proposition (which hangs heavie on his hand) speak∣ingM. A. p. 31. of Arguments drawn down by Poedo-baptists from the example of circumcision, demands, what are they else but such, which are after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, i. e. such as are according to the ministration of the Law, which was by Moses, and not according to that of the Gospell which is by Christ (p. 31.) 1. Answer hath been made, that in his sence of the clause, after the rudiments of the world, his Argument drawn down from Circumcision, to prove the unlaw∣fulnesse of Church-communion with Saints by him called unbaptized, is as much, (or more) after these rudiments, as any the Arguments derived from the same fountain for Infant-baptism. I here adde; 2. That by, the rudiments of the world, Col. 2. 8. accord∣inga) See Calvin, Grotius, Esti∣us, and others upon the the place. to very able Expositours, is not meant the Mosaicall ceremonies, but Philosophicall Institutions and disputes: And indeed, the scope of the place well considered, this interpretation will be found the most genuine and pro∣per. Therefore all that Mr. A. builds upon his ceremo∣niall sence of the Phrase, to fortifie his second proof of his Proposition in hand (which is, upon the matter, the whole building here) is built upon a very slipperie and loose foundation, & which it self needeth establishment; if any thing can be said to need that, which it is unca∣pable to receive. Yet 3. Understand we by the rudiments of the world, Mr. A's understanding, I mean, Mosaiall Ceremonies; yet have we no ground at all to think, that the Apostle rejecteth Philosophie, or things of humane tradition, as being after the rudiments of the world in such a sence as this, viz. because they are managed and ordered by such principles of wisdom, as those by which the Mosai∣call ceremonies were ordered by God, which yet must
be M. A's sence, to make his citation of the words any wayes pertinent to his purpose. But if we must needs, for Mr. A's sake, though contrary to reason, inter∣pret the rudiments of the world, the ceremonies of Moses; that character of evill, or of danger, upon things, which the Apostle placeth in this, that they are after the rudi∣ments of the world, must be conceived to stand in this, that they are of like nature and consideration (in ap∣pearance) with the old ceremonies of the Law, viz. ex∣ternall and carnal rites and observations, having no com∣munion with the spiritualnes or inwardnes of the Gospel, which hath chiefly to do with the hearts & souls & con∣sciences of men, and injoyneth such wayes, and actions, and exercisings of themselves unto men, which are pro∣per to arise and proceed from an heart sanctified thorow Faith, and fill'd with the love of God. Now Bap∣tism, to whomsoever administred, cannot in any such sence as this be▪ said to be after the rudiments of the world, or the Legall ceremonies: because it is an Evangelicall Ordinance, and commanded by Christ himself: or if it be after these, it is as well, and as much after them, when administred unto men and women, as when unto chil∣dren; inasmuch as the nature of it is not altered or changed by being administred unto men. So that Mr. A. is extreamly out of his way, to think that the Admi∣nistration of Baptism unto Infants, is any wayes touch∣ed or concerned in that clause of the Apostle, wherein he censureth things as dangerous, and of threatning consequence, for being after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. Sect. 141. Although it nothing concerns the cause in hand to follow him in his Answers to that objection, which he falls upon (though very unseasonably and irrelatively to the businesse before us, and led unto it by the false light of his understanding the clause lately mentioned, after the rudiments of the world) p. 32. yet to afford him an opportunitie to reflect upon his importunitie in oppo∣sing
Infant-Baptism, let us endeavour to shew him theMr. A. p. 32 weaknesse of his answer thereunto. The Objection (as himself propounds it, p. 32.) is this, That both our Saviour, and his Apostles, vindicate and as∣sert practises under the Gospell, from the examples and practi∣ses under the Law; as the disciples gathering ears of corn on the Sabbath, from Davids eating the shew bread, &c. Mat. 12. 3, 4, 5. The ministring in carnall things to Ministers of the Gospell, from the not muzling the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the corn under the Law, 1 Cor. 9. 9, 10. To this Objection he answers, 1. that it doth not ap∣pear that men of private spirits, wanting that infallible guidance of the holy Ghost, which Christ and his Apostles had, may use like libertie in this behalf. But (for answer to this answer) 1. Are not seeing men competent guides unto those that are blinde? And if it be not lawfull, or safe for us to follow or imitate Christ and his Apostles in any thing they did, because we want the infallible guidance of the holy Ghost, which they had, what Christian or worthy way (almost) is left for us to walk in? 2. Whereas he seems to distinguish between the guidances of the holy Ghost, and to make some infallible, and others falible, I can at no hand subscribe his di∣stinction. I cannot believe any guidance whatsoever of the holy Ghost, to be fallible, i such which may mislead, or deceive, those that are guided by it. Only if by an infallible guidance, he means such a guidance, which they who are partakers of it, know certainly to be such, (I mean infallible) and by a fallible guidance, such, that they who are guided by it, may possibly doubt whether it be his guidance, and so infallible, or no, and in this respect may deceive them, his distinction (I suppose) may passe. But then . Of what guidance of the holy Ghost can we be more confident that it is his, and consequently, infallible, then when we are led by him to such grounds and prin∣ciples
of arguing, upon which he taught those to argue and conclude, in whom his guidance was infallible, and known to be such by these persons themselves, and ac∣knowledged for such by us also? Sect. 142. And whereas Mr. A. endeavours to strengthen his Answer thus: Nay, hath not the presumption thus to do, been the sluce, thorow which many popish superstitions have first entred into the world, as supposing them to hold an ana∣logicall and equitable proportion with many the Jewish cu∣stomes? I answer; That what sluce soever a PRESƲMPTION of imi∣tating Christ and his Apostles in the methods and grounds of their arguings, may be for the letting in either of Popish superstitions, or other erroneous opinions; cer∣tain it is, that a duly considerate and reall imitation of them in this kind, must needs be an happy sluce to let in many necessarie and important truths into the world. For how small a portion of those truths, which are im∣portantly necessary to be known, are expresly, or (as we use to say) totidem verbis, delivered in Scripture? And if it be not lawful, or safe, to draw conclusions from Scripture-Principles, or grounds, the christian world must bear an intolerable burthen of darknesse and igno∣rance, or of hesitancie and doubtfulnesse at the best (which is little better then ignorance, if not the same) in things of highest concernment unto it. Yea, if it be not safe to draw conclusions upon the terms now men∣tioned, Mr. A. with all his Anti-poedo-baptismall train, have run a dangerous course in opposing Infant-Baptism, there being (as is notoriously known) no plain or expresse Scripture against it, no not yet (the truth is) of any more remote or obscure overture. But Mr. A. seems to be a little jealous that his ob∣jection would ride over the head of this answer; there∣fore he brings a second to encounter it. The tenour hereof, is, 1. Though Christ and his Apostles did both back and illustrate their Doctrine and Precepts from instances and
examples under the Law, yet▪ they never made these exam∣ples the sole ground and foundation thereof, but these are still built upon that authority, which they had from God o∣therwise.—2. The things which both Christ, and the Apostle, in the cases obected, plead for examples out of the Law, were not meerly and barely institutive and posi∣tive, but of a morall consideration, and so of a more ready perception and deduction from those examples. For an∣swer: Sect. 143. 1. Are the two members of this answer of any good accord between themselves? or when the things which they (Christ and his Apostles) taught, were of a morall con∣sideration, and so of a more ready perception & deduction from Scripture-examples, was it proper for them to insist up∣on that authoritie which they had from God otherwse, for the confirmation or avouchment of such things? Espe∣cially considering that the Jews, with whom they had, either only, or chiefly to do, in these reasonings, sub∣scribed to the Authoritie of the Scriptures, but rejected the Authoritie of the persons, who argued from them, and did not own them as teachers sent from God. And however, the Apostle Peter maketh the word of Prophesie, [i. the Scriptures of the old Testament] more sure [i. of greater, and of a more rationall authoritie for a mans satisfaction and conviction, touching the truth of what they deliver] then a voice from heaven, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. when things taught are of a ready perception and deduction from the Scriptures, and the Divine Authoritie of the Scriptures acknowledged by the persons, to whom these things are delivered, it is very unreasonable for the Teachers to bear themselves with a strong hand upon their extraordinarie Commission or Authoritie from God to teach, especially towards such hearers, who are hard to be convinced hereof. Nor are the scripture-in∣stances produced by Mr. A. to shew the contrary, any wayes pertinent to such a purpose. And that he is mi∣staken in that, wherein he placeth his greatest trust, Mat.
12. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath day, I have shewed elsewhere, Water∣dipping▪ Con∣sider. 1. pag. 6. directing the Reader where he may find a very sufficient account given, that by, the Son of man, in that saying, is not meant the Lord Christ himself, but any person of mankind, as the the phrase oft signifieth in scripture, Job 25. 6. 35. 8. Esa. 51. 12. 56. 2. Psal. 8. 4. 144. 3. 146. 3. (to omit others.) 2. If neither Christ, nor his Apostles, ever made the Scriptures, or those scripture-examples, upon which they argued and avouched their Doctrine, the sole ground and foundation hereof, by what Authoritie can we do it? Upon what account can we raise Doctrines from, and build conclusions upon any scripture-examples, yea though the Doctrines we raise and build in this kind, be but of a morall consideration, and of the easiest and readiest perception and deduction from these examples? Or are they, who do raise any Doctrinall conclusion from any Scripture example, worthy reproof for so doing? Or if Mr. A. teacheth this, doth he not make a rod for his own back? Sect. 144. 3. Whereas he pleads, that the things which Christ, and the apostles, in the cases objected, plead for examples out of the Law, were not meerly and barely institutive, but of a morall consideration, and so of a more ready percepti∣on, &c. pretending, that Infant-baptism hath no morall equity, in, and of, it self discernable to commend it; I clear∣ly answer; that though Baptism it self be institutive and positive, yet Baptism, with the severall gracious ends intended by God in it, supposed, (which is nothing, but what Mr. A. himself, as well as his adversaries, suppo∣seth) the baptizing of Infants is of a morall consideration, and hath equitie, in, and of, it self to commend it. If God intended good by Infant-circumcision, either to the Jewish Church in generall, or to the children them∣selves who were to be circumcised, the administration of circumcision unto children, was of a morall consi∣deration,
and had a morall equitie in it self to commend it: and they upon whom the duty of the said administra∣tion at any time, and in reference to any person, lay, should have sinned against the Law of charitie to neg∣lect it. Now there being the same, or as much reason to judge (as hath been formerly argued, and may be further, in due time that God by Infant bap∣tism, intendeth spirituall good, either unto the Infants themselves, who are or should be baptized, or to the Christan Churches (respectively) as that he did intend the like good, either to the circumcised Infants, or Church of the Jews, by Infant circumcision, it roundly follows, that Infant Baptism, notwithstanding Mr. A's opinion to the contrary, is of a morall consideration, and in this respect of a readie perception and deduction from the example of Infant-circumcision; yea and that they who do deprive their children of it, walk uncharitably to∣wards them, and deserve reproof; according to the saying of Beza; Baptismus sine impietatis scelere contem∣ni nequit, & gravissimam reprehensionem coram Deo & hominibus me∣rentur, qui tan∣tum beneficium differunt, vel sibi, vel suis li∣beris accipere. Beza. Opnsc. p. 334. Baptism cannot without the great sin of impietie be despised: and they deserve a most severe reproof both before God and men, who delay the reception of so great a benefit, either for themselves, or THEIR CHILDREN; So that things duly and unpartially considered, Mr. A's Objection is too hard for his Answer, the spirit of the former, is the greater spirit. And thus we see, that his minor Proposition, which he hath been all this while labouring in the fire to make straight, remains as yet crooked. His two former probations have afforded no Protection at all to it. But it may he hath kept his best wine to the last; and his third Answer will recover the credit, which his two former have lost. Let us therefore with patience, and without partialitie, hear and consider what this hath to say unto us. Another thing by which it may appear that Infant-bap∣tism is not agreeable to the Gospell-ministration, is, in that itM. A. p. 34. differs from it in this propertie of it, viz. as it is a ministra∣tion of the spirit; for so it is called, 2 Cor. 3. 8. It's the
ministration of the spirit in two respects: 1. because, in, and by, this ministration, the spirit is given unto men. 2. Be∣cause the worship and service, which God receives from men under it, is, or ought to be, more spirituall, then that was under the Law: in both which respects Infant-Baptism will be found disagreeable to it. I answer, Sect. 145. 1. This argument, or probat, is to be commended in this before either of the former: it promiseth full, and undertakes home, in the cause of the Proposition to be se∣cured; the Proposition (as we heard) being this: In∣fant-Baptism is disagreeable to the ministration of the New Testament. Now his first proof undertook for no more, but to prove Infant-Baptism, not simply disagreeable, but only lesse agreeable, to this ministration. His second, that Infant-Baptism, as he might well fuppose, savors strong∣ly of the Legall ministration. But this proof, it be as good as its word, will prove Infant-Baptism, simply and right-down, disagreeable to the said ministrati∣on. But 2. Whereas he attempts to prove this disagreeable∣nesse by this argument, viz. that it differs from it in one particular proprtie, his attempt amounts to no more then the beating of the ayr. For what though it should differ from it in two properties, which are more then one, yet if it agree with it in others, especially in more, why should it not be judged, rather, or more, agreeable with it, then disagreeable? yea one thing may be agreeable enough with another, when there is a disagreeable∣nesse between them in many properties, and scarce a si∣militude in any. Righteousnesse is agreeable enough with Christ, (and so with a regenerate soul) yet in how many properties or considerations, do they differ? The meat which a man eats, if it be wholesome, thoughMr. A. p. 32. 33. it be dead or without life, yet may it be agreeable enough to his body, which is alive. So that this argument, hath not so much as the face or colour of a proof in it.
And 3. When he saith that the Gospel-ministration is therefore called the ministration of the spirit, because the worship and service which God receives from men under it, is, or ought to be, more spirituall, then that was under the Law; 1. I do not very well understand what he means by the Gospel-ministration; as viz. whether, the publi∣cation or manifestation of the Gospell, which was made by Christ and his Apostles, unto the world, in their dayes; or whether, that publishing or preaching of it, which hath been made since in generations succeeding▪ by the ordinarie ministers and Preachers of it. If he means the former; I confesse the ministration of the Gos∣pel may well be termed (as it is by the Apostle) the mi∣nistration of the spirit: for the spirit was abundantly poured out, under, and by this ministration. But if the latter, I make a great question whether the Apostle intended to stile this, the ministration of the spirit; con∣sidering how sparingly, (and for the most part) imper∣ceptibly and without observation, the spirit hath been, or in these our dayes, is, given under it. This by the way. 2. Neither is it so demonstratively true, that the worship and service, which God (generally) receives from men under the Gospel-ministration (in the latter sence) either is, or ought to be, more spirituall, then that was (in reference to many persons at least) or ought to have been, in respect of all, under the Law. For it is no great shame for any man to believe, that the worship and service, which Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, (with others in great numbers) exhibited unto God under the Law, was altogether as spirituall, i. had as much of their spirit, heart, and soul in it, as any worship or ser∣vice which is no (at least, ordinarily) performed unto him under the Gospel. And it is yet lesse questionable (of the two) that that worship and service, which Moses, Aaron, Joshua, David, did perform under the Law, were no works of Supererogation, and conse∣quently, not more spirituall, then they ought to have
been, or then the Law required. So that this third and last proof levied by Mr. A. upon the account of his said Proposition, hath lesse in it then either of the for∣mer. Sect. 146. Neverthelesse Mr. A. maketh a long businesse to fill up with words an argument so empty of weight and truth, as we have heard. But he that pleadeth an evill cause, cannot do it effectually by speaking truth: and pittie it is that Mr. A's understanding should be so over-mated with an unfeasible undertaking, as I find it here. 1. He saith, that Baptism is a part of the Gospel-mini∣stration. If it be so, then is an Ordinance, a piece or part of an action. For certain it is (I suppose, to Mr. A. himself) that Baptism is an Ordinance: and suppose no lesse certain, that the Gospel-ministration is an action. But who ever notioned, or conceited an Ordinance, to be a part of an action? If he had said, the administration of Baptism is a part of the Gospel-ministration, it had been more regular and proper; though (haply) no whit more a truth. For as Baptism is rather an appendix unto the Gospel, then a part of it (as was formerly shewed, Sect. 102.) so is the administration of Baptism rather an Appendix to the ministration of the Gospell, then any part of it. And (doubtlesse) if Paul had included the Administration of Baptism in the Gospel ministration, when he termed it, the ministration of the spirit, he would have been so far from thanking God that he had baptized so few, as those mentioned by him, 1 Cor. 1. 14, 16. that he would rather have been humbled, or sorrowfull, before God, that he had baptized no more. yea in the very next words (ver. 17.) he makes a plain opposition between Baptizing, and Preaching (i. mini∣string) the Gospell, For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospell. Yes, 2 Cor. 5. 18. he expresly saith, that God had given, or committed unto him (with the other Apostles) the ministerie of reconciliation [what
is this, but the ministration of the Gospell?] again, 1 Cor. 9. 17. that the dispensation of the Gospel was commit∣red unto him. Therefore certainly had he judged the administration of Baptism any part of the Gospel mini∣stration, he would not have affirmed, that Christ sent him not to baptize. Sect. 147. 2. Concerning what he argues from Act. 2. 38. to prove that Baptism, when duly administred and received, contributes towards mens receiving the spirit, &c. hath been answered at large already, viz. Sect. 89, 90, 91. &c. I here adde, 1. I presume Mr. A. will acknowledge, that when John baptized, Baptism was duly administred and received: yet he did not look upon his Baptism as much contributing towards the receiving of the spirit in re∣spect of a greater presence and operation, nor did he bear his baptized ones in hand, that any such thing was to be expected by it, or from it, but represented it unto them as a matter of inferiour concernment, declaring unto them from whom they might expect another Baptism, which was of a rich and high concernment indeed. I indeed have baptized you with water [meaning, that his Baptism was of mean consequence] but he, [viz. Christ, who came after him] SHALL baptize you with the holy Ghost. Mar. 1. 8. Mat. 11. 11. Luk: 3 16. If upon, or by means of Johns Baptism, they had received the Spirit, or had bin baptized with the holy Ghost, he would not have said, he SHALL baptize you, or, ye SHALL be baptized with the holy Ghost, but, ye have been already herewith baptized. So like∣wise, Act. 19. we read of Disciples, who had been bap∣tized by John, or by some authorized in that behalf by Iohn, and therefore their Baptism (doubtlesse) had been duly administred and received; yet this notwith∣standing they had been so far from receiving the Spirit by their Baptism, that they professed that they had not so much as heard whether there were an holy Ghost, or no. And Pauls question unto them, Have ye received the holy Ghost since ye BELIEVED, plainly importeth, that the
receiving of the holy Ghost, either depended upon, or was a consequent of their believing, not of their being baptized, according to that of our Saviour; He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath said, out of his belly(b) Ioh. 7. ae 8, 39. shall flow rivers of living waters. But this he spake of the Spirit, which they that BELEEVE on him [not they, who should be Water-baptized in his Name] should re∣ceive. Gal. 3. 2. So again by a like question put to the Ga∣lathians by the same Apostle, Received ye the Spirit by the works of the Law, or by the hearing of Faith. [c. i. of the doctrine of Faith, the Gospell] he plainly enough supposeth, that the receiving of the Spirit, was, and is, the gratious and bountifull reward of God unto mens Faith, annexed by promise hereunto, not of their be∣ing baptized. And accordingly we read, Act. 10. that all they, who heard Peter preaching the Gospell, upon their beleeving, received the holy Ghost, before there was any thing done, or spoken of, about their bapti∣zing. While Peter yet spake these words, the Holy Ghost fell on all them, which heard the word. Act. 10. 44. Yea their Baptism was so farr from contributing to their receiving the holy Ghost, that on the contrary, their receiving the holy Ghost contributed towards their baptism. Can any man (saith Peter) forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received the holy Ghost as well as we? Verse 47 To the same purpose, and with reference (I suppose) to the same thing, the same Apostle declareth to the Council at Jerusalem, that God gave the holy Ghost unto the Gentiles, as he had done unto them, upon the purifying of their hearts by Faith, and by way of testimony of their beleeving. God (saith he) made choice among us, that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear he word, and beleve. And God who knoweth the heart, bare them witnesse, giving them the holy Ghost, even as he did unto us. And put no difference between us and them, having purified [] their hearts by Faith. Act. 15. 7, 8, 9. See  more upon this account, To these we might adde, Gal. 2. 14. Eph. 1. 13. (with others) And though we read of severall persons, and some∣times
of great numbers, and at severall times, bapti∣zed, yea oft-times of persons receiving the Spirit before their being baptized, yet (to my best remembrance) we never read of any receiving the spirit, either imme∣diately upon, no nor yet by means of, their baptizing. The report or mention whereof without all controver∣sie, would not have been passed over in silence by the holy Ghost, had there been any such remarkable dispen∣sation; especially considering that he sometimes reports the receiving of the spirit upon the laying on of hands, as Act. 8. 17. and 9. 17. and 19. 4. 2 Tim. 1. 6. So that Mr. A's Notion about the contribution of Baptism to∣wards the receiving of the Spirit, is clearly, Anti-Evan∣gelicall. Therefore I adde. Sect. 148. 2. That when Peter speaks thus to those Iews, on whom his preaching had wrought so farre, as to cause them to ask, men and brethren what shall we do &c, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Iesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, his meaning is not, cannot be (the Scripture passages lately insisted on, duly consider∣ed) that Baptism should contribute towards their receiving of the Spirit, but Reentance; which is (as hath been formerly shewed, if my memory faileth me not, or however is of ready demonstration) both of the same nature with Faith, and inseparably accompanying it, and hath the same promises made unto it. For though Baptism be joyned in the same exhortation with repent∣ance, and the promise of receiving the holy Ghost made unto those, who shall be found obedient unto it, yet since the same promise appertains unto repentance, aparta) See p. 244. from, and without Baptism, and hath been. performed accordingly (as we have both lately and formerly pro∣ved) there is no ground to think, that the promise made to those, that shall obey the said exhortation, should be made with an eye or reference unto Baptism, or as not intended to be performed without this, unto all those who shall. repent. When Christ faith, And
this is the will of him that sent me, that every one which seeth the Son, and believeth on him, may have everlasting life, Ioh. 6. 40 he doth not imply, that a seeing of him is as ne∣cessary to the obtaining of everlasting life as a believing on him; no nor yet that everlasting life doth in any de∣gree depend upon a seeing of him, although as well seeing, as believing, is mentioned in this promise. Tho∣mas (saith Christ unto him) because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: Blessed are they, who have not seen and yet haue believed. Ioh. 20. 29 Where 1. it is observable, that bles∣sedness (which is by the Apostle Paul interpreted by remission of sins (Rom. 4. 6, 7.) is annexed by promise unto, or suspended upon believing, without the least intimation of any necessitie of a baptismall concurrence herewith for the obtaining of it. 2. That though Christ in the late cited Scripture, Ioh. 6. 40 mentioned, the seeing of him, together with a believing on him, in order to the obtaining everlasting life [and consequently, remission of sins] yet may everlasting life (and so re∣mission of sins) be obtained by believing on him only without seeing him. Yea to shew, that Baptism con∣tributes, neither towards remission of sins, nor receiving the spirit, I adde 3. (And lastly) that the promise, which Peter here declareth unto these Iews, was made to them, and their children, &c. the matter of which Mr. A. himself inter∣preteth to be, remission of sins, and the receiving of the Spirit, was an old Testament promise, either expresse, or resultive; and consequently could not be made unto, or suspended (in the performance of it) upon Baptism (either in whole, or in part) See Sect. 95. p. 244. because there was no such Ordinance in being, when the promise was made, nor mentioned as future, in this promise. Therefore it is a clear case that the promise we speak of, was made unto Repentance, or Faith (each including other) without any consideration had of Baptism. But I remember some∣what of this before. Sect. 95.
Sect. 149. The irrelativenesse of his two subjoyned Scriptures to his purpose (viz. Ioh. 3. 5. and Tit. 3. 5.) hath been evict∣ed formerly, Sect. 78. Nor is there any whit more, but lesse rather, in his additionall Scripture, 1 Cor. 6. 11. Nor doth the descending of the holy Ghost in a visible manner upon Christ so soon after his baptizing, counte∣nance his notion, that Baptism contributes towards the receiving of the Spirit, in respect of a greater presence or operation hereof, &c. Nor doth Mr. A. himself seem to place much in this: in which respect we shall wave the further consideration of it at the present. But whereas in the processe of this argument (viz. p. 35.) he saith, The Promise of the Spirit is not made, either to repentance or Baptism singly, but to both in conunction; those very Scriptures pointed at (a few lines before) by himself (being for the most part the same that we lately argued against him) are abundantly sufficiently to refute him. The Scriptures are, Ioh. 7. 39. Act. 15. 7, 8. and 19. 2. Gal. 3. 14. Eph. 1. 13. See upon this ac∣count, Sect. 147. where it is made evident that the pro∣mise of the Spirit is made unto Repentance, either ex∣plicitly, or implicitly, (I mean as included in Faith) apart from, or, otherwise then in conjunction with, Baptism. The rule which he subjoynes, if rightly un∣derstood, is right and straight: and thus understood, and applyed accordingly, may do good service. Where things (saith he) are promised upon severall conditions, or upon condition of severall things in conjunction, it is not the performance of one of these conditions, that can put a man into a due and well grounded expectation of the promise. But M. A. hath lately learned, or (I am certain) might have learned, that every thing which is inserted in a pro∣mise, or in reference to the obtaining of a promise, con∣dition-wise, [i. in the forme of a condition] hath not therefore the matter or force of such a condition, with∣out which the performance of this promise cannot be ob∣tained. And this explication, or limitation of Mr. A's
rule, alwayes taketh place in such cases (and possibly in some others) where the blessing promised ūder the speci∣fication of two conditiōs, or more, in one place, is expresly insured upon the performance of one of these conditions only, in another. See more of this Sect. 95. p. 244, 245 &c. and Sect. 96, 97. p. 24. &c. An instance hereof we lately gave from Ioh. 6. 40. in the preceding Section. Unto which may be added, Ioh. 3. 5 (as being of somewhat alike considerati∣on) Except a man be born of water, & the spirit, he cannot en∣ter into the kingdom of God. Water seems here to be joyned (conditiō-wise) with the spirit, as necessary, together with the spirit, to put a man into a capacitie of seeing [i. injoy∣ing] the kingdom of God. Yet it appears from the 3. verses immediatly following, where this capacitie, under the no∣tion and name of a new▪birth, is attributed unto the Spirit only, as likewise from the generall urrent of the Scrip∣tures, that the Spirit, by the word, is the sole worker of this capacitie in men. See 1 Cor. 6. 11. and 2 Cor. 3. 6. 2 The. 2. 13. 1 Pe. 1. 2, 22. Sect. 150. Whereas he further adds (p. 135.) that Infants are in no present or actuall capacitie of believing, whilst such, and makes a solemn businesse of the proof of it, doth he not make himself a companion of those, who are wont to disquiet themselves in vain? For though there be some, as full of their own sence to the contrary, as he can be of his, to whom neither this his assertion, nor yet his proofs of it, are any wayes satisfactorie; yet were he gratified with a peaceable assent unto both, his cause would be little gratified hereby. For, Though the ministration of the Law, or rather of the Gospell under the Law, was (as the Apostle notion∣eth it) a ministration of the letter, (as we formerly heard) yet his sence herein was comparative only, not simple or absolute (as we largely proved, Sect. 133.) For The Spirit of God was in some measure and degree gi∣ven under, & by this dispensation; though the proportiō of this gift in respect of the generalitie of men, was very
little considerable, compared with the rich effusions of this spirit, under, and by means of, the ministration of the Gospell; especially about the first entrance of this ministration into the world (as not long since, viz. Sect. 145. we distinguished.) And there is nothing more familiar or frequent in the Scriptures, then to expresse a comparative sence in words of a positive or absolute1 Cor. 1. form. Christ sent me not to baptize, &c. i. not so much to baptize. So, Labour not for the meat which perish∣eth,Ioh. 6. 27. but, &c. i. labour not so much for this meat. Receive my instruction, and not silver. i. Be more readyProv. 8. 10: and willing to receive my instruction, then silver, (besides many the like). Now if the ministration of the Law was simply & absolutely a ministration of the Spirit, though not comparatively, and God himself notwith∣standing judged Infants in a sufficient, yea in the best, capacitie, to partake of a principall part of this ministra∣tion (I mean, of the administration of Circumcision) evident it is that the present incapacitie in children under the Gospel to receive the spirit, is no barr in their way against their admission to participate in Baptism, only because this is a part of the Gospell ministration, and this ministration is the ministration of the spirit. For he that thus argueth, what doth he lesse then put God himself to rebuke, who judged Infants, such an incapa∣citie notwithstanding, capable enough of the initiatorie part of such a ministration, which was a ministration of the Spirit also? Sect. 151. Mr. A. was not (it seems) aware of this answer to his argument in hand; but he was jealous of another; which he seeks to way-lay by proposing it (Obje∣ction-wise) and so to shape an answer to it. Nor can it (saith he) reasonably be supposed here, thatM. A. p. 36. such a notion as this will salve this sore, viz. that Baptism may be received by Infants in order to their receiving the Spirit, when they come to believe, and so their Baptism come to be agreeable to the Gospel-ministration as it is a mi∣nistration
of the Spirit, notwithstanding it be received in In∣fancie; Because Baptism hath no influence this way as it is a work done; in which respect only Infants are capable of it, but as it is done, submitted unto, and taken up out of Faith, and in obedience unto God, as hath been already proved in part, &c. I answer. 1. That the sinews of this Answer were lately cut in∣sunder, where we proved, that God himself judged In∣fants, notwithstanding their actuall incapacitie of re∣ceiving the Spirit, capable of communion and fellow∣ship in a principall part of such a ministration, which was a ministration of the Spirit, as well as the Gospel-mi∣nistration it self, though much inferiour in this conside∣ration unto it, see Sect. 133. Yet 2. Whereas he saith, that Baptism hath no influence this way [he means, to, or about, the receiving of the Spirit] as it is a work done, in which respect only Infants are capable of it, but, &c. I answer; neither had Circumci∣sion any such influence as he speaks of, as it was a work done, in which respect only Infants were capable of it, yet did God judg them meet to partake of the admini∣stration of it. 3. Whereas he saith, that Baptism hath no such in∣fluence as he speaks of, but only as it is submitted unto, and taken up out of Faith, &c. I answer, that as there oft is a subsequent consent to things done, as well as an Antecedent, and that as valid to all ends and purposes, as this; in like manner a consequent submission in Faith unto that Baptism, which was administred unto a per∣son without his antecedent consent in this kind, may be as available unto him for all spirituall ends, as an Ante∣cedent submission could have been. Let me put a case to Mr. A. Suppose any one, or more of his Baptismall Proselytes should at the time of their taking up Baptism, deceive both him, and themselves, conceiting that they submit unto it, and take it up out of Faith, when as they know not what true Faith meaneth (which I have cause in aboundance to fear, is a case of very frequent occur∣rence
among the Proselytes of his newfound Baptism, and it was the case of Simon Magus, who it seems decei∣ved both Philip, and himself, in his taking up Baptism) but should afterwards come to be convinced of their er∣rour and hypocrisie, in this kind, and thorow the Grace of God be brought to believe indeed, is it Mr. A's sence, that their Baptism, because not submitted unto, and taken up out of Faith, at the time of their literall reception of it, can now contribute nothing towards their receiving of the Spirit, or have no influence upon them this way? Or is it his opinion, that in this case they ought to take another voyage by water to invite the Spirit unto them? If it be, certain I am that there is neither precept, nor ex∣ample, in the Scriptures, nor any competent ground in reason, to support it. But Sect. 152. 4. We have Examples in the Scripture of edification and spirituall benefit received by men afterwards, by such, both words and actions, which at the time of the hearing of the one, and transacting of the other, were not understood by those, who were in time thus edified by them. When Peter thought it strange that his Lord and Master should come to wash his feet, Jesus answered and said unto him, What I do, thou knowest not NOW: but thou shalt know HERE AFTER. Ioh. 13. 7 Might not God have spoken in like manner to every child, which he (by his precept and order in that behalf) cir∣cumcised under the Law (the continuance of their lives untill years of discretion only supposed.) What I do, thou knowest not now: but thou shalt know afterwards? Or is there not the same consideration of children in their Baptism? When Christ said to Joseph and his mother, how is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers business? it is immediatly subjoyned; And they understood not (viz. at the present) the saying which he spake unto them; Luk. 2. 49 50: but were they therefore in no ca∣pacitie of understanding it, yea and of receiving spiri∣tuall benefit by it afterwards? So again, when Christ
said thus to his Disciples, The Son of man shall be deliver∣ed into the hands of men, the Evangelist presently adds, But they understood not this saying, and it was hid from them, that they perceived it not. Lu. 44. 45 [viz. at the time when it was spoken unto them] Was it therefore spoken unto them in vain? or did it not do worthy execution upon their judgements and consciences in due time? Se∣verall other instances there are of like consideration. See Joh. 10. 6. Ioh. 12. 16. Mat. 16. 6, 7, &c. we formerly shewed, that the end of planting is not made void, by the non-fructification of the tree at the time of the planting of it. See Sect, 69. So that Mr. A's first An∣swer in this place leaves his Objection in full force, strength, and vertue. Nor doth his second answer any whit more disable it. Infant-Baptism (saith he) is disagreeable to the Gospel-mi∣nistrationM. A. p. 36. as it is the ministration of the Spirit, in this re∣spect also; viz. as it requires all worshippers, in all acts of worship, in all the Ordinances of this ministration, to wor∣ship God in Spirit, with the mind, in faith & fear of the Lord. I answer, that to this reasoning, answer hath been given over and over. For 1. it hath been opened, that the Gospel-ministration, is by the Apostle called, the mini∣stratiō of the spirit, cōparatively only, & not with any im∣port or intimatiō, that the ministratiō of the Law was in no respect or degree, a ministration of the spirit also. This, Sect. 133, 150. 2. It hath been proved likewise, that the ad∣nistration of Baptism is no part of the Gospel-mini∣stration, but an Appendix only unto it. This Sect. 146. 3. It hath been made good, That Infant-baptism may be agreeable enough to the Gospel ministration, though it should not agree with it in some one propertie, or particularly in this, as it is the ministration of the Spirit. This, Sect. 145. Therefore whereas he here pretends to give a reason, why Infant-Baptism should be dsagree∣able to the Gospel-ministration, as it is the ministration of the Spirit, doth he not pretend to give a reason of that which is not? and withall take that for granted with∣out
proof, which is denied by his adversaries? Sect. 153. And whereas he appropriates it unto the Gospel-mini∣stration, that it requires all worshippers in all acts of wor∣ship—to worship God in Spirit with the mind, &c. as if the Legall-ministration required not the same, this Conceit of his also hath been made to lick the dust at the feet of the Truth, Sect. 10, 145. So that we have here nothing but braided ware, soiled and foil∣ed notions. But whereas in the further traverse of this Argument, he professeth his ignorance, or want of understanding, how children should be uncapable of the Ordinance of the Supper, and yet capable of Baptism, especially consideringMr. A. 37 that they both represent the death of Christ, both relate to the great benefit of remssion of sins, &c. I suppose that this Salve (in his own Rhetorique is proper for this sore, and will heal it without a scarr. If Mr. A. can but understand, how a child may be carried ten or twentySee Mr. Rich. Baxter plain Scripture proof for In∣fants Church-membership, &c. Part. 2. cap. 4. 114. miles, and yet not be able to go this journey, or the like, upon his own leggs, (did not that bane of understand∣ings, prejudice, and preoccupation, here intoxicate him) he may as well understand how a child may be capable of the Ordinance of Baptism, and yet not of the supper. For Baptism is an Ordinance of such a calculation, na∣ture, and condition, that, as to the Elementarie and literall reception of it, it requireth no principle of action a all in its subject, but passivenesse only, as Cir∣cumcision also did under the Law; which among many others (to mention this briefly by the way) is an Ar∣gument to me of a very considerable intimation, that it was and is as an Ordinance principally intended by God for such subjects of man-kind, which are meerly passive, and know not how to act any thing, in, or about, their reception of it. The like counsell of God is observable, in his enditing of that Ordinance, which he intended should be initiatorie, and primarily and ministrable unto
Infants under the Law. Circumcision was an Ordi∣nance of such a nature, so conditioned, that it required nothing but a regular passiveness in its subject (I meā, its ordinarie and most appropriate subject) to the participa∣tion of it. But now the Ordinance of the Supper, is of quite another consideration: to take, and to eat, and to drink, and to do all this in remembrance of Christ, re∣quire principles and abilities for action in him that performeth them. And me thinks Mr. A's understanding might as reasonably be opposed with this question, how an Infant of the eight day, should be capable of Circumcision, and yet uncapable of eating the Passeover, as how an Infant, being uncapable of the supper of the Lord, should notwithstanding be judg∣ed a capable subject of Baptism: yea imposition of hands being an Ordinance of this nature (I mean, not requi∣ring any thing active in its subject about the reception of it) was adjudged by the Lord Christ himself an Or∣dinance meet for little children, Mat. 19. 15. I con∣fesse that some very judicious and worthy men, as Austin amongst the Ancient, and Musculus amongst the Modern, have judged it regular and meet that children should be admitted to the Lords Table also. And Lu∣ther in one of his Epistles affirmeth, that the Pighards(a) Bohemos, qui parvulos communicant, non probo, quanquam non in hoc haretco cenceo. Tom. 2 Epist Lutheri ad ad Nicolaum Haus mannum, p. 333. or Protestants in Bohemia, did in his time admit their children to the Lords Table with them, as (though he disliketh such their custome.) Sect. 154. What Mr. A. subjoyneth towards the close of his third argument, he rather repeats, then addes, as him∣self acknowledgeth. Only when he saith, The whole mi∣nistration [he means, of the Gospell] is denominated by Faith (Gal. 3. 23, 25.) because Faith from first to last, from one end of it to the other, is to steer all affairs under it on mans part, &c. here (I confesse) is a new Notion, or two. For, 1. by Faith, Gal. 3. 23, 25. I believe neverMr. A. p. 37 any Expositor understood, a ministration, or the ministra∣tion of the Gospel, but rather the subject matter of this
ministration, or the fuller manifestation of those hea∣venly truths, which had been more darkly overtur'd under the Law. Yea himself (pag. 20. of his discourse, as we formerly heard) conceiveth that by Faith, is meant the confessing or acknowledging Christ Jesus to become in the flesh, and to be the Son of God and Saviour of the World. Which interpretation of the word, Faith, is as wide from his present sence of it, as both the one and the other are from the truth it self. 2. Whereas he gives this for the reason of his present sence, that Faith from first to last is to steere all affairs un∣der it on mans part, &c. 1. The great Apostle assigns the great steerage of affairs under the Gospel dispensa∣tion, unto love: Knowledge (saith he) puffeth up: but love edifyeth. 1 Cor. 8. 1 If love edifieth, love must steer and order all things under the Gospell-dispensation: For all things here ought to be done to edification, 1 Cor. 14. 12, 26. Rom. 14 19: and 15. 2. &c. But 2. Grant we that Faith ought to steer all affairs here on mans part, to act all services, &c. ought it not to have done the like under the Law? or did it not the like when children were Circumcised, at least when they were cir∣cumcised by those who beleeved? And may it not do the like now though Children be bapti∣zed? Of a truth these are very light and loose reasonings to overrule the conscience of a sober man to the distur∣bance of the affairs of the Gospel, and disquietment of the Christian world. The premises in the examination of this third argu∣ment from first to last, duly considered, can we think that Mr. A. had so much as any tolerable ground to wind up this his Argument in such a vapour as this: Where this qualification [Faith] therefore is known to be wanting, as it is in Infants, certainly their Baptism cannotMr. A. p. 37 be applyed without an apparent breach of the Laws and Rules of this spirituall ministration. And thus also I have made good the Premisses of this third Argument. The Conclusion will follow of it self without help, &c.
Sect. 155. The Conclusion he speaks of will indeed follow the pre∣misses without help. They have been detected of vanitie, and are vanished into the air: and thither will the con∣clusion also flee: let no man stay it. The breach of which he speaks, is very probably apparent, [i. such in appearance] unto men who have prejudiced their sight, and look thorow such a medium, which is ap to cause a mistake. Water, as both reason and experience informs us, will make a straight thing seem crooked; if it be look∣ed upon thorow it. But though Infant-baptism be an APPARENT breach of the Laws and Rules of Gospell∣ministration, whilst looked upon by men, who have maimed their judicatorie by an unadvised and overhasty Engagement in a by-way, yet being beheld and consi∣dered by men of chast judgements, & free understādings, it is an APPARANT cōformity thereunto. Whereas he he saith that he hath made good the premisses of his argumēt, Solomō saith, that which is crooked cannot be made straight. Possibly he hath made them good in his own eyes: but the answer given, will, I trust, thorow the blessing of God, dissolve the inchantment, and make that, which he calleth making good, appear to him to be nothing else but a washie colour. Sect. 156. His fourth and last Argument against Infant-Baptism,Mr. A's fourth and last argu∣ment. p. 38. he bringeth upon the stage of his discourse, p. 38. where it acteth its part on this wise. If none ought to be baptized but such who appear voluntarily willing to be bap∣tized in obedience utno God, then Infants ought not to be baptized: But none ought to be baptized but such, who appear voluntarily willing to be Baptized in obedience unto God. In this Argument we have only a new suite of appar∣rell,  but the same body of matter, which we met with in the two next preceding Arguments. So that the strength and substance of it have been answered already. Yet
because many of those with whom we have chiefly to do in this writing, are not so well able to distinguish be∣tween words, and substance of matter, let us examine the argument in the former words, wherein it stands now last recommended to us. The whole weight and strength of the Argument, depends upon the sence, and truth of this Position, That none ought to be Baptized but such who appear voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience to God. First, for the sence of this Position; 1. it is doubt∣full, whether by, voluntarily willing, he means that which the terms precisely import, viz. such, who are freely of their own accord, and without much contesting by others, as by arguments, perswasions, and the like, willing; or whether such, who are very intensly, or more then ordinarily willing, whether this intense de∣gree of willingnesse in them be from themselves, or from others. For that by voluntarily willing, he should mean nothing but simply and meerly willing, especially in a presse and close Syllogism, or Argument, is not easie to be believed. Now taking the Phrase, voluntarily wil∣ling, in either of the two former significations, the said Proposition is apparantly untrue. For not only they, who appear willing of themselves, and of their own ac∣cord, or who appear extraordinarily, and without any the least regret, or degree of unwillingnesse, willing, but even they who appear willing in any such degree, as to require Baptism, may be Baptized, at least, if other things required in those who are, or desire to be baptized, be not wanting. This (I suppose) will not be gainsaid by Mr. A. himself. 2. When the said Proposition saith, That none ought to be baptized, but such who appear voluntarily willing, &c. If it desires to be understood of persons capable of the appearance it speaks of, it may passe. But thus understood, it prevaricates with the Conclusion, which it undertakes, to protect and prove, and doth it no ser∣vice.
Therefore I make no question but the Authors meaning in it is rightout this: That none, i. no person whatsoever, of what capacitie, or incapacitie soever, ought to be baptized, but such [only] who appear willing to be baptized. The Proposition then in this sence un∣derstood, we absolutely deny. Sect. 157. The Reasons of this our deniall, are, 1. and principally because the Scripture no where exacteth, or requireth, any such appearing, as the Proposition speaks of, in or∣der to receiving of Baptism, but only of such persons, who are capable of making or exhibiting it. Therefore for men to make it a requisit in all persons whatsoe∣ver, and without the exception of any, to capacitate or qualifie them for Baptism, is to make themselves wise above that which is written. 2. Circumcision being a Sign and Seal of the righte∣ousnesse of Faith (as the Apostle affirmeth, Rom. 4. 11. and this in such a sence as we Argued, and proved formerly, Sect. 61. 62▪ &c.) it must needs be an Ordi∣nance of a very neer affinitie, and comportment with Baptism (as we have formerly likewise declared and made good. Sect. 1. If so, God himself having judged such persons meet subjects of it, who did not, indeed could not, appear voluntarily willing to receive it in obedience un∣to God, who are we that we should exclude persons from Baptism, upon the meere account of such a weak∣nesse, or infirmitie? Similium similis est ratio. 3. Imposition of hands, at least during the times of Christ, and his Apostles, when it was practised cm effe∣ctu, with some visible effect, and particularly (as we lately shewed) with the gift of the holy Ghost, was in this respect a greater Ordinance, then Baptism; which we never find accompanied with the like testimonie from heaven in the practise thereof (which we also shewed and proved, Sect. 147.) yet were children judged capable and meet subjects of this Ordi∣nance by the Lord Christ himself, Mat. 19. 15. Mar. 10. 16.
Now then, as the Apostle (1 Cor. 6. 2, 3.) concludeth the Corinthian Saints capable of inferiour judicatures, from their capacitie of greater; in like manner from that ca∣pacitie in children, testified by Christ himself, of a greater Ordinance, (viz. inposition of hands) we can∣not but judg them much more capable of a lesser; I mean, Baptism: and consequently, that the Propositi∣on contested cannot stand. Sect. 158. 4. The Lord Christ being much displeased (as the Text saith) with his Disciples for discouraging and rebuking those, who brought little children unto him (Mar. 10. 14.) upon the occasion makes this generall Order, gives this in charge unto all men, that they suffer little children to come unto him, [viz. in such a sence, as those came un∣to him, who were now before him, who properly came not, but were brought unto him by others] and not to forbid them. Now 1. it cannot be conceived that Christ made this Order for mens suffering childen to come unto him, in reference to his on time only, and to his cor∣porall presence on the earth; for we do not find that any more children were at any time brought unto him du∣ring his abode in the flesh; nor could he be igno∣rant that there would no more come, or be brought un∣to him in this kind. Therefore the said Order must of necessitie be supposed to respect (principally at least) the times after his death and ascention, and to enjoyn and charge, that such children who should come unto him [in the sence formerly declared, i. should be brought unto him] should not be opposed in their com∣ing at any time unto the worlds end. 2. My under∣standing is not as yet able to comprehend, or conceive, how, or in what way, or respect, childen should come, or be brought to Christ, either in these our dayes, or in any other, since his Ascention, but by baptism only: or consequently, how such a coming, or bringing of them unto him as this can be denied, or opposed, but with a manifest breach of the said Order of Christ made
in their behalf. The Reader is desired, to reperuse, upon this account, what hath been formerly argued, Sect. 25. and especially, Sect. 40. The import of these things duly considered by us, render us very bold and strong in our deniall of Mr. A's Proposition under debate. Sect. 159. 5. The Apostles Order is, that all things in the Church should be done to edification; 1 Cor. 14. 26. Doubtlesse his meaning is, that all things ought to be done to the best advantage, for the best and highest promoting of this end. Now that the constant administration of Baptism unto children, makes much more for the edification of the Church, then the administration of it unto persons of years only, hath been demonstratively asserted former∣ly, Sect. 56. 73. Yet for the further confirmation and clearing of the businesse, other considerations may be added to what is delivered in those Sections. .1 There is little question to be made but that God intended the edification of his Church under the Law, and this upon the best terms, not only, or simply, or by Circumcision, or by the administration thereof, but in, and by, his Election of, and precise order about, the more appropriate and standing subject hereof. This, for for the matter and substance of it, hath likewise been al∣ready proved, Sect. 138. If the truth of it yet stick in the throat of any mans judgment, and will not down pleasantly, he may be relieved by this consideration. If God did intend the edification of the Church of the Jews by Circumcision, and the administration thereof, and did not likewise intend the edification of this Church in his choice and appointment of the ordinarie & stand∣ing subject of this administration, then was he divided in, and against, himself; yea and gave such a Law unto his people, one clause whereof observed should tend to blesse them, another, prejudice them, or at best do them no service at all. Now if the administration of Cir∣cumcision unto children was judged by God himself the
most edifying administration of this Ordinance unto the Church of the Jews, upon what substantiall account can men denie the administration of Baptism unto children to be the most edifying administration unto the Gentile Churches? The differences pretended by Mr. A. to∣wards the close of his second argument, between the one administration and the other, upon examination of them, we found to be meer impertinences and shifts, from Sect. 120. to the end of Sect. 134. where the Reader may please to peruse their respective examinati∣ons. Sect. 160 2. The regular baptizing of children inricheth the Church, totie quoties with the solemn testimonie and profession of the Faith of those, who have been (like Mnason) Act. 21. 16 old Disciples, and have had long experience of the waies of Christ in the Gospel. For such Christin Parents, or Friends, who offer their children unto Bap∣tism, do hereby avouch the goodnesse and truth of the Gospel, and of the Faith hereof, it being every mans sence, that no Parent is desirous to have his child bap∣tized into such a Faith, or Profession, which he judg∣eth unsound, erroneous, or false. Whereas the Baptizing of men and women (at least if they were baptized, as Mr. A. himself acknowledgeth they ought to be, I mean, upon their first believing) accommodateth the Church with the testimonie and profession of young converts only, and such who are as yet unexperienced in the word of righteousnesse, and little other then strangers unto the Gospell. In which respect their testimonie and profession cannot be of like authoritie, weight, or edification to the Church, with theirs, who have been in Christ many years before them, and still continue sted∣fast in him. 3. Infant-Baptism maketh more for the edification of the Church, then after-Baptism, upon this account also. When Infants are baptized, the whole Church may, and this with conuenience, and without breach
upon their other occasions, be present, and so partake of all the fruits, benefits, and accommodations of the ad∣ministration. Whereas when men and women are baptized, very few of the Church, especially in many places, can have the opportunitie of being present, the place of the administration in this case being remote, (at least where Rivers or Pools of water, convenient for the service, are not neer at hand) and the time like∣wise of the said administration, can hardly be notified unto the generalitie of the Church. In which respect this Baptismall administration cannot be much edifying to the Church, nor comparable with that, which may be, and ought to be, (and in part) is, (ofttimes) made unto children. 4. Infant-Baptism affords many more occasions and opportunities for the administration of the Ordinance, and consequently, for the edification of the Church, then Beleever baptism doth. For the children of Be∣leevers are many more in number, then Beleevers them∣selves: and many thousands live to a week, or moneth, who are prevented by death before they come to years of discretion, and so much as to a capacitie of belee∣ving. In which respect many baptismall opportunities are lost, and cut off from the Church, which might have been gained and enjoyed, by the baptizing of these per∣sons in their infancie. Sect. 161. 5. Whereas the holy Ghost admonisheth the gene∣rality of mankid, to Remember their Creatour in the dayes of their youth, Eccle. 12. 1 they must needs be accessarie to the sin of their children in case they do not thus remember him, who deprive them of so great an engagement to thisSee M Rogers Treatise of Sacraments. part. 1. p. 80. timely remembrance of him, as their having been early baptzied must needs be. And they on the contrary wisely and graciously consult the obedience of their chil∣dren to that heavenly exhortation, who prevent them with, and lay upon them, a baptismal engagement here∣unto, in their Infancy. 1. It cannot be denied but that bap∣tism
is an ingagement to that duty, which Solomon ex∣presseth by a mans remembring his Creatour. 2. Neither can it be denied, but that men and women in their youth, and as soon as they are capable of the duty it self of remembring their Creatour, are capable of the said in∣gagement also; I mean, of understanding and concei∣ving, that their being baptized, is, and ought to be unto them a motive unto this dutie. 3. Neither can it reasonably be denyed, but that they who are actually capable of a motive or ingagement unto a duty, or work, may, thorow want of this motive or ingagement lying on them, neglect the performance of the duty, which under an ingagement, they would perform, and not neglect. 4. Every mans sence may teach him, that when the two scales of a ballance are equally poised, a very small weight cast into either, will cast it. 5. (And lastly) from these premises it roundly followeth, that any mans children, who know themselves unbaptized, and so free from the ingagement of Baptism, may from hence take occasion to neglect the dutie of remembring their Creatour in the dayes of their youth, a duty which would lye with more weight and authoritie upon their consciences (and so weas more likely to be performed) did they look upon themselves as by Baptism ingaged unto it. I am not positive in affirming, that ever the Son or Daughter of any Parent did actually miscarrie upon the account we speak of: but this I say, with ful∣nesse of conviction in my judgment and conscience, 1. that it may very possibly come to passe, that a Child, Son, or Daughter, unbaptized, may be lesse thought∣full, and carefull, to remember their Creatour in the dayes of their youth, by understanding thēselves free & loose from a baptismall tie and engagement thereunto. 2. That in case the child of any Parent shall stumble at that stone we now speak of, and fall, and be broken to pieces by it, the parents of this child, being accessary hereunto, will be able to give but a sad account of the losse of their child unto God. 3. (And lastly) that whatsoever
the consequent or event of a non-baptizing a child in his infancie, shall, or may be, evident it is, that in this case, the Parents, or Vice-parents, upon whose hand the Christian nurture of this child shall lie, will want a very materiall and weighty argument, whereby to work his judgment and conscience to the remembrance of his Creatour. And (doubtlesse) the reason why God threatned the uncircumcised manchild amongst Abrahās posteritie, with a cutting off from his people▪ Gen. 17. 14 was not to signifie, that this judgement should universally be∣fall every man-child amongst them, which possibly tho∣row the neglect of his Parents should be uncircumcised, but to awaken the care and conscience of every Parent of such children amongst them, to circumcise them, lest the want of this Ordinance should occasion them to per∣petrate such things, which should and ought to be pu∣nished with such a judgment. However, by the consi∣deration now last traversed, in conjunction with the four preceding, it is evident enough that Infant-baptism is a better Benefactresse unto Christian Churches in the spirituall good of edification, then the practise lately risen up in competition with it. And, supposing only the practise of baptizing to be still in force, and binding upon Christian Churches (which, may, I doubt not, be sufficiently proved from the Scriptures, and however, is one of the first-born Articles of Mr. A's faith) there needs no other precept be inquired after in the Scriptures to warrant, yea and more then to warrant (I mean, to commend) the Administration of it unto Infants, but only this (lately mentioned) Let all things be done to edification, (so understood as was briefly sug∣gested) Sect. 162. By this time I suppose an account in full hath been given why we denie this Proposition (asserted by Mr. A. in his last Argument) None ought to be baptized, but those who appear voluntarily willing to be baptized in obedience to God; although for the confirmation of the
contrary Opinion, much more hath been said by others, and much more then both, may, or might, be said yet further, if matters of much more weight did not claim preheminence. However, let us hear and see what artificiall colour Mr. A. can put upon that which is not, to make it seem to be. The reason hereof (saith he, speaking of his said Pro∣position)Mr. A. p. 38 is this, because without this Obedientiall willing∣nesse, Baptism will be unprofitable, and fruitlesse to them: and where we know the good of Baptism is not to be attained, there it is not to be administred. For in case we should, it would be a prophanation of the Ordinance, a taking of Gods Name in vain. Though the sowing of seed be never so ne∣cessary, yet it would be no mans wisdom, but folly, to sow in such a ground, or at such a season, which he knows will render his seed fruilesse. I confesse if Mr. A. could prove, that the good of Bap∣tism, is not to be attained by Infant-baptism, or that the  seed hereof sown in such a ground as he liketh not, must needs become fruitlesse, his Proposition might well laugh all opposition to scorne. But such things may be a thousand times over said, before once proved. I doubt not but that the contrary is every mans belief, who hath duly weighed the premisses. Notwithstanding Mr. A. (it seems) hopes to find rocks in the air to build these castles upon. That there is no reason (he proceeds) to expect other∣wise, but that Baptism should be unprofitable to all such, who do not take it up voluntarily, willingly, and in obedi∣enceMr. A. p. 38 unto God, appears upon this account, 1. Because now under the Gospel, this is the standing Rule or Law between duties and rewards, between the using of holy Ordinances, and the benefit that comes by them, viz. that duties be done, and Ordinances performed willingly, and in obedience to God. And to make this stand, he cites this of the Apostle, (1 Cor. 9. 17.) If I do this thing willingly, I have a reward. To
this we Answer (as we have in effect answered for∣merly.) Sect. 163. 1. That standing Rule and Law between duties and re∣wards, of which he speakes, was a Rule and Law in as much force under the Law, as now it is under the Gospel. See Sect. 127, 130, 145. And without Faith it was alto∣gether as impossible to please God then, as now. This not∣withstanding, the counsell of the will of God was, that the Administration of the great initiatorie Ordi∣nance, Circumcision, should be made unto children. But of these things, formerly, and (I trust) to satis∣faction. 2. The saying of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9. 17. is very im∣pertinently cited for his purpose (and so are the other two, 2 Cor 8. 12. 1 Cor. 13. 3.) For there is nothing more evident, then that this scripture (with those other) speaks of persons actually capable, by reason of years, and understanding, of performing duties and services upon the terms he speaks of, viz. willingly, and in obe∣dience unto God. And accordingly, they who do bap∣tize children, ought to do it willingly, and in obedience unto God: and are like to receive no reward from God for this action, unlesse it be thus performed. But Baptism, in respect of the baptized, is no action, or service per∣formed: nor doth the reception of it as such, require any principle of action in the receiver. See this suffici∣ently proved, Sect. 76. and again, Sect. 153. Not∣withstanding, as Circumcision, though not received voluntarily, willingly, or in obedience unto God, yet did afterwards profit the receivers, when they did vo∣luntarily, willingly, and in obedience unto God, accept of his counsell therein (Rom 2. 25. Rom. 3. 1, 2.) in like manner though Baptism be not voluntarily or willingly received, the receivers not being capable of commend∣ing their reception of it upon these terms, yet if it be voluntarily and willingly subscribed and owned by them, and wisely improved, afterwards, the benefit of it will
in full measure accrue unto them. Yea I am of Mr. Calvins judgment in this; that Baptism received in In∣fancie, and so before a man hath done any good, or performed any service at all unto God, is, in a way of reason, more highly improveable to spirituall ends and purposes, then when received after beleeving. Sect. 164. But Mr. A. advanceth a second reason to prove Bap∣tism unprofitable to all such, who do not take it up vo∣luntarily, &c. 2. Promises (saith he) made unto duty, or upon condi∣tion of duty, are rewards of that obedience, which is yeildedM. A. p. 39. to God in discharge of duty, when they are fulfilled thereup∣on. Now it is no wise proper to say, or rationall to sup∣pose, that God rewards his creature man, for that where∣in he is only passive, they being such actions, which we call morall, and which proceed from the motion of the will go∣verned by a divine Law, that are rewardable by God. And therefore unlesse Baptism be submitted unto willingly, and in obedience unto God, which cannot be supposed in Infants, the good things annexed thereunto by way of promissorie re∣compence of such obedience, connot upon any goood ground be expected. I answer, 1. Neither is it proper to say, or rationall to suppose, that promises made to duty, or upon condition of duty, are rewards of obedience, &c. For such promises are made or given before obedience: and rewards for service do not use to be given before work, or service. But by promises, I suppose he means, things promised: and yet is it very improper to say that things promised, are made unto duty, or upon condition of duty. But acyro∣logies in speaking are of easie pardon, when they have truth and worth of notion accompanying them, to me∣diate for them. 2. Whereas he saith, that it is not rationall to suppose that God rewards his creature, man, for that wherein he is meerly passive, he saith nothing either to help his own
cause, or to harme the cause of his adversaries. For who ever said, on the one hand, or proved on the other, that Baptism was, or is, rewardd by God, unless the word be taken actively, or for the act of baptizing, which (I know) is not Mr. A's nce here? Notwith∣stāding it may be some question amongst wiser men then either he or I, whether God in some cases, may not re∣ward his creature, man, for that wherein he is only passive, and particularly, whether he will not reward Rachels children (as they are called, Mat. 2. 18.) for the losse of their lives by Herods murtherous crueltie, although they were only passive herein. But concerning Baptism, there being nothing in it, simply as such, afflicting or grievous to the flesh, but, as it may be administred and received, rather pleasing to it, I know no ground why any man should look upon it as rewardable by God. Only when (as Mr. A. speaketh) it is submitted unto in obedience to God, I judge it to be rewardable by God, ac∣cording to the line and measure of other acts of obedi∣ence commensurable in difficultie of performance unto it. But as I judge the obedientiall perseverance and continuance in the profession of baptism, in those who were baptized, when believers, as much (or more) re∣wardable by God, as their momentanie act in their first submission unto it, and receiving it: so I judge a con∣scientious owning and profession of their Baptism, in those who were baptized Infants, when they come to years of understanding, and their perseverance in this profession unto the end, altogether as rewardable by God, as the voluntary taking up of the Ordinance in conjun∣ction with the like perseverance, in the other. When Mr. A. shall offer unto me a considerable reason for the con∣trary, I shall demurre, untill this his reason, and my understanding, have conferd together about the case. In the mean time I cannot but judg a conscientious own∣ing of a mans Baptism, whensoever received, aswell, and as much, yea and as worthy, a morall action, as the recei∣ving or taking it up at any time: and consequently,
that the good things annxed▪ unto Baptism (I mean, unto a willing and obedientiall submission unto Baptism) by way of a promissorie recompence, may upon a very good ground be expected, though not by Infants, whilst such, yet by persons, who were baptized Infants, when they come to be men and women, and shall professe such an acceptance of, or submission unto, their Baptism. Sect. 165. The third and last reason, which Mr. A. offereth upon the account lately specified, uttereth it self in these words. 3. I have proved before in another Argument, that now under the Gospel-ministration, there is no benefit comes, ei∣therMr. A. p. 39 40. by Baptism or any other Ordinance, but by means of his Faith, who partakes thereof Without Faith it is impossible to please God, (Heb. 11. 6.) i. e. in any service to approve ones self acceptable unto him. For whatsoever is not of Faith, is sin, Rom. 14. 23. I answer, 1. That I also have proved; that neither did there any benefit come, either by Circumcision, or any other Or∣dinance under the Legal-ministration, but by means of his Faith, who did partake of them: and yet God judged it meet that Infants should be circumcised. Peruse Sect. 127, 130, 145, 163. 2. It hath been lately shewed likewise, that though children did not approve themselves unto God in their being circumcised, yet God did approve of their Cir∣cumcision, yea and they who Circumcised them, did, or might, approve themselves unto him in the service. What then hinders but that God may approve of childrens being baptized, though chil∣dren at the time of their baptism cannot approve them∣selves unto him? And if Circumcision profited those, who were circumcised nfants, by means of that Faith, which was found in them, when they came to be men (as we lately heard) why may not the Baptism re∣ceived in Infancie, benefit the receivers of it by means of that faith, which by the Grace of God comes to be
wrought in them afterwards? So that here is nothing in in this reason, but what hath been out-reasoned over and over. Yea Mr. A. himself (it seems) was aware that this Reason of his was Obnoxious to the Answers, which have been given unto it: but excuseth himself thus: I shall not here again answer the case of Infant-Circum∣cision,Mr. A. p. 40 which possibly may again rise up in the minds of some, against what hath been now laid down in this Argument also; but shall referre the Reader, for satisfaction herein to what hath been already done about that subect in answer to another Objection, as judging it sufficient at this turn also. I answer, that the Sanctuary, unto which he sends his Reader, to secure him from the force of the Obje∣ction which he feareth, hath been polluted since the building of it, and is razed to the ground. See Sect. 120. to the end of Sect. 134. Sect. 166. Before he comes to grapple with that Objection or Argument of his Adversaries, with the conquest and overthrow of which be thinks it honourable to sound a retreat, and to ungird his armour, he interlaceth this discourse. I shall not proceed further to leavie more Arguments toMr. A. p. 40. serve in this Controversie (unlesse occasionally) though many more of like import with the former, might perhaps readily be formed and drawn up, as judging these already insisted on abundantly sufficient to detect the vanity of Infant-bap∣tism. For answer, remembring the Latine Proverb, Suum cuique pulchrum, every mans own is lovely in his own eyes. I look upon Mr. A's conceit of an aboundant suffici∣encie in his Arguments for the purpose he speaks of, but as a strain of that weaknesse which is much incident to men. It is the wise mans observation; Every way of a man is right in his own eyes: Pro. 21. 2. Upon the account here∣of, it is no great matter of offence to me, that Mr. A.
pleaseth himself with a supposall that he hath detected the vanity of Infant-baptism. By way of recompence, I trust it shall be no great offence unto him, that I am confident, that instead of detecting the vanity of In∣fant-baptism, he hath detected the vanity of his undertake∣ing against it, and hath confirmed the doctrine and pra∣ctise which he opposeth, by letting the world see, how little weight, either of reason, or truth, there is in such Arguments which are leviable against them, and how there is nothing to be found in the Scriptures, rightly managed and understood, that condemneth or dis∣countenanceth them. But hear we the processe of this his by-discourse. Nor shall I apply my self to answer those many contrary Arguments, which are wont to be mustered up in defenceM. A. p. 40. of Infant-Baptism; not because I count them, or any of them impregnable, or of hard or difficult attempt; but partly be∣cause in those Arguments I have produced, there is a ground or foundation laid of answering all contrary reasonings, and which is of easie application this way: and partly because some of the chiefest arguments on that side, have been pro∣duced already objection-wise, and received their answer: and partly likewise, because this hath been sufficiently done by other hands: and lastly, for brevities sake, as perceiving copious discourses hereabouts to be burthensome. I an∣swer. Sect. 167. 1. That copious discourses about any Subject whatso∣ever, when they want light and strength to make good their undertakings, are for the most part burthensome. No marvell then if such discourses written against the Doctrine and practise of Infant-baptism be burthensome. Never yet did I meet with any Argument of one kind or other much considerable in that warfare, or of any pregnant import, to disable, I do not say the lawfulness, but the expediencie, and consequently the necessity, of Infant-Baptism. 2. Neither do I know any one ground or foundation
laid by M. A. in his discourse, in any degree competēt for the answering all contrary reasonings; All his foundatians (so called) have been cast down, or else evicted of the crime of irrelativenesse to his buildings. If he be able to nominate any one of them, in which one stone hath been left upon another, or which is not guilty of the sin of impertinencie, I will acknowledge his cunning to be be∣yond my expectation. 3. Neither have any the chiefest Arguments on the Pae∣dobaptists side been produced by him Objection-wise: Nei∣ther hath he given the due weight to those produced by him: neither hath he given sufficient and due answers unto them, as produced by him. 4. And lastly; Neither hath the task or thing he speaks of been sufficiently done by other hands; unless he confines his meaning in the word, sufficiently, to the inconside∣rate partie of men and women, who have gone wonder∣ing after his own judgement, whose fancies and con∣sciences being a little disturbd, the shadows of mountains may very possibly seem men unto them, or else unto such, who through injudiciousnesse and weaknesse of apprehension, some other occasions (hap∣ly) concurring, are prepared to take the impressions of any light pretences for a new way. To persons of this character, what (almost) is not sufficient? Mr. A. having super-sufficiently cōmended his preceding discourse against Infant-baptism, in those supernumera∣rie passages lately rehearsed, prepares to incounter his last enemie, which he purporteth as such an objection, over which if his pen be but able to magnifie it self, he seems to suppose the doctrine of Infant-baptism will sud∣denly give up the ghost. But because (saith he) there is one Argument, whichMr. A. p. 40. seems to be much taking with some, which as it is of a later invention, the others, so perhaps hath not received such answer and refutation, as others have: therefore as to this I shall give in somewhat by way of Answer.
Sect. 168. By the way, the Reader may please to take knowledg, and consider, that all that Mr. A. hath pleaded for his opinion and practise against Infant-baptism, being clear∣ly disabled and refuted, the credit of his cause is no re∣coverable by the Answer of an Objection, though he should do it never so commendably and effectually. For the goodnesse of a cause, practise, or opinion, is not proved by the insufficiencie or weaknesse of an argu∣ment, one, or more, that may be brought against them, no nor yet by the weaknesse of all the Arguments and Reasons for the contrary which (possibly) have seen the light of the Sun hitherto, but by Reasons and Grounds positively and pregnantly demonstrative of this goodnesse, and such which with reason and truth cannot be gainsaid. So that though Mr. A. should slay the Argument which opposeth him, in his incoun∣ter with it, yet can he not hereby raise his dead, nor cause his Arguments again to live, which are now as so many dead Corpses. Notwithstanding, let us go forward with him, and first hear what the said Argument, or Objection is, as he hath pleased to propound it, and then weigh and consider the substance and pertinencie of what he gives in by the way of answer unto it. The Argument (saith he) is this. If the love of God to persons be the first and originall ground of their being ca∣pable of Baptism, then Infants are capable of Bap∣tism. But the love of God to persons is the originall or first ground of their being capable of Baptism.Mr. Ap. 41. What he is pleased to subjoyn in the name of those, whom he makes thus to argue, by way of confirmation and proof of either Proposition, respectively, we shall understand, when we come to hear and consider what he answereth unto it. But before we are admitted to hear this, we are desired to observe two things by the way. 1. That this Argument contradicts another that is wont
to be employed in this service, to wit, that the promise of God belongs to children of beleeving Parents, and thereforeMr. A. p. 41, 42. Baptism: by which Baptism is restrained to such Infants only, as are the children of believing Parents. But by this Argu∣ment, Baptism is made to appertain to all Infants whatsoe∣ver, whether they be children of believing, or unbelieving Parents: because it supposeth all Infants to be in the love of God in the forementioned respect. And therefore if this be true, the other must be false in its restrained sence, and con∣trarily, if the other true, this false. So that you see the wit∣nesses do no better agree in their evidence in this behalf, then the false witnesses did, that came against Christ in their testimonie. 2. This Argument, if it were good, would render not only all Infants capable of Baptism, but all men likewise, whether Christian or Pagan, because they are beloved of God in such a sence, as its said Infants are, viz. in having that sin, of which they were guilty in Adam remitted unto them, &c. Sect. 169. Before I come to speak to these two, by the ways, I must desire also that one thing be observed by the way (on the other side.) This is, that I have ground in abundance to believe, that he never heard any Paedo-baptist plead the cause of Infant-baptism by that Argument, which here he undertakes to answer, in those terms, or tenour of words, wherein he exhibiteth it, and that he cun∣ningly changed their terms, that he might gain an ad∣vantage for his two by the waies, especially the latter, and withall be supposed to answer their Argument, whilst (indeed) he only answers a mock argument of his own. The Argument, which I suppose he pretends to answer, or would be thought to answer, I acknow∣ledg to have been sometimes urged by my self; nor do I remember that I have met with it from either the pen, or lips, of any other. In which respect I am able to speak with the more confidence what I have said. The true tenour then of the Argument which Mr. A.
should have answered, had he quitted himself ingenu∣ously, is this: If the relation of Son-ship unto God, and not Faith, or repentance▪ be the originall or first ground, or qua∣lification in persons, which render them capable of Baptism, then may Infants lawfully be Baptized. But this relation, and not Faith or Repentance, is the o∣riginall or first ground in persons, qualifying them for Baptism. Ergo. Had M. A. propounded the Argument in these terms, he had had no colour at all (or a very faint colour only) for his latter by the way. For though it be suppo∣sed, that all men, whether Christian or Pagan, have, or rather have had, that sin, of which they were guilty in Adam, remitted unto them (for it may be some doubt, whether this guilt, after remission, returneth not again with the guilt of actuall sinning, though this be a point that I shall never much controvert) and in that respect sometimes were, or let it be, at present are, alike parta∣kers in the love of God, with Infants; yet doth it not follow from hence that therefore they are equall with them in the relation or priviledge of Son-ship, or in that love of God which accompanieth this relation. He that committeth sin (saith John) is of the Divell. Ioh. 3. . See also ver. 9, 10. And the reason why Infants are the Children or Sons of God, is not only or simply because they have the sin, whereof they were guilty in Adā, remitted unto them, but because, in conjunction with this, they are free from sinning against the Covenant of Grace, and so from cutting themselves off from that salvation which is by Christ. Whereas men and women, who have actually sinned, and not re∣pented and belelieved, remain in the gall of bitternesse, and bands of iniquity, and are children of Sathan, not of God. This for answer to Mr. A's latter by the way, be∣ing a purchase made by him, with the one half of the wages of that disingenuitie, which he practised, in con∣cealing the true Argument of his Adversaries, and sub∣stituting in the place thereof a Changeling of his
own. Concerning his former by-the-way. I answer, Sect. 170. 1. If his meaning be, that the one Argument of his Adversaries (that against which he is now buckling on his armour) contradicts that other argument of theirs, which he mentioneth, as one part of a contradiction contradicteth the other, he hath made a very bad bar∣gain for his cause by the way. For it is a generall rule without any exception, that altera pars contradictio∣nis semper est vera; one part of every contradiction is alwayes true. Now if either of those Arguments, which he saith contradict the one the other, be true, his Doctrine of Anti-paedobaptism must needs be false; be∣cause they are both contradictions to it. For 1. if it be true, that the children of Beleevers, and these only, ought to be baptized, then must it needs be false, that no children at all ought to be baptized. Or 2. if it be true, that all children are capable of Baptism, or ought to be baptized, then it is much more apparantly false, that no children ought to be baptized. Therefore I do not be∣lieve, that when Mr. A. challengeth the one Argument of his Adversaries to contradict the other, he would be understood to speak of a contradiction strictly and pro∣perly so called, but only of a cōtradictiō by way of contra∣rietie (as Logicians speak) in which kind both parts of the contradiction may (possibly) be false, but never true. Therefore 2. I answer further, that if he judgeth it any matter of prejudice to the cause of Infant-baptism, that some of those, who maintain it, are in some things relating to it, differently-minded amongst themselves, herein also he consulteth disrepute to his own cause. For it is well known, that the Peter and the Paul, the two great Apostles of Mr. A's Re-baptismall Faith (I mean, Mr. J. Tombs, and Mr. S. Fisher) resist one the other in their respective Doctrines about the the state and condition of children God-ward. Yea the former professeth (in ef∣fect) that if he were of the judgment of the latter, a∣bout
the said point, he would give hostages to his Pae∣dobaptismall Adversaries, and baptize children with them. His words (in his exercitation about Infant-bap∣tims, p. 24.) are these: Nor do I doubt, but that the E∣lect Infants dying in their infancie, are sanctified: yea if it should be made known to us that they are sanctified, I should not doubt that they are to be baptized, remembring the say∣ing of Peter, Can any man forbid water that these should baptized, who have received the holy Ghost as wel as we? Not long before (viz. pag. 19. of the same Exercitation) he had delivered his sence to the same purpose in these words. I answer, the major Proposition is true, if it be un∣derstood of thse whose is the kingdom of Heaven, when it appears that the kingdom of Heaven belongs to them. Now the mjor Proposition▪ which here he grants to be true upon the terms specified, was this: They may be bapti∣zed, whose is the kingdom of heaven. Now Mr. Fishers judgement, declared over and over, is, that unto children, yea unto all children, doth belong the kingdom of Hea∣ven. I believe (saith he) all Infants, as well as some, dy∣ing Infants, and before they have deserved exemption, and damnation by actuall rebellion, to have, according to the ge∣nerall declaration of the Scriptre, right of entrance into the kingdom of Heaven. Baby-baptism p. 301. (with much more of the same notion, in that which followeth, and elsewhere.) Nor do these two Grandees only digladiate between themselves about a businesse of such a main import, and so neerly relating unto the Que∣stion about Infant-Baptism (as Mr. Tombs in the passa∣ges now cited, plainly enough supposeth) but the Churches themselves of the Ana-baptismall perswasion, are accordingly divided one from another, thorowout the Land, one crying out, I am of Paul, another, I am of Cephas, some of them, siding with Mr. Tombs in his judgement, others, imbarqueing with Mr. Fisher in his. Nor are these Shepherds, and flocks, scattered from one another in their judgements about the point menti∣oned only: they are at variance amongst themselves
about many others. Yea notice hath been taken some∣where in the premises, that Mr. A. himself contradicts Mr. Fisher himself in his sence about the sealing na∣ture and propertie of Baptism. So that if he looks upon contradicting assertions amongst those, who are joyned in the defence of the same cause, as an argument of the badnesse of their cause (as he seems in his first by the way to do) certainly his own cause must needs be very bad, whose Assertours have no communion in judgment about many things. But Sect. 171. 3. And lastly) what if Mr. A. be quite mistaken, in his supposall, that the one Argument he speaks of, contra∣dicts the other? then (sure) this by-the-way will be found out of the way, aswell as the other. He that affirms on the one hand, that all children are capable of Baptism, and he who on the other hand affirms, that the children only of believers are capable hereof, do not necessarily contradict the one the other in these sayings, there be∣ing a sence wherein they may be, yea, and are, both true. For all children, as such, may be capable of Bap∣tism: and yet many of them, yea all, the children of believers only excepted, in other respects, uncapable. There is a double capacitie of Baptism (at least, as the word, capacitie, may signifie) the one, in respect of the subject, (simply considered) the other in respect of cir∣cumstance. All children, in case they should be regu∣larly offered unto Baptism, that is, 1. freely, and by those that have the right of their education, as Parents, if living, or Guardians, or Foster-parents, in case the naturall be dead, and 2. unto persons, or baptists regu∣larly authorized to Baptize them, they might all be baptized. But because Infidell Parents cannot be free in offering their children unto Baptism, nor can they, being under no Pastour, or christian Church-officer, offer, or bring them to a person regularly authorized to baptize them (it being irregular for any Churh to autho∣rise their Pastor, or other Officer, to baptize the children
of unbelievers) in this repect these children of theirs are not capable of being baptized. That poor Cripple, who waited 38 years together for healing at the pool of Bethesda, was all this while, in respect of his person, or, as he was an impotent man, as capable of healing, as any of those, who were healed; yea had he at any time found such a friend, as would, upon the Angels stirring of the water, have cast him in, before some other had prevented him, he had been actually healed. But being helplesse in himself, and friendlesse, he was under these circumstances, in no capacitie of being healed by those waters. A Virgin in respect of her years and person every wayes, may be capable of marying such or such a man; yet in respect of the charge and command of her Parents, under whose power she yet remains, to the contrary, she may be uncapable of so marrying. Yea the man himself, with whom, in the respect mentioned, and in many others, she is capable of marrying, may notwithstanding be a person so, or so, conditioned, as (for example) may be an Idolater, or son of a strange God, or the like, that she is not in a regular actuall ca∣pacitie of marrying with him. Many cases of a like ex∣emplification might be proposed. It were easy to pro∣duce many sayings out of the Scriptures themselves, which do every whit as much contradict the one the other, as those catched at, and compared, by Mr. A. whose consistencie notwithstanding is readily enough salveable by distinguishing, partly between positives, and respectives, partly, between respectives, and respe∣ctives. The three particulars now propounded, duly consi∣dered, it appears that Mr. A. hath made no bargain at all, either for his credit, or for his cause, by the way: but it may be matters will succeed better with him at his journeys end. And I confesse that if he can come off with credit from his incounter with the argument now before him, he will do more for the cause of Ana-bap∣tism, then hath been done for it (as far as I can under∣stand)
these many years; although neither is the good∣nesse of that cause sufficiently evinced by never so suffi∣cientMr. A. p. 41, 42. an answer given to one argument bent against it. But let us now hear how he quitteth himself in his an∣swer hereunto. But to come closer to the Argument: I do deny the con∣sequence of the Major Proposition; I doe deny that it there∣foreMr. Ap. 42. 43. follows, that Infants are capable of Baptism, though it should be granted, that the love of God is the originall ground of rendring persons capable thereof: And the reason of this deniall is taken from that difference which is between the originall ground of persons capabilitie of Baptism, and the next immediate ground hereof. For howsoever the love of God be the ground of all dispensations of good to the crea∣ture, yet it is not so from the self same respect: but as it exhibits it self in one dispensation of it in one respect, so in another Dispensation thereof it exhibits it self upon other terms and respects. And thereforce we must distinguish between the love of God, as it is the ground of Baptism. The love of God then is to be considered, either 1. in the whole entire summe or body of it, generally and indefinitely considered, as comprehending and inclosing in it all particu∣lar dispensations of Grace towards the creature; or else, 2. as it excites or puts forth it self in those particular dispensations themselves. The love of God in the former sence, though it be the the ground of all particular acts of Grace, and so that also which appertains to Baptism, yet is it no sound way of reasoning, to conclude persons to be in an immediate capa∣citie of Baptism, because they are in the love of God under this generall consideration. For upon the same ground men might as well argue infants to be strong Christians, or fit to be chosen Pastors, Teachers, or Deacons, as to argue them capable of Baptism, because persons are in these capacities by vertue of the love of God to them. And yet who sees not how absurd it would be to reason thus: If the love of God to persons be the originall ground which renders them capable of being chosen into the office of Pastor, Teacher, or Deacon, then Infants are capable of being chosen into these Offices,
because they are in the love of God, &c. If the love of God to persons be the originall ground of rendring them capable of the denomination of strong Christians, then Infants are capable of the denomination of strong Christians, Be∣cause they are in that love and favour of God. But, &c.— By the light then of these Instances, the invaliditie, in∣deed absurdity, of concluding Infants to be capable of Baptism, because they are in that love and favour of God, may (you see) be sufficiently discerned. Sect. 172. Never did there a more impertinent piece of discourse shew it self on paper, then this: and yet what joy doth  Mr. A. make in the winding of it up. For 1. It runs all along upon a palpable and wide mistake of the Argument, unto which it pretends the relation of an Answer (as was lately observed.) Infant bapti∣zers argue Infants capable of Baptism from their relati∣on of Son-ship unto God: Mr. A. answers, and la∣bours to prove (though very unhandsomely too) that the love of God to them doth not render them capable thereof; as if the relation in men of Son-ship unto God, and the love which is in God towards men, were one & the same thing. May not a man as well suppose, that the silver which is in my purse, and the gold which in his, is one and the same thing? 2. The Argument which Mr. A. should answer, buildeth a baptismal capacity in Infants, upon that which it calleth the originall or first gound, or qualification for Baptism in the creature, which it affirmeth to be, the relation specified (Son-ship unto God) and this in opposition to Faith and Repentance: Mr. A's answer discourseth of the originall ground of the dispensation, in God: which, being interpreted, is nothing at all to the purpose. By the way, when the Argument, with the Answer, whereof Mr. A hath at present both his hands full, asserteth the relation of Son-ship unto God, to be the originall or first ground, or qualification for Bap∣tism;
it doth not take originall, or first, in opposition to immediate or next, but in opposition to that, which is after, and subordinate. So that it avoucheth Son-ship in children to be every whit as neer, as immedi∣ate a ground of Baptism, as Faith, or Repentance, or a declaration of either, or a desire it self of Baptism, are in persons capable of such things. Yea and supposeth, that neither Faith, nor Repentance, nor a Declaration of either, are any grounds or qvalifications for Baptism at all, but only as they make, and declare their subjects, men and women, the children of God. But 3. Were the Argument, as he propoundeth it, owned by his adversaries, yet his answer would not reach it. For whereas he saith, upon the same ground one might as well argue Infants to be strong Christians, or fit to be chosen Pastors, Teachers, or Deacons, as to argue them capable of Baptism, because persons are in these capacities by vertue of the love of God to them; he builds upon the sand, For persons are not in the capacities he speaks of by vertue of the love of God to them; For then all persons, to∣wards whom there is love in God, should be in the same capacities, which is manifestly untrue. Yea some may be in these capacities, towards whom there is no love in God at all (I suppose Mr. A. speaks of Gods speciall love, or that wherewith he loves his Saints.) Judas was in the capacitie of being an Apostle (which is more then of being a Pastor, Teacher, &c.) when his Lord and Master bare no such love to him. It is rather by vertue of the bounty of God considered as exerting it self in such or such a determinate manner, then of the love of God that persons are invested with such capaci∣ties. So at Mr. A's Instances, besides that they hold no parallel, or Proportion, with the reasoning or arguing, which he pretendeth to oppose, proceed upon a groundlesse surmise, instead of truth. But let us see what work he makes in the further processe of his answer. If then (saith he) we would come to argue steadily, so as
to conclude persons capability of Baptism from the love ofMr. A. p. 43 44. God to them, we must consider the love of God under that particular and precise notion, by which persons are put into an immediate, not remote, capacitie of Baptism. For though it is true, that the love of God, which is vouchsafed Infants in the pardon of that sin that de∣volved it self on them from Adam, doth put them into a remote capacitie, both of Baptism, and all other consequen∣tiall acts of Grace, which are vouchsafed men upon their be∣lieving, and diligent, and faithfull improvement of all means and opportunities of Grace, &c. yet it doth not put them into an immediate capacitie of these, untill they do believe, and have improved those means and opportunities; upon conditi∣on of which such additionall and progressionarie acts of Grace, are promised and suspended; no more then a childes abilitie to read his horn-book, or Primer, puts him into a capacitie of understanding his Grammar. I an∣swer, Sect. 173. 1. That neither have we here the Argument of his Adversaries so much as touch'd, but an Onion talk'd of instead of an Apple, (as we have more then once late∣ly observed) 2. It is somewhat an uncouth expression, to say, that by any notion of the love of God, how particular or precise soever, persons are put into any capacitie of Baptism, whether immediate, or remote: whatsoever the love of God it self may do in this kind, certain it is that the notion of this love hath no operation either way. 3. Neither is it so true, that the love of God, which is vo∣uchsafed Infāts in the pardon of the sin devolved on thē from Adam, doth put them into a remote capacity of bism, &c. For they are in this capacity as they are Infants simply, or as members of the race of mankind. However, we have not yet so much as the softest air, or gentlest brea∣thing of an answer to that argument for Infant-baptism, which bears so hard and heavie upon Mr. A's conceit of Anti-pedo-baptism. It may be somewhat will come
out at the last in the shape or likenesse of an Answer. Therefore let us wait upon his pen a little further. That the Dispensation of Gods Grace and love (saith he) is made to Infants in one respect, and to persons of an imme∣diateMr. A. p. 44. capacitie of Baptism, in another; and that act of Grace which is vouchsafed Infants in the pardon of that first sin, &c. doth not put them into animmediate capacitie of Bap∣tism, appears upon these grounds. 1. Because the act of Grace or dispensation of Gods love, unto which Baptism doth appropriately belong, is that which is exerted and put forth in the pardon of mens actuall trans∣gressions, and this too notwithout their repenting, or beleeving, whereas that act of Grace, of which Infants par∣take, is such as is vouchsafed unto them in the pardon of o∣riginall sin only, and this too without their repenting and believing, meerly upon the account of the death of Christ. I answer; Sect. 174. 1. Mr. A here undertakes to prove that, which none of his Adversaries do denie; viz. that that the Dispensa∣tion of Gods grace and love is made to Infants in one respect, and to persons in an immediate capacitie of Baptism, in ano∣ther; if by the persons he speaks of, he means, persons who have actually sinned, which (I question not) is his meaning. 2. By one and the same undertaking, he undertakes likewise to refute, that which none of his adversaries af∣firm, or hold, viz. that that that act of Grace, which is vouchsafed infants in the pardon of that first sin, puts them into an immediate capacitie of Baptism. So that though he should prosper on both hands in this undertaking, his prosperitie would be but a successefull beating of the air. That which his Antagonists hold about this latter point is, that the relation of Son-ship, which by the Grace of God working in that redēption which is by Christ, ac∣crues unto Infants naturally descending from Adā, part∣ly by, or from, the pardon of the sin he speaks of, partly also from that immunitie from actuall transgression,
which is found in Infants, renders them actually, or immediately, capable of Baptism. Even as it is the same Son-ship in persons of discretion, though other∣wise, in part, accruing (as viz. from the remission of their sins, both originall, and actuall, thorow belie∣ving) which being made known, or apprehended by the Ministers of Baptism, invests them with an immedi∣ate capacitie of the Ordinance. But 3. Whereas he makes an opposition between Infants, and persons in an immediate capacity of Baptism, he broad∣ly commits that errour in disputing, which Logicians call, Petitio Principi, a begging of the thing in Questi∣on. For is not the Question between him, and his Op∣ponents, whether Infants be in an immediate capacitie of Baptism, or no? And Mr. A. here takes it for granted that they are not. 4. Neither is it so broad a truth, as his measure seems to make it, that that act of Grace, of which infants partake is such as is vouchsafed them in the pardon of originall sin ONLY. For the relation, or prerogative, of Son-ship, and, the pardon of Originall sin, are not one and the same act of Grace, nor yet one and the same benefit, or pri∣viledge. And certain it is, that God doth conferre as well the former, as the latter, upon Infants. But Mr. A's discourse advanceth thus. That that act, or those acts of Grace, unto which Bap∣tism doth appropriately belong, is the pardon of sin upon re∣pentance, and such other acts of grace as are concomitantMr. A. p. 44 and consequentiall hereunto, appears plainly by this, viz. in that Baptism is called (according to the nature of it, and the intent of God in its institution) the Baptism of repentance for the Remission of sins. That is, that Baptism which is to be received upon mens repentance for the remission of sins; or that Baptism, in and by which men professe that they ex∣pect remission of sins in the way of Repentance: or because the reception of which Baptism proceeds from a principle of Repentance [this clause is no good sence] or else because God therein doth authentically assure men of the remission of
their sins upon their Repentance. Take it which way you will, it proves this, that Baptism is conversant about, and subservient unto, that act of Gods grace and love, which is vouchsafed unto men in the pardon of their sins upon their re∣pentance. And if so, then is it irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon of Infants sinne, which is vouchsafed them without, and before Repentance take place. I an∣swer. Sect. 175. 1. The conclusion, which Mr. A. works after in the fore-part of this parcell of discourse, and which he draws up in the lasts words hereof (now recited) viz. that Baptism is irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon of Infants sin, may be granted him, with this explicati∣on; that that which Baptism, when administred unto Infants, properly and immediately relateth unto, is not the grace of God in the pardon of their sinne, but the grace of God in investing them with the priviledge of Sons. Which, whether in order of nature, it be antecedaneous, or subsequentiall, to the other (the pardon of their sin) may be argued to and fro: I in∣cline to the latter. But if his meaning be, that Baptism is simply, universally, and in every respect, irrelative to the grace of God in the pardon of Infants sin, this is a crow which remains to be pull'd. But 2. How his second, and fourth, explication of these words, The Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, in both which he suspends remission of sins upon repent∣ance only, making Baptism, in the former, a professi∣on only of an expectation of this remission, in the lat∣ter, an assurance of it only, will be able to reconcile themselves with his Confidentiall Doctrine formerly a∣vouched (as we heard) in which he makes Baptism a sharer or partner with repentance it self in the procuring or obtaining this remission, I am to seek, and (I fear) he will hardly be able to find. 3. Whereas he makes Baptism appropriately to belong, not only to the pardon of sin upon repentance, but unto other
acts of grace also concomitant and consequentiall thereunto, doth he not seem to lean either towards the Clinicall Bap∣tists, who were wont not to administer Baptism, but un∣to persons on their sick beds, and (as the Papists their extream unction) in the approach of death; or else to∣wards the Hemerobaptists, who judged it necessary to be every day baptized, and practised accord∣ingly? For if Baptism appropriatly belongs unto other acts of grace concomitant and consequentiall to Repentance, as well as unto Repentance it self, ought it not to be ad∣ministred upon the vouchsafement or performance of these acts, if not with as much frequencie, as once a day amounteth unto, yet at least in the end of a mans life, when all such acts shall have been vouch∣safed? 4. If Baptism appropriatly belongs unto the pardon of sin upon repentance, can it, upon the same terms, or after the same manner (I mean, appropriately) belong un∣to Repentance? Or is Repentance, and pardon of sinne upon Repentance, one and the same thing? But Sect. 176. 5. (And lastly) To give Mr. A. an account, why Baptism is thus held forth, or described in the Scripture, the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins (words, I confesse which face his Anti-paedo-baptismall conceit more plausibly, then any thing besides in all the Scrip∣tures, although they have nothing in heart for it) it is to be considered, that the Gospell, being to be preached only unto persons of years, who only are capable of un∣derstanding it, and from whom only obedience is expected unto it, is drawn up by the holy Ghost (in the generall frame and carriage of it) with speciall re∣ference unto these, notwithstanding many things in it relate unto Infants and children, and their benefit by the grace of it. Hence it is that many things are here requi∣red, as simply, absolutely, and universally necessary unto salvation; viz. because they are thus necessary in respect
of those to whom the gospell is to be preached, and that are capable of performing them, as persons of years and understanding: but Infants, as such, and whilst such, and children, are never the more subjected to this neces∣sity: As when the Gospel threatneth, He that believeth not [i. whosoever believeth not shall be damned, the threat∣ning is calculated for men & womē only: nor is it any part of the intent or meaning of it, that Infants not belee∣ving, shall be damned. So when the Apostle saith, without holinesse [or rather, without the purchase of ho∣linesse] , none, or no person shall see the Lord (Heb. 12. 14.) children are not hereby subjected to the con∣dition specified, to invest them with a capacitie of seeing the Lord, but men and women only. So again, when John saith, whosoever doth not righteousnesse, is not of God,Ioh. 3. 10. neither he that loveth not his Brother, it cannot be from hence concluded, that children are not of God, or are not the children of God, and upon this account, his hers, although they do not righteousnesse, nor yet love their brother. This method and strain of the Gospel might be exemplified in very many passages and instances more. In like manner, because the Doctrine of Baptism was and is, to be taught and preached unto men and women only, these only being of capacitie to understand it, therefore is Baptism described and set forth in the scripture, as it relateth unto them, and their conditions; viz. as a sacred pledg from God to assure them of the high priviledg and blessing of remission of sins upon their repentance. But this no more proveth that the administration of it belongeth not unto Infants, because they do not repent, then this saying, He that believeth, and is baptized, shall be saved, proveth that sal∣vation belongeth not unto Infants, because they do not believe. Upon alike account, because the Doctrine of Circumcision, and of the counsell of God in it, was to be declared and preached only unto persons of under∣standing, therefore the scripture describeth it, and fre∣quently speaketh of it, under that relation and concern∣ment,
wherein it related unto men, as where it is de∣scribed, to have been a seal of the righteousnesse of Faith. [See Sect. 61, 64.] even as Baptism is termed or descri∣bed, the Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sinnes, [which two descriptions we formerly scanned, and com∣pared, Sect. 61.] so again, where God saith to the Jews, Circumcise your selves to the Lord, and take away the fore∣skin of your hearts, Jer. 4. 4. and again, it shall be a token of the Covenant between me and you, Gen. 17. 11. (to omit other places) These and severall other like passages and sayings notwithstanding, which represent Circumci∣sion upon no other terms, nor in any other consideration then as appropriable and appliable unto men, yet children (we know) were the more appropriate subject of the administration thereof. In like manner, though it should be granted, that Baptism be described under such a consi∣deratiō, wherein it is only serviceable & appropriable unto men and women, who are capable of Repentance, and of Remissiō of sins hereupon, yet this no way proveth, nor so much as lightly intimateth, that therefore Infants are not the regular, yea, or not the more proper and convenient subject hereof, ordinarily. Sect. 177. And let me here adde this one thing further, that men altogether as judicious and learned in the Scriptures, and (I believe) as narrowly and throughly vers'd, in the controversie, as Mr. A. conceive the sence and mind of the holy Ghost, in calling Baptism, The Baptism of Repentance for the remission of sins, is as well to signifie and hold forth, that remission of sins, shall be obtained upon Repentance future, as that it is obtained or injoy∣ed by means of Repentance past▪ or at present in being. Calvin, in answer to an Objection, made of the very same notion, of which Mr. A's answer (now in examination) is made, viz. that Baptism is a Sacrament of Repentance and Faith; and therefore is not competible to Infancie; having first said, that such darts as these are rather thrown against God, then against him, or other Infant-Baptists, in pro∣cesse
of his answer, saith; For although Infants, in that moment of time wherein they were circumcised, did not compre∣hend the meāing or intent of the sign: yet were they truly circū∣cised, for, [or unto] the mortificatiō of their polluted & corrupt natre, which being come to years of discretion, they were to meditate, and bethink themselves of. And to conclude; the Objection may receive a ready answer, viz. that [children] are baptized in order to their FUTƲRE REPENTANCE AND FAITH: which, although they be not as yet form'd in them, yet by the secret work of the holy Ghost, there is a seed of both lying hid in them. Subne∣ctunt, Baptis∣mum poeni∣tentiae ac fidei sacramentum esse. Quare cum neutra in tenellam in∣fantiam cadat, cavendum ne si in Baptismi communionem admittatur, inanis & eva∣nida reddatur significatio. At enim haec tela in Deum magis quàm in nos diriguntur. Siquidem & circumcisionem fuisse poenitentiae signum, multis Scripturae testimonii compertissimum est. Et paulò post: Nam etsi Infantes quo circumcidebantur mo∣mento, quid sibi vellet signum illud intelligentiâ non comprehendebant, verè tamen circumcidebantur in naturae suae corruptae ac contaminatae mortificationem, quam a∣dulti posteà meditarentur. Deni{que} nullo negotio solvi potest objectio haec: bapti∣zari in futuram poenitentiam & fidem, &c. Calvin. Institut. l. 4. c. 16. Sect. 20. Baptism (saith Musculus) is the laver of regeneration: but not so [or, in such a sence] that only they who are already regenerate, should be sealed with it, but those also who are yet to be Regene∣rated. Bap∣tismus est lavacrum regenerationis: at non ita, ut regenerati tantùm illo debeant ob∣fignari, sed etiam regenerandi. Mus. in Mat. 22. 41, 42. &c. The Scripture it self very much favours the judgement of these learned men now touched. I indeed (saith John to the people, who came to be bapti∣zed, and were accordingly baptized, by him) baptize you with water, , towards, or unto, Repentance, Mat. 3. 11. And accordingly, Luk. 3. 7. he sharply reproveth them, as persons at present not ingaged in any way of repentance, but exhorteth them hereunto for the future. Then said he to the multitude that came forth to be baptized of him, O generation of vipers, who hath warned you to flee from the wrath that is to come? Bring forth therefore fruits worthy Repentance, and think not to say, &c. Luk. 3. 7, 8. Had he judged them truly penitent at the present, it is not like he would have stiled them, a generation of vipers, or admonished them as he doth.
See more to this point, Sect. 35. Nor is it probable that the Apostle Peter did look upon those as having al∣ready truly repented, whom he exhorted to Repent and be baptized (Act. 2. 38.) nor yet, that because in the first place he exhorteth them to repent, and in the second, to be baptized, he therefore diswaded them, or took them off from being baptized, untill they should have first repented. For to repent being a farre greater duty, then to be bap∣tized, it may well have the precedencie of mention in the same exhortation; and yet this not necessarily imply that to be baptized was no duty to be performed by them, until they had first repented. When two duties are requi∣red in the same exhortation, the obligation unto the latter is not necessarily suspended upon a mans obedience unto the former, so that he shall be in conscience bound to forbear, or not to practise the latter, untill he hath first performed the other. And though it should be granted, that so many of the persons exhorted by Peter to repent and be baptized, as were soon after baptized, did indeed truly repent before they were baptized (though neither is this sufficiently proved by their recceiving of his word gladly, ver. 41. See Mat. 13. 20. Mar. 6. 20. Joh. 5. 35. Eze. 33. 32.) yet this proveth not that therefre they should have sinned, in case they had been baptized without this qualification. However, whether this Doctrine stands, or falls, Mr. A's Doctrine, that Baptism appropriately be∣longs to the pardon of sin upon Repentance, &c. is a notion quite besides the Scripture-foundation to which it pre∣tends. That Baptism is stiled, the Baptism of repentance for the remission of sins, doth no wayes prove, that it appro∣priately belongs, either to pardon of sin, or to Repentance, or to pardon of sin upon Repentance. Yet this he at∣tempts to make good by a second argument: give we him a patient hearing of this also. Sect. 178. 2. (Saith he) The love of God is the mediate ground of Baptism, so farr only as it relates to, or is effective of theMr. A. p. 45 good of men, in Baptism. For the reception of Baptism is not
otherwise to be esteemed an effect of Gods love, then as the good and benefit of men is concerned therein. That which Christ speaks of the Sabbath, how that it was for man, Mar. 2. 27.▪ i. for the good of man, is true of Baptism, and everyMr. A. p. 44. other Ordinance and institution of God. In as much then as Baptism is not beneficiall unto any, but by means of their Faith, and answer of a good conscience; and in as much also that Infants are not under this capacitie of means, both which I have formerly evidently proved; therefore it follows unde∣niably, that God doth not love Infants upon any such terms, as he doth those unto whom he commends and communicates his love in, and by, Baptism: and consequently, that the love which God bears to Infants, puts them into no immediate capacitie of Baptism. Neither is there any thing in this bundle of discourse, relating to Mr. A's cause, but what hath been already cast into the fire, and burnt. That every Ordinance and institution of God (and so Baptism) is for man (in the sence declared by him) is the sence of his Adversaries, as well as his, and maketh more for their cause, then his. For Circumcision was in (this sence) for man, and yet In∣fants in the best capacitie to receive it. Neither should Baptism be as much for man [i. for the good of man] as now it is, in case infants were not in a regular capacitie to receive it. Not to repeat what hath been formerly insisted on, and proved, upon this account, as viz. that Baptism received in Infancie, is a seasonable and preventive ingagement upon them to remember their Cre∣ator in the dayes of their youth (for Infants, are the same, the same persons, in their Infancie, and in their youth) See Sect. 161. as likewise, that infant-Baptism makes more for the edification of the church, then the contrary practise, See Sect. 56, 57, 73, 156 160. and again, that it is more improvable to spiritu∣all ends, then after-Baptism, (c) with some other par∣ticulars of like import) I shall here only subjoyn that meditation of Calvin. How sweet a thing (saith he) is it to the minds of godly men, to be assured, not only by the
word, but also by a visible spectacle [or sign] that they have found so much favour in the eyes of their Heavenly Father, as that their posterity also is regarded by him. Quàm enim suave piis animis, non verbo tantum, sed oculari etiam spectaculo certiores fieri, tantum se gratiae apud patem colestem obtinere, ut posteritas sua illi cura sit? Calv. In∣stitut. l. 4. c. 16. Sect. 32. Sect. 179. Whereas he saith, that Baptism is not beneficiall unto any but by means of their Faith, &c. if his meaning be that it is not, or proves not, actually or eventually saving unto any adulterous person, but by meās of their faith, the say∣ing hath had a pass grāted unto it before. But neither was Circumcision thus beneficiall unto any, without Faith likewise (as hath been proved over and over) and yet Infants judged by God himself in a sufficient capacitie to receive it. If his meaning be, that Baptism is no wayes, in no respect, or degree beneficiall unto any person without Faith, I must borrow his Faith, or some like unto it, to believe it. Baptism without Faith, will open the door into any of the Churches, which call them∣selves baptized. And is it not very beneficiall for a man to have a standing here? Or is it not possible for him to be truly converted to the Faith, by means of his coming into one of these Churches, and walking there? If so, then may a mans Baptism prove very beneficiall unto him without Faith, i. without Faith in the Receiver at the time of the receiving it, which (I preume) is a sence of perfect accord with Mr. A's meaning. However, Mr. A's Answer to the Argument before him, as yet comes on very heavily and slowly: it may be we shall find it in the reere. Let this then be drawn up. 3. (Saith he) The extent of Gods love to Infants, so
farre as is pretended in the reason of the consequence in the Major Proposition, consists only in the pardon of Originall,Mr. A. p. 45 sinne, and the putting them into a condition of Salvation by Christ: all which love of God they are invested with, before ever Baptism can be applied unto them. Because the love of God in this respect is not conditionall, nor does de∣pend upon the action of any creature, or application of any means, but solely upon the attonement which Christ hath made on that behalf. And therefore Baptism lies out of the verge, compasse, circumference of the love of God as en∣joyed by Infants, and contributes neither lesse nor more in that dispensation of Gods love unto them. In which respect also Baptism is irrelative to the love of God in that precise consideration of it in which it is communicated unto Infants. Thus farre Mr. A. in an Aenigma in this place: and as farre as I understand the Riddle, I shall assoil it. 1. I am not able to comprehend what he drives at, nor where the thred of reason reason runs, in this dis∣course. Only I perceive that he works upon his former mistake, supposing that his Adversaries argue and con∣clude a Baptismall capacitie in Children from the love which God sheweth unto them in the pardon of their guilt in Adams sin. But 2. Whereas he saith, that Infants are invested with all that love of God which consists only in the pardon of original sinne, and the putting them into a condition of Salvation by CHRIST, before ever Baptism can be applyed to them, I am so dull of hearing, that, I cannot conceive which way this would operate, or what it desires to produce. The best of my conjectures at this turn, is, that because the extent of the love of God to Infants, of which the Major Proposition speaks, consists in the pardon of Originall sinne, and is vouchsafed unto them before Baptism can be apply∣ed unto them, therefore the application of it unto them, is superfluous and vain. I shall not spend much time in de∣tecting the vanity of this arguing, because I am not sa∣tisfied in my self, whether I hit Mr. A's Notion
right, or no. But if I do, then he may please to consider, Sect. 180. 1. That that which immediatly qualifies any Subject whatsoever for Baptism, is somewhat already in being in this subject, before Baptism be applyed unto it, not any capacity in in to receive somewhat, by, or after, Bap∣tism. It is true, there is no subject duly qualified for Baptism, but what is in a capacitie of receiving benefit, after, and by means of, his baptizing; and it hath been proved over and over, that Infants are in such a capaci∣tie as this, aswell as men. But however, it is not such a capacitie as this, which qualifieth either the one, or the other, for Baptism: for then all persons whatsoever of mankind, young and old, should be qualified for it, inasmuch as they are all in some capacity this way. 2. That although it should be granted, or could be supposed, that Infants are in no capacitie of any additi∣onall love of God by means of Baptism, beyond what they are possessed of before; yet supposing withall, that their Parents may receive any additionall comfort concerning the Grace and Love of God towards them, by means of their Baptizing, or that they judge them∣seves bound in Conscience to procure, or indeavour their baptizing (neither of which is any unreasonable supposition) it will not follow that the application of Baptism unto them should be superfluous or vain. But I am here in the dark: only here is a sufficiencie of light whereby to discern that in this paragraph here is neither little nor much to comfort the heart of Mr. A's fainting cause, under the burthen of that Argument, that lies still so hard and heavie upon it. But as if hi∣therto he had only combated with the Major Proposi∣tion of the Argument, (whereas indeed, he hath had his sayings in Folio to them both) his next ingage∣ment
is against the proof of the Minor. Whereas (saith he) it is alledged by way of proof of theMr. A. p. 45 46. minor Proposition, 1. That the reason why Faith is necessa∣ry in persons, who have not been baptized in their infancy, to render them capapble of Baptism, is because it is that mean, by which those that are to admit unto baptism, come to know that they are in the love of God; and that if such a thing could be known without such a profession of Faith, as it may in the case of Infants, then such a profession would not be necessary in order to such an admission; To this I answer likewise; i. That a profession of Faith in such persons, to render them admittable to Baptism, is not necessary to inform them that admit them touching Gods love to them in any respect whatsoever, for this may be known without such a profession; but in relation to their knowing them to be in the love and favour of God in that par∣ticular respect, and determinate consideration, which ren∣ders men immediatly capable of Baptism. In this respect such a profession of Faith is necessary, because without it the love of God to them upon such terms is not knowable, and consequently they not admittable to Baptism, as was be∣fore proved: by which, Infants, as touching their capabi∣lity of Baptism, are clearly excluded. This is the first advance of Mr. A's Answer to the proof (as he calls it) of the Minor Proposition. For Answer unto this Answer. Sect. 181. 1. The proof he speaks of doth not hold a necessitie of Faith in the persons mentioned, to render them known to those, who are to baptize them, for persons being in the love God. To be in the love of God, im∣ports a love in God born towards them, not any thing in them towards God. Now it hath been oft said, that that which immediately and formally qualifieth for Baptism, must be somewhat in the creature or
subject it self, not any thing in God. Therefore Mr. A. doth not here argue to the sence of his adver∣saries, nor answer any thing to their Argument. But 2. The very Tenour and substance of his Answer, as it is quite besides the Argument against which it pretends, so is it otherwise most irrationall and impor∣tune. For 1. This Answer saith, that a profession of Faith in persons admittable unto Baptism, is not necessary to informMr. A. p. 46 those that admit them touching Gods love to them in any re∣spect whatsoever, for this may be known without such a profession; If he speaks of any such love of God to the persons admittable unto Baptism, which is commonly called, common, and is born by him unto all his creatures, and all men (without exception) he doth not only ar∣gue quite besides the sence of his Adversaries, but (that which is very disingenious) quite besides what himself knows to be their sence. For how should it ever enter into Mr. A's heart to imagine, that his Adversaries should affirm, or hold, that it is necessary for Bapti∣zers to be informed, by one means or other, concern∣ing the common love of God towards persons to be baptized? If he speaks of that love of God which is peculiar to his children, and those who believe, I desire to know of him, how this in the persons to be baptized, may be known to the persons baptizing, without such a Profession as he speaks of. He should have done well at least to have named the means or way, by which this knowledge may otherwise be attained: for I confesse I am wholly ignorant of it. Again 2. Whereas this Answer further saith, that a Profession of Faith is necessary in relation to the Baptizers knowing them to be in the love and favour of God in
that particular respect, and determinate consideration which renders men immediatly capable of Baptism, I would be a debtor unto him for his good information, if he would inform me what this particular respect and de∣terminate consideration is, wherein the love of God ren∣ders men thus mmediatly capable of Baptism. For un∣lesse it be the relation of Son-ship, I confesse I am to seek. However, in this part of Mr. A's Answer, we have nothing distinct, nothing but what savours of a fear, or loathnesse, to speak plainly. But to this first member of his Answer, he subjoyues a second, in these words▪ 2. The profession of Faith is necessary in the case in handMr. Ap. 46. for other causes then meerly to inform those that admit per∣sons unto Baptism, of their being in the favour of God in ge∣nerall, whom they do admit: and that is to let them know, that they are capable of the severall ends and benefits of Bap∣tism, and so meet for Baptism it self; because unlesse they have reason to conceive that they have Faith, they have no reason to conceive them in a present capacitie of the ends and benefits of Baptism, and so not of Baptism it self, inasmuch as these are suspended on Faith, as hath already been evin∣ced. I answer, Sect. 182. 1. Mr. A's Adversaries never affirm'd, that a pro∣fession of Faith is necessarie to inform any person whaso∣ever of the favour of God in generall towards persons to be baptized. Nor did they ever denie but that such a profession might be necessary for some other cau∣ses, besides an information of mens being in the fa∣vour of God, whether generall, or speciall. So that the former part of this latter Answer is a meer im∣pertinencie.
2. Whereas he supposeth, and (in effect) saith, that Baptizers have no reason to conceive persons to be in a pre∣sent capacitie of Baptism it self unlesse they have reason likewise to conceive them in a present capacitie of the ends and benefits of Baptism; I answer; 1. if by a present ca∣pacitie, he means a capacitie which is at present vested, and found, in the subject, in this sence Children are in a present capacitie of the ends and benefits of Baptism, as well as men. For there is at present, and whilst they are yet children, a capacity of the ends & benefits of Baptism, vested and residing in them. This hath been shewed and proved formerly, Sect. 64, 65, 68, 69. 2. If by a pre∣sent capacity he means (as I suppose his meaning is) such a capacity which renders its subject actually, and at present, capable of the said ends and benefits of Baptism, it hath been formerly shewed, and proved once and a∣gain, that such a capacitie is not necessarie to render a person capable of Baptism, more then a like capacitie of the ends and benefits of Circumcision was necessary to render Children capable of this Ordinance under the Law. Peruse Sect. 69, 152. with others. So that we have nothing but overthrown Notions and Con∣ceits to make up this Answer. But it seems Mr. A. hath been troubled with a second proof of the said minor Proposition, which he lifts up his pen to disable in the next place. We shall give him somewhat more then the hearing of what he hath to say to this proof also; although (by the way) this is more then the confirmation and proof of our Argument in hand, and consequently of the intire cause of Infant-Bap∣tism, requireth at our hand. For when an Argument is regularly formed, one sufficient proof, given for the truth of either Proposition (I mean, both of the Major, and the Minor) renders the Argument as au∣thentique and concluding, as many proofs of either could do.
Now against the form of the argument in hand, no ex∣ception hath been, nor with, either reason, or truth, can be taken. However, let us see Mr A. and the second proof he speaks of, play together before us. Whereas in the second place (saith he) it is said, that it was upon this ground, viz. of Gods loving him, that Christ himself was capable of Baptism, and not his Faith, in as much as he had no such Faith as is required of men to render them capable of Baptism, to wit, a Faith in God touching the remission of sins through Christ: and that yet Christ did not receive Bap∣tism upon any terms extraordinary, but upon the same terms as others do, in as much as it was in conformity to a standing Law of righteousness, common to others, as well as him. This proof is not drawn up, either in terms, or in substance of notion, to the sence of Mr A's Adversaries, as we shall shortly declare in particular: however, let us see whether the peny of it be not better silver, then the Answers To this I answer, That this Reason is built upon a mistaken ground, as supposing Christ to have no such faith as MIGHT render him capable of Baptism, at least such as is required of other men in order thereunto, for Christ had the same faith whichMr. A. p. 47. is required all other persons in that case. For what Faith was re∣quired of other men, to render the capable of Baptism, save this; viz. To beleeve that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. For so when the Eunuch demanded of Philip, See here is water: what hindreth me to be Baptised? Then Philip answered and said, If thou be∣leevest with all thine heart, thou mayest. And he answered Philip again, and said, I beleeve that Iesus Christ is the Son of God. I Answer, Sect. 183. Whereas Mr A. saith, that the Reason which he is to Answer, is built upon a mistaken ground, the truth is, that this is not the building of the reason, but of the answer here made to it. For 1. The reason he speaks of, doth not speak as he makes it to speak, viz. That it was upon the ground of Gods Love to Christ, that Christ himself was capable of Baptism. But what speak∣eth it? it speaketh this, That it was the relation of Son ship in Christ unto God that rendered him thus capable. How
material the difference is between these two, hath formerly been opened. 2. Whereas this answer saith, that Christ had the sam faith which is required of all other persons in that case, it builds upon another mistaken ground. For that the faith which was in Christ, was essentially and specifically differing from that which is reqirea of ther persons in the case he speaks of, is evident from hence, viz. because such properties which are essential unto and do universally accompany that faith which is required of other persons in the case specified were wan∣ting in the faith of Christ That faith which is required of o∣ther persons in the said case, must be accompanied in its sub∣ject, with repentance for si perpetrated and committed. This is so essential unto this Faith that without it, no Faith whatsoever gives unto the persons we speak of, a regular ca∣pacity of Baptisme. At least according to Mr. As. principles. Yea Baptisme (as we have oft heard) is described by its relation unto Repentance, not unto Faith, as the more proper and signal qualifier of the two, for its reception. Therefore that Faith which is not accompanied in the same subject with repentance, is not of that kind or spe∣cies of Faith, which is required in persons in order to their baptizing: and consequently, that Faith which was in the Lord Christ, not being thus accompanied (for he that never sinned, could not repent of his sins) was not, could not be of the same kinde of Faith, with that required in other per∣sons. Again, that kind of Faith which is required of ordinary men and women (upon the account before us) in all and e∣very the particular and individual actings and residings of it, obtaineth remission of sins. But the faith which was in Christ, obtained no remission of sinnes. Therefore it was a Faith of a differing kind from the Faith required of other persons. Sect. 184. Yet again: upon that Faith which is required in other per∣sons, &c. this Law is imposed by God in all and every the residings of it, viz. that upon the first coming of it unto, and working of it in, the soul, a profession or declaration of it
b eopenly made by Baptism. This is Mr. A's own a vou∣ched Doctrine in the premises, and is also asserted by him in the sequel of his present Answer. So that they, who truely beleeve, in case they delay their Baptism (not having been already baptized) until afterwards, commit an error at least, or an oversight herein. But there was no such Law impo∣sed by God upon that Faith which was in Christ; otherwise he must be supposed to have committed an over-sight, in that he offered not himself unto Baptism until many yeares after this Faith had been first resident in him. Therefore his Faith, and the Faith required of other persons, are not essentially or specifically the same. Whereas Mr. A. pleads the sameness of expressions or de∣nominations, to prove both Faiths to be specifically the same, and that to beleeve Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, is the Faith required of all other persons to render them capable of Baptism and that this Faith was in Christ, I answer; That the sameness of name, expression, or denomination, doth not alwaies prove the identity or sameness (I mean not the specifical sameness) of the things expressed or denomi∣nated, but sometimes an agreement onely between them in some generical property or consideration. Their Faith, who have power given them hereupon to become the Sons of God, is called, a beleeving on his name, Joh. 1. 12. and their Faith also, to whom Christ refused to commit himself, is in like manner termed, a beleeving on his name, Joh. 2. 23, 24. Yet these two Faiths were of very different natures and considerations (as sufficiently appears by the two passages compared) notwith∣standing their consent in name. So again, their Faith, who because the Pharisees did not confess him, lest they should be cast out of the synagogue, and who loved the praise of men more than the praise of God, is termed, a beleeving  on him [i. e. on Christ] Joh. 12. 42, 43. and their Faith also, who beleeve to justification and salvation, is expressed after the same manner, a beleeving on him, , Joh. 3. 16. and els∣where. So again, that act, or series of actings, by which the Saints testifie their approbation of the wisdom of God, whe∣ther in the Gospel, or in his providential actings, is termed,
a justification (Mat. 11. 19.) as well as that act of God by which he absolveth or dischargeth sinners from the guilt of their sins upon their beleeving in Jesus Christ (Rom. 5. 1 and in twenty places besides) yet are these two acts of very dif∣ferent natures, and specifically (at least) distinct the one from the other. It were easie to levy many other instances upon the same account; but these are abundantly sufficient to prove, that the Faith of Christ, beleeving himself to be the Son of God, and the Faith of other men beleeving him to be the Son of God also, are not by their agreement in name, or expression, evinced to be Faiths of the same consideration or kind. Sect. 185. Suppose it were granted, that the belief which was in Christ of his being the Son of God, and the belief of the same truth in other persons, were of the same nature and kind, yet neither will it follow from hence, that Christ was baptized upon the account of this Faith, because all other persons are: For, 1. Other persons are not baptized simply, directly, or im∣mediately upon the account of this Faith, but by the interce∣ding of their profession hereof before those, who are to bap∣tize them. Whereas Christ made no profession unto Jon of that Faith, by which he beleeved himself to be the Son of God; neither was it proper or comly for him so to doe. From whence (by the way) this saying of Mr. A. a little after, therefore may it well be said indeed, that Christ received Baptism upon the same terms as others did, is manifestly evi∣cted of untruth, unless he think to salve the dishonour by those words, at least in several respects; of which salvage notwithstanding he bereaves himself by these words follow∣ing, and that in conformity to the same standing Law of righte∣ousnesse (to wit, the Institution of God) common to others, as well as to him: For (doubtless) there neither was nor is any such standing Law of righteousnesse, nor Institution of God, according to which any other person of mankind, should be baptized upon the account of his Faith without any profession or declaration made of it unto the Baptizer. Therefore Christ being baptized upon these terms, was not
baptized in conformity to the same standing Law of Righte∣ousness, or Institution of God common to others, but by a Law (in this respect) appropriate to himself. Sect. 186. 2. If John baptized Christ upon the account of his Faith, whereby he beleeved himself to be the Son of God, then when at first he refused or declined the baptizing of him (Mat. 3. 14.) either he was ignorant that such a Faith was in Christ, or that this Faith was a legitimate ground of baptizing him, or else it must be supposed, that when e refused to baptize him, he did against his conscience, and contrary to what he knew his duty to be. But all these are unworthy of John, and not to be conceived of him: There∣fore hee did not baptize him upon the account of his Faith. 3. If he did baptize him upon the account of his Faith, then before his baptizing him, he must be conceived to have reasoned thus within himself. This man, or this person, sure∣ly beleeves himself to be the Son of God; and since I have a compent or sufficient ground to conceive this of him, viz. that he thus beleeveth, therefore I will baptize him. But it is loudly dissonant from all that reason saith, to imagine, that John reasoned after any such manner as this to strength∣en his hand to the Baptizing of Christ. Therefore he did not baptize him upon the account of his beleeving himself to be the Son of God. The major in this argument shineth sufficiently with its own light. The minor is evident from hence; viz. because John knew as wel before his prohibiting him his baptism, or refusing to baptize him, that he beleeved himself to be the Son of God, as afterwards, when he yeeld∣ed to baptize him; and yet (as we see) refused to baptize him, notwithstanding the knowledg he had of such a belief in him. Therefore certainly he did not baptize him upon the account of his Faith. Nor did Christ in the interim (I mean, between John's refusing to baptize him, and his admitting him unto his Baptism) any wayes inform John, that since he beleeved himself to be the Son of God, he lawfully might, or of duty ought, to baptize him. So that on which side soever
of the businesse we look, there is not so much as the least lineament of a face of probability, that Christ was bap∣tized upon the account of his beleeving himself to be the Son of God. Sect. 187. If it be objected, that John, when he refused to admit Christ to hi Baptism, did as well know that he was the Son of God, as that he beleeved himself to be Son of God; and yet did not upon this account baptize him. Therefore ac∣cording to the tenor of your late reasoning, neither did he baptize him upon the account of his being in favour with God, or of his relation of Sonship unto God. To this I answer, that although John knew Christ to be the Son of God when he declined the baptizing him as well as afterwards when he baptized him, yet (it seems) he did not at present so wel consider, that he being the only begotten Son of God, and so a person in dignity infinitely transcending other men, it was meet for him being a weak and sinful man to baptize him, until the Lord Christ himself admonished or informed him of the meetness of the thing, the transcendent dignity of his person notwithstanding. Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfill all righteousness (Mat. 3. 15.) as if he should have said: How true soever it be, which thou al∣ledgest against thy baptizing me, as viz. that thou hast need to be baptized of me, and not I of thee, yet be content to do what at this time, and upon the present occasion, I desire of thee, because it becometh me, notwithstanding the peculiar dignity of my person, yet in respect of my mediatory under∣taking, to condescend to every thing which is righteous, or meet for other men to submit unto. So then if it be righte∣ous and meet for other persons, who are the sons of God, and because, or as, they stand in this relation unto him, and not meerly as they are beleevers, to be admitted unto Bap∣tism, then did Christ desire Baptism, and was accordingly baptized, as, or because he was the Son of God; although it be true, that he was indeed the first born amongst many bre∣thren (as the Apostle speaks) and so his relation of Sonship of an higher nature then other mens.
Sect. 188. Now that other persons are not regularly admittable unto Baptism, nor ever were in the Apostles times admitted here∣unto, simply and meerly, as, or because Beleevers, but as, or because their faith, thorough the profession of it, did de∣clare them to be the Sons of God, and so i special favour with him, is beyond all controversie evident upon these grounds. 1. If beleeving Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, gives a regular capacity of Baptism, as it is simply beleeving, and not as it declares the Beleever to be the Son of God, and in special favour with him, then is the Devil himselfe, or at least may be in a regular capacity of being baptized. The reason of this consequence is evident; because he beleeves Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, or at least is a sufficient capacity to believe it. The Apostle saith that he was migh∣tily [or with power] declared to be the Son of God, according to the spirit of holinesse; by the resurrection from the dead. Now the devil is very capable of any rational demonstration. how much more of such, which are pregnant, and full of power to convince? And though he be a lyar, and the Father thereof, yet being subtile and wise in his generation, he is not like to lye to his own disadvantage: which yet he must be supposed to have done, when he said unto Christ, I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God, (Mark 1. 24.) f he had lyed in so saying. So that there is little question of the validity and truth of the consequence in the said major pro∣position. Now that the Devil is, or may be, in a regular capacity of being baptized is (I presume) none of Mr. A's thoughts. Therefore believing, simply as beleeving, doth not qualifie for baptisme but as it selfe being professed or declared, de∣clareth the Professour of it to be a child of God. 2. If believing, simply, as believing, inrights unto baptism, then did Philip put the Eunuch upon harder and stricter termes to satisfie himselfe about his meetnesse to be baptized, when upon this account he required of him, or imposed on him, a beleeving with the whole heart) Act 8. 37.) then his com∣mission
in that behalfe allowed him to do. And (indeed) his admonishig or presting the Eunuch to believe with all his heart, plainly intimated, that it was such a Faith, or beleeving, which would render him capable of Baptisme to his own comfort, by which he could approve himselfe to be a child of God If so, then is it not the simple or absolute nature, or act of beleeving, but that relative or declarative nature o property of it we speak of, by vertue or meanes whereof it gives a capacity of baptisme unto men. If so, then it readily follows, that it is the relation of Son-ship unto God, which originally, primarily, and directly investeth with this capacity, and that wheresoever, and in whomsoever this may reasonably be presumed to be there is as rich, as re∣gular a capacity of baptisme, as beleeving by means of the profession of it, can give unto any man. And that it is the property of Faith to give unto men the relation we speak of (I mean, of Son-ship unto God) is the loud vote of the Scripture from place to place, Joh. 1. 12. Gal. 3, 26. and else∣where. And if Faith gives the relation of Son-ship, the pro∣fession or declaration of Faith, must needs give knowledge of this relation unto men. Sect. 189. If it be here replyed; true it is, Faith professed declareth a person to be the Son of God; but it followeth not from hence, that therefore it qualifieth for baptisme in this con∣sideration: I answer; if this be the noblest and highest con∣sideration in Faith, viz. that it gives the relation of Son-ship unto God, makes a man or a woman to become a child of God (which I suppose is no mans question) then must it needs be the highest consideration also in the profes∣sion of it, that it declares a man or woman to be the childe of God. And if these things be so, it undeniably followeth, that either it is somwhat that it is meaner and lower in Faith (and so in the profession of Faith) which instates men in a ca∣pacity of Baptism, or else that it is that relative & declarative nature in it of which we speak, which thus enstateth them. Now then if Baptism be to be looked upon as a matter of favour, or priviledge vouchsafed by God unto men, or unto
his children, it is unreasonable to conceive or think that he should conferre it upon the account of that which is meaner, and lesse considerable in them, passing by that which is more excellent, more considerable and worthy. 3. If faith giveth not right unto Baptism in that declara∣tive consideration mentioned, then giveth it in some consi∣deration relating to it; as (for example) either as it is sim∣ply an act, or as it is such, or such a kind of act, or as it re∣lateth to such or such an object, or the like. But there is no other consideration in Faith, by vertue whereof it can so much as tolerably be conceived that it should give a ca∣pacity of Baptism: Therefore it must needs be conceived to give this capacity in the consideration specified. Nor can it here reasonably be pretended, in opposition to what hath been said, that it gives the capacity now conten∣ded about, in consideration of the ordinance or appoint∣ment of God, that so it should do, or that by vertue of such a divine ordinance as this, it gives the said capacity. For, 1. When we affirm that it gives the capacity so oft speci∣fied by vertue of the declarative property of it (frequently likewise mentioned) we do not exclude the ordinance, or appointment of God in this behalfe but suppose or include it altogether. We believe that faith doth not justifie, or make a child of God, but by vertue of the will, appoynt∣ment, or ordination of God in this kind: nor do we beleeve that it gives the capacity of Baptism, upon any other erms (I mean without the ordinance or appoyntment of God.) But, Sect. 190. 2. Whensoever God by the counsel of his will, or by his appointment, settleth any priviledge or benefactory pow∣er, upon any grace, act, or service of his creature. he doth it stil in consideration of, or with an eye unto, something that is considerable in, or about this Grace, act or service, which commendeth it unto him as meet and proper for an investiture with such a priviledge. He doth not invest every Grace, or every service, with every priviledge: but confers priviledges with an exact proportion to each Grace, or ser∣vice
priviledged by him, in respect of some thing or other considerable in them in reference to such a collation. Now then when we affirm and say, that faith gives a right unto Baptism as it is declarative of Son-ship unto God, our mea∣ning is, that this declarative property is that consideration in it, in regard whereof God judged it meet to be invested with such a priviledge, as to give a capacity of, or a right un∣to baptism unto all those in whom it should be found, and hath invested it accordingly. Thus then, all things duly weighed and considered, it fully appeareth, that the device which Mr. A imagined against the argument or objection, lately propounded by himselfe, is too great for him to perform. By the light of all these late discussion it is sufficiently evident, that faith in no other considerations intrinsically appertaining to it, gives a capaci∣ty of Baptism, but onely as it is declarative of Sonship and that this is the original and proper qualification for Baptism; and that being by any probable (much more by any de∣monstrative) argument made known unto those, who have a right to baptise, baptisme ought not to be denied unto it. Whereas Mr. A. very operously, and with the quotation of many Scriptures, labours to prove the Eunuch's Faith, I beleeve Jesus Christ to be the son of God, was none other then the Faith of the Gospel, and the common form of Beleevers confession: and again, that Christ had this Faith, i. e. that he beleeved himselfe to be the Son of God; he might to as much purpose, and (well nigh) with as much pertinence to his cause, have spent his paines in proving the Sun to be up at noon day. If he could have proved, First that Christ's faith was of the same nature and consideration with the Faith of beleevers; And secondly, that he was baptized by John upon the account of this his Faith, simply and absolutely consider∣ed, he had made the face of his cause to shine (at least to a degree) but being defective in these, his labour and cost otherwise signifie nothing. Sect. 191. What he speaks afterward, concerning Christ making a dedication of himselfe unto the service of professing and publi∣shing
the Gospel, by the solemnity of baptisme, as others did and ought to do; he speaks upon no steady, no nor probable, ac∣count in reason. For Christ (doubtlesse) had made a dedi∣cation of himselfe to the service he speaks of long before his receiving the solemnity of Baptism: yea and had professed the Gospel, and declared himself the Son of God. For being yet but twelve years old, he was found in the Temple discour∣sing the things of God amongst the Doctors (so called) of those times. And to his Parents his Mother saying thus un∣to him, Son, why hast thou dealt thus with us? behold thy Father and I have sought thee sorrowing, he returned this an∣swer, How is it that ye sought me? wist ye not that I must be about my Fathers businesse? (Luke 2. 46. 49.) So that now he both professed himselfe to be the Son of God, and decla∣red also that he had dedicated and devoted himselfe to that work of his, about which he was sent, whereas he was not baptized till about the thirtieth year of his life, Luke 3. 21. 23. Or if Mr. A's. meaning be, that Christ was now com∣ming forth into the world to professe and publish the Gospel o∣penly when he was baptized, the expresse letter of the E∣vangelical History riseth up against him. For Christ did not thus profess or publish the Gospel, untill Johns casting in∣to prison (Matth. 4. 12. 7. Mark 1. 14.) which was some considerable time after his baptizing: for presently after his baptizing he was led by the spirit into the wilderness, and there continued forty days and forty nights amongst the wild beasts (Mark 1. 13. Matth. 4. 1, 2.) which importeth (as Theophylact well observeth) that all this time he continu∣ed in such a part of the wildernesse, where men were not wont to come. So that all this while he did not professe or publish the Gospel openly, unless it were to the wild beasts, or the Devil. Nor can it be proved that Johns casting into prison immediately followed the abode of Christ in the wilderness: indeed the contrary appeareth from the Scriptures; yet shal we not argue this at present: So that M. A. is out of the way of truth at this turn also. Why Christ deferred his bap∣tism to that time, when he received it, may be shewed in the progress of this answer very speedily.
But however Paedo-baptists claim countenance to their practice from the baptisme of Christ, Mr. A. hath a conceit that from it he can frame an argument against their practise, and this (as he saith) without wresting it; as if it were some∣what a singular thing with him to argue against his adversa∣ries without wresting the Scriptures, which he manageth a∣gainst them. His argument is a little prolix, and encumbred with words; yet let us give it a patient hearing, as himself layeth it down. If Jeus Christ his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion when he began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in conformity to a Law o righteousness in this be∣half; then those that are baptized, who yet make no such pro∣fession, as Infants are, are not baptized inconformity to that Law of righteousness. But Christ his being baptized at that season, and upon that occasion, when he began to profess and publish the Gospel, and not before, was in conformity to a Law of righteousness in this behalf: Therefore those that are baptized, as Infants are, who yet make no such profession, are not baptized in conformity to that Law of righteousness. To this argument we answer, 1. That Mr. A. may be gratified with a concession of the whole Argument, conclu∣sion and all, and yet his cause not gratified at all hereby, nor the cause of his adversaries at all impaired. Sect. 192 For what though Infants are not baptized in conformity to that Law of righteousness, according unto which Christ was baptized, it doth not presently follow from hence, that ther∣fore they are baptized in conformity to no Law of righteousness at all. There must go two words (as the common saying is) to this bargain. Isaac, in conformity to a Law of righteous∣ness, was Circumciszd on the eighth day, Gen. 21. 4. A∣braham also was Circumcised in conformity to a Law of righte∣ousness, yet was he not circumcised in conformity to that Law of righteousness, according unto which Isaac was cir∣cumcised; for he was not circumcised untill the 99. year of his life, Gen. 17. 24. Mathias was chosen into the place and
office of an Apostle, in conformity to a Law of righteous∣ness; yet he was not thus chosen in conformity to the same Law of righteousness, according to which Peter, Andrew, and the rest were chosen; for he was chosen by the decision of the lot between Barsabas and him, Act. 1. 26. whereas the other were chosen▪ either by a call from the mouth of the Lord Christ himself, or else by his entertaining them up∣on their voluntary applications of themselves unto him; which seems to have been the case of Andrew and Peter, and another, Joh. 1. 3, 38, 40, 41, 42. And as the Apostles, were all true Apostles, and all lawfully called, although the terms or forms of their callings were various; and as those who were circumcised men, and those who were circumcised infants, under the Law, were all lawfully and truly circum∣cised, though the times of their respective circumcisions were differing: in like manner they who are, with Christ, baptized about the thirtieth year of their lives (not having formely been baptized) and they who are baptized before the thirtieth day of their lives, may lawfully, or by a like, though not the same, law of righteousness, be baptized. So that Mr. A. doth but beat the air, not his adversaries, with this syllogism. Sect. 193. 2. That which this argument taketh for granted, and upon which the whole stress of it resteth, viz. that Christ should be baptized at that season, and upon that occasion, when he began to profess, and publish the Gospel, and not be∣fore, hath been lately cashiered upon the delinquencie of errour found in it. The true reason (to give knowledge of this by the way) why Christ was baptized at that season, of which he now made choice for that purpose, was (as the Evangelist Luke seems to insinuate, Luk. 3. 21.) that in the midst of that great confluence of people which came unto John to be bap∣tized, he might receive a testimonie from heaven, that he was the Son of God. This account of the time or season of his baptism, was given by Hierom long ago. The context in Luke very much favoureth it. Now when all the people were
baptized, it came to passe that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the Heaven was opened, and the Holy Ghost descen∣ded in a bodily shape like a Dove upon him, and a voice came from heaven which said, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased, Luk. 3: 21, 22. The multitude of those, who came unto John to be baptized (and were now baptized ac∣cordingly) is here mentioned, 1. As the occasion of Christs coming to be baptized (and of his baptism accordingly) and, 2. Together with this baptism of Christ, as an occasion, both of the opening of the heaven, and of the descent of the holy Ghost in a visible shape upon him, and (as the end of these two) of that voice that came from heaven and said, Thou art my beloved Son, &c. The Evangelist Mathew also (c. 3. 13. compared with the foregoing part of the Chapter) glanceth a like intimation: For having first reported, the great numbers that had been baptized by John, as viz. Jeru∣rusalem, and all Judea, and all the region round about Jordan, ver. 5, 6. subjoyning the tenor of Johns Doctrine and Ex∣hortation to those that had been baptized by him, ver. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. He taketh notice, v. 13. that Christ took this op∣portunity for his comming unto John to be baptized of him: THEN cometh Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be baptized of him: THEN, viz. when, and whilst those who repaired unto John's baptism, were in greatest numbers about him, and attending on his Doctrine. Sect. 194. The reason or occasion now assign'd of Christs delaying his Baptism until the time when he accepted it, hath (as we have shewed) a ground in the Scriptures; whereas that pretended by Mr. A. viz. His coming now forth to profess and publish the Gospel in the world, hath neither word, syllable, nor iota here for it. 3. (And lastly) whereas he saith in the argument before us, That Christ was baptized in conformity to a Law of righte∣ousness (inculcating the expression of such a Law, before and after, over and over) he should have done well, and dealt clearly in his cause, had he produced the Law of which he
speaks so much, and so oft, or had directed us to those Scripture quarters where such a Law is to be found. Certain∣ly Christ was not baptized in conformity to that Law of Baptism, which either is, or was, imposed upon o∣thers: For this Law, according to Mr. A's own notion and description of it (as we have formerly seen) requireth of all men to repent, before they are baptized; and further, re∣quireth of them to be baptized, in order to the obtaining, or receiving remission of sinnes: whereas nothing can be more evident than that the Lord Christ was not baptized upon either of these accounts; and therfore not in conformity to the common Law of Baptism, which respecteth every o∣ther man. Lex Mosis de hoc Baptis∣m nihil praescripserat: & coeleste mandatum, quod Baptista accperat, ad pecca∣tres resipiscentes proprie pertinebat. Hugo Grot. in Mat. 3. 15. If he was baptized in conformity to any Law of righteousness it was some or o∣ther of these general Law, which respect not Baptism more, then many things besides, nor yet other men more, then the Lord Christ himself, as man. et all things be done to edi∣fication. 1 Cor. 14. 26. Let all things be done decently. ver. 40. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good re∣port; and if there be any vertue, if there be any praise, think on these things. Philip. 4. 8. And it is the sence of our best Expositors, that when Christ saith: For thus it becometh us to fulfil all righte∣ousness, he speaketh not of obeying any Institution or positive Law, but onely of doing whatsoever was in any respect meet for him to doe, even in matters of the least moment o∣therwise. Vox  hoc quidem loco latissime sum∣mitur, ita ut signifcet non modo , sed & quicquid ulam aequi at{que} onesti habet rationem. Grot. in Mat. 3. 15. This place (saith Musculus) is diligently to be noted against those, who having no regard of what is Christianly comly, think nothing is to be observed by them, which is not commanded by the express Word of God: nor any thing to be taken heed of, or avoyded, which is not forbidden in the manifest words of the Scripture.
And Hugo Grotius (in the words lately cited from him) saith, That the LawInducitur, , cujus a∣pud honesta ingenia & Deum timentia, multa perpetu vis est, ac ratio—Locus hic probe notandus est contra eos, qui nul∣lam habentes decoris Christiani rationm, nihil sibi servandum putant, quod non sit expresso Dei mandato praeceptum, & tale, quod omissum damnt: nec cavenda & vitanda, quae non sunt manifestis Scripturae locis vetitae Musculus in Mat. 3. 15. of Moses had prescribed nothing about this Baptism; and the heavenly command which the Baptist had received, properly belonged to repentant sinners. These things duly considered, it clearly appear∣eth that Mr. A's pen mistook errour for truth, when it wrot: And therefore well may it be said indeed, that Christ received Baptism upon the same terms as others did, AT LEAST IN SEVERAL RESPECTS, and that in conformity to the same standing Law of righteousness (to wit, the Institution of God) common to others as well as to him; unless by this cautionary proviso, atMr. A. p. 47. least in several respects, he intends to restrain the Baptism of Christ in its conformity to other mens, unto these two re∣spects: 1. That as other men being the children of God, and not having been baptized in their infancie, are regularly baptized when they come to be men, so was Christ. 2. That as other men are baptized upon the account of their relation of Son-ship unto God, being made known, so was Christ. However, those respects wherein he maketh the Baptism of Christ corresponding with the Baptism of other men, viz. 1. His being baptized upon the account of the same Faith, upon which they are baptized. 2. His being baptized at his coming forth to profess and pub∣lish the Gospel in the world, have been weighed in the balance, and sound light. Sect. 195. Whereas he saith, that Christ had an OPPORTƲNI∣TY of being baptized long before, and much soeuer, then he was, &c. The saying is somewhat reflexive, either upon the Lord Christ, or upon the ordinance of Baptism, or both: For if to be baptized be a worthy peece of obedience and
subjection unto God, and the Lord Christ, had an opportunity to exhibit this obedience unto him by being baptized, and yet for a time (for a long time, Mr. A. seems to affirm) neg∣lected, or delayed, to exhibit it, doth not this represent him upon terms much unworthy of him? But it may be Mr. A. at this turn did not so well weigh the import of the word, opportunity. What reason is very imaginable, yea and is suggested by the Evangelists themselves (I mean by two of them) why Christ was baptized not with the first, but with the last, of the people, besides that which Mr. A. conceiteth hath been late∣ly declared. See §. 193. Yea the reason here pretended by him hath been detected for a nullity, §. 191. Concerning his critique inference, or observation from this Particle Now, in these words of Christ to Jhn, Suffer it to be so NOW, as if it pointed at that juncture of time in which he was to be manifested unto the world to be the Son of God; and to manifest to the world the Gospel of God. 1. In this description, or expression of it, he identifies, at least in time, two things, which are, even in this respect, as well as otherwise, much diversified, as hath been (in part) already proved: For though the juncture of time wherein Christ was baptized, was (as hath been granted) the same, or very near to it, with that wherein he was to be manifested unto the world to be the Son of God, yet was it not the same (nor near to it) with that wherein he was to manifest unto the world the Gospel of God. See this demonstratively proved, §. 191. 2. VVhereas Mr. A. following our English translation, readeth the clause in hand, thus, Suffer it to be so nw, Beza out of the Greek, and Tremellius out of the Syriaque, render it, omitte nunc, i. e. omit, or passe by now; meaning, that consideration which thou pleadest why thou shouldst not baptize me, viz. that thou hast need to be baptized of me, and not I to come unto thee for Baptism. This reading of the words, , maketh the sence of them as if Christ should more at large have spoken unto John thus: John, that which thou pleadest against thy baptizing me, viz. that thou hast need to be baptzied of me▪ and not I to come to thee
for baptism, is true, and considerable; yet wave the insisting upon it at present: For, thus [i. e. sometimes by waving our prerogative, as I do mine, in coming to thee to be baptized, and other while by doing of that which in ordinary case seems to be above our line, as thou must do by baptizing me being the Son of God.] it becometh us [i. e. both thou and me also] to fulfil all righteousness [i. e. to do whatsoever the present exigencie, either of the glory of God, or of the edi∣fication and salvation of men, doth require.] If this be the true sence, and import of the passage (as I know none more agreeable either to the scope of the place, or to the words themselves, or that exhibiteth a better, or more spiritual no∣tion) Mr. A's criticism about the particle NOW, vanisheth. Musculus wel expresseth the summe and substance of the said exposition. It is to be noed (saith he) that he doth not onely say, omit [or, let pass] but addeth, now; intimating, that that which was true in i self, just, and worthy, was notwith∣standing then to be omitted, and that rather to be don, which was at present agreeable to the dispensation undertaken by him. He doth not imperiously command, saying, Thus I will, thus I command; but gives a reason why it should at present be done, as he desireth Deinde notandum est, quod non tantum dicit, o∣mitte, sed addit, nunc: in∣nuens, etiam id quod ve∣rum in se, justum ac dig∣num erat, tum tamen esse omittendum, & id potiùs agendum, quod in prae∣sens susceptae dispensa∣sationi competbat: non imperat, dicens, sic vole, sic jubeo; sed rationem reddit, ur iam ita sit fa∣ciendum. Muscul. in Mat. 3. 15.. The emphasis, or force of the said paticle, , NOW, implyeth the specia∣lity or extraordinariness of the present occa∣sion, and this (probably) with more reference unto John than unto Christ, intimating, that John was never like to be put upon such a kind of action, as the Baptizing of Christ, more, this being an action transcendently above his line or condition (as was lately signified) in which respect he ought, or might the more willingly suffer himself to be for once over-ruled to it, although it be burthensome to a truly modest and humble man, as John was, to act above, or out of his proper sphere. Whereas Christ had many acts of a like, or rather far greater con∣descention, then his being baptized of John, yet remaining to be performed by him.
Now the reason why it was a matter of righteousness [i. e. a thing equitable, meet, and comely] for Christ to be bapti∣tized and in this respect, for John also to baptize him) may be conceived to be, either, 1. because he was to be the head or principal member of a body of baptized ones, or of persons that were to be baptized, and a conformity between Head and Members in this kind, is comely; or, 2. That by submit∣ing unto Johns Baptism, he might countenance the same to∣gether with his Ministry, and commend the like submission unto others; or else, 3. (and lastly) that he might leave a gracious pattern and example in general unto others, to con∣descend both to the doing and suffering of such things, being for the benefit and profit of many, which they have no neces∣sity or occasion otherwise, or in respect simply of themselvs, to submit unto, according to that of the Apostle Paul: For though I be free from all men, yet have I made my self a servant unto all, that I might gain the more, 1 Cor. 9. 19. Sect. 196. But notwithstanding Mr. A. hath quitted himself so weak∣ly, not only in his accenting the particle, NOW, but indeed in his whole reasoning about the Baptism of Christ, yet, as a man that had in a short time perfectly learned the common Genius and deportment of his new Generation, he conclu∣deth masculinely: And thus we see (saith he) that the ex∣ample of Christs personal baptism, which was intreated to bless the opinion for Infant-baptism, hath contradicted it altogether. They who desire to see the sight here spoken of had need borrow Mr. A's eyes; and yet I am not without all hope, but that if his eyes were throughly anointed with the salve pre∣pared in th preceding discourse, he would acknowledge, a deceptio visus in reference to the said Vision, and confesse it, darkness. The truth is, that the example of Christs personall Baptism is so far from contradicting the opiion for Infant-Baptism, that were I to plead the cause of this opinion against the greatest Anti-paedo-baptist under heaven, I would desire no ground of more advantage to stand on, then it. And con∣cerning the argument for Infant-baptism, which Mr. A. pro∣poundeth (but amiss) and undertaketh to answer, p. 41. of
his discourse, let the tenour and term of it be rectified accor¦ding to my proposal of it, §. 169. of my discourse; if either Mr. A. or if there be any other pillar of the Anti-paedo-bap∣tismal Faith greater than he, shall give a fair, full, and cleare answer to it, I shall become their Proselyte; although I have much more strength than this to support me in my present judgment and practise, as the Reader may (in part) find in this present discourse. Having, thus to the satisfaction (I trust) of all reasonable, and considering men, who shall please to read the preceding Treatise, not only detected of insufficiency whatsoever Mr. A. hath pleaded against Infant-baptism, but above all reaso∣nable contradiction evinced the lawfulness, yea expediency, of the practise thereof in Churches constituted, there is no need of pursuing the second part of his Discourse with an Answer: For if men may be lawfully baptized, whilst they are yet children, and shall be baptized accordingly: 1. There can be no necessity (at least in ordinary cases) of their being baptized thesecond time. Nor, 2. Can there be any irregulari∣ty in holding Church-Communion with persons thus bapti∣zed. And for this latter point, I have elswhere at large, and by many arguments, pregnant, and full of demonstrati∣ons, evinced the regularity and lawfulness of communion with the Saints in Church-fellowship, though unbaptized (especially as Mr. A. calleth un-baptized) But if any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.
Postcript, for the finishing of Sect. 25. p. 133. TO say that Christ blessed these children as symbolical or typical resemblances of the humility and docility of Chri∣stian converts, or in such a sence as he is said to have blessed the elements in the Sacrament, Mat. 26. 26. Mar. 14. 22. not as persons really capable of any true spiritual blessing, is (it seems) a late Apocryphal, and empty shift found out by some of the Masters of the Ana-baptismal perswasion, to help their lame cause over this stile. For, 1. The Scripture no where so much as whispers this noti∣on; I mean, that Christ blessed the children brought unto him no otherwise, then as types onely, and as he blessed the Bread in the Sacrament. There is neither precept, nor ex∣ample in the Scriptures, nor any good consequence from any part of Scripture, so much as to colour such a conceit. 2. Did Jacob blesse Ephraim and Manasseh (the sons of Joseph) typically, or as Christ afterwards blessed the Sacra∣mental Bread? or if he blessed them as persons really capa∣ble of such good things, as mankind, or reasonable creatures are capable of, and this his blessing them was not fruitless or in vain, but they really prospered upon the account of it; can we imagine that the blessing of Christ conferr'd upon the children brought to him, should turn to so inconsiderable an account unto them, as to benefit them no otherwise, then as inanimate and sensless things may receive benefit? The like demand might be made concerning Moses his blessing the children of Israel before his death, Deut. 33. 1. 3. Christ pleading the cause of those who brought the children unto him, against his Disciples, who rebuked them, plainly justifies the reasons and grounds of their act in bring∣ing them, which are said to have been, that he might lay hands on them and pray, Mat. 19. 13. Therefore (doubtless) he did answer the desires and intentions of these persons in that behalf, in what he did unto, and for these children. Now it must needs be a very weak mans thought, to imagine that they, who brought these children unto Christ, desired no∣thing from him on their behalf, better or greater then what senceless and liveless creatures might enjoy, as well as they:
And if he had conferr'd upon them only some such thing, as this, he had (certainly) frustrated both the desires and ex∣pectations of those that brought them. 4 If Christ had blessed these children only as emblems or types of Gospel converts, in case Lambs or Doves, or Sheep had been brought unto him likewise, he might, upon such an account, as well have layd his hands upon these, and blessed them, and have said, Suffer Lambs and Doves, and Sheep to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of God. But is it meet to make any part of a sober mans faith, to beleeve or think, that the Lord Christ in the case specified, would either have done or spoken, according to the tenour of these things? 5. (And lastly) because the conceit we oppose, is in it self so uncouth and improbable, that it is not like to ride any mans judgement, unless he finds it bowed down with preju∣dice) the reason which Christ gives for this his order, that Children should be suffered to come unto him, and conse∣quently of his gracious intentions towards them upon their coming, is this, viz. That of such is the Kingdome of heaven. This clearly proveth, that the blessing where∣with hee now blessed those children that were brought unto him, and intended to bless those that should be brought unto him afterwards, was a blessing appropriate unto Saints, or such, who are subjects in the Kingdom of God: But the Bread in the Sacrament, is no Saint (though the Papists dream it to be the King of Saints) and therefore no capable subject of such a blessing, which the children obtained by their coming to Christ.
A Table of some Texts of Scripture occasionally handled, or touched, in the preceding Discourse, and to which some light is given (besides many others cited only probation-wise.) GEn. 17. 1. The uncircumcised Man-child shall be cut off from his people, page 349 Exod. 3. 6. I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, p. 3, 12 Eccles. 7. 11. Wisdom is good with an inheritance, 230 12. 1. Remember thy Creator in the daies of thy youth, 347, 348, &c. Isa. 1. 11, 12. To what purpose is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me, &c. 103 Mat. 3. 11. I indeed baptize you with water unto re∣pentance, 246, 248, 328, 375 3. 15. Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness, 263, 390, 401 12. 3. Have ye not read what David did when he was an hungry? &c. 12 12. 8. For the Son of man is Lord even of the Sabbath∣day, 323 18. 6. But whoso shall offend one of these little ones who beleeve in me, &c. 166, 167 19. 13. Then there were brought unto him litle children, that he should put his hands upon them, and pray, &c. 132, 161, 162, 344
22. 31. But as touching the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read? &c. page 3 28. 19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them, &c. 167, 168, &c. Mar. 1. 4. The Baptism of Repentance for the Remission of sins, p. 246, 372, &c. 1. 8. I indeed baptize you with water, 328 1. 38. For therefore came I forth, 247 10. 13, 14, &c. And they brought young children unto him, that he should touch them, &c. and he layed his hands on them, and blessed them, 132, 159, 160, 161, 162, 344 16. 16. He that beleeveth, and is baptized, shall be saved, 229, 230, &c. 373 Luke 3. 15. And all men mused in their hearts of John whether he were Christ, or no, 284 7. 29, 30. And all the people that heard him, and the Publicans, justified God, being baptized with the baptism of John. But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel of God against themselves, not being baptized of John, 182, 183, 260, 261 Joh. 1. 31. But that he should be made manifest unto Israel, am I come baptizing with water, 175, 176 3. 5. Except a man be born of Water, and the Spirit, &c. 216, 333 3. 23. And Iohn also was baptizing in Enon, neer Sa∣lim, because much water was there, 62, 63 3. 32. No man receiveth his testimony, 152 5. 31. If I bear witness of my selfe, my witness is not true, 206 6. 40. And this is the will of him that sent me, that he that seeth the Son, and beleeveth on him, &c. 331
7. 39. This he spake of the Spirit, which they that be∣leeve on him should receive, pag. 329 13. 7. What I doe, thou knowest not now; but thou shalt know hereafter, 202 20. 29. Blessed are they who have not seen, and yet have bleee, 8ed 331 Acts 2. 3. Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the Holy Ghost, 234, 235, 236, &c. 330, 376 2. 39. For the promise is unto you and your children, &c. 145 2. 41. And the same day there was added about three thousand souls, 294. 3. 19. Repent therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, &c. 235 5. 14. And beleevers were the more added unto the Lord, multitudes both of men and women, 157 7. 25. For he supposed that his brethren would have un∣derstood, how God by his hand would deliver them, but they understood it not, 4 8. 10. To whom they all gave heed, &c. 157, 158 10. 47. They were baptized both men and women, 152, 158 10. 47. Can any man forbid water, that these should not be baptised? 25 15. 10. Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples? &c. 85 17. 31. Whereof he hath given assurance unto all men, in that he hath raised him from the dead, 4 21. 5. And they all brought us on our way, with Wives and children, 155 22. 16. And now why tarriest thou? Arise and be bap∣tised,
and wash away thy sins, &c. 252, 253, &c. Rom. 2. 26. Therefore if the uncircumcision shall keep the righteousness of the Law, shall not his uncir∣cision be counted for circumcision? 294, 295 4. 11. And he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of the Faith which he had, being yet uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all men that beleeve, 187, 188, &c. 4. 18. Who against hope beleeved in hope, that he might be the Father of many nations, 188, 189 &c. 6. 5. For if ye have been planted together in the likeness of his death, ye shall also, &c. 280 8. 14. As many as are d by the Spirit of God, these are the Sons of God, 286 8. 23. Even we do sigh in our selves, waiting for the a∣doption, 249 8. 24. For we are saved by hope, 303 10. 1. My hearts desire and prayer for Israel is, that they may be saved, 246 10. 10. For with the heart man beleeveth unto righte∣ousness &c. 249 14. 22. Hast thou Faith: Have it to thy selfe before God. 107 1 Cor. 1. 17. For Christ sent me not to baptize, but &c. 128, 327 3. 8. The ministration of the spirit, 326 7. 9. It is better to marry then burn, 108 9. 9. Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treadeth out the corn, 4 10. 1, 2. And were all baptized unto Moses in the cloud, &c. 37, 38 11. 28. But let a man examine himself, &c. 25, 26 14. 12. Seek to excel to the edifying of the Church, 173
14. 26. Let all things be done to edifying, 345 1 Cor. 14. 31. They may all prophecie one by one, that all may learn, &c. 246 2 Cor. 2. 16. And who is sufficient for these things? 23 13. 1. In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established, 133, 138 Gal. 3. 12. For the Law is not of Faith; but the man that doth them shall live in them, 299 3. 24. Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by Faith, 266, 267. 3. 25, 26, 27. But after Faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster: For ye are all the children of God by Faith in Christ Iesus. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, 265, 266, &c. 286. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, 271. 272 5. 5. We thorough the spirit, wait for the hope of the righteousness by Faith, 249 7. Ye are all partakers of my grace, 276 Philip. 1. 16. The one preach Christ of contention, not sincerely, suppossing to adde affliction to my bands, 24 Col. 2. 8. After the rudiments of the world, 318, 319 2. 11, 12. In whom also ye are circumcised. Buried with him in Baptism, 145, 256 1. 5. The unfeigned Faith which is in thee, which first dwelt in thy Grand mother, &c. 190 2 Tim. 4. 3. For the time will come, when men will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap to themselves Teachers, having, &c. 2
Heb. 12. 14. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, page 373 Iam. 3. 2. For in many things we offend all, 212 1 Pet. 3. 21. The like figure whereto, even Baptism, doth also now save us; not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, &c. 256, 302 2 Pet. 1. 19. We have also a more sure word of Prophe∣cie, &c. 322 1 Joh. 3. 10. Whosoever doth not righteiusness, is not of God, &c. 373
A Table of the particulars contained in the preceding Discourse. A ADminstration. No administration comprehendeth or ex∣presseth the whole mind of God, in, or abou, the Ordi∣nance administred 110, 111, 118 Agreeableness may stand in the community of one property only 325 Mr. Allen his Petition p. 101. His discourse how censured by some p. 102. His abuse of Baptism, the greatest 104. His question not properly about Baptism, nor the administration of Baptism 104, 111. Not stated in opposition to his adver∣saries 108. His prescription how to come to satisfaction in it 111. Makes the night overseer of the day 111. Takes no notice of a want of a Baptismal Institution, ibid. His late opinion about anoynting with Oyl 113. He turns aside from his business 123. Alters the state of the question 261. Differs from his Master Fisher 34, 199. Cites Scriptures against himself 154. Rends Christian society upon had-I∣wist 216. Alloweth not the holy Ghost the liberty of his own understanding to draw up his own records 152. Maketh himself wise above what is written 151. Offereth sacri∣fice to an unknown God 185. Contradicteth himself 228, 198, 214, 265, 305, 340, 371. Most heavily censureth the whole Christian world 218, 221, 222. Blameth in Paedo∣baptists what himself practiseth 314. Citeth Scriptures impertinenly 306. Triumpheth without a Conquest 278. Mispropoundeth the argument of his adversaries 359. In his citations of Scripture, he somtimes putteth in wrds that make for him, and sometimes leaveth out words that make against him 181, 182, 260, 302 Ana-baptism can sail with any wind 162. Not so termed by way of disparagement, or disgrace, 165. Not justifiable by
the Scriptures 72, 73. The wrath of God hath been from time to time revealed from heaven against it, and this in several kinds 80, 81, 82, &c. An harbinger to erroneous, wild, and fond opinions 81, 82, 83, &c. Anabaptists. Some Samaritanze better Jews then themselves 9. No good consequetialists 13. Multiply bands of consci∣ence without Scripture 14. Improvident in exchanging their Infant-baptism 18. Superstitious, and Will-worship∣pers 30, 41. Make the entrance into Christian Churches, more dangerous and grievous, then the entrance into the Jewish Church was 39. Act beside, and without Scripture warrant or example 42. Former and latter compared 86. Two sorts of them 88. Their Churches divided 362. They have alwaies been injurious to the Gospel 85, 86, &c. , what it sign fieth 25 Augustin for Infant-Baptism from the Apostles 133, 134, &c. 140. Accounteth for the original of Godfathers, &c. 41 B Baptism. A seal of the righteousness of Faith, page 34, 190, 191. Not to be administred with danger 20, 21. May be performed without dipping 29. Questions about in like to be endless 104. and little advantageous to the Gospel 107. Contendings about Baptism now, and Circumcision of old, compared 102, 103. Idolized by Mr. A. ibid. Never ex∣pressed by the Verb, , which properly signifieth to dip 47. Typifies Christs applying him lf unto men 55. not given for bodily cures 57. Manifestation of Christ to the world no end of it 175, 176, &c. 283. Justifying God in the sight of the world, no end of it 259, 260. compared with Circumcision 187. When it is common, it is no argument of Faith 178, 179, &c. It is not unlawful, when some one end of it only is not attained 258. It is not a part of the Gospel 263. Is no Scripture test o visible Saintship 274. 275, 276, &c. 281. No declaration or profession of Christ made by it unto the world 283, 284. &c. Admini∣stred in Rivers and in cold seasons, prejudicial unto health, yea and life it self 39. Three kind of Baptism (besides
Water-baptism) 236. Whether Christ be put on by Bap∣tism 285, 286. How it saveth 302, 303. Whether it be a part of the Gospel ministration 327. Whether it contributes towards the receiving of the Spirit 327, 328, &c. Requi∣reth no active principle in the subject, in reference to the reception of it 241, 338. It is still in force 349. although the arguments to the contrary have not been well answer∣ed by any Anti-pado-baptist 231, 232. Why called the Bap∣tism of Repentance for the remission of sins 380, 381. Whe∣ther and how rewardable 353. Why described as relating onely unto persons of discretion 372, 373. How rewardable without Faith 153. What it must be that qualifieth for it 380 Adult baptism a seminary of confusion in Churches constitu∣ted 32. Amongst persons born of Christian Parents, not consistent with the Gospel rule of Baptizing 70, 71, 72, &c. Baptism administred to non-beleevers 112. 113, 173. Ad∣ministred by un-baptized a nullity 143. To be taken up for future repentance 186. Asign to children 191 signifieth to wash, as well by any other kind of washing, as by dipping 47. Never used in the New Testament to signifie to dip 48. However, it doth not signifie to un-dip 50 Baptizing. Never expressed by the word , which pro∣perly signifieth to dip 48. To baptize, a business of Inferi∣our consequence, compared with the preaching of the Go∣spel 123, 124. The baptizing of many no argument of the success of the Gospel 152, 153 Basil 75 Mr. Baxter 16, 32, 39, 42, 78, 84, 86, 88, 89 Beza 77 L. Brook 138 Bulinger 78, 82, 83, 85, 256 C Calvin p. 67, 76, 77, 186, 216, 217, 241, 257, 265, 268, 352 374, 377 Children. Their righ to Baptism 26. As capable of Baptism,
as they were of Circumcision 34, 35. Baptized into Moses, 37, 38. Children of Gentile beleevers not inferiour to the children of the Jews 37. In the same capacity of holy things under the Gospel, in which they were under the Law 196, 197, &c. 304. How in a capacity of ingaging to the practice of repentance 195, 196, &c. 384. How stand in need of Baptism 204. As capable of the benefit or the ends of Baptism, as the ends of imposition of hands 307. 308. Why not capable of the Lords Table 338. How, and why, the children of God 360. Whether, and how all children are capable of Baptism 363. Jews children involved in the rejection of their parents 36, 37 Christ. His Faith not of the same kind with the Faith of o∣ther beleevers 386, 387. Whether baptized upon the ac∣count of his faith, and what Faith 388 389 &c. Whether consecrated himself to the service of the Gospel by Bap∣tism Not baptized in conformity to the common Law, or rule, of baptizing 388, 389. &c. May be put on several waies 270 Church-membership, a great priviledge to children under the Law 35. So under the Gospel also 36. No Levitical cere∣mony, nor abolished by Chist 42, 43 Circumcsion, with all the burthen of the Mosaical Law at∣ding it, no yoke, in comparison of Baptism, as it is now obtru∣ded 166. The end and use of it better serv'd, by the the cir∣cumcising of children, then of men 174, 196, 199, 208, 308. A sign or seal of no mans Faith 194, 195. The use and end of it the same in substance with those of Baptism 187. Why the fierce Advocates of it so severely censured by the Apo∣stle 102, 103. The end of it 174. Ingaged to the practise of Repentance, as well as Faith 194, 195. The remaining of it in the flesh 289, 290, &c. The visibility of it not in∣sisted upon by the Scriptures 290, &c. Not profitable with∣out keeping the Law 297. Not a seal of righteousnesse of Abrahams Faith onely 33, 188, 189, &c. Intended prima∣rily for children, yet first administred unto men 112. Pro∣fited not upon the meer deed done 297, 298, &c. How it a∣bolished from Christ 226. The Circumcision of men more
spoken of in the old Testament, then of cildren and why 19 &c. The administration of i unto inns a pa of the wisdom and strength of the Law 309. Ther sons of Infant Circumcision Evneical 315 quired ony a re∣gla pssiveness in t prpr sujct 339. More edying in being administed unto children 345. The want of it why thratned with cutting ff 349. Though ot rceived voluntarily, ye profited afterwards 31 Circumstance. Diffrent circumstaces may justified dffe∣rent actions 113. may suspend lawful, yea, in some caes, necessary actions 123 Conscience. Reverence is due to the consciences of the Saints 172 Consent. Subsequent and Antecedent 335 Conequences from Scripture are Scripture 15 16. T mre unabl, or in xpert, mn are, to raise conequences regularly, they must needs be so much the more ignorant of the mind of God in the Scriptures 112, &c. Contra-Remonstrants magnifie teir opinions 10 Contraries. One contrary emoved placeth not the other 184 Cyprian oft cited by Austin for Inant-bapim 134. cied 148 D Deodate 217 Dpig with garments, or without, very inconvenien 56, 57, 64. Was the Devils ceremony 58, 59 Dnatists 9. E Smetimes used for, ad, unto 60. Sometimes for , in 65, 66. Sometimes for , because, or, for the sake of 247 Ex sometimes signifieth, fom 60 Errour is apt to propagate 89 90 Est us 265 Eugenius Pope 241
Eunomius 9 Eunuch (Act. 8.) not dipped 51, 52, 61, 62 Examples of Christ and the Apostles do not bind universally 116, 117. In what cases they bind 127 F Fact. Meer matter of fact no meet pillar to build any mans Faith upon 116, 117 Faith and Repentance dead works (according to Mr. A.) untill Baptism quickeneth them 221. Faith under the Law how differs from Faith under the Gospel 266. How it qualifieth for Baptism 391, &c. It investeth men with the prerogative of Sonship 391, 392, &c. Mr. Fisher 34. acknwledgeth the Jews doting on the Circum∣cising of their childen 144. His hard hap 150. His mis∣understanding Christs imposition of hands on the children 160. His daring assertions 162, 163, 166. His mistaken construction of Abrahams receiving Circumcision 188, 189. His true interpretation of the verb substanive 193. His error, that Baptism is no sign unto children 199, 200. Knoweth better how to triumph, then to conquer, 166. Re∣sisteth Mr. Tombs 361 G Godfathers & Godmothers thir origial recorded in Church History, not the original of Infant bapism 140 Grotius 217, 265▪ 268 Guater 241 H Hands. Laying on of hands, a mean of receiving the Spirit, not Baptism 329, 330. Chilren why capable of laying on hands 339 Dr Holms 136, 149 Mr Th. Hooker 53 Houshold, and house, commonly signifie children in an house, a well as others 131
I Jaylor and his house, whether dipt when baptized 69, 70, 147 Idolatrous usage prohibited by God 59 Jews their zeal for their cildren 45. yet never complained of their not being baptized 45 Imitating Christ and the Apostles, in their arguing, how neces∣sary 320, 321, 322 Infant-baptism yeeldth all the real fruits of true Baptism 97, 99. May be proved from the Scriptures to have been pra∣ctised in the Apostles daies, though not from the History of the Scriptures 115. Proved by many arguments that it was then practised 122. to p. 150. Asserted from the Apo∣stles by more then two or three witnesses 138, 139. If for∣born by the Apostles, it was neither out of their own pri∣vate spirits, nr by any Scripture restraint 122, &c. There may be other reasons now for it 124, 125. The original of it not recorde in any Church-history 149, 141. No reason or likelyhood that it should be inrduced into the Church con∣trary to the practis of it in the Apostles daies 147. The first opposers of it, both in former and latter times, were wicked men and unsound in the Faith 142, 143. How it is a means to enlarge the Kingdome of Christ 149. Christ manifested by it, as well as by men-baptism 177. More edifying quick∣ning, &c. then men-baptism 180, 181. 346, 347. More ju∣stifying God in the sight of the world 262, 263. More improveable and engaging 30▪ 31, 348. As proper and suf∣ficient to compass all Baptismal ends, as Infant-circumci∣sion, the ends of Circumcision 310. Yet is it not built upon Infant▪ circumcision 314. How of a moral consideration, 223, 224. How it may be ascertained to the Baptized after∣wards 291, 292, &c. Ʋpon what grounds it was first diswa∣dd 74, 75. Practised by those, who cnversed with the A∣postles 46. Was nt brought into the Church by Pope Inno∣cent, 46, 47, 74. Is no will-worship 41. May be a duty, though not so easie to come at 5 (.) Why the arguments against it are so taking with many 3. It is not disagreeable t the Gospel ministration 325, 326, &c. Infant-church-membership not abolished by Corist, 43, 44, 45, 154
Infants See children. Pope Innocent not the first that commanded children to be bap∣tizd 74, 149 Institutions not instances, the best means to regulate the admi∣nistration of Ordinance▪ 109 110. No administration fully commensurable to an Institution 110 118. They are subject to the Law of Natre and humane accommodation 110, 111 See Ordinance. John Baptist why termed Elias, 246. Whether he baptized by dippig 66, 67 Jovinian 9 L Laying on of hands. See hands Law. Weakness and unprofitableness attributed unto the Law comparatively onely 308 Lorinus 241 Love, steereth all things in the Gospel 340. Love of God, what, and how, qualifieth jor Baptism 383 M Marlorat 217 Mr. Marshal 136 P. Martyr 241 Melchior Adamus 82 Means may be lawfully used, though, and where, they are lesse serviceable 171, 173, 177 Musculus 77, 167, 186, 265, 268, 375. N Nature. The Law of nature allowed to umpire in the admini∣strations of Ordinances or Institutions 110 Nazianzen 75 , & , how distinguished by Paul 267 O Objections answered▪ no relief to weak arguments 170 Ordinance. The subject no part of it, 19, 20, 163. In what
cases God himself poureth contempt upon Ordinances 103. He best understands their conducement to their ends 174 P Mr. Perkins 265 Mr. Joh. Philpot 137, 141; 150, 159 Precedencie in mention is not argumentative 167, 168, 176 Primitive practices how, and in what cases not obliging, 113▪ 114, 115 R To Relieve is to honour 6 Remission of sins is the righteousness of Faith 34. 188. Not suspended upon Baptism, 187. 214, 315. 220▪ It is two∣fold 111. 235. Promised both unto Faith and Repentance 317, 218, &c. 246. Somtimes signifieth the assurance or fruition of this remission 249. not the same with Sonship 370 Repentance, how, and in what respect, qualifieth for Baptism 367 Rudiments of the world 318 S Sacramental, or typical expressins 256 Sanctification, sanctifie. Men are oft said to sanctifie them∣selves, but not to justifie themselves 255 Salvation, not suspended upon Apocryphals, or man-supposed truths 231. Some thing necessary to it, which are not necessa∣ry to justification 239. &c. Scripture, The result of Scripture, is Scripture 16 Scultetus 76 A Seal is not to procre, but to confirm 34 Signs, and seals, not ncessarily corresponding in similitude 27, 28 Silence. Total silence of Scriptures, no proof of a negative 128, 129 Sin. Every sin is way-laid by God 11 Sda 6. Son-ship unto God, ow ueth 360. 36. c.
Superstition, wha 29▪ 10 Synecdoche. A figure of Speech frequent in the Scripture 33▪ T Teaching differs much from making Disciples 169 Tertullian seems to be the first that perswaded to delay Infant-Baptism 74. yet approveth it in case of necessity 75 Mr Tombs 85. 146 opposeth Mr Fisher 361 Trapezuntius 294 Trent Catechism 242 Truth why embraced with much difficulty 1, 2 V Visibility of Saintship 272, 273, &c. Saints visible before Baptized 278, 279, &c. Ursine 77, 82 W Washing performed by the application of water to the thing to be washed, not on the contrary 55 Will worship, what, 29. 41. Every usage of holy things not particularly prescribed by God, is not Will-worship 41 Women, upon what ground to be admitted to the Lords Table 26. and children comprehended under men. 156 Z Zuinglius 76
Reader the mistakes of the Prefs, are rather many, then material. Yet if in reading thou meetest with any thing that disturbeth thee in thy way, thou maiest presently be relieved by repairing to this Index corectivus: Pos∣sibly thou mayst meet with some other oversights, besides those rectified here (especially in the Epistles.) For as the saying is, that finitum addi∣tum finito non facit infinitum, so neither doth a Corrector added to a Printer, nor a Supervisor added unto both, amount to a man that cannot erre or mistak. p. 2. l. 23. read, rejected, p. 4 l. 4. r. truth, p. 11. l. 24. r. there p. 12. l. ult for 23. r. 3. p. 19. l. 24. r. kind, p. 25. l. Title, r. cmmensurable, p. 28. l. 9. r. typical. p. 31. l. 9. r. apparant, p. 34. l. 26. r. contradictions, p. 34. l. 33. r. descriptior, p. 37. l. 25. r. as, p. 40. l. 33. r. there p. 41. l 7. r. not, p. 45. l. 32▪ r. yet p. 53. l. 1. r. appropriate, p. 44. l. 7. after not, r. as much, p. 56. l. 27. dele unto them, p. 57 l. 3. r. apoplexies, p. 60. l. 15. r. , Ibidem, r. , p. 64. l. 35. r. a provision, p. 77. l. 10. r. Anabaptists, p. 79 l. 22. r. propagate, p. 82 l. 10. r. Christians, p. 82. l. 15. r. sent, p. 83. l. 33. r. Doctrines, p. 92. l. 19. r. YE, p. 94. l. 8 for discourse, r. conside∣ration, p. 132. l. 23. r. Administer p. 102. l. 30. r. obtruded, p. 100. l. 29. r. externalities, p. 109. l. 1. dele a, p. 117. l. 15. r. spes, p. 118. l. 1. r. denying, p. 129. l. 35. r. did forbear, p. 123. l. 23. dele here, p. 134. l. 14. r. Ecclesiae, p. 140. l. 8. r. putid, p. 153. l. 8. r. And, p. 157. l. 3. r. persons, p. 170. l. 22. r. for, p. 184. l. it. r. placeth, p. 186. l. 8. r. (haply) himself, p. 187. l. 47. r. , p. 198. l. Tit. r. capacity, p. 206. l. 11. r. declaration, p. 216. l. 15. r. Christian, p. 226. l. 4. r. care, p. 240. l. 30. dele the, p. 243. l. 24. aftr saved, r. onely addeth, p. 243. l. 32. r. gift, p. 245. l. Tit. r. repentance, p. 247. l. 12. r. upon you? p. 248. l. 12. r. from, p. 252. l. 24. r. eightieth, p. 254. l. 2. r. forgiven, p. 256. l. 24. r. hereafter. p. 264. l. 19. r. assumes, p. 266. l. ult. r. after, p. 269. l. Tit. r. putting on, p. 273. l. 4. r. Ani-pedo baptism, p. 274. l. 4. r. consideration, p. 284. l. 7. dele Christ, p. 288. l. 17. after would r. not, l. 34. r. substantial, p. 318. l. 7. r. he, before demands, p. 339. l. 10. r. opposed, . 26. dele as, p. 341. l. 8. r. apt, p. 342. l. 4. r. form of, p. 345. l. 1. r. in their, p. 3▪ 6. l. 34. r. baptized, p. 348. l. 23. dele we as, p. 357. l. 2. r. foundations, p. 360. l. 32. r. beleeved, p. 365. l. 24. r. exert's, p. 376. l. 6. r. disswaded, l. 23. r. therefore, p. 378. l. 11. for adulterous, r. adult. p 379. l. 18. dele reason, p. 380. l. 6. for in, r. it. p. 387. l. Tit r. where, l. 1. r. to be, p. 391. l. 14. after is, r. in, p. 393. l. Tit. dele to, l. 6. r. it in some other, p. 394. l. 14. r. discussions, l. 15. r. consideration, p. 404. l. 1. r. terms.
