H2026 E23_1 99872465 124902
THE RIGHT SEPARATION INCOVRAGED; IN A SERMON PREACHED To the Right Honorable the House of LORDS, in the Abbey-Church at West∣minster, on Wednesday, Novem. 27. 1644. being the day of the Monethly publick Fast. By THOMAS HILL, B. D. Pastor of Tychmersh in Northampton∣shire, and one of the Members of the Assembly of DIVINES. Hebr. 7. 26. Such an high Priest became us, who is holy, harmlesse, undefiled, separate from sinners. Luk. 3. 17. Whose fan is in his hand, and hee will throughly purge his floore, and will gather the Wheat into his Garner, but the chaffe will hee burn with fire unquenchable. Jude ver. 22, 23. And of some have compassion, making a difference. And others save with feare, pulling them out of the fire, hating even the garment spotted by the flesh. LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for John Bellamy, and Philemon Stephens, 1645.
Die Veneris 29 Novemb. 1644. IT is this day Ordered by the Lords in Parliament, That this House doth here∣by return thanks to Mr. Thomas Hill, for his great paines taken in his Sermon Preached by him on Wednesday last before their Lordships in the Abbey Church Westmin∣ster, it being the day of the Monethly Fast: And this House doth hereby desire him to Print and Publish the same. And lastly, it is Ordered that none shall Print or re-print his said Sermon without being authorized so to doe under the hand of the said Mr. Hill. Joh. Brown, Cler. Parl. I doe hereby appoint John Bellamy and Philemon Stephens to Print my Sermon. THOMAS HILL.
TO THE Right Honorable the House of PEERES Assembled in PARLIAMENT; Sitting at Westminster. My Lords, GODS Providence hath cast you in∣to these times wherein there are ve∣ry many of Solomons Puritans, Prov. 30. 12. There is a genera∣tion that are pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their filthinesse. Wherin Iudes Separatists swarm, such mockers who walk after their owne ungod∣ly lusts, who separate themselves, sensuall, hav∣ing not the Spirit, Iude ver. 19, 20. But I hope his Spirit is teaching you to bee Pauls Separatists, acquainting you with such a pure Separation from
unclean persons and things, as may well bee the ob∣ject of your thoughts, the matter of your Coun∣sels, the summe of your Prayers, and scope of your Indevours. It will bee a very great addition to your greatnesse, to ingage your selves fully herein. There are no men more miserable then those who are Gratius est no men pietatis quam potestatis. great and evill, none more happy then they who are great and good. It is noblenesse indeed to have an heroicall spirit for God: It is true high-minded∣nesse to bee heavenly minded, to have pure mindes. This poore Church hath had her Autumn, her declining under many pollutions, and her Winter of Humiliation; Blessed bee the good hand of God, wee see some hopes of a Spring, of pure Reforma∣tion, which will usher in a Summer of deliverance. It is true, wee are still in the Wildernesse, where wee meet with many Amalekites, who do oppose us, and with divers false spies, who raise an evill re∣port of the promised Land, disparaging by their tongues and pens our hop't for Reformation. The Lord keep us all from Wildernesse sins, from repi∣ning and quarrelling at his dispensations: farre bee it from any to desire such Captaines as would bring us back againe to Aegypt. Your Lordships have had the honour to bee our Ioshuahs, to bee our Leaders in several steps of the Reformation: (which
will stand upon Record to the everlasting renowne of the House of Peers) and I hope you have ta∣sted some such bunches of Grapes from the Holy Land, as will quicken your desires after a more full separation from all impurity. There are two taking words abroad, grown very familiar in our discourses, Purity and Liberty. Let Purity and Liberry goe hand in hand. Sweet words, precious things, it is pity they should ever bee severed. It is well worthy of your care to incourage such a purity as will adorn and sweeten Liberty, and withall to countenance such a Liber∣ty as will maintain and cherish purity. God forbid, that any should expect countenance from you, for any thing like licentiousnes, whereby purity should bee in the least measure blemished and betrayed. Sometimes amongst Physicians there is as much in the Method, as in the Medicine; I beleeve Poli∣ticians may finde the same. I doubt not but in your Treaty for Peace you will begin with Purity; the wisedome which is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable; and rather abate in any thing which James 3. 17. concernes your selves, then in purity, wherein the honour of God is so much interessed. Ride on prosperously in all your Marches after Scripture purity; If you meet with Mountaines of difficulty in the way, bee not dismayed. Re∣member
Lots Wife, what it cost her who looked back only, though she went not back. You wel know, that Faith and Friendship are best tryed in extre∣mities, and in the heat of opposition. If the distractions still continue without, labour to get and keep a calm within, no feast like that of a good Conscience, which is Meat, Mufick, Wel∣come; No such Friend, who will bee a cheere∣full Companion though alone, even in the worst seasons: Bee yee therefore doing much for your God in the cause of purity, alwayes abouding in his work, forasmuch as you know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord. Bee pleased to ac∣cept 1 Cor. 15. 58. this from a Remembrancer to Your Honours in the behalf of purity, and for your own Salvation, THOMAS HILL
THE RIGHT SEPARATION INCOVRAGED. 2 COR. 6. 17, 18. 17 Wherefore comes out from among them, and bee yee sepa∣rate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will receive you, 18 And will bee a Father unto you, and yee shall bee my Sons and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. IT need not seeme strange that Chrysostome spent so many pages in the high Commen∣dation Seven Orati∣ons in the commendati∣on of Paul. Chrysost. tom. 8 of Paul being hee was so superlative∣ly▪ abundant in the work of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 1. 10. None of the Apostles, hath spoken, written, done, and suffered so much; Hee be∣ing overcome with the love of his Saviour, felt a sweet violence constraining his spirit to study how hee might expresse as much zeale for him, as ever hee had shewed against him. An Epitome of Pauls Journall concerning his Apostolicall pere∣grination, you have here drawn up in this sixth Chapter, (which yet hee modestly expresseth in the plurall number:) ver. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8, 9, 10. Giving no offence in any thing, that the Ministery bee not blamed, but in all thing oving our selves or the Ministers of God in much pa∣tience,  in necessities, in distresses, &c. Hee very well knew, that the good life of a Minister gives new life unto his Ser∣mons in the hearts of his hearers, and that the godly example of the leaders, is the most compelling Rhetorick to ingage the followers. Hereupon, having besought the Corinthians, ver. 1. That they re∣ceive not the Grace of God in vaine, hee would have them proportion the crop to the seed, and answer Gospel Grace appearing to them with the graces of the Gospel shining in them. This counsell unto them, hee edgeth with the Summary of his own doings and sufferings for them. Then hee renues his importunity with profession of great affe∣ction unto them, and with expectation of the like from them, ver. 11, 12, 13. using this as an ingaging insinuation. And so in the following verses, the better to advance his Gospel designe, that they may with improvement intertaine the Grace of God, hee puts in caveats by way of dehortation, against communion with the ungodly in their sinfull wayes, and this by severall arguments. 1. One drawn from the imparity that is betwixt Saints and un∣beleevers, ver. 14. Bee not unequally yoked; How unmeet a match is it for you Corinthians to bee yoked with such? you cannot well draw together in Gospel wayes. 2. Another, from the high autipathy, and invincible contrarietie, that is betwixt them, ver. 14, 15. What concord? you may as well reconcile light and darknesse, Christ and Beliall, as Beleevers and Infidels. 3. The last, from the rich advantage they have by their interest in such precious priviledges and promises, ver. 16. That hee may make them perfect Separatists from evill, and the more prevailingly perswade them to walk with God as becom∣meth Saints, you shall finde in these words two generall things to that purpose. Two generall parts of the words. Adhortation. Incourage∣ment. First, A serious Adhortation to make a full Separation from unclean persons and things, ver. 17. and this as a conclusion out of the fore∣going premises, intimated in that particle of illation, wherefore, This , this wherefore carries an ingagement with it. Wherefore, come out from among them, and bee yee separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing.
Secondly, A quickning incouragement to act it. ver. 17, 18. And I will receive you, and will bee a Father unto  and yee shall bee my Sonnes and Daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. The Spirit of God knew wee need strong arguments to dis-ingage us from our Belived evils. Nothing below God himselfe, can bee a prevailing attractive, his love and favour is the best load∣stone, to draw us from sin to himselfe. This Adhortation of the Apostle, ver. 17. is expressed almost First generall Part▪ Adhortation. in the words of the Lord, by his Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 52. 11. Depart yee, depart yee, goe yee out from thence, touch no uncleane thing, goe yee out of the middest of her, bee yee clean; Thus our Translators following the Hebrew, wherein likewise they have Hierome going before them, render the words. Indeed the Se∣venty Interpreters, in their Greek Translation, make here some difference. The word  which Hierome renders mundamini, and our Translators, bee yee cleane, they read it , bee yee separate. This Paul makes use of by his Apostolicall Authori∣ty, though it seeme not every way so answerable to the He∣brew. I confesse many have been puzzled about some places of Why many so much unsatis∣fied about some places quoted out of the Old in the New testa∣ment. Non verbis in∣haeret, sed sen∣sum proponit, Musc. Scripture, quoted out of the Old Testament in the New, as in Hebr. 2. 13. &c. partly because our narrow mindes are not able to comprehend the whole wisedome of the Spirit of God there∣in, as in Hebr. 5. 5. &c. partly because wee doe not observe that Liberty which the Holy Ghost useth many times to follow the sense rather then the words, as in 1 Cor. 2. 9. &c. partly because wee doe not consider that in citing some places out of the Old Testament, the Originall is not alwayes exactly followed, but some∣times the Septuagint, even where that differs somewhat from the Hebrew Text. This appeares, if you compare Act. 8. 33. with Isai. 53. 8. and also in divers other places. The Greek Tran∣slation of the Old Testament, was then most common, and a∣mongst them then best understood, and when the Apostles made use of it, if they did not finde it, yet possibly they might make it Scripture, they being guided by the Spirit of God in∣fallibly, what they revealed as the mind of God to the Chur∣ches, in what words so ever, it was Canonicall. Therefore, bee not offended at any little variation here, when you com∣pare
the words of the Apostle, Paul; and of the Prophet I∣saiah▪ Onely for your better direction herein, bee pleased to re∣member, that whereas the Prophet Isa. 52. 11. exhorted the remnant of Israel, that they would come fully out of unclean Babylon, the Apostle here applies it to Christians, to the Saints at Corinth, perswading them so farre to renounce communi∣on with the wicked, that they bee not polluted by them. Here∣in Three steps of renouncing communion with the wic∣ked. they were to take three steppes, wherein you are to follow them. First, Come out from amongst them. Sometimes even locally, by a personall withdrawing of your selves. The pollutions 1 Come out from amongst them. may grow so generall, that you cannot dwell amongst them, without infection from them. You may heare a voyce from Heaven, calling the people of God out of Babylon, Rev. 18. 4. when ever Rome becomes a Sodome for filthy uncleannesse, an Aegypt for cruell bondage, and a Babylon for Idolatry, and o∣ther Rv. 11. 8. Rev. 18. 2, 3. great abominations, it is high time for the Saints to leave it. Secondly, Bee yee Separate; if you doe not alwayes bodi∣ly 2 Bee ye sepa∣rate. and locally renounce the society of all wicked men, yet e∣vermore spiritually, bee yee separate from them, expresse your dislike of their wicked courses, bearing witnesse against them. Possibly your Callings and Relations may oblige you to ci∣vill converse with them, yet whilst you are constrained to stay amongst them, thinke, affect, speak, act▪ as men of another spirit, maintaining an holy separation from their impurity. Thirdly, Touch not the unclean thing. Here the Apostle bespeaks 3 Touch not the uncleane thing. a more ful renouncing of fellowship with al uncleannesse. Moses Law provided against unclean touches; under the Gospel Saints should bee as carefull. Hee doth not only say, beware lest you . Chryso. Second gene∣rall part: ncouragement. wallow in filthinesse, not onely forbid them to act that which is evill, but dischargeth them from touching the unclean thing. Suffer not your spirits and consciences to bee defiled in any de∣gree, no, not with the least touch of wickednesse, by any vo∣luntary compliance with it. The incouragement backs the Adhortation. And I will receive you, and will bee a Father, &c. That you may bee willing to
act the Adhortation, separating your selves from all unclean∣nesse, you may finde here almost as many incouraging argu∣ments, Duo Deus pro∣tet, Recep∣tionem. Adop∣tionem; Caje∣tan. as words. First, God promises receptionem, I will receive you: As if the Lord should say, when I have called you out from amongst the wicked, and discharged you from fellowship with the un∣cleane, 1. Reception. you must make account as you separate from them, they will with scoffes, scornes, and persecutions disclaime you: when Saul was become a Paul, there was a change in his old friends, as well as in him, his former Patrons became his bit∣ter persecutors, the more zealous hee grew for his God, the more violently did they oppose him. In such a case the Lord would have all Proselytes know they shall exchange with advantage, Volo vos vaga∣ri, sed exeuntes, at separatos ego suscipiam vo, in mea domo spirituali loco tandem aete na in caelis. Caje∣tan. suppose by renouncing fellowship with their wickednesse, you lose their personall favours, yet bee not discouraged, I will own you when they throw you off, I will receive you into my spiritu∣all and eternall House. You shall have communion with mee in my Church on Earth, and bee made everlastingly happy by the injoyment of mee in Heaven. Secondly, God promises adoptionem, I will receive them as a Father doth his children. They shall have not onely house-roome, 2. Adoption. but also heart-roome. I will receive you, not onely into my house, but into my favour. Under the sweet relation of a Father, as beloved Sonnes and Daughters, I will entertain you. I will expresse the affection of a Father, and you shall injoy the Officio paterno erga vos mege∣ram, amando, providendo, cu∣ram habendo, &c. Cajetan. priviledges of children. The Lord Almighty will performe this. His love as a Father will ingage his power; his power as Almigh∣ty will secure and advance his love. Here is the Saints Incou∣ragement to a right Separation. These two generals will commend to your consciences, and considerations two suitable Observations. God expects the Saints should make a Separation from unclean∣nesse. 1 Observation. It is a great peece of the Devils policy, agere , as much as hee can at least to pretend an imitation of the wise God in his actions. Hereupon, as the Lord hath communicated him∣selfe
to his people by a Covenant, which hee publisheth by his Minister, and confirmes by his Sacraments. So the devill by way of resemblance conveyes himselfe by compacts, by sorceries, by charmes; And likewise, as the Spirit of God gaines much upon us by names, inviting us to Piety, under the name of wis∣dome, deterring us from sinne, by calling it folly: In the same See booke of Solm. Proverbs method Satan indevours to ingage some in wayes of intempe∣rance, under the title of good-fellowship; others in the wayes of covetousnesse, calling it good-husbandry. And withall often times doth hee most industriously practice to discourage us from that which hee knowes to bee good, by branding it with some bad name. Hence evermore the best Persons and things have been re∣proached with the worst names. Even the sweet and precious Act. 11 26. name of Christian, given to the Disciples at Antioch, was soon stain∣ed by blasphemous wits and tongues. By the Jewes they were in contempt called Nazarites, by Julian scornfully termed Ga∣lileans, The Devil hath made much use of bad names to oppose good, both per∣sons and things by Ʋlpian under Severus, Impostors; by Demetrian, (whom Cyprian confuted) procurers of all the Plagues of God that came upon the world. This afterwards proved to bee the portion of the Waldenses in the Lateran Councell to bee condemned as Catharists, Publicans, &c. They did indeed discover the Prelates, and Briests amongst the Papists to bee the grand Soule-deceivers; Deeeptores animarum, Diaboli laqueos: Hereupon the Popish Cler∣gie conceived themselves concerned how to render them odious Vid. Catalog. Testium veri∣tatis, l. 15. Petr▪ de Buis. to the world, under the most ignominious names. The Saints in this Church have found the same designe pra∣cticed against them in these later times. Though the Scripture commands purity, and so highly commends it, that our Saviour makes it one of the Beatitudes; Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; yet under the nick-name of Puritans, the most gracious Christians have been not a little disparaged. At Mat. 5▪ 8. first indeed there were Ceremoniall Puritans onely, so they were traduced who would not comply heartily with Prelaticall Ce∣remonies; Then afterwards the iniquity of our times rose to this height, that any Ministers Orthodox in Judgement, and conscientious in practice, were opposed as Doctrinall and morall Puritans; And at last such Nobles and Gentry, who had but
good State-principles, and were faithfull to the publick, were Many faithfull Servants of God in England cryed downe heretofore as Puritans, and now as Separa∣tists. cryed down as State-puritans, and accounted  many the Troublers of this Israel. The Devill and his agents are now acting the same part a∣gainst the power of godlinesse, though in another new dresse. The beauty and purity of true Christianity is amongst many in England at this time, clouded under the name of Separation, as if the word Separate, did alwayes carry a crime with it. Wee doe not enough consider that there is a Right desirable inoffensive Separation, unto which the Scripture directs; Indeed because divers do runne into unhappy extremities of paration, (whom yet wee should pity, and with meeknesse of wisdome seek to reduce, because they seem to aime at purity therein) hence it is grown so common to represent all such who con∣scientiously endevour to separate from sinne, as guilty of a sin∣full Separation, not onely at Tables and Tavernes, but even in Pulpits too often▪ such as long to see purity and unity meet in the Churches of Christ are by some involved in a reproach full Separation; yea, our zealous Reformers, are by intemperate tongues and pennes lashed as odious Separatists. I hope there∣fore, it will not bee thought unseasonable to pres to this Noble Auditory, who have so farre ingaged themselves for a pure Reformation, what that Right Separation is, which is so much incouraged by God himselfe. Two things I shall indevour by the helpe of Gods holy Spirit to discover. First, From what the Saints are to Separate: Secondly, Why they are to make such a Separation. There is a fivefold Separation which the Lord who is glorious God expects from his Saints a fivefold Se∣paration. 1 From un∣clean courses. in holinesse, challenges from all his Saints. First, The Saints must separate from all unclean courses. They should all accept and act that counsell which Daniel gave Ne∣buchadnezzar, Dan. 4. 27. Break off thy sinnes by righteousnesse. It is not enough upon a day of Humiliation, and now whilest God is breaking us by his Judgements, to bee somewhat bro∣ken for our sinnes, unlesse wee by Reformation break off from them. They are not worthy the name of Saints, who live in any grosse sinfull practices, or allow themselves in any little ones.
Paul, 2. . 1. calls for this improvement of these graci∣ous promises, that the Corintbians should bee cleansing themselves from all filthinesse of flesh and spirit, perfecting holinesse in the feare of God. They should not stint themselves with any de∣gree of holinesse, Gods owne purity being their Copy, 1. Joh. 3. 3. but evermore bee purging out all defilements which fall either upon their bodies or upon their spirits. Secondly, The Saints must separate from unclean company: 2 From unclean company. What should Doves doe amongst Crowes? when David did ap∣peale to God, Psal. 26. 4, 5. in the integrity of his heart, hee could mke this profession, which would bee as comfortable to you as it was to him. I have not sate with vaine persons, neither will I goe in with dissemblers, I have hated the congregation▪ of evill doers, and will not sit with the wicked. Possibly your callings, Qui non digno∣scitur exse, dig∣noscitur exsocio. your relations may tye you to a frequent converse with some unclean persons, (which is a sad portion where ever it falls) yet electively, it is not agreeable to the spirit of a Saint, to sin∣gle out such as your Companions, as your bosome friends, as the people of your delight, to make a league and combination with them. Wise Solomon advises, Prov. 22. 24, 25. Make no friend∣ship with an angry man, and with a furious man thou shalt not go: lest thou learn his wayes and get a snare to thy Soule. Angry men though they are very dangerous, yet not the onely dangerous companion: All sinfull and unclean societies are infectious; You should alwayes goe into bad company as a Physitian goes into Plague-houses. Hee carries his Antidote with him to pre∣serve himselfe, and his prescripts for the health of others. So should Saints fortifie their own Spirits against danger, by pray∣ing and watching; and by speaking healing speeches, and ex∣presse such exemplary actions as may helpe to cure the Soules of others. When the Sower went forth to sow, some seeds fell by the wayes side, and the fowles came and devoured them up, Mat. 13. 3, 4. who are these fowles, but the devill and his factors? birds of this feather do build very often in Tavernes, and Ale∣houses, the cages of unclean company; they are the bushes which harbour them ordinarily, you had need beware of such places. The more Saints meet in any company, the more of the Holy Ghost is there, the more of Christ, it is a little corner
of Heaven. The more unclean and wicked persons there are in any company, the more of the devill is there, who rules in the children of disobedience, Ephes. 2. 2. Saints must turn away from such. Thirdly, Saints must separate even from the very appearance of 3. From the very appea∣rance of un∣cleannesse. uncleannesse, 1 Thess. 5. 21. Abstain from the appearance of evill, not onely from all kinde of sin, (as some render the Greek) but from all appearance of sin; they should avoyd the shews as well as realities; and that both appearances of errours in Do∣ctrine, and appearances of exorbitancy in conversation. This There are re malae, & malae pariter species Bern. was Daniels care, who was an Oracle for wisedome, Ezek. 28. 3. In Chap. 1. 8. Hee purposed in his heart that bee would not defile himselfe with the portion of the Kings meate. Some Expositors V. Pembles & Estius his Notes. say, some of the meates might bee prohibited to the Jewes, o∣thers, for feare of superstition; the Babylonians meat being bles∣sed by invocating their Idols: another conceives hee did de∣cline it, to avoyd scandall, hee would not fare so pompously, whilest his Brethren suffered such hard things. Learned Cal∣vin apprehends Daniel might at best see an appearance of un∣cleannesse V. Calvin in locum. in it, therefore useth twice that expression, that hee might not defile himselfe. This holy man suspected the Court delights might prove a snare to him, hee might learn intem∣perance, and so lose himselfe and forget his God; There was to him such a shew and danger of uncleannesse in it, hee would rather live with pulse then venture upon the Kings meat. Hee well knew that any one may soone bee plunged into great sinnes, who doth not shunne the very beginnings and appearan∣ces of the least; and that hee scarce makes conscience of any evill, who doth not make conscience of all. It is true, in separating from the appearance of uncleannesse, the Saints should wisely consider whether the appearance of it bee Reall, when there is an outward resultance of some inward pravity; or whether it bee onely imaginary, when for want Appearance of evill, Reall. Imaginary. of knowledge, or of love, or of both, standers by conceive it hath a shew of evill in it. To a mind not rightly informed, to an heart not charitably affected, good actions may sometimes bee mis-interpreted, as if they had an appearance of uncleannesse in them. In this case Christ himselfe did not forbeare to con∣verse
with sinners, though some through ignorance or malice, did reproach him as a friend to Publicans and sinners, Luke 7. 34. For want of a wise consideration, what is indeed an appea∣rance of evill to bee avoyded, many may bee as easily, and as farre transported as the Jews, who did ignorantly task them∣selves with needlesse observances, and impose uncomfortable burdens upon others. Where the Lord forbad them to eate or See Godwyns Iewish Antiq. p. 152. drinke things sacrificed to Idols, they prohibited all drinking with Heathens, because it is doubtfull whether it were offered to I∣dols or no. The Lord commanding them in the time of the Passeover, to put away leaven out of their houses, they would not take the name into their mouthes all the time of the Feast. But if there bee reall grounds, to call any thing an appearance of e∣vill; this golden Rule of the Apostle, Abstaine from the appea∣rance of evill, will extricate you in many puzzling cases of Conscience. If one bee inquisitive about the lawfulnesse of Painting the face, patching, spotting, carding, dicing, about many of your habits, customes, recreations; you may resolve diverse such queries with this Aphorisme, In all doubtfull ca∣ses In dubiiis elige tutissimum; Illa est pars tu∣tior in qua non est periculum peccandi. A∣mes. Cas. Confc. l. 3 c. 17. S. 26. take the safest way; That is certainly the safest, where there is no danger of sinne; not so much as an appearance of evill. If you doe such things, it may prove a sin, it may bee an appea∣rance of uncleannesse, there is not the least shew or shadow of uncleannesse in forbearing such habits, such customes, such sports, as becommeth Saints; Therefore resolve to separate, not onely from unclean practises, and unclean societie, but also from what∣soever doth indeed appeare to bee unclean. Fourthly, Saints must separate from communion with a false 4 From com∣munion with a false Church, when unclean in the very sub∣stantialls. Church, being grown unclean and corrupt in the very substan∣tials of Doctrine, Worship, and Government. Learned and Godly Divines grant, that the Saints may hold some fellowship with a Church which is much corrup∣ted. 1. Though it bee tainted with diverse grosse errors in opinion, as, Matth. 5. 20. to 43. 2. Though the publick worship bee stained with vile hypocrisie, as Mark. 7. 6. to 13.
3. Though the publick government become oppressive, with tyranny and disorder, as Joh. 9. 22. 4. Though Church members bee blinded with ignorance; and carryed away with superstition, as Matth. 15. 9. 14. Who knowes not that such distempers were found in the See reverend▪ Mr. Heldershant on John 4. p. 159, 160▪ See 1 Cor. chap∣ters 5, 6, 11, 15. Church of Hierusalem? yet the Apostles, and primitive Christi∣ans, as Christ himselfe had formerly done, did joyn with them in the Ordinances of God, Act. 3. 1. &c. And when many weeds had over-grown the Church of Corinth, in Doctrine, Di∣scipline, and Conversation, Paul seriously perswades them to a Reformation, and not presently to a Separation among them∣selves, but still ownes them with all their defects, as the Church of God, 2 Cor. 1. 1. And though the Church of Rome was very much degenerated, yet for a long time the true Churches of Christ held communion with it. Indeed when it was grown so abominably impure, in the very vitals & substantials of Christianity, then God would send from Heaven to invite the Saints to make a Separation from it, Rev. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, that yee bee not partakers of her sinnes, and that yee receive not of her Plagues. I need not spend time to justifie the Separation of Luther and the Reformed Churches from Romish Babylon. The Schisme began in Rome it selfe. They were the Schismaticks who forced Non fugimus, sect fugamur. Vide Davenant, ad pacem eccles. adhort. us to fly from them. First, There was Monstrous Heresie in Doctrine maintain∣ed. Secondly, Grosse Idolatry in worship practised. Thirdly, Intolerable Tyranny in Government owned. Fourthly, Another may now bee added, The man of sin is revealed to bee amongst them, 2 Thess. 2. which more fully Vide Camero. de eccles. Tract, de Schismat. warrants a departure from them who now so clearely appeare to bee the Anti-Christian-Church. Especially seeing after much meanes used for their conviction, they continue to reject and blaspheme the Truth of Christ. As in Act. 13. 46. and 19. 9. 5 From fellow∣ship in any thing that is un∣clean even in the true Chur∣ches of Christ. Fifthly, The Lord will have his Saints separate not onely from false Churches, but also from fellomship in any thing that is uncleane, even in the True Churches of Christ. Admit a particular Church having many corruptions in it,
continue a True Church, and so whilst Christ ownes it wee may owne it, and some communion may bee maintained with it, in that which is sound and good; yet when you cannot live with them in externall communion, unlesse you will hold fel∣lowship with them in some sinnes, as to approve some erroneous See Chilling worth in praef. Ans. to 2 Motive Doctrine, or practice some superstitious worship; If this Church will not allow you her Communion, but upon such conditions, in such a case the Church for requiring this condition is Schisma∣ticall, and not you from separating from it. God will not allow you to do any evill, though you might thereby enjoy the grea∣test good. Rom. 3. 8. His Saints must rather forbeare the sweet∣nesse of fellowship with others in somewhat that is good, then suffer themselves to bee unavoydably ingaged ingaged in doing or ju∣stifying any thing which is unclean and sinfull in the pure eyes of God, Ephes. 5. 11. If they bee like to bee involved in defiling their consciences, if in danger to bee compelled to blaspheme, they should keepe themselves from sinne what ever they suffer; better undergoe the greatest then commit the least e∣vill; by this Compasse the primitive Saints sailed, Act. 8. 1. and 11. 19. Yet here remember Camerons distinction of a Schisme into Schisma Nega∣tivum, Positivū. Fide Cameron de Eccles. Tract. de Schismat. Negative and Positive. There may bee in the Church a negative Separation, a personall forbearing of any thing which will undoubtedly pollute us; when a positive Separation, where there is not only a denying of communion with others, but a sudden consociating of themselves into distinct bodies, into lit∣tle independent Corporations by themselves for the worship and service of God, will not so easily as some imagine bee justifyed to hold consistency with that peace and order which is so desira∣ble in the Churches of Christ: But of this I shall speak more particularly in the Application. Having shewed you from what you must separate, with the se∣verall steppes you are to take therein, I will indevour fully to ingage you in that necessary worke, by the cleere evidence of some arguments, either couched in the bowels of the Text, or Reasons why the Saints should separate from unclean∣nesse. borrowed from the neighbouring words; They are these foure, which will discover why the Saints should separate from uncleannesse.
First, The Saints ought to proportion their carriage to their 1 From the Saints priviled∣ges. 1 Pet. 2. 9. priviledges, (they are largely expressed, ver. 16.) all which bespeak a Separation from uncleannesse. They are the Temple of the living God. First, they are new built by God himselfe, Ephes. 2. 10. Secondly, Set apart from profane uses for God, Psal. 4. 3. Thirdly, yea dedicated and consecrated unto him in a peculiar manner, Titus 2. 14. Againe, the Saints are the Temple of the living God, therefore it is most incongruous for them to converse with dead and unclean company, and to mul∣tiply dead and sinfull workes. This is the argument which the Apostle Paul useth, 1 Cor. 6. 19. why they should flye Forni∣cation, Know yee not that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost in you? and by the same reason all other uncleannesse; Gods Temple should have no cob-webhs, no unswept corners in them. . Further, God saith here, ver. 16. I will dwell in them, and walk in them, and I will bee their God, and they shall bee my peo∣ple. Here is an high degree of owning them, and of greatest intimacy with them; God is in the middest of his enemies as In Templo vis o∣rare; in te ora; sed prius esto Tem∣plum Dei. Ille enim in Templo suo audit orantem Aug. ruling them; But hee is in his Saints as in his House, as in his Temple, which is for communion, there hee dwels, there hee walks, there hee is pleased to communicate himselfe to them, and heare them speak to him; They have not onely his presence, but also most sweet discoveries from him; as in Joh. 14. 21. All which should hold them at a distance from sinne and all uncleannesse. 2 From the fil∣thinesse of sin and sinners. Secondly, sin is in the nature of it, of a polluting disposition, Heb. 12. 15. One roote of bitternesse will defile many, it staines all who doe not separate from it, as being so directly contra∣ry to the pure nature, holy will, blessed Image and glory of God. Hence it is in Scripture frequently compared to the most loathsome things. Sinners are Vipers, Swine, Dogges, yea, bri∣ars, Matth. 3. 7. Matth. 7. 6. Isa. 1. 6. Eze. 24. 11, 12 Hebr: 6. 8. 2 Tim. 2. 17: 1 King 8. 38. thornes, &c. Sinne is Drosse, scumme, rottennesse, and the worst of diseases, Leprosie, Plague, &c. all which doe pro∣claime a separation. It defiles the body and soule, 2 Cor. 7. 1. It defiles the heart and conscience, Tit. 1. 15. It puts mudde in∣to the spring of all your actions, which will make the streames very foule. It defiles our best duties, Prov. 15. 8. and it defiles our society, 1 Cor. 15. 33. Whereas, the more you separate from
sinne unto God, the more the soule is conformed to the pure law of God, which is both our rule and beauty, and the more it will bee transformed into Christ, which is our glory. Thirdly, there is no possibility of reconciling Christ and sin, 3 No reconcili∣ation with Christ, but by separation from sin. therefore the Saints have great reason to fall out with sinne, that so they may bee in some capacity of falling in with Christ. They can expect no communion with him, unlesse there bee a separation from sinne. When once they have washed and made themselves clean, put away the evill of their doings from before Gods eyes, ceased to do evill, Isa. 1. 16. then they are invited to a sweet familiarity with him, ver. 18. Come now, let us reason toge∣ther. Then, and not till then they shall have communion with him to soule-saving purposes. The same language James speaks Chap. 4. 8. Draw nigh to God, and hee will draw nigh to you, cleanse your hands you sinners, and purifie your hearts you double minded. You cannot meet and injoy fellowship with God, but in paths of purity. Jesus Christ would not ingage himselfe to sup with any of the Laodiceans till they had separated from their luke∣warmenesse, Rev. 3. 20. Here in vers. 14, 15, 16. the Spirit of God makes choyce of five emphaticall words in the Greeke, and ? expresses it by way of interrogation, which containes a vehe∣ment negation in it. What fellowship? what communion? what concord? what part? what agreement have the Saints of God with uncleannesse. As if Paul should have said five times over, the Saints who are in Christ, and have Christ in them, must not, cannot reconcile themselves, to any compliance with sinne and sinners, no more then reconcile Christ with Beliall. Fourthly, unlesse the Saints make a separation from un∣cleannesse and fellowship with wicked men therein, as they 4 Inevitable danger of com∣municating with sin and sinners. come to share in their sins, so will they bee involved in their calami∣ties. If Israel had not separated themselves from Aegypt, by the blood of the Paschall Lambe, but had communicated with them in their Idolatry, they might have felt the sword of the destroying Angell in their houses, as well as the Aegyptians. It did cost them very deare afterwards, that they had such fel∣lowship with Achans offence, for his act they smarted, indeed because Josh. 7. 1. The children of Israel committed a trespasse in the accursed thing, they were not carefull to keepe themselves
and one another from that evill as God had charged them, Josh. 6. 18. It was a seasonable prayer of that man of God; Lord deli∣ver mee from my other mens sinnes; God knowes wee have per∣sonall finnes enow standing upon our score to undoe our soules eternally; the greater reason have wee to renounce all com∣munion with other mens uncleannesse. Hence Paul calls upon the Saints in Ephesus, Ephes. 5. 11, Have no fellowship with the unfruitfull workes of darknesse, but reprove them rather; make them not your sinnes, by command, counsell, consent, connivence, nor any other way; but rather beare witnesse against them, at least by a checking silence, if not by a seasonable speech, by lookes, by gestures, by some rebuking actions, if not by downe∣right reproofes; If you joyne hearts in sinning against God, ex∣pect Revel. 18. 4. to goe hand in hand under punishments from him. If God lookes that all his Saints should make such a separa∣tion Ʋse 1. Instruction. as not to touch any uncleannesse, then behold how much worke you have this day for deepe humiliation! So farre are you from answering Gods expectation herein, that many of you are drenched in great defilements, and wal∣low in grosse impurity. The Lord helpe you to behold it with weeping eyes over your selves and this unclean Nation. May not the Lord send his Prophet to you, as once hee did Ezekiel to Hierusalem, Ezek. 22. 24. &c. Son of man, say unto her, Thou Consider sadly with reference to England, Eze. 22. 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31. art the Land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of In∣dignation? (sometimes raine waters and makes a barren Land fruitfull, sometimes there is a raine of righteousnesse which washeth away unrighteousnesse, Hos. 10. 12.) 25 There is a conspiracy of her Prophets in the midst thereof like a roaring Lyon, ravening the prey; They have devoured soules, they have taken the Treasure and pretious things: they have made her many Widowes in the midst thereof. 26 Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy things, they have put no difference between the holy and profane, nei∣ther have they shewed difference between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them. 27 Her Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the
prey, to shed blood and to destroy soules, to get dis-honest gaine. 28 And her Prophets have daubed them with untempered morter, seeing vanity and divining lies unto them, saying, Thus saith the Lord God, when the Lord hath not spoken. 29 The people of the Land have used oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poore and needy, yea, they have oppres∣sed the stranger wrongfully. It concernes you wisely to consider that the complaint in the 30 verse, bee not as justly taken up against you. 30 And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before mee for the Land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none. What, no mourners? none that sigh and groan for Englands filthinesse? then the sad portion in the 31 verse may prove yours: 31 Therefore I have powred out my indignation upon them, I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath, their owne way have I recompensed upon their heads, saith the Lord. May you not heare God speaking to this polluted Kingdom, as once to his Hierusalem, Jer. 13. 27. I have seen thy adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdnesse of thy whoredome, and thine abomi∣nations on the hills in the field; Woe unto thee, O Jerusalem, wilt thou not bee made clean? when shall it once bee? What not after so many yeeres purifying Sermons? not after so many melting mer∣cies, which should have led thee to repentance? not after so ma∣ny purging judgements? What not yet cleansed by all these ri∣vers of teares upon so many praying dayes, by all these streames of blood, in so many cruell fights? Oh when shall it once bee? What? England never cleansed from her old abominations? Doubt∣lesse, if wee still tread in Hierusalems steps, wee must expect her cup of Trembling to bee put into our hands, till wee bee utter∣ly overturned. Historians make a sad relation of the Desolation of Hierusalem, twelve severall times the heavy judgements of God fell upon them, Jerosolyma duo∣decies in univer∣sum expugnata. Vide Perelium, Mellif. bist p. 24 as the wofull fruites of their abominations: So as at last it became the Jews prison, and then their grave, and after an heape of carkasses, then of stones, Luk. 19. 41, 42, 43, 44. I hope you will (Right Honourable and Beloved) seriously humble your selves before God this day, for that you have in
many things walked so unbecomming Saints. Instead of Sepa∣rating from all Impurity, the All-seeing God knows, you have You may di∣vers ways help to fill up the measure of En∣glands unclean∣nesse. contributed very much to make England more unclean. First, Every one of you hath an unclean spring within, in your own corrupt natures, which bubbles up daily in many impure thoughts, desires, &c. Jer. 4. 14. O Jerusalem wash thine heart from wickednesse, that thou mayest bee saved; how long shall 1 When an un∣clean spring is within you. thy vaine thoughts lodge within thee? And in Matth. 15. 19. 20. For out of the heart proceed evill thoughts, murders, adulteries, for∣nications, thefts, false witnesse, blasphemies, these are the things which defile a man. The heart is the Fountain, which is full of filth, many carnall principles, sinfull inclination, &c. hence so ma∣ny unclean streames in our polluting actions. Secondly, You defile both your selves and others by cor∣rupt 2 When by your converse you defile o∣thers. Heb. 12. 15. speeches, and sinfull conversing together, Ephes. 4. 29. Let no corrupt communication proceed out of your mouth, but that which is good, to the use of edifying, that it may minister grace to the hearers. Sometimes one rotten hearted person in a family, like one rotten apple upon an heape, corrupts many others; they little know what it is to speak to edify profitably, but rather at a Table in a . with-drawing roome, pull down that in one houres discourse, which a faithfull Minister hath been building up by many Ser∣mons, ver. 30. And grieve not the holy Spirit of God; such sin∣full discoursing doth not onely sad the spirits of the Saints, but even grieve the Spirit of God himselfe, ver. 31. Let all bit∣ternesse and wrath, and angor, and clamour, and evills speaking bee put away from you with all malice. One passionate word be∣gets another, and so you doe mutually helpe to defile one ano∣thers soules. Thirdly, You adde much to the common pollution, even 3 By the ini∣quity of your holy things. by the iniquity of your holy things. If you please to consult with Exod. 28. 38. you shall finde there a course prescribed how Aaron was to beare the iniquity of the holy things, among the children of Israel, that they may bee accepted before the Lord. Which cleer∣ly intimates that there are not onely evill doings, but also evill of our good doings, there are Sermon sinnes, Prayer sinnes, Com∣munion sinnes, Humiliation sinnes, many Sanctuary sins, which doe defile both our spirits and performances, and cast more
mudde into Englands unclean streames, whereby wee become more obnoxious to the displeasure of the Holy God: Hence you may observe, Ezek. 9. 6. God gave commission to the destroy∣ers, to begin at the Sanctuary. For the most part pollution be∣ginnes at the Sanctuary, and there should they beginne de∣struction. Fourthly, Possibly besides all your owne personall sinnes, whereby the Land is so much defiled, you may by compliance 4 By making the filth of o∣ther mens sins your own. owne them, yea, and helpe to make the Kingdome guilty of all the sinnes that are committed by any in the Kingdome; Here∣by you who are advanced to such authority in the State, may make those sinnes which were too common before, in some kind to become Nationall, and leave a destructive guilt upon the King∣dome. As Ministers by not reproving their flock, so Magi∣strates by not punishing the offenders, stnd charged with their sinnes: The Lord teach you wisely to consider how angry hee was with Eli for his connivence, 1 Sam. 3. 13. God would ruine his house, because his Sonnes made themselves vile, and hee restrained them not. It is high time to looke about you, lest your indulgence to any other mens sinnes multiply so much uncleannesse, as may both ruine your own-houses, and hazzard the whole Kingdome. If God expects his Saints should separate, then give mee leave here to enter a Caveat against rash censuring, and condemning Ʋse 2. Caution against rash censuring of al separation of all Separation. God himselfe by his Word, and by his pra∣ctice teacheth there may, there must bee some Separation. First, in his owne eternall counsels hee makes a separation, his electing love singles out some, chusing them to grace and glory, Rom. 9. 13. passing by others. Secondly, his Spirit in the Ministery of the Gospel makes a separation, picking out here and there one, drawing them to 1 Cor. 1 9. communion with Christ. Thirdly, when the Son of man shall come in his glory, with all the holy Angels, hee will separate the sheep from the goates, the sheep on his right hand, the goates on the left. And here Paul Matth. 25. 31, 32, 33. invites you to a separation, and therefore doubtlesse there is no reason you should bee offended at the Name or Thing, when
it is rightly stated and practised: This I shall indevour to re∣present in these two following Conclusions. There must bee no Separation made from fellowship with the Ca∣tholick Church. 1 Conclusion. Such a separation would rend the very body of Christ him∣selfe. Hee is pleased to call the Church his body, the fulnesse of him that filleth all in all, Ephes. 1. 23. This would dis-joynt that sweet Harmony, which is the beauty and strength of that body, Ephes. 4. 16. The improvement of the Gospel is the advancing of Saints to this honour and happinesse, Heb. 12. 22, 23. But yee are come unto Mount Sion, and unto the City of the living God, &c. To the Generall Assembly, and Church of the first-borne; In this your pilgrimage you must still bee comming to this Church, but never separating from it, because in comming hither, you come to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, ver. 24. You need not make a separation from a particular Church, because 2 Conclusion. there are some defects found in it. If you are bound to separate because of defects, to what par∣ticular Church will you associate, which shall not bee defective? Onely the Church Triumphant in Heaven is absolutely perfect, weeds will incessantly bee springing up in all Gods Gardens here on earth. This hath evermore been taken for granted a∣mongst all sober spirits, that imperfections doe not presently unchurch a True Church, and so though they cry for a Refor∣mation, yet doe not warrant a Separation. Quest. But what if some wicked persons continue in Church Society, doth not that give a just occasion of separation unto Reasons why separation not suddainly to be made from a Church though some wicked persons be to∣lerated in it. See Ames. Case consc. l. 4. c. 24. sect. 15. others? Answ. Such Divines to whom God hath revealed much of his minde concerning Church-affaires, give divers reasons why the tolerating of some wicked persons in a Church, is not a sufficient ground for others to separate suddenly from it. First, because, that tolerating may bee onely an errour or infir∣mity of the Church, wherein you are to beare with it, and not thereupon to separate from it.
Secondly, Patience is to bee used towards a particular Brother, when hee is overtaken, Gal. 6. 1. Much more must you in such a case expresse it towards a Church. Thirdly, The suddain separating of the godly, is not the best me∣thod to cure a sick Church, but rather puts it into a more desperate condition, &c. Quest. Doth not the fellowship of wicked persons in the Or∣dinances make them ineffectuall? Answ. Their wickednesse may make the precious Ordinan∣ces of God ineffectuall to themselves, yet not to such others whom the Lord invited and for whom he prepared these Gospel-dain∣ties; Will a loving Father deny his owne children their bread, because some dogges creep under the Tables? Indeed as in Hag. 2. 13. If one that is unclean by a dead body, touch any of these, shall it bee unclean? And the Priests answered and said, It shall bee unclean. To whom was this uncleannesse contracted, not to others, but to themselves? And hence, 1 Cor. 11. 28. Let a man examine Him∣self, and so let him eate. Hee doth not say, let him examine all others that come. It is indeed a very desirable and beautifull thing, which would much increase our Communion comforts, to see none but Christs Members at his own Table. Yet how can the very be∣ing of an ungodly person there, enervate the power of the Or∣dinances unto thy soule? It is most true, A little leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6. That incestuous person, (and so How a little leaven leaven∣eth the whole lump: others) leaven a Church Physically, not by their presence, sim∣ply, because they are there; Then the being of an Hypocrite in Church fellowship, (however hee creep in,) would leaven all, if bare presence did it; But Morally by his Impurity, hee being suffered without censure for so great an offence, doth imbol∣den and harden others in sin, whereby the whole Congrega∣tion might in time bee sowred with such leaven. The presence of an unclean person cannot hurt you, further then you make his uncleannesse yours, by not doing your duty against it. What though 1 Cor. 10. 17. they being many, are one bread? If an unclean, unworthy person, by creeping unto Gods Or∣dinances, and enjoying communion with the Saints therein, doe obtain this advantage, so as by profession to seem one bread
with them; yet this doth not imply, that the Saints are there∣by made one with him in his wickednesse. If an unclean person challenge more then belongs to him, this doth not devest the Saints of what is their due, and their priviledge, nor must it hinder them in performing that service, they owe to their Sa∣viour, Incommoda fa∣ciunt aliquando ut praeceptum affirmativum desinat obligare, quod alias non possit non obser∣vari sine pecca∣to. Ames. Cas. l. 4. c. 24. sect. 15: Si ex separatio∣ne vel schisma metuendum, vel contagio peccan∣di multitudinem invaserit, divinae disciplinae seve∣ra misericordia necessaria▪ est: consilia separa∣tionis tunc ina∣nia plus pertur∣bant infirmos bo∣nos, quam corri∣gant animosos malos, Aug. con∣tra Parmen l. 3. c. 2. Matth. 18. 15, 16, 17. being called to it. They must remember Christ & his death, though others forget him, and their duty towards him. Quest. But I cannot do any duty (as it is expressed, Matth. 18. 15, 16. &c.) remaining in Communion with such a particu∣lar Church, may I not then separate? Answ. First, in this case a man had need bee cleerly satisfy∣ed, that to doe such things (soil. to admonish, to excommu∣nicate, as in Matth. 18.) bee his duty, pro hic & nunc, in such and such circumstances. Affirmative precepts, though they do semper obligare, yet not ad semper. They do not binde mee to act in e∣very juncture of things. In Morals, in matters of this nature, circumstances have such an influence, that what was my duty in one posture of things, may cease to bee my duty, when it is otherwise circumstantiated. I am not in all circumstances e∣qually obliged to reprove offences, or to proceed to Church cen∣sures. Sometimes the disease hath so far prevailed, the body will not beare physick. Secondly, a man likewise, before hee separate from a Church because hee cannot do his duty therein, had need bee sure that his not being in a capacity to do his duty to the full, bee a suffici∣ent ground of Separation. The order in Mat. 18. is to cast off the offender, if he heare not the Church, not to cast off the Church if shee heare not him. Qu. But may we not desire communion with the purest Church? Answ. You may; yet withall observe how this may bee sought, and obtained by you with the peace, order, and edification of the Churches. It is possible to remove to another Church, without a separation from your owne. Onely I wish these two things were remembred by such as thinke of separating. First, Try to gather purity into your own Church, and to separate all impurity from it, before you separate to another, or gather a Church out of other Churches. Endevour to separate the drosse from among you, before you separate your selves from the gold. Secondly, If at last you will separate, doe not uncharitably
condemn the true Church, whose fell owship you leave. There is too often an errour on both hands, to cry up every thing wee like, as Jus Divinum, and what wee dislike, to blast it as An∣tichristian. When the Saints doe separate, let it bee; If you separate let it bee▪ First, A prudent Separation, from evill, not from good; from the vile, not from the pretious: Possibly they may sometimes 1 Prudently. bee necessitated to suspend communion from some particular Church, in somewhat that is good, because then unhappily much evill was incorporated into that Church, and yet not excommunicate themselves, but still own, and approve, what is good therein, Rom. 12. 9. abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good. Secondly, A pious separation; from evill unto good, not from one evill to another, not from extremity to extremity, not from 2 Piously. Tyranny to Anarchy, not from Prelaticall usurpation to popu∣lar licentiousnesse. So farre as you concurre with them▪ and bid them God speed in any of their errors, you are partaker of their e∣vill deeds, 2 Joh. ver. 11. Thirdly, A peaceable separation. Separate from the unclean, 3 Peaceably. without a sebisme, (that is) without an unwarrantable rent, not rashly condemning all who come not up to your height; not as one affecting a proud singularity, but as one who is necessita∣ted to withdraw out of pure tendernesse of conscience; not out of any passionate selfishnesse, but as one who labours to please his neighbour for good to edification, Rom. 15. 1, 2. Fourthly, A loving separation. Though some Saints should differ and have a kinde of separation in some opinions and pra∣ctices, 4 Lovingly. wherein the holy Scripture allowes a latitude, yet still united in affection, (which the Devill most opposes) one soule though in divers bodies, though in divers Churches, still striving together for the Faith of the Gospel, Phil. 1. 27. Then, as you desire to approve your selves Saints, study how you may answer Gods expectation, Minde purity in the whole Ʋse 3. Direction. Exod. 15. 11. Hab. 1. 13. Col. 1. 12. course of your lives. Your God is an holy and pure God; Hea∣ven is a pure place; never expect communion with him in his Church here, or in heaven hereafter, without purity and holinesse. As you must bee visible Saints, to make you fit mem∣bers
of particular Churches here, so must you bee reall Saints, that you may bee members of the Church mysticall, Heb. 12. 14. Follow holinesse, without which no man shall see God. Many indeed will easily bee perswaded to pretend to purity, and have gotten their tongues tipt, in these times of Reforma∣tion, with some pure Gospel Language, yet in conclusion will bee ashamed, because their hearts are not sound in Gods Statutes, according to Davids prayer, Psal. 119. 80. But tell mee thou Hypocrite, (saith hee) If it bee a good thing to seeme good Chrysost. Aut ergo esto quad appares, aut appare quod es. why wilt thou not bee that which thou wouldest appeare to bee? for that which is a shame for a man to appeare to bee, is it not much more shame for him to bee indeed? And if it bee good to bee a gilt Professor, is it not much better to bee a pure golden Christian? Means and me∣thod how spi∣rituall purity is promoted in the Saints. I watch against the least evill. First, Watch against every evill, the occasions, the begin∣nings of it; whatsoever defileth, though it bee thy beloved, gainfull, pleasing sinne, away with it, Psal. 97. 10. Main∣tain constantly thy fortifications against all assaults: If there bee a traine of importunate sollicitations laid to overcome thee, blow up all with Josephs holy defiance, Gen. 39. 9. How then can I do this great wickednesse, and sin against God? Secondly, Breathe after inward purity of spirit and consci∣ence, Tit. 1. 15. Ʋnto the pure all things are pure, in their acti∣ons, 2 Labour after inward purity. as well as in their injoyments. A chaste minde will keepe you undefiled in the way. A pure Fountain in your Garden will helpe to make all cleane. Pray for your selves, as Paul for his Thessalonians, 1 Phest. 5. 23. And the very God of Peace sanctifie you wholly, and I pray God your whole spirit, soule and body, bee preserved blamelesse unto the comming of the Lord Jesus. Thirdly, Reach after pure Ordinances, that you may see and taste the simplicity of Christ, in all divine administrations. The 3 Prize pure Ordinances. more of Christ in any Ordinance, the more sweetnesse and the more purifying influence it hath upon our soules: Humane in∣ventions will stain and formalize; Divine Institutions, when they are kept pure, have a most soveraigne healing, cleansing ver∣tue. Hence Paul reduces all to the first institution, as hee recei∣ved it of the Lord, 1 Cor. 11. 23. 4 Make choyce of pure com∣pany. Fourthly, Single out pure company; mingle not your selves in
intimate familiarity with such whose converses carry defile∣ments with them. Remember what incouragements Solomon Discamus ex hac parte sanctam superbiam, scia∣mus nos esse illis meliores, Hie∣ron. ep. gives to close with holy society, Prov. 10. ver. 11. The mouth of a righteous man is a well of life. ver. 20. The tongue of the just is as choyce silver, ver. 21. The lips of the righteous feed many. Shun such acquaintance, where you can expect no good, and can hardly escape without receiving some hurt. David made this one Character of a Citizen of Sion, Psal. 15. 4. In whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but hee honoureth them that feare God. 5 Get pure af∣fections in the use of lawfull comforts. Fifthly, Keepe pure affections in the use of lawfull comforts. It is not enough for Saints to have a lawfull use of temporall bles∣sings, unlesse they gain an holy use of them, that they may bee spiritualized unto them, Col. 3. 1, 2. Saints should propor∣tion their carriage to their hopes. Seek high things, if you bee highly born. If you would bee great persons indeed, minde the great things which are above. Sixthly, Maintain pure aimes in all your undertakings. The 6 Keep pure∣aimes in all your affaires. last end hath a great Influence upon mens actions. Such men are, as their ends are. Doe not look asquint at carnall selfe, that will mis-leade you into uncleane wayes, looke at the sanctifying of Gods name, the comming of his Kingdom, the doing of his will with a single eye. It kept Paul very even, and gave him much occasion of glorying, that his aimes were so pure, so full of simplicity and godly sincerity, that hee could with confidence appeale to a threefold Tribunall. In 2 Cor. 1. 12. There was the Throne of his owne Conscience, and in ver. 13. The Throne of the Corinthians knowledge, and then ver. 14. The highest Throne of all in the day of the Lord Je∣sus. Having thus dispatched the Adhortation, let us now look into the second generall part of the words, and see what incou∣ragement wee can thence gather to ingage you in a separation from all uncleannesse. The Lord Almighty will undoubtedly as a Father receive all those 2 Observation who are such Right Separatists indeed, that they renounce communion with any impurity.
The pollution of sinne made the first breach betwixt God and man, leaving him unfit for communion▪ with so glorious a Majesty; there is no recovering fellowship with the Lord, unlesse the great obstruction bee removed, unlesse wee re∣nounce sinne, which provoked him to withdraw from us. Indeed when once the soule bethinks it selfe, and beginnes to looke after God, hee is rady to meet her with deale imbraces, Luk. 15. 20. But when hee was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and had compassion, and ran and fell on his neck and kissed him. Yea, this whole 15. Chapter of Luke is spent in three in∣couraging Parables to this purpose, discovering that no Shep∣herd is more desirous to seek his lost sheep, no woman more in∣quisiti after her lost groat; no Father more carefull of the re∣turne of his , then the Lord into entertain such as unfainedly disclaim all impurity. Here you have two particulars fit to bee considered, in the prosecuting of this observation: First, Gods readinesse to receive them. 1 Gods readi∣nesse to receive such as Secondly, he kinde entertainment hee gives them. Hee receives them as a Father. Two Arguments may bee produced which will evidence Gods readinesse to receive all such as separate from unclean∣nesse. 1. The first is drawn from the gracious sposition and inclina∣tion 1 Argument. of our good God: He saith, Isa. 30,  professed that hee waites  also pronounceth them  for him. You can not  more ready to forsake sinne, then hee is ready  Isa. 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and  thoughts, and let him return  the Lord,  him, and to our God, for hee will abundantly pardon, as in the Hebrew. Hee knows how to multiply pardons as  multiply sin. Though thou bee a man of iniquity, as it is in the Heb. v. 7. . 2. The second Argument is taken from the Lords ingage∣ment 2 Argument. to all  as come to him, renouncing all their impurity. Hee hath condescended to make himselfe their debton by his
unchangeable promises, Matth. 5. 3. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, and the more purity of heart they have, the more they shall see in God, and injoy the more of God. Christ ingages himselfe to the uncleane Laodiceans, that if they will heare his voyce and open the doore, Rev. 3. 20. Hee will come in and sup with them, and they with him; whatever luke∣warmnesse they have been stained with before, yet now upon such termes, hee promises they shall enjoy a sweet and inti∣mate communion with him. Yea, here lies a threefold ingage∣ment. First, this is suitable to the Tenour of the Covenant of Gods Free Grace, Ezek. 36. 25. Whom hee cleanses hee owns as his people. Secondly, this is agreeable to the intention of Christs death, who laid down his life that hee might purifie a peculiar people unto himselfe, Tit. 2. 14. And, Thirdly, this is the method of the Spirit of God, in the execution of his eternall Counsels for the salvation of our Soules, it is in a way of Sanctification, and cleansing us from the filth of fin, 2 Thess. 2. 13. that so wee may bee meet to bee partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light. And as for the Lords entertaining such as separate them∣selves from all uncleannesse, it is most like a tender Father. 2 The kind en∣tertainment God gives them as a Father. First, Hee welcomes them at their first return home to his house with joyfull imbraces, Luk. 15. 23. There is great triumph in Heaven at the recovery of a lost sinner. Secondly, Hee will kindly own them, and with candid inter∣pretation, accept of weak prayers, and small endevours from them, Mal. 3. 16, 17. The lisping, the stammering of a childe is pleasing to the love of a Father. Thirdly, Hee can indulgently overlook great weaknesses in them, Psal. 103. 13. forbearing their frowardnesse, their evill man∣ners, expecting no more from children then their strength will beare. Fourthly, Hee takes care to secure them in time of dangers, and troubles: If hee bee provoked to send a deluge of calamities, yet hee will provide an Arke for them against a storme, as for his Noah, Gen. 6. 18.
Fifthly, Hee will helpe them at plunges, carrying them through difficult services; A father will, when his children come to a slippery bridge, or a dangerous stile, lead them over by his own hand: As in Deut. 32. 10, 11, 12. Sixthly, Hee will bee sure to make rich provision for their spi∣rituall, temporall, and eternall welfare. Hee knows what they have need of, and what is best for them, Matth. 6. 31. 32. Having given them Christ, hee will withhold no good thing else from them, Rom. 8. 32. Yea, being children of God, they shall bee joynt heires with Christ himselfe, Rom. 8. 17. Thus honourably doth the Lord receive all them, who come unto him upon his own termes, leaving their impurity be∣hinde them, they shall understand and taste the loving kindnesse of the Lord. If the Lord bee pleased so farre to ingage himselfe as a Fa∣ther, Ʋse 1. Information. to receive all such as make a Right separation from un∣cleannesse: Then, when God still denies to receive our requests, and suspends his Fatherly compassions in our extremity, wee have Wee may scare England is not yet cleansed. great reason to suspect our selves; and yet to make more exact inquiry what impure things, and persons there are amongst us. Wee in England may powre out Joshuahs complaint, Josh. 7. 8. O Lord what shall I say, when Israel turneth their backs before their enemies? and expect the Lords answer to him, ver. 10, 11. And the Lord said unto Joshuah, Get thee up; wherefore lyest thou thus upon thy face? Israel hath sinned, and they have also trans∣gressed my Covenant which I commanded them. Now is a pro∣per season to consider whether there bee no Achan in the camp, whether no Jonahs still asleepe in a corner, which occasions the storme, and indangers the ship. This were most suitable work for a day of Humiliation. You may have many Praying dayes, yet if they bee not cleansing and scouring dayes, your Prayers will still miscarry, your Counsels bee shattered, and your grand undertakings bee disappointed. Remember Judg. 10. 10. The children of Israel cryed unto the Lord, yet to little pur∣pose, till they swept away the unclean things. The Lord re∣pulsed their prayers, and bade them, ver. 14. Goe and cry unto the Gods which yee have chosen, let them deliver you in the time of your tribulation. Indeed when they said, ver. 15. Wee have
sinned, and when, ver. 16. They put away the strange Gods from among them, and served the Lord. Then, His soule was grieved England must bee cleansed, else not delive∣red. for the misery of Israel. Could wee in England act our pray∣ers, not onely bemoane our uncleannesse, but put it away from among us, renounce all our impurity, wee might hope to find our Heavenly Father, so farre grieved with our miseries, that our sorrows might bee turned into rejoycings. Then, let all the Saints who have indevoured to separate themselves from all uncleannesse, learn hence, with all hum∣ble Ʋse 2. Incouragement. Let the Saints fly to God as to a Father. Abba Father found 3 times, Rom. 8. 15. Mark. 14. 36. Gal. 4. 6. Abba Syr. Chry∣sost. vocat verbū. puerorum legiti∣morum quo pa∣rentes suos ap∣pellant. boldnesse, to improve this blessed priviledge, make use of this sweet Relation you have unto God, runne to the Throne of Grace, and cry Abba Father. Rom. 8. 15. If hee hath bound himselfe to receive you as a Father, doe you follow him as chil∣dren, doe not onely say, Abba Father, but cry, Abba Father; Sometimes a childe can say or doe nothing to helpe it selfe, but cry after his Father; Though hee bee stuck fast in the mire, yet looking after the Father overtakes him, crying after him overcomes him. Oftentimes [Ah Father] proves an effectu∣all prayer, there is prevailing Oratory in the Name, in the Re∣lation. Therefore, if thou canst do nothing else in the behalf of poore England, yet put thy finger in thine eye and com∣plain to thy Father, tell him how ill it fares with thy poore Brethren and Sisters in gasping Ireland, in unsettled Scotland, in bleeding England, and what a bitter cup of trembling, Germany, and the Palatinate, have had in their hands for above twenty yeeres together. As Mary and Martha sent to Christ, Joh. 11. 3. saving, Lord, behold hee whom thou lovest is sick: Represent by thy Prayers, the sick and sad condition of many of those whom the Lord dearly loveth amongst us. Possibly thou mayest heare the same gracious answer, concerning the cause and people of God here, as in ver. 4. Jesus said, This sicknesse is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Sonne of God might bee glorifyed thereby. Onely hee will have us to bee brought so low, that the sentence of death being passed upon us hee may bee magnifyed in our Resurrection. O therefore suffer not your selves to bee discouraged from wonted importunity in Prayer. You have here two excellent props of Faith; Gods power, Two props for faith in Prayer.
and Gods will; The Lord Almighty is your Father; As hee is Almighty, hee is abundantly able, as hee is a Father, hee is as cheerefully willing. Hee who is Almighty can work, with∣out meanes, as well as with meanes, by weak meanes as well as by strong, contrary to meanes, as well as according unto meanes. Hee who is a Father will help, when you may think your selves at losses, and in the dark, as hee hath promised, Isa. 42. 16. And I will bring the blinde by a way that they know not, I will lead them in path that they have not known, I will make darknesse light before them, and crocked things streight, these things will I doe unto them, and not forsake them. It the Lord Almighty will receive all Right Separatists, as Ʋse 3. Direction. Let the Saints love as Brethrē as children of the same Father  a Father, this may oblige all the Saints in their moving to∣wards a pure Separation from uncleannesse to imbrace one an∣other as Brethren. It is most wholesome counsell, 1 Pet. 2. 17. love the Brother-hood, not onely love this or that Brother, which may bee done upon politick respects, because hee is learned, discreet, or usefull, but love the brotherhood, the fraternity, the whole corporation of Saints; Yea, 1 Pet. 1. 2. See that yee love one another with a pure heart fervently. First, It must bee hearty love, not lip love onely. Secondly, From a pure heart, not out of carnall selfe-seek∣ing. Thirdly, It must have fervency as well as purity, such love as will not bee quenched by some passions, discourtesies, diffe∣rences, &c. O this were most becomming Saints, like chil∣dren of the same heavenly Father, to joyne hearts, heads, and hands with all Brotherly affection. This State were not in so much danger to bee broken by ene∣mies, if wee did not give them advantage by breaches amongst our selves: And this makes our present Church differences the more sad, because many of them are amongst Brethren; who are indeed going from Aegypt to Canaan, from Babylon to Hie∣rusalem, but they forget their Relation to God and one ano∣ther, and most unhappily fall out and quarrell in the way. In King Henry the eighths dayes, there was a strange tem∣per of things, both Protestants and Papists were persecuted. About Anno 1540. At one time three were burned for not subscribing the six Arti∣cles,
and three hanged for denying the Kings Supremacy; the sight whereof made a Frenchman cry out: Deus bone quomodo hic vivunt Gentes, suspenduntur Papistae, comburuntur anti-papistae! What a place is this, where Papists are hanged, and antipapists are burned! Is it not more prodigiously strange to see Bre∣thren, under the names of Independents and Presbyterians, not onely persecuted by others, but even condemning and doing se∣vere execution upon one another? I doubt you doe not often enough remember that of Moses, Act. 7. 26. Sirs, yee are Bre∣thren, why doe yee wrong one to another? They who have sweetly agreed in the destructive part of Refor∣mation Since the preaching of this Sermon our hope of a∣greement is much incourag∣ed. On the 4 of Ianuary 1644. when the Arch bishop of Cant. was condem∣ned, the Directo∣ry passed both Houses of Par∣liament, with the removall of Common Prayer book, Ceremonies &c. And on the 10 of Ian. when his head was ta∣ken off, the chiefe head of our Divisions in the Assembly about Excom∣munication was chopped off by Accommo∣dation. for the pulling downe Popish superstitions, and Prela∣ticall usurpations; They who have joyned like Brethren in one practicall Directory, for publike Worship, by a prudent moderation, settling such an order therein, as may prevent confusion in Church-Administrations, and withall leaving such liberty as may relieve tender consciences; They who have taken divers steppes towards an happy accord in the doctrinall part, in one Confession of Faith; and form of Catechisme; why should not they also as children of one Father, as Subjects of the same King, (by the help of your Prayers and indevours) bee brought to shake hands in lesser things, harmoniously con∣curring in matters of Church-government? The Devill hath a great plot, a dangerous design upon us here∣in, (the Lord make us more vigilant against it) when other attempts prosper not, hee indevours, by dividing our spirits, to weaken our Counsels of Reformation, hee knows how by the affixing of exasperating names, Presbyterians, Independents, &c. to blow the coale, and inflame the differences in things. Come into some companies, you shall heare people talk them∣selves and one another into a passion against Independents; o∣thers will draw as ugly a picture of Presbyterians, (and through both these names too many strike at the power of godli∣nesse) yea, and by the words heighten the differences them∣selves more then needs. Whereas, if there were such prudent love as the relation of Brethren bespeaks, they might reason themselves into an hopefull agreement. Presbyterians would appeare in so many things Independents, and Independents in
so many Presbyterian, or rather Classicall Divines will bee so farre Congregationall, and Congregationall ones, so farre Classicall, (for indeed the word Independent seemes not so comely, either for creatures or Churches, the very law of Nature will not allow the same persons to bee parties and Judges without an appeale) that both might bee much satisfyed. The meeknesse of wisdome, in much love studying the Word of God, might possibly discover such a reconciling way, wherein the Pres∣bytery shall have so much power as will helpe to bound the Li∣berty of the People, and withall the interest of the People bee maintained in such a manner, as may best ballance the power of the Presbytery. Whereas, if the differences bee fomented, remember the Apostles doome, Gal. 5. 15. But if yee bit and de∣voure one another, take heed that yee bee not consumed one of ano∣ther. If the Almighty Lord give such incouraging entertain∣ment Ʋse 4. Exhortation. to the generation of Right Separatists, then, I hope, you will easily bee perswaded, both as patternes, and Patrons of purity, to cherish and promote it in your selves and others. In these times of Reformation, so manage all your counsels, that the Result may bee a pure Separation from all unclean∣nesse. Never had any generation of Nobles in England, a more rich price put into their hands: The Lord fill your spirits with that wisdome which is first pure, then peaceable, and full Jam. 3. 17. of good fruites, that you may with all your might improve it. Some of your Ancestors had thirsty desires for the pur∣ging of England, but they wanted opportunity. The set time for God to favour this Sion was not come. His good hand hath Psal. 102. 13. cast you into that juncture of things, lets you see such a con∣currence of providences, enemies as well as friends helping forward the work, Ministers Preaching, the people petition∣ing for purity; O where (Right Honourable) are your hearts, where are your proportionable affections to welcome such a season! God forbid that this should lye at your doore, that such and such Nobles in England had a great price put into their hands, but they wanted hearts to improve it. In former dayes it was accounted a great matter, that a Com∣mission
was granted to some persons to do somewhat towards the cleansing of England; following Parliaments in Queen E∣lizabeths A Commission granted to 32 persons, in Ed∣ward the 6 days time, cleansed some of the cisterns, but still left much mud in the Fountaine. God hath reserved you to have an ho∣nourable share in this service; you will allow mee the liberty to say to yo as Mordecai to Esther, Chap. 4. 14. Who knoweth whither thou a come to the Kingdom for such a time as this? Whe∣ther God hath raised you to such a high station for this very service to help to purify England? Let it bee the everlasting ho∣nour of this Parliament, and of you Noble Senators herein, to pluck up all our weeds, take away all our drosse, to remove all our , yea, to doe your utmost to advance a pure Separati∣on from all uncleannesse. If any ask, (as I hope divers of you are so truely Noble, that you will inquire) What should wee doe that wee may advance Directions for the advancing a pure Reforma∣tion in England 1 Begin with your selves. a pure Reformation in England? Bee pleased to observe and improve these few directions. First, Begin with your selves, bee cleansing your selves from all personall  of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7. 1. O that all our Reformers were indeed self-reformers! O that all our great Counsellor would often keepe a become Committee in their own Consciences, to examine and discover their own errours and exorbitancies. You have many to humour, to flatter, and adore you, but few will admonish, few dare reprove you, lest your smiles become frownes. You have the more need to bee searching and cleansing your selves according to the Word of God, Psal. . You should wisely consider your Great∣nesse hath an influence  wayer. If you are good, your good∣nesse will bee the more glorious, being ioyned with greatnesse; but if , your greatnesse greans your sins, your height makes you the more notoriously▪ evill. Wee expect Oracles in Noble∣mens Much good expected from great-men. speeches,  by their action, coppies from their con∣versations; wee looked at Judges should first judge themselves, and remember to condemn that in their own practes which they sentence in other mens. You may passe good ills, and Ordinances against swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, yet if you continue to blaspheme his Name, and prophane his day, even our Law-makers, by their
unhappy examples, will teach others to bee Law-breakers; O bee sweeping every day before your own doores! God forbid, that whilst you condemn the Antinomians Doctrine, any of you should bee found Antinomians in practice. Secondly, As friends to purity have a speciall eye upon the 2 Take care to cleanse the springs. chiefe springs: never expect pure streames, whilst the Fountains continue full of mud. There are three springs in En∣gland, the cleansing of which is of great consequence. Ʋniversities, Innes of Court, Noble mens Families. Three speciall Springs to bee cleansed. 1 Universities. 1. The main Spring is the Ʋniversity: There your Sonnes, the hopes of your Family, are bred; If they suck in unwhole∣some aire thence, that may breed such diseases as prove incura∣ble. If those Nurceries bee not well pruned, you may receive such Chaplains thence, as may study to corrupt you and yours, flat∣tering you into everlasting misery. 2. Another Spring is the Innes of Court: Those Honourable 2 Innes of Court. Societies, where the young Nobles and Gentry should bee fashion∣ed and shaped for the service of their God and of their Coun∣try. As the Ʋniversity breed Ministers for the Church, so the Innes of Court breeds Magistrates and Parliament men for the State. If filth bee tolerated there for want of cleansing preach∣ing, and purging Government, the whole Kingdome will bee in danger to derive pollution thence. 3. A third Spring, much to bee considered, is, Noblemens Fa∣milies. 3 Noble Mens Families. If there should bee found Chappels to the Devill, in re∣gard of ignorance, profanenesse, and superstition, rather then Churches in their houses, maintaining Family Religion, wor∣shipping God purely, and walking in holinesse of conversa∣tion. If there a Mercenary Chaplain bee entertained, who is like one of Baals, or Jeroboams Priests, rather then like a Ti∣mothy or a Titus, who should learne in all things to show himselfe a pattern of good workes; in Doctrine, uncorruptnesse, gravity, sin∣cerity. Tit. 2. 7. If there bee nourished a set of vicious Servants, who are slaves to the lusts of their Lords or Ladies (besides the sad experience of the poysoning of many young Nobles by such Chaplaines
and servants,) what a dangerous Influence will all this have upon the Tenants and Neighbours? and so by this one muddy Spring, many uncleane streames shall bee fed abroad in the Country. Thirdly, As you desire to perfect a pure Reformation, extir∣pate 3 Leave no fil∣thy weeds growing in the Church. Matth. 15. 13. all noysome weeds. Pluck up every plant which is not of Gods planting, whether persons or things, whether Offices, Ceremonies, Innovations, &c. A few weeds, when rooted, and seeding, will soon over-runne a great deale of ground. To this purpose it is good to consider where our defilements chiefely began. It was a notable hint that Cassander gave, who by two severall Emperours, Maximilian and Ferdinand, was set on work as a Reconciler, to compose the quarrels of the Church. The Principall cause (said hee) of the calamity and distraction Cassander Con∣sultat. Misericorditer corripiat homo quod potest, quod autem non potest patienter ferat, & cum dilectio∣ne gemat atque lugeat, donec aut ille desuper e∣mendet & cor∣rigat, aut usque ad messem diffe∣rat eradicare zizania & pa∣leam ventilare: & tamen securi de salute sua bo∣nae spei Christi ani inter despe∣ratos, quos cor∣ripere non va∣lent, in unitate versentur, August. 4 Advance a pure Ministry in England. of the Church is to bee laid on those, which being puffed up with a vaine insolent conceite of their Ecclesiasticall power, proudly, and scornfully contemned and rejected them which did rightly and mo∣destly admonish their Reformation. Wherefore my opinion is, that the Church can never hope for any firme peace, unlesse they make the be∣ginning which have given the cause of the distraction. There is the same reason for purity. Wee cannot expect a good and sound peace in the Church of England without purity. Our polluti∣ons being many, occasioned amongst us great separation; (in divers places tender consciences were necessitated, at least in re∣gard of some personall acts, to suspend communion with their Congregations where they lived) Beginne your cleansing work there. Wee have great hope that such a pure Reformation as might satisfie godly spirits, would produce an happy Reconci∣liation amongst sober mindes, and possibly would recover ma∣ny who have incogitantly runne into great extremities. How∣ever doe your duty, put forth your utmost indevours, and humbly wait upon God till hee appeare in his glory, for the com∣pleat purging of this Sion. Fourthly, Imploy your power to advance the Ministery of the Gospel in the purity of it, so will you much promote a pure Se∣paration from all uncleannesse; Joh. 15. 3. Through the word yee are clean. Where are the filthy sinkes in this Kingdome, but in such corners as have wanted a faithfull Minister? This made
Cathedrall aire (for the most part) so impure, where they had so much empty externall pompe, in stead of the purity and sim∣plicity of Christ. When a Minister preacheth in the evidence and demonstration of the Spirit of God, which is a most pure Spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 4. there the Sunne of righteousnesse shines, and such light will puri∣fie: There the Holy Ghost breathes, and such Gospel aire is purg∣ging; it will not indure fogges of errors, or mists of superstition, where a man of God Preaches, his Doctrine drops as the rain, his speech distils as the dew, as the small rain, upon the tender herb, Deut. 32. 2. and as the showers upon the grasse, this will purify as well as san∣ctify. Yea, by the Ministery of the Gospel, sinners are directed unto Jesus Christ, in whom there is a full and overflowing foun∣taine, for the washing away all their pollutions. This was his Soule-cleansing method, Ephes. 5. 25, 26, 27. Out of love to his Church, Christ gave himselfe for it, that hee might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water, by the word, that hee might present it glorious without spot or wrinkle, &c. If you would indeed befriend the Church in England, and make us an unspotted people, concurre with your great Lord and Master, in opening the passages for a cleansing Ministery of the Word, all the Kingdome over. The Lord Almighty act your Counsels, and prosper your undertakings, to make England so pure that it may bee glorious, Amen. FINIS.
