N961 E620_5 99863145 115329
NEWES FROM GUILD-HALL. OR, A Premonition to the Citizens of LONDON. Worthy Citizens, THere has arisen of late in Common-Councell, a Question of very great concernment to your Liberties, about the election of the chief Officers of your City of London; It is very requisite that all and every one of you, should take notice of the whole course of Proceedings thereupon, and the issue thereof, your Liberties in Elections being the subject-matter of the Debate; and according as the Determi∣nation is, so are you to be accounted either Freemen or Vassals. God hath in these late Times brought to light many memorable dis∣coveries of the Captivation and undue Subjection of the English People, and more particularly of the many stratagems and delusive Arts, whereby the Citizens of Lon∣don, and the Commonalties of the severall Corporations therein contained; as also the Commonalties of other Corporations in other Cities and Burrough Townes, are deprived of their rights in Elections, and the knowledg of the Liberties, Charters and Transactions belonging to, and passing from them; whereby likewise they are kept in ignorance of their respective Revenues, and are engaged many times beyond and a∣gainst their Consents: The means of the knowledg of all which, and many other parti∣culars since God hath afforded you, if you shall either negelct the same, through a slothfull inanimadvertency, as if your private Callings only concerned you; or shall not (through want of conscience) appear in the Claimer thereof, it is but just with God to leave you in worse Vassalage, and more irremediable bondage then ever. My purpose is not to give you a Narrative of the severall Arguments and Respon∣ses
concerning the Question above-mentioned, it will suddenly be done by a very able and faithfull Pen, and when upon the view thereof you shall be truly inform'd what your right in Elections has been, and ought to be; how it has been transferr'd into such Hands as doe not properly Represent you, and yet by such Elections conclude you; when I say you shall be sensible of these things, and knowing your selves out of the way, shall desire to be brought in; you may then cast your eye upon this following Act ready drawn up as fit for that end to be presented to the Right Honorable the Parlia∣ment. Neither need you be afraid, or doubt of good Success therein, inasmuch as your Desires are grounded upon such Principles as they themselves have made use of in most of their late Acts, as having been in many particulars under much the same snares and captivations with your selves. A Copy of the ACT thus followeth: WHereas by the aucient Charters granted and confirmed to this City, the election of the Mayor, Sheriffs, and other Officers of the said City, ought to be by the Citizens or Commonalty thereof; Whereby it is evident that the whole Commonalty, either Personally (if without Confusion it might be done) or their Representatives chosen by them for that purpose, were to have Vote in all such Elections. And whereas of la∣ter times the Masters, Wardens and Liveries of the severall Copanies of this City have used and taken upon them (with the exclusion of an other Citizens) to make the said Elections: which practise of theirs seems to be grounded upon an Act of Common-Councell made the 23. day of September, in the seventh year of KingLiber L. 53. Edward the Fourth. Before which time the same Elections were made by a certain number of Persons chosen out of every Ward for that purpose, as appears (amongst may other Records) by an Act or Order of the Common-Hall made in the twentieth year of KingLiber ult. 20 E. 3. Edward the Third, whereby (to avoid inconveniencies hapning before that time in generall and immense Assemblies of the Citizens) it was agreed that for the time to come, the Officers aforesaid should be chosen by Representatives of the severall Wards. Now forasmuch as divers Companies of the Citizens of this City have no Liveries at all and so have no manner of vote in the Elections by Liveries: And for that by the Con∣stitutions of most of the other Companies, the Liveries thereof are not chosen by the whole Brother-hood, but by a few (as namely) the Wardens and Assistants only; and thereby the greatest part of the Citizens (Mem∣bers of those Companies) are also excluded from having any Vote either in Person or Representation, in the Elections before-mentioned: And so that great Priviledge of Choosing their Maior, Sheriffs, and other Officers, is wholly taken from them, to their great grief, occasioning thereby their of∣ten complaints; For remedy whereof, and to the intent the ancient Char∣ters of this City (touching Elections) may be pursued and kept inviolable;
Be it Enacted and Ordained, That from henceforth the Election of the Maior. Sheriffs, Burgesses for Parliament, and all other Officers of, or belonging to this City, formerly used to be chosen in a common-Hall, shall be made in the Common Hall of this City at such times as hath béen formerly used in that behalf; And by such Persons, and in such manner as is hereafter mentioned, (that is to say) That the Aldermen and Common councell-men of every Ward of this City, and the like number of other honest men of every Ward to be Chosen yearly for that purpose in the Wardmote, to be held by the Inhabitants of the same Ward (being Fréemen of the City of London paying Scot and Lot) which per∣sons so chosen, shall be Representatives of all the Inhabitants of each Ward, as touching every such Election; And shall for ever hereafter be the only Electors, of, and in every such Election in the Common-Hall; and shall be from time to time returned by the Wardmote-Inquests of every Ward respectively in their Presentations as Representatives and Electors for, and on the behalf of the Inhabitants of the same Wards; and shall duly be summoned to the Common-Hall when any Election is to be made there, by the Lord Maior of the City for the time being, or his Officer thereunto appointed. And that every Election of any the Officers afore∣said, which shall be made by the said Aldermen, Common-Councel-men, and the other Persons to be chosen in every Ward for that purpose, or by the Major part of them assembled in the Common-Hall, shall be good and effectuall to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been made by all the Citizens of this City in their own Persons. And that no Person or Per∣sons, save only the Electors hereby appointed, shall be at any time hereafter admitted unto, or have any Vote in any the Elections aforesaid, upon the Penalty of paying for every such Intruston the sum of Forty pounds. And be it further Enacted and Ordained, That all former Acts, Orders, and Determinations heretofore made by the Court of Common-Councell of this City, for, or touching the Election of any the Officers aforesaid, shall be and are hereby Repealed, and made null & void to all intents and purposes. Now inasmuch as the alienation of your right in elections, is but one particular, wherein you worthy Citizens of London have been abused, and that it is grown al∣most the common discourse of every one of you, that the City Banke and Revenue is by undue means exhausted, and the Orphans money most uncharitably and uncon∣scionably embezled, and the City it self thereby impaired in its credit. You shall understand that divers good men of the Common-Councel out of a deep sense hereof, & sadly laying to heart the exceeding dishonour that thereby arises to the City besides the unexpressible dammage to poor Orphans, to whom the City ought to be in loco Parentum, insteed of Parents, the institution being intended for their preservation, & the prevention of fraud and deceit in particular persons: Those good men I say fearing a miscarriage herein, have earnestly laboured that the Common-Councel might have a true knowledg and account of the City Treasure; And after much importunity & pains taken therein; with much ado a Committee was obtained to take the said ac∣count,
to the year 1649. A Copy whereof for your information, as a particular nearly concerning you, is likewise thought fit hereunto to be annexed: Together, with the anumeration of certain other grievances, and their Remedies, offered by the said Committee to the Common-Councel. August 26. 1650. The Report of the Committee appointed for Examination of the state of the CHAMBER of London. ABout 1630. we finde the Chamber to be indebted about the sum of 050000.00.00. At Michaelmasse 1649. the Accompt of the Chamber being then Cast up, the Chamber was then in Debt: Viz.   l. s. d. To Orphans 169654: 01: 03 ½ To other Persons for Principall money 094412: 13: 04   264066. 14. 09 ½ The means whereby it came into Debt, are either Extraordinary, or Ordinary. Extraordinary. Anno 1630. A Gold Cup given the Prince 001191. 04. 09 Anno 1633. Presents given to the King, Queen, and Prince 00326. 00. 00 Anno 1634. A Jewell given the Queen 004000. 00. 00 Anno 1634. Entertainment of the King and Queen at Merchant-Taylors-Hall. 001287. 12. 08 Anno 1634 Christening the Duke of York 000633. 00. 00 Anno 1639 A Cup of gold given the Q. Mother, & other charges 001000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Charges of the Charter 002355. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Given the King 010000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Composition for Package and Scavage 004000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 Composition for London-Derry 012000. 00. 00 Anno 1639 To the repair of Pauls 000600. 00. 00 Anno 1642 Entertainment of the King and Queen 001786. 00. 00   For Building the Bridge 006400. 00. 00   For Ship-monty, and setting out Ships at Sea 017218. 00. 00   By Gifts and Rewards to Officers for 20 years, at 1200. l. per Annum 024000. 00. 00   089730. 17. 01 ☞ Quaere, What authority the Court of Aldermen had to give such gifts By severall bad Debts     By severall bad Debts 071739. 14. 01
Ordinary.   l. s. d. Charges for Marshall Causes for twenty years 035278. 00. 00 For Interest-money paid 20 years, at 6000 l. per annum 120000. 00. 00 By delivering up of Bonds to be Cancelled by Act of Common-Councell in 1640. to severall Persons for money lent them out of the Chamber 20. years before about 30000. l. Principall in all with Interest 060000. 00. 00 For Officers standing Fees for about 20. years, at 1400 l. per annum 028000. 00. 00. For Workmens wages for 20. years at 1000 l. per annum 020000. 00. 00 Stuff for Reparation for about 20. years, at 1600 l. per annum 030400. 00. 00 The totall sum given, lost and expended for about 20. years, is 455148. 11. 02 Now having found out what the CHAMBER is indebted, and by what meanes it came so indebted; We have these Two things to offer; Viz. The reimbursement of the CHAMBER. The prevention of the like evill for time to come. First, For reimbursement of the Chamber, we conceive thar a speedy course should be taken for getting in I. All Debts belonging to the CHAMBER. II. That all the Lands, Tenements, and all other things belonging to this City, be speedily sold towards satisfaction of the Debts; and in case they shall not be sufficient, then the Remainder to be made good by a Tax, or otherwise as the Court shall think fit And having set before you what your Engagements are, we judged it also meet to give you a guesse of what you have wherewith to discharge the Engagement. Viz.   l. s. d. By Fines for City Lands 002329. 00. 00 By Fines for Aldermen and Sheriffs 005206. 00. 00 By severall other Debts 004813. 00. 00 By the Royall Contract 025000. 00. 00 By the Mannor of Finsbury a 1000 l. per annum 008000. 00. 00 By the Lands and Tenements belonging to the Chamber, 8000 l. per annum 068000. 00. 00 By Goods, and Plate, and Jewels 001200. 00. 00 By London-Derry 020000. 00. 00   134548. 00. 00 Secondly, for prevention of the like evill for time to come, this Committee hath set down the most materiall Grievances, and their respective Remedies, as they conceive, and offer them to the consideration of this Court.
Grievance 1. The said Committee finde that the Revenue of the City and the Orphans money come all into one Bank and Treasury, and the vast and unnecessary expence of the Ci∣ty exceeds it's Revenue, and incroaches upon the stock of the Orphans to supplie it's exorbitancy, and whatever charges have come upon the City have been defrayed in great measure by the Orphans money. Remedie 1. That two distinct Accounts and Cashes be kept henceforth by way of Debtors and Creditors, one for the Revenue of the City, and the other for Orphanage money, and that none of the Orphans money be issued out for payment of former debts con∣tracted, but for the payment of those particular Orphans by name, whose moneys shall from henceforth be brough in; and that until such moneys shall grow due to be paid unto the Orphans that brought in the same, they shallbe put forth for the best advantage, and thereout to pay finding money; and that also a strict account be ta∣ken of what the City Revenue will amount unto (the Lands being sold) that so we may apportion our expence accodingly. And that two Committees be chosen, nine persons to be of each Committee, the Quorum to be three, the one for the Revenue of the City, and the other for the Orphans; four of each Committee to fall of at Michaelmas day every year, and four more to be chosen, the said Committee to examine from time to time, and Audit the several and respective Accounts of the Revenue of the City and Orphans, and take care the money be issued upon the distinct Accounts aforesaid, which Committee shal from time to time make their reports to the Court of Common-councel. And in case the Chamberlaine shall issue out any monys other then by Act of Com∣mon-councel, & the order of the said Committees respectively, unless for finding mo∣ney, or upon satisfaction to be made to Orphans for their portions; that then the Chamberlaine shall answer and make good the same and forfeit his place. The Officers under the Chamber to be imployed herein to be two, the one to be receiver of the City Revenue and of the Orphans money, the other to be Cleark to keep the Book of Accounts. Grievance 2. The said Committee finde an excessive charge to be upon the City in main∣taining and keeping so many workmen of all trades, and by being confined to make use of those particular men, who bring in great sums annually Expended in emption of reparation, stuffe, and for work-mens wages, and their wages sometimes exceeding the materials, who make their Bills it's conceived more by custome, then by real charge expended or work done by them. Remedie 2. That all the said worke-men be discharged, and that a Committee be chosen that shall from time to time contract with work-men as they shall see cause, both for their stuffe and labour, and that a Surveyor be chosen to view works to be done, and to make report as the case shall require to the said Committee, and upon warrant from that Committee to the Chamberlaine, the work-men to be paid their Bills out of such money which shall be raised by fifteens, According to the Ancient and Laudable Custome of this City.
Grievance 3. The said Committee find an Annual Charge of 6. or 700. l. per annum expended in keeping Courts in Kent, Essex, Surry, and about the River of Thames, for conservati∣on of the River in Fishing and keeping it Navigable; and yet small or no fines or other profit ariseth thereby to the City, whereby the said charge may be defrayed, so that the same is a superfluous expence Remedie 3. That one steward be appointed to keep Courts & receive fines and give account of the same, and to be allowed reasonable charges therein. Grievance 4. The said Committees finde great sums of Money and Annuities given to divers Offi∣cers of the City by way of Gifts and rewards over and above their ancient Sallaries and allowances, which in this ttme of the Chambers stock declining are most fit to be spared. Remedie 4. That no moneys by way of gift, reward, or increase of Sallarie be henceforth given by the Major and Court of Aldermen, without consent of the Court of Com∣mon-Councel. All which we humbly leave unto the consideration of this Court, and offer it as the earnest desire of this Committee that a Common-Councel be held once eve∣ry week, to prosecute this our Report unto some good issue, for the good of the City. August 26. 1650. Present, Mr. Sheriff Pack Mr. Ald. Chiverton Col. Mannering Mr. Cole. Mr. Barbone Mr. Dallison Mr. Ald. Tichborne Mr. Ald. Hayes Mr. Gibbs Mr. Bolton Mr. Adams Mr. Manton. By all which you may perceive. I. That though it hath ever been urg'd as necessary, that the chief Officers of the City should be men of great Estates, yet you shal find that their Liberality was stil supplyed from the common Purse, as appeares by the Sums swallowed up in Presents, Gifts, and superfluous Entertainments, &c. mention'd in the beginning of their Accompt: Their very Hous-keeping also (for the most part) during their being in Office, being de∣frayed by the City. II. You will finde the present Poverty and low condition of the Chamber of Lon∣don; and that it is necessary that some other Security be thought upon, and the Estates you leave your Children, in some mor secure manner disposed of, till such time as the Debts already contracted be discharged; at least force not in the Estates of present Orphans, to stop old Aldermen-Gaps; but reserve them carefully for the right owners.
III. You will hereby finde it necessary, that an effectuall way be taken for the yearly Auditing of Accounts, such as is offered as a Remedy to the first Grievance; Inas∣much as there is nothing doth more encourage and give occasion to embezelment, and undue dispending the City-Treasury, then the long omission of Accompts. I shall humbly-likewise subjoyn, as necessary for your considerations, That the du∣ty and business, the time of continuance and allowance of every Officer in the City, from the highest to the lowest, be amongst your selves agreed upon; and, That they be fairly Written in Tables, and affix'd in the Common-Councell, and Common-Hall. And that likewise the business, time of continuance, and allowance be exprest in Writing, and publickly Read at the Election of every Officer; And that two Copies thereof be drawn up, the one to remain in the custody of each respective Officer, and the o∣ther in the custody of the respective persons that chose: That so controversies about these particulars may be at an end; and that as well the Officer may know what he has to doe, and how farr he is authorized; and that the People likewise may know when, and how far each Officer exceeds the bounds and limits of his Authority. This I humbly conceive to be absolutely necessary; for want whereof hath arisen these many usurpations, and undue administrations that have been complained of on the one hand, and the many disgusts and differences between the People themselves on the other; and all because of an uncertainty in these particulars. Mark those that shew fair before they are chosen Common-councell-men, but prove false, or negligent, or proud and presumptuous ever after; That stand stoutly and faith∣fully for your good and for your Libertie, whilst they are Common-councell-men, but being made Aldermen prove treacherous, and trample upon your Liberties; and use all diligence to make their unworthiness known unto the world, and to render unto them according to their Works; and in making use of the Act of Parliament for Elections here following, be sure to reject all such perfidious Persons. Vicessimo octavo Februarii, 1648. An Act of the Commons of England in Parliament assembled for removing Obstructions in the proceedings of the Common Councell of the Citie of LONDON. THe Commons of England in Parliament assembled, do enact and ordain, and be it enacted and ordained by the authoritie aforesaid, That in all times to come, the Lord Major of the said Citie of Lon∣don, so often and at such time as any ten or more of the Common Councell men doe by writing under their hands request or desire him thereunto, shall summon, assemble, and hold a Common Councell. And if ut any time being so requested or desired, he shall faile therein, then the ten persons, or more, making such request or desire, shall have power, and are hereby authorized by writing under their hand, to Common, or cause to be summoned to the said Councell, the members
belonging thereunto in as ample manner as the Lord Maior himselfe usually heretofore hath done. And that the Members appearing upon the same summons, being of the number of fourtie, or more, shall be∣come a Common Councell. And that each Officer whose dutie it shall be to warn in and summon the members of the said Councell, shall performe the same from time to time, upon the Warrant or Command often persons or more so authorized as aforesaid. And it is further enacted and ordained by authoritie aforesaid, that in every Common Councell hereafter to be assembled, the Lord Maior of the said Citie for the time being or in his absence such Locum tenens as he shall ap∣point, and in default thereof the eldest Alderman present, if any be, and for want of such Alderman, or in case of his ueglect or refusall therein, then any other person Member of the said Councell, whom the Com∣mons present in the said Councell shall chuse shall be from time to time President or Chairman of the said Councell, and shall cause and suf∣fer all things offered to, or proposed in the said Councell, to be fairly and orderly debated, put to the question, voted and determined in and by the same Councell, as the maior part of the Members present in the said Councell shall desire or think fit; and in every vote which shall passe, and in the other proceedings of the said Councell, neither the L. Maior nor Aldermen, joint or separate, shal have any negative or distinct voice or vote, otherwise then with & among, & as part of the rest of the mem∣bers of the said Councel, and in the same manner as the other members have: And that the absence and withdrawing of the Lord Maior or Al∣dermen from the said Councell, shall not stop or preiudice the proceedings of the said Councel, And that every Common Councel which shall be held in the city of London shall sit and continue so long as the major part of the councel shal think fit, and shal not be dissolved or adjourned but by and ac∣cording to the Order or consent of the Major part of the same councel. And that all the Votes & Acts of the said common-councell which was held 13 Ianuary last, after the departure of the L Maior from the same councel And also all Votes & Acts of every common-councel hereafter to be held, shal be from time to time duly registred as the Votes & Acts of the said councell have used to be done in time past. And be it further Enacted & Ordained by the authority aforesaid, that every Officer which shal sit in the said councel, shal be from time to time chosen by the said councel, and shall have such rea∣sonable allowance or salary for his pains and service therin, as the coun∣cel shal think fit. And that every such Officer shal attend the said com∣mon-councel: And that all Acts & Records, and Register-books belonging to the said city, shal be extant to be perusd and searched into by every citizen of the said city, in the presence of the Officer who shal have the charge or kee∣ping therof, who is hereby required to attend for the same purpose. HEN. SCOBELL CLER. PARLIAMENT.
Quit your selves and the City of all those inhumane cruel, sharking, and growling Officers, as Clerks, Sergeants omen, Youngmen, Couner keepers, Prison-keepers, being all so enured to baseness and villany, that in vant you endevor to reorm abuses whilst such ar employed; and in all their places, retain none but discreet and conscio∣nable persons that will use men with humanity and Christianity; Be sensible of the crys of poor distressed Priso∣ners and consider how it can be answered, that any should be choakt and eaten up with nastiness, want of food, and vermin; least whilst you complain of unfaithfulness and hard heartedness in others, your selves be found guilty in the judgment of the Lord. And that you may more fully and groundedly know your Rights, take the Heads of your Freedoms, as they are confirmed by the Charter of Edward the second, as here followeth; and fix them in your own, your Servants, and Childrens memories for ever. EDWARD by the grace of God, King of England, Lord of Ireland, and Duke of Aquitane: To all to whom these present Letters shall come, greeting KNow ye, that whereas our beloved and trusty, the Major, Al∣dermen, and the rest of the Citizens of our City of London, for the betterment of the said City, and for the common profit of the Inhabi∣tants in the same City, and of such as repair and come to the same; did a∣mong themselves ordain and Enact certain things to be for ever observed in the said City, and earnestly supplicated us, that we would take care to accept and confirm the same; we having seen certain Letters Pattents touching the premises, signed with the common Seal of the said City, and with the Seal of the Office of the Majoralty of the same City, concerning the premises being open, and presented to us; we have caused certain Ar∣ticles to be drawn out of the said Letters Pattents, and the same in some things to be corrected as here following they are set down, That is to say, That the Major, and Sheriffs of the said City, be chosen by the Citizens of the same City, according to the Tenure of the Charters of our Progenitors, former∣ly Kings of England, therefore made unto them, and not otherwise. And the Major of the City aforesaid shall not abide in the office of his Majoral∣ty, at one time, above one year. And that none of the Sheriffs of the ci∣ty for the time being, have but two Clerks, and two servants, in regard of that office. And that they take such Clerks and serjeants at their own pe∣ril, for whom they will answer. And that the Major of the City afore∣said, while he is Major, hold no other office belonging to the City, then the office of the Majoralty of the same City. Neither draw unto him, or hold before him in the Chamber of the said City, any Vicecountill plea, nor any other pleas then those which according to the ancient custom of the said City, as Major, he ought to hold. And that the Aldermen of the said City from year to year, and especially upon the day of Saint Gregory the Pope, by the said Commonalty be removeable; and being removed, may not be chosen again for the ensuing year. But instead of those that be removed, others be chosen by the same Wards of which the Aldermen so removed were: And that Tallages or Aids for the use of us, our heires, or for the State or profit of the said City, from henceforth in the same, to be assessed, after they be assessed by men of the Wards chosen or deputed for that end, may not be increaed, or raised by the Major, Aldermen, or others, but by the common conseat of the Major and Commonalty of the City aforesaid. And that the monies arising from such Tallages, or Aids, be delivered in to the custody of foure honest Commoners of the City aforesaid for that end, to be chosen by the Commonalty of the said City, to be paid over by the
testimany of the same 4. men; so that the said 4. men may be able to inform the said Commonalty, for what profit and what uses the said monies went. And that no stranger or alien be admitted into the freedome of the said ci∣ty, but in the Hustings. And that a Native, and especially an English Merchant of any trade or calling, be not admitted into the liberty of the said City, but by the manucaption of six honest and able men of the trade or calling of which he shall be who is so to be made free; which said six men shall become bound for him to be made free, for keeping the City harmless on that behalf. And the same manner or form of manucaption shall be ob∣served of the strangers or aliens aforesaid, who are to be made free of the said citie in the Hustings, if they be of any certain trade or office. And if they be of no trade, then they may not be made free of the said city, without the assent of the Commonalty of the said City. And they that were made fee of the city, since we took upon us the government of our Realm, contrary to the formes prescribed, and who against their oaths in this behalf taken, or a∣gainst the State of the City have acted and been lawfully thereof convicted, shall forfeit their freedome of the City; Provided alwayes, that the ancient manner and form of the City aforesaid of Apprentices in the same citie, be ob∣served, And that every yeare in the said citie, so often as need shall require inquisition be made, if any free man of the said City, shall sell in the citie the goods of others, who are not free of the citie by calling those goods their own, contrary to their oath, and the freedom of the said City: those that shall be thereof lawfully convicted, do forfeit their freedom of the City. And that all and every of those which are free of the city aforesaid, and willing to enioy the liberties and free Customes of the said City, be in Lot and Scot, and partakers of all charges for the State of the said City aforesaid, and for maintaining the freedom thereof, according to the Oath which they did sake, when they were made free, And he that will not this do, doth for the freedom of the City; And that all and every who be free of the said City: and dwell without the same, and do exercise Marchandize by themselves or Agents within the City; Bain Lot and Scot with the Commons of the Ci∣ty for the said Merchandize, or otherwise, they shall forfeit their freedom; And that main Common Seal of the City aforesaid, remain in the custody of two Aldermen, and two other Commoners to be chosen for it by the COMMONS of the City; And that the said Sel be not denied to the poor: nay, rich Commoners of the City aforesaid, whensoever they stand in need of it, while they can reasonably prove the cause or demand. And that nothing be tak∣en for the setting to of the said Seal. And that Redditions of Iudgements in the Courts of the City, and especially after verdict of Inquisitions taken in cases where Inquisitions are taken, shall not be hindered or retarded, unless some difficulty fall out; And if difficuity fall out, yet for this they shall not remain beyond the third Court to be holden after. And that weights and measures of Merchandize to be measured betwixt Merchant and Mer∣thant, of which the profits arising, and the Cognizance of the same, be∣long to the COMMONALTY of the said City, remain in the keeping of honest and able men of the City, skilfull in that Calling, and to be chosen
for this by the COMMONALTY of the City to be kept at the pleasure of the said COMMONALTY, and it to be intrusted by no means to any other, but to such so to be chosen. And that the Sheriffs of the City aforesaid for the time being may set the Toll and other Customs belonging to their Farm, and other publick offices belonging to them (and to be exercised by others) to able Citizens (if they will set them) for whom the Sheriffs themselves will answer, and to none other. And if any Deputed to any of the pre∣mises, undue customs, or shall otherwise behave himself, in that office then be ought, and at the ue of the Complainant be thereof convicted, Be put out of that office, and punished according to his demerits. And that Merchants who are not of the freedom of the City aforesaid may not sel any wines or other wares within the City or the subur therof by Retail. And that Brokers of any merchandise in the City aforesaid may not be except they be chosen by Merchants of those trades in which these Brokers have had their Callings to exercise, and upon this at the least take oath before the Maior of the said City. And that all common Inn-keepers in the said City and Suburbs thereof, though they be not of the freedom of the City, but partakers of the charges belonging to the said City, for maintaining the state of the City, so long as they be common Innkeepers; as other the like Innkeepers in that City and suburbs shall partake by reason of the Innkeepers: provided always, that merchants of Gascoign, and other strangers always may dwell and long toge∣ther in the said City as formerly they were accustomed to doe. And that the keeping of the Bridg of the City aforesaid, and the Rents and Profits belonging to the said Bridg, be commit∣ted to two honest and able men of the City aforesaid, others then Aldermen, to be chosen for that purpose, by the Commonalty of the said City to be kept at the pleasure of the Commonalty of the said City, and who are able to answer to the Commonalty of the said City for the same, and not to any others. And that no Sergeant of the Chamber of Guild Hall of the City afore∣said, take Fee of the Commonalty of the said City, or make execution, unless he be therunto chosen by the Commonalty of the City for that end. And that the Chamberlain, Common Clark, and Common Serjeant of the City aforesaid, be chosen by the Commonalty of the said City; and removed at the pleasure of the said Commonalty. And that the Major and Recorder of the said City, and the said Chamberlain and Common Clark, be content with their Fees appointed, and paid of old, by reason of their office: And other fees they may not take for their offices abovesaid And that the Goods of Aldermen of the said City, be taxed as the Goods of other Citizens, in Aydes, Callages, and other Contributions hap∣pening in the City, by men of the Wards, where these Aldermen abide. NOW worthy Citizens, by what is before expressed you may partly see your own freedoms and rights which are to have votes in the annual election of the greatest of your Officers either personally, or by reason of the popularity of the City Deputatively by representatives, and this is so essential a right of yours, to denominate you to be freemen indeed, as the robbing you of it demonstrates you to be slaves rather then freemen: and though in any of your ancestors there should have been so much baseness as voluntarily to give them away, (which they never did) yet their giving cannot tye you in your generationss from the claiming and assuming the Exercise of your indubitable natural rights; and high time it is for you so to do, forasmuch as the incroachments of your Court of Aldermen upon your natural rights, hath not only run your common Treasury into about three hundred thousand pounds debt, but also hath put them in the road way to cosen and cheat all your Orphans of all their portions that at the deaths of their fathers they force the execu∣tors to bring into their hands and what man but a mad man or a fool would labor for to get riches that his children shall never be the better for, but be left for knaves and cheats to wast, spend and consume: And therefore consider with your selves of how great a concernment it is for you at your next election to chuse faithful and valiant Common-Councel-men that will struggle with the strength of reason to regain your lost Liberties, and to controvert with the strength of Argument, that just and needfull question now one foot betwixt your present honest Common-Councel-men, and your arbitrary incroaching Court of Aldermen, viz. Whether those Aldermens lands and e∣states that were Aldermen in those years your money was wasted and spent, shall pay those vast debts they have run you into, or whether now in your poverty and decay of your trades, you shall be forced by a common tax to pay about 300000. l. your Aldermen in less then 20 years hath wasted you: Room straitens me for going on, but expect in few daies a Peice to the purpose, by a better pen, and if you give incouragement by your good use of what is here already declared to you, this pen promiseth to visit you again in print before many weeks be expired; but in the mean time commits you to God. This 17. December, 1650. FINIS.
