P1505 E686_7 R206853 99865953 166422
Perfect OCCURRENCES: Faithfully communicating The chief Intelligence and Proceedings of the King of Scots, the King of France, and the Prince of Conde: With the Affaires and Designes now on foot in France, Denmarke; Sweden, and Portugal, in relation to the Parliament, Army, and Common-Wealth of England. Containing these ensuing Occurrences, viz. 1 The Message and Proposals of his Excellency the Lord General Cromwel, and the General Councel of the Army, to the Officers of the several Garrisons and Regiments of Souldiers, both in England, Scotland, and Ireland; concerning the electing and calling of a new Parliament; the removing of heavy burdens, and grievous Oppressions from the people; the regulating of all abuses, both in City and Countrey; and the restoring of Liberty and Freedom. 2 A great Ʋictory obtained by the English against the Dutch; the sinking of the Pearl, the Dragon, the Temple of Solomon, and ten more; The re-taking of the Island of Amboyna; and the putting of man, woman, and child to the sword. 3 The States of Hollands Message to Ʋantrump; his advancing with his Fleet towards England; the Letters read in the Ge∣neral Councel at the Hague, touching the King of Scots; And a Narrative of their present proceedings. Licensed according to Order. London, Printed for George Horton, 1653.
Perfect Occurrences, &c. THe Officers of the Army having had a General Meeting at James's Westminster, about the emer∣gent and weighty Affairs of the Nation; in con∣sideration thereof, agreed upon a Letter to be sent to the Officers of the several Garisons and Regiments of souldiers both in England, Scotland, and Ire∣land; a breviate whereof take as followeth; to wit, That after several dayes waiting at the Throne of grace, we were generally convinced, That our hearts have been looking after the things of this world, and our own privat affairs, more then the things of Jesus Christ and his peo∣ple. That we have been overtaken with a slothful spirit, & growing weary of the work of the Lord, have been ready to say with Baruch, Wo is me now, for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow, I fainted in my sighing, and find no rest Jer. 45.3. That the people of this Nation are subject to grie∣vous oppressions through the obstruction of justice: and that the Lord might say to us, for whom he hath done such great things in England, as he did to his Vineyard, Isa. 5.7. And he looked for judgment, but behold oppression; for righ∣teousness, but behold a Cry. That through the corruption of many in places of Authority some good men are made to suffer for conscience sake, and many bad men take incou∣ragement in their licentious principles, and prophane pra∣ctises, by reason whereof wickedness doth very much a∣bound amongst us. Upon these and the like considerations
we have been strongly convinced, that it is a duty very much incumbent upon us to awaken our selves, and by all lawful wayes and meanes to endeavor the procuring of these following things, which have been promised by the Parliament, and, as we are informed, are under their pre∣sent consideration. First, For the preventing the many inconveniencies ap∣parently arising from the long continuance of the same persons in supreme Authority, That there may be succes∣sive Parliaments consisting of men faithful to the interest of this Common-wealth; Men of Truth, fearing God, and hating covetousness. Secondly, That the Laws may be regulated in such sort, that what is good in them may be maintain'd, and the cor∣ruptions, abuses, delayes, vexations, unnecessary Travels and expences, and whatsoever shall be found really bur∣thensome and grievous to the people, may be taken a∣way Thirdly, That liberty and protection may be given by a Law to all the truly godly though of dfferent judgments to worship God peaceably, withu imposing upon, or molesting one another. And that no encurgment be thereby given to such as are popish or prophne in the ex∣ercise of their superstitious forms, or licentious practises. Fourthly, That the Gospel of Jesus Christ may be dis∣pensed to all the pple of this Commonwealth, and those that labour faithfully in that work, receive all due coun∣tenance and encouragement. From aboard the Leopard in Leghorn mole, January 7. The first of this instant the great Duke was pleased to create himself in a Galley upon the water; and at his going out, the Dutch Admiral gave him 9 guns, and all the rest
of his Fleet in order. At his going in we gave him two Vollies of small shot, and 31 guns, and the rest of our ships in order. The 3. of Jan. his Highness sent aboard a Present to Cap. Badiley. The 4. here came a messenger from Naples to the Captain, who brought Letters, informing us, That the Elizabeth and the Warwick have taken a Dutch ship bound for Apulia. She was light, having in her 26 Guns. The 5 instant here came aboard the great Dukes brother, who is a Cardinal, and another Prince with him; and at their going away Cap. Badiley gave them 31 Guns. This day, by Letters from our English Merchants at Aleppo, we are adverised that our English Conful there resident, has received Letters from the English President in the East Indies, That at Amboyna, an Island now under the command of the Dutch, which they got in time past by bloud and treachery, there rode 9 Dutch ships at An∣chor, which by a sudden storm were cast away. Most of their men got ashore thinking to save their lives; but the Natives rose, and put them all to the sword, and immedi∣atly fell upon the Towns and Fortifications, and took them all except one castle. They put man, woman, & child to the sword. The English President wrote further, That he thought the Natives had gained or would quickly gain the re∣maining Castle, and that very suddenly. I saw a copy of the Letter that came from our Aleppo Consul, and heard it read to Cap. Badiley aboard our ship. A just Judgment of the Almighty on the Dutch, for mur∣thering so many English as they did formerly on that very Island. We hear that Cap. Cox, with 7 sail of English, hath had a sharp conflict with 11 sail of Dutch; but after four hours dispute obtained a glorious Victory, sunk one, and took Three.
A Letter from Holland. SIR, THe States are very busie about hastning away the new Fleet, and have sent Orders to Trump, to repair forthwith into the Channel; so that he is suddenly expected from the Isle of Ree; he hath about 70 fighting ships, and some 300 Merchants. Prince Rupert is expected by some; but when he will return, no man knowes, for as yet there is no certain news of his being in any part of the world. Here are two Irish-men lately arrived out of Ireland, they have Letters from Charles Stuart, to countenance their ad∣dresses to the State in the behalf of the Irish; yet before they deli∣ver them, they have aken the advice of the holy Fathers of their own faction, of whom there is a crew now residing at the Hague, as well as in other places; and their design (if possible) is to stir up and ingage this State to do somewhat against the Parliament of England in Ireland. On Wednesday one of these Irish factors de∣livered a Letter to their High and Mighties at the Hague. This gives just occasions to suspect that the Scottish King endeavors to hook his own interest into the ingagement of this Hogen State, upon an Irish account, so that if the Dutch should clap in between these two interests, they would be daintily ingaged, and a fine blessing must follow the business. Amsterdam Jan. 31. stilo novo. From Zealand  Jan. 30. Great brags are made here of their alliance with Denmark, giving our, That they expect great supplies thence for their assistance. But the Danish Resident here in the Hague has made an unexpected motion to their Lordships for laying aside the Treaty of Redemption, fomerly made betwixt them and his Master, and resume another way, wich fills their heds with jealousie. They have likewise an eye still upon the intercourse betwixt England and France, suspecting the worst of this French application. They have news also, That the Swede will insist reso∣lutely
upon the maintaining of a free Trade betwixt the Hans-Towns and Sweden. But we hear that her Majesty hath declared against Denmark. From aboard the Bryar-Frigot riding in Tinmouth haven the 27 of Januarp. SIR, BEing the 23 instant upon the North coast in company with a Fleet of Lyn ships bound hither, we fell in com∣pany with a man of War belonging to Flushing, which had taken some small English. Our Captain immediatly gave chase to this man of war, and after an houres chase he came up with him; who after the firing of one broad side, yield∣ed his ship: After which we rescued two of the Vessels he had taken. We are now arrived here with the fleet and the prise, which is a ship of 15 serviceable Iron guns, and well appointed with Sailes, Cables, and Ammunition. She sailes well, and will make a very good man of war. From Marseilles Jan. 21. Here is no great newes, but too much sorrow: A Toulon French man of war hath taken an English ship laden with 370 Hogsheads of Pilchards, which is brought into this Port, where they intend to make sale thereof; and in very few dayes there will be 4 men of war more out of Tonlon, to go in course, besides those ships and fire-ships designed for West France. From Nantes we have received advertisements of a Lon∣don ship of 16 guns brought thither as a prize by a Holan∣der, boudd from Bilboa to the Canary Islands; the Masters name being Mr. Crane. But that which doth equalize this loss, is, the taking of a Flemish Vessel, called, the Arms of Genoa, by the War∣wick frigat, who carryed her to Naples. Besides, the Pearl, the Temple of Solomon, the Dragon, and 10 more are cast
away at Abarka, on the coast of Barbary. But the Letters from Genoa advertize, That a Flemish Merchant man that bers a Letter of Mart, hath brought in an English prize which he took in Alicant-rode, riding at anchor under the command of the Castle, at midnight. Her name is the Ro∣bert and Richard, loading 120 Tuns of Oyl, and 72 sacks of Anniseede, belonging to Mr. Robert Burdet. But supplicati∣ons are made to the Duke to secure her, till it be determi∣ned whether she be lawful prize. From Paris Feb. 5. stilo novo. The long expected Return of Cardinal Mazarine is now accomplisht; he was entertain∣ed with abundance of Tryumph (being accompanied by the titular Duke of York) and was no sooner entred the Lovure but the King carryed him to the Queens Lodgings, where he was received with great alacrity, and after a long conference, his Majesty invited his Eminence to a stately banquet prepared on purpose for him, which was very sumptuous; and during the Feast a famous fire-work was prepared to play, which lasted above half an hour, that the city might take notice of this joyful night of Jubilee; Yet notwithstanding, the Citizens were al à mort; and very ob∣servable it is, that from the Gate of their entry into the Lovure, none but a few little boys and some Porters, cryed Vive le Roy.
