R1816 669.f.16[97] 99870398 163250
TO HIS Excellency the Lord Generall Cromwell. A few Proposals, relating to Civil Government. Humbly offered by John Rogers an unworthy servant of Christ, and Preacher of the Gospel now at Tho. Apostles London. RIGHT HONOURABLE, WHilst my soul is boyling over into earnest prayers to the great Jehovah for VVisdome, Counsel, and Courage for you in this exigency of importance, as the great Deliverer of his people (through Gods grace) out of the house of Aegypt, I am visited with that word in Exod. 12. 42. It is a night to be much observed unto the Lord for bringing them out of Aegypt; This is that night of the Lord to be observed of all the Children of Israel in their Generations. So this is the day (viz. April. 20. 1653.) to be much observed (or in Hebr. full of observations) and the rather for that in the revolution of times, the changes will run their round out, and then the Lord will come to reigne. For at as first Israel had no Governour but God, and next to him Generals, as Moses, Joshua, &c. with their Officers; and after that Judges and Synedrions or Parliaments over them, and then Kings; So now the change is to go back again from Kings to Parliaments, from Parliaments to Generals, until we have Governours as at the beginning, Isa. 1. 26. and till Christ come. But my Lord, my heart is full (with humble thankfulnesse, and resentment of the hopes you have put us all unto, and to your Honour indeed) I am pressed in spirit; and so are many others (after a solemne meeting of prayers with hundreds of this City at Tho. Apostles London, about this change, and to seek God for you) to present you with these following Proposals. I. That your Excellency do choose the men that must governe this Commonwealth (being that it is the judgement of many faith∣ful discerning Ministers, and others, that you are called thereunto of God.) So Moses did choose able men to be Rulers in Exod. 18.  25, 26. And they judged the people at all seasons, but the hard causes they brought to Moses. So that Moses. gave them their charges to doe righteously without respect of persons, Deut. 1. 16, 17. And Joshua the next General (with's Officers) commanded the people, Josh. 3. 2. and the Lord said to Joshua (though in another case) ch. 4. 2. Take you twelve men out of the people, one of a Tribe, &c. and sayes the text, Vers. 14. that very day (that Joshua did so) the Lord magnified him in the sight of all Israel, and they seared him, as they feared Moses before him. So it is upon our hearts (Right Honourable) that God will make you hereby, Right Honourable indeed, in the sight of all his Israel. After this, Gideon (the General of that little Army of three Bands, that destroyed the huge host of the Midianites) was offered by the Israelites the Government, Judg. 8. 22. for hee had won it. And Nehemtah, chap. 7. 2. gave Commissions out to men fearing God, to governe. And so all the Governours that ever were victorious (in the word) were either Rulers themselves, or else chosen to be such, or else chose such, wherefore we say, as Ezra 7. 25. And thou, after the wisdome of thy God that is in thine hand, set Magistrates and Judges which may judge all the people that are beyond the River, all such as know the Laws of thy God, and teach thou them that know not. The second Proposal, as to number of persons that shall Governe, I humbly propose either a Synedrin, Parliament, or Councel of seven∣ty, or else one of a County. For that in the Commonwealth of Israel (which is our best patterne) they had three sorts of Courts, the Upper  Court (or Synedrin) which consisted of seventy able (fit) men joyned with Moses, Numb. 11. 16, 17. And the Lord said to Moses, Gather before me (or in my Name) seventy (worthy) men of the Elders of Israel, whom thou knowest, to be the Elders and Officers over them; For  I will come down and talk with thee, and I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and I will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, &c. This number answers to the seventy, which at first went into Aegypt, Gen. 46. 27. Exod. 1. 5. Deut. 10. 22 and to the seventy Elders which went up Mount Sinai, Exod. 24. 1. 9. Now in this first great Senate, they sat in forme of an halfe Circle round; so that the Nasi or Abbeth-Din, chiefe, or father of the house sat as the Speaker in Parliament doth, to see all before him. The second sort of Synedrin was called the Lower Court, &c. they were under a great Senate, and consisted of three and twenty  persons who sate in the City gates, as Amos 5. 5. which Christ implies, when he promises the Gates of hell (Councels and strength) shall not prevail against his Church. So Deut. 16. 18. And the third Court consisted but of three Judges in smal Cities. But Secondly, or else choose one of a County, representing that County, as one of a Tribe did represent the Tribe, in Num. 1. 4. And with you there shall be a man of every Tribe; and Vers. 16. These were the renowned, i. e. famous for abilities and qualifications, called to  be States-men, or to consult about matters of State, Num. 7. 2. and 16. 2. But if the present juncture of affairs requires a quicker dispatch, that in the interim, twelve Worthies may be chosen as present Governours, Josh. 4. 1. 2. Numb. 14. Deut. 16. 18. Ezra 7. 15. like to Israels twelve Judges. The third Proposal, As to their Qualifications, they must be menfearing God, Nehem. 7. 2. Exod. 18. 21. lovers of Truth and Ju∣stice  Deut. 16. 18. hating bribes and covetousnesse (which corrupt Justice) Deut. 16. 19. Exod. 28. 21. not respecters of persons, Deut. 1. 17. and 16. 19. Wise (though not politick) and Understanding in the times and seasons, Deut. 1. 13. Searching Gods word, Dan. 1. 4. and 9. 2. (As the Jewes Cachami wisemen or Magistrates doe at this day,) they must be able active men, Exod. 10. 21. Gen. 47. 6. 1 Chron. 26. 6. in the things of God, and at all seasons ready to hear and helpe the oppressed, Exod. 18. 19, 22. the Greeke is, at every houre, (who were wont to sit from the daily sacrifice in the morning, till the daily sacrifice in the evening (so that they began and ended with Sacrifices every day:) And then they must be Easers of the people as Numb. 11. 17. Exod 18. 22. hence the word Rulers, (Nasi,) is so named of lifting up, or easing the burthens of the people. And they must govern as the Servants of Jesus Christ, Isa. 60. 2, 10, 17. Rev. 21. 24. But not as Lords over Christ, Rev. 4. 10, 11. least the Nobles be like Oreb, Judg. 7. 25. and Zeeb, and the Princes as Zebah and Zalmunna, that take the houses of God (i.e. Christs Government and Jurisdiction over Chur∣ches and Consciences) into their possession, Ps. 83. 11, 12. Such are (v. 13.) set as a wheel upon the run, till they have run themselves all to peeces (and this was openly declared would be the ruin of this Parliament at Thomas Apostles Febr. 18 (unlesse God prevented) a day when we and the Navy were ingaged together all day long. Lastly, they must govern all for God (not too much for man) 2 Chro. 196. Take heed what you doe? for ye govern not for man but for the Lord, saith Jehosaphat. O that! they may be Moses's for meekness! and for their oft meeting and conferring with God on the Mount! Joshua's for courage! and Samuels for uprightnesse! and Davids for Gods Favorites! and for figuring out the coming of Christ! and Solomons for wisdome, and workers for Gods latter Temple! and Daniels for discerning the daies wee live in! and Nehemiah's for activity, and abillity, and builders up of the broken wals of Jerusalem; and then shall they in their measure make good the promise of Judges as at the first, Isa. 2. 20. and then the work of the Lord shall go on in the hands of Zerubbabel with shoutings of grace grace unto it. The fourth Proposal is, That those who are righteous, and spirited for this Government, of the Worthies of the late Parliament (that  are without just exception) may be owned with honour, That the righteous suffer not with the wicked. The fifth Proposal is, That the Rulers (after they be chose) be set solemnly and publickly apart by prayers to God for their Worke,  and his wisdome, as they were wont to doe in Israel, as Numb. 11. 16, 17. Gather them before me, and I will take of the Spirit which is upon thee, and put it upon them; and say to the people sanctifie your selves. So Ezra 9. 23, 24. So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was intreated of us; and then I separated twelve of the cheife, sayes he. And although in the Commonwealth of Israel, they were wont when they set them apart for Governours to poure out a horne of oyle, or else to lay on hands on each. These Ceremonies are now abolished, and yet the signification of them remains, viz. that there bee some evidence or other that the Lord hath laid his hand on them, and hath poured out his horne of oyle upon their heads, unto their very hearts; I mean his Unction from on high, the holy Spirit, enduing them with sanctified gifts and abilities, separating, and setting them apart for the worke of this Government, by such a measure of his oyle of grace, as suites with the age wherein we live (i. e. aboundantly more then in former ages.) These Five Proposals (Right Honorable) put in practise (with Gods blessing) shal serve as five fingers sor the Work, and wil show that the hand of the Lord is with us; wherefore consult with the Saints Deu. 1: 13. and send to all discerning spirited men for their Proposals. And I beseech your Excellency to accept these few (at first) from a faithfull Commonwealths man, one that longs for the day of the Lord Christ, and that this Government may be a fore-runner thereof, and a preparative thereunto, these Proposals are presented with the full sailes and gales (I hope) of the Spirit. Seeing thousands of glazed eyes are upon you, with hungry longings for such a Government, as may be most intent to make way in these three Nations for that day of Christs reign in righteousnesse. That our mountains may drop downe with new wine, and our hills with milke Joh. 3. and great be the day of Jezreel by this Government, is the soule-strug∣gling and faith-acting unfained, and resolved prayers of one who defires nothing of your Excellency for himselfe, but to be one of the meanest of Your Servants for Christ, and this Commonwealth. JO. ROGERS. From my Study Tho. Apostles 25. day of the second Month Ziu. 1653. Printed for Robert Ibbitson, 1653.
