T2848 R185613 43077714 151828
TRUE NEWS of another bloody Battle, of the King of Poland WITH THE TURKS And also an Account of the taking of the Great VIZIER And divers other Turkish Lords, and Great Commanders, and of the Re∣deeming many thousand Christian Captives from SLAVERY. THe Last Letters from Germany, of the 20, 21st, and 22d. In∣stant, give Account that the King of Poland was Encam∣ped, about Twenty Leagues to the Eastward of Vien∣na, with the Army of German, as well as Polish Horse, under his Command; and that in the Persuit of the Turks- Since the Twelveth, before Ʋienna, they had cut many Scatter'd Parties into Pieces, and have taken near forty heavy Cannon: with a considerable quantity of Aminition that Attended them, and had also, a Fierce Battle, with a Grand Body of the Turkish Horse; who where under the Conduct of the Grand
Vizier in Person, & had killed near twenty thousand of them upon the place. And it is credibly Affirm'd the Grand-Vizier, is taken Prisoner the Principle Standard of the Ottaman Empire is also taken; not without loss on the Christian side: For the Turks are said to Engage in this Battle with a fury, rather proceeding from an Apprehenti∣on of Despair, than true Courage, or good Conduct; and continued the Battle several Hours with great obstinacy, notwithstanding the great Slaughters the Christians made in all parts of the Battle. This Battle being ended, and the Christians by the miraculous Providence of God, crowned with a second Victory, continued their persuit with great eagerness, and fell upon another party of Turkish Horse, (who had the Conduct of near Ten thousand Chri∣stian Captives) and Totally Routed them, and redeemed the poor Christians from the perpetual Chains of Bondage that then had seized them. Most of the said poor Christians, were young choice Men, that the Turks had Catcht up, ever since they made this last Invasion, into the Christian Emerours Country's. (In their Ra∣vaging, they cut off all Middle-Aged, and Elderly people without respect of persons or Sexes.) This dileverance of the poor Cap∣tives, being no way less Considerable than the former; and for which all good Christians in Duty, ought to Return hearty thanks, to the Divine disposer of all things. The undanted and unwearied King of Poland, after this Defeat, had not pursued the Enemy above three, or four Leagues, but recieved Advice by Scouts, that a Great Army of Turkish Horse, was on its March with Great Expedition; which caused his Majesty to make an Hault, & send express to the Duke of Lorain; to hasten to him with the German Foot, and accordingly the Auxiliries of the Empire (who have been considerably Reinfor∣ced since the Beating the Turks from Ʋienna) are on their March withal Expedition, to joyn the Polish Camp. And it's the Opinion of all, that the Turks will run the hazard of another Battle. It is also affirm'd, that besides the Grand-Ʋizier, several other Persons of great Note, in the Turkish State are taken Prisoners; and that this fresh Army has been gathered with great Diligence, and designed to joyn the Ʋizier before Ʋienna, which Extraordinary preparation is judged, could not proceed otherwise, than from great Assurances that have been privately made, as well as the open Assistance re∣cieved from the Tekillitish Rebels, the first of which kind of Tray∣tors. It's believed, the Ʋziers Letters, that were found in his Tent before Ʋienna, will more enable the Emperour to subdue both sorts of the Conspirators (and are of greater Value: for the securi∣ty of the Empire) then the great end Immence Treasure they took from the Infidels. By the next I hope, I may give you, not only an Account of the Total Destruction of this New Army, but also of New-hausel, or some other considerable Turkish Garrison, being be∣seiged by the Christians. LONDON Printed for R. P. 1683.
