W1186 E133_8 99871904 156389
A PREPARATIVE FOR THE FAST, OR, A sovereigne Balsome for the cure of the distempers of the times. by Job Weall apothecary LONDON, Printed by A. N. for Richard Lownds, at his shop adjoyning to Ludgate, 1642.
A PREPARATIVE FOR the Fast, &c. WHo that is embarked in the Common Vessell, intere∣sted and engaged by the Laws both of Nature and Religion; to mayntain the Truth and Peace of the Church and State, will not at this time of their appa∣rent distresse, lend his hel∣ping hand, and give his best assistance (as farre as lawfully he may) to any probable way, to close up those fatal wounds that have bin made therin? To that end (according to my meane ability) I
have, yet once againe, adventured to cast in my Mite, and to present a Sovereigne and infallible Balme to heale all our Solutions of Unitie what∣soever. Much good may come by making use thereof, and no small danger by the neglect therof. If you shall finde it consonant to Gods Truth, beware how you contemne and defer the use of it. How∣ever it be accepted, it shall comfort mee that I discharged my Duty, Conscience, and true affection, to the best of my understanding, for the peace and welfare of the Church and State, (though to my owne prejudice.) But to my pur∣pose. The most sacred Word of God, and the Laws and Ordinances of Man grounded thereon, are those Oracles which afford Theorems and Aphorismes, aswell for the knowledge of our present condition, as also for the true indication and perfect cure of the same, and which will one day be the Judge of us and all the World. The Disease whereof the Church and State in generall labour at this present time, is a Solutio Continuitatis, a solution of Unity. This (in Phy∣sick) is that Morbus communis, or preternaturall af∣fect, which alike incommodates the functions of either part, and is variously procured by (and I pray God wee see it not accompanied with) Wounds, Ulcers, Fractures and Luxations. The Primary and Antecedent cause of all these Disunions and Disjunctions, are most certainly
our most heinous sins, whereby wee have justly provoked the Almightie to wrath and indignation against us. The Secondary, Instrumentall, and Conjunct causes, are the Malicious and Seditious practices of the Jesuited Papists, and the Schismaticall, fa∣ctious, and sinister endevours also, of others, and their adherents likewise; both of them being made the Hereticall instruments of the Devill, unnatu∣ally to Divide and Rent, the Head from the Bo∣dy, or the Body from the Head, that he might the better rule and prevaile against both, and the Truth, Peace, and Prosperity of our Church and Common-weal. I am not ignorant that many good Patriots and nehemiahs, true Friends to the Church and State, are scandalously branded with those names, but I feare that some seeme to be when they are not, and it is one thing to be falsly called so, and another thing to bee so really indeed: For such certainly there are, whom God in his good time will make manifest, who unlawfully goe about to sever them whom God hath joyned together, to divide and rent the Truth and Peace of the Church and State. These indeed (according to Saint Paul in the Galathians) trouble, and intend to pervert the Gospel: But (saith he) though that an Angell from Heaven preach unto you other∣wise then the Truth, Let him be accursed. The signes of this Disease have been sufficient∣ly made knowne, and they are apparent in their
effects, these gaping wounds, both in Church and State, pitties their beholders and friends to see them. The Prognosticks are of great danger, and threaten the subversion and dissolution of the whole Bodie, and this may justly be feared, if the complication of this Disease bee well weighed with the manifold and malignant Symptomes wherewith the Body languished before; this tends to the very expiration of the animall and vitall spirits the life it selfe; And that which makes the Omen worse, is, that Instruments for Cure are not only neglected, but despised. This treble cord of Unitie, to which our Ship was fastned in those stormes, is cracked, and ship∣wrack feared; Our partition Wall is broken downe, or at leastwise uncaemented, and readie to fall, whereby we are exposed aswell to Forraigne as intestine mischiefes. This divide and scatter, if it be not prevented, will be no small curse to Jacob and Israel: and our Saviour (if we will be∣lieve him) tels us, that the issue of a Kingdome divided against it selfe will be destruction. The Remedies as they ought to be contrary to the effects, so they must have respect to the cau∣ses, for till they be removed the effects will not cease. That irritating and primarie cause that hath made a Separation betweene our good God and us, are our sinnes, these are those noysome and in∣fectious vapours that have ascended up, and by their interposition and Eclipse of Gods gracious
goodnesse, have produced malignant and pestife∣rous influences on us. To you that are so much distempered at this time, give me leave before I come to propound you a cure, to advise with you first, that you may be the more willing to embrace and under∣goe it; To which purpose let me entreat you dili∣gently and consideratly to reade over and medi∣tate on the second Chapter of the first Epistle to St. Peter, if you be religiously inclined, which I heare you much professe, it will make you the bet∣ter listen to what I shall afterwards say unto you for the same end. In the next place I would ad∣vise you to resolve to be contented to referre your selves to your Prudent Physicians, Whom God hath made as happy instruments of his mercy for your recoverie; and let me entreat you to be per∣swaded by those that are, and alwayes have been, your true friends, and have loved, and desired your wel-fare as their owne: Bee confident that they know your disease, and severall distempers, and the severall causes of them, and have provi∣ded (to their great charge and pains) fit Reme∣dies for you, if you will be patient, and conforme to their directions, without which all their skill, care and cost, will be of no availe to you: Your Disease for want thereof hath growne more diffi∣cult of Cure, and hath contracted to it other des∣perate diseases, and is now become of such a phre∣neticall disposition, that it transports you beyond your selfe, and hath depraved, and corrupted
your judgement, And your distracted feares and Phantasmes make causlesse jealousies in you, even of your best friends, and make you some∣times to offend them that most commiserate and endevour to heale you. Your actions now will not endure the touch∣stone of Common sence and Reason, nor the law of the Land, nor the Ballance of the Sanctu∣ary, wherein you desire to be weighed; insomuch that unlesse a speedy remedy be applied, you are like to destroy your selfe and all yours, and it may be everlastingly too. Therefore while you doe enjoy at sometimes a little better understanding, let the light of common reason prevaile with you. If the benefits of recovery will not invite you to incline to a cure, yet let the terrors and torment of thy diseases, and Death allure thee, and the con∣sideration of thy Parents and friends, or thy wife, children, estate, and all that is thine or theirs: Be∣sides, remember that thy life is not thine owne to dispose of, thou must know that it is but lent thee for the service of thy Creator, thou shalt aswell answer for the neglect of that due meanes God hath appointed thee for thy recoverie, As for laying of violent hands upon thy selfe or any o∣ther, both of them being Murther in the sight of God. So likewise if the blessings and Commo∣dities of Unitie and Order will not prevaile with thee, Let the discommodities and terrours of Dis∣cord and disorder affright thee to it. Suppose thy selfe and all thou hast, or canst call deare and
pretious to thee, either for the present or the fu∣ture, were embarked only in one Vessell, and it in a great storme, amongst rocks, quicksands, and Pyrats, and your only Cable that holds and pre∣serves you from ruine were almost crackt in sun∣der, Wouldst thou be so farre from lending thy hand to mend it, that thou wouldest cut and breake it more. Certainly no man in the same Ship that understands himselfs, but will account thee a mad man for so doing, and hinder thee from doing it. Againe, if there were but one Bul∣warke or partion-wall that keepes us from our bloudy enemies, and the cruelties of our adver∣saries, wouldst thou be one of them that should pull it downe; Thinke upon the hydeous roaring of Cannons, the tormenting murders, bloudy Massacres, and lamentable cryes of thy Parents, Wife, Children or Friends, and losse of all, it may be of thine owne soule and theirs likewise. Againe, consider of those bounds and Fences which keepe in the violence of the Fire, and the rage of the Waters, which within their due bounds are usefull and profitable for thee, wilt thou be so sencelesse to pull the fire out of the Chimney into the middle of thy house, where Gun powder and other combustible matter is? Wilt thou breake downe those bankes, and let the Ocean in to make a perpetuall deluge and inunda∣tion of all? Or let me demand of thee if thou hast so much judgement to discerne it, whether in thy warfare thou wouldst not observe military disci∣pline?
Wouldst thou bee one of them that shouldst endeavour to breake those rankes and formes thy Generall and Commanders order thee to fight in, and thereby to let the enemy make an inrode upon thy route, and disorder, and so bring thee to confusion? and you must know this may happen, by so small a matter, as the losse of one naile of an horse shooe, inan Army, and therefore how behoveful is it for thy Comman∣ders, and thee also, to take care, and prevent all disorder whatsoever in the least appearance. Wherefore now as it stands thus desperate, you are to be the more patient and willing to submit your selfe to your Physitians care and fidelity. Be confident that they will doe nothing but for thy good, for they and theirs are likewise interressed therein. Thou must be contented to have thy ul∣cers and putulent wounds clensed before they are bound up, and Fractures and Dislocations are not so easily united and reduced to the service of the body without some dolour; Peradventure some of thy wounds are gangrened, and have contracted so much virulencie, that there must bee amputati∣on and dismembring of that joynt; But bee well assured that thy Physitians will not order it so to be, unlesse they find absolute necessitie, and then thou wilt find it better to part with a limme, then lose thy life. Peradventure they may see cause to make some evacuation of thy redundant and pec∣cant humours which hinder thy wounds from healing, and are apt to bring thee into other di∣stempers.
When they see it fitting; they will give thee Cordials to comfort thee, and to give thee rest for thy unsetled and distempered spirits, if they finde it to conduce to thy good. By this time I hope you are resolved to be patient, and therefore now I will apply my selfe to the Remedies. Let this Principle be granted (which indeed is not to be denied) that all afflictions come from God, and all injuries whatsoever doe befall us, by the Providence of the Almighty, and then we may presently draw these Conclusions; That the instru∣ment must doe that which the Almighty will have it to doe, And that it can goe no farther then hee pleaseth to order it, and therefore we must first ap∣ply our selves to him to remove it from whom it commeth. The Disease indicates a necessity of a speedy Vnition and Reconciliation to be made with the Almighty (whom wee have offended and provoked to wrath) in and by the Mediation and intercession of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. Speedy I say, because that a little delay may bring a great deale of danger, few dayes neglect in this case may hazard thy life, And if this Remedy prevaile not sen∣tence of Death may passe upon you sooner then you are aware. Procrastination in wounds and other diseases often makes them incurable. Continuance in sin is not the way to make satisfaction to God, Confession, and Contrition begets remission, when obstinacie heapes on further punishment. Do'st thou think to escape Gods hand by murmuring
against him? Be well assured, if the sword of Ju∣stice prevailes not, it may be the Plague or Famine shall, or some severe judgement. Thou shalt get nothing by thy impatience; for thou art not able to resist the Almighty, and if he takes the rod into his hand againe, hee will make thee feele it to the purpose. Let me rather advise thee to submit to the mercy of so gracious and loving a Father; and not to stand to the terror and anger of the Almighty. That wee may meet God in the way of his Judge∣ments by Prayers and true Repentance, that sweet Incense which will correct and dissipate those ma∣levolent aspects. It hath beene heartily prayed for, and endeavoured, that there might bee a generall monthly day of Humiliation, for the blessing of the Parliament with Vnanimous proceedings, for the setling of Religion in Truth & Peace, for the com∣posing of distractions at Home, and for the distresses and seasonable reliefe of our Brethren in Ireland, for aversion of those impendent judgements over our heads. Not forgetting to give thanks to the Lord, for those manifold Mercies we have received, and for all good meanes conducing to our reliefe. That these dayes may take the better successe and effect, As a praeparatory thereunto, it may prove usefull and beneficiall, if some grave Ortho∣dox Divines, and Christians, wel setled and affected to the Truth, and Peace of the Church and State, did meet and consider of those chief and provoking Sinnes of this Kingdome, which are those efficient and impulsive causes of our disunions and distiesses at this time.
There are questionlesse generall sinnes of Nati∣ons as well as of particular persons, whereby God is provoked to wrath. There may be sinnes of Superiours, as well as sinnes of Interiours, there may be sinnes in the Court, and sinnes in the Parliament. Sinnes of Vniversities, and sinnes of those streames that flow from thence, sinnes of the Citie, and sinnes of the Country, sinnes of the Clergie, and (which is to be lamented) scandalous, seditious, and Schismaticall sinnes of Professours, and such as take themselves to be (and peradventure some of them are) of Gods owne Isael and chosen people, wherewith God is, and will be much incensed and offended. When these are well discovered (and notice also given by Advice of Authority) that true Repen∣tance may be faithfully and respectively preached, and Reformation in generall and particular endea∣voured, otherwise the cure will be but Palliative, and Master left for Recidivation. Humiliation without Reformation is but Hypocrisie, which will end in Apostacie. There must be true and plaine dealing with the Almighty, hee seeth and knowes every mans heart and wayes, and ponders all our doings. It is not any particular blaming one another wil excuse us to him, not the Cities crying out on the Country, or Country on the Citie, or the like. Eve∣ry one must put his hand to this genreall work; every one that hath had but one hand in breaking downe our Partition wall, must lend both hands to
build it up againe: But those that have lent both their hands to pull it downe, and more then their owne hands too, as well in the Primary as in the in∣strumentall cause, had need to give more then ordi∣nary diligence to the speedy rebuilding thereof a∣gaine. And whosoever that is not willing to put his helping hand hereunto, let him partake of those miseries which his owne hands have wrought. It agrees not with my disposition to grate and stir in those wounds, they have already by some bin laid open, and may indue time be more largely dis∣covered by others, to whom it properly belongs. I shall rather lend my hand to close them up, to which end till better Remedies are found out, I shall make bold to recommend and Present a most soveraigne and pretious Balme for all Solutions of Vnity whatsoever. It is composed of many severall Ingredients of admirable vertue. It is Saint Pauls Balsamum Charitatis. It is his Sine quibus esse nole. You shall finde the Receipt in the first of Corinthi∣ans the 13 Chapter: where also you may ready the Description of the severall Vertues and Operations thereof. Charity (saith he) suffers long, and is kind, Charity envies not, Charity vaunts not it selfe, Is not puffed up, doth not behave it selfe unseemly, seekes not her owne; is not easily provoked, thinks no evill, Rejoyceth not in iniquity, but rejoyceth in the Truth: Beareth all things, Beleeveth all things, hopeth all things, eudureth all things. The farther excellency and necessity thereof, is expressed in the said Chapter. Though I speake
with the tongues of men and of Angels (saith he) and have not Charity, I am become as sounding brasse, or a tinckling Cymball, and though I have the gift of Prophecic, and anderstand all misteries and all knowledge, and though I have all faith, so that I could remove Mountaines, and have no Charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all my goods to feed the poore, & though I give my Body to be bur∣ned, and have not Charity, it profiteth me nothing. Charity never faileth, but whether there be Pro∣phecies shall faile, whether there be tongues they shall cease, whether there be Knowledge it shal vanish away. And now abideth Faith, Hope, and Charity, these three, but the greatest of these is Charity. This Composition includes the Prophet Micahs Tripharmacum, viz. To doe justly, to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. And what doth the Lord require more of thee O Man, saith the Prophet. This is that Balsamum Sympatheticum, the true Pa∣nacca that will heale all our rents and divisions, and it doth not only cure for the present, but preserves for the future, weare it as a Prophyactick about thee, and goe notwithout it. Hee that rejects it, put a mark upon him, and according to Solomons advice in the 24 Pro. Meddle not with him, for hee feares not God and the King, and is given to sedition. Avoid such an one as thou wouldst doe a Viper, a Crocodile, a Basilisk, or one that is infected with the Plague. Our wounds being bound up with this Balme,
(it hath been likewise humbly sought, and prayed for) that Religion may bee setled both in Doctrine and Discipline with all due and conve∣nient speed, and all Protestants, especially Mini∣sters, united therein by Protestation, and satisfa∣ctory explanations and reasons published thereof. That the Conversion of all Papists and other Hereticall and Schismaticall Subjects in the King∣dome, who have erred and gone astray from the Truth, may in all charitable and Christian man∣ner be endevoured with to be reduced home to the Church; shewing them the necessity of our Separation from them, or rathers as it is indeed their Apostacie from the true Church with which we partake, the danger of the condition they are in, the benefit of embracing these, and the like gracious invitations, extending to the good of their soules, bodies, and estates. Thus many of them, who certainly belong unto God, may be brought home to him, and made usefull and ser∣viceable, the rest left inexcusable to God, the World, and their own consciences. That justice and judgment may be executed on such as have received such putrifaction, that by their virulencie they infect and indanger others. That the severall languishing, oppressed, whose cryes have entred the eares of the Lord (some of whom for severall yeares have received al∣most
deadly wounds for the mayatenance of the publike good) may in good time be relieved and redressed. That the well deserving may be incourage, Virtue advanced, and Vice depressed. Thus God will be pacified, and wee united and reconciled to him, and amongst our selves. Thus all those incoveniences and Mischiefs which we feare, by Gods blessing on the unanimous endea∣vours of the Parliament, may turne to our great blessing and commoditie. Thus our Ship will arrive safely at her desired Port. Thus our treble Cord, and Partition Wall, will be made stronger then ever. Thus those bloudy, fiery and malignant Con∣figurations (which hang over our heads) will be speedily terminated, and their revolutions pre∣vented for the future, and wee shall receive more benigne and favourable influences and aspects from above, then ever wee had before. Thus wee shall begin a new World, or at least∣wise make a happy Conclusion of an old, Where∣in God will give us one heart, and one Way (as
it is in Jeremiah) that wee may feare him for ever, for the good of us and our Children after us. God I say will doe it, for He and He only is a∣ble to unite and heale all our Solutions, and there∣fore, Not unto us Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name be given the Glory and Prayse, now and for evermore. Amen. I. W.
PErlegi Tractatum hunc ingeniosum, in quo nihil inveniri potest, quod non sit pium, religiosum, bonismoribus, legibus∣que sanis maxime consentaneum: cessent ita∣què virulentae malevolorum linguae hoc (ut optima imò quidem omnia solent) carpere opusculum, acerbitatis suae virus in Autho∣rem candidum evomere erubescant; & dum morosos & imprudentes nostri hujus saeculi homunciones (quorum insipidis palatis nihil nisi proprii cerebelli figmenta sapit) ad re∣ctam rationis legumque normam reducere conatur, ab omnibus (quibus curae est pax & serena Ecclesiae heu nimis nunc tempo∣ris dilaceratae tranquillitas) laudem, uti benè meretur, consequartur.
