W2404 R229735 99899252 152777
His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS SPEECH To both Houses of PARLIAMENT. On Saturnday the Twenty third day of November, 1695. My Lords and Gentlemen, IT is with great Satisfaction that I Meet you here this Day, being Assur∣ed of a good Disposition in My Par∣liament, when I have had such full Proofs of the Affection of My People, by their Behaviour during My Ab∣sence, and at My Return. I was Engaged in the present War by the Advice of My First Parliament, who thought it Necessary for the De∣fence of Our Religion, and for the Preservation of the Liberties of Eu∣rope. The Last Parliament, with great Cheerfulness, did Assist Me to Cary it on; and I cannot Doubt, but that your Concern for the Common Safety will Oblige you to be Unanimous∣ly Zealous in the Prosecution of it. And I am Glad that the Advanta∣ges which We have had this Year, give Us a Reasoneable Ground of Hoping for further Success hereafter. Upon this Occasion, I cannot but take Notice of the Courage and Bravery the English Troops have shewn this last Summer; which, I may say, has answered their highest Character in any Age: And it will not be de∣nied, That without the Concurrence of the Valour and Power of En∣gland it were impossible to put a Stop to the Ambition and Greatness of France. Gentlemen of the House of Commons, I think it a great Misfortune, that from the Beginning of My Reign, I have been forced to ask so many and such large Aids of my People, and yet I am Confident you will agree with Me in Opinion, that there will
be at least as great Supplies requisite, for carrying on the War by Sea and Land this Year, as was Granted in the last Session; the rather, be∣cause Our Enemies are Augmenting their Troops, and the necessity of increasing Our Shipping does plainly appear. The Fonds which have been given, have proved very Deficient. The Condition of the Civil List is such, That it will not be possible for Me to Subsist, unless that Matter be taken into your Care. And Compassion Obliges Me to mention the miserable Circumstances of the French Protestants, who suffer for their Religion. And therefore, Gentlemen, I must earnestly Recommend to you, to provide a Supply suitable to these several Occasions. I must likewise take Notice of a great Difficulty We ly under at this time, by reason of the ill State of the Coin; the Redress of which, may perhaps prove a further Charge to the Nation: But this is a Matter of so General Concern, and of so very great Importance, That I have thought fit to leave it entirely to the Consideration of my Parliament. I did Recommed to the last Parliament, the Forming some good Bill for the Incouragement and Increase of Seamen; I hope you will not let this Session pass without doing somewhat in it: And that you will consider of such Laws as may be Proper for the Advancement of Trade, and will have a particular Regard to that of the East-Indies, lest it should be lost to the Nation. And while the War makes it necessary to have an Army Abroad, I could wish some Way might be thought of, to Raise the ne∣cessary Recruits without giving Occasion of Complaint. My Desire to meet my People in a New Parliament, has made the Opening of this Session very late; which, I Hope, you will have such Regard to, as to make all possible Dispatch of the great Business before you, and will call to Mind, That by the long Continuance of the last Session, We did not only lose Advantages which We might have had at the Beginning of the Campaign, but gave the Enemy such an Opportu∣nity, as might have proved very Fatal to Us. And I am the more Con∣cerned to Press this, because of the great Preparations which the French make to be Early in the Field this Year. My Lords, I have had such Experience of your Good Affections, and I have such an entire Satisfaction in the Choice, which My People have made of you, Gentlemen of the House of Commons, That I promise My Self a Happy Con∣clusion of this Session, unless you suffer your selves to be misled into Heats and Divisions; which, being the only Hope Our Enemies have now left, I make no Doubt but you will entirely Disappoint, by your Prudence and Love to your Countrey. Edinburgh, Re-printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to the Kings Most Excellent Majesty, 1695.
