W3668 E198_8 99873597 157483
An Occasionall SPEECH MADE TO THE HOVSE OF COMMONS this Parliament, 1641. Against Bishops. BY Sir JOHN WRAY, Knight and Baronet. Being none of the 8. Speeches before published. LONDON, Printed for IOHN NICHOLSON. 1641.
Sir JOHN WRAYES SPEECH concerning BISHOPS, 1641. THe first chalenge for Lord∣ly Primacie hath of old beene grounded out of the great Charter, by which they hold an Episcopall primacy or Iurisdiction to belong to their state of Prelacie: this is their temporall foundation and maine object Here I demand of them unto what Church this great Charter was granted, and whether it were not granted unto the Church of GOD in England? Let the words of the Magna Charta decide this
which are these; Concessimus Deo pro nobis in perpetuum, quod Ecclesia Anglioana libera sit, habeat omnia Iura sua Integra & libertates suas illaesas. Now by this Charter, if it bee rightly inter∣preted, there is first provision made, that honour and worship be yeelded unto GOD, as truly and indeed belong unto him. Secondly, that not only such Rights and Liberties as the King and his pro∣genitors, but also that such as God had endowed the Church of England with, which God himselfe hath given by his Law unto the universall Church, and in that which the Kings of England by their Charter have bequeathed to the particular Church of England, and this we doubt not was the cause that moved Hen. 8. so effectually and pow∣erfully to bend himselfe against the Popes Supremacy, usurped at that time over the Church of England, for, saith the King, we will with hazard of
life and losse of our Crowne uphold and defend in our Realmes whatsoever we shall know to be the will of God. The Church of God then in England not being free, according to the great Charter, but in bondage and servitude to the See of Rome, contrary to the Law of God, the King judged it to stand highly with his honor, and his Oath to reforme, redresse, and amend the abuses of the same See. If then it might please our gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles, that now is, in Imitation of that his noble Proge∣nitor to vouchsafe an abolishment of all Lordly primacy executed by Arch∣episcopall & Episcopall authority over the Ministers of Christ, his Highnesse in so doing could no more rightly be charged with the violatiō of the great Charter, then might K. Henry the 8. with the banishment of the Popish Supre∣macy, or then our late Soveraign Lady Q Elizabeth could be justly burdened
with the breach of her oath by the e∣stablishment of the Gospell. Now if the Kings of England by reason of their oath were so streightly tyed to the words of the great Charter, that they might not in any sort have disanulled any supposed Rights, or Liberties of the Church used & confirmed by the said Charter unto the Church, that then was supposed to be the Church of God in England, then belike K. Henry 8. might be attainted to have gone against the great Charter & against his oath, when by the overthrow of Abbeys and Mona∣steries he tooke away the Rights and Li∣berties of the Abbots and Priors, for by expresse words of the great Charter, Ab∣bots and Priors had as large and ample a Patent for their Rights and Liberties, as our Archbishops and Bishops, can at this day challenge for their Primacy. If then the Rights and Liberties of the one, as being against the Law of God, be duely & lawfully takes away,
notwithstanding any matter, clause or sentence contained in the great Char∣ter, the other having but little reason by colour of the great Charter to stand upon their pantables, and to contend for their painted Sheaves, for this is a Rule and Maxime in Gods lawes; that In omni Iuramento semper excipitur autho∣ritas majoris. Vnlesse then they be able to justifie by the holy Scriptures, that such Rights and Liberties, as they pretend for their spirituall Primacy over the Ministers of Christ, be in deed & truth inferred un∣to them by the holy law of God, I sup∣pose the Ks. Highnesse (as successor to H. 8. and as most just inheritour of the Crowne of England) by the words of the great Charter, and by his oath, is bound utterly to abolish all Lordly Primacy, as hitherto upheld and de∣fended, partly by ignorance and part∣ly by an unreasonable and evill Cu∣stome. FINIS.
