13693 99891917 183104 Renowned Robin Hood: Or, His famous Archery truly related: with the worthy exploits he acted before Queen Katherine, he being an Out-law man, and how she for the same obtained of the King, his owne, and his fellowes pardon. To a new tune. GOld tane from the Kings Harbengers, downe a downe a downe, as seldome hath beene seene, downe a downe a downe, And carried by bold Robin Hood, for a preesent to the Queene. downe a downe a downe. If that I liue a yeare to an end, thus can Quéene Katherine say: Bold Robin Hood, I will be thy friend, and all thy Yeomen gay. The Quéene is to her Chamber gone, as fast as shee can wen, She cals vnto her lonely Page, his name was Richard Patringten. Come hither to me thou louely Page, come thou hither to mee. For thou must post to Nottingham as fast as thou can drée. And as thou goest to Nottingham, search all those English wood, Enquire of one good Yeoman or another, that can tell thee of Robin Hood. Sometimes hee went, sometimes hée ran, as fast as hee could win, And when hee came at Nottingham, there he tooke vp his Inne. And when he came at Nottingham, and had tooke vp his Inne, He cals for a Pottle of Renish wine, and dranke a health to his Quéene. There sate a Yeoman by his side, tell me sweet Page said hee, What is thy businesse, or the cause so far in this North Countrey. This is my businesse and the cause, Sir, Ile tell it you for good, To enquire of one good yeoman or another to tell me of Robin Hood. Ile get my horse betime in the morne, be it be breake of day, And I will shew thee bold Robin Hood, and all his Yeomen gay. When that he came at Robin Hoods place, he fell downe on his knée, Queene Katherine she doth greet you well, she gréets you well by me. She bids you post to faire London Court, not fearing any thing, For there shall be a little sport, and she hath sent you her Ring. Robin tooke his mantle from his backe, it was of the Lincolne gréene, And sent that by this louely Page, for a present vnto the Queene. In Summer time when leaues grow gréene, it's a seemely sight to sée How Robin Hood himselfe had drest, and all his Yeomandry. He clothed his men in Lincolne gréene, and himselfe in Scarlet Red, Blacke hats, white feathers, all alike now bold Robin Hood is rid. And when he came at Londons Court, hee fell downe on his knée, Thou art welcome Locksly, said the Quéen, and all thy good Yeomen three. The King is into Fensbury field marching in battle ray, And after fellowes bold Robin Hood, and all his Yeomen gay. Come hither Tepus (said the King) downe a downe a downe, how bearer after me, downe a downe a downe, Come measure mout with this line, how long our marke shall be. downe a downe a downe. To second part, To the same tune. VVHat is the wager said the Quéene, that must I now know here? Thrée hundred Tun of Rhenish wine, three hundred Tun of Béere. Thrée hundred of the fattest Harts that ran on Dallom Lee. That's a Princely wager said the King, that needs must I tell thee. With that bespake one Clifton then, downe a downe a downe, fall quickly and full soone, downe a downe a downe, Measure no markes for vs most Soueraigne siege, wée'l shoot at Sun and Moone. downe a downe a downe. Full fifteene score your marke shall be, full fifteene score shall stand: Ile lay my bow said Clifton then, Ile cleaue the Willow wand. With that the Kings Archer led about, while it was three and none: With that the Ladies began to shout, Madam your game is gone. A boone, a boone, Queene Katherine cries, I craue on my bare knée: Is there any knight of your priuy counsell, of Queene Katherines part will be? Come hither to mée Sir Richard Lee, thou art a knight full good, For I doe know by thy pedigrée, thou sprung'st from Gowers blood. Come hither to me thou Bishop of Hereford∣shire, for a noble Priest was hee, By my siluer Miter said the Bishop then, Ile not bet one peny. The King hath Archers of his owne, full ready and full light: And these be strangers euery one, no man knowes what they hight. What wilt thou bet said Robin Hood, thou seest our game the worse: By my siluer Miter said the Bishop then, all my money within my Purse. What is in thy Purse said Robin Hood, throw it downe on the ground, Fiftéen score nobles said the Bishop then, it's neere an hundred pound. Robin Hood tooke his bagge from his side, and threw it downe on the gréene, William Scadlock went smiling away, I know who this money must win. With that the Kings Archers led about, while it was thrée and three, With that the Ladies gaue a shout, Woodcock beware thy née. It is thrée and three. Now said the King, the next three pay for all: Robin Hood went and whisper'd to the Queen the Kings part shall be but small. Robin Hood hee led about, hee shot it vnder hand: And Clifton with a baring Arrow, hee cloue the willow wand. And little Midge the Millers Son, hee shot not much the worse, He shot within a finger of the prick, now Bishop beware thy purse. A boone, a boone, Queene Katherine cryed, I craue that on my bare knée, That you will angry be with none that is of my partie. They shall haue forty daies to come, and forty daies to goe, And three times forty to sport and play, then welcome friend or foe. Then thou art welcome Robin Hood said the Queene, and so is little John, So is Midge the Millers Son, thrice welcome euery one. Is this Robin Hood now said the King? for it was so told to mee, That hee was slaine in Pallace gates, so far in the North Country. Is this Robin Hood said the Bishop then, as I sée well to be? Had I knowne that had been that bold out-law I would not bet one peny. Hée tooke mee late one Saturday at night, and bound mee fast to a tree, And made me sing a masse, God wot, to him and his Yeomen three. What an if I did saies Robin Hood, of that mae I was faine, For recompence to thee hee saies, here's halfe thy gold againe. Now nay, now nay, saies little Iohn, downe a downe a downe, master that shall not be, downe a downe a downe, Wee must giue gifts to the Kings Officers, that gold will serue thee and mee. downe a downe a downe. FINIS. Printed at London for Francis-Groue.
