19250.5 99884308 183021
Labour in vaine. OR An imperfect description of Love. Imperfect I well call it may, For who can all Loves parts display? To a dainty new tune, called Ienkinson. FIe vpon loue, fond loue, false loue, Great are the torments that Louers endure: It is a snare, brings care, bones bare, None can a remedy for it procure: Of all the afflictions that are incident To vs while we march vnder Times regiment, There's nothing to man brings so much discontent as loue vnbeloued againe. It breaketh our sleep, it distracteth the wit, It makes vs doe things that for men are vnfit: If I may but giue It a true censure on it, shall be call'd Labour in vaine. Loue is a fire, hot fire, fierce fire, Who can abide the extremity on't! It burnes the reines, great pains, small gaines Shall a man get after beauty to hunt: Tis that which the learned by right doe name (As I doe coniecture) the Idalean flame, Jove grant that I neuer doe féele the same. so néer as I can Ile refrain: Yet if the blind rascall at me shall shoot, I know to withstand him it were no boot, Both young men and maidens with you look to't, For this is right Labour in vain. Loue is a well, déepe well, stéep well, No man can sound its profundity right: The water in't, melts int sets stint Both to the Pesant, the Lord, and the Knight: It is Aganipe, or Helicon, It giues him inuention that erst had none: It yéelds enough matter to worke vpon For euery illiterate swaine: Tis like to that water where Tantalus stood, A man may be staru'd among plenty of food, I had rather taste of the coole running flood, Then drink at this Labour in vain.
The second part, To the same tune. LOue is a hill, high hill, great hill, No man ere climb'd to the top of the same: He that aspires, it tyres, with bryers It is inuironed wilde men to tame. Tis that against which poore Sisiphus strives To roule up a stone, which downward driues, This restlesse foyle costs many mens liues, & few by the iourney do gain: The paths are so difficult to find out, The best Cosmographer his skill may doubt, Twill daunt him if he thinks himselfe most stout, And this is right Labour in vain. Loue is a chaine, strong chaine, long chaine, He who is bound in it seldome gets free, Twill hold him fast, till th'last, houre's past, Though strong as Hector, or Aiax he be, Tis that wherewith lusty Aleides bound The thrée headed Cerberus, that hell-hound, When he did Don Plutoes power confound, and got Proserpina againe. Tis that where with Sampson, by'th Philistims was Bound to the mill where he ground like an asse: Tis stronger then iron, stéele, or brasse, And this is call'd Labour in vain. Loue is a whéele, round whéele, swift whéele, Which when tis turning none's able to stop: In circle wise, it flyes, and hyes Swiftly to bring what was lowest to'th top: Tis that which vnfortunate Ixion turnes, While at his nere ending labour he mournes, The axletrée of it perpetually burnes, because it no liquor can gaine: In briefe, Loue is any thing that's without rest, A passion that boileth and scaldeth the breast, Yet he who loues lou'd againe (so all this jest) Dwelsr not at the Labour in vain. M. P. Finis. Printed at London for Thomas Lambert.
