a587a 99884185 182927
An Admirable New  Northern Story Of two constant Lovers as I understand, Were born near Appleby in Westmoeand, The Lads name Anthony, Constance the Lass, To Sea they went both and great dangers did pass: How they suffer'd ship wrack on the Coast of Spain For two years divided, and then met ag, By wonderfull forture and care accident, And now both live at home with joy and content. The Tune is I would thou wer't in Shrewsbury. TWo Lovers in the North, Constance and Anthony, Of them I will set forth a gallant History; They lov'd exceeding well, as plainly doth appear; But that which I shall tell, the like you ne'r did hear. Still she crys Anthony, my bonny Anthony, Gang thou by Land or Sea, I'll wend along with thee, Anthony must to Sea, his Calling did him bind, My Constance, Dear, quoth he, I must leave thee behind. I prithee do not grieve, thy tears will not prevail: I'll think on thee, my Sweet, when the Ships under Sail. But still, &c. OHw may that be? said he, consider well the case: Quoth she, sweet Anthony, I'll bide not in this place. If thou gang, so will I, of the means do not doubt: A Womans policy great matters may find out: My bonny Anthony, &c. I would be very glad, but prithee tell me how? I'll dress me like a Lad, what say'st thou to me now? The Sea thou can'st nobrook, yes very well, quoth she, I'll Scullion to the Cook for thy sweet company. My bonny, &c. Anthony's leave she had, and drest in Mans array, She seem'd the blithest Lad seen on a Summers Day. O see what Love can do, at home she will not bide: With her true Love she'll go, let well or woe betide. My dearest, &c. In the Ship 'twas her Lott to be the under-Cook; And at the Fire hot, wonderful pains she took: She served e'ry one, fitting to their degree; And now and then alone, she kissed Anthony. My bonny Anthony, my bonny Anthony, Gang thou by Land or Sea, I'll wend along with thee.
ALack and weladay, by Tempest on the Main, Their Sip was cast away upon the Coast of Spain; To th' mercy of the Waves, they all committed were, Constance her own self saves, then she crys for her dear, My bonny Anthony, my bonny Anthony, Gang thou by Land or Sea, I'le wend along with thee. Swimming upon a Plank, at Bilbo she got ashore First she did heaven thank, then she lamented sore, O woe is me, said she, the saddest Lass alive, My dearest Anthony, now on the Sea doth drive. My bonny, &c. What shall become of me, why do I strive for shore, Sith my sweet Anthony, I never shall see more? Fair Constance do not grieve, the same good providence, Hath sav' thy lover sweet, but he is far from hence, Still, &c. A Spanish Merchant rich. saw this far seeming Lad, That did lament so much, and ws so grevious sad, He had in England been and English understood, He having heard and seen, he in amazement stood. Still, &c. The Merchant asked her, what was that Anthony, Quoth she, my Brother Sir, who came from thence with me: He did her entertain, thinking she was a Boy, Two years she did remain, before she met her joy. Still, &c. Anthony up was tane by an English Runagade, With whom he did remain, at the Sea roving trade: I'th nature of a slave, he did i'th Galley row, Thus he his life did save, but Constance did not know: Sill she cryes Anthony my bonny Anthony, Gang thou by Land or Sea, I'l wend along with thee. Now mark what came to pass, see how the fates did work, A Ship that her Masters was, supriz'd this English Turk, And into Bilbo brought all that aboard her were, Constance still little thought, Anthony was so near. Still, &c. When they were come on shore Anthony and the rest, She who was sad before, was now with joy possest, The Merchant much did muse, at this so sudden change, He did demand the News, which unto im was strange: Now she, &c. Upon her knees she fell, unto her Master kind, And all the truth did tell, nothing she kept behind: At which he did admire, and in a ship of Spain, Not paying for their hire, he sent them home again. Now she, &c. The Spanish Merchant rich, did of's own bounty give A sum of Gold on which they now most bravely live: And now in Westmoreland, they were joyn'd hand in hand Constancy and Anthony, they live in mirth and glee, Now she says Anthony, my bonny Anthony, Good providence we see, hath guarded thee and me. FINIS. Printed for William Thacker at the Angel in Duck-Lane, and A. M.
