C3623 52528762 178728
C R HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms HIS MAJESTIE'S TWO GRACIOUS LETTERS, Viz. ONE Sent to the House of PEERS, by Sir John Greenvile Knight, from Breda. THE OTHER, To the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of the City of LONDON. CHARLES R. RIght Trusty and Right Well-Beloved Cosins, and Right Trusty and Well-Beloved Cosins, and Trusty and Right Well-Beloved, We Greet you Well: We cannot have a better reason to promise Our Self an end of Our Common Sufferings and Calamities, and that Our Own Just Power and Authority, will with Gods Blessing be Restored to Us, than that We hear You are again ac∣knowledged to have that Authority and Jurisdiction, which hath alwayes belonged to You, by Your Birth, and the Fundamentall Laws of the Land: And We have thought it very fit and safe for Us, to call to you for your help in composing the confounding Distempers and Distractions of the Kingdom, in which your Sufferings are next to those We have undergon Our Self; And therefore you cannot but be the most proper Counsellors for removing those Mischiefs, and for preventing the like for the future: How great a Trust We repose in you for the Procuring and Establishing a Blessed Peace and Security for the Kingdom, will appear to you by Our enclosed Declara∣tion; which Trust, We are most confident You will discharge with that Justice and Wisdom, that becomes You, and must alwayes be expected from You; and that upon your Experience, how one Violation succeeds another, when the known Relations, and Rules of Justice, are once transgressed, You will be as jealous for the Rights of the Crown, and for the Honour of your King, as for your Selves: And then you cannot but discharge your Trust with good Success, and provide for, and establish the Peace, Happiness, and Honour of King, Lords, and Commons, upon that Foundation which can only support it, and VVe shall be all happy in each other: And as the whole Kingdom will bless God for You all, So VVe shall hold Our Self obliged in an especiall manner to thank You in particular, according to the Affection You shall express towards Us. VVe need the less enlarge to You upon this Subject, because VVe have likewise writ to the House of Commons, which VVe suppose they will Communicate to You: And VVe pray God to bless your joynt Endeavours for the good of Us all; And so VVe bid You very heartily farewel. Given at Our Court at Breda, this  Day of April, 1660. In the Twelfth Year of Our Reign. CHARLES R. TRusty and Wel-beloved, We greet you well. In these great Revolutions which of late have happened in that Our Kingdom, to the wonder and amaze∣ment of all the World, there is none that we have looked upon with more Comfort, than the so frequent and publick manifestations of their affections to Us in the City of LONDON, which hath exceedingly raised Our Spirits, and which, no doubt, hath proceeded from the Spirit of GOD, and His extraordinary Mercy to the Nation, which hath been encouraged by you, and your good example, to assert that Government un∣der which it hath so many hundred years enjoyed as great felicity as any Nation in Europe, and to discountenance the imaginations of those, who would subject our Subjects to a Government they have not yet devised; and to satisfie the pride and ambition of a few ill men, would introduce the most Arbitrary and Tyrannical Power that was ever yet heard of: How long we have all suffered under those and the like devices, all the world takes notice, to the no small reproach of the English Nation, which we hope is now providing for its own Security and Redemption, and will be no longer bewitched by those Inventions: how desirous we are to contribute to the obtaining the Peace and Happinesse of Our Subjects, without further effusion of blood; and how far we are from desiring to recover what belongs to Us by a War, if it can be otherwayes done, will appear to you by the enclosed DECLARATION, which, together with this Our LETTER, We have entrusted Our right trusty and welbeloved Cosin the Lord Viscount Mordant, and Our trusty and welbeloved Servant, Sir John Greenvile Knight, one of the Gentlemen of Our Bed-chamber, to deliver to you; to the end that you, and all the rest of Our good Subjects of that Our City of LONDON (to whom We desire it should be published) may know how far We are from the desire of Revenge, or that the Peace, Happinesse, and Security of the Kingdom should be raised upon any other foundation than the affection and hearts of Our Subjects, and their own consents: We have not the least doubt of your just sense of those Our Condescentions, or of your zeal to advance and promote the same good End, by disposing all men to meet Us with the same affection and tendernesse, in restoring the fundamental Laws to that Reverence that is due to them, and upon the preservation whereof all our happinesse depends: And you will have no reason to doubt of enjoying your full share in that happinesse, and of the improving it by Our particular affection to you. It is very naturall for all men to do all the good they can for their native Country, and to advance the honour of it. And as We have that full affection for the King∣dom in general, so We would not be thought to be without some extraordinary kindnesse for Our native City in particular, which We shall manifest on all occa∣sions, not only by renewing their Charter, and confirming all those Priviledges which they have received from Our Predecessors, but by adding and granting any new Favours which may advance the Trade, Wealth and Honour of that Our native City, for which We will be so solicitous, that We doubt not but that it will in due time receive some Benefit and Advantage in all those respects, even from Our own observation and experience abroad; and We are most confident We shall never be disappointed in Our expectation of all possible service from your affections. And so We bid you farewell. Given at Our Court at Breda, the  day of April, 1660. in the Twelfth year of Our Reign. To Our Trusty and Wel-beloved, the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Our City of LONDON. At a Common Council, holden the first of May, 1660. ORdered by this Court, That the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor do acquaint the Lord Viscount Mordant and Sir John Greenvile (who brought the said LETTER and DECLARATION) That this Court do return most humble and hearty thanks to his Majesty for his gracious Condescentions to, and owning this Court and City, expressed in his Majesties said LETTER and DECLARATION: And do likewise return hearty thanks to the said honourable persons that brought the said gracious Message: And do declare this Courts ready submission to his Ma∣jesties Government: And that in testimony thereof, they had now taken down the Commonwealths Arms, and ordered his Majesties Arms to be set up. And further, that this Court do beg the favour of the Lord Mordant to return with an Answer in Writing to his Majesty from this Court. And also, that this Court do intend very speedily to send Members of their own to wait on his Majestie. SADLER. EDINBƲRGH, Re-printed by Christopher Higgins, in Harts Close, over against the Trone-Church, 1660.
