D1142 99889197 182726
A Description of a Great Sea-Storm, That happened to some Ships in the Gulph of FLORIDA, in September last; Drawn up by one of the Company, and sent to his Friend at London. THE PREFACE. THe blustring Winds are husht into a Calme; No Air stirs now, but what my Muse Embalm'd, Breaths forth to thee, dear Friend; Heaven smiles upon My Paper, and the Sea turnes Helicon; The Mermaids Muses all, the Sea-Nymphs, bring Aid to my Genius, whilst to thee I Sing Of Storms, Gusts, Tempests, if compar'd to these, Bermoodus Winds are but a Gentle Breez; And to express them fully, I am faine To raise in Verse a kind of Hurrycane. THE STORME. NOthing but Air and Water is in sight; (I am no Poet here, since Truth I wright.) When Eolus with his Iron whistle Rouzes The blustring breathings from their Airy houses, Which like to Libertines let loose, will know No Law to guide them, but begin to blow The Sea to swell her teaming Womb, brings forth Wave after wave, and each of greater birth: Waves grow to Surges, Surges Billowes turn; The Ocean is all Timpany, the Ʋrn Of water is a brimmer; Neptune drinks So full a Cup it over-runs the brinks. To Amphetrites Health, the proud waves dash At Heaven as though its Cloudy Face t'would wash: Or sure the lower Water now was bent To mix with that above the Firmament; Or the cold Element did go about To put the Element of Fire out. Our Ship now under water seems to sayle Like to a drowned Tost in John Cook's Ale. The Sea rould up in Mountains: O! 'tis such Your Cottsall-Hill's a Wart, if't be so much, Which fall again into such hollow Vales I thought I'de crost the Sea by Land ore Wales; And then to add Confusion to the Seas, The Saylers speak such Babel words as these: Hale in maine Bowlin, Mizen tack aboard; A Language, like a Storm, to be abhorr'd: I know not which was loudest, their rude Tongues, Or the Bigg Winds with her whole Cards of Lungs. So hideous was the Noise, that one might well Fancy himself to be with Souls in Hell; But that the Torments differ, those Souls are With Fire punisht, we with Water here. Our Helme that should our Swimming-Colledge sway, We lash't it up, lest it should run away. Have you a Hedge seen hung with Beggars Fleeces? So hung our tattered Mainsaile down in pieces. Our Tackling crack't as if it had been made To string some Fiddle, not the Sea-mans Trade. Whilst her own Knell the Sea-sick Vessel Rings, In breaking of her Ropes, the Ships Heart-string As to repent, but never to amend; So we pumpt th'Ship, even to as little end; For all the water we pumpt out with pain, The Sea returns with scorne, and more again. The Guns we carry'd to be our Defence, Heaven thunder'd so, it almost scar'd them then And yet to Heaven for this give thanks we may, But for it's Lightning we had had no Day. The dropy Clouds drinking Salt-water sick, Did spew it down upon our Heads so thick; That twixt the low'r and upper Seas that fell, Our Ship a Vessel seem'd, and we Mackrell. Pickl'd in Brine, and in our Cabines lye Soust up for Lasting Immortality. The Fear of being drowned, made us wish Our selves transpeciated into Fish. Indeed this Fear did so possess each one, All look't like Shotten-Herring, or Poor-John: Nay of our Saving, there was so much doubt, The Masters Faith begun to tack about; And had he perish't in this doubtful Fit, His Conscience sure (with his own Ship) had For which way into Heaven could his Soul Steer, Starboard or Larbord that still cries, No neer? But we were in great Danger, you will say, If Sea-men once begin to Kneele, and Pray; What Holy Church ne're could, Rough Seas hav Made Sea-men buckle to Devotion, And force from them their Letany, whilst thus They whimper out, Good Lord deliver us! So pray I too, good Lord deliver thee, Dear Friend, from being taught to Pray at Be wise, and keep the Shoar then, since you m Go in by Land to your VIRGINIA. Licensed, August the 5th. 1671. Roger L'Estrange. Armes in the Poultry, 1671.
