E3017A 47012423 174392
Englands pleasant May-Flovver OR, Charles the second, as we say, Came home the twenty ninth of May. Let Loyal hearts rejoyce and sing For joy they have got a Gracious KING. The tune is, Upon Sait Davids day. WHy should we speak of Cesars Acts, or Shimei's treacheries, Or of the Grand Notorious Facts of Cromwels Tyrannies. But what we all might gladly sing, and bravely chant and say, That Charles the second did come in the twentie ninth of May. Since that his Royal person went from us beyond the Seas, Much blood and treasure have béen spent but nere obtained peace: Vntill the Lord with-held his hand as we might chearfull say, And did a healing balsome send the twenty, &c. This healing Balsome Soveraign is, and a very Cordial thing, Which many evils can suppress by vertue of a King, And poysoned blisters overcome which in thrée Kingdoms lay, Twas God that sent this Balsome home the twenty, &c. Surely he is determined. a mighty King on Earth, That God hath so remembred, and kept him from his birth: As David from the Lyons paws whose beard he bore away. So Charles the second made good Laws the twenty ninth of May. The King of Africa subdu'd by fire and by sword, But Charles the second was indu'd with power from the Lord. Who trained was in Davids field with prayers night and day. That he thrée stately Kingdome held the twenty, &c. King David had a General strong, and Joab was cal'd by name, He made him Lord of Babylon, and rul'd where ere he came. But through his spleen with envi'd quarrels David did betray. But our Saint George brought home King Charls the twenty ninth of May The second part, To the same tune. NOw give me leave to speak so far as truth might justifie, Of that most glorious blazing Star at his Nativity, The grandest Planet of the morn shin'd glorious at noon day: Which was the time King Charls was born the twenty ninth of May. I think I could my self ingage, in déep Astrologie, To speak what this same Star presag'd of Grorious Majesty A mighty Monarch he shall Reign which makes me chnt and say Now brave King Charls is come again. the twenty, &c. 'Twould blunt the pen of any Poet, to write what may be said, But to the Order Honi Soyt just tribute shall be paid For such a prudent Gracious King lets never cease to pray, He heald the sick when he came in the twentie &c. Gods holy hand doth him protect his Angels doth him guard, Likewise his students doth direct, which makes his foes affraid. On Davids musick we will sing and bravely chant and say, The glory of the world came in the twentie ninth of May. He alwayes weareth Joshua's hands and beareth Davids praise. And like to upright Job he stands to wear out Abrahams dayes. He was the wit of Solomon, and upright in his way. So like to Joseph he came home the twenty ninth of May. Like Daniel he was so devout, his Star did follow him, In all his tragedyes throughout like that of Bethleem. Twelve years he travel'd Christendom that makes me chant and say, 'Twas marked out just for his own, the twenty &c. Now let all people celebrate this day which is so pure, And to be kept by Church and State for ever to endure. That Generations all might sée the honour of the day, Which everlasting it shall be the twenty, &c. So God preserve our Gracious King the Duke of Yorke also, Defend them from the Dragons sting and every Christian Foe. Then let true Loyal Subjects sing and bravely chant and say, The like in England nere came in the twenty ninth of May. Finis. Printed for W. Gibertson.
