F286 99887691 183333
The Faithful Shepherd; Or, The Loves of Tommy and Nanny. To a New Scotch Tune: Or, There was an a bonny young Lad, &c. WHen Tommy became first a Lover, his Nanny so fir'd ev'ry part, That poor Tommy's eyes did discover the Conquest she made of his heart: Ah! Nanny, quoth he, be not cruel, reverse that ill fate of your mind, Who Nature ordain'd for a jewel, should never be fair and unkind: Ah! Nanny, quoth he &c, Were all those plump smiling Graces, that delicate supple white skin, That seems to disoul in the Embraces, and would force a Senick to Sin: Were these my dear Nanny, bestow'd thee to keep a perverse peevish mind; Or to bless thy dear Tommy that loves thee, ah! never be fair and unkind: Were these &c. The hopes of those Ivory Pillows, to repose my poor head on at night, Secures me from all Fortunes Billows, or ought that can Nature affright: There's nothing but Nanny can please me, to Nanny my Soul is confin'd, No, nothing but Nanny can ease me, then Nanny dear Nanny be kind; Then's nothing &c. In Nannys dear sight I have anguish, which Blushes proclaim in my face, And out of her sight I do languish, to think who possesses my place: Ah! Nanny, no more let me leave thee, but both be together confin'd, And of all my fears undeceive me, and for ever for ever be kind: Ah! Nanny, &c. Ah! Nanny, you told me you lov'd me, and bid me no more to tomplain, And when I have sigh'd have reprov'd me, and kist me, and vow'd it a Game, You told me that Fortune should never dispoyl what your Soul had design'd, That you would be Tommys for ever, and for ever to Tommy be kind: You told, &c. Remember dear Nanny, you said it, and call'd all the Gods to attest, And blushing to think that you did it, you laid your face close to my Breast: Remember how dearly I blest ye, and beg'd ne'r to alter your mind, Remember how often you kist me, and vow'd you would alwayes be kind: Remember how &c, But now cruel Nanny has left me, and owns me no more for her own, And of all my joys has bereft me, and turn'd all my hopes to dispair: That Nanny that once had so loving: obliedging, so gentle a mind, That Nanny of all Creatures moving, Is now perjur'd, false, and unkind; That Nanny, &c. What tho' my dear Nanny be cruel, and nothing her fancy can move, Yet Nanny must still be my jewel, and all that my Soul can love: Perhaps 'tis no alter of Nature, bu only for Reasons Confin'd, So lovely so pritty a Creature, can never prove false and unkind. FINIS.
