G1946B R188162 51784559 174968
THE Comparative Anatomy OF Stomachs and Guts BEGƲN. BEING SEVERAL LECTURES Read before the ROYAL SOCIETY. In the Year, 1676. By Nehemjah Grew M. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and of the Colledge of Physitians. LONDON, Printed by W. Rawlins, for the Author, 1681.
An Advertisement to the Reader. WHereas a Book Entitul'd, Exercitatio Anatomico-Medica de Glandulis Intestinorum, earum{que} Ʋsu & Affectibus. Cui subjungitur Anatome Ventriculi Gellinacei. Studio Joh. Conradi Peyeri Scafhusa-Helvetij, 1677. In which are found some of those Observations contained in the following Lectures. It was therefore thought fit, here to take Notice, That the said Book was not Published, till the Year after these Lectures were Read.
CHAP. I. Of the Stomachs and Guts of Six Carnivorous Quadrupeds; sc. The Weesle, Fitchet, Polecat, Cat, Dog and Fox. I Am not ignorant of what many Learned and Inquisi∣tive Men, both at home and abroad, especially in this last Century, have performed in the Anatomy of Ani∣mals. After all whom, if it be demanded, what is left for me to do? I Answer in the words of Seneca, (a) Epist. 64. Multum adhuc restat operis, multúm{que} restabit; nec ulli Nato, post mille Saecula, praecludetur occasio, aliquid adhuc adjiciendi. I shall omit most of what is already noted by Anatomists; and princially speak of those things, which have hitherto been unobserv'd. A Weesle. The Gulet of a Weesle (which from the Ears to the set∣ting on of the Tail was 10 inches) about five inches long, ¼ in Diametre, equally wide, and thin. Enters the Stomach at the left End. The Stomach about three inches long; proportionably, more than a Dogs. An inch in Diametre at the upper Ori∣fice; at the nether, ¼; having a flexure towards its Con∣junction with the Guts: shaped like to the body of a pair of Bag-Pipes. Thin, and plain, or without Folds. Which seems to be the property of the Stomachs of most Rapaci∣ous Quadrupeds. The Guts thin, and plain, or with little store of Glands, especially of such as in most Carnivorous Animals are con∣spicuous. About a yard in length, and ½ an inch in Dia∣metre; without any considerable contraction, difference of Size, Texture or Substance from the Stomach to the Anus. No Colon. No Caecum. So that it seems to be all but One single Gut. Contrary to what is seen in any other Quadru∣ped, I have opened. At the Anus, a Couple of Bags grow to the Gut; one
on each side. Each of them, fill'd, about the bigness of a large Garden-Peas: containing a yellow, and thickish Li∣quor, extraordinary foetid, and having the peculiar scent of the Animal in the most intense degree. Over the Bags or Bladders, is spread the Sphincter-Muscle; which compressing Them and the Anus both together, forceth them to a con∣temporary evacution. I have not yet dissected the Civet-Cat, but suppose, that these Bags are analogous to those that contain the Civet in that Animal. These Bags, so far as I have observ'd, are proper to all Carnivorous Quadrupeds, and those only: as will further appear by the following Examples. A Fitchet. A FITCHET, being of kin to the Weesle; hath also a Stomach and Guts much alike. The Guts about a yard and two inches. At most, but two. The first, about two feet and ½ long; and ⅜ths of an inch over, where widest. Hath five or six Necks or Con∣tractions. And a little before most of them, stands a small Cluster of Glands, about as big as a Silver Half-peny. The second, is about ½ a quarter of a yard long, and ½ an inch over where widest. Very thin, plain, and without any Glands visible to the bare Eye. On each side the Anus, there is also a Bag of foetid Liquor, with the stink of the Animal. The Guts of these Two Animals, and I suppose like∣wise of the Ferret, are the most simple, and plain, of all I have observ'd in Quadrupeds. A Pole-Cat. The Gulet and Stomach of a POLE-CAT, are in shape like those of a Weesle. But the Guts are different. They may be reckon'd, four. The first, about ¾ of a yard long; ½ an inch over; very thin, and plain. The second, ¼ of a yard in length; ¼ of an inch over, and in some places more. This Gut is Glandulous and very thick, in comparison with the other, from end to end. The
Glands extream small, no bigger than little Pins heads. Yet every Gland hath its Orifice, out of which a Mucus or Pituita may be visibly squeez'd. The Third, is ½ a yard long; and about ½ an inch over, as the first. About the middle hereof, is a Cluster (of petite Glands) about two inches long, and ¼ of an inch broad. At the further end also, joyning to the fourth Gut, is ano∣ther like Cluster, but as broad again. Each Gland in both these Clusters, is about the bigness of a Mustard-Seed. Each of these Clusters, may be called a little PANCREAS INTESTINALE. Their difference is, That This hath not one common Ductus. Of these Clusters, it is observable, That both here, and in all the other Animals hereafter mention'd, they stand directly opposite to that side of the Gut, into which the Vessels are inserted. The Fourth, or Rectum, is separated from the former by a Contraction. Almost five inches long; and near the Anus, ¾ of an inch in Diametre. So that all the Guts together, are two yards, within ½ a quarter. This Animal hath neither Colon, nor Caecum. At the Anus, a pair of Bladders grow to the Gut, as in a Weesle; containing also a Liquor with the peculiar faetor of the Animal, most intense. A Cat. The Gulet of a well grown CAT, ¾ of an inch, where widest. The Texture two-fold. The Muscular Fibers of the upper half next the Throat, plainly Platted. A sort of Work, which will best be seen in the Gulet of a Sheep. Those of the other half, rather Annular, though not exactly so. The Stomach in shape like that of a Dog, and most other Carnivorous Quadrupeds; only somewhat shorter and rounder; being not above five inches long, yet 3½ over. But in the Guts divers Specialties are observable. Alto∣gether, about two yards and ¾ long. With respect to their substance, but two in number: To their shape, the first may be subdivided into four.
This first may be called Musculare: being in proportion, thicker or more carneous than the Guts of any Quadruped I have open'd. It hath about 28 or 30 Contractions; some an inch, others two or three inches distant one from another. I have not seen a quarter so many in any other Animal. It may be subdivided into four. The First, i. e. from the Stomach to the place where the Gut is considerably amplify'd, about a ¼ of a yard; and some∣what more than ¼ of an inch, over. The Second, i. e. to the place where more conspicuously contracted, about ½ a yard; and in its widest place, above ½ an inch, over. The Third, i. e. to the next greater dilatation, a yard and ⅛th; and ⅜ths of an inch, over; near the same width with that of the first. The Fourth, about ½ a yard and ½th; and ½ inch, over. So that two slender, and two ample ones are reciprocally joyn'd. This Intest. Musculare, is furnished with several Clusters of Glands, six or seven in number: each Cluster about ¾ of an inch long; and the last above three inches. This espe∣cially, as in the Pole-Cat, may be called PANCREAS IN∣TESTINALE. The Next Gut (in the place of the Rectum) may be called Membranaceum, in distinction from the former; be∣ing far more perspicuous and thin. About ½ a yard long; and where widest, an inch and ¼, over. So that its hollow is more than four times as great as of any part of the Intest. Mus∣culare; and eight or ten times as great as of the small parts. And doth therefore contain far more than all that Gut. To the undermost part of this Gut, about an inch and ½ before the Anus, is fasten'd the end of a slender Muscle; the other extremity, to one of the Vertebrae of the Loins. This Gut is furnished with several large Glands, not stand∣ing in Clusters, but singly, as in a Fox or a Dog presently to be describ'd; but not so big. The upper End of this Gut where it joyns to the Muscu∣lar, for the length of ¾ of an inch, is partly Conick and partly Helick; being, as it were, the beginning of a Caecum.
On each side the Anus, a Bag of foetid Liquor, as in the former Animals. To the Guts of a Cat, I suppose those of a Leopard, Tiger, and Lion, may have some Analogy. A Bitch. The Gulet of a BITCH (from the top of her Head to the setting on of her Tail about ¾ of a yard) near an inch in Diametre. Somewhat thick, redish, and muscular. The Stomach shaped as a Cats, saving that it is a little longer. In length, nine inches; in breadth, six; in depth, as much. Somewhat Muscular, as the Gulet. Not very visibly Glandulous, except near the lower Orifice. Where, for the space of three or four inches, are a great number of small Glands, yet fairly observable round about. The Guts are Four. The Frist, or Crassum, two yards and ½, and near an inch over, where widest. The Second, or Tenue, about a yard and ¾ long, and somewhat more than ½ an inch wide. The Third, or Caecum, where widest, near an inch; and about ½ a foot long; but winding with three flexures, three several ways. Not joyned to the Tenue, but the Rectum; and so postur'd, as to make an acute Angle not with the Rectum, but the Tenue; in other Animals. And the passage between This and the Rectum somewhat straight. The Fourth, or Rectum, half a yard; next the Caecum, an inch over; near the Anus an inch and ¾. All the Guts toge∣ther, near five yards. This only, of the Animals yet mention'd, hath a Caecum. Yet without a Colon. The Guts of this Animal, as well as the Gulet, are all of them thick, redish, and Muscular. The like, I suppose, are those of all Ossivorous Quadrupeds. They are furnished with store of Glands. In the Caecum, at several distances from ⅛th to ⅜ths of an inch. Very conspicu∣ous to the naked Eye, even after they are blown up and dry'd. In the two foremost, they stand in Clusters; and the Clusters in all, about 20. Some of them round, as big as a Silver Peny or Two-peny; and some Oval, the compass of an Almond: and some, especially towards the Caecum, two
or three inches long, and ½ an inch broad. Every Gland, as big as a Turnep-Seed. The Caecum besprinkled with Flat Glands, the breadth of a Marshmallow-Seed or little Spangle. And so the Rectum, especially towards the Anus; but here big. In the centre of these Flat Glands, the Orifice, or if you will the Anus of every Gland is very conspicuous: by which the Gland speweth out a certain Mucus or Pituita; as by compressing the Gut may be easily seen. So that although the Glands of the Stomach and Guts, especially in Men and Quadrupeds, seem to lie behind, or under the inner Membrane: yet the Mouths of them all, do open into the Hollow of the Stomach and Guts. The Pituita which is always found very copious in both, not being half of it, the spittle, or bred of the Aliment, as is ge∣nerally conceiv'd; but spewed out of these Glands. At the Anus, are two Bags of stinking Liquor, as in the aforesaid Animals. A Fox. The Gulet, Stomach and Guts of a FOX, (½ a year old, and ½ yard from Head to Tail) are much like to those of a Dog. But with some differences. The Gulet, in proportion, somewhat larger. The Stomach deeper. The first Gut, or the Crassum, far shorter, not above ½ a foot. The second, or the Tenue, somewhat wider. The Caecum, much larger; near ¾ of a foot long. It lies not strait out, but is wound up almost spirally. Where it joyn∣eth to the other Guts, ½ an inch over; at the other End, near an inch. The Guts furnished with several Clusters of Glands, as in a Dog, about 14 in number. That next the Caecum four inches long, and above ½ an inch broad. Before every large Cluster is a little Contraction in the Gut. In the Caecum and Rectum much larger than in the Bitch. I suppose it is proper to all other Ossivorous Animals, for the Rectum to be furnish'd with such Glands. Just upon the Anus lie two Bags of stinking Liquor, as in the Animals above-said.
CHAP. II. Of the Stomach and Guts of the Mole; which seems to feed on Insects. As also of the Urchan, Squirel, and Rat; which are chiefly Frugivorous. A Mole. THe Gulet of a MOLE, is not fasten'd to the End of the Stomach, as in the foregoing Animals, but to the middle. The Stomach shaped somewhat like that of a Polecat, and is as big; being three inches long, an inch and ¼ broad, and as deep: which in comparison with the small bulk of the Animal, is exceeding great: this Animal weigh∣ing not much above three Ounces; but an ordinary Pole∣cat betwixt 20 and 30. The Guts, a yard and ¾ long; longer than in the Carni∣vorous kind. About ¼ of an inch over every where. Near the Anus a little wider. So that they seem, so far, to be but two. Yet taking in their Texture, they may be three. The Texture of the First (about ¾ of a yard long) is plain and simple, to the Eye, as in other Guts. Of the Second, extreme Curious; the Fibers of the Muscular Membrane, making Ʋndulations or Indentures, continued for the length of ¾ of a yard, round about the Gut: very much resem∣bling the Needle-work, commonly called Irish-stich. But the Graver, though in other respects he hath done tole∣rably well, yet cometh short of the elegancy of this Work. Both these Guts are furnish'd with five or six small Clusters of Glands; each Cluster as big as a little Spangle. The Rectum, of a plain Texture, as the First. And with∣out any conspicuous Glands. Half a ¼ of a yard long, and where widest, ½ inch over. Here are none of the Bags described in the Weesle, &c. Nor any Caecum nor Colon.
An Ʋrchan. The Gulet of an URCHAN enters the Stomach towards the middle, as in a Mole. Somewhat small, not ¾ of an inch over. The Stomach not so large as in the Mole, yet bigger than in Carnivorous Animals; as than that of a Weesle, although the Body of an Ʋrchan of the same age be no bigger, as is plain, when the Skins of both are taken off. 'Tis also of a rounder shape. The Guts, for substance, seem to be but One. But from the difference of shape, may be accounted Four. The First, or Crassum, a yard and ⅛th long; and near ½ an inch over, where widest. It hath several, about 12 observable Con∣tractions; some of them an inch or two long, some more, and some less: which, as to their length, is peculiar to this Animal. The Second, or Gracile, is about ¾ of a yard long; ¼ of an inch over, and of an equal size throughout. The Third, or Amplissimum, ⅛th of a yard long; and above ¾ of an inch over, where widest. The Rectum, about as long; and above ½ an inch over. So the length of all the Guts, is Two yards and an inch or two: much longer, than in the Carnivorous kind. The Third and Last, are sprinkled with an innumerable company of extream small Glands, scarce discernible with∣out a Glass; through which, they shew as big as little Pins heads. This Animal hath none of those Bags near the Anus, above described in the Weesle, &c. Hath no Caecum. No Colon. A Squirell. That I open'd, was a Virginian, smaller than the European. The Gulet enters the Stomach towards the middle, as in a Mole and Ʋrchan very small, like the top of an Oaten-straw: so that the upper Orifice of the Stomach, hardly lets any thing, so much as wind, to pass into it. The Stomach two inches long; the left end, an inch over; the right, ½ an inch.
The Guts may be reckon'd Four. The First, which reacheth to the Caecum, above ½ a yard long; and near ¾ of an inch over. The Caecum very large, near three inches long, and about ½ an inch over. Lies spirally wound up on it self. The Third, about three inches long, not above ½th of an inch over. The Last, about as long. Hath two Contractions and Dilatations; where widest, ¼ of an inch over. All the Guts together without the Caecum, not ¾ of a yard: the shortest of all yet describ'd. Here are none of those Bags upon the Anus, above men∣tion'd. A Rat. The Gulet of a RAT, is extream small, like that of a Squi∣rel; and inserted into the Stomach in the same manner. The Stomach, with respect to that of a Mole, very small; sc. three times less: although the Body of a Rat, is above twice as big as the Body of a Mole. The substance hereof is also more plainly distinguish'd into two sorts. One half, towards the left end, more pel∣lucid, thin and membranous. The other half, sc. from the Insertion of the Gulet to the Pylorus, more opacous, thick and Muscular. The Guts may be accounted Five. The First, or Gracile, ½ an Eln long, and ¼ of an inch over. The Second, or Amplum, ½ a yard long, and ⅓d of an inch over. In these two together, are eleven or twelve Clusters of Glands; every Cluster about the breadth of a Spangle. The Third, or Caecum, contained by a Ligament in an Orbicular posture round about the Amplum. Above ½ an inch over, and three inches long. So that take it breadth and length, and it is as big as the Stomach it self. The Fourth, I crave leave to call the Abomafideum: for that it is in figure or structure very like to that Ventricle in a Sheep or Cow, called the Abomasus. About two inches long; and near its Conjunction with the Caecum, ⅔d of an inch over, narrowing all the way to the other end. That
which is curions herein, is, That 'tis furnished with a con∣siderable number of oblique Plates, about 46; 23 or thereabout, on each side oppositely; exactly like to those in the Abomasus of a Sheep. The Last, or Stercoraceum, is six inches long; ¼ of an inch over, where widest. And hath one or two Contracti∣ons, as in a Squirel. The Gulet, Stomach and Guts of a MOUSE, are little dif∣ferent. Only the Glands of the Guts fewer; and the Caecum, less. On the contrary, in a SHREW-MOUSE, the Caecum is rather greater, being ⅓d of an inch over, and two inches long. Yet the Body of the Animal five or six times less than that of a Rat. CHAP. III. Of the Stomach and Guts of such Animals as are both Frugivorous and Graminivorous; as the Rabbit, Horse, and Pig. A Rabbit. THe Gulet of a RABBIT is inserted into the middle of the Stomach, as in a Rat. The Stomach shaped almost like a Dogs, but bigger, with respect to the Animal. Its inner Membrane is gather'd up into several little Plates, like those in a Man. At the End next the Pylorus, much thicker, and more Glandulous, Ner∣vous, and Muscular than in any other part. The Guts, without the Caecum, are four yards long. In number, five. The First, or Jejunum, about four feet long, and ½ an inch over. The Second, or Ileum, as long; and above ½ an inch over. Whereas in some, as the Polecat, Dog, Ʋrchan, the Second Gut is smaller than the First. The Jejunum is besprinkled with a great number of very small Glands: which when the Guts are blown up and dry, look like a multitude of little Specks. Whence the Gut is more opacous than the Ileum.
Besides these smaller Glands, the Jejunum and Ileum to∣gether, are furnished with four or five Clusters, about as broad as a Two-penys; and every Gland as big as Wall flower-Seeds. Where the Ileum enters the Colon, it hath a very thick white and Glandulous Body, or Pancreas Intestinale: and the mouth of each Gland very apparent. The Caecum, of a prodigious size; above ½ a yard long, and and an inch and ½ over where widest. At the End of the Caecum hangs a certain Label, also con∣tinuously hollow with the Caecum, and may be accounted part of it. Betwixt three and four inches long; and at the upper end, ¾ of an inch over; in shape like a Man's Finger. Lined quite through with a thick Glandulous Body, like that in the end of the Ileum. All the rest of the Caecum very thin, and transparent: so as being blown up, it looks like those Skins of Iceing-Glass, formerly us'd for Transparent Flower-Works. This Gut seemeth at first, to have many Valvulae Conni∣ventes. But by being blown up, is fairly represented one single Valve or Plate, stretched out perpendicularly from the circuit of the Gut, and most curiously winding, in a spiral Line, from one End to the other. This Gut runs into the Colon, which is above a foot long, where widest or next the Caecum, an inch over; at the other end ½ an inch. It hath a double Vinculum, one on each side; by which 'tis gather'd up into a great number of little Cells, contiguous one to another throughout. In opening this Animal, being just dead, the Peristaltick motion of the Guts, was very apparent, especially in this Gut. By means whereof, the several Cells aforesaid, were made reciprocally to move in and out; so as while one moved and was convex inward, another next adjacent, mo∣ved and was convex outward; and so on by a kind of un∣dulation, for several inches together. This Gut is very thick and Glandulous all over, the Glands standing every where close and contiguous: so that the in∣side of the Gut, looks like the Seal-Fishes Skin. The Glands are not flat, as in the Guts above describ'd, but standing up round and high, like an infinite number of Papillae: the Mouths of each visibly open; from whence a Mucus may easily be express'd.
So that all Intestinal Glands are either Flat, or Spherical; both with a Mouth in the centre. Answering to a Button-Mould; the Flat Gland, to a flat Mould; and the Sphaerical Gland to the like Mould. The former may be called Rotu∣lares: the latter Papillares. The Last Gut is about four feet long; as wide as the Ileum, and near the Anus wider by ¼ of an inch. This Animal hath none of those Bags observed at the Anus of the Carnivorous kind. A Horse. The Gulet of a HORSE, is large, thick, red, and very Muscular. The properties of the Gulet in all Voraceous Quadrupeds. Inserted into the Stomach, not at one End, but the middle, as in a Rabbit. The Stomach single. Not much above a foot long, about ¼ of a yard deep, and seven inches over. Which in respect to the Animal, and especially to his Guts, is exceed∣ing small, I had not time to observe the inside, but proba∣bly, 'tis gather'd up into Plates or Folds as That of a Rabbit. The Guts are six. The First, or small Gut, about 28 yards. Near the Stomach, two inches over; towards the other end, two inches and ½. Which though it be wider by far, than the same Gut in any other Quadruped that I have open'd: yet in respect to the Amplitude of the other Guts in this Animal, it may properly be called the Small Gut. It hath six or eight Contractions or short narrow Necks; and amongst them, a long one, about a foot before its en∣trance into the Caecum. It hath very few, and but small Clusters of those larger Glands, observable in the fore-mention'd Animals. But of a smaller kind, the inner Coat is every where full as it can hold, each Gland not so big as a Cheese-Mite. The Second, or Caecum, is square; having not two, but four Ligaments which contain it in that figure. By means whereof the sides are also gather'd into many Cells, small and great, as the Colon it self in this and other Animals. The Bulk is vast: Near the Cone, or close end, about three inches over. But at the Base, or where it joyns to the
Colon, a ¼ of a yard over. And in length, a full yard. So that it is more than twice as big as the Stomach. The Learned Dr. Glisson, in speaking of the Stomachs of Quadrupeds, saith, That a Rabbit and a Horse have a double Caecum. His words are these; In Equis, Cuniculis, & Por∣cellis Indicis, Caecum duplex deprehenditur. But herein he is mistaken. As to a Rabbit, the contrary hath been seen in the Guts presented entire before this Honourable Presence. And who ever will take the pains to examine all the Guts of a Horse, will find, That neither hath he, any more than One Caecum, which I have above describ'd. The Third Gut, is the Colon. The unusual shape, and pro∣digious Amplitude whereof, might give occasion to the Doctor to mistake it for another Caecum. So that although a Horse hath but one single Caecum; yet may he not impro∣perly be said to have a Treble Colon; sc. Two Ample ones, next the Caecum; and a smaller one next the Rectum. Un∣less any please rather to call the two Great ones, the two BELLIES of one and the same Colon. The First Belly next the Caecum, is no less where widest, than ¼ of a yard over; and in length, above a yard and ½. The Second Belly, next the Rectum, as wide as the former; and above a yard long. So that each of these Bellies are bigger than the Caecum. That next the Caecum half as big again: And about four times as big as the Stomach. These two Bellies are joyn'd together by a Neck, about four inches over, and ¾ of a yard long. Gather'd likewise into Cells, as all the other parts of the Colon. But with four Ligaments, as the Caecum. By which also they lie square. And upon a passing view, might be another occasion of the forementioned mistake. So that if any one shall call either of these Bellies, a Caecum; then a Horse will not have two only, but three Caecums. But these Bellies have neither of them, the defining property of a Caecum; which is, To be pervious at one end only. The small Colon, or the smaller part of it, runs betwixt the Second Belly and the Rectum: likewise full of Cells, con∣tain'd together by two opposite Ligaments as in other Animals. 'Tis about three inches over; and six yards long. The Rectum, very thick and Muscular, as in most other
large Quadrupeds; about three inches and ½ over, and not above ½ a yard long. The length of all the Guts (without the Caecum) is about 37 yards. So that the Guts of a Horse, although they come much short of those of the Animals next mention'd: yet in wideness, much exceed them: So as to contain about ten times more than his Stomach. A Pig. That which I procur'd was but 16 days old. The Gulet was torn off; so that I could only observe the Insertion of it, which is about the middle of the Stomach, as in a Horse. But that of a Hog, I have often seen, and it is very thick, muscular and red. The Stomach, was five inches long, and three over. Shaped somewhat oddly; in a manner with a double Ventricle. The one, and the principal, may be called Venter magnus, shaped like that of Carnivorous Quadrupeds. Very thick and Muscular; especially in the Neck and at the Pylorus. Against the Pylorus stands a round Caruncle, as big as a small Filbert Kernel, like a stopple to the Pylorus. A part I think peculiar to this Animal. This Ventricle within, hath several Folds, about ⅙th of an inch broad, and as deep; and wind to and and fro, as in a Rabbit or a Man. Scituate only about the right End or half of the Belly: the other End being, though also Mus∣cular, yet very plain. At the left End of this greater Ventricle, another far less, yet distinct one, is appendent. Much after the same man∣ner as the Reticulum in a Sheep is to the Panch. Or as the Intestinum Caecum to the other Guts: for which reason it may be called Caecus Ventriculus. Separated from the greater by a Muscular Ligament, like a half Valve. Where it joyns to it, an inch and ½ over, and thence extended two inches in length; ending in a twisted or hooked Cone. Not so Muscular, as the greater Venter, but thin and Membra∣nous. The inner surface also plain, or without Folds. Yet is it Glandulous, as the other: but the Mucus the Glands yield somewhat thiner. The Guts of this Pig (so young) were near fourteen
yards in length. Which is more than doubled, perhaps trebled in a well grown Hog. They may be reckon'd six or seven. The First, hath several Flexures, next the Sto∣mach, within the length of a ¼ of a yard, and may be called Serpentinum. The Second, about five yards and ½ long, and ½ an inch or ⅝ths over. In this (no more than in the first) are scarce any conspicuous Glands; so that it may be called, Per∣spicuum. The Third, of the length of the Second; and somewhat less in Diametre. The Vessels of This, are more numerous than of the former. And 'tis furnish'd with several large Clusters of Glands, about nine or ten: some of them an inch and ½, two or three inches long; and ¼, or ½ an inch over. And may be call'd Minus Glandosum. The Fourth, is a yard and ¾ long; where widest, as the Third; but the greatest part of it not above ⅜ths of an inch. This Gut, instead of Clusters, is Lined with a Glandulous Lace, extended from one end to the other. At the be∣ginning ¼ of an inch broad; at the end next the Caecum, ¾ of an inch. Spread or extended (as was first observed of the Glandulous Clusters) upon that side of the Gut, as is directly opposite to the Insertions of the Vessels. The other part of the Circuit of the Gut, is very thin and perspicuous. This Gut may be called Magis Glandosum. The extremity of this Gut, doth not only joyn to the Colon, but is inserted into it, and therein protuberant: very like, in shape and bigness to the Nipple of a Womans Breast that gives suck: and is likewise punched in several places at the top and round about with the Orifices of so many seve∣ral Glands. The Fifth, or Caecum, is four inches long, and an inch and ¾ over. Among all the Quadrupeds I have open'd, pe∣culiar to This and the Caecum of a Horse to have the same structure with the Colon. The Sixth, or Colon, is ¾ of a yard long. Where it joyns to the Caecum an inch over; from which place it tapers all along to the other end, where it is not above ½ an inch over. Gather'd up into several Cells from end to end, with two opposite Ligaments, as in a Rabbit. At the top of it, just under the abovesaid Nipple, is a large round Cluster of Glands with very fair Orifices.
Of all the Quadrupeds I have open'd, peculiar to this Animal, a Horse, and a Coney (perhaps also an Ass and a Hare) to have a true Colon: if that of a Man be the stand∣ard for the Definition of it. The Last, or Stercoraceum, is also ¾ of a yard long. Scarce any where more than ½ an inch over; and towards the Anus, not so much. Whereas in most Quadrupeds, 'tis there widest. Here are no Bags, as above described in the Carnivo∣rous Animals. CHAP. IV. Of GRAMINIVOROƲS QƲADRƲPEDS; a Sheep and a Calf. A Sheep. THe Gulet of a SHEEP (three years old, and weighing 120 pounds Haverdupoise) about an inch and ¾ over: which with respect to the Panch is but small. Composed of several Organical Parts: which because they are here, as well as in some other larger Animals, more conspicuous, I shall somewhat more particularly describe them. They are all of them, by Anatomists, usually, but impro∣perly called Coats: for the inermost, are the chief Body of the Gulet: So that 'tis the same, as to call the Wood of a hollow Plant, one of its Coats. 'Tis therefore composed of Five Membranes; Three in the middle, lined with a Fourth, and faced with a Fifth. The Utmost, and the Inmost, are both Cuticular. The Inmost, or Glandulata, exceeding white, and very fri∣able: answerable to the outward Rind of the Root of a Plant. The next to it, is the Nervous. Which here, and in some other Voraceous Animals, is so very thick, that it may more properly be called the CORPƲS NERVOSƲM. Com∣posed of Fibers, partly running by the length of the Gulet, and in part tranversly to the two Muscular Membranes.
Throughout the length of it, run many small Nerves, like the finest Lawn-Thread. This Corpus Nervosum, is, as I conceive the TENDON to the two next or Muscular Membranes. These Two (they are at least two) are truly Muscular. Stenon hath observed them to be spirally continu'd: which of some of them is true, not of all. And Dr. Willis saith also truly, That they Decussate, the one winding from the right hand downwards, the other from the left. But, to proceed where these two accurate Persons have left; of the admirable Texture of these two Muscules, it is further ob∣servable, That of each parcel of Fibers, one half is so distri∣buted, as those Fibers which belong to the uppermost Mus∣cule on the right hand, are in their progress towards the left, cast into that which lies underneath. And so on the contrary, those which belong to the Upmost on the left hand, are cast, into that which lies underneath on the right: both together making a perfect Plat, somewhat like to that in a Riding-Whip. The other half keeps always above, and is continu'd by a compounded line, partly Spiral, and partly Elliptick; especially towards and at the bottom of the Gula. The Stomachs or Venters in a Sheep are Four. The First, or Panch, consisteth of as many Membranes as the Gulet. The Inmost and the next, sc. the Nervous, are raised up, and made all over rough with a multitude of small Ner∣vous and pointed Knots, in some places smaller and round; in others larger and flat: all very like those upon the Tongue. In the Panch also are several Gibbosities, caused chiefly by the doublings and thickness of the Muscular Mem∣branes, in those places. So that they are as it were the Ten∣dons of the said Membranes. The Second Venter, is by the Latins called Recticulum. In which are the like Nervous Knots, as in the Panch, but smaller. And comprehended within several round Ridges or Plates composed together in the form of a Net or Honey-Coome. The Third, is called the Omasus: by Butchers the Feck. Of a wonderful structure: being divided into above 40 Receptacles by so many Sepiments, great and small:
some ¼, ½, or ¾ of an inch, others an inch, or two inches broad. All cover'd with the like Knots, as the two former Venters; but extream small. The Fourth Venter is called Abomasus: by Butchers, the Read. The only analogous one to that in a Man; the Membranes hereof being all alike. Saving, That the Plates (as here they are rather than Folds) are far deeper; and oppositely and regularly mett in an oblique posture. The Guts are Six or Eight. The length of all, near 32 yards. The First, or Serpentine, from its Flexures, about ½ a yard long, and ¾ of an inch over. The Second, or Jejunum, about 13 yards and ½, and as wide as the first. The Third, or Ileum, 11 yards long; and an inch over. The Fourth, or Caecum, above a Foot in length; and where widest, two inches and ½. The Fifth, is continu'd from the Caecum without either Valve or Contraction intervening. Above a yard long; and an inch and ¼ where narrowest. The Last, may by way of Eminence, be called the Mus∣cular: being as thick as the Gulet it self. And This may be subdivided into Three. From the Fifth, it grows small to the length of an Eln; where it is ½ an inch over. Of this width it continues two Elns more and ½. After it widens again, to the Anus or the length of another Eln and ½; where 'tis near an inch and ¾ wide. In the Jejunum, the Vessels are less numerous; in the Ileum, more; in the Caecum, and the next, most; and in the Muscular, least. The Glands, not so observable, as in those of a Calf, which I shall next describe. A Calf. The Number, Shape, and Texture of the Gulet and Ven∣ters of a CALF, are the same, as of a Sheep. The Guts much different. In length, about 20 yards. In a well grown Ox, at least thrice as long. Asking a Butcher, at his Slaughter-House, How long he thought they might be; he guessed 30 yards. But believing him mistaken, I caused them to be measur'd, and found them full 60 yards, and four over, which may be allowed for their stretching, for that they were measur'd empty.
They may be reckon'd seven or nine. The First, the Serpentinum, as in a Sheep. In length ½ a yard, and ¾ of an inch wide. The Second, or Amplum (being the widest of all the rest but the Caecum) is five yards and ½ long; and an inch and ¾ broad. These two are very thin, and have scarce any con∣spicuous Glands. The Third, or Magis Glandosum, near seven yards long, and an inch wide. Furnished with a great many Clusters of Glands, like those in a Pig, about 50 of them; an inch ¼, or ½ long, and some longer. The Fourth, or Gracillimum, about two yards long; and not above ½ an inch over. Whereas in a Sheep, the Guts next the Venters, and that following, are near of one width. Somewhat thicker and more fleshy than any of the former. Hath several Clusters of large Glands; but nothing near so many, no not with respect to its length, as the precedent: and may therefore be also called Minus Glandosum. The Fifth, or Maximè Glandosum, is a yard and ¾ long, and an inch wide. By far the most opacous, thick and ponde∣rous of all the five. Lined throughout the length, with such a Glandulous Lace, as in a Pig. This Lace is thicker than all the other Parts of the Gut together. At the begin∣ning ½ an inch, at the lower end an inch broad. The rest of the Gut, over which this is not spread, is perspicuous. The Sixth, or Caecum, near two feet long, and above two inches and ¼ over where widest; where narrowest, an inch. Very thin, and without any considerable Glands. The Last, or Musculare, two yards and ½ long, and of the same Diametre in its several parts as in a Sheep; being wide at both ends, and slender in the middle: and may therefore, as that, be subdivided into three.
CHAP. V. Of the Ʋses of the Gulet and Stomachs of Quadrupeds. And first of the Gulet. IN speaking hereof, I shall, as in the Anatomical Part, insist chiefly on those Particulars which have been omitted by others. It may therefore first be noted of the bore of the Gulet, That it is not every where alike answerable to the Body or Stomach. As in a Fox, which both feeds on Bones, and swal∣lows whole, or with little chewing; and next in a Dog, and other Ossivorous Quadrupeds, 'tis very large; sc. to prevent a contusion therein. Next in a Horse; which though he feeds on Grass, yet swallows much at once, and so requires a more open passage. But in a Sheep, Rabbit, or Ox, which bite short, and swallow less at once, 'tis smaller. But in a Squirel, still lesser, both because he eats fine, and to keep him from disgorging his meat upon his descending leaps. And so in Rats and Mice, which often run along Walls with their Heads downward. The Thickness of the Gulet is also different. So in a Weesle or Pole-Cat, which eat no Bones, more Membranous or Skiny. In Dogs more Muscular, greater force being re∣quired to carry down Bones, than Flesh. But in Sheep, Hogs, Cows, Horses most of all; for three Reasons: First, For that Grass, and especially Hay is less slippery, and apt to clog by the way. Secondly, Because they eat continu∣ally, and so the Gulet is in continual action, which it could not bear without pain, were it not made sturdy for hard la∣bour: in like manner, as are the Muscules of the Chaps, and especially the Masseter, in all the said Animals. Thirdly, For that all they eat and drink (because they hold their Heads down) must be made by a greater force to ascend into their Stomachs. Whereas in Carnivorous Animals, and espe∣cially a Man, it passeth by descent. And there are few, but may remember, how difficult it was, when they were Boys, to drink with their Heads down at a Spring. And al∣though Dogs drink with their Heads down, yet they can
only Lap, their Gulet not being Muscular enough to carry up much at once. The several Parts of the Gulet, have their distinct Uses. The outer Membrane, is both a Fence, and a Swath to all the rest; especially to the Muscular. For the Nervous un∣derneath, being always capable of, and sometimes subject to inordinate expansions (as Dr. Willis doth well conjecture) it would Rack the Muscular Membranes beyond their Tone, were they not bound up within this. The two Musculars, chiefly subserve the several Motions of the Gulet. Amongst which, Dr. Willis reckons Oscitation or Yauning, and Expuition. Of the first, (a) Phar∣mac. Ration. P. 1. his words are these; In Oscitatione, Oesophagi ductum ampliari, & quasi a vento quodam inflari & expandi sentimus. But who knows not, that the Windpipe, and not the Gulet, is the part con∣cern'd in all kinds of Respiration, whereof Oscitation is one. Of the latter, his words are these; (b) Ibid. Gulae Tunica carnosa, duplex quasi Musculus censeri debet; quorum alter, expuitio∣nis opus perficit. At that time forgeting, that no man ever spat any thing out of his Stomach; no more than he can be said to vomit or eructate out of his Mouth. The Doctor is one, of whom I have learned much: and therefore I mention these Things, only because they lie in my way: and that we may still remember, Nullius in Verba. The Actions of the Gulet are therefore principally these Three, Deglutition, Vomition, and Eructation. By one of the Muscular Membranes, saith the forementioned Doctor, sc. that which descends, Deglutition is performed; by the ascendent, Vomition. His words (c) Ibid. are these, Cùm unius Fi∣brarum ordo descendens, Deglutitioni inserviat; alter ascendens, Vomitionis opus perficit. But that he was herein mistaken, I conceive, appears from the structure of the said Membranes, neither of which, is ascendent or descendent, more than the other; and from the manner of their Contexture, as is above describ'd. Besides, if it were so, why should there not be Ascendent and Descendent Fibers or Muscules, for the Natural, and the Inverted Motions also of the Guts? I conceive therefore, That Deglutition and Vomition are made by the Cooperation of both the said Membranes: only in the former, the Motion goes from the Throat downward, in the latter, from the Stomach upward. And
so in Eructation, only with less force. For the performance of which Actions, Two Muscules or Muscular Membranes are yet requisite; and those platted and interchanged, as hath been describ'd: That is, by a double Plat of the Fi∣bers of both; whereby half the nether Membrane on the one side the Gulet, becomes half the upper Membrane on the other side: and so vice versa, in spiral rounds through∣out. To the end, That the Gulet being hereby contracted in one part, and dilated in the next, might at the same time, thrust forward, and let pass, any body therein contain'd: and that the said Contractions and Dilatations might be more easily and regularly made, and by reciprocal Ʋndula∣tions, carry'd on from one end of the Gulet to the other. These Ʋndulations, in the Gulet of a Horse, when he drinks, are very plainly seen. And that this Ʋndulation may be made with more speed, it is observable, That the said Muscular Fibers are not con∣tinu'd by a close, but very oblique or open spiral Line. Whereby, as the spiral Rounds or Circuits, so the Ʋndula∣tions, are the fewer; and consequently, not slowly (as in the Guts) but much sooner finished. Hence it is, That a Cat hath so difficult a swallow, the meat commonly seeming to stick in her Throat. Not from the smallness of her Gulet; but for that in the longer half of it, the Muscular Fibers are continu'd in so close a spiral Line, as rather to seem Annular. Whereby, the Ʋndulati∣ons of the Gulet are more slowly and difficultly made. So that a more difficult swallow, being one thing necessary to make her not greedy, but patiently to watch for her Prey; Nature hath therefore contriv'd her Gulet for that pur∣pose. The Nervous Membrane, or (as in some Graminivorous Animals it may be call'd) Corpus Nervosum, hath hitherto been thought to serve only for sense. Dr. Willis Con∣jectures, That it is also the Instrument of some certain mo∣tions of expansion in Oscitation and Preternatural Inflation: which is all he saith. But to Me, it seemeth, That it Cooperates with the Muscular Membrane to all the Natural Motions of the Gulet, in Deglutition, Vomition, and Eructation. And, to speak properly, That 'tis nothing else but a HOLLOW
TENDON; that is, the Tendon of the two Muscular Mem∣branes. It may be Objected, That then it should lie above, not under the Membranes. But in a Gizard, we find the Ten∣don spread within or underneath the Fleshy part of the Muscules, as well as above. The truth of this will further appear, if we consider the great Thickness of this Membrane, where the most force∣able motions of the Gulet are required. For it would serve as well for sensation, if it were ten times as thin: the gross∣ness of the sensory, not being necessary to the exquisiteness of the sense; but of the mover, always to the strength of the motion. And therefore, whereas the Cuticular or ut∣most Membrane is much of the same thickness in all Ani∣mals; the Nervous is much varied according to the thin∣ness or thickness of the Muscular: that is, where the Mus∣cule is thick, the Tendon is proportionable. The notice of which in Oxen, &c. sheweth the same use hereof in a man. The Inmost Skin or Lining of the Gula, is to be a pro∣tection to the Nervous, as the outer is to the Muscular; that so nothing hard, salt, sower, or any way acrimonious, may be injurious to it. To keep it the better within bounds, in all the motions of the Gulet. To be the Bed of the Glands. And one seat of Thirst; which oftentimes lies no deeper than the Throat and upper part of the Gulet: and is cured by any thing which by moistening the Throat shall give vent to the Mucus stagnant therein. CHAP. VI. Of the Ʋses of the Stomachs of Quadrupeds. ANd first, all Carnivorous Quadrupeds have the smallest Ventricles; flesh going farthest. Those that feed on Fruits and Roots have them of a middle size. Yet the Mole, because It feeds unclean, hath a very great one. Sheep and Oxen, which feed on Grass, have the greatest. Yet the Horse (and for the same reason the Coney and Hare) though
Graminivorous, yet comparatively have but little ones. For that a Horse is made for labour, and both This and the Hare for quick and continu'd motion: for which, the most easie Respiration, and so the freest motion of the Diaphragme is very requisite; which yet could not be, should the Stomach lie big and cumbersome upon it, as in Sheep and Oxen it doth. For which cause Nature hath here transfer'd the greater part of the Alimental Lugage into the Caecum. The Neck of the Stomach, near the Gut, is commonly reflected backward, so as to make an acute Angle with the Back of it. To the end, the extrusion of the prepared Ali∣ment to the Gut, may be stinted. And that the thiner part, which will more easily wind about, may the better pass away, and leave the rest behind. Sometimes it hath three or four Flexures, as in Sheep and Oxen: for that the Gut being so small with respect to the Venter, and with all so very thin; it would, by too sudden or copious an irruption of the Aliment, be in danger of being burst. And for the same reasons, the Stomach of a Pig, so voraceous a Crea∣ture, is also furnished with a Stopple. The distinct uses of the Parts of the Stomach, are many of them the same as of the Gulet. I shall not therefore re∣peat, but proceed to those particulars as remain to be ex∣plicated. And first, 'tis plain, in those thick Stomachs of an Ox or a Sheep, that the carneous Membranes are true Muscules: which conducteth us more easily to believe that of a man also Muscular. 'Tis certain, that the Muscules of the Abdo∣men in some Animals, as in Squirels, are thiner than those of a mans Stomach. Now the Nervous and Muscular Parts joyntly subserve to all the motions of the Stomach, which I reckon five, viz. Corrugation, Astriction, Ʋndulation, Convulsion, and Voluntary Motion. Corrugation, is when there is a double motion of Con∣traction, beginning from both the Orifices of the Stomach, and so drawing it up into innumerable small Wrinkles. For the better expression of the Mucus out of the Glands of the inner Membrance. For a closer comprehension of the Ali∣ment, and immission of the said Mucus or other fermenting Juyce, into it. And for the gradual expression of the colli∣quated
parts thereof into the Gut. In this motion, the ut∣most Muscular Fibers contract the Stomach in length; and the inermost, in breadth. Astriction, is a Contraction only about the Pylorus; per∣formed by the inermost Fibers alone. For the firmer Re∣tention of the Aliment, and its orderly dismission into the Gut. Ʋndulation, is when the Contraction is made in several parts of the Stomach successively, beginning at one Orifice, or End, and terminating at the opposite. Made also by the Inner Fibers; after the same manner, as the Ʋndulation or Peristaltick Motion of the Guts. The use of it, is either for Excretion or Eructation. If it begins from the Gulet, it serves, after the finest of the Aliment is discharg'd by Corru∣gation, for Excretion of the rest. But if the Ʋndulation be Inverted, or begins from the Pylorus, it produceth Eructation. Answering to the like Inverted Motion, which sometimes happens in the Guts. Convulsion, is a forcible and suddain Contraction of all the Orders of Fibers, outer, middle, and inmost. The use hereof with Ʋndulation, is for Vomition. For first, there is only an Inverted Ʋndulation, that is, I conceive, when there is only a Naucea or tendency to Vomit. Which Ʋndulation also, carries part of the matter by degrees, to the upper mouth of the Stomach. And growing quicker and stronger, at last turns into a Convulsion; the Stomach being hereby contracted both in width and length, and the Pylorus forced up to the upper Orifice (as a Barbars Puff in powdering the Hair, or the Bladder in the Injection of a Clyster) and so produceth actual Vomition. The Voluntary Motion of the Stomach, is that only which accompanies Rumination. That it is truly voluntary, is clear, from the Command that Ruminating Animals have of that Action. For this purpose it is, that the Muscules of their Venters are so thick and strong; and have several Duplicatures as the Bases of those Muscules, whereupon the stress of their motion lies. By means whereof, they are able with ease to rowl and tumble any part of the meat from one Cell of the same Venter to another, or from one Ven∣ter to another, or from thence into the Gulet, whensoever they are minded to do it. So that the Ejection of the meat
in Rumination, is a Voluntary Eructation. Not at all labo∣rious to them, because of the great strength of the Muscules of their Stomach and Gulet to command and govern the same. By the Joynt assistance of the Glandulous and the Ner∣vous Membranes, the business of Chylification seems to be perform'd. The Mucous Excrement of the Blood being supply'd by the former, as an Animal Corrosive, preparing; and the Excrement of the Nerves by the latter, as an Animal Ferment, perfecting the Work. And the Caecus Ventricu∣lus of a Hog, seems to be a Repository provided for such a mixed Leven or Menstruum: whereby he not only becomes more voraceous, having thence continual irritations to eat: but all he eats, is thereby likewise well digested. The Folds of the Stomach, which in its Corrugation must needs be much deeper than when it is dilated, or of use, To divide the Aliment into several Portions, and thereby ad∣minister their Ferments not only to the Circumference, but intimate parts of the Mass to be fermented. The pointed Knots, like little Papillae, in the Stomachs of divers Ruminating Beasts, are also of great use, viz. For the Tasting of the Meat. Dr. Willis describing the Inner Membrane of the Stomach (not of a Beast, but expresly of a Man) speaketh thus; Haec Crusta Ventriculum (Huma∣num puta) intus obtegens, similis videtur Illi, quae Linguam obtegit. Wherein he was mistaken: this Inner Membrane being Glandulous; the Skin of the Tongue not so, but only Fibrous. But of divers Beasts which Ruminate, thus much is true, That in their Three first Venters, the Inner Mem∣brane is Fibrous, and not Glandulous; the fourth only be∣ing Glandulous, as in a man. Of the Fibers of this Mem∣brane and the Nervous, are composed those pointed Knots before described (a) Chap. 4. both in substance and shape, altogether like to those upon the Tongue. Whence I doubt not, but that the said Three Ventricles, as they have a power of Volun∣tary Motion: so likewise, that they are the Seat of Tast, and as truly the Organs of that sense, as is the Tongue it self. Lastly, and consequently, the said Nervous Knots, are of use to Methodize the Work of Rumination, after this manner. The Animal having eaten enough for the Panch
well to govern; rowles and tumbles the meat to and fro therein: and at the same time, with the help of the said Nervous Knots of several degrees of fineness (as the Gold∣smith hath his Assayers of several degrees of niceness) judges of the Courseness or Fineness, Crudeness, or Concoction of any part of it; and accordingly lets it rest, or removes it. So then the grossest of these Assayers standing about the Gulet, and so in the passage of the meat between the Panch and the Reticulum, being the proper judges of what is Course or Crude; if they find it so, then 'tis tumbled back to receive a further maturation in the Panch. If somewhat fine and Concocted, 'tis then permitted to pass on and rowl into the Reticulum. And the said Assayers or Nervous Knobs being here sharper and softer, than in the Panch; have still a more accurate Tast: and therefore what they yet find too course, the Reticulum forthwith throws it up into the Gulet and Mouth. From whence, being further refined, 'tis re∣manded to the Reticulum; and thence after a while, into the Third Stomach or the Omasus. And This again being a more nice Assayer than the Reticulum; if it feels the meat fine and soft enough, passeth it into the last Stomach or Abomasus. But if otherwise, throws it back into the Reti∣culum, and the Reticulum into the Gulet and Mouth to be labour'd once again, and so remanded. CHAP. VII. Of the Ʋses of the Guts of Quadrupeds. I Shall here, as before, pass over such particulars as have been spoken of by others; and divers also which being observable in the Gulet and Stomachs, as well as here, have been already sufficiently explain'd. And first the different Bore of the Guts is observable. So, for example, the Guts of a Horse are very wide. For that he both swalloweth, and dischargeth from his Stomach into his Guts, the meat more gross; which therefore re∣quireth a more open passage, lest it should clog. As also, that it may move with greater speed towards the Caecum,
here, (a) Chap. 6. for the reason above-said, design'd by Nature to be a second Stomach. Whereas in an Ox or a Sheep, the meat having passed four successive Concoctions, 'tis thence deli∣vered to the Guts of a much finer substance; and so moveth safe enough through a much smaller Chanel; and fast enough, there being much less work here left, for the Caecum to perform. The Contraction also of the Guts, or lessening of the Bore by several Necks, is of good use. As for instance, in an Ʋrchan or Cat; serving to stint the Transition of the meat, that it be not over quick, and dividing the Guts into so many little Venters, in which the meat restagnates for some time, in order to its reception of as many repeated Con∣coctions. Whereby also in these Animals the work of the Caecum, and therefore the making of it, seems superseded. Moreover, the rarious length of the Guts is observable, according to the cleanness, or more fewer nutritive parts of the Food; or its colliquability into Chyle. So in a Weesle or Squirel, that feeds much on Eggs, and Nuts, and such like fine and nutritive food, they are extream short. And in all Gross eaters, longer than in other Quadrupeds. And therefore one reason, why the Guts of a Sheep or Ox are slender, is, that they may be long. For were they shorter and wider, it would not be tantamount: For the food being Grass, it is not sufficient that they should hold enough: but also necessary, that they give a longer voyage to a substance so jejune, for a thorow solution and exuction of all its nu∣tritive parts. Besides, that in a smaller Channel, the said parts will all along lie nearer to the Lacteal Veins, and so more easily be express'd into them. The Membranes of the Guts, have a general analogy in all Quadrupeds, and divers of their Uses have been well assign'd. I shall therefore only Note, That as the spiral Fibers contract or purse up the Bore of the Gut; so those that run by the length, draw it up shorter, and so dilate it. Whereby, as one part of the Gut may press the meat for∣ward, or as it were disgorge it, so another gape to receive it, at the same time. And in case one Gut should by ano∣ther, or by some Bowel, be oppress'd, being by the said Con∣traction in length removed a little out of its place; the free∣dom of its motion, or any thing therein, will thereby be regain'd.
But in a Mole, the same Fibers which run by the length, being Indented, do also for a little way, each parcel obliquely run by the breadth of the Gut. Whereby they are able, without the help of spiral Fibers, to narrow or shorten the Gut of themselves: and also to do both in the same place. For by the Relaxation of the Fibers, the sides of every Indenture, must needs grow both wider and more distant, and the Gut wider and more extended, at the same time: and so Vice versa. Probably with this design, That the Shells of In∣sects may make a more safe transition, without raking against the tender sides of the Guts. The Glands of the Guts are likewise of great Use. The Mucus which they spew, serves to make the Guts slip∣pery, that the meat may the more easily and fasely glide along. As also for another Ferment superinduc'd to that of the Stomach, and so a further colliquation of the meat. With respect to both which Uses, the said Glands, according to the Bore of the Guts, the hardness or softness, courseness or colliquability of the meat, are more or less numerous; as in the precedent Examples. And that this Mucus may be duly supply'd, Nature still allows Blood-Vessels proportionable to the plenty of Glands. And hath taken care that the Vessels enter not the Guts on the same side on which the Glands are seated, but the oppo∣site: that having space enough to branch themselves into the smallest capillary Tubes, before they reach the Glands, there may be the less danger, that any sincere Blood should with the Mucus make an Inundation into them. Through the same Glands, as so many little Springs, I con∣ceive, That the Humours are either emunged, or precipi∣tated, out of the Blood, in Purgation. For that one so small a Pipe, as that of the Pancreas should bring so great a quan∣tity, is not at all probable. And the Glands being a visible way, I know no reason, wherefore we should have recourse to any invisible one. Thus the same Glands are a great means to prevent Fea∣vers, and other ill effects of Cold by a Diarrhea. For when by a suddain astriction of the Pores of the Skin, or other∣wise, the usual perspiration is stop'd: the redundant matter in the Blood, is often safely discharged, by the Glands, into the Guts. But if the matter be very sharp, or rusheth upon
the Glands too suddainly; it sometimes corrodes or breaks them, and so makes way for Blood also: as may be observ'd in the Guts of such as die of a Dysentry. The Use of the Caecum is manifold, but divers in divers Animals; according to the make of it, and the Relation it bears to the Stomachs and the Guts. And first, for the most part, it serves to give a second Deliberate Concoction to the meat, that nothing nutritive in it may be lost. For which purpose, it is always furnish'd with Glands, as well as the other Guts. And, with respect to its width, is commonly but thin, or less muscular, that so being less apt to constringe it self, it may give a due time of stay to the meat deliver'd to it. For which end also it is placed out of the common Road of the Guts; that being thereby less receptive of their Peristaltick Motion; it may lie the more still. For the same intent the Caecum in a Sheep hath several Flexures answerable to those in the 4th Stomach or Abomasus. And in a Hog, 'tis drawn up into Cells on both sides, like the Colon, to make it so much the more retentive. In the Coney, the same is done still more effectually, by the spiral Plate, or Connivent Valve winding from end to end. And in the Horse, not by two only, but four Rows of Cells on the four sides. In which two last Animals the said Use is so eminent, that the Caecum, considering its bigness withall, is the chief Stomach, and much superior to the Stomach so call'd. And it is also ob∣servable, That the Abomasideus in a Rat, hath the same re∣lation to the Caecum; as in a Sheep, the Abomasus hath to the other Stomachs. Hence likewise it may be, that some Ani∣mals have little or no Caecum: either because the meat is so dissoluble, as not to need a second deliberate Concoction, as in a Weesle; or for that Nature hath made something else to serve without it; as those several Contractions in the Guts of a Cat; and the Valvulae Conniventes in the small Guts of a Man. Where we may observe, That these Valves are not every where spiral, as is thought, but do also make some perfect and distinct Rings: whereby they are fitter to retard the motion of the meat in its descent. Another Use may be, For a Retreat; Either to the meat, if it should chance to rush too fast into the Gut below it: Or to the Excrements, in case the Animal is diverted from a present ejection of them.
The last Use, I shall name, may be this, That in case the meat, or the Excrements in the lower Guts should be at any time so dry and hard, as too slowly, and not without much stress to the Guts, to descend; the Caecum is as a Clyster-Bag, always ready with its liquid Content, to be in some part thereinto injected. For which purpose, it usually makes an acute angle with the upper Guts, and opens directly into those below it. The Make of the Colon, with other Uses, also answers to the greater need of Retention. Either because of the up∣right posture, as in a Man; or frequent and speedy motions, as in a Horse or Hare: where, without the Cells of the Colon, to retain the Excrements from the Rectum, there would be a continual Conatus egerendi. The Rectum, or rather Stercoraceum of a Cat, being pecu∣liarly of so great a bulk; I will conclude with a Conjecture of one Use of it: and that is, To be as a Counter-poise to her Head: whereby, from what height soever she falls, she still lights upon her feet. CHAP. VIII. Of the Stomachs and Guts of BIRDS. BEcause that many particulars will here occur, which are intelligible from the former Descriptions, and have already been explain'd; I shall therefore be the shorter. Of about Forty, which I have open'd, I shall describe these Thirteen that follow, sc. of a Casowary, an Owl, a Cuckow, a Dunghil-Cock, a Tame Pigeon, a Jackdaw, a Starling, a Yellow∣hammer, a Bull-finch, a Wry-neck, a Bunting, a Reed-Sparrow, and a House-Swallow: and figure them all, but those of a Cuckow. With Notes upon others, as I proceed. Of a Casowary. The CASOWARY hath no Crop. But a wider Gulet, I suppose, as well as Guts, than in any other Bird. Far greater than those of an Ostrich; although the Body be much less. The Gulet, where widest, or near the Throat, about five inches
over; next the Stomach, two. Sprinkled with many small Glands, as it is, more or less, in all Birds. At the bottom of it, the Echinus; common to all Birds that I have open'd. But here less conspicuous. The Figure hath not express'd it. It hath always a Lining of much larger Glands than those in the Gulet or Crop; commonly of an Oval Figure, and each of them with an open mouth spewing out a Mucus. He hath no Gizard (as hath the Ostrich); yet a thick Muscular Stomach, as in other Carnivorous Birds. Almost of an Oval shape; and small with respect to the Guts: ex∣pressed somewhat too big for the Scale, (as also the Gulet and Guts) in the Figure. The Pylorus guarded with a kind of Valve. The Guts not two yards and half long. Beside the two Caeca, are three. The larger, next the Stomach: as it is, in almost all other Birds. About three inches and ½ over, where widest. The smaller, somewhat above two. The Rectum, the largest, sc. about four. Much wider than even those of a Horse, excepting only his Caecum and his Colon. He hath two Caeca; as have almost all Birds. Yet here very small, about ½ a foot long, but no thicker than a Womans little Finger. Here, as in all other Birds, making obtuse Angles with the Rectum. So that what is said of them in Mr. Willughby's Ornithologia,—Cum Intestino Recto an∣gulos acutos faciunt: was only a slip of that most accurate Pen. The Rectum is separated from the next above, by a Con∣nivent Valve. Of an Owle. The Gulet of a young Grey-OWLE, is of an indifferent size. At the bottom of it, the Echinus. And somewhat more apparent, than in the Casowary, but less than in most frugivorous Birds. The Stomach, a middle Thing betwixt that of other Carnivorous Birds, and a Gizard, sc. a plain Bag, yet in the middle somewhat Tendinous. The Guts in length two feet and ½. Three, besides the
Caeca. The first or Amplum, a foot long; and above ¼ of an inch broad. The Gracile, which reacheth to the Caeca, a foot and three inches; and above ⅛ of an inch where nar∣rowest. In this Gut, are 15 or 16 Contractions, like those in a Cat's, but made longer. The Caeca, four inches and ½ long. As the Gizard of a middle Nature, so these of a middle size, betwixt those of some Carnivorous, and some Frugivorous Birds. At their close or further ends, ½ an inch over. But where they en∣ter the Rectum, no thicker than the bigest string of a Trebel Vial. The Rectum, three inches long; towards the Anus, near an inch wide; almost in the Figure of a little Pear. As it is also in most Wild-Fowl. Of a young Cuckow. Neither hath this Bird any Crop, nor a Gizard. But to the Gulet it is peculiar, That it hath Ten or Twelve Rows of more conspicuous Glands, which run along from the Throat to the Echinus. The Echinus, of a ratable bigness, and more distinct from the Stomach, than in the Owle; being divided from it by a Muscular Neck. As it is also in most other Birds. The Stomach, a plain Bag, much like to that of an Owle; yet somewhat thicker, and more Tendinous. The Guts about a foot and ½ long. Three besides the Caeca. The first, an inch and ¼ long; and near ¼ of an inch wide. The second, above a foot, and ⅙th wide. The Caeca, as wide in the middle, as the first; and above an inch long. The Rectum, two inches and ½. The Wild-Duck and Teal also, and I suppose all of this kind, and most other Birds, are without a Crop. Of a Dunghill-Cock. A DUNGHILL-COCK, hath one Stomach or Ventricle more than the former Birds, sc. a Crop: all over be∣sprinkled with small Glands, somewhat more visible than in the Gulet. The upper part of the Gulet, leading to the Crop, ¼ of an
inch over. But the lower part, leading from it towards the Echinus, very slender, not above ¼ wide. The Echinus almost an Oval shape, being divided from the Gizard by a pretty long and slender Neck. And may therefore be properly call'd the Second or Oval Ventricle. The Third, is the Gizard, in the place of the plain Bag or Stomach in the former Birds. 'Tis made of Six Muscules and a Cartilaginous Lining in the greater Concave; which may be called the Laboratory. Those four, which make the greatest part of the Gizard, may be called the Grinders. Of extraordinary thickness; whereby the length of the Convex, is cross to the length of the Concave of the Gizard. Yet thinner towards the Edges, so as to make a kind of dou∣ble Hyperbola. In the Centre hereof on both sides meet the Tendons of the said Muscules, continued or expanded for about ½ an inch in breadth, without any Carneous or Red Fibers mixed with them. From whence, they are divided, the one, which is the stronger, spread over, the other, under the Muscules; into which they are also branched all the way, so as meeting in the body of the Muscule they make a sort of fine Cancellated Work, as may be seen better in the Gizard of a Goose; especially in a thin slice hereof par∣boyl'd, and held up against a Candle. And in all Gizards, so as to be seen to run cross, as in that of a Pullet in Tab. 29. The Fifth Muscule is that which standeth between the Echinus and the four Muscules now describ'd, and may be called the Deductor, from the use hereafter mention'd. Very thin with respect to the former; placed at the upper end of the left edge of the Gizard, and spread a little on the side, but not so much as in the Figure. Better represented, Tab. 29. The Sixth, is such another Muscule, standing opposite to the former, sc. on the right edge of the Gizard, and may be called the Reductor, as shall be shew'd why. The four Grinders are strengthened within, not only with a Tendon, but a Gristly Lining, thicker than the outer Ten∣don, with a rough surface, and wrinkled into several Trans∣verse Furrows, from one end to the other. The Guts are about a yard and ½ long. Three besides the Caeca. The first, the smaller; contrary to what it is in most Birds. Not much above ¼ of an inch, where widest.
About two feet and ½ long. Where it joyns with the Great∣er, stands the end of the Ductus Intestinalis, accurately de∣scribed (a) Lib. de Foetu For∣mato. by Dr. Walter Needham. The Greater, where widest ½ an inch. The Rectum, some∣what more. The Caeca near eight inches long: at the fur∣ther end, above ¼ of an inch over; but where they open into the Rectum, no thicker than the great string of a Base-Viol. 'Tis proper to the Gallinaceous kind, to have a great Gi∣zard. That of a good big Turkey, near eight Ounces Troy. Whereas that of a Japan Peacock is not above two: yet the Body about half as big as that of the Turkey. Not only all the Gallinaceous kind; but the Duck, and, I suppose, all of that kind, have two very long Caeca. Of a Tame Pigeon. The Gulet of a Tame PIGEON, near the Throat, very wide; almost an inch and ½ over. The Crop is above three inches broad; above two, long; and an inch and ¾ deep. Not so distinct from the Gulet, as in the Gallinaceous kind; this and the Gulet running one into another in a direct Line. In the Belly of it, are few visible Glands: but the Neck thence down to the Echinus, is curiously Lined with six or seven Glandulous Laces. The Crop of a Carrier-Pigeon, is curiously shap'd; as it were Treble-Belly'd: the two outmost or side-Bellies, open∣ing into that in the middle. The bottom and Neck where∣of, are lined with several Glandulous Laces, as that of the Tame Pigeon. The Crop of the Cropper-Dove, is almost of the same Figure. But the Gulet of a wonderful extent; when blown up lightly, above nine inches in the girth. The Echinus large, and so the Glands therein; for the sight of which, I have represented it inside outward. Divid∣ed, as usually, from the Gizard by a Muscular Neck. The Gizard rounder than of most other Birds. The Mus∣cules very thick and high in the middle, and flater at the edges. The Deductor stands at the top of it, and the Reductor at the bottom.
The Greater Gut a foot long, and near ⅜ths of an inch where widest. The sender Gut above ½ a yard long, and not much above ⅛th of an inch over where smallest. The Caeca not more than ¼ of an inch long, nor thicker than a Kniting-Pin. Placed about an inch above the Rectum. The Rectum near ¾ of an inch wide, and an inch and ½ long. Of a Jackdaw. The Gulet above ½ an inch over at the top; ¼ at the bot∣tom; being Conick all the way, as in most Birds. The Gizard, above ¾ of an inch over, an inch and ¼ long; and very Tendinous. The Guts a foot and ¾ long. The first or Greater, ¾ of a foot; and ¾ of an inch wide. The smaller, Ten inches long, and somewhat more than ⅛ of an inch over. The Rectum, two inches long, and above ½ an inch over; shaped like the end of a Plummers sodering Iron. The Caeca, not much above ¼ of an inch long, and very small. All along the slender Gut, and in part of the Rectum, the chief Muscular Fibers are most curiously Indented, as in the Mole; especialy near the Caeca. Not ill resembling the Needle-Work called Irish-Stitch. Transverse to these Fibers which make the Indentures, and which are continu'd by the length of the Gut, run others of the same colour, round about it; one of them to every In∣denture, which it divides into two equal parts. The same Indented-Work is seen in most other smaller Birds, as well as here, but not every where after the same manner, nor in the same place. In the Twite or Avicula Anadavadensis, it continues also very far, sc. four inches above the Caeca. In the Redstart, above three. And in the Titlark, as far. In the Water-Wagtaile, not above two and ½; and an inch below them. In the Solitary-Sparrow, they are also very pretty below the Caeca. In the House-Sparrow, they are visible only in the small Gut an inch and ½ above the Caeca. In the Chaffinch, only in the Rectum. The Gulet of a Jay, being contracted in the middle, is divided into two slender Venters, as the Guts of some Ani∣mals. So also is that of a Japan Peacock. The Rectum of a Jay, hath several Muscular Plates, or
Valvulae Conniventss placed at the distance of 1/7 or ⅛ of an inch. Of a Starling. The Gulet exceedeth not ½ an inch in width. The Echinus small, with respect to the other parts. The Gizard, mean; near an oval shape: the Reductor conspicuous. Next to the Gizard stands the slender Gut, and the Greater follows; as in the Dunghill-Cock: contrary to the order kept in most other Birds. Where they meet, there is a remarquable Con∣traction. The Indentures run along the lower half of the Ample Gut; with some Ʋndulations over-against the Caeca. Of a Yellowhammer. The Gulet, at top is dilated into a Crop an inch and ¼ long, and above ½ an inch over. The Axis whereof, as in a Pigeon, is the same with that of the lower part of the Gu∣let, and not transverse, as in the Gallinaceous kind. Curi∣ously Laced with 16 or 18 Rows of Glands, about half an inch long. The Green-Finch hath a Crop of the same shape: but the Glands sprinkled all over it; very small, yet distinct. The Echinus very small; not above ¼ of an inch long, and as broad. The Gizard above ½ an inch long, almost ½ an inch broad; thin edg'd, but high in the middle; very strong and Tendinous. And it may here be observ'd, That although the Gallinaceous kind have a very large Gizard: yet in many other Birds, even of the smallest sort, the Gi∣zard, with respect to its bulk, is altogether as strong: that is to say, the Muscules, with respect to their length and breadth, are as Thick, and their Tendons answerable; as not only in this Bird, but the House-Sparrow, Linnet, Titlark, and many more. And with respect to the Body, some small Birds have also a great Gizard, as a Chaffinch, which hath one four times as big as that of a Linet. The Guts about eight inches long. The Greater, three; and above ¼ over where widest. The smaller, about three and ½; and above ⅛th wide. The Rectum an inch and ½ long, shaped like a Pear; ⅝ths over in its widest place: very great. The Caeca stand ¼ of an inch, below its smaller end: not above ⅛th of an inch long.
The Indentures continu'd about ¾ of an inch from the Caeca both upward and downward. The Annular, or rather spiral Fibers, in the Rectum more apparent. Of a Bull-Finch. A very different Bird from all the Finches. For first he hath a Lateral Crop. 'Tis above ½ an inch broad, and about ¾ long. The Gulet, between the Crop and the Echinus, near ½th over. The Echinus near ½ an inch long, and above ¼ broad: Thrice as big, as that of a Martlets, Swallows, or Sparrows. The Gizard near ½ an inch broad; broader than long. The Guts no less than ½ a yard and an inch long: much beyond what they are in any of the Finches. The Greater, a foot and ½ an inch; and 2/7th wide. The smaller five inches and ½; and 1/16th in width. The Caeca, at the end of the Rectum, not above 1/12th of an inch long. The Rectum, near an inch: and where widest, almost ½ an inch. Figur'd like a Pear, as in most other Birds. The whole smaller Gut, and about five inches of the greater, very curiously Indented. And the Indentures deeper in the latter. A Young Wryneck. Hath no Crop, and but a small Gulet; not much above ¼ of an inch, where broadest. The Echinus of a prodigi∣ous bigness; near an inch and ¼ long, and ½ an inch over. Much bigger than in a Jackdaw, that is yet near six times as big as this Bird. I found it full of meat. The Gizard of a mean size; ½ an inch long, and ⅜ths broad. The Guts about eight inches. The greater, near two; and near ¼ wide. The next, four; and somewhat more than ⅛th broad. The Rectum, above two and ½; and 3/2ths, where widest. The spiral Fibers herein more visible. He hath no Caeca. The Indentures not so regular, as in most Birds, and but few. As this Bird hath no Caeca; so the White-Throat, hath no small Gut.
Of a Bunting. Hath no Crop. The Gulet from end to end; above a ¼ of an inch over where slenderest. The Echinus ⅜ths long, and as broad. The Gizard large, about ¾ of an inch square. The Guts, ratably, extream, short, not above nine inches long. The larger, four inches, and ¼ wide. The next, as long; and ⅙th over. The Rectum, about an inch; and not very wide. The Caeca not above 11/6th. The Indentures continu'd from the Caeca upward, three inches, but less visibly. Down∣ward or towards the Anus, a ¼ of an inch, very curious. Of a Reed-Sparrow. The Gulet, Echinus, Gizard, and Guts of this Bird, are all much like in shape to those of a Bunting: and ratably, less. Of a House-Swallow. The Gulet above ¼ of an inch over next the Throat; next the Echinus, ½th. Laced with eight or nine Rows of Glands by the length, as in a Pigeon. He hath no Crop. The Echinus, above ¼ of an inch long, and as wide. The Gizard near ½ an inch long; and ⅜ths broad. The Guts about five inches long. For the bigness, strong and mus∣cular. The Indentures, for the length of an inch and ½, very fine; especially, when the Guts are blown up. The Caeca ⅜th of an inch. Between the Indented Gut and the Rectum, a great Contraction: but is omitted in the Figure. In a Robin-Redbreast; the Guts are more Muscular, than in any small Bird. The Caeca, fasten'd, not as usually either on the Neck of the Rectum, or where that and the smaller Gut meet; but ½ an inch above the end of the smaller Gut. None of them have any visible Indentures.
CHAP. IX. Of the Ʋses of these Parts. THe Gulets of Birds, are bigger or less, according to the quantity they swallow. More or less Glandulous, according to the Solidity, or the Dryness of their Meat. And with respect to the same, the Figure thereof is more simple; or expanded into a Crop; by which it is retain'd a longer time, before it further descends. And according as less or more Time is requir'd, the Crop is made so, as either to have its Axis, the same with that of the Gulet; or else to stand Collateral, and so open transversly into it. After the Meat hath been sufficiently macerated there, it descends into the Echinus, for a second preparation. So much the more thorowly made here, because by far greater Glands. And what was done before to all at once, is here in, to smaller parcels. This Part in some sort answering to the Crop, as the Reticulum, in a Sheep, to the Panch. Withall it should seem, That when the Gizard is either over loaded, or the Meat not enough prepar'd; 'tis thence returned back to this Part, (as the Reticulum also subserves the Omasus) till It and the Gizard are more ready, one for the other. For which end also the Muscular Neck below the Echinus, serves as a Sphincter to purse it up. At length it descendeth into the Third Ventricle. Either Membranous, as in most Carnivorous Birds; where the Meat is concocted as in a Man. Or somewhat Tendinous, as in an Owle; as if it were made indifferently for Flesh, or other Meat, as he could meet with either. Or most Thick and Tendinous, called The Gizard; wherein the Meat, as in a Mill, is ground to pieces, and thence pressed by degrees into the Guts in the form of a Pulp. For which purpose, the Deductor serves to deliver the Meat from the Echinus to the Laboratory; as a Hopper to a Mill. The four Grinders or chief Operators, as the Millstones: Partly, as they are extra∣ordinary Thick, and made with double Tendons; whereby they are constring'd with the greater force. And partly, as their Tendons stand high in the centre, so as to be arched: for so, every time the Tendons are contracted, they must
needs make a shallower Arch, and so force the insides of the Grinders closer together. And as the Millstones are peck'd and cut with small Gutters, least their force should be evaded: so the Gristly Lining of the Gizard is all over rough, and gather'd into answerable Furrows. And because the force∣able motion of the Grinders, must needs work the Meat from under them: as therefore in some Mills there is one attends still to turn the Grist under the Stone; so the Re∣ductor here, to deliver it back to the Grinders, and so over and over, till it be sufficiently elaborated for the Guts. And as the strong and continual motion of all these Mus∣cules, is taught us from their structure, so likewise from their red colour, which especially in the Grinders is intense. Hence in a Fish, the Muscules which move the Fins are usu∣ally Red, although the rest of the Flesh is very white: And so the Leg of a Domestick Fowl. Whereas the Wings also of a Wild Fowl, are of the same colour. So likewise the Flesh of a driven Calf, or of a Hare, though that of a Coney be white. And that which comes nearer, the Heart in all Creatures, having the like continual motion, is of a Red Colour. The Guts are of different length and bigness, not always proportionable to that of the Bird, but the nature of the Meat. So those of a Casowary, though it be necessary, that they should contain Meat enough for so great a Body: yet not, that the Meat, which is very nutritive, should make any long voyage. Yet is it needful there should be a Connivent Valve before the Rectum, for the guarding of so open a pas∣sage. And so with Variety in other Birds, according as they feed on Worms, Seeds, Fruits, Flys, or Shell'd Insects, requiring a longer, or more open passage, for their more deliberate, or safer Transmission to the Anus. The Indentures also seem to be made, and with variety; to the same Intent: sc. That the Guts hereby receiving the greater Contraction and Dilatation, may so much the more forceably detrude the Meat, or more easily give way to it; as it is softer, or mixed with Shells, Stones and the like. The Caeca, especially where large, and made for a further Concoction of the Meat; for the better Retention hereof, where they open into the Rectum, are very straight. And for the same reason, also thinner and less Muscular than the
other Guts: that so the Meat therein may lie the more quiet. The ampliation of the Rectum, chiefly in Wild Fowls, amongst other Reasons, is, I suppose, That the Dung lying there in good quantity, may be as a Counter-poise to the Head, to keep it up in flying. CHAP. X. Of the Stomachs and Guts of FISHES. IN so many as I have open'd, two Things are more gene∣rally observable, viz. That many of them have no Stomach, that is one that is not Belly'd; as in the Salmon, Jack, Tench, Barble, Breme: or very little, as in the Place. And many more, instead of One Caecum, as in some Qua∣drupeds; or Two, as in most Birds; have three or four, as the Pearch; nine or ten, as the Rochet; many more, as the Trout, above thirty; the Whiting, above forty; the Salmon many more. The Stomach of a Place shaped almost like the Echinus of a Bird. Bounded at the bottom with a Connivent Valve. The Guts two only. The upper end of the first, hath two little extuberant Parts, the use whereof may be answerable to one use of the Caecum, sc. To divert the Meat, lest upon any Inverted Motion of the Gut, it should regurgitate into the Stomach, or strain the Valve. The bottom of this Gut is separated from the Rectum, by another pretty Connivent Valve: both which, and the visible Texture of the Fibers, are shewed in the last Table. The Stomach of a Salmon is only like a wide Gut. He hath about fourscore Caeca, hanging on the great Gut, almost like the Mane upon the Neck of a Horse. Being ty'd alto∣gether with small Vessels, and the Vessels hid with Fat; they have been mistaken by some for a Pancreas. The Rectum is guarded with about thirty Annular Valves. The Whiting hath a large Stomach, which is a distinct Bag or Belly. And numerous Caeca, not standing as in the Salmon, but all in a Ruck. The Stomach and Guts of a Cod are very like.
Some NOTES upon the TABLES. TAb. 1. Describ'd, p. 9, 14, 19, 27. The Stone only, drawn after the life. Tab. 2. Desc. p. 11, 13, 21, 24, 25, 29. All but the Ram's Horns, af∣ter the life. Tab. 3. Desc. p. 36, 38. Tab. 4. Desc. p. 42, 50. Tab. 5. Desc. p. 63, 64, 67. Tab. 6. Desc. p. 78, 80. The double Egg drawn after the life. Tab. 7. Desc. p. 87, 104, 108, 110, 113, & 114. Tab. 8. D. p. 115, 117, 121, 123. Tab. 9. D. p. 126, 127, 128. Tab. 10. D. p. 130, 131. Tab. 11. D. p. 133, 135, 136, 137, 140. Tab. 12. D. p. 140, 141, 142, line 9. p. 146, 148. line 1. p. 149. Tab. 13. D. p. 154. line 13. p. 156, 158, 161, 163, 165, 166. Tab. 14. D. p. 188. line 13, 23, & 30. p. 189, 190. line 18, 33, & 40, 191. Tab. 15. D. p. 197, 198. Tab. 16. D. p. 201, 202, 203, 204, 205, 206. Tab. 17. D. p. 185, 216, 229. Tab. 18. D. p. 233, 243, line 22, p. 244. line 37. p. 245, line 33. Tab. 19. D. p. 254, 255, 256. line 33, 263. line 35. p. 264. line 3. & 19. Tab. 20. D. p. 267, 268, 273, 276, 291, 297, 302, 303. Tab. 21. D. p. 305, 306, 307. line 23. p. 308, 312. Tab. 22. D. p. 315, 323, 326. line 34. p. 329, 330. The rest belong to the Anatomical Part. Tab. 23. In which the Stomach and Guts of a Fox, are supposed to be turned inside outward, to shew the Glands. Tab. 24. In which all the Guts are supposed to be inverted, to shew their Glands and inward Stru∣cture. Tab. 25. Where some Faults are to be rectify'd by the Descriptions. To which the Reader is desired always to have regard. Tab. 26. In which the Stomach and Guts of a Sheep supposed to be Inside outward. Tab. 27. In which the width of the Casowary's Guts is somewhat a∣bove the Scale. Tab. 28. In which the Gizard of the Dunghill-Cock is not so well drawn, as in the following Table. The Pigeons Crop drawn Inside outward, to shew the Glands both in that, and in the Echinus. FINIS.
Tab: 1. stone A Stone voyded by ye Urethra of a Man: after ye life. armadillo Weesle Headed Armadillo. animal skull Head of ye Baby-Rousa. boar tusk Tusk of a Wild Boar hippopotamus skull Head of ye Hippopotamus or ye Behemoth
Tab. 2. ram's horns Muscovy Ram's Horns rhinoceros skin Skin on ye Buttock of a Rhinoceros Deer horns A Greenland Deer's Horns stone A Stone of a Dogs Bladder bone Throttle Bone of a Mon∣key leg bone and hoof Greenland Stag's Leg.
Tab. 3. scale along side of page Inches 3 6 9 12 15 tortoise shell viewed from top and bottom A Great Chequerd Tortoise-Shell 2 tortoise shell A Lesser from Virginia tortoise shell A Scaled Tortois Shell
Tab. 4. elephant tusk An Elephant's Tusk. snake tail Rattle Snak's Tail, after ye Life. scale along top of page Feet. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 crocodile skeleton with measuring scale at top Skeleton of a Crocodile or ye Leviathan bony appendage The Wesan
Tab. 5. bird head Ind: Stork's Head bird head Phoenicopter's Head bird head Ind: Hern's Head scale along side of page Inches 5 10
Tab. 6. bird skull Head of ye Albitros. egg in another egg Two Eggs, one within another. bird's nest A Bird's nest. bird's nest Another.
Tab. 7. depiction of fish Little Sea-Uni∣corne. scale along side of page Inches 4 8 12 16 20 fish head Head of ye Under-Sword Fish depiction of fish Square Fish depiction of fish Long File Fish. depiction of fish Hare Globe Fish.
Tab. 8. depiction of fish Square Acarauna. depiction of fish Mailed Fis of Brasile scale on side of page Inches 2 4 6 front and back of starfish Smooth Star-Fish 1. 2. crowned starfish Crowned Star-Fish.
Tab. 9. front and back of shell Wilk with plaited Spikes I 2 front and back of shell Leser Persian Wilk I 2 front and back of shell Flat Lip'd Snaile I 2 front and back of shell Diping Snaile I 2
Tab. 10. front and back of shell Square Wilk I 2 front and back of shell Long Square Wilk I 2 front and back of shell Thick Lipp'dWilk I 2 front and back of shell Triangular Wilk I 2 front and back of shell Inverted Wilk Snail I
Tab. 11. front and back of shell Spiked short Whirle I 2 front and back of shell Concave short Whirle I. 2 front and back of shell Finger'd Snail I 2 shell Blober Lip shell Fore Whirle shell Mailed Sailer shell Vaulted Limpet
Tab. 12. front and back of shell Chestnut Oyster I 2 shell Neted Shell shell Conick Limpet. Sloaping shell Multiarticulate Oyster shell Scaled Centre-Shell shell Rugged Oyster shell Blob Lip'd Muscle 2 1
Tab. 13. fly nest Fly Nest bee and hive Wild Bee I 2 3 top and bottom of insect Lanthorne Flie I 2 insect Nocoonaca beetle Great Gogle Ey'd Beetle beetle Leser Bull Chaser beetle Long Gogle Ey'd Beetle top and bottom of beetle Thick Gogle Ey'd Beetle I 2
Tab. 14. nut Trivalvous. nut Indian Plum-stones. Great, Poynted. nut Quinquevalvous, Oval. nut Woody Oval. nut Round Mammee. nut Woody, Orbicular. nut Orbicular, Tuberous. nut Quinquevalvous, Orbicular.
Tab. 15. nut Coco Nut nut The Shell nut Outward Coat scale on side of page Inches 3 6 9 12 nut Kernel nut Inward Coat
Tab. 16. nut Great Palmacoco-Shell. nut and insides Date-Nut 1. The Stone 2. The Kernel. 3 nut Round Palmacoco. two views of a nut Dog-Palmacoco 1. 2 nut Broad Palmacoco nut and insides Butter-Nut 1. The Stone 2. nut Indian Filbert.
Tab. 17 close up of leaf-texture Part of a Palm-Bag gourd Indian Gourd leaf and acorn Dwarf Oak Leaf Akorne
Tab. 18. scale on side of page Inches 6 12 18 24 sea shrub Horney Sea Shrub, Incrustated. sponge Cats-Tail Sponge. peas After the Life Orbicular Indian Peas. Another some-what Flat. sea shrub Flat Sea Shrub, with numerous Branches. sea shrub Sea Shrub with united Branches.
Tab. 19. tooth Petrifyd Tooth of a Sea Animal. two images of a fish mold A Fis Mold 1. 2. tooth P. Tooth of a Land Animal. shell Cardites. shell High-war'd Conchites. shell Quadrilateral Musculites.
Tab. 20. coral Florid Coral. sea life specimen Flat Bolt-head two stones Stones like Flower-Columns 1. 2. sea life specimen True Ste∣lechi∣tes. sea life specimen Shell'd Belemnites. sea life specimen Dendropotamites. sea life specimen Geometrick Iasper 1 2 sea life specimen Florid Eagle Stone. sea life specimen Worme-stone
Tab. 21. geological specimen Astrochites geological specimen Silver-Spar. geological specimen Foliated Talk. geological specimen Mundick. Spar. geological specimen A Talk-Crystal geological specimen A Half Crystal geological specimen Starred Waxen-Vain
Tab. 22. geological specimen Onychine Marble geological specimen Plated Silver geological specimen Copper both Capillary & Gravulat'd geological specimen Crystalline or Figurd Lead geological specimen Brush-Iron Ore. geological specimen Brush Iron
TAB: 24 digestive system Stomach and Guts of a Mole digestive system Stom: and Guts of a Rat. digestive system Stom: and Guts of a Rabbit. digestive system Stom: and Guts of an Urchan. scale at bottom of page Inches. 1 2 3 4
TAB: 23 digestive system The Stomach and Guts of a Weesle. digestive system The Stom: and Guts of a Pole Cat.. digestive system Stom: and Guts of a Cat. digestive system Stom: and Guts of a Fox. scale at bottom of page Inches. 1 2 3 4 5
Tab. 25. digestive system Stomach and Guts of a Horse. scale at bottom of page Inches. 5 10 15
TAB: 26 digestive system The Stomacks and Guts of a Sheep. muscles The Muscules of the Gulet of a Calf after the Life. organ The Omasus or Feck of a Sheep scale on side of page Inches 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 scale at bottom of page Inches. 1 2 3
Tab. 27. digestive system Stomach and Guts of a Cassowary. digestive system Of an owle.
Tab. 28: digestive system Crop, Gizard, & Guts of: a Dunghil Cock: scale in middle of page Inches. digestive system Crop &c. of a Tame Pigeon.
Tab. 29. digestive organ Crop of a Cropper Dove scale in middle of page Inches. digestive organ Gulet Gizard & Guts of a Jack Da digestive organ Gizard of a Pullet after the Life. digestive organ Part pf a Jack Das Guts Mag∣nify'd
TAB. 30 digestive tract The Gulet &c. of a Starling: digestive tract The Gulet. etc. of a young Yellowhamer digestive tract The Gulet. etc. of a Bullfinch: digestive tract The Gulet. etc. of a young Wryneck: digestive tract The Gulet. etc. of a Bunting. digestive tract The Gulet. &c of a Redd Sparrow digestive tract The Gulet. etc. of a Hous Swallow.
TAB. 31. digestive tract The Stomach & Guts of a Salmon. interior and exterior view of digestive tract The Stomach & Guts of a Place. I The Inside. 2 digestive tract The Stomach & Guts of a Whiting
