K578 99887361 182087
King VVILLIAM'S Courage and Conquest: TOGETHER, VVith the Glorious Success of his Royal Highness the Duke of Savoy; to the Unspeakable Consternation of the French Court and Kingdom. To an Excellent New Tune. Licensed according to Order. HArk! Hark! Hark! how the mad World, All Sword and with Fire, Conspire, Conspire; Their Forces all Gay, In Battle Array, To Combat, to Combat with the Emperor of France, Yes let them Advance, Advance, Whilst William, Great William shall dash them in sunder. And Scurge them with Scorpion Rods, As Jove drove the Gyants down down by his Thunder, Who Battl'd the Throne of the Gods. All France, all France is in fear, Of true Sons of Thunder, Who under, who under His Highness's Command, Has Enter'd their Land; Defending their Kingdom will prove but in vain, Fair Dauphin he soon shall gain: Thus William & Savoy shall dash them in sunder. And, &c. Monsieur, Monsieur Catinat, Being over-power'd, He scower'd, he scower'd Before the Savoys, Stout Conquering Boys, Which made his whole Army to tremble for fear, VVhen they with their Duke drew, near; Thus Savoy great Savoy shall dash 'em in sunder, And, &c. Strong Towns, strong Towns they shall yield To him at discretion, Oppression, Oppression, Has caus'd them to groan, And therefore they own His coming is purely to keep 'em from thrall. French Dragoons shall pay for all, For Savoy, great Savoy shall dash them in sunder. And, &c. His Arms, his Arms with success, Still clears all before him, Adore him, Adore him, The Protestants due, There's none but a Crew, Of Romans, of Romans that does him oppose, Who only shall feel his blows, For Savoy, great Savoy, shall dash 'em in sunder, And, &c. To Arms, to Arms crys the French, For the Enemy's coming, He's Bombing, he's Bombing, Our Fortify'd Towns, And Conquering Crowns, Now thus in confusion they march to & fro, Yet all is in vain I know, For Savoy, great Savoy shall dash 'em in sunder. And, &c. Huzza, Huzza they rush on Like brave Alexanders, Commanders, Commanders Still Leading the way, In Battle Array, Tantararo, Tantararo the trumpets do sound, While Cannons shall tear the Ground, Thus Savoy, great Savoy shall dash 'em in sunder And, &c. Now while, now while he runs on, Our King with Commanders, In Flanders, in Flanders, With Battering Balls Shall beat down the VValls Of Dunkirk, of Dunkirk; & make 'em to knm He fears no Insulting Foe; Thus William and Savoy shall dash 'em in sunder And Scurge them with Scorpion Rods, As Jove drove the Gyants down down by his Thunder And Battl'd the Throne of the Gods. Printed for P. Brooksby, J. Deacon, J. Blare, and J. Back.
