N1121 99887248 183503
Nick and Froth; OR, The Good-fellows Complaint for Want of full Measure. Discovering the Deceits, and Abuses of Victuallers, Tapsters, Ale-Drapers; and all the rest of the Society of Drunkard-makers: By filling their Drink in False Flaggons, Pimping Tankerds, Cans, call'd Ticklers; Rabbits, Jugs, and short Quarterns, To the Grand abuse of the So∣ciety of Good-fellowship. Good Fellows Drinks their Liquor without flinching; Then why should Knavish Tapsters use such pinching. Tune of, We'l Drink this Old Ale no more, no more. ALl you yt are Frée-men of Ale-Drapers hall And Tapsters where ever you be, Be sure you be ready to come at my call, And your Knavery here you shall sée. A knot of Good-fellows we are here inclin'd, To Challenge you out if you dare, A very sharp Tryal you're like to find, Although it be at your own Bar. Your Cheats and Abuses, we long did abide, But times are so wondrous hard, That Loosers may speak, it cannot be deny'd, Of our Measure we have been debar'd. But now we'l show you a trick you knaves And lay you all open to view, It's all for your froth and your Nick you slaves And tell you no more then is true. If in a cold Morning we chance to come, And bid a good Morrow my Host, And call for some Ale, you will bring us black Pots, Yet scarce will afford us a Toast. For those yt drink Béer, 'tis true as i'me here Your Counterfeit Flaggons you have, Which holds not a Quart, scarce by a third part, And yt makes my Hostis go brave,
BVt now pimping Tankerds are all in use Which drains a Mans Pocket in brief: For he that sits close, and takes of his Dose, Will Find that the Tankerd's a Thief. Bée't Tankard or Flaggon, which of them you brag on, We'l trust you to Nick and to Froth; Before we can Drink, be sure it will shrink, Far worser then North Country Cloth. When Summer is coming, then hey brave boys, The tickling Cans they run round. Pray tak't in good part, for a Winchester Quart Will fill sir, I dare lay you a Pound. Your Rabbits & Iugs, & Coffée-house Mugs Are ready when e're you do call, A P— take his Trade, such Measures that made, I wish that Old Nick had them all. When we have a Fancy our Noses to Stéel, And call for some Nance of the best, Be sure the short Pot, must fall to our lot, For now they are all in request. Scarce one House in twenty, where measure is plenty; But still they are all for the Pinch; Thus every day, they drive customs away, And force us good Fellows to flinch. Somtimes a man may, leave somthing to pay Though seldom he did it before: With Marlborough Cholke you his patience provoke VVhen ever he clears all his score. The women likewise, which are not precise, But will take a Cup of the best, Tho they drink for pleasure, they'l have their measure Or else you shall have little rest. There's Billings-gate Nan, & all her whole gang Complaining for want of their due: True Topers they are, as o're scor'd at Bar, For they'l drink till their Noses look blew. A Pot and a Toast, will make them to boast, Of things that are out of their reach: So long as a Groat, remains in the Coat, They over good Liquor will Preach. In Shoo-makers Row, there's true hearts you know But give them their Measure and weight, They'l scorn for to stir, but stick like a Bur, And Tope it from Morning till Night. Then there's honest Smug yt with a full jug VVill set all his Brains on a float: But you are such Sots, to fill him small Pots VVill scarce quench ye spark in his Throat. VVith many such Blades of several Trades VVhich fréely their Money will spend; But fill them good drink, they value not chink VVhere ever they méet with a Friend. Most Trades in ye Nation gives there appro∣bation How that you are much for to blame: Then make us excuses, but cease your abuses And fill up your Measure for shame.
