p709B 52614825 176006
An Abstract, OF A LETTER From a Person of Eminency and Worth in Caledonia, To a Friend at Boston in New-England. SIR, I Have Received your kind Letter of the 26 December last, and Communi∣cated it to the Gentlemen of the Council here; to whom your kind Sentiments and Readiness were very acceptable. Certainly the Work here begun is the most Ri'pned, Digested, and the best Founded, as to Priviledges, Place, Time, and other like Advanta∣ges, that ever was yet begun in any part of the Trading World. We arrived upon this Coast the first, and took possession the third of November: Our Si∣tuation is about two Leagues to the Southward of Golden Island. (by the Spani∣ards called Guarda) in one of the best and most desenceable Harbours perhaps in the World. The Country is Healthfull to a wonder; insomuch that our own Sick, which were many when we Arrived, are now generally cuted. The Country is exceeding Fertile, and the Weather Temperate: The Coun∣try where we are settled, is dry, and rising Ground. Hills but not high; and on the sides, and quite to the tops, three, four or five foot good fat mould, not a Rock or stone to be seen. We have but eight or nine Leagues to a River, where Boats may go into the South Sea. The Natives for fitry Leagues on either side are in intire Friendship and Correspondence with us; and if we will be at the pains, we can gain those at the greatest distance. For our Neighbour Indians are willing to be the joyfull Messengers of our settlement, and good Disposition to their Country men. As to the Innate Riches of the Country, upon the first Information, I always believed to be very great: But now find it goes beyond all that ever I thought, or conceived in that matter. The Spaniards, as we can understand, are very much surpized, and alarm'd and the more that it comes as a Thunder-clap upon them; Having had no notice of us, untill three days after our Arrival. We have written to the President of Panama, giving him account of our good and Peaceable Intenti∣ons, and to procure a good Understanding and Correspondence; And if that is not Condescended to: we are ready for what else he pleases. It Merchants should once Erect Factories here, this place will soon become the best and surest Mart in all America, both for In-land and Over land Trade. We want here Sloops and Coasting Veslels; for want of which, and by reason we have been all Hands at Work, in Fortifying and fitting our selves, (which is now pretty well over) we had but little Trade as yet: most of our Goods Unsold. We are here a Thousand one Hundered Men, and expect Supplies every Day. We have been exceeding unhappy in loosing two Ministers who came with us from Scotland; and if New-England could supply us in that, it would be a great and lasting Obligation. Fort St. Andrew, April 18th, 1698, 9. EDINBƲRGH, Printed by John Reid, 1699.
