s1750 52612314 179619
A PROCLAMATION, Discharging Merchants and other Traffickers to Sell or Exchange any Prohibite Com∣modities, with themselves, or amongst others. CHARLES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To  Macers of Our Privy Council, or Messengers at Arms, our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly and severally, specially constitute, Greeting, Forasmuch as We, from the great care We alwayes had of the Advancement of the Trade and Manufactories of this Our Ancient Kingdom, have made several good Laws and Acts thereanent, and particularly, by the 12th. Act of our Current Parliament, in the Moneth of September, 1681. Relative to our former Proclamation, in April preceeding; The Importing, Selling, Venting, Bartering, or Exchanging of diverse Commodities therein named, is Prohibited and Discharged, under the Certifications and Penal∣ties exprest therein: And albeit We then understood that the Importing, and Venting of these Prohibited Commodities could hardly be restrained without a total Prohibition had been given to the wearing thereof; yet out of a tenderness to the Merchants, who might have have had great parts of their Stocks in these Commodities upon their hands, We thought it not then fit to make a total and immediat Prohibition to the Wearing, but ordained them to be put under Bond, not to Import any of these Prohibited Goods thereafter, nor to Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any thereof, upon hazard of incurring the cer∣tifications contained therein: And notwithstanding there hath been more then sufficient time allowed to the Merchants to have sold off these Prohibited Goods, yet upon pretext thereof, and of the Ambiguity of the words in the Bond, that they are on∣ly obliged not to Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any of these Goods, that at the buying or receiving thereof were known to have been Imported, contrary to the Laws; diverse Persons have presumed to Import, at the least to Reset Commodi∣ties unwarrantably Imported, and to Vent, Sell, Barter, and Exchange the same, so that thereby the Execution of the Law hath been hitherto evacuated and eluded, and honest Men, who out of Conscience and Duty have given obedience, in hazard to be ruined, and the Trade and Manufactory of the Kingdom overturned and destroyed; and although we had more then reason to have inforced the Execution of the saids good Laws, by the examplary punishment of persons most guilty: Neverthe∣less We, according to Our accustomed Clemency, have thought fit to continue any Sentence upon the Process in dependence against them, at the instance of Our Advocat, till We shall have occasion to know their future behaviour. And in the mean time, for Explicating and making the said Act of Parliament effectual for the good ends therein designed, We, with Advice of Our Privy Council hereby Prohibite and Discharge all Merchants within this Kingdom, or other Trafficquers, Men, or Women, to Buy, or Sell, Barter, or Exchange with themselves, or among others, any Cloaths, Stuffs, Sarges, Holland, Cambridge, Silk-stockings, or any Goods made of Wool, or Lint, after the Date hereof, except they know, and can be able to declare upon Oath they were either made in the Kingdom, or lawfully Imported, preceeding the Prohibition contained in the Act of Parliament, and Proclamation foresaid, under the Penalties and Certifications therein contained, to be inflicted on them, with∣out favour or desalcation. And in respect diverse persons have, or may pretend to have such Goods in their custody, as to which they cannot positively declare upon Oath that they were Imported before the Prohibition, as having come through se∣veral hands: We do allow the Merchants Burgesses of Edinburgh, and others, havers of such Goods in their possession, before the Date hereof (who did take the Bond, and give up Inventar, and none others) liberty to Retail the same to the Liedges, or Export them out off the Kingdom at any time betwixt and the first of November next; Certifying such as shall upon pre∣text hereof Import any Prohibited Commodities, or Vent, Sell, Barter, or Exchange any thereof after the said day, the same shall be Confiscat, Burnt, and Destroyed, and the Persons guilty otherwise punisned, conform to the said Act of Parliament. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the sixteenth day of August, One thousand six hundred eighty and three. And of Our Reign, the thirtieth and fifth Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilii. WILL. PATERSON, Cls. Sti. Concilii. GOD save the KING. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty. 1683.
