I200A R188290 [ocm]62369326 187954
DECREES OF OUR HOLY FATHER POPE INNOCENT XI. Containing The SUPPRESSION of an Office of the Immaculate Conception of the most Holy VIRGIN; And of A Multitude of INDƲLGENCES. According to the Copies at Rome: From the Printing-Press of the most Reverend Apostolick Chamber. Translated into English out of the French Copy; (to which the Latine was adjoyn'd, as also here it is;) By the direction of an Eminent Person of Honour. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printed to the University, for Ric. Davis, 1678.
Sept. 18, 1678. IMPRIMATUR, JOH: NICHOLAS Vice-Can. OXON.
Prove all things: Hold fast that which is Good. S. Paul, 1 Epistle to the Thessalonians, c, 5. Let us not make to our selves a Religion out of our own Fancies: For what is Real and True, how small soever, is more worth than all that we can invent of our own head. S. Augustin in his Book of the True Religion, c. 55. What is to be uttered in the presence of Truth it self, ought not either to be spoken, or written, but with great Reverence and Cir∣cumspection: least we Provoke God more to wrath, even by those things whereby we think to Pacifie him. For nothing can be Pleasing to him, but what is Honest and True. Letaldus a Monk of Mans, in his Preface to the Life of S. Julian, Bishop of Mans.
The SUPPRESSION of an Office, Of the Immaculate Conception of the most Holy VIRGIN. FRier Raimund Capisucci, of the order of the Preaching Friers, Master of the Sacred Apo∣stolique Palace, Judge Ordinary, &c. By Autho∣rity of the Office we hold; and by express Order of our most Holy Father, by Divine Providence Pope INNOCENT XI, to us directed; His Ho∣lyness having first consulted & heard the Advise of the most Eminent and most Reverend Cardi∣nals, the General Inquisitors: We do Prohibite, and Declare to be Prohibited, a small Book, Inti∣tuled [The Office of the Immaculate Conception of the most Holy Virgin, our LADY; approved by the Soveraign Pontif, PAUL the Fifth; who hath granted, to whosoever shall devoutly recite the same, an Hundred daies Indulgence; as may appear by his Bull of July 10. 1615. Printed at Milan, by Francis Vigon.] Which Office begins with these Words. At Mattins. Ave Maria, ver. Eia mea labia nunc annunciate, &c. (i. e. Hail Mary. O my lips shew ye forth, &c.) And ends with this Prayer; Deus qui per Immaculatam Virginis Conceptionem, &c. (i. e. O God who by the Im∣maculate Conception of the Virgin, &c.) Let none therefore of what Order, Degree, or Condition soever, dare to keep, read, print, or cause to be printed, the said Office: But, so soon as they
shall have knowledge of this Decree, whosoever shall have the said Office, be required forthwith to deliver the same to the Ordinaries, or to the Inquisitors of the Place; under the Penalties contained in the Index of Books Prohibited. In witness whereof, we have given forth this pre∣sent Decree, (Signed by our Hand, and ratified by our Seal,) the XVII day of February, in the Year MDCLXXVIII. Fr. Raimund Capusucci, of the Order of the Preaching Friers, Maister of the Sacred Aposto∣lick Palace, &c. The place of † the Seal. This day, being Febr. 19, 1678, the above-mentioned Decree, was set up and Published at the Gates of the Palace of the Holy Office (of the Inquisition) and in Campi Florae, and other usual and accustomed places of the City, by me Francis Perid, Cursitor of our most Holy Fa∣ther, and of the most Holy Inquisition. At Rome. From the Printing-house of the most Reverend the Apostolique Chamber. MDCLXXVIII.
The SUPPRESSION of a Multitude of INDULGENCES. THe Sacred Congregation appointed for re∣gulating Indulgences and Holy Reliques, hath often times received complaints, against certain Indulgences dispersed & carried about in divers parts of the Christian world, which are supposititious and purely false: and others to be examined, which upon diligent Inquiries are found to be either Apocryphal; or by Popes of Rome revoked and called in; or null and void, the time for which they were granted being now past and expired: Many of which, not being ea∣sie to be discovered by Christian people, not well skilled in these affairs; they are thereby deluded and disappointed of the hopes they had of obtaining Indulgences and Forgiveness of their sins. For which cause the said Sacred Con∣gregation, earnestly desiring to apply a remedy to this evil, which doth dayly spread it self more and more; and to provide for the good of Souls, and the due respect of Indulgences; hath with great care and diligence, caused a Collecti∣on to be made of divers of them, and an Index or Table made thereof. Such are those, in the first place, which are said to de granted by John II. and Sixtus IV, to
those who shall say the Prayer of the Charity of our Lord Jesus Christ. We pray Thee most grati∣ous Lord, &c. By Urban II. granted to the Church of S. Mary, commonly called, of Campagnole, and of S. Vi∣ctoria. By Eugenius III. to the Revelation made to S. Bernard, of a Blow or Stroke on the shoulder of our Lord Jesus Christ. By Innocent III. to the Archiconfraternity (or Arch-con-friery,) and rhe Order of the Re∣demption. By Boniface IX. to those who repair to the Chapel of S. Nicholas of Tolentin on the day of his Festival. By John XXII. to those who kiss the measure of the sole of the Foot of the Blessed Virgin. By Alexander VI. to the Image of S. Mary, commonly called Laghetti. By Leo X. to those who wear the Cord of S. Francis. Printed first at Rome, and then at Milan, in the year 1665. (but there are also true Indulgences belonging to the Co-friers of the Archiconfriery of the Cordiliers of S. Francis.) To them that shall say the Angelical Prayer, when the Clock strikes. To the Image of the Immaculate conception of the Virgin Mary, painted in a circle, with the Moon under her feet. By Pius IV, or Pius V. to the Prince of Sienne.
By Clement VIII. to those who say the Praye O great mystery, &c. To the Church of our Lady (as they call it) of Mount-Serrat. Printed at Avignon. And likewise other Indulgences for the Soul of Christs faithful people departed. Printed a Madrid, July 20. 1606. By Paul V. to those who sing the Hymn, We praise thee Mother of God, We confess thee Virgin Mary, &c. or who be present on Saturday when it is sung. And to the Crowns, Rosaries, and Medals, blessed by the said Pope, at the request of the Cardinal Frederick Borromaeus in the year 161 when the Church of S. Charles was building a Rome. And by the same Paul V, & Gregory XV, to those who say, Praised be the most Holy Sacrament, Praise be to the most Holy Sacrament. By Vrban VIII, in honour of the same Sacra∣ment: at the request of Cardinal Magalotti. And to the Priests, that, after the celebrati∣on of the Masse, shall say, Hail Daughter of God the Father; Hail Mother of God the Son; &c. By Clement X, to those who say, morning noon, & night, the accustomed Anthymne, The Angel of the Lord &c. and in the end of i▪ Thankes to God & Mary. And likewise some others, which are sayd to be granted by some Popes of Rome, to the Crownes of the mysteries of the passion of our
Lord Jesus Christ: at the request of the Gre Duke of Tuscany. Such also is that Indulgence of the Confrier of S. Nicholas; whereby, upon five times r¦peating the Lords prayer & the Ave-Mary, they pretend to deliver every day one soul out o Purgatory. Such are those others, of S. Sebastian & S. Roc at Perouse. And, of the Society of S. Bernard at Trajan Pillar, at Rome. And those of the Crosiers of S. Eustorge, a Milan, Arimini and Bononia. Of the same kind are those which are sayd t be grnted to the Chapel of the Rosary in th Church of S. Anthony de Rovigo or Rodige. Or to the Church of the most Holy Trinity at Bergome. Or to S. Peters of mount Todon, on the Festi∣val of the Invention of the Holy Crosse. Or to those who weare the Cord of S. Francis de Paula. Or to those who say the masses of S. Augustin. Or five other masses, in honour of the five Festivals of the Blessed Virgin. Or to those who say the office of S. Francisca Romana. Or the Anthymn, Oh the great Passion, &c. in memory of the passion of Jesus. Or the Rosary of S. Anne: (which the Sa∣cred Congregation doth not approve.)
Or the prayer which is wont to be printed with the Image of S. Anne, Hail full of grace, &c. (which prayer is forbid to be sayd.) Or, the Office of the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin; which is pretended to be approved by Paul V. Or, the Prayer O God who for us in holy Li∣nin, &c. (except the Indulgence of an hundred daies, granted in the year 1671, at the request of the Duchess of Savoy, to continue for 25 years, for all that live in her dominion.) Or that other, Hail Daughter of God, &c. to be said after the Communion. Or, to those who by any outward Sign testify their veneration of the Name of the most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist. And likewise those Indulgences for Four∣score Thousand years, coppied out of the Anci∣ent Table which is said to be kept in the Lateran Church, to those who say this (truly pious) Pray∣er, O God who for the Redemption of the world, &c. And those Printed at Pavia; in the year 1670, intituled A Summary of the Indulgences granted by his Holyness our Lord the Pope, Leo X. to the Image of the Conception of the Glorious Ʋirgin Mary. Or, those published at Pesaro, in the year 1608, under the name of S. Joane. Or at Barletta (or Barule) to be obtained by by those who say certain Prayers, (which yet are not ill ones.)
Or at Parma, for those who in the daies of Lent repair to the Churches of the Third Order of S. Francis. Or at Pistoye, or Gastalle, for those who say the Prayer, Haile the most Holy Mary, Mo∣ther of God, Queen of Heaven, &c. And other Indulgences contained in a Book Printed by it self, of which the Devout Sera∣phick Benefactors are said to have benefit. To these are to be added, the Indulgences said to be granted to the Crosses of Caravaca. Or to the Crown, or Stellary, of the Imma∣culate Conception of the Virgin, consisting of Twelve Beads. Or to the Beads, Crosses, and Crowns of A∣loysia de Ascensione, a Spanish Nunne, of the Order of S. Clare. Or to the Measure of the Hight or our Lord Jesus Christ. Or to the Image or Measure of the Wound made in his side. Or to the Prayer which is said to have been found in our Lords Sepulchre. And the Indulgences, said to be granted on occasion of a certain Revelation made to S. Bri∣git, S. Mechteld, and S. Elizabeth, and to S. Joanne of the Cross. And those which are said to be granted to such Beads as have touched some one of the Three Beads, of which the Pope keeps one, the King of Spain another, and the other is in the
hands of the General of the Friers Minors, of the Order of S. Francis. All and every of which Indulgences the Sacred Congregation declares to be partly Supposititi∣ous & wholy Fals, partly Apocryphal, or on some other account Null and voyd, and that they can be of no benefit to any: And doth prohibit for the future their being, in any place whatsoever, published as true, or proposed to be obtained by Christian people: And Commands that all Books or Leaves of Paper, wherein they are pro∣posed or mentioned as such, be destroyed or suppressed, unless the said Indulgences be there∣in carefully defaced, or blotted out. Mean while it is not the intention of the said Congre∣gation that other Indulgences, not specified in this Decree, should therefore be accounted true and legitimate, and to be tacitely approved. And moreover, all Indulgences, which (be∣fore the Decree of Clement VIII, made Jan. 9, 1597,) were granted to any Blessed or Conse∣crated Crowns, Rosaries, Beads, Crosses, and Images. Or, which (before the Bull of Paulus V, be∣ginning The Pope of Rome &c, Dated May 23, 1606,) were made to Regulars (or Religious persons) of any Religions or Orders whatsoever; the Mendicants not excepted. Or, which, (before the 115 Constitution of Clement VIII, beginning Quaecum{que}, &c; and the 68 of Paulus v, beginning Quae salubriter &c.
were obtained by Aggregation or other Com∣munication, o any Archiconfriery, Order, Con∣gregation, Society (that of the Jesuites not ex∣cepted,) Chapter, or Company whatsoever; or of their Officials, Superiors, or other person or persons; even though such as that special and particular mention should be made of them; (unless they have been afterwards by the autho∣rity of the Pope of Rome renewed or confirm∣ed:) are by the said Congregation in like man∣ner declared to be of no force or moment. Moreover the Summaries of Indulgences for the Congregations of the Christian Doctrine, for the Con-frieries of the most Holy Trinity, and Redemption of Captives, of the Name of God, of the Rosary, of our Lady de la Mercé and Redemption of Captives, of our Lady of Mount Carmel, of the Girdle of S. Augustine, and of S. Monica; are not permitted: unless first revi∣sed by the said Congregation. The said Congregation doth likewise declare, that the Indulgences of the Stations of Rome, which out of a singular favour, have at some time been granted by the Popes of Rome, or hereafter shall be granted to certain Places, Or∣ders and Persons, can be advantageous on no o∣ther daies of Stations than those which are ex∣presly setdown in the Roman Missal. And that a Plenary Indulgence granted to such as do on certain daies repair to a Church, or do some other Pious work, be not of advan∣tage to them but for once only the same day.
All these the Secretary haveing made Re∣port of to his Holyness; his Holyness hath ap∣proved them all, and Commanded them to be observed inviolably. Given at Rome the 7th day of March, 1678. The Cardinal Aloysio Homo-Dei. The place of † the Seal. Michael Angelo Ricci, Secretary. The 12 day of the Month of March 1678, the Decree above said was affixed and published at the Gates of the Court, and in Campi Florae, and other accustomed places in the City, by me Roch de Stephanis, Cursitor of our Holy Father the Pope. Laurence Segni Master Cursitor.
The Rules whereby we may Judge of the Ʋsefulness of these Two DECREES. WE find upon accurate observation very often, tht even those things which had been judged right and good, have, upon a more exact examination of the truth, been found far otherwise in, S. Just. 1. Discourse to the Gentiles. The Truth is not put to shame by any thing, but by being suppressed. Tertullian against the Valentinians. And what, I pray, is it that we have to do? Is it not, what the Canons of the Church re∣quire? ...... But when things are done a∣gainst the Canon, it's fit they should be reform∣ed. Pope Julius 1 Epist. ad Orientales, in the 11 A∣pology of Athanasius. It is dishonorable and pernicious to Chistia∣nity, that those who make profession of it, should in matters of Religion talk so absurdly, that an Infidel who hears them so discoursing, contrary to all reason, cannot but laugh at it. But that which is herein the greatest trouble, is not, that he who thus talks becomes ridiculous; but, that
those who are not of the Church take this to be the sense of those that are the Founders of our Religion, ...... And these rash venturous persons, it is not to be expressed, what grief and trouble hereby they do create to prudent, sober Christians. S. Augustin in his Book, on Genesis, ad literam, chap. 19. For in the prayers of a great many, there be e∣very day many things found amiss, if heard by the more learned: And many things therein contrary to the Catholick Truth. The same S Aug. l. 6. of Baptism, against the Donatists. c. 25 And in Gratian's Canon-law. De Consecrat. Dist 4. si non sanctificatur. Truth gives a luster and splendor to all Art and Disciplines: And where this is wanting beauty and comliness must needs be wanting Isidore Pelusiote lib. 2. Epist. 64. What hope is there left, when the Master (the learned) are silent, and the Talkers be thos who, if things be as they say, were never th Sholars of those Masters? I am afraid that th silence of theirs is a Connivance. I am afrai that 'tis those rather may be thought the Speak¦ers who suffer these thus to speak without con¦troll. Silence in such cases is very suspitiou For Truth certainly would oppose it, if the fal¦hood were displeasing. 'Tis we therefore mu answer for it, if by our silence we give counte¦nance to the errour. Let such therefore be sharp¦ly rebuked, and not left at liberty thus to ta
as they list. Pope Celestin 1. Epist. to the Bishops of France. He that cannot content himself with a few things; 'tis evident that he makes his estimate, not by the Worth of things, but by the Bulk of them. S. Avitus Bishop of Vienna, in the Dalphiny, Epist. 2. to King Gundebald. 'Tis the source of most pernicious Errours; in those Authors for whom we have a reverence to be fond of euery thing, & without distinction resolve to justify whatever we there meet with. M. Aurelius Cassiodorus, a Senator, in his book de divinis Lectionibus, c. 24. Next unto God himself, we are to reverence the Truth, being that alone which brings us nearest to God. Martinus Dumiensis, Bishop of Bragues, in his Book De moribus. To observe also inviolable in every point, the holy General Counsils, of Nice, Constantinople, the first of Ephesus, of Calcedon, the second of Constantinople held in the time of the Emperour Justinian of pious memory ...... And to reform whatever shall happen to be contrary to the dis∣cipline of their Canon. The Journal of the Roman Church, in the Profession of Faith which the Popes were wont to make at their Creation or Election. There be some who think they do service to God, if, in order to the putting a greater luster on his praise, they invent Romantick Stories full of untruths. But they would be of another mind, if they well considered the words of the great
Apostle, who saies to the Corinthians, If Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and your faith is also vain; yea and we are found false wit∣nesses of God, &c. according therefore to these words of the Apostle, he deserves to be called A false witness, who out of an indiscreet zeal to praise God, tells a Lye: And he doubtless bears witness against God himself, who doth unwor∣thily contrive a forgery for his praise. The Car∣dinal Petrus Damiani in his Preface to the Life of S. Maure Bishop of Cesena in Italy; and in the Pro∣logue to the Life of S. Romuald. It belongs to our duty as well to retrench and forbid what is amiss; as to establish what is right, and when so established to enforce it by the strength of our Apostolick authority. Pope Alex∣ander the III, Epist. to Stephen Bishop of Meaux. As we do not intend to infringe or make void what by our Predecessors hath upon good and advised deliberation been established: so also those things which have been gotten of them by surprise, to the Churches detriment and disho∣nour, we will have reformed, and reduced to a better condition. Pope Innocent III, to the Bi∣shop of Canterbury, and to other Bishops. Forasmuch as falshood ought not to be suffer∣ed under the pretense of piety, we do by these our Apostolick Letters to you directed, Require you to admonish the said Abbat and Monks to desist from such presumptions. ...... For it is no way conducing to their salvation or their re∣puration
to make a gain by Preaching a Lye.... The XV. year of our Popedome. The same Pope, l. 3. Epist. 10. to the Abbat and Prior of S. Victor. In this (sixth) rank, we are to reckon the Le∣gends and Miracles of Saints, the Lives of the Fathers, the Visions of devout persons, the Ci∣tations and Opinions of holy Doctors. All which the Church admits, not as things necessary to be believed in order to salvation, but as things conducing to excite devotion in Christians, and for their edification: Provided, there be nothing therein contained which is known to be false. John Gerson Chancellare of the Church of Paris; in his Declaration of Truths to be believed as neces∣sary to salvation. The abuses, which are crept into the Church of God, it becomes us by the exercise of our autho∣rity to take away. Pope Nicolaus V, in his Constitu∣tion touching the conferring of Benefices in Germany. The Wheat as yet is covered with the husks. The Bishop of Rome is not able to pry into and search the hearts of men. Mans heart is wicked and unsearchable, who can know it? 'Tis I the Lord that search the heart and try the reines. 'Tis God alone is able to do this..... There are in man a thousand windings, a thousand artifices to deceive, a thousand tricks for mischief. In his heart is one thing, in his mouth the quite contrary. 'Tis but few that are truly good, and vorthy the love of God, not carried on with varice: But the greatest part of men by much
are hypocrites and counterfeits; more are desi∣rous to seem good, than to be so; Wolves in Sheeps clothing. It is not therefore to be won∣dred at, if the Popes prudence be sometimes imposed upon; and favours obtained for money. Aeneas Silvius Cardinal of Sene, (afterwards Pope, by the name of Pius II.) in an Epistle to Martin Meyer Chancellar to the Archbishop of Mayence. Care is to be had also, that by pretence of false Miracles (we may as well say False Indulgences) we do not injury to those that are true. The Fa∣culty of Divinity at Paris; in answer to a consulta∣tion concerning the souls of persons deceased appear∣ing after they be dead, January 22, 1534. The holy Synod (of Trent) doth declare and ordain, that the use of Indulgences being very wholsome for Christian people, and approved by authority of Sacred Councils, is to be retained in the Church, And doth Anathematize those who who say they are useless, and deny that there is in the Church a power to grant them. But desi∣reth nevertheless that, according to the ancient and approved custome in the Church, a mode∣ration be used in the granting of them: least by too great a facility therein the discipline of the of the Church be infeebled. But being desirous that the abuses which herein have crept in, and have been an occasion that the favourable name of Indulgences hath been reproached by Here∣ticks, be reformed and corrected; doth by this present Decree Ordain in the general, that all
wicked waies of making gain for the obtaining of them be wholy abolished, as from whence hath issued the cause of manyfold abuses amongst Christian people. And as for other abuses, pro∣ceeding from superstition, ignorance, irreverence, or from any other cause, or in what manner so∣ever, forasmuch as they cannot easily be all pro∣hibited in particular, by reason of the manifold corruptions of the different places and provinces wherein these abuses are committed; Doth strict∣ly charge all Bishops, that every one as to his own Church do make a diligent collection of such kind of abuses, and make report of them in the first Provincial Synod; to the end that they may be censured by the suffrages of the other Bishops also, and thence transmitted forthwith to the Soveraign Roman Pontif, and by his authority and prudence it be so ordained as may be most expedient for the universal Church; so that by this meanes the Treasure of the holy Indulgences be distributed to all Christian people in a pious and holy manner, and without corruption. Coun∣cil of Trent, Sess. 25. in the Decree touching In∣dulgences. I say it more out of sorrow, than by way of re∣proach; that the Lives of the Philosophers by Diogenes Laertius are written with more serious∣ness, than the Lives of the Saints by Christians. And that Suetonius hath with much more inte∣grity and less corruption related the affairs of the Caesars, than Catholicks have done (I say not
those of their Emperors, but) of their Martyrs, Virgins, and Confessors ∴∵ I forbear to name persons. But certain it is, that those who thus mingle the Ecclesiastick History with ficti∣ons and falshood, cannot be good men, or persons of honesty; and that the whole of their Narra∣tions is purposely designed either in order to Lucre, or in order to Errour; the one whereof is base and sordid, the other mischievous & per∣nicious .˙.˙. So that, those who have gone a∣bout by fictions and false stories to stir up in mens minds a devotion for the Saints, have but (as I may judge) by these false stories impaired the credit of those which are true; and what has been most accurately delivered by the most serious Authors is by this means become questi∣onable .˙.˙. As though these holy men of God, who had in truth done and suffered so much for Christ, did stand in need of our Lies! Ad∣mitting then that these fictions, how fals soever, might with so much wit and artifice be compo∣sed as not to do hurt; they are at best but use∣less and of no real service, and (like lasy Sol∣diers) the burden of them is more than the ad∣vantage; they hinder more than they help .˙.˙ They do therefore a great deal of mischief to Christs Church, who think they can never write a good history of the worthy deeds of Saints, unless embellished with forged Revelations and false Miracles. Melchior Canus (who was one of the Divines in the Council of Trent,) lib. 11. de locis, ch. 4.
Making his visite in those parts (de Liano) he understood that near the church of that place there was a Coffin of Stone with some bones in it which were had in great veneration, as true reliques of Saints: There being a common re∣port that the night before the Feast of S. Peter in vinculis (or Lamms day,) there did in mira∣culous manner come forth of those bones so great a quantity of water that it filled the whole Coffin: and though those of the neighbourhood came in great numbers that day to take of that water, which they held to be a thing miraculous & holy, yet was the water not at all diminished, but the Coffin still continued full .˙.˙. The Cardinal (S. Charles Borromeus) who held the reliques of Saints in great Veneration where e∣ver he met with them, would needs come see these and examine them, that thereupon he might particularly recommend them to the people for their greater veneration. Whence came the Proverb, That Cardinal Borromeo would neither let the living, nor the dead be at rest. Resolving then to visite these bones, and inqui∣ring diligently how they came there, he could find nothing of certainty. He thereupon began to suspect it was some devilish cheat. And to e∣vidence the truth, he caused the Coffin and the bones to be well dryed; and then committed the custody thereof to three Priests, whom he could trust, that same night on which the water used to come forth: And then there appearing no
sign of water at all; it was thereby discovered to be a meer artifice and cheat. And, to make provision against so great an abuse, he caus∣ed both the Coffin and reliques to be buried under ground, that the people might not any more be cheated to that false worship. Which thing was received by the people of those parts with great admiration, extolling the Cardinal as a holy man, and having the spi∣rit of God with him. Johannes Petrus Issuanus, a Priest of Milan, in the Life of S. Charles; lib. 6. chap. 7. The thing was done in the year 1580. We Ordain that the Bishops be careful to have the Breviaries within their Diocess to be well & accurately corrected; and that things therein appointed to be read, be reformed by judicious and skillful persons, according to the truth of history, out of the records and writings of anci∣ent approved Authors. The Provincial Council of Tours, held in the year 1583. ch. 15. De Paroecis & Presbyteris. Honour and Virtue, two of the Heathens Dei∣ties, had their two Temples built close together, and unto that of Honour there was no passage but through that of Virtue. In like manner amongst Christians, to whom all Will-worship is inter∣dicted, Truth and Piety ought not to be dis∣joyned, nor indeed can they be. 'Tis with them only that Devotion or Piety is built upon Truth. .˙.˙. Devotion therefore is to be joyned with Truth; not blended with Forgeries or Falshood
Joh. Launoye, a Parisian Divine, in an Epistle to to the Cardinal Francis Barberine, at the beginning of his Treatise against the Vision of Simon Stoch, and the Priviledge of the Bull called Sabbathine, &c. The Bull called Sabbathine, is spurious: and the Vision of Simon Stoch, a forgery of the Thirteenth Century. We commend the action of S. Martin, who refused to offer on an Altar dedicated to a Robber, & caused it afterwards to be destroyed. Like commendations we allow to those who make it their business to Correct the Offices of Saints: and judge those to be guilty of grievous sin, whoever put Fables or Fictions into books of the church, or hinder them from being put out. Theses in Divinity, of Claude Blouin, a Priest of Paris and Licentiate of the Faculty of Di∣vinity there; maintained in the Sorbon at the Act of the Ʋespers, October 24. 1674. Column. 3, 4. The Bull called Sabbathine is spurious; and unworthy a Pope of Rome. Theses in Divinity, of Noel Varet, a Priest of Parise, a Licentiate in the sacred Faculty of Paris, a Fellow of the Colledge of Navarre; maintained in the College of Navarre at an Act of the Ʋespers, Aug. 23. 1677. Col. 4. There be a great many Constitutions ascribed to the Popes of Rome, which never proceeded from them .... And in particular the Bull com∣monly called Sabbathine, I take to be supposititi∣ous and falsly ascribed to Pope Joh. XXII. For what can be more ridiculous, or more unworthy
a Pope of Rome, than to affirm; That the Vir∣gin Mary should make a promise to one that he should be Christs Vicar upon earth, on con∣dition that he grant a confirmation of the Or∣der of the Carmelites: That every one who is a Carmelite, and enters that holy Order, shall obtain eternal Salvation: That the Satur∣day next afer any of the Brothers or Sisters of the Order of the Carmelites do dye, the Vir∣gin Mary will go down into Purgatory and deliver thence all that she finds there, and bring them back to the Mountain of Eternal Life. Away with these fooleries, and such as these are, from the true Professors of the Catho∣lick, the Apostolick, and the Roman Faith and Religion. Theses in Divinity maintained in the School of the Jacobins, by Noel de Bretigneres, Priest of Verneuil and Licentiate in the Sacred Fa∣culty of Parise, in an Act of the Ʋespers, Septemb. 13. 1677.
Omnia probate: quod bonum est, tenete. Paulus, 1 Thessalonic. v. Non sit nobis religio in phantasmatibus nostris: melius est enim qualecuu{que} verum, quam quid∣quid pro arbitrio fingi potest. S. Aug. lib. de ve∣ra religione Cap. LV. Cum magnae reverentiae gravitate dicenda, & scribenda sunt, quae in conspectu veritatis recitari debent; ne unde Deus placari creditur, inde am∣plius ad iracundiam provocetur. Nihil enim ei placet, nisi quod verum est. Letaldus Monachus Cenomanensis in prologo Vitae S. Juliani Ceno∣mensis Episcopi.
DECRETUM. FRater Raimundus Capisuccus, ordinis Praedi∣catorum, Sacri Palatii Apostolici Magister, Judex ordinarius, &c. Auctoritate officii quo fun∣gimur, ac de mandato speciali Sanctissimi D. N. Domini INNOCENTII, Diviná provi∣dentiâ PAPAE XI, Auditis prius a Sanctitate sua Eminentissimorum DD Cardinalium, genera∣lium Inquisitorum votis, nobis imposito: Prohibemus, prohibitumque decernimus, libellum inscriptum, Officio della immacolata concettione della San∣ctissima Vergine nostra signora, approvato dal Sommo Pontefice Paola V. il quale à chi devo∣tamente lo recitara concede indulgenza di cento giorni, come apparisce nel suo Breve dato in Roma li X Juglio M.DC.XV. in Milano per Francesco Vigone. Quod quidem officium in∣cipit per haec verba: Ad matutinum. Ave Maria. ver. Eia mea labia nunc annunciate, &c. Et de∣sinit cum oratione: Deus qui per immaculatam Virginis conceptionem. Nemo igitur cujus∣cunque ordinis, gradûs, et conditionis existat, praefatum Officium apud se retinere, legere, impri∣mere vel imprimi curare audeat: sed statim a
praesentis decreti notitia, quicunque illud habuerit, locorum Ordinariis, aut Inquisitoribus tradere teneatur, sub poenis in Indice librorum prohibitorum contentis. In quorū fidem praesens decretum a nobis propriâ manu subscriptum, et sigillo nostro munitum, dedimus, die XVII Februarii, An. M.DC.LXX VIII. Fr. Raimundus Capisuccus, or∣dinis Praedicatorum, Sacri Pala∣tii Apostolici Magister. &c. Loco † Sigilli. Die XIX Febr. M.DC.LXXVIII. Supra∣dictum Decretum affixum & publicatum fuit ad Valvas Palatii S. Officii, & in acie Campi Flo∣rae, & aliis locis solitis & consuetis Vrbis, per me Franciscum Peridum, Sanctissimi Domini nostri, & Sanctissimae Inquisitionis Curs. Romae ex Typographia Rev. Camera Apostolicae. M.DC.LXXVIII.
ALIUD DECRETUM. Delata saepiùs fuere ad Sacram Congregationem indulgentiis sacrisque reliquiis praepositam, Indulgentiae quaedam confictae & omnino falsae, quae per diversas Orbis Christiani partes circumferuntur; aliae vero examinandae, quae, adhibito studio, in∣ventae sunt vel apocryphae, vel a Romanis Pontifi∣cibus revocatae, vel nullae, quòd datum eis tempus praeteriisset: Quarum quidem plurimae, cùm non fa∣cilem cognitionem habeant Christi fideles, harum re∣rum minus peritos fallunt, qui spe indulgentiae re∣missionisque peccatorum suorum consequendae fru∣strantur. Quamobrem eadē Sacra Congregatio vehe∣menter cupiens huic malo magis indies serpenti oc∣currere, animarum profectui, et indulgentiarum dig∣nitati consulere, plures illarum singulari diligentiâ colligi, et in indicem referri curavit. Tales imprimis sunt illae, uti asserunt, concessae a Joanne II. Et Sixto IV. recitantibus orationem
charitatis Jesu Christi Domini nostri: Precetor ssime Domine. &c. Ab Ʋrbano II. Ecclesiae S. Mariae, ut vulgò ici solet, Campagnolae, et S. Victoriae. Ab Eugenio III. revelationi de plaga in humero esu Christi factae S. Bernardo. Ab Innocentio III. Archiconfraternitati, & or∣ini Redemptionis. A Bonifacio IX. visitantibus capellam S. Nico∣ai de Tolentino in ejus die Festo. A Joanne XXII. osculantibus mensuram plantae pe∣is B. Mariae Virginis. Ab Alexandro VI. imagini B. Mariae, vul∣gò dictae Laghetti. A Leone X. gestantibus funiculum S. Fran∣cisci, primùm in urbe impressae, deinde Mediola∣ni. An. M.DC.LXV. (suas tamen habent & veras Confratres Archi confraternitatis Cordige∣rorum S. Francisci.) Recitantibus orationem Angelicam ad pulsum horologii. Et imagini conceptionis Mariae Virginis imma∣culatae, in circulo depictae, cujus pedibus Luna subjecta est. A Pio IV. vel Pio V. principi Senarum.
A Clemente VIII. dicentibus orationem: O Magnum mysterium, &c. Et Ecclesiae S. Mariae quam vocant Montis-Serrati. A venione impressae. Tum aliae pro animabus Christi fidelium defun∣ctorum, impressae Matriti XX. Julii M.DC.VI. A Paulo V. cantantibus hymnum: Te Matrem Dei laudamus, Te Mariam Virginem confite∣mur, &c. vel si die Sabbathi intererint, dum idem cantatur. Et Coronis, Rosariis, Imaginibus, & Numis∣matibus (quae Medallias appellant) ab eo benedictis, Frederico Cardinali Borromaeo supplicante Ann. M.DC.XI. dum Ecclesia Romae in honorem S. Caroli aedificaretur. Et ab eodem Paulo, & Gregorio XV. dicen∣tibus, Sia lodato il Sanctissimo Sacramento, Laus Sanctissimo Sacramento. Ab Urbano VIII. in honorem ejusdem Sacra∣menti, precibus Cardinalis Magalotti. Et Sacerdotibus, celebratâ Missâ, dicentibus: Ave Filia Dei Patris, Ave Mater Dei Filii, &c. A Clemente X. recitantibus, mane, meridie, ac vespere consuetam antiphonam, Angelus Domi∣ni. &c. & in fine: Deo gratias & Mariae. Ac demum aliae à nonnullis Romanis Pontifici∣bus tributa, ut ajunt, Coronis Mysteriorum passio∣nis
D. N. Jesu Christi, prece Magni Ducis Etruriae. Talis indulgentia sodalitatis S. Nicolai, qua, epetita quinquies Oratione Dominicâ, & salu∣tatione Angelicâ, unam liberari animam quolibet die à purgatorii poenis affirmant. Talès aliae Perusii confraternitatis SS. Sebastia∣ni & Rochi. Et, Romae, societatis S. Bernardi ad columnam Trajani. Tales demum aliae Cruce-signatorum S. Eustor∣gii, Mediolani, Arimini, & Bononiae. Ejus generis sunt & illae concessae, ut ajunt, Ca∣pellae Rosarii in Ecclesia S. Antonii de Rodigo, seu Rodigii. Vel Ecclesiae Sanctissim ae Trinitatis Bergomi. Aut S. Petri Montis Todoni die festo Inventio∣nis Sanctissimae crucis. Vel gestantibus funiculum S. Francisci de Paula. Vel celebrantibus Missas S. Augustini. Aut aliàs V. festivitatum in honorem v festi∣vitatum B. Virginis. Vel recitantibus Officium S. Franciscae Ro∣manae. Aut antiphonam: O! Passio Magna, &c. in memoriam passionis Jesu. Aut Rosarium S. Annae [quod Congregatia sa∣cra non probat.]
Aut orationem, quae impressa cum imagine S. Annae circumferri solet: Ave gratiâ plena, &c. [quae oratio prohibetur.] Aut Officium Conceptionis B. Virginis Imma∣culatae, quod asserunt a Paulo V. probatum fuisse. Aut orationem: Deus qui pro nobis in Sanctâ syndone, &c. [Excipitur indulgentia cenum dierum An. M.DC.LXXI. concessa precibus Du∣cissae Subaudiae ad Annos XXV. cunctis in illius ditione degentibus.] Aut aeliam: Ave Filia Dei, &c. post commu∣nionem recitandam. Vel aliquo conspicuo signo venerantibus Sanctis∣simi Eucharistiae Sacramenti nomen. Indulgentiae rursus octoginta millium annorum, veteri de tabula exscriptae, quam in Basilica La∣teranensi asservari affirmant pro dicentibus oratio∣nem illam vere piam: Deus qui pro redemptione mundi, &c. Tum quae impressae fuerunt Paviae, An. M.DC.LXX. sub hoc titulo (Sommario delle indulgenze con∣cesse dalla Santita di nostri signore Papa Leonex. all imagine della concettione della gloriosa Ver∣gine Maria.) Vel Pisauri sub nomine B. Joanna An. M.DC.VIII. vulgatae. Vel Barlettae, seu Baretuli, à recitantibus quas∣dam non sanc malas orationes lucrandae.
Vel, Parinae à visitantibus per Quadragesima dies Ecclesias tertii ordinis S. Francisci. Vel, Pistarii & Vastellae, à recitantibus oratio∣nem; Ave Sanctissima Maria, Mater Dei, Re∣gina Coeli, &c. Et aliae in peculiari impresso libro descriptae, quibus frui dicunt devotos Seraphicos Benefactores. His annumerandae sunt quae crucibus Carave∣censibus tributae dicuntur. Vel Coronae, sive stellario conceptionis Virginis immaculatae, quodex XII globulis precaeriis con∣stat. Vel granis, crucibus, & Coronis Aloysiae ab Ascensione Hispanae monialis ordinis S. Clarae. Vel mensurae altitudinis Jesu Christi D. N. Vel imagini aut mensurae vulneris lateri ejus in∣flicti. Vel orationi (ut aiunt) in Sepulchro Domini no∣stri repertae. Et indulgentiae, ut aiunt, innixae revelationi factae SS. Brigittae, Mectildi, & Elizabet, vel B. Joannae de Cruce. Et concessae, ut asserunt, granis quae aliquod ex tribus granis tetigerint exstantibus penes Romanum Pontificem, Hispaniarum Regem, & Ministrum
Generalem fratrum Minorum, Observantiae S. Francisci. Omnes vero & singulas jam dictas indulgentias Sacra Congregatio partim esse confictas, & plane falsas declarat, partim apocryphas, vel ex alio capite nullas, quae nemini suffragari possunt: Eas∣que in futurum ullo in loco ut veras publicari, & lucrandas Christi fidelibus proponi vetat: Folia∣que & libros, ubi sic proponuntur & afferuntur, omnino praecipit aboleri; nisi praedictae indulgentiae fuerint diligenter expunctae. Nec ideo tamen vult alias, quas hoc decretum non continet, pro veris & legitimis, tacitéque probatis, haberi. Ac demum omnes indulgentias concessas ante de∣cretum Clementis VIII. latum die IX Januarii M.D.XCVII. Coronis, Rosariis, granis seu calcu∣lis, Crucibus & Imaginibus Sacris. Vel ante Breve Pauli V. quod incipit: Romanus Pontifex, &c. editum XXIII Maij, An. M.DC.VI. personis Regularibus quarumcun{que} Religionum & Ordinum, etiam Mendicantium. Vel nte Constitutionem CXV Clementis VIII. cujus initium: Quaecumque &c. & LXVIII Pauli V. incipientem Quae Salubriter, &c. habi∣tas
per aggregationem, vel aliam communicatio∣nem ab Archiconfraternitate nullâ, Ordine, Con∣gregacione, Societate etiam Jesu, Capitulo, vel Coetu quocunque; vel ab eorum Officialibus, Su∣perioribus, aliisque personis, vel personâ; etiamsi earum vel ejus mentio specialis & individua fa∣cienda esset; nisi fuerint deinde Romani Pontificis auctoritate innovatae aut confirmatae, nullius esse ro∣boris & momenti pariter declarat. Porro Summaria Indulgentiarum pro Congre∣gationibus Doctrinae Christianae, Confraternita∣tibus, Sanctissimae Trinitatis & Redemptionis Captivorum, Nominis Dei, Rosarii, B. Mariae de Mercede, & Redemptionis Captivorum, B. Mariae de Monte Carmelo, Cincturae St Au∣gustini & Monicae; nisi ab eadem Congregatio∣ne recognitae, non permittuntur. Indulgentias vero Stationum Ʋrbis quae a Ro∣manis Pontificibus singulari quodam beneficio, vel communicatae sunt, vel communicabuntur inter∣dum aliquibus locis, Ordinibus, aut Personis, diebus tantum Stationum in Missali Romano de∣scriptis, suffragari posse declarat. Semel autem duntaxat in die Plenariam Indul∣gentiam in certos dies Ecclesiam visitantibus, con∣cessam, vel aliud pium opus per agentibus lucrifie∣ri.
De quibus relatione facta per Secretarium ad Sanctissimum, cuncta Sanctitas sua probavit, & inviolatè serv ari jussit. Datum Romae, die VII. Martii M.DC.LXXVIII. Aloysius Card. Homo-Deus. Locus † Sigilli Michael Angelus Riccius Secretarius. Die XII Mensis Martii M.DC.LXXVIII. supradi∣dictum Decretum affixum & publicatum fuit ad Ʋalvas Curiae, & in acie Campi Florae; ac aliis locis solitis Urbis, per me Rochum de Ste∣phanis Sanctissimi D. N. Papae Curs. Laurentius Segnus Magister Cursor.
A Curata rerum inquisitio, persaepè ea quoque quae recta judicata sunt, exactiori examine ve∣ritatis adhibito, longè aliter se habere ostendit. S. Justinus Orat. 1. ad Graecos. Nihil erubescit veritas nisi solummodo abscondi. Tertullianus l. contra Valentianinos. Quid quaeso nos oportuit facere? an non quod Ecclesiastici Canonis est? ...... Par autem est ut quae contra Canonem acta sunt, emendationem ac∣cipiant. Julius 1 Epist. ad Orientales apud A∣thanasium in Apologia 11. Turpe autem nimis & perniciosum, ac maxi∣mè cavendum, ut Christianum, de his rebus qua∣ secundum Christianas literas loquentem, ita de∣irare quilibet infidelis audiat, ut, quemadmodum icitur, toto coelo errare conspiciens risum tenere vix ossit. Et non tam molestum est quod errans homo eridetur: sed quod Auctores nostri, ab eis qui
foris sunt, talia sensisse credentur ...... Quid e∣nim molestiae tristitiaeque ingerant prudentibus fra∣tribus temerarii praesumptores, satis dici non potest. S. Augustinus lib. de Gen. ad literam c. XIX. Multorum enim Preces emendantur quotidie, si doctioribus fuerint recitatae; & multa in eis re∣periuntur contra Catholicam veritatem. Idem l. VI. de Baptismo contra Donatistas c. XXV, & apud Gratian c.) Si non Sanctificatur, dist. IV. de Consecrat. Veritas omnibus artibus & disciplinis ornamen∣tum affert, quae si absit, omni ornatu & elegantiâ carent. Isidorus Pelusiota Epistolarum libro II Epist. LXIV. Quid illic spei est, ubi Magistris tacentibus, hi loquuntur, qui, si ita est, eorum discipuli non fuerunt? Timeo ne connivere sit hoc tacere, Timeo ne magis ipsi loquantur, que permittunt illis taliter loqui. In talibus causis non caret suspicione taciturnitas, quia occurreret veritas, si falsitas displiceret: me∣rito namque nos causa respicit, si silentio favamus errori. Ergo corripiantur hujusmodi; non sit his
liberum habere pro voluntate sermonem. Coele∣stinus I Epist: ad Galliarum Episcopos. Qui recipere pauca fastidit, non virtute, sed mole rem conjicit. S. Avitus Viennensis E∣piscopus Epist. II. ad Gundabaldum Regem. Origo saevissimi erroris est, in suspectis authori∣bus amare totum, & sine judicio defendere velle quod invenis. M. Aurel. Cassiodorus Senator. l. de Divinis Lectionibus. c. XXIV. Post Deum veritas colenda est, quae sola homines Deo proximos facit: Martinus Dumiensis aliàs Bracarensis. l. De moribus. Sancta quoque Universalia Concilia, Nicaenum, Constantinopolitanum, Ephesinum primum, Calce∣donense, & secundum Constantinopolitanum, quod Justiniani piae memoriae Principis temporibus cele∣ratum est, usque ad unum apicem immutilata ser∣are ...... Si qua vero emerserint contra dis∣iplinam Canonicam, emendare, Romanae Eccle∣iae Diurnum, in fidei professione, quam olim ecens creatus, vel electus Pontifex emitte∣at. Nonnulli enim se Deo deferre existimant, si ad deferenda laudis ejus insignia, falsitatis Argumen∣a componant; qui nimirum, si egregii Praedicato∣ris
verba diligenter attenderent, talia non sentir ent. Ait enim Corinthiis; Si Christus non surrexit, inanis est ergo praedicatio nostra, vana est fides nostra: invenimur autem & falsi testes Dei &c. ....... Secundum haec ergo Apostolica ver∣ba, Falsus testis meritò dicitur, qui indiscretè e∣um cupiens laudare mentitur: & adversus Deum proculdubio perhibet testimonium, quisquis in ejus laude perversâ molitur arte commentum. Petrus Damiani S.R.E. Cardinalis in praefatione vitae S. Mauri Coesenatis Episcopi, & in prologo vitae S. Romualdi. Sicut ad officium nostrum pertinet, quae incon∣grua sunt prohibere; ita nobis potissimum conve∣nit, quae recta sunt, stabilire, & stabilita Aposto∣licae firmitatis praesidio roborare. Alexander III. Epistolâ Ad Stephanum Meldensem Episco∣pum. Sicut ea quae a Praedecessoribus nostris providâ fuerunt deliberatione statutâ, nullatenus irritari polumus, vel infringi; sic, ea quae ab eis sunt per obreptionem obtenta in honestatis Ecclesiasticae de∣trimentum corrigi volumus, & in statum redigi meliorem. Innocentius III, l. 1. Epist. ad Cantu∣ariensem & alios Episcopos. Quia igitur falsitas tolerari non debet sub ve∣lamine pietatis, Discretioni vestrae per Apostolica Scripta mandamus, quatenus memoratos Abbatem & Monachos, ut ab ejusmodi praesumptione desistant, authoritate nostrâ moneatis ..... Cùm nec saluti nec famae congruat eorundem, quaestum acquirere
de praedicatione mendacii...... Pontificatûs nostri Ann. XV. Idem. l. III. Epist. X. ad Abbatem & Priorem S. Victoris. Respicit iste gradus (Sextus) Legendas & Mi∣racula Sanctorum, Vitas Patrum, Visiones devota∣rum personarum, recitationes & opiniones Sacro∣rum Doctorum. Quae omnia suscipit Ecclesia; non quòd determinet talia de necessitate salutis esse cre∣denda, sed quia proficiunt ad commovendos affectus pios fidelium, & in aedificationibus: Dum in talibus nihil de certitudine scitur esse falsum. Joan. Gerso Cancellarius Paris. in declaratione veritatum quae credendae sunt de necessitate salutis. Quae in Ecclesiâ Dei incommoda inferunt, nostrâ nos expedit animadversione removere. Nicolaus V. in Constitutione edita circa collationem Sacer∣dotiorum in Germania. In thecis adhuc grana consistunt: non potest Ro∣manus Praesul introspicere, nec rimari hominum cor∣da. Pravum est cor hominis, & inscrutabile, quis cognoscit illud? Ego Dominus scrutans corda & renes probans. Dei solius ea potestas est. ...... Mille sunt in homine latebrae, mille fal∣lendi artes, mille nocendi astutiae: aliud in corde, aliud in ore gerit: pauci sancti, & digni, quos opti∣me amet Deus, quos avaritiae non agunt stimuli; sed maxima pars hominum ficta, fucataque est,
plures videri boni, quam esse volunt; sub ovina pelle saepe lupinum offendes animum. Nihil igitur miri est, si Romani Pontificis aliquando providen∣tia fallitur, & beneficia pecuniis extorquentur. Ae∣neas Sylvius Cardinalis Senensis, qui & posteà Pius 11. Epist. ad Martinum Meyerum Archie∣piscopi Moguntini Cancellarium. Attendendum quoque ne falsorum miraculorum (falsarū Indulgentiarum) praetextu veris miracu∣lis (Indulgentiis) detrahatur. Facultas Theolo∣giae Parisiensis in responsione ad consultationem de reditu animarum post mortem. An. M.D.XXXIV, die XXII Januarii. Sacro-Sancta Synodus indulgentiarum usum Christiano populo maximè salutarem, & Sacro∣rum Conciliorum authoritate probatum, in Ecclesia retinendum esse docet & praecipit: eosque Anathe∣mate damnat, qui aut inutiles esse asserunt, vel eas concedendi in Ecclesia potestatem esse negant. In his tamen concedendis moderationem juxta veterem & probatam in Ecclesia consuetudinem adhiberi cupit, ne nimiâ facilitate Ecclesiastica disciplina enervetur. Abusus vero, qui in his irrepserunt, & quorum occasione insigne hoc Indulgentiarum nomen ab Haereticis blasphematur, emendatos & correctos cupiens, praesenti decreto generaliter statuit, pravos
quaestus omnes pro his consequendis, unde plurima in Christiano populo abusuum causa fluxit, omni∣no abolendos esse: Caeteros verò qui ex superstitione, ignorantiâ, irreverentiâ, aut aliunde quomodocun∣que provenerunt; cùm ob multiplices locorum & provinciarum, apud quas hi committuntur, cor∣ruptelas commodé nequeant specialiter prohiberi; mandat omnibus Episcopis, ut diligenter quisque hujusmodi abusus Ecclesiae suae colligat; eosque in prima Synodo provinciali referat, ut aliorum quoque Episcoporum sententia cogniti, statim ad Summum Romanum Pontificem deferantur; cujus authorita∣te, & prudentiâ, quod Universali Ecclesiae expedi∣et, statuatur; ut ita Sanctarum Indulgentiarum mu∣nus piè, sanctè & incorruptè omnibus fidelibus dis∣pensetur. Tridentinum Concilium Sess. XXV. in Decreto de Indulgentiis. Dolenter hoc dico potiùs, quam contumeliosè, multò à Laertio severius vitas Philosophorum scriptas, quam à Christianis vitas Sanctorum; lon∣géque incorruptius, & integrius Suetonium res Cae∣sarum exposuisse, quàm exposuerint Catholici, non dico res Imperatorum, sed Martyrum, Virginum,
& Confessorum. ...... Nominibus parco. Cer∣tum est autem; qui fictè & fallaciter Histori∣am Ecclesiasticam scribentes, eos viros bonos atque sincers esse non posse, totamque eorum nar∣rationem inventam esse, aut ad quaestum, aut ad er∣rorem; quorum alterum foedum est, alterum per∣niciosum ..... Quamobrem qui falsis atque mendacibus scriptis mentes mortalium concitare ad Divorum cultum voluere, hinc mihi nihil aliud vi∣dentur egisse, quàm ut veris propter falsa adima∣tur fides; & quae severè ab autoribus planè vera∣cibus edita sunt, ea etiam revocentur in dubium. ..... Quasi vero sancti Dei homines nostris men∣daciis egeant, qui tam multa vera pro Christo gesse∣runt. Ʋt falsa quantumvis licet eruditae simulati onis artificio composita, ut noxia non sint; quoniam inutilia sunt ta men, tanquam ignavi milites, one∣ri sint magis quam auxilio ..... Ecclesiae igitur Christi vehementer incommodant, qui res Divo∣rum praeclarè gestas, non se putant egregiè expositu∣ros, nisi eas fictis & revelationibus, & miraculis adornarint. Melchior Canus, qui Concilio Tri∣dentino interfuit, lib. XI. de locis C. VI.
Mentra egli faceva la visita de Liano in quella riviera intese, come appresso la Chiesa di detto luogo, era un' arca di pietra con dentro alcune ossa tenute in molta veneratione, come vere reliquie de' Santi, essendovi publica fama che la notte precedente alla Festa di S. Pietro in Vincola Uscisse miracolosa∣mente tanta copia d'acqua da quel ossa, che se n' empiva tutta l'arca; è Benche concoressero le vi∣cine terre, in quel giorno à pigliar di tal acqua, che si teneva per cosa miraculosa, e santa, non scemava Però mai restandone sempre l'arca piena ..... Jl Cardinale che teneva le reliquie de Santi in somma veneratione e doue ne ritrovava tutte, le voleva ve∣dere è ricanoscere, metterle in stima grande ap∣presso i popoli, donde venno il proverbio, Che il Cardinal Borromeo non lasciava riposare ne i vi∣vi ne i morti, Volle visitare qu'est' ossa; è in vestigan∣do la loro origine, non trovò cosa alcuna di certo▪ Onde commincitò dubitare di qualche inganno dia∣bolico; è per sicurarsi delle verità, fece asciurgare benissimo l'arca el' ossa insieme, e poi la fece custo∣dire dà tré sacerdoti fedeli la notte istessa, che l'ac∣qua soleva scaturire: e non apparendo mai segno
alcuno d'acqua, scoper se che ciò veniva fatto con¦rtificio e inganno. E per provedere a un tanto dis∣ordine, commandò che fosse sepulta sotto terra la casa e l'ossa ancora, acciò il popolo ingannato non le adorasse piu falsamente. Cosa che recò in quelle parti grande ammiratione predicando poi quei popo∣li il Cardinale per huomo Santissimo, il quale ha∣vesse le spirito di Dio con lui. Joannes Petrus Is∣suanus Mediolanensis Presbyter. lib. VI de Vita S. Caroli. Cap. VII. Quod factum contigit, An. M.D.LXXX. Volumus Episcopos curare propria Breviaria, quàm fieri poterit certissimè & accuratissimè e∣mendari; lectionesque insertas peritorum industriâ, ad historiae veritatem, ex antiquorum probato∣rumque auctorum scriptis & monumentis refor∣mari. Turonense Concilium provinciale. C.XV. de Parcoeis & Presbyteris. Honor & Virtus Gentilium numina gemellas aedes junctim locatas habebant; ad honoris non nisi per virtutis januam patuit aditus: apud Christia∣nos, quibus omnis interdicitur Etelotresceia. Ve∣itas & pietas nec dissociari debent, nec possunt. A∣pud eos solos, veritati pietas superstruitur ∴∵ Ergo jungenda Veritati aut à falsitate secernenda Pietas.
Joannes Launoius Parisiensis Theologus E∣pist. ad Franciscum Barberinum S. R. E. Car∣dinalem praefixa operi cui titulus est, De Simo∣nis Stochi viso. de Sabbathinae Bullae privile∣gio, &c. Spuria Bulla, quae vulgò dicitur, Sabbathina; visum Simonis Stochii XIII. Seculi figmentum est. Laudamus S. Martini factum, qui ab erecta uni alicui latroni aera se abstinuit, illamque post∣modum summovit: Pari laude suffragamur eis, qui ad emendanda Sanctorum officia incumbunt; atque vehementer peccare asserimus omnes, qui∣cunque in Ecclesiasticos libros commenta inferunt, vel impediunt ne illata tollantur. Theses Theo- M.DC.LXXIV. in Sorb. pro actu Vesper. III. & gicae Claudii Bloïni, Presbyteri Parisiui, & Sacrae Facul. Paris. Licentiati die XXIV Octob. An. IV Columna. Spuria est Bulla, quae vulgo dicitur Sabbathina; indigna quippe quae a Pontifice Rmano emanaverit. Theses Theologicae Natalis Vareti, Presbyteri Parisini, & Sacrae Facult. Paris. Licentiati, Socii Navarrici, die XXIII. Aug. An. M.DC.LXXVII. in Regia Navarra, pro actu Vesper. IV. Co∣lumna. Multae tribuuntur Romanis Pontificibus Consti∣tutiones, quae ab iis non emanrunt ∴∵ Bulla quo∣que quae vulgo dicitur Sabbathina supposititius vi∣detur mihi Joannis XXII. partus: Quid enim
magis ridiculum & Romano Pontifice magis indig∣num, quam asserere B. Virginem polliceri ali∣quem fore Vicarium Christi in terris, si confir∣mationem Ordinis Carmelitarum concedat; Sa∣lutem aeternam consecaturum, quicunque Carme∣lita fiet, & Sanctum ordinem intrabit; B. Vir∣ginem Sabbatho primo post obitum Confratrum, & Consororum Ordinis Carmelitarum descensu∣ram in Purgatorium, & inde quot quot inveniet liberaturam, ut eos in montem vitae aeternae redu∣cat. Has & similes ineptias apagè à Catholicae, & Romanae Religionis & fidei veris cultoribus. Theses Theologicae Natalis de Bretigneres, Presbyteri Vernolaei, Sac. facultat. Paris. Li∣cent. Theologi, die XIII. Sept. An. M.DC.LXXVII. in Scholis Doctoris Angelici, pro actu Vesper. v. Columna.
Advertisement. IT hath been thought advisable, with the Two Decres above-printed, to adde the Rules and Passages subjoyned to them; that it may apper with what spirit our holy Father the Pope, and their Eminencies the Cardinals have applyed themselves to the making these De∣crees; and the obligation incumbent on other Christians in this as in all other things to com∣ply with their good intentions, and conform themselves thereunto. It is not to be denyed, that there be a great many people who do not think the matter in hand to be a matter of so great consequence; nor that it is so dangerous a thing to be mistaken in these affaires, when there is (as the people phrase it) a good mean∣ing. But the Prelats and Pastors of the Church are not of that opinion: and do very well know that it is a thing of great importance, not to suffer what is suspicious and frivolous in Religi∣ous
exercises. This they indeavour to make evi∣dent by the Rules adjoyned; wherein they think there is nothing contained but what may serve for publick edification. Having therein no other design, but to shew the difference that ought to be made between those Indulgences and Pray∣ers which be True, and those which be Fals and Apocryphal. And indeed, in such things as these, we are not so much to look upon the great num∣ber, as the worth of them: 'Tis with Truth, as with excellent Wine; it is not to be drunk with the dregs in it. Contemnendus Pincerna est, qui dum Vini copia jactat, foecem quoque punienda temeritate propinat. Petrus Damiani, Praefat, Vitae S. Mauri Caesen. Episcopi. The Drawer is not to be excused, who to make his Wine seem the more, doth (very unhandsomely) fill out the dregs with it. Peter Damian, in his Preface to the Life of S. Maure, Bishop of Ce∣sene.
Thus far, the French Copy. In some places of the English Translation, where we may seem to vary from the Latine (in the phrase, not in the sense,) we have therein followed the French, who have taken a greater liberty in paraphrasing the Latine, than we have done.
TO filll up the vacant Pages, I have thought fit to add, (as a specimen of such things as are here prohibited,) the Hymn, commonly called Te Deum, as I find it perverted and by them ap∣plyed to the Virgin Mary. Whence we may see, with what boldness they apply to her, this most solemn Hymn designed for the praise of God himself. A Copy of this, thus perverted, I find Print∣ed, in a stately manner, in the close of a Book written by Melchior Inchofer, a Jesuite, in Justi∣fication of a Letter pretended to be sent by the Virgin Mary to the City of Messina. Two of which Books (intituled as hereafter followeth) are extant in the Bodleyan Library; at C. 4.14. Jur. and Seld. Theol. O. 1. 1. This Hymn (so perverted) I take to be the same, (or not much differing from it,) with that which is here said to have been recommended by Pope Paul, V. with Indulgences granted to those who sing it, or hear it sung: which (a∣mongst others) are deservedly condemned by this Decree.
An Epistle written by the Blessed Virgin Mary to the Messeneses, asserted to be True, &c. By P. Melchior Inchofer (of Austria) one of the Society of Jesus; Printed at Messina by Peter Bree, at the charge of Joseph Materose, in the year 1629. Pag. 405 WE praise thee, O MARY: we acknow∣ledge thee to be the Lady. All the earth doth worship thee: the Mother of the everlasting God. To thee all Angels cry aloud: the Heavens and all the Powers therein. To thee Cherubins and Seraphims: continu∣ally do cry, Holy, Venerable, Wonderful: Mother of the Lord God of Sabaoth. Heaven and Earth are full: of the fruitfulness of thy Virginity. The glorious Company of the Apostles: praise thee. The goodly number of the Prophets: praise thee. The noble army of Martyrs: praise thee. The Holy Church throughout the world: doth acknowledge thee. The Mother: of infinite Majesty; Thine honourable, true: & onely Son, Conceived by the Holy Ghost; the Com∣forter.
Thou art the Queen of glory: O MARY. Thou art the true Mother: of the Son of the everlasting Father. When he took upon him to deliver man: thou didst afford him thy Virgin Womb. Thy seed having overcome the sharpness of death: the kingdome of heaven is open to all believers. Thou sittest at the right hand of thy Son: in the glory of the Mother. We believe that thou shalt come: with thy Son the Judge. We therefore pray thee, help thy servants: whom thy Son hath redeemed with the pretious blood he had from thee. Make them to be numbered with thy Saints: in the glory of God. O Lady, save thy people: and bless thy Sons inheritance. Day by day: we magnify thee. And we worship thy name: ever world with∣out end. Vouchsafe, O Lady: to keep us this day with∣out sin. O Lady have mercy upon us: have mercy up∣on us. O Lady, let thy mercy lighten upon us: as our trust is in thee. O MARY, after God, in thee have I trusted: let me never be confounded.
Epistolae B, Virginis Mariae ad Mes∣sanenses veritas vindicata, &c. Authore P. Melchiore Inchofer Aus∣triaco è Soc. Jesu. Messanae ex Typo∣graphia Petri Breae, sumptibus Jose∣phi Materosi. Anno salutis M.DC.XXIX. Pag. 405. TE MARIAM laudamus: te Dominam confi∣temur. Te aeterni Dei Matrem: omnis terra veneratur. Tibi omnes Angeli: tibi Coeli & universae Po∣testates; Tibi Cherubim & Seraphim: incessabili voce proclamant. Sancta, Venerabilis, Admirabilis: Mater Domini Dei Sabaoth. Pleni sunt Coeli & Terra: foecunditatis Ʋirgi∣tatis tuae. Te gloriosus Apostolorum Chorus, Te Prophetarum laudabilis numerus, Te Martyrum candidatus honorat exercitus. Te per Orbem terrarum Sancta confitetur Eccle∣sia. MATREM immensae Majestatis. Venerandum tuum, verum, & unicum Filium; Ex Sancto conceptum paracleto Spiritu.
Tu Regina Gloriae MARIA. Tu Patris Sempiterni Filii: es vera genetrix; Cui ad liber andum suscepturo hominem: exhi∣buisti Virgineum uterum. Per semen tuum devicto mortis aculeo, aperta sunt credentibus Regna Coelorum. Tu ad dexter am Filii sedes: in gloria Matris. Cum Filio Judice crederis apparitura. Te ergo quaesumus, tuis devotis subveni: quos Filius tuus pretioso Sanguine ex te suscepto redemit. Aeterna fac cum Sanctis Dei gloria numerari. Salvum fac populum tuum Domina: & benedic haereditati Filii tui. Et dirige eos, & extolle eos: us{que} in consumma∣tionem seculi. Per singulos dies: benedicimus te. Et veneramur nomen tuum: in seculum, & in seculum seculi. Dignare, Domina, die isto: sine peccato nos custo∣dire. Miserere nostri Domina: miserere nostri. Fiat misericordia tua super nos: quemadmo∣dum speramus in te. In te MARIA post Deum speravi: non confun∣dar in aeternum.
Of like nature is that which they call Our Ladies Psalter; where, what the Psal∣mist applies to God, is by them apply∣ed all along to the Virgin Mary. An in∣stance whereof, we have collected by Arch Bishop Ʋsher, in his Answer to the Jesuits challenge. pag. 490. BLessed is the man who loveth thy name, O Virgin Mary; thy grace shall comfort his Soul. Psal. 1. Lady, how are they multiplyed that trouble me: with thy Tempest shalt thou persecute and scatter them. Psal. 3. Lady, suffer me not to be rebuked in the fu∣ry of God; nor to be judged in his wrath. Psal. 6. My Lady, in thee have I put my trust: de∣liver me from mine Enemies, O Lady. Psal. 7. In our Lady put I my trust: for the sweet∣ness of the mercy of her name.Psal. 10. (or, as we reckon, Psal. 11. and so in these that follow.) How long wilt thou forget me, O Lady: and not deliver me in the day of Tribulation. Psal. 12. Preserve me, O Lady, for in thee have I put my trust: and impart unto me the drops of thy: Grace. Psal. 15. I wil love thee O Lady of Heaven and Earth
and will call upon thy name among the Nations. Psal. 17. The Heavens declare thy Glory: and the fragrance of thine Ointments is spread amongst the Nations. Psal. 18. Hear us Lady in the day of trouble: and turn thy merciful face unto our Prayers. Psal. 19. Unto thee, O Lady, have I lift up my Soul: in the judgment of God, by thy Prayers, I shall not be ashamed. Psal. 24. Judge me Lady, for I have departed from mine innocency: but because I will trust in thee, I shall not be weakened. Psal. 25. In thee O Lady, have I put my trust, let me never be confounded: in thy favour receive me. Psal. 30. Blessed are they whose hearts do love thee O Virgin Mary: their Sins by thee shall merci∣fully be washed away. Psal. 31. Lady, judge them that hurt me: and rise up against them, and plead my cause. Psal. 34. Waiting have I waited for thy grace: and thou hast done unto me, according to the multi∣tude of the mercy of thy name. Psal. 39. Lady, thou art our refuge in all our necessi∣ties: and the powerful strength treading down the Enemy. Psal. 45. Have mercy upon me O Lady, who art called the Mother of mercy: and according to the Bowels of thy mercy cleanse me from all mine iniquities. Psal. 50.
Save me Lady by thy name: and deliver me from mine unrighteousness. Psal. 53. Have mercy upon me O Lady, have mercy upon me because my heart is prepared to search out thy will: and in the shadow of thy wings will I rest. Psal. 56. Let Mary arise and let her enemies be scatter∣ed: let them all be trodden under her feet. Ps. 67. In thee O Lady have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion: deliver me in thy mercy, and cause me to escape. Psal. 70. Give the King thy judgement, O God: and thy mercy to the Queen his mother. Psal. 71. O Lady, the Gentils are come into the in∣heritance of God: whom thou by thy merits hast consecrated unto Christ. Psal. 78. Thy mercies O Lady, will I sing for ever. Psal. 88. God is the Lord of revenges: but thou the mother of mercy dost bow him to take pity. Psal. 93. O come let us sing unto our Lady: let us make a joyful noise to Mary our Queen that brings Salvation. Psal. 94. O Sing unto our Lady a new song: for she hath done marvelous things. Psal. 97. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: give thanks unto his Mother, for her mercy in∣dureth for ever. Psal. 106, and 117. Lady, despise not my praise, and except this Psalter that is dedicated unto thee. Psal. 108.
The Lord said unto our Lady: sit thou, my Mother, at my right hand. Psal. 109. They that trust in thee O Mother of God: shall not fear from the face of the Enemy. Psal. 124. Except our Lady build the house of our heart: the building thereof will not continue. Psal. 126. Blessed are all they who fear our Lady: and blessed are all they who know to do thy will, and thy good pleasure. Psal. 127. Out of the deep have I cryed unto thee O Lady: Lady hear my Voice. Psal. 129. Lady remember David: and all that call up∣on thy name. Psal. 131. O give thanks unto the Lord because he is good: because by his most sweet Mother the Virgin Mary is his mercy given. Psal. 135. Blessed be thou O Lady, who teacheth thy servants to war, and strengthenest them against the Enemy. Psal. 143. Praise our Lady in her Saints: praise her in her virtues and miracles .˙.˙. Let every thing that hath breath praise our Lady. Psal. 150. And after the same rate is that whole Psalter of our Lady, written by Bonaventure. Who's own words in Latine (which I spare here to re∣peat) are there cited verbatim, by that Reverend Primate. Another like Psalter there is, framed by John Peckham, called the Psalter of the salutations of the Virgin, or Psalterium Meditationum B. Mariae.
And Bernardinus de Senis, hath the conf¦dence to tell us, That the Virgin Mary hath done as much or more, for God, than he hath done for all mankind. Sola benedicta Virgo Ma∣ria plus fecit Deo vel tantum (ut sic dicam) quam fecit Deus toti generi humano. Credo etenim cer∣te quod mihi indulgebit Deus, si nunc pro Virgine loquar. Congregemus in unum quae Deus homini fe∣cit: & consideremus quae Maria Virgo Domino satisfecit, &c. Reddendo ergo singula singulis, sc. quae fecit Deus homini, & quae fecit Deo beata Virgo; videbis quod plus fecit Maria Deo, quam homini Deus. Ʋt prosolatio dicere liceat, quod propter Beatam Virginem, quam tamen ipse fecit, Deus quodammodo plus obligetur nobis, quam nos sibi. Bernardin. Senens. serm. 61. artic. 1. cap. 11. And Bernardinus de Busti to the same purpose. as he is there cited. And much more of such Stuff, you may find collected together by that Reverend Prelate and Primate, in the same Book; especially from Page. 465. to pag. 514. So that 'tis but high time for the Popes them∣selves (if they have but any sense of Reason or Religion left) to put a check to these insolent extravagances. And not incourage them by such Indulgences, as themselves (it seems) be∣gin at length to be ashamed of. FINIS.
