P860A R182593 [ocm]64551658 184758
A Relation of the publick Testimony of Joy, Shewn by Sir GABRIEL SYLVIUS, Envoy Extraordinary FROM His Majesty of Great Britain TO THE KING of DENMARK, FOR The BIRTH of His Royal Higness The Prince of Wales; The 12th of July, 1688. SIR Gabriel Sylvius, Envoy Extraor∣dinary from His MAJESTY of Great Britain to the King of Denmark, having receiv'd Information from England of the Birth of His Royal Highness the PRINCE of Wales; imme∣diately gave Order for the preparing all things, e to celebrate a solemn Rejoycing on that Occasion, which was on the 12th of July very magnificently perform'd. On which day the Envoy at a most splendid Dinner treated all the Ministers of State, the ick Ministers of Foreign Princes, with most of those of the Court. And whilst they din'd, the Fountains, that were before his House, con∣tinually ran with White Wine and Claret, and a great quantity of Cannon was fir'd to the ths they drank, being to the number of three or four hundred. At Night in a spatious place on the Sea-side, and before the House of the said Envoy, did ap∣pear an Amphitheatre, garnish'd all over with the Arms of the KING of Great Britain, the QUEEN, and the PRINCE of Wales, with their Supporters, the Lion and the Unicorn, all which were illuminated: And beyond these e several Stairs, that led to a Tower, whereon were plac'd the Kings Arms, all in Artificial Fire, which burnt for the space of Three Hours, and were so lively represented, that one might have distinguish'd betwixt the Pearls and Rubies of the Crown, and also have discern'd, as well what was written about the Garter, as His MAJESTIES Motto, Dieu & mon Droit. On the Corners of the Amphitheatre were e∣rected several Pyramids, out of the Top of which issu'd Artificial Fire, representing seve∣ral sorts of Flowers. Over the Portal of the Amphitheatre were plac'd the Arms of the PRINCE of Wales with his Motto, Ich dien, which was also in Artificial Fire; and before the said Portal was the Figure of a Woman, representing Britannia, with a Spear in her hand, and leaning on a Tar∣t, which was likewise in Artificial Fire. Nearer the Envoys House were the Foun∣tains, which ran with Wine in divers Places by little Pipes, secretly laid for that purpose, over which were His MAJESTIES Arms, curiously Engraven, Gilt, and Painted in their proper Colours; and at the sides were Circles of Fire, so enlightning the Fountain, that one might see it run. Just before the House was a great Basin, fill'd by a Pipe, which, being in the midst of it, cast the Water up thirty Foot high. Round about the Basin were Fireworks, which, ha∣ving burnt some time, flew into the Air, and there brake with a wonderful Noise. In the mean time was seen in the Water a Castle, out of which issu'd divers sorts of Fireworks, which, flying into the Air, and there break∣ing, were some of them converted into a quan∣tity of Serpents, others into falling Stars, and others into Globes of Fire. After this there was another sort of Firework put into the Ba∣sin, which, having made an hundred several Shapes and Figures, sunk to the Bottom, where breaking on a sudden, it flung the Wa∣ter out of the Basin in the form of a great Sheet, which, separating, fell down like a Shower, the Firework also once more break∣ing in the Air, and sending down a Shower of Fire, so well mixt with the Water, that Vulcan and Neptune seem'd to be striving for the Mastery. All this time the Cannon were discharg'd, and several other Fireworks cast into the Air by Mortar-pieces. Thus pass'd things without the House, within which were at the entrance divers De∣vices, compos'd to the Honor of the KING, QUEEN, and PRINCE, and, as occasion serv'd, interlac'd with their Names, all which were illuminated. Just within the great Door was a Woman arm'd, representing the Genius of Great Bri∣tain, holding the PRINCE of Wales in her Arms, with these Words, Britanniae spes alterae Magnae, and underneath Vivat. At the bottom of the great Stair-case, to represent His MAJESTIES Care and Vigi∣lancy
for his People, was a Lion sleeping with his Eyes open, and these words, Et dormiend vigilat. Going up the Stairs were these following Devices. First, a Serpent wound up, erecting his Head in the middle, with this word, Custos. Near this was a Lion standing, with a lit∣tle Dog laid down before him, and on the other side a wil Beast torn in pieces, with this Motto, Parcit Subjectis, debellat Superbos. By this Emblem was signifi'd His MAJESTIES Clemency to those, who submit to him, and his Justice to those, that resist. To shew, that he enterprises nothing with∣out throughly examining it, there was painted an Unicorn, with these words, Non aggreditur, quin praeviderit. To signify his constant Endeavors to bring his People to be of one Mind, and make them accord and agree, there was an Harp, with an Hand, striking on some of its Strings. The Motto was, Movet, ut consonent. To represent the Encouragement, he gives to Learning and Arts, there was a white Eagle flying towards the Muses, who receiv'd her into their Bosom, with these Words, Et istis favet. To shew, that the KING is the Happiness of his Kingdoms, and how much the Birth of the PRINCE of Wales contributes to their safety, was painted a Tempestuous Sea, with a Ship, that had cast Anchor, on which a Dolphin rid, to make it take the deeper hold, with this Motto, Incolumitas publica. To signify, that the QUEENS giving a PRINCE to Great Britain is a peculiar Blessing, conferr'd on her by Heaven, was painted a Field, cover'd with Ears of Corn, and a gentle Shower falling on it, with these Words, Benedictionem accepit. To shew, that Her Majesty, having receiv'd this PRINCE, as a Gift from Heaven, be∣stow'd him on the People for their Good and Joy: There was an high Mountain, that, having receiv'd the Rain, sent it down by many Ri∣vulets into the Valleys, which were thereby render'd Fertile and Green. The Words were, Recepit, & largitur. To represent the Qualities of the New Born PRINCE, there was an Eagle, having in her Nest a young one, which strove to fly after a Bird, it saw in the Air, with this Motto, Fortes creantur fortibus. To intimate the Majesty, appearing in him from his very Birth, there was painted a young Lion, newly born, and having his Eyes spark∣ling, with these Words, Nascendo perspicax. There was also a Ship, whose Anchor, being lifted up out of the Sea, drew with it a Coral Tree, which, as it rose, grew hard and red: The Motto was, Robur & Decus. To shew, that the PRINCE is the Hope, and will be the Support, of the Royal Family, were represented two Palm-trees, the one Male, the other Female, and betwixt them a young In∣fant Palm, with these Words, . To signify, that the Birth of his Royal High∣ness is an Obstacle to the Designs of such, as would oppose Great Britains Happiness, was painted a rising Sun, with many Stars about it, whose Courses contrary to the Suns, are checke by his Arisal: The Motto was, Cursus{que} vagos statione moratur. There was likewise in another place another Sun arising, and beginning to Shine on the Earth, with this Motto, Toti{que} salutifer Orbi. There was a little farther an Eagle, flying out of the Nest, where it had left its young one, which, nevertheless opening its Wings, tries to follow: The Words were, Per Patris Augusti vestigia curret. To shew, that the Birth of this PRINCE calms all the Disorders, with which Great Britain might seem to be threatned, and fills the Hearts of the People with Joy: There was the Island of Great Britain, as it is represented in the Map, environ'd with the Sea, on which the Rising Sun extending its Beams, drives away the Clouds, that seem'd to cover it, with these Words, Illas fugat, recreat istas. This also was the device of Medal, which St. Gabriel caus'd to be coin'd, there being only added at the bottom these words, Ob natum Walliae Principem Gab. de Sylviis auratus, ad Ser. Dan. & Nor. Reg. Chris Ableg. Extraord. CC. MDCLXXXVIII. On the other side of which Medal were repe∣sented the KING and QUEEN. All these Devices were on the great Stai-cas and so illuminated, that the Night seem'd turn'd into day. Thrô the midst of these Illuminations they ascended up into the Great Hall, where the the King and Queen of Denmark, who had pro∣mis'd to be at the Ball, was prepar'd a stately Throne, the Ground being all of Green, inter∣lac'd with all sorts of Flowers, which cast a sweet Odor. The Canopy was also of the same only that there were Festons running along it in the nature of a Fringe. On the Back, whe the King should have sat, were two great Look∣ing-Glasses, having their Borders cover'd with Sweet-herbs and Flowers, the whole Room∣ing also hung with Looking Glasses, garnis with Flowers and Green, which with the number of Lights, and their Reflexions, it seem all on fire. In another Room beyond the Hall was∣par'd a Magnificent Collation, whither who were weary'd, retir'd, to refresh themsel with all sorts of Liquors and Sweet-meats. The Prince Royal, and his Brother, whom His Majesty of Denmark had sent both to excuse his Absence, and to Grace the Ball, as they do every place, where they come, together with all the rest of that illustrious Company, departed highly satisfi'd with the Nobleness of their En∣tertainment, which was equally Magnifice and Delightful. Printed by Edw: Jones in the Savoy, 1688.
