G2163 [ocm]12191690 199150
CHINA AND FRANCE, OR Two Treatises. The one, Of the present State of China, As to the Government, Customs, and Manners, of the Inhabitants thereof; never yet known to us before in Europe. From the obser∣vation of two Jesuites lately returned from that Countrey. Written and Published by the French Kings Cosmographer, and now Englished. The other, Containing the most remarkable Passages of the Reign and Life of the present French King, Lewis the Fourteenth; and of the valour of our English in his Armies. London, Printed by T. N. for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-house in the Strand. 1676.
The present State of CHINA. ON the Thirtieth day of January, 1665. I went in the company of Mr. Carlos Daty, to visit Father John Grueber at his arrival from Constantinople. About two years since, he came out of China, where he had resided full three years. He began his pilgrimage at Venice, where he took shipping for Smyrna; from thence, by Land, he marched to Ormus in five moneths; from thence to Macao in seven; so from the South Coast he travelled to the
North, through the large Empire o China, sometimes upon Rivers an commodious Channels, and some∣times by Land, and at last he go safe to the City of Pekin. In his re∣turn from thence, he adventured t pass, and survey a Countrey whic was never yet seen before, by any i Europe; namely, The unfruitful Sands of the Desarts of Tartaria, which he passed over in three days, and came to the Coast of an Inland Sea called Kokonor,Kokonor in Tatarty. sig∣nifies Great Sea. not much un∣like to the Caspian. The River Jannus that runs through China with a strange rapidity, & discharges it self into the Oriental Sea, near the Island of Carea, hath here its source. This River is the deepst and largest of all that Country Afterwards this adventurous Tra∣veller, lost the sight of the Sea to n∣ter further into the Land, into the Province of Toktokai, which is
barren and wild, that one of the Neighboring people can have any temptation to dispossess the antient Inhabitants. Nothing is there re∣markable, but only some few dis∣persed Tents of the Tartars, who lead a most miserable life. The beautiful River Toktokai, which is as large as Danubinus, but so shallow, that any Man, on Horse∣back, may ford it over in the deepest place, watereth this blessed Coun∣trey, and gives unto it a name. From hence our Traveller passed through the Province of Tangut, which is very populous and belongs to the Kingdom of Barantola; he visited, in his way, the City of Retink, and the Kingdom of Barantola, the Me∣tropolis is called Lassa, and the pre∣sent King Teva. He is of a very an∣tient and noble Family of the Tar∣tars of Tangut. His ordinary re∣sidence is at Butala, a lofty Castle built according to the European
mode upon a high Hill, having Buildings of four stories, of very good and regular workmanship. The Court of this Prince is numerous, and his attendants are extream lavish in their apparel, which is, for the most part, of Cloath of Gold, and of embroidered Stuffs. Neverthe∣less this Nation is generally very sluttish, and unhandsome in their attire: Neither Men nor Women wear lining next to their skin. Their common Bed is the ground, their ordinary food is raw Flesh, and they are not so scrupulous to wash their hands or faces; but they appear very kind and courteous to stran∣gers. Their Women have the liber∣ty to walk about the Streets, as amongst the other Tartars; but their other Customs are like to those of China. Their Arch-Priest or Mufty is called Lamacongiù, whom they re∣verence as God, and believe to be
related to their first King, but they name him the Brother of all the the Kings of the World. They are perswaded that he riseth from the dead as often as he dies, and that this Man hath already risen seven times. The Kings and Polititians of that Countrey labor, by subtil means, to entertain the common people, in this strange belief, and the Lamacongiu himself contributes to it; for he keeps his face always covered, and suffers none to look upon it, but such as are acquainted with the mystery. The Nobility do mightily respect him; some of them come to that point of adoration, as to covet that which is incredible, and to carry it about as a sacred relick: From Barantola, Father Grueber tra∣velled to the Kingdom of Nekpal, and in a moneths time passed through it. The two principal Towns are Catmandir and Patan, situate on the Banks of a River op∣posite
to one another. This latter is a young Prince very well accom∣plished; he commands all the Militia of the Kingdom as General. When Father Grueber was there, he was at the head of a great Army marching against a Neighboring King called Varcam, who made frequent inroads to spoil the Countrey. The Jesuites gave this young Prince a Prospective Glass, through which he caused him to look at a place where Varcam's Army lay encamped; he found it so nigh, that he gave order presently to make ready and prepare for the fight, for he perceived not that this propinquity was but an effect of the Glass. This present was acceptable to him. From Nekpal our Traveller went, in five days, to the Kingdom of Mo∣ranga, where he could see no City, but only small Houses covered with Straw, and little Huts, one appoint∣ed for a Custom-Housse. The King
of Moranga pays a yearly tribute of 250000 Rixdollers, and seven Ele∣phants to the Mogol. From Mo∣ranga he travelled into that part of India which is beyond the River Ganges, and came to Minapor, the Metropolis of that Countrey; where he passed over that River, which is twice as big as the Danubius. From thence he went to Patan; and from that City, in five and twenty days, to Agra, the Royal City of that part of India, which is on this side Ganges. From thence to Laor in fourteen days. This City is built upon the Banks of the River Ravi, which is as large as Danubius, it runs into India, near Mltaia. There he took Boat and was carried down the River, in forty days to Tata, the ut∣most City of Indostan, the ordinary residence of the Viceroy of that Countrey; his name is Laskarkan, there he met with many English and Dutch Marchants.
From this place he sailed to Or∣muz by Sea, from Ormuz he went to Persia, afterwards he returned back to Smyrna, where he took shipping and arrived safe at Messina; from thence he went to Rome, where he received an express command to go back again to China. For that pur∣pose he travelled into Germany and Polonia, hoping to find another way through Muscovia. By the Emperors procurement, he had got Pasports from the Dukes of Curland and Muscovia. But when he was so far on his way as the Borders of Mus∣covia, he understood that the King of Poland and the Tartars had made a conjuction of their Forces, with an intent to attempt upon the Duke of Muscovia. By this means he was diverted in his passage to Musco; for the fear of the dangers and diffi∣culties in time of War, brought him back to Vienna, where he arrived at a convenient time when the Empe∣ror
was dispatching an Ambassador, Count Leshley by name, to Constan∣tinople. The Jesuite took this op∣portunity to travel thither with a resolution, from thence to go for∣ward in his intended journey: But when he came to Constantinople, he was mightily incommoded with a great rheume, with shortness of breath, and with violent pains in his stomach; so that being not able to proceed on in his journey, he went aboard a Ship bound for Le∣gorne; from whence he was carried to Florence, where he remained a∣bout eight days. In this time he was pretty well recovered of his distemper, so that he could go after∣wards to Venice; from whence he passed through Friuli to Vienna, with an intent, by that way, to re∣turn to Constantinople, that he might travel afterwards to China, accord∣ing to the orders of his General.
This Father is about forty five years of age, of a jovial temper, ex∣traordinary civil, as sincere as a Ger∣man, his conversation is very plea∣sant; in a word, he hath so many good qualities, and is so gallant a Man, that though he were not a Jesuite, all the World would esteem and love him. Monsieur Carlos Dati had seen him, the day before we had any dis∣course with him, in the With-draw∣ing Room of Prince Leopold, where he was entered into a conversation with him, which lasted not long; for the Father was called away and introduced into his Highnesses pre∣sence. After this first acquaintance, he intreated him to give him satis∣faction to some questions that he had a desire to make him concern∣ing China, which request the Father granted in an obliging manner. First, Mr. Dati desired to know, whether the present King of China
is the Son of the last Conqueror of that Kingdom? Where he kept his Court? Whether in China? or in Tartaria? The Father answered, that he was but his Grandchild; for the Grandfather being invited and brought in by the Rebellious Eu∣nuchs in the year 1646. He con∣quered all China, as Father Marti∣nius hath written at large in his History of China. He told us, that the present King of that Countrey is about twelve or thirteen years of age; that he resides at Pekin, the cheif City of the Kingdom, that his Father and Grandfather also did dwell there, according to Ma∣chiavels Rule; for he adviseth a Prince when he intends to keep in his hands a Countrey newly sub∣dued to his Scepter, where the In∣habitants differ from him in Lan∣guage, Customs, and Laws, to go and make there his abode. This is a Policy not so subtil, but that the
Tartarians have very well under∣stood and practised it. We inquired next, what kind of Militia they had? And how the Chineses were treated by their Tar∣tarian Kings? He told us, that the most part of the Soldiers of the Kingdom were Tartars, unless it be the Kings Guard which is a Body of about 40000 Men armed with Muskets and Bows of Corea or Japonia, for the most part. That the Inhabitants were not oppressed with Taxes, nor treated worse then by their former Kings; for they have all kind of Liberty and Freedom of Religion. The antient Laws are yet maintained in force all over the Countrey, and Justice is administred by Judges that are natural Chineses, only there is this alteration, a Tartarian must assst in every Court with a limited Autho∣rity, which suffers him to alter no∣thing of the antient Customs and Laws of the Countrey.
We desired him to tell us, what manner of Government they had under the King? At Pekin, replied the Father, there are nine Judges or Courts of Judicature; and so it is in all other Cities of the Kingdom, where they are called by the same names, and hear the same causes. The first and highest Court is called Li-pú, where half are Chineses, and half are Tartars. It judges all Causes proceeding out of other Courts of the Kingdom, by way of Appeal, of what nature or business soever. The second is named also Li-pù, but here the syllable Li is pronounced in a different manner from the first, for in the former it sig∣nifies Reason; but in this latter word it imports Ceremony. This Court is the Forum Ecclesiasticum that judges of all differences be∣tween the Learned; and decides all matters of controversie in Religion.
The third is stiled Pim-pù, which examines the affairs of the Militia. The fourth is for offenders, or the Criminal Court called Nim-pù. The fift is named Cho-pù, appointed for the Kings Treasury, as the Exchequer is amongst us. The sixth is Cum-pù, which hath a care of all the Kings Buildings and publick Structures, and Edifices. The seventh is to see to the payment of all the Kings Of∣ficers and Attendants in his Family. The eighth hath an inspection over the Kings Kitchin and Table. The Father had forgot the names of the two latter Courts, and of the busi∣nesses examined in the other. In every City, these nine Courts are erected subordinate to one an∣other; for example, that of one City, appointed for the Militia, is under the jurisdiction of the Pro∣vincial Court, which is in the cheif City of the Province; and from that, and all others, Men appeal
to the Metropolis of the Kingdom for the Militia, from whence they may appeal to the highest Court, which is the Li-pù, when it is a business of great importance. From this Tribunal, there can be no appeal further, but to the Kings person, which is never granted without the punishment of one hun∣dred bastinadoes, which every one must patiently endure before he can be admitted to the Kings presence. The manner of giving them is very cruel; the poor wretch is forced to lye down upon the ground, upon his Belly, with his middle and back∣side naked, two men sit one against another upon his Neck and Legs, with two great Indian Canes in their hands attempered before in wa∣ter, that they might be more pliable, then they strike one after another; he that sits at the Head, strikes up∣on the Hips, and the other upon the Back, one after another so fast,
that they are forced to stop some∣times, and suffer the patient to breathe; for otherwise they would beat the breath out of his Body. The Mandarins, that is to say, the Noblemen of the Countrey, and the Tartars, do commonly inflict this kind of punishment upon their servants, for the least offence. He that is forced to undergo this misery before he can come into the Kings presence, proceeds in this manner. He is to cast in a stone at the Kings Chamber Window, then he is com∣manded to come in; and if the King perceives that he suffers brave∣ly the first bastinadoes in such a manner, that declares his cause to be just, and the greatness of his op∣pression, he commands the Execu∣tioners to forbear, and the party to relate his business. If it appears then, that any injustice hath been done him, all that have had any hand in the judging of the matter
before, are happy if they are dis∣charged, only for the loss of their Offices; for commonly they are condemned to die. I asked the Father, whether there were none left of the Race of the last Kings that reigned in China. For Monsieur Dati said, that some affirm that a Son of the former King of China had escaped into an ad∣jacent Island where he doth now live. The Father assured us, that if we did but consider where that Island was situate, that it was enough to convince us of the falhood of that report: For it is in the Oriental part of China, therefore in such a case the Prince was to pass and tra∣vel many moneths through the whole Body of the Tartarian Army, and conquered Territories, for they were come that way into China; which is a thing not possible to be performed. The King his
Father that reigned then, was be∣come effeminate by his lascivious behavior. He seldom shewed him∣self out of his Palce, more then once a year, leaving the Govern∣ment of the Kingdom and Army, to 10000 treacherous Eunuchs that had called in the Tartars, who had subdued three whole Provinces, and besieged the City of Pekin ound about, before the King knew any thing of their attempts upon his Government. This sudden approach and sur∣prise, cast him into such a despair, that he resolved to die. In order to it, he writ with his own blood upon a Busquin of white Damask these words. God preserve the new King, let him not trust my Counsel∣lors, but let him take compassion of my people. After this he hanged one of his Daughters, and then hanged himself under the door that leads into the Garden of his Pallace. The
Queen also died in the same manner, but her Son and another of her Daughters were taken by the Tar∣tars, and shut up in a prison where they died also. We inquired of what Family were the antient Kings of China? and the Kings that now reign, of what House they are? He informed us, that the antient Kings of China, were of the Family called Min, which signifies Light. Monsieur Dati replied, wherefore then doth Father Martinius in his History call their Family Taimin? Tai answered Father Grueber, signi∣fies Stock or Race; so that the meaning of Taimin is the Race of Min, as we say the Race, or the House of Austria, or the House of Arragon. But he told us, that the Tartars have no name to their Fa∣milies, they are not distinguishable, but by their proper names. The Father of this present King was cal∣led
Xun-chi, that is to say, The Son of Heaven; and this Kings name is Tun-min, A great Light. We desired him to tell us, how the King lives with his Wives, and what distinction he did put between their Children, and the Children of his Concubins. At this question, he answered al∣most in the words of the Canticles, Chap. 6. Sexaginta sunt Reginae & octogint  Concbinae & adolescentulo∣rum nonest numrus. The truth is, the King hath fifteen Wives honor∣ed with the title of Queen, they are not all equal, three of them are more esteemed then the rest? The first, and the cheif is named Cnis, that is to say, A perfect Queen. One of the others is stiled Tum-si, Queen of the East, and the other Si-fi, Queen of the West. These two Queens are named collateral, they attend upon the Soveraign Queen, but never speak to her but upon their
knees; but the other twelve are never admitted to speak to her: But if they desire to signifie any thing to her, they do it by the me∣diation of these Collateral Queens. The other Wives are more or less, according to the Kings pleasure and humor; but it is certain, that there is never less then one hundred, they are all in the Guardianship of Eu∣nuchs: But the Children of these Wives are all equal; he is looked upon to be the cheif, whom the King chuseth as his Successor. The King that reigns now, is the Son of a Concubine, he attained not to that honor for want of other Bre∣thren, for he was preferred to five of his Brethren, Queens Sons, a little before his Father died; be∣cause, when the dying King had called them before him, he did not look upon them as able to com∣mand in cheif, and manage so great an Empire. Therefore he ordered
this Man to be seated in the Throne, and to be proclaimed King in his stead, and his Mother to be decla∣red Queen Regent, during his mino∣rity, appointing him four Tutors or Governors, of whom the cheif is named Samni. I inquired afterwards, how they did bury their Kings? He answered, that they did ne∣ver bury their Corps, but burn them according to the Tartarian fashion. The pile is not of Wood, but of Paper, it is almost incredi∣ble, what a vast quantity is imploy∣ed, or rather wasted, in such an oc∣casion: For they do not only burn his Body, but also all his Wardrobe, his Moveables, his Treasury, his Jewels; in a word, all that was use∣ful to the deceased, or that was de∣signed for his service, the living Animals only excepted. Twelve Elephants bridled, and richly har∣nassed, loaden with Turkish Stones,
meral ds, Saphirs, and all manner of jewels of an inestimable price; three hundred Hoses, and one hun∣dred Camels carried the Kings Trea∣sure at the last Funeral. All this was unloaden, and put upon this Mount of Paper, erected to burn the Kings dead Body; when the fire had been put to it, the Gold and Silver did run from it in streams, and force a way through the gazing multitude, who are not all idle lookers on; for some seek to advantage them∣selves with the spoils of the de∣ceased: But there is a great care taken to prevent such kind of vio∣lences and stealth, by the watchful∣ness of the Guards, and by the grie∣vous punishments inflicted upon such offenders. The Tartars are very superstitious in this respect, and careful to consume to ashes the very Bones, and not suffer so much as the bigness of a Pins-head to re∣main; the Gold and the Silver that
is left, after the burning, is spent, to provide more Paper in such a case, and to burn again the relicks of the dead Body, for the Souls sake. At the last Funeral, when the expence of Paper was reckoned up, it a∣mounted to no less then Seventy thousand Crowns, and the whole Treasure that was there consumed, to Forty thousand Millions. Three of the Kings domesticks, a Privy Counsellor, a Chaplain, and a Con∣cubine, devoted themselves to at∣tend upon the deceased Princes Soul, and follow him into another life, by sacrificing themselves, assoon as the breath was out of his Body. They have always the liberty to chuse what manner of death they like best, but commonly their Heads are cut off, which is the most usual kind of death amongst these people to punish offenders, only Soldiers are strangled. Besides these three Officers, many offer themselves free∣ly
to death, some out of affection for their King, others out of a su∣perstitious perswasion, unto which their Religion inclines them. But in case every one should refuse to die, and none would be willing to wait upon the Princes Soul, they force such as he took most delight in, and his dearest servants to depart and follow after him. I inquired next, in what did the Kings Revenue cheifly consist? He informed us, that the Fields and Countrey did properly belong to the Peasants, who out of the in∣crease of their Fruits, pay about the tenth part to the King, and an∣other part to the Mandarins, that is to say, to the Gentlemen that dwell in the Castles; for they are the Lords of their adjacent Fields. This Revenue that belongs to the Crown, is very great; there is an∣other that proceeds from all the Cattle of the Kingdom, out of
which, a tribute is gathered: Be∣sides, there are great Customs upon Cattons and Rice transported, and several Mines in the Province of Tunan, which signifies a Southerly Cloud. These Mines yield plenty of Gold, Saphirs, Emeralds, and all manner of precious Stones, that in∣rich the Neighboring Kingdom of Pegu. There is also an unknown quantity of Silver brought out of these Cities, Quangh-ceu, Canton, and Nanquin, which are the cheif Mart Towns of all the Kingdom. We asked him, if the King did often shew himself publickly in the City? And how many Inhabitants may be in Pekin? He told us, that he was wont to cause the Soldiers of his Guard to be drawn up in Battalia, and exer∣cise once every moneth, where he did commonly appear, to cause them to shoot at a mark in the Mea∣dows belonging to the City, be∣tween
the Walls that incompass it; for it is surrounded three times about, the uttermost Wall is the lowest, the two others are higher; the nearer they are to the middle of the Town. The Ditches are deep and full of Water; about the City there are many pleasant Mea∣dows. In one of them a great Sta∣tue of Wood is erected, against which, the King appoints his Soldi∣ers to shoot either with Bow and Arrows, or with Powder and Shot; one is to hit the Hand, another the Head, a third the Brest. If the Soldier misseth the first time, he hath liberty to try the second, and the third; if he fails all three, with∣out touching his mark, he receives a great many bastinadoes for his reward, and is disbanded as un∣worthy of his Kings service. In the whole City of Pekin, there cannot be less then a Million of Inhabitants, some say that there have been here∣tofore
Nine millions: But that is not credible, for the City is not so extraordinary large, and their Buildings are but of one story high. We desired to know, how they did cover their dwellings? He informed us, that they did cover them with Tiles, the Coun∣trey Houses have no other covering The Tiles of the Kings Pallace are of various colours, of yellow and marble, very pleasant and beautiful when they are looked upon at a distance: When the Sun shines up∣on them, they appear as if they were all of Gold. We inquired, what Religion the Chineses did profess? He answered, that they did pro∣fess Idolatry, that they were all I∣dolaters in their hearts, worship∣ing several Idols in private. But i we consider only their outward profession, there are three differing
Sects. The first is of the Learned, that profess to worship a superior Being, named in their Language Sciax-ti. These two words are en∣graven upon Tables of Gold, hung up in their Temples; unto them they offer Sacrifice, by burning be∣fore them Paper gilded with Gold or Silver; together with some small round Balls made with Storax and Frankincense. But although they make profession of this Religion, which appears more plausible then the rest; it is only outwardly, that they might be distinguished from the Bonzi, a sort of men come out of China into India, extreamly super∣stitious, exceeding all others in Idolatry, and fond Conceits; at first they were in some good repute amongst the Chineses; as it common∣ly happens when any new Sect ap∣pears that is not known. The Do∣ctrine which they published of the Transmigration of Souls, which is
not altogether like that of Pytha∣goras, got them the peoples esteem, and procured them the envy of the Learned: So that they, in time, opposed the progress of this new Sect, more out of displeasure against it, then out of love for their antient Religion. Therefore they have so well published and established the worship of their Sciax-ti, that the Religion of the Bonzi is out of fashi∣on and date, and hath lost all its credit; and they themselves are looked upon no better then cheats. Now all over China, there is no kind of people more exclaimed against and decided; nor is there any Pro∣fession more ridiculous then that. A man of credit scorns to exchange a word with them in publick, or to be in their company, unless it be in such occasions as are not to be a∣voided; as in Funerals, publick Sa∣crifices, Processions, where these Idolatrous Priests are mercenary,
and hired to attend. The Nobility cause them to go in Procession in nuptial Solemnities, at the birth of their Children, and such like times. Their Processions are preceded by several Instruments of Musick, and attended with Banners, and dis∣played Ensigns, which they carry about their Idols; whose praises they sing in Songs and Hymns, and to whom they burn Paper and Fran∣kincense. The second Sect is the most nume∣rous, for it consists of the Citizens, of the Nobility, of the People and Peasants; in a word, of all manner of People. These pay their Devo∣tions to the Souls of their Ancestors, unto whom they Sacrifice continu∣ally in their Temples; and in their private Houses, by burning Paper and Frankincense. All over the Countrey, this is the ordinary Sa∣crifice which is offered to the good and evil spirits every morning, be∣fore
they go out of their doors. The third Sect is that of the Bonzi, who are most abominably superstiti∣ous. We inquired, what the Chineses did believe of Mans estate after Death? They believe, answered he, that we shall be all happy, that we shall be inriched with more wisdom, and delighted with more pleasure then in this life; but they proceed no further to particularise how these advantages shall happen to Men. The Soul they believe to be immor∣tal: But replied Monsieur Dati, if they believe that all shall be hap∣py in another World, how comes it to pass, that they are not thereby en∣couraged to indulge themselves in all manner of Vices? Nothing hin∣ders, answered the Father, but the fear of present punishment. Yet they have some light perswasions of Hell, where the Souls of the wicked
shall be tormented; but they have found a way to get them out of those Tortures. You must know, that at Pekin, and in every considerable Town, there is a great Temple e∣rected, unto which, above three hundred little Chappels belong; every Trade hath one appertaining to it, and not only the Trades, but also every order and rank of Men, from the Magistrate to the Beggar. Now their perswasion is, that the Spirit that is to vex the Soul of the wicked man, deceased, haunts the Chappel appropriated to that Pro∣fession, unto which he did belong: For example, a Theif or a Robber shall bring a small gift to the Theifs Chappel, to ingratiate himself with, and appease the displeasure of that Spirit that punishes Theft and Rob∣bery, that he might spare him when his Soul shall fall into his hands. The Spirit makes no use of the gift, as you may imagine, but the Bonzi
that keep the Chappel: So is it with the rest. This is a politick In∣vention, very well contrived for two good purposes, by that means they free themselves from the trou∣blesome apprehensions of the fu∣ture; and they cause a pack of Knaves to subsist, who otherwise would trouble all the World with their begging. We asked the Father, whether amongst the Chineses there were any Religious Orders of Men? To this question he answered: There are no other Orders of Reli∣gious Votaries, besides the Bonzi, who are most wicked Varlets, and infamous for their unnatural love of Boys; they want not opportuni∣ties to commit this abomination, for they are intrusted with the tuition of the youth; they are as the Schoolmasters of that Countrey. This sin is too common amongst the Tartars, as well as amongst the Chi∣neses.
Instead of abhorring it, they make publick Profession of it, by erecting Academies for that infa∣mous purpose. This Vice hath spred it self farther into Persia; they are so base as to receive Boys in Mar∣riage, and their Fathers themselves, are not ashamed to give their con∣sent, and appoint them a kind of Portion, as to their Daughters. A∣mongst the Tartars, there are also Religious Votaries not much unlike the Bonzi; they have the care of the Sacrifices, and are attired with Yellow or Red Garments, that fall down as low as their heels, with large sleeves open. Some of them carry on their heads Paper Miters; but commonly their heads are un∣covered; they march with naked feet, and all their habit is much like that which our Painters give to the holy Apostles. This Religi∣ous Order hath many Convents of the Tartarian Women, situated, for
the most part, upon High Moun∣tains, of an uneasie access. Out of these Monasteries, they never go out, without the leave of their Superi∣ors, and seldom, unless it be to beg, and then the oldest of them are ap∣pointed. All these Nuns make Vows of perpetual Chastity, Poverty, and Obedience; their heads are unco∣vered, and their hair is cut round, close to their ears; their garments are like to that of the Bonzi in shape; but they are of a red colour, that of the Bonzi is gray. We inquired of the Sciences pro∣fessed amongst the Chineses. They have, said the Father, the Works of Consucius, who is as much esteemed amongst them, as Aristotle is amongst us. Confucius lived about Three thousand years ago, he hath left them a Moral Philosophy mingled with Divinity and Natural Philoso∣phy. I have seen one of his Posterity reckoned to be the Threescore and
third Man of his Race: He is very rich, and honored with the title of a Prince; for the Kings of China have always had so great a respect for this Learned Man, that they have allowed that title of honor to his Grand-children. Besides the Works of Confucius, they are natu∣rally inclined to the knowledges of Numbers; but their Geometry is very imperfect, for it teaches only the more ordinary and practical part: They are not in the least acquainted with the Theory, nor with the most excellent part of Geometry, as the Optick. From hence we may judge how little they excel in Painting and Architecture. They are mighti∣ly addicted to Chyromancy, Metos∣copia, Magick, and such like Arts. And in Judiciary Astrology they esteem themselves super-excellent. We intreated him to tell us next, something of their Language, and of their Writings.
For their Language, said the Fa∣ther, it is very poor, for it hath not above Four hundred words. All the Nouns are undeclinable, and the Verbs are imployed only in the In∣finitive Mood. I answered him, Sir if you would but continue but eight days in this City, I am per∣swaded that I could learn so well the Language, that I might be taken for a Natural Chinese. The Father laught at my confident conceit, and returned me this reply. After such a study of eight days, you might possibly call a Man a Hog, instead of honoring him with the title of Sir; for all the significations of the China Language consist in the varia∣tion of the accent, in the difference of the tone, in the aspirations, and other alterations of the Voice, which are almost innumerable. For example, Cin pronounced sim∣ply, hath no signification. Ciunun pronounced by lengthning the pro∣nounciation
of the u, and sharp∣ning of the Voice, signifies Sir or Monsieur; Ciu pronounced in lengthning the u, and keeping the same tone, is a Hog; Ciu spoken swiftly, or rather shot in haste out of the Mouth, signifies a Kitchin; and Ciu made use of in the begin∣ning of a strong Voice, which di∣minisheth at last, signifies the Foot of a Stool. By this example you may see how one word may have five differing significations. In like man∣ner Tien, pronounced plainly, hath no meaning. If it be spoken sharp∣ly, so that it makes Ti-en, it will signifie Sweet. If the (i) is accent∣ed thus Ti-en, it means Bread. Ti-en uttered speedily, signifies the Foot of a Table, or of a Bed. Most part of the words in this Language are Monosillables, and may be joyned together in a various manner. But this Art of Joyning the words, is very difficult, and not to be learn∣ed
in an instant; but that which renders it more uneasie to strangers, is, That they have neither Cha∣racters for their Letters, nor Alpha∣bet; for they write all their Con∣ceptions in Figures and Ciphers, that signifie every one of them two or three words, and many times whole Periods and Sentences; therefore they are forced to write the five significations of the word Ciu, by five differing Ciphers, for want of Characters and Accents; whereas we might easily distinguish them by the several Accents, which we might place variously upon the same words. This is the Perfection of other Tongues, although the same word may have divers signifi∣cations, we can easily distinguish that which is proper to it in that place of the discourse, where we find it by the words that go before, and follow immediately after.
But to return to this wod Ciu, besides the different Characters to express the five former significations. Suppose I intend to write Good mor∣row Sir, I must not make use of the Character that signifies good, nor that of Sir, but I must write an∣other Character different from all the former, which alone shall signi∣fie all these three words Good mor∣row Sir. Or suppose that I am to write Yes Sir, I must not use the Character of yes, nor that of Sir, but must imploy another which will signifie alone Yes Sir. By this you may easily judge what number of Characters are needful to write our Conceptions in this Language. Therefore it is more uneasie to read it, then it is to write it; for when we intend to express our mind in writing, it is only requisit that we should understand the single Cha∣racters of words; for when they are joyned together, we may easily
understand their meaning. But this manner of writing is not esteemed, and only in use amongst the vulgar sort of Men. But the Learned must be acquainted, not only with those single Characters and Ciphers, but many others of a larger significati∣on: Some reckon them to be about Seventy four thousand; whosoever knows any more then the rest, is esteemed the most Learned, because he is most able to understand and read more Books. From hence it is, that this Tongue is so difficult to be learned; for as they have no Letters, they have no Dictionary to teach the meaning of the words; so that there is no other way to learn them, but to hear them spoken, to ob∣serve the sound and accent, and to imitate the Inhabitants by repeating them often, as the Parrots when they learn to speak. The Jesuites have caused a Catechism to be
Printed, and certain Dialogues; the one to teach the proper terms, that they might discourse of the myste∣ries of our Faith, and make the Chineses understand them; the other is for the words most common∣ly used in a familiar conversation: Nine thousand Characters which are in that Book, are sufficient for this purpose. This account of the China Lan∣guage discouraged me, and took me off from my inconsiderate de∣sign of learning it in six days. When I feriously think upon it, I cannot conceive how mans life can be long enough, for any to attain to a per∣fect knowledge of so many Ciphers, to understand them, when they are placed together, and to remember their different shapes and significa∣tions. I have sought out a familiar example, to make me conceive the possibility of mastering the difficul∣ties of such a study. I remember
the Figures that are imployed in the Demonstrations of Geometry, may serve very well for this purpose; for although these Figures be in∣tangled in Lines, Triangles, Squares, Circles, and many such Figures which are made by the crossing and meeting of the several Lines; ne∣vertheless, at the first view, I under∣stand not only that which is demon∣strated, at last, by these differing Lines; but also many other Truths, which must of necessity appear, be∣fore all the Lines can be drawn by a great many former Figures that enter into my mind, though they appear no more in that Figure and Demonstration which they finally compleat: For all those Figures and Truths are supposed to have been sufficiently demonstrated. There is yet another difficulty in this example; the Figures of Geo∣metrical Demonstrations, are to be looked upon variously, as a strait
Line is sometimes the basis of the Triangle, sometimes the Diameter of a Circle, or part of an Oval, or as the right side of a Parabole, or as the Latus transversum of another. This consideration caused me to ad∣mire, the more, Mans ingenuity, and to conceive a possibility of writing and understanding the Characters of the Chineses; for our skilful Geo∣meters who are well acquainted with all the Figures of Euclides and Archimedes, &c. And that are able, of that Truth that is thereby proved, and to gather from thence a great many other conse∣quences that are deduceable, seem to perform something more difficult then the Chineses, who are only to discover the meaning of certain Fi∣gures imprinted in their minds, by a long continuance and usage; for it is possible in the whole course of our
life to attain to a familiarity with them all. The Father Grueber told us of their Marriages, that the Chineses when they came to nineteen years of age, or thereabouts, commonly espouse a Woman that is reckoned as their only and lawful Wife; they receive with her a Portion in Marri∣age, according to their Estates; but it is always in their power, to put her away by returning her Portion to her again. When a Father de∣livers his Daughter in Matrimony, he never expects to see her again, he shuts her up in a close kind of Sedan. When he hath locked her in, he delivers the Key to the good Woman, by whose Mediation the Marriage is consummated; for there are some who make it their Professi∣on and Trade, to deal in such kind of Wares. The Woman she delivers the Key to none but to the married Man, who is not to open it, and
free his Bride from her prison, but when she is brought into the Nupti∣al Chamber. When the Virgins of the Nobility go abroad, they are carried in Litters by Horses or Asses covered over with a Vail, the rest march on foot with their faces also hid; all kind of Women appear in this manner in publick. He told us afterwards, that when any Man hath taken a Wife, he is at his liberty to entertain as many Con∣cubines as he pleaseth, of whom there are two sorts, some free, others slaves: The free are descended of Gentlemen, or other Persons well qualified, who to free themselves from the burden of so many Chil∣dren, which they have by their many Concubines, are ready to part with their Daughters upon that ac∣count for small sums of Money, which they never restore again to the Men, when they divorce or send them away. All the Children re∣main
still with the Father, unless he please to allow a yearly Pension to them and their Mothers. The Con∣cubines that are slaves, are common∣ly the Daughters of the meaner sort of people, they part with them for the same reason as the Gentlemen do with theirs: They bring their Children to the Market-place of the City to sell them; Daughters to serve as Concubines, and the Boys as Servants; but they commonly drowned all such Children, Males and Females as are crooked or mi∣shapen at their Birth, or when they are otherwise deformed. For fifteen crowns any man may chuse the most beautiful Girls of the meaner sort to be his Concubine; but their con∣dition is most miserable, for they are forced to carry water, and to drudge about the lowest offices of the family: When their Master de∣sires to enjoy them, they cannot re∣fuse him; for they were bought for
that purpose; and although they may be of as good Family as himself; if they are taken in Adultery, they commonly loose their heads. The Catholick Priests make use of these meaner Concubines, to insinuate the Mysteries of Christianity, into the minds of the other Women, and to teach the Children of the Noblest Families. They have been by this means so successful, that many of these Women are become Converts, but they do not think it convenient to baptize them, in regard of that obligation that lies upon them, to grant to their Masters all the liberty that they desire. The Catholick Religion is there freely professed all over the Empire, without let or hinderance. In every one of their Churches, a Copy of the Kings Mandate, by which he grants a free exercise of our Religi∣on, is graven in a Stone, and hung up in an eminent place, in the view
of the Congregation. Christians are very well esteemed of in all the Provinces of China; and the Tartars as well as the Chineses, have liberty to turn Christians, and imbrace the Catholick Faith. The Learned Men of the Countrey, are familiarly ac∣quainted with our Missionary Priests; the greatest opposition that they meet with, is from the Idolatrous Bonzi. The Father told us, that he had left in China six and twenty Je∣suites, four at Pekin, six Jacobins, and two bare-footed Carmelites. These Missionaries wear the same habit as the Learned of the Coun∣trey, a long garment of white Da∣mask that reaches to the ground. Father Adam Schall is one of the four Missionary Jesuites in this City, he hath lived forty five years in China, and is very well esteemed of the Prince and People. We inquired what kind of Coyn
or Money, and what Weights the Chineses use? He answered, That they had but one sort of Coyn Printed, named Cuxa, of very base mettle, each of them is worth about a farthing; upon one side is the Kings name, up∣on the other, the name of the Coyn. Three hundred peeces of this money make a Lexu, which is worth about a Crown; they divide the Lexu in ten Ziens, in eight Fueus, and every Fueu in ...... Cuxas. They use in∣stead of Money, both Gold and Silver pieces, which they cut off as they spend; for that purpose, they carry in their Boots, and about them, Seales and Cizers. The Pound weight of China is sixteen of our ounces. They mea∣sure by a cubit: All kind of Victu∣als is very cheap, as well as their cloathing; for five Fucas, which are five of our pence, one may buy a very large Hen; by that any may
judge of every thing else that is sold, at a proportionable rate. We asked him concerning their Meat and Drink. He told us, that they had no Wine, although their Countrey af∣fords excellent Grapes. The Euro∣peans sometimes make Wine with them, which the Inhabitants like very well, but they dare not drink of it, but in private, for this proud Nation have a Law in force to punish severely all such as shall bring in new modes of living. Their or∣dinary drink is Thé, and Wine made of Rice; they extract it doubtless by the Limbick and the Still. It is not certainly known how they do it, for they will not discover the secret of any of their Arts to strang∣ers, unless they swear first to profess it, and it may cost them their lives, if they fail afterwards. They de∣light to drink hot liquors for that purpose; they are always upon the
fire in vessels near their Tables. In Summer they cast a little quantity of Ice in their drink, which they suffer to remain there only for a mo∣ment, that the liquor may receive from it, in so short a time, some∣thing of its cold nature to cool the stomach; but they quickly take it out again, that they might not loose the pleasure of drinking it hot. They keep their Ice, as we do in Europe; it is sold about the Towns very cheap, they use it more to cool their Fruits, then their Drinks, for they delight to eat them very cold. But to return to their liquors, Wine made of Rice, appears of a whiteness, inclining a little to the Amber colour, and mixed with a Golden Yellow, very beautiful to the eye. It hath a very pleasant taste, and so delicious, that it seems as good as the best Sack. The com∣mon people drink out of Earthen
Vessels, but the rich and noble are provided with Golden and Silver, adorned with ordinary Workman∣ship. The greatest Lords use drink∣ing Vessels made with the Horns of a Rhinocerot, imbellished in a course manner, inriched with Gold, and sometimes with Diamonds. For their Meats they have all kind of varieties, as we have in Europe, of Venison, and of Fowl, of all man∣ner of Fruits and Pulse. Their Spi∣ces are better then ours, for they are nearer to the Molucas. Their Wheat is very good, they can make Meal of it, but they have no skill to knead it into Bread; therefore in lieu of that, they use Rice which hath soaked in the Water, and been parched and dried afterwards at the fire. This they take and carry to their Mouths, with long sticks that serve them instead of Forks. In their left hands they are commonly provided with a Porringer full of
this Rice, which they use instead of Bread, taking it out with their sticks at every bit of Meat. They have no skill, nor taste to season their Meats well: In the same Pot they boil Pork, Hare, Fish, Veal, and Pheasant together; and their best Cooks are continually pouring in abundance of Water, while they are boiling. When they are sodden, they fill their Porringers and Dishes with this mad Oleo Podrido, which serves them instead of Pottage. The most ordinary Flesh that they feed upon is Pork; their Mutton is in good esteem amongst them. The poorer sort eat Asses, Dogs, Cats, and such like things, which they buy in Shambles, appointed for all kind of Flesh. The dried Legs of Dogs, well and curiously smoaked as we do our Neats Tongues, is a bit very savory to them; they commonly reserve it for their dessert and last morsel at dinner; they
esteem it a great fortifier of the stomach. They bring every kind of Meat severally in distinct Dishes, but they have but two sorts of Saw∣ces to encourage and provoke appe∣tite. The first is a kind of Paste made with small Beans in this man∣ner; they beat the Beans soaked in Water, and then stir them well to∣gether in the Water; when upon the top there appears a thin cover∣ing, or green skin, they strain all through a Linnen cloath into clean Water; the finest substance runs through, but the skins remain be∣hind. This they use instead of Sawce to all their Meats, and instead of Salt also; for they never salt them otherwise, although they want not Wells and Fountains of Salt and Brackish Water in all the West∣ern Provinces. The other Sawce is named Mi-sso, which is made of a rotten Grain that yields a most noy∣some smell; they do not boil it
with the rest of their Meats, but they put it by it self in Sawcers; and when they are at dinner, they dip their morsels of Meat in this strong and filthy Mustard. At their Feasts, and at the Tables of their Nobles and Lords, they garnish their Dishes variously, but ordina∣rily with Rice, Herbs, or with hard Eggs, minced small and fried. When their Cooks have shewn all their art and skill in such occasions, it is no light punishment to condemn a Man of Europe, to carry thither an empty stomach: Therefore when strangers are invited, they provide themselves with a good dinner be∣fore hand, for they are certain to meet with nothing there fit for their appetites. Their Tables stand round about the room where the Feast is to be held, never above two or three are together at the same Table, the Ma∣ster is wont to sit alone at the lower
most. They use no Table-cloaths, but cover them with as many neces∣sary utensils, as there should be per∣sons at the Table: These utensils are a dish to drinkin, a Plate of Rice, another of their dainty Mi-sso, and two of these Sticks, that serve them instead of Forks. All their Dishes are of Porcelane, the Kings as well as the meanest Subjects, with this difference, That the one is of a finer substance then the other. When the invited guests are seated, an Officer ushers in the first service; and when all the Tables are furnished, he makes a sign to all to begin to eat. If any should offer to touch the Meat before he hath given the sig∣nal, he would be severely checked, and looked upon as a Clown or an impatient Glutton. The signal or liberty of eating, is given by saying to them all Zin, that is to say, I in∣vite you; then the guests all answer, Zin, zin, zin, repeating this word
three times, as the Italian Priests do the word Peace, when they salute and embrace one another. After this, they all carry their hands to their several Dishes together, and the Meat to their Mouths; and if any do not eat at the same time, as the rest, the Officer calls upon them; for they think that the perfection of their Feasts consists in eating altoge∣ther, otherwise they judge it to be out of order, and unhandsome. When the Officer esteems that they have sufficiently eaten of the first service, he causeth the second to be brought in, and after that the third, observing the same ceremonies and decency, as at the first. Likewise, when he thinks it is time to drink, he invites them to it, in the same manner as he doth to eat; but they must all empty their Cups. When they begin to drink the first time, the Stage-players enter into the Room, some of them are common,
who play for Mony at every House, when they are hired, others are en∣tertained by Noblemen; the richest have several companies of them, as the great Lords in Europe have Musicians. These kind of people are very richly cloathed; when they come in, they address themselves to him that sits at the highest Seat to shew him their Book of Comedies, and to desire him to tell them upon what subject to play. He sends them, out of civility, down to another, with their Book, which comes at last to the Master of the House, who commonly tells them to act what Comedy they please. This Comedy lasts about a quarter of an hour: The Subjects of the most part of their Comedies, are taken from the Lives and Heroick Actions of their former Kings and Queens; when the Comedy is ended, the Officer enters in with other Dishes of Meat; and when they are all taken away,
and have ended their drinking, the Comedians return again, observing the same ceremony as before, to in∣treat the assistants one after another, to appoint the subject, upon which they are to discourse and act. When this second Comedy is finished, the Officer comes again to give his at∣tendance: Now this unpleasant di∣version lasts sometimes six or seven hours. I had almost forgot, said the Father, to tell you, that they have no Olives growing in China, therefore they make use of three other sorts of Oyl: The richest have an Oyl taken out of the Berries of Flowers of that Countrey, that grow upon Bryars: This is very sweet and pleasant. I know not how they make it, but they have a great quantity of it; for their Land is as fruitful of such Bryars, as ours is of Nettles. The meaner sort of people make use of another Oyl, extract∣ed from a Grain which they call Tel∣selin;
it hath almost the same taste as the Oyl of Sesamum, a little bit∣ter. The Countrey People, as in Poland, employ the Oyl of Line or Flax, or another kind of Oyl ex∣tracted from a Plant named Ma-sen, which hath a most odious and strong smell. They never eat any Sallads, nor other raw Herbs; many of their Fruits they preserve in Salt and Vinegar. In short they are not cu∣rious in their taste and eating, but are filthy and unhandsome. When we had a Pheasant, or a Hair, we could not abide to see our China Cook handle and dress it; we were forced to spit and dress it our selves, and eat it in the most retired Room, having first forbidden the door to be opened to any that should come, unless it be to the Kings Officers. And that none might surprise us un∣awares, while our Meat was pre∣paring, always one of us stood Senti∣nel at the Window, to give warn∣ing
of any Mans coming up to us. It is a very strange thing said Monsieur Dati, that this Nation that hath so many Sheep and Cows, have no skill to make Cheese with their Milk, in any other manner, but with small Beans. This proceeds, replied the Fa∣ther, from their unsufferable Pride; for they scorn to learn any thing, from strangers, especially from the Tartars; because the Tartars make Cheese that is enough to cause them to abominate such a composi∣tion; for that Nation. I could never make use of any of their Cheese, nor of the Milk of the Chineses; for both yield a most odious smell. The Tartars make their Cheese of the shape of our Cracknels, and hang them up with strings, a great many together, at their Shops, to invite the hungry stomach to buy them; they are so grievous hard, that the
Flint Stones are not more. They are not to be eaten, but after they have been softned by the Fire, and molified as our Wax. But the Chineses, are far more nice and curious in their sleeping, then in their eating and drinking. In Winter they spred Cotten Mats upon little Furnaces, and square Stoves, named Caù, where they keep a very moderate Fire. Upon these Mats they lay very fine Sheets of Cotton, all their Linnen is of that substance; for they use their Line to make Oyl, and their Flax to twist into Ropes. At the four corners of their Caù, there are Pillars as at our Beds; at the top round, the Curtains are fastned, which they call Cai-ïà. In Winter they are of Cloth, or of some other thick sub∣stance; but in Summer they are of a very fine and thin Cotton, to keep off the Musketas. When the cold is over, they carry their Mats, and
lay them upon Boards or Tables; and in the heat of Summer, instead of Wool and Cotton, they fill them with a Sea weed, which when it is dried, is as soft as Silk, and as light as Feathers: It is naturally very cool. Their Bolsters and Pillows are very neatly made of the thinnest and softest skins of Reed, which we call Indian Cane, in the manner of Hurdles. When the inside is emp∣tied out, and shut up close, they are filled with wind, which yields in the hottest Season much pleasure. The head feels them to be very soft, and never sinks deep; it is not buri∣ed as in our Down-pillows, they are very smooth. Their head are as though they were upon Springs, when they turn; and at the least motion, they cause their Pillows and Bolsters, to send up a cold and fresh Air to cool their faces, which is a notable advantage in the hottest nights of the Summer.
Their Chairs are of the same sub∣stance, the Back and the Elbows are made of the Skins of Indian Cane, very commodious to sit down. The Tartars are not so effeminate to make use of all these things, they sleep upon the bare ground as the Turks. We desired him to tell us some∣thing of the Kings pomp, and of the magnificence of his Throne, when he appears in publick in all his grandeur. He assured us, that the former Kings of China did delight in a great deal of glory and state; but that the present King of the Tartars, who reigns now in China, is not so cere∣monious: He is content in his great∣est splendor, to sit upon a Carpet spred on the ground. Monsieur Dati desired to know from the Father, in what the Chi∣neses were most expensive.
He answered, that they spent much in their Funerals, in the great quantity of Perfumes and Wax, which they did there burn, in the making of Wooden Statues, in their Frankincense, which they did offer to the deceased, and specially in the rare Coffins, in which they put the dead Bodies. They are of pre∣cious Wood, as of Aloes, of Yellow Saunders, or of some other Aroma∣tick Wood of a great value: This serves instead of imbalming. We inquired of the goodness of the Air, of the Countrey, and how long the Inhabitants do commonly live. The Air, said he, is very good every-where; therefore the Coun∣trey people that are temperate in their diet, commonly live to be very old; some are one hundred years of age. The Nobility at forty seem to be old, and when they see fifty, they begin to be crasie; this
difference proceeds from their de∣baucheries with the Female Sex, and their immoderate eating, in which they prescribe no bounds to themselves. Their Daughters sel∣dom come to be thirty years of age, because their Mothers are wont to tie and bind their Legs assoon as they are born; for they think all their beauty consists in crooked Legs, which is that part alone of their Bodies seen when they go a∣broad. This strange and unnatural bending and tying of their Legs so young, disorders the Channels, through which; the nourishment of their Members passeth, and stops the Conduits, in such a manner, that neither their Legs nor their Bodies ever come to a perfect stature and bigness; for by that means, the Blood is hindered in its ordinary circulation; and the complexion and constitution of their Bodies be∣ing
vitiated, it hastens them the sooner to their Graves. We desired him to tell us, which were their most noted Festivals? He answered us, That they cheifly observe three; the one at the first New Moon in February, the second in November, and the third at the Kings Birth-day. In every one of these Festivals, the King goes out of the City, attended upon by all the Nobility and Lords of the Court; by the Magistrates, Officers of the Law, and by the Learned Men, &c. Every one wears an habit suitable to his dignity and place. All their Garments are differing from one an∣other, none but the King dares wear a Pearl alone at the top of his Gap. Many of the most eminent Lords have precious Stones, and some Pearls; but always a Ruby, an Emerald, or a Jasper, is put with it; for none but the King is to wear it alone. He wears also as marks of
his Royalty, two Storks embroider∣ed with Silver upon his Brest. The Mandarins have other Animals: There are nine cheif differences, by which the Nobility is distinguished in their habits. The first hath a Crane for his Badge, the second a Lion, the third an Eagle, the fourth a Peacock; I do not remember the rest, nor what differences are to be noted in the Garments of their Ma∣gistrates and Learned Men. I only remember the Badge of the Mathe∣maticians, they wear four little Squares of Jasper, tied with silken strings at their Girdles. In the mid∣dle of the Squares there is a Ruby, and upon the top of their Bonnet, they bear a Ruby and a Pearl to∣gether. The most ordinary colours of their Garments, are Red, Blew, Orange mixed with Blew. We have already said, that their Bonzi are cloathed in Gray, and the Learned in White.
I remember that at every Festi∣val observed at the New Moon in February, every one is wont to melt or cast some piece of Mettle; upon which they represent the Figure of a Crescent or New Moon; and they call this Festival, The Sacrifice of the Hare. We inquired, Whether the Chi∣neses had any Memorials so antient, that give an account of the passages of so many thousand years ago, as some do affirm. He told us, that they had no Hi∣stories more antient then King Tao, who lived about four thousand se∣ven hundred years ago; and that they had no Histories of antienter date, that speak of the beginning and continuance of the World. We put the Father next upon the Art of Navigation, to know whe∣ther they believe in China, that there is any passage out of Asia into America; he assured us, that they
had but little skill in Navigation; that they know not well how to make use of the Compass, or rather this knowledge is defective. Their greatest Vessels are not able to carry above fifty Men, their Sails are made of Mat, but so artificially, that they can go almost with any wind. Their rowing differs from ours, for they move their Oars be∣fore and behind. Therefore as they have no great insight into the Art of Navigation, it is not possible that they should be able to adven∣ture far at Sea, they dare not loose the sight of the Land. Concerning their passing from Asia into America, the Father told us, That he knew nothing certain, because the English and the Holland∣ers have been disappointed in their attempting to pass through the Frozen Sea, where they have no manner of Trade: For the Tartars they are no great Traders, and it is
not probable, that any of them will venture upon a meer curiosity, to open that passage. It is not likely, that the Chineses will leave their Countrey, to undertake any such hazardous voyage: Nevertheless, it is generally believed, that there is some-where a passage, or that Asia is divided from America, but by a Narrow Sea. The continual ap∣pearance of many wild Fowl of A∣merica, in the Southern Parts of Tartaria, do very much strengthen this opinion: For it is not probable, that they would there be seen, if America and Tartaria were not joyn∣ed together, or not far from one an∣other. We asked him concerning the Dan∣cings, Plays, and Gardens of China. The Chineses, replied the Father, never dance, but the Tartars use that sport amongst themselves; the Men with the Men, and the Women with the Women; but never both Sexes
together. Their Musick consists in striking their hands one against an∣other, or in beating upon some V∣sel of Mettal that yields a l sound. The Chineses have all ma∣ner of Sports and Plays; they pla with Balls and Draughts, with Di and Cards; they are very dext∣rous in striking the Ball with their feet: Their manner is not to play in parties, only five or six meet to∣gether, and send with their feet th Ball from one to the other; I hav seen a Ball continue a quarter of an hour without touching the Ground. Their Gardens are, for the most part inclosed Meadows, on purpose to e∣ercise themselves with a Ball. Thy have no other sweet scented flowers, but Jasmin; their Roses are very beautiful, but without any scer▪ They have also some Tulips, Vio∣lets, and Gilliflowers; but they know not so much as the name of an Anemone: Nevertheless their
Gardens are very green and delight∣ful, because of the conveniency of watering them with fresh Rivers; but they have but small skill to dress and order them. All that I could take notice of, in such places, was in the Kings Garden, where is to be seen a great Cascade of Water, that falls from a Rock of Brass, covered all over with artificial Trees of the same substance. The Chineses are extraordinary skilful in the Art of casting Mettals; therefore their Ar∣tillery is very beautiful. We desired him to inform us of something concerning their other Arts, and cheifly concerning their Physick and Physitians. Their Physitians, answered the Father, are notable in discerning by the Pulse, the nature and qualities of a disease; but their knowledge is not so extraordinary in prescribing remedies, for they govern themselves by guess, at all adventures, as our Physitians.
I can speak of both by experi∣ence; for when I fell sick, about forty days distance from the City of Pekin, one of the Kings Physitians visited me, at the request of Father Adam Schall. As soon as he was come into my Chamber, he caused me to sit down and suffered me to rest quietly a while. Afterwards he uncovered both my Arms as far as the Elbows, placing them upon a Table, and felt the Pulses of both Arms, one after another; pressing the Arteries sometimes hard, some∣times softly, sometimes equally; and at other times he prest hard upon one Arm, leaving the other free: Sometimes he prest hard upon one Pulse, and softly upon the other; he continued to feel it along while, a∣non he felt it but by turns; sometimes he caused me to hold my fist closed, anon he made me open it. In short, he felt and examined my Pulse, as it did beat in every posture of my
Arm and Hand, which lasted a long while, about three quarters of an hour. After all this, I had almost a mind to discover to him my dis∣case, but Father Adam interrupted me, and told me, that he knew it better then I did. When the Phy∣sitian was sate down, he described with a wonderful majesty my dis∣ease, and all its properties and cir∣cumstances, assigning to them the time of their first beginning, in such an exact manner, that I was strange∣ly surprised. He appointed me some Potions, but by the small advantage that I received from them, I found that he had been more skilful to guess at my disease, then to prescribe Remedies. They never let any man blood, as we do, but instead of that, they make use of Cupping-Glasses in the Shoulders: They cure the Pox very well, with certain mixture of Herbs; so that this dis∣ease is not so mortal, in these parts,
as in Turky, Persia, and other Coun∣treys of the East Indies: They have amongst their Physicks a very fa∣mous Root that grows, cheifly, in the Province of Sur-iven, they name it Tigers-Milk; for they say, That it never comes, but where the Milk of the she Tigers hath moistened the ground, when they are furious and inraged by the pursuit of Hunts∣men. It is certain, that the smell of this Root is very like the smell of Milk, and its colour is white as Milk: They say, that when this Root is well prepared according to their skill, it is able to give an in∣fallible sweat; it is true, I have seen the Root, but never the experiments of its vertues. We questioned him afterwards, concerning the other Arts of the Chineses; and the Father in the same order, as we had proposed to him, returned us an answer to every question.
That in China they have no Chry∣stal, but many Glasses, one sort espe∣cially, which they name Rice-Glass, it is more brittle then our Glasses, but easier to work: For as soon as the substance of it feels the heat of the Furnace, it melts; and they are not unskilful in handling it, for they make with it most beautiful shapes and fabricks. Instead of Iron, they make use of great and hollow staves of Glass, as our Enammellers in Europe. All their Looking-Glasses are very good; and as they have a particular Art in Melting and Cast∣ing Mettals, they make many curi∣ous Looking-Glasses in a Concavity, for a very small price; for a little above a peice, one may buy a Look∣ing-Glass containing thirty two Thumbs in Diameter. The Jesuites have carried to them the Art of making Spectacles and Telescopes. It is a wonderful thing that the Chineses have humbled themselves
so much, as to learn this skill from us. At present they do them very well, according to our patterns which the Merchants of Europe transport thither. Our Specta∣cles of the larger size, is a gift well accepted of them; therefore the Merchants do not forget to furnish them with this commodity. They make excellent Stuffs with Thred of Gold, and with Golden Wire they make many beautiful Works: But they boast much of their Art in Gilding with Gold and Silver-Straw at the fire, in several manners; for with this gilded Straw they compose many rare and excel∣lent Works. But I judge them to be most ingenious, in their making of artificial fires with Gunpowder; for they cause them to represent all kind of Shapes, Characters, Figures of Trees, and to appear in all man∣ner of natural colours. I could never have believed from others re∣lations,
what my eyes have con∣vinced me to be true. I have seen at a Feast, a big Vine come down from the Roof of a large Room; and another fire after incompass it about, representing its Leaves and Grapes so perfectly well, and so na∣turally coloured, that a Painter could not have shewn one more lively. This appearance lasted as long as we are repeating over our Mi∣sereri; when the combustible mat∣ter was spent, the artificial Vine vanished away, leaving behind a dark mist in every place, where any part of the Vine had appeared with its Leaves and Branches of Grapes. They have something of this Art in Persia, but they cannot do such wonderful feats as in China, for here they care not to communicate their skill: The expence is not ex∣traordinary, for forty shillings any man may have a fire representing
three or four shapes. At these words I instantly replied to Father Grue∣ber. You make me now believe, what I could never credit before. About eleven years ago, I met at Rome with Monsieur Sestel, a Dane, who told me, that some of his Friends had written to him from Coppenhagen, that a Dane being re∣turned out of China, had shewn the King an artificial Fire that rose up into the Air, and burst out into many flames, which represented the Kings name. The Father replied, You may safely believe it; but I wonder how this man could come to understand the mystery, which he could never have been able to put in practice, unless he had tried it before, and taken an Oath re∣quired in all such occasions, I wonder also, how he could escape out of the Countrey after such an Oath.
Monsieur Dati asked, Whether they use any Coaches or Chariots? He answered, That the Chineses are carried in Litters by Mules, or by Men; they are like ours, but somewhat longer; for they put in them, their Cloaths, a Bed, a Table, and other conveniencies for a Tra∣veller. The Tartars have Coaches, with two Wheels, drawn by one or two Mules or Horses. The Ladies of Viceroys, or of other eminent Lords, are drawn by two of these Beasts, and incompassed about with a great many Tartarian Women on Horsback, Armed with Bow and Arrows. They carry their Bag and Baggage upon Camels backs, and up∣on a kind of carriage that hath but one great Wheel that turns in the midst of two Trunks full of Stuff. One man draws this with a Girdle tied to his middle, and tied also to two Staves that are fastned to the Trunks, with which he governs
this Carriage at his pleasure. They carry about their Wares and Com∣modities through the Land, in this manner. We asked him, Whether they de∣light in Hunting? Whether they run Races? Whether they be good Horsmen? And, whether they have any skill to manage Horses? He answered, That the Tartars are good Huntsmen, but the Chine∣ses seldom practice hunting: They know not what it is to run a Race; they are very careful and curious in harnassing well their Horses, but they do not know how to man∣age them. We desired to know, Whether they took any Tobacco? To this he replied, That they take no Tobacco in Powder, but in Smoak; the Tartars and the Chine∣ses, the Men and the Women are great takers of Tobacco. For that purpose, the Women are commonly
provided with a Bag that hangs over their shoulders, where their Pipe and their Tobacco is kept; but the Men carry their Pipes at their Gir∣dles. Monsieur Dati desired to know, Whether the word Mandarin be of China? He answered, That it was a Por∣tugues, and that at China they are termed Quoan, which signifies a Prince, or a Governor. We asked him concerning their Courage and Inclinations, to Mar∣tial exploits and War. He assured us, That they were Cowards, and that in three years time that he lived in China, he ne∣ver could see above two people fight together at cuffs; for they have no other way to satisfie their revenge, and end their quarrels. We inquired of him, whether in his return he had not met with one Monsieur Tavernier, a French Mer∣chant,
that was gone from Legorne, about two years since, into the In∣dies, to carry thither a great deal of riches in Jewels; amongst the rest, he had a set of great Saphires, and of Pearls, as big as Pears, to make a Rose, which he intended for the Great Mogol, to imbellish the Plume of his Elephant. I told him also, that Monsieur Tavernier had said, That the Great Mogol did spend e∣very day Fifteen thousand Crowns, only to keep the Elephants of the late King his Father. Therefore I desired him to tell us, whether we were to believe any such thing. He assured us, That he had met with Monsieur Tavernier in Persia, and that I might credit what he had told me, and much more concern∣ing the expence of this Prince to keep his Elephants. That you may better understand the truth, you must know said Fa∣ther Grueber, That India beyond,
and on this side of the River Gan∣ges, is divided into several distinct Regions or Governments, which are given by the Great Mogol, to the Lords of his Court, during life, upon condition of paying every year a certain sum of money, as a Present or a Tribute. Besides that, they are also obliged to keep al∣ways, some a thousand, others two thousand men on foot, others five thousand, which may be ready to march at the Emperors command. By this means it happens, that the number of their Militia never di∣minishes; and when the Prince comes to take a view of them, if the Soldiers be not well chosen, and of a good appearance, well cloathed and armed, their Cheiftains are in danger of Banishment from Court. Therefore the Mogol, may upon a sudden, raise five or six hun∣dred thousand men, ready for the encounter, without putting himself
to any extraordinary expence; for every Governor is obliged to have all his Militia ready, in all times of the greatest Peace. Now you must understand, that six or seven Ele∣phants are kept purposely to attend upon the person of the Mogol, they are named Panciasari, which signi∣fies Lords of Five thousands; be∣cause the Great Mogol expends as much to keep them, as the Lords or Governors do, to entertain Five thousand Horse in the Army. By this you may judge, that what Monsieur Tavernier has told you, is very true. But you may take notice, that the Mogol spends a great deal of this money in keep∣ing fair Horses, as well as Elephants. They are richly harnassed and ador∣ned with many precious Stones; the Mogol delights much to make them run Races. He told us, that the present Em∣peror in his young days, did seem
to affect a retired life, spending his time in contemplation. But since this crafty Hypocrite hath cast a∣way his Mask, and pulled down his Father from his Throne, shutting him up in a prison at Agra; the old man is about Eighty six years of Age: Only the fear of the Rebelli∣on of his people, that did intirely love the Father, has hindered him from taking away his life. His pri∣son is a very large Palace, with many Buildings about it, and pleasant Gardens. He is there guarded by a numerous Company of Muskettiers, and attended upon by his Women that are kept in an adjoyning Se∣raglio, in which he spends, for the most part his time, and passeth the melancholly thoughts of his retire∣ment. The Emperor, his Son, cau∣sed a high Tower to be built near to this place, in such a manner, that it did overlook all the Gardens of his Father: Upon it he appointed a
Watchman to overlook and spie out all that passed in the Prison; but the old man caused him to be shot and killed by a Company of his Women: Then he desired the cheif Commander of the Prison, to tell his Son, from him, that he should do well to send such manner of Birds, and place them upon the same Tower, for they would give a great sport to his Women. The present Mogol, or Emperor, is renowned for many examples of Justice and Wisdom, that are report∣ed of him. It hapned when I was at Lahor, a Prince caused the Groom of his Stables to be killed in a very barbarous manner, his head to be struck through with a large Nail, for a small fault, for not having tended and dressed his beloved Horse, as he should have done. When the Emperor was sitting in the Seat of Judicature, which he constantly doth every moneth, in a
day appointed for that purpose, in a great Meadow, out of the Royal City, the Grooms or Farrier Wife made her complaints of the cruel massacre of her Husband; the Great Mogol sent immediately for the Prince, and asked him, If it were so as the Woman said; He confessed his crime: Therefore the Mogol caused him to be stretched upon the Ground, and commanded the Wo∣man, or the Farriers Widow, to deal with him in the same manner as he had dealt with her deceased husband. There are many other reports con∣cerning the Justice and Wisdom of this Prince. He governs his King∣dom very well, and causeth Justice to be administred, only to ingrati∣ate himself with his Subjects, and prevent the tumults which they might otherwise be tempted to raise, because of the cruel detention of his aged Father; for which unnatural deed, he knows that he is hated.
He is about forty years old, it may be when his Father shall be dead, he will loose his present Mo∣deration, and his forced Inclinati∣ons now imprisoned, by the con∣siderations of Safety and Interest, may burst out and discover them∣selves. In this manner Father Grueber answered to our Questions; we had a great desire to inquire of other Matters, concerning that remote Countrey; but in regard our con∣versation had lasted many hours, and that much of the night had been spent in this pleasing discourse, we thanked him for his great civili∣ty, and withdrew to our Lodg∣ings.
Observations of the Travels of Father J. Grueber, taken out of the Letters which he hath written in Latine to Kircherus. IN the Year One thousand six hundred sixty one, in the Moneth of June, these Fathers travelled out of Pekin, and in thirty days they arrived at Siganfú and from thence they went to Sining or Siningfu, in as many more, having twice passed the River Hoang. This City of Si∣ning or Siningfu, is a great City full of Inhabitants, scituate near the prodigious Wall of China; through its Gates all Merchants and Passen∣gers, out of India, must pass to en∣ter into Cathaia or China, and where they must rest, until they have got, from the King, a Passport to proceed further.
This City is in Thirty six Degrees and ten Minutes from the Pole. From Sining they went in three Moneths time through Kalmuck, a Wilderness of Tartaria, to the Bord∣ers of the Kingdom of Lassa, which the Tartars call Barantola. This Wilderness is in some places Moun∣tainous, in others plain, full of Sand and Gravel; and therefore is barre and unfruitful: Nevertheless, Na∣ture hath allowed some few Rivers to water it; upon their Banks there is very good Grass for Cattle. Th Desart stretches it self from t Southern part of India, to t Northern, and is so large, that n∣ver any body yet, that I could find did ever survey its bounds; som think that it reacheth as far as th Frozen Seas. It hath many name P. Marcus Venetus names it the De∣sart of Lop, famous for the ordinar apparitions of Devils and Spirits  but the Fathers of our Society mak
no mention of it, although these Spirits have oftentimes discovered themselves: He does not approve of their continuance and constant ap∣pearing to all. The Tartars did an∣tiently call it Belgian, afterwards Somo, the Chineses Kalmuck, others Caracathai, that is to say, Black Ca∣thaia, where no Animal is to be seen but wilde Beeves of an extraordi∣nary bigness. The Tartars that are used to the Desarts, venture through at any time; and when they come to the Rivers that afford any feeding for heir Cattel, there they commonly pitch their Tents, capacious enough to shelter Man and Beast. From Lassa, otherwise named Barantola, situate in twenty nine degrees and six minutes from the Pole, they came in four days to the Foot of the Mountain Langur. This Mountain is one of the highest of the World; so that when Travel∣lers
pass over its top, they can scarce draw their breath, because of the subtilty of the Air. The breath of several venomous Herbs render a passage this way in Summer, to be very dangerous to our health. This Mountain is so full of grievous Pre∣cipices, and steep Rocks, that nei∣ther Cart nor Horse can pass over it therefore all Passengers are force to march a foot, for a moneths time till they come to Cuth, the firs Town of the Kingdom of Nekbal▪ upon the Borders. Although this Region is so moun∣tainous and difficult to pass ove Nature hath furnished it with seve∣ral Springs of hot and of cold Wa∣ter, that burst out of the Concavi∣ties. Here is in some places plenty of Fish for Men, and Grass for Cat∣tel. I think this is the Hilly Region which Ptolomy saith, that it lies un∣der the Mount Caucasus, and stretch∣eth it self a great way into the East
Countrey, and then divides into ranks of Hills; the one tends to the North, the other to the South. He calls it Parapanismus, and P. Mar∣cus Venetus, Belor. Other Nations do give other names to these Hills that border upon their several Countreys. From Cuth, in five days journey, they came to the City Nesti, belong∣ing to the Kingdom of Nekbal, where the Inhabitants live in a most grievous Idolatry, without the least knowledge of Christianity. This place abounds in all manner of things necessary for the life of Man; so that you may have thirty or forty Hens for a crown. From Nesti they travelled in six days, to the Metropolis of the King∣dom of Nekbal, called Cadmendu, lying in twenty seven degrees and five minutes from the Pole. The King is a great Prince, and a Hea∣then, but no Enemy to Christianity.
From Cadmendu, in half a day, they went to Nekbal, the cheif City of the Kingdom, which is called also Baddan; and from thence, in five days, they arrived at the City Hedonda, belonging to the Kingdom of Maranga, situate in twenty six degrees and thiry six minutes from the Pole. From thence, in eight days, Travellers go to Mutgari, the first City upon the confines of the Kingdom of Mogol. From Mutgari, they went to Battana, a Town of the Kingdom of Bengala, situate up∣on the River Ganges, in twenty five degrees and forty four minutes. From Battana, in eight days, they came to Benares, a populous Town near the River Ganges, lying in twenty four degrees and fifty mi∣nutes. It is a noted place, for there are the Schools of the Brachmans, where all the Sciences, professed in those Countreys, are taught, and
with them, the most abominable Su∣perstitions. From Benares, there are eight days journey, to Catampor; and from thence to Agra, seven more. From Pekin to Agra, Men go in 214 days. But when they go no faster then the Carravans, they are four∣teen moneths in their journey. This Relation I had from the Fa∣thers of our Society, who gave me this account of their Journeys. These Kingdoms were never known by any in Europe before, nor to the Geographers. In their passage they took notice of many particu∣lars concerning the Customs and Manners of the several Inhabi∣tants. From Pekin, the Imperial City of China, they travelled in two moneths to the famous Walls of that Coun∣trey, where the great City Sining∣fu is situate, as a strong Bulwark against the Tartars invasions. They
took great notice of the Walls, that are as strongly built, as the conve∣niencies of that place will afford. This Wall is so large, that six Hors∣men may ride upon it, in a brest, without hindering one another. They are often visited by the In∣habitants of Siningfú, to receive the benefit of the fresh Air, which comes off from the Sandy Moun∣tains of the Neighboring Desart; and to exercise themselves in walk∣ing and delighting their eyes, with the pleasant Prospects; for they are so high, that they discover the Countrey round about, and invite the Citizens to take a view of the delightful objects that appear be∣fore them: There is a very easie ascent up to this high Wall. Its length from this City, to the other Gate, by which Men come out of the Desarts into the Town of Sucien, is about eighteen days journey; many, out of curiosity, as
well as out of necessity of business, undertake this journey. For that purpose they get a Passport from the Governor of Siningfú, and provide themselves with sufficient victuals. They say, that in this delightful pil∣grimage, they may see an infinite number of dwellings in their way, in the China side, which they dis∣cover as from a high Mountain; but on the other side, towards the great and spacious Wilderness, as the Inhabitants have told them, there are all manner of wilde Beasts to be seen, Tigers, Lions, Elephants, Rhinocerots, Leopards, Wilde Bulls, Monocerots; this last sort are a kind of Asses with Horns in their Fronts. The beholders may from hence, without fear of danger, please them∣selves with many strange and un∣usual sights of furious Beasts, espe∣cially from that part of the Wall that is towards the South, in the most inhabited places near to Quam∣si,
Junnam, and Tibet. From hence to the Yellow River, in the Coun∣trey adjoyning to the Wall, the wild Beasts hunt together in Com∣panies to seek for food in these places that are full of Brambles and Bushes. When the Fathers of our Society were gone out of this prodigious Wall, into the Neighboring Wil∣derness, they found a small Stream of Water full of Fish, whereof they dressed a great quantity in their Tent, and kep some for another time. When they were passed over the Yellow River which runs out of the Wall, they entered into that vast Desart of Kalmak, full of un∣fruitful Mountains, and Fields most dreadful to behold; and in three moneths they arrived at the King∣dom of Barantola. Although this Wilderness be so solitary, and uninhabitable, it is fre∣quented by the Tartars of Kalmuk, at certain times of the year, when
the Grass appears upon the sides of the Rivers; then they transport their Portable Houses or Tents, and pitch them in such numbers toge∣ther, that any man would judge every company to be a City. These Tartars take the liberty to march up and down, and plunder all that they can meet with; there∣fore it is necessary to be well armed against the violences of these Rogues, and to travel with a good Caravan. Our Fathers did often light upon several scattered com∣panies of them, as they travelled through this Wilderness. The Lamae, who are the Priests of these Tartars of Kalmak, are distinguishable by a Red Hat, a White Gown twisted behind, a Red Girdle, and a Yellow Tunick: At their Girdle there is a Purse that is fastned to it. They say, that the Tartars of Kalmak are cloathed with Skins, and a Yellow Cap;
their Women with Skins, or with Green or Red Stuffs; every one of them hath a Charm and Characters hung about their Necks, to pro∣tect them from evil spirits and witchcraft. They lodge in the in∣nermost Room of the Tent, made up with portable Staves, but the outside is covered with a thick Wollen Cloath and tied with Ropes. When their Lamae are at their Devotions, their Bigots, there present, roul about a Wheel, and handle it as a Scepter. They have given the description of Han, a deceased King of Tanguth, whom they say had fourteen Sons, and for his Goodness and Justice in governing his Kingdom, the Inha∣bitants have honored him as a god, in their Countrey fashion. He is said to have been of a Tawny coun∣tenance, he had a Beard of a Ches∣nut colour, and Eyes like unto Dogs-eyes, swelling out of his Head.
Tanguth is a large Kingdom of Tartaria, these Father-Jesuites have travelled through a great part of it. At that time, in the Court of Dena, King of Tanguth, there was a Woman came from the Northern part of Tartary, that wore twisted Hair, in the manner of Ropes; her Head was adorned with Sea-shells, and her middle bound about with a Girdle. In the same place, some of the Courtiers were habited as Wo∣men, only their Cloaths were of a Red colour as their Priests. Into these Kingdoms of Tanguth and Barantola, the Devils subtilty hath brought in a most abominable and horrid custom. They chuse a strong youth, stout, and lusty, and give him liberty at certain times of the year, to kill, with the weapons, that he hath for that purpose, Men, Women, and Children, that he meets in his way; and when they are
killed in this manner, they imagine that they are consecrated to their goddess Menipe, that they are in a most happy estate; and therefore the living render to their memories, particular honors. The youth is cloathed with a Garment of several colours, he is furnished with a Sword, with Bow, Arrows, and a Quiver; he carries sometimes a Banner. At a certain season, he is transported with Fury, and possessed by the Spirit, unto whom he is consecrated; he flies in∣to the Streets, and rambles up and down; all that he meets, he kills, for none dare make him any resist∣ance. This youth they call, in their Tongue, Buth, which word signi∣fies a Slayer. Whiles the Fathers were there, they had a sight of him habited in that manner as he is al∣ready described.
In this large Kingdom of Tanguth, there are many Kingdoms included, first, Barantola, which is also called Lassa, the name of the Metropolis of that Kingdom. It hath a King of its own, miserably addicted to Paga∣nism. He worships many Heathen Idols, amongst whom Menipe is one of the cheif. Its head riseth up as a Sugar-loaf, in a monstrous manner. Kircherus hath promised to publish a discourse, more at large, of this and other Idols of China. Before this Idol, these people per∣form their Sacrifices with strange gestures, often repeating this excla∣mation, O Manipe mi hum, ô Ma∣nipe mi hum, that is, Manipe save us. Besides, these foolish Idolaters bring to their Idol, to ingratiate them∣selves with him, all kind of Meats; and observe many other abomi∣nable practices of the antient Hea∣thens.
There is another Image of a false God to be seen in Barantola, which is so strange, that scarce any body will believe it; therefore I shall here give a more punctual account of it. The said Fathers, Grueber and d'Orville affirm, that whiles they waited at Barantola, about two Moneths, until a Caravan was ready to march, they took great notice of the Peoples Manners and Customs, whereof some were ridiculous, and some most abominable. In this Kingdom there are two Kings, the one is imployed about the Government of the Kingdom, and is named Dena; the other is re∣tired from all worldly affairs; he lives idle in the secret Chambers of his Pallace, and is adored and wor∣shipped as a god; not only by the Natives, but also by all the Kings of Tartaria, subject to this King∣dom; for they come to him in pil∣grimage.
They name him their eternal and heavenly Father, and reverence him as the true and living God, by offering to him great pre∣sents. He sits in an obscure and dark place of his Pallace, adorned with Gold and Silver, upon a Bed raised on high; under his feet rich Carpets are spred, and round about him many Lamps stand lighted. When strangers come to him, they fall upon their faces, they creep to him upon their knees, and kiss his feet, as the Papists do the toes of their Pope, with a wonderful re∣spect. From hence we may discover the Devils subtilty, in appropriating this ceremony and testimony of re∣spect due to none on Earth, but to the Pope of Rome,Here Mr. Jesuite speaks as a Papist. to the barbarous Super∣stitions of this Idola∣trous Nation. He hath had the malice to transfer and usurp all the other
mysteries of our Faith to his own Worship. As the Papists call the Pope, the Father of all Spiritual Fa∣thers; so these Idolaters call this Demy-God, The great Lama, or The High Priest, or The Lama of Lamas; that is, The Priest of Priests: For all their Religion and Idolatry de∣pends upon him; therefore they honor him with the title of Eternal Father. And that by his decease, his weakness and mortality might not appear, the Inferior Lamae, and other Priests only are admitted to attend upon him, to procure him whatsoever he stands in need of, to receive his commands, and deliver them as Oracles of the Divinity to the simple Pilgrims. These men after his death, are wont to seek another, as like him in feature and stature as they can; him they lift upon the Throne. By this means the whole Kingdom, un∣acquainted with the manner of the
deceit, firmly believes that he is risen again to them, from the dead, seven times; and that he shall con∣tinue for ever. This perswasion is so fixed in their minds, blinded with the Devils illusions and deceits, that there is none questions it. There∣fore he is worshipped by all in a signal manner. Every one esteems him happy indeed, who can prevail so much upon the goodness of the inferior Lamae, his attendants, as to get something that hath but touched his body, or been taken from him, which they bear about their necks. For that purpose they load them with many rich gifts to obtain this their desire. O abomina∣ble and filthy blindness! By these Relicks, they imagine themselves protected against all manner of evils. This the said Fathers under∣stood, to their great grief, from the Inhabitants of Barantola. It is true,
the Fathers did not see this great Lama, because none is admitted that makes profession of the Chri∣stian Religion; and there are many previous Ceremonies full of Ido∣latry to be practiced, before any man can be permitted to go near him, but they saw his Picture at the Entry in of the Kings Palace; unto which, as much reverence is paid, when but represented in Pictures and Images, as if he were there in person, by these Idolaters. His au∣thority is so great all over Tartaria, that there is no King that offers to take upon him his royal Scepter, but he sends first his Ambassadors with rich presents to the great Lama, to obtain his blessing for his happy and prosperous reign. They saw also at Barantola some strange Women, of a Neighbor King∣dom called Coïn, one old and the other young: Women of an anci∣ent Nobility fold up their Hair in a
bundle, and cast them behind their backs. Upon their foreheads they wear a red Ribbon, adorned with Pearl, but on their heads a Silver Crown, in the shape of a Box, em∣bellished with Turkoises and Cor∣ral. They arrived next from Baranto∣la to the Kingdom of Nekbal, through a difficult way that leads over one of the highest Mountains of the World, named Langur, which we have already described. They found all things there needful to the life of Man, but only the knowledge of Christianity; for the Natives are all involved in the thick mists of the Heathens ignorance. The cheif Towns are Cuthi and Nesti; the Custome of the Inhabi∣tants is, when any drink to Women, other persons pour into the Cup their liquor called Chà, or Wine, three times, and observe other ri∣diculous ceremonies.
There is another custome practised here most horrid and barbarous, they bring out into the open field, and leave upon the ground, in the cold and wet, without any pitty, such as are desperately sick and near death; and when they are dead they suffer them to be devoured by the wild Fowl, by the Wolves and Dogs; for they look upon this namely the stomachs of living Ani∣mals, to be the most glorious Monu∣ments that their dead Corps ca pretend to. The Women of th Kingdom are so ugly and deforme that they seem to be Devils, rathe then humane Creatures: For the never wash themselves for Religio sake, but anoint themselves wi an oyl, noisome to our smells, whi causeth them to stink most intol¦rably to all strangers, and cov them over with such frightful ¦pearances, that one would t
hem to be Witches, and Devils in umane shapes. The King was very kind to these athers, cheifly because they gave im some Prospective Glasses, which e had never seen before, and some other curious trifles which surprised m in such a manner, that he re∣lved to detain these Fathers with m, and would not suffer them to epart, until they had solemnly omised to return; which if they d, he ingaged to assign them an ouse, which he would build for eir use, to allow them a sufficient elihood, and full liberty to pro∣gate their faith in any part of his ngdom. When they departed out of Nek∣l, they entered into the Confines f the Kingdom of Maranga, which orders upon that of Tebet, the eif Town is Rodok, the uttermost ounds of the Travels of Father andrada.
They found here some signs o Christianity, by the names of Fran∣cis, Anthony, and Dominicus, &c which made them conjecture, tha our Religion had been heretofore professed in this place. From hence they travelled to the first City  the Mogols Kingdom, named H¦donda; and from thence to Battani a City upon the River Gange and then to Benares, the Academy of the Brachmans; afterwards the went to Agra, the Royal Palla of the Mogol. Father Albertus d'O¦ville, sick and weary of his trave¦ling died within a few days after  arrival, in this middle way betwee China and Europe. FINIS.
THE Most Remarkable PASSAGES OF The Life and Reign OF LEWIS XIV. The Present KING IN FRANCE. LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lownds, over against Exeter-House in the Strand. 1675.
The most noted Passages of the Raign of the French King. THe French and Spanish Monar∣chies seldom live long in Peace. Either the Interest of the Kingdoms, or the jealousies of State, or the humors of the People, or the na∣tural aversions and animosities which they have received by inhe∣ritance from their Forefathers, do frequently kindle the flames of War. Their Neighborhood and continual Conversation furnishes them with many occasions of distastes and dis∣putes;
for both the Spaniard and the French, have no compliance nor respect for one another. They are naturally proud and high-minded, they pretend both to the Universal Monarchy, and think all the World must bow and creep to their great∣ness. I intend not to examine in this short Tract, the causes of their frequent Ruptures and Wars, I shall confine my discourse within the Borders of the French Domini∣ons, where we must visit the King and Court, and see what hath hap∣ned worthy of our observation up∣on that famous Theater of Europe. I design not so much to satisfie the Readers curiosity, as to furnish him with that knowledge which he may improve to his advantage; for in every capacity true and impartial History tends to our right informa∣tion and direction, God by his pro∣vidence teacheth men as well as by his Word. It concerns us not to
neglect the means that he affords for our instruction. And there is no∣thing more required in men that pretend to learning and perfection, then to be acquainted with the late and present Affairs, as well as with those that we have received from our Forefathers Relations. It is very observable, that the French and Spaniards seldom con∣clude Peace without a Marriage. The old Fable of Mars's Adultery or Conjunction with Venus, is a practice so ordinary amongst them, that it needs no proof. In the year One thousand six hundred and fif∣teen, the Polititians of both King∣doms were resolved to conclude their disputes, and reunite their in∣terests in a Marriage between Lewis the Thirteenth, sirnamed The Just, and Anne of Austria, Infanta of Spain. Both Kingdoms expected from these two hopeful Princes, a numerous posterity; but to the
great disappointment of their Sub∣jects, and of all Europe, they lived together three and twenty years without Children. Success follows not always our best endeavors. At last in the Moneth of September, One thousand six hundred thirty and eight, the Queen was brought to Bed of a brave lusty Boy, who was saluted and welcomed into the World by the Parliament of Paris, with the name of Dieu-donnè, Given of God: For they were verily per∣swaded, that his Birth and Concep∣tion had been miraculous, in regard of the indisposition of his Father. To strengthen this perswasion, the more by Cardinal Mazarines con∣trivance, then the Factotum of France, the King, the Queen, and the whole Court had been in Pro∣cession, with much devotion, bare∣footed, to the Chappel of the Vir∣gin Mary, near Paris, to desire from her, a Son and Heir to the Crown o
France. Therefore the French look upon this Prince, as the effect and return of their Prayers, then so∣lemnly offered up to the Blessed Virgin; for within a year after, the King and Queen were blessed with this hopeful Child, to the greater joy of France, then of some of the Blood Royal, who had promised to themselves the Kingdom, in case Lewis the Thirteenth did die with∣out issue. Their discontents remain∣ed long concealed in private, and were not suffered to break out into a Publick War, by the good order that the Cardinal gave to the Affairs of the Kingdom, and by their re∣spect for the King, then alive. But afterwards, when they saw Lewis in his Grave, the People dissatisfied, and the Grandees discontented, with the Italian Government, they pro∣claimed their displeasures at the Head of an Army, with the loud noise of Drums, Trumpets, and
Cannon; as we shall see by and by. As soon as the Dolphin was inau∣gurated into his Principality, and initiated into Christian Religion, they gave him his Attendants and Officers, according to his quality and Birth; the two cheif were his Governess — a Lady of a no∣ble spirit, and Hardouin de Perefixe, afterwards Bishop of Rhodes, and since removed to the Archbishoprick of Paris, was his Governor and Tutor. He is a great Polititian, Wise, and Learned, very affable and courteous. Whiles he lay in his Cradle, we can find nothing wor∣thy of our notice, but as soon as he stept out of it to walk alone, Pro∣vidence waited upon him, to put into his hands a Scepter, before he could manage it: For at four years of age, and a few Moneths, his Fa∣ther Lewis, sirnamed The Just, de∣parted this life, having published
before his Declaration, dated April 21. 1643. By which the Queen was appointed Regent, and Go∣verness of the whole Kingdom, the Duke of Orleans was her Lieute∣nant, and cheif of the Council. The Prince of Condé deceased, the Cardinal Mazarine, Monsieur Se∣guier, Chancellor of France, Mon∣sieur Bouthillier, and Monsieur Cha∣vigny; were to be of this Privy Council; but the conduct of the Army, then on foot, was left to the Duke of Enguien, who is now Prince of Condé. This Declaration settled the Af∣fairs of the Kingdom, and prevent∣ed the mischeif which might have hapned, in case the election of these great Officers of State had been left to the choice of such as might have designed to imbroil the King∣dom, for their own private ends. About a Moneth after, on the four∣teenth day of May, 1643. the King
died. At that time the Spaniard was attempting to inlarge his Do∣minions in the Low Countreys, by a War with France. Don Francisco de Melo was Viceroy there, at the Head of an Army before Rocroy, a French Garrison, which he besieged in vain: For the Duke of Enguien, a young General, of twenty two years of age, came seasonably to its re∣lief, forced the Spaniards to a re∣treat, and obtained of them a no∣table victory on the nineteenth of May. All their Artillery was taken, with about threescore Colours; all their Bag and Baggage, and six thousand prisoners: The Colours were sent to Paris, to be presented to the new King, six days after his promotion to the Throne. The Viceroy behaved himself like a great Commander, he incouraged his men by his words, promises, and example; where he perceived the greatest danger, there did he hazard
his person, and his life; but when he saw the day lost, and the grie∣vous slaughter of his Soldiers, he found a way out of his Trenches, to retreat with the sad remains of his broken Army, and left his Enemy to glory in their Success, and to in∣rich themselves with his spoils. The Count de Fontaines was then grie∣vously incommoded with a disease; nevertheless, for the honor of his Master, he caused himself to be car∣ried in a Chair, during the fight, that he might assist his men with his Counsels, and incouragement; see∣ing he could not help them by his example. He purchased to himself much renown with the loss of his life; for he resolved to overcome or die. Therefore in the hurry and rout of the Spaniards, whom he labored to keep to their Colours, he was killed by a mean hand. This victory gave a check to the designs of the Court of Spain, of
inlarging their Borders upon France. They had perswaded them∣selves, that the French had been dis∣couraged, during the sickness of the old King; and that they were not so able to make resistance in the mi∣nority of the new; for commonly, Factions and private Interests, raign in all Courts and Armies, when the Prince hath not attained to the age and ability of managing his own affairs. But it hath been ob∣served, that when men intend to advantage themselves by their Neighbors weakness, they find themselves disappointed at last, for providence makes use of the feeblest and most contemptible Agents to defeat the proudest purposes. The French General pursued the Enemy into his own Countrey, and took, from him, several small Forts and Towns, as Maubeuge, Borle∣mont, Aimmerikt, Binch, and Thion∣ville, &c. So that they that had
flattered themselves of enjoying new Conquests, lost a small portion of their own Land. The Castle and Town of Cirke stopped the course of the victorious General; it was so well furnished with Men and Pro∣visions, and commanded by such a resolute Governor, that the threats of the French Army, the inconve∣niency of an approaching Siege, and the noise of the thundering Cannon, could not prevail upon him to yield to the first Summons, therefore it held out against the French several days; but when they had brought their Trenches to the Town Walls, the Spaniard heark∣ned to Conditions of Surrendring it up. After this, the Duke of Enguien left the Army, about the latter end of August, to receive the Compli∣ments of the Court at Paris, for his great success in Flanders; but at his first arrival, the news of the
death of the Mareschal de Guebri∣ant, General of the French Forces in Germany, hastned him thither. He had been ingaged in a Battle against the Imperialists, on the seventeenth of November, where he was mortal∣ly wounded; for he died a few days after. The fight had been des∣perate between the Germans, and the French, both lost a great many of their best men; so that the French Army was not able to hold the Field any longer, without the coming in of fresh and victorious Troops out of Flanders, with their young Ge∣neral Enguien. His coming restored heart and courage to the shattered Companies of the dead Mareschals Army. The French, who are always wont to boast much in their Suc∣cesses and Victories, and seldom or never to grant the loss of the day to their triumphing Enemies, de∣clare, That the Mareschal beat the Germans out of the Field. It is
certain they seised, a little after, upon Rotueil, a Frontier-Town, where the wounded Mareschal breathed forth his last gasp. This War between France and Spain, had ingaged most Princes of Europe, in the quarrel, the Trum∣pets sounded round about the Borders, in Savoy, in Italy, in Na∣varre, Catalonia, Flanders, Ger∣many, Alsatia, &c. Armies and Armed Men did carry about, Death and Destruction. In Italy, the French had three watchful Commanders, Prince Tho∣mas took from the Spaniard, Trin; the Marquess of Ville seised upon Ast; and the Count of Plessis-Pras∣lin invaded Estura, small places that would deserve no mention, if these Generals had but taken any more considerable Towns; but for want of stronger and more noted Garrisons, and braver exploits, the French must needs stuff their Relations
with the taking of these poor Ham∣lets. And the Spaniard, on their side, were not idle, they gained several places upon the French, but none of any importance. In Catalonia, the Mareschal de la Mouthe Houdancour commanded as Viceroy, for the French, at the head of a small Army, with which, he drove the Spaniards from the Siege of Miravel and Flix; he made some inroads into the Kingdom of Arragon, and seised upon Almeras. In the same year, at Sea, as well as at Land, the affairs of War were carried on with much heat: The Duke of Brezè was Admiral for the French, in the Streights. He in∣gaged, with his Light Squadrons, against the Spanish Fleet, twice, once before Carthagena, in the Moneth of August; and another time, on the nineth day of September. In both Rencounters, the Armadoes ex∣changed a few Bullets, looked one
another in the face; but they were so scared with their Enemies fright∣ful countenances, and with the ap∣prehension of what might happen, if they continued too obstinately in the fight, that they were both willing to part upon equal terms; although the French and Spaniard both claim the Victory as their own. When the War is once kindled between these two Nations, it is not one or two Campagnes can put a period to their disputes; no less then a River of the Subjects Blood must be spilled, to extinguish the flames. And it is observable, that all their Neighbors must dance at the sound of their Fiddles, and be interested in their quarrels. All the Nations of Europe must attend up∣on them, and second their bloody designs. War like a Tempest, com∣monly riseth out of Spain or France, then it spreds it self, and involves
all the Neighborhood into the same misery. Both Kingdoms are so po∣pulous and considerable, that when the Princes of either stir, all the bordering people move; they are forced in their own defence to have their Armies ready; which when they are so, Interest obliges them to employ them. During this Winter, great prepa∣rations were making for the ensuing Spring of the year 1644. As soon as it appeared, the Duke of Orleans was appointed to command in Flan∣ders, where he besieged Graveling, which was surrendered to him, after a stout resistance of two moneths: He made his entry the Twenty nineth of July. This place was strong and well fortified, and the Key of Flanders, on that side; therefore the taking of it, did as much rejoyce the French, as it did grieve the Spaniard. After this success, the Mareschal of
Gassion, Lieutenant General, had orders to march with his Army fur∣ther into the Enemies Countrey, where he took and pillaged some small Castles, the Abby of Vate, the Forts of Rebus, d'Henuin, and Arq. Some few Spanish Troops that were so unhappy as to come within his reach, were put to flight. In the mean while, the Duke of Enguien was General in Germany; for that Countrey hath always been the Seat of War, when any is stir∣ring in Europe. At this time, the whole House of Austria that have so great a sway in that Climat, thought themselves ingaged to assist the King of Spain, their Brother, against the common Enemy the French. General Merci commanded the Army of the Duke of Bavaria, he was so successful to take Frie∣burgh from the French. As he was marching farther, to besiege some other place, the Duke of Enguien
met him with his Army, and in∣gaged three times on three several days; at last, the French forced them, after a notable slaughter, to a disorderly retreat. After this, many considerable Towns submitted to the conquering valor of the Duke of Enguien, and received, from him, Garrisons only to preserve their Territories from the spoil, which otherwise he would have made. Philipsbourgh, a strong Frontier Town, Vormes, Spire, Mayence, Burghen, Landau, and the Castle of Magdebourgh, were yielded up this Summer. But before the year was over, the Princes of Europe agreed to send all their Plenipotentiaries to Munster, there to compose their differences, and agree in a General Peace; for Germany, and the Frontier Towns of the Empire had been so much impoverished; by the long and con∣tinual Wars, that as many died by
Famine, as formerly by the Sword. The only remedy was an Universal Peace, which was endeavored be∣tween all the Princes of Christen∣dom. The Queen Regent of France, sent thither the Count d' Avaux, and Monsieur Servien, to manage the French interest; afterwards the Duke of Longueville followed. The Treaty began in the Moneth of A∣pril, 1644. but could not be con∣cluded till the Twenty fourth of October, 1648. All the Monarchs of Europe agreed to lay down Arms, and to suffer their People to injoy the Blessings of Peace, only France and Spain had such differences as could not be composed, their pre∣tensions were so high, and so in∣tangled, That the greatest Politi∣tians that assisted at this composure of Affairs, could not find any ex∣pedient to bring them to an agree∣ment: Therefore the Ministers of other Princes did their business
without them. When they saw them so stiff, in not yielding to one another, they left them to them∣selves, and their Masters alone, to end their own quarrels, and fight till they were weary. That which administered new difficulties every day to this Peace, between the two Monarchies, was the prosecution of the War, which was so vigorously managed by the French, in the time of the Treaty, that in the begin∣ning of the Spring, 1645. they had five Armies on foot, in Flanders, in Germany, in Lorraine, in Catalonia, and in Italy. The Army of Flanders was com∣manded by the Duke of Orleans, as Generalissimo; his Lieutenants were the Mareschals de Gassion, and Rant∣zau: At their passage over the Ri∣ver of Colme, there was a very hot dispute between the French and Spaniards; but, in fine, the two Mareschals behaved themselves so
bravely, that the Spaniard was put to flight, and the passage opened. Mardike, Bourbourgh, Lillers, Be∣thune, Mount-Cassel, S. Venant, Me∣nenes, and Armentiers, were forced to yield. The Town of Lens was suddenly taken. Upon the Borders of Germany, the Duke of Enguien, the French General, marched with his Troops as far as the Nekar, he took Rotem∣bourgh, and went next to find out his Enemies, the United Forces of the Empire, that were encamped about Nortlinguen, and Dunkespiel. The French had here a notable victory, Four thousand men were killed, with Merci, the Duke of Bavariaes General; Gleen, the Em∣perors General was taken, with all the Provisions, Artillery, Waggons, and above forty Colours. The Duke entertained Gleen very kindly, and set him at liberty; the Neighbor∣ing Towns, Nortlinguen and Dunkes∣piel,
were surrendered to the French, after the Battle. The Army had orders to march towards Hailbron, but the Duke fell dangerously sick; so that he was forced to withdraw, and be carried to Philipsbourgh. At this time, the House of Austria uni∣ted all its Forces under two Gene∣rals, the Archduke Leopold, and General Galaz. There were in this Army above Thirty thousand Men. Monsieur de Turenne, and the Mares∣chal of Grammont, commanded in the French Army, instead of the Duke d'Enguien; they had not a∣bove Twelve or thirteen thousand Men, yet they behaved themselves so gallantly, that the Imperialists could never come to fight them. They retreated with their Soldiers through their Enemies Countrey, and returned safe home into the Borders of France. The French Generals were highly commended for their Wisdom, in foreseeing the
danger of a General Battle; and for their care and prudence, in ma∣naging the Retreat to save their Men. In Lorraine, the Mareschal de Vil∣leroy was sent with an Army to drive the Duke out of his Domi∣nions, because he had Confedera∣ted himself with the Enemies of France. The Inhabitants are natu∣rally inclined to favor the French, therefore they made no great resist∣ance, but submitted themselves to the King of Frances General, only La Mothe held out. Monsieur Ma∣galoty undertook to defend it; but his death caused it to be surrendred also: So that the poor Duke was driven out of all his Patrimony, by the overruling power of his Neigh∣bor. In Catalonia, the French were no less successful for the General, the Count du Plessis-Praslin took Roses the nineteenth of May, and the
Count de Harcourt, Viceroy of Ca∣talonia, defeated the Spaniards in the Fields of Liorerys, and forced the Town of Balaguier to open its Gates. Du Plessis-Praslin was ho∣nored with the Staff of a Mareschal of France, for his good service to that Crown; and was commanded into Italy to assist Prince Thomas against the Spaniards. In the Duke∣dom of Milan, Viguerano was taken from them; but when the Prince was in his Retreat, the Spanish Ge∣nerals overpowered him; and had it not been for the seasonable com∣ing in of the new Mareschal, his Sol∣diers had been cut in pieces, and totally routed. The next year 1646. the War was managed with the same fury as be∣fore, especially in Flanders, under the Dukes of Orleans and d'En∣guien, who laid siege, with a nume∣rous Army, well appointed, to the City of Courtray, which they took
in the presence of all the Forces of the House of Austria, that came with a design to raise the Siege. Mardike was again retaken from the Spaniard, and Dunkirk was besieged by the Duke of Enguien. Caracena and Lambay were the Spanish Gene∣rals, but they did not dare to ad∣venture a pitcht Battle. The Mar∣quess of Leda, a famous and ex∣perienced Commander, was then Governor of this Town, that was well fortified by Nature as well as by Art. Nevertheless, the French won it in thirteen days, and forced the besieged to a Capitulation. Af∣ter this, Prince Thomas, and the Duke of Brezé besieged, and took Orbiselle; but the Spaniards were so strong in Italy, that the Court or∣dered the Mareschal de la Meilleray, and du Plessis-Praslin, with United Forces to march thither; they took two small places, Paombino and Por∣tolongone.
About this time, Henry de Bour∣bon, Prince of Condé died, the Six and twentieth of December, and his eldest Son, the Duke of Enguien succeeded him in his Principality, and to the honor of being the first Prince of the Blood Royal of France. In the year 1647. the Mareschal de Gassion forced many places to submit; he was wounded at the siege of Lens, and carried to Arras, where he died. Monsieur Villequier commanded in his absence, and took the Town. About this time the Duke of Brezé was killed over against Na∣ples, with a Cannon Bullet, and his Fleet was put to flight by the Spa∣nish Armado. But the misfortunes and ill suc∣cesses of the Duke of Guise, brought all his family to ruine. He had been sollicited by the Rebellious Neapo∣litans, to command their Army
against their lawful Prince. He too credulously trusted an unconstant Rabble, and went to Naples to manage a War against Spain, in that part of the World, and dispossess the House of Austria, of one of its best Kingdoms. His first arrival was attended by some Successes, and the favor of the Inhabitants; but when the Court of France, out of a jealousie of his greatness, began to frown upon him, and deny the assistance which they had promised, and might have sent him; the Neapoli∣tans betrayed him to their old Masters for their own safety and pardon. He was carried into the Prisons of Spain, from whence he could scarce obtain his freedom in three years. This great disappoint∣ment brought the House of Guise to a low estate, together with some other miscarriages, that they have been guilty of.
In this Campagne, Lerida, the strongest Bulwark upon the Borders of Spain, was streightly besieged by the Army of the Prince of Condé. The Count de Harcourt, had at∣tempted it the year before; but this place stood it out, till the last, so that the siege was raised to suc∣cor some other more considerable Town, which the Spaniard was ready to carry. In the beginning of the Spring 1648. that dismal year for England, the Prince of Condé appeared again at the head of an Army in Flanders. where he took Ypres in twelve days; but before this siege was over, where the French Army suffered many wants, the Spaniard had re∣covered Funes, Courtray, and Lens. These advantages had made them contemn their Enemies, command∣ed by the Prince: So that General Beck, assistant to the Arch duke Leo∣pold in his Army, assured him of a
full victory over the French. With this perswasion, they ventured to ingage, but the Troops of Lorraine were disordered in the Battle, and the Archdukes Cavalry were so miserably treated, that if the Prince de Ligny had not come in, with his reserve, the Archduke had been made prisoner. General Beck died with the displeasure of his ill suc∣cess, as well as by his wounds. This Battle was fought the twentieth of August; it caused several petty Towns to open their Gates, as Lens and Furnes, &c. At this time, Ma∣reschal de Schomberg, the Kings Ge∣neral in Catalonia, took the Town of Tortoise, in the Kingdom of Va∣lencia, and defeated the Army of Don Francisco de Melo, the Spanish General, that came to relieve it. All these Sieges, Battles, and Ren∣counters, hapned during the Treaty at Munster, which excluded the French and the Spaniard. Their
quarrels alone could not be ended, for the Spaniard had intelligence of a secret Conspiracy in France, where the greatest Princes were concerned. He did therefore expect to recover what he had lost by the favor of the Domestick Wars, and troubles of his Neighbors. The Prince of Condé, and many more of the Blood Royal were united together, they publish∣ed their Manifesto to justifie their taking up Arms to reform the Go∣vernment, as was pretended, and to remove the Cardinal from that great trust reposed in him by the Queen. Paris held for the Rebels, and many other Towns were in dan∣ger of following the same example. The Inhabitants were more then usually scurrilous and scandalous against the King, the Queen, and the Cardinal. These troubles had almost deprived the young King of his Crown and Scepter, had it not been for the seasonable assistance
and kind Mediation of our great Monarch, and the vigorous endea∣vors of the Mareschal de Turenne, more faithful to his King then to his Religion. At last after much Bloodshed in an intestine War, the Prince re∣treated into Flanders, with those of his party, whom neither Love, Loyalty, nor Interest, could per∣swade to guard their young King. The Spaniard put him at the Head of their Troops, with which he re∣covered almost all the Towns that he had formerly lost. If the Mares∣chal de Turenne had not stopped the progress of the Princes victories, he had invaded the Crown it self as well as the Frontier Towns. But after an absence of several years, the King invited him home, received him into his favor, bestowed upon him his Government, and Employs, and treated the Dukes of Conti, and Longueville, in the same generous
manner, publishing a General Par∣don to all other offenders in the Civil Wars. On the Seventh of September, 1651. the King being thirteen years old, was declared of Age, sufficient to take upon him the Government, and to begin to act in person, in that sphere where providence had put him. The Declaration was approved of in the Parliament of Paris, and proclaimed all over the Land. The War continued still between France and Spain. In the years 49, 50, 51, and 52, the Spaniard had the greatest Successes against the French; for they were assisted by the Sedition and Treachery of the Inhabitants, as much as by their own valor and numbers of Men, to recover more then they had former∣ly lost. But after the Kings majo∣rity, he appeared himself at the head of his Troops, and, with his presence, gave them so much cou∣rage
and resolution, that they turn∣ed the fortune of War. The City of Bar, and the Castle of Ligny, was surrendred to the Mareschal de la Ferté, in 1653. The Duke of Esper∣non besieged Bellegard, but could not take it, till the news was come, that the King was in the Camp; then the Governor was loath to stand it out against his own Prince. Rethel and Mouzon were retaken by Monsieur Turenne, St. Menehou by la Ferté, the twenty seventh of November. Du Plessis Praslin be∣haved himself so gallantly in taking this place, that the King gave it him to command. Grancey surprised Castillon, and withstood the valo∣rous efforts of General Caracena. The year 1654. was honored with the greatest solemnity, and most sacred Ceremony of France, the Coronation of their King at Rheims, with that holy Oyl which they affirm to be faln from Heaven,
and sent from God for that purpose, to anoint their Kings therewith. When they have been thus inaugu∣rated, the people have a particular respect for their persons. After this, Stenay was besieged by the French, commanded by Mares∣chal d' Hocquincourt; when the Spa∣niard saw they could not hinder the taking of this place, they labored to make a Diversion, and to recom∣pence themselves for their loss, by the invasion of Arras. Turenne, la Ferté, and Hocquincourt, had orders to hazard all, rather then to suffer this great City to fall into their hands. When they had called a Council of War, they resolved to attack the Lines and Trenches, which they did with much resolu∣tion, in the night, the 24 and 25 days of August. Hocquincourt en∣tered first into the Enemies Camp, through the Troops of the Duke of Lorraine, but he was beaten back
with a great slaughter of his Men; the other Commanders relieved, and seconded him: So that at last the Spaniard was forced to leave his Trenches with some loss of Men, of Ammunition, and Baggage: For the Governor of the Town sallied out at the same time, and recei∣ved so much assistance, that the Enemy despaired of being able to gain the Walls. The Spanish Gene∣ral preserved his Army by a season∣able retreat, which was managed with that prudence and courage, that he hath worthily deserved the admiration of his Enemies. The King went to visit his Camp and Army immediately after this Siege was raised, to encourage and reward his brave Soldiers. In Catalonia also, the Prince of Conti had some success in taking Conflans and Cerdagne from the Spa∣niard. About the beginning of the Spring 1655. Landrecy, Maubeuge,
Condé, and St. Guilham, submitted themselves again to the French Mo∣narchy. Thus these small places were often taken and retaken by the Armies of Spain and France. At every advantage, in the Field, these weaker Towns, of no resistance, were forced, for their preservation, to prefer their Safety to their Loyal∣ty, and to side with the strongest party. In this year there was a League Offensive and Defensive, made be∣tween Cromwel and Mazarin, a∣gainst Spain, upon conditions dis∣graceful to the King and Court of France. Monsieur Bourdeaux solli∣cited his Masters Affairs so notably, that he got that Arch-Rebel to send over, in the beginning of the Spring 1656. an Army of stout Soldiers, commanded by Reynolds. For al∣though France abounds in Men, it is wont to make use of the valor of its Neighbors, in all Wars, against
strangers: For it hath been found, by experience, that the French are good for the first Onset, but cannot abide nor weather so many discourage∣ments, as the English, Scotch, and Switzers can in War; besides their Foot are not to be compared to ours. Therefore they may ascribe their most difficult Conquests to their Money, and to the English, Scotch, Irish, and Switzers valor; as we shall see in several late Encount∣ers with the Hollanders and Imperia∣lists. The year 1656. was noted for the remarkable Siege of Valancien∣nes, where the French received an overthrow, and were forced to quit the place; but afterwards they took Cappelle and Valencia in Italy. In the beginning of the Cam∣pagne 1657. Montmedy was be∣sieged by la Ferté, the King him∣self went thither, after that the Suc∣cors which were intended for a re∣lief,
were happily routed. After∣wards the City yielded to his Ma∣jesty, and opened its Gates to re∣ceive him on the seventh of August. St. Venant, Bourbourg, and the Fort of Mardike, also were taken by Turenne. Our English served him in good stead in the recovering of these places, especially in storming of Mardike. The attempt was not e∣steemed feasable by the French Ge∣neral, who had a design rather to besiege it, then to win it by an As∣sault. But our English Commanders undertook this perillous attempt, Sir Tho. Morgan, now Governor of Jersey, lead his Party with so much courage and resolution, that they recovered the top of the Walls in an instant, passing through showers of shot and fire, to the great asto∣nishment of the rest of the Army. This Gentleman hath purchased to himself the name and honor of one of the bravest Soldiers of Europe.
And when the Spaniard ventured in the night to surprise this Fort again, the English saved it, beat back the Spaniard, and obliged them to a speedy retreat to Dunkirk. After this Turenne was employed with a Flying Party to raise the Siege of Ardres, which he did with so much bravery, that the Spaniard received there a considerable loss. But all these Conquests were in∣considerable to those of the next year 1658. Turenne and La Ferté were the two Generals of the French, and after the death of Rey∣nolds, drowned near Goodwin Sands, in a small Boat in which he ventured to pass from Mardike into England, my Lord Lockart, then Ambassador at Paris, took the charge of the English Forces. The Army was com∣manded to besiege Dunkirk, for it had been agreed between England and France, that this place should be put into the English hands. It
was surrounded the Twenty fifth of May; which when the Marquess of Leda had notice of, he shut himself in, with a strong Garrison, resolving to defend it, or die there. The Siege was carried on very resolutely, the English and French Armies made their approaches on a sudden; so that the fear of loosing this strong place, caused the Archduke to en∣deavor to raise the Siege by assault∣ing them in their Trenches. Turenne confided in his own strength, there∣fore when he heard of the Enemies approach, he marched bravely out of his Camp to meet the Archduke, the victory declared for the French. In this encounter, it was the unhap∣piness of the English to fight with their own Countrey-men. In the Spanish Army, the Noble and Cou∣ragious Duke of York, a Prince of an invincible resolution, was enter∣tained by the Spaniard as one of the best Commanders of that Army.
That wise Nation, as well know∣ing in Men as in Affairs, would not suffer so great a Courage idle, in time of War. If I might have the liberty in this succinct Narration, I could give an account of the most heroick actions of his Royal High∣ness; insomuch, that Turenne, and the other Generals, have often con∣fessed him to be the ablest and most skilful Commander of the World. His Courage and Wisdom had not that success that could have been expected at this time; for the Eng∣lish Regiments under my Lord Lockart, especially that of Colonel Alsop, beat back the Spaniards, and pursued them over the Sandy Hills, with a great slaughter. This victory was due cheifly to the courage of the English, the fifteenth of June, 1658. After the Retreat of the Spa∣niards, the French Army returned to the Siege, where the Marquess of Leda was killed with a Bullet. After
his death the Town began to listen to terms of Surrendring, which were agreed on the Two and twen∣tieth of June. The King entered into the City, to take possession of it, afterwards he delivered it up to my Lord Lockart, for the use of the English, whose Blood and Valor had got it from the Enemy. Bergues, Furnes, and Dixmuyde, yielded also to the Kings Summons, so did Oudenard. Ypres staid for a Siege, and when the Prince of Ligny had gathered the Relicks of the Dispersed Army, beaten before Dunkirk, he labored to raise it; but was beaten off with loss by Turenne, who took after∣wards Menein, and many other small Castles. At that time La Ferté assaulted Gravelin, but could not recover it in a Moneth, for the Garrison was strong and resolute. Many brave Actions hapned in this attempt, the
besiegers and besieged, behaved themselves very gallantly; at last they capitulated upon honorable terms, the Eight and twentieth of August. In the interim, the Dukes of Mo∣dena and Navailes, took Mortera for the French. This first hath always been devoted to the Crown of France. The Spaniard endeavored to take from the French, some little places which they recovered; but it is certain, that the Spaniard was the greater looser. Therefore the Princes of the Empire assembled, together to consult about the chu∣sing of another Emperor at Franck∣fort, sent to desire his Majesty of France, to hearken to an Accommo∣dation. The King of Spain, Philip the Fourth, had caused some Overtures of Peace to be made by the Popes Mediation. The French Court entertained them wil∣lingly
upon condition of a match, between the young King, and the Infanta of Spain. When the King was at Lions, an Envoy came to him from Madrid, about this Negotia∣tion. The Cardinal had orders to have a private Conference with him, to make way for the Ambassa∣dors de Lionne and Pimentel. The first was dispatched away to Ma∣drid, the second went to Paris. They dealt so effectually, that all Differ∣ences were composed, Articles were concluded, and the great breach was made up, to the satisfacti∣on of both Princes and Kingdoms. The Queen-Mother was not a little useful in this business; for when the Cardinal did seem to put in some Demurs, she declared, That the Peace should be made without him, for that she was resolved, that her Son should match with one of her own Kinred.
The Kings indisposition had al∣most ruined this Affair, for he fell dangerously sick; but he recovered after a few days distemper. After∣wards he made a progress into the farthest confines of his Kingdom; for there had been some discontents and disorders about Lions, Burgun∣dy, and Provence, which could not be terminated without his coming. When he was at Lions, the Duke of Savoy came to wait upon him. This Prince is so near a Neighbor to France, that he is forced to keep his friendship, for fear of loosing his Principality; which hath been seve∣ral times in great danger to be swal∣lowed up, by this great Monarch, at the least distaste. In the mean time, the Spanish gra∣vity was very slow in concluding the Peace; that Court trifled away the time in Consultations and Meet∣ings, whilest the Spring of the next year 1659. was coming on apace.
Which caused the King to give or∣der for new levies of Soldiers, to appoint Generals and Commanders, as if he had intended to prosecute the War as vigorously as before. This made the Spaniard desire a Truce of four Moneths; from the eighth of March, to the third of July, which was granted the King, That it should continue till his Declaration to the contrary or∣dered. In order to a Peace, Mazarin went to Bayonne, and Don Louïs d' Aro de Gusman came to S. Sebasti∣ans, to treat more commodiously. These two Plenipotentiaries at last concluded and signed the Articles the seventh of November next ensu∣ing. The Inhabitants of S. Sebastian, of S. John de Luz, and of the Neighboring Cities declared their satisfaction and joy, by Bonefires, and other publick signs.
Whilst the business was in debate, the French Court was at Bourdeaux and Tholouse, that it might be sooner consulted in all difficult Matters. After the conclusion of the Treaty, the French King sent a Procuration to Don Louïs d' Aro, to espouse the Infanta of Spain in his name. The Marriage was performed in Fonta∣rabia in the presence of the Court of Spain, the third day of June. The two Kings met in the Isle of Conference, scituate between both Kingdoms, where the young Queen was delivered to her Husband, and both Kings swore to keep, and con∣firmed to one another the Treaty of Peace. After this interview, they separa∣ted; the French King and Queen was received at S. John de Luz, with much pomp and Joy; and in their journey to Paris, every good City in their way expressed their extra∣ordinary satisfaction, for the Marri∣age
and Peace between the two Kingdoms. But their Reception at Paris, was one of the most glorious Ceremonies, the most splendid Tri∣umph of our Age. The young Queen was carried in an open Char∣riot, shining with all the riches of the East and West Indies; she was attended upon by the whole Court, in their greatest splendor and glory. The People, the Clergy, and the Nobility, did welcome her with such expressions of joy, that they are not credible. In the beginning of the next year 1661. on the nineth of March, the great Minister of State, Cardinal Mazarin, paid his last debt to Na∣ture, having, by his policy, raised himself and family from a low be∣ginning, to the greatest honors in France. The Court was pleased to Mourn for him, but they quickly cast off their sad attire, when Monsieur of
France resolved to marry with the Princess of England: A Lady, very well accomplished in Beauty and Vertue. The publick ceremony was performed on the One and thirtieth of March. There hapned nothing remark∣able this year, till the latter end. The first day of November, the Dau∣phin of France was born, to the great joy of all that Kingdom, Mon∣sieur de Montausier was appointed to be his Governor. One thousand six hundred sixty and two, the King made Seventy two Knights of the Order of the S. Esprit; all Persons of the greatest Nobility, and approved valor. In the same year there hapned a differ∣ence between the Ambassadors of Spain and France, about preceden∣cy, in the City of London. The Spa∣niards were prepared to receive the French; so that the tumult was great, and some Bloodshed on both sides.
The French sent their Complaints to Madrid, the King gave them sa∣tisfaction, and forbad all his Ambas∣sadors for the future, to appear in any publick solemnity with the Ambassadors of France; for they claim a precedency in all Courts of Europe, unless it be in Vienna, where the House of Austria are Lords. The King of Spain preferred in this occa∣sion, the Peace and Quiet of his Kingdoms to this odd Punctilio of Honor. This year was spent in Sports and publick Divertisements of the Gen∣try and Nobility at court, till the Moneth of November. Then the French Ambassador in England, had Orders to demand the restitution of Dunkirk to the French, for a sum of Money, according to their pretend∣ed Agreement with Cromwel. It was generally supposed by the wisest in France, that the English would never part with a place so well fortified,
by their late industry, purchased with the Blood of many of their bravest Men that took it, and so handy and commodious to them, both in Peace and War; and that therefore there would be a dispute between the two Nations, for the recovery of it. But it hapned other∣wise, to the Universal Sorrow of all our people, Dunkirke was surren∣dered, and the French King made his entry into it the second day of December. There had been a Treaty be∣tween the old Duke of Lorraine, and this young King, by which the Duke made over to him, all his Right, Title, and Interest, in the Dutchy of Lorraine, for some Lands in lieu of it; and for the priviledge of being declared Heir to the Crown of France, in case the Fa∣mily of Bourbon did fail. This A∣greement had been made the sixth of February, 1662. and confirmed
in the Parliament of Paris, in the Moneth of March. So that the French seised upon all the Cities and Countrey of Lorraine, only the strong Town of Marsal remained in the Dukes hands, who seemed un∣willing to deliver it. Besides the young Prince Charles of Lorraine, was supposed to have won the Sol∣diers there in Garrison, therefore they would not surrender it upon Summons. This affair caused the King to tra∣vel into that Countrey, with a suffi∣cient Army, to reduce it to his obe∣dience, commanding that Marsal should be besieged without delay. His sudden motion surprised the Duke, and found him unprovided; therefore he went to meet his Ma∣jesty at Metz in Lorraine, to submit himself unto him. The King re∣ceived him very generously, and made him welcome; Marsal, accord∣ing to Agreement, was put into
the French hands, on the third of September, 1663. A little before, the French Am∣bassador Monsieur de Crequi, had been affronted, and in danger of his person, in the City of Rome. Some of the Popes Guards shot into his Coach, and wounded his servants. When the Court of France heard of it, the King commanded the Popes Nuncio, then at Paris, to depart out of the Kingdom, and sent for his Generals, ordering them to pre∣pare for a War. Alexander the Se∣venth did then sit in S. Peters sup∣posed Chair. He sent immediately, upon the news of the coming of the French Army, an Express, to assure his Majesty, that he was much dis∣satisfied with the deed, and that he would give him all the satisfaction that he should desire. The City of Pisa was pitched upon to examine and discourse of this affair, where the Popes, and the French Deputies,
concluded it the Twelfth of March, 1664. to the great joy of the Ro∣man Catholicks. The Pope yielded to his own dishonor, that his Ne∣phew Flavio Chigi should wait up∣on the King, and beg his pardon, that a Monument should be erected in the very place, for posterity to gaze upon, with an Inscription, de∣claring the cause of its standing there. This was performed accord∣ingly; but the zeal of the French, for their King, and their concern∣ment for his honor, is very remark∣able in this occasion. The Parliament of Aix hearing of the affront given to the French Ambassador, and the Kings resolution to revenge it, made some levies of Men of their own accord, and marched to Avignon, where they drive out the Garrison, they surprised Carpentras, and all the Popes Territories near them. This action gave the King and Court great satisfaction, and facilitated an
Agreement between him and the Pope; for the French are not so wedded to their Superstitions, as to be so much afraid of the Popes thunderbolts as in former ages. It would become the wisdom of the Politicians of this Nation, to shake off the Popes burdensome Fetters, and establish a Patriarch of their own. There wants nothing else to make their King an absolute Mo∣narch. Some of the Jansenists have attempted to perswade their Clergy to it, I hope God will one day open their eyes, to perceive their slavery to S. Peters counterfeit Keys, and to oblige them to use that liberty unto which Providence invites them. At the same time, that the Car∣dinal was in France, the Emperor desired the Kings Succors, to help him against the Turks, who had in∣vaded his Dominions. This motion pleased the French humor, for they
would be thought to be the Cham∣pions of Christianity against the Infidels. The King ordered, as some say, about Ten thousand Men to march under the command of Mon∣sieur de Coligny, and Monsieur de la Fueillade, who is now Duke of Roannez. This Army joyned with the Imperialists about the Moneth of June, 1665. they found out the Turks Army, and encountered with them twice. It is certain, the French behaved themselves very gallantly in this expedition; so that the Enemies were worsted, and in their retreat, over the River of Raab, they lost about Five thou∣sand Men that were slain, Sixteen pieces of Cannon, and about One hundred and fifty Colours were taken, with much of their Baggage. The rest of their Army fled, not be∣ing able to withstand the Christians valor.
The Queen-Mother of France fell dangerously sick, and died the Twentieth of January, in that omni∣ous year One thousand six hundred sixty six. She was much lamented in France and Spain, for she was an excellent Princess. At this time there was War be∣tween the Crown of England, and the States of Holland. Their Fleets had had a brush at Sea, where the brave Duke of York adventured, in person, against their Squadrons, more in number then ours. Opdam their Admiral was blown up, and after a sharp fight they fled to their own Coast, to carry thither the sad news of their defeat, and of the loss of many Ships taken by the English: When the French saw that the Hollander was likely to be worsted, he pretended an obligati∣on to defend them; therefore he declared War against us, not so much with an intention to assist the
Hollander by Sea, as to stand by with his Fleet, and judge of the blows. However, the countenance of such a Prince, dreadful to all the World, because it was not known yet what mischeif he could do, helped them very much. The French made no attempts upon us at home, unless it be upon our industrious Merchants, who lost some Goods and Ships at Sea. But in the West Indies their treache∣ry and cruelty were remarkable in the Iland of S. Christophers, where the English and French Plantations had lived in Peace and Amity seve∣ral years, they supposed our Eng∣lish would endeavor to drive them away, after this breach between the two Nations. To prevent there∣fore that which the others had no design to execute, they fell upon them unawares, and massacred their Neighbors, to their eternal shame, plundering all their Goods, and
rifling their habitations. They sei∣sed next, the Islands of Antego, Ta∣bago, and S. Eustache. Our Men re∣solved to revenge these outrages up∣on those of Guadeloupe; but the Fleet that set forth for that intent, was dispersed by a terrible Hurri∣cane, and some of our Ships were broken and shipwracked, amongst the American Islands, to the great disappointment of the English. This War between England and France, continued till the year 1668. the Peace was concluded at Breda; for the French had no quarrel with the English, but only as was pretended in defence of Holland. The truth is, the King did not care to have two Enemies upon his back, at once; he was resolved to take into his possession some Towns in Flanders, belonging to the Crown of Spain; he was glad that His Majesty of England, would let him alone, and not intermeddle in this
Affair. The pretence to colour the invasion was, that some Articles of the Treaty of Marriage were not performed by the Court of Spain. The King, by his Ambassador at Madrid, acquainted them with his demands, but they neglected to give him satisfaction; this caused him to publish his Manifesto, to justi∣fie the seisure of those Lands and Towns which, he said, belonged to the Queen, by agreement at her Marriage. At the end of May, 1667. he en∣tered into Flanders with about Thirty thousand Men, well furnish∣ed. The first Garrisons were for∣saken, as Armantiers, La Bassée, Condé, and S. Guilhain. Bergnes and Furnes, were yielded up to the Mareschal d' Aumont. The King com∣manded Charleroy to be rebuilt and fortified, that it might serve as a Bulwark against Flanders. Tournay was besieged and assaulted, but
could not stop the impetuous tor∣rent of the French, that carried, at this time, all before them. Douay waited for their coming, its Gover∣nor had the meen to stop the French progress: But upon his Majesties Summons, he obeyed, and sent him the Keys. Courtray was taken in four days; Oudenard and Alost were quickly frighted into a compliance with the French. Lille was the next Garrison that had the unhappiness to be in the French Kings way. The Governor of this place had the re∣putation of a brave Commander, he had under him 800 Horse and 4000 Foot in Garrison, and was resolved to defend it. Therefore the King came before it with his whole Army, laid siege to it, and, after a very stout resistance, obliged the renown∣ed▪ Governor to save the rest of his men by yielding up the Town, upon honorable terms. The King made his entry on the Eight and
twentieth day of August, One thou∣sand six hundred sixty and seven. During the siege, the Spanish Commanders had raised a small Ar∣my, with an intent to Assault the French before Lille. Marcin was at the Head of these Troops in his march, when Crequy, Rouvray, Lille∣bonne, and Bellefonds, met with his Cavalry, in two several Rencoun∣ters, and broke his design. For these Captains had so disordered his Men, and scared them, that they could not be perswaded to attempt upon the French again without more assistance. After this Campagne, the King went to Paris, and in the first ap∣pearance of the Spring, One thou∣sand six hundred sixty and eight, he gave order to his Armies to march towards the Franche Comte. The Prince had the command of this ex∣pedition; but when the Inhabitants understood it, they sent to his Ma∣jesties
Deputies, to treat of yielding to him, to prevent the spoils of an Army. Whilest the Deputies de∣layed, the Prince, with his Army, being ready, went streight to Besan∣zon, where he encamped. On the sixth of February, it was surrendered into his hands; some other Towns were taken without resistance, and Salines was seised upon suddenly. At that time his Majesty was come to his Army, which he caused to draw near to Dole, a place well for∣tified and furnished with Men and Cannon, which caused the Inhabi∣tants to stand upon their Guards, and think of a resistance; but when they saw that the French had pos∣sessed all the Outworks in one night, and lodged themselves under their Counterscarpe, they accepted of his Majesties offers, and sent him the Keys of their City. All these places were taken in twelve days, to the great astonish∣ment
of all Neighboring People. There had been some overtures of Peace made the year before: To pre∣vent the conclusion of them, the King appeared with his Army this year so early in the Field; for the Dutch had threatned him, by their Ambassador, to joyn with the Spa∣niard, if he would not hearken to an accommodation. This Speech, together with the Resolution of his Neighbors, of rising up in Arms against him, brought forth the Treaty of Aix la Chappelle: Unto which place, Colbert was sent as an Extraordinary Ambassador, to meet with the Ministers of the Media∣ting Princes. It was signed the sixth of May, and sent to be published at Paris and Brussels; but the French King was mightily offended at the Dutch, who had forced him, against his will, to this conclusion of Peace; therefore in due time he was resolved to find an occasion
to punish them for their sauci∣ness. In the mean while, the Nobility and Gallants of France that had prepared their equipages, for the next Campagne, when they saw themselves disappointed by a hasty Peace, resolved to venture a∣broad in Foreign service. Fame had told them of the long Siege of Candy, by the Turks, and that these Infidels did daily win upon the besieged by their numbers; there∣fore the greatest Zealots of them re∣solved to hazard their persons for the releif of that noble City be∣longing to the Venetians. The Duke de Roannez, the Count of St. Paul, the Duke de Chateau-Thierry, the Chevalier de Harcour, with many other brave Adventurers, voluntari∣ly ingaged themselves in this expe∣dition. It is certain, that they be∣haved themselves with all the gal∣lantry that could be expected. At
their return, they acquainted the King with the condition of the place, and the strength of the Turks. This perswaded his Majesty, to∣gether with the Sollicitations of the Venetians, to send over thither the Dukes of Beaufort and Navailles, with about 10000 Men, to see whe∣ther they could raise the siege. All the World expected a Success an∣swerable to the French courage: At their first sallying out upon the Turks, they beat all down before them; but when the Turks saw their vigor abate, they charged furiously upon them, and routed them, for∣cing them back into the City Walls. Beaufort himself was lost, and kill∣ed, as it is supposed, in the rout, but his body could not be found afterwards. He was much to be blamed for venturing his person, and the honor of his Prince, amongst the meanest
Soldiers; for Commanders of his rank and quality, are to be mind∣ful, that the safety of the whole Army depends upon the preserva∣tion of their lives: They are never to hazard themselves in the Front of a Battle, but when their presence is necessary, to give courage to their fainting Soldiers, or to add more vigor to them, when the victory is almost in their hands. After the de∣feat of the French, the besieged City was yielded up to the Turks General, upon very favorable con∣dition. The King had intelligence about the end of the year 1669. that the Duke of Lorraine did endeavor to stir up the Emperor and King of Spain, against him. This caused him to send the Mareschal de Crequy with an Army of 18000 Men into Lorraine, to take in that Countrey. The Duke seised upon Pont a Mous∣son, and pulled down the Walls.
Epinal and Chaté held out a litteè, but they were, at last, Surrendered up into his hands, and the old Duke was driven out of all his Principality. This year 1670. the King visited his new conquered Towns in the Low Countreys, repairèd their breaches, restored their Fortifica∣tions, and put them all into a good posture of defence. But that which was remarkable in this progress, the King had no extraordinary Militia; he trusted so much these new Sub∣jects, that he entered into all their populous Towns, attended only by his houshold Servants, and usual Guards. This got him the love and respect of the Walloons, and secured him the hearts of his people, as well as the Walls of their Towns. About this time, a King of Guinny, who lives at a City called Arda, sent an Ambassador to Paris to treat
about an establishment of a Trade, between that place, and the Islands of America, under the French Scep∣ter. The King entertained him, and his motion, very kindly, and sent him back with Tokens of his liberality. There had been an Order of the Kings Council published, by which certain Wares of the Hollanders were prohibited in France. They labored, by their Ambassador, to perswade the King to revoke this Order; but in vain, for the King was now resolved to revenge him∣self upon them, for their insolent carriage towards him, and his peo∣ple, in the West and East Indies, and in many Foreign Countreys; where they had ingrossed all the Trade to themselves. It is certain, that both the Eng∣lish and the French had great cause to complain of the Hollanders, who had, on several occasions, discovered
an unsufferable Pride, and a haugh¦ty carriage, not to be endured by Crowned Heads. They had exer∣cised their cruelty upon the Sub∣jects of both Kingdoms beyond the Seas, and had seised upon their Goods, affronting thereby their Princes who are ingaged to protect them. These, and other unjust practises, as was pretended, obliged the French to prepare for War: There∣fore in his Progress in Flanders, he visited, himself, the Fortifications of all his Frontier Towns, and caused the weakest places to be fortified with new Works; from Dunkirke, he went to Amantiers, from thence to Lille, to Courtray, to Aeth. He found that Monsieur de Montal had strongly repaired the Walls of Charle le Roy; for which, he highly commended him. Before the War was proclaimed, Madam de Orleans, the only Sister a
live, of our Gracious Monarch, came over here unto England, to visit the King, and the Duke of York. She was received with all the ex∣pressions of kindness, that Nature did require, and her Vertues de∣serve. But as all our satisfactions are momentary, she had no sooner seen these dear Relations, but was forced to leave them again, and re∣turn over to France, where she died so suddenly, that most men en∣tertained the bad reports that were raised about her death. However, the Court of France honored her Birth and Vertues, with an out∣ward Mourning, and the Duke of Orleans's countenance seemed to be very sad and pensive, until the King had cheared him up with the thoughts of another Wife. The Daughter of the Prince Palatine of the Rhine was pitched upon; the Mareschal du Plessis was sent to es∣pouse her in the Dukes name, in the
City of Mets, the sixteenth day of November. The Duke himself wen as far as Chalons, to receive and welcome her: The King, the Queen, and all the Court expressed their joy and satisfaction for her safe arrival; and about a year after, she was brought to Bed of a Son. All this while, the War was pre∣paring against Holland. England and France were to unite their For∣ces, by Sea and Land. On the se∣venth day of April, 1672. the King published his Declaration, to forbid all Commerce and Trade with the States of the Ʋnited Provinces; and immediately after, appeared at the Head of an Army of One hundred and fifty thousand Men, with whom he carried all before him in the Low Countreys, as a violent torrent: No∣thing was of a sufficient resistance for so great a power; every one did judge, that he would win all the other Towns, the following Spring,
if there were not a stop put to his undertakings. But the motion of the French is always violent at the first, and then at the least discourage∣ment, it begins to abate. The Dutchy of Cleves, the Electorate of Cullen, the Dutchy of Limburgh, the County of Zutphen, Ʋtrecht, and its Territories. Holland, Bra∣bant, Overissell, the Oriental Frieze, Groningen, and the Dutchy of Gel∣dres, were full of French Troops, on a sudden. Orsoy, Vesel, Burick, and Rhineburgh, that had been so strongly Garrisoned, that the Dutch thought them to be the Bulwarks of their Land, were surrendered at the first appearance of the Kings Standard. Reez, Emmerick, and Groll, were delivered to the Bishop of Munster, who had taken up Arms to vindicate the French quar∣rel. The next attempt was, the Pass∣age over the Rhine, which was first
undertaken by the Count de Guiche, at the Head of Two thousand Horse, he swom over it, although three Squadrons of Horse, and some few Foot, were ready to re∣ceive him on the other side. When the French had recovered the Bank, they charged so desperately, that the Enemy was disordered, and fled to their Foot for succor. They had Barricadoed themselves in, but when the Prince, and the Dukes of Orleans and Longueville, were got on the other side with their Infan∣try, they resolved to assault them in their Trenches. The Prince de∣sired to march in order against them, but some of his Men were so furious, that nothing could keep them in. The Duke of Longueville, in a rage, went so near them, with the Prince, that the Duke was kill∣ed, and the Prince wounded in the left arm, with many more laid up∣on the ground.
When they saw the whole Army surround them, they desired quar∣ter, which was granted by the Prince, by that means they yielded, and were all taken prisoners. It is not good to render an Enemy de∣sperate, a small company in a dan∣ger have won the victory; there∣fore the Prince freely offered them their lives. This Action amazed the Hol∣lander, and astonished the Prince of Orange, who expected the Kings Army another way. Harnen was taken by Monsieur de Turenne, Ni∣meguen and Schenk also. Does∣bourgh and Zutphen, were surren∣deed into his Majesties hands, and the City of Ʋtrecht sent Deputies to yield it up. Monsieur de Lux∣emburgh was sent thither to take in all the places about Ʋtrecht. After this, Turenne recovered Crevecoeur, Coërden, Grave, and Bomel; so that almost all the Inland Countrey
thereabouts, submitted to the French. The Hollanders were then so much troubled, that they offered Conditions of Peace to the King; but he hoped to gain all the rest of their Countrey: Therefore they were rejected as unreasonable. The King after all these Successes, left the Army the Six and twentieth of July, and arrived at Paris the first of August, where he was con∣gratulated and welcomed by all the Societies of his Kingdom. The Queen was so much overjoyed, that she commanded a Chappel to be built at Roan, and dedicated it to Our Lady of Victories; for as a∣mongst the Heathens they did give to Pallas, the Goddess of War, se∣veral attributes, and names be∣tokening the many good Office that they fancied, proceeded fron her favoring of them: So the Pa¦pists assign divers, and differing ti∣tles to the Virgin Mary, who is
now become the Goddess of War amongst them, and the Giver of Victory to her devout Proselites. The Princes wound had cast him into an indisposition, which made him follow his Majesty, and accom∣pany the Duke of Orleans, the Kings Brother, to Paris, leaving the Conduct of Affairs to Monsieur de Luxembourgh and Turenne. The Prince of Orange was then before Voërden with Twelve thousand Men; Luxembourgh prepares a strong brigade of Two thousand five hun∣dred Men, and by a secret way over the Marshes, he gets into the Town undiscovered, with his Party, with which he made such stout Sallies, that the Prince was forced to rise from thence with his Army, to leave some of his Baggage and Cannon be∣hind him. All this while the Dutch had scarce time to look about, the French had been so nimble and
furious, that they had gained all this Countrey, without any consi∣derable loss. But before the next Campagne, the face of affairs was changed, the Dutch had many Armies come to their assistance, the Spaniard, the German, and the Im∣perialists, sent their powerful Suc∣cors to aid them: So that they have since recovered a great part of what they first lost, and will, accord∣ing to all probability, recover the rest. The Prince of Orange was now restored by Order of the States, after the inhumane massacre of de Wit, to his Patrimonial Offices of Statholder, Admiral, and General of the Ʋnited-Provinces. This generous Prince began to appear at the Head of an Army of 24000 Men; with these he resolved not to be idle; some places he took, but did not yet dare to adventure against his inso∣lent Enemy, triumphing for so many
great Successes. Monterey, Viceroy of the Netherlands, for the King of Spain, desired him to attempt some∣thing in his Countrey, because the French had drained their Garrisons; for the Spaniard had not declared yet against them. According to this advice, he laid siege to Charle∣roy, a Fortress that was likely to annoy the Spaniard, their next Neighbors. Montal, the Governor, had notice of the design, he Posts: thither in haste; and taking his: time in the night, he passed through the Dutch and Spanish Troops, and got safe into the Garrison, to the great joy of the besieged. The next day he adventured to sally out with a strong party, which was re∣ceived and welcomed by the Prince of Orange, with loss on both sides. When the King heard of this siege, he drew near to the Borders of Pi∣cardy, and gave order to several thousands of his Soldiers to meet
him, with a design to beat the Dutch off. Therefore this intelligence caused the Prince to rise with his Army, the Two and twentieth day of December, and depart: Which was signified to the King by a Post, sent from the Governor. At this time, Luxembourgh at∣tempted to lead his Men over the Ice, to Assault Bodengrave, Swam∣merdam, and Niverburgh; which three places he took without much resistance. After this, the French went no further till the next Spring, 1673. They were all sent into seve∣ral Garrisons, where we shall leave them to take notice of their behavi∣or at Sea. On the Water, as well as on the Land, the War was carried on. The Dutch had a gallant Fleet, with which they did defie the Fleets of England and France: But though De Ruyter, their Admiral, labored by Policy to fight us, and to sur∣prise
us at an advantage; he was much mistaken to find our English courage, in the greatest discourage∣ment, not to resist and brave Death it self. His Majesty of England had been engaged to joyn his strong Fleet with the French Squadron, which was commanded by the Count de Estrées. Therefore the Twenty eighth of May, 1672. in prosecu∣tion of the War that had been de∣clared against the States of Holland, our Fleet, under the command of the brave Duke of York, had a very sharp Engagement with the Dutch, upon the English Coast; in which, the Victory declared for the English, with the loss of the Royal James, which was unfortunately burned; and of the Earl of Sand∣wich, who was drowned, and his body found about the tenth of the next Moneth floating on the English shore. He was an excellent Captain,
more fortunate in the Mediterrane∣an, and in the Sound, then in our Channel. England lamented the loss of so excellent a person. It seems his courage destroyed him; for when his Ship was Boarded and Fired by a Dutchman, when it was surrounded by many of the Ene∣mies best Ships; His resolution to brave Death, and the Enemy, in the midst of the greatest disadvantages and dangers, made him abide and continue the sight in his Flaming Ship. Of our English, Twenty four Persons of Note were killed, with three of the French. Amongst the rest, a Gentleman, so Courageous, Learned, Civil, and so well accom∣plished, that I cannot but mention him in this place: It was Mr. Cle∣ment Cotterel, Sir Charles Cotterels Son. About fifteen Gentlemen were desperately wounded, seven hun∣dred Common Soldiers and Seamen
killed, and as many maimed. Mon∣sieur de Rabiniere tres le Bois, Rear Admiral of the French, was killed, and buried at Rochel. The Duke of York, in this En∣gagement, behaved himself as a discreet and wise Commander, with an undaunted Courage. It is supposed, that if our whole Fleet could have had the conveni∣ency of fighting, the Dutch had been for ever undone; but the Wind hindered most part of our Ships from coming up to them; so that the Blew Squadron was forced to ingage with the Enemy alone. The Dutch had great loss of Men and Ships; it is thought about five or six of theirs, besides the Fire∣ships were sunk: It is certain, that our Fleet pursued them to their own Coast. About this time, the Twentieth of August, 1672. hapned a most barbarous execution of the two
De Wits torn in pieces by the rude rabble of the Hague, their Privities cut off, their Bodies dragged through the Streets, and hanged at the Gallows, in such a barbarous manner, that the Cannibals would have been ashamed to have done the like. Groningen had been besieged by the Mercenary Weather-cock of Munster; but in the Moneth of August he left the Town, after a con∣siderable loss of his Men. The good Bishop was moved with compassion to see his Soldiers slaughtered by the stout-hearted Dutch; so that he preferred their safety, or it may be his own, to the filling of his Purse with Gilders; which was the thing this noble Captain aimed at in this attempt upon the Dutch. The States of Holland had pre∣vailed with many of their Neigh∣bors, especially with the Emperor, King of Spain, and Duke of Bran∣denburgh,
to send their Succors to assist them by Land. The Prince Palatine was perswaded, notwith∣standing his Alliance with France, to enter into the party. They were all resolved to send into the Field their Armies, in the next Spring; for they were afraid that the French would not be content with the Conquest of Holland, but would incroach upon them also after∣wards. During this Winter, nothing hap∣ned worthy of notice, but the loss of private persons, robberies, and small Encounters of Parties, that sought for Plunder and Booties. In the beginning of the Spring, 1673. three Armies appeared for the Hollanders; the King of Spains commanded by the Count de Mon∣terey, the Emperors by Montecuculi, the Duke of Brandenburghs by him∣self; besides the Army of the Prince of Orange, who was declared Ge∣neral
at Land, Admiral at Sea, and Statholder by the States. The French Army commanded by Turenne, marched against the Duke of Bran∣denburgh, who was forced to quit to him all the County of Marck, and to leave his Bag and Baggage behind him, for fear of a total de∣feat of his Forces. The French took Ʋrnia, Ham, Camen, Altenau, Soest, and Hoexter, Bilefeld, and Ravensperg, small places of no strength. At this time, the Swede and the Dane, with other Neuter Princes, had desired an accommodation of the differences between the Kings of England and France. Cologne was the place of meeting; all the Ple∣ipotentiaries were sent with In∣structions: But although the Dutch had so many losses by Land, and by Sea, they would not yield to any reasonable Propositions at first. Their stout hearts were resolved to
try the Fortune of War, before they would listen to any peaceable conclusion. At last after several De∣bates, and Consultations, the Peace was concluded between the King of England and the States, but the French pretentions were extraordi∣nary high, and their Successes great; so that there was no possibility that did appear, to end their differences at this time. But before the Peace was published between England and Holland, all this Summer of the year 1673. the War was vigorously carried on by Sea and Land. By Sea, Prince Rupert command∣ed a Fleet of English and French, One hundred and twenty Sail. With these Ships he attacked the Dutch Frigats, under the command of De Ruyter and Van Trump. The fight was mannaged with much re∣solution on both sides: The French in the former Engagements had been taught to face their Enemy
upon the Water; for they behaved themselves now very bravely, be∣cause they could not well excuse themselves. It is certain, the Princes conduct and courage in this, and all other Engagements, have justly de∣served the praise of all Men, and the thanks of our Nation. This noble Spirit hath since his infancy, spent his Wit and Blood in the de∣fence, and for the honor of our Countrey. The Dutch proclaimed Victory at Land, whilest their Ships and Shipwracks complained of their ill usage at Sea by the English. They lost eight considerable Vessels, that of Van Haen was the chief, it was blown up by an unfortunate shot. Many were so disabled, that they could not reach into their Harbors. His Majesties Fleet had received some damage in the Rigging, and loss of Men; but not so as to hinder them the next morning, the nineth
of May, from pursuing their Ene∣mies to their own Coast. The Dutch lost many Men, some of note, and a Ship taken by the English. At Land there were frequent en∣counters between the Dutch and French. The City of Mastreicht was the cheif place of action this Summer: The Count de Lorge, and Monsieur Montall, were ordered to invest it, the sixth of June: The rest of the Army marched thither to post themselves about this strong place. Fario was then Governor, with a very stout Garrison of six thousand Men; the Count de Mon∣terey had sent thither two thousand Italian Horse and Foot, to reinforce the place. The King himself was in the Army with the bravest and choicest Regiments; and the Noble Duke of Monmouth, with several thousand English under his com∣mand.
It is certain, the French King visit∣ed the Trenches, and incouraged his Troops, with a great contempt of the danger. Fario had sent him this civil message, That if he knew whereabouts his Majesties Quarters were, he would command his Men to forbear shooting to that place: The King sent him word again, That his Quarters were every where in his Camp. The besieged made a stout resistance, many Men were kil∣led on both sides. It is thought that this Town might have put a stop to the French Conquests, if the Burgers had been more faithful to their old Masters, and less careless of their lives and riches. It is cer∣tain, that it had never been taken by the French alone, had not our English spent their blood, and in contempt of all danger, passed with their Regiments through showers of small and great shot, to the Assault.
We cannot sufficiently admire the courage of the Duke of Monmouth, a young General of an admirable conduct and skill in Martial Affairs. He commanded in the Trenches, with an intention to assault the Counterscarpe, and the Half-Moon, before Brussels-Gate. He led on his Men with such resolution, that though two or three Mines were sprung up, and the shot fell thick amongst them, they carried the Half-Moon, to the great wonder of all men, in half an hour. As soon as it was taken, the Duke, with his Party, was immediately re∣lieved by the French, upon whom, the besieged played so briskly, with their great and small shot, that they beat them out with the assistance of a Mine, and a stout Sally. When the Duke saw that the French had lost what his Men had got, he pre∣pared himself to regain it; which he did with the greatest resolution
and happiness imaginable. This in∣vincible spirit at the Head of his Party, leaped over the Trenches first, with his Weapon in his hand, only twelve stout Voluntiers accom∣panied him, the rest followed so furiously, that the Dutch were beat∣en off again, and his Grace became Master of the Half-Moon the se∣cond time, delivering it into the hands of Monsieur de la Feuillade. So that without flattery, the French ow the taking of Mastreicht to the courage, conduct, and brave resolu∣tion of the Duke of Monmouth, to the Blood and undauntedness of our English. Sir Henry Jones was killed in one of these assaults, which hapned the twenty fourth of June. After some other attempts, where our Men were again imployed, the Town desired a Parley the twenty nineth, and in two hours the Arti∣cles were granted, That the Go∣vernor and Garrison should march
out as stout Soldiers, their Colours flying, Drums beating, Match light∣ed, Bullet in Mouth, with Bag and Baggage, and two Pieces of Can∣non, and a Mortar Piece. That they should be safely convoyed to Boisle∣due and Breda. The French lost 4000 Men, and about 1000 of the besieged were killed. The King took possession of it the thirtieth of June, and commanded the Cardinal de Boüillon to resanctifie the Church∣es profaned by the Dutches Devo∣tions. About this time there hapned an∣other Sea-sight, between the English and the Dutch Fleets, with loss on both sides; but our English beat the boasting Dutch again into their Harbors, where they left them to complain of their wounds and dead, and to glory in their pretended Suc∣cesses and Victories. The many Armies that were now on foot, to attend upon and stop
the further proceedings of the French, caused them to call away their Garrisons from many Conquer∣ed Towns: Besides the Sickness and the War, had consumed a great number; so that they were forced, for their own safety, to gather a little more close together. Several strong places were abandoned, and several were dismantled; the So∣diers were sent to reinforce the Armies. During this Winter, many En∣counters hapned between the Ene∣mies, and some few unconsiderable places taken. But now to the great joy of England, it pleased His Ma∣jesty to grant a Peace to the Hol∣lander, on most honorable Condi∣tions to the English. The French King nevertheless continues his designs by Land; but by Sea he commands his Ships to be drawn up, or to sail out of the Dutchmens sight. In the beginning
of the Spring he besieged Besanzon, in the Franche Comté; Pesme, Mar∣nay, were taken before by the Duke of Navailles, the fourteenth of February. The strong Town of Gray was yielded up after two or three days siege: On the twenty eighth, Vesoal was also taken. The King himself, with a strong Party, arrived at his Camp before Besanzon, in the beginning of May, 1674. It was surrendered into his Majesties hands before the end of the Moneth, after many brave exploits and much blood shed. Whiles the Treaty was on foot at Cologne, the Emperor caused the Prince of Furstemberg, Plenipoten∣tiary for the Archbishop of Cologne, to be arrested by the Officers of his Regiment of Grana, in his Coach, and carried to Bon, because he had not maintained the interest of the Empire, as he should have done, he being a Subject.
This violent proceeding did mightily scandalise all the Ambas∣sadors, especially the Archbishop, and the French King, were offended at this violence: For they pretend, that the person of an Ambassador is sacred, and not to be violated by any means. Nature hath taught the most barbarous people to suffer them to go and come in safety, who are imployed in quenching the Flames of War. Navaigne was afterwards be∣sieged and yielded to the Prince of Condé; but the Prince of Orange, had an intent to succor it, had not the besieged made so much haste to secure their lives by a Surrender. Dole was also besieged by the King, and taken after a stout resistance. The fifteenth of June, there hap∣ned a fight between Monsieur de Turenne, and the Imperialists com∣manded by the Duke of Lorraine, and the Count of Caprara. The
Duke of Bournonville was march∣ing up to them, Turenne resolved to hinder a conjunction; for that pur∣pose, he passed the Rhine at Philips∣burgh. The Duke and Count had but Seven thousand Horse, and a Regiment of Foot, but Turenne was Twelve thousand strong. The Confederates behaved themselves so bravely, that had they not been inferior in number, they had forced the French to a retreat. After a hot ingagement, which lasted all the Afternoon, the Germans sought their fafety in a retreat over the Neckar; many brave Men were kill∣ed on both sides, some say the loss was equal. It is certain, four thou∣sand Men lay dead on the Ground; the old Duke of Lorraine headed his Troops with so much resolution, as if he had intended to win a Duke∣dom in another World, by his not∣able courage.
The Dutch Fleet, about one hun∣dred Sail, passed out of the Chan∣nel to scoure the Seas, of all French Frigats, and to attempt something upon the Coast; they Landed on Belle Isle, but were repulsed after the loss of a few Men. The Duke of Schomberg com∣manded the French Forces in Cata∣lonia; in the County of Rousillon, he ingaged with them, and forced them to a retreat, with the loss of his Son, and another Gentleman of quality taken prisoners. The next action was between the Prince of Condé, and the Prince of Orange, assisted by the Count de Souches, the eleventh of August, near Haynault. The two Armies were resolved to have a brush, which was performed with much gallantry: The Prince of Oranges Army lost many Men, and Commanders; and the French disputed the case very stoutly; at last they retreated into
their Camp, carrying with them many noble prisoners, and most part of the Princes Baggage; leav∣ing the Dutch to boast of their empty and sorrowful Victory, in the open Field. At this time Grave was besieged by the Dutch: The French could not be perswaded to surrender it, till after a long and bloody siege. The Messinenses had revolted from the Spaniard, and put them∣selves under the French protection. The Duke de Vivonne arrived there, with some Succors, and relief of Men, and Provision. The Inhabi∣tants put them in possession of the strongest places about the City; the Spaniards, by Sea and Land, endeavored to plague them. A short conflict hapned upon the Coast, between the French and Spanish Fleets, where the noise of their great Guns, and their mutual Rodomontadoes, soon terrified
them, and made them both willing to part upon equal terms. By this means the Messinenses had some Pro∣vision brought to them in their ur∣gent necessity. In October, the Confederates, in∣camped upon the skirts of Turennes Army, were forced to fight near Strasburgh; they lost three thousand Men, ten Pieces of Cannon, thirty Standards, and many Prisoners; the French also had many of their best Menkilled. The Confederates re∣treated to Spire, and Turenne to the sides of the Rhine. The taking of the Cittadel of Leige this Winter, by the French, was an accident, that surprised and startled all the World. It was be∣trayed by a treacherous Governor, and delivered into the Kings hands, who sent thither three thousand Men to remain in Garrison. This year 1675 the War con∣tinues still call Europe is ingaged in
this Bloody dispute, between the French and Dutch. The Swedes have been perswaded, for the French sake to enter into the Borders of the Duke of Brandenburgh, and in defence of the Protestant Interest, as they pretend, to help the French, who carries on the Popes. There∣fore they have quartered their Army all this Winter, upon the Sub∣jects of Brandenburgh, who hath been forced to draw his Army from the Confederates to stop the Swedes violences. In May the French King caused Limburgh to be besieged, after the taking of Huy and Dinant. The Confederates were resolved to raise the siege, but the surrender pre∣vented them. Nevertheless the Dutch and Spaniards have behaved them∣selves very stoutly in the defence of this Town. At present the Prince of Orange, with his Army, attends upon the
French King near Ruremond; Tu∣renne is incamped near the Rhine, about Strasburgh, in sight of the German, commanded by Montecu∣culi. All the World expects to hear of a bloody dispute between them. What end this great quarrel will have, God alone knows; however we ought to lament at the miseries of our Neighbors, at the Christian Blood that is shed to satisfie the Am∣bition of a Prince that wants no∣thing on Earth, but Content. We ought to pray God to preserve our England, in Peace and Unity; and our gracious King, the best of all Monarchs, in health and prosperity. Amen.
