S953 R41669 [ocm]31355747 155303
THE Scotch HAY-MAKERS: OR, Crafty JOCKEY's Courtship TO Coy Jenny of Edenborough. To an excellent new Tune, much in Request. I. 'TWas within a Furlong of Edenborough Town, In the rosie time o'th' Year, when the Grass was down, Bonny Jockey, blith and gay, said to Jenny making Hay, Let's sit a little, Dear, and prattle, 'tis a sultry Day: He long had courted the black-brow'd Maid, But Jockey was a Wag, and wou'd ne'er consent to wed; Which made her pish and phoo, and cry it will not do; I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. II. He told her Marriage was grown a meer joak, And that no one wedded now but the Scoundrel Folk. Yet, my Dear, you shou'd prevail, but I know not what I ail, I shall dream of clogs, and silly dogs, with bottles at their tails. But I'll give the Gloves, and a Bongrace to wear, And a pretty filly Foal to ride out and take the air, If thou ne'r will pish and phoo, and cry out it shall not do, I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. III. That you'll give me Trinklits, cry'd she, I believe, But ah! what in return must your poor Jenny give, When my Maiden-treasure's gone, I mun gang to London Town, And roar and rant, and patch and paint, and kiss for half a crown; Each drunken Bully oblige for pay, And earn a hated Living an odious fulsome way: No, no, it ne'r shall do, for a Wife I'll be to you, Or I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. IV. Ne'r was I so courted in all my life before, You will stop young Jenny's Breath, if you kiss me any more; Fie upon you Lad forbear, you'll a silly Maid ensnare By your fooling so, then let me go, or your locks Ise tear, You are uncivil, I must be coy Till wedded, there's no Loon shall my Maiden-head enjoy; Then did she pish and phoo, and cry'd, it ne'r will do, I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. V. Sike a Lad as Jockey, young, Lasses would embrace, Who can sing them pleasant Sonnets, and dances with a grace On the pleasant rural Plain; do not then my Suit disdain, From thy charming eyes, Love, arrows flies, which renew's my pain; Love's fresh encounter he then renew'd; She cry'd out, Fie, O fie, geud faith, you's muckle rude, Then did she pish and phoo, and cry'd, it ne'er will do, I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. VI. If you mean to marry, Ise freely be your Bride, Then at pleasure you may have what is otherwise deny'd, Ne'er a Loon in all the Land, shall have me at his command, Nor my Maiden-head, until I wed, take away your hand, Or else I will cry, and rend the Skie, For I will marry'd be, or else a Maid I'll die; Then did she pish and phoo, and cry'd, it ne'er will do, I cannot, cannot, cannot, wonnot, wonnot buckle too. LONDON: Printed for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible in Pye-corner.
