S1509 t.100*[124] 816.m.17[8] R225220 99885948 186091
A LETTER Directed from the COUNCIL OF SCOTLAND, TO THE KING. May it please Your Sacred Majesty, WE have good Reason to believe that Your Majesties just Commands shall never be obstructed by the Unwilling∣ness, nor retarded by the Negligence of the Subjects of This Your Majesties Ancient Kingdom, being fully convinced, that no∣thing is required of us, save that we may preserve our selves by suitable and easie Means, against those formidable and eminent Dangers, which threaten us now from the same Principles, by which we were formerly Ruined; So that the only thing which is forced upon the worst of Your Ruined; So that the only thing which is forced upon the worst of Your Subjects, is, that they must unavoidably confess, that nothing can lessen their happiness, except their being unsensible of it. And Your Majesty by dispensing for our Protection, all the Revenue which is raised in This Your Majesties Ancient Kingdom, lets us see, that all you crave of us, is, that we would be true to our own Interest, and that You get by us, is, the Care of Governing us to our own Satisfaction. That profound Re∣spect, and sincere Kindness, Sir, which we observe in Your Majesties Subjects here, to Your Royal Brother, the Duke of Albany and York, assure us, that we want nothing but occasion to hazard for the Royal Family, these Lives and Fortunes which You have already made so sweet
and secure us. And as our esteem for His Royal Highness at His last be∣ing here, grew daily with His Stay, so our expectations of Security and Satisfaction return naturally with Him. And therefore we are obliged with all Zeal and Sincerity to return Your Sacred Majesty our most Humble aad Hearty Thanks for securing the Just and Natural Descent of that Royal Family, which is the chief Glory and only Security of This Kingdom, upon which the least Invasion would be so great an Invitati∣on to all Insolence and Arbitrariness in Your Subjects, as could not but procure us a Civil War in every Age; For men of Parts and Inrerests be∣ing discontented or Factious, would, by promoting colourable Titles and Pretences, make the Body of Your People the Price of their Ava∣rice, and the Prey of their Ambition, and rent, not only these King∣doms from one another, but amongst themselves: Nor can we see why every Man may not pretend to be King, when the lawful Succes∣sors are debarred, nor how we can be fixed in any thing, when we lose this great Fundamental. And in the next Place, we do likewise return Your Majesty most Humble and Hearty Thanks, for sending your Roy∣al Brother to be an Example to, as well as a Witness of our Loyalty, and affording us in him the renewed Occasion of letting the World see that no Humour nor Jealousies shall for the future divert that Dutifulness to the Royal Line, which our Predecessors have maintained for so many Ages. Nor doubt we very shortly to let vour Majesty find, what happy Effects His stay here will produce for promoting your Service, and ce∣menting our Differences, in all which His Royal Highness shall be most obsequiously assisted, By, Edinburgh, Nov. 2. 1680. May it please Your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesties most Faithful, most Humble and most Obedient Subjects and Servants, Rothes Cancell. Alexander St. And. Athol. Dowglas. Montrose. Glencairn. Winton. Linlithgow. Perth. Sirathmore. Roxburgh. Balcares. Caithnes. orn. Jo. Edinburgen. Ross. Ja. Dalrimple. Ch. Maitland. Thomas Murray. Geo. Mackenzie Rich. Maitland. Ja Foules. A. Ramsay. Jo. Wauchop. Geo. Gordon. J. Drummond.
