10490 99845544 10449
¶An Epistle of the famous clerke Erasmus of Roterodame, concernynge the veryte of the Sacrament of Christes body and bloude, whiche Epistle is set before the excellent boke, inti∣tuled D. Algeri De veritate cor∣poris et sanguinis dominici in Eucharistia.) which boke was made by the sayd Algerus aboute fyue hondred yeares passed. And nowe of late yeares, hath agayne ben ouer seen and reuysyted, by the sayde famous clerke Erasmus of Roterodame, and de∣dycated by hym, vnto the Reuerende father Balthasar bysshop of Hyldesyn. ¶This present Epistle of Erasmus makynge is to be founde oute, in the great volume of all his Epistles, pagina 1577. Hauynge this lytell wrytynge ouer it. In Algerum.
To the deuoute and good Christian Reader. HEre foloweth good christian reader, an Epystle made by the ryght famous cler¦ke of late memorye. D. Erasmus of Ro¦terodame in the whiche he doeth euydently de∣clare, what mynde he was of in his lyfe tyme. Consernynge the veryte of the body and blou¦de of oure sauyoure christe in the blyssed sacra∣ment of the alter, in whiche Epystle he doeth also with many reuerende wordes set forth the dewe vse of the holy masse. The same Erasmus hath also translated out of the greke tonge in¦to latyn the self maner of sayeng of masse whi∣che the famous father of christes churche saynt Iohn̄ Chrisostome vsyd in his dayes hauyng this lytell missa Iohannis Chrisostomi, Des Erasmo, Roterodamo interprete, The sayde Erasmus speaketh also very reuerently of the masse in his boke intitelled Des Erasmi, Ro∣terodami liber, de sarcienda ecclesie concordia deq{que} sedandis opinionum diffid, and in many other places of his workes besydes as in his Enchiridion, & in his Para∣phrasis super .ii. caput Iohannes.
¶An Epystle of Erasmus wryten to Balthazar Byshop of Hyldesyn. I Know very wel right hyghlye renoumed Bysshop that lytell ciuilite it is at this season to dysturbe you, beyng enbusyed with so great a nombre of affa¦res as you now are, but sence that your well knowne deuocyon towardes God, doth so ryght earnestly fauoure the mat¦ters of the catholyke churche, it shall as I suppose be nothynge dysplesaunt vn∣to you, thoughe I at this tyme do mocy¦on you in this matter, which of all other most hyghly doth appertayne as well vn¦to the concorde, as vnto the dygnite of our sayde mother the catholyke church. For of truth our mother the holy church hath in her none so hygh a treasure nor nothyng of more excellent dignite, than is the promotion where vnto she is cal∣led,
by the wonderfull benifyte of the bo∣dy and bloude of our sauyoure Christe by vertu wherof, she becōmyth to be ma¦de one with christ both in nature and sub¦staunce ye and therto is as it were trans¦formed into god, and surely there is no∣thynge more effectuall, to norishe in her a perfighte and an indyssoluble concord: Than that the same our mother the ca∣tholyke church etynge one self body and drynkynge one selfe bloude, by one spirit is made and compact into one body, by whom she also receyuyng lyfe is knyt vn¦to oure lyuynge heade christe, and yet do we nowe se, that al these great benifites & hygh promocions nothwithstandynge, howe yt throughe the slyghtie craftes of our deceytfull & stronge aduersarie Sa∣than, it is brought to passe, that ye same most beneficiall gyfte the sacrament of the body & bloude of our moste mercifull and moste tenderly louynge sauyour, gy∣uen vnto vs to brynge all persons into
vnytie and concorde, hath bene the mat∣ter wherupon in olde tyme so many dis∣centyons haue rysen, and of late yeares are nowe agayne renewed. Whyle that some there be which do denye that there is any thyng els in the blyssed sacramēt, but onely the outwarde tokens of the bo¦dy & bloude of our sauyoure christ. Some others do kuoweledge that Christe is in the sacramente, but yet vnder the sub∣staunce of bread and wyne. And agayne some there were that sayde howe that through the wordes of consecration, the substauuce of breade and wyne do fyrste peryshe, and so succedeth after the bodye and the bloude of oure sauyoure christe. Some others do holde that our sauiour by the wordes of consecration doeth be∣come breade and wyne, by theyr myndes makynge it but a lyghte matter, that he was once for vs incarnate, and dyd for our sakes become man. There haue also ben some that were called starcoranista,
whiche irreuerent persons deseruyd wel so vyle a name bycause they dyd both im¦magyn and speake so vyly and withoute all reuerence, of so hyghe a Sacrament the countre of Grece also, to disquiet the vnytie of the catholyke church, haue sent forth amongest vs theyr leuanars so cal¦led bycause they dare presume contrarye to holy scripture, to leaue the vse of pure breade vnleuanyd, and do consecrate in breade whiche is leauanyd. After this hath rysen the debate and stryfe for ye re∣ceyuynge of the Sacrament in both the kyndes, but yet as in that matter the hy¦ghe Byshoppes haue varyed amongest them selues. For Galacius dyd orday∣ne that all suche parsons shulde be re∣mouyd from the receyuynge of the sacra¦ment in both the kyndes. whiche wolde nedys receyue it but vnder one, whiche ordynaunce he than made, bycause the vse for that tyme was contrarye. There haue some ben also whiche stryuyng for
the matter, haue styfly mayntained that an euyll and synfull priest, had no power to cōsecrate nor that the body of our sa∣uyoure christ was receyued of any wret∣ched and synfull lyuer. and yet hath it so happenyd that the sondry errours of all these persones haue ben greatly benyfi∣ciall vnto the catholyke churche, for tho∣rough the meanes of these stormy assaul¦tes made agaynst her by these instrumē¦tes of Sathan, she hath bene dryuyn to call to god for helpe, and to beseche hym to sende downe his holy spirit amongest his flocke to instruct them of the trueth, consernynge these hyghe and wonderful mystery and by these meanes haue euer the catholykes ben more & more inlyght nyd, better instructed and the stronglyer in the trewe fayth confyrmed. But yet is the catholyke church to no man more be holden, then vnto Berengarius, nay not to Berengarius, but to the great wys∣dome of our sauyour, Chryst whiche tur∣nyth
the malyce of men into good, for the more parfit establishing of his espouse ye Catholyke churche howe many notable men and famous clerkes hath the per∣lous and shamelesse heresy of Berenga∣rius sette on worke & caused them to set theyr pēnes to ye boke which berēgarius fyrst dyd sow this poyson abrode, yt after ye wordes of cōsecracion were dewly spo∣ken remayned yet styll the substaunce of brede & wyne ī ye sacramēt, But agaynst his heresy, Guymundus wrote an excel∣lent worke whiche nowe of late dayes is newly come to lyght which, Guymūdus beyng a monke of the order of saynt Be¦ner, was afterward called to be the Bys¦shop of Auerence. Nowe is come forth al¦so. The excellent worke of Algerus: whi¦che beynge fyrst a studēt was afterward made a monke of the same order. And of these two notable clerkes, Guymūdus is in his wrytynge more earnest and fer∣uent, & his style is more beautefyed with
with the science of rethorike, but Algerus prosedyth more quietly and tasteth more of deuotion, mete for a relegious per∣son to haue, but eche of them do shewe theyr selues to be very well learned, both in the art of disputacion and also in Phi¦losophie and yet apereth it not in theyr bokes, that there is any affected desyre in them to shewe them selues soo to be, but yet they both were gretly exercysed in the study of the canons of holy scriptu¦re. And in the auncyent fathers of christ{is} churche, as in the workes of Ciprianus Hylarius, Ambrosius, Hieronimus, Au¦gustinus, Basilius, and Chrisostomus, whose wrytynges do yet represente vnto vs that heuenly spiryte which the holye apostles had in theyr tyme, and farther more ye sayd two holy fathers haue wry¦ten theyr workes, with as moche eloquē¦ce, as vnto a deuyne is requesite, and su∣erlye thorowout all theyr workes there is no place which wanteth any quycknes
of wyt, in bestowynge of theyr wordes, nor any fyne pythynes, in cothynge of theyr matters togyther, they do so affec¦tually set forth theyr sentēces, with such substanciall and well grounded reasons. Nor they do not as to many wryters do nowe a dayes whiche do bestowe a gret parte of theyr bokes, with chydynges, & braulynge wordes agaynste other men or with disfamynge checkyng and taun¦tynge wordes, nor moche worse is they do not bestowe somtyme hole pamphe∣lettes with irreuerent and bytter word{is} agaynst those thynges which both they and all other ouhgt to haue in hyghe re¦uerence and dewly to worshyp nor they do not hādell theyr matters with sophy¦stical reasons, as many do now a dayes whiche do care for nothynge more, than to yllude suche as do gyue credence to them, and yet doeth it well appere that these two here aboue named aunciente fathers which ī theyr dayes were so no∣table
clerkes, dyd floryshe byfore Bona¦uentures dayes, or Thomas de aquino, or Dunce, whom they otherwyse do call Scotus, or Albertus mangnus, or Pe∣trus bombardus, whom clerkes do also nowe call the master of the sentences. Ye and of these latter writers, lyke as some of them do moche bost them selues to be profoūdly sene in Aristoteles philosophy, euen so is the maner of theyr endytynge, by meanes of that theyr to moche affec∣tyd style, but harsche, & roughe, and with¦out any comelye settynge forth of theyr matters whiche they do intreate of. As who shulde saye, that in theyr so doynge (to theyr Iudgemēt) they haue thought the nerar therby, to folowe the style of theyr Arystotele, where as it is with thē moche contrary in dede, for though that Arystotele, regardynge chefly the harde∣nes of the matters whiche be entreated of, and therfore dyd not regarde to sette forth his workes with the vsynge of any
affections: or by any other meanes, affec¦tately beautyfie his wrytynges, yet vsed he in all his workes, the hyghest sorte of eloquence that coulde be, whiche thynge these afore named wryters otherwyse called scole men, coulde in no poynte at∣tayne vnto. But as to me warde (I wot not howe) it semyth to be comely vnto a deuyne, that in the settynge forth of the mysteryes of oure fayth, there ought to be vsed a certayne dignitie and magestie in theyr wrytyng, & there ought further∣more no conuenient affections to be wā¦tynge, for by suche maner of enditynge in effect it is brought to passe, that the reader doth not onelye the better vnder∣stande, that whiche by any learned man is after such maner taught hym, but he shall also the better fauour and caste his loue vnto suche thynges: as he shall per∣ceyue them to be wrytten, by a deuoute louer of such diuine mysteries. We haue it of the Gospell. This is my body, whi∣che
is betrayde for you. And of. S. Paule we haue. I haue receyued of oure lorde, that whiche I haue gyuen vnto you. &c. And foloweth after. He that shall eate & drynke vnworthelye, he shall be gyltie of the body and blode of our lorde. This is and ought to be vnto all christianed men a foundaciō immoueable. But certayne of the auncyent fathers of Christes chur¦che haue vpon this hygh misteries som∣tyme wrytten darkely, & sometyme they do some to varye one from a nother, yea and somtyme, they do seme to wryte dy∣uersly of this blyssed and holy sacrament but all suche darkenesse, and all suche se∣mynge to varye one from a nother, or whan that they do to any readers seme to wryte thynges that do dyffer one frō an other, that ought to be ascrybed vn∣to the vnspeakeable profoūditie of this hyghe mysterie: or els to theyr ware and syrcomspecte speakynge or wrytynge of the sayd auncyent fathers, which many
tymes speakynge vnto the multytude, whiche dyd assemble togyther to here them, they beyng of dyuerse sortes, myx¦ed of Iewes and Gentyles and Christi∣ans togyther, for that cause oftentymes dyd they not thynke it conuenient, to gy¦ue that holy of all holyes, vnto dogges. And the varyte whiche semyth to be in theyr wrytynges, ryseth here vpon, that somtyme the formes sacramentall them selues be called of them holye tokens. Somtyme the very receyuyng, is called of them, an holy token. And in conclusyō the very body it self is by them, called an holy token, somtyme of it selfe, and some tyme of some other thynge. And for so moch as vnder these tokens, the body of our sauyour Christ lyeth hydden by mea¦nes of applyenge of those thyng{is} vnto ye body itselfe, which do belonge vnto the vysyble sygnes, the doctours doo vse in theyr speakynge to saye that the body is brokē, or mynished, or crushed, into small
pecys, furthermore for so moch as there is in the sacrament consecrate, the selfe body in substaunce, which dyd hange for vs vpon the crosse, though it be not now the selfe bodye in qualyte, for why it is nowe gloryfyed and spirituall vnto such as do take, but lytell hede, what they do reade, the auncient fathers do seme vnto them contrarye amongest them selues & to holde one agaynst an other, whā they at any tymes be founde in theyr wrytyn∣ges to saye. The selfe same body, and not the same body. Where as in verye dede there is in theyr saynges no contrariete at all, vnto suche as haue the knowlege to dyscerne the true meanynges of theyr wordes, and for a conclusyon, the body of christ is somtyme taken for that natu∣rall bodye whiche he toke of the virgyn Mary, and often tymes by his bodye is ment his mysticall bodye, whiche is the catholyke churche whiche thynges hath also gyuen occasion vnto suche readers
as haue not ben attentyfe, and in these matters of so great importaunce, haue not taken dyligent hede, what they haue red, that the holye doctours haue semed vnto them to be contrarie in theyr say∣enges one to an other, or at the leste that they haue not agreed amongest them sel¦ues. But nowe here makynge an ende, a¦ny farther to aduertyse all readers to be in ye readyng of these auncyent Fathers dewly syrcomspect, let vs now retourne to oure chefest purpose, and for so moche as that we haue for the proffe of our spe¦cyall matter, the euydent testymonie, both of our Sauyoure christ hym selfe, and also of saynt Paule. And further∣more sence it is by these two holye Fa∣thers here abouesayd, Guymundus and Algerus, moste euydently in theyr bokes declared, howe that in veryte, the bodye and bloude of our Sauyoure christ is in the blyssed Sacrament of the alter, and that al the auncient fathers here aboue
sayde, and mo a great nombre bysydes all those fathers, whom clerkes do nowe call scole men whom the catholyke chur¦che not without great and worthy cau∣ses euer haue done and styll do gyue soo hyghe auctorite and credyte vnto, with one assent agrement & concorde, do holde and constantly mayntayne and euer frō age to age haue done, that as I haue sayde in the sacrament of the alter is the verye substaunce of the body and bloude of our Sauyour Christ. And for so moch also as besydes all these aforesayd wyt∣nessys, the constant and full auctorite of all generall Counselles doo agre with them, and specyally for so moch as al the hole nombre and congregacions of such as be faythfull Christians throughe the hole Christendome do concernynge his hyghe mystery consent and agre in one, with the sayde auncyent Fathers, and generall councelles and Scolemen. Let vs nowe also at this tyme, ioyne our sel∣ues
vnto all these, and agre also amon∣gest our selues concernynge this heauen¦ly mystery. And whyle we be here present in this transitorie lyfe let vs so with con¦corde and harty deuotion, thoughe it be (duryng this our lyfe) but vnder a darke shadowe, and as it were vnder a couert maner of spekyng vnto vs, mekely eate, and drynke, of this breade and cup, vntyl the tyme may come that we may farre o¦therwyse to our heauenly comforte, eate and drynke it in the kyngdome of God. That wolde to God, that suche parsons as haue folowed Berengarius in his maner oferrynge, concernyng, the very∣te of the body and bloude of our sauyour Christ to be in the blyssed sacrament of ye alter, which thyng he denyed so to be, wolde in lykwyse folowe hym in repen∣tynge of theyr selues as he dyd, and that they whiche nowe in our dayes be infec∣tyd with the same erroure, wold so vnite themselues vnto the catholyke Churche
agayne, as he dyd, which dyed for his of¦fence full sore repentaunt. Futhermore there haue rysen aboute this blyssed sa∣cramēt innumerable questions. As how is the transsubstantyacyon broughte to passe that is to saye, howe doeth the sub∣staunce of breade gyue place vnto the ve¦rye substaunce of the body of our Sauy∣our Christ? Also howe the accidentes of breade and wyne be preserued and do re¦mayne after theyr former substaūces be gone? And howe is it, that those acciden¦tes do kepe theyr coloure, theyr smell, theyr sauoure, & also power to fyll lyke o∣ther fode, and to make dronken, all whi∣che qualites the breade and wyne had in them selues afore that they were conse∣crat, also at what moment of tyme, doth the body and bloude of christ begyn to be in the Sacrament? Also at what tyme the body and bolude of christ doth sease to be in the Sacramente? Also whether that after the formes be corrupted any
other substaunce do succede? Also howe that one selfe same body maye be at once in places innumerable? Also how the bo¦dy of a perfyte man may be vnder so ly∣tyll a broken peace of breade? And many suche other questions which it behouith with sobernes to be entreated of, amon∣gest suche persons as haue theyr wyttes exercysed, in disputynge and reasonynge vpon suche hyghe matters, But as vnto the laye people it doth suffise, yf they do beleue yt after the wordes of cōsecracion be once by the mynyster spoken ouer the creatures of breade and wyne, that there is incontynent the very body and bloude of our sauyour Christ, which neyther can be deuyded, nor yet receyue any hurte, nor is not mete to receyue any maner in iurye, what so euer chaunces do become of the outward formes. For yf the sacred body of our lorde shulde be throwne into the myer, or into any vyle gonge, or any otherwise (vnto any irreuerent persons
thynkynge) shuld be iniuryd or soyled, in dede the most iniurye yt can be done vn∣to it. Is whan it is receyued in to the mouth, of a wycked and synfull person, whiche is sore soyled and spotted with greuous and odyble synne. Nowe suerly it is therfore syttynge for oure christian religyon, to entreate and order, the out∣warde formes of breade and wyne of the holy sacrament, with all dewe reuerence but as concernynge the very body of our Sauyour it selfe, lyke as god is after his nature is no lesse glorious in a vyle synk than he is in heauen, and can by no ma∣lyce of man, or chaunce by man, or other wyse happenynge receyue any hurte or Iniurye, no more can the glorified body of our Sauyour christ, what Iniurye so euer be done vnto the outwarde tokens. And to be brefe agaynst all the doubtes and scrupules of mans weake knowlege Let vs fyrst call into our mynd{is}, the Im¦mesurable power of God, vnto whom no¦thyng
is impossible. Ye and vnto whom there is nothynge, but it is lyghte to be done, so it be his pleasure, that it shuld so be. And farther more let vs cōsyder, how inestymable the gyftes of any body glo∣ryfied be, but specially, & incomparablye of the body gloryfied, ye and these hygh∣ly super exaltyd body in glory and honor of oure lorde Iesus. There restyth ther∣fore nowe no more, but that the thynge of which the veryte is here so sufficyent∣ly vnto vs perswadyd, may on our parte be worthely worshyppyd, and had in re∣uerence, and that the thynge whiche we do professe to beleue to be so, we may by matter in dede, declare vnfaynedly that suche is oure beleue, as we do make for. For with howe great a purenes of lyuyn¦ge. With howe moch humble reuerence and with howe moch ferefull tymerous∣nes oughte this, thryse ye & foure tymes to, worthy to be worshypped mystery, to be receyued, ordered, and entreted, who
can suppose that they do beleue earnest∣ly, and from the bottome of theyr hartes whiche whan this holye mysterye at the masse tyme is in doing do walke vp and downe in the churche, pratyng and Ian¦gelynge togyther? or that (which now in some places is taken vp for a custome) do stande in the market place without the church dores, there spending theyr tyme aboute tellynge of Idell tales? In olde tyme that place was appoynted for peni∣tentes, or for them that were but newe come to our fayth, and had not yet lear∣ned theyr belefe, and so thought them sel¦ues not worthye once to entre into the churche dores. Some other or euer the mynisters be shewed vnto the people, at the leuaciō tyme, do get them into some tauerne or alehouse, & do in maner leaue the churche empty. What kynde of ma∣ner or condicion call we this? yf yu shuldest stande to here a play made but for laugh¦ter, thou woldest indure to take pacience
and abyde styll to the ende, and that the game shoulde be fully done and finished. And canst thou not endure tyll the endyn¦ge of this heauenly mystery be fully done and fynished, all the masse tyme the An∣gelycall sprites do with most humble re∣rence stande aboute the altare, thereto do theyr worshyp and lowlye reuerence. He also is there present, whom all the he¦uenlye hoostes of blyssed spirites do de∣syre to beholde, and loke vpon, and thou as thoughe theyr were some leude game or playe there in hande, eyther thou ga∣pyst, and gapyst for werynes, or els thou makest a pratyng there, and tellest some lewde or rybalde talles, or els thou get∣test the away strayght to the tauerne. I do se that it is nowe adayes a custome ta¦ken vp amongest many folkes, whiche perauenture ought not to be called wic¦ked, bycause it doeth some to procede of some deuoute affection, though it be but of man, withoute any dewe and conueni¦ent
groūde. For that custome is brought in, contrarye to the olde maner of the church: and in dede not very conuenient so to be, which custome is, that at the sa¦crynge tyme whyle the mynisters of con∣secration be a doyng, the Quyare vsyth to synge some songe, made in the laude of the virgyn Marye, & set forth by wor∣des cōtaynynge some prayer made vnto her. But is it fyt and fyttynge at that tyme in the wonderfull presence of the Sone our Redemer to make sute by any prayer vnto the Mother? Suerly yf we wolde nowe in our tyme herein, kepe the auncyent and laudable custome of the churche vsyd in olde seasons, there was at the Leuacyon tyme no maner voyce herde in all the Church but al the people at once bowynge downe them selues to the groundewarde, with theyr styll de∣uoute myndes dyd gyue thankes vnto god the Father, whiche hath gyuen his sone vnto the death for the saluacyon of
mankynde. And therunto in very deade, doeth the priest a lytell before the leuati∣on, exhorte the people whan he speakyng vnto them sayth. Lyfte vp your hartes. Let vs gyue thankes vnto the lorde oure God. For whyle this vnspeakeable my∣steryes be in doynge, nothynge is more conuenient to be done on the peoples be¦haulfe, than to kepe a deuoute and a re∣uerent scylence. Nor the wonderfull cha¦ryte of our lorde Iesus is by none other meanes more worthyly praysed than by a cōmon scylence at that tyme of all the people, as the moste effectuall kynde of lowde speakynge, that is in man, whan he speaketh to God before whom all har¦tes do lye prostrate and wyde open? So that at ye leuacion tyme, whylest that all maner noyses of orgaynes or other ma∣ner voyces kepyng a styll and reuerende scylence, the people with theyr bodyes be¦ynge inclyned downe wardes and lyftyn¦ge vp theyr hartes, shulde at that tyme,
after that maner speake vnto our lorde and mercyfull god. Yea and that the peo¦ple myght the more worthelye worshyp this holy mystery, accordyng to the hygh worthynes therof, the deuouote and god¦ly conuersation, of the priest{is}, is no smale helpe and Furtheraunce there vnto. In olde tyme, whan the Churche dyd moste floryshe in deuotion and godly conuersa¦tion, they vsyd no more but one masse which onely the Bysshop dyd execute, as for the multytude of priestes whiche be nowe a dayes, fyrst deuotion and shortly after Lucure, hathe moued the worlde there vnto. And now at the last the thyn¦ge is come here vnto that many persons do learne to synge masse, for none other intent, but as the laye people to mayne∣tayne theyr lyuinges, do lerne theyr han¦dy craftes as some do learne to be sho∣makers, some to be dawbers or tempe∣rars of morter, and some others to be Taylers, and vnto suche priestes theyr
masse seruyth them for none other intēt but as to be a meane for them to gette theyr lyuing by. In very dede, it is good reason, that he whiche doeth serue the alter shulde lyue of the alter. But yet is it moche requesite that the executoures of this hyghe mysterye shulde rather be mete to execute theyr worthy to be wor∣shyppyd tome and offyce than to vse it lyke any vyle bartrynge as it were of were for ware or of one marchaundyse for a nother. So that it is not onely re∣quisite for suche mynysters to haue the knowledge of theyr outwarde gestures, and to haue theyr vestementes and voy∣ces to theyr offyce accordyng, but it is al¦so moch more requisite that all the hole trade of theyr lyues & conuersation, shul¦de be mete and answerable vnto the dig¦nite of theyr offyce ye it is suerly a great mater to consyder howe moche sobryete it becōmyth for a priest to haue of what pure chastyte oughte he to be and howe
moch ought he to be garnyshed with all maner clennes of lyuinges what contēpt and dyspysynge also oughte there to be in them of all such voluptuous pleasures as the comyn people do delyte in. And spe¦cyally what great & feruent loue oughte there to be in thē towardes the dyligent and contynuall redyng of holy scripture. And how moche vnsyttyng and vncome¦ly is it for a priest incontinenty after the selebratynge of such a godly and deuyne mysterye, to consume all the resydue of the daye, eyther in gullynge, and dryu∣kynge or intellynge or heryng of vyle ry¦balde tales, or to syt playeng at the dysce or at the cardes, or to go a huntynge all daye to cast away the tyme in Idell wan¦derynge aboute to and fro, and eyther to bestowe no parte of al the day besydes or els very lytell therof, eyther in redyng of any holy auctours or in any medytaci¦on or contemplaciton of heauenly thyn∣ges, let all priestes therfore consyder the
hyghnes of theyr professyon, whan they do stand at the alter. They haue Angels to mynister vnto them, whan they be de¦parted frō thence, some of them do make it but a lyght matter incontinenty after to gyt them into companye of the moste vyle dregges of man bycause I wolde here vse no mo wordes which myght be sharpelyer spoken I praye God that the vnworthy conuersacion of those whiche do take vpon them a mynistraciō which is aboue the dignite of Aungels, do not gyue occasyon vnto herytykes to concey¦ue a wycked opinion of so vnspeakeable mystery, but let all ministers by theyr de¦uoute and godly conuersacion so deme∣ne them selues on theyr party, that oure lorde on his party maye honour them a∣gayne. Bothe here in this worlde before men, and also in another worlde before his father in heuen, but what do I now wrytyng of these thynges? Algerus and Guymundus, shall a great dele more ef¦fectually
exhorte all priestes here vnto, whiche to godly auctours I do knowe∣lege my selfe that I haue dilygently red ouer, to the hyghest frute of my soule yt euer I hytherto receyued by the readyn¦ge of any other, for suerly thoughe I dyd neuer doubt of the trueth of the presence of the body and bloude of our Sauyoure Christ to be in the blyssed sacramente of the alter, yet nowe sence I haue ouer red them (I wot not howe) that by the mea¦nes of ye ouer readyng of them I do fele yt my mynde is not a lytell therby establys∣shed and confermyd and my knowledge is made more stedy and certayne, & my reuerence towardes that blyssed sacra∣ment, is a great dele the more incresyd. And now these my poore labours what soeuer they be I haue thought it good to dedycate them vnto your most reuerēde fatherhod, that they myght vnto others be a testymonye that Erasmus hath in hym selfe dewe remēbraunce of his dew¦tye
and seruice towardes his patrone, by that meanes to gyue you some lytell oc∣casyon on youre partye, to haue remem∣braūce vpon me. And thus our lorde pros¦pere you in all your good and holy purpo¦sys, so that they may redownde vnto his glory, and to the profyte of our deuoute and Christian Religion. Gyuen at Friburge Brisgoie vpon the Ides of Marche the yea∣re from our Sauy∣our Christ incar∣nat. M.D.xxx. ¶Finis. ¶Imprynted by me Robert Wyer. ¶Cum priuilegio, ad imprimendum solum.
