12366 99850879 16114
A notable and marueilous Epistle of the famous Doctour, Mat∣thewe Gribalde, Professor of the Lawe, in the Vniuersitie of Padua: cōcernyng the terrible iudgemente of GOD, vpon hym that for feare of men▪ denieth Christ and the knowne ve∣ritie: with a Preface of Doctor Caluine. Now newely imprinted, with a godly and whole∣some preseruatiue against desperation, at all tymes necessarie for the soule: chiefly to be vsed when the de∣uill dooeth assaulte vs moste fiercely, and death appro∣cheth nighest▪ LVKE. 12. But I saie vnto you my friendes, bee not afraied of theim that kill the bodie, and after warde haue no power to doe any thyng els. ¶ Imprinted at London, by Henry Denham, for William Norton.
❧Ihon Caluin to the christian Reader. HOW frowarde our minde is in iudgyng the workes of God, and how crooked a iudgemente wee haue, it doeth right well appere by this▪ that wher as he sheweth so many exāples one after an other, in punishing the wickednesse of man, yet many dooe sleightly passe ouer, or regarde thesame, yea, some plainly scorne theim, other suppose theim to come by chaunce: and finally, all men sodainly forget thē. This vnthankfulnesse, as it is not of it self to be borne, so bryngeth it also this mischief with it▪ that we receiue not the fruite of the iudgemen∣tes of God▪ that we should doe, whiche is briefly noted of the Prophet Esai, that is to saie, that allEsay. 26. the inhabiters of the yearth, maie learne righte∣ousnesse thereby. By the whiche saiyng, he doeth shewe vs that being strikē with feare, we ought to learne to dreade GOD, and liue an holy life. And bicause the Prophetes would remedy this all, there is no poinct of doctrine, that thei haue more to doe-withall, then to fasten in our remē∣braunce, suche plagues as God sendeth vpon the wicked, and vngodly persones. And yet is there  other other mischiefe worse then this. And that is
stubburnesse, that we bee not wise, hauyng go monition and warning: and therfore of so many aduertisementes, as the Prophets in euery pla beate into our heads: yea, threate and thunder  pon vs, there commeth but small profite, & fe there been that are moued thereby. Bicause God would shake from vs this beastly sluggishnes,  sheweth oftētymes, suche monstrous examples  may cōstrain vs to fele, yea, though we be a sl Suche like example not long ago, hath he ¦clared in Frances Spera: first in Italie, that to say, in the highest & most notable Theatre all Europe, and Christendome: secondly, in th nation, whiche as it dooeth otherwise excell finesse of witte, so is it in this pointe without  sense and felyng. For there in euery place do all wickednesse so licenciously reigne, that  moste parte either thinketh not, that God is  maker of the worlde, or els knoweth not, that shall come to bee our iudge. And what maru i it if Antichrist, with his blast infecte the  lians so nigh vnto hym, whiche hath poured  his dedly poison, euen vpon the vttermost c of the yearth. And therefore we se other nat bewitched with wicked superstitions, but  moste furiously and outragiously, contemp God hymself. In deede there be in the cou some excellēt & wise seruantes of Christ.  doubt not but god hath many shepe there (wing
now scattered abrode, at length shalbe ga∣ered together), But yet in the common life of en (if a man would viewe euery estate & de∣ee) there appereth nothyng but horrible blind sse. Then for as muche as thei despise God so chelously, and with suche arrogancie, let them ue suche scholemasters as thei deserue. Surely rances Spera is worthy to be one of the chief. or whereas the vaine fellowe puffed vp with bicious bragging, would prophanely dispute d teache in the schole of Christ: at length com∣yng abrode, could but a while enioye the place  them, of whose sort he was not. Hereby the alians maie learne, that vse accustomably to lly with God, how earnest vengeaunce he wil ke vpon those that scorne his maiestie. Now, hereas the Romishe Antichrist would by his gate so notably triumph vpon Christ and his ospell, in the persone of this wretched man, he th enioyed suche successe, as is meete for suche ollicie & subtile enterprise. As long as Spe∣ drewe his breath in this worlde, in the middes his moste horrible pain and tormentes, he ne∣ ceased to crie that he was euerlastyngly cō∣pned, bicause he was brought wickedly to  sweare the sonne of God, his onely health and uation: partly through the whorishe intise∣nte, and partly through the tyrannicall threa∣ges of the Legate of Rome. The voices of the
Martires, whiche thei moste cruelly murder, do sounde emongst them: yea, and are heard euen in heauen: but the Pope and his garde, thinke them not worthy their hearyng. Let them delight thē∣selues therefore with the song of this martire of theirs so long, till thei bee brought into the same pageaunt of desperation themself. I speake to the Romishe Pope, with his bande of theeues, and to the Italians by name, not bicause this example pertaineth to theim onely: but bicause this fighte was set so nigh before their eyen, by the maruei∣lous prouidence of God: forasmuche as thei can not be wakened, but by suche tragicall motion. In the meane season, all other nations maye know that thei are warned of the lorde. Let the Frenchemen bende and set their mynde on this, that are, through their folie & lightnesse auaū∣ced aboue the cloudes, and are to muche accusto∣med vnreuerently to scorne religion. Lette the Germanes harken to this, that haue been hereto∣fore to slacke, and dulle in perceiuyng the iudge∣menes of god, and now in their last euilles, sme vtterly to be voide of al reason. Let the English men also, and other learne, with what reerence and carefulnesse thei ought to receie Christe, now shinyng vpon them. This wretched Spera (whether he was entised by tattrie, or constrai∣ned by feare, to forsweare Gods veritie▪ whiche he had confessed) as a notable example, that the
cōfession of godly & wholesome doctrine (which we so stēderly regard) is not a little estemed be∣fore the iudgement seate of god. For assone as he suffered hymself to bee led awaie to this false si∣mulation and saiyng (as the reprobate cease not to commit one mischief vpon an other) he fell in∣to many trappes, and entangled hymself in many snares of desperation, till at length through his dotyng phantasies, striuyng in vaine (as beastes that ar caught in snares) he strāgled himself. for asmuche then as this exāple of Gods iudgement, s bothe worthie to bee knowen of this our age, nd to be remembred of our posteritie, I thought good to set abrode (as faithfully as became me) his historie of hym, compiled by a learned man nd an eloquent: lest partly through negligence, artly through sluggishnesse, & partly through he wickednes of men, it should be vtterly loste. For seing that euery man perceiueth how vn∣iscretely suche treatises wer compiled, as haue een heretofore set forthe, I can not se what thei an profite the reader. The lorde Iesus establishe ur hartes in the right and pure faithe of his go∣pell, and kepe our tonges in the stedfast confes∣on of hym: that now singing with his Aungels, e maie at length with them enioye that ioye of he heauenly kyngdome. From Geneua, the fifte of December.
An Epigram of the terri¦ble example of one Francis Spe∣ra an Italian, of whom this booke is compiled. E xcesse of riches, promotion worldlie D ignities, honour, and yearthly pleasure, W ife, children, kinred, name, affinitie: A ccompt not these thyngs as perfite treasure R iches that faile not, but euer endure. D escende from heauen, and neuer turne to A s these whiche oft bothe soule and bodie G race, truthe, clere conscience, what treas thei been. L et Spera be example to vs all I n these our daies the like hath not been s O f one that had from God, so greate a fall, N ot able once hymself for grace to call. B icause the wretch did set this worldly dros I n place about Christs gospel, truth, & cros Sub his acrosticis latens, authoris nomen.
A greate and marueilous example of the diuine iudgement, hath appeared in these our latter daies. Wee dooe witnesse that,. Ihon. 2. whiche wee haue heard with our eares, and seen with our Eyes. FRAVNCIS SPERA▪ a Lawier and famous aduocate, borne in the Castell of Citadell: a man aboute fiftie ye∣resHe had a te∣die mynde to vnderstande ye scriptures. of age, hauyng a wife and .xi. children, worldly goodes, offices, and promotions aboundauntly: After he had receiued the giftes of the holie ghoste, through the vn∣speakeable grace of GOD, and had fully knowne the Lorde Iesu Christ our ai∣our, by the reuealyng of the whole scrip∣ture, and being illuminate with the light of the holy ghost, did confesse Christ one∣ly, and preached that wee had saluation▪ giuen vs onely through Christ the sonne of God, and that by Christ onely we wer iustified, and ought not to putte affiaunce in any workes or merites of men and
yet not withstandyng, ought to doe good workes, to the ende we might obey God, and liue iustly and godlie. And finally, af∣ter hée had attayned aboundaunt know∣ledge of the trueth, through faith, by the manifest testimonies of the holy Scrip∣ture, tastyng in the meane season in his har, with much quietnesse, pleasure, and comfort, the giftes of the holy Ghoste, a faith▪ hope, charitie, méekenesse, gentle∣nesse, and all maner of quietnesse and tranquillitie of the minde, as he that d possesse▪ Christe, and had the fruition and pleasure of Christe: this wretched mn (alas too too wretched) beyng, through the pricking for ward of his enimies, sommo¦ned to appéere at eny before the Le¦gate of the chiefe Bishop, and there being accused of here, grieuously aunted and threatned: &  constrained through fre, either of corporal death, or conis¦ti of his goodes▪ vtterly abiured and de¦nied the doctrine whiche hée tofore ha preached, hauing commaundement to re¦turne into his countrie, and exan hi professed doctrine, in the place of Cita wher he before had manifestly to  ort, declared and taught the same, and
there to contente the people and Mini∣ers of the Church, with a minifest and lempne recantation▪ This wretched man béeyng dismissed from the Legate, and prepared to his urney to execute the commaundement of late giuen hym, concernyng his abiu∣yng, began diuersly to reason with hym∣elfe, whether he should returne to Ci∣adell, to confirme his recantation: either houlde forsake all his goodes, and goe toThe holie ghost inspi∣ryng. me other place to repent. As he went in his iourney, the spirite of God cōtinually ame into his mynde, and the pricke ofCōscience is a thousande witnesses. onscience prouoking him to repentance, and councellyng hym alwaies not to goe o abiure: but rather to forsake Wife Children, and the whole world: yea, and o suffer present death▪ rather than to ab∣re and recante the truthe whiche he newe. The spirit said, Frauncis, e ware leastThe utter in remem∣braunce of our inwarde thoughtes. hou confirme the Recantation whiche o heretofore haste made, take hede ast thou confirme and eale with the s∣et of thy hart, that Epistle which thou st signed with thy simple hande: thou▪Christian li∣bertie. t frée yet Frauncis, and haste escaped▪
out of the handes of men, forsake not theDoe not be∣come the ser∣uauntes of menne. truth▪ stand and fall no more, repent, and God wil haue mercy vpon thée: the fraile∣nesse of the flesh hath moued thée to this, beware least the wickednesse of the spi∣rite come after. All these thinges and ma∣nieThe war∣nyng of the spirite. other (as Frauncis tolde vs) did the Spirite, and his conscience continually beae in his heade, the whiche spirite be∣yng at lengthe reiected, and his hearte beyng hardened, he decréed with himself, to preferre his wife, children, offices, pro∣motions and temporall goodes, before the truth which he knewe, and to confirme his abiuration which he before had made, that he might inioy his temporal goodes, in worldly quietnes. And vpon this pur∣pose, entring into the towne of Citadell, offered hymselfe to the Maior (who was aduertised of the same, before by letters) to be ready to satisfie the people and con∣gregation, and to abiure the doctrine whiche he had preached before: and thi dn, he departed home, the same night came to hym a Priest bringyng hym a certaine Copie of the recantation whiche be should make the next daie before al the people, and the same night, the wretch
man tooke no sléepe: the next mornyng followyng beyng Sunday when Masse was done: this Frauncis rising vp did ab∣ure the doctrine whiche hee before had mainteined, before the whole multitude of the people▪ whiche he reported to be a∣bout the nūber of two thousand persons, in the presence of the Maior, officers, and other his friendes, and there did recant al whiche he before had taught, confirmyngMerites, af∣fianceof wor∣kes, freewill Purgatorie, intercessions of Sainctes Pardons of Bishops, sa∣tisfactiōs. &c▪ the merites of men, affiaunce of workes, free will, place of purgatorie, intercession of sainctes, pardons, satisfactions: and fi∣nally, all things which he before had con∣futed by the testimonies of scripture, af∣firmyng with open protestation, that he did erre and was deceiued, but now was returned to the waie of light and truthe, and into the bosome of the holy Churche of Rome. This done, he was appointed to paie a ne of thirtie Crownes, of the whiche he paide fiue to the Priest, that brought him the Copie of his recantation, the other xxv. he gaue out of hande for a receptacle or Tabernacle of the Sacrament of the Auter. And so was dismissed of the ma∣gistrate, and was restored to his wife,
children, goodes, and promotions. AnoWhosoeuer denieth me be fore men, I will also bee ashamed of hym. this most wretched man and most vnluc¦kie of al other, perceiued the terrible sen¦tence of the righteous GOD, to lighte and glister against him: and did most eui¦dentlie knowe that the wrath of the Al¦mightie God was fallen vppon his head▪ By and by he lost all the giftes of the ho¦lyDooe not make the ho∣lie ghost sor∣rowfull. Ghost, and Christ was separated from hym: All the benefites of Christ, all com¦fort vanished awaie▪ his heart was filled with hatred, confusion, cursing, and blas¦phemie. And immediatly came in his mind a heape and remembraunce of all the iniquities and faultes, from the dai of his natiuity What should I say mor▪ By and by christ departed from him, and the most swéete peace of Christe. And i their place came death, Sathan, horro feare, confusion and dispaire. And thus this wretched person conti∣nuyng in this most miserable estate, by He recanted thē in Maie. space of sixe Monethes, came at the lēgth (in these latter daies) with his wife chil¦dren and houshold vnto Padua, when daily falling into worse estate and wors and striken continually with greater  fusion, feelyng also the terrible indig
n of God against him, fell at the length to vtter desperation. And so laye doune his bed, without any feuer, léesing all e vse of his body, except his spéeche: nei∣er desiryng, nor eatyng any thyng, nei∣er digestyng that whiche was put into m by force, nor voidyng any thyng, but ely drinking, and troubled with an vn∣iable thirst, as though he would haue onke vp Hister and Nilus But in coun¦aunceHister & Nilus be greate ri∣uers. and visage, well liking, in mind d vnderstandyng, most constant, moste ong of remembraunce, neuer repea∣ng one worde twise, receiuyng all that ne vnto hym, and vtteryng learned, aue, and sober communication, that he as condempned by the rightous iudge∣ent of God, that he was already in hel, continuall torment, that he was voide d destitute of all hope and fauour of GOD, that he ought not▪ to looke for the ercie of God, for that hee had sinned a∣inst the holy ghost, and that his fault s vnpardonable, that the merites ofHe led th knowē truth for the peace of menne. riste did auaile hym nothyng, that he  no maner faith or hope left, wishyng e in the place of Iudas or Caine, that looked for nothyng els daiely, but the
horrible sentence of the iust God, and t the mercie of God, did farre surmount  the sinnes of the world: but yet could  auaile him any thing, for that he was  probate from the beginnyng: neytHe knewe hymself to be foreknowne. written at any tyme, in the booke of ly that Christe neither suffered nor pra for hym: but for the elect onely, that t iudgement of God was declared, and  iustice fulfilled in him onely. Finally, that within shorte space,  horrible ende should come: that he miThe princi∣pall ende of this matter. giue an example to all the elect, of his  iuration. When hee had vttered all the thinges, and many mo, moste euiden and in perfite mind, in the presence of that were assembled, about thirtie p¦sons in number, with the reuerend L Bishop Vergerius: the same Verge began to comfort hym by all meanes. And when I amongst other, was a to speake: the reuerend Vergerius s vnto hym▪ Deare Maister Frauncis,  s that Doctor Gribald that in this ¦uersitie of Padua▪ professeth the la godly man and faithfull, who coYou bee wel∣come: and I ill founde. to see you. Then he in his mother t said. Sia luil ben venuto, et io il mal
ato. Then did I directe my communica∣tion towardes hym, and saide. Maister Frauncis, this is the illusion and moc∣kyng of the Deuill, that euidently doth trouble your minde. Wherefore with all your hart turne vnto the blessed GOD, who is readie to haue mercie vppon you. Doe you not knowe that the earth is full of the mercy of God? and that, if all the nnes of the world were in one man, yet ould thei not bee compared to the smal∣lest sparke of the mercy of God, who said. As oft as the sinner shall mourne, I will remember his iniquities no more. Consi∣er Peter that denied Christ thrise, and hat with an othe, with whom he had li∣ed so long familiarlie, of whome he had eceiued so many benefites, so many to∣ens of loue: and yet notwithstandyng, e moste mercifull God pardoned hym. Consider the theefe that neuer had done y good dede, but had bestowed his whole e in mischiefe, how he, through one m∣n of his harte, and power of faithe, as receiued into fauour. Knowe ye not at the hande of the Lorde is not yet   whose propertie is to pardon and haue mercie▪ Call vpon hym a little
with your hart, and aske for his mercie▪ And I promise you assuredly, that he is most readie to haue mercie vpon you, and to receiue you into fauour, through Ie∣sus Christ his blessed Sonne▪ Haue a su confidence Maister Frauncis, and rise and doubt ye not at all, God hath already mercie vpon you, and hath pardoned yo through Christe, all your offence. They saied he, I doe not beleue. And I answe¦red againe. Maister Frauncis, I haue knowne many by face and acquaintance that haue bene both moste grieuous sin¦ners, and possessed of the Deuill, and in farre worse estate than you are, brougt into extreame desperation, and yet the rowe the grace of God, by the exhortati of their faithfull frendes, haue turned in to hope and fauour, and died in peace a quietnesse, what should let you then, b that ye may direct the smallest sparke  your hart to so oboundant mercie of God with an affection of your heart to call vp¦pon hym in hope and faith. When I h saide these, and many other thinges: t reuerend Lord Vergerius tooke my  by the ende, and saide. Ah swéete Mai Frauncis, and my moste dere Ma
Frauncis, vnderstand the wordes of this octor, who is both faithful and the Mes∣nger of God, whom God hath sent vnto u, to ascertaine you of his mercy. Why e ye not beleue this? Will ye not that od should haue mercie vppon you? He ill out of doubt haue mercie vpon you, d pardon all your offence, howe can he nie you any thing, that hath graunted u Christ his blessed sonne? Be of good éere, and lifte vp your hearte a little in pe and trust. Will ye that wee saie the rdes praier togither from the hearte? ee aunswered to this: I beleue all that  saie: yea, the Deuils beleue and are a∣yde, but all this auaileth me nothyng. y sinne is to death. Certes I woulde ndly attaine the mercie and fauour of d: but hee will not. All the power of th is taken from me. For the Lord had spect vnto Peter: but he hath no respect to mée. He was elect, and I am repro∣te,He doeth al∣ledge his re∣probation or refusyng. I will praie vnto GOD with my gue, and will quickely say whatsoeuer  will haue me to saie. But my heart is  of hatred, cursing and blasphemie. I eue and feele that God is against mee. d as he spake thus, a flie came fliyng
before his face: Lo (said he) nowe Belza∣bub calleth mée to a feaste, ye shall per∣ceiue mine ende to approache, to the ex∣ample of many, that the iudgement and iustice of GOD, maie openly be declared vpon me. And when he had thus saide, he turned his face awaie from vs, turnyng himselfe on the other side, then saide the reuerende father Vergerius. Ah deare master Francis, turne your face vnto vs. I would wee praied to God togither, and saie. Our father. &c. Then he turnyng him, began to say the lordes praier in his mother tongue, with suche grauitie and deuotion, that all wee did wonder: and this vttered, hee added these woordes. I haue saide it with my mouth, but my hearte is cleane from it. God hath taken all his grace from mee. My heart is vtterly hardened: Ye labour in vaine. And when we had spoken with hym all these wordes, and many other, we had hym farewell. And so departed all thence with the Lord Vergerius, to pray vnto God for hym, entendyng to returne on the morow, if the blessed God woulde vouchesafe to shew hym his mercie. The next daye we came to the wret∣chedThe seconde daies worke.
man, saluting him as the maner is, to whom the reuerende lorde Vergerius sayde. Right welbeloued Maister Fran∣cis, is it any better with you, by the grace of GOD? haue ye receiued no comforte in your hart? haue you conceyued any good hope? to whome he aunswered no∣thing at all: but rather cōtinually worse, and worse. Then began we to demaunde of him many questions, and especiallye what time he fell first into that cōfusion and desperation, and when that vnquen∣cheable worme did firste begin to burne his conscience, then recited he vnto vs the whole order and processe of his first and seconde abiuration: as we haue de∣clared in the beginning. Which abiura∣tions made, by and by he perceiued him∣selfe to be smitten wyth the mightie hād of God, not with any affliction or infir∣mitie of the body (which he right gladly would haue acknowledged for the cha∣sticement and correction of sinne, and would not vtterlye haue cast away hope and trust:) But the most wretched felow from that houre, and that sodainly, par∣ceyued himself to be stricken in heart, spirite and conscience, for God from that
houre, sente into his harte a gnawyng worme, an vnquencheable fire, that so∣dainely he might be filled with errour, confusion and desperation, which worme and fire, neuer since forsooke hym: in so much that hée confessed himselfe to be in farre worse estate, than if his soule were deuided from his body, and he with Caine and other dampned persons, desiring ra∣ther to be in the place of any deade and damned soule, than so to lyue in his body, and that death shoulde be much more welcome to him. Then wéeping he began to declare vn∣to vs horrible visions, how that he per∣ceyued since that time cōtinually Deuils to come to his chamber, yea, to his bed, making a noyse and businesse, putting him in feare and sheauering, sticking pinnes in the pillow vnder his heade, and sayde, that he cōceyued not these thinges by a false or corrupt imagination, but euen as truely as he sawe vs all aliue, and speaking with him. Then sayde the reuerend Lorde Ver¦gerius. Ah deare Maister Frauncis, yo spirite vtterly corrupt, representeth  to you these erronious illusions and f
imaginations. But returne a while vnto the spirite of truth, and direct your hart with hope and affiaunce vnto the blessed God, mercifull, and full of goodnesse, and without doubt he will be good and merci∣full vnto you, he wyll cast from you all horror and confusion, haue sure cōfidence swéete M. Francis: we all haue good hope of you, through the infinite mercye of God: and (if it please you) let vs saye to∣gither from the heart the Lords prayer. Then sayde he in Latine the whole prayer, with plētifull teares, so deuoutly and grauely, and wyth such inwarde af∣fection, as we thought, that all we that stoode by, did wéepe wyth hym, And when I behelde both the teares, the repentance and contrition of the man: I sayde Mai∣ster Frauncis, the blessed God be pray∣sed. Now are not these the tokens of vt∣ter refusyng or castyng awaye. You ourne, ye cal for the fauor of God with arest desire. Doe not vtterly dispaire of his pardon, and say not with a despe∣rate minde, that God is against you, and that ye beleue that yée were reprobate and refused from the beginning. For no a can know, as long as he is in this
mortall lyfe, whether he bée worthie the hatred or loue of God, through the righ∣teousnesse of workes. And when we ear∣nestly exhorted him, that in no case he shoulde fall from all hope and trust, and that euerie man that is borne (althoughEccle. ix. he had committed all the sinnes of the whole worlde) ought yet to haue some hope of the fauour and mercy of God, whose goodnesse & mercie is muche more plenteous, than mannes vnderstandyng can perceyue: and that if any of vs were fallen into suche miserie, yet shoulde he not dispaire of the mercie of the high and good God. To the which hée aunswered: I knowe all this, and I beleue that the infinite mercy of God, doth farre sur∣mount all the sinnes of the worlde, and that euerye man that beléeueth and hath fayth, eastlye obtayneth pardon of all the sinnes of the worlde. But this hope, thys faith, is the gifte of God. And this oneFaithe is the gift of God. thing wante I, that I can neyther hope nor beleue of the fauour and mercie of God towardes mée. And I would God that he would graunt me this one thing, that I coulde conceyue neuer so little hope and beliefe
of forgiuenesse and pardon. But this is euen as possible as to take the whole water of the sea, in one spoone, and to drinke it vppe at a draughte. If Salomon had bene in suche case as I am, and had some what knowne those thinges, which I prooue nowe by mani∣fest experience, hee woulde neuer haue vttered that Sentence. But I doe be∣léeue (and this I knowe most assuredly) that there was neuer any man that had more manifest experience in his lyfe, of the hatred, wrath and indignation of the righteous god against hym, then I haue. I would I were in the place of any damned person. You that are in blessed estate suppose thys an easie thing to be done, that a sinner reknowledging his fault, may lift vp himselfe to hope and faith towards God▪ and therefore ye ex∣hort me, for as much as ye sée me repen∣taunt and sorowfull, that I would con∣ceiue some hope and trust to rise againe▪ The helthfull hath no néede of a Phis∣tion: and he that is whole, can soone giue councell to the sicke. But herein am I tormented: this is my hel, this is my con∣fusion and desperation, that I knowe all
grace to be taken from me, that I féele my heart hardened, that I can not be∣leue nor hope any thing at all of the at∣tonement and mercie of God. FeweFewe chosen there be whome iust Iupiter hath loued. We comforted the miserable estate of this desperate man, by such meanes as we coulde: & promising that wée woulde praye to God for him, bad him farewell, and departed thence with the reuerend Lorde Vergerius. And thus doth the wretched man liueThe state of the desperate manne. in his body. A certaine strong man there is, that when he intended to giue him meate, doth binde his armes and shoul∣ders with handes, bicause he shoulde not resist wyth his handes. And so opening his mouth by force, putteth thinne broth into his mouth with a spoone or other instrumēt. And yet doth he let it as much as he can, stopping it with his tongue. But it can not choose, but that some of the broth must néedes fall downe by his gaping into the iawes and palace of his mouth, and so thence into his stomake. And thus with much a doe, he is ∣shed twise a daie, but auoyding nothyng. But euer he desireth to die, and to go to
hell with all spéede: lookyng euerie houre for the terrible sentence of God: as he most euidentlye and openly doth declare by his communication. The thirde daie came wee vnto hym,The iij. da∣yes woorke. with the reuerend Father Vergerius, and did salute hym as the maner is: and began againe to comfort him: Notwith∣standyng, he saide nothyng, but shuttyng his eyen like one a sléepe, with pain gaue aunswere. Then came there a certaine a∣ged man, from the place of Citadell, as∣kyng hym whether hee knewe hym his friend: whom the wretched man behol∣dyng with his eyen, did scarce acknow∣ledge. Then saide he: Maister Frauncis, I am Anthony Fontanina Priest, who was with you, the same day that ye came to Venis: about seuen or eight monethes past. Then saide Frauncis with pittifull grone, and sighings. Alas that cursed daie. Alas that cursed daie. I would I had ne∣uer gone thyther, or else had dyed at that present. Then began we to demaunde him ma∣ny questions, specially of his olde fayth, and whether hee had at any tyme, any
stedfast or perfite beliefe: and how he fell so miserably from that faith▪ for as muche as it was vnpossible that he that had once perfitely and firmely beleued should fall from the whole. For it is written: thatRoma. xj. the giftes of the holy ghoste, are without repentaunce. Then aunswered hee. Cer∣tes, I did beléeue that Christ was the sa∣crifice that appeased Gods wrath towardChrist onely iustifieth. vs, and that it was he only, by whom we did attaine saluation and righteousnesse, neither doubted I at any tyme in this. But I did not reknowledge the benifitesHe had not true charitie. of Christe, and (to saye the truth) I neuer loued hym againe with perfite hart. But rather tooke the fayth of the Gospell, to the liberty of the fleshe, and so did abuse that faithe, to vnlawfull licence to sinne:Often error. and did neglecte the whole studie, desire, and meane of Godlinesse and religion. By and by, turning him vnto certaine yong men that stode by, he said. My Son∣nes hearken to my words. I say not this for that I woulde plucke any thing from the holy Gospell (whiche I knowe to bee moste true: (but that ye should not set is muche by youre faithe: but that also  should doe good workes, beléeue me, that
haue proued it. And then oftētimes with teares and sighynges, he did commende aboue all the scripture, the worthie Epi∣stle of Peter, chiefe in deede of all the A∣postles:ij. Peter. which exhorteth all faithfull chri∣stians to Godlinesse, chastitie, holinesse, and cleane life: and to prepare an vn∣spotted Temple to God. But I (saied he) where as I bothe did presume that I had attained perfite faith and also boldely preached to other: and had in a readinesse all the places of Scri∣pture, yet liued wickedly and vngodly. And behold the manifest iudgement of God, who hath sodainely taken me in his anger and furie, not for any amendment, but to perfite damnation, Then rose there vp one that was there present, a man excellently learned, and long exercised in holy Scripture, and said Maister Frauncis, we doe not altogether allowe this your exhortation, wheras ye councell vs not so muche to yelde to the faith of ye Gospell: but that we should also embrace and commende the affiaunce of works. For we know that there are two kindes of righteousnesse, outward and in∣warde. Outwarde righteousnesse, whiche
is of workes, and which the worlde doth commend, the same iustifieth not before God, neither auaileth to saluation. For Socrates, Cato, and Arestides, right well perfourmed that righteousnesse: wherby they gate muche prayse and glorie in this worlde. But the inwarde righteousnesseThe rightu∣ousnes which is in Christ, iustifieth. is of God, whiche doth regenerate vs by grace into hope, faith and charitie: and by this faith fréely graunted vnto vs, doe we liue and are iustified, and God imputeth not oure sinnes vnto vs, without the whiche, neuerthelesse, we can not be, as the scripture saith: if we saie we haue no sinne, we beguile our selues. But blessed is hee to whom the Lorde imputeth not sinne, and whose sinnes are couered. Wherefore, there is no cause that ye should sende vs to outwarde workes, as to the Anker and refuge of saluation and righteousnesse. Than saide I: Sir, May∣ster Francis words are not to be taken so precisely or exactly, as though he would compare the outwarde righteousnesse of workes, to the faithe of the Gospell, and inward righteousnesse: But he exhorted the yong men after this sort: bicause the most parte doe wickedly turne the liber∣tie
of the Gospel into the vnlawful liber∣tie of the fleshe, and without aduisement buse the gift of faith, and whereas they all themselues faithfull, yet denie faithe  their déedes. Therefore Peter in his Epistle (whiche this man so muche com∣ended, as ye haue hearde) and Iames also teache almost nothing else, than that we shoulde declare our faithe in our out∣warde woorkes, as Sainct Peter saieth. Wherefore brethren, doe as much as ye n to make your election certain by your ood works. And Iames also saith. Shew e thy faith, and I will shewe thée mine y my workes. Therefore this man bla∣eth himselfe greatly for this cause, that hereas he professed that hee had the in∣ard righteousnesse, alwaies neglected e outward. Then began wee earnestly to disputeThe begin∣nyng of a di∣sputation. of the matter, and of the estate of this retched man, and diligently to searche, heter his trespasse were mortall, or no. for the whiche, accordyng to the saiyng  Sainct Ihon, wee ought not to praie. nd that well learned man beganne to spute learnedly and excellently of the nue against the holy Ghost, and of resi∣styng
after the truthe▪ is knowne, and made a plaine distinction (as we thought) of all the kindes of sinne, againste the ho∣ly ghost. And the wretched man harkened to all these thinges with attentiue eare: to whom the Lord Vergerius said. Wel▪ beloued Maister Francis, when ye heare these thynges disputed so godlye and de∣uoutly, and the places of Scripture, in whiche ye haue excelled) to bee brought forth, take you in the meane season n comfort and recreation with vs? And spe∣cially, seyng that you for your capacitie▪ declare the Scriptures so eloquently, w are not without all hope of your saluatiō and suppose that the spirite of God is no cleane taken from you, to whom he aun∣swered. What comfort can happen to cursed and damned man? yea, whatsoe¦uer I speake, heare, see, tast, or féele: all  turned vnto my confusion and cursse, to whom the Lord Vergerius said. Ah dea Maister Francis, why should ye not hop of the goodnesse and mercie of God? Do not the Lorde leade doune into Hell, and bring backe againe? Consider Dauid the Prophet, who beyng brought downe  Hell, and to death: yet praied vnto G
with gronyng and teares, to graunt hym the renuyng of harte and spirite. And hee made aunswere: Dauid was alwaies e∣lect and in Gods fauour, and although he fell grieuously, yet the spirite of God ne∣uer departed from hym: Yea, hee praied vnto God, that he woulde not caste hym from his face: and that he would not take the holy ghoste from hym. But I am in farre vnlike estate, neither elected, nor in Gods fauour, but haue béene alwaies reprobate and cursed: neither can I pray nto hym, not to take awaie the holy Spirite from mee, for hee is quite taken awaie alreadie, and neuer shall be resto∣ed. I know that god doth raise vp again, hose that are bodily dead, and restoreth to fe, those that are brought vnto hell: that , to their Sepulture: as Christ raised vp azarus, and brought hym againe from ll. But I that am condemned to eter∣ll death, haue no hope left of bringyng gaine: but so that I could conceiue neuer  little hope or trust of the mercy of god: would moste gladly those to liue ten ousand yeres and more, in all the pai∣s and torments of hel, so that at length might hope for some ende. But I dooe▪
moste firmely beleue, that I shall thus long remaine in life, and in al cursing and desperation: that the iudgement of God may be fulfilled in mee: that I maie be an example to all the worlde, of Gods ven∣geaunce and iuste indignation againste a reprobate man: would God I were dead▪ and in the place of any dampned person. Then said I, Maister Frauncis, here me a little, I cannot vtterly dispaire of your saluation. For I dare take it in good part▪ that the blessed GOD hath so grieuously tormented you in this present life, and hath not reserued your punishment to a∣nother worlde: so that I haue some hope▪ that God will haue mercie vpon you. And he made aunswere: Nay, I knowe moste assuredly my refusing and reprobation▪ and that he hath not corrected my synne with corporoll punishment: but rebuking mée in his anger and furie, hath condem¦ned my soule, harte and spirite, with per∣petuall hardnesse and confusion. Wou God he had sodainly vexed my body, and had left my spirite frée. What shall I say more? We talk with him, till it was night of manye ¦ces of Scripture, and of the marueyl
iudgemēts of God. Amōgst other things, I demaunded of him what he thought ofThe place of soules. the sleeping of soules. And he aunswered. Although a certaine Doctour of Germa∣ny supposeth that this is not manifestly ynough declared by the scriptures: yet I beleue that the soule of the elect doth raight way ascend into the place of e∣erlasting blisse, and doth not sleepe with the buried body. Then the reuerēd Lorde ergerius, taking his tale by the ende, f this (sayde he) ought we in no wise to oubt. There be for this many places of ripture: as, this day thou shalt be with e in Paradice: and it is also manifestly prooued by the story of Lazarus, and the h man, and Paule desired to bee dead, at he might be in heauen with Christ. t the length, beholdyng the vncurable ague (as me thought) of this desperate lowe, I was so bolde to aske him thys estion. Maister Frauncis, I praye you answere me: for as much as through er desperation, ye saye, that in this e ye are worse, than if ye were with  dāpned folke in hell: and for as much I sée you cōtinually to wish for death, t ye might go to hell, as though now▪
bothe your body and soule were in more painefull torment, as yée doe opēly wyt¦nesse. I demaūd of you, if ye had a sworde in your hande: would ye kyll your selfe (as all desperate persones for the moste part doe) that haue sticked themselues with weapon, or strangeled themselues by hanging. Then saide he, giue me a sworde, and ye shalt see what I will doe. Nay (sayde I) I doe but desire you to shewe vs your will: I can not tell (saide he) neyther can I saye what my will t should be. And when he had thus saide▪ the reuerende Lorde Vergerius obtay∣ned of him againe with much a doe;  saye the Lordes prayer. But he sayde  no more with such affection of hart, as he was woont to doe. Moreouer▪ he did pro¦test that his heart was quite from God and that he called hym not father with his heart, but rather curssed and blasphe¦med him: and therfore he sayde▪ there was no cause why wee should labour any more in vaine, to comfort and bring him home againe. For it was euen as possi¦ble to bring him to any hope or trust  the mercie of God, towardes him, as  was possible to fill the whole worlde
with one grain of Mill. Then all we ho∣noringMille, is a small seede. the wonderfull iudgemēt of God, hade him farewell and departed. And for as much as his kinsfolke had prouided a Chariot, & were purposed the next daye to conuey him from Padua, to the place of Citadell: we gaue them warning in no wise to forsake him, but continuallye shoulde get him the companye of godlye men: that the blessed God (if it were pos∣sible) by the continuall prayer and com∣fortyng of good men, might vouchsafe to graunt him his mercie. The next day after, when the wret∣chedThe .iiij. da∣yes woorke. man was readie to take his iorney, and hauyng his apparell on, was brought from his bed, he behelde all the chamber with a fierce and cruell countenaunce, & horrible eyen, and by chaunce espied a Woodknife liyng vppon the table, which by and by, he snatched to sticke hymselfe. But his two sonnes that were alwaies by him, tooke him sodainely by the hand, and plucked the knife from him: wherby we maye plainly knowe what we maye vndoubtedly thinke of that demaunde whiche we asked him the day before, of kylling him: to the which he would make
none aunswere, yding his intent. And this did the reuerend Lorde Vergerius signifie vnto mée, as an enterprise wor∣thy to be noted, being aduertised of the same by his forenamed kinsfolkes. Thus was this miserable man con∣ueyed to his house at Citadell. But howe he doth, and what ende hee hath, I shall by all meanes go about to vnderstande:That maye ye see in the Preface. and being aduertised of the truth, I shall by Gods fauour, declare you the whole▪ Fare yee well. From Padua, the xxvij. of Nouember. 1548. These things haue we séene, and sen∣sibly knowne, and haue thought good to write them vnto you, to the praise and glorie of the high God, whose kingdome we earnestly desire to be openly knowne to the whole worlde. ¶ Here followeth a godly Prayer against desperation.
A godly prayer against desperation. OLyuing God, and most mer∣cifull father, which alone of thy almighty power proui∣dence and wisedome diddest create heauen & earth with all things therein, in most comely forme▪ and de order, and that of verye loue that thou dearest, chiefly towardes man∣kinde▪ whome thou diddest not onely much safe to make after thine wne si∣militude and likenesse: but also diddest ke m Lorde and gouernour ouer  thy other good creatures: placing him in the Paradice of all felicitie▪ forbidding him nothing▪ but onely the eating of one uite among many, that this one com∣maundemēt shoulde be a meane for him▪ to knowe his superiour: and to practise his obediēce towardes his Creator. But our father Adam, nothing regarding thy fatherly loue, nor inestimable benefites▪ not waiyng the Royall state and felicitie that he was in, did most vnthankfully nothing staiyng hymselfe by thy fore ad∣monition)
trāsgresse and wilfully break thy commaundement, thereby deiectin himselfe cleane out of thy godly fauou vtterly losing all his former beatitude  felicitie, making himself of the frée son of God, bondslaue to the deuill: of immo¦tall, & euer to haue lyued in all feliciti mortall and subiect to death and all ¦serie. And alas, not onely casting away hymselfe by his vnfaithfull disobedienc but (for that he hauing the sentence  death and dampnation layde vpon hy begatte vs, as the whole parent of ma kinde) he, in his offense, most iustly c¦demned me, & all his posteritie: Here so haynously displeased thy Maiestie,  so iustly procured thy wrath and i¦gnation: that all our deedes all our me¦tes, no not all the intercessions and  rites of all the creatures that euer liu in this worlde, coulde not once moue t righteous iustice, to pardon him, nor  offence committed in him: But as t godly prouidence did frō euermore for sée that miserable fal of manne, so did t mercy from euerlasting, determine  redéeme man againe: for thou so loue the worlde, that (at the time appointe
thou didst sende downe thy onely begot∣en sonne incarnate, to suffer death for mākinde, and by his death once for euer, o make the frée sacrifice and omnisuffi∣ient satisfaction to thy iustice, for the nnes of the whole world fréely to make ust in thy sight, all that vnfainedly be∣éeue therein. Therefore, for as much as t hath pleased thee, oh father, so to open y minde, and darke senses, that I doe ertainely knowe, and vndoubtedly be∣éeue, all these things, by that infallible estimonie of thy sacred and holy Scri∣ture, not onely that thou of thy mercie oost fréelye forgiue me the offence of mine originall sinne, for Christes sake: ut also my manifolde and dayly sinnes, ōmitted actually▪ against thy maiestie:  most humblye beséech thée here, being rostrate, and lowlye submitting me be∣ore the throne of thy mercie, alwayes to graunt me thy peace (whiche passeth al nderstanding that when, or how soeuer he worlde doe rage against me. The so∣icitie or care of lyuing, losse of goodes, or riendes, or any thing visible, or inuist∣le, doe molest & trouble me, that I may uer haue thy peace, rest and quietnesse,
in my conscience, and to put my wh trust and affiaunce in thée: and so to pr¦serue mee from the subtill perswasio and cruell assaults of Sathan that what¦soeuer my calamities, my losses, or min aduersities bee, or how great, hainous  manifolde soeuer my sinnes be: that  neuer fall into any kinde of desperation, other of body or soule: But that I maye alwayes remember and knowe thy bot∣tomlesse mercie to surmount and passe the number and grauitie of all mine of∣fences. That I maye alwayes trust in thy mercie, that thou wilte other pre∣serue me frō sinne, or of thy mere mercy fréely forgiue mee all my sinnes for thy sonne Iesu Christes sake. And that tho wilt neuer take from me thy spirite, but euer graunt me grace, that in all my ne∣cessities and troubles, other of bodye or soule, I maye truely repent my sinnes, call vpon thée for helpe and aide, and that I maye stedfastly beleue, that thou (lyke a mercifull father, for thy sonnes sake) wilt fauourably heare me, mercifully forgiue me, and mightily defend me a∣gainst all my enimies, and in all my troubles, that I neuer commit nor con∣sent
to the destruction of my bodye or oule: but euer to lyue here in thy feare and dreade, vntill it shall please thée (of thy mercie) to call me to raigne with thée in glorie euerla∣sting. Amen. Here followeth the Godlye and wholsome preseruatiue against desperation, &c. I. PETER V. Be sober and watch, for your aduersarie the Deuill as a roaring Lion: walketh about, seeking whom he may de∣uoure, whom resist stedfast in the faith.
The Preface. THis preseruatiue (g¦tle reader) is prepar for thy profite: Th thou readyng it at l sure, maiest chose o suche cōfortable se¦tences, as maie bot staie thyne owne conscience in the ty of temptation: and also quiet others, w the Deuill shall bee busie with them: ij. Cor. ij. we bee not ignoraunt of the thoughtes Sathan, how he cōtinually furnisheth hy self, to bende his ordinaunce against m And nowe with the consideration of t greatnesse, and multitude of synne. NoEphe. vj. with the terrour of death and dampna on, doe labour to beate the buckler j. Thess. v. Faithe out of our handes, to strike the he met of hope from our heade, and to wr from vs the swearde of the spirite, whiEphe. vj. is Gods worde. But here, christian reader, is thy swo and buckler deliuered vnto thee, her thy helmet put vpon thy heade, here th shalte finde suche armoure and weap whereby thou shalt be able to withsta the force of our common enemie the D
: and also (by the counsaill) to rescue ers that thei perish not. Yea, here thou lte finde choise of moste comfortable ntences, whereby mannes conscience e bee staied from dampnable despe∣ion▪ Watche therefore, stande stedfaste inj. Cor. xvj. the, plaie the manne, and bee of good mforte. Resiste the Deuill, and he willIacob. iiij.  from thee. Not for feare of thine owne wer, strength, or holinesse: but for feare Christe: in whom by faithe thou art in∣ffed. For it is Christe, through whomj. Cor. xv. od hath giuen vs victorie against synne, ath, hell, and the deuill. Neither is thereActes. iiij. any other name vnder heauen giuen vnto manne, wherein we maie be saued, but the name of Iesus Christe our Lorde. To whom with the Fa∣ther, and the holie Ghost, be all honor and glorie. Amen▪
A preseruatiue against desperation. FOr as muche as the diseas of the bodye and corpor death, doth so trouble ma minde, that we commo tremble & quake at the o mention of them: Howe much ought  to feare the sicknes of the soule and dea of the same, then which ther can no gr¦ter nor more fearefull calamitie chau vnto man. And seyng that euerie man doth a (so much as in hym lieth) the paine, ¦ries, diseases, and death of the bodie: h muche more ought wee to decline and  chewe the causes of these euils, which  sinnes and offences, and feare the yre  God, which we so (by our enormities)  prouoke. If wee be neuer so little sicke our body, by and by we send for the P¦sition, we spare no cost, we seeke for me¦cines and remedie, though they be ne so chargeable, and all to patche and cl vp this earthen vessel of our body, whi doe we neuer so muche, can not last l And why vse we not like diligence in ¦siryng and seekyng remedies agains
diseases of the soule, which like as they be re grieuous, euen so they bryng with m (without comparison) infinitely re daunger. For what can it profite a nne though hee haue all the riches in  world, though he liue a thousand yere  that in such health and pleasure, that s not once touched with sicknesse or e: his soule in the meane time being oued with synne, beyng captine to than, hauing god displeased with him,  damnation readie for hym after this  For truely this life must once haue nde, neither know we whan, where,  what maner or how soone. Therefore saithe Christ watch, for yeMatth. 25▪ er knowe the daie nor houre when onne of man will come. And least we short tyme of our abode (omittynge ges moste waightie and profitable) d followe trifles and things of small : hee hath vouchsafe to prescribe vs der, and as it were a briefe, certaine re wae: to come vnto true felicity, g. eke first for the kindome of God andMatth. 6. ghteousnesse therof: and all thinges e added vnto you▪ Care for liuyng,
care for riches, care for worldly dignitie, worldly fauour, worldly estimation, and such like trāsitorie things, which in déed doeth little profite, but many times by∣cause both of filthie vices and also of grie∣uous calamities (doth busie, doth vexe, doth trouble, doth euen defatigat vs both day and night) but in séeking for and pro∣curing of Godly and heauenly thinges▪ we be most negligent, most slacke, moste dull, most forgetfull. And I praye yo what can be a greater blindenesse, or  more daungerous madnesse? whilest w be lustie, whilest we be in helth, while we be in prosperitie, we scarcelye think vpon anye life to come, we remember not once that we shall die. But when we be in perill and daunger by sickenesse,  death beginneth to knock at our dore, Euē at that same houre when we should play the men and fight against our eni∣my, beyng sufficiently armed and wea∣poned afore, then begin we first to thinke vpon our armor, to thinke vpō our wea∣pon, to thinke vpon mending of our lyfe. These thinges declare vs to be smally exercised Souldiours, to bée men of pre∣posterous iudgement, and verie weake∣lings
in faith. God be mercifull vnto vs. Amen. But yet though a man be neuer so olde, though the daye be neuer so farre past, so he amende whiles he is here, ere it be night, his repentance cōmeth not out of ceasō. Neuerthelesse it wer to be wished, that no man should defer his repētaunce to his last and most daungerous conflicte. For euen thei shall haue muche a dooe to stand and to defend them selues from the assaultes, the guiles, and inuasions of the enemie, which in the time of their health prepared & armed them selues, what thā shal come of thē whiche not fearyng God, neither mindyng once repentaunce, had ledde a dissolute, filthie and naughtie life, howe shall thei fight? how shall thei be a∣ble to withstande the force of Sathan? Seing therefore the multitude of peo∣ple is great, and the ministers of the Gos∣pell verie fewe, neyther able to be eue∣rie where to doe their office to euery mā: I hauing a will to helpe all men: haue ga∣thered togither and written out of Scri∣pture, a certaine briefe forme, howe to admonishe, instruct, and comfort such a e sicke, that they either reading these
thinges, or hearyng them red by others: may conceiue certain hope and perfite consolation, least in this most daunge∣rous conflict they faint, giue ouer like towards, and so be ouercomed & perishe: For this is certaine, whensoeuer a man is taken with extreme sickenesse and is in daunger of death, he is assaulted wyth dyuers many, and grieuous temptations▪ First, it is a grieuous and behement tē∣taption, when he séeth the moste terrible Image of death afore his eies, when he séeth he must leaue this lighte, leaue this lyfe, leaue friendes, leaue landes, goodes▪ kinsfolkes, father, mother, wyfe, chil∣dren, all thinges wherin he had here ey∣ther pleasure or comfort. Then suche sin∣nes as he against the wyll and pleasure of God hath committed shall shewe and present themselues, and shall appeare more in number, and more grieuous thā euer they séemed afore, and so shall won∣derously vexe and tormente the consci∣ence. Then death, iudgement, ell, damp∣nation as it were in a plumpe, shall as∣sault and layd siege with diuers daunge∣rous ingines against the old man of ours▪ In these Agonies, except a man be ar∣med
with a sure and constaunt faith: it is to be feared, least he be wearied, tired, & at last ouercommed. For these tempta∣tions which chaunce vnto men liyng in extremes: appéere most huge, fearefull, and daungerous, and that for bycause out faith is verie slender, and wauering, ney∣ther yet able to see, perceiue, or appre∣hende, the incomprehensible and inesti∣mable riches of the childrē of God, which be remission of sinnes, through Christ; resurrection of the fleshe, communion of sainctes, euerlasting life, and all these gi∣uen vnto vs in Christ, and for Christ. In these articles of our fayth we must daily exercise our selues. These we must diligently reuolue, and earnestly expēde in our mindes. For though all the arti∣cles of oure fayth are diligently to be re∣membred, and without all wauering be∣leeued: yet in the Agonie and poynt of death, these foure (that is) the commu∣nion of sainctes, remission of synne, by the bloud of Christ, the resurrection of the fleshe, and euerlasting life: are chiefly to be minded, expended, and inculcated. For lyke as death is the paine and ∣pendeRom. 6. of synne: euen so for synne God
doth commonly punishe vs with diuer diseases and plagues, as it is to be seene in diuers places of Scripture. Iohn. 5▪ Psal. 88. Deut. 28. 2. Reg. 24. Neuerthelesse afflictions be many ty∣mes laide vpon vs, that our faith may be tryed: For than is it easie to be perceiued howe much we loue God, what faith w haue in him, how we trust him, whe we be pressed and grieued with aduersi¦tie. In thys case therefore we must  wayle and acknowledge our synnes, fo the whiche, wée haue iustly incurred Gods displeasure, & deserued most grie¦uous paine, we must turne to God wit true repentaunce in all oure hearte a mynde, without all fayning and coun¦terfeyting, we must haue recourse  the Gospell, where we shall finde  bountifull consolation. First, absolutio or remission of our synnes, which Chris hath instituted in the Church. Iohn.  Receyue (sayth Christe) the holy Gho whose synnes ye forgiue, they are for¦uen. This inestimable treasure is day opened and offered vnto vs. When ¦mission of synnes is thus desired and ¦tayned: vndoubtedly then the paine
ynne whiche is the disease or affliction hall soone ceasse and leaue vs, or else ac∣ording to the most beneficiall will of our eauenly father: shall turne to the pro∣te and soule helth of him that is disea∣ed or afflicted. For this may we be sure f, that the paine & affliction in the body  this worlde (séeme it neuer so grie∣ous a burthen or heauie yoke to the eshe) as commonly nothing else but a therly rodde, wherewyth God doeth aw vs his children from synne, and callPsal. 88. s home to him. Truely our heauenly ther doth loue vs most feruently, he eareth vs good minde, & doth all thingesHeb. 12. r our amendemente and profite, for home God loueth, him he chastiseth, & rrecteth vs temporally here: that wee1. Cor. 11. oulde not be punished in hell euerla∣ngly. Though he séemeth angrye: hée eth singulerly. Neyther is his yre the e of a Tyraunt or tormentor desiring r perdition, but of a father seeking our endemente and safetie. First there∣e we must crie God mercie, desire par∣n and forgiuenesse of our synnes (but  Christ, but with a hart truely peni∣t) that we may be at one with God,
and haue him mercifull vnto vs. This done we may then desire God to deliuer vs from the imminent and present affli∣ction and disease. For so teacheth Eccle∣siast. Sonne in thy infirmitie neglect notEccle. 3. thy selfe, but praye to the Lorde: and he shall deliuer thee. Also in the Psalme, remember not O Lorde God our oldePsal. 70. iniquities, but let thy mercie speedily preuent vs: for we be verie miserable, helpe vs God our Sauiour. Lorde God of power turne vs? shewe thy face and we shall be saued. Here we be taught first to desire remission of synne, that we may be at one with God: and after that to haue hys wrath, and the tokens of the same taken away. But whensoeuer we desire to be deliuered or to be eased of the crosse that presseth vs, we must alwaye annexe this addition. Thy wyll (O hea∣uenlyMatth. 5. Father) bee fulfilled. Neyther knowe wee so well what is profitable vnto vs. Neither can we so well prouide for our selues as our most louing heauenly father. Whiche is both of infinite power, and also of incompre¦hensible wisedome, whiche neuer tur¦neth his eyes from vs, whiche careth cō¦tinually
for vs, whiche knowethe the number of our yeres, whiche doeth quic∣ken, nourishe, feede, keepe, defende, pro∣uide for all his creatures muche better than they can wishe or desire. But to drawe to the more perticuler tempta∣tions, and to shewe what thinges doe mooste fiercely and daungerously at the tyme of death assaulte vs. And how wee shall withstande them. ¶ There be three thynges▪ whiche at the houre of death, doeth wonderously vere, trouble, and feare our myndes (that is to saie, synne, death, hell, or damnation. Synne. WHerein wee haue vngodlie mispente our life, whereby we haue greeuously offen∣ded GOD, and our neigh∣bour: this commyng to our remembraunce, when wee lye vpon our death bed, doeth driue vs to a wonderous feare, pensiuenesse, and anxietie, As S.Rom. 2. Paule saieth: Wrathe, indignation too trouble, and anguishe against euery soule of man that doeth euill.
¶A medicine against synne, vexyng and troublyng our conscience LET vs call earnestly to re∣membraūce, that the sonne of GOD came donne from heauen, became man, tooke vpon his backe the synnes of the worlde, died for theim vppon the Crosse, there makyng satisfaction for vs, and paiyng our debtes. This moste pre∣cious bloud of Christe was shed also for vs, and of his death we be also partakers, so we rightly beleue in Christe. Neither neede wee to doubte, but Christe died asRom. 6. well for vs, as for Peter and Paule: For wee bee baptised also (as Saincte Paule saieth) in the death of Christ. This ought to comforte vs: This ought to erecte, and ae our myndes. For seyng we bee bap∣tized in the death of Christe, Christes death bryngeth also vnto vs healthe and saluation. By Christes death we bee also dead to sinne, by Christes death we haue also certain and sure remission of our sin∣nes, by Christes death we bee raised also to a newe and euerlastyng life. For bap∣tisme is a couenaunte betwixte God and vs. And a signe of his grace and
toward vs, wherein wee bee reconciled, and made at one with God again, so that wee maie now haue a ioyfull, and quiete conscience, for so muche as our synnes bée forgiuen vs, through the resurrection of Iesus Christ, yea Christ also in the insti∣tution of the moste blessed Sacrament of his last supper, speaking also to vs saiyng that his bloud is shed for the remission of synne. Now although we haue not liued alwaie innocently, neither leade suche a life as wee ought to haue dooen: yet wee maie not dispaire, but without delaie re∣sort vnto God, by true repentaunce, callBeleuyng the Gospell. Rom. 10. faithfully vpon his name, and we shall be aued. Yea, lette euery one of vs with a meeke harte burst out into these, or like wordes and saie: O moste mercifull God Father of all mercie, father of our Lorde Iesu Christe, bee mercifull vnto mee a wretched synner, make speede to deliuer me, for the moste bitter (but moste preci∣ous) death, and passion of Iesu Christ, thy onely begotten soonne, our redemer, and onely Sauioure: Amen. Enter not (O lorde) into iudgement with thy seruaunt, handle me not, accordyng to my deser∣yng, neither doe vnto me after my ini∣quities:
but accordyng to thy infinite  botomelesse goodnesse and mercie, t mee vnto thee. I a miserable and wre¦ched creature, am in thy hande, I am thy debte and daunger, thou maiest d with me what it please thee. O m mercifull father forsake me not, nor  me of. I am thine all that I am, there  no man comforte, no man helpe, no  deliuer me, but thou alone. Thou art  true comfort, the moste present help, t surest Bulwarke in all necessitie. The God art my refuge, my strength, my  in all trouble. Thou art my Lorde, in t handes resteth all my chaunce and aff¦res. Shewe thy louyng, and merci face vpon thy seruaunte, saue me in t mercie, O Lorde: but in any waies in  extreme sickenesse and affliction, let  beware wee looke not to earnestly, ¦ther too longe vpon our synnes. But ¦ther lette vs haue the Image of Chri moste healthfull, and precious death ¦fore our eyes. Let vs fixe in our mynd and bee full perswaded, that Christe now burdened with our synnes, that  hath nowe taken theim vppon his o shoulders, and so hath satisfied for t
d washed them awaie, that he will ne∣r charge vs with theim, but freely for∣e vs them, as we professe in our Crede, ē we saie, Credimus remissionem pec∣orum, wee beleeue the remission of nes. And that thou maiest be assured thereof g∣ell reader, with a full perswasion of faithe, I haue noted out of Gods holie woorde, some places, shewyng .i. Howe Christe our true Messias was promised from the begin∣nyng of the worlde, and so from tyme too tyme .ij. The assuraunce that he is come. j. To what ende Christes commyng is. GOD saied vnto Abam, theGen. 2. Christ our Messias promised. Gen. 12. Seede of the woman shall treade doune the Serpen∣tes heade. God saied vnto Abraham thy seede all the nations of the yearth all bee blessed, bicause thou hast heard y voice. Moises saied vnto the children of Is∣ell,Deuter. 18. Actes 3. a Prophet shall the lorde your God ise vp vnto you, euen of your own bre∣en, like vnto me, hym shall you heare  all thynges, whatsoeuer he shall sa t you. God saied vnto Dauid, I will sette vp. Kings. ▪ y ede after thee, whiche shall procede out
quities: but accordyng to thy infinite  botomelesse goodnesse and mercie, ta mee vnto thee. I a miserable and wre¦ched creature, am in thy hande, I am thy debte and daunger, thou maiest do with me what it please thee. O mos mercifull father forsake me not, nor  me of. I am thine all that I am, there t no man comforte, no man helpe, no ma deliuer me, but thou alone. Thou art th true comfort, the moste present help, th surest Bulwarke in all necessitie. Th God art my refuge, my strength, my hel in all trouble. Thou art my Lorde, in th handes resteth all my chaunce and aff¦res. Shewe thy louyng, and mercif face vpon thy seruaunte, saue me in th mercie, O Lorde: but in any waies in o extreme sickenesse and affliction, let  beware wee looke not to earnestly, n¦ther too longe vpon our synnes. But ra¦ther lette vs haue the Image of Christ moste healthfull, and precious death b¦fore our eyes. Let vs fixe in our mynd and bee full perswaded, that Christe now burdened with our synnes, that  ath nowe taken theim vppon his ow shoulders, and so hath satisfied for the
d washed them awaie, that he will ne∣r charge vs with theim, but freely for∣e vs them, as we professe in our Crede, hē we saie, Credimus remissionem pec∣torum, wee beleeue the remission of nes. And that thou maiest be assured thereof gē∣ell reader, with a full perswasion of faithe, I haue noted out of Gods holie woorde, some places, shewyng .i. Howe Christe our true Messias was promised from the begin∣nyng of the worlde, and so from tyme too tyme .ij. The assuraunce that he is come. iij. To what ende Christes commyng is. GOD saied vnto Abam, theGen. 2. Christ our Messias promised. Gen. 12. Seede of the woman shall treade doune the Serpen∣tes heade. God saied vnto Abraham thy seede all the nations of the yearth all bee blessed, bicause thou hast heard y voice. Moises saied vnto the children of Is∣ell,Duter. 18. Actes 3. a Prophet shall the lorde your God ise vp vnto you, euen of your own bre∣ren, like vnto me, hym shall you heare  all thynges, whatsoeuer he shall sat nto you. God saied vnto Dauid, I will sette vp Kings▪ ▪ y seede after thee, whiche shall procede
out of thy bodie, and I will stablishe th seate of his kyngdome for euer, and  will bee his father, and he shall bee m sonne, and my mercie will I neuer tak from hym. Dauid saieth in the spirit of God, thPsal. 2. art my soonne this daie begat I thee. Againe thy seate O God, indureth fo¦euer.Psal. 2. Beholde, a virgine shall conceiue anEsay. 7. beare a soonne, and thou his mother, sh call his name Emanuell, that is to sa God with vs. Vnto vs a childe is borne, vnto vsEsay. 9. soonne is giuen, vpon his shoulder sh the kyngdome lye, he shall be called  his owne name, wonderfull, the giuer  counsaile, the mightie GOD, the euerla¦styng father, the prince of peace. There shall a Rodde spryng out of thEsay. 11. kinred of Iesse, & a blossome shall spryn out of his Roote, and the Spirite of th Lorde shall rest vpon hym. Beholde my seruaunte vpon whomEsay. 42. leane, my electe, in whom my soule  pacified. Beholde saieth the Lorde, the syIeremy. 23. shall come, that I will raise vp a righ
s braunche vnto the house of thy ser∣unte Dauid, whiche kyng shall beare le, and he shall prospere in wisedome. The Aungell of the Lorde saied vntoMatth. 1. Fyue wyt∣nesses amōg many that the true Mes¦sias is come. Luke. 1. seph, feare not to take vnto thee Ma∣ thy wife, for that whiche is conceiued her, commeth of the holie Ghoste, she ll bryng forthe a sonne, and thou shall l his name Iesus, for he shall saue his ople from their synnes. The Prophete Zacharie saieth, bles∣ bee the Lorde God of Israell▪ for he th visited and redemed his people, and th raised a mightie saluation for vs▪ in e house of his seruaunte Dauid, as he ke by the mouthe of his holie Pr∣etes, whiche hath been since the world ne, that wée should bee saued from  enemies, and from the handes of all t ate vs. Lorde, now lettest thou thy seruaunt art in peace, accordyng to thy worde,  myne eyes haue seen thy Saluation, iche thou hast prepared before the face ll thy people, to bee a light to lighten  Gentiles, and to bee the glorie of thy ple Israell. Sain Ihon Baptist saieth. BeholdeIhon. 1▪
the Lambe of God, whiche taketh awaie the synnes of the worlde. 5 Our heauenly father saieth, This isMatth. 9. 17. my deare soonne in whom I doe delight, heare hym. Who saieth, the whole neede not theTo what end Christes comyng is. Phisition but thei that are sicke, for I come not to call the righteous, but the synners to repentaunce. The sonne of manne came not to beeMatth. 20. ministered vnto, but to minister, and to giue his lie for many. He that beleueth and is baptized shallMark. 16. bee saued, but he that beleueth not, shall bee daed. God so loued the worlde, that he gaue his onely begotten soonne, that whosoe∣uer beleueth in hym should not perishe, but haue euerlastyng life. He that beleueth on hym shall not beeMarke. 3. condemned, but he that beleeueth not, i condemned alreadie, because he beleued not in th name of the onely begotte soonne of God. He that heareth my woordes, and b¦leuethIhon. 5. on hym that sente me, hath euer¦lastyng life, and shall not come into  nation, but is escaped from death to life.
Christe saieth, this is the woorke ofIhon. 6. GOD, that he beleue on hym whom he hath sent. Verily, verily, I saie vnto you, he thatIhon. 6. eleueth in me hath euerlastyng life. I am the resurrection and life, he thatIhon. 11. eleueth on me, ye though he were dead, et shall he liue, and whosoeuer liueth nd beleueth in me shall neuer die. I am come a light into the world, who∣oeuerIhon. 12. beleeueth in me, shall not bide in arkenesse▪ I am the wai, the truthe, and the life,Ihon. 14.  man cōmeth to the father, but by me. This is the life eternall, that theiIhon. 17. ight knowe thee the onely verie God▪ nd whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. Sainct Peter saith, Christ is the stoneActes. 4▪ hiche was caste awaie of you builders, hiche is become chief of the corner, nei∣her is there Saluation in any other, for mong men vnder heauen, there is giuen one other name, wherein we muste bée ued. To Christ bare all the Prophetes wit∣esse,Actes 1. that through his name, whosoeuer leeueth in hym, shall receiue remission f synnes▪
Sainct Paule saieth, through Christ Actes. xiij. preached vnto vs the forgiuenesse of sy¦nes, and that by hym all that beleeue, a iustified from all thynges, from which wee could not bee iustified by the Law of Moises. Sainct Paule to the Romanes saiethRom. 1. the iuste shall liue by faithe. The righteousnesse of God, comm by the faithe of Iesus Christ, vnto al  vpon all that beleue. There is no difference, for all haue ¦ned,Rom. 3. and are destitute of the glorie of g but are iustified freely by his grace, th¦rowe the redemption that is in Chris Iesus, whom God hath sette for the as seate of mercie, through faith in his bl that he might be coumpted iuste, and th iustifier of hym which beleueth in Iesu To hym that woorketh not, but bel¦ueth on hym that iustifieth the vngodl his faithe is coumpted for righteousnes By faithe is the inheritaunce giu that it might come of fauour, and the pr¦mise might be sure to all the seede. Christe was deliuered to death for Rom 4. synnes, and rose againe for our iustif¦tion.
Because we are iustified by faithe, weRoma. v. are at peace with god the father, through our lorde Iesus Christ, by whō we haue awaie in through Faithe, to that grace wherein wee stande, and reioyce in hope of the glorie of God. God setteth out his loue that he hath to vs, seyng that while we were yet syn∣ners, Christe died for vs, muche more now, seyng we are iustified in his bloud, shall wée bee saued from wrathe through hym: for if when wée were enemies, wee were reconciled to GOD by the death of his soonne, muche more seeyng wee are reconciled, wée shall bee preserued by his life. Not onely so, but we also ioye in GodRoma. v. by the meanes of our lorde Iesus Christ, by whom wée haue now receiued the at∣tonement. Eternal life is the gift of God, throughRoma. vj. Iesus Christ our Lorde. There is no dānation to them whicheRoma. viij. are in Christe Iesu, whiche walke not after the fleshe, but after the spirite. We knowe that all thynges woorke for the best, vnto them that loue God, and them whiche be appointed before them,
he also calleth, and whiche he calleth them he iustifieth, and whiche he iusti∣fieth, them also he glorifieth. What shall we say thē to these things, if God be on our side, who can be against vs, whiche spared not his owne sonne, but gaue him for vs all, how shall he not with him giue vs all thinges also. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, it is God that iustifieth, who then shall condemne, it is Christe whiche is dead, ye rather whiche is risen againe, whiche is also on the right hande of God, and maketh intercession for vs. If thou shalt knowledge with thy mouth that Iesus is the Lorde, and shalt beléeue in thy harte, that God raysed him vp from death, thou shalt be safe, for the beliefe of the harte iustifieth, & to know∣ledge with thy mouth maketh a mā safe. Christ is the ende of the lawe, to iusti∣fieRoma. x. all that beleue. None of vs liue vnto himselfe, if we liue we liue vnto the Lorde: and if we die, we dye vnto the Lorde, whether we lyue therfore or die, we are the Lordes, for Christ therfore died and rose againe, and reuiued, that he might be Lorde both
of quicke, and dead. Sainct Paule sayth: Christe Iesu ofCorrin. i. God is made vnto vs wisedome, righ∣teousnesse, sanctification and redemptiō. We are washed, we are sanctified, weCorin. vj. are iustified, by the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ, & by the spirite of our God. Christ died for our sinnes, agréeing toCorin. xv. the Scriptures, he was buried and rose againe the thirde daye, according to the scriptures. As by Adam al die, euen so by ChristCorin. xv. shal all be made aliue. Death is swallowed vp in victorie, death where is thy sting, hell where is thy victorie, the sting of death is synne, and the strength of synne is the lawe: hut thankes be vnto God, whiche hath giuen vs victorie through oure Lorde Iesus Christe. Therefore my deare brethren be sted∣fastCorin. xv. and vnmoueable, alwayes riche in the workes of the Lorde, for as muche as ye knowe, as your labor is not in vaine in the Lorde. By faith ye stande.Corin. j. Corin. iiij. According as it is written in the 116. Psalme. I beleue & therefore haue I spo∣ken:
we also beleue, and therefore speake, for wee knowe that he whiche raysed vp the Lorde Iesus, shall raise vs vp also by the meanes of Iesus, and shall sette vs with you. God hath made Christ to be synne forCorin. v. vs, whiche knewe no synne, that we by his meanes shoulde be that righteous∣nesse, whiche before God is allowed. A man is not iustified by the déedes ofGala. j. the lawe, but by the faithe of Iesus Christe, and therfore haue we beleued on Iesus Christ, that we might be iusti∣fied by the faythe of Christe, and not by the déedes of the lawe, because that by the déedes of the lawe, no fleshe shall be iustified. For the lyfe whiche I nowe lyue inGala. ij. the fleshe▪ I liue by the faith of the sonne of God, whiche loued me, and gaue him∣selfe for me, I dispise not the grace of GOD, for if righteousnesse come by the law, then dyed Christ in vaine. Abraham beleued to God, and it wasGala. iij. counted to him for righteousnes. The scripture sawe before hande, thatGala. iij. God would iustifie the Heathen through faith, and therefore shewed before hand
glad tidings vnto Abraham, in thée shall all nations be blessed, so then they which be of faith are blessed with faithfull A∣braham. Vnderstand therefore that the whiche are of faith, the same are the chil∣dren of Abraham. Christ hath delyuered vs from the curse af the law, and was made accurssed for vs. That we might receyue the promise of the spirite by fayth. The scripture concludeth all thinges vnder synne, that the promise by the faith of Iesus Christe, shoulde be giuen to them that beléeue. We are all the sonnes of God by the faith whiche is in Christe Iesus. We be all one in Christe, Iewe, Gen∣tle, bonde, and frée man and woman. If ye be Christes, than are ye Abra∣hamsGala. v. séede, and heires by promise. Ye are gone quite frō Christ, as manyGala. v. as are iustified by the Lawe, and are fal∣len from grace, we looke for and hope in the spirite, to be iustified through faithe. God forbidde that I shoulde reioyce inGala. vj. anything, but in the crosse, death and passion of our Lorde Iesus Christ.
For in Christe Iesu neither Circum∣cisionCala. vi. auaileth any thyng at all, nor vn∣circūcision, but a new creature in Christ, and of the houshold of God. By Christ we haue redemption tho∣rowEphesi. j. his bloude, euen the forgiuenesse of oure synnes, according to the riches of his grace. By grace are ye made safe thoroweEphe. ij. faith, and that not of your selues, for it is the gifte of God, and commeth not of workes, least any man shoulde boaste himselfe. We are made nie vnto God by theEphesi. ij. bloud of Christe, for he is our peace, and hath broken downe the wall that was a stop betwene vs, and by hym we haue an open waye in one spirite vnto the fa∣ther: nowe therefore we are no more strangers, but citezens with the saintes. By Christe we haue boldenesse and entrance, with the confidence whiche we haue by faith in him. Christe is gone vp on high▪ and hathEphesi. iiij. ledde captiuitie captiue, and ath giuen giftes vnto men. Christe is to me lyfe, and death is toPhilip. j. mée aduantage.
In Christe we haue redemption tho∣roweColos. j. his bloude, that is to saye, the for∣giuenesse of synnes. In Christe dwelleth all fulnesse, andColos. j. thorowe the bloude of his Crosse, are all thinges reconciled to God the father, & set at peace both in heauen and earth. We whiche were deade in synne, hathColos, ij. Christ forgiuen vs all our trespasses: and hath put out the hande writing that was against vs, contained in the lawe writtē: and that hath he taken out of the waye, and hath fastned it to his crosse, and hath spoiled rule and power, and hath made a shewe of thē openly, and hath triumphed ouer them openly in his owne persone.Timo. j. This is a true saying, by all meanes worthye to be receyued, that Christe Ie∣sus came into the worlde to saue syn∣ners. There is one God, and one MediatorTimo. ij. betwéene God and man, whiche is, the man Iesus Christ, whiche gaue himselfe a raunsome for all men. The power of God hath saued vs, andTimo. ij. calleth vs with and holy calling, not ac∣cording to our deedes, but according to hys owne purpose & grace, whiche grace
was giuen thorowe Christe Iesus be∣fore the worlde was, whiche hath put away death, and hath brought lyfe and immortalitie vnto lyght, thorowe the Gospell. God hath not saued vs for the deedesTitus. iij. of righteousnesse, whiche we wrought, but of his mercie hath he saued vs. Christe in his owne person hath pur∣gedHebre. j. our synnes. Christ hath put downe thorow death,Hebre. ij. him that had Lordiship ouer death, that is to say, the Deuill, and that he might delyuer them, whiche for feare of death were all their life tyme in daunger and boundage. Christe is an euerlastyng Priesthoode:Hebre. vij. wherefore he is able also euer to saue them that come vnto God by him, for as muche as he euer lyueth to make inter∣cession for vs. We are sanctified by the offering ofHebre. x. the body of Christ once for all. With one offering hath God madeHebre. x. perfite for euer them that shall be san∣ctified. We are not redemed with corrupti∣blei. Peter. j. syluer and gould, but with the pre∣cious
bloud of Christe as of a Lambe vn∣efiled and without spote. Christe his owne selfe bare oure syn∣nesPeter. j. in his bodye on the Tree, by whose stripes ye were healed. Christe hath once suffered for synnes,Peter. iij. he iust for the vniust to bring vs vnto God. If we say we haue no synne, we de∣eyueIhon. j. our selues, and the truth is not in s, if we acknowledge our synnes, he is aithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our syn∣es, and to clense vs from all vnrigh∣eousnesse. If any man synne we haue an aduo∣ateIhon. ij. with the▪ Father Iesus Christe the ighteous, and he it is that obtayneth race for oure synnes. Christe appeared to take away oureIhon. iij. nnes. For this purpose appeared the sonneIhon. iij.  God, to lose the workes of the Deuill.Ihon. iij. This is Gods commaundement that e beleeue in the name of his sonne Ie∣ Christ, and loue one another. In this appeareth the loue of God toIhon. iij.  warde, because that God sent his one▪ begotten soonne into this worlde▪ that
we might liue thorow him. God hath loued vs, and sent his sonnIhon. iiij. to make agreement for vs. Hereby perceyue we his loue that Ihon. iiij. gaue his life for vs. Here is the loue perfite in vs, that wIhon. iiij. should haue trust in the daie of iudgeme there is no feare in loue, but perfect lo casteth out feare. He that beleueth not God, hath ma hym a lyer, because he beleeueth not  recorde that God gaue of his soonne, a this is the recorde, how that GOD h giuen vs eternall life, and this life is his soonne, he that hath the soonne ha life, and he that hath not the soonn God, hath not life, These thynges doe I write vnto yIhon. v▪ that beleue on the name of the soonne  GOD, that ye maie knowe, how that haue eternall life, and that ye maie b∣leue in the name of the soonne of God. Iesus Christ is verie GOD, and et¦nallhon. v. life. Christe hath loued vs, and washedApoca. j. from our synnes in his owne bloud,  made vs Kynges and Priestes vnto  his father.
Christe is Lorde of Lordes, and kyngApoca: xvi▪  Kynges, and thei that are on his side, e called, and faithfull chosen. He that ouercommeth, shal in all thin∣s,Apoca. xxj. and I will bee his God, and he shall e my soonne. He that testifieth these thinges, saieth▪Apoca. xxij The ende. it, I come quickly, euen so come lorde esu. 1 The Paschall Lambe of the Iewes,Exod. xij. Ihon. j. Ephe. v. Peter. ij. the figure of the true Paschall Lambe sus Christ, whiche is the pure and vn∣filed Lambe of GOD, whiche offered mself a sweete smellyng Sacrifice to OD for vs, whiche neuer committed ne, and in his mouthe no guile was unde. 2 Christ was figured by Manna, whichExod. xvj. od gaue from heauen vnto the Israeli∣, to eate in the deserte. 3 The rocke gushyng out, the comfor∣bleExod. xvij. waters signifieth Christ. The brasen Serpent in the old lawe,Deut. xxj. as a figure also of Christ. 4 Whosoeuer shall drinke of the wa∣Ihon. ii. that I shall giue hym, shall neuer irste▪ 1 Christe is that welbeloued soonne ofMath. iij. x.
God, for whose sake the heauenly father was well pleased. 2 Christe is that kyng, whiche forgaMath. xviii. the seruaunte the tenne thousande T¦lentes, whiche he ought. 3 Christe is that moste louyng Sam¦ritane,Luke. . whiche healed the wounded m that was halfe dead. 4 Christe is that tender ShepheLuke xv. whiche fetched home vnto the shee folde, euen vpon his shoulders the l sheepe. 5 Christe is that most gentle fath whiche with so great ioye, and with  bracing armes receiued home againe  lost sonne. Come vnto me all ye that labour Math. xi. An exhorta∣tion. are laden, and I shall refresh you. Lo,  calleth al, he refuseth, he excludeth n we must include also our selues with his wordes. All we must resort to him, and he  receiue and refresh vs. God setteth forthe his loue towaRoma. v. For Christ died for vs, when we  yet synners: muche more now the we being iustified by his bloude, sh safe from wrath by hym.
Christe Iesus is become vnto vs wi∣dome,i. Cor. j. righteousnesse, holinesse, and re∣mption. Here let vs cōfort our selues, at though we haue beene neuer so eat synners, yet let vs confesse and owledge our synne, let vs call for mer∣ and pardon, let vs vnfainedly beleeue riste to be oure onelye health, iustice,  redemption, and straight way he is he will by and by uer and put away  ynnes, in she sorte that we shall e feare no peril nor daunger. Him that knew no fynne, hath Godij. Cor. ▪ de synne. j. a payement of synne for  that we shoulde become the righ∣snesse of God by hym. Christe gaue himselfe for our synnes,Gala. j▪  he might deliuer vs from this pre∣ wicked worlde, according to the  of God our father. hriste Iesus is come into this worldej. Titus. j▪ e synners. hriste Iesus hath giuen himselfe aj. Titus. ij▪ ption for all men. This let vs con∣ly beleeue, vndoubted we be of the er of those that shall be saued. For  he is come a redemption for all  thinges that he hath suffered, per∣taineth
no lesse to thee and mee, and eue¦rie one of vs (so we beleeue) than to P¦ter or Paule, Christ hath borne our syn¦nes in his body vpon the Crosse. By these places and suche lyke, wei. Peter. ij. maye see how God the father (which will not the death of a synner, but th we shoulde tourne and liue) for that m seruent burning loue that he bear towarde vs, hath eased vs of the burth of our synne, and hath laide it vpon Esay. liij. backe of his moste deere beloued soon whiche his sonne hath so taken, bor and suffered for them, that they can ¦uer condemne vs. For God taketh  reputeth the death of his sonne for a  satisfaction and payement for all our nes▪ so that we truely beleeue in h For seyng that our synnes thus laied  Christe, coulde not ouercome him, taine him in death, nor damne him ( why he rose againe) vndoubtedly a  satisfaction is alreadie made for them▪  iustice of God is fully aunswered,  they be vtterly hid and forgiuen.  beleeue this and we shall not periuerlastingly. For Christe is now  ours, with all that he hath wit
ath, with his resurrection, with his as∣tion into heauen, with his lyfe, his rites, his glorie. As sainct Paule wit∣ssethQui proprio filio suo non sepercit. Rom. 8. Wherefore Sathan, hath w no title to vs, he cā not meddle with , he hath no power to hurt vs▪ Forso∣e as we be iustified by Christ, pur∣ from our synnes, and made the chil∣n of God by Christ, who hath recon∣d vs and wrought our peace, we must refore be of good comfort. For seeing  be in the handes of God, that is om∣otent, who is now oure best, moste ng, and trustie Father, we be in a  porte, we be without daunger, there o incōmoditie, nor aduersitie hurte or we be inuironed with the custodie od, and the garde of Aungels, out of handes of this heauenlye father, can reature by force pluck vs. When weIhon. viij. t an ende by death of this crosse and orall affliction, then haue we ended ourney, then haue wee finished oure re. Christe hath borne the same e▪ Christe hath passed the same e, he hath suffered lyke death, he is heade, we must be lyke to him, we suffer with him, if we intende to
raigne with him, we must leaue this ¦porall life, ere that we can enioye  euerlasting. Let not oure synnes tro vs: let them not torment oure cons¦ces, as thought they coulde not befor uen. They are alreadie forgiuen, if  repent and beleeue: Christe is all  as muche as he is. He by his innoce hath couered and taken awaye oure nes. As Christe can not bee dampne uen so we can not be dampned, if w right faith, we cleaue vnto him. As si death, and helle, had no power agai Christe, so haue they no power ag vs, so we be in Christe, and Christe i Yf the matter had bene lefte and ¦mitted to vs, to haue borne oure o synnes, and to haue satisfied for th they woulde haue beene to heauy  wee had not beene able to stande t them, they woulde haue pressed  sunke vs downe to Hell. But Ch both God and man, hath (of his  free will) offered himselfe for vs, he  taken oure tourne, he hath playde  parte, and paide for vs all that we o As it is in the Psalme spoken in th sone of Christe, I paide that I ough
e had trespassed we wer the detters, so farre behinde hande, that all that was in s, was not able to paye the least somme hat we ought. Christe became our suer∣y, paied for vs, acquited vs, and set vs at ibertie, yea, made vs coheires with hym f euerlastyng glorie. If it wer possible for one man to com∣it the synnes of the whole worlde, so he ruely repent, and cleaue by true faith to Christ, he cannot be dapmned, his sinnes e sufficiently, and aboūdantly by Christ iffied for. For Christ (as touchyng his dhed, one in substance with the heauē∣ father. As touchyng his manhoode, our rie flesh and bloud) hath purchased and uely bought grace & pardon for vs. For hrist became man for vs, was borne for , died vpon the Crosse for vs, rose from ath for vs, ascended into heauen for vs,  hath accomplished, and performed al ynges mete for our saluation for vs. If refore we beleue in Christ, we are be∣e partakers of Gods fauour, we are ed of the packe and burthen of synne, e are made the heires of God, and co∣es with Christe for euer, and that by iste, and for Christe. For without
Christ there is no consolation, no health no hope, no helpe. In Christe alone is  comfort, all health, all hope, all succou all refuge, all grace, and mercy, more ¦boundant, more plentious, more exc¦lent, then any man is able eyther▪  comprehende or to wish. God graunt  therefore a true, and a constaunte faith In this forme, or in like sorte, we mu comfort oure selues in oure sickenesse, calamitie, and our brother being visit But in any wise, and with all diligenc is to be foreséene, that we withdraw  mynne from the fearefull and terri contemplation of synne, death, and da¦nation. And that wee fixe these of  minde, and whole thought vpon Chr onely, that we cleane vnto him, that call vpon him, that we commit our sel wholy to hym. For in Christe wee s espie nothing but innocencie, iustice,  saluation, whiche all be deriued fr Christe into vs, so that we will ackn¦ledge him, and receiue him, for the ¦thor of our saluation, and onely redée if we haue Christe crucified afore  eyes: if we imprint him in oure hart wee flye to him with oure faithe, if
holye cleane to him. Then shall hell tes nothyng preuaile against vs, then all we be able to withstande all the rcible assaultes of Sathan, though they  neuer so sore, neuer so fierce, neuer so rrible▪ Let vs call to remembraunce with hat lenitie, what gentlenesse, what hu∣anitie, what clemencie Christe (as it is the euangelicall hystorie) hath called to him and receiued all suche synners hath repented them, and desired his pe. We shall finde Marie Magdalen,  sinner that hong vpon the right hand Christ crucified, the publicane, Zache, h other mo, whome Christe moste yngly receiuyng, pronounced cleare  synne (though thei had synned grea∣) and the children of saluation: Christe erie grace, mercie, helpe comfort, life, e, and saluatio to al those whiche loke these thynges at his handes, and put r trust in hym. And all these thynges  God (who is truthe it self, and can lye, nor wil not deceiue (promised vn∣ for Christes sake. inally, when Death approcheth, wée
must do as Christ did vpon the crosse, wMath. vj. muste praie for our enemies, and forgi them with our hart. If we haue offend any man, we must be hartely sorie for  we muste desire forgiuenesse, if we ha iniured any man, we must make hym mendes, or take suche order that amēd maie be made vnto hym, if it passeth o power to make restitution, & amende shalbe inough that we desire forgiuene And with our harts forgiue others wh hath hurte vs, either in name, bodie, s¦staunce, or estimatiō. For if we truly  giue, God hath promised we shalbe fo¦uen, as it is in the 6. of Mat. but aboue haue an vnmouable faithe in the for promises of God made in Christe Ie our lorde. It is verie necessary also & ¦ble, for the confirmation and stren¦ning of our faithe, to receiue the i blessed sacrament, of the body and  of our sauiour Christ, which we are ¦maunded to receyue in remembra of his benefites, that hereby, wee  be truely certified in our conscienc his body to be giuen for vs, and his bloud to be shed for remis∣sion of our synnes.
Death. OF our fleashe and fraile nature, is so feared and abhorred, that when he approcheth, mannes hart e filled and laden with suche sorrowes, panges, d anxieties, as tongue is not able too presse. ¶A medicine against the feare of Death. WE muste call to our remem∣braunce, Death to bee ouer∣commed and abholished by Christe. So that nowe the soules of so many as truste Christ, can not dye nor perishe: but de∣tyng from the bodie, goeth straight to rist. For thus was it saied to the these is houre of death. This daie shalt thou with me in paradise. The body though est and pause for a while, yet wee bee certaine hope, that at the laste daie, it  bee raised againe to immortall and rlastyng life. And therefore scripture eth the death of the bodie but a slepe, that this same fraile, weake, vile,
mortall, and corruptible bodie, whiche wee cary aboute, whiche lieth sicke and sore diseased, whiche shortly shall bee put into the yearth, burne to ashes, deuour with beastes or foules, drowned in wa¦ter, that self same bodie (I saie) shall be raised againe incorruptible, glorious beautifull, stronge, pure, immortall,  possesse a newe and euerlastynge life where there shall neither bee hunger. Cor. xv. thirste▪ heate, colde, synne, death, nor a kinde of calamitie: but iustice, innocent life, ioye, blesse, world without ende▪ F as the bodie of Christ laied in the gra rose againe the third daie, neuer more  die, euen so shall the bodies of all that be¦leue in Christe, at the latter daie bee  suscitate to a life, after whiche shall fo¦lowe no death. God who is of infinite ¦wer, and infallible truthe, hath promise these thynges, thei muste therefore  des bee so. And here it shall bee ¦ble, to all to remembraunce suche pla of scripture, as treateth of the resurr¦on of the fleshe, whiche bee the woor not of manne, but of GOD, who is  and will certainely fulfill whatsoeuer  hath spoken. No manne can chaunge
ill, no manne can alter his purpose. No eature can frustrate, lette or tarie his tence. He is omnipotent, he is true, he  faithfull, his goodnesse and mercie is explicable. Lette no manne therefore ubte of the truthe of his woordes, lette  manne doubte of the performaunce of s promise. Here after followeth certaine places of scri∣pture, witnessing the resurrectiō of the ded,  accordyng to the articles of our faith, wherein we saie, we beleue that this fleshe shall rise againe. THis is the will of my fatherIhon. vj. whiche sent me, that who∣soeuer seeth the soonne, and beleueth in hym, shall haue life euerlastyng, and I will se hym vp at the last daie. The houre commeth wherein all theiIhon. v. t bee in the graues, shall heare the e of the soonne of God, and shall goe the, thei that haue doe good, vnto the rrection of life. For if so▪ bee that the ite of him, whiche raised vp Iesus frōRoma▪ viij.  dedde, dwelleth in you: euen he that ed vp Iesus Christe from the dedde, ll also quicken your mortall bodies,
because of his Spirite that dwelleth  you. GOD hath bothe raised vp our Loj. Cor. vj. Iesus Christe, and shall also raise vs  by his power. Christ saith, Lazarus was but a seIhon. xj. where in verie deede, he was dedde  buried. But Christe is the resurrection and life▪ (as it is in the same place) so th he that beleueth on him, though he w dedde, he shall liue. In verefiyng whe of, he raised straight waie Lazarus ¦yng fower daies dedde and stinkyng. A because wee bee naturally in the ago of death verie fearfull, weake and fai harted to the ende that we might bee  easelier perswaded in the Article of  surrection: Scripture maketh menti of many, whiche in the tyme of the P¦phetes, Christe and the Apostles, we called from death to life. Christe raised the widowes soonne.Luke. vij. He raised the ruler of the SinagLuke. j. his dughter. He raised Lazarus.Ihon. xj. Peter restored to life Tabitha.Actes. ix. Paule raised againe Euihus.Actes. xx. Elizus the Prophet, called againe iiij. Reg. iiij.
e his hostes soonne. Helias raised the Babe of the womaniiij. Reg. xvij. f Sareptanie. GOD tooke also vnto hym out of thisGe v. aile and transitorie life, these twoo er∣llentiiij. Reg. ii. and holie menne, Enoch and He∣as, quicke bothe bodie and soule, to giue  (as it were) a taste and representation of the true life to come, leaste after the o∣iion of the Ethnicks and Epicures, we should thinke there were no worlde, nor eeyng after this wretched and misera∣ble life. Let vs not forget what Christe esus, Lorde of life and death, saieth, in the eight of Luke: Wepe not, the maide  not dedde, but a slepe. Reason not com∣prehendyng the misteries of GOD, nei∣ther perceiuyng his power, dooeth laugh his saiyng to scorne, but Christ proueth his saiyng true, he raised by and by the edde maide to life. The fiftene Chapiter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, is eplenished with moste godlie, pleasaunt d pithie consolations. Truly it is more precious then any gold. For in that Cha∣ter Saincte Paule doeth so annexe and uple our resurrection▪ to the resurrecti∣on of Christe, as though thei could in no
wise bee separate, or deuided after th forme. Christ is risen from death which thyng is certaine) ergo, wée also shall v doubtedly rise. For Christe is our hedd and we his members: this hed is neith without, neither will forsake his me¦bers. Then it followeth that where▪ Chr is, there shall we bee. For why, wee  the members of his bodie, and euen of fleshe and bone: what tongue, what p what witte, is able to set foorthe (as iEphe. v. worthie) this ineffable, and inestima glorie of the mercie and grace of GO that God hath vouchsafe so lowe to h¦ble hymself, as to become mortall m that this eble and fraile nature of m vnited and knitte to the diuine nat by the power and efficacie of the god might be inhaunced and promoted to mortalitie. For truely the nature o faithfull menne, whiche either were fore Christe, hath been since, or now shall be to the worldes ende: vndoubt¦ly, in Christe verie GOD and ma hath obtained immortalitie. The ¦lation therefore that riseth of Chr resurrection is of great efficacie. A
ncte Paule saieth to the Corinthians: riste is risen againe from dedde, and isj. Corin. xv. e first fruictes of them that slepe, for by e manne truely came death, and by one nne commeth the resurrection of the de. And as al die in Adam, euen so shal  bee made aliue in Christe, but euery e in his order. The firste is Christe▪ hen thei whiche are Christes, whiche h beleued in his commyng. And sainct ule dooeth adde a similitude taken of urall thynges, whereby he dooeth set  the, and declare the resurrection of bo∣s. The similitude is taken of seede, iche is cast into the yearth by the hus∣dman, dieth as it were and rotteth▪ uerthelesse, it is not vtterly loste, but ength springeth, and commeth foorthe he yearth, goodlie, beautifull, and saunt. So our bodies shall rise again;  feeble, vile, corruptible, and mortall:  strōg, glorious, incorruptible, immor∣, neuer to dye againe, but euer to liue.  The waie into true and euerlastyng  to our longe home, as thei call it, and ntrie, is by corporall death. Fleashe bloud beyng corruptible and mortal,  not inherite the kingdome of GOD,
where nothyng is but life. Therefor this corruptible bodie must put on int¦ruption, and this mortall muste putte immortalitie. Then shall the saiyng t is written bee fulfilled: Death is swa¦wed vp in victorie. Thei that beleeue Christe, hath nowe ouercommed sy death, and helle. Therefore not fearOze. xiiii. death, but strong, bolde, and well haEsay. xxv. in Christe: Thei maie saie, Death wh is thy sting: Death where is thy vict The stynge of Death is synne: and  power of synne is the Lawe. But t¦kes hee vnto GOD, whiche hath g vs the victorie, through our Lorde I Christe. Let vs heare also more sentences,  of godlie and mightie consolation.ii. Cor. iiii. He that hath raised vp Iesus,  raise vs vp also with Iesus. Our conuersation is in heauen, Philip. iiii. whence we doe looke for the sauiour,  lorde Iesus Christ, whiche shall cha our ile bodie, that it maie be like ¦ned vnto his glorious bodie, a to the woorkyng of his power, by  whiche also he is able to subdue all ¦ges vnto hymself.
Ye are dedde, and your life is hid withColos. iii. riste in God, but when Christe your  shall appeare, then shall ye also ap∣rs in glorie with hym. Wee woulde not brethren, that yei. Thess. iiii. uld bee ignoraunte concernyng theim t sleape, that ye sorrowe not also as o∣r doe, whiche haue no hope. For if we eue that Iesus Christe died, and rose iue: Euen theim also whiche are a pe through Iesus, shall GOD bryng h hym. aicte Paule also doeth comforte Ti∣theii. Tymot. ii. with the article of resurrection▪ ng: Remēber the Lorde Iesus Christ yng the seede of Dauid, rose againe  the dedde, accordyng to my Gospell.  if we bee dedde with hym, wee shall  liue with hym. If we suffer pacient∣e shall also reigne with hym. It was written also to the Hebrues,Hebr. ii▪  Christe tasted death for all menne,  that he was partaker of fleashe and d: firste became verie manne, that he ht destroye hym, whiche had the rule ath (that is) the Deuill, and that he ht deliuer them, whiche were in bō∣ all their life tyme, by the reason of the
hearing of Christes Gospell: is so v the feare of death. God hath deliuered vs, and called ij. Tim. iiij. with an holy calling, not according to  workes, but according to his purpose grace, whiche is giuen vs in Christe  before the time of the world, but is n made manifeste by the appearyng of  sauiour Iesus Christ, whiche truely  destied death, and hath brought life immortalitie to light, by the Gospell. Wee knowe that wee are transj. Ihon. iij. from life to death, bicause wee loue brethren. In this hath the loue of God appeIhon. iiij in vs, bycause God sent his onely be¦ten sonne into the worlde, that we  lyue thorowe him. I knowe that my redeemer doth Ihon. xix. and in the laste daye I shall ryse ag & againe be wrapped in my owne s And in my owne fleshe shall see  whome I my selfe shall sée, and these eyes shall beholde and none other. These places of holy Scripture,  suche lyke, if we diligently reme and faythfully imbrace: we shall pe great consolation and comfort. And
saint Paule reioyce, that we knowePhilip. iij. ste, and the power of his resurre∣, whereby death is ouercommed. ther is there now (to these that be∣ in Christe) anye thing in death ter∣, or to be feared, sauing onely the ge and outwarde forme, hurte it can  Lyke as a deade serpent, keepeth is olde fearefull shape, and forme,  sting, or to doe harme, it hath no r at all. And lyke as by the brazen ent whiche Moyses by Gods com∣dement set vp in the desert, when s looked vpon, through the power of  worde, men were deliuered from er of the liuely and venymous Ser∣s: so our death is made harmelesse, wee deliuered from the feare and er of it, so oft as wyth the eyes of ithe, wee dooe beholde the health∣nd medicinable death of Christ. In ion, death is nowe become an I∣▪ and shadowe of death, yea▪ the en∣ce and gate of lyfe. For ChristeIhon. viij▪ s truth it selfe, saith. If any man my worde, he shall neuer see death:  trusting to the mercy of God, h faith whiche he conceiueth by hearyng
and knit to Christe hys Lorde and  ster, that he cannot be plucked, nor s rate from him. The bodye in déede for a time is  rate from the soule, but in certaine  of rysing againe to euerlasting lyfe.  so he that beléeueth in Christe doth  see nor feele the euerlastinge death bodye and soule, whiche is euerla damnation. For the death of good m nothyng els, but a departure from  transitorie and mortall life: to im talitie to Christe, to his Aungelles  Sainctes. Hell and damnation. DOeth offer it self at the wer of death, so that  tymes manne doeth g¦ly feare, least he bee ab from the fauour of  and appoincted to euerlastyng pain.  Deuill (whiche seeketh by all m howe to deuoure vs) stirryng vp i myndes many dangerous and troub thoughtes, concernyng our election▪ predestination.
¶ A medicine against the feare of Helle and damnation. WHen the deuill goeth about, to cause vs to dispaire, or to doubt of our election: whe∣ther wee bee of the nomber of them that are appoincted  euerlastyng life or no. In any wise let  not bee to bolde in copyng with hym, t vs not enter disputation against hym or he is to subtile and expert for vs) but ie shortly vnto hym. A waie Sathan ith sorrowe, it is written, thou shalte t tempt the Lorde thy God. For seyng t God as a moste louyng father, hath t onely giuen vs life, fedde, and preser∣ vs, to this hower: but also hath en∣ed, and euen loden vs from tyme to e with his singuler benefites, what dnesse were it contrary to our former erience, now to doubte of his mercie?  hath receiued vs into his flocke by ptisme. He hath sente vs the Gospell is grace, wherein he hath promised ecome our father. We haue been sed h the fleshe and bloud of his Soonne  Sauiour Christe, in remembraunce  our debtes bee paied, and we acqui∣red,
why should wee now then doubt the good will of God towarde vs? Le not therefore admitte the doubtfull, daungerous imaginations of our pr¦stination, whiche the Deuill like a tie, and malicious marchaunte dooebour to iustle. But lette vs thinke  suche sentences, as God would haue myndes occupied withall, whiche C hymselfe hath prescribed, as Ihon where he saieth. GOD hath so loue worlde, that he hath giuen his onel gotten soonne, that whosoeuer bele in hym shall not perishe, but haue luerlastyng. Loe, here wee see th whiche beleueth in Christ, whiche  fully acknowledgeth Christe to b sanctification, iustice, redemption, atisfaction, can not bee dampned, but sured of euerlastyng life. So many  ceiue faithe by hearyng of Gods w and so trust stedfastly vpon the me Christ. Vndoubtedly thei be of the ber of those, whiche bee chosen to estyng blisse, knowen before in C predestinate, and written longe s the booke of life. These thinges be  certaine, and moste true, God can n
ceyue, nor be deceyued: Suche is his od will, so hath he purposed and de∣ed afore the worlde beganne, what nges so euer therefore oure enimie  Deuill (spyting oure saluation, and king oure destruction) shall put in e minde contrarie to this doctrine▪ t them not moue vs, let them not ke vs afrayde, but let vs trust truely Christe: and so shall he become ours,  wee become his, who being our good de, we can not perishe, nor bee dam∣. For he wyll lose none of those thatIhon. x.  father hath giuen him, wee muste  oure eyes vpon Christe, we muste  to hym, we muste cleaue to hym. He ure onely and true Sauiour, who te be apprehended, and imbraced by h, if we looke to be saued. For they  beleeue rightly in Christe, they are estinate to euerlastyng life. ere we wuste diligently remember  earnestly expende the godly exhor∣n of Saincte Paule, whiche he wri∣ in the xij. to the Hebrues, whoseHebr. xij. es be these. Let vs runne by pa∣e vnto the battaile that is set afore ooking vnto Iesus the aucthor and
finisher of faithe, whiche when the io was set afore him, suffered the Crosse and dispised the shame, and fitteth at  right hande of the seate of God. Furthermore, all the grieuous temp¦tations, and afflictions that Christe s¦fered, he suffred them for oure sakes.  saincte Paule saieth, also in the fourth Hebre. iiij. the Hebrues, we haue not a highe Prie that is not able to haue compassion  our weakenesse: but suche one was pr¦ued in all pointes without synne: let  therefore with boldenesse go vnto t seate of his grace, that we may obtay mercie, and finde grace to helpe in ti of neede. Let vs in any wyse consider and dee¦pely imprint in our hartes, Christe to  giuen vnto vs, not onely to the ende th we might be redeemed, reconcyled, a made partakers of euerlasting salu¦tion: but also that in him we might ha an example, bothe how to liue, and al howe to ende our life. Neyther can a man liue, suffer, or die well: vnlesse  looke vpon and followe the lyfe, suff¦ring, and death of Christe: if therefo wée desire to ende this life well & go
t vs consider and remēber, how Christ haued himself in the bitter and smarte onie, when hanging vpon the Crosse,  was assaulted with diuers, fierce, and ost grieuous temptations, and praye at wee maye haue grace to folowe his ample. FIrst he was tempted with synne, when being hanged betwixt twoo theeues as a notable and hainous syn∣ner: it was said vnto him,Math. xxvij. thou be the sonne of God, come downe m the crosse. By this contumelious yce, what doe they signifie else, but at they iudged him a naughty and vn∣dlye person, suche one as by craft, sub∣tie, falsehood, socerie, and other vn∣wfull meanes had deceyued the peo∣e, had blynded the worlde, and to be thing lesse than the sonne of God. Euen in lyke maner at the houre of ath, doth the Deuill tempt man, what euer man hath cōmitted against God, l the synnes that euer he did, he she∣th vnto him, he doth exaggerate them  the vttermost: to the ende, that the
multitude, and hainousnesse of them sidered, and perceyued, man shoud do of the mercy and fauour of God, and,  fall into desperation. Here we had ne to stande sure, and euery one of vs h neede to aunswere our enimie, thus te¦pting vs after this maner: I knowled my selfe to haue synnes aboue all num¦ber, and measure but Christe: who ne synned, in whose mouth was founde  guile, who is that verie innocent lam hath suffred death for my synnes, he ha washed them away, he hath satisfied Esay. liij. boundantly for them, how many, a how great so euer they were, Christe death pertayneth also to me, he w wounded also for my iniquities, he w brused for my vngraciousnesse, by  stripes I am also healed. All my synne hath Christe taken to himselfe, so th now, I haue none (thankes be to Christ who hath satisfied for them in his own body. CHrist was tēpted also with deaMath. ij. when it was sayde vnto him,  hath saued other, but he can  saue hymselfe. (As though if shoulde
sayde) he is now at a poynt, he must dye, ere is no reamedie, he can not escape. hus doeth our olde and erreconcible imie, labor to feare vs with death, but  vs holde out the buckeler of fayth in hrist against him, let vs remember t Christe our Lorde, King of glorie,  Prince of life, coulde not be ouer∣nmed, nor holden of death, but though once tasted of death: he nowe liueth  reigneth for euer. This Lord of ours ll not leaue vs, nor suffer death to ere∣e any tyranie againste vs, that after  hath suffered vs to be tēpted a while,  will also that we dye corporally: all t is wholy for our welth. Neyther could we eotherwyse come euerlastyng life, but by tēporall death▪ e must therefore leaue this present e, ere we can inherite the eternall e. Also this corporall death, bringeth s commoditie, that by tasting the bit∣nesse and sowernesse of it, we haue erience and knowe the exceding loue t Christe bare towarde vs, and the stimable benefite, that he did for vs ensing our synnes, in abolishing of th, in breaking vp of Hell gates, and
all by his death. Otherwyse, wee coulde neuer h knowne the power of Christ, in abo¦yng of death, wée could neuer haue i esteemed the excellency of this bene wee coulde neuer haue seene how i cause we haue to giue thankes to C our Lorde and redeemer. Christe ly truely, we shall also liue. And this co¦rall death to vs shall be nothyng els  a sweete and holsome slepe, an entr and gate into the true and blessed  For after this transitorie life, the ginne we first truely to liue. THirdlie, Christe was te with helle, or euerlastyng  nation, when it was saied  hym, he hath trusted in G let hym nowe deliuer hym, if he will  though thei should saie. Now it app that he hath hoped in God in vaine.  God will none of hym, he hath for hym, he liketh hym not, he doeth  hym, he will easte hym doune to h perpetually condemned him. W fore the temptour shall lashe at  like temptations, wee maie not
maie not be afraied, we maie not bee ouraged, but commende our self who∣o Christ, hang vpon hym who is who∣urs, who hath giuen hymself wholie s, so that synne, death, nor helle, hath thyng to doe with vs. Christe with an stimable price, his own bloud hath de∣ered vs from the tyrannie of the De∣, and euerlastyng damnation, he is be∣ne our innocencie, our life, and our iu∣e. Let vs take héede in any wise, that  tourne not our hartes from Christe, cified. If we cleane to hym, we are set on a sure, and inexpugnable rocke, a∣nst the whiche, all the power of hell is e to dooe nothyng. So that wee maie ly exclaime, and euery one saie with riste: I prouided the Lorde afore myPsal. xvj. s alwaie, for he is at my right elbowe t I should not be moued, therefore my te hath been glad, and my tonge hath yced: moreuer, my fleshe shall reste ope. By faithe in Christe we become sonnes of God, the brethren and co∣es of Christ, and partakers of euerla∣ life, by this faithe departyng hēce,  shall goe to the kyngdome prepared the electe, afore the beginnyng of the
world. And if in the feruentnesse of th temptations, our faith begin to waue we do not beare paciently the will of  heauenly father, if our loue toward  ware faint, & cold, if our hope begin to feble and weake: and therefore we be to feare, least God and wée be not all  full pointe, but yt he is yet displeased w vs, whiche rēptation surely is very gr¦uous, painfull, dangerous & harde to ou come: we must call to remēbraūce Chr to haue suffered for vs so intollerable, a inuincible temptations, that there ap¦red no help, no comfort, no refuge, wh in God and the whole worlde, seemed  haue forsakē him, and to be against hy in so muche that he exclaimed, O my g O my God, why haste thou forsaken  Oh here was a greeuous temptation.  sharpe and bitter death that Christe su¦fered for vs, and all to make the waie the crosse and death easie vnto vs. The¦fore, seyng that Christe of his owne fr will, caste hymself into the féelyng of tollerable paine, calamitie, and anxiet (GOD our moste louyng father, bee therewith content) vndoubtedly he kn¦weth, and cōsidereth our infirmities▪
btedly he will not deale with vs, ac∣yng to the rigour of the Lawe, but l beare muche with vs, and pardon ny thynges to our infirmitie. Dooeth  Christ speake to all men? Dooeth he  cal men, when he saieth: Come vnto  all you that doe labour, and are laden,  I shall refreshe yōu? How can there  any greater consolation? Howe could riste speake more mercifull too vs? here be many things that pinche, vexe,  trouble manne gréeuously, but what ng is it, that can trouble the consciēce  synner more, then when he doubteth he mercie of God, then when he fea∣h least God will cast hym of, then whē can not perswade hymself, to conceiue  truste of Gods mercie, but imagine t as a withered member he shal cutte and cast awaie. Here we had neede of Christes present , here we had nede of spedie comfort, st this violent tempest ouerwhelme, & une vs. But let vs not fear, Christ is issembler, he will stand by his worde wil performe his promise, he wil help, refreshe. Therefore when we begin remble, and feare in our consciente,
when we begin to doubt of Gods mer when we perceiue our faithe to be f Let vs forthwith call vpon God, and t feruently, and that instantly, euen fr the bottome of our harte, that he tou not his face from vs. Let vs poure before hym al that do trouble vs. Let vs disclose to hym all  miserie, our imbecilitie, our increduli Let vs crie with the Disciples: Lorde  crease our faiche. And with the Father the lunaticke, Lorde we beleue, helpLuke. xvij. incredulitie. And with the Prophet, loMarke. ix. make haste to helpe vs. For thy merci aboue all thy woorkes. O moste louy O moste mercifull father, Lorde God our healthe, our onely helpe and refu Enter not into iudgement with thy ¦nauntes.Plal. lxix. Christ is our iustice, our rede¦ption, and innocencie, he for vs hath s¦fered moste better and cruell death. Let these thinges moue thée, O fat of mercie: for this thy soonne our saui Christes sake, haue mercie vpon vs: ¦firme and strength our harte in faith fort vs with the consolations of thy  spirite, that we maie finally obtaine  euerlasting, through Christ our lord.
AFter this sort, if we (labouring wrestyng, and striuyng with our imhecilitie, accusing before God, and lamentyng our puci∣itie▪ and Incredulitie) doe catche holde Christ, and cleaue fast to hym, earnest▪ nd feruently destryng his helpe, that wil vouchsafe to take our place, and to lie that is lackyng in vs. These thin∣ if we doe surely, all thynges shall bee ll, wee shall auoide and escape easely, aunger and perill, wée shall bee saufe ugh. For these twoo, to beleeue in ifte, and with harte to desire faithe, th not muche differ the one from th r. For though wee féele yet greate kenesse, and imperfection in our self,  this ought to comforte vs, that God eth, and commaūdeth that he should alled vpon, that he hath promised to e, and help these, that call rightly v∣ hym. Now, as nothyng is more iust∣ necessarily destred then true faithe, so God heareth no praier soner, nor  gladly, then when man findyng no lesse in hymelf, doeth acknowledge wne infirmitie, his owne miserie, wne beggerlinesse, doeth accuse, and
lamente his owne incredulitie, and  deepe ighes, and hartie desires calle faithe. These sighes, these desires, t praiers, this little sparke of faithe, is  very séede of God, wrought in vs by  whiche saieth of Christe by the Pro Esaye, that he shall not quenche the  kyng flaxe, nor breake the brused Re Therefore let vs stedfastly beleeue,  the least earnestly and hartely praie,  wee maie beleeue, bewailyng afore  our lacke of faithe, whiche thynges i doe, we neede not doubte, but we be¦eped of God, we bee taken for his ¦dren. For it is not for nought, nor in  that he hath laied our imbecillitie  synnes, vpon his onely begotten soo backe▪ In Matthewe it is saied: blessMatth. v. those that mourne, for thei shall bee ¦forted: blessed bee those that hunger righteousnesse▪ for thei shall bee sati These wordes are spoken also to vs maie iustly be applied to vs, we mo and are sorie in our hartes, that we  mispended our life paste. Wée wish desire, yea, we euen hunger and thi ¦ter righteousnesse. Lette vs bee o cheare, wee shall obtaine our desire▪
ll bee comforted, we shall bee compted e afore God, for Christe our Sauiour  sake. Finally, let vs after this exam∣ of Christe, and saincte Steuen, com∣de our soules into the handes of God  heauenly father, saiyng euery one af∣ this maner. O Moste mercifull Father, I cōmende into thy holie han∣des my spirite, yea, thy spi∣rite, for thou hast created it, thou hast committed it for a e, to the bodie, thou hast giuen it thy e Image and similitude. Thou haste e for the redemption of it, thy owne e dearely beloued soonne to shed his d. This the spirite. I resigne into thy es, O God of all mercie, I am thyne at I am, I beseche thee refuse not y owne, but receiue, keepe, and place me in euerlastyng glo∣rie, for the sake of Ie∣sus Christ, thy onelie be∣got∣ten sonne. Amen.
