13020 99847826 12887
¶ An exposition of the whole eight Chapiter to the Ro∣maines, expounded by Ihon Hedlambe, Preacher and Minister to the Congre∣gation at Braughin, and student of Di∣uinitie in Peter house at Cambridge, be∣fore Maister Doctour Squire, and the whole Ministerie assembled at the laste Synode, holden at Ware in Lent laste past 1579. Wherein is perfectly proued our iustification to bee by faithe onely, to the beatyng doune and ouerthro∣wyng of all erronious and false opinions to the contrarie. Seen and allowed. ¶ Imprinted at London, by Robert VValley. 1579.
To the right woorship∣full maister Thomas Meade, one of the Queenes Maisties Iustices of her common Plees at Westminster, Ihon Hedlambe wisheth long life, with the increase of god∣linesse and felicitie. THat the good and god∣lie order of that man of God: the right worship full & our godlie Arch∣deacon maister Doctor Squier, maie be knowē vnto your worshipp, for whō I with the reste of my brethren, and fellowe Mini∣sters of the Churche of God are to giue GOD moste hartie thankes, for that it pleased GOD to sende suche a faithfull distributer of his woorde to raigne ouer vs. Who bothe with godly zeale setteth forthe the truthe, and also with greate mildnesse encourageth vs to goe fore∣ward in the same: It was his good plea∣surs to appointe me, though moste vn∣worthie,
at his laste Sinode at Ware, to open as GOD would blesse me, and di∣recte me at that tyme vnto my fellowe Ministers those notes, which according to my small capacitie, I had collected v∣pon the viij. Chapiter to the Romaines, after whiche my rude discourse beeyng ended, he did so comfort me to go fore∣ward, as was greatly to my ioye and cō∣solation in the Lorde: wherefore as du∣tie bindeth me, praiyng the Lorde long to cōtinue this our churche of England with hym, and many suche faithfull Mi∣nisters to God his glorie, and their and, our greate comfortes, not beyng able to speake that he deserueth, neither to vt∣ter that in hym, whiche my harte doeth conceiue, I referre it to your worship & others, godlie and learned. Wherefore now returnyng my baise stile to write vnto your worship: as the diuine Philo∣sopher Plato (right worshipful) did oftē tymes giue thankes to the Angell of his birthe for three thinges: first that he was a man, and not a beast: Secondly, that he
was a Grecian, & not a barbarian: third∣ly, that he was borne in the daies of So∣crates, whiche rhankfulnesse that Hea∣then Philosopher, euen to that God he knewe not, and that for worldly & tran∣sitorie thinges, hath pricked me forward (though not forgetfull, yet vnable to fulfill any part of my dueties) to be har∣tely thankfull to the Father of mercie, & God of all power, whom I truly knowe through Christe Iesus, for that he hath created me like vnto hymself, sinne one∣ly excepted, & hath not onely brought me to the pleasant spryng of the hie He∣licon, but also hath sent me suche a Me∣cenas, who as he is able, so is he willyng to further those my studies and labours, wherunto God hath called me. And se∣yng (right worshipfull) that you are that fauorer of my labours in Christ Ie∣sus, for whom I am not onely to pray to God, but also through his assistaunce in and by my self, to shewe some effectes and tokens, of my thankfull mynde and knowleging bothe with what loue you
embrace the truthe of God his woorde: and what fauour you beare to the Mini∣sters of the same, as also what delight you take in reading of the same, and mi∣xyng the studies therof, with other your labours professed: I haue here sent vnto your worshippe a breef discourse of the whole viij. Chapiter to the Romaines, whiche although I haue neither so well pollished, drawen suche lineamētes, nor added such coulers as other both could and would haue dooen, if thei had been appointed to haue spoken in that place. Yet as GOD at that tyme did giue me grace and vtteraunce, and for the mea∣sure of that Spirite whiche he lent me, I did breefly bothe in deuidyng and ex∣pounding, so labour, as the shortnesse of tyme wherein I had warnyng, and was to speake permitted me: whiche my la∣bours if thei be accepted and approued by your worship, I trust I shall (God his grace assistyng me) take suche like or greater paines, in some other place of Scripture, to the building vp of the wal∣les
of the decaied Hierusalem, and to the beatyng doune of the kingdome of Sa∣than, bothe in other, and also in my self. Thus desiryng the God of mercie, who raised againe frō death, the great Shep∣herd of his flocke, euen Iesus Christe the righteous, alwaies to preserue and pros∣pere your worship and yours, bothe to his Churche, and also to this our com∣mon wealthe. Thus with due remem∣braunce of my bounden dueties, I cease to trouble your wor∣shippe: from Braughin this xxj. of Maie. 1579. Your worshipps moste bounden in the Lorde, duryng life Ihon Hed∣lambe.
¶The Printer to the gentle Reader. WHereas it hath pleased God (gē∣tle reader) through his holie spi∣rite, to moue and directe the au∣thor hereof, to set doune here for thy com∣fort an exposition of the whole 8. Chapi∣ter to the Romaines: These are to desire thee, with humilitie and diligence to read the same, and also for the better vnder∣standyng thereof, to reade ouer the eight Chapiter, not doubtyng but that in rea∣dyng hereof, thou shalte receiue comforte through Gods holie Spirite, praiyng vnto hym, that he will directe the hartes, myn∣des, and pennes of all readers and writers that all their actions maie bee to God his glorie, and to the edifiyng of the readers and hearers, whiche God graunt for his mercie sake. Thus fare thou well in the lorde, who euer blesse vs. Amen.
¶ Octauum caput ad Romanos. IT is not (as I sup∣pose) vnknowen vn∣to any of you, right worshipfull welbe∣loued brethren, and felowe ministers of Gods holie Miste∣ries, how and in what order the blessed Apostle S. Paule disputeth against that people, whiche in his daies did vexe the Churche with the deuelishe and abhomi∣nable doctrine of saluation, by their own workes and santification, by the vanities of mans braine: and yet I haue thought it good at this present breefly to open the whole methode of the same, bothe because I feare there bee some here, who either haue not perfectly heard, or learned the same, and other that haue not distinctly taught it: as also that I maie by the assi∣stance of Gods spirit and your gentle pa∣cience, more plainly set open before you, the whole contents of this present scrip∣ture,
to the aduansement of Gods truthe, to the true vnderstandyng of his worde, and the health of all our soules &c. This whole Epistle maie well be de∣uided into twoo especiall partes, the first is of doctrine especially, I saie especially because that in the disputation of Doc∣trine, he handeleth other thynges by the waie. The seconde of manners. And in that first parte whiche is doctrine he dis∣puteth at large of iustification by faythe in the first 8. Chapters. And the 9.10.11. Chapters he bestoweth in the con∣firming of the other parte of this doctrine which is predestination. And in the other Chapters he onely handleth their man∣ners. Thus you see the scope of the A∣postle: Now lette vs consider the Scrip∣ture whiche is reade thus &c. Reade the 8. After that the holy man of God Paule had satisfied the doutefull and wauering myndes, and ouerthrowen the subtill and crafty reasons of those, who most impu∣dently ascribed the causes and meanes of their saluation to workes, he addeth this
8.2. Principall thinges. Chapiter wherein wee are to knowe that there are conteyned twoo principall thinges. First a conclusion of those thin∣ges, whiche he set doune in the former Chapiters. Secondely a comforte and consolation for all those who imbrace this Doctrine, and cast from them those re∣likes of errour. The conclusion whiche I spoke of contayning in it, an affirmation of the whole disputation from the viverse of the first Chapter vnto this 8 Chapter is confirmed this sentence, without good woorkes is onely graunted saluation too the electe. The confirmation is in the se∣conde verse of this Chapter, wherein the thirde verse is expounded, a doubt as it weare of the weaknesse and inabilitie of the Spirite, whiche is aunswered in the same verse by an argument ex aduersis, that is contraries whiche affirming are perpetually opposite. That these thinges are onely graunted to those whiche are regenerat is set forth in the fourth verse ex dissentaneis, whose first parte sette doune in the 5. verse, is
plainly declared of the effect following in the twoo next verses, hauyng their owne conclusion in the 8. verse. The seconde parte of the afore saied argument, is in the 9. verse. Where are bothe the propo∣sitions of this syllogisme. Who so is in the spirite hath the spirite: You are in the spirite ergo. The latter proposition, or as it is ter∣med the Minor or assumption, is con∣firmed by the effecte of the graftyng into Christe in the 10. verse, and effectes of the spirite in the 11. verse. The conclusiō of the firste parte is in the 12. verse, and set forthe by two disagreing argumentes in the 13. verse, the latter being proued in the 14. verse, by an enthimeme or im∣perfect syllogisme, whose proposition is confirmed by the effectes and testimones of the spirite, in the 15. and 16. verses. Whiche parte thus orderly set doune the Apostle directed still by the same spirite, entreth into the disposition and artificiall setting doune of the comforte, whiche the Children of God receiue by that faythe,
in whose assurance he hath so laboured. Which comfort he taketh not of the vaine delites, whiche carnall men wishe or hope for in this life. But first of that company, whiche we haue with Christe in the ende of the 17. verse. Secondely a comparatis in the 18. verse, thirdly of an argument a Maiori in the 19. verse, All thinges doe looke for this comforte, muche more wee whiche God hath blessed with reason, and called to the perticipation of his mercies in Christ Iesus. And this lookyng for, is contayned more largely in the 20.21.22. and 23. verses. Fourthly of the mat∣ter of hope 24. and 25. verses the spirite helping and prayer 26. and 27. Fiftly of the ende of our afflictions 28: God wor∣king the same, whiche hath predestinated vs, as 29. and 30. verses. Sixtly of an argument a Maiori 31.32 to the whiche he anexeth a most excellent conclusion and affirmation, of the whole parte beginning at the 33. verse vnto the ende. Thus you see deare britheren, what order I am to obserue in the treatise of this Scripture,
whiche that I maie dooe too the glory of God &c. I tolde you that the firste parte was a conclusion, whiche the blessed Apostle Paule added to that notable disputation, whiche he before had handled to the bea∣ting doune, and erecting againe bothe of Iewe and Gentile, and to the repairyng in them whom God of his mercye, hath called that the Image of perfection, from whiche we fell with our forfathers, whose tokēs we beare, I meane original sinne. The expositiō of the 1. verse., this woorde beyng without that accente whiche the Grecians call accen∣tum graue, is a note of copulation, and proueth this to bee ioyned to some dispu∣tation goyng before, and addyng these woordes followyng, he giueth them in steade of a Buckler to defende vs in that daie of battaile, when the Deuill shalbee readie to giue the onset, and to ouercome vs, if wee arme not our selues with this armour, either to preuente his malice, or valiantly to resist his force. And here the wisedome of God by his seruaunt Paule
ioyneth three especiall thinges to be mar∣ked: Firste,Three thinges to be marked. the imperfections often inci∣dent  euen to the faithfull. Secondlie, the  greate fauour of God. Thirdly, the rege∣neration  of the Spirite. Whiche if wee perfectly consider, then it shalbe impossi∣ble for Hell it self to preuaile against vs: the imperfections are sett doune in wal∣kyng after the fleshe, whiche worde fleshe maie bee taken either for the outwarde man, the whole man, that is bodie and soule: or for the present tyme: If therefore any of the children of God doe externallie offende God, as when the Childe of God boweth hym self in time of persecution to an Idoll, or with desire of minde, and con∣sent of bodie fall into any synne, as when God giueth vp his children to worke ac∣cordyng to their owne hartes, and so fall into some greeuous synne, as adulterie, swearyng, liyng, & suche like: lastly, whē those whom God hath called, liue accor∣dyng to the course of the worlde, either fashion them selues therevnto in their be∣hauiour, Religion, or apparell, and thus
disagree from the written woorde, then I saie thei walke after the fleshe, and yet thei so sinne, that for Christ his sake these sinns shal not be laied vnto their charges: And therefore thei flye vnto that mercie offered, and acknowledge the same. The seconde thyng that I noted, to bee Gods fauour towardes vs, whiche pardoneth and forgiueth vs, so that although synne assault vs, and oftentymes subdue vs, yet wee acknowledge our selues to bee free from the power of Death, and the cursse. Thus fell Dauid in committyng adulte∣rie with bloud,Magi. Senten∣tiarum libro 4 distinctio. 16. thus fell Moses at the wa∣ters of strife in smityng the rocke: Thus Peter, Mary Magdalen and others whose falles were not to death, but to their far∣ther confirmation. And although the blo∣die Papistes (trustyng in the defence of a foolishe distinction of synnes Veniall and Mortall, and willyng in their grossenesse to play and ieste with God, saie that mor∣tall sinnes must paie a greate raunsome, but veniall synnes to bee pourged with more easie remedies, as with mumbling
vp and often repetition of the Lordes pra∣yer, with sprincklyng of holie water, or the absolution of the Masse) would take awaie this place, because it is saie thei, a paradox of the Stoickes makyng equali∣tie of synnes, yet lette vs (beloued) thus thinke, that if this were not true, that eue∣ry one should dye for euer, because Roma. 6.23. the rewarde of synne is death, Ezech. 18.2 because the same soule that synneth shall dye. Yea let vs be perswaded that all the synnes of the faithfull are remitted, not because thei doe not deserue death, but because by the mer∣cie of God, there is no condemnation to them that are in Christe Iesus, so that their synnes are blotted out by pardon, and shall not bee imputed vnto them, nei∣ther dooeth this place argue equalitie of synnes (as thei dreamed) though it make all synnes worthy of condemnation, or as thei tearme it Mortall. For in deede thei them selues saie, that the synnes of Eze∣chias, Dauid, the Niniuites, Peter, and those that were conuerted at Peters ser∣mon were all mortall, and yet some of
them lesse then others: but wee see those synnes not to haue been taken awaie by mans power or pollicie, but by the grace of God who called them to repentaunce. For Ezechias beyngKyng. 20.2. sai. 38.1. afraied of the mes∣sage of death that he receiued, praied, weepyng, but looked into the mercies of God, and trusted. Dauid confessed his greate sinne in numbryng the people, but he saied Sam. 24.10. Lorde take awaie the iniquitie of thy seruaunt. He did acknowledge the synne of adulterie and manslaughter, at the reprehension of Nathan, and Sam. 12.13.16 caste hym self doune before the Lorde, but in sure hope and stedfast faithe. The Niniui∣tes troubled with the fearfull threatenyn∣ges of destruction nas. 3.5. put on Sackeclothe, sprinkled their heades with ashes, and praied, hopyng that the lorde would haue mercie, and turne his sharpe wrath from them. Yea Peter hym self wept at. 26.75. bitterly but ceased not to hope. And those whiche were striken at the sermon of Peter, one∣ly trusted in the goodnesse of God, and therefore saied to the Apostles,ct. 2.37. men and
brethren what shall we doe. Now let vs come to the laste parte of this conclusion, whiche is the regenera∣tion of the spirite,2. Daungen opiniones. wherein there are twoo daungerouse opinions to bee taken heede of, the one of those sailyng abrode in the  sea of all vngodlinesse, with the shippe of their owne filthie desiers, without safe-conducte of Gods worde, promise vnto themselues all maner of licentiousnesse, because the mercy of God is freely giuen and his righteousnesse bountifully besto∣wed vpon his elect. The other is of them  who mounting aloft with the waxed win∣ges of their owne inuention,The family loue and su like. aboue the comon vse and custome of the life of gods Children, chalenge to themselues phan∣tasticall Spirites of sinceritie. But as both these are most horrible, so they which doe either of them wrest the Scripture, are most vngodly and damnable, vnlesse they repent. For the Apostle in the sixt Chapiter of this Epistle, seing the vn∣godly to chalenge vnto themselues, that liberty saieth, that it is proper onely to
those, whiche put one the righteousnesse of Christe, and that they are regenerate in spirite, and haue a pledge of this rege∣neration in their baptisme. But for other whiche cleaue not to Christe, he promi∣seth the rigour of the Lawe, whiche ouer∣whelmyng them with his cursse, dooeth easely destroye them. Now as for those whiche would mount alofte in their fai∣ned sinceritie, because thei studie all that in them lieth to make God a lyer, we are thus to perswade our selues, that to walke after the fleshe, is not to seeke to putte of all the senses of the fleshe, and to flie vp into the middle heauen, or altoge∣ther to separate our selues from the com∣panie of the wicked, for that is impossi∣ble for man:Cor. 5.10. and therefore S. Paule wil∣lyng vs not to haue any companie with euill doers, straite waie expoundeth hym self, saiyng: I meane not that you should not at all companie with them, for then you should goe out of the worlde. And as I thinke this is the true sense of this Scripture, to walke in the Spirite is to
be conuersant in beatyng doune fleshely lustes, and to giue tokens of our hatered of sinne. And therefore not yeldyng to the former opinions, to saie thus vnto our consciences, I haue often fallen and syn∣ned greeuously, but the Lorde hath recei∣ued me to grace, he hath graffed me into the cōmunion of Christ, he hath brought me into the fellowship of the Churche by Baptisme. Therefore as long as I go on forward in faithe, although synne seeke to deale violently with me, yet shall I bee free from all giltinesse and damnation, because I beyng in the fleshe, walke not after the fleshe, yea, I abhorre all the lu∣stes and concupiscence of the fleshe. To the confirmation of the Grace before concluded, might be proued by good rea∣sons, as if a man will alledge workes, we maie thus reply, If Saluation or iustifi∣cation be by workes, then either by per∣fect workes, or vnperfect, but not by vn∣perfect workes, for euery vnperfect wor∣ke is sinne, and therefore, if it be by woor∣kes it must needes be by perfect workes,
whiche no man is able to worke, but only the sonne of God, and therefore our wor∣kes be accompted vyle and of none effect. I might reasō against the blindnes of the enemies of Gods truthe, but it needeth not because it is here set doune,he expositiō f the 2. verse. that only the Spirite of God giueth all thinges, setteth free, and maketh bonde, giueth healthe, and scourgeth with sicknesse. For by these woordes the lawe of the Spirite of lyfe is vnderstood, the bountifulnesse and power of Gods Spirite, the power whiche bringes vs to a castyng awaie of the relikes of the olde Adam, and putting on of the righteousnesse of the newe man Christe, the bountifulnesse whiche as it graunteth pardon, and abolisheth the law of sinne in vs, setting vs free from the gil∣tinesse of death. So it graunteth vnto vs the holinesse of Christe, whiche once im∣puted doeth, perfectly and absolutly finish the sanctification begon in vs. This which is heare called the law of the Spirite of life, is that Spirite whiche is promised to bee poured on the seede of
man, because man without the moister of this spirit, is as a drie Esai. 44.3. and barren lande. Whiche Spirite also is promised to bee Ioel. 2.25. powred vpon all fleshe, and is called the Ezech. 36.25. cleane water, whiche shall so reforme and regenerate the electe, that thei shalbe cleane from all filthinesse: this is that spi∣rite whiche was sentAct. 2.4. vpon the Apostles and Churche of God. Now that this freedome is confirmed to bee doen by the woorkyng of the Spi∣rite, and not by woorkes, let vs see from what slauerie it hath freed vs, truely not as some thinke, who because of this free∣dome, saie that we are not bound to kepe the Lawe of God sett doune in the tenne Commaundementes. No my brethren, that is a perilous doctrine, wherefore I praie you beware of it, for to be free from the lawe of Synne and Death, is not to liue as wee liste, or to shake of the Com∣maundementes together with the Cere∣moniall lawe, but it is thus to bee taken, that we by the grace of Gods Spirit are so confirmed, that the Lawe of concupi∣scence
is ouercome by vs, that we be deli∣uered from vnder the yoke of our affec∣tions, so that wee hauyng rule ouer our owne will, doe seeke now nothyng in all our dooynges, but to set forthe the glorie of God, to repaire the decaied Image of our former perfection, and to referre all our worldly practizes or actions what∣soeuer, to bee ruled and squared by the written worde. This did Paule feele and therefore he doeth triumphe ouer synne, ouer concupiscence, and affections of the old man whatsoeuer. A doubt pro∣pounded and aunswered by the third ver. The doubt.But I tolde you that this confirma∣tion, was more clearly sette forthe in the thirde verse, with a doubt there propoun∣ded, and an aunswere followyng in the same. The doubt riseth thus, it was said before that the lawe of the Spirite aban∣doneth synne, and ouercommyng setteth vs free from Death. Here it is saied that the Lawe is weake, or as the Greeke woorde  signifieth impossible to redeeme, or to free from synne, so that it remaineth that the lawe is onely a she∣wer
of our faultes, and a condemner of our synnes. And least any should thinke that he condemned the Lawe, he setteth doune the cause of the inhabilitie or wea∣kenesse, namely, the corruption of our fleshe, as though he should saie, the doc∣trine of the Lawe is able to iustifie, be∣cause it containeth a moste exact and per∣fecte rule of iustice, but because no fleshe cā come vnto that iustice, the whole force and strength of the Lawe is perished and taken awaie: but because wee see that our corruption maketh the Lawe of God vn∣profitable vnto vs, and that though it shewe the waie of life, yet it is not able to keepe backe vs from runnyng headlong into destruction: Let vs come to the aun∣sweryng of this doubt by the argumente as I tolde you er aduersis, that is of con∣traries whiche cannot agree:The aunswere for the mer∣cies preached in the Gospell, are opposed or set against the seueritie of the Lawe, and the righteousnesse by the newe man, in takyng our fleshe, to the corruption of the fleshe of the olde Adam, whiche had
spoiled all mankinde of the benefite of e∣ternall life, if it had not pleased God to haue sent this present and onely remedie. Now that Christ was perfect man, wee reade that he was the seede of Gen. 3.15. Abraham, and afterwardes of the seede of Gen. 17.2. Iacob. So that then the curssed opinion of the Manaches maie not be receiued,The error of the Manaches & Marcionits confuted. whiche would haue hym to be a phantasticall bo∣die, neither as Marcion faineth a heauen∣ly bodie, for neither in a heauenly bodie, or bare shewe of a manne is the blessyng promised, but in the seede of Abraham to come out of the loynes of Dauid, whiche Rom. 1.3. Paule affirmeth that he was made of the seede of Dauid after the fleshe. And in an other place Math. 2.16. that he sprange of the Iewes, yea, and the Lorde hym self cal∣led hym self not onely by the name of a man, but also by this name the Math. 6.28. Luke. 9.58. soonne of Man, like vnto man in all thynges except synne onely whiche he wanted (not be∣cause he was borne of a woman without the knowledge of a man, as some vainly and childishly thinke) but because he was
sanctified by the Spirite, that his birthe might bee pure, euen as it should haue been before the fall of Adam, and in al the scripture these wordes Puritie of Christe doe note vnto vs the true Nature of man in hym: that he died onely for our synnes it is manifest, but especially in that of E∣saie: Esai. 53.4.5. surely he hath borne our synnes and caried our infirmities &c. And in the laste verse in the same Chapiter, he was ac∣compted emong the transgressours, and he bare the synnes of many, and that is moste euident that 2. Cor. 5.21. Christ whiche knew no synne, is become synne for vs, that we might be partakers of his righteousnesse. And that we maie more assure our selues Paule setteth doune, that this was dooen in our fleshe, whiche when wee see, wee maie acknowledge our nature to be par∣taker of his victorie. And that the fruites before set doune pertaine onely to the godly,The expositiō of the 4. verse. I reason this out of the fourth verse. None haue the for∣saied frutes, but suche as fulfill the whole law, or suche as being ingrafted in Christ
are made perfecte by him. But they that chalenge the fauore of God to their owne wantonnesse, or thinke euill of the doc∣trine of Saluation by faithe, doe neither fulfill the lawe (for by it they are condem∣ned) Neither are they ingrafted but cut of from Christe. And that lest the rigoure of the lawe might preuaile any more a∣gainst them to condemnation. For the whole substance or extremitie of the lawe is in Christe fulfilled, that we might bee found iust before God. For if once sancti∣fication be imputed vnto vs with iustifi∣cation, then is the whole forme of the law made perfect.The expositiō of the 5.6.7.8. verses. This parte is playnlier set doune in the next fower verses. First of argumentes that disagree in the matter, as to walke after the fleshe and after the Spirite, to seeke for carnall and Spiritu∣all thinges. Neither is the Apostle heare to bee vnderstood as before, for he maketh not a flatt opposition, but hee comforteth euen the beginners in religion. For vnto whome he seemed to haue denyed the fe∣loshippe of Christe, because they walke
not absolutly after the spirite, and weare giltie to themselues of many infirmities,What is to liue after the spirite and af∣ter the fleshe. for this is to liue after the spirite, to giue ouer our selues to the gouernance of the Spirite: and againe to liue after the flesh is too imagin too themselues an Epicu∣risme, and to giue open tokens that they are excluded from the Children of God, and haue giuen themselues ouer to hunt after their hartes desire, and to féede their owne affections:Writing vpon the same place And therefore Maister Caluine hath trāslated  which is sapere cogitare, that hee might more manefestly declare their earnest zeale, in seking carnall thinges which shewe them to be without all hope of regeneracion. Now this parte is sett out by certaine effectes of bothe as the following of the fleshe is death,The effectes of the spirite and of the fleshe. enemitie with God and disobedience, but the following of the spi∣rite is life and peace. And that to followe the wil of the fleshe is death, the olde law declareth whiche willeth euery man too take heed of the lustes, which bring trans∣gressions of the law which causeth death.
It is enmitie with God, because it cau∣seth him to enter daiely into iudgement, and to scourge vs for the breache of his statutes. It causeth disobedience, because it is vnwilling to bee bridled or kepte vn∣der, but alwaies rebelleth and seeketh meanes whereby to displease God. In this wisedome of the fleshe walked Cain, Saule, Ahab, and all other, the wicked whiche either wilfully broke the flat com∣maundement, or otherwise most shame∣fully transgressed.The 8. verse whiche is the conclusion of the former verses. In the eight verse I toulde you, was contayned a conclusion, of the effectes whiche sheweth that the reason of the Apostle gathered together is this.An argumēt. Those that giue themselues vp to followe the fleshe, and to worke vnclean∣nes with greedinesse cannot please God. Those that liue after the fleshe are suche, therefore they cannot please God. Seing then that this conclusion gathe∣reth so well the reason of the first disagre∣yng argument, whiche was to walke af∣ter the fleshe, marke also how the Apostle propoundeth and proueth the second. For
where in the ninth verse he setteth doune the Propositions,The expositi∣on of the 9.10 11. verse. I toulde you before whiche weare. They whiche are in Christe haue the Spirite. You are in hym. The conclusion is in the twelfth verse, the coniunction of the Trinitie is suche, that no reasonable man can denie the one to bee so anexed to the other, that wheare mercy is shewed in the one, there grace aboundeth by the other. The assumption he proueth by the effects of our graftinge into Christe, by whome although he ac∣knowledgeth all thinges to come, Yet in this principally he comforteth them that beside the benefite thei receiue and enioye in this life, euen then when their fleshe li∣eth in the Grounde, (For so I expounde Corpus for the one parte of the body one∣ly) their Spirite shall liue in peace, and the Bodie whiche as yet is not purified from corruption, shall receiue life by the grace giuen by him in whome they are ingrafted. An other proofe of the assump∣tion is in the 11. verse and it is of the ef∣fectes
and working of the holy Ghoste, as if a man would saie, truly it is an hard thing to fleshe and bloud to thinke a bodie burned, eaten with the foules of the Ayer, or consumed with the same, to meete a∣gaine and to bee ioyned together parte to parte, and then the whole to the soule yet if suche an one whosoeuer looke too the power of the Spirite,The power of the spirite. and acknowledge Iesus Christe to haue risen by the same Spirite, and then acknowledge him selfe to be a member of Christes bodie he shall easely discerne this, and se that the power of the Spirite is not diminished, but that it is the same whiche it was from the be∣ginning, and too whome euery creature shall giue in accompte, and before whome euen the Sea shall bringe all the bodies it hath swallowed, the Beastes and foules all that they haue deuoured and eaten, and the Sonne shall restore those Bodies it hath consumed. But as this power is not denyed to Christe, although it be here by wordes giuen to the Father, but is made common with them bothe, so is this acti∣on
of the holie Ghost not all togeather to be referred to the last rising, whiche shal∣be doune in the twinkling of an eye, but euen to the daiely helpes that this spirite ministereth to vs, whereby he prepareth vs to bee fitte members of his Soonne Christe, and to bee made meete heires of his kyngdome, by the bloud of his sonne. Now then the conclusion is in the 12. Note here the conclusi∣on of the 9.10.11. verses. verse, whiche sheweth that wee renounce the fleshe, when we suffer Gods Spirite to rule our actions, and wholie depende vppon his prouidence, and if wee doe so, then we are in Christ, that is, we liue ac∣cordyng to his will, and walke in his cō∣maundementes,Ephe. 4.30. as it is saied to the E∣phesians, if wee liue in the Spirite, then wee walke in the Spirite. And although we see that this conclusion thus gathered doeth shewe a truthe, yet the Apostle pro∣ueth it by certaine disagreyng argumen∣tes, whiche I will touche in a woorde or twoo, because the effect of them was sett doune before.The expositi∣on of the 13. verse. The first therefore contai∣neth a sharpe threatenyng againste the
wicked, and a comfort to the godlie, this threatenyng he placeth here to bee as a pricke in their bodies, to stirre them vp to call for grace, and not to put their trust in them selues, or to thinke that thei may be saued without the righteousnesse ther∣of, for if thei dooe so, thei shall surely dye. And why? truely because thei transgresse the Commaundement, and no maruell. For if a mortall Prince appoint a Lawe to bee kepte, similitude. and decree that the breache thereof shalbe punished with Death, if he apprehende any transgressor, he shall dye without mercie. And shall a man deale so with his brother, and shall not the Lorde deale more seuerely with his owne han∣die woorke, if it rebell and saie, why hast thou doen thus and thus to me? The cō∣fort he promiseth to all those, whiche giue their indeuour to woorke the will of God and to deny the will of the flesh, although thei cannot doe it as thei should. The se∣conde proofe of his conclusion is, that thei are the soonnes of God,The expositi∣on of the 14. verse. if soonnes? Then fellowe heires, and alwaie so directed by
the Spirite,The exposi¦on of the 15. and 16. verse whiche thynges he proueth in the 15. verse by the effectes of the spi∣rite, and in the 16. by the testimonies of the same spirite: the effectes are the sure∣tie of truste, in whiche all the faithfull be∣leeue, and the takyng awaie of feare and waueryng, acknowledgyng our selues not to come to mounte Sinai, where all thyng were terrible, and the people as striken with death fell doune and cried, that the Lorde should not speake vnto them, where Moises hymself was afraid: but we are come to Sion to the heauen∣ly Hierusalem, where wee haue the Me∣diatour of the newe Testamente.A greate co¦fort of the spirite. And where the Spirite of God assuryng vs of his clemencie, causeth our spirite to cal vppon hym, and to take hym as our hea∣uenly Father, whiche we durst not to doe without suche assuraunce: and this is that Spirite, whose vniuersall actions sustain all Creatures, whose particular actions giue all other blessinges whiche are vnto vs seales, and pledges of euerlastyng life and heauenly inheritaunce.
¶ The seconde part. THus I haue spoken of the first parte of of this Cha∣piter which was a conclu∣sion, and as God hath gi∣uen me knowledge and vt∣terance, I haue in sinceritie of the worde, shewed the true meanyng and order of the Apostle, whiche I meane to doe God willyng in this laste parte, whiche is a consolation drawen of sixe argumentes,Argumētes. inferryng a godlie and comfortable con∣clusion of this firste parte of the doctrine of this Epistle. Argument. he expositi∣n of the 17. erse.The first argumente is drawen of the fellowshippe wee haue with Christe 17. verse, we are the sonnes of God as he is, and beyng sonnes we are made free par∣takers of our Fathers treasures, and are appointed to haue our inheritaunce with hym, with the condition followyng, that we walke not accordyng to our owne ap∣petite, but prepare our selues to bear his crosse, whiche if we doe not, then is there
no hope for vs.A double comforte. And here wee haue a dou∣ble comforte, that euen in the beginnyng  of this Crosse, and in the sufferyng of af∣flictions, we haue Christe to be an equall sufferer with vs. Secondly, that as wee  now suffer with him, so shall we liue with hym euerlastyngly: Neither is this doc∣trine to be kepte close, because that some hereby would affirme the abilitie of wor∣kes, for we knowe that woorkes doe not sette doune any cause of saluation, but the meanes and waies by whiche we are ap∣pointed to come thereunto. The seconde argumente is a compa∣ratis, that is as the learned knowe,2. Argument. twoo simple argumentes compared together,The expositi∣on of the 18. verse. to the settyng forthe of the one 18. verse. He compareth thinges present with thin¦ges to come, and setteth doune the vani∣tie of thynges present in respect of the o∣thers. For al the afflictions and euill dea∣lynges of menne against the children of God are nothyng. Therefore I rather a∣gree to their sentence, that make these wordes a confirmation of the former cō∣fort,
then to some that saie, thei are a ma∣ner of correction, because that he lighte∣neth the heauinesse of the Crosse, in com∣paryng with it the greatnesse of the glo∣rie. And that he might the better arme the myndes of the faithfull with pacience he compteth all troubles and afflictions whatsoeuer, whiche sodainly passe awaie nothyng in respect of the ioyes of the life to come. Where by the worde , whiche is futura, he meaneth aeterna, so that by the glorie to come, is meante the eternall glorie. Argument.The third argumente is a Maiori, all thynges looke for the accomplishyng of this comfort, therefore muche more man 19. The expositi∣on of the 19. verse. verse. And here wee are taught paci∣ence, to abide the good will and pleasure of the Lorde, because there is no elimente nor any part of the worlde, whiche doeth not feele this present miserie, and yet suf∣fer, in hope of the resurrection: So then e∣uery creature doeth with reuerence, euen bareheaded and with greate diligence, craue at the handes of God to bee dissol∣ued,
and to receiue those greate fruites and blessing of eternall life, after thei haue put of their corruption: but some will saie that beastes haue no hope, that is true, but hope is ascribed vnto them, that wee might more earnestly seeke the kyng∣dome of God, and with open eyes looke for the comfortes whiche shall neuer end, whiche are mentioned by the reuealyng of the sonnes of God:The expositi∣on of the 20.21. verse. and he sheweth rea∣sons in the nexte twoo verses of the firste parte of this comparison, for saieth he the Creatures suffer with vs, euen againste the course of their nature, neither can thei come to their former estate, but shall still dye and be corrupte, vntill the soonnes of God be restored bothe in bodie and soule, to that perfectiō whiche was lost in Adā. But note firste here,Note. that this whiche is called will, is a naturall inclination, wher by all reasonable Creatures desire their perfection. And here is a notable figure called Prosopopeia,Prosopopeia. whereby he maketh the senselesse creatures to labour, and to will or nill, and further to shewe their o∣bedience,
and in hope to bee restored, for the Sunne and the Starres fulfill their courses and sure motions, the Ayre, the Water, yea euen the beast of the feelde: and all creatures doe diligently their due∣ties, and yet all this is in hope to putte of their olde corruption, and to bee restored into a better estate, as the children of God shalbee, but not to bee partakers of their ioyes. Now that wee haue seen our cor∣ruption to bee suche, that euen all creatu∣res,The expositi∣on of the 22. verse. yea the verie heauens are polluted thereby, in the nexte verse repeatyng first the suffering of the treatures, he sheweth the greatnesse of the libertie, and ioyes, by a similitude of a womans grownyng in childbed,A similitude. whose sorrowe is greate, yet when a man childe is borne, she receiueth suche a comfort, that all her sorrowes are forgotten. So after wee haue wallowed with synne, and haue polluted all creatu∣res, yet beeyng called of God, our sorro∣wes are no more frutelesse, then the wo∣man whiche reioyseth, for thei are taken awaie quite, andHebru. 10.17. verse. our synnes are blotted
out. Now in the 23. The expositi∣on of the 23. verse. verse he commeth to the latter parte of the comparison, and ex∣horteth by the example of these creatures whiche daiely wishe for our reuelation, to bee more circumspect, and to looke more narrowlie vnto our selues, that where we are burdened with synne, wee maie sighe and grone, and yet paciently looke for the mercies of God, as also to strengthen our selues by the lookyng for of this blessed∣nesse, that wee maie so prepare our myn∣des, to ouercome all present sorowes and miseries, for that we are the first fruites of the Spirite by Christe, who assuryng vs by the testimonie of his Spirite, euen in vs of our redemption, doe boldely cha∣lenge the benefite of Gods eternall de∣cree, whereby he electeth vs before the beginnyng of the worlde,Iohn. 3.16. Actes. 13.28. as it is in the Gospell, and therefore sent his soonne, to paie the price of our redemption, whiche cannot profite vs, except the fruites ther∣of should appeare in our heauenly renu∣yng and regeneration. 4. Argument.The fowerth argumente is of the na∣ture
of Hope,The expositi∣on of the 24. and 25. verse. in the 24. and 25. verses, for this comfort is especially wrought by faithe, whiche faithe maketh vs to hope assuredly, that after we haue finished our course, wee shall attaine the croune, and therefore he saieth, that hope is not repo∣sed in those thynges whiche we see or hā∣dle,What hope is. but in those whiche wee assuredly looke for, and then he sheweth that hope is pacient, long sufferyng: nowe this pa∣cience so strengtheneth vs, that in the middest of tribulations wee doe not dis∣paire, neither thinke muche of the differ∣ryng of a benefite.Col. 3. verse. 3. And why? Truely be∣cause the health of the faithfull is hid frō them, because the health of the faithfull is laied vp in hope, neither is hope at any tyme without pacience, and therefore by paciēce is the health of the faithfull made perfecte. Now least that any man should either faint vnder the burden of the crosse or As the famile of loue doth chalenge. chalenge to muche to hym self, if he hath been aided by the Spirite of God, he sheweth the meanes wherby the Spi∣rite bryngeth to this Grace, Faithe and
Hope 26.27. verses.The expositi∣on of the 6. and 27. verse. Where we learne thus muche, that the Spirite doeth euen as it were a greate burden, beare our in∣firmittes, whiche beeyng by the Apostle, put in the Plurall number, sheweth the continuaunce of this goodnesse, least we should faint when wee were after a grea∣ter measure afflicted. Furthermore, wee see a newe goodnesse added to the former assistance of the Spirite:A newe good¦nesse. that it doeth not onely arme and strengthen our infirmi∣ties, and seale vs vp to eternall healthe, Math. 6.9. but euen daiely putteth into our hartes and mouthes,Luke. 11.2. Ihon. 14.26. Zachar. 12.10. that forme and order of praier, by whiche wee are to craue the goodnesse of our heauenly Father. And least wee should bee dismaied, when wee praiyng after our owne phantasies be not heard, he saieth in this 26. verse, that the Spirite doeth praie for vs, that is: doeth cause vs to shake of our former negligen∣ces, and to prepare our selues to praier, yea, that wee maie doe this with a zeale, he doeth as it were, put into our hartes wordes and sighthes, whiche the Father
acknowledgyng to come from his owne Spirite whiche dwelleth in vs, dooeth heare our praiers directed by that Spi∣rite, and doeth easely graunte our reque∣stes. Argument.The fifte argumente, is of the ende of our afflictions 28. verse, thus he saieth: seeyng wee our selues haue paste the pi∣kes of these afflictions,The expositi∣on of the 28. verse. and feele a ioye in our spirites, wee doe not thinke, but doe knowe, and assuredly perswade our sel∣ues, that this comforte so proued before, belōgeth to vs, and al thinges are so tem∣pered from aboue, that, that whiche the worlde thinketh to bee hurtfull, is by the grace afore shewed profitable vnto vs. But how? Truely euen by the eternall purpose of God, who loued vs before we loued hym, yea whom we could not haue loued,Gal. 4.9. if he had not called vs. Neither is this callyng onely mente of the election, but also of the continuall direction of all our woorkes, whiche are moderated by the hande of God,Ephe. 1.5. and therefore it is Tim 1.9. she∣wed that all thynges (whatsoeuer) come
of his good will, power, and pleasure.The expositiō of the 29. and 30. verse. There followeth now in the 29. and 30. verses a figure, whiche is called clymax, gradatio, whiche goeth from one woorde to an other, and adorneth all,Clymax or gradatio. whiche be∣ginnyng with the order of our election he saieth, that all the afflictions of the god∣lie, are meanes whereby thei are made sure to Christe, whiche he before proued to bee verie necessarie. The gradation is whom he knewe those he predestinate, or decreed of hym self, for so the woorde  maie well be translated, whom he predestinate, those he called, whom he called, those he iustified,The dewties and rewardes of Christiani∣tie. and by all whiche he openeth the dueties and rewardes of Christianitie: For if wee bee compared with Christe (who is the elder Soonne) then are wee also so to frame our selues, that wee maie bee conformable to his I∣mage. And labouryng thus, in these wee knowe that with our vocation, iustifica∣tion and glorie is ioyned, the fellowshipp of the crosse, whiche cannot be separated. 6. Argument.The sixt and laste argument is a Ma∣iori
in the 32. The expositiō of the 32. and 33. verse. 5. and 33. verses, where he hauing acknowledged the infinite power and vnspeakable mercie of God, bursteth out into these wordes: what shall we saie then? Shall wee euen seeyng the good∣nesse of God increaste? Distrust because wee are wrapte in miseries? No, but ra∣ther let vs thinke thus, God is with vs, and therefore these can not ouerthrowe vs. Now this is the greatest staie for a Christian, to haue God with hym, but how shall I whiche see my selfbeset with synnes, take holde of this goodnesse? There is no good in my self. I am a det∣ter to God, and therefore dare not offer my self to hym: In these conflictes saie thus to thyne owne consciēce, God is my father, therefore I am not to doubt of his beneficence, he hath giuen Christe Iesus to bee slaine for mine infirmities, whiche is the greatest benefite, whiche either is, or shalbee: and will not he together with hym giue me all thynges, yes assuredly, and therefore I will in boldnesse offer my self before him, in the name of his and my
Christe,The conclu∣sion with the 6. verses follo¦ing. and conclude with the Apostle in the verses followyng, that beyng assu∣red by these his promises, and grounding my faithe, yea, staiyng my self, that nei∣ther Hell, Deuill, persecution, anguishe, thynges presente, and thynges to come, can separate me from the loue of Christe Iesus, who for his mercies sake,A praier. graunt that wee maie stedfastly beleeue his pro∣mises without presumption, beare afflic∣tions without desperation, grounde our faithe and hope vppon his woorde with∣out waueryng, haue true comforte in his Death without rashenesse, confirmed to vs by the fellowship wee haue with Christ, by hope of his mercies and all other assurances here set doune. Amen.
