13138 99857579 23340
The Order of Ceremonies obserued in the annointing and Coronation of the most Chri∣stian King of France & Nauarre, HENRY the IIII. of that name, celebrated in our Lady Church, in the Cittie of Chartres vppon Sonday the 27. of February 1594. Faithfully translated out of the French coppy printed at Roan, by com∣maundement of the said Lord. by E.A. LONDON Imprinted by Iohn Windet, and are to be sold by Iohn Flas∣ket, at the great North doore of Paules.
The Printer to the Reader. FRendly Reader, this discourse of the annointing and coronation of the King was written by a notable per∣sonage, who was assistant at the said ceremony, one that gathered it at the handes of those that were chiefe Actors therein, which neuerthelesse he would not commit to the presse before he had shewed and imparted it vnto them. Whatsoeuer other discourses of this argument that may peraduenture come to thy handes are false, counterfait, and rashly published, but this is true, perfect and written at leysure, with all order requisite. Thus much I thought good to giue thee to vn∣derstand, least otherwise, where thou seekest for trueth, thou mightest be abused with falsehood. Farewell.
The order of ceremonies obserued in the annointing and coronation of the most Christian King of Fraunce and Nauarre, Henry the IIII. of that name, celebrated in our Lady Church, in the Citie of Chartres vpon Son∣day the 27. of February 1594. ALmighty God who giueth and preserueth all Scepters and Crownes, and disposeth of them as semeth best to his pleasure, who in his hands holdeth the hartes of kings, hauing miraculously guided and aduaun∣ced the king to the lawfull succession of this Monarchy &c. which was still quar∣relled at, and challenged by certaine re∣belles, supported by the capitall and auncient ennemies of France, &c. He was entreated, desired and aduised by the Princes of his bloud, the Officers of his Crowne, the Lordes of his Counsel, and the most notable personages of his Courts of Parliament to frame himselfe to his annointing, in like manner as other kinges his pre∣decessors haue allwayes vsed to procéede to their annointing and coronation, soone after their comming to the Crowne: which said annointing is the token of their Royalty and of the publike appro∣bation of the French nation. His Maiesty therefore resolued to be annoynted, and could haue wished that the said ceremony might haue béene perfourmed in the Church of Rheims, the rather for that of long time, the kinges haue neuer béene other where annoynted but there, albeit they bée no way tyed or bound to the sayd Church, either to the Archbishop of Rheims, as many examples and reasons doo euidently testifie. And his Maiestie, who seeketh to preserue all the auncient and lau∣dable customes of his predecessors, and the Realme, could haue beene contented not to breake this, in case the Rebells that possesse the same towne, would together therewith, haue giuen him opor∣tunity to haue béene there annoynted and crowned. Héerevppon for the effecting of the resolution of his annoynting, it was aduised
and determined, that in as much as Rheims was still enclined to persist in her rebellion, the same should be perfourmed at our Lady Church in Chartres, a Church famous throughout the whole Realme, as also in diuers partes of Christendome: the towne bée∣ing situated in place commodious, and as it were in the nauell of those partes of the Realme, from whence his Maiestie had called the Princes, Lordes, and principall personages of his Courtes of Parliament, to be assistant at this solemne ceremony. The preparatiues for all thinges necessary to the sayd annoyn∣ting, béeing set forward in the sayd towne and Church, his Maie∣sty arriued there, vppon Thursday the seauentéenth of February last, without any triumphant entry, which the French kinges doo vse to make, at the towne where they are to bee annoynted, the day before the solemnization thereof: but in respect that at the re∣duction of the sayd towne into his Maiesties obedience, he had al∣ready there made his entry, as also that since he hath many times gone thether, and there soiourned a long tyme together, he now néeded not to doo it agayne. Vppon Saterday the nynetéenth of the sayd moneth, the Holy Voyalt, (so tearmed there) preciously preserued in the Abbay of Marmoustier néere the citty of Tours, euer sence that miraculou∣sly it wrought Saint Martins health, was brought to the citty of Chartres, béeing thether conducted, from the auncient dwelling place thereof, by the Lord of Souure, Gouernour and the Kinges Lieuetenant Generall in the land and Duchy of Tourayne, ac∣companyed with foure Fryers of the sayd Abbay, who had the cu∣stody thereof, And béeing arriued at Chartres, it was there with great ceremony, carried by one of the sayd Fryers, from the gate of the towne, to Saint Peters Abbay, béeing attended by the Clergy, and a great number of people, the stréetes béeing all the way hanged, in honor and reuerence of so precious a rellike. From the day of his Maiesties arriuall, vntill Saterday the sixe and twentieth of the sayd moneth, they finished all the prepa∣ratiues for the ceremonies of the annoynting, before begunne. Thether was brought the Imperiall close Crowne, the middle Crowne, the Royall Scepter, the hand of Iustice, the cloake
Royall, the Shirt, the Sandalls, the Spurres, the Swoord, the Tunicle, and the Dalmatike, with all other the ornamentes Roy∣all, all which were to bée new made, as fayre and ritch as might bée, by reason that the fellonious minds of the rebelles had molten, defaced, & wasted the others, which time out of minde had bene re∣serued in the Church of S. Dennis in France to serue for the kings annoynting. Howbeit by this particular and so execrable a déede, they haue declared that they meant to root out as well the tokens, markes, and ornaments of royalty, as the effect and name thereof. And as most accursedly they found meanes to murther the sacred person and Maiesty of him that before held it, so haue they sence his death diuersly attempted the like against the person of him that now holdeth it. Vppon Saterday the sixeteenth of the sayde moneth about eight of the clocke at night, the king came to the sayd Church of our Lady, there to doo his deuotions and to be shriuen, he would haue heard Euensong according to the auncient custome, as other kinges did vse to heare them in the Church appoynted for their an∣noynting vpon the Eeue, if the rule of the holy time of Lent could so haue permitted: After his prayers deuoutly made, he entred in∣to his Oratory, erected vnder a tent of twoo fadome and a halfe square of purple damaske, with a border aboue of violet veluet, set full of Fleure de Luces, and there was shriuen by hys Confessor Monsieur Benedict, Curate of Saint Eustace in Paris, and no∣minated bishop of Troy. After shrift, hee returned to his lodging in the Bishop of Chartres Pallace. Furthermore forasmuch as all the Carpets, Tapistry for clothes of Estate, for Chayres, Pillowes, Cushions and other like kept to serue at the ceremony of the kinges annoyntinges, had likewise bene stollen, pilfered, and purloyned by the rebells, as were the ornaments royall, they were driuen to make new, not so stately as the former, but such as the shortnesse of tyme, and tyme it selfe could permit. First the Quier of the sayd Church, was all decked and hanged with ritch Tapistry. All before the sayd Aultar vnto the stepp whereupon stood the
Holy water stocke, was couered with Carpets and aboue and néere to the said high Aulter was set and placed the Chaire where∣in the Bishop of Chartres, then subrogated in stéede of the Arch∣bishop Duke of Rheims, first Péere Ecclesiasticall was to execute, being couered with a rich Carpet. Where, note that hence foorth throughout this discourse, we will terme the said Lorde Bishop of Chartres Archbishop of Rheims, in respect that he tooke his place and executed his Office. Ouer against the said Chaire, some nine or tenne foote behinde, was erected a high Cloth of estate of halfe a foote déepe, and two fadome and a halfe square, couered with ritch Tapistrye, where was placed an other Chaire richly adorned and couered with a Cloth of estate: Also betwéene the Kinges Chaire and the Arch∣bishops was placed an oratorie Deske couered with Cloth of sil∣uer all Damasked with red leaues, and two Cushions of the same, whereof the lowest was some fiue quarters long, to serue both for his Maiestie and for the said Lord Archbishop, when hee lyeth groueling with his Maiestie during the Letanie according as by the ceremonie is expedient and hereafter shall be shewed. Behind the King was there placed a stoole couered with blew Satten pouldered with flowers de Luce, whereupon should sit (as afterward he did) hee that supplyed the place of Constable: And a∣bout some thrée foote behinde that, was there an other stoole ador∣ned as the former, for the Lord Chaunceler. And againe some thrée foote behinde that was there an other seate so couered for the Lords great master, great Chamberline, and chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber. And thus were they afterward placed as hereafter shall be shewed. On the right side of the high Aulter was there a great seate co∣uered with Carpets, whereupon were set the Péeres Ecclesiasti∣call, except the Archbishop of Rheims, who was to be sometimes at the Aulter, sometimes elsewhere, according as by the ceremo∣nies to execute. Behinde the saide Péeres Ecclesiasticall vpon an other seate were placed other Clergie men who were not to bee imployed a∣bout the misterie of the anointing, and behind vpon an other forme,
the Counsellers that were of the law, the presidents and Counsel∣lers of the Courte of Parliament, translated to Tours, whome the King had sent for to assist this ceremony. In the Bishops and ordinaries seates on the right side of the Aulter were placed the Secretaries of estate. Betwéene the foresaid formes and the Bishops seate stoode the Singing men of the Kings Chappell, among whome were also some of his Chamber, ready to sing as time should require. On the left side of the high Aulter stoode an other long forme, furnished as that on the right side for the Péeres laye. Behinde the same vpon a little forme close to the Pauillion of the oratorie sat the Venetian Ambassador alone, being the onely Ambassadour resident about his Maiestie. And in the same rowe vpon an other forme sat the Lord Duke of Montbason sonne to the Lord Prince of Guemene, the Lord of O, and the Lord of Reque∣laure. The first being appointed after the Communion to receiue the Kings Crowne, and to carrie it before him into the hall of the pallace Royal, where the dinner was to be kept: The second to ease the King at the offering, at the Communion and at his departure from Church of the Scepter Royall: The third likewise of the hand of Iustice. Behind that forme vpon two other formes sat certaine knights of the holy Ghost with other Lords as well of other callings as of the Counsell. There were also round about the quiere scaffolds whereto they ascended on the out side by fower paire of Timber staires. Vpon neerest on the right hand were placed the Ladies, Prin∣cesses, Ladies of the Court and sundry Lords, Gentlemen and Gentlewemen. On the saide side néere the Princesses stoode my Maisters of the great Counsell and of the Treasury, with other notable parsona∣ges that then were in the towne both men and women, who were thether admitted by the Captaine of the Guard and the Masters of the ceremonies. In the other Galleries and almost vp to the highest Glasse win∣dowes both in the quire and body of the Church, stoode such others
as could thrust in or finde any place. At the end néere to the Tribunal were placed the hundred Gen∣tlemen. On the stage of the quire vnder the Crucifix was erected and placed his Maiesties throne Royall in manner following. In the middest of the saide stage was made a platforme of seauen or eight foote long and fiue foote broad, whereto from the said stage they ascended by fower steppes, vpon this platforme stoode the Kinges Chaire in such sorte that being set, such as were in the quire might sée him from the stomacke vpward and such as were in the body from the wast vpward as indéede they did when he was gone vp and set. Ouer it was there a Cloth of estate of Violet veluet, pouldered with flower de Luces of Golde. Before the said Chaire was placed an oratorie Deske vnder the which and vpon the playne of the saide stage was there a seate pro∣uided for him that supplyed the Constables roome. At the right hand vpon the platforme was erected a seate for the Lord great Chamberline, and at the left hand vpon the first and lowest step of the said platforme was a place for the chiefe Gentle∣men of the Chamber. Before his Maiestie vpon the flat of the saide stage at the right side was the seate prepared for Lord Chaunceler, and the left side for the Lord great Maister, all who shall hereafter be called by their names and Offices. At the Kings right hand néer to the rayle of the saide stage that looketh into the body of the Church were seates for the Péeres Ecclesiasticall, and at the left hand for the Péeres lay. And all the throne, seates, footepases and sides of the said stage were decked with rich Tapistry. And betwéene the barre of the said rayle of the stage, and the seates prouided for the said Péeres stoode some of the hundred Gen∣tlemen. At the end of the said stage on the Kings right hand was erected an other Aulter, whereon to sing Masse before his Maiestie. To ascend to the said throne there was in the quire two Tim∣ber staires, one on the right hand, an other on the left of the high Aulter, furnished on each side with rayles, pillers and barres all hanged with Tapistry and Carpets.
Vpon Sunday the seauen and twentie of Februarie being the day of ye ceremony of anointing. the Lord of Rhodes, great Maister of the ceremonies, together with the Lord of Surenne, steward ordinary of the Kings house, came to the Church at thrée of the clocke in the morning to take order for all things necessarie: Also the Lord of Chasteau-vieup, Captaine of the Scottish guard for the Kings body, came soone after to prouide against the disorder and presse of such as sought to get into the Church, and vnto the scaffoldes, and to place euery one according to the prescribed order, or as the best knew the desert of their parsons. About sixe of the clocke in the morning the King sent fower young Lords, Barrons to the Abbie of S. Peter, where was kept the holy Vyall that was brought from Marmoustier, to desire the aforenamed Friers of Marmoustier that kept it, to bring it into our Lady Church, thereout to take of the holy Oyle, which was to be imployed vpon the annointing of his Maiestie. Which fower Barrons according to the custome obserued about the ceremonie of the holy Vyall in the Church of S. Remy of Rheims did binde them selues to restore it in the said Abbay of S. Peter, and to the saide Friers after the end of the annointing: As also the Lord of Souur had before bound him selfe to the Abbot and Friers of S. Peter for the restitution thereof. These fower Barrons were the Earle of Lausun, eldest sonne to the Earle of Lausun of the house of Caument: The Earle of Dinan, second sonne to the Lord of Pienner Duke of Hallioin. The Earle of Cheuerny, eldest sonne to the Earle of Cheuerny, Chaunceler of Fraunce, and the Lord Barron of Termes, younger brother to the Lord of Bellegard, great Esquire of Fraunce. These fower at the Kings commaundement departed from the pallace Royall with their Esquires and Gentlemen, each of them hauing borne before him vpon the end of the speare the banner of his armes in perfect coullours leading with them a white Hacnie, whereupon should ride the Frier that was to carry and recarry, and indéede did carry and recarrie the said holy Vyall, with a Ca∣napie of white Dammaske, which still should bee carried ouer the saide Frier both going from the Abbay, and returning after the end
of the annointing. Then the said Frier accompanyed with the said fower Barrons departed from the said Abbay with a Canna∣pie borné ouer him by fower Friers apparelled in white Albes, all the stréetes from the said Abbay of S. Pere to the great Church were hanged, and the people with great respect and deuotion reue∣renced the said holy Vyall. Soone after the departure of the fower Barrons, departed also from the pallace Royall the six Péeres lay, thrée Dukes, and thrée Earles, apparelled in Tunicles of Cloth of siluer Dammasked with redde leaues, comming almost to the midde legge, and vpon the same a cloke or short gowne of Cloth Searge dyed Violet vp∣on Scarlet, open vpon the right shoulder with a round coller tur∣ned downe with the garnish, and turning downe Furred with powdered ermins. Euery of the thrée Dukes had vpon his head his Ducall hat of golde, and euery Earle his Circle of golde. Howbeit in as much as of these thrée Dukes and thrée Coun∣ties auncient Péeres lay, represented by these sixe, fiue of the Pay∣ryes are annexed to the Crowne, and the Countie of Flaunders is out, the French Kings hath since this annexion vouchsafed to re∣present the six Péeres and Payries by so many Princes and Lords attendant about their parsons. And those that at this ceremonie of annointing, representing the saide six dignities are these that fol∣low. The Prince of Condy, representing the Duke of Burgondy Deane of the Péeres. The Countie of Soyssais, representing the Duke of Norman∣die. The Duke of Montpensier, representing the Duke of Aqui∣taine. The Lord of Lupembourg, representing the Countie of Tho∣louze. The Duke of Rays Marshall of France representing the Coun∣tie of Flaunders. The Duke of Vantadon, representing the Countie of Cham∣pagne.
The sixe Péeres lay, thus apparelled and cloathed, came to the Church about seauen of the clocke in the morning, and entring in∣to the Quier, hauing perfourmed theyr due reuerences, came to the high Aultar, where was the Archbishop of Rheims, accom∣panyed wyth the other fiue Péeres Ecclesiasticall, who were come a little before wyth theyr Myters vppon theyr heades, and great Coapes, sitting already on the right side of the sayd Aultar, vppon the two large seates before mentioned, in order following. The fiue Péeres Ecclesiasticall alwayes assistant at the kings annoynting, or in whose absence, or when any of the Seas bée voyd, the kinges doo surrogate others, as these. The Bishop Duke of Laon. The Bishop Duke of Langres. The Bishop County of Beauuais. The Bishop County of Chaalous. The Bishop County of Noyen. And because the Bishops of Laon, Langres, Beauuais, and Noyen were not present, also that the Bishop of Chaulous who was in the city of Chartres was so sicke, that hee could not assist at the sayd ceremony, there to take his place, The Kings pleasure was, that these fiue dignities should bee represented by fiue other Bishops, that then were at the Court, namely these. The Bishop of Nantes, representing the Bishop D. of Laon. The Bishop of Digne, representing the Bishop D. of Langres The Bishop of Maillesais, representing the Bishop County of Beauuais. The Bishop of Orleans, representing the Bishop County of Chaalons. The Bishop of Angiers, representing the Bishop County of Noyon. The sayd eleuen Péeres béeing thus sett, and the sayd Lord Archbishop of Rheims making the twelfth, sitting in his chayre with his backe to the Aultar. They altogether, according to the custome, did appoint the Bishops of Nantes and Maillesais repre∣senting the Bishop of Laon and Beauuois, who with the Rel∣liques of Saintes hanging at their neckes, and accompanyed with
the Cannons, Vicars, and Chaplens of the sayd Church, the two Crosses, the Holy water, and the Encensers goyng before them, and accompanyed with the sayd Lord of Surenne, came processio∣nally into his Maiesties outward chamber. In the sayd chamber was prepared a bed, wherevppon the king was layed cloathed in a shirt of holland, slit before and behind to the end thereby to receiue the holy oyntment, and therevppon a dublet of crimson satten for the same cause likewise slit before and behinde, and a gowne of cloth of siluer, with sléeues comming to the mid legge. And when the sayd Lordes Bishops of Laon and Langres came into the sight of his Maiesty, the Bishop of Laon sayd the prayer following. Oremus. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus &c. This prayer ended and doone, the sayd Lord Bishop of Laon on the right side, and hée of Langres on the left side, reuerently and kissing theyr handes, lifted the king from his bed, and proces∣sionally brought him to the Church in order following. First marched the Lord of Surenne, who caused the Archers of the great Prouost to march first. Then the Clergy that had accompanied the sayd two Prelats Péeres. The Switzers of the kinges guard. The Trumpets. The Herehaults. The Knights of the holy ghost. The Vshers of the kinges chamber, with their maces. The Archers of the Guardes in manner of a hedge. The Scottes néere to the kinges person. Then marched before the king, the Lord of Matignon, Mare∣shall of France, representing the Constable, cloathed in a tunicle of cloth of siluer, damasked with violet: the cloke and circle vpon his head like to one of the Péeres Counties lay, bearing in his right hand a naked sword the point vpward. After the sayd Lord Constable, marched alone the Lord Coun∣ty of Cheuerny Chauncelor of Fraunce, apparelled in a tunicle of red Crimson veluet, comming downe to the féete, with a cloake
or halfe gowne, foulded and furred with Ermines, two limbes of the same, each shoulder couered with gold lace: and the morter of cloth of Gold vpon his head. After him marched the Lord County of Saint Paul, represen∣ting the Lord Great Master, with his staffe vpright in his right hand, on the right side of hym, the Lord Duke of Longueuille, Great Chamberlayne, and on the left side, the Lord of Bellegard great Esquier, and taking his place as chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber, all thrée apparelled in tunicles and cloakes as Péeres lay. The Duke of Longueuill hauing vppon his head his Ducall hat, as a Duke Péere, the other twoo with circles as County Peeres, and two limbes vppon their cloakes. In the meane tyme after the aforenamed prayer, the Cannons and singing men sung the Respons. following: Responsorium. Ecce mitto Angelum meum &c. Then the Clergy staying a little at the Church doore, the Lord Bishop of Beauuais sayd the prayer following: Oremus. Deus qui scis humanum genus &c. The mayer done, the Cannons entring into the Church, and comming into the Quier doore, sung this Antheme: Antiphona: Domine in virtute tua laetabitur Rex &c. The Antiphony ended, and the king béeing come before the high Aultar, he was by the foresayd Bishops, presented to the sayd Archbishop, who then began to say the prayer following. Oremus. Omnipotens Deus caelestium &c. This prayer as also the kinges béeing ended, hee was by the sayd Bishops of Laon and Beauuais, brought to hys chayre pre∣pared as is aforesayd, ouer against the Archbishops chayre. At his right hand stood the Lord of Chasteau-vieux, Captayne of the Scottish guard of the kings body with the said Scotts néere to his Ma. person. At his left hand was the L. of Praslaine captaine of the French Guard, and two foote before the king, at his right hand stood, the Lord of Chauigny, Captaine of one of the Companies of a hundred Gentlemen, and at the left, the Lord of Ramtouillet the Captayne of the other, and the sayd hundred Gentlemen confused∣ly néere vnto theyr Captaines.
Behinde the king sate the sayd Lord Constable with∣out any sword: for, comming toward the high Aultar, hée had deliuered the swoord into the handes of one of his Es∣quiers, to the end to take vp that which serued for the my∣stery of the Coronation, as shall heereafter be shewed: The Lord Chauncelor behind him, both vppon the stoole afore described, Also behinde the sayd Lord Chauncelor vppon an other seat, sate the Lord Great Master, and the Lord High Chamberlayne in the middest, and the chiefe Gentleman of his Chamber. The aforesayd prayers béeing ended, and taryeng the comming of the holy Vyoll, the Archbishop gaue Holy water to hys Maiesty, and to the sayd Lordes Péeres both Spirituall and Temporall, and then the Quier bee∣gan to sing the Thirdes. Vnderstanding that the Holy Vyoll came, the sayd Lord Archbishop pontifically apparelled, came in Pro∣cession to méete it, béeing accompanyed wyth certayne Prelates and Cannons of hys Church, both the Crosses marching béefore him vnto the great Porch of the church, and so it was brought into the Chappell of Vandosme, where the sayd Lord Archbishop tooke it and brought it vp into the Quier, and at the receyuing thereof, was sung this Antheme. O preciosum munus, O preciosa gemma, cuius visi∣bili & inuisibili dono, inuisibilia percipimus. Versus. Inueni Dauid seruum meum &c. Responsio. Oleo sancto vnxi cum &c. Oremus. Omnipotens sempiterne Deus &c. Then came the aforesayd four Barons into the Quier, each bringing in his hand, the Staffe with the Banner of his Armes, and sate downe in the Cannons seates, on the left hand. This doone the Lord Archbishop went into the Ve∣stry
prouided for him behind the High Aultar, there to put on his Pontificall habites, as it were to sing Masse, assi∣sted by the Abbot of Saint Genouieue of Paris, and the Deane of his Church of Chartres, the Deane to reade the Epistle, & the Abbot the Gospel, with twelue Canons in the habite of Deacons and Subdeacons, then retur∣ning to the High Aultar, the king rose out of hys chayre to doo him honor, and the king sitting downe agayne, the Archbishop came to hym to make his requestes, and to take hys Oathes and promises, in the name of all the Churches to him subiect as followeth. A nobis perdonari petimus &c. The kinges aunsweare and Promise. Promitto vobis & perdono &c. After that his Maiesty had made this Promise, and taken this Oath, the sayd Bishops of Laon and Beau∣nais, lifted him out of his chayre, then as hee so stood, they asked the people and assistants, whether they accepted him for their king, and hauing as it were taken the con∣sent of the people and the whole assistance, the sayd Lord Archbishop caused hym to take the Oath to the Realme, with his hand vppon the Gospels, which, after his promise he kissed in this manner. The kinges Promise and Oath. Haec populo Christiano &c. After this Oath and promise béeing made, the sayd Lord Archbishop went toward the habits and ornaments Royall, which as is aforesayd, were prepared and layde vpon the Aultar, before whome the king was brought by the Bishops of Laon and Beauuais, and there by the chiefe Gentleman of his chamber, hee was vncloathed of
his short gowne of cloth of siluer with sléeues, and stan∣ding in his satten dubblet, the sayd Lord Archbishop sayd ouer him, this that followeth. Versus. Adiutorium &c. Oremus. Deus inenarrabilis author mundi &c. This prayer ended, the Lord great Chamberlaine put him on his bootes or sandalls afore mentioned, and the Lord Prince of Conty, kéeping the state of the Duke of Burgondy, put him on his spurres, and presently tooke them off againe. Then did the Archbishop blesse the Sword within the scabbard in this manner. Oremus. Exaudi quaesumus Domine praeces no∣stras &c. This prayer ended, the sayd Lord Archbishop girt on the kinges sword, and straight vngirt it agayne, and toke it naked into his hand, leauing the scabbard vppon the Aultar, and holding it naked, sayd the prayer following, deliuering the said sword into the kinges hand, who in all humility receiued it, and held it vpright with the point vp∣ward, vntill the end of the prayer and Antheme following Oremus. Accipe hunc gladium. Then was sung this Antheme. Comfortare & esto vi &c. Oremus. Deus qui prudentia tua &c. The king hauing kissed the Sword, with all humility offered it, and layd it vppon the Aultar, and immediately the sayd L. Archbishop tooke it, and returned it into the kinges hand, béeing vppon his knees, who immediately deliuered it to the Lord Constable, who alwayes carried it naked before him, throughout all other actes that were doone, and all dinner time, the sayd Lord Archbishop pro∣céeding in the prayer ouer the sayd Lord still knéeling. Oremus. Prospice omnipotens &c.
Another blessing. Oremus. Benedic Domine &c. Oremus. Deus pater aeterne &c. The sayd prayers béeing ended, the Archbishop tur∣ned to the High Aultar, to prepare the holy Oyntment in manner and forme following. He tooke a plate of gold, wherevppon hee layd the holy Cresme, so much as was requisite for the annointing of a Bishop. Then out of the sayd Holy Vyoll with a golden néedle, he tooke the quantity of a peaze of the Holy Oyle, which with his finger he mixed with the said holy Cresme While the sayd Archbishop thus prepared the holy oyntment, the Chanter of the Church began the Respon. following, which the kinges Chapell did prosecute. Responsorium. Super gentem Francorum incli∣tam, simul cum rege suo nobili, Christus Oleo exulta∣tionis &c. Versus. Emitte spiritum tuum Domine & crea∣buntur. Responsorium. Et renouabis faciem terrae. Oremus. Deus a nobis &c. After this prayer, the king came to the Deske of hys Oratory, and the Archbishop with him, there to tende to their deuout contemplations, during the which, the sayd Prelats began the Letany, and the Quier aunsweared, as followeth. Letania. The Prelates began. Kyrie Eleyson. Heere the King did arise and the Archbishop likewise, who turning to the sayd Lord, and holding hys Crosse in his hand, sung the thrée verses following, the Quier aun∣swearing him. Vt hunc praesentem &c. This verse thrise repeated, and aunsweared by the Quier, the sayd Lord Archbishop returned to his Deske
néere to the King and the Bishops procéeded in the rest of the Letany as followeth. Vt regibus & principibus &c. The Letany being ended, the King and the Bishops fell groueling vppon the earth, and the sayd Archbishop standing vp with a loud voyce sayd. Pater noster &c. Then the Archbishop sayd these prayers following ouer the king before he annoynted him, and sate as if hée should haue consecrated a Bishop. Te inuocamus &c. After the prayers the Lord Archbishop, holding the plate wherevpon lay the holy oyntment, began to an∣noynt his Maiesty. First vpon the Crowne of his Head. Secondly hauing put off his dubblet and shirt, vppon the brest. Thirdly betwéene the two shoulders. Fourthly vpon the right shoulder. Fifthly vpon the left shoulder. Sixtly in the bowing of the right arme. Seauenthly in the bowing of the left arme. And at euer̄y of the sayd annoyntinges the said Arch∣bishop sayd. Vngo te in Regem &c. And they all aunsweared Amen. And during these annoyntinges the singing men sung this Antheme. Antiphona. Vnxerunt Salomonem Regem. After which Antheme, the sayd Lord Archbishop sayd the prayer following. Oremus. Christe perunge hunc Regem. The prayers sayd & ended, the Lord Archbishop wyth the Prelates assistant, tooke him vp and closed the slittes
of the dubblet and of the shirt: and then the Lord great Chamberlaine deliuered to the king the garmentes that he was to weare aboue the sayd dubblet: that is to say, the tunicle, or the same which representeth a Subdeacon. The Dalmatike, or the same that representeth a Deacon, and the cloke Royall, representing the Chasuble. The king being thus cloathed, the Archbishop tooke a∣gayne the plate whereuppon lay the holy oyntment, and layd some vpon the palme of the kinges right hand, for the right annoynting. Then in the palme of the left hand for the ninth annointing, saying: Vngantur manus istae de oleo &c. The kinges handes thus annointed and hallowed, hée layeth them close vppon his brest, and then deliuereth him a payre of hallowed gloues, wherin he putteth his hands, and this is the blessing of the gloues. Oremus. Omnipotens creator qui homini &c. The said Lord Archbishop hauing blessed the sayd gloues, and putting them vpon the kings handes, sayth: Circunda domine manus &c. Then the said Lord Archbishop blessed the Ring, and said as followeth. Oremus. Deus totius creaturae &c. After this blessing, the sayd Lord Archbishop put on the Ring, wherewith the king marrieth the Realme, vpon the fourth finger of his right hand, saying: Accipe anulum signaculum &c. This prayer sayd, the Lord Archbishop tooke the Scepter Royall from the Aultar, and put it into the kings right hand, saying: The deliuery of the Scepter. Accipe sceptrum re∣giae potestatis &c. Immediately the sayd Lord Archbishop deliuered hym the hand of Iustice into his left hand, saying:
Accipe virgam virtutis &c. All thinges thus ended, the Lord Chauncelor standing against the Aultar, and turning his face to the king and the assistants, with a loud voyce called the twelue Péeres according to their orders and dignities. First beginning with the lay, as followeth. My Lord Prince of Conty, who serue for the Duke of Burgundy, present your selfe in this action. My Lord County of Soysons, who serue for the D. of Normandy, present your selfe. My Lord Duke of Montpensier, who serue for the D. of Aquitaine, present your selfe. My Lord of Luxenburg, who serue for the County of Tholouse, present your selfe. My Lord Duke of Rayz, who serue for the County of Flaunders, present your selfe. My Lord Duke of Vantadour, who serue for the County of Champaigne, present your selfe. As for the Péeres Ecclesiasticall, they were likewise called according to the former prescript, and according to their callinges, both of the representers and of the repre∣sented. The sayd conuocation ended, the Archbishop did rise out of his chayre, and turned to the High Aultar, from whence hée tooke the close Crowne, and held it ouer the kinges head, without touching the same, whereto imme∣diately all the Péeres both temporall and spirituall set their handes to supporte it, and the saide Archbishop sayd thus: Coronet te Deus corona gloriae. &c. This prayer ended, the sayd Archbishop set and placed the Crowne vpon the Kinges head, still staying it with his left hand, whereto all the other Péeres likewise set their handes, and the Archbishop said the prayer following
Accipe coronam regni &c. After the coronation, he sayd this prayer. Oremus. Deus perpetuitabis &c. The blessing, Extendet omnipotens &c. The second blessing ouer the king. Benedic domine &c. All these prayers finished and ended, the said Archbi∣shop tooke the king by the sléeue of his right arme, and the sayd Lord still held in his handes the Scepter, and the Hand of Iustice: and the said Péeres both temporall and Spirituall, were round about the said Lord, and as much as in them lay, did put their handes to the Crowne: Be∣fore him marched the Lord Constable, with the Sworde naked in his hand: then the Lord Chauncelor alone: then the Lord Great Master, on his right hand the Lord great Chamberlaine, and on his left, the chiefe Gentleman of his chamber. Then did the Archbishop bring the king to his throne and High Seate, prepared vpon the stage as is aforesayd, the traine of whose cloke royall was carried by the Lord of Saint Luke: and as the king was aboue, and his back turned to the body of the church, the said Archbishop still holding of him, said as followeth. Sta & retine a modo statum quem huc vsque &c. Then the said Archbishop holding the king by the hand caused him to sit downe, saying: In hoc regni solio confirmet te &c. This prayer ended and the king being set in his throne the said Archbishop tooke off his Mitre, and after great reuerence and honor by him done to his Maiesty, he kis∣sed him, and then sayd. Vinat rex in aeternum &c, After him all the other Péeres kissed him, the Péeres Ecclesiasticall first beginning, saying thus.
Viuat Rex in aeternum &c. Then the people gaue a great shout, crying, God saue the king: and immediately the Harguebuzes shot off, and after them the great Ordinance, and the Trumpets, cor∣nets, hautbois, drommes and other instruments sounded, and the said Lord Archbishop began. Te Deum laudamus, béeing accompanied with the Organs and other Musicke. During all this ioy and acclamation, the Herrauldes cryed a Largesse, wherevppon were cast foorth a great number of péeces of Gold and Siluer, some mony cur∣rant, others coyned purposely and marked with the kings picture. After the sayd Lord Archbishop had inthronized the king in his seat royall, and perfourmed euery thing as a∣foresaid, he went downe and returned to the high Aultar, there to solemnize the High Masse, and in the meane time, was the kings Ordinary low Masse said at the Aul∣tar prouided vpon the stage, at the right hand as is afore∣sayd, the Scepter and Hand of Iustice béeing layd vpright at each side of the sayd Lords Oratory Deske: And when they came to the Gospell of the High Masse his Maiesty arose, and the Prince of Conty, representing the Duke of Burgundy, tooke off his crowne and set it vpon the cussion that lay vpon the sayd Deske or leaning pew. Here we are to note that so often as the king returned neuer so little to the body of the church, the people béeing an infinite number, cryed, God saue the King. And the church rung with theyr cries, and with Harguebuze shot. Vpon the top of the stayre, on the right hand, descen∣ding toward the Quier, vpon the first step, stood vpright and bare head, the Lord of Rhodes, Great Master of the ceremonies, with a staffe in his hand, bending downe∣ward: vppon the left stayre stood the Lord of Surenne
with his staffe downe. Vpon both the stayres from step to step stoode the Har∣roulds bareheaded in their coates of Armes: And lower vpon the staire on the right hand stoode the Lord County of Mauleurier captaine of the garde of Suitzers. The Deane of our Lady Church of Chartres red the Epistle, and the Abbot of Saint Genouese of Paris read the Gospell, which doone, the Harrouldes first came downe from the two staires, then the Lord of Rhodes, af∣ter him the Archbishop Patriarcke of Bourges, the Kings great Amner, apparelled in his pontificals of Vio∣let coullour, attended vpon by diuers notable Clergie men, came to the Aulter, where the foresaid Abbot tooke the booke of the Gospels and carried it from the said Aulter vp to the stage betwéene his hands, the said Archbishop of Bourges still following him. In this order and with al this braue ceremonie they all ascended vnto the stage, and there the saide Lord of Bourges caused the King to kisse the said Gospells. Which doone, the said Archbishoppe of Burges with other Clergie men aforesaide came downe the staires the same way they went vp, and in like cere∣mony as before returned the booke of Gospels to the Aul∣ter, where the Abbot still remained by the Lord Arch∣bishop of Rheims to serue him as a Deacon, and the saide Archbishop of Bourges returning vp sat him downe néere the King in the accustomed place of the great Amner. When they came to the offertorie, four Lorde, knights of the holy Ghost, who during the whole ceremonie afore∣said had sit vpon the right side in the Cannons seates, de∣parted from their places in manner following. The first, who was the Lord of Sourdis carried the wine in a vessell of golde, chased. The second, Lord of Souure who carried a siluer loafe vpon a Cuishion.
The third, Lord of Antragues carried a loafe of golde vpon a Cushion. The fowrth Lord Countie of Escars carried a rich Purse, garnished with thirtene peeces of gold, hauing the Kings stampe and portraiture, euery of them waying fiue and twentie Crownes, which purse lay vpon a Cush∣ion. Before these fower Lords marched seauen kinghts at armes and Harroulds, who not omitting any of the re∣uerences requisite in such a case, ascended euen to the Kings throne, and being come thether, returned againe in order following. First marched the seauen Harrouldes, and with them two Hushers of the Kinges Chamber, with their Ma∣ces, next the fower Lords carriers of the offerings. After them, the Lord Chaunceler, the Lord Maister and Lord Counstable bearing the sword naked in his hand. Then came the King enuironed with all his Péeres, bearing the Scepter in his right hand, and the hand of Iustice in the left: And there remained at the said throne as it were to kéepe it, the Lord great Chamberline and the chiefe Gentleman of the Chamber. The King thus accompani∣ed, being come to the high Aulter, the Harroulds and Hushers, then the Lord Counstable, Chaunceler, and great Maister tooke sides and made way for the Lords of O, and Roquelord, who very reuerently to ease his Ma∣iestie, tooke at the Kings hands, the one the Scepter, the other the hand of Iustice. Then the Lord Countie of Es∣cars, who carried the purse after a low reuerence, deliue∣red it into the Kings hands to offer: The like did the Lord of Antragues with the loafe of golde, also the Lorde of Souure with the silver loafe & the Lord of Sourdis with the vessell of wine. The offering in this manner ended, and the King ta∣king
againe the Scepter and the hand of Iustice, returned to his throne and high seate, accompanyed as before, the quire singing God saue the King, and the fower Lordes that carried the offerings returned to the seates wher they sat before. The Masse being ended vnto Pax Domini, before the Archbishop of Rheims had ended it said ouer the King and people this prayer following. Benedicat tibi Dominus &c. The said Lord Archbishop procéeding and hauing sung Pax Domini, the Archbishop of Bourges, great Amner with the Clergie aforesaid, and the Kinges amners, the Lord great Maister of the ceremonies and the Harroulde, went to the Aulter and taking the Pax at the Archbishop of Rheims hand, kissed him on the chéeke. That done, he returned vp to the Kings seate and throne, and presented him the Pax and after the King had kissed it, al the Péeres first the Ecclesiasticall, then the lay did the like. In the meane time the Archbishop of Rheims, procée∣ding in the office, blessed the banner Royall, saying as followeth. Inclina Domine aurem tuam, &c. Heere followeth the Collect or first prayer saide at Masse vpon the day of this solemnitie. Collecta. Quaesumus omnipotens Deus &c. The second prayer, saide in screte. Munera quaesumus Domine, &c. The last prayer of the Masse, or past Communion. Post Communio. Haec Domine, &c. Oratio salutari, &c. The Masse thus ended the saide Lord of Rheims lea∣uing vpon the Aulter, tarieth vntill the other Péeres both Ecclesiasticall and lay, brought downe the King to the Aulter. The King being come thether, entered into his
pauillion afore mentioned, there to reconcile him selfe, with his confessor aforesaid, then comming forth againe, he knéeled downe before the high Aulter, and hauing saide the Confiteor, and receiued absolution, which was giuen him by the said Archbishop doing the office. The Prince of Condy took of his Crowne, and the other Péeres lay tooke off the attire off his head, and he receiued the precious bo∣dy of our Lord, vnder both formes of bread and wine in great deuotion and perfect humilitie, and then tooke againe his great Crowne. This done the said Lord Archbishop of Rheims tooke of that Crowne and set him on a lighter and meaner, and then was the great Crowne deliuered to the Duke of Montbason, who was to carry it before the King to his pallace and he carryed it vpon a rich Cushion. The Scepter was deliuered to the Lord of O, and the hand of Iustice to the Lord of Requelore. Then the King thus arayed in his garments Royall, accompanyed with the foresaid Péeres, in like ceremony and order as he came to Church returned to his pallace. The people with great acclamation and signes of ioy, cryed, God saue the King, the Cannons and small shotte played their parts, the trumpets, drumms and other instru∣ments sounded and played, and at the same instant was the holy Vyall brought out of the Church and returned to the Abbay of Saint Pere in like ceremony as it came be∣fore to our Lady Church. The King being returned to his pallace tooke his Chamber, where hee stayed a good while, and shifted him selfe into an other shert, deliuering that to his great amner to vse according to the custome of that shert. Then he came into the great hall of the pallace, at the vpper end whereof hung a high Cloth of estate of some six fadome and a halfe square and thrée foote déepe, and vn∣der
the same a Table nine foote long, whereon the King did eate. On the right hand stoode an other Table and on the left an other. At that on the right hand sat the Lord Péeres Ecclesiasticall in their Copes and Miters, and at that on the left the Peeres lay in their Péeres attire. Some∣what beneath sat the Ambassadours of England and Ve∣nice, the Lord Chanceler, the officers of the Crowne and they that had carried the honours. The Lord Counstable all the while stoode at the end of the Kings Table, with the sword naked and vpright in his hand. The Countie of Saint Paul serued as great Maister, bearing his Staffe vp. The Lord of Rohan as pantler. The Countie of Sauuerre as taster. The Countie of Torigny as caruer. The Gentlemen of the Chamber carried the meate, euery course being accompanied with trumpets, cornets and haultbois, and the Harroulds and stewards of the housholde marching before the Lord great Maister with his staffe downe. Betwéene the Seruice the Musicke sung. Grace was sung in Musicke in manner as the late King caused to bee saide before him, and then euery man with drew himselfe. At night his Maiestie supped in feast Royall. At his Table vnder the Cloth of estate sat Madam his sister, with a distaunce betwéene him and her. On the right hand was the Lady Princesse of Conde, the Lady Dutchesse of Niuernois and her daughter the Lady of Neuers. On the left beneath Madam sat the Lady Princesse of Condy, the Lady of Rohan and the Lady of Raiz.
The Lord Countie of Soissons kept his estate of great Maisters. The Lord Prince of Condy serued as high pantler and carried the first dish. The Duke of Longueuill as high taster. The Lord of Rohan as caruer. To Madam serued the Lord Countye of Mauleurier as pantler. The Lord of Mirepoix as taster. The Countie of Lude as caruer. At euery seruice the trumpets, cornets & drummes did sound, and the Harroulds and Stewards marched before the Lord great Maister, to whom the Lord of Gois of Tillet presented the Towell. The saide Lord great Mai∣ster deliuered it to Madam the Kings sister, who as alrea∣dy set, but she arose from her seate and deliuered it to his Maiestie, to wash his hands. After supper grace was sung in Musicke, and then the King withdrew him to his Chamber, accompanied with Madam, his sister, the Dukes, Duchesses, Princes, Prin∣cesses, Lords and Ladies that were assistant at supper, and hauing stayed there halfe an hower Madam desired to depart, whom the King accompanied to the great Cham∣ber doore, and then euery one withdrew to their rest. The next morning on Munday the twentie eight & last of Februarie, the King would take the coller and order of the holy Ghost according to the purport of the Statutes of the said order founded and made by the late King Hen∣ry the third. The same day at thrée of the clocke in the afternoone he went to our Lady Church in like ceremonie as by the Statute is ordained, causing his officers to go before him, then the prelats, commanders and knights of the same or∣der, apparelled in their long robes and their great collers
about their neckes, and after Compline ended the Lorde Bishop of Chartres in this ceremonie also retaining the place and calling of the Archbishop of Rheims caused him to take the Oath required and appointed by the saide Sta∣tute. After the said Oath taken vpon the booke of the holy Euangelists which the Lord Chaunceler of the order did holde, the Lord of Rhodes put vpon him the great robe of the said order and the saide Lord of Chartres the coller. This done hee went and sat downe in the Chaire of estate where all the said Prelats, knights, commaunders and officers one after another kissed his hands. This ceremony ended, his Maiestie returned to his pallace causing the aforenamed to march before him in like ceremony and pompe as they came. God giue his Maiestie grace to plant peace in his Realme and parson and long to enioy the same, Amen. FINIS.
