13385 99852135 17442
AARONS BELLS A-SOVNDING. In A SERMON, tending cheiftly to admonish the ministerie, of their charge, & duty. Preached by M. SAMVEL HIERON at a ge∣nerall visitation neere Bristow. And now published by them to whom his coppy was entrusted after his death. Mal. 2.1. And now ô Preists this Command∣ment is for you. PRINTED. 1623.
THE EPISTLE TO THE READER. IT was said of old,Ier. 23.15. that from the Pro∣phets of Ierusalem, was wickednes gone forth, into the whole land: And, it may be said, as truly this day. that, the Sinns of the ministers, have infected, the whole Estate. Now indeed, by the rule of the Gospel, it must needs be so: If the light (saith our Saviour) which is in thee,mat 6.23. be darknes, how great is that darknes? If the calling, which should give direction to others, be it selfe corrupted how great must that corruption be? If the founteine be poysoned, all, that drinke thereof, must needs be in danger. I am, by the mercie, of him that hath called me, a Christian: therefore, cannot but even honour, the feete of Gods messengers: I am a minister,Rom. 10.15. and also am bound, to mainteine the credit, of the calling: but let my tongue, cleave to the roofe of my mouth, rather then I shoule use it, to the licking over those sores, which, except they be launced to the quicke, and searched to the bottome, can never be cured. And wretched is that kindnes, which goeth about, to heale the hurt of the church, with sweete words: saying, all is as it should be, when the garden of the Lord, lyeth, like the feild of the Sluggard, and his vineyard, like the vineyard of him that is idle: and Sion, even now,Jer. 4.31. as in time past, sigheth, and stretcheth out her hands, and
cryeth, woe is me, my soule fainteth, because of the mur∣therers! What man can see, the desolation of the Lords howse, by dumbe Idoles, incroaching Simoniacks, drow∣sy Demasses,iob. 32.18 ubiq uitarie Non-residents; but his spirit with in him, (if he have but a dramme of zeale) will even compel him, to lift vp his voyce, and cry a lowd, against those,Esay. 58 1 who have no remorse, over their soules, for whome Christ died? The earnest desire, to fur∣ther by all good meanes, the speedy reformation, of theise grosse corruptions, stirred vp, the worthy Authour, of this fruitfull Sermon, being called to preach at a ge∣nerall visitation) to imploy part, of that precious gift, where with the Lord, in a large measure, had endowed him, to that most necessarie, important purpose. As the text was excellent, for the thing intended: so hath he handled it: I speake my opinion, and doubt not, but thou wilt joyne with me, when thou shalt peruse it: except, thou art forestalled, either against the man, or against the matter: his handling of it, as may be seene, was such, as neither wrung in ought, that might be thought impertinent; nor omitted any observation, which the words, kindly, and voluntarily, might not afford. The sence, is delivered soundly: the division made artificially, the doctrines raysed naturally, prooved substantially,2. tim 2.15. and applyed powerfully; heere is art: the words cut a-right, heere is learning, the declaration of the trueth, heere is eloquence in the plaine evidence of the spirit,1. Cor. 2 4 heere is zeale allayed with mildnes of the spirit, and sharpnes of reproofe, tempered with sweet∣nes of exhortation. Such, as thou seest his Sermon to be, were his weekely exercises: such was his doctrine, such was his life, for
gravitie, admired: for amiablenes, for readines, either to admonish, or exhort, according to occasion, for bowells of compassion, to the poore, even a continuall Sermon. Few such Elthues, so full of matter: such Timothes, so nourished vp, in the words of faith,iob, 32.18. 1. tim. 4.6 Esay. 57.2 and of good doctrine, which he continually followed. And as he walked, before God, in his life time: so now he resteth from his labours, in him: and is joyned to the company of innumerable Angels,Rev. 14. Heb. 12.22.23. mat. 9.28. phil. .23.24. Esay. 57.1 & to the spirits of just and perfect men. It was to the churches great losse, that in this scarsity, of faithfull labourers, he abode no longer in the flesh: but, as for him, it was a benefit, to be so soone dissolved, being thereby taken from the evill to come: and gone to Christ which is best of all. But, I will hold thee no longer, from perusing this, his after-worke, which by Gods providence, comeing to my hands, I thought my selfe bound in conscience, to impart vnto thee. I pray God the reading it, may so worke with thee, that, if thou be a minister, it may either reforme thee; or incourage thee; according as, thou art either lyable to the reproofe, or, capable of the comfort herein contei∣ned: or, if thou be a private Christian, it may both be∣get, & increase in thee, a reverence, to the ministers of God: & such a deepe detestation, of theise enormous corruptions, heere taxed: that thou mayst become a daylie suttour, at the throne of grace, that the Lord, for his owne name sake, and for his poore churches sake, would vouchsafe, spee∣dity to reforme them, Amen! {inverted ⁂}
A post-script to the Reader. CVrteous Reader, we must renew the common, and ordinarie request, at thy hands: namely, to conceive the better, of such, as had the peru∣sing, and printing this Sermon: when thou shalt meete with some few places therein (for they are not many) more difficult, then can be wel vnderstood: & other, petty, small faults, of the presse. For the one, know, the Coppy came to vs miserably written, which therefore craved a necessitie of retrans∣cribing, wherein were some places hard to be read: yet being loth, to leave out any sentence, or peice of a sentence, which we could make English of, we put some words downe, at a venture. For the other, know, that it was printed, where, our language is a stranger: and by such, as could neither vn∣derstand nor speake the same: and therefore, it could not be, but that more then ordinarie slips, and solaecis∣mes, in our tongue, must be committed: but sticke not thou, at theise triffling errours; make vse of the solid, and substantiall matter, thou shalt find in the worke: and give God the glory of his owne trueth, tho in the light thereof, a little obscured, with the motes, of hu∣more frailety, from shining, altogether so cleerely to thee. Fare well.
A Fruitfull Sermon preached by a faithfull servant of God, & minister of the gospell at a generall visitation. The text Col. 4.17. And say to Archippus, take heede to the ministerie, which thou hast received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it. AFter the Apostle Paul in the first part of the Epistle had sett downe the summe of the Christian doctri∣ne, & therein shewed what Christ was, both concerning his person, & his office, & how we are made partakers of the benefits of both; & in the second part thereof had disputed with the false Apostles, & confuted their false doctrine & corruptions: & in the third place had sett downe precepts concerning manners & ex∣hortations to a Christian, adding in the end of all, freindly & brotherly salutations: he comes to admo∣nish them of a duty which they were to performes to Archippus their minister, in theise words. Say to Ar∣chippus take heede to the ministerie &c. It appeareth by theise words that Archippus was a minister of the church at Colossia; & because he was negligent in his dutye, or at least not so diligent & faithfull as both he should & might have beene, he therefore willeth the Colos∣sians to admonish him of his fault, & to stirre him vp to a carefull dis-scharge of his ministerie. Say to Ar∣chippus take heede to the ministerie &c. As if he should
have saide: be vigilant & circumspect, be carefull & watchfull, diligently consider, & marke earnestly what thy calling is, & of what great accounte it is: it is the ministerie, the preaching of the word, the instructing of the people, which thou hast received, not of man, but of the Lord: both, of the Lord who is the authour of the ministerie, & for the Lord who is the end of the ministerie. Thou hast received it by his grace, thou hast received it for his glory; let not this grace be in vaine in thee, let not this glory be neglected by thee but so walke in thy ministerie that thou fulfill it: ab∣solve & perfect, & finish, & discharge that charge, which is layde vpon thee. The summe then of theise words is a rousing of negligent ministers: wherein we may note two things: first, the persons comman∣ded to doe this duty. Secondly, the manner how, na∣mely by exhortation, wherein observe two things further. First, wherevnto they must exhort him to a ful∣filling of his ministerie. Secondly, the reason whereby they stirre him vp to the same drawne from the au∣thoritie of God who is the authour of the ministerie. Thou hast received it in the Lord. Say to Archippus:] who must say to Archippus thus, namely the Colossians to whome Paul writeth. There∣fore it is the dutye of the people to admonish the mi∣nister of his ministerie,Doct. 1. & to put him in mind of the discharge of his dutye if he be negligent therein. For otherwise Paul might have admonished Archippus him∣selfe by writing vnto him some particular letter, but in that he biddeth the Colossians to doe it, he sheweth it a dutye belonging to the people to iogg their mi∣nister in the ellbowe as it were, to put him in mind of
his charge, & bid him remember his office & ministe∣rie & by exhortation to excite & stirre him vp to a faithfull dis-charge of his dutye. A strange & vnreasonable doctrine may some men saye; for what should the stones come tumbling out of the quarrie, and saye to the builder come cutt me and square me, and hew me thus? or should the tree come dauncing out of the wood and say to the Car∣penter cutt me and plaine me, or frame me thus, or thus; that I may be fit for the building? what shall the sheepe come to the shepheard and put him in mind of his dutye? So, should the people come and admonish the minister, and tell him of his ministerie? right even soe;1. Pet. 2.5. for they are no dead stones that lie in the quarrie, but as Peter calleth them they are living stones which can turne themselves to the hammer, and trees of righteousnes (as the Prophet calleth them) which offer themselves to the Carpenter:Esa. 61.3. they are rea∣sonable sheepe,Rom. 12. which can bring their cause to the Shep∣heard. Their soules are committed to the care of the minister to be taught and instructed, and comfor∣ted, and therefore as they regard their owne soules and salvations, they must regard the ministers dutye. As was the case of that ship which was covered with waves when Christ was a sleepe, such is the case of a congregation when the minister is idle and negligent, as lulled a sleepe in the cradle of securitie. The dis∣ciples feared lest through Christs sleepeing, they should have been drownea: and that congregation may feare lest through their Pastours negligence, it be damned. Therefore as then the disciples, in love of their lives went to Christ and a woke him: so it be∣hooveth the people for love of their soules to goe to
their Pastour, and awake him, and stirre him vp that he looke about him. In other matters we are carefull to put him in mind with whome we deale to deale faith∣fullie with vs, and shall we be lesse carefull in this which is the maine pointe? In the hand of the Miller we loose but our meale, of the Farrier but our horse, of the Taylour but our garment, of the Lawyer but our money, of the Physition but our bodyes: but in the hands of an vnfaithfull minister a man looseth his soule and his everlasting portion in heaven. If then we say to the Miller, looke to my meale: to the Far∣rier, have a care of my horse: to the Taylour, spoyle not my garment: to the Lawyer, tender my case: to the Physition, regard my health: how much more should we say vnto the minister (if he be vnfaithfull) looke to oursoules & take heede to the ministerie which thou hast received in the Lord. 2. Kings 4 3.[When the Shunamites sonne was dead shee went to the Prophet to tell him of it that he might come and restore her dead sonne to life againe: the Prophet sent his servant Gehazi, with a staffe but shee would not be content with that but tooke holde of him and would not leave him, but he himselfe must come. As carefull as the Shunamite was for her dead child: so carefull ought the people to be for their dead soules: as shee went to the Prophet to have her dead sonne raysed: so must they to their minister to have their dead soules quickened. As shee did not content her selfe with the Prophets servant but tooke hold of the Prophet hinselfe so must the people not content them∣selves with ignorant substitutes of others, but take hold of the Pastour himselfe and he shall have enough to recover their dead soules to life, though he goeth
himselfe, and putteth mouth to mouth. This being the dutie of the people toward their minister to bid him take heede to his ministerie what if I should expostulate with you that are to your mi∣nister, as theise Colossians to Archippus?Vse. Tell me you that complaine of your minister that he is ignorant, or negligent, or vnfaithfull, did you ever say vnto him take heed to thy ministerie! did you ever stirre him vp, and incite him therevnto? alas no! your owne consciences tell you that you have failed heerein! & there hath been both in the minister toward you: & in you toward the minister, a carelesnes by consent each with other: he, not regarding whither he did dis-charg his ministerie or no: and you, not careing whither you did admonish him or no, and thus Ar∣chippus hath been long a-sleepe because the Colossians did not awake him. Thus the ministers have neglec∣ted their dutyes because you have not said to them as heere the Colossians must say to Archippus take heed to the ministerie &c. Say to Archippus] The Colossians must admonish Archippus and Ar∣chippus must be content to be admonished of the Co∣lossians. Therefore. The minister must not refuse to be admonished,Doct. 1. & put in mind of his dutye by the people whome he should teach: but as it is his dutie to teach others, so he must shew himselfe teachable, and willing to be in∣structed of others: still remembring though honou∣rable his calling be, excellent his authoritie, great his power, yet he is not exempted from lawes, nor privi∣ledged from the admonition of his people, but both may and when occasion is offered must be admonis∣hed,
even of them that are as inferiour to him, as the Colossians were to Archippus.2. Kings 5 As when Elisha comman∣ded Naaman to wash himselfe seven times in Iordan he turned about in a snuffe, & went away in displeasure, but his servant came vnto him and said: Father if the Prophet had commanded thee a greater matter, wouldst thou not have done it? how much more, when he saith vnto thee wash and be cleane. Then went he downe & washed himselfe,2. Kings 5.13.14. and was clensed. Sure∣ly if this noble man had disdeined the admonition of his servant, he would have continued a leaper still, and had never been cleensed: so if the ministers in the pride of hearte should scorne the admonition of their poore Parishioners, surely they should continue negli∣gent still, and would never be reformed. Therefore as he with a good hearte endured the voyce of his servants, and did as they counselled him: So shall it be good for you (men and brethren as many as are negligent in your duties) to heare the admonition of your people, and to obey them. Moses that man of God, though indued with the H. Ghost, though magni∣fied with the guift of workeing wonders, though ac∣quainted with policie, and managing matters of state, as may seeme by his bringing vp in Pharaohs courte, yet disdeined he not to be better instructed in the manner of good government by Iethro,Exod. 18.17. inferiour to himselfe. The eye cannot saye to the foote I have no neede of thee, nor the head to the hand I have no neede of thee, nor the Pastour to the people in matter of admonition, I have no neede of you. Away then with that proud, haughtie and disdeinfull mind that is not ashamed to be negligent in his ministerie and yet scorneth to be admonished of his people, and to
be put in mind of his ministerie? awaye then with theise scornefull speeches (the very signes & tokens of a proud hearte) shall I be reprooved by him? or shall a taylour or shooe-maker come and tell me my dutie? a hatter or mercer or such like, admonish me of my mi∣nisterie? why, I doubt not but among theise Colossians, there were both taylours and shooe-makers, and of most occupations, and yet doeth Paul will them to tell Ar∣chippus of his dutie: & without doubt he would faine have Archippus contented there withall. Therefore let vs of the ministerie send home this pride to the Eldest sonne of pride, the beast of Rome,Vse. that man of sinne that child of perdition, whoe sitteth in his chaire of mischeife, mooveth like an oracle, and both thinketh in his heart, and speaketh with his mouth, that no man may say to him: Domine quid it à facis! Sir, why doe you thus? let vs rather remember that A∣pollos though an eloquent man & mightie in the scrip∣tures, though fervent in spirit, and a diligent Preacher, yet he refused not to be taught more perfectly the waye of the Lord by Aquila and Priscilla:Act. 18, 25.26. an handy craft man, a poore tent-maker, nay of Priscilla a woe∣man, and wife of Aquila. And if he was contented to be taught, & instructed of them in his dutye, let none of vs disdeine to be admonished, or stirred vp in his dutye by those that are committed to our charge. Thus much of the persons admonishing and such as are to be admonished; now of the admonition it selfe. Take heede to the ministerie which thou hast recei∣ved in ye Lord. This ministerie which he must take heede vnto, conteineth all the dutyes of the ministers of God, which may be referred to theise generall heads.
Mat. 28.19.20.First to the preaching of the word. Goe pteach the Gos∣pell, have a care and regard that all the commande∣ments be kept teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commande you. Secondly to the administration of the Sacraments. Bap∣tizing them in the name of the Father, the Sonne, and the H. Ghost. Thirdly, to private inspection by reprooveing Sin∣ners by admonishing, exhorting, by comforting the afflicted & those which are cast downe, & all to this end, that the elect whome sinne hath loosened, & dis∣joynted from Christ their head, may be restored to their place againe: joyned both to Christ their head by the Spirit, and one to another by love, which is it Paul speakes of Ephes. 4.12. That also (saith he) the bodie of Christ may be edi∣fied and built vp, and come vnto a perfect man in Christ. Which shall then be, when all the elect shalbe gathered together by the ministerie of the word: which the Apostle there calleth the worke of the minis∣terie, not an idlenes, but a worke, not a lordlines, but a mi∣nisterie. This dutye may further be seene by the titles which are given to the ministers in the Scriptures.Ephes. 4.. They are Pastours and therefore their dutye is to feede the people of God that dependeth vpon them. 1. Cor. 3.9They are Husband-men and therefore in duty must till Gods ground, and sowe his seede. 1.17.They are VVatchmen and therefore must give the people warning of ensuing danger. Cor 4.1They are dispencers of the mysteries of God to deliver that to the people which they have received of him. Called stewards of Gods howse, 12. and therefore must
give everie man his portion of meate in due season. They are the light of the world,Mat. 5.14. and therefore their duty is to shine forth by heavenly doctrine to enligh∣ten Gods people. They are the Salt of the earth,Mat. 5.13. and therefore their dutie is to season with wholesome doctrine, the weake soules that bend to corruption. They are builders,1. Cor. 3.10 and therefore must edifie the body of Christ, the howse of God. They are Captaines,Heb. 13.17. and therefore it is their part to fight Gods battailes: and as good leaders and cheife∣teines to instruct Gods people well in this spirituall warfare. They are called Embassadours,Eph. 6.2 and therefore their dutye is to declare Gods message to the people. And all this is but their ministerie, now for the full∣filling and dis-charge of this ministerie, two things are required. First Knowledge. Secondly faithfullnes. First that he be able, and secondly that he be care∣full, and diligent to teach Gods people. Concerning the first, the minister of God must not be onely as a Spence or store-howse, wherein God hath layd vp know∣ledge, as a good howse-holder doeth Corne in a gar∣ner, signified by that in the Prophecie of Malachie,Mal. 2.7. that the Preists lips must preserve knowledge, and for want thereof God hath divorced him from the honour of the ministerie, and hath pronounced him to be no Preist for him, because thou hast refused knowledge,Hos. 4.6. I will also refuse thee thou shalt be no Preist to me. But he must have the wisdome of a wise steward,Luc. 12.24. that knowes how to give Gods children, or howse∣hold,
their portion of meate in due season as Christ speakes: ministring milke to those that are but babes, and yonglings in Christ, and strong meate to those of riper age. 2. Tim. 2.15.He must be one that can divide the word of truth aright, being as skilfull in divideing the word of God, as the Levites were in cutting a broad the beast for sacri∣fice, whence that phrase of divideing the word seemes to be borrowed. He must not onely be learned him∣selfe,1. Ti. 3.2. but which is more, apt and fit to teach others as Paul speakes. This skilfulnes of the minister in tea∣ching others was signified in the old Testament, not onely by that urim & Thummim on the brest-plate to signifie his knowledge and holines:Ex. 28.30. but also by the bells which did hang on the skirts of the Preists gar∣ments▪Ver. 33. meaning as by the Pomegranates he should smell sweetely with the odours of a good life, so by the bells that he should sound vnto others by prea∣ching of true doctrine, by the sound of which bells he was to be heard when he went into the holy place, & when he came out vpon paine of death. And what els in the N. Testament did the H. Ghost in the likenes of tongues signifie? he descended vpon the Apostles, not in the likenes of hands,Act. 2.3. whereby to overcome the world by wordly feare, nor of feete, whereby to flee from the rage of persequuting ennimies, nor of eyes and eares fitt instruments to learne: but in the like∣nes of tongues, to teach the people their dutye in being the tongues of God to them. And what els doe all their names declare, being so many arguments to enforce this pointe? For how can they be called light, if being darke themselves they cannot send out the blaze of true th to enlighten others? Or salt of the
earth, if being vnsavourie themselves they cannot season & preserve Gods people from sinne and cor∣ruption? Or Pastours if they cannot feede the flocke of Christ with the foode of life? Or Husband-men and cannot plowe Gods ground, and sowe his feede? Or Stewards if they cannot, or doe not rule his howsehold? Or Messengers and Ambassadours if they cannot speake in his name and declare his message, and ambassage vnto his people? Or builders if they cannot build vp Gods spirituall howse? Or Capteines if they knowe not how to fight Gods battailes. Neither let any man thinke that if a minister be able to reade he hath suffi∣cient knowledge,Mat. 9.36. and that bare readers are sufficient ministers, Christ greived to see the multitude disper∣sed as sheepe without Shepheards, and yet had they Moses read in their Synagogues even every Sabaoth day, and the Prophets, as may be gathered by Luke in the Acts.Act. 13. Implying that readers were no sufficient Pastours, for els the Iewes in their Synagogues (as we have in our churches) had not ben without Pastours and so not so miserable, as he greived they were, when he consi∣dered what was requisite in a minister, namely to bring back that which is gone a straye, and to preser∣ve from daunger, to heale the broken, to bind vp the wounded, and the like. For which cause he sends his Apostles, by their preaching to performe that which they by their reading, could not doe. And if to have the law and the Prophets read had been enough, then had the Iewes knowne Christ, for Moses wrote of him Ioh. 5.39.46.Ioh. 5.39, 46. And among the Prophets, Esay so plainely that Ierome sticks not to call him an Evangelicke and yet
the noble-man when he read Esay could not vnder∣stand,Act. 8.30.31. but he was in neede of Philip to come & preach vnto him, and to instruct him. And if this instruction did not neede, but that the ignorant by bare reading, might vnderstand the meaning of the word (which yet is impossible) yet theise of greatest knowledge may, and often be so overtaken, and surprized with passions & infirmities, that they have neede of others (by applying of the word) to heale their diseases. Whither Moses were read in Davids time we cannot certainely affirme, yet certaine it is that David whose whole delight and study was in the law of God as ap∣peares Psal. 119. was well skilled therein: so that his knowledg would serve him to conclude, that he hath committed murder and adulterie, and as sure as God lived, was the child of God and yet he had need of Nathan to applye this word vnto him, and to tell him he was the man.2. sam. 12. So that we see how necessarie it is that a minister should have, not knowledge to read onely (for that children, and woemen have) but to preach, and also to apply the word to the soules and con∣sciences of the hearer. Vse.The more lamentable is the state of the church in whome-soever the fault lieth, whither in them that should provide sufficient living, and will not, as it is in some Parishes, or in them that should make sufficient ministers, and doe not as in some Bishops: or in them that should present able Pastours, and care not, as in some Patrones. But in whomesoever the faulte is, la∣mentable is their state, that are yet as sheepe without a shepheard, as an army of simple Souldiours without a conducteur. If the estate of Israel was in danger, when through the tyrannie of the Philistines, even in the
dayes of battaile, there was neither speare, nor sword found in the hand of any of the people, but onely in the hand of Saul, and Ionathan: how, not dangerous,2. sam. 13.22. but almost desperate, is the estate of any thousands of our people, who not onely themselves are vn-armed of the knowledge of God, but even Saul & Ionathan toe, even the leaders and Commanders want the armour of God, and skill how to vse it, even the ministers them∣selves want the knowledge of Gods word, and skill how to preach it.Numb 4.2. What marvell then though the people perish? The Lord commanded that the Arke should be carried by none but Levites, for so he spea∣keth, and David repeates it, none (saith he) ought to carry the Arke of the Lord but the Levites.1. chro. 15 2. For the Lord had chosen them to beare the Arke of the Lord, and to minister to him for ever, therefore when this or∣dinance of God was not observed, but the Arke was put vpon the Cart, and drawen by Oxen, the Oxen did shake it,2. sam. 6. and the Arke of God had almost fallen to the ground: right so hath God commanded that the care of the church should be vpon the shoulders of preaching ministers onely, and if this ordinance be not observed, but neglected, (as we see it is) and the arke be drawne by oxen, the care of the church be committed to ignorant men, voyde of sound know∣ledge, skandalous to the word, the dis-grace of the ministerie, the bane of religion, and the shame of the church, what may we looke for, but the daunger of a great downe-fall, surely the oxen will shake it. Pharaoh so feared the hurt, and regarded the good of his Cattell, as that he thought none fitt to be their ruler, but men knowne to be men of activitie,Gen. 4.7. for so he speaketh, if thou knowest that there be men of
activitie, make them rulers over my cattell: speakeing to Ioseph concerning his brethren. And shall Pharaohs cattell have men of activitie, and shall not Gods peo∣ple have men of knowledge? will Pharaoh have none to be his Cow-heards but men skillfull in that trade? and shall we thinke men of no learning fit to guide, and teach Gods people, which is a trade of trades and an art of artes? If we be to travell we seeke the chei∣fest men of skill to direct vs, if to goe by sea, we de∣sire the best Pilot to conduct vs, if we be sicke we wish for the most excellent Physitian to cure vs: and shall we be so sence-les, and infatuated, as to thinke any minister (be he never so ignorant) good enough to teach vs? if you thinke so, then looke and behold the miserie that is vpon the mounteine of Samaria, behold the blacke countreyes of ignorance yet among vs, voyde of the light of Gods word! how many of our land are compassed with confusion of hellish darknes as a people vowed to destruction! how many be like dragons and serpents in the deepe caves of the earth! how many sleepe in ignorance like Molles and battes in the holes! how many as the Assyrians in Samaria, who know not the manner of the God of our land, whose estate is blacke and a dismall day vpon them, vnlesse God send them Pastours after his owne heart, which may feede them with knowledg, and vnderstanding; the want whereof let the Popish idolatrie and grosse superstition, let the heathenish, prophane, and palpable blindnes of the common people, their vnreverent, & irreligious behaviour in things concerning God, let their Sybaritical feasts and banquets consecrated to Flora, Crispin, Clement and Bacchus, and such bouzing drunken Patrones, let the excesse, and most lothsome
vomit of whitson-ale, and Pentecost Lords; let the en∣trance of poperie into England againe, with a maine streame, as of the Romanes into Ierusalem, speake and cry alowde in your hearts and eares: and moove you to inward pitty and compassion of Gods church. And as for you which entred into this calling, and have not knowledg to dis-charge your calling, I say not as the Colossians to Archippus, take heed to your mi∣nisterie, but take heede of the danger, which you in∣curre by starveing Gods vnspotted lambs, with gol∣den fleeces. Remember, that you have not the charge of oxen, sheepe, but of the most brittell, and dange∣rous things in the world, even the soules of men that are ready to be mooved by every temptation: of tho most choyce and precious things in the world bought with the greatest price, even the blood of Christ, whose charge is so great that the Apostle well weigh∣ing the same, crieth out as a man vnder a heavy burden; and who is sufficient for theise things?2. Cor. 2.16. and if he being qualified from above, haveing excellēt guifts of the spirit, did so highly esteeme of the same, as to judge himselfe insufficient for al that: what base con∣ceite had you of the ministerie? how easy did you deeme it to be, when you entred thereinto! no man will presume to teach an art before he have learned it himselfe. Consider how you dis-grace the mi∣nisterie, and the profession of divine studies, by your ignorance. For as in times past the people haveing a Ghost in great admiration, thought that to be wanting in the religion, which was wanting in him; so the people which follow you to be instructed by you, seeing the lamentable lookes of your ignorance, thinke that to be wanting in the minister, which is
wanting in you. Consider the great danger both of your selves, and the people whome by your ignoran∣ce you keepe in continuall ignorance, and therefore both may feare that fearfull doome pronounced by Christ.mat. 15.14. If the blind leade the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. If Bezaleel and Aholiah when they were to worke in the tabernacle, had not knowledge enough (though they were work-men before) but had neede to be filled with the Spirit of God in wisdome,Exod. 31.2.3, 6. and vn∣derstanding, in knowledg and workman-ship: then much more thinke you in the secrets of your hearts, what knowledge is required of you who worke not in an earthly Tabernacle, but in the building vp a temple for God to dwell more speciallie in, even in the hearts of the people, in reareing vp a chaire of estate for Christ Iesus to sitt & rule in, even in the consciences of men, and in frameing a schoole for Christ to teach even in the soules of men? Sitt downe and consider that which Christ shewed, before you entred into this calling, to be considered of, whither you be suffi∣ciently armed to meete your enimies that come a∣gainst you: if not, let not ten shekels and a sute of appa∣rel, and meate and drinke, which was the wages Micha gave to his wandring curate,Judg. 17.10. that went vp and downe to seeke a service, nay let not a thowsand times so much prevaile with you to incourage you heerein, as the feare of that fearefull speech terrifie you: when you admonish not a wicked man of his wickednes. Nay, that wicked man shall die in his sinns, but his blood will I require at thy hands.Ezek. 3.18. So that if any perish through ignorance, your soule standeth for their sou∣les, both shall go to hell together, therefore take heede to your ministerie.
The second thing which the ministerie requireth at a ministers hand, is, not onely that he be skilfull, but also faithfull & watchfull, which,Luke 12.42. Act. 20.20. Tim. 4.2. as Christ commanded in a Steward that gives his howse-hold meate in due season, so Paul practised as a faithful Steward, teaching openly, and in every howse, laying it to the charge of Timothie, with witnes, saying: I charge thee before God, and before the Lord Iesus Christ, Who shal judge the quicke, and the dead at the day of his appearing, and in his kingdome. Preach, that is his office, be instant in season and out of season, that is the time. In season to them that will, out of season to them that will not. How? reproove exhort, correct, with al long-suffring, and doctrine, that is the manner. And this duty Christ enjoyned Peter vnto,Ioh. 21.1. he sayth not, be thou a Pastour, or a Bishop, or a Prelate, but feede thou because many Pastours in name, are but idoles in deede, which either devoure them, or fleece them,Mat. 9.3. but feede them not. Therefore sayth Christ the harvest is greate, and there are, what few few Prelates, few mi∣nisters, or few learned men? no, but there are few la∣bourers, few workemen. Wherevnto serveth that of the Apostle. If any man desireth the office of a Bishop, or a minister he desireth a good worke a good dutie, not a good dignitie, not a good delight, not good riches, not good re∣venews, but a good worke. And to this end were Aaron, and his sonnes anoin∣ted, not onely to be Preists to the Lord and to stand as many do like Cyphres in Augrum; but to execute the Preist-hood and as the phrase is often repeated, to serve in the Preists office before the Lord. So that, a
minister must not onely be skilfull in his ministerie, but faithfull and diligent, and painefull, in his ministe∣rie: and consider the faithfulnes of Iacob in keeping Labans sheepe I was (saith he) consumed with heate, and the frost by night, and my sleepe departed from mine eyes. If he be so carefull for Labans sheepe: how much more carefull & watchfull should we be for the sheepe of Gods fold and feare neither the pinching cold of adversitie, nor the parching heate of persequuting Ty∣rants to procure their good. 1. Chr 18: 14.15.16.We may reade in the booke of Chronicles, that in Davids howse there were Officers appointed to everie charge: particular Officers for his treasures, for his sheepe, for his vines &c. that no man should be oppres∣sed with too great charge, but that everie man should be carefull, and faithfull in his place. So in Gods howse hath he appointed particular officers. And what are Davids treasures to the Lords? Gods trea∣sure is Davids heart, and Davids treasure but dust: Da∣vid himselfe one of Gods sheepe▪ and Davids sheepe simple beasts: David is a branch of Gods vine, and Da∣vids vines but vanitie. se. 2.Then this is just reproofe to all such to whome the Lord hath given gifts fit to teach & yet are negligent, and idle, and slothfull, and will not teach being like faithles Capteines who receive continuallie the Lords pay, and yet never fight the Lords battailes whose knowledge is wrapt vp in an idle braine without prac∣tise as Goahs sword in cloth without use.2. sam. 12.5. Prov. 11.26, If the peo∣ple curse him that with-drawes his Corne from the mar∣ket: how much more shall they be cursed, who by keepeing the corne of Gods word, from the congrega∣tion of his people, bring vpon themselves so fearefull
a sinne? Who when as they should by preaching the word, distill on the people, as the dew vpon the grasse, and as the raine vpon the hearbes, (like clowdes which sweate themselves to death) vanish away in vanitie, like brests without milke, and clowdes without water, who when they should in the wombe of the church, be∣gett many children of glory to God, deserved to be fined of our Gouvernours as the old and single men of Rome were by their Censors cast out because they brought no children to the common-wealth. And now hearken what the Lord saith to the idle of idole shephearde. Thus saith the Lord God vnto the shepheards of Israel that doe feed themselves:Ezek. 34.2. should not the shepheards feed the flockes? there∣fore saith the Lord I wil come against the shepheard, and will require my sheepe at their hands: and his blood that dieth without warning will I require at the watch-mans hands. For what, should the Porter sleepe when the theefe seekes to enter? Or the Pilot be care∣les when the ship is in danger? Or the Capteine secure when the enimie is at hand? Or the minister be ne∣gligent, when his people be ignorant, and like to pe∣rish for want of vision? and the devill readie to de∣stroye at all advantages? Far be it! for what were this, but even to betraye Gods people into the hands of Pirats, theeves, and robbers? But what shall we say to them that have a cure of soules in one place, and live in another: like fugitive Capteines forsake their Ensigne and Company at Barwicke & flee to Dover who being with Ionah com∣manded for Niniveh, se to Tarhish: who being pla∣ced in the countrie, run to the universitie. Who leave their charge, as the Ostrrich doeth her Eggs in the
earth,Job 39.17. and sands: forgetting that either the soote might scatter thē, or the wild beast breake them shewing her selfe cruel to her yong ones, as if they were not hers: & is with feare, as if shee travailled in vaine: Or at the least, leaved her eggs, as the Cueow doeth, to be hatched of a sparron, or some other bird. Do they not every how∣re feare lest God should meete thē where they are, & hast vnto thē as Eliab did to David,1. sam. 17.28. why camest thou dow∣ne hither? & with whome hast thou left those few sheepe in the wildernes? Or feare they not lest that befall them which befell David, who when he fought Gods battai∣les as the sworne Capteine of God, was secured from the ambushes of Satan and fortified against the corruption of his owne nature, but when he gave vp the admini∣stration to others, without just cause and sate himselfe downe to rest in Ierusalem, and was not resident in his Campe: then was the H. Ghost not resident in his heart but he fell into those grosse sinns of adulterie and murder. Or lastly feare theise not lost in their absence their unlearned and for the most part ungodly Vi-Curates should bring a great sinne & consequent∣ly a great punishment as Aaron the first Vicar of the Synagogue as Parisiensis calleth him (tho a Vicar of Gods owne chusing) brought on Israel who when Moses had ben absent from them but onely fourtie dayes, and not as he doeth add in the Court with a Prince, nor in the Pallace with a Bishop, but in the mount with God: at his returne he found the fooles of Israel dauncing a Morice-dance about a Caife. Con∣sider then how ignorance irreligious poperie and pro∣phanenes, creepeth into the charges of those men who are absent not fourtie dayes onely as Moses was but fourty weekes together: not with God in any
calling of his, as the same Moses in the mount, but like enough either in the Court, or in the Pallace as was spoken before out of Parisiensis: or els where regar∣ding little their duty Gods glory, or the peoples gooe. And to theise may be added those, who seeking their owne, and not that which is Iesus Christs, are con∣tent to live, and waxe rich with the spoyle of the church, and the destruction of Gods people. They who are Capteines of two armies, Pilots of two ships, shepherds of two flocks, Pastours of two churches yea and more toe, when a Godlie painfull man, making con∣science of his dutye, grones vnder the burden of one but they travailing at one time with two children,Gen ▪ harder to bring forth then Iacob and Esau were, cry not out in sence of any paine, as Rebekah did seing it is so why am I thus? but thinke that their presence in one place excuseth their absence in the other, and the rather, because they supply that by their Vicars, or Curates; which in their owne presence they cannot dis-charge. But consider I beseech you as many as be heere faulty in this particular is your absence excused because by others your places are supplyed? what then is the election of ministers but a scorne, and mockerie (as Dominicus Soto speaketh writing hereof at large.Lab. 10.) If a man may take a benefice and dis-charge it by an other man? and seing Christ sendeth you as Labourers, Teachers, not ordeiners of Labourers and Teachers in your places,De vit Cap. 22. what is it as Pari∣siensis speaketh writing much to to this pur∣pose, but as if a man should marry a woeman vn∣der hope to obteine issue of her, but by another man?
what is it but a crosse practise to that of the Samaritan, and of Christ:Luke 10.35. Ioh. 21.15 Joh. 19.26 of whome, the former did not commit the care of the wounded man, to the Inn-keeper, till he was to depart himselfe. The Lord did not commit his sheepe to Peter, nor his mother to Iohn, till he was now ready to commit his soule to God, and his body to the ground: as Alphonsus de Castro discoursing hereof at large, speaketh: vnto whome it you be not yet resol∣ved hereof, you may add Buffus and Dumeus de sacris Ecclesiasticis ministerijs: but especiallie Dominicus Soto, who prooveth this NON-RE sidencie to be vnlawfull by the law of nature, by the law of man, by the law of God: by Councells by Fathers whome he reckons vp. And, if I did want matter, many more things might heere be spoken from him: but I onely repeate that sentence of Damascene (which he he hath) in an Epistle of his, which he calleth a golden Epistle: where (I take it) he compareth those that leave their charge to others, to cruel harlots, that set forth their children to nurse, the sooner, to fulfill their inordinate lusts: So do they set forth their charges to others, that they may go whither they will the more freely: and intangle themselves in secular affaires. To conclude, what is it but to send Gehazi with a staffe, that can never recover a dead soule to life? You, your selves must put mouth to mouth, and preach the word vnto them; you must put eyes to eyes, and enlighten their minds; you must put hand to hand, and show them all good examples, in your owne per∣sons; which if you will not do, but still thinke your Cu∣rates presence can excuse your absence,Ezek. 44.1. then go to the Prophet Ezekiel and put your finger in the print of the Prophets speeche that you may not still be vn∣faithfull,
but beleeve: that it fully concerneth you: You have not kept the ordinances of my holy things saith God but you have set others to take the charge of my Sanctuarie. As if he should have saide: you have received the oblation of my holy things: but you have not kept the ordinances of my holy things, and as if you were the Lords of my heritage, you have put others vnder you, to take the charge of my Sanctuarie, which yourselves should have dis-charged. Thus doeth the Lord plainely reproove you, for substituting others vnder you: and therefore may you justly feare that which Claudius Espencaus, a Papist, is bold to write, which I am even a-frayd to speake: that God shall serve you heareafter, as you serve him now: you shall be saved by your vicars, but damned in your owne persons. And now further, men and bre∣thren, if that blind buzzards onely which know not the price of soules, were guilty of this sinne, I would not have marveiled: or if the purple Cardinall of Rome onely, with that accursed rabble of that Romish Court, were guilty of this sinne, I would have held my peace: but that learned men, men of judgment and vnder∣standing, which reade and professe to know the Scrip∣tures, and theise words pronounced against them, no milder then gall and worme-wood; should be so sore blinded, by that love of the world as to seeke their owne ease, their owne proffit, their owne pleasure: but not that which is Iesus Christs, not his glory, nor the salvation of his people. ò ye heavens be ashamed at this! & thou ò earth conceale not this iniquitie! Crye out thou hunger-starved-soule, as the Soules of the slaine, vnder the altar: let not your tongues cleave to the roofe of your mouth, vntill the Lord, holy and
true, avenge your blood, on them that slay you, as beasts in the middest of the streete! and thou blood of the soule al-ready dead: dead in respect of any spiri∣tual vegetation, and dead in everlasting malediction, ne∣ver be dryed vp, but cry lowder, then the blood of Abel against Kaine for vengeance, against this sinne! and you that are the Lords faithfull ministers on earth, regard the soules, and salvations of Gods people, and let them be as deare to you, as they were to him that bought them, with no lesse deare a price, then the price of his owne blood. And you Fathers, and brethren, who in the ministerie live in this cittie, and have now long nayled your eares, to the doore-posts thereof; I say not as Bishop Latymer sometime said, to his fellow-Bis∣hops, let the example of the Devill moove you, who is ever diligent, and never Non-re sident in his great Parish, but I humbly beseech you, if there be any place for beseechig left, let the commandement of Gods word moove you, who willeth you to looke to your calling, and abide in that; let the example of Christ, and regard to his glory, moove you, who him∣selfe came to seeke the lost sheepe, and finding it, put it vpon his shoulders, and himselfe brought it home: let the example of the Levites, and all good over-seers in∣cite you, oh let the ignorance of the people, and dread to murder their soules which Christ hath purchased with his blood, provoke you: yea, let the care of your owne quiet, and the peace of your owne conscien∣ces, which shall heareafter greivously rue it, enjoyne you: and let the assured persuasion of Gods goodnes, who hath promised to mainteine you, and will per∣forme it, constreine you to redresse all vnfaithfulnrs: and thinke on those temptations which hold you
therein; are they not grosse, and such as the shame of the world might shift of? how much more should Gods spirit prevaile heerevnto! thinke on the gaine you get by spirituall promotions, joyned with spirituall structions, are they not more shame-full, and infa∣s, then the gaines of the usurer and promotour? let  be enough that there be those in hell al-ready, who urse the day that ever you were borne, through whose cruelty they are fallen into theise vnspeaka∣ble torments: and from hence forth take heede to your ministerie and to the faithfull dis-charge of your duty. Let it never be said that you loved the Lord, as Laban loved Iacob, onely to get riches by him, or as Saul loved David, to get honour by him, and not for any love to the person of Iacob, or David; but let your love be seene by your paines in the ministerie of Christ Iesus. Let it never be said, that a good benefice is as a white marke in a greene medowe, seene a farr of, and faire to shoote at, but let it be said, that the soules and salva∣tions of Gods people, is the thing you aime at. Re∣member this admonition, take heed to the ministerie, forget not that of Paul in his Visitation Sermon at Ephesus;Act. 20.28.29. Take heed to your selves and to all the flock whereof the H. Ghost hath made you overseers to feed the church of God which he hath purchased with his owne blood. Take heede to the ministerie thou hast received in the Lord. Archippus did receive his ministerie in the Lord: that is, of the Lord. Therefore he did not thrust him∣selfe into the ministerie, but had his calling of God, and his example is to be marked of all the ministers of the
word:Doct. That they have not onely a calling from man but a calling from God: as all the Prophets of God had: all the Apostles of Christ had: whose commission vnto them, was a brazen wall, to secure them: and as a for∣tresse, and rocke to stand vpon. If they have a calling from God, they shall see a seale of their ministerie i the conversion of some soules at least; but if t have received their ministerie from man, & not front the Lord,Ezek. 13.6. they receive a curse in sted of a blessing, a woe is denounced against them: and their people con∣tinue without proffit: as God sheweth in the Prophe∣cie of Ieremiah: saying I will come against them that Prophesy false dreames & I sent them not,Ier. 23.32. nor commāded thē therefore they bring no proffit to this people, saith the Lord, therefore the people are not bettred, their soules are not converted, their lives are not amended, God is not glorified, because they came, and God sent them not, they had a ministerie, but not of the Lord: but saith God in the same chapter,vers 22. if they had stood in my counsel, and had declared my word, to my people: then, they should have turned them from their evill way, and from the wic∣kednes of their inventions. Behold a blessing that should have followed their labours, if God had sent them. Reade,1. Kings. 22. 2 King 3. jer. 6.14. Amos 7. Psam. 12. Mat 14 and consider, what made Micajah so confident with Ahab? what made Elisha, a worme of the earth, so bold with Jehoram? what made Ieremie, so plaine with Preist and Prophet? what made Amos so stout against Amaziah? what made Nathan so free with David? what made Iohn Baptist so zealous, to reproove Herod? what did open the mouthes of the Apostles, and made them speake the word with all boldnes of speech, but this warrant of their callinge. They had their minifierie not of man but of God.
Theise are the faithfull ministers of God, whome God hath called, and armed from above, to this ser∣vice. Theise are they, to whome he hath given Crownes of authority, and lincks of iron to bind the Princes, and nobles of the earth: the rest have no courage, no power, no zeale at all, whome the Devill feareth not, but espying the wants of their commission,Act. 19.15. use. sayth to them, as he once did, to the Sonns of Sceva: Iesus I ac∣knowledge, and Paul I know, but who are yee? let every minister that heareth me this day, enter into his owne heart, and examin his inmost affection, and try whither he hath received his ministerie of the Lord, or no: which he hath not, unlesse he hath gifts, in some tolle∣rable measure, to dis-charge that ministerie: for God sendeth no blind guides, unlesse it be in judgment to pu∣nish the people. We reade in the booke of Esiber, that none might come into the presence of the King, un∣lesse the King did hold out his golden Scepter vnto him: how shall they then be punished of the Lord, that come, not into Gods presence, but into Gods place, where God himselfe is; even the Father, full of Majestie, the Sonne of God, replenished with glory, and the H. Ghost great in power: and presume, to take the place vpon them, without any warrnt from the Lord? They are the vipers of the church, which stay not the appoin∣ted time of nature, but breake out of their mothers bellyes, before their time, tho their mother pay for it. They will not stay, till God openeth them a doore, but will run in another waye.what will you give me? what shall J give you And Iudas with his quid vos dabitis mihi? on the one side: and Simon Ma∣gus with his quid ego tihi dabo? on the other side: make wicked bargaines together; and without any calling
from God, enter into the charge of Gods people. But let them looke, that they who set them a-worke, pay them their wages. As many as have their ministerie of the Lord, can say as Paul did, when the Gospell was committed vnto him, you know of the grace which was given vnto me: but for the rest, we see the ministerie in them, but we know no grace in them, neither in their word, nor worke. VVhich thou hast received of the Lord, or in the Lord. Hence we learne againe. That the Lord is the author of the ministerie.Doct. 4. It was he that sent forth Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists,Ephes. 4.11.12.13. as extraordinary, and for a time: and it is he which sends forth still both Pastours, and teachers, which be ordinarie, and forever, as Paul sheweth. 1. cor. 4.1. 2. cor. 5.20And therefore are they called servants, and ministers of Christ, and Ambassadours for Christ: to whome, not man, but God, did commit the ministerie of re∣conciliation. Heere then is excellent matter for minister and people. For minister, he hath received his ministerie of the Lord: and therefore he must give account of his ministerie, to the Lord. Take heed (saith Paul to the Elders of Ephesus) to your selves, and to the flocke whereof the H. Ghost hath made you Overseers: not man, but the H. Ghost to whome you shall be accounteable for all the flocke and therefore take heede to the charge. This should be as a thowsand Spurrs to our sides to moove vs to the performance of our dutyes, when we consider the Majestie of him, who hath commited the ministerie vnto vs: when we consider, the price of soules,
that depend vpon vs: when we thinke on that account. which we, one day must make: when Peter shall come before God, with his converted Iewes: and Paul with his Gentills; Andrew with Achaja; John with Aiaz Thomas with India. Whome shall we bring with vs? what soules shall we present to God as our Crowne, and our glory? where shall we find the seale of our ministe∣rie? or, if we have none, by reason of our negligence and ignorance; how shall we dare, to appeare before the Lord, the fearfull judge, of quicke and dead; when he shall say; come give an accounte of thy steward-ship. Secondly; the ministerie should hence learne, this  lesson of instruction: that because the Lord is the authour of this ministerie; therefore they must in their ministerie, seeke the Lords honour; and not their owne: they must seeke to enlarge Gods church, and not their owne livings; to winn glory to God, and not gaine to them∣selves: for, they have received their ministerie in the Lord; by his grace, and for his glory. A just reproofe, to those, who in the ministerie aime not at this end; nay, whose consciences tell them, they thought not therevpon; but on their owne ease, such, and such a benefice, such a prebend-ship, such a common, such a Bishoprick, such credit, & countenance in the world: & intend this end in their ministerie, & not the other. A just reproofe of those, who preach themselves, & not the Lord: speaking to the eare, & not to the conscience: seeking, rather by a painted eloquence, to set forth them∣selves, & to get the name of Schollers, and learned men; then to set forth the knowledge of the trueth: being like to adulterers, (as Gregorie cōpareth them) who delight in the company of woemen, not so much to get children, as to satisfy their owne beastly lusts: So do theise, delight
to preach, now and then; once a moneth once a-quarter, or so: but not so much to gett children to God, as to sa∣tisfy, their owne vainglorious humour: as he, that com∣meth into the feild, to fight with a posie of flowres, in stead of a sword: & a plame of fethers in stead of a buckler: commeth more like a Carpet-knight, then a man of armes: so may we rightly judge him, that commeth into Gods place, with curious phrases, and invented words, of mans wisdome, thereby to get applause of the simple: rather like a wanton man-pleaser then a faithfull Prea∣cher. Thirdly; let all faithfull ministers, comfort themsel∣ves herein; tho men be against them, yet, they have their calling, from the Lord: he will backe them, and beare them out: he will give power vnto them. They are starrs in Gods right hand; God will defend them. Feare not therefore, the faces of men; seeke not to please men,Gal. 1.10. for, if you doe, (as Paul speakes) you cannot be the servants of God. You have your mini∣sterie from the Lord, seeke therefore, to approove your selves, not to the wicked, but to the Lord, who will de∣fend,Revel. 11.3.4.5.6.7 and give power vnto you, as he promiseth, to his two witnesses, in the Revelation. Now, for the people: here is also a lesson for them to learne: the Lord is the authour of the ministerie, there∣fore, honourable is their calling, & they are to be had, in singular accounte, for their works sake: not, for their li∣vings sake, nor degrees sake, nor, their persons sake, nor, their freinds sake: but, for their works sake. The worke of their calling, their honourable calling. For this cause,2. Tim. 3.1. the minister is called, the man of God, as if he should say, Gods Embassadour and legate, and lieutenant, on earth. If then, it be an honourable thing, to be a Princes Embas∣sadour;
how much more, to be Gods Embassadour,Revel. 3. revel. 12.4 King of heaven, and earth? Therefore, called Angells, and Starrs, to shew, the excellencie of their calling: which Paul considering, he cryes out in a wonder: how beautifull are the feete, that is, the comming of them,rom. 10.15 which bring glad tidings of peace? As if, he should have said, I cannot expresse, how beautifuil, and excellent, how lovely, and amiable, their comming is. See what accounte, Elizeus made of, Elias; who being taken vp, Elizeus looketh after him, and cryeth out: Oh the Charriots of Israel & the horsmen thereof! signifying, that Elias being gone,2 King. 2.12. the very beauty, and strength of Israel, was gone. If this were well regarded, then the ministerie of God, would be more regarded, lesse despised, lesse dis-gra∣ced, more honoured, more reverenced, more esteemed then it is: but for want of this consideration, the minis∣ters of God are accounted now a dayes, as the Apostles were before them;1 cor 4.13 the very filth and off-skouring of the world: the very off alls, and refuse, of mankind. And, if by our dishonouring God, in our places, and our un∣faithfull walking, in our calling, God hath justly disho∣noured vs, and made vs base, and vile; abject, and con∣temptible, in the sight of the people; let vs blame our selves: but if any, doe esteeme thus, of Gods ministerie, and account, the calling of his ministers, dishonoura∣ble; they dishonour, not vs, but God, whose messen∣gers, and Embassadours, we are: as God said to Moses:Num. 14 17. 1. sam. 8.7 they have not murmured against thee, but me: and, so he said to Samuel: they have not rejected thee, but they have cast me away, from being King over them. Let them remember, that fearefull speech; he that despiseth you, despiseth me. Christ, shall take that dishonour, done to his minister, as done to himselfe. And therefore, if David would
not put vp that dis-grace which was offred to his messengers by Hanun: certeynely, Christ will not put vp that dis-grace, which is offred, to his messengers, and mi∣nisters. Wherefore, I heere dare, all Papists, Atheists, Libertines, Newters, Machiavells, and, all prophane Epi∣cures whosoever, to contemne the ministers of God: if thou darest dishonour them, dis-grace them, mocke them, and laugh at them: Call them, pestilent fellowes, as Tertullus did: and troublers of the state, as Ahab did Elias, a troubler of Israel: Call them mad-fellowes, as Erastus did,Act. in his mad moode: Call them, railing prea∣chers, seditous preachers: assure they selfe, who ever thou art, that; thus thinkest in thy heart: or, speakest with thy mouth: the Lord, of whome, we have received our ministerie, shall not forget this contempt: but, tho base be our persons, poore be our livings, disho∣nourable be our estimation: he shall remember, and he shall revenge it. And therefore, feare to vilify, any of those, who have their ministery from the Lord. Men we are, as you are: and that is for your good, for you could not heare the voice, of God himselfe, and live: or, of any of those blessed; and glorious Angels of his. Sinfull we are, as yee are: and that is, because we are men. Mortall we are, as you are: and that is, because we are sinfull. Yet still, tho men, sinfull, and mortall, we are the messengers of God, and Ambassadours of Christ. If you love vs not, in regard of our persons, yet love vs, in regard of our office: we are indeed, but earthen ves∣sells; but we have pretious treasures in vs: if, you estee∣me vs not, because we are vessells, and of earth, yet honour vs, for the treasures sake. Our ministerie is not ours, but the Lords, we, and thrice wee be to him,
that scorueth it. The last thing, comes to be considered,Doct. 5. in this verse. That thou fulfil it. It is heere required of the minister, that, he thinke it not enough, to dis-charge his duty, coldly, and perfunctorily, and for fashion (as it were) but, he must sett himselfe to it, earnestly, zea∣lously, and fervently, that he may even fulfill it: that he may, as Paul speaketh, make his ministery fully knowne:1. Tim. 4. and, approove himselfe, the true minister of Christ: and make it appeare, by all meanes, that it is his hearts desire, to fulfill his ministery: So did Apollos, preaching fervently, & teaching diligently, the things of the Lord. First, he spake fervently, and then taught: noting thereby, that many speake, who do not teach, be∣cause they speake not fervently, as Apollos. Thus did Paul, burne in Spirit, and then, he testified to the Iewes, that Iesus was the Lord. Thus did Christ preach:oh. 7. of whome, the Pharises messengers, gave this testimony, and ingenuously confessed; never man spake like this man: because, he spake zealously, and with authority, and,mat. 7. not coldly, and faintly as did the Scribes. Tho a man, had all knowledg, of all Fathers, ton∣gues and arts, yet unlesse he have zeale,Act. 2. he can never fulfill, the ministery of Christ. Therefore, did the H. Ghost descend, in the likenes of cloven tongues, like fire; to signify a zealous, a hott, preaching ministerie. Iohn was a burning, as well as a shining light:ioh. So must we burne with zeale, if we will fulfill the ministerie. If this be so, what shall we say, of theise cold, com∣fortles  discourses, and morrall-philosophy-lectures, (rather then Sermons) without zeale, of formall-preaching ministers, which shame the heate, by which men should be quickened; being as Bernard speakes
luciferi, but, not igniferi, having, some light of know∣ledge, in their heads, but, no fire of zeale, in their hearts, who, speaking the word of God, do weaken the power thereof, by dulnes, and fanes of Spirit; bringing forth their doctrines, as many woemen do their children; still-borne, without sence, without feeling, without motion; using doctrine, without application; application, without zeale, like men without soules, or Images with∣out lives. Such were, the intollerable cold, collations, of the Scribes, and Pharises, whereby, they did loose their Auditours, and, made their Synagogues, desolate: and such are the Sermons, of those ministers, whose minds are drowned, in wordly matters, whose spirits are frozen, and pittifully benummed, with woldlines, and sensuality. And, so dull are their owne hearts, by want of holy meditation, that, they have no life, in their ministerie, nor power in their preaching, more, then when, a little boy,2. tim. 1.6. saith grace. Wherefore, as Paul bids Timothy, to stirr up,anadsopu∣rem. the graces of God in him; to blow them, as it were with bellowes, as, the Greeke word, imports: so must we, and endevour, to Godly vehemency; in our preaching, that, we may enforce our doctrine, to the hearts of the hearers, and, may make our ministerie, knowne to Gods people. And lastly; that our ministerie, may be fulfilled; let vs be,1. Tim. 4.12. to them that beleeve, as Ensamples, in word, in con∣versation, in love, in spirit, & in purenes, as Paul speaketh to Timothy: let vs labour, to be unreprooveable, and with∣out blame, that, we sett an edge, on our Sermons,  may, by our owne life, authorice our doctrine; let us first, be confirmed, as Peter was, and strengthen others; let vs first, observe the commandements of God, & then
teach them others to observe; let vs first, labour to be the servants of God, as Paul was, and then, the Apostles of Iesus Christ; let vs have in our brest-plate, both urim, and Thummim, both knowledg, and holines, and, in the outmost borders, of our garments, let there be, both, bells, and pomegranates toe, both, soundnes of doctrine, and sweetnes of conversation. Take away the reproch of the people, that hath, a great while taken vp,rom. 2. that speech; Thou that teachest another, teachest thou not thy selfe? You are in the face of the people, a fault in you, is, as a staine in the face, and a blow in the eye: as most perspicuous, so most dangerous, in the hand, the glove may cover it: in the feete, the shooes may cover it: in the body, the clothes may cover it: in a child, his age: in a woe∣man, her sexe: in a private man, his ignorance may excuse it: in you, that must be Ensamples to others, in all kind of conversation, nothing can excuse it. Therefore, if there be heere, any lizards, that, do wipe out with their tayle, the print of their feete, made in the dust: any preacher, who, by the uncleane tayle, of a loose life, wipes out the print, of true doctrine; if any have Iacobs voyce, and Esaws hands, if any, that carry the bellowes of preaching in the one hand, to kindle, and the water of ungodlines, in the other, to quench it: let them not deceive themselves, by their preaching, their ministery, is not fulfilled, and therefore, they shall have their portion, with that servant, that knowes his masters will, and doeth it not. And now to Conclude all, I say vnto all take heed to your ministerie: for the devill your adversary, [there is his dread] as a lyon, [there is his power] as a rouring lyon
[there is his desire to hurt] goeth about, [there is his industrie] and seeketh [there is more then ordinary di∣ligence, not what, but, whome, he may devoure: Even the soules of men, that is his preye. His force, very greate, his wiles, and advantages, not unowne, his malice experienced, his cruelty, such as as hell can afforde; therefore, take heede to your ministerie. The wicked, your enimies, are Eagle-eyld, to looke into you, and spye you, as narrowly, as the Romans did Cato, or the Pharises, Christ; to find a fault, and having found, either your ignorance, or, your negligence, or, the pride of your ambition, or, your covetousnes, they have enough, to talke of, with joy on every ale-bench. Others see your faults, and weepe, in secret, for your sinns, that Gods glorious gospel, that sweete oynt∣ment, should be carried in such filthy boxes, as some of you are. Take heede to your ministerie you have received in the Lord: you have received of the Lord: to him, you must give account, you have received it for the Lord, to him you must performe your dutye, shame not him, that hath called you, walke worthy of the Lord, approove your selves, as workmen, that need not, to be ashamed, in fulfilling this your ministerie: for, if you have bene faithfull, there is layd vp for you, a Crowne of glorye, which, God, the righteous judge, shall give you at that day: if unfaithfull, go many fathomes, deeper into hell, then other men, because you have bene, the Soule-murderers of them, whome you should have sa∣ved. Thus, as the Colossians must say to Archippus, so I to you, every one, take heede to your ministerie, which you have received in the Lord that you fulfill it. Even so good Lord, grant vnto the ministerie, of thy chosen ones all gifts, fit for their calling, give vnto
them, increase of knowledge, give them faithfulnes give them zeale, that they may teach thy people, in thy trueth! And reforme, all them; that either, for ignorance can∣not: or, for negligence, will not; or, for fearfulnes, dare not; or, for wickednes, and ungodlines, ought not, to preach thy word: that true Pastours, being pla∣ced in, among thy people, which may feed them, with knowledg, and vnderstan∣ding, thy church may grow vp, in perfect beauty, to the glo∣ry of thy name! Amen! FINIS.
