16771 99838708 3096
THE KINGS Medicines for the Plague, Prescribed for the yeare 1604. by the whole Colledge of Physitians, both Spirituall and Temporall. And now most fit∣ting for this dangerous time of In∣fection, to be used all Eng∣land over. LONDON, Printed for Henry Gosson, and are to be sold by F. Coules, at his Shop in the upper end of the Old Bayly neere Newgate 1636.
The Kings Medicine of the for∣mer yeare, against the Plague of the Body. The first part. TAke Sage of vertue, Rue, (other∣wise called Herb-grace) Elder-leaves, red Bramble leaves, and Wormewood, of each of them a good andfull, stamp them all together, and then straine them thorow a fine linnen cloth: & put to the juice a quart of per∣fect good white Wine, and a good quantity of white wine Vinegar: min∣gle them all together, and put thereto a quarter of an ounce of white Ginger, beaten to smal powder, use todrink this Medicine every morning fasting (for the space of nine dayes together) the quantity of a spoonfull at a time, and this will (by Gods helpe) preserve you  the space of a whole yeare.
The Kings Medicine for this present yeare against the Plague of the soule, and the effect thereof. TAke the herb of Uertue, (the doing of good, Psal. 34. 14.) and the herb of Pati∣ence (otherwise called a wayting vpon the Lord, Psal. 37. 7.) wherewith possesse your soules, Luke 21. 19. In steed of Herb-grace, take another, called Christs grace: and in the place of Elder-leaues, Elders Examples, fol∣lowing and imitating the Elders of Israel, 1 Chron. 21. prostrating your selues before the Maiestie of God. Let not two things be the ingredients of this Spirituall Kings Medicine, which are in the corporall, the Bramble and the Wormewood. Leaue out the proud Bramble, and his leaves, for he would exalt himselfe above the other trees, Iudges 9. 15. Secondly leaue out also the hitter worm∣wood of hate, anger and envie: and according to the counsel of God (the best Physician) Deut. 29. 18. Let there not be among you any root of bitternesse and Wormewood. In steed of these two, take the humble Figgetree and his leaves, who would not exalt himselfe above others, Iudges 9. 11. Mingle herein the broad Figge-leaues of lowlinesse, humbling your selves under the mightie hand of God, 1. Peter
5. 6. Couering your good works (as the Fig∣trée his swéet fruit) with the broad leaves of humility. Take of each of those a good quan∣tity, and be aboundant in good works, and in the Work of the Lord (as the Apostle spea∣keth) being filled with all fulnesse of God, Ephc. 3. 9. Straine these through the fine strainer of uprightnesse and integritie, wal∣king uprightly, Psal. 15. Avoyding all hypo∣crisie, and laying aside all guile and dissimula∣tion, 1 Pet. 2. 1. In stéed of white Ginger, out thereunto the hot Ginger of loue to∣wards God & thy neighbour: let it be white and pure, louing without dissimulation, Rom. 12. 9. Further, hot and feruent. Aboue all things, hauing feruent loue among you, I Pet. 4. 8. Breake with the stamper of obedi∣ence and humility, the hardnesse of thy heart: Let it smite thée as Davids did, make as it were a small powder of it through humility: & if to day thou hearest the voyce of the Lord, arden not thy heart, Heb. 3. In stéed of white Wine, put to the iuice of these: The perfect white and pure Wine, that is, the blood of Iesus Christ: and the sowre Uinegar of his death and passion: For, onely by the vertue of this, the Medicine must operate. Use to take in this Medicine euery day fasting: sometime outwardly and corporally (when
in publique calamity it is appointed by the superiour power, to reproue a present iudge∣ment) but alwayes inwardly and Spiritu∣ally, loosing the hands of wickednesse, taking off the heauie burthens, letting the oppressed goe frée: couering the naked, dealing thy bread to the hungry, Esay 5. 8. Use this (I say) not for the space of nine dayes together, but the whole yeare, yea all the dayes of thy life. So continuing in the Lord, Phil. 4. 1. and being not weary of well doing, 2 Thes. 3. 13. And this will (by Gods helpe) pre∣serue you from the Plague of the soule, and the infection of the world. I say, not a whole yeare; but all thy life time, till against the future resurrection, both with body and soule, thou mayest liue eternally.
The Kings bodily Me∣dicine after Infection. The second part. IF it fortune, that one be striken with the Plague before he have taken the former Medi∣cines: then take the things re∣hearsed and put thereto a spoonfull of Bettony water, and as much Scabi∣ous water, and a pretty quantity of fine Trea∣cle and temper them well together, and let the Patient vse to drinke it often, and it will ex∣pell the venome or poyson forthwith. But if the Botch doe happen to appeare, then take a good quantity of Elder-leaves, red Bramble leaves, and Mustard-seed: stampe them well together, and make a Plaister thereof: apply it to the sore, and it will draw forth all the ve∣nome and corruption.
The second part of the Spiri∣tuall Medicine. IF it fortune, that thou art striken with the Plague, before thou hast taken in the for∣mer Kings Medicine of repentance, then take the things afore rehearsed: and lest in thy affli∣ction thou wax impatient, put thereunto, not the Balme of Gilead, Jerem. 46. 11. But the Spiri∣tuall Treacle and Mithridate of the consideration of Gods will and Providence, Psal. 39. 9. opening not thy Mouth because hee doth it: and hol∣ding that, nothing can happen vnto thee with∣out his appointment. Further, that thou shouldest not distrust or despaire of the remis∣sion of thy sinnes, of the health of thy soule, and of the goodnesse and power of God the Physician; In steed of Betony water, put there∣unto a good quantity of that Aqua Benedicta, of that blessed water of Gods mercy, praying with David, Take away, O Lord, the trespasse of thy servant, 2. Sam. 24. 10. and wash me that I may be whiter than snow, Psal. 51. This will coole the heat of thy conscience, and comfort thy weary bones. Adde as much of the water of life, Ioh. 4. 10. which is powred into our hearts by the holy Ghost, unto ever∣lasting life. Fetch it by prayer, of Christ the Phy∣sician and Doctor of our soules: for hee doth
give it to quench our thirst, John 4. 14. Put hereunto thy Baptisme water, representing the blood of Christ Iesus: It is one of the three wit∣nesses 1 Iohn 5. Assuring thee of the remission of thy sins. Leave out Scabious water: I meane that Scabby-holy-water, with the Bulles and Indul∣gences of the Anti-christ: for it will make thee to get scabs and sores in thy soule, and bee vnto thee, not the water of Life, but the water of Death. Adde also a good quantity of that comfortable Treacle of hope, with the conside∣ration of the future glory, being sure that thy Redeemer liveth, and that thou shalt see him with thine eyes, Iob 19. 25. Mingle and tem∣per thus well together, this Patience, Faith, Confidence and Hope, and let the Patient that is infected with either of them both, vse to drink this Kings Medicine often: let all his life (in health or in sicknesse) be a continuall re∣pentance and Meditation of those things, & it will expell the venome of his sin, of impati∣ence, distrustfulnesse, and immoderate feare. But if the filthy botch of impatience, distrust∣fulnesse, and immoderate feare doe happen to appeare: then in steed of Elder-leaves, take a good quantity of Elders examples: the Faith of Abraham, Patience of Iob, the hope of Da∣vid, and take (my brethren) the Prophets for an example of patience in suffering adversity,
Sam. 5. 10. Further, take also the Mustard∣seed of Gods word, Math. 13. 31. with the ex∣cellent commandements, admonitions, pro∣mises, and comforts contained therein: min∣gle these together, consider upon them, make a Plaister of them, apply it to thy sore, it will draw forth the venome and corruption of im∣patience, distrustfulnesse, and immoderate feare. The Mustard seed, as Plinie doth wit∣nesse, is both purgativum, & Curativum, it pur∣geth the body of ill humours, and cureth the venemous biting of a Serpent: Even so the Spirituall Mustard seed of the Word, purgeth and avoydeth the evill humours of the soule, and healeth the venemous bi∣ting of that old Serpent the Devill.
Sundry Medicines for the Plague. Those that feare the Plague, and are not Infected, let them take of this drinke hereafter following, which is twise in every weeke halfe a spoonfull at a time: it hath beene observed, that never any one dyed of the Sicknesse, that did take it in time. TAke three Pints of Malmesie, a handfull of Rue, as much of Sage, boyle these to a quart: then strain out the herbs, & then take an ounce of Long Pepper, Vinegar and Nut∣megs, all beaten small in a Morter, and put in∣to the Wine, and boyle it a little, then take it off, and put into it one ounce of Mithridate, two ounces of the best Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of Aqita-vitae, and put all into the Wine and so keepe it. The vse of it. If any be infected, take one spoonefull of it as soone as the party doth presume him∣selfe infected, luke-warme, and so goe to bed, and sweat two or thrée houres, and then dry the body well, and keepe warme, and drinke no cold drink, but warme drinke and
Cawdels, and Posset drinke with Marigold leaues, and flowers, when the party hath sweat & is well dryed with warme cloathes, and so long as the party is ill, take a spoon∣full morning and euening. These things ought duly to be looked unto, viz. IT is very conuenient that you keepe your houses, streets, yards, backsides, sinks, and kennels sweet and cleane, from all stan∣ding Puddels, Dunghils, and corrupt moy∣stures, which ingender stinking sauours that may bee noysome, or breed Infecti∣on: nor suffer no dogges to come running into your houses: neither keepe any (except it bee backward in same place of open ayre, for they are very dangerous, and not suffera∣ble in time of sicknesse, by reason they runne from place to place, and from one house to another, feeding vpon the vncleanest things that are cast forth in the streets, and are a most apt cattell to take infection of any sick∣nesse, and then to bring it into the house. For ayring your Roomes. Ayre your seuerall Roomes with Char∣cole-fires,
made in stone pans or Chasing∣dishes, and not in Chimneyes: set your Pannes in the middle of the Roomes: ayre euery Roome once a wéeke (at the least) and put into your fire a little quantity of Fran∣cincense, Iuniper, dried Rosemary, or of Bay-leaves. To smell to. The root of Enula-Campana, steeped in Vinegar, and lapped in a Handkercher, is a spe∣ciall thing to smell vnto, if you come where the Sicknesse is. To taste or chew in the mouth. The root of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Sinamon, is a speciall preserua∣siue against the Plague, being chewed in the mouth. To eat. Eat Sorrell stéeped in Uinegar, in the morning fasting, with a little bread and butter: Sorrell sauce is also very holesome against the same. To drinke. Take Rue, Wormewood, and Scabius, sleep't in
Ale a whole night, and drinke it fasting every morning. Another. The root of Enula-Campana, beaten to powder, is a speciall remedie against the Plague, being drunke fasting. Another. If any feele themselves already infected, take Angelica water mixt with Mithridatum, drinke it off, then goe to bed and sweat there∣on. Another speciall Preservative. Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and the yolke, and fill the shell onely with Saffron, rost the shell and Saffron together, in embers of Char∣coles vntill the shell war yellow: then beat shell and all together in a Morter, with halfe a spoonefull of Mustard-seed: Now so soone as any suspition is had of Infection dissolue the weight of a French Crowne in ten spoon∣fuls of Posset Ale, drinke it luke-warme, and sweat vpon it in your naked bed. Drinke for ordinary Dyet. So neere as you can, let the Patients ordinary
drinke be good small Ale of eight dayes old. For Vomiting. Vomiting is better than bleeding in this ase, and therefore provoke to Vomit so neere s you can. To provoke Vomit. Take three leaves of Eastrabecca, stamp it, and drinke it in Rhenish wine, Ale, or Posset Ale. For Purging. If the party be full of grosse humors, let him blood immediately vpon the right arme, on the Liuer veine, or on the median veine, in the same arine: so as no sore appeare the first day. A very wholesome water to be distilled. Steepe Sorrell in Vinegar foure and twen∣ty houres, then take it out, and dry it with a linnen cloth, then still it in a Limbeck, drink foure spoonfuls with a little Sugar, then milke upon it till you sweat, if you may: if not, keepe your bed, and sweat upon it. Use this before supper on any evening. If the Patient happen to be troubled with any Swellings, Botches, Carbuncles, let him
sweat moderately now and then. Outward Medicines to ripen the Sore. Take the root of a white Lilly, rost it in a good handfull of Sorrell, stampe it, and apply it thereto very hot, let it lye foure and twenty houres, and it will breake the sore. Another. Take a small quantity of Leauen, handfull of Mallowes, a little quantity of Scabias, cut a white Onyon into pieces with halfe a dozen heads of Garlick, boyl these together in running water, make Poultus of it, and then lay it hot to the sore Another. Take a hot Loafe, new taken forth of the Oven, apply it to the sore, and it will doubt∣lesse breake the same: but afterward bury the same Loafe deepe enough in the ground for feare of any Infection: for if either Dogge or any other thing doe feed thereon, it will infect a great many. For Ayring Apparell. Let the Apparell of the diseased person
be well and often washed, be it linnen or woollen: or let it be ayred in the Sunne, or uer Pans of fire, or ouer a Chasingdish of Coales, and fume the same with Frankin∣ense, Iuniper, or dried Rosemary. To preserve from the Infection of the Plague. Take Garlick, and péele it, and mince it mall, put it into new milke, and eat it asting. To take the Infection from a house Infected. Take large Onyons, peele them, and lay three of foure of them upon the ground: let them lie ten dayes, and those peeled Ony∣ons will gather all the Infection into them that is in one of those Roomes: but bury those Onyons afterward deepe in the ground. Against the new burning Feaver. If the Patient be in great heat, as most commonly they will: take of faire running water a pretty quantity: put it on a Cha∣singdish of Coales, then put thereinto a good uantity of Sunders beaten to powder, and
let it boyle halfe an houre betwéen two dishes: that done, put a couple of soft lin∣nen clothes into a dish, wet the clothes well in water and Sunders, and apply the same so hot as you can suffer it to your belly. To procure sleepe to the sick Persons that are diseased, either with the Plague or the hot Feaver. Take of womans breast-milke a good quantity, put thereunto of the like quantity of Aqua-vitae, stirre them well together, and moysten therewith the Temples of the Patient, and his Nosethrils, lay it on with some feather, or some fine thin ragge. Butter-milke in this contagious time is generally holsome to be eaten, and is a good Preservative against either the Plague or the pestilent Feaver.
A Prayer for those that are not Visited. OH most mighty and mercifull Lord God, in whose hands are health and sicknesse, who at thy pleasure canst kill and comfort: I doe confesse that my sinnes call lowder for Iustice, then I can cry for mercie, and I deserue all Plagues and punishments in this life, and the Plague of Plagues in the life to come, damnation both of body and soule: but Oh Lord, bée thou more mercifull, then I can be sinfull, and in Iesus Christ bee reconciled vnto me, and purge mee, and cleanse mee from all my sinnes: and I beséech thée Oh heauenly Fa∣ther, at whose Commandement the Angels passed ouer the houses of the Israelites, when it struck the Egyptians, (if it be thy blessed will) that this present Sicknesse may passe uer me and my Family. We doe confesse, Oh Lord, that I and others haue deserued the Plagues of Egypt: but Oh Lord, howso∣euer
kéepe vs from the greatest Plague, which is hardnesse of heart: and if it be thy pleasure, with-hold thy heauy hand from vs: Doe not correct vs in thine anger, nor yet chastise vs in thy heauy displeasure, but in thy mercy release vs, and if it be good vnto thée, that I and others should taste of this bitter Cup, strengthen our Faith, encrease our Hope, augment our Patience, that so wes may rest in thy peace, rise in thy power, and remaine in thy glory, and that for Christ Iesus sake in whose name we further call vpon thee, Our Father which art in Hea∣ven, &c.
A Prayer for those that are Visited. OH Lord God, thou best Physitian, both of our soules & bodies, who canst bring to the Graue, & pull back againe whom thou easest, which wert moued at the Prayers of Moses for others: of Ezekiah for himselfe: Oh Lord heare me for others, others for me, and all of vs for thy Son: and looke with the ye of mercy vpon mee whom it hath pleased ée at this time to visit with the Plague and Sicknesse. O Lord, I am held in thy fetters: Oh thou which hast bound mée, loose me, and if it tend vnto thy glory and my good, re∣store my health vnto mée. Oh Lord, I haue éene an vnprofitable seruant all my life time: Oh thē let me not then be bereft of the fe of nature, when I begin the life of grace: ut if thou hast disposed of mée otherwise, encrease my Patience with my paines: shew y strength in sustaining my weakenesse:
and be my strong fortresse in this houre of my tryall: giue me grace to apprehend, and apply all the merits and mercies of Christ vnto my soule: and oh Lord, let thy Com∣forter oppose the Tempter, in such a mea∣sure, that he may not preuaile against mée, but as thou makest me like Lazarus, full of sores, so also let thy Angels carry mee into Abrahams bosome Oh Lord, I intreat, let mee obtaine euen for his sake, for whom thou hast promised and bound thy selfe, to heare and helpe the afflicted, euen thy Sonne, and my Sauiour, Christ Iesus: To whom with thée and thy blessed Spirit, bee all praise, &c. FINIS.
