17469 99847604 12644
A compen∣dious treatise in metre declaring the firste origi∣nall of Sacrifice, and of the buylding of Aultares and Churches, and of the firste receauinge of the Christen fayth here in Englande by G. M. Iacob. 4. ¶Drawe nyghe to God, and he wil drawe nighe to you. Anno Domini. 1.5.5.4.18. Decembris.
❧ The Preface, Vnto the Readers. Spiritus ubi uult Spirat Good readers pardon me I praye you more and lesseThe first let∣ter of euery of these verses dothe cōtayne the name of the maker. Emptye of learning, furnished with rudenesse Onlye my good will, accepte here in this place Regarde here the stories, thoughe they you ap∣prehende Grudge you not at thē, but your faultes amend Exāples thei you shew, for to moue you to grace Vse me & amēd me, & I wil thanke you therfore Saue me sure harmelesse, & I aske you no more Marke not my ryme, but regard well y• matter As tyme shal serue you, reade it with leasure Referring all faultes to your good discretion Sythe I am bare of knowledge, and voyde of eloquence Haue it not in despite, but pardon my insolence Al thynges I wishe to come, to good ende and conclusion Laude god and prayse him howe euer ye worlde turne Loke wel to the marke yt all men muste runne Iacob. 4.Clense your handes ye synners, & purge your hartes ye waueryng mynded.
❧ To the right Worshipfull mayster Ri∣charde Whartun Esquier G. M. dothe wishe longe life with grace. INasmuche right worshipful Sir, as it is well knowen to all your neygh∣bours, that you haue bene a worthie champion, and a bolde souldiar, that very manly hath stande and fought vnder the banner of Christes fayth, not beynge moued or driuen backe, neyther with the pestife¦rous blastes of Antichristes preachers, or yet in feare of peryll of the highe and mightie waues of this tempestrious sea, which vnsatiably hath swalowed vp many a cowardly heart, and ouer¦whelmed many weake in fayth. Which constan∣cie of your behalfe hath no lesse demerited, then Christ him selfe hath promised (as his Apostle saynt Iames dothe full well recorde) that is to saye, a crowne incorruptible. And therfore hath Christe him selfe willed all men to perseuere in fayth vnto the ende. Also monishinge all his, to beware and take hede of the false and deuillishe doctrine, that shalbe sowen in the ende of the worlde (saying) that therby many shalbe decea∣ued, yea and the heartes of innocentes shalbe therby peruerted, as the Apostle doth wel testi∣fie. We maye nowe in these oure dayes ryghte worshipful syr saye, that sede hathe bene sowen. But it is darnell in the stede of good corne. For the increase thereof is euil, and therfore the sede is the better perceaued. For the nature of dar∣nell is suche, that yf it be receaued in what licor
or meates, it wil cause the eater therof to iudge him selfe to be dusie in the braynes, as the expe∣rience doth full well proue, that this darnel, the whiche hath bene receaued of manye, what car∣nall vessels hath brought them selfes, as to saye into a madnes of minde, neyther fearynge God, dreading hell, obeying their kyng, or knowyng them selfes, as we maye daylye perceaue by ex∣perience in their workes. For who haue redde of so many heresies, treasons, conspiracies, mur¦ders, false accusations, prowde attemptes, de∣uillishe assaultes, fonde enterprises, lamentable crimes, and wretched ending, as hath bene sithe the time, that this darnell hathe entered into their brayne. Yet maye be well iudged by these people, that Legion the great deuil the monste∣rous cockatrice hath layde her egges, and hath hacheged them, and hath brought forth her bir∣des in an euill time, by whose poyson innumera∣ble hath bene and is infected. Who happie good fyr is that man, that hath not entered into their wicked iudgement, neyther yet hath walked in their peruerse wayes, neyther yet hathe rested them selfes in theyr seate or pestilēt chayre. Yet doth these wicked byrdes chatter, and continu∣allye saye: that all the cause of our plages hathe bene for that we haue not receaued gods word, as thoughe Goddes woorde was neuer in this realme before, and that Gods worde can not be receaued but in the Englishe tongue. But sure¦lie good syr the rulers of the earth hath bene to blame for suffering so precious and holye aynell to be cast amonge swyne, sithe Christe him selfe
hath warned vs the contrarye. And so it is an olde sayinge, that to muche familiaritie ingen∣dreth contempte: yet will this wicked generati∣so stiflye stande in argument, that it is necessa∣rye, that al men shuld haue the Bibel and Testa¦ment in their mother tongue, as thoughe that all men being ordeyned to learne Gods worde, shoulde also be teachers. But surelye good syr theyr opinion is verelye false, as you shall well perceaue. Vza being appointed to driue the oxen that did beare the arcke of God, was not ordey∣ned to touche the arcke. For as it is wrytten in the storie, because he didde staye the arcke wyth his hande, when it was in ieopardie of fallyng, he was stroken downe deade by the hande of God. Oza the kyng dyd also enterprise to incense the aultare, whiche was not his office to do, and therfore, he was strokē with leprosie in his face. Thus were they plaged, that didde presume to the office, not being called therevnto, although they did suppose to do God good seruice. Christ him selfe didde talke of the kingdome of heauen with Nicodemus a ruler in Israell, so dydde he with Zacheus, a man of worshipfull estate a∣monge the Iewes, with the Centurion a capi∣tayne, the yonge inheritour, the widowe of Ca∣naan, the woman of Samarie, and with manye innumerable mo, yet did not Christ commaūde none of all these to preache the Gospell. Yet it was his good pleasure, that they shulde knowe it, when he healed the man, that was both dōme and deaffe: which doth figure those, that know not Christe, neyther can talke of his lawe. Yet
when this man did knowe Christ, and could te∣stifie of his grace and mercy, yet Christe did not sende him to preache, but to prayse God, & hym to magnifie: and when Christe did clense the le∣pers, he didde not sende them to preache, but to shewe them to the priest, and gaue them charge to fulfill, that the lawe did commaunde them. And contrarye, when Christe had strokē downe Saule, and cōuerted him to Paule, he sent him to preache vnto the Gentiles, and Christ gene∣rally sent his Apostles to preache to all creatu∣res. And yf Christe shuld haue geuen that com∣maūdement to all men, then all shuld haue bene preachers and no hearers: therefore euen as God hath set orders and degrees amonge hys Archaungels and aungels: and diuersitie of the light and brightnes of the sunne, moone, & eche other starre. Euen so he hath made some Patri¦arches, Prophetes, Apostles, Euangelistes, do∣ctors, and teachers, and so diuerslye of estate of eche other degree amonge the people on the earth. For God him selfe euen from the first cre∣ation, of stones, herbes, and fruites, that growe and sprynge yearely out of the earth, God hath made some of more vertue and worthie estima∣tion then some. Lyke as the potter dothe not make all his vessels for one vse or purpose, but diuerse vessels to serue for diuerse vses, accor∣ding to the will of the maker. And therfore it is Gods will, and also the counsell of the Apostle, that euery man should abide and walke in hys vocation and calling. And nowe good syr to con¦clude, for that I haue euer hearde, & well dothe
knowe, that you haue bene faythfull in your of∣fice, and iustelye hath walked in your vocation. I haue therfore dedicate this my simple worke in your name, therby declarynge my good wyll towardes the maynteynaunce of the true reli∣gion, and also to do some thing to pleasure you, yf it were in my simple power. But to con∣clude as I haue sayde, I beseche you good syr consider my good wyll, and lette it stande for a iuste facte. Iesus preserue you.
AS I laye musing in my bedde alone My pyllowe remouinge. For slepe was gone So troubled was my spirite by gre∣uous agonye Consideryng the state and staye of our beleue The ofte chaunging therof christen hartes doth greue Which standeth in no staye, it is the more pitie God geue vs grace our lyues to amende And true fayth in Englande agayne sende For lacke of grace we haue gone astraye Ensuing the steppes of wickednes alwaye Our soules and bodyes by synne is corrupted The thinges that of olde to God was begonne We fondely agayne haue them fordonne The badde for the good vnsemely placed Experience hath taught vs it is well knowen That euil men haue reped, that good men haue sowen When Adam dyd lyue with Eue his wyfe Genes. 3.The serpent begonne to sowe some stryfe Betwene our lorde and the soule of man Perswadyng the woman of the appell to eate Promysyng her wysedome therby to gette Where sinne was vnknowē, there then it began Thus by the breakyng of Gods cōmaundement Mans soule was caught captyue by death to shent Genes. 9.When Abell and Cayne fyrst dyd begynne
Of their fruites to offer yt then were growinge On the earth to the lorde in worthy sacrifyce Cayn slewe Abell there in that stede With the Iawe bone of an Asse as we reade Because the lorde dyd hys oblation despyse, When oblation and sacrifice here first beganne The deuill set stryfe betwene man and man As the people beganne to encrease in number, With vnclennes theyr soules they dyd incūberGenes. 6.7. That God dyd repent that euer he made man And for that they would not repent & amende The rayne from heauen to ye earth dyd ascende Wherwith was distroyed all creatures than Thus was the worlde destroyed for synne But Noye hadde an Arcke to saue hym in When the floude was ended, then Noye gods preacher Beganne fyrst to buylde to God an Iultare Whereon he dyd offer swete incense & sacrifice Which was so well accepted to God in heauen That he sayde he would neuer dystroye agayne All creatures from the earth by glage or o∣therwiseGenes. 22. Leuit. 9. Matth. 5. Then aultares was vsed as the bokes doth tel Of the Leuites, patriarkes, prophetes, & gospel The Aungell to Abram from the lorde was sent That Isaac his sonne in sacrifice should presentGenes. 10. Vnto the lorde for so was his wyll Abram then stode not this message to reason But went with his sonne wyth all expedition
Vnto the mounte there Isaac to kyll To sacrifice his sonne, Abram was content As the lorde him selfe had geuen cōmaundemēt Here maye you se thoughe some will prate The aulter and sacrifice was not deuised of late As the stories olde dothe truely tell When Hanna the baren dyd fast and praye 1. Regum. 1.And sacrifice to the lord as the storye doth saye He gaue hyr a sonne, that hyte Samuell With prayer and oblation God was pleased The troubled hart, he therfore hath eased When the Citezins of Niniue wickedly did liue Ionas.Ionas was sent them warning to geue Within fortye dayes there subuersion to be The Kyng in all the hast, sent commaundement then That all shoulde repent, both woman and man Their clothes not rendinge but their hartes in∣wardely Thus by repentaunce, the Citie was saued By prayer and fastynge, their paynes released Israell beynge plaged with mortall Pestilence 2. Regū. 2.4.Bauyd it knew it was for his insolence From numberyng the people, from Dan to Bersaba Then Dauid did cause to reare vppe an aultare Wherevnto the lord he did sacrifice and offer To cesse the plage of Israell and Iuda When the people of olde the lorde had offended By sacrifice acceptable their sinnes they clensed
Salamon the kyng and most wise of fame3. Regum. 6. Builded a temple to Gods honour and name With ryches aboundant he dyd it beautyfye Ceder, Oliue, & palme tree, there was not skant Tynne, Copper, Syluer, nor Golde did there wante Neyther stones precious or ornamentes costely Of sockes and lauers, there was many a one All of bryght brasse, they were made eche one An aultare of Golde vnto the lorde he made A tabell of the same, where the swete bread was laydeIdem. And Candelstickes ten on the aulcare standing The lampes and flowers of golde were pure Boules, peces, spones, and euerye masure Rychely was wrought, for no coste sparinge3. Regum. . Here may you see that the good fathers of olde Destroyed no Aultares, but made some of golde Many very fondly in argument doth standeAct. 7. That God doth not dwell in temple made with hande As though the scripture ment so playnely The heauens & whole earth are insufficient God to attayne or kepe, a tyme or moment But where his will is, there will he be Yet is the churche an house to God buyldedMatth. 2.1. Esay 5.6 A place for his name, there euer to be praysed Some thyng it is but labour loste To bestowe on the churche one peny of coste In Cope, crosse, or vestiment, or any other iewel
For sacrifice or offeringe God doth not care Esay 58.To fede the hungrye, and the oppressed to spare Of suche good workes, the scrypture doth tell This do they surmyse deuotion to oppresse Counterfeyting holynes, and meaning nothing lesse Matth. 2.Christ hym selfe at his byrth was contente To receaue of the kynges their offerynge and present That they in the stable to hym dyd offer And when he was of twelue yeares of age Luke 2.He came with his mother and his father sage To offer in Ierusalem, accordyng to the maner Thus our lorde Iesus would not in no wise Offend the lawe thoughe we it despyse Christ knowyng ryght well his death to drawe neareMatth. 22. He sent for an Asse, as it doth well appeare Theron for to ryde to Ierusalem wyllingly Some cutte downe bowes, and before him they strawed Some put of their garmentes, & in the way thē layed Syngynge altogether, Osanna God on hye God was contente the people shoulde adore With Body and goodes, he gaue it therfore In all tymes past, suche was the Conclusion When scysmes hathe bene, then true Religion Was falsely peruerted as the booke sayes Since the time that Peter in Rome dyd rayne
There hath bene scysmes, twenty and twaynePetrus de Ali¦aco in concor∣dantia theolo∣gie cū Astro¦nomia. ca. 58. This now excepted, begonne in oure dayes Lyke to this scysme in this Realme neuer was With so great destruction to sone now alas Fiftene hundred yeares past we in writing find Synce Lucy was Kyng of Englande by kyndePoli. Whyche sent to the Pope called Elentherius That he woulde send or els sone come This Realme to cōuerte to holy Christendome Which sent Damian with his fellow Forganus Then was this Realme to Christ conuerted Which we agayne hath falsely subuerted Although frō Rome these preachers were sentPoli. To Christen this Realme by y• Kinges consent Shoulde we therfore our fayth agayne denye Christ in Bethleē Iurie, a poore citie was borneMatth 2. Luke. 27 In stable amōg beastes yt fedde were with corne Should this dimynyshe his power or his glorie To gods pleasure & wil hūble soules shuld To his workes & wordes, & not against thē saye Trouble not thy braines thy faith for to skanne For God is a great God, & thou a symple man Yet is not in thy thought, to searche oute his wysdomeEccle. 3. Rom. 11. Psal. l 18. Matth. 26. Marke. 14. Luke. 22. Iohan 6. 1 Cor. 11. All thing of nothinge with his worde he made The bread eke his body, when he the word sayd And so to remayne tyll he agayne come The Euagelistes & Apostle of this doth recorde Saying take and eate the body of ouer Lord
Iosephus.Vpon this Scripture, & Christes owne saying The sacrifice of the Masse toke the begynnyng The Apostles thē selfes the same hath begonne Iames Alpheus in the selfe same yeare Sayde Masse in Ierusalem, as it doth appeare At the Penticost after Christes Ascention This is not newe, thoughe foles surmyse Agaynst the Masse to counterfeyte lyes Iames the lesse in Ierusalem byshop did raigne Eusebius in historia eccles¦siastica. lib. 3. Ieronimus de uiris illustris¦bus.Peter in Antioche & in the East lādes certaine And so in Rome twenty yeares and fiue Andrewe to the Grekes in Constantinople did preache To Egeas Christ crucified he dyd well teache In legenda Andreae.The lambe dayly offered, and yet styll alyue These thre Apostles sayd Masse in their dayes Thoughe Satans satyllites agaynst it sayes When this Iames was made fyrst byshoppe of Ierusalem They ordeyned him ministers & deacons seuen As the Actes of the Apostles dothe wel testyfie Act. 6.Stephen, Philip, procures: Timō & Permenas With the other also, Nichanor, and Nicolas Whych ministred to the people wel & worthely Act. 2.This was ordeined by ye Apostles whole cōsent According to the auctoritie, that God them sent Ambrose. Ieronimus.Many nowe dothe muse and fondely can chatte Where Rome this auctoritie fyrst them gatte Synce thay are but men, euen as we be This auctoritie to ye place forsoth was not geuē
The holy gost to ye Apostles was sent frō heauēAct. 2. Them to ende we with power and auctorytie Whych ordeined by lotte the Apostle Mathias To be on the stede of the traytoure Iudas Thus had the Apostles power as you may see To ordeine in ye churche ministers of eche degreIeronimus de uiris illustri∣bus. The people to gods lore and rules for to call In al publike weales, wher good order is skant There loue, rest, and ryches doth euer want And sodenly are trapped in daungerous thrallMatth. 12. That realme or monarche can not long endure Where good order doth want, you may be sure The shyppe without guyde longe can not saileMatth. 12. Iacob. 3. Neyther can the puisantes of men preuayle Withoute good rule, and order decente In tyme all thynges hadde their begynnyng And so in tyme shall returne to their endyng For so it is ordeyned by gods iust consentEccle. 3. We may not impute it as a faulte or cryme That ye Apostles and fathers ordeined in their tyme When faith in England beganne first to springe The Priestes in the churches did dayly Masse syng And so dyd contynue and styll holde an Tyll at the last as the storyes dothe tell A kynge here dyd raygne, that faithe dyd expel Dioclusion by name, that slewe saynt AlbonPoll. This man is holden as a martyr full good And the other a tirant cruel and woode
Iosephus libr. 20.Gayus Decius, Herode, and cruel Hero Persecuted ye churches with other tirantes mo To kill and to slea was all their whole delyte Peter and Andrewe on the crosse they spredde Act. 12.Iames they slewe, and Paule lost his hedde Thus at goddes seruantes they hadde despite Like as the Perselites doth nowe in our tyme Skanne of their faith, and against it time When Dioclusian and Maximilian forsoth dyd raygneEusebius. Beda. There was .xvij. thowsande of volye martyrs slayne So cruel was these tirantes fayth to delaye That Peter and ye Apostles so sore was affrayd That in spelunkes & caues there thei masse said Before the holy bretherne preuely eche daye In legenda sancti Sylue∣stri.Til Siluester came, that bysshoppe ful good That buylded stone Aultares, yt before was of woode Thys persecution helde on full as I wene Poli.The space of two hundreth yeres and syxetene Destroying the churche and good christianitie The holye places to goddes honor dedicate . Regum. 12.With heythen Maumentes they dyd maculate Thus fayth was turned to infidelitie This was forsoth a full pitious case To plucke downe Christ, & set satan in his place There was a bysshope that hyte by name Iue Beda, lib. 2.That came to England, and in Deuenshere did aryue
Which Christ & the faith to ye people did preache He was the kinges sonne of Perse, a good holy man Hutte, hutte, and yught where his decons then Which busied them selfes gods lore for to teachIn legenda sancti Iuonis. These men were buried in Huntyngdon shiere In a place called Slepe, as ye story doth appeare Yet was not this realme fully conuerted Which was before by infidelitie subuertedPoli. Tyll Gregorye in Rome Pope was there He came into the markette, as it by chaunce fel Where as he founde Englishe chylderne to sellIn legēda san∣cti Gregorij. Beda. lib. 1. ca. 23. Demaūding of what coūtrie & nation they were Aunswere was made of Englande they be As Angles sayde Gregorye they seme to me Then sent to Augustine with good intent Which dyd aryue at Tanette in Kent The kynge and the subiectes he cōuerted thereBeda. lib. 1. ca. 23. Then fayth agayne began for to sprynge Which then was receaued of subiectes & kynge As in the Englishe Cronicles it doth appeare Why should we at Rome nowe haue despyte That chaunged our darkenesse agayne to light Ethelbertus was then kynge, as I haue redde Berta hyte the Quene, that much desiredBeda. idem. To here Augustine preache gods worde deuine Then dyd it chaunce, and folowe by successeVVilhelmus lib. 1. That the people conuerted bothe more and lesse To Christes fayth, and holy doctrine Then began Kynges Churches to buylde
Which were before with Idoles defyled Then came to raygnyng by succession in time Beda. lib. 3. ca. 13Noble kynge Edgar, Oswoulde and Edwyne That found & rebuylded mo then fortie abbeies That were before by the Saxones destroyed And eke by infideles, that the fayth denied To counte some by name, as stories sayes Whinchester, Wylton, Brought, and Ramsey, Glastonbury, Abyngton, and also Thorney. Edmund & Edward, ful noble kinges thei were Which buylded worthely, & for no cost did spare To erecte such places to gods honor and glorye O Henry the seuenth a ful worthy king was he Whose noble workes in Cambrydge you may se And eke in Westminster both sūptuouse & costlie Matth. 7. As the good tree by the fruite is euer tryed So are good men by their workes espied. Thus noble kynges in olde time were content To builde Abbeyes, and to endue thē with rent There to remaine while ye world should endure Prayer, almose, and fastyng they ordeined there to be And in indifferente of good hospitalitie That the penylesse man of meate may be sure And though he there taried dayes two or thre No man would demaund from whence came he O cursed Germany, woo be vnto the That first nowe began to skowre the old heresie Of the Caphernites and Arians with other di∣uerse mo
With the was harbored the cursed Luther Decolampadius, Melancton, and Bullingere, Carolstadious, Stalbrydge, and wicked Otho Marke to what ende their learning is come By warre and sedition, their Realme vndone These cursed men and wicked teachers Where cleane contrarie to gods holy preachers that taught false libertie, deuout vertue to hide Downe with the churche, ye Masse, & the grayle Prayer and fasting naught doth preuayle That thing yt was good, they myght not abide That good men of olde, study to maynetayne Nowe Antichristes preachers hathe destroyed agayne Then Cupido and Venus in England beganne As gods for to gouerne bothe woman and man And auarice was ordeyned, then puruior to be Their lust and their will, to supporte & vpholde With aboundaunce of treasure of siluer & golde Tyll weale and welth was turned to pouertie Then be thought treason some rule to beare Which sodenlie was caught, and takē in a snare Yet chansed in England as I shall you tell Nowe kyng Edbaldus, from the sayth fell And gaue his beleue, to false maumentryBeda. lib. 2. ca. 9. Milletus the byssshoppe, then to flee was fayne Tyll the kynge vnto Christ was turned agayne Which thē was restored to his see in Cāterbury The citezins of London would not in no wise Leaue their infidelitie, and to Christ agayne rise
Rom. 13.Helias made prayer to God agaynst Israell Which slewe their prophetes, & their aultares downe fell And I am lefte alone, and they my life seke God aunswered and sayd there be yet left some That by the adoption of grace to heauen shall come With me to dwell, and my seruauntes meke Thoughe some haue their faith by folye defiled Yet some remayne constant and neuer chaūged This storie doth resemble ye people in these daies That grinne at the ministers, & against ye aultare sayes Vtteryng out lyes couered with Ipocrisie Yet some men did espye their deuillishe intent And woulde in no wyse therevnto consent Perceauing it was newe skowered heresie Euen for the heresies yt many hath bene burned Fooles hath beleued, and there vnto turned All the olde heresies that heretofore were Were put in vse by Iohn Wyckeleffe here And were confuted by William Wylford He was a famous clarke & an english man borne Whose workes containe those heresies eche one Which he dyd confute, as the bokes recorde Hony and poyson of swete floures are sucked So truth and falshode on scripture is gathered Some men there be that wil not beleue No writing or storie except scripture it proue As thoughe al were false, but the wryting there
The succession of kynges and eke lordes by hest, The scripture dothe not tell of ciuill warre or conquest Yet are they true, and in wryting do appeare If you wil not beleue but what scripture sayeth Then chaunge not the truth to peruerse waies The Phariseis doubted, Christ gods sōne to be Desiringe from heauen some wonderouse to seeMatth. 12. By the proue thereof, ye truth they might know Euen so our Perselites doth as fondlye denye The bread to be gods bodie, by his word verely Vnlesse they see bloude in their tethe when they chowe O you vipers byrdes, and adulterous nation Your dulnesse of faith, hasteth faste your dam∣nation Reade out the stories, and marke to what ende To the church destroyers, god dyd ofte sende The bibell in diuerse places, doth well testifie3. Regum. 13. Daniel. 4.5. Macha. 5.6. What myserye and myschiefe hath bene in this lande What penurie and plages haue we here founde Synce we began fyrst the churche to destroye That plage neuer in no Realme hath bene But we in these dayes hath it felte or sene Yet is but in vayne herein to enterdyte What care thē befel, yt at the church had despite Wittenesseth well Cromwell as you wel know Duddely the stoute with his felowes Aye Their parte on the skaffolde full well did playe
That then were on hye, and nowe are full lowe These men are to vs example and warning To serue our lorde God, and obeye the Kynge To saye all Amen, and to geue God the glorye We her subyectes are bound for the state of her maiestie For surely she is Gods chosen vessell Lyke to our Quene▪ we may not well compare Neither ye wydowe Iudith, or yet quene hester Whose worthy factes the bybel dothe tell To eche of this women, God shewed ones his mercy As he hathe diuerse times to our Quene Mari Iudyth with wyne, & eke with fayre promise, Holofernes ouercame, & slewe him in his dronknesse Wherby she ye citie of Bethulia hath preserued But Mary our Quene, by prayer deuoute Ouercame her enemies, beinge neuer so stoute Withoute fayre promyse, or any gifte profered God right wel heard her chast & humble praier That sodenly stroke her enemies, & caused thē retier. Hester made her prayers for the Iewes onlye Which a man wente about by enuy to destroye Whose prayer god heard, & the Iues deliuered But Mary our Quene, prayed in generallye That no bloude myght be shedde, of her frende or enemy God heard her praier, and the matter so ended A wonderfull myracle, euer to be remembred
That God wrought for our Quene, he euer be praysed The fayth of Christ and all trewe religion Wyth prayer and fasting, and eke good deuotiō Was almoste gone oute of euery mans harte The Churche, the aulter, & Gods sacred bodye They robbed & spoiled, and their faith did denie Lyke desperate wretches, thus played they their parte All was forlorne, tyll good Quene Mary Restored them agayne to gods honor & glorye The sacramētes of ye churche was new to begin Adulterie & sacrilege was counted for no sinne Nor y• selling of ofices, to mayntayne briberye The belles they plucked downe by subtil pre∣tence To coyne therof testers, grotes, and eke pence, Thus al came to nought, til good quene Mary Began for to raygne, as we ryght well se That Iesus preserue, her graces maiestie The churche Goddes spouse, was brought vn∣der trybute With lawes vniust, and paymentes greate The churche & the cōmons was greued yerely, The catholyke fathers, yt are good men in dede Wrongfully were oppressed, and euill placed in their stede That vsurpplie did rule, til good quene Marie Deposed the prowde & the good men in chayne She iustely vnlosed, and restored agayne
The noble lyon, that of colour is whyte Gyltelesse they helde captyue, by enuy & spyte Their purpose to cōpasse, they thought it so best For this they wel knew, that if he were at large he wold sone haue tēpered their madnes & rage Brynging the vprorers agayne some to rest O Englande reioyce at our good quene Mary That iustely hathe losed the lion not gylty Let vs al praie God bothe more and lesse that hath sent vs a quene, our thralles to relesse Wher wt we were captyue bothe in soule & body We may be right glad, ye god hath now chaūged A lambe for wolues, ye vnsatiably deuoured The realme & the cōmons wtout pitie or mercye God saue and preserue our noble Quene Mari Ouer vs longe to raygne, let vs al pray hartlie God saue the Quene. Prayse be to god that a noble quene hath sent Ouer vs for to raygne if we canne be content That wel hath begonne to call thinges agayne, The which were before by falsehead subuerted, Agayne to Gods glorie, she hath them cōuerted Amonge vs Christians euer to remayne Sithe we were before deceaued with heresie Let vs nowe be faythful, & geue God the glorie AMEN. Matth. 24.Coelum & terra transibunt, uerba autem mea non praeteribunt. ¶ Excusum Londini in aedibus lohannis Cawodi Typographi Regiae Maiestatis.
