18575 99839901 4362
The co∣pie of a letter sente to one maister Chrispyne chanon of Exceter for that he denied ye scrip∣ture to be the touche stone or trial of al o∣ther doctrines wher∣unto is added an appologie and a bulworke, in defēce of the same let∣ter.
¶To the right worship¦full and his syngular good Mai∣ster syr Peter Carewe: Philip Nicolles wysheth the conti∣nuall fauoure of God. GReate cōforte is it to Chri∣stes pore floceke (right wor∣shipful syr) among so manie hudge Rockes and wylde seas, as oure weste partes are compassed with all: to haue some porte or ha∣uē wher Christes shippes mought cast ancre, and for a space haue suc¦coure, tyl ye stormes be paste. This fatherlie prouision maketh the al myghtie and most mercifull Lorde al waies to helpe thē that be hys. And though Ionas sincke yet is ye whale redie to kepe him frō perish∣ing & to brynge hym to land, as a∣monge so manye greate stormes, no meruaile thoughe some haue ben pluged vnder the water but of suche, gloriouse shall the resur∣rection
be. But in my contrey (my right deare sir) where most dayn∣ger appeareth to be: scantly hath ther any wette their feete, praysed may the name of God be therfore, yt so prouideth for yong suckelinges whiche else shoulde be ouer whel∣med before they were weaned frō their milke. Your pure and yer∣nest zeale toward gods truth and paynefull laboures infendeynge innocentes is not vnknowne to a great menye. But would to God it were farther knowne, euen tho rowe out. Not that you shoulde haue the prayses of men for your laboure, for they belonge to God and it is wickednesse to seke them from hym, but that it myght pro∣uoke other mē of worship, and ho∣nour also in all places, to so feruēt and godlye desire of Christes doc∣trine, to be publisshed among vs, Namely the whole bible, the scrip∣tures of God, the newe and olde
testament. Which onely doctrine is a lone sufficient to teache vs the true worship of God, fayeth in his promises, and in all good workes, to walke the waye to euerlastinge lyfe. To the defence of thys hea∣uenly doctrine (I saye) woulde I prouoke all mē of honour and wor¦shipe, by your ensample, if wit and learneing failed not. Your gentle∣nesse and liberalitye, towardes me and al those that longe for that heauenly doctrine: I passe ouer wt silence, to cut awaye occasions frō iuell tonges, althoughe the exam∣ple be greatly to be desired, in all men of worshippe, yea in all them that professe Christe accordinge to theyr power. Al these thinges nowe conside∣red, besyde the manyfolde labours and daylye trauaile that you take diuers waies to haue the veritye knowne, to bannyshe lieinge and cloked holinesse, to haue the Lorde
truly worshiped, and to rote cut Idolatrie. Consideringe also your yerneste desier to thys my smal la∣boure in writing to maister Chris∣pyne a simple letter, for asmuch as I perceyued that you were deter∣minatly mynded to put it in print I thought I coulde not bestowe my laboure better, then to set it furthe in your name chiefely to purg me from that euel suspicion that is lyke to ensue the printinge of it. For seinge they begin to byte me priuilye all redye, for exhibi∣tynge certayne Articles preached of oure learned men, and woulde perswade men that I dyd it of a pretēced malice, sekeinge their de∣struction: I knowe well they shall saye much rather, that it was my suite to haue this my letter spread a broad, and that I dyd it to seeke prayse, as they alwayes seeke most preise to them selfe, ye least deserue it, or that I stād in mine owne cō∣ceite
as to thinke yt I haue done a∣great acte, wheras I acknowe∣ledge it in deede to be but counter∣faite, in cōparison of a great nūbre that be wel leraned. Which if they had the matter in handlyng: these men myght haue been a shamed to shew their faces in a pulpit, to declare any suche matter agayne Nowe to preuente these biteinge serpentes of thys poisone the lord knoweth whether it be my faute or no to haue it printed, and you partly can testifie. Notwithstand∣ynge▪ it shal not greue me to haue it prynted, but rathere I shalbe glad of it thoughe it were but for thys cause onelie. To declare vnto all other contreis, that deuensher lacketh not some well wyllers (at the leaste) as well amonge the pore creatures, as the riche and wor∣shipfull, ye desier the glorye of God and furdraunce of hys word. As touchinge the articles offerred to
the visitours, which they say to be done of malice, hatered, and manie other good morowes, let suche mē knowe that I hate theyr doctrine in dede. As for any malice that I owe to the men: I axe no more grace and fauour of the Lorde, to be geuen to my selfe, then I wysh to the vilest of them all, if it might so come to passe and please God. For I knowe there can no suche ranckor and malice dwell in any christen herte, as they iudge other men by them selues. And thys I saye more ouer, that I am assured of these mini∣sters and of the kynges counsayle also: that they be no suche bloude thurstye tirantes, as haue pleasur in shedynge of bloude. For if they were but as cruell in punisheinge the blynde wycked and sedici∣ouse. I nought saye, preachers, as the popes ministers haue beene in tormentyng innocentes: I take
God to wytnesse, I woulde neuer haue declared so muche as I haue vnto them, though I should haue smarted for it. This much haue I sayde, to declare vnto all honeste hertes myne innocencie in suche thynges as they begin to laye to my charge: and to stope the mou∣thes of them, that can do naught elles but slāder, flatter, and dissē∣ble, euen with theyr frindes, that they mought holde theyr tongues lest if they passe theyr boundes. I opē them to theyr shame let them take thys for a warning. Neithere let them thynke this spoken of ma¦lice, for I spake it for theyr hone∣stie and quietnesse, as wel as mine owne commoditie. Now, to conclude in fewe wordes I haue added to thys my letter, a little appologie or defence, the bet¦ter to wythstande theyr cruel and subtyle deceite. And because, they lye alwaye lurckynge in bulwor∣kes
and wyll not come furth into the open fielde, I haue in the ende made a little bulworke, out of the whyche I haue shotte a fewe of theyr owne pellettes. Not that I thinke them necessarie to confoūd them wyth all: but euen to shame them whē they shal se them selues striken with theyr owne weapons Esai. xxix.Beholde, nowe appeare those meruailouse thynges that Esaye speaketh of so ernestlie, in so much that he repeteth it agayne. Yea e∣uen meruailouse thynges and a wonder, sayth he, and what is it? It foloweth. For the wysdome of the wyse shal perishe, & the vnder¦standeinge of the wyttye, shal hide it selfe. But wherefore happeneth thys? Loke you a little before and you shal easelye perceiue the cause No man can open it more playne, then the prophet doeth hym selfe. Read the place. After this will I poure out my
spirite (saieth Ioel) vpon all fleshe,Ioel. ii. and your sonnes and daughters shal prophecie your olde mn shal dreame dreames, and, your yonge men shall se visions. Yea in those dayes I wil poure out my spirite vpon maidens and seruaūtes. & ct Nowe therefore,i. Pet. . seynge that S Peter affirmeth after the Pro∣phete Esay, that al fleshe is grasse,Esaie. xi. and al ye glorye of mā is as ye floure of grasse, the grasse withereth and the flower falleth a waye, but the worde of oure God abydeth for e∣uer: I woulde exhorte in you (ryght worshippefull syr) all men frome the hygheste to the loweste, to cleaue faste to the word of god. For it wyl come to passe, that who soeur calleth vpon the name of the Lorde shall be saued. Who e∣euer defende you Amen ☞Your humble and fayethful at your commaundement Phillip Nicolles.
¶Here foloweth the copie of a let¦ter writtyn to master Chrispyn chanone of Excester concernynge thre questians put furth in hys sermon, wherby he entended to declare all them heretickes, that would Gods word to be the touch stone: IT chaunced me, wor∣shipful maister Chris∣pen, to be at your ser∣mō preached at Marle¦don, the .xxiiii. Daye of marche laste paste, at the mone∣thes mynde of maister Otes Gyl∣berd. In whiche sermon, amonge other thynges, I remembre you enuied Luther verie sore, onelye because he woulde haue the scrip∣ture to be the touch stone, or triall of al other doctrines. And calling Luther, as it were, into disputaci¦ons wyth al his disciples, you put furth three questians whyche be these. Fyrst, if ther rose any heresies or dissentions before the Gospel was
written (as ther dyd in dede, bet∣wene Simō Magus and Simō Peter, and ouer the circumsicion) aske Luther & hys disciples, whoe nowe shall discusse the matter, and whoe shoulde be the touche stone to trie the mattier. The Gos¦pell, can not, for it was not then wrytten. The second questian is. If one shoulde denye Mathewes Gospel or say Mathewe wrote it not: how can it be proued by scripture? It can not you say, for scripture spea∣keth not of it, The thyrd questiā dyd deceiue the ignorante people, which haue litle or no knowledge, which is. If ther be dissension or strife aboute the vnderstandeynge of the scrip∣tures, and both alledge scripture, as the Areans dyd, whoe brought to places of scripture for ye defence of theire errour, in suche case you aske whoe shalbe iudge: or by whō
shall this be determined. Or ra∣ther to vse your veri wordes: wher is Luthers touch ston? The scrip∣ture can not be touche stone you saye, for boeth bringe forth scrip∣ture. Wherefore ther must nedes be an other touch stone. Where is Luthers now? quoth you.. What answer can be made to these questi¦ans? For Luthers touch ston wyll not serue. Your answer was ther fore, that Luther must gyue place and saye wyth you, that it is the holye gost that must be touchston. Thus you triumphed vpon Luther and hys disciples, meane∣inge by Luthers disciples, suche, (I suppose) as holde thys, opinion as though you had ouer come thē that they coulde answere nothing Thys is easye to do, when a mā hath all the talke hym selfe. But for as muche as you wyshed Lu∣ther there at your sermon or some of his disciples, to answere to your
questians? I thynke verelye you wylbe contented to heare a pore man answere, though yet but sim∣plye. But I do you to wyt, that I am none of Luthers disciples, for I knowe not Luther. But that I thynke hym to be a man as you be and therefore of hym selfe a lyer. But if Luther spake the truth, I woulde beleue him as sone as you or any other that speake the truth For the trueth, by the whiche I meane gods worde, can not be spo∣ken wyth out holye gooste, if it be spokē to the glorye of God. But in dede, you or any other maye wyc∣kedlye alledge the scripture of your selfe wythout the spirite, to the defaceinge of the glorie of god and hinderaunce of hys worde, as the deuyll dyd to Christe Mathe. iiii. But I wyl resorte to the que∣stians▪ wyth thys protestacion, that if I haue by any meanes mysse reported your wordes, or
other wyse vnderstanded them, then you ment: I hertelye desire you that you wyll charitably in∣fourme me what were your que∣stians, what ye ment in them, and howe you lyke thys my rude ans∣were. In so doinge▪ I wyll be con∣firmable to your counsayle, or else I wyll shewe you my mynde why I ought not. Nowe to your fyrste questian, whyche is thys. If ther arose any dissention of heresie before the gos¦pell was writen, as it happened in dede betwene Simō Magus and Simon Peter. Also ouer the cir∣cumsicion, where had ben then the touche stone? To this questiā. by your leaue mayster Chripyne, I wyll in this maner answer, wyth Luther, and say the scripture must be the touch stone. If you saye it was not writ∣ten: I answer. The worde was in the begyninge. You wyl saye that
Christe came accordynge to the scripture, to finishe a newe testa∣ment, whiche he cōfirmed and sea∣led wyth his bloude and when the newe was come, the olde vanished awaye as Saynte Paule affir∣meth to the Hebrues. And you wyll saye peraduenture, that Lu∣ther also meaneth the newe testa: mente, whiche was not written, when the questian of circumsicion was moued, wherefore it coulde not be the touche stone. To make many wordes about this questian in my cōceyt, wer but losse of time. But I aske you, Maister Chris∣pine, what difference is betwene scripture written and scripture spoken, if boeth be scripture? You wyl graunte I am sure, that Pe∣ter, Paul and Iames wordes wer scripture, when they preached or taughte the Gospell. Then if anie man had asked for scripture it mought haue ben an∣swerd.
Go to Peter, Paul, & Iohn wyth thother Apostles. For theyr preaching and coūsayle was scrip∣ture. So lacked not at that tyme Luthers tuchestone, for the Apo∣stles wryttinges and preachinges agreed, and all was scripture. Wherefore thys questian is suffi∣cientlye answered to the worthy∣nesse of it To your second questian which is. It any man should denye Ma∣thwes Gospell, you aske howe it coulde be proued by scripture, that Mathew wrote it. To this I an∣swere, that if it be agreinge to the other scriptures, and dissent in no∣thinge from it: what daynger is it to call it Mathewes Gospell, who so euer wrote it? And though you coulde denye Mathewes Gospell to be Scripture: yet there is Scripture. For Marke, Luke and Iohns Gospell, Peter, Paule and Iohns Epistles, be scripture
But I doubt not you wyll graūt Mathewes Gospel to be scripture. But you wil aske me how I know it. I answere, by the reporte of the elders, holye fathers, mother ho∣lye churche. Howe saye you nowe? Haue I answered you wel? Doth not thys answere please you? I thynke yes. But if I shoulde are the turkes howe they knowe that Mahomete was an holye prophet whoe deuised and caused to be de∣uised, the Alcaron, what answere suppose you they coulde make? I thynke none other but as I haue made you before. That is we knowe it by oure elders or holye prophetes and fathers before vs. Nowe I wyll aske you a questian whiche shall not be impossible, nor verie vnlyke. If it pleased God to moue the herte of a Iewe whiche wer neither christian nor turke, to seke in the worlde here, the moste perfecte religion. He goeth to the
Turkes and cometh to the christi∣ans. Wherwyth woulde you per∣swad hym to thys perfect religion? Woulde you preache to hym con∣stitutions, coūselles and customes of the elders? He mought then as well beleue the turkes as you. For they haue many thynges in their lawe, that seme to be verie godlye. And theyre authoritie, wythout authoritie of scripture, is euen as good as yours. But I knowe you wyl saye, what so euer you thinke, that you woulde preache the Gos∣pell vnto hym. Then must you ne∣des graunte, that the scripture is of greater efficacie and strength, them oure fathers elleders and counsayles. If you wyll yet wyth your questians affirme, that the fathers whyche descended frome tyme to tyme frome the Apostles hither to: haue greater authoritye then the scripture: I wyl axe you an other questian.
The Apostles of Christ, forsoke the ceremonies, customes and con∣stitutions of theyr elders, forefa∣thers, and of as holye mother ho∣lye churche in the iudgemente of the worlde at that tyme, as yours is wt the world at thys houre, and of as longe continuaunce of tyme. Yet folowed they Christes doc∣trine, who was named of those ho¦lye fathers, a sediciouse felowe, a newe tidinges bringer and an he∣retike. Answere me nowe, what touchstone had they to trye Chri∣stes doctrine wyth that they so er∣nestlye folowed hym, and refused theyr forefathers, olde holye doc∣tours, proceadynge from Moyses to Christ? Ther were at that tyme auncient fathers which had great learneing, both byshopes and prie¦stes. The tradions, ordinaunces and ceremonies whiche they vsed, receyued they of theyr elders, lyke as you woulde haue vs to receiue
the constitucions of oure elders. Tell me nowe, how can you excuse the Apostles? They were but pore fisher men and net makers, they wer not brought vp in the scholes, they hadde not the leisure toturne and tosse those greate volumes to be made doctours of deuinitie nor law. And yet within a whyle, they toke vpon them to teach the great doctours, and what mought those holye fathers haue sayed to these fishers? Take hede to your fyshe∣ynge. What haue you to do wyth the scripture? It is not mete for e∣uerie coblarde to be talkeynge of scripture. Howe were these men so lyghtlye perswaded? What touchestone I saye had they? But seynge you woulde so fayne haue the name of the holye fathers and holye churche. I axe you thys questian. Those Apostles and Disciples
of Christe whyche were in hys tyme wyth hym presente, whyche preached and wrote the scripture: were holy fathers and of the per∣fecte true churche. If the fathers syeth theyr tyme haue dissented frome them in doc∣tryne, maners, custome, lawes, or in anye thynge partayneynge to Christes relygion: whyche fa∣thers woulde you folowe? If you denye that the fathers haue des∣sented, as is a fore sayed, I refer the proue of it tyll a tyme of more leasure. Partely because I thynke you wyll not denye it, but chie∣felye because my letter woulde be to longe. Wherfore I wyl come to your thyrde question, whyche in dede in¦cludeth the matter of all the reste whiche is thys. If ther aryse anye contention in vnderstandeynge the Scrip∣tures wherein, boeth the parties
bringe scripture for them: whoe shall nowe discusse the matter? Where is nowe the toucheston? The scriptures can not. For boeth bring scripture. And the scripture you meane causeth ye cōtrouersye. But I aske you whether the scrip¦tures be deuided or no? If they be deuided: then accordinge to Chri∣stes worde, they muste be confoun¦ded. But that is an incōuenience and I knowe well you wyll not graunt that If the scriptures be not deuided, but agre in one, as they do in deede, for one place can∣not be repugnaunte to an other, thoughe it so seme: then haue not boeth parties scripture for them, but ye one partie must nedes false∣ly alledge scripture. But you will aske me who shal geue sentence, or by whom the cō∣trouersye shalbe appeased, and where is Luthers touchstone? In dede at your sermō, no man made
answer. Wherefore you made an∣swere and sayde, the holye gooste must be tuchstone. As who should saye, Luthers answere were not the very same. When he sayeth gods worde must be the touchston as you reporte of hym. And I praye you maister Chrispyn, what difference is betwene gods worde and godes spirite? Is not goddes worde the breath of gods mouthe? And call you not that the holye goste? Howe be it, it is easilye per∣ceyued what ye meane. Ye put in the holye gost for a cloke to deceiue vs wyth albeit ye meane nothing lesse then the holye gooste If you aske me how I proue it: I answer thus I proue it. Wythout fayeth it is not possible to please God, but fayeth cometh by the word of god Ergo, wythout the worde of God nothyng can please God. But you exclude the word of God from the spirite of God, and in stead of that
ioyne vnto it, fathers, counsay∣les, and oure mother holy churche for you saye the worde of God can not be touchston▪ but onelie beare wytnesse, but the holye gooste is the touch stone, whoe was and is in the holye fathers, that haue al∣wayes gathered counsayles by whyche all thynges muste be iud∣ged and dermined. To proue thys ye alledge these wordes. Where so euer two or three be gathered together &c. These holye fathers, you affirme to be the by∣shopes and prelates. But thus to include the holye gooste into by∣shopes, you exclude ye word of god. If this be not to be disceiued, sure I am deceyued. But it were ne∣cessarie for you to proue the chur, that you speake of to be the true-holye, and catholyke churche, be∣fore you perswade men so ernestye to belyeue and stycke vnto it. But I saye, the churche that taketh
awaye the authoritye of goddes worde, or diminisheth it by anye meanes, is not of Christe. But you mayster Chrispyne, graunte youre selfe to be of thys churche, Ergo etc. And in myne o∣pinion, you do naught to say that all holy fathers frō Christ to thys time, wer of the same opinion that you be of concernynge goddes worde. For I dare saye Augustine (whome you admytte to be of the verye holye church wyll not hold wyth you in thys matter. But if he woulde, the autho∣ritye of Christe is greater. Whoe is it that wyll not suspecte your churche, seynge you set it so high in Lucifers place aboue Christe, and separate the hollye goste from Christe, where as Christe sayeth, I am that I say vnto you? What is yt he spake vnto vs? Is it not his word? He saith moreouer, the wor∣des yt I speake, are spirite & lyfe. I
praye you, master Chrispine, what spirite ment Christe here? What lyfe speaketh he of? Can ther any man bring out of hys breast, either by writting, preachinge or other∣wise teacheinge, or speakeinge, the sentence of the holie spirite wyth∣out goddes worde? Is not the sen∣tence or worde of the holye gooste the worde of God? Is it not to be vnsterstand of the lyueynge fayth that the holy goste worketh in the soule of man in beleuing the word Is not the scriptur called the two edged sworde? Is it not also called the sworde of the spirite? Maye ye separate the spirite from the wor∣des, seynge he calleth them spirit and lyfe? I thynke not▪ No more than heate can be separated from fire. Why then in the name of the holye gooste, do you vnder∣mine Christe? The churche, you saye, must be iudge, and the scrip∣ture muste be wytnesse onlye. So
must Christe be inferioure to mē. For I am sure you wyll not denye but these holye fathers, which you cal the church, were & be men. And those you saye must be the iudges. And Christe to be the worde and promise of the father, he hymselfe wytnesseth sayeinge. I am that I saye vnto you, and hym you make but a witnesse or iudge. Therefore I saye your churche is to be sus∣pected. As toucheynge the true spose and catholyke, churche of Christe, which are verye membres of hys bodye, and he the head: this churche hath so muche authoritie as the scripture geueth them, and take vpon them no more for the scripture and they are one, and for the scripture they ieoparde theyr liues, as many haue done, whome you and your forfathers, bishopes and prelates haue alwayes put to dath. Who persecuted ye prophets and put them to death. Who pro∣cured
Christe to the crosse? Whoe the Apostles wyth manye othere holy men? Were they not byshops and prelates of the churche? Howe manye godlye preachers wyth other good soules, hath the byshop of Rome put to death by the helpe of prelates in diuers contries syth he came to the supremitye, and beareynge a rule ouer kynges and emperours? Hath there not ben some put to death here in Englād wythin these .xx. yeres, for speake∣ynge agaynste the Pops pardons and pylgrymages, wyth suche lyke abuses? Was not the Pope chiefe of these holye fathers, whom you cal holye churche, and woulde haue them iudges? But I knowe what you meane. You would per∣swad the multitude, that you and youre churche, be the verye true churche, and haue the holye gooste and that what so euer you do is well. But whereby do ye perswad
thē? By olde custome (for you haue nothynge else) and longe continu∣aunce of tyme, the whyche if you coulde beate in to the heades of the communaltye: your reforma∣cion of thynges that are amysse, shoulde be as you luste. But mai∣ster Chrispyne, if you were not in darckenesse you coulde not refuse the light. Christ sayth, if you cōti∣nue in my worde: then are you mi verye Disciples, and ye may know the trueth, and the trueth shall make you fre. But he that refuseth me, and receyueth not my wordes hath one alredye that iudgeth hym the worde that I haue spoken, shall iudge hym in the laste daye. Beholde, Christe sayeth hys worde shal be iudge. All that be of Christ, heare Christes wordes. Mayster Chrispyne, my let∣tere is longer then I thoughe it should haue ben, howe it shal lyke
you I can not tell, but hertily de∣sire you, if you loue the truth and desire the glorye of God: answere wyth the trueth and defende the trueth, and do not wyllfully resist the truth. But defend it not with the authoritye of men, but wyth the power of God, and that wyth charitie, For if I haue by any mea¦nes spoken any thynge in this let∣ter more rigorously then charitye requireth whereby you myght be offended at me iustlye: I am redie in such case wyth all myne herte to be reformed. Wherfore I eftsones desire you to answere me, as it be∣cometh a true preacher, for quiet∣ynge of my conscience. And so do∣ynge I comitte you to Christ and hys worde. Amen. ¶ Yours lokinge for an answer. Philip Nicolles. Written, xxiii. of Aprile. MDxlvii.
HEre haste thou my letter (gentle rea∣der) euen worde for worde as it was de∣liuered to mayster Chrispyne. And trueth it is, I wrote it inmediately after my retoune frome hys sermon, euen whyle it was hotte. For it gre∣ued me that it had not been law∣ful for me to haue answered him euen incontinente before all the audience. For he perswaded them al, for the mooste parte, that nothynge coulde be sayde to the contrarie. Which greued me to heare. Not wythstandynge, when I hadde written my letter: I dyd not sēde it furth wt, but paused a whyle, partelye, seeinge ther was suche a greate audience, to se whether any man of woship, or some bet∣ter learned then I woulde take the mattier in hande. But after
I had rested vpō thys a moneth or .vi. weakes and perceiued that no man busied hym selfe in it (al though ther were present men of worship pretēding to haue know¦ledg) I sent furth my letter, the laste daie of Apriel or nere there aboute. And because the mesen∣ger dyd not in all thynges fulfyl my request, I wrote agayne to maister Chrispyne, desireinge hym to sende me an answere by the sayede bearer of my letter, to whō he gaue thys answer. That he would not writ, but cōmune wyth me him selfe. I lefte him not thus, but wtin a while after he cam to a benefice yt he hath cal¦led Herbertō, besyd Totnes, and preached there ye sūday after cor∣pus Christi day, as they cal it, & ye mūdaie in the morning: I wente to him and communed wt hym, and spent wel most ye whole day. In which cōmunicaciō, we swar¦ued not frō these .iii. questiās. I
I resorted vnto him againe, not long after ye, and had much talke wt him, al which cōmunicaciō, I haue not: nor wyll babble out, al thought it be reported yt I came to him for non other purpose, but to haue matter to talk of, and to accuse him. But yet they be to blame so to reporte of me. For if Maister Chrispine, or other yt be more busie peraduēture in talk∣ing then he him selfe, can say▪ yt I haue accused him of any such pri¦uat cōmunicatiō: let thē lay it to my charge, else let thē for shame hold theyr peace, and say ye thing they knowe. As for the wordes that he or any other shal speake in a pulpyt or any suche like au∣diēce. I am sure they wilbe cōtē∣ted to heare of thē againe. If not let thē hēce forth desire their audi¦ence to kepe coūsel or else truly, if I be presente, & heare any thing spoken againste god or my prince
especially agaynste the doctrine of Christe: I muste needes dis∣close it. If they wyll blame me for this: I am cōtented to beare it, howe be it vn worthye in my owne conceyte, let other iudge. But if he were able to defend it that he hadde preached, whye shoulde he feare to wryte to the defence of the same? Wherfore, seinge he hath receyued my let∣ter, kepeth it, and wyl not write agayne, and yet blameth and fyndeth diuers fautes in it: why shoulde he be greued wyth me, for spreadeynge a broode myne owne doynges, to vtter myne owne secretes. And where as he was offēded wyth me (although I haue not, nor wyll laye anye such priuate communicacion to anye mans charge, specially of myne owne seekynge) yet I saye I muste declare my meaneinge more playnely, in those thynges
whyche he is so muche offended wythall, to thentente that no stublynge stocke be purposely layed in my brothers waye, that he shoulde not vnderstande the trueth and prayse God. For al∣though I found mayster Chris∣pyne verye gentle and charita∣ble to talke wythal (for yt which thynge I haue and wyll gyue him prayse yet disputeth he sub¦tlelye, and especially when he thynketh to haue yonge scholars in handelynge, as he dyd wyth me. For in thys he put me to my trumpe, because I asked him in my letter what difference was betwene scripture wrytten, and scripture spoken. Nowe truth it is, that accordyng to the Etimo∣logie of the word, which cometh of Scribo, and so to Scriptura: it can not be called Scripture, vn∣lesse it be written. And so euerye thynge written, maye be called
scripture. And in that sentence, we shall fynde no difference be∣twene the bible and Robyn hod, by this name scripture, for both maye be called scripture I saye, after the verie nature of ye word Lo heare haue you an exāple of sophistri. Let yong scholars take hede by me, howe they meddell wyth thē. For whereas I mente symply after the commone vsage and phrase of ourespeache, meane¦inge by Scripture written and spokē: the prophecie of ye olde and newe testament the doctrine of Christe euen the verie worde of God, as well beynge opened by the mouth of the Apostles vn∣to the heares in those dayes, as written wyth theyr owne han∣des, and reade vnto vs nowe in our time: he nowe takeinge hys aduauntage at ye nature of ye la∣tine word Scriptura, out of whiche this englishe worde scripture is
diriued: denieth that it maye be called scripture, vnlesse it be writ¦ten What other thynge is thys then a mere sophisticall cauilla∣cion? The scribes and pharises in Christes tyme (by lyke) had not learned their sophistrie or els thei wer not so curiouse as our mē be. For if thei had, thei mought haue asked Christ, whē he bad thē serch the scriptures, what scripture he mēt.ii. Tim. iii. But Paule therfore preuē∣ting such subtile disputīg calleth it holy scriptur geuen by inspira¦cion. Thus you se, a mā had nede (as the prouerbe goeth) to haue a long spone yt shal eate wt ye deuill. It is no maruaile, though mas∣ter. Chrispin in his lessō not long sēce, dyd so much cōmēd distincti¦ons, & proued thē so necessarie yt we could not be wtout thē. For he that shal haue to do wt such sophi¦sters had nede to make diffinici∣ōs, & premeditat his words before
pretacion. For the prophecie was neuer brought in by the wyll of man, but ye holy mē of god spake as they were moued of the holye gost. Nowe if I shoulde aske. S. Peter what he meaneth by scrip¦ture here, I thynke he woulde say the word of god. But it is the word of god writtine would you say, yet doth. s. Peter say it of the same written worde ye the holye men of God spake, as they were moued by ye holy goste. But tru∣lye I thinke it but a vaine thing and euen a losse of tyme to trifle in suche questians which can no waye edifye, especially, seynge S. Paule doth so often diswade Timoth frome such foleishe que∣stians:i. Ti. vt. & exhorteth him to cleaue faste to the word of God If anye man sayth he, teache other wyse and agreeth not to the holesome wordes of our lord Iesus Christ and to the doctrine of godlinesse: he is puffed vp, and knoweth no∣nothing,
but wasteth his braines about questians and striueing of words, wherof sprīgeth enuie &c. After a like maner also he toke me vp (how be it more ernestlye for that I sayde,Iohn. i. Iohn. viii. the worde was in the beginning and for alledg∣ing, Christes wordes, I am that I say vnto you. Or euen ye same thinge that I speake vnto you As thoughe I wente aboute to proue yt Christe was but a voice only, or a writtē letter in paper. Thus he dalyed wt me & was in wt his distīctiōs, whether I mēt bi ye word ye voice, ye breath, or the writtē word, with manie double doubtes. For mi words (he saied) as they stode in my letter, were heresie. But I told him yt I mēt it by ye same word yt the lord Ie∣sus christ taught, as Christ hym selfe wittnesseth. I am euen the very same thinge yt I speake vn∣to you. He saied that the words were not as I alledged them
them. For the latyne hath (saied he) Ego sum qui loquor vobis. Now as for the alledgeinge of those wor∣des? I folow the English trans∣latours, whose lerneynge I can not correcte. If he can amende theyr doinges: he shal haue good leaue for me. Notwythstanding seinge that, he maketh my wor∣des to dayngerouse: I cānot but say more in it, although they can not be spokē (in my cōceyt) more playne to be vnderstād, thē they be alredi writtē. For. s▪ Iohn say∣eth. The worde was in ye begin∣ning & the word was wt god and God was the worde. Nowe, to de¦nye that Christe is the worde of God, by whiche all thinges were made: I say is anheresie in dead. Therfore it must nedes be graū∣ted that Christe was and is the worde of God. Psal. CxviiiThy worde Lorde (sayeth the prophete) is a lanterne to my fet
and a light to my pathes. Again he sayeth.Idem. Cxiii. When thy worde go∣eth forth, it geueth lyght and vn¦derstandeynge euen to babes. Nowe what meaneth he by this worde that geueth thys lyghte? Christe sayth, I am come a light into ye world, that who so euer be leueth in me should not abyd in darknes By these & many other it wyll appeare, Christe to be the true worde of God. But nowe wyll they graunte that Christe is the worde that came from the father, the lyghte of the worlde the life of the worlde,Deute. xxxii. as Moyses saith: set your hertes on ye words that I testifie, sayeth he, for it is no vayne worde but your lyfe. I am sure I say, they wyl graūt Christe to be the worde, but not the worde wryttyn whyche we reade in the boke. In dede, to say that Christe maye be written in paper, or that the letters whiche
be made of incke & paper should be Christe: were a fonde opinion and suche as I neuer harde of. But the wordes written in the boke, which we cal the scripture. As the prophetes from Moyses to Christ, and the doctrine of the apostles, which is written we cal it the Gospel, we call it the scrip∣tures we cal it ye newe testament and the olde these wordes writ∣ten in a boke, beinge reade vnto the people, to enstruction & edify¦ing of ye cōgregatiō is the word of god, yea Christ ye breade of life which came frō heauē so ye whoso eateth therof,Io. vi. shal liue euer. The words that Moyses dyd testifie vnto the children of Israell, and sayed vnto them it is no vayne word but your life: be they not writtē? And be they not our life as wel as theyrs? But what life cā thei be vnto vs, if thei be kept frō vs so that we know thē not?
Dyd Moyses hyde them away, and say they would make mē he∣retykes? But all suche as do euil hate the lyght,Iohn. iii. and come not to it that theyr dedes should not be reproued but he that doeth the trueth cometh to the lyght, that his workes maye be knowen, for they be done in God. Agayne, I am the lyghte of the world sayeth Christe. Whye shoulde these men refuse goddes word to be their light, if they wer of god: whie should they feare to saye ye Christes worde is Christe the worde of the father,Esai. viii. the light that lyghneth al men that come vnto hym? Esaye sayth. If anye man want light, let him loke vp∣on the lawe and testimonies. What meaneth he by the lawe and testimonies? meaneth he not the scripture or written word of God, shall we not ther fynde the lighte? I woulde aske these dis∣puters
of the worlde. Whether the Gospell be written or no? I thyncke they wyll graunte that it is written.Rom. i Well Saynct Paulle sayth, he is not a shamed of ye Gos∣pell of Christe, for it is the powre of God, whiche saueth all that be∣leue. Nowe is this gospel written for our learneing, & saueth as ma¦ny as beleue. Marke wel the bele∣uers are not saued because it is writtē but they be saued, because they beleue ye which is writē. I aske these philosophers, whether ye wor∣des that Christe speake be written or no? I trowe the Euangelistes haue written the moste necessarye thynges, yea the verie secretes & hyd thynges. If Christes wordes which he spake be writtē, then the word yt is written shal iudge these vnbeleauers in the laste daye. For thus sayth Christe.Iohn. xii He yt refuseth me and receyueth not my wordes: hath one alredye yt iudgeth hym.
The word (sayth he) that I haue spoken, shal iudge him in the last day. Vnderstād nowe gentle rea¦der, yt these fathers, would vnder colours plucke a waye the great authoritie of the scriptures, and diminishe (thorowe subtyle dis∣putinge) ye efficatie and strength of the gospell. Whether they do of hatred to gods word, or blind¦nes and ignoraunce in the same, or else for lucers sake, I can not tell But to far wander they out of the waye. But I exhorte the though they be to far on the left hand, rune not yu to far on ye rigt hande. Enter in at the strayte gate, for wyde is the gate, and brode is the way that leadeth to destructiō, & many ther be ye,Math. vii. go in ther at. But strayte is ye gate and narrowe is the waye that leadeth vnto lyfe and fewe ther∣be ye fynd it. Thys is therfore the sume of thys disputaciō yt Christ
is the word and wisedome of the father, in whom who so beleueth hath euerlasteinge lyfe.Ioh. viii. Thys same word did he him self preach and sayeth.Iohn. xv. If you abyde in me any my wordes abyde in you: ye shall axe what you wyll, and it shalbe done vnto you. Beholde wheras he sayde before. If you continue in my wordes: nowe he sayeth. If you byd in me and my wordes abid in you. By this it is euident, that Christe is the worde, euen that worde whiche was preached frō the beginning is preached nowe, and shalbe to the ende. And although Christe be not, as is sayde, incke and pa∣per, or a worde closed in a boke as thought we mought saye, looe, here in thys boke is Christe, or in that boke is Christe: yet was it the wyll of God that thys hea∣uenly doctrine shoulde be writ∣ten, and that it shoulde remaine
wyth vs, and also that these wor¦des written beinge reade vnto vs, shoulde be vnto vs, euē that same worde that Christe spake when he sayed. He that is of god heareth gods worde. And euen the verie same (to them that be∣leue) that he speaketh of sayeing If anye man kepe my worde, he shal neuer se death. And to them that beleue not: the same that he sayeth shall iudge the vnbele∣uers in the last daye. Now marke well,Iohn. x I besech the and consider wyth thy selfe, the mischiefe of these subtyle sophi∣sters. They make it wounderfull dayngerouse, to call the scriptur Christe. They be verye carefull to haue the true worship of god preserued and kepte. And they feeare leaste we wyll fall to wor∣shipynge of the verie boke wher¦in the testimonies of Christe be wrytten. And therfore do they
withdrawe all men from reade∣inge and heareing it as much as they can. But alas, why be they not so ware and dayngerous in theyr laye mens bokes (as they cal them) whiche al the scripturs crie out vpon, euen from the be∣gininge of the olde testament to the later ende of the new. By the which bokes (or rather abomina∣ble Idoles) it is open and mani∣fest, that muche Idolatrie hath ben cōmitted, yea & wilbe stil, so longe as ther is one left standing in the temples. The word of god, the doctrine of Christe, whiche he and his A∣posteles so ernestlye taught, ex∣horted & cōmaunded to harken vnto, to beleaue and folowe (al∣most al the bible is nothing else) this I say, they cānot suffer any man to haue to do with al. Thei haue burned it frō tyme to tyme they burned the readars of it, as
al the worlde can testifie. It is manifeste, that they beare little good wyll to it vnto thys daye. But these mahomets puppetes & veri Idolles, which haue not one word in al scriptur for them, but contrarie, to the vtter abolish∣inge of them, these they can suf∣fer to be called Christe saynte sa∣uioure, saynte Sundaye, the ho¦lye trinitie, oure ladye of Pitye our ladye of grace, oure ladye I can not tell wherof. Alhallowes wyth a thousād like names. Yea they can abyde that the people should worship those stil, for they neuer preach agaynste them, but rather defende them, to kepe the vnlerned in their blindnesse styl. Alas, to open is your doynge nowe (O you catholyke fathers) euerye chylde maye perceyue your blinde doctrine. Yet wyl not you cease to exalt this false church & cōgregaciō of decey∣ceyuers,
euē aboue god him selfe For God was the worde,ii. . ii. and a∣boue the rule of thys worde, sete ye your owne tradicions, in the name of Christes church. Thus dyd Christe prophecie that you shoulde come,Math. xxiiii. & that you shoulde dooe miracles and wonders. In so muche that euen the verie e∣lect (if it were possible) should be brought into errowre. And saint Paule sayth you shal come with lieinge signes and wonders,ii. These. ii. i. Timoth. iiii. and wyth al deceyueablenesse of vn∣rightuousnesse. And to Timoth he sayeth, you shall forbyde ma∣riage and meates. So playne is it in al the scrip¦ture, that thei that read it must neades vnderstand it. Most eui∣dent and playne it is, that ye be euen of the same sinful sinagoge For trulye the spouse of Christe is obedient to hir bridgrome. The disciples of Christe, herken
to theyr Maister. And doubtles we can not be Christes verie dis∣ciples, vnlesse we continue in his doctrine. He yt is of God heareth goddes worde. and he that kepe∣eth thys worde, shall neuer se deathe. Moyses sayeth.Deut. iiii. You shall put nothinge to the worde whiche I commaunde you, neyther take ought ther from etc. Agayne.Iosue. i. You shall turne neyther to the ryght hande, neither to the lefte but in the waye which your lord god cōmaundeth, shal ye walke. What more playne cōmaunde∣mēt can ther before the establish¦ment of the authoritie of ye word of god? Moises had,Deut. vi.xxxii. the childrē of Israel shoulde write them vpon the postes of ther dores, & bynde them vpon theyr hādes to teach their children. He sayeth they be oure lyfe.Iohn. vi. And Christe sayth his wordes be spirit and life. Saint
Peter saith we haue a sure word of prophecie, & ye do well to take hede ther vnto, as vnto the light that shineth in a darcke place &c If this worde were not wryt∣ten, that we myght knowe why∣ther to resorte for al thys: what should it auaile al these wordes? What were we the nere for all these testimonies, if the sume of Christes doctrine were not writ¦tē, and the certaynetie vnkowē? Whoe should be certayne of hys fayeth, if we had not a prescripte and certayne doctryne where∣unto wee moughte resorte to haue thys in fallible veritye.Math. vii. Howe shoulde we knowe these false prophetes to come in shipes clothing outwardly, & inwardly be rauenynge woulfes: if we had not a sure touche stone to trye theyr doctrine wyth all?Galath. 1. If anye man preache vnto you (sayeth Paul) other then ye which is prea¦ched
alredye, althoughe it were an angell frome heauen: let it be accurssed. What be we ye nere of these wordes: if we be in doubte wher to fynde this Gospell?Apoc. xxii. But I testifie vnto euerie man (sayth saynte Iohn) that heareth the wordes of prophesie of thys boke If any man shal adde vnto these thynges: God shall ad vnto hym the plages that are wrytten in thys boke. And if anye man shal mynishe of ye wordes of the boke of thys prophesie: God shall take a waye his parte out of the boke of lyfe. etc. To conclude therfore I saye playnelye, that to denye the scripture, the Prophetes and Apostles, whose prophesies are wrytten in the Byble, to be a sufficiente doctryne and en∣struction necessarye for oure sal∣uacion, or to saye that it oughte not to be the touche stonne and
trial of al other doctrines aboue all other doctrines of anye other men, aboue theyr lawes, de∣cres and customes or cere∣monies (beside thys boke) whether it be of men or angelles: it is not only heresie, but also a di∣uellishe and dam∣nable doctrine. Nowe to our bul∣warcke.
¶The bulwarke for defence. THis is chiefly to be noted, yt gods worde is neuer spred a∣brode, wyth∣out contenci∣on, strife, and much troble, as Christe himselfe affirmeth sayeynge. Thinke you not that I come to sende peace,Math. x. but a sworde. For I am come to set variance betwene the father and the sonne, the mothere and the daughter etc. For what agre¦ment can there be betwene a be∣leuinge sonne and vnbeleueinge father and so contrarye. Nowe sayeth Christ. He that loueth fa∣ther and mother more then me: is not mete for me etc. He yt find¦eth his lyfe shall lose it. And he yt loseth his life for my sake shall find it. Marcke thys also, yt by no
thyng do these false deceiuers, be gilde ye simplicite of ye multitude so muche as by the name of our fathers, by custome & longe con∣tinuaunce of tyme, by whyche thynges they confirme their church. For loke what hath bene done of our elders and forfathers that is theyr gospell. To breake these tradicions and customes: is to breake theyr whole religion. The scribes and phariseis, axed Christe why walke not thy disci¦ples after the tradicions of the el¦ders,Math. vii. but eate breade wyth vn∣washen handes? &c. Lykewyse these Hypocrites, when they se anye man breake an olde custom, thoughe it be but eateyng of an egge vpon a frydaye, howe gre∣ouslye take they the mattier? But euen as Christe answered the phariseis and scribes: so may I ryghte well answere these fa∣thers sayinge.Esai. xxix. Full wel hath E∣sai
prophecied of you Hypocrites as it is written (marke here, that Christe goeth to the scripture) Thys people drawe nere me with theyr lippes:Colos. ii. but theyr herte is fare frome me. But in vayne do they serue me whylse they teache suche doctrines as are nothynge but the commaundementes of men. Ye leaue the commaunde∣ment of god: & kepe the tradiciōs of men. In the stead of washing of cuppes & cruses: what a sort of ceremonies haue we? what is ho¦lye breade? what is holye water? What be holye candeles? What are holye bowes? Touche not the water in the fonte, handle not the chalise nor the corporace. Good lorde what a sorte of suche commaundementes haue we of oure fore fatheres? Oh, howe goodlye haue you caste asyde the commaundementes of God to maynetayne your owne
tradicions? I besech the (good christiā reader) marke how vehe∣mente the Lorde Iesus is hym selfe agaynste the beggarly tra∣dicions of men to bringe vs to the wyll and commaundemente of God. What can the grateste doctour of thē all, say vnto this? Is it not open and manifeste to all the worlde that for breakeing of these triflinge and foleishe tra¦dicions, thei haue punished men greuouselye, euen wyth death? And haue we not sene the brea∣kars of goodes commaundemen∣tes vnpunished at all? As swe∣rars drunckardes, whoredome, and auoutrie with all the reste? Beholde, all christendome kno∣weth, that thys is no lye. My truste is therfore, that the magi∣strates wyll nowe loke vpon this gear. For these felowes neuer go about any suche thynge. But be¦cause they blinde the ignoraunt
soules wyth holye doctours, holy fathers, and holye churche from Christes tyme hytherto: you shal se what the holye doctours say, e∣uē such as be most auncient and best learned, as they them selues will graunte. Augustine in an epistle to For¦tunatus, hath these wordes.Epist. clxxxx∣viii. We ought not to regarde and e∣steme the disputacions of any, thoughe they be neuer so catho∣lyke and well praysed, as canno∣nicall scripture, but that we may saueing the reuerēce that ought to be geuen vnto suche men, re∣proue and spue out agayne, any thynge in theyr wryttynges, if perchaunce we fynde that they vnderstande ought in theyr wri∣tinges, otherwyse then the truth hath, whiche is perceyued by the helpe of God, nether by oure sel∣ues or other. &c. Suche a one am I in other
mens writtinges: as I would o∣ther men should be in myne. If we had no moe sayeinges of the doctours, but thys one, consideringe the estimacion Au∣gustine is in: it were inoughe to ouerthrowe all the confidence that they woulde teach vs to haue in mens writinges, besyde gods worde. But heare an other He writeth vnto Hierome and sayeth.Libr. iii. Fol. clxi. I haue learned to geue this feare and honoure onlye, vn¦to the writters whiche be called canonicall: yt I stedfastly beleue that none of them haue erred in writtinge. For if I finde anye thinge in those letters yt semeth contrary to the trueth: either I thinke the boke not to be true, or the translater hath not truelye folowed his copie, or else I think verilye I do not vnderstande it. But I read al other writers, sai¦eth he, after this maner, that I
thinke, be they neuer so holy and well learned, that it whiche they haue written is not strayte way true because they haue thought so: but because they coulde make me beleue it either by those cano∣nical authoures, or else by some probable and sure reasone, which dissenteth not frō the trueth.Libro. ii. Cap. xxiii. He writeth agaynste one Cresonius the grāmariā sayinge. I am not boūd by the authoritie of this E¦pistle, because I do not cōpt and esteme Ciprians letters as cano∣nicall & of lyke authoritie wt the scripturs, but I way thē & pōder thē by the scripture. If I finde any thing in thē agreinge wt the authoritie of holy scripture: I re¦ceyue it with his praise. But if it agre not bi his leaue & fauour I refuse & for sake it. Againe in his treatise of shepherdes.Tractatu po∣storum. He hath ordeined ye hilles of Israel (sayth he) ye authours of holy scripturs
There feade ye, that you maye feade salfelye. What so euer ye heare of that: let it sauoure well wyth you, whatsoeuer is besides that, spite it out agayne, leste ye erre in the clowde. Addict youre selues to the meaneynge of the scripture. There is the deyntie of ye hert there is no poysen, no straynge thynge, ther onelye is the moste holesome feadeyng. Beholde the mynde of this great doctour, na¦med to be one of the greateste clarkes that wrot sence the apo∣steles tyme. He woulde haue no mans doctryne, what soeuer he be, to be compared to the holye scriptures.Augustinus in prologo tertu. lib. De Trini¦tate. In hys owne wryt∣tynges he warneth vs, that we shoulde not geue ouer much cre∣dence, in the thynges, sayeth he, that you thynke yourselfe suer, vnles ye surely vnderstande it: beleue it not so stidfastely. And
writyng to Vincentius, he graū¦teth that he hath wryten some thynges worthye to be blamed,Idem ad Vin¦centium. and therefore sayth that he hath made a boke of retractacions, re¦uoking and casting agayne that which he had made before, that the readers thereby maye learne that al his writinges in al points dyd not please hym. Thys diffi∣dence had Augustine in his wri∣tynges, that in no case he would compare them wyth the scrip∣ture. And loke what opinion he had of his owne writinges: euen the same had he in al other mens besides the canonicall scriptures For he sayth in his boke of retrac¦taciōs, I cā not nor ought to de∣nie sayth he, but, lyke as in myne elders so are many thynges in so many seuerall workes yt I haue made, whyche maye be blamed wythout rayshnes, & with good iudgment.
If Austen wyl haue no credence geuen to mens writinges, whe∣ther they be byshops,Epist. xlviii. or what so euer they be onlesse they bringe the authorite of scripture wt thē as he writteth to Vincentius. We must make a differēce (sayth he) betwene mens wryttinges He nameth Hilarie, Ciprian, and Agrippie, which be lyke were by∣shopes, and the canonicall scrip∣tures. For they ought not so to be reade (sayth he) as though we might geuefurth suche testimo∣nies of them that it shoulde not be lawefull to thinke other wyse then they affirme. For peraduen¦ture, they vnderstande it other∣wyse thē ye truth requireth. He yt lusteth to searche Austēs workes shal find many thinges cōtrarie to their proud doctrine & kycking against ye scriptures, yea cōtrarie almost, to al theyr blind erroures In so muche that I haue mer∣uayled,
that they haue had him so longe in such estimacion, and had not rather condemned hym for an heretike. As for the autho¦ritie of mens doctrine besyde the scripture, he can not abyd. But in all thynges he wylleth vs to haue respect to the scripture euē in prayseing god (sayeth he) let it be done as he hath appoynted, lest in steppinge a syde, we offend him that we would prayse.Austinus su∣per Ssal. cxlxii. Libr. vi. Cap xiiii. And agaynste fanstus, be writeth euē the same we must not tourne, ei∣ther to the right hand, neither to ye lifte, no not in ye prayse that we geue to god. But euen the same praises, sayeth he, must we frame according to ye wil of ye scriptur. And in ye xvi, Cha. he sayth, that they which would teach ye people any other thing thē ye canonical scriptures are not only false pro∣phets but theaues & robbars euē of our sauioure. How cā our olde
catholike fathers abyde thys fe∣lowe? He calleth thē false pro∣phetes, theaues and robbars. It is tyme the popes excommu∣nication were out for hym. He writeth agaynste the Maniches and sayeth. Dispise you the scrip¦tures, whiche are commaunded and established with so great au¦thoritye? You do no miracles, whiche if you dyd, yet we would be ware of them in you, because the Lorde teacheth vs to beware of suche saynge. Ther shall aryse many false Christes etc. Many mo places maye there be founde in this mans workes, which thei maye be a shamed to heare, if it were nedfull. But because they shall not conceyue al ther malise against Austen, and parauēture haue hym in examinacion, for slanderinge these holye fathers ye shal heare what Hierome say∣eth. He declareth. yt Christ speak∣eth
in Peter, in Paule, and that of the people and princes, ye scrip∣ture is to be vnderstanded of the doctrine of the Apostls. Of those sayeth he, which were in it, & not of those which we beholde nowe. And marke what he sayeth Those that were, and not those that be, that ye moughte vnder∣stande that what so euer shalbe sayed after the Apostles tyme: let it be cut a way sayth he, for it hath none authoritie afterward. Therfore, if ther be any S. after the Apostles tyme he hath none authorite, for thei come to late to be alowed, quia nō fuerūt in ea, sayeth he. If ye saints must geue place to the holie scripture, and haue none authoritye besydes that: than what are they that make articles of our fayth? or at least condemne thē for heretikes that wyl not receyue that doc∣trine that hath none authoritie
of ye scripture, but rather against the scripture. The same Ierome vpon Ieremie sayth. And they haue gone after straing gods, as theyr fathers taught them. etc. Therefore (sayeth he) neither of our forefathers nor of our elders is the erroure to be folowed, but the authoritie of the scripture and the cōmaundemente of God which teacheth vs. The same Ie¦rome vpon Ezechiel, sayth also yt we maye sinne as muche whē we think in our owne opinion yt we do wel: as whē we willinglye do naught. He writeth vpon ye pro∣phet Nahum, & sayth, yt against the cōing of Christ: ye people shall fle to the scripture, & their studie shalbe allowed, because they shal not find anye to teach them, and the slouthfulnesse of their teach∣chars shalbe rebuked. Marcke wel thys propheci, for suerelye it byteth. He writeth vpon Math.
and sayth. Anye thing that hath not authoritie of ye scriptur may as sone be reiected & despiced, as approued and alowed.Tomo. v. Againe to Ctesiphō he sayth. What soeuer we affirme we must do it by the testimonies of holie scripture. What soeuer is done without these bokes, is in nowyse to be re¦ceyued. Do these doctours set so little by the authoritie of god∣des worde,Capit. xlv. as oure men woulde perswade vs? Do they not rather attribute al together to the scripture? Am¦brose also in the boke of paradise vpon this that Eue added to the wordes of the Lorde (Neythere shall ye touche the trye) We do learne by this present lessone,Tomo. xi. Ca. pite. iii. sayeth he, that wee ought to ad nothynge to the worde of God,Capit. xxiii. no thoughe wee do of it good in∣tent or warines. For if thou either ad any thing
or take ought frome it: thou se∣meste to be a trangressour of the commaundemente. Heare haue you Ambrose also, which can not in any wyse suffer the wysdome of man to be equale with ye scrip¦ture, but that in all thynges we should leane to that. For though our meaneing be ne¦uer so good: yet muste we not truste oure owne wyttes. Thus he writeth vpon these wordes of the Epistle to the Romaynes, be ye all of one mynde, thys may be by God,Capt. i. sayeth he, but by mans wysdome can it neuer be. And v∣pon the beginnynge of the fyrste Epistle to the Corhinthyans he sayth that the philosophers, whē they first began to preach Christ they preached hym by the wys∣dome of the worlde, and reiected the lawe and prophetes. And a∣gayne writing to Gratianus Au¦gustus, he sayeth, that ye Arrians
gate all the colour of theyr wyc∣kednesse out of philosopheie.De fide. ca. v. Yet woulde oure diuines perswade vs, that they gote it by readyng of scripture, and expoundeinge it after theyr owne sence. And therefore ther was no remedy to ouer come them, but wyth some other learneinge for they were perfecte in the scriptures. Not∣withstandinge. Gregorie, wryt∣tynge vpon Iob sayeth This ca¦nonicall scripture passeth all sci∣ence, all doctrine wythout com∣parisone. Thys onely preacheth the trueth, calleth to the heauen lye contrey, it entiseth the herte of ye reader frō earthly desires to heauenly thinges. Beholde, gen¦tle reader, they boast them selues of the old holy doctours frō Chri¦stes tyme hythereto and yet the doctoures thē selues make cleane agaynste them. Originne wryt∣tinge vpon the prophet Ieremy
sayeth It is nedfull & necessary for vs to cal ye holy scriptures to witnes. For our sēses & our expo¦sitions (sayth he) wtout these wit∣nesses, are not to beleued. After this sorte also he expoūdeth this saying, vnder .ii. or iii. witnesses vnder .ii yt is the newe & old testa¦mēt, vnder thre yt is, ye gospel, the prophetes & apostles. Againe vp¦on ye Ro. he sayth. Paul gaue the doctours an ensāple to speake no thyng but they could proue it by the scripture. For if he beinge so great & such an apostle, did not be¦leue his sayinges sufficiently ex∣cept he taught it to be writtē in the law & prophetes yt he speake how much more ought we which be far inferiours to him to obseue these thinges yt we do not bringe forth our owne doctrine whē we preache, sayth he, but ye sētence of ye holy gost. Here haue you also the mind of Origen, agreat clark whō they alledge verie oftē. Cy∣priā
writeth to one Cecilius not¦ing vpon these wordes of Christ.Libr. iii. Epist. iii. If ye do yt I cōmaūd you thē are ye my frēdes. And ye Christ onely ought to be harde: ye father wit∣nesseth frō heauē saying. This is my welbeloued son, in whō I am wel pleased, heare him. Wherfor if onely Christ must be heard we ought not take hed what ani mā hath thought good to be done be¦fore vs, but what christ hath first done which was before al mē. Nei¦ther ought we to folow ye custom of mā: but ye truth of god. Seing god spaketh bi his prophet Esa, & sayth. Thei worship me in vaine teaching ye cōmaūdemētes & pre∣ceptes of mē. And againe in the gospel. Ye cast away ye cōmaūde∣mentes of god, yt ye mought esta∣blishe your owne tradiciōs. And therfore, deare brother If any of our fathers, other by ignoraūce or simplicitie, haue not obserued this & kept yt ye lord hath taught
vs to do by his example and go∣uernaunce: pardone and forge∣uenesse thorowe the goodnesse of the Lorde maye be graunted to theyr simplisitie. But vnto vs it can not be so graunted, which be admonished and enstructed of the Lorde &c. He that lusteth to se more of thys, let hym loke the place and reade farther, and he shall fynde lyke wordes in hys thyrde treatise of the simplicitie of prelates. And whereas men be so muche addycte to theyr cu∣stomes, ye same Ciprian sayth. Ne¦ther ye custome whiche hath crept in among some, ought to be a let whereby the trueth shoulde not preuayle and ouercome. For the custome wythout the truth is an old errour. Therfore, let vs leaue the erroure and folow the truth All the doctours agree wholelye in thys, that the scripture is the touchstone, a recoursse for al chri¦sten
men to seke vnto, to be sure of theyr fayeth, and to haue qui∣etnes of cōscience. And what ex∣hortacions Chrisostom geueth to all men for the studye of ho∣lye scriptures: appeareth in hys thred sermon De Lazaro. And vpon Iohn the .xvi. Homelye, in the end. Also vpon Iohn the .iii. Homelie and .iiii. Chapi, and in diuers other places. Nothinge doeth he so ernestlye beate into oure heades as the study of scrip¦ture. And I thynke there is no doctoure that writeth vpon the scripture: that doeth not lyke¦wise and geueth it euen suche a rowme and preheminence, that all other doctrines muste geue place. Ireneus sayeth.Libr. i. Cap. l vi. To go a∣bout wyth ye diuine scriptures, whiche is the vndoubted trueth is to build an house vpon a strōg rocke: but all other doctryne what so euer it be: is to builde
a weake house vpon an vncer∣taine place of quicke sand, which wilbe lightli ouer throwē. Now if these authorities be not suffi∣cient to stope theyr mouthes: I thynke they wyll neuer be ans∣wered. For where as the scrip∣ture is so hard to be vnderstand and therefore loke vpon the doc∣tours (saye they) and beleue the catholyke churche whiche hath continued frome Christes tyme hitherto, we can shewe (say they bi auncient writers from tyme to tyme sence Christs ascention. But what can these men shewe? Be not these writters whiche I haue rehersed, of the chieffest of thē? And al thes agre that their wrytinges must be tried by the scripture, and if that allowe thē not they would not in any wise that we should beleue them. This is a wonderfull thynge yt they would haue vs geue such
credite to the doctours whiche thynge the docters them selues forbyd But they haue alwayes this sayeinge of Augustine in their mouthes. I would not be∣leue the gospel, except the autho¦ritie of the curch did moue me. Nowe as sone as they haue caught thys in theyr sermons: thei triumph. Lo (say they) what authorite did this geat doctour attribute to ye church in so much that ye gospel is and must be iud∣ged by ye church. For wtout the church, he would not beleue chri¦stes gospel manye wordes haue they which I cā not remembre. But me think, these mē mought be answered out of Augustines owne wordes before rehersed. For he wil geue no such credit to any mans writtinges what so e∣uer he be as he doth to the scrip∣ture neither would he yt any mā
woulde he that any man should so esteme his writtynges. For al hys wryttynges dooe not please hym. Therefore if they wil haue me beleue Augustines wordes: they muste proue them true bye the scripture or else by some o∣ther probable and sure reasone that dissenteth not frome the truethe, else maye not I beleue Austens wordes. For thys he counselleth hym selfe. But ad∣mytte Austens wordes to be true wythout anye contradici∣on. What moughte then be say∣ed to it? These be Augustines wordes, I shoulde not beleue the Gospell, onlesse the authori∣tye of the churche moued me. Nowe I aske you what the au∣thority of the churche is. What cal you ye authorite of ye church? Is it long continuance of time? Thē was christes doctrine doubt¦ful. For the scribes and phariseis
had that on theyr syde. Or is it the greater number? With lyke reasone we maye refuse Christes Gospell. For many be called, sayeth he, and fewe elected. Or else was it the consent of learned wise men? All thys had the great byshopes and high pristes in christes time. For they were great learned and wyse men.Corh. i. But saynt Paule ax¦eth, wher be the wyse? Wher are the scribes? where are the dispu∣ters of the worlde? Hath not god made the wysdome of the worlde foleishenesse? Therfore let them declare vnto me the verie true authoritye of the churche. And I make heare distinctiō of chur∣ches. For Christe and the Apo∣stles haue prophicied that theyr shal come false prophetes in Chri¦stes name, and shal rise euen frō amonge our selues & shall speake peruerse doctryne. These men
come in Christes name and saye they be christes chruch. But I am assured, they be not Christes true spouse.Math. xix. For Lira writinge vpon Mathe sayth. The church standeth not in men, by the rea∣son of spirituall powre or secu∣lar dignitie. For many princes and many popes and other infe∣riour persones, haue swarued frome the fayth. Wherfore the church doth stande in those per∣sones, in whom is ye true know∣ledge and cōfession of fayth and veritie. Therefore it must nedes by Lira his wordes consiste in the scriptures. For the gyfte of fayeth and vnderstandeynge the veritye, is the worckeynge of the holye spirite, that confor∣tour which the Lorde promised to those that beleue hys worde. But because they alledge me Austens wordes I wyl answere thē with Austen him selfe, wry∣tinge
vpon the .lvii. Psal. Wee speake true thynges (sayth he) which haue heard true thinges that the lorde sayth, not that mā sayth. It may be that man may lie, it can not be that god should lye. By the worde of trueth do I knowe Christe the same verie trueth. By the worde of trueth do I knowe the church to be par¦taker of the trueth. Nowe lette them scan these wordes and tell me where the true touchestonne is. Then alledge they these wordes of Christe.Math. xx. I haue yet muche to saye vn∣to you, but you can not nowe beare it a waye. Nowe be it, when the spirite of the trueth commeth: he shall leade you into all trueth. & etc. And agayne. Manye other tokens dyd Iesus before hys
his disciples. Which are not wri¦ten,Iohn. xx. in this boke. Here staye they and go no farder, for it foloweth. But these are written, that you shoulde beleue. etc. But seynge we haue begone wyth Saynte Augustine, we wyll ende wyth him. He wryteth vpon this same place of Iohn and sayeth.Tractatu. xlix Capit. ix. They were chosen and pycked out, as many as were thought necessa∣rie and sufficient for the saluaci∣on of the faythfull.Supr Iohn Capit. xii. Cirillus also affirmeth the same, and sayeth more ouer, that althynges that the wrytters thought sufficient, boeth for the fayeth and beleue, and also for ye cōuersaciō of men that wee myghte shyne wyth a ryghte and perfecte fayeth, and wyth true workes and ver∣tues, and so come to the Kyng∣dome of heauen thorowe oure Lorde Christe be wryten sayeth he, and therefore it is a newe¦lye,
inuented in ye diuilles shop, to saye that all the articles of oure christian fayeth can not be proued by scripture, and mens tradicions bysyde the scripture be goode workes and please God These be Cyrillus workes. And therefore sayeth Saynte Am∣bros, in hys fourth boke of vir∣gines. All newe thynges that Christe hath not tought we law¦fully condemne. For vnto fayth∣ful men sayeth he Christe is the waye. If Christe therefore haue not taught that we teache (say∣eth he) we iudge it to be detesta∣ble. Nowe let these holye fathers turne and tosse these olde holye doctours, and let them fynde me out a touchston some other wher For these doctours say playnely the worde of God the holy scrip∣ture, the word of truth is ye rule wherby Christes true church is ordered, gouerned & enstructed.
For whosoeuer sercheth findeth The holy gost faileth not such as seke him ther but to seke him in anye other, place: is no promise made. As for theyr general coun¦sayles that they sticke so muche vnto: is but a weake foundacion For saynt Austine writtynge a∣gaynst the donatistes sayeth.Capi. iii. Who is it that knoweth not the holy canonical scriptures, boeth of the olde and newe testamente to be conteined within certayne limettes and boūdes? And that they be so put before al the wry∣tinges of bishopes yt shal come af¦terward, that it can not be doub¦ted at all neyther can we be, de∣ceyued of the whether it be true or whether it be ryght and good or not what soeuer is knowen to be writen in them. But al other wrytynges of byshopes or else, which either haue writtē or shal write, after the confirmacion of
the cananicall wrytynges, maye be reprehended, both by the wor∣des or wyse sentēce of some more knoweynge man in that matter as well as by the sage authorite of their bishopes, and by the pru∣dence and learneinge of learned teachers, and by counsayles, if bi chaunce anye thynge be strayed from the trueth. And those coun¦selles, sayeth he, that be done in euerie prouince or region, ought to geue place without any doub∣tes, to the authoritie of the full counsayles, whiche are done of the whole companie of Christian men. And those generall coun∣sayles that go before, maye often tymes be amended by those that folowe after, when soeuer anye thynge shall appere by anye ex∣perience, whiche was before shet vp, when so euer anye thynge, is knowen that before was hyde wythout anye coloure of false
holy pryde, wythout anyē puffed vp spice of Arrogancie, without anye▪ condemnacion of enuye or malice wyth pure humilitye, wyth vniuersall peace and qui∣etnes, and wyth Christian cha∣ritie. These be Augustines wor∣de, whiche beinge charitably vn¦derstande are surelye goode and profitable. For the fyrste he set∣teth goddes worde, euen the ca∣nonicall scriptures, to be the ve∣ry perfect and vndoubted touch∣stone. As it were an euerlasting trueth, agaynste the whiche no man maye repyne or stande. Then of mens writtinges he de∣clareth, what the nature is, and howe they ought to be vsed. Af∣ter that, of generall counsayles to whyche thoughe he attribute much: yet layeth he ther no suer foundacion, but they maye con∣clude vpon matters, that maye be afterwarde reformed. But a∣alas,
when was ther any suche generall counsayle, as Saynte Augustine here speaketh of? But what shoulde we doubt of suche perilouse tymes spoken of in so manye places of the scrip¦ture to be euen nowe, wherein that aduersarye is opened? Whyche hath so longe tyme sate in the steade of God, aboue all that is called God or goddes ser∣uice. The abhominacion of deso∣lacion, stode in the holye place. That gallāt whore trimmed wt purpel hath ben drunke with the bloude of the Sayntes, but the Lord hath shortened those daies for hys electedes sake, and hath destroyed this wycked wyth the bryghtnesse of his comeing, with the spirite of hys mouth. For the Gospell is preached. Blessed are they, which are called to the lambes supper. Among so manye fine and ca¦ptiouse
wyttes, among so many swifte and diuers iudgmentes of men as are nowe regninge in the worlde: harde shall it be for a right wel learned mā, to please the multitude of them that be learned. Wherefore I maye not nor wyl not, loke for it. But vn∣to you, dearlie beloued brethern, which onely desyre the glorie of God and the lorde Iesus, and in the same lorde, the must charita∣ble reformacion and retourne of his elect frō blindnes & errour vnto the perfite knoweledge of ye lordes heauenly doctrine: to you bretherne I saye, I make thys declaraion concerninge this my simple labour, in thys wyse. As touchynge my letter, I dyd it, God is my wytnes, euen of a fer∣uente zeale, knowyng for a sure∣tye, that thought Maister Chri¦pyne be learned, and a greate sorte more which haue & do hold
the same opinion that he doeth yet am I certen that none of them is able to defend it, either by scripture or doctours. As cō∣cerneing ye authoritye of the doc¦tours: I take them euen as thei yt selues desier. That is If they expoūde anye place of scripture, declareynge to be so wyth the helpe of other manyfeste places of scripture, or wyth a sure and probable reasone, whiche is not contrarye to anye places of the scripture: then I accepte it and prayse God for hys gyftes in them. If not: I let them passe as I fynde them. For I haue not al∣ledged them here to thentente that anye man shoulde thynke that the scripture is the more established thorow theyr learne∣nyge (For all men are vayne and cursed is he that putteth hys trust in them) But because
these mē sticke so muche to them that in thys poynte are theyr e∣nimies If they thinke I haue ben to quicke wyth them in any thinge: let them knowe that the Lorde hath opened his wysdome euen vnto babes And in those thynges, we maye not nor wyll geue place to such wyse and pru¦dente, from whome they be hyd. If they can finde in their hertes to geue place to the infallible ve¦ritye of Christes doctrine. If they can be contented to caste a∣waye the hye estimaciō that thei haue in theyr muche readynge and longe continuance of tyme wyth the titles of honoure geue them by men. If they can tho∣rowe pure charitye and desyre of vnitie, caste them selues into suche an humilitie, as to thynke that God hath opened that vn∣to simple men, whiche thorowe theyr hante mynde is kept from
them: If they woulde I saye, haue theyr whole respecte to the laste wyll and testamente of the lorde Iesus Christe in so muche that if it were an asse that speake vnto them any of those wordes they woulde yet here hyr and re∣garde the wordes for hys sake, who so they be if they were thus minded: I would wyshe to spēd a greate parte of my lyfe wyth them, I woulde reuerence theyr learneinge, and geue them as much honoure as appartayneth vnto suche men. But beinge o∣ther wyse puft vp contrarye to ryght charitye and in a wronge estimacion of them selues, and despyceing Christes simplicitie: the Lorde cut ther combes And therfor I hertely exhort al faith¦full bretherne, to lyfte vp theyr hertes wyth me vnto the lyue∣inge God, in pure fayeth, geue∣ing hym most ernest, hertie, and
humble thankes, for that he of his tender mercie, hath geuen vs so towardelie a yonge kynge so graciouse a gouernour, so ver¦tuouse a counsayle, by whose meanes all cruell tirannye and murderinge of innocentes is ba∣nished, pure christian charitye put in vre and practise, the lor∣des doctrine brought in agayne into the seate a poynted, straūge learneinge banished and put a∣waye, the true worship and ser∣uice of God foūde out, the Idole seruice and false worshippynge driuen out of the church of God. Thys waye shall the filthy and vncleane conuersacion of men be purified, and ye vncharitable and vnfayethfull dealynge of neyghbours shalbe reduced into vnitye fayethfulnes, and immu¦table loue whiche alwayes shal continue in the lyueynge God throughe Iesus Christe. Whose
name be magnified, praysed and exalted for euer. Amen. ☞Written the .vii. of Nouem∣bre Anno Domini. M.D.xlvii. P. N Imprinted at London by Iohn Day and Wyllyam Seres, dwel∣lynge in Sepulchres Parish at the signe of the Resur∣rection a litle aboue Hol∣bourne Conduite. Cum gratia & priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
