19129 S114063 99849291 14431
A FAITHFVLL ADMONITION OF THE PALTSGRAVES Churches, to all other Protestant Churches in Dutchland. THAT THEY WOVLD CONSI∣der the great danger that hangeth ouer their heads as well as ours by the Popedome, and therefore Christianly and brotherly cease the priuate vnnecessary and now too much growne strife with vs. TOGETHER WITH A SHORT ABSTRACT of the warning about the Iesuites bloodthirsty plots publi∣shed in print at Tubing. Published by Authoritie. According to the Originall Printed in the Electors Pals∣graues Country at Nustadt vpon the Hardt, Englished by IOHN ROLTE. Imprinted at London by Edward Griffin for George Gibbes, and are to be sould at his shop in Poules-church-yard at the signe of the Flowerdeluce. 1614.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE OLIVER Lord St. Iohn, Baron of Bletso, his Maie∣sties Lieutenant of the County of Huntington the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, and heereafter the Crowne of glory. ABRAHAM the Prophet & roote of true nobility (Right Honoura∣ble) hasted to performe dueties of loue euen to strangers, and noble Nehemias stayed not vntill his poore brethren spake to him, but with Moses had his affections a∣mongest Gods afflicted ones a∣broad, though they themselues abounded in earthly com∣forts. Wherefore I make no doubt of your Honours fa∣uourable acceptance of these my small endeuours; not for my labours being of no worth, neither my person also of no respect, but of your honours godly disposition, there∣by the better to see how it standeth with the people of God elsewhere. The present is small, and also plaine, be∣ing serued in so homelily in an earthen dishe. With which presumption of mine, I trust your honour will beare, I being neither Prophet, nor a Prophets sonne; but a heardman, and gatherer of wild figges, and lighting yet (in my liuing abroad) on this small bunch of Rhenish grapes, which (though it be not that goodly one, brought out of that land, manifestly notifying the fruitfulnesse
thereof; to wit, the renowned Prince Frederike his Cate∣chisme, vsed in all the Churches & schooles of his Excel∣lency, and also all the Netherlands reformed Churches) yet is it of the same grouth, and both watered and warmed ripe by the Spirit and Son of God from heauen, as well ap∣peareth herein by their cōstancy to the truth of God, ma∣nifested to them out of his holy word, by their meeknesse towards their brethren who yet are too vnnatural to them, and also by their vigilancie to preuent the subtle strata∣gems of the arch-enemy of Iesus Christ, intended against them, and the rest of the Churches of God. And there∣fore if your honour be pleased to suffer it, onely to bee set at the lower end of your table, though vnder the couert of some of your goodlier seruices, I make no doubt but o∣thers wil thereby be encouraged the rather to tast thereof, and so find it as wholesome for their soules, as they haue done in Germany. (I assuring my selfe that no sound body can take any hurt thereby.) Which I only ayming at, and praying for; desire the Lord of light, to encrease your daies in honour, to the further comfort of his Maiesties subiects in this part of the land, and after you to make your sonnes like vnto the sonne of Barzillai to stand be∣fore our Dauid, & to follow your steps, as wel in inward as outward graces, to the glory of God, and further comfort of his seruants. Your honours most humble at command IOHN ROLTE.
Epistle to the Reader. CHristian Reader, and beloued in the Lord, a∣mongst many friuolous and slanderous impu∣tations which our aduersaries the Papists lay vpon our Religion, this is none of the meanest, nor vnusuallest, that wee cannot be the true Church, which is as a Cittie at vnitie in it selfe, because of the manifould dissentions & diuisions which are nourished amongst vs, for they thus cast in our teeth, that the Doctrine of Luther was no sooner bred, & borne, but it deuided it selfe like a Hidra into many heads: Lutherans, Caluinists, Anabaptists, Libertines, Swelckfeldians, Arians, &c. which to be a mere calumniation of theirs, deuised as many other things else by them to the discredit of our religion, may appeate by many reasons, three or foure whereof I will onely propound to thy in∣different censure in this short Epistle. First therefore their ca∣lumnie doth appeare in that diuerse of those sects which are na∣med, as springing from Luthers roote, are none of ours, neither euer were of vs. We abhorre & detest them as much, if not more then they themselues. They sprung from the Diuel, and not from Caluin and Luther: to wit the Anabaptists, Libertines, Swenckfeldians and Arians: against whom both Luther and Caluin haue writtē expresse treatises, that the world may know how farre they were from approuing their damned errors, and how our aduersaries make no conscience of open lying and slan∣dering our religion and persons, so that they may discredit vs & aduantage themselues thereby. Secondly if vnity in all things be a certaine marke of the true Church, and diuision a marke of the false Church, then was there neuer true Church in the world, for there was neuer any yet in the perfect vnitie of opini∣ons
that in it there were not many sects and diuisions. Irenaeus an excellent and holy father, telleth vs as much when he saith: tanquam ex nucleo nucis oliuae nascitur oleaster: sic ex medio ecclesiae extiterunt hereses: that is, as from the kernell of the sweete Oliue springeth the wilde: so out of the midst of the Church springeth heresies. Thus was it in the Church of Corinth, Galatia, Thessalonica and the rest to whom Paul wrote his Epistles, where there were many sects and di∣uisions, and many exorbitant opinions touching things indiffe∣rent: the Lords supper, and the resurrection of the body, Cir∣cumcision, the second comming of the Lord, &c. Likewise after and in the Apostles times, how the primatiue Church was pe∣stered with Heritikes, the Simonians, the Nicolaitans, the Ebi∣onists, the Cerinthonians and such like. Who knoweth not the like may be showne of all ages successiuely? Neither was there e∣uer such a vnity to be found in any Church vpon earth, that there were no heresies, nor opposition of opinion lurking therein. Thirdly if this be a iust exception against vs, then much more may it take hould of them, whose diuisions are both more in number and weightier in consequent then ours are, for ex∣ample, they cannot agree whether the Pope can erre in the faith or no: nor whether the counsell be aboue the Pope: or the Pope aboue the Counsell: nor whether a man may be certaine of his standing in the state of grace or no. All matters of great moment. Againe it is notoriously knowne to all men, how the Iesuites and secular Priests differ in iudgement about the Popes coactiue power in the temporall affaires of Princes: and how of elder yeares their diuinitie was diuided into three families, Tho∣mists, Scotists, Occamists: Thomas against Scot, and Scot against Thomas and Occam against both. And againe who knoweth not, how the Romish doctors differ in iudgement about the vow of single life, the lent fast, & auricular confessiō; whether these be of diuine institution or ecclesiasticall onely, as also about mariage after diuors, originall sinne, and the conception of the Virgin Mary: about all these matters there is such contention amongst them, and oftentimes with such bitternesse, that they
would euen seeme to deuour one another. Lastly it is a wonder to see with how many idle controuersies their doctrine of tran∣substantiation is enwrapped, one houlding this, another that, & scarce two of them agreeing all things, the verse is well knowne which I shall heere set downe: Corpore de Christi lis est, de sanguine lis est: Lis est de modo, non habitura modum. If varietie of opinions now marre the forme of a Church, then is their Church vtterly spoyled. and put out of fashion, rather then ours, wherein for one controuersie with vs, there are tenne with them (I dare bouldly auouch) and those of no trifles but of main points of their Religion. Lastly if we consider aright the diuisions that are in our Church betwixt the Caluinists and the Lutherans, we shall easely perceaue that they are both few in quantitie and in qualitie, such as ouerthrow no fundamen∣tall article of the faith: And this to be so, this short treatise will plainely and briefely discouer vnto thee, if thou please to be∣stow but an houre or two reading vpon it. The Authors thereof are Germanes, the translator a man not professing schollership, but exercised in traficke of marchan∣dise, and therefore thou in wisedome wilt accept his wholesome bunch of Rhenish grapes, though clad with a plain and easie gar∣ment made of homespun thred. I am perswaded that his zeale to Gods Church, and his loue to the peace of Zion moued him to vndertake this taske, and in my iudgement this his good intent cannot but in some measure take some good effect, for this short tract may serue thee for three excellent purposes: First to dis∣couer the malice of our Romish aduersaries, who by mustering vp our diuisions, would faine proue vs to haue no veritie a∣mongst vs, because we haue no vnitie: whereas our differences are here made manifest to be not many in number, nor of anie great moment, that is such as concerne the wals and windowes of our faith, but not the foundation. Secondly thou maist also here take view what the maine differences are betwixt the Lutherans and the Caluinists, that thou maist be able to iudge how the vnitie of faith is not broken betwixt them, and that both ioine together in the seruice of one Christ, and against his
great enemie Antichrist. And Lastly it may serue also, as a meanes to calm the heat of the moderne quarrels in our Church, which haue beene pursued on both partes, with too too much vio∣lence of spirit: for here both sides may learne this wholesome and short lesson, that seeing they builde vpon one foundation, therefore though they meete not in opinion, yet they would meete in brotherly loue: and laying aside all rancour and violent cour∣ses, ioine their forces against the common aduersarie. And this is the principall drift of this short discourse. Now the God of peace sāctisie vs al throughout both in body, soule and spirit, that they may bee kept blamelesse to the com∣ming of our Lord Iesus: and giue vs grace that wee may hould fast the vnity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Thine in the Lord Thomas Beard, Minister of Gods word in the towne of Huntington. Pag. 4. lin. 25. read, is not.
A FAITHFVLL ADMONITION of the PFALTZGRAVES Churches, To all other Protestant Churches in DVCHLAND. BEloued brethren, all you that call vpon the name of the Lord Iesus with vs, and desire to be saued by his death and bloodshedding, as well as we; you know how our true Lord and Sauiour so heartily councelled vs to peace,Ioh. 13.34.35. Ioh. 17.11.21. And how feruently hee commanded at his departure out of this world, that wee should agree one with another: that so, the whole world might know that hee was sent of God. You know also, how Paul saith,1. Cor. 10.17. 1. Cor. 12.12.13.14. that wee who beleeue in Christ, are all together one body, and should loue together as members of one body, and one beare with the infirmities of another: And he that doth not so,1. Cor. 11.16. but hath delight in con∣tention, hee is no true member of the Church of God. For, the congregation of God hath no pleasure in contention.
How come we then to it, (Louing brethren) that wee haue now contended together so many yeares with such bitternesse, which well besee∣meth not the very heathen; and that, for such questions, without the knowledge whereof, a man may well bee saued? It being so, that many thou∣sands, are since dead, on both sides, who vnder∣stood neither the one nor the others meaning a∣right, and yet are neuerthelesse saued, being dead in Christ. What intend we then, by so shameful a separati∣on, about such questions, whereon saluation de∣pendeth not? One thinketh that the bread is to be broken at the Supper: the other, that it may well be left vnbroken. How many thousand people are saued, who haue eaten the bread brokē at the Sup∣per? How many thousand people are saued also, who haue eaten the bread at the Supper vnbro∣ken? Is that then such a matter, for which one should condemne an other so vnchristianly: as for∣merly the Wittenbergers condemned vs, and as now the Darmstatters condemne vs anew. True it is, the Darmstatters and Wittenbergers, accuse vs, as if wee had begun such condemning, and had outlawed to Hell, all such, as doe not breake the bread at the Supper. But, the Lord knowes it, that they doe vs wrong. They would indeed inforce it from this: for that we hold the breaking of bread for needfull. Now it is most certaine, wee hold the breaking of bread as needfull: for we take it, that Christ re∣quired
it so to bee: to accomplish his commaund, is then needfull. And therefore we beleeue, that they do erre, who hold the breaking of bread for a free indifferent thing, which one, may as wel leaue vndone, as done. But that wee should condemne any man for such an error, that wil neuer be found in any of our writings, but almost euery where the very contrary is holden by vs in this matter.Epist. 2. Beza writ at least 30 yeares agone, that one who dwelt in such a place where the breaking of bread were not in vse, was not therefore to refraine the Supper. For although it be an errour to leaue the bread vnbroken, yet is it not such an errour, for which a man should be houlden a heathen: which a man doth when he refuseth to cōmunicate with him that houldeth the contrary. But it is such an errour, which a man for christian loue sake, must beare withal in them that commit it, as with many more others also. The like also writes Doct. Parens in his remem∣brance of breaking bread, and saith: that we do not say nor hold, that they that breake not the bread at the sup∣per, haue no supper of Christ at all, as some accuse vs. In like manner hath bene diuers times shewed in the three writings penned by the common con∣sent of the Pfaltzgraues Churches, eight yeares a∣gone, in defence of the Anholts reformation, and set against the writings of complaint of the Di∣uines of Wittinberge, especially in the preface vp∣on the answere of the Wittenbergers message of the Ambergs information, amongst which these words
are read, therefore wee intreat all honest Christians to whom this writing shall come to bee read, that they would certainly hould, that though wee maintaine the opinion of our Churches, with befitting zeale, yet doe we not ther∣fore in any sort condemne other Churches which therein hold not with vs, namely concerning the breaking of bread, putting away of Images, and other the like questions, which are handled in these writings. But we acknowledge all those for the children of God, and for brethren in Christ Iesus, who desire to be saued onely by faith in Christ, and with such a faith practise a Chri∣stian and blamelesse life, though they doe not practise the very same Ceremonies which we constantly hold that God hath commanded to be practised. Behold, louing brethren, what hath beene euer our opinion and construction concerning this matter, and is now: to wit that we condemne no man for leauing the bread vnbroken, though wee hould such vnbreaking for a thing vniust. If wee then condemne no man that leaueth the bread at the supper vnbroken, though wee hould such vnbreaking to be vnlawfull, wherefore shall we be condemned, for that we hould the breaking thereof at the supper, whereas euery man acknow∣ledgeth that the breaking thereof at the supper is vnlawfull, it beeing so, that Christ himselfe brake the bread at his last supper. That therefore is strained too farre, that wee should be condemned because we hould the brea∣king of bread for needfull, it beeing but a free in∣different thing, as if all men must bee damned that
hold an indifferent thing for needfull. But the Apostle Paul teacheth much other waies. One (saith he) beleeu's he may eat of all things,Rom. 14.2. & another which is weake eateth hearbs, let not him that eateth des∣pise him that eateth not: and let not him which eateth not Iudge him that eateth, for God hath receiued him Who art thou that condemnest an other mans seruant? hee stan∣deth or falleth to his owne master: yea he shall be establi∣shed, for God is able to make him stand. These are the Apostle Pauls own words. Wherin hee teacheth that though one hould an indifferent thing needful, yet he should not be cōdēned for it. But it is yet disputable, whether the breaking of bread be an indifferent thing or not. Wee haue shewed our reasons, in the afore named three wri∣tings, and many others of our bookes, wherfore we hold not that the bread-breaking is an indiffe∣rent thing, of which our reasons euery man may iudge as his conscience moueth. But, admit that bread-breaking were an indifferent thing, and that we erred therein, in holding it for needfull, yet were it not such an errour, for which wee should be condemned as heathens, and be shut out of the fellowship of the Euangelicall Churches. They alledge against vs the example of Paul: who else could well haue endured the circumcisi∣on: but when it was stood upon as needfull: hee saith, that no man should enforce it vpon him: that he lose not Christ. Euen so say the Wittenberg. & Di Vietor of Siessen, that if men hould the brea∣king of bread for indifferent, then they could well
let it passe, but when it is stood vpon as needfull, then ought euery man iustly to set himselfe against it. For answere: we must know that Circumcision was neuer an indifferent thing, but was comman∣ded in the old testament. But in the new Testamēt and in the time of Paul, God would haue it laide downe with honour, and from that time to bee e∣steemed a forbidden Ceremony. Therefore the example of Circumcision hath no reference to the question of indifferent things. And therefore re∣maineth the rule which Paul giueth of indifferent things vncast downe with this example. Which rule is, as aforesaid, that a man should not therfore condemne another, though he should erre in hol∣ding an indifferent thing, for needfull. It is further obiected, that neuerthelesse Chri∣stian liberty is broken, when indifferent things are esteemed needfull. But this obiection is also of no force.1. Cor. 14.33. For Christian freedome brings not that with it, that in indifferent things, euery man may doe what he will, Else there would bee no order held in the Church of God.Not. Antes fol. 6.2. But, it standeth free for euery ma∣gistrate (with helpe of the ministery) to take order as eue∣ry country best fits for their furtherance, as the Witten∣bergers themselues confesse. At last it is complained of, how fearefully the common man taketh offence at the breaking of bread, but wee cannot beleeue that any where a Christian man is offended at breaking of bread, for euery man knoweth that Christ himselfe brake the bread at the supper, as appeareth by the cleare words:
Our Lord Iesus Christ in the night that hee was betrayed tooke bread and when hee had giuen thanks hee brake it. How is it then possible for any man to bee offen∣ded at breaking of bread? No man sure will take offence at that which Christ himselfe hath done. In somme, let them seeke what they can: they cannot find the least oc∣casiō to controle the practise of breaking of bread. Yet must we therefore bee againe condemned of the Darmstatters, and put into the number of those of whom it is written:Gal. 5.12. Would God they were euen cut off. Not so louing brethren, but would God wee were all honest: and that the one would beare with the other with patience, as Christ hath giuen vs a commandement, that were much better then that wee desire one another to be cut off.Iohn. 13.35. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, saith Christ, not if you desire to destroy each other: but if you loue one a∣nother. Blessed bee God wee are no such folke as they were of whom Paul saith, Wold to God they were euen cut off. Wee desire not to bring in a∣gaine the Leuiticall ceremonies, and to be thereby iust and saued before the Lord, and so make the grace of Christ of no effect: as they did of whom Paul saith, would to God they were cut off, wee put our confidence onely and soly in Christ Iesus, and desire not otherwise to be made iust and saued before God, then through faith in him, of such people did not Paul say, would to God they were cut off: though they should yet faile in some
things:Phil. 3.15. Rom. 14.1.13. But if any be otherwaies minded, the Lord shall manifest the same vnto him. Also, him that is weake in the faith, receiue vnto you, but not for controuersies of disputations. Also, let vs not iudge one another any more; but vse iudgement rather in this, that no man put an occasion to fall, or a stumbling-blocke before his brother. It may well be, that we faile in something, for we are men: but consider, louing brethren, that you are also men, and so may faile euen as well as other men. Where now yee condemne vs, and wee con∣demne you, what will be the end thereof? not other∣waies, then that we shall be both deuoured.Gal. 5.14.15. As it for∣merly befell to the Easterne Churches, when they would not cease to condemne each other. The Papists plot about it day and night, how they may destroy and consume vs, one with ano∣ther. When we now our selues shall desire the one to deuoure the other, what shall wee otherwaies accomplish, then that wee deliuer the Papists the sword into their hands, wherewith to destroy vs all? But and if we agreed, and held together, the Pope with all his adherents would be driuen to consider well with himselfe, whether hee would take vs in hand, or not. But if we be separated from each o∣ther, it will be no hard matter vnto him to deuoure one of vs after the other. Yea indeed, that is the very matter, out of which the Papists ground their sure hopes, that they will shortly againe be masters of all Duchland. For say
they, the Protestants are seperated,Iohn Paul Win∣deck in Prog∣nostico, futuri status Ecclesiae. Luk. 11.17. and therefore their building cannot hold. This rekoning the Pa∣pists themselues make, and in truth it is an infal∣lible rule, for Christ faith himselfe, Euery kingdome deuided against it selfe shall be desolate: and a house de∣uided against a house falleth. If we will not then cease one to contend with the other, then cannot the Papists reckoning faile them, but we must needs be made desolate. It is true indeed, the greatest part amongst those that call themselues Lutheranes, suffer themselues to be perswaded, that the blood-thirsty drifts of the Papists tende onely against those whom some call Caluinists. As for themselues, there is no dan∣ger at all, for the Caluinists (who hould but naked tokens in the Sacraments) as they falsely accuse them, are not comprehended in the contract of the peace for Religion. But they themselues are out of all doubt comprehended in that religious peace, and therefore the Pope dare not medle with them, yes indeed, no more then the Wolfe dare lay hould on the Sheep that is branded. The Papists write, and it is yet vnrecalled, that they are not bound to hould that religious peace,Iohn Paul Win∣deck in Pro. sut. sta. Eccle. pag. 326. no not with the Lutheranes. For first, it was forced from the Emperour by constraint, besides that, it was meant onely for a time, which is now expired, since the publishing of the decrees and explication of the Counsell of Trent, and last of all, the Pope neuer confirming the same, therfore it neuer stood in any force indeed. As also in like manner, euery
yeare, in the day of the Lords Supper, in Rome, all they that are called Lutheranes, as well as they that are called Caluinists, are in like manner acknow∣ledged and condemned for Hereticks, and excom∣municated and pronounced to be out of the num∣ber of the Church of Christ. Therefore they are simple people, that put any trust in this Religious peace. Our agreement and bond, next vnto God, is a right religious peace indeed, and had not iuditious Polititians of late hindered it at seuerall Parlia∣ments when it was sought for, namely, by kindling a breach amongst the Protestant Princes, by some of the contentious Diuines, it would long since haue beene seene, what had beene the force of a Religious peace. When the Papists were masters of Aken, what helped the Lutherans their Religious peace? they must euen as well depart the Citie, as the Calui∣nists. And what manner of people were they which were persecuted and banished many yeares in Au∣stria, Carinthia, Stiria, also in Frankenlands, and the Abbey of Fulda, were they not Lutherans? In summe, the Pope loueth Luther and Caluin alike, euen the one as well as the other, and if he could this day destroy them both, he would not tarry till to morow. Therefore beloued brethren, consider what we are to do. The Heathen were formerly of such vn∣derstanding, that whē they had a common enemy,
they layed aside their priuate and particular enmi∣tie, and appeared against their common enemy with one accord. Wherefore should not we Chri∣stians also vse the same wisedome; when we may with a good conscience doe it so, that we may doe it well? For concerning the Ceremonies, there hath euer beene a difference in the Church of God, and yet the ancient Fathers neuer condemned one ano∣ther for it. Neither is it the will of God that men should condemne each other for such outward things.Mat. 12.7. Hos. 6.6. I haue pleasure in mercie (saith the Lord) and not in offerings. Besides,Anno. 1556. at Franckfort. the Protestant estates haue long since there∣in agreed, that concerning Ceremonies, when they agree with the word of God, (as the Wittenbergers, Darm∣statters, and Giessers confesse themselues that our Ceremonies doe,) that no State should burthen, vexe, or damnifie another, or falsely accuse them, or per∣mit any of theirs to doe so. Concerning the doctrine thereabouts, Paul gi∣ueth this rule, that if men be agreed in the grounds of saluation, then should no man be condemned for by faylings, because God will not condemne such people, and therefore also should not they con∣demne the one the other. The words of Paul are these, Another foundation can no man lay,1. Cor. 3.11.12.13.14.15. then that which is layd, which is Iesus Christ. And if any man build on this foundation gold, siluer, pretious stones, timber, hay, or stubble, euery mans worke shal be made manifest, for, the day will declare it, because it shall be
reuealed by the fire: and the fire shall try euery mans worke of what sort it is. If any mans worke that he hath built vpon abide, he shall receiue wages. If any mans worke burne, he shall loose, but he shall be safe himselfe, neuerthelesse, yet as it were by the fire. See, louing brethren, Paul sayth plainely, when one houldeth the grounds of saluation, though he alwayes build not vpon the same ground gold and siluer, but also some wood, and stubble, yet shall he not therfore be damned, but be saued, and their a∣greeing of euery man be acknowledged for a child of God. Now doe we hold the foundation of saluation on both sides without back-sliding,On the foun∣dation of sal∣uation. for the foundation of saluation, sayth Paul, is Christ Iesus, wherein we agree on both sides in one manner, for, we beleeue on both sides, that he is the euerlasting Sonne of God, which at the appointed time tooke vpon him the nature of man, and so at present is both God and man, and so shall remaine euerlastingly in one onely and vnseparable person, yet so, that the two natures that are in him, namely, the God-head, and the man-hood, with their naturall properties, re∣maine vnmingled euerlastingly, and neither nature is changed into the other, for else could he not be true God and man, when he had not in himselfe as well the godly, as the humaine, and as well the hu∣maine as the diuine nature, which can no waies be made knowne one from the other, but by their na∣turall properties. Also, we beleeue on both sides, that he in his naturall body which he tooke vpon
him, suffered death for vs, and arose againe the third day from the dead, and ascended into heauen forty dayes after his resurrection, and at this present sit∣teth at the right hand of God, from whence he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead: also, that in the meane time, he causeth to be preached repentance, and forgiuenesse of sinnes, and that all that beleeue such preaching, and repent them, shal not be lost, but haue euerlasting life, that is indeed on both sides our faith. And so we doe both of vs hould the foundation of saluation without back∣sliding. Wherefore then should we not with good con∣science keepe brothership one with another, and in all that may befall vs, hould together as brethren. The Apostle Paul saith, that we may not onely doe it with good conscience, but we are bound also to doe it, for he that houldeth the foundation of salua∣tion which I haue laid, saith Paul, the same, though he haue some wood and stubble in his doctrine, which in time must be burnt with fire, yet shall he be saued. Shall he be saued? then must he be a childe of God. Is he a childe of God? then must he also be my brother, or else am I no childe of God. Is he my brother? then stands it not alone free for mee to performe brotherly truth and loue vnto him, but I am euery way indebted to him therein. It is very true, there are some contentious ones that say, that we haue not onely wood, hay, and stubble in our doctrine, but that wee also erre in
those points, that concerne the foundation of sal∣uation: as namely of the person of Christ, and of the holy supper: but especially about the euer∣lasting foreknowledge of God, or of free election by grace. For of these last points, say they, giue we such fearefull reasons; that no Christian can with good conscience acknowledge vs for children of God, and is able to hould any brotherhood with vs. But if we be innocent in this one point, then are we certainly without blame in these points, for we beleeue and teach no otherwise of these points: then as next the holy scriptures, happie D. Lu∣ther himselfe beleeued and taught euen vnto the day of his death. The summe whereof is to this effect:Of the fore∣knowledge of God. that man∣kind is so corrupted through the fall, that hee is neuer able to beleeue in Christ, or to come vnto him by his owne power; though hee be called to him by the Gospell: But that hee may vnderstand and receiue the Gospell of Christ, God together with the outward preaching of the Gospell must also inwardly open his vnderstanding, and turne his heart to Christ by his holy spirit. And so is faith nothing lesse then a worke of free¦will: but a meere free gift of God, which gift no man hath deserued of God: It so being that al men are sinners. But God giues such grace freely by grace to whom he will. But those whom hee pre∣sently will, those hath he willed from euerlasting: according to the saying of Iames.Act 15.18. From the begin∣ning
of the world God knoweth all his works. Therfore floweth faith from this spring, euen the euerlasting foreknowledge of God. And the faithfull haue no cause to ascribe it to themselues, but to praise God, that they do beleeue. The vnbeleeuers also cannot ascribe the fault to God, but to themselues that they doe not beleeue. For though all men are so corrupted by nature that they cannot of them∣selues beleeue in Christ: yet hath not God so cor∣rupted them: but they haue so corrupted them∣selues: seeing that through the diuells prouocati∣on they fell willingly from God. About which fall no man hath cause to complaine against God, though he should leaue all men in their destructi∣on and vnbeleefe together. And therefore that he doth helpe only some out of the same, for that they are to magnifie his mercy, and not to dispute with him about the rest. But when as one desireth to know whether God hath foreseene, and chosen him to euerlasting life, or not: Then shall he not search into the secret councel of God: for such a searching is but in vain; & tendeth to no other end, then to serue to bring one another to despaire, or indeed vnto fleshly se∣curity. But when one desireth to be assured, whe∣ther he be ordained to saluatiō or no, let him hold himselfe to the reuealed word of God: and accor∣ding to the command thereof beleeue in Christ, & repent. And then need he not further search whe∣ther he be elected to life euerlasting or not, for all they that beleeue in Christ without hypocrisie,
are chosen to life euerlasting, as it is written, All that be∣leeue in him, shall not perish, but haue euerlasting life. E∣uen so and no otherwise hath D. Luther constantly taught continually of the euerlasting foreknow∣ledge of God. As is to bee seene in all his writings, which hee put forth from yeare to yeare, which writings, he that hath them not, or cannot read them: let him read onely the abstract taken out of them, and was printed certaine yeares agone at Amberge vnder this title:Anno. 1598. The Constant doctrine of D. Martin Luther of the first mouing causes of faith. Or hee that cannot get that abstract, let him read onely the Preface of D. Luther vpon the Epistle to the Romanes: in his Dutch Bible: which he ouersaw a new, and cau∣sed to bee printed the last yeare before his death, there may he cleerely finde it. And if hee haue an vpright heart in him, must acknowledge that D. Luther neuer beleeued and taught otherwaies, then as is aboue mentioned, we therin beleeue and teach. Whatsoeuer fearefull reasons are obiected a∣gainst vs, aboue and against such a doctrine, they are nothing else then bare forges deuised by peace hating people thereby to discredit vs. And it skills not much that they note the books and leaues, wherein such fearefull reasons stand. When one is a mans enemy, easily may he finde somthing in his arguments & writings, which hee may haue shew to make an euill construction of. When Iulian the Apostata, was enemie to the
Christians he accused them that they would haue Magristacy cease, and would cast all good order on an heap: for they taught that men should not any more punish theeues and Murtherers: but let euery man fulfill his owne euill desires: and to shew them to be such, he repeats Christs words: You haue heard what is said, eye for eye, & tooth for tooth but, I say vnto you, that you shall not resist euill. What could be more manifestly in shew said and laid be∣fore them, and yet neuerthelesse they suffered wrong. Euen so in truth are we also wronged, whē men broach such feareful & odious matters of vs. which a man cannot easily vtter without sinning: For example they say of vs that wee teach that God is the cause of sinne, and hath a delight and pleasure in sin, and helpeth to sin, but God know∣eth, whom no man can deceiue, that such blas∣phemy against God neuer entred into our minds. The contentious would wring it out of this, that some of ours write, that there befalleth nothing without the foreknowledge, councell and will of God, no not sinne it selfe. Now it is certaine; our men write thus: that there can nothing be done, without the foreknowledge, councell, and will of God, whether it be little or great, bad or good, ei∣ther in heauen or on earth. But they doe not ther∣fore say, that God is the cause of sinne, or hath de∣light and pleasure in sinne, and helpeth therein. But they teach in all their writings the clean con∣trary, that God is not the author of sinne, that al∣so hee hath no delight and pleasure in sinne, and
that he helpeth no man to sinne, or doth either se∣cretly or openly prouoke them to it. But whereas indeede they doe write that there comes nothing to passe without the foreknow∣ledge, councell & will of God, yea also that which in it selfe is euill, and sinne. That vnderstand they thus & not otherwaies, as Luke vnderstands it, where he writes of the feareful and great sinne, which Herod and Pilate committed against Christ:Act. 4.27.28. doing whatsoeuer the hand and councel of God had deter∣mined before to be done. More cleerely, they vnder∣stand it thus: That God is an almighty God, and so can hinder all things which he will not suffer to come to passe, and that therefore also the euil spi∣rits and men can performe nothing, when as God hath not determined it, or as Luke saith: when that God in his coūcel had not determin'd that it shold come so to passe: that & no otherwise is the opiniō of our teachers of the foreknowledge of God, & it is in very truth a right comfortable opinion, for wo vnto vs poore folke, if the Lord were not so al∣mighty, that he before knew all our enemies bad intents, and could let them passe, or hinder them according to his councell and will? How long would the Diuell, Pope, and Popish confederates suffer vs to liue when that God by his prouidence did not gouerne them, and bridled them? Euen so do we beleeue of the foreknowledge of God, and are assured that no Christian man doth beleeue any otherwise thereof, yet will they per∣swade the people that wee beleeue and say more
haynously of the foreknowledge of God: then the Iewes, Turkes, and Heathens. We will shew one example more, out of which such as feare God, vnderstanding and impartiall men may see how hetherto they haue delt with vs. Wee say it is not possible that the elect should perish, which they construe vpon vs, as if we had said and written: he that is elected must be saued, doe what he will. And on the contrary, he that is not elected must bee damned, though hee liue so honestly and holily, as he can possibly. But we te∣stifie before God, and before Christ Iesus, who is to come againe to Iudge the quicke and the dead, that such an opinion neuer came into our minde, we say indeed that the elect cannot bee lost. And why should we not say so? Christ saith it himselfe. Mat. 24. Chapt. And D. Luther saith so also in innu∣merable many places. But that we should say that the elect cannot perish, with this addition doe they what they will: that will neuer bee shewed in our writings. But that is our opinion, and for that we say, that the elect cannot perish,1. Pet. 1.5. Luke 22.32. because God kee∣peth them by his power in faith to saluation: and though they sometimes fall, yet they lye not ther∣in, but he raiseth them againe by repentance, for whom God hath elected to euerlasting life, those hath he not otherwaies elected,Ephe. 1.4.5. Rom. 8.30. Ezek. 36.27. then with this conditiō, that he would giue them faith in Christ, and that by his holy spirit hee would make them new creatures, and such people as should walke in his commandements, Therefore are they no elect
that doe what they will, but onely they that haue a harty purpose, and an earnest intent to do what God will, that is our opinion herein. Concerning the person of Christ,Of the person of Christ. thereof doe wee beleeue no otherwaies, then the other Prote∣stant Churches vniformely doe beleeue, namely that Christ is true God and man, in one vnsepara∣ble person. That is the common consent of ours, and all o∣ther Protestant Churches also. But that the bo∣dy of Christ should bee euery where: that is the priuate opinion of some few contentious ones, whom not onely many Lutherans Churches, as Brunswick, Pomern, Holst, Marke, and Denmark speake against, but also most of their owne audito∣ry giue no, credit vnto it: as a man may perceiue if he come into conference with them. Setting then aside this priuate opinion of some few contentious ones, about the vbiquity of the body of Christ: wee are not inferiour in the do∣ctrine of the person of Christ, as also of the euerla∣sting foreknowledge of God, to the other Prote∣stant Churches: And to D. Luther himselfe in all things,Of the holy supper. and in all points agreeable. And so there remaineth no more besides, wherein there is any difference betwixt vs, and D. Luther, then alone that point of the holy supper. And yet differ wee not in the whole point, but onely the least part thereof is in controuersie.D. Martin Lu∣ther postie: de anno 1529. in the winter part fol. 102. b. The principall part in the holy supper, is the spirituall eating and drinking of the body and
blood of Christ, which onely maketh a man right and blessed before God, the bodily eating and drinking, is but a token, that maketh no man right and blessed before God: Euen as the horse can neuer be satisfied with painted oates: saith D. Luther. Now, we in euery thing agree with D. Luther, in the spirituall eating and drinking of the bodie and blood of Christ: and we beleeue as well as he, that it is done by faith: When one feedeth himselfe with the comfortable promise of God, that hee gaue his sonne to death for him, and for his sake will bestow vpon him euerlasting life, through which faith a man is so in¦corporated into Christ, that he is, as it were, one bread and one meate with him, as D. Luther saith. Whilst, wee then on both sides agree in the spi∣rituall eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: wherefore will we seuer our selues, and condemne each other for the signes sake, by which the spirituall eating and drinking, is represented. Doc. Luther saith: the tokens in the holy supper, which men eate & drinke with the bodily mouth, are not onely bread and wine, but also the body, and the blood of Christ, present in the bread and wine, vnseene. We say, the body and blood of Christ, are not the tokens: but the betokened heauenly riches: which cannot be laid hould on, neither fed on by the bodily mouth, but onely by faith. But the to∣kens which we shall, and can eate, and drinke in the supper with our bodily mouthes, we say, are bread and wine, ordained of Christ, to this holie
vse, that through such bodily eating of tokens, the spirituall blisse, making, feeding, by the betokened heauenly riches (Namely the true body & blood of Christ, which is performed by faith) are repre∣sented, confirmed, and sealed. And so, in no manner of waies doe wee teach, that men doe eate and drinke onely bare bread and wine in the supper, as the contentious falsely accuse vs: but wee doe teach that men eate and drinke in the supper, both bread and wine: and al∣so the true body and blood of Christ: but with this difference, that men eate and drinke the bread and wine with the bodily mouth: but the bodie and blood of Christ with the spirituall mouth: namely by faith, by which onely a man can bles∣sedly take hould on Christ. And therefore there is no strife betwixt. D. Lu∣ther and vs, whether we eate and drinke the true body and true blood of Christ in the supper: but there is the difference: how we eate and drinke the true bodie, and true blood of Christ in the supper. We say, we eate and drinke the true bodie and true blood of Christ in the supper onely spiritual∣ly by faith. D. Luther,D. Martin Lu∣ther. Tom. 1. fol. 208. Tom. 2. fol 197. tom 3. fol. 487. saith: wee doe not onely eate and drinke the true body and blood of Christ in the supper, spiritually, by faith: but also bodily with the mouth. That cannot wee beleeue. Not that we would not gladly beleeue the word of God, but because
wee cannot finde in our iudgements,The body of Christ is eatē with the mouth of the faithfull & vn∣faithfull, as well of Iudas as of Peter. that that is Gods word, that wee should eate and drinke the bodie and blood of Christ, with our bodilie mouthes. D. Luther saith: Christ hath said it, in that hee tooke the bread and said: Take, eate, this is my body. Now dowe gladly beleeue the words of Christ, but that the words of Christ should haue such an vnderstanding, as D. Luther giues them, as if he had said, namely. In, or vnder the bread, is my body vnseene, and yet really together with it. And therefore when you eate the bread with your mouthes, so doe you therewith eate my body also with your mouthes, it being in or vnder the bread hidden. That that should be the meaning of Christ, that cannot we beleeue. For such a construction runneth against the ar∣ticles of the Christian faith, and the whole holy Scripture, therein being plainely testified, that Christ hath but one body, wherewith he sat at ta∣ble in their open sightes, at the time of the first supper. And wherewith hee also in open sight as∣cended into heauen, fortie daies after his resur∣rection: but not much the better if hee hath one body at present seene in heauen, and an other vn∣seene on earth, in euery host one. But we vnderstand, that this is the meaning of Christ, when he tooke the bread and spake: This is my body, which is giuen for you: as if he had said, that shall bee vnto you a remembrance of my body, which I haue giuen for you to death, that so I as the right heauenly bread may feede you to euer∣lasting
life, or which is to one effect, that so I may deliuer you from the euerlasting hunger and mi∣sery, which else you must haue suffered in hell. We vnderstand, that that was the meaning of Christ in these words, This is my body which is giuen for you: Whilest he presently after saith, doe it in re∣membrance of me: and whilest in al Sacraments God vsed so to speake, he naming the tokens euen so, as if they were the betokened treasures themselues. For example, when he ordained circumcision: he said:Gen. 17.10. Gen. 17.11. Rom. 4.11. This is my couenant, yet was it not otherwise ment, then if he had said: This is a token or seale of my couenant: euen as presently God himselfe declared, where he for the words: this is my couenant, pre∣sently vseth these words: It shall bee a signe of the couenant betwixt me and thee. Also the Easter lamb is called of God the Pascha, which is in dutch as much as Passeouer,Exod. 12.27. Exod. 12.17. Exod. 13.16. when hee made his deuouring Angell passe by the houses of the children of Israell. And yet it was not meant by it, as if the Easter lambe were the Passeouer it selfe, but that it should bee a token and a remem∣brance of the Passeouer, as the Lord againe him∣selfe declared where he said: This shall bee a token to thee in thy hands, and a remembrance before thine eies. Euen so doe wee vnderstand that also in this sacra∣ment, namely in the holy Supper, Christ spake Sa∣cramentally, and so said first: This is my body which is giuen for you, and after added, doe such in remem∣brance of me: thereby demonstrating, that hee cal∣led the bread his crucified body for vs; therefore be∣cause
hee ordained it in remembrance, or for a wit∣nesse, seale, or pledge of his crucified body for vs. In which opinion that confirmeth vs also,Ioh. 6. which wee finde in the holy Scripture, that Christ most flatly againe and againe casteth away the bodily eating and drinking of his body and blood. With these two grounds: first,Vers. 61.62. that hee would ascend to heauen, where wee could not sease on him or eate him, with our bodily mouths. Secondly, that al∣so,Vers. 33.63. such a bodily eating & drinking of his body and bloud was not profitable vnto saluation. But rather who so doth eat and drinke him spiritually, or as hee had presently said before, he that commeth to him and beleeueth in him, he shal haue euerlasting life, and he will raise him vp at the last day. Whilst now Christ hath againe and againe cast away expresly the bodily eating, and drinking of his body and blood: therefore cannot wee beleeue, that hee would ordaine against himselfe, a bodily eating and drinking of his body and blood in the Supper. Those bee our grounds, which mooue vs to hold that the words of Christ, This is my bodie, are not so to bee vnderstood, as if the body of Christ were really there present hidden in the bread: (as they sing: hidden in the bread so little) but that the bread & the same food should be a remembrance or put∣ting vs in minde of the body of Christ, which hee gaue vp to death on the crosse for vs, as Christ pre∣sently himselfe hath cleared and said, Doe this in re∣membrance of me: that is, take this bread, and eat it,
in remembrance that I as the true heauenly breade gaue vp my body for you euen to death on the crosse, and haue spilt my bloud, for the forgiuenes of your sinnes, and shall be vnto you a true meat & drinke to euerlasting life, which meat and drinke neuerthelesse, you must eat by true faith, and let slip into your hearts, that it may comfort, wash & quicken your selues, both in life and death. Admit now that we did erre, with such a con∣struction of ours: yet did not such an error, con∣cerne the grounds of saluation: for Saluation de∣pendeth not in the bodily eating, and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: but saluation stan∣deth in the spirituall eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ: as D. Luther confesseth himselfe, therefore and if indeede we did erre, a∣bout the bodily eating and drinking of the bodie and blood of Christ: yet neuerthelesse did we not ouerthrow the ground of saluation with such an error. Wherefore they haue no sufficient and vrgent cause, for this points sake (namely, for so much as concerneth the holy supper) wherefore they should condemne vs as heathens, and with such condemning any longer hinder the highly neede∣full agreement of the Protestant Churches. Intruth it were well to be wished,Rom. 12.16. Rom. 15.5. 1. Cor. 1.10. that we were all of one mind, and vsed one forme of reasoning, euen all of vs together of all and euery point of Christian Religion: as also the Apostle Paul in di∣uers places most truely admonisheth vs therunto.
But it is vnpossible that wee can euer bring it perfectly to that passe in this life.1 Cor. 13.9. For we know but in part: and God giueth alwaies more light in spiri∣tuall matters to one then to another: as a man may notably see in the writings of the old fathers, whereof not anie of them agreede in all things to∣gether. If then wee shall not loue one another before, and as brethren hould together till such time as we haue one vnderstanding, and meaning altoge∣ther in all godly matters, then shall wee neuer in this life loue one another, and hould together as brethren. Now then this is the very Pith of the whole Christian Religion, that we doe out of a pure hart and a good conscience, and faith vnfained, first loue God, who gaue his sonne to death, for vs, and then also our selues, that we loue each other. Therefore Paul giues vs not onely this com∣maund that wee should bee of one minde in all things, and should be diligent to vse one forme: but he giues vs also yet another commaundement to this effect, that though there were some diffe∣rence found in vs about the vnderstanding of godly matters, we should not breake the bond of loue, and part the vnity of the spirit, but beare pa∣tiently the one with the others ignorance and weakenesse. Paules words are these.Phil. 3.15.16. Let vs therefore as many as be perfect, be thus minded, and if yee be other∣wise minded, God shall reueale euen the same vnto you, Neuerthelesse, in that whereunto we are come, let vs pro∣ceede
by one rule, that we may minde one thing. That is the commaundement of the Apostle Paul: name∣ly, that we seperate not our selues for one point, or other, but giue place to God (whosoeuer he bee that at the present houlds any vnfit thing) to make it more knowne vnto him in his time; And in the meane time walke peaceably, as is saide accor∣ding to the common rule or ground of Christia∣nity, wherein by the grace of God we do agree. This command of the Apostle Paul, louing bre∣thren, wee intreate you to consider and to begin from this time forth to liue brotherly and peace∣ably with vs. We do not desire, that you should for our sakes be silent in any thing you hold to be truth, or not to confute our grounds if you can do it. But onely this is our desire, that you would for those errors sake, which we hould (in your opiniō) of the holy supper, not so shamefully raile vpon, vs and condemne vs, in your sermons and wri∣tings. When you shall but doe so, then is the peace readily accomplished. For we desire not to condemne you. But when you liue godlily, according to the knowledge which God hath giuen vnto you, then hould wee you for children of God, & for brethren in Christ Iesus, for all the errors which wee are perswaded that you haue about the holy supper. And therefore it resteth in you louing brethren, you can helpe the Churches of God, if you so please. And there is iust cause why you should
please: being it is so Gods pleasure: and also our great necessitie requires it, for it is vnpossible that ours (namely the Protestant Churches) should be able long to stand, if we do not quickly make peace one with another, and lay downe the vnhappie contention that hetherto hath beene betwixt vs. For by such strife, doe we make our selues naked of all armor, which wee should haue both from God and man against the Pope.Psal. 133. It so being that God will not assist the contentious, but if wee a∣gree, and call vpon him with an humble spirit, then will he bestow vpon vs his grace, and bles∣sing. And indeede the power of the Protestant Prin∣ces and States, is also not sufficient to counteruaile the Popedomes, if they seuer themselues into two or three sides, and the one part shall helpe to rippe vp the other. As touching the common man, he vnderstands almost nothing any more now of the abominati∣ons of the Popedome, for that he heares almost nothing else from the Pulpet but onely railings vpon the Caluinists, yea he heares that (according to their teachers suggestions) the Papists are not by much so bad, as the Caluinists, and therefore is it not possible that in the time of necessity, hee should haue a sound zeale to fight against the Popedome, but in time he will hould as much of one Religion as of another. And grant it, that we should neuer be bodily set vpon by the Papists, yet are we at this very present
so set vpon by them spiritually as neuer before the like. The Iesuites plot subtilely day and night, how they may make their bad cause good, with serpent-like writings, and on the contrary side, bring our good cause into all euill suspicion, not onely to the common man: but also, and that most especially, to all great Princes. We in the meane time are together by the eares and the youth of the Protestants study almost no∣thing else, but how the Lutherans may match with the Caluinists, and the Caluinists with the Luthe∣rans: that is, God be mercifull vnto vs, almost all the diuinity in our times of the Protestants and should not a man also find a great number amongst the Preachers, who doe not well and groundedlie know whereon dependeth the certaine grounds of strife betwixt vs and the Papists: and wherfore our forefathers did separate themselues from them, or what grounds they maintained against them. To what manner of end these things will at last reach vnto, we intreat all vnderstanding people to consider. And when yet they will not thinke vpon it, who ought most of all to thinke vpon it, then the Lord God grant that the Princes and Lords toge∣ther with their peacelouing councells, may for that end once open their owne eies: It is high time, and if it come not to passe speedily: then will the mis∣chiefe which the Pope hath intended against vs, most assuredly not long be kept out from vs. The God of Peace, who hath euer hetherto ta∣ken his Church into his fatherly protection, hee bee
pleased furthermore also to take pitty vpō the same: and to stirre vp godly people, who may rightly con∣sider, and take to hart what that is that Christ saith:Mat. 6.5. happy are the peacemakers for they shall be called the children of God. To the almighty true God and Father, together with the sonne and holy Ghost, the onely and alone true God: be thanks, honour, and praise, both now, and for euermore: Amen.
A SHORT AB∣STRACT, TAKEN out of the warning about the Iesuites bloodthirsty plots, which was put in print at Tubingen, by Doctor LVCAS OSIANDER. DOctor Lucas Osiander publi∣shed a booke at Tubingen, vnder this title: Warning a∣bout the Iesuits bad practises, & bloodthirsty plots, &c. In the which booke (euen from the Iesuites owne pictures & wri∣tings) hee manifestly noteth and testifieth, that the Iesuites together with the Popes confederates haue wholly concluded, that they will no more dispute with vs out of the word of God, but would consume and destroy all those with fire and sword, by the helpe of the worldly potentates, who were fallen from the Pope. And that they are determined to put in practise, such their bloud thirsty plots, and bad practises, so soon as may possibly be brought to passe, & that most
especially in our beloued fatherland the Dutch Nation. In the same booke are two things most especi∣ally to be marked, the one is, that the Papists are euen as great enemies to the Lutherans, as to the Caluinists, and desire to consume and destroy the one side as wel as the other: the other is; That the religious peace would nothing at all stay the Papists from their intents: when they can but come to practise them. These two things doe not all men in Dutchland beleeue: but Doctor Lucas Osiander doth constant∣ly beleeue them, as indeed the truth is not other∣waies. Doctor Lucas Osiander his words are as fol∣low. Pap. 5. Although Satan be a thousand fold more sub∣tle spirit, and much more secret and crafty together with the children of this world in their practises, then the children of light in their businesse: yet for all that, our Lord God oftentimes so blindeth Satan, that he cannot in all things bee secret and close in the wickednes which hee goeth about, but hee tickleth himselfe so with his inten∣ded practises, that men of vnderstanding can marke, yea and as it were, lay hold on what he hath in his mind. Euen so hath Satan in the abouenamed paintings of his trustie beloued, the Iesuites, so let his sharpe clawes peepe out that a man may gripe how they haue hitherto practised, that the highest and chiefest Potentates in Christendome (if they would follow their mindes) might fall vpon the E∣uangelicall Protestant States of the Augsburges Confes∣sion, and distroy them and consume the faith of the Euan∣gelicall professors: for it is manifest by the counsel of Trent (in the which our Christian Euangelicall Religion is most
vnreasonably railed on, and condemned for herisie) and in like manner, out of the manifould poisenous writings of the Iesuites, which they haue these diuers yeares pub∣lished against the sound Doctrine of the Agusburges con∣fession, what people they hould for heritickes, and for ene∣mies of the Christian Churches (in their opinion) which (in their mindes) as wilde beasts should destroy the vine∣yard of the Christian Churches: which also should bee strangled and distroyed (according to the Iesuites desires) by great and high intituled Potentates. And the Iesuites vnderstand by the same beasts,The Iesuits haue sworne the death, of the Lutherans as well as the Caluinists. not onely those who are fallen from the Romish Religion, and yet agree not rightly with the Augsburges confession, but all those who will not haue to doe with the Papists Religi∣on, misdoings and Idolatrie. And especially those who haue bound themselues con∣stantly to the Christian Augsburges confession, and there∣fore they haue also put vnder the beasts some of those en∣signes, which the Protestant Princes vse to beare in their Armes. And when they should get the gace into their owne hands, they would (out of all doubt) hold the one as the other, and destroy them all who would not acknow∣ledge the Pope of Rome for the vicar of Christ, nor wor∣ship him for their earthly God. &c. Also Pag. 10. If the Iesuites had but one drop of Chri∣stian bloud in them, and one sparke of the meeke spirit of Iesus, they would not onelie in right not hate vs, or perse∣cute vs, but loue vs with all their hearts, and in time of necessity euen wager their verie liues for vs. As Iohn teacheth in his Epistle, where he saith: wee should euen lay downe our liues for the brethren, therfore
the Iesuites haue no reasonable cause to persecute vs, if they were true Iesuites, that is, were faithfull Christians. And though there be here and there some Christians,N. B. The Calui∣nists are also true Christiās. (most especiallie in France, and the low Countries) who are found, to haue falne from the Pope, and neuerthe∣lesse doe not agree with vs in euery article of Christi∣an religion, whose error we indeed cannot also allow of, as being against the holy Scripture, yet is not this any Chri∣stian way or meanes to helpe the Church of God, and to maintaine pure Religion, that the same should be destroyed with the sword. And the Iesuites should in all reason consider, that looke how often the same Christians defend one Erronious Ar∣ticle, that they the Iesuites haue alwaies tenne Erronious Popish Articles, which they both beleeue and hold, which yet they shall neuer be able to defend to the end of the world: and therefore they might very well carry water with them vpon one colestaffe. And besides that, consider that vnder the aforenamed Christians, there are certaine thousand simple people, who haue neuer bene better instructed, & that if they heard of a better religion in their Lands, they looking to it thēselues would take it in thankfulnes. And so there is a great num∣ber vnder them like to those of whom the Lord said to the Prophet Ionas, that they know not the difference betwixt the right hand or the left. And therefore if the Iesuites had that Christian loue (by which Christ willeth, that his disciples should bee knowne) in their hearts, they would not cast out the child with the bath, or rend vp the good wheat with the weeds: much lesse so lay their platformes, that the childe should be
murthered in the mothers bellies, as is manifested by their prouocations in France, at Paris, Orliance, and other pla∣ces vpon Bartholmew day, Anno. 1574. &c. practi∣sed, where no woman with child was spared. But the Iesuites would gladly begin the play with those simple Christians, who are not in al things sufficiently in∣formed,N. B. The Iesuites would begin with the Cal∣uinists, that so they might end it with the Lutherans. M. Lucas Ost∣anders glosse, The Iesuites esteeme one Euangelist Christian as the other. whereby they might end it, with those who do in euery point hold the pure doctrine of the Augsburges con∣fession. For the Iesuites esteeme the one as they doe the o∣ther. Who will not make himselfe partaker of their Idola∣try, iugling and false Romish Religion, hee is adiudged of them to death. These Christians which faile, men ought to informe out of the word of God, and make them to vnderstand better the truth, but for the cause of Religion (which they doe neuerthelesse maintaine quietly and reasonably) should they not be put to death. Also page. 14. If we had no better testimony against the Romish Antichrist the Pope, that hee is from his Father the Diuell, yet were it sufficiently witnessed by this, that he hath in the cause of Religion stirred vp so much shed∣ding of blood: and yet at this present day doth most eager∣ly prouoke and desire to driue on the Potentates thereto, that they might staine their hands in the innocent bloud of honest Christians. And to effect this,The Iesuites care for no re∣ligious peace. hee vseth his Scoutwatches (the Diuels posts) the Iesuites, who vnder the shew of great holinesse possesse the hearts of many people, and desire to bring the matter to that passe, that a fearefull cutting of throats, and butchery might be set abroach in Dutchland, and other kingdomes, the peace of Religion be broken, and
that the stronger should put the weaker in the sacke. In like manner also, before this time, one that thought himselfe a Lawyer, but a bad and false Christian, Doctor George Eder mocked the Religious peace in manifest wri∣ting put in print, and drue the same onely to a toleration, which neither could nor should be of force. Such folke hath the subtill Diuell kept till the last ende of thē game, and made his cards of helps, that through them he might set a worke misery and necessity. And therfore whilest there is not onely so much to be gathered out of the abouenamed pictures of the Iesuites, but also out of their writings, practises, and plots, that their intent and purpose reacheth to that end, to destroie the Protestant Religion and Estates: By this it is manifest that the murthering spirit, namely the Diuellrideth them, and will not let them keepe holy day, till that they (when the Lord shall tolerate them) haue set a worke a fearefull bloodbath. Therefore is it much better to hould nothing, then to be such people, who desire to ouerthrow the peace of Religion, and also the worldly peace, and to be set a worke, to the furthering of Misery and necessity. FINIS.
