19279 99855121 20594
The wandring Jews Chronicle: OR, The old Historian His brief Declaration Made in a mad fashion Of each Coronation That past in this Nation Since Williams's Invasion For no great occasion But meer Recreation To put off vexation. To the Tune of, Our Prince is welcome out of Spain. William Conq. portrait of William the Conqueror Will: Rufus. portrait of William Rufus Henry . portrait of King Henry I Stephen. portrait of King Stephen Henry 2. portrait of King Henry II Richard 1. portrait of King Richard I John. portrait of King John Henry 3. portrait of King Henry III Edward 1. portrait of King Edward I Edward 2. portrait of King Edward II Edward 3. portrait of King Edward III Richard 2. portrait of King Richard II Henry 4. portrait of King Henry IV Henry 5. portrait of King Henry V Henry 6. portrait of King Henry VI Edward 4. portrait of King Edward IV Edward 5. portrait of King Edward V Richard 3. portrait of King Richard III Henry 7. portrait of King Henry VII Henry 8. portrait of King Henry VIII Edward 6. portrait of King Edward VI Q. Mary portrait of Queen Mary I Q. Elizabeth. portrait of Queen Elizabeth I K. James. portrait of King James I K. Charles. portrait of King Charles I Q. Mary. portrait of Queen Henrietta Maria (wife of Charles I) WHen William Duke of Normandy With all his Normans gallantly this Kingdome did subdue; Full fiftéen years of age I ws, And what ere since hath come to pass I can report for true. I can remember since he went From London for to conquer Kent, where with a walking wood The men of Kent compassed him And be for aye confirm'd to them Kng Edward laws for good. Likewise I William Rufus knew And saw the Arrow that him slew hard by a Forrest side: well could tell you if I list, Or better tell you if I wist, who next to him did ride. Henry I, and Stephen knew hen no man here but I did view; I saw them crown'd and dead I can remember well also The second Henries royal show that day that he was wed. I likewise was at Woodstock bowre, And saw that swéet and famous flower Quéen Elenor so did spight. I found the clew of thréed again, After that worthy Knight was slain 'twas gréen, blew, red and white. I saw King Richard in his shirt Pull out a furious Lions heart whereby his strength was tryd, I saw King John when as the Munk Gave him the poyson which he drunk, and then forsooth he died. I marke the Barons when they sent For the French Dolphin, with intent to put third Henry down: I saw the Earl of Leicester stout (Call'd Simon Mounford) with his tent besiege fair London Town. And I have the first Edward séen Whose legs I still thought to have béen a yard and more in length: With him I into Scotland went And back again incontinent which hée subdued by strength. I knew Canarvans minion déer, And saw the fall of Mortimeer, with all the Barons wars: And likely was to have béen shent At Burton battel upon Trent, where I receiv'd these skars. Third Edward and his valiant son By whom such feats of arms were done I saw on Cressey plain, Which day when bows and arrows kéen Grew scant, with migh'y stones I wéen were many French-men slain. I knew Wat Tyler, and Jack Straw, And I the Mayor of London saw in Smithfield which him slew, I was at Pomfreet Castle when The second Richard there was slain, whose death ere since I rue. I saw when Henry Bullenbrook The Crown and Scepter on him took which he became full well; I saw when Henry Hotspur he And many Lords at Shrewsbury were slain in battel fell. I saw the brave victorious Prince (Whose death I have bewail'd ere since) Henry the fifth I mean, And I can give you just report How many French at Agencourt were in one battel slain. I saw the white and red Rose fight And Warwick great in armour bright in the sixth Henries raign And present was that very hour When Henry was in London Tower by Crookt-backt Richard slain. I in a Gold-smith Shop have séen Fourth Edwards famous Concubine whose name was fair Jane Shore; I saw when Richard truelly Did put her to great misery, and I was griev'd therefore. Also I was at Bosworthfield Well armed there with spear and shield, meaning to try my force: Where Richard losing life and Crown Was naked born to Leicester Town upon a Colliers horse. To the seventh Henry then I was A servant, as it came to pass, to serve him at his néed; And while I did in Court remain, I saw in the eighth Henries raign fully many great men bléed. I as a souldier bold with him O're Neptunes curled breast did swim unto the Realm of France; I help'd to ransack Bulloin Town And many places of renown, yet home I came by chance, I knew sixth Edward of a childe Whose countenance was very milde, a hopeful Prince hee was. I knew Quéen Mary in her raign Put Protestants to mickle pain, and re-set up the Mass. And (to my comfort) I have séen Elizabeth that Maiden Quéen, Quéen Maries onely Sister, Though she raign'd four and forty years Her Subjects shewed well by their tears that they too soon had mist her. I saw King James come from the North, Like to a Star that shineth forth to glad the peoples fight, He brought a Salve to cure our wound, And made great Britain safe and sound through equity and right. Hee was in truth a Prince of peace And made all former jars to cease 'twixt English men, and Scots; The English men sung merry sonnets, The Scots did throw up their blew bonnets, for joy of their good lots, From him by lineal right did spring This happy Charles our Royal King and now to make conclusion I wish him and his gracious Quéen And Princely off-spring may be séen until earths dissolution. M. P. FINIS. London Printed for Francis Grove on Snow-Hill. Entered according to Order.
