19290 22459414 25563
An Admonition to all such as shall intend hereafter to enter the state of Matrimony, godlily and agreeably to Lawes. FIrst, that they contract not with such persons as be hereafter expressed, nor with any of like degree, against the law of God, and the lawes of the Realme. Secondly, that they make no secret contracts, without consent or counsell of their Parents or Elders, under whose authority they be: con∣trary to Gods lawes and mans ordinances. Thirdly, that they contract not anew with any other upon divorce and separation made by the Iudge for a time, the Lawes yet standing to the contrary. MArriage is honourable among all men, and the bed undefiled. But whoremongers and adulterers God will iudge. Heb. 13. To avoyd fornication let every man have his wife, and let every woman have her husband. He that cannot containe, let him marry: For better it is to marry, than to burne. 1 Cor. 7. Vnto the married I command, not I, but the Lord; let not the wife depart from her husband. But if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or he reconcited unto her husband. And let not the Husband put away his LEVITICƲS. XVIII. & XX. None shall come neere to any of the kinred of his flesh to uncover her shame: I am the Lord. A Man may not marry his   Secundus gradus in linea recta ascen∣dente.     Con. Avi. 1 Grandmother af. Avi relicta. 2 grandfathers wife af. Prosocrus, vel socrus magna. 3 Wives Grandmother   Secundus gradus, inaequalis, in linea transversa ascendente.     Con. Amita 4 Fathers sister Con. Matertera 5 Mothers sister af. Patrui relicta 6 Fathers brothers wife af. Avunculi relicta 7 Mothers brothers wife af. Amita uxoris. 8 Wives fathers sister af. Matertera uxoris. 9 Wives mothers sister   Primus gradus in linea recta ascen∣dente.     Con. Mater 10 Mother af. Noverca 11 Stepmother af. Socrus 12 Wives mother   Primus gradus in linea recta descen∣dente.     Con. Filia 13 Daughter af. Privigna. 14 Wives daughter af. Nurus. 15 Sonnes wife   Primus gradus aequalis in linea trans∣versali.     Con. Soror 16 Sister af. Soror uxoris 17 Wives af. Fratris relicta. 18 Brothers wife   Secundus gradus in linea recta de∣scendente     Con. Neptis ex filio 19 Sonnes daughter Con. Neptis ex filia 20 Daughters daughter af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis exfilio 21 Sonnes sonnes wife af. Pronurus. i. relicta nepotis ex filia 22 Daughters sonnes wife af. Privigni filia 23 Wives sonnes daughter af. Privignae filia. 24 Wives daughters daughter   Secundus gradus in aequalis in linea transversali desēdēte     Con. Neptis ex fratre 25 Brothers daughter Con. Neptis ex sorore 26 Sisters daughter af. Nepotis ex fratre relicta 27 Brothers sonnes wife af. Nepotis ex sorore relicta 28 Sisters sonnes wife af. Neptis uxoris ex fratre. 29 Wives brothers daughter af. Neptis uxoris ex sorore. 30 Wives sisters daughter. A woman may not marrie with her       Secundus gradus in recta linea ascēden∣te. 1 Grandfather Con. Avus 2 Grandmothers husband. af. Aviae relictus 3 Husbands grandfather. af. Prosocer, vel socer magnus.       Secundus gradus inaequalis in linea transversali ascendente. 4 Fathers brother Con. Patruus 5 Mothers brother Con. Avunculus 6 Fathers sisters husband. af. Amitae relictus 7 Mothers sisters husband af. Materterae relictus 8 Husbands fathers brother af. Patruus mariti 9 Husbands mothers brother. af. Avunculus mariti.       Primus gradus in linea recta descendēte 10 Father Con. Pater 11 Stepfather af. Vitricus 12 Husbands father af. Socer.       Primus gradus in linea recta descendēte 13 Sonne Con. Filius 14 Husbands sonne af. Privignus 15 Daughters husband af. Gener       Primus gradus aequalis in linea trans∣versali. 16 Brother Con. Frater 17 Husbands brother af. Le vin 18 Sisters husband. af. Sororis rctus       Secundus gradus in linea recta descen∣dente. 19 Sonnes sonne Con. Nepos ex filio 20 Daughters sonne Con. Nepos ex filia 21 Sonnes daughter husbād. af. progener. i. relictus neptis ex filio 22 Daughters daughter husbād af. Progener. i. relictus neptis ex filia 23 Husbands sonne sonne af. Privigni filius 24 Husbands daughters sonne af. Privignae filius.       Secūdus gradus inaequalis, in lineà trans∣versali descendente. 25 Brothers sonne Con. Nepos ex fratre 26 Sisters sonne Con. Nepos ex sorore 27 Brothers daughters husband af. Neptis ex fratre relictus 28 Sisters daughters husband af. Neptis ex sorore relictus 29 Husbands brothers sonne af. Liviris filius. i. nepos maritiex fratre. 30 Hsubands sisters sonne. af. Gloris filius. i. nepos mariti ex sorore 1 IT is to be noted, that those persons which be in the direct line, ascendant, and descendant, cannot marry together, al∣though they be never so farre asunder in degree. 2. It is also to be noted, that consanguinity and affinity (letting and dissolving Matrimony) is contracted as well in them and by them, which be of kindred by the one side, as in and by them, which be of kindred by both sides. 3. Item, that by the Lawes, consanguinity and affinity (letting and dis∣solving Matrimony) is contracted as well by unlawful company of man and woman, as by unlawful marriage. 4. Item, in contracting betwixt persons doubtful, which be not expressed in this Table, it is most sure, first to consult with men learned in the Lawes▪ to understand what is lawful, what is honest and expedient, before the finishing of their contracts. 5. Item, that no Parson, Vicar, or Curate, shall solemnize Matrimony on of his, or their Cure, or Parish Church or Chappel, and shall not solemnize the same in private houses nor lawlesse nor exempt Churches, under the paines of the Law, forbidding the same And that the Curate have the Certificates when the parties dwell in diverse places. 6. Item, the bands of matrimony ought to be openly denounced in the Church, by the Minister, three several Sundayes, or festival dayes, to the end, that who will & can alledge any impediment, may be heard, & that stay may be made till further trial, if any exception be made there against it upon sufficient caution. 7. Item, who shall maliciously object a frivolous impediment against a law∣ful matrimony to disturb the same, is subject to the paines of the Law. 8. Item, who shall presume to contract in the degrees prohibited, (though he do it ignorantly) besides that the fruit of such copulation may be judged un∣lawful, is also punishable at the Ordinaries discretion. 9. Item, if any Minister shall conjoyn any such, or shall be present at such contracts making, he ought to be suspended from his Ministry for three yeares: and otherwise to be punished according to the lawes. 10. Item, it is further ordained, that no Parson, Vicar or Curate do preach, treat or expound of his own voluntary invention, any matter of controversie in the Scriptures, if he be under the degree of a Master of Art, except he be licen∣sed by his Ordinary thereunto, but only for the instruction of the people, read the Homilies already set forth, & such other forme of doctrine as shall be hereaf∣ter by authority published: & shall not innovate or alter any thing in the Church or use any old Rite or ceremony, which be not set forth by publick authority. Set forth by the most reverend Father in God, Matthew Arch-bishop of Canterbury, Primate of England, and Metropolitane. Imprinted at London, by I. Okes, for Iohn Harrison, and are to be sold at the signe of the Unicorne in Pater-noster-row. Anno 1639.
