19314 99838904 3294
THE GROVNDS Of Diuinitie, Plainely discouering the Mysteries of Christian Religion, pro∣pounded familiarly in diuers Questions and Answeres: Substantially proued by Scrip∣tures; Expounded faithfully, according to the Writings of the best Divines, and euident∣ly applyed by profitable Vses, for the helpe and benefite of the Vn∣learned which desire Knowledge. To the which is prefixed a very profita∣ble Treatise, containing an Exhortation to the Study of the Word, with sin∣gular directions for the Hearing and Reading of the same. By ELNATHAN PARR Minister of the Word, at Palgraue in Suffolke. PROV. 3.13.14. Blessed is the man that findeth wisedome, and the man that getteth vnderstanding. For the Marchandise thereof is better then the Marchandise of Siluer, and the gaine thereof is better then gold. LONDON, Printed by N. O. for SAMVEL MAN, and are to be sold at his Shop, in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of the Ball. 1614.
TO THE VERTV∣OVS, RELIGIOVS, AND MOST WORTHY LADY, the Lady IANE CORNEVVAL∣LEYS, Widdow: Grace and Peace from God the Father, through our Lord Ie∣sus Christ. MADAME, I Present vnto you these my weake and homely labours, being the first fruits of my paines in this kinde, humbly desi∣ring that your Ladiship wold vouch∣safe to patronize them. That which hath emboldened me to dedicate them to your worthy Name, is Partly
A minde willing in the best mea∣sure I can, to testifie my thankeful∣nesse for your many vndeserued fauours, whereby I confesse you may iustly challenge more then my Mediocrity can euer performe: Partly, your loue vnfeigned, and sincere profession of the Gospell, (whereby you are an honour to your Degree and Sexe) cleerely eui∣denced many wayes, during your abode in Suffolke: which, as it is a sweete testimony to your owne breast, that you are beloued of God, and hath made you farre and neere honoured by all such which loue God: so also it hath made mee very confident, that your Ladiship will fauourably ac∣cept these my thankefull ende∣uours. Goe on I humbly beseech you (good Madame) goe on in that good way which you haue chosen: and constantly continue, as a bright
Starre, to shine (without waning, or being ecclipsed) to the directing, confirming, and comforting of many, as hitherto you haue done. And, for my part, I shall neuer cease (among many other) to stand vp as an humble Suppliant to God; that you may bee more and more strengthened in his Grace, and di∣rected by the Eternall Spirit, that as you haue already, by your zeale in Religion, prouoked many: so you may perseuere vnto the end, in this holy course, and bring on, and encourage others by your sin∣gular example: Then shall your Name bee still more honourable while you liue here, and your ac∣count furthered in the day of our Lord IESVS. And thus humbly tendering my best seruice to your Ladiship, and to the hopefull Gen∣tleman Mr FREDERICKE, your ioy, (vpon whom I beseech God
to double the glory of all his An∣cestors) and wishing vnto you both, and to your whole fami∣ly, all temporall and eternall blessings by Iesus Christ: I humbly take my leaue, and alway rest, Bound to your Ladiship to my vttermost in all Christian duty, Elnathan Parr.
¶ To the courteous Reader. COurteous Reader; Thou hast here the fruit of my sicknesse, whereby in the beginning of this Win∣ter, I was made vnser∣uiceable for my publique duety. In this while, considering that Time is preti∣ous, and the dayes euill, as the Apostle saith, the Lord put into my heart, to redeeme the time: Whereupon (as God enabled me to hold vp my head) I looked ouer my ragged Notes, and scattered pa∣pers. Part of which, after my rude ma∣ner pollished, are here offered vnto thee. I am not without hope, but that (by the good hand of God) as I had experience of the profit of these things, being deliue∣red by liuely voyce: so also the charita∣ble reading of them may much auayle
thee. I know that euery day there are many new Bookes set forth, and of this kind not a few: yet in this method, with sound & briefe Propositions of the prin∣cipall points of Diuinity: euident and infallible proofes: succinct and perspi∣cuous Explications; and plaine and liue∣ly Applications, I haue not obserued any: So that, this, and also the great igno∣rāce of the multitude considred, I doubt not but the Indifferent, will free these my Endeuors from the censure of super∣fluous, & of writing Iliads (as they say) after Homer. I confesse ingenuously that much of my Explications is drawn frō the fountains of other men, both for∣ren Writers, and many our owne worthy Countreymen. So that, as the little Bee, greatly industrious, flieth ouer many a garden and flower, to gather a little ho∣ny: so haue I out of many mens gardens, selected and gathered many such choice things, which I iudged might most make for thy benefit. And this can be no Im∣putation
to mee, in asmuch as the Lear∣ned know, that (not to speake of some of the Pen-men of the holy Ghost) both aun∣cient & later Writers, haue, to the great benefit of the Church, taken this course: & also because I haue made such things, which I haue receiued from others, so to serue my purpose, either by contraction, addition, exposition, or marshalling into my order: that I may in some sort iustly challenge them as mine owne. The summe of this my small Labour, (to the which is prefixed an exhortation to the study of the Word) is an Expositi∣on of the Description of God, named the Grounds of Diuinitie, expounded & applied, because it propoundeth, preueth, and as a key openeth, & easily vnlocketh, the hidden mystery and counsell of God, concerning our saluatiō by Iesus Christ. The Questions and Answers, are fami∣liar and friendly depending. The Expli∣cations, plaine, & for the most part, con∣cise, pointing at some things in a word,
at some in a parenthesis, which to the in∣dustrious Reader wil be the more aduan∣tageable: and for the Vses (which being practised, are the praise & life of know∣ledge) I haue not obserued euery thing, nor so pressed any thing, but that I leaue much more to be gathered and obserued, by such which are accustomed to Medi∣tation. In a word, that which I iudged most profitable, I haue performed for thee. If thou beest learned, as thou needest it not, so I humbly intreate thee to know that I writ it not for thee yet I barre thee not the reading, but most willingly submit it to thy censure. If thou blamest the Phrase and Stile, that it is not fluent and round, but ragged and harsh: Truly neither can I commend it. Happily, I haue striuen, to be plaine, or at least, ha∣uing no skill in finer cookery, haue drest it as I was able, after our homely and country fashion for the stomackes of the vnlearned, who rellish and like better,
of that which is plaine and easie, then either learned and deep treatises which they vnderstand not, or such cooked con∣ceits where the cost is greater then the nourishment. Some delight in toyes like children: I should then thinke very ill of my selfe, when I should goe about to please their humour, fitter to be purged then norished. Some (& worthily) in re∣gard of their great acuity & iudgemēt, like nothing (for themselues) but that which transcendeth common capacities: I doe not thinke my selfe able to doe that which might giue them satisfaction. And, in asmuch as there are three fold more which haue but meane knowledge, then which abound, it shall content me, that euen as Golde is common in Rich mens pockets, but Siluer is currant a∣mong the common sort; it shall (I say) content me, if, while those of deeper iudgement bee conuersant in the Wri∣tings of the learned, my Labours may be in the hands of the meaner sort, for
whose sake specially I haue taken this paines. For thee therefore which arte but a beginner I haue laboured. If I may adde to thy knowledge and affection, and be a helper of thy Faith and Ioy; giue thou God the glory: I haue then attained the end of my labors: Reade once, and reade againe; it may bee the second reading wil be more sauory then the first. If thou profitest herein, according as I haue prai∣ed for thee, I know thou shalt neuer re∣pent thee. And thus, desiring the helpe of thy prayers, I commend thee to God, and to the word of his Grace, wishing thy farther vp-building in all sauing knowledge, godlinesse, and established comfort of conscience, through Iesus Christ. Thine in our Christ. E. P.
A Table for the ready fin∣ding out of the principall things contained in this Booke. A ATTENTION in hea∣ring. pag. 22. Application necessary of that which wee heare and reade. 37. Of Angels Good and Euill, and what they are. 77. B Of Baptisme. 272. C Not onely for the Church doe wee beleeue the Scriptures to be Diuine. 52. 53. Of Creation, and what it is. 73. Of the Workes of Creation the first day. 80. Of the Workes of the second day. 83. Of the Workes of the third day. 85.
Of the Workes of the fourth day. 88. Of the Workes of the fift day. 94. Of the Workes of the sixt day. 95. Of the Creation of Man. 96. Of Conscience. 103. A consideration of Christ, how and why his Righteousnesse is sufficient for the Iustification of all the Elect. 182. 183, &c. That Christ is God and Man in on Per∣son, and why. 187. Of the righteousnesse of Christ whereby we are iustified, what it is. 192. How wee are made partakers of this Righteousnesse. 193. Of the Offices of Christ. 199. Of the Church. 241. The Church but one, and how. 260. What a visible Church is. 262. Of the notes of a visible Church. Ibid. Church-men subiect to Ciuill Magi∣strates. 293. Of the Ciuill Magistracy. 294. D Difficulty of the Scriptures, to whom and why. p. 7. 8. 9.
Distracting care a hinderance to wise Hearing. 18. Of Church Discipline. 288. E Of Eternall Life. 226. Of Eternall Death. Ibid. Of Election. 247. F A description of God the Father. 68. Of the Fall of Man. 140. How the fall of Adam and Eue be∣longs to vs. 148. Of Faith what it is. 196. G What GOD is, described. 54. Of diuers Attributes of God. 55. 56. 57. Of the Relations of Persons in the Tri∣nity. 61. There are three Persons but one God. Ibid. What Essence and Person are in the God-head, and why the Church vseth such tearmes, as also Trinity in Vni∣ty. 64. 65. 66. A description of God the Holy Ghost. 68. Of the Generation of the Sonne. 70.
H Of wise Hearing the Word. 17. & se{que} Three things required to wise Hearing. 17. Three things necessary in Hearing. 21. 22. I Intemperance a let to wise hearing. 17. Intention in Hearing. 23. Iudgement to be vsed in the Reading of the Scriptures. 33. Iudgement in Reading consisteth in three things. Ibid. Of the Image of God in Man. 115. Of Iustification. 173. Of Iustification by the Righteousnesse of Another. 177. Of the day of Iudgement. 232. K Of the Knowledge of God. 39. 40. L Of the Law. 155. How the Law is abrogated and how not. 161. Of the vse of the Law. 165. None can perfectly keepe the Law. 169.
Of the penalty of breaking the Law. 172. How we are freed from the Law. 173. M Of Meditation after we haue heard, and how to be practised. 25. 26. 27. The right Meaning to bee carefully sought out in our Reading, and how we should find it. 35. 36. Of the Creation of Man. 96. Of the Soule of Man. 99. Of Mortification. 211. Of the Ministery of the Word. 267. Of the Ciuill Magistrate. 293. Of the Power and Authority of the Ci∣uill Magistrate. 294. N Of the New Man. 212. O Of Order to be vsed in Reading of the Scriptures. 30. P Of Preparation to the Hearing of the Word. 17. Preparation consisteth in two things. 17. Fiue things to be auoyded that we may be prepared. 17. 18. 19.
Preiudice against the Teacher, a hinde∣rance to wise Hearing. 18. Pride a hinderance to wise Hearing. Ib. Three things to bee done that wee may Heare Wisely. 20. Prayer necessary to Preparation before Hearing, for whom and for what. 20. Of the Procession of the Holy Ghost. 70. Of the Prouidence of God. 117. Of Prayer. 220. Of Predestination. 247. Predestination bringeth not in a neglect of Godlinesse. 248. R Retention necessary to wise Hearing. 24. Of Reading the Scriptures. 28, &c. Reuerence to bee vsed in Reading the Scriptures. 28. Of Redemption. 127. How it comes to passe that wee stand in need of a Redeemer. 132. Of Repentance. 204. Of the Resurrection. 237. Of Reprobation. 247. S The Scriptures difficult. 7. 8.
Our paines ought to be the more. 9. 10. The Scriptures are the word of God. 12 Security a let to wise hearing. 19. We are wisely to reade the Scriptures, & three things necessary thereuntô. 28 The Scriptures the best means to attaine the sound knowledge of God. 39. What the Scriptures are described. 40. Why called Scriptures, and Holy. 41. Why the Scriptures are called a Couenant and a Testament. 44. Of the authority of the Scriptures. 48. How we know the Scripuures to be Di∣uine and Canonicall. 50. A Description of God the Sonne. 68. Of Originall sinne. 151. Of Sinne what it is. 155. Of Sanctification. 204. Of Free-will. 207. Of the parts of Sanctification. 211. Of the measure of Sanctification attained in this life. 218. Of helpes to sanctification. 220. Of the Reward of sanctification. 224. Of the Sacraments. 271.
Of the Lords Supper. 280. Of reuerēt coming to the lords table. 282 How oftē to come to the Lords table. 283 Of Subiects and their duties. 295 T Timely comming to the congregation ne∣cessary to preparation before the hea∣ring of the word. 21. A fit time to be obserued for reading. 33 Of this word Testament, referred to the Scriptures. 43. The Testament how one, and two 44. 45. V Of the Vtility of the scriptures. 10. 11. W Fiue reasons shewing that all are bound to the study of the Word. 3. 4. Diligence in study of the Word. 5. 6. Two Reasons to prouoke our diligence in the study of the Word. 7. Two parts of the study of the Word. 16.
A SHORT AND PLAINE EXHORTATI∣ON TO THE STVDY OF THE WORD, WITH SEVE∣rall directions for the hearing and reading of the same, very neces∣sary for these times. AS the Sun is to the World, so is the Word of God to his Church and People, the light of their liues, the life of their soules: But as the Sunne in regard of the commonnesse, is not duly considered; so the commonnesse and plenty of the word (a benefite vn∣speakeable) breedes the contempt of it. Euen as the Manna at the first admired, was afterwards loathed: so doth our cor∣ruption vse the word. When the Lord strooke Aegypt with darknesse, then they vnderstood the benefite of the light; so if the Lord should deale with vs, sending
such a famine of the word, as the Prophet Amos speaketh of,Amos 8.11 we would then ac∣knowledge the plenty of the Gospel to be a happy blessing: For we are brought to the acknowledging of good things, rather by the wanting, then the hauing of them. So the sicke man learneth greatly to ac∣count of that health, for the which before his sickenesse he was seldome thankefull; but this is of corruption: and grace must teach vs neuer the lesse to esteeme of the word for the plenty of it, and our liberty in professing it; but so much the more to loue it, and for it to praise our mercifull God in Iesus Christ. This also we must know, that the more plentifully the Lord giueth the means, the more fearefull is our blindnes, & the nee∣rer we are to iudgement, if we make not good vse of it. When Iohn Baptist prea∣ched repentance, and the kingdome of God,Mat. 3.10. he saith: Now is the axe laid, &c. as if he should haue said: Howsoeuer God hath hitherto spared, yet when the Sonne from his fathers bosome shall teach, Hee that heareth not now, shall bee hewen downe, and cast into the fire. How cul∣pable this way our English Nation is, is
too too manifest, and what we haue cause to expect for it, I tremble to write. Wherefore as in the morning when the Sunne ariseth in his strength, we open our doores and windowes to partake of his comfortable brightnesse: so, in as much as the Lord causeth the beames of his glorious Gospell to shine clearely a∣mong vs, it is our parts to open our eyes, and to endeauour to be illustrated by the same. Is it not the Commandement,Ioh. 5.39 Coloss. 3.16. binding all, and to all industry in the sear∣ching and study thereof? That all are bound, may appeare by these reasons: First, if any might be dispē∣sed with, for not studying in the word; ei∣ther in regard of the worthinesse of their person, or for the multitude of their busi∣nes, then Kings: but not Kings,Deut. 17.18.19. and Dauid is an example; therefore none. Secondly, all parents and children are bound to the knowledge of the word: but all degrees,Deut. 6.7. orders, and conditions of men, are in these contained: therefore all. Thirdly, the reason of the commandement shew∣eth it: In them you hope to haue eternall life.Iohn 5.39. But all hope for, and would haue eternall life: ergo. Fourthly, the Scriptures set
downe the duties of all men in their seue∣rall callings: but these duties we cannot performe, vnlesse wee know them; and know them we cannot without the word. Ergo. Fiftly, the Apostle Peter writeth thus:1. Pet. 3.15. Bee ready alwayes to giue an answere to euery man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you. But render a reason, and rea∣dily we cannot, without the word: there∣fore all, whether teachers or learners, able or not able to read, are bound to the study of the word. Away then with the figge∣leaues of the multitude, who think them∣selues here of discharged, either for their worldly businesse, or because they are not booke-learned, or for some such foolish excuse. This also reproueth the Papists, who barre the common people the rea∣ding of the Scriptures; fearing least that thereby they should proue Heretickes: But this is a foolish feare; for the Scrip∣ture teacheth the contrary; affirming, that the law maketh not wise men simple, but simple men wise; not putting out the eyes of them that see,Psal. 19.7.8. but giuing light to the eyes. And indeed, their reason is with∣out reason: for the word is a rule; but the rule maketh not the worke wrong, but is
a meanes to right the same. The word is a light; but the light causeth not darke∣nesse, but the absence of the light: So the word causeth not heresies, but the ab∣sence of the word: yea, and if they well consider, they shall finde, that not the sim∣ple common people, but the learnedest Clearkes, priding themselues in their wit, haue beene the brochers of heresies. As all are bound, so to vse all industry and diligence to know the word: which is expressed in those significant tearmes & phrases: Search the Scriptures, and, let the word of Christ dwell in you plenteously: Search, that is, not slightly & ouerly, as many do, not regarding whether they finde or no: but narrowly, & painfully, as Salomon ex∣poundeth, by calling, crying, and seeking,Pro. 2.3.4. as for siluer, and searching, as for treasures: Then shall we vnderstand the seare of the Lord, and finde the knowledge of God. Let the word of Christ dwell in you: that is, euen as they that dwell with vs vnder the same roofe, are well knowne vnto vs, and wee familiarly conuerse with them: So ought the word to bee, not as a stranger; but as a welcome and wel-knowne guest: Let it dwell plenteously, or richly: that is,
euen as cuery corner of a rich mans house is fraughted with stuffe, so ought we to be full-filled with diuine knowledge: This condemneth those blinde ones, who liue like bruit beasts, that haue no vnderstan∣ding; whose brutish ignorance cannot be but exceeding fearefull: For euen as a house without walles and windowes, and other necessary furniture is accounted forlorne; so that is a very forlorne and na∣ked conscience, which is destitute of the knowledge of the word: And as it is an easie matter to leade the blinde out of the way; so the ignorant are easily lead, and taken in the snares of the Diuell. And this reproueth the negligence of such, who are not carefull to apply themselues with all diligence to the study of the word: our negligence herein being the cause of the barrennesse of knowledge in these plentifull times. If men would be∣stow that time in the study of the word, which they for the most part bestow, some in hunting and hawking, some in dicing and carding; some in drinking, swilling, and following bad company, some in sloth and idlenesse, thus wisely redeeming the time, then certainely knowledge would a∣bound
among vs, as the waters that co∣uer the sea. Euen as in matters of the world, though a man haue neuer so good a Trade; yet without labour and diligence he can doe no good in it: and as the dili∣gent shall beare rule,Pro. 12.24. Pro. 22.29. and stand before Kings, so knowledge shall increase to the diligent, when the negligent shall be vn∣der darknesse. There are two principall causes among many, which ought to prouoke our dili∣gence herein. The Difficulty, and the Vti∣lity of the Scriptures: The Scriptures are difficult and hard, but first not to all; but to them which perish,2. Cor. 4.3. 1. Cor. 2.14. and to them which are naturall, and haue not the spirit: but to them which haue receiued the enlighte∣ning spirit, it is otherwise: God, who com∣manded the light to shine out of darke∣nesse, shining into their hearts, and gi∣uing them the light of the knowledge of God, in the face of Iesus Christ.2. Cor. 4.6. Second∣ly, they are difficult, but not alwayes, the Lord more and more scattering the dark∣nesse of the mindes of his elect Children, by his holy spirit. Thirdly, they are diffi∣cult, but not all: for in the foundation of the doctrine of saluation, and of faith and
manners, they are easie and plaine: but some places indeed are wonderfully hard: There is milke for babes: that is easie, and meate for strong men,Heb. 5.12.13.14. there is hardnesse. The Ancients of this haue excellently spoken: One saith, The Scriptures are like a mighty riuer, in the which a Lambe may walke safely, and yet an Elephant be drowned. And another: The writers of holy Scripture are in some things like An∣gels, descending to the capacity of the simplest; and in some things as Angels, transcending the capacity of the learned∣est. And againe, In the holy Scriptures some things are open, and some things obscure: those are for our nourishment, these for our exercise: by those our hun∣ger is staied, in these our loathing. And indeed, this variety addeth to the excel∣lency of the Scriptures, as in the globe of the earth, some land, and some sea, makes both the more esteemed; and in the land, some hilles, and some vallies makes both the more delightsome; and as the Som∣mer is so much the more welcome, after a hard and stormy Winter: euen so this mixture in the word, maketh both the more pleasing, and continueth the edge
of our desire to study: which if it were all alike, would soone be dulled. These reasons may be rendred why the Lord would haue some things in his word to be thus folded vp in the clouds of ob∣scurity; making (as it were) darknesse their pauillion: First, that we might know, and acknowledge the vnderstanding of the word to be the gift of God. Secondly, to tame the pride and arrogancy of our na∣ture, which would soone appeare, if all things were obuious and easie at the first sight. Thirdly, that we should not vilipend and make light reckoning of the word: for this is our corruption: Proffered kind∣nesse, or grace is not esteemed. Fourth∣ly, that impure dogges, and swine may be kept from holy thing. Fifthly, that wee should make high account of the ministe∣ry of the word, ordained for the opening and interpreting of the same. Sixthly, to stirre vs vp to prayer, and to continuall di∣ligence and paines in the hearing and rea∣ding of it: As matters of great difficulty, are not compassed (we see) with ordinary paines. Many by reason of the difficulty of the diuine Oracles, doe quite giue ouer the
study of them; like vnto the sluggard, or idle person,Prou. 26.13. who saith; A Lyon is in the way. But as generous and noble spirits are not daunted nor dismayed by the dangers of great Enterprises, but rather so much the more inflamed with courage to set vp∣on them: Euen so the difficulty of holy Scriptures should not abate our paines; but in reason so much the more whet on our diligence: without the which, not on∣ly no excellent, but no ordinary comfor∣table measure of knowledge can be at∣chieued. Is the word difficult? Then it re∣quireth of thee so much the more industry in reading, hearing, conference, medita∣tion and prayer; In which things if we did exercise our selues in a consciona∣cle manner, wee should soone become men of ripe age in these hidden myste∣ries. The second reason to excite our paines, is the vtility and profite that comes by the word. As Dauid said of Goliath his sword, There is none to that:1. Sam. 21.9. So I may say of this reason, There is none to this: For amongst men, whose heart is so hard but profite and gaine will perswade him?2. Tim. 3.16. But the Scriptures are profitable: By them we be∣leeue:
By them wee are conuerted,Ioh. 17.20. Rom. 10.14. Psal. 19.7. 2. Tim. 3.15. 1. Pet. 1.23. Iam. 1.18. Act. 10.44. Iam. 1.21. Luk. 11.28. Ioh. 6.68. Act 13.26. Psal. 119.105. Pro. 6.23. Deut. 32.2 Esay 55.10.11. Eph. 6.17. 1. Pet. 2.2. Cant. 2.5. Mat. 5.13. Psalm. 19.10. Psal. 12.7. Psal. 119.72. and made wise: By them wee are regenerated. By the preaching of them wee receiue the Holy Ghost. By them wee are saued, therefore called, The words of eternall life, and of saluation. The word is compared to Light, to en∣lighten vs. To Raine, Snow, and Dew to make vs fruitfull in good workes. To a Sword to defend vs. It is a Key, to direct vs to Christ, the treasury of all happinesse. It is as Sincere Milke to feede vs, and make vs growe: As Flagons of Wine, and Apples of Paradise to comfort vs. As Salt, to season, purge, cleanse and pre∣serue vs. Preferred before Honey for sweetnesse, before tryed Siluer and Gold for price, and inestimable value. What shall I say? The praise and excellency of the Scriptures, exceedeth all the praise and commendation that can be giuen vn∣to them. If I had the tongue of Angels, I could not expresse it, but must be com∣pelled to say, as the Apostle in another place: O the deepenesse of the riches of the wisedome of God, and of his word! Is any thing then so profitable as this? O what a base, slauish and foolish nature haue we, which runne and hunt after the fea∣thers
of the world, neglecting the true & certaine treasures of the word. You haue a sure word of the Prophets,2 Pet. 1.19. to the which you do well if you take heed, &c. Yea, if we study in the word, we haue the Angels fellow-stu∣dents, searching, enquiring, and desiring to behold the things that are reuealed to vs by the preaching of the Gospell.1. Pet. 1.10.11.12. Ephes. 3.10. But some percase, will thus obiect: The word of God is to be studied we con∣fesse; but how shall we know that those Scriptures are the word of God? That the Scripturs contained in the old and new Testament, are the word of the li∣uing God, may appeare, either by Testimonies, or other Reasons. The testimonies are either Diuine, or Humane. The testimonies di∣uine, confirming this truth,1. Cor. 2.13. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.21. are either of God, speaking in the word: or of The holy Ghost spea∣king in the consci∣ence. God so witnesseth in his word: and what
more ordinary in the Prophets, then Thus saith the Lord? as Zacharie also, He spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets,Luk. 1.70. which haue beene since the world began. The Holy Ghost beareth this witnesse vnto the consciences of the elect: And this testimony is that inward force and effica∣cy of the holy spirit, by the which wee feele our hearts moued, bowed, and per∣swaded to beleeue the word.1. Cor. 2.10.11.12. Ioh. 2.20.27. 1. Ioh. 5.10 Hee that beleeueth, hath the witnesse in himselfe. This testimony (next to the voyce of God speaking in the Scriptures, who in∣deed is onely a sufficient witnesse to him∣selfe) is to be preferred before all other testimonies and arguments whatsoeuer. But this must be remembred, that this witnesse of the Spirit in the heart, serueth not to confirme doctrines, and to confute aduersaries: but onely, that euery one for himselfe by this witnesse might be cer∣taine in his very conscience, that the holy Scriptures are of God. In this the consci∣ence resteth, and is satisfied: and it ari∣seth, and is wrought in our hearts, by the word read, heard, meditated vpon, and translated to the vse of faith and life: as,Ioh. 7.17. If any man will do his will (saith Christ) he
shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or whether I speake of my selfe. The humane testimo∣nies are either of the Church, or of The enemies of the Church. The perpetuall consent of the Church, & of all the people of God, in receiuing, embracing, and conseruing the word of God, so many ages, notwithstanding their diuersity and disparity of mindes and iudgements; argueth no lesse then a di∣uine authority in the word. The enemies are either Iewes, or Heathen. The Iewes acknowledge the bookes of Moses, and the Prophets, to be giuen by diuine inspiration. And among the Heathen, when Ptolomy the King of Ae∣gypt demanded why Heathen Authors in their writings, make no mention of the bookes of Scripture: one made answere, Because they were diuine; and that God the author of them, was reuenged of all those that presumed to touch them, as Io∣sephus and Eusebius report. The other reasons may be drawne, first
from the antiquity of them, being of all writings the most ancient: Moses the first Pen-man of holy Writ, being farre elder then all other writings now extant in the world: a thing well knowne to the lear∣ned. Secondly, from the certaine euent & accomplishing of the diuers prophesies, which neither by naturall causes, nor by the wit of man, could euer haue been fore∣told. Thirdly, from the miracles which Sa∣than neuer could bring to passe. Fourthly, from the matter of them, containing the whole, pure and perfect law of God; and describing such a meanes of saluation, which both agreeth to the glory and per∣fect Iustice of God, and satisfieth the con∣science. Fifthly, from the maiesty of them, which shineth euen through the humility and simplicity of the phrase. Sixthly, from the inuincible firmity and continuance of them, notwithstanding the rage of so ma∣ny persecutors, labouring to abolish their very memory. Seuenthly, from the beau∣tifull harmony, and admirable consent of all the parts of the doctrine contai∣ned therein. Eighthly, from the force of them in the mindes of men, effecting, mouing, conuerting and transforming
vs into new men, and kindling a liuely consolation in our mindes in the day of tryall, as appeared in the Martyrs. Ninth∣ly, from the irreconcileable hatred of Sa∣than and his complicies, tyrants, persecu∣tors, and all prophane men, against the Scriptures, more then any other Bookes. Tenthly, from the vengeance of God vp∣on the contemners, blasphemers and ene∣mies of the word. It were almost infinite to reckon all that might be said herein: all which are good, iointly and seuerally considered, to confirme vnto vs the au∣thority of the Scriptures, and to conuince the consciences of all them, which in the vanity and wickednesse of their hearts, shall any way call them into question. Wherefore it appeareth (and nothing can be said to the contrary) that all are bound with all diligence, to study in the word of God. Two principall parts of our study in the word, are the Reading, and the Hearing of it. All then must giue all diligence to heare and read the Scriptures. And because things good in themselues, through bad and negligent vsage, become oft-times vnprofitable and hurtfull vnto
vs, therefore the Apostle Paul prayeth and exhorteth,Colos. 1.10 Colos. 3.16 that the Word dwell in vs in all wisedome. That wee ought wisely to heare the word preached, appeareth by our Saui∣our himselfe in his monitions to his Apo∣stles and Disciples:Mat. 15.10 Mark. 4.24 Luke 8.18. Heare and vnderstand. Take heed what you heare. Take heed how you heare. Vnto this wise hearing, three things are necessary: First, something is to bee done before we heare. Secondly, some∣thing in the hearing. Thirdly, something when we haue heard. That which is to be done before wee heare, is called Preparation; which consi∣steth in the auoiding of some things, and in the doing of other some. Those things which are to be auoided, may be reduced to these fiue heads: The first is Intemperance: in riotous eating and drinking, & pampering the body; where∣by we are made vnfit for the exercises of the word: the body being then more apt to sleepe then to heare. Full bellies (for the most part) haue empty soules; and therefore our Sauiour Christ monished his Apostles to beware of surfeiting and
drunkennesse,Luk. 21.34 which oppresse the heart. The second is Distracting cares of the world: these must be banished out of our minds when we come to heare the word: As Abraham, when he went to sacrifice his sonne vpon the mount,Gen. 22.5. left his Asse and Seruants at the foote of the hill: E∣uen so, when we come to the holy hill of God with the Congregation, we must put off, and abandon all our owne thoughts, words and seruile labours: For as thornes choke the Corne, so will these the word, as our Sauiour teacheth.Luk. 8.14. The third is Preiudice against the person of the Teacher: for when the person is once distasted, we relish not his doctrine, though neuer so good. So Ahab could not abide Micaiah; and therefore would not endure his teaching and admoni∣tions. The fourth is Pride for some measure of knowledge receiued: As many will say, they know as much as the Preacher can tell them. It may be they doe: But doe they practise it? Such must know; first, that preaching is not onely to teach men that which they know not, but also to stirre them vp to practise that which
they know: not so much ordained to in∣forme the iudgement, as to reforme the affection. Secondly, they must remember that part of the song of the Virgin: He fil∣leth the hungry with good things; but the rich he sendeth empty away. The fifth is Carnall security: when we come to the hearing of the word with a resolution, that speake the Lord what he will; and cry the seruants of God against our sinnes, as long and as loud as they will, yet we will do as we list. For many by this meanes come into the congrega∣tion, as the vncleane beasts into the Arke; they come in vncleane, and goe out vn∣cleane. Well,Rom. 1.28 2. Thes. 2.10.11. this of all other is most fearefull, and the high way to a reprobate minde. These especially, and so all other sinnes must be carefully auoided, and vnfeigned∣ly repented of:Wisd. 1.4. For wisedome entreth not in∣to a defiled soule. And as the eye, if it be e∣uill affected, cannot discerne the obiect; so the minde infected, and the conscience polluted with these and the like sinnes, cannot possibly vnderstand the things of God: Sathan by these meanes stea∣ling out of our hearts the pretious seed
of the good word of God. Those things which are to be perfor∣med before the hearing of the word, are especially two. The first is prayer. If wee must pray before the receiuing of our bo∣dily meate, much more before this hea∣uenly food of our soules. And in our prayers wee must commend our Tea∣chers and our selues vnto the Lord. For our Teachers we are to pray for three things: First, that their lippes may pre∣serue knowledge. Secondly, that they may be faithfull in deliuering the whole coun∣sell of God vnto vs. And thirdly, that they may powerfully and wisely speake to our consciences. For our selues also we are to pray for three things: First, for the pardon of our sinnes. Secondly, that our mindes may be opened to vnderstand. Thirdly, that our hearts and affections may be sanctified to obey the holy word. For oftentimes we do not that we know to be best; but that vnto which our affections carry vs. An ho∣nest and a good heart is a notable signe of Gods Spirit. The second thing to be done, is timely and seasonable resorting, with the rest of
Gods people, to the house of God. Negli∣gent comming, that is when we come one stragling after another; howsoeuer it be ordinary almost in all places, yet it argu∣eth a grosse carelesnesse and neglect, if not contempt of the worship of God. If our loue vnto the word should be measu∣red hereby, it would soone appeare to bee a great deale lesse then our loue to Faires, Markets, Feasts and merry-meetings, as they call them, vnto the which we will be sure to come with the first. O that wee had but halfe the care to come to the mar∣ket and feast of our soules, which is the mi∣stery of the word! Why should we not bee like to Peter and Iohn in striuing to out-run one another to the house of God,Iohn. 20.4. as they to the Sepulchre of Christ? In the time of Nehemias the people ga∣thered all together,Nehem. 8.1. and called for the reading of the Law:Act. 10.33 And Cornelius and his houshold were all ready waiting for Peter, to heare the word.Luk. 5.1. And the people pressed vpon Christ to heare him. The forwardnesse of these is for our imita∣tion. In hearing, three things are requisite: first, Attention; second, Intention; third,
Retention: The 1. ordereth the body, the 2. the vnderstanding, the third the memory: Attention is, when the whole body, but specially the eare, and the eie are reuerently composed to heare the word.Eccle. 4.17 Of the eare we reade, Be more neere to heare.Luke 4.28 Of the eye, The eies of all that were in the Synagogue were fastned on him, that is, on Christ, when he began to teach them. Of the reuerent carriage of the whole bo∣dy Constantine the Great may be an exam∣ple, who as Eusebius reports, though he were the most noble Emperour that yet the world hath seene, for the most part would stād at the preaching of the word, and not sit downe, though admonished of his Nobles.Luk. 10.39 Marie also is an example hereof. Wherefore, to sleepe, to talke, to reade, to gaze vp and down in euery cor∣ner, which is the marke of a foole, as Salo∣mon teacheth, are specially to be auoyded. So also departing out of the Congregati∣on, without iust and reasonable cause; as the people stayed for Zacharie, though in regard of the vision hee held them very long: Euen so should we stay with reue∣rence, till the Congregation be dismis∣sed with the blessing of God.Luke 1.21. More reue∣rence
then must bee of a great many pra∣ctised in hearing. If Paul will haue wo∣men reuerently to behaue themselues in the congregation, because of the Angels; much more ought all, both men and wo∣men, behaue themselues reuerently, be∣cause of the presence of God, who is the Lord both of men and Angells: of the which his presence we haue his promise: and therefore Dauid called the meeting the saints in his time the presence of God.Mat. 18.20. As therfore Iacob was stricken with great reuerence for the vision which hee had at Bethel,Psal. 42.2. & said, How feareful is this place?Gen. 28.17 this is none other but the house of God, this is the gate of heauen: so should wee esteeme of the assemblies of the children of GOD, worshipping in feare, as Dauid;Psal. 1.7. remem∣bring we are present before God himself, as Cornelius. The second is Intention, and this is of the mind, when wee diligently marke those things which are taught. For if our thoughts wander,Acts 10.33 and bee not bent on the things spoken, we heare without profite. Euen as wee see by experience, that in a deep meditation, though our eies be fixed vpon some certaine obiect, yet we smally regard it: so, if the minde bee not
present aswel as the body, all is to no pur∣pose, For this is to be like the Iewes, who honoured God with their lippes, but their hearts were farre from him. Wherefore heere is required, that wee suffer not our hearts to wander, but that we call home all the powers of body and soule to this holy businesse; not onely marking some words, and sentences, but the Booke, the Text, the Parts, the Doctrines, the Proofs, and the Vses. This is Intention, and this is commaunded to the Church:Psal. 45.10 Heare O daughter, and consider, incline, &c. And, Cause thine care to hearken,Prou. 2.2. and incline thine heart to wisedome and vnderstanding. The third is Retention, and this is of the me∣mory; when we lay vp the word of God in the heart, as the virgin Marie, the say∣ings concerning Christ:Luke 2.51. Not so to lay it vp, as the euill seruant the talent, neuer to vse it; but as Ioseph in the yeares of plen∣ty, laied vp corne for reliefe against the yeares of famine; so should wee store vp the word, that wee may haue it ready for our vse vpon all occasions offered. And this is noted to bee the property of good ground;Luke 8.15. Ioh. 14.23. To keepe the word. But many are like to siues, or broken vessels, into which
whatsoeuer is poured, is lost. That bodie thriueth not, where the stomacke wan∣teth a retentiue faculty to keepe the meat till it be digested: Euen so, all the hearing in the world profiteth not, if wee be not carefull to remember it. Wherefore, as a man hauing receiued a pretious iewel ca∣steth it not at his heeles, but layeth it vp charily vnder locke and key: so should wee lay vp the word which wee haue re∣ceiued. The word is a well of life; but (as Iacobs well) it is very deepe: Preaching is the drawing of this water; our hearing the fetching of it: But as wee goe not to the riuer for water to spill it by the way; so if we spill and loose the word wee haue receiued, what profite shall wee haue? And because we are nimble to apprehend, and strong to retaine euill things; but slow, and weake to good things; we must earnestly pray and entreate the Lord, to sanctifie, and to strengthen our memo∣ries, that that which we haue once heard, we may often remember, to the benefite of our soules; Amen. That which is to be done after we haue heard, is Meditation, the very life of our Hearing and Reading; and it is a reuol∣uing
in our mindes, and a repeating againe those things which wee heare and read: without the which, I dare bee bold to say, that neuer any did, or shall profite in the study of the Word: This meditati∣on is either with God or man: Meditation with God, is either when we giue thanks, or pray, concerning things heard or read. When thou hast heard, praise God for it, and pray that by the finger of his Spirit it may be written in thy heart: and that thou maist finde in thy selfe, the liuely formes of the doctrines deliuered: It is a good de∣gree of profiting by the Word, when we can conclude the things we heare and reade in the forme of a prayer. Meditation with Man; is, either with our selues, or others. With our selues, when wee make triall what we can remember of that wee heare and reade: and heere wee must not stay, but proceed to the heart and consci∣ence, and examine them vpon euery point wee haue heard. As if thou hast heard that which before thou knewest not: blesse God, and labour to bee more confirmed in the truth. If any thing hath bene reproued, that either thou art guil∣ty,
or not guilty: If guilty, blesse God that thou art admonished of thy fault, and from hence make thy rise to repentance: If thou beest not guilty, praise God, for preseruing thee from such sinnes, so con∣demned in his word: If thou hast heard a vertue, or good duety commended, then either thou hast not practised it, or thou hast: If nor, beginne heere in the name of God; if thou hast, praise God for such grace, and let such exhortations encou∣rage thee to proceed in wel-doing. Meditations with others; is, when ei∣ther with our family, or with any other of the godly brethren, we do reuerently and discreetly conferre of the things deliue∣red. The benefite heereof must needs be great; for as two eyes see more then one; so when wee meete to conferre of that which we haue heard, that which one for∣getteth, another may remember; and that which is not well vnderstood by one; is, it may bee, better marked by another.Luk. 24.31. The two Disciples thus coferring, had their vnderstanding opened: And the men of Berea their faith confirmed:Act. 17.11.12. And this is wisely to heare: The Lord blesse al his peo∣ple with this grace for Christs sake. Amen.
Thus much concerning wisedome in hearing the Word: Now followeth to be declared, how wee should read the holy Scriptures wisely. That we are wisely to reade, teacheth our Sauiour,Mat. 24.15. Let him that readeth consider: and wee finde by other experience, that our affaires vndertaken rashly, and with∣out due consideration, succeed not. That we may reade wisely, three things are necessary: 1. Reuerence: 2. Order: 3. Iudgement. First, Reuerence is required in our rea∣ding of the holy Scriptures; both in re∣gard of the Maiesty of the Authour of them, which is the liuing God; and also in regard of the worthinesse, and weighti∣nesse of the contents, and matter of them: which is the hidden, and great mystery of godlinesse, concerning Iesus Christ, and eternall life: The summe of the word of the Lord, is, The word, the Lord: In these two respects, besides many other, the Scriptures are farre more excellent then all other writings whatsoeuer. Therefore when thou takest thy Bible, remember the Lord whose word it is; and sanctifie thy exercise therein, with a god∣ly
and deuout prayer, for leaue; and for an vnderstanding heart: yea, as Moses at the setting forward of the Arke, and at the resting of it deuoutly prayed.Numb. 10.35.36. So whensoeuer thou readest, begin and end; open and shut thy booke with prayer: For as they which come to the Lords Table, and eate and drinke vnworthily, and irre∣uerently, eate and drinke their owne iudgement, not considering the Lords Body.1. Cor. 11.29. So they which come irreuerently to the reading of the Scriptures, as to the reading of any prophane or common booke, reade to their owne iudgement for not considering the Lords Booke. As we reade that the Lord commanded Mo∣ses to put off his shooes, when hee drew neare the burning Bush;Exod. 3.5. because the ground whereon hee stoode was holy ground. So when wee drawne neare to the Lord, in offering to reade his word; hee commaundeth vs to put on holy and reuerent affections, because the Booke wee reade, is a holie Booke. For, which way soeuer we turne or cast our eies: in euery leafe and page thereof, the holy and reuerent name of the Lord is engrauen. As Peter therefore writeth of speaking, If any man speake, let
him talke as the word of God:1. Pet. 4.11 so may I say; if any reade, let him reade, as the words of God. For as many thousands of the Beth∣shemites were sore punished for their irre∣uerent gazing vpon the Arke:1. Sa. 6.19. as we reade also of Vzzah:1. Ch. 13.10 So verily, the iust Lord striketh many Readers with blindnes and hardnes of heart, for irreuerent vsage of his holy Scriptures. When thou readest therefore, be reuerent, and pray. Pray; for this is the way to obtaine wisedome:Iames 1.5. Luke 11.13 and to obtaine the Spirite: which spirit, leadeth in to the knowledge and practise of all trueth:Iohn 18.13 and which reuealeth vnto vs the hidden things of God:1. Cor. 2.10 Vse reue∣rence also: For the feare of God is the begin∣ning of wisedome:Prou. 1.7. And the secret of the Lord is reuealed to them which fear him; and his couenant to giue them vnderstan∣ding: The Lord put in our hearts this feare for Christs sake,Psa. 25.14. Amen. The second thing required in the rea∣ding of the word is Order; and Methode; which is a great furtherance of know∣ledge, and a singular helpe of memorie. An army disranked in and out of battell a∣ray neuer getreth the victory: so neither doth disorderly and confused reading, get
any great measure of grounded know∣ledge. As Saint Luke wrote the Gospel in an orderly manner from point to point:Luke 1.3. so wee are to reade the word, in an orderly manner going forward from point to point. Memorable is the example of one Alphonsus, a King of Spaine; who; not∣withstanding the affaires of his king∣dome, read ouer the Bible foureteene times in order, with certaine Commen∣taries vpon the same: As his diligence is here very commendable, and for our imi∣tation; so also this: He read in order. If therefore I were worthy to giue directi∣ons this way, I would thus aduise: First, what booke soeuer we take to read, to be∣gin at the beginning, and so to continue reading till we come to the end of it. And thus shall wee carry the summe and the drift of the History and argument before vs; of which in a great part, they which read now a Chapter in one booke, now a lease in another, must needs be ignorant. Such simple readers I may liken to those simple women, which are alwayes rea∣ding, but are neuer able to come to any sound knowledge of the truth.2. Tim 3.7 For as he
that goeth but an easie pace in the right way, speedeth his iourney faster then he that maketh more haste in a wrong way: Euen so a little read in good order, aduan∣tageth the knowledge more then greater paines, if it bee confused. Secondly, I would aduise, that in our reading we be∣ginne first with the easiest and playnest Bookes, as the history of Christ, set down by the Euangelists, and the Booke of Ge∣nesis: Then to reade the Epistles, first the shortest, as the Epistles to the Phi∣lippians, Colossians, the first and second to the Thessalonians: then the Epistles to the Galathians, and to the Romans, which last Epistle is called of some, the Key of the Bible. And when wee haue tryed our selues in these, then to beginne the Bible, and to reade it through: For euen as in Trades there are some things more easie, to the which the apprentice is applied; and afterwards, as hee groweth in capaci∣tie, hee is taught the harder and more se∣cret things of his mystery: so in the scrip∣tures, there are some things easie and fa∣miliar for learners, and beginners, as milk for babes: and there are other things, hard and obscure, which it is not safe to
meddle withall, till wee haue our senses well exercised in the word. The third thing required in wise rea∣ding, is Iudgement and Discretion; by the which, first wee make choice of a fit time to reade: secondly, discerne the right sense and meaning of that wee reade; and thirdly, apply and make the right vse of our reading. Iudgement is requisite;Psal. 112.5 for a wise man ministreth all his affaires with iudge∣ment: and euery thing is beautifull in his time.Eccle. 3.10. Therefore the time is specially to be regarded. All time is not to bee spent this way. For our callings must carefully be followed: neither is all the time to be taken vp in our callings, but some time is to be spared for reading, prayer, and me∣ditation: One of these may not hinder an other, which must needs come to passe without Iudgement. Dauid and Daniel obserued prayer thrice a day; and they that feare God, will so diuide their times, that at the least once a day they will reade a chapter or two in the Bible; and because of the stuggishnesse of our nature, soone weary of good things: it were good to taske our selues; and when it so fals out
that we are constrayned vpon extraor∣dinary occasion, to leaue our taske vn∣performed one day, then to double our paines and diligence the next time, rising the earlier, and working the harder in our callings, that we may redeeme that time without any losse. Theodosius the second Emperour of that name, is reported to haue written out the Bookes of the New Testament with his owne hand, accounting it a speciall Ie∣well; and out of it hee read euery day, praying with his wife and sisters, and sin∣ging of Psalmes. And it was that famous Eunuches practise, as we may gather out of the eight chapter of the Acts. I reade of another Emperor of Rome, who was wont to account that day lost, in the which he had not bestowed a benefit vpon some of his subiects: So we may well reckon that day among our losses, in the which wee reade not, or meditate not of something in the word. But foolish men thus ob∣iect; I haue no leisure, by reason of vr∣gency and multitude of busines. To such a one I answer: Is any businesse more vr∣gent then this? Martha is troubled in∣deede about many things; but this one
thing is necessary: namely, the know∣ledge of God by his word. Againe, Thou wilt spare a time to eate and sleepe, why not then to read? Iob esteemed the words of God, more then his appointed food: If our loue were such to the word,Iob. 23.12. wee would rather spare the times of our ea∣ting, then of our reading; as Iacob spared the meate out of his belly to buy the bles∣sing. Hath the body neede of nourish∣ment, and hath not the soule much more?Gen. 25.30 &c. Now the bread of the soule is the word of God. O Lord giue vs euermore of this bread, Amen. Iudgement also is requisite in reading, that wee may vnderstand the meaning of the Holy Ghost: For the word of God is not in the letters and leaues, but in the meaning and sence, as some of the Anti∣ents haue spoken; yea, one of them saith: that the word of God foolishly vnder∣stood, is not the word of God. Our Sa∣uiour Christ hauing oftentimes to deale with the learned Scribes and Pharisies,Mat. 12.3. & 19.14. & 21.16.42. & 22.31. Mark. 12 24. and with the Sadduces, asketh thus: Haue you not read? and, Did you neuer read? and You erre, not knowing the Scriptures. And yet these Scribes did so diligently reade
the Scriptures, that they numbred the let∣ters and words: but they read without iudgement; not discerning, nor searching into the heart of the sence, but staying in the barke of the letter. Thus to read is vn∣profitable. And here, as we must be care∣full to finde the meaning, that we may not read as children; so also we must take heed, that we feigne not a meaning of our owne, and thrust it vpon the word; lest we proue Heretickes. Therfore the right, true, and fit sence is to bee sought out: which of one place can be but one: And that must be, not according as we thinke; (for no Scripture is of priuate interpreta∣tion,2. Pet. 1.20) but according to the Scriptures, which are the onely best expounders of themselues. The meanes, and ready way to finde out the genuine and true meaning of any Scripture, are especially these: First, a due and learned considering of the originall Tongue, in the which the Scripture is written. Secondly, a diligent marking of that which goeth before, and that which followeth. Thirdly, a wise comparing together, the place in hand, with other places, both like and vnlike. Fourthly, a heedfull examining of the
sence arising, with the Analogy of faith; that is, with the doctrine contained in the Apostles Creed, so called, the Lords Pray∣er, and the ten Commandements, which are a short summe of the whole Bible. Fifthly, conference with the learned In∣terpreters. Sixthly feruent prayer to God for vnderstanding: for as wee cannot see the Sunne without his owne light; so we cannot see the wonders of the word, vn∣lesse the Lord manifest them vnto vs by his Spirit. The third thing that is to be done, that wee may read in iudgement, is Applica∣tion, to make vse of that wee attaine vn∣to by reading, in the reforming of our liues. Many esteeme highly of the tree of knowledge, with Eue; but they re∣gard not the tree of life: when as the very life of our knowledge consisteth in the practise of that which we know. As it is said of Hearers, so it is true of Readers. Not the readers of the word,Ioh. 13.17. Iam. 4.17. but the doers shall be iustified. And, These things if you know them, happy are you of you doe them. Nay, he that knoweth, and doth not, shall bee the more beaten, and is guilty of the more sin. As therefore wise men labour to make
profite of all things they deale with: so we should propound this end to our selues in all our reading, that it may be profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to in∣struct vs in all righteousnesse, that we may become absolute and perfect in all good workes. Some read onely to this end, that they may know more then they did; and this is vanity: Some that they may bee knowne to know more; and this is pride: Some to make a gaine of their know∣ledge; and this is filthy lucre: Some to e∣difie others; and this is charity: Some to edifie themselues, and this is Christian prudence: such like words hath one of the Antients. Another saith thus: Then is our reading to be commended, when we turne the words into workes. And againe, the Scriptures are Gods Epistle written to men, to the end they should liue well: And the Holy Ghost better then all;Reuel. 1.3. Bles∣sed is he that readeth, and they that heare the words of this prophesie, and keepe those things which are written therein. Amen. Now to God onely wise, be honour and praise for euermore.1. Tim. 1.17. Amen. Amen.
THE GROVNDS Of Diuinitie. The prime and chiefest place of Diuinity is concerning God,Heb. 11.6. Hee that commeth to God, must beleeue that God is, and that hee is a rewarder of them which seeke him: and this is life eternall,Iohn 17.3. that they know thee the onely very God, and him whom thou hast sent IESVS CHRIST. QVESTION. HOw may we come to the sound knowledge of God? Ans. The best meanes to attaine such knowledge is by the holy Scriptures.Esay 8.20. Iohn 5.39. Explication. The know∣ledge of God is either Naturall or Re∣uealed: That which is Naturall is either by the notions imprinted in euery mans
minde, whereby the conscience is conuin∣ced; or by the consideration of the crea∣tures: which naturall knowledge is vn∣sufficient to saluation,Rom. 1.19 20. though sufficient to leaue vs without excuse: The Re∣uealed Knowledge is that which is attained by the word of God; who, though he dwell in the Light, which none can attaine vnto,1. Tim. 6.16. yet hath therein reuea∣led himselfe so farre as he saw fit for vs to vnderstand: This knowledge, beyond comparison, is far more excellent then the naturall,1. Cor. 8.1. & is sufficient to saluation in re∣gard of Knowledge, but not in regard of working or effecting it, which onely is by the holy Spirit, making this knowledge effectual; to syncere faith, loue, feare, obe∣dience, &c. Quest. What are the holy Scriptures? Ans. The holy Scriptures are all those bookes of the old and new Testament, by the direction and inspiration of the Holy Ghost, written, or approued by the Pro∣phets and Apostles. Explic. These are the writings of the Prophets which are contained in the Hebrew Canon of the old Testament: Those the writings of the Apostles,
which are contained in the Greeke Ca∣non of the New. But all those bookes vsually contained in our Bibles, from the end of the small Prophets to the Gospell of Saint Matthew, together with the prayer of Manasses, are called Apocry∣pha, that is hidden, which though they containe many wholesome things, and for many ages haue béene read in the Church; yet are to be distinguished from the other, being neither equall in authority, nor of any more credit, then as they agrée with them. They are called the Scriptures, that is the Writings, in regard of their super∣eminent excellency, being vnto all other Writings, as the Sunne vnto the lesser Starres: both in regard of their péerelesse worth, and also, because that all other bookes obtaine a degrée of worthinesse, according as they more or lesse accord with them: They are called Holy,Rom 1.2. be∣cause of the Authour, which is God;2. Tim. 3.16 be∣cause of the Pen-men,2. Pet. 1.21. which were holy Men; because of the matter, which is the holy Will and Counsell of God;Act. 20.27. because of the vse to make vs holy and perfect in all good workes.2. Tim. 3.17.
It pleased God that the heauenly do∣ctrine shold he written, both that it might be the better conueied vnto succéeding po∣sterities, and also that it might bee the sa∣fer preserued from corruption, there bee∣ing an infallible standeth for the exami∣ning and determining of all doctrines and opinions which should arise: If the wor∣ship of God, and the doctrine of saluation hath béene meruailously depraued, now it is written; what, think wée, would it haue béene, if it neuer had béene written. Vse Whosoeuer then desires the true and sound knowledge of God, are to bée admonished to procure themselues Bi∣bles, and diligently to reade in them, or if they cannot reade, to heare others; that they may fetch euen from the Fountaine it selfe the doctrine of saluation: and also that they may euen discerne the bookes wherein the same is infallibly contained. For though it be possible for a man to bee saued (holding the summe of the heauen∣ly doctrine) without the distinct know∣ledge of the seuerall bookes: yet it is the duety of all Christian men and women, so farre as they haue meanes, and are capable of it, to endeuour to attaine to
the Historicall knowledge of the Bible, and bookes Canonicall therein contai∣ned: First, that they may with all thank∣fulnesse, honour the holy Scriptures aboue all other Writings: Secondly, that they may make the best profite of the Preaching of the Word, which they cannot doe, who, when Authorities are alleaged, and places quoted, are not able to distinguish the worth of the authority, as whether it bee Diuine or Humane: Thirdly, for the more certainty of their faith, when they can themselues find and examine by the holy Scriptures those things which are Preached: In which re∣gard the men of Berea are commended as an example vnto vs.Act 17.10.11. For all doctrines of men are to bee examined by the Scrip∣tures, and no further to be credited then they haue warrant from the same: This condemnes them which are negligent this way, which negligence is (by too well knowne experience) found to bée the cause that after long Preaching, many remaine very grosly ignorant. Q. What doe you meane by this word Te∣stament? Ans. By Testament I vnderstand the
vnchangeable Couenant betweene God and man,Gen. 17.1.2.7.9. Ier. 31.1.31.32.2. Cor. 6.18 concerning the mercy of God by Christ to man; and mans obedience to God. Q You say that the holy Scriptures, are the Bookes of the Old and New Testament: Are there then two Testaments? Ans. I beleeue that the Testament or Couenant of God, is but one in regard of Substance; though in regard of Cir∣cumstance it be said,Gal. 4.24. that there are two. Expli. The Doctrine of Grace offer∣ing to men, in the name of God, saluati∣on, and binding man to obedience and thankefulnesse to God, is called, in re∣gard of the forme of conuention & agrée∣ment betwéene God and man, a Coue∣nant, and in regard of the maner of con∣firming it, a Testament; being in many things like a Testament: For, first, as in a Testament or last Will, the Testators minde is declared; so is the will of God in his word: Secondly, as in a Will, so héere is a Testator, which is Christ: a Legacie, which is eternall life: Heires, which are the Elect: an instrument and Writing, which are the Scriptures: and Seales, which are the Sacraments:
Thirdly and principally, as a Testament is in force by the death of the Testator; Heb. 9.16.17. so the Couenant of God is ratified by the death of Christ. This Couenant is, and hath béene al∣waies one and the same; to Abraham and the Elect before Christ,Rom. 4.23 24. the same that it is to vs, for all are saued by Christ; they by him to come, wée by him come in the flesh:Acts 15.11 But because God in his manifold wisedome, otherwise propounded it to the Fathers, otherwise to vs: Euen as a Physition administreth after one man∣ner to a child, after an other to a man growne, for the diuersitie of their age and temperament: therefore it is said to be double: God bringing them and vs af∣ter a diuers manner to the knowledge of saluation by his Sonne Christ: For be∣fore the comming of Christ, the manner of the Couenant, to the Fathers, was darke, burdensome and costly; they being gouerned and tutored by the ministery of the Law, a seuere Schoole-maister, Gal. 3, 24. vnder hard conditions, as the yoake of many & diners Ceremonies to be abolished,Heb. 15.10 Gal. 3.10. and the burden of the Curse: and hence it is called Old: but vnto vs all things are af∣ter
a more plaine, easie and frée manner, without the same strict exaction of the law of obedience to be performed in our owne persons:Act. 13.38.39. the grieuous burden of ye Curse, and the intollerable yoake of Ceremonies being remoued from our neckes by the preaching of the Gospell: and for this it is called New: Therefore Saint Augu∣stine said, that the new Testament was hidden in the Old, and the Old manife∣sted in the New: Wherefore when you read in the Scriptures, that the old Te∣stament was but for a tune,Heb. 8.6.7.8.9.10.11. and to be a∣bolished, &c. and that the new is better, and such like; vnderstand this oppositi∣on and abolition, not in the bookes: for the bookes of the old Testament are the word of God, which abideth foreuer, nor in the substance or matter, but in regard of circumstances afore spoken. Notwithstanding this, the Law it selfe, or Decalogue, which by a figure is sometimes called the Couenant, must be holden to be a diuers kinde of doctrine from the Gospell, and bringing forth (in respect of vs) contrary effects:2. Cor. 3.7.8.9. and the Gospell not to bee a new Law, differing from the old, onely by a further degrée of
perfection, or by addition of Councels, as the Papists teach. Vse 1. Remember, that to be in coue∣nant with God, is the fountaine of all thy happinesse: which Couenant the Law is not: but it is the Copy (as it were) of the Articles & points agréed vpon betwéene God and thy selfe; declaring not why God is thy God, but what he requireth of thée: nor why thou art receiued to grace, but what thou promisest to do. As then when thou sealest to Couenants or Indentures, which are for thy great ad∣uantage, thou labourest well to vnder∣stand what thou sealest to, and art careful to kéepe conditions on thy part: so this re∣quireth that thou shouldest know the law of thy God, with the particular points thereof; and (if thou expectest the aduan∣tage of the couenant) that thou shouldest precisely kéepe ye conditions on thy part; which if thou doest not, but transgressest, it is as if thou shouldest deny thine owne hand and seale. Vse 2. Remember also, that the Scrip∣tures are Christs Testament, wherein thou hast a rich bequeathment of eternall life. As men neglect not to haue the Co∣pies
of their fathers wils, wherein the in∣heritance is giuen them, and aske coun∣sel, and are very conuersant in them, that they may vnderstand euery tittle in them:Iohn. 5.39. Col. 3.16. so shouldest thou be diligently con∣uersant in the word of God. Q. Of what authority are the holy Scrip∣tures? An. I beleeue that they are of a diuine Authority, whereby we are infallibly cer∣taine of the Doctrine contained in them,Psal. 119.9 Esay 8.20. Gal. 6.16. Phil. 3.16. 2. Tim. 3.16. 2 Pet. 1.19 and necessarily bound to beleeue and o∣bey the same. Being therefore called the word of God, and the perfect and onely Canon of our faith and life. Expl. The Scriptures are two waies taken, essentially for the doctrine con∣tained in them; and accidentally for the writings wherein such Doctrine is ex∣pressed: now in both these they are Di∣uine, but Canonicall properly the first way. The whole Scripture is the rule, but not the whole of the Scripture: as in a Carpenters Rule, euery thing that is of the Rule, is not the Rule. The Scriptures are Diuine and infal∣lible, because God is the Author, who can neither be deceiued, nor deceiue by word,
signe or writing. They are Canonical,2. Tim. 3.16. 2. Pet. 1.20 21. Esay 8.20. Rom. 15.4. 1. Tim. 3.14.15. Ioh. 20.31 be∣cause written to this end; namely, to be the rule of our Faith and Life. And of this authority they are in themselues, though all the world should contradict it, or be ig∣norant of it: As the sunne was the mea∣sure of the day & night, before either man or beast were made to behold it. That they are diuine, it must néeds be,Deut. 5.32. Eze. 20.29 2. Tim. 3.16. because of God the Author: and Canonicall they must nées be, because diuine: which two agrée together, as the cause and the effect. Vse 1. Hence wée learne, that by the Scriptures, as by a supreme Iudge, all controuersies in Religion are to be deci∣ded. Euen as all difference and strife a∣bout weight, is ended by an euen and iust ballance: so all dissention in the faith, is by the vnpartiall beame of the Sanctua∣ry, which is the Scriptures, easily & cer∣tainly compounded: Yea, we attribute this power onely to the Scriptures: and therefore we must exclude all vnwritten Traditions, or Decrées of men, though neuer so holy and learned, from being this Rule, or any part thereof. Therefore we are forbidden to adde,Deut. 4.2. Reu. 22.18 19. or take from the written word of God. Beléeuest thou
the Scriptures? They say, thou shalt not adde to them. And therefore Tertullian saith: When we beléeue, wée beléeue this first, that there is nothing more which we ought to beléeue. Vse 2. This bindeth all to all reue∣rence in reading,Prou. 1.7. Psa. 25.14. 1. Pet. 4.11 speaking, hearing of the word, because of the Author, which is God, and to all care to know, vnderstand, beléeue and obey the same, because to this purpose it is giuen vs as a most perfect Rule, by God himselfe. Q. The holy Scriptures are Diuine and Canonicall in themselues;Esay 8.20. Deut. 5.32 Ioh. 5.39. 2. Pet. 1.19 Gal. 6.16. 2. Iohn. 10 Iohn. 7.17 1. Cor. 2.10.11.12. 1. Ioh. 2.27 & 5.10. but how do we know that they be so? Ans. We know that they are so, both by the testimony of themselues: (for so the old Testament testifieth of it selfe; the new of the old, and of it selfe;) and al∣so by the witnesse of the Holy Ghost in our hearts. Expli. There are two principall argu∣ments of the Diuinity of the Scriptures to vs:2. Sam. 23 2. Luk. 1.70. 2 Tim. 3.16 2. Pet. 1.21 1. Cor. 2.13 the first is their owne voyce, wit∣nessing that they are of God; as of∣ten this is repeated in the Prophets, Thus saith the Lord. And this is the chiefest Ar∣gument, euen the very voice of God him∣selfe:
of which we may safely collect thus: If the Scriptures be true, when they speake of things to come; then also when they speake of things present. The second argument is like vnto the first, and it is the testimony of the Holy Ghost; which as it inspired the holy men to write, so al∣so it teacheth the children of God to be∣léeue the Scriptures:2. Pet. 1.21 1. Cor. 2.10 for if faith be the gift of God, as it is, then also to beléeue the Scriptures to be the word of God. The first of these is to perswade others and our selues: the other chiefly to satisfie our our selues: which also is alwaies agréea∣ble to the Scriptures, and is to be exami∣ned by the same. Vnto these two you may adde also, their miraculous preseruation, notwithstanding the rage of all Iulians, and Diuels: the diuine vocation, mission and life of the Writers, the Maiesty of the stile, the purity of the Doctrine, their power vpon the conscience, for the con∣founding and breaking of the stubborne, and for the raising, conuerting, and com∣forting of the broken, and such like. Vse. This serues to confute ye Papists, who hold, that the only & chiefe argument whereby we are perswaded of ye authority
of the Scriptures, is the testimony of the Church: we willingly acknowledge, that the Church is a meanes whereby wee come to the knowledge of ye Scriptures; but not that for the which only we beléeue them to be diuine. The Scriptures are a Rule,1. Tim. 3.15. the office of the Church is to keep & to vse this Rule. Now as the worke-man which vseth a Rule, giues not that power to it, wherby it iudgeth ye dimensions, but it hath it of its owne nature, by an inward essentiall property as it is a Rule: so also the Scriptures haue not this power of ye Church, though the Church haue power & skill to vse the same. And therfore our Sa∣uiour when question was whether he were ye Messiah or no, resteth not on ye wit∣nesse of Iohn,Iohn. 5.36 Ibid. Vers. 37. Verse 39. but vpon greater and better witnesse, & this witnesse was, his workes, the witnesse of his Father, and of the holy Scriptures. So when the Tessalonians re∣ceiued the preaching of Paul as the word of God,1. Thes. 2.13. it was not the testimony of any Church, nor the worthinesse of Paul, a meane & poore man, but the very force of ye word it selfe, which bowed their hearts. The testimony of the Church is to be re∣uerenced, & is good, but not infallible. The
testimony of the Scriptures themselues is better, and infallible. The Church is to be proued by the Scriptures, not ye scrip∣tures only by ye Church. Yea, the Papists to proue the infallibility of the Church, flie to the Scriptures. And vniuersally,Mat. 16.18 1. Tim. 3.15. the authority prouing, is greater, more certaine, & more knowne then the conclu∣sion proued by the same. Yea, if we should belieue the Scriptures onely for the au∣thority of the Church, which is in conclu∣sion the Pope & his Prelates: then first, they should be Iudges in their own cause, which is vnequall. Secondly, there could be no certainty of Faith or Religion, be∣cause the Church hath varied diuersly in her iudgement of the Canon. Thirdly, why may not the Turkes perswade them∣selues, that their testimony of their Alcoran is as sufficient as ours of the Scriptures. Fourthly, this is to sub∣iect the Word of God to the will of Man: yea, God to man: so that God shall not be beleeued to speake to vs, nor we be∣leeue him when he speaks, vnlesse it please the Church; that is, the Pope and his Pre∣lates: yea, there shal be no more difference betweene God & the Diuel, truth & lying,
the sacred and diuine Scriptures, and the Alcoran of the Turkes, then the Church shall thinke fit, which is most horrible blasphemy: The Lord open the eies of our Aduersaries (the Papists) to consider it. Q. How do these holy Scriptures set forth and describe God? or what do you beleeue God to be according to the Scriptures? Ans. I beleeue by the Scriptures, that God is a Spirit, being of himselfe, and gi∣uing being to all things, Infinite, Eter∣nall, Almighty, Knowing all things, &c. Wisedome, Goodnesse, Mercy, Truth, Iu∣stice it selfe, &c. The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost: The Creator, and Preser∣uer of all things: The Redeemer and San∣ctifier of his Church. Expl. None must imagine, that I haue set downe all that can be said of God, for there are many other particulars in the holy Scriptures; but these are the heads: neither can the knowledge of Men & An∣gels expresse fully the amplitude of his es∣sence and glory. Though that so much as is auaileable for vs to know, himselfe hath reuealed in his word: for it is most true, that a learned man said:Ramus. God cannot be defined without his owne logicke: This
is not a Definition, but a Description, ta∣ken out of the Scriptures, consisting of thrée parts, first of Attributes: secondly, of Relations and proprieties of persons: Thirdly, of Actions and Effects, which are generall, as Creation & Prouidence: spe∣ciall, belonging only to his Church, which are principally two, Redemption, and Sanctification. Of these I purpose (ac∣cording as God enableth) to enquire in order, according to the Scriptures: and first, I will briefly expound the Atributes as they are alleaged. We beleeue that God is a Spirit.Ioh. 4.24. Now this word Spirit is taken many wayes, but when it is attributed to the God∣head, it is either essentially taken, or per∣sonally: here not personally, for so it is onely attributed to the third person; but essentially, and so the meaning is, that God is most simple, without compositi∣on, merely incorporeall, neither to be per∣ceiued by any bodily sence,Luk. 24.39 according as you read that Christ distinguisheth. That God is of himselfe,Exo. 3.14. Rom. 11.36. & giueth being to all things, is proued. And this of all o∣ther attributes best setteth forth what God is, & is most peculiar to him, signified
by the name Iehouah, which principally betokeneth two things: first, the Eternity and alwaies being of God: secondly, his cause of being to all other things, specially his promises: and therefore was it that God told Moses, that he was not knowne to Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob by his name Iehouah,Exod. 6.3. because the promise of the Land of Canaan was not performed vnto them: Hence also it is, that vsually in the Pro∣phets, when either some speciall mercy is promised, or some extraordinary iudge∣ment threatned, the name of Iehouah is affixed; which is a name incommuni∣cable vnto any creature, and ineffable: not in respect of the letters (as thought the Iewes) but of that which is there∣by signified, the Nature and Essence of God. Infinite, is that which can neither be comprehended by any creature, nor con∣tained, nor circumscribed in any space, or bounds, but being whole and the same euery where, filleth Heauen and Earth, not onely with his vertue and operation,1. King. 8.27. Ier. 23.24. but with the greatnesse of his Essence. And thus is God infinite. Eternall, is that which neither hath be∣ginning
nor end of his Being:Psal. 90.2. and such is God. Almighty, is that which without any difficulty or labour, onely by his will, can effect and bring to passe all things, which hée willeth, or which in his Nature,Gen. 17.1. Psal. 115.3 Mat. 19.26 or Maiesty, hée can will, and that in an in∣stant: And so we beléeue of God. Omniscience, or to know all things, when wée attribute to God; is meant, that God doth alwaies most perfectly vnder∣stand, and in a wonderfull manner, vn∣knowne to vs, sée and behold himselfe, and the whole order and purpose of his minde, reuealed in the nature of things, and in his Word: and whatsoeuer agréeth, or disagréeth there with; and all the works, words, and thoughts of all men, and all creatures, past, present, and to come,Ps. 147.5. Rom. 11.33 Heb. 4.13. with all the causes and circumstances of all things: and this is proued. For the rest of the Attributes, as Wise∣dome, Goodnesse, Mercy, &c. they néed no Exposition: Onely this is to bee remem∣bred, that wée beléeue, not onely, that God is Mercifull, Wise, True, &c. but Mercy, Wisedome, Truth, because they are his Essence, and Being; euen euery one of
them, being his whole Essence. In the Creatures these are Accidents, that is Qualities, which may bee changed, lost, increased, or diminished: but not so in the Creator, for nothing is Accidentall in him, but Essentiall: and therefore by such forme of spéech is signified that God in al∣waies the same, like himselfe; Vnchange∣able, either in regard of time, or the ma∣lice of the creature: As, in the creature the person, which hath life and wisedome, is one thing, and the wisedome and life in the creature another thing: but in God they are not distinct from his Essence, but his Life and Wisedome are his Essence, and cannot bee changed in him as in the creature:Numb. 23.19. Math. 36. Psal. 102.13. Iam. 1.17. When we say then that God is Mercy, wée meane an Essence, shewing Mercy, and so of the rest: These things are proued. Vse 1. That wée remember excéeding∣ly to praise God, for his Word, whereby hée hath made himselfe manifest, who otherwise could neuer haue béene comfor∣tably knowne of vs:1. Tim. 6.16. Ioh. 1.18. For as wée cannot sée the Sunne without his owne light: so not God, if our Sunne of Righteous∣nesse had not reuealed him. A certaine
Heathen Philosopher, called Simonides, being asked of Hiero, the King, what God was demanded a daies respite, then two daies, afterward thrée: and being as∣ked why he did so; answered, that the lon∣ger he thought what God should bée, the lesse he vnderstood of him: What was the reason that so wise a man was to séeke héerein; because hée wanted the word of God to direct and teach him.Plato. And there∣fore a wiser then hée said well: It is hard to finde God, but to vnderstand him vn∣possible: But now, to vnderstand so much as his pleasure is wée should know, and is necessary to lift, is possible, through his infinite goodnesse by his word: for the which to him be praise for euer. Vse 2. That wée suffer not our minds to roue beyond the rules of the word, but that wée stay all our thoughts and can∣ceits of God therein. For the Scriptures must be the bounds of our thoughts and spéech of God; and withall wée are bound to know what therein is reuealed of him:Deut. 29.29. Gen. 32.29. There is a wonderfull and secret Name of God which hée will not haue knowne: And there is a wonderfull and excellent Name, which wée must know vpon perill
of our best liues.Psal. 79.6. ler. 10.25. Ambrose. Concerning which point one of the Ancients giueth notable counsell. Those things (saith hée) which God will haue hidden, search not: those things which hee hath made manifest de∣ny not: least in them, thou be vnlawfully curious, in these damnably vngratefull. Vse 3. God is Almighty, knowing all things, Mercy, Iustice, Truth, &c. The knowledge of these things auailes not without application: Many can say, and proue by Scriptures, that God is Iust; but they feare him not; and Mercifull, but féele him not; and True, but glorifie him not: As a sword in a scabberd, or in the hand of a child, so is the knowledge of these things without application: There∣fore wée must labor to know these things in all wisedome and vnderstanding:Col. 1.9. Otherwise wee are no better then the de∣uill, who knowes more Historically, then all the Diuines in the world: but it is to his greater condemnation: as Salomon saith: I haue seene riches reser∣ued to the hurt of the owner:Eccl. 5.12. So euen knowledge, without wise application and vse, is hurtfull to them that are endued therewith: Knowest thou that God is
Just? feare him; that Mercifull? loue him; that present euery where, and knowing all things? walke vprightly; Beware of hypocrisy; be afraid of that in secret, and in the darke, which thou wouldst bée asha∣med of atnoone day. Againe: Is God iu∣stice, and Truth it selfe? then woe to the wicked; for if God be himselfe, they shall surely be damned without repentance: Is God Mercy and Truth it selfe? then be comforted thou which art penitent: For though a woman should forget the child of her wombe,Esa. 49.15. yet the Lord will not for∣get thee: Yea,Esa. 54.10. the Mountaines shall re∣moue, and the Hils fall downe; but my mercy shall not faile, nor my couenant of peace fall away, saith Ichouah, who hath compassion. Thus much of Diuine Attributes,Mat. 3.16.17. & 28.19. 1. Ioh. 5.7. Deut. 6.4. Esay 44.4. 1. Cor. 8.6. Eph. 4.5. 1. Tim. 2.5. now of relation of Persons. Q. You said that God is the Father, the Sonne, and the Holy Ghost: are there not then three Gods? Ans. No: These are three Persons, sub∣sisting in the Diuine Essence: I beleeue there is but one God: Ex. That there is one God & 3 Persons, is a Mystery propoūded in ye Scriptures to
our faith to beléeue, not to our reason to dispute, and discusse: Wée know it is so, because God hath so reuealed, but the rea∣son of it, wée are not capable of; and therefore wée must bée wise vnto sobrie∣ty, admiring with humble acknowledge∣ment this great Mistery: Wée may not bée ignorant of it, nor curious in inqui∣ring into that which is not manifested: both are very hurtful. This then must bée holden, that the God-head, or Essence of God is one vndiuided; the Persons one∣ly distinguished, not Essentially, for euery one hath the whole Essence of the God-head, and is that onely true God; nor onely rationally, but really, and yet, in a manner, incomprehensible, & vnknown of vs. The Father is that God, so is ye Son, so is the Holy Ghost; Not thrée Gods, nor thrée Eternals, but One: As Atha∣nasius excellently in his Créed: Neither aforencr after other: And yet the Father is not the Sonne, nor the Sonne the Father, neither of these the Holy Ghost, nor the Holy Ghost either of them, but really distinguisht one from another in regard of their Persons: So that the Fa∣ther is another Person from the Sonne,
not another thing, or another God, &c. Wée must beléue the Essence to bée one, the persons to bée three, neither confoun∣ding the Persons, nor diuiding the Sub∣stance. Vse Bee exceeding carefull rightly to vnderstand these things: For, as August. wee cannot liue well, vnlesse wee beleeue well of God: And againe, Errour is no where more dangerous; seeking and stu∣dy no where more painefull; Finding no where more profitable. If we conceiue amisse heere, to whom are our prayers di∣rected? to whom our Worship? Not to the true God, but to the frame of our owne braines: When wee pray therefore, some∣times naming the Father, sometimes the Sonne, sometimes the Holy Ghost; wee direct our prayers to the Diuine Essence, and together to the three Persons: Be∣cause we beleeue and professe, not onely that the three Persons are the true God, but that euery Person is (not a part of that one Diuine Essence, but) the whole Diuine Essence, that is the onely true God, besides whom there is no other: They that call vpon one of the Persons, as separate from the rest, erre from the
true God, according to that of our Saui∣our: The Lord eulighten vs.Ioh. 5.23. Q. What meane you by these words Essence and Person? Ans. Essence is the Nature common to the three Persons, being the same, vndi∣uided and whole in euery of them, sub∣sisting by it selfe: A Person is a Subsistance in the Diuine Nature, or that one Essence; which being referred to the other Per∣sons, is distinguished from them by an in∣communicable Property. And this is the sacred and secret mystery of the Trinity in Vnity, and Vnity in Trinity, for euer to be adored. Expl. These words, Essence, Per∣son, as also Trinity, Vnity, are not all in the Scriptures, but the things signified by them are: which tearmes the Church hath béene driuen by a necessity of speak∣ing to finde out, and to vse; to auoyde the snares of Heretickes, who vnder the words of the Church in time past, hidde their hereticall prauities, and so by their likely spéech, conueyed their poyson to ye vnskilfull. As the Church acknowledged God to be one; so the Heretickes: but in a diuers sence. The Church, one in Es∣sence;
the Heretickes not so: but one in consent and will, &c. And therefore the Church, out of the common & vsuall ma∣ner of speaking, vpon this necessitie; bor∣rowed certaine tearmes to defeat the He∣retickes: which tearmes it hath taken, not as though these or any other, could fully expresse this mystery, but, that it might not wholy be concealed: of the which an Emperour spake well and mo∣destly;Gratian to Ambr. We speake of these things, not as we ought, but as we can. Neither doth the Church vse these tearmes Essence, Person, in their com∣mon and vsuall meaning wholly; as namely: The Essence of man, is a thing communicable; but it is an vniuersall Name, which truely exsisteth not by it selfe, but is onely a collection of the minde, and therein conceiued. But Es∣sence Diuine as it is communicable, so also it truely is and subsisteth, and is not an imaginary thing as the former; nor an vniuersall name, as the Philosophers speake of the humane Essence; but the Diuine nature, subsisting indéede, being common to the thrée Persons, and whole in euery one. So also of the word Per∣son.
In men, what a person is we vnder∣stand: as Peter, Iohn and Paul, are 3. per∣sons, to whom is common one humane nature: So, Father, Sonne, and Holy-ghost, are thrée Persons, to whom is com∣mon the Diuine nature; but here is won∣derfull difference. First, the Diuine na∣ture common to the thrée Persons, truly subsisteth, so doth not the humane. Se∣condly, The thrée Diuine Persons differ not in substance; but the thrée humane Persons doe substantially differ, so that one whole, is wholy distinct from an other. Thirdly, In the humane Per∣sons, there is a difference betwéene them, in time: as one yonger then another. In dignity; one more worthy then another: In will; one contradicteth another: In works one laboureth more then another, but there is none of these things in the Diuine Persons: Fourthly, In humane Persons it followeth not,Iohn 14.10 where one is, that there the other should be; Paul is at Rome, Peter at Antioch: but in the Di∣uine it is otherwise;Iohn 8.29. where one is, there are all, for their common and vndiuided Essence. These things are after an vn∣speakeable manner.
Vse. That as wee reuerently thinke of this wonderfull mystery, so that wee wisely speake of it, not taking to our selues, liberty to vse new formes of spea∣king, or to swarue from the receiued cu∣stome approued by the Church according to the Scriptures: but that as duetifull children wee tie our selues to her whole∣some language. For as Saint Hierome said; Heresie breedeth out of words im∣properly vttered. And Saint Augustines caueat is singular, If thou canst not find what God is, yet take heede to thinke of God that which he is not. This doctrine of the true God, one in Essence, three in Persons, is most religiously to be lear∣ned, kept, professed, maintained, and taught in the Church, both for the glorie of the True God, and also to distinguish vs from Iewes, Turkes, and Infidells; and for our owne comfort and saluation,1. Ioh. 2.23 as it is said: He which denieth the Sonne, hath not the Father. And, He that honou∣reth not the Son,Iohn 5.28. the same honoreth not the Father which hath sent him. And, No man can say that Iesus is the Lord,1. Cor. 12.3 but by the Holy-ghost. Therefore we conclude that the doctrine of the Trinitie ought in
some measure to be knowne and belee∣ued, and that such faith is necessary to sal∣uation. Q. What is the Father? Ans. The Father is the first Person in the Trinity:1. Iohn 5.7. that onely true God: not begotten nor proceeding,1. Cor. 8.5.6. Iohn 1.14. Mat. 10.20. Rom. 8.11. but being of none, and from euerlasting begetting the Sonne; and sending forth the Holy-ghost. Q. What is the Sonne? Ans. The Sonne is the second Person in the holy Trinitie,1. Iohn 5.7 Iere. 23.6. Iohn 1.1. Rom. 9.5. 1. Ioh. 5.20 Prou. 8.22 &c. Iohn 1.14. Galat. 4.6. Rom. 8.9. 1. Pet. 1.1. Iohn 5.7. Acts 5.3, 4. 1. Cor. 3.16 Ex. 4.11, 12 2. Pet. 1.21 Ioh. 15.26. Ioh. 16.15. Ioh. 17.3. Rom. 16.27 1. Tim. 6.16 that only true God, not created but begotten from euerlast∣ing of the Father; with the Father sending forth the Holy-Ghost. Q. What is the Holy-Ghost? Ans. The Holy-Ghost is the third Person in the holy Trinity, that only true God, compared with, not made, nor cre∣ated, nor begotten, but proceeding from the Father and the Sonne, compared with. Expli. The Father is God onely, so are the Sonne and Holy-ghost, and there∣fore when you reade in the Scriptures, that the Father is the onely true God, and onely wise, and onely hath Iunnor∣tality, and such like; remember to vn∣derstand,
that it is spoken exclusiuely, not in regard of the other Persons, but in re∣gard of Idoles, and the Creatures. The Father is the first person, the Sonne the second, the Holy-ghost the third: not in time and dignity, but in order: all equall in all attributes and workes, though in regard of vs, Creation be attributed to the Father, Redemption to the Sonne, and Sanctification to the Holie-ghost, without excluding the other persons: for one & the same God doth all these things, according to a common saying; The workes of the Trinitie out of it selfe are vndiuided. So these persons are two wayes distinguished, first by their com∣mon outward operations, which with a common efficacie they worke in, and to∣ward the creatures; sauing alwayes this order of the persons, that the Father worketh of himselfe by the Sonne and the Holy-ghost; the Sonne and the Ho∣ly-ghost, not of themselues, but by them∣selues. Secondly, they are distinguished by personall proprieties, and inward a∣ctions which they haue towardes them∣selues. The proprietie of the Father to beget, and to be of none. The propriety
of the Sonne, to be begotten of the Fa∣ther. The propriety of the Holy-ghost, to proceed from the Father and the Son. Where we must obserue, that wee may not say the Godhead begetteth, or is be∣gotten, or proceedeth; but the person. The Sonne and the Holy-ghost being of themselues, as they are God: of the Fa∣ther as persons: The essence of the Son and Holy-ghost wanting beginning: their persons hauing the Father for their beginning from euerlasting. For the Es∣sence of the Deitie is to be distinguished from the maner of subsisting in the same. If any shall desire to know what is the meaning of the generation of the Sonne, and proceeding of the Holy-ghost, and how they differ: let this suffice to the so∣ber; that by generation and proceeding, is meant a receiuing of an Essence from another: yet with two cautions. First, that we conceiue no superiority or infe∣riority, betweene that which giueth and that which receiueth. Secondly, that we thinke of no priority or posteriority in time or dignity betweene that which is begotten, and that which proceedeth. And for the distinguishing of these, I know
no other Art but this, that the Sonne is begotten and proceeds not, and the Ho∣ly-ghost proceedes, and is not begotten: For that which is not written, is not to be spoken or thought. There is a diffe∣rence betweene them, but I am not able to vnfold it, faith Saint Augustine, be∣cause both the generation of the Sonne, and the procession of the Holy-ghost are ineffable. And yet the same S. Augustine goeth thus farre, saying, that that which is begotten, proceedeth, but that which proceedeth, is not begotten: The first part of which speach, being vnderstood of the inward workes (as they are called) of the Deity, I dare not auow; because these are speciall proprieties of persons, ad∣mitting no such communication. To conclude this whole point, let vs heare Nazianzene, who being pressed of one, to shew the difference betweene proceed∣ing and being begotten. Doe thou tel me (saith Nazianzene) what is Generation, and I will tell thee what is Procession, that we may both runne madde, in sear∣ching into the vnreuealed secrets of God. Vse. Wouldst thou vnderstand these
high and reuerend Misteries? Repent then of thy sinnes,Wisd. 1.4. For such wisedome entreth not into a defiled soule, and sinne blindeth the eyes of ye Seer:Iohn 9.39. Ioh. 12.40 Straggle not out of the bounds of the Word, for that is giuen to be thy Rule.Galat. 6.16. Desire not to know that which is not reuealed, neither be inquisitiue after such things,Acts 1.7. for that is dangerous, vanity, and pride. Bring to the study of this Mystery, and humble, and a teachable minde:Psal. 25.9. for such shall vnder∣stand the secrets of God. Captiuate thy reason,2. Cor. 10.5. and aduance thy Faith, for héere Reason is dazeled with the brightnesse, which Faith apprehends.Hebt. 11.3. Vse frequent and feruent prayer, for prayer is the key of heauen, and such receiue the Spirit, which teacheth,Luke 11.13 and leadeth vnto all truth.Iohn 16.13 Obserue these things, and thou shalt vnderstand and finde the know∣ledge of God.Prou. 2.5. The Lord giue vs vnder∣standing in all things which it is our duety to know, and without the knowledge whereof wee cannot be saued. Amen. Thus much of the Relations of Per∣sons, where of the doctrine of the Trini∣ty; now follows the consideration of the Actions ascribed to God, and first of ge∣nerall
Creation and Prouidence. Quest. What is Creation? Ans. Creation is a worke proper onely to God,Gen. 1. Iob. 9.8. Psa. 146.6. Mat. 2.10. 1. Cor. 8.6. 1. Cor. 8.6. Heb. 1.2. Iohn 1.3. Col. 1.16. Heb. 1.2. Gen. 1.2. Psal. 33.6. Ps. 104.30. Gen. 1.1. Gen. 1. Ex. 20.11. Prou. 8.24. Rom. 4.17. Heb. 11.3. Gen. 2.1. Ex. 20.11. Col. 1.16. Pro. 16.4. Ps. 8.6.7.8. vndiuidedly common to the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and to the Holy Ghost, whereby, in the beginning, and in the space of sixe daies, God made of no∣thing, the heauens and earth, and all the Host of them visible, and inuisible, to the glory of his Name, and the vse of Man. Explication. The worke of Creation is common to the thrée Persons, as is proued, though ascribed to the Father in our Créed, as to the Fountaine, and Be∣ginning, Originall, (not Temporall) of the Deity: And this Creation is two-fold. Simple, viz. Aproducing of things out of Nothing, negatiuely taken, or in Re∣spect: viz. A producing of things out of matter prae-existent vndisposed. So that these words, Of Nothing, signifie both or∣der, as if wee should say when there was nothing; after, whatsoeuer it was made: and also a simple denying of the habitude and fitnesse of the materiall cause. If any shall say, as of old some Heathen, that of Nothing, Nothing is made:
wee may answere thus; It is true, of a Physicall, and Naturall generation and working: not true of a Diuine Crea∣tion. Vse 1. The worke of the Creation, is a manifest conuiction of the Athiest,Rom. 1.20. Act. 14.17. the creatures being liuely, representations, glasses, and witnesses, of the infinite wise∣dome and power of God. The greatnesse of the world sheweth his power: The forme and beautifull disposition wherein one creature is subordinate to another, his Wisedome: In the vse his Goodnesse: In the forme & constant order, his Truth is manifest. The heauens declare his glo∣ry, the firmament sheweth his handy-worke: So doth the earth also, which is full of his Goodnesse, and the wide sea, wherein are things créeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. Consider (not onely Behemoth but) the smallest Flye: (not onely the tall Cedars, but) the lowest Shrub, and smallest hearhe or flower; yea thine owne body (the Epitome of all) with Dauid,Ps. 139.14. and thou shalt finde, that all these with one voyce proclaime, and say: It is Hee,Psa. 100.3. is it Hee, which hath made vs: Euen as the work argueth the workman;
so the creatures the Creator. Dost thou say, who saw God? Thou Foole: who euer saw the winde? yet thou hearest the noise of it, and féelest it. So the Innisible God is manifest in his visible workes; whom acknowledge, least thou féele the stormy winde and tempest of his wrath. Vse 2. Consider seriously the worke of the Creation, that thou maist learne, both the better to know God, & to celebrate his Goodnesse, Wisedom, & Power. There is not the least Fly, but if ye fashion, nimble actiuity, &c. nor ye most contēptible hearb, but if ye colour, ye qualities, &c. might giue vs plentifull occasion of praises to our God the Creator. Verely, the negligence of the most part of Christians, is this way most apparant & feareful. For God hath so made his meruailous workes that they ought to be had in remembrance, which are sought out of them that loue them.Psal. 111.2.4. Yea whereas ye Lord could haue made ye world in an instant, it pleased him to take sixe daies to finish the heauen & the earth, with all ye host of thē, to this end (we may well suppose) that we should take good notice of the same. For this, was ye Saboath ordai∣ned, that we might preserue ye memory of
the Creation, & praise the Lord: though now a greater worke be added, which is Redemption by the bloud of Iesus. This hath béen the practise of ye Saints,Psal. 26.7. Psal. 8. & 104. &c. as may appeare in the example of Dauid. Surely he is vnworthy of his creation and being, which finds nothing in, or out of himselfe, whereby he may stirre vp his dulnesse to praise God. Alasse, for the most part we consider in the creatures nothing, but that which serues for our backes and bellies; whereas the right vse consisteth not only in ye maintaing of life, but also in teaching vs the invisible things of God. If a cun∣ning Painter should bring vs into his shop, to behold his curious pictures, beau∣tifully set forth with much Art, would he not be offended if we should not vouchsafe them the looking on, nor commend his Art? So perswade thy selfe, whosoeuer thou art, that readest these things, that the mighty Creator is offended with thee, when all his workes, euen vnsensible creatures praise him, if thou béeest dumbe: how much more when they declare his glory, if thou by thy wickednesse bring∣est dishonour to his name? Q. The History of the Creation is set
downe in the first of Genesis; but I finde no mention there of the Creation of Angels: what thinke you of that? Ans. I verily beleeue, that both good and euill Angels were in those sixe dayes created of nothing: all good at the first; but changeable: Spirituall substances, of singular wisedome, power & nimblenesse;Gen. 2.1. Col. 1.16. Psa. 103.20 but the very day and time exactly of their creation I know not, neither is it reuealed. Q. What are the good Angels? Ans. They are all ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for their sakes which are heires to saluation.Heb. 1.14. Q. What are the euill Angels? Ans. They are spirituall substances, which being created good in the begin∣ning, stood not in the truth,Iohn 8.44. Iude 6. but of their own will fell from their happinesse. These wee call Diuels: but of the number of them that fell, and their sinne, what cer∣tainly it was, and of the exact time of their fall, I professe ignorance. Expl. The Angels are the most noble of all the creatures; of whom many things are curiously enquired, of their degrées, language, knowledge, power, number, &c. But this shall suffice, that we know they
were created of singular power, know∣ledge and wisedome, yet finite: neither knowing all things; no not the heart of man, neither able to doe all things: for these are proper to God. We may con∣fesse order amongst them; but it were rashnesse to take vpon vs to declare it. This is certaine, they which abide in their goodnesse, haue it from the grace of their Creator, néeding Christ as a Media∣tor to conserue them in their happinesse, though not to redéeme them. Also we are not to be ignorant, that though God née∣deth not their ministery, yet it pleaseth him to imploy them for the punishment of sinners; chiefly for the good of his chil∣dren: And yet not so, that euery one hath assigned him at his birth, one good, and an other euill Angell, as some haue without warrant affirmed. And as for euill An∣gels, besides that which hath béen spoken, we are to remember, that they are, in re∣gard of their substances, the creatures of God, of whom we may acknowledge one chiefe, because the Scripture speaketh of the Prince of Diuels, and of the Diuell and his Angels. That they are of won∣derfull knowledge and power, though li∣mited:
And that they are of excéeding ma∣lice toward Christ, his Gospell,Iob 1.12 Math. 8.31 and his Church, as euery where is manifest in the word, and by daily experience. Vse 1. Not to inuocate or worship good Angels, for they are creatures:Iudg. 13.16 Math. 4.10 Col. 2.18. Reu. 19.10 & 22.9. yet we deny not, but they ought to be honoured, by thinking reuerently and rightly of them, by louing them, initating them, & praising God for honoring vs sinfull men with the guard attendance, and ministry of his holy Angels. Vse 2. That we walke soberly, and in the feare of God, because of the Angels, who as they note our behauiour,Luk. 15.10 so they reiuice at the conuersion of sinners. Vse 3. For euill Angels, remember first, to hate all sinne, in asmuch as the Diuell is an accuser of vs,2 Pet. 2.4.9 2. and a deadly enemy of our saluation, séeking as a roaring Ly∣on to deuoure vs, endeauouring by all meanes, as Cyprian saith, being lost him∣selfe to make others the children of perdi∣tion: to put on the whole Armour of God, and to resist him; and to kéep watch & ward against so subtill, malitious, watch∣full, powerfull, and vnwearied enemy: and this with so much ye more assurance,
because the whole power of darkenesse is ouercome and vanquished, by our Lord Iesus Christ, to whom be praise for euer Amen. Quest. Well, you say the world was crea∣ted in sixe daies, with all that therein is. What did God create the first day? Ans. In the first day were created the Earth, Waters, and the Light. Explic.Genes. 1.2, 3, 4, 5. These thrée God created the first day; and that by his word: not a word spoken, or sounding: but by his commaundement, or by his essentiall word. The Earth was without forme, and void, that is, not as it is now, dry, solide, appearing, fruitfull; distinguished by hills, vallies, riuers, &c. The absence of these, is vnderstoode by those words, without forme and void: Yea, it had not the name of Earth: for that name it had the third day, here so called by anticipa∣tion. It was not onely empty and void, but drowned, as it were, in a most déepe gulfe of waters, and swimming in the same; being like vnto a slimy or muddie substance; not appearing, vntill by the power of God it was compacted into a so∣lide masse, and drawne out of the depth;
and receiued the forme of the earth, which was the third day. And darkenesse was vpon the face of the déepe. Then God said, Let there be Light, and it was so, &c. This darknesse vnderstand not a substance created of God: but a priuatiue quality of the rude masse of earth, and water commingled: that is, a defect of light, or rather a méere negation, and nothing. And whereas the Scripture saith that God creates darke∣nesse, it is to be vnderstood, by accident, because he takes away the light.Esay 42.16 and 45.7. This darkenesse was vpon the face of that wa∣try and muddy body, and beganne with the same. The light spoken of, I thinke to be meant, not a thing altogether immate∣riall, or subsisting without a subiect: but a lightsome quality sparsed ouer the face of the déepe, whereby it was so illustra∣ted, that it wholy might be discerned. The time of this first darkenesse, and the first continuance of the light following, made the first naturall day: The darkenesse be∣ing called Night, and the Light, Day: which Light went and returned by the wonderfull appointment of God, till the
fourth day; when the order of day and night was to be disposed by the Sunne. Vse 1. First here, as in all other workes of the Creation, (to note it once for all) the wonderfull power, wisedome, and goodnesse of God is to be magnified, that of nothing hath made al these things. Vse 2. Here consider that of Saint Paul,2. Cor. 4.6. God that commaunded the light to shine out of darkenesse, hath shined in our hearts, to giue the light of the know∣ledge of the glory of God in the face of Ie∣sus Christ. Whereby we may note, that the worke of Grace in our hearts, where∣by we know and behold God, in the ami∣able face of Iesus Christ, is a worke e∣quall to the first creation of light: and that, as the earth was without forme and voyd, partely in respect of the want of light: So a conscience wanting the light of Grace, and the illumination of the spi∣rit, is most miserable and wretched: And as the light is pretious, & it is comforta∣ble to the eies to behold the Sunne:Eccl. 11.7. So the comfort of comforts is this, when the conscience séeeth, and by faith discerneth the countenance of God appeased and fa∣uourable in Iesus Christ.
Quest. What did God create the second day? Ans. I beleeue that on the second day, God made the Heauens, and diuided the waters which were vnder the firmament, from the waters which are aboue the fir∣mament.Gen. 1.6.7.8. Expli. God (not of water) but of no∣thing, made the heauens, with their mo∣tion, together with that wonderful space from the fact of the earth to the vtmost Heavens, called a spreading ouer:Esay 40.22 & 42.5. Psal. 104.2. called also the Firmament, not as though it were hard or solide, but being of a most pure matter, because of the constant and enduring firmenesse of it, by the which it is not worne through the continuall mo∣tion, but remaineth such as it was fra∣med of God in the beginning: Which Heauens are by Philosophers curiously distinguished: In Scripture we reade of thrée heauens; The lowest, which is the ayre. The second, which are the Celesti∣all Orbs, or the Aspectable Heauens. The third, the Heauen of the blessed; the Heauen of heauens; Paradise, into the which Paul was rapt, and Christ ascen∣ded: The House and Throne of God:
his seate and habitation, not that God dwelleth there, and is contained therein, as in a house: but because he ineffably shineth there in maiesty and glory, and communicates himselfe to the blessed An∣gels, and men. Vnderstand then, that these highest heauens are called the seate of God, by the manifesting of his glorie: of Angels and men, by the comprehen∣sion of their natures. The waters aboue the firmament, are the cloudes ouer our heads, in the middle Region of the Ayre, which God diuided from the waters which couered the face of the earth, that it might be a prepara∣tion for the Appearance of the Earth the third day. God diuided these waters, not by their Centre, as if one diuide an Apple into two equal parts: but in the middest, or betwéene the middest of the waters, or∣bicularly, or round about the whole com∣passe of the same, as in a ball of foure co∣uers, if one should take the two outmost round about, and stretching them to a larger concauity and hollownesse, should so diuide them. So God did diuide, or make thinne and spread abroad the out∣most halfe of the waters, that part of them
should be aboue the firmament: that is, not aboue all the heauens, but aboue that part of it, which is from the face of the earth, and sea vnto the cloudes, which is called Heauen, Verse 20. Vse. Let all the Inhabitants of the Earth serue God, and feare before him, who is able euery moment to let fall the clouds vpon vs, to drowne the world: For if these waters which hang ouer our heads, were not by the mighty comman∣dement of God holden vp & surely bound in the clouds, they must néedes drowne vp all, as in Noahs floud; which cloudes he causeth at his pleasure to powre forth water, eyther for punishment or mercy,Iob 36.31. and 37.13. either to iudge the people, or to giue meat aboundantly, as Elihu saith. Quest. What did God create the third day? Ans. The third day God gathered the waters vnder the firmament into one place, which hee called Sea, and made the Earth to appeare, and dried the same,Gene. 1.9, 10, 11, 12, 13 and made all kindes of hearbs, and trees vpon the face of the Earth. Expli. God purposing to create many beasts, and man also, now maketh ready
the place where they must be, by com∣mannding the waters which still couered the face of the Earth, to gather together into one place,Psal. 33.7. dilating the poares and pass ages of the earth, to receiue the same: that the Earth might be vncouered and appeare, and together with the sea make one round body. Also in this commaun∣dement is to be vnderstood the continuall abiding of the Sea in the place it is, with the ebbing and flowing, and motions of the same. Whereas therefore the Philo∣sophers ascribe the motion of the Sea, to the motion of the Heauens, or to the Influence of the Moone: though I deny not, but the quantity of the waters mo∣uing, may be ruled by these causes; yet the motion it selfe is onely from the com∣mandement of God,Iob. 38.8.11. Ier. 5.22. Psal. 114.9 who caused the wa∣ters to ebbe and flow before the Moone was made. The waters being thus gathered, and the dry land appearing, the Lord by his commandement clotheth it with all man∣ner of hearbs, flowers, trées, fruits, and séeds, not onely to couer the nakednesse of it, but also to serue the vse of man and beasts after to be made. The Lord com∣manded
the earth to bring forth these hearbs, &c. out of it selfe; not as out of the matter, but as out of the originall place of them. Now wheras there be only 3 kinds of plants named: the Budde, the Hearbe, the Trée: yet vnder these, all whatsoeuer are contained: Yea, it is very agréeable to thinke, that the very hurtfull and poy∣sonous hearbes were then created, though before the sin of man they were not hurt∣full, neither should haue béene: euen as he created venemous beasts, as the serpents, which began to be hurtfull onely after the fall. Here further we are vnder the com∣mandement of God, to vnderstand, the continuall fructifying of the Earth, by Roote or Séede, or otherwise, whereby there is a kinde of Immortality of the kindes of all Hearbes, Plants, and Trées, &c. Vse 1. Nothing is more fading, then flowers and hearbes; yet God hath giuen such liuely séedes vnto them, that they come vp againe, and are conserued in their kinde: Hence note (euen by the di∣rection of the Holy Ghost) first our Mor∣tality, who flourish to day, and to morrow
are in ye graue Secondly,Esay 40.6. Psal. 90.6. Ioh. 12.24 1. Cor. 15.36. the resurrection of our bodies: for thus is both the resur∣rection of Christ, and our resurrection shadowed forth. While life lasteth, be humbled in remembrance of thy mortali∣ty: when life passeth, be comforred in hope of immortality. Vse 2. Euery plant brings forth fruit according to his kind. Consider this, & be ashamed: faith, feare, loue, obedience, pa∣tience, sobriety, &c. are the fruits that thou according to thy kinde shouldest bring forth, both in regard of thy first and second creation.Ephes. 2 10 What then is Drunkennesse, Vncleannesse, Blasphemy, Pride, Coue∣tousnesse, &c. what fruits are these? Doth the Vine bring forth Thistles? No, it is not his kinde: euen so thou art contrary to kinde when thou sinnest, and bringest not forth good fruits,Ioh. 15.8. &c. Q. What did God create on the fourth day? Ans. On the fourth day God created of nothing, the Sunne, the Moone and the Starres; appointing them to these ends: First, to separate the day and the night. Se∣condly,Gen. 1.14.15.16.17.18.19. Psal. 33.6. to be for signes, seasons, dayes and yeares. Thirdly, to enlighten the earth day and night.
Expl. What Ptolomie, and our latter Astronomers and Mathematitians ob∣serue, concerning the motions, aspects, coniunctions, oppositions, influences, bignesse and quantity of the Starres both fixed and wandering, is wonderfull: as namely, that the least fixed starre, (which are distinguished into sixe magnitudes) should be eighteene times bigger then the whole compasse of ye earth and sea (whose globe is holden to be at the least twenty thousand miles about) and onely thrée of the Planets to be lesser, which are the Moone, Venus and Mercury. And of the Sunne (which God created to be the Cha∣riot of light, one of his most wonderfull workes) they write that it is of a most maruellous (yea almost incredible) big∣nesse, not only in regard of his influences and effect, and lights, from whom the rest of the Starres receiue their chiefest; but also in regard of his quantity and bignesse: namely, that it is about an hun∣dred & three score times bigger then the whole compasse of the earth and sea, though to our sence it appeare not so. These things ye learned know very well, & Saint Ambrose, a very learned Father,Li. 4. Hex∣am. cap. 6.
by euident reason demonstrateth the ge∣nerall truth hereof: which I thought good to touch briefly, that all men vnder∣standing of these things, might be astoni∣shed with admiration of his greatnesse, which hath created them. But concerning the vses of these beautiful creatures, they were ordained, First, to diuide the day and the night by their rising and setting: the Sunne to rule the day, the Moone and Starres to gouerne the night. Secondly, they were ordained for signes, (I vnderstand not in regard of their scituation, as to make the signes in and out of the Zodiaque) but in regard of their vse, portending and signifying ma∣ny things by the diuine ordinance, which are necessary for the life of man. The sig∣nification of the starres (otherwise called Prognostication) by their rising, setting, &c. as by causes or signes, are three-fold: First Naturall, as of the Eclipses of the Sunne & Moone, Earth-quakes, Winde, Raine, Drought, &c. Secondly Ciuill, as the opportunity of many ciuill actions: as of fit time of Nauigation for Mari∣ners, plowing and sowing for Husband∣men,
hiring and letting of ground for housholders, &c. Thirdly Spirituall,Eccles. 3. by their naturall and preternaturall affecti∣ons: as of changes in Common-wealths, Warres, &c. which diuers times are by Ecclipses, Blazing-starres, &c. fore∣showne: Which though they haue, for the most part, & cause in Nature; yet by the will and appointment of God, doe fore-signifie such things, as Fore-runners of the wrath of God, as experience hath ob∣serued, as the signes in the aire which Io∣sephus mentioneth, immediately forego∣ing the destruction of Ierusalem, and the horible signes foregoing the generall Iudgement. We acknowledge that the starres haue great & strong influences on the inferiour things: not on all; but only on such which by the ordinary course of nature moue without deliberation: in which number, and account, are not to be reckoned the mindes and wils of men, & the actions proceeding from these begin∣nings. Therefore that part of Astrology concerning the calculations of mens Na∣tiuities, and the Iudgement and Diui∣nation of things to come, which are contingent, as the Nature, Qualities,
Fortune, (as they call it) Successe, Mar∣riage, Children, with their Inclinations, kind, and time of death of men & women; we condemne as blasphemous: The Lord hauing not ordained ye Stars to this vse,Deut. 18.10.14. Esay 8.18. Esay 19.3.12. & 44.25 Ier. 10.2. & 27.9. & 29.8. Esa. 47.13. as may appeare by diuers Scriptures, where such practise is reproued. The de∣uils themselues, who passe all men in such knowledge, cannot certainely thus fore∣tel, muchlesse Astrologers, & cunning-mē, as they are called. And so vnderstood ye Fa∣thers & professed, & the Imperiall Lawes: Astronomy is not, nor Mathematicks cō∣dēned, but this curious & damnable Astro∣logy. The Stars were also ordained for times, daies, and yéeres: that is, that by their motion they should bee the measure of time: according to whose motions time running should bée reckoned and di∣stinguished into certaine parts: That one should bée Time Past; another, Time Present; another time to come: one Time a Yeare, another a Month, another a Wéeke, another a Day, another an Houre, &c. Which wee could neither vn∣derstand, nor distinguish, without the motion of these Celestiall Bodies: where∣by, (as also by the two former vses) ap∣peares
most singularly, the necessity of such Motions, but chiefly the wisedome and goodnesse of God; who hath not one∣ly giuen to man the knowledge, and fa∣culty of numbring: but also hath set such markes in the heauens, whereby man should measure Time, and the continu∣ance of his life, and of other things; with∣out the which, we should be like vnto chil∣dren, which know not their age; or like to them which sléep, which know not how Time passeth, because they number not. Lastly, they were ordained to giue light to the earth, and to the creatures therein; without the which they could not diuide the day and the night, nor bee for signes and seasons, &c. Vse 1. Hereby are condemned, not only al such which practise Astrology, con∣cerning diuining of things to come, and telling of things lost, as before spoken of, but also all such which resort to such for counsell, or help, as by the Scriptures in the exposition appeareth. Vse 2. God appointed the Starres for the diuiding of the day and night: and this appointment ceaseth not: Hence comfort thy selfe thus: If God bee constant and
true in this, why not then in all his other promises? though Reason séeme to sée, Sence to féele, and the whole world say the contrary, as the Lord himselfe testi∣fieth.Ier. 31.35.36. Quest. What did God create on the fifth day? Ans. On the fifth day, God created all manner of Fishes, and all manner of Birds; euen all creatures that liue, and moue in the Aire, and in the Waters, and appoin∣ted the Fishes to fill the waters, and the Birds to multiply themselues on the Earth.Gen. 1.20.21.22.23. Expl. God on the fifth day, (whereas before there was not so much as a Fly) created (not of water, but) of nothing; the Fishes and Birds of all sorts and kind; and also appointed this Order, and gaue them this Faculty, that they should bring forth their Like, for the continu∣ance of their seuerall kinds, as wée sée by daily experience: but the Fishes in grea∣ter aboundance thē ye Fowles; as ye word to the Fishes (Fill the water) and to the Birds onely (Multiply yee) doth shew. Vse. That wée prouoke our selues to obedience by the nature of Birds:Ier. 8.7. and by
remembring that the Water, a bruite creature, obeyed the voyce of God: how much more should man heare and obey, which is endued with Sence and Rea∣son? Quest. What did God Create on the sixth day? Ans. On the sixth day, God created, of Nothing, all Cattell and creeping things, and the beasts of the earth, accor∣ding to their Kings: also hee made man of the dust of the earth.Gen. 1.24. to the end. Expl. First, of the Creation of the beasts of ye Earth: They are here distingui∣shed, into 3. ranks or sorts. First, Cattell, whereby we vnderstand all tame Beasts, and Domesticall, which are familiar and conuersant with man: as Horse, Kine, Shéep, Dogs, Cats, &c. Secondly créeping things, whereby are vnderstood, those that haue no féete, as Serpents; or those which haue, but very short, as Wormes, Ants, &c. Thirdly, Beasts, whereby are vnderstood all wilde Beasts: As Lyons, Beares, Tigers, Wolues, Foxes, Hares, and all such which are of wilde Nature. The least of which creatures; either Fi∣shes, Fowles, or Beasts of the earth, is so
great a worke; that all the world is not able to make the like: no not a Fly, not a Louse.Ex. 8.18. Vse 1. If God abase himselfe to make and preserue the smallest liuing creatures, much more wil he prouide for them which feare him.Mat. 6.26. Vse 2. The Lord made all things good, and so approued of them; but through the sinne of man, many creatures are become hurtfull, as Toads, Snakes, &c. As one saith: They were created Good,Eucherius. but to them that are euill they are become a scourge: Learne then by the rebellion of the creatures to thee, and the danger and feare thou art in by them, to bee humbled for thy finne the cause thereof. Quest. You said that on the sixth day, God also created Man, What thinke you of Mans Creation? Ans. I beleeue that on the sixth day, God made Man, Male and Female, accor∣ding to his Image and Likenesse; The Bo∣dy of the Man, of the dust of the earth, and his Soule of nothing; the Body of the woman of the rib of the Man,Gen. 1.26.27. & 2.7.21.22. and her Soule also of No∣thing. Expl. It is a great folly, and ouer∣sight,
for a man to take vpon him to know other things, and to bee ignorant of him∣selfe; in whose Body and Soule there are such euident marks of Gods wisedome, power, and goodnesse; that euen Heathen Philosophers haue called Man: A little World; or a Map of the whole world. Man consists of a body and a Soule: wée will speake first of his Body, noting briefly, only that which thereof is said in ye Text. When God had finished all his other workes, then he made Man: In whose Creation, he saith not as before, Let there be Man, or Let the earth bring forth Man; but as with Counsell, Let vs make Man: Hereby noting more cléerely the do∣ctrine of the Holy Trinity, in mans Cre∣ation, then in the creation of other things. Concerning Mans body; wée may con∣sider either the matter, or the Figure of it: The matter was the dust of the earth: other things were made of nothing; onely Man, and Womans body of matter prae∣existent; thoough of it selfe hauing no disposition to such an effect: as what like∣nesse, hath dust or red earth, to the flesh, bloud and bones of mans body? Now for the Figure of it, it is wonderful, as Dauid
obserueth:Ps. 139.14.15. God not onely giuing the out∣ward shape, and beautifull colour of the skinne, and outwardly distinguishing, & compacting in singular order and comeli∣nesse, the parts and lineaments of the bo∣dy; but framing & giuing within, Bowels, Veines, Arteries, Nerues, Muskles, and Bones, &c. most wonderfully. Now whe∣ther Iesus Christ, by whom we beléeue all things were made, did in the shape of man (as he often so appeared to the Fathers) with his hands, frame and fashion the bo∣dy of man, as some affirme, I leaue it as vncertaine. Vse. Did not God make mans body of nothing? nor of gold, or some heauenly and pretious matter, but of dust? Remem∣ber then thy beginning and be humble, in as much as thou, nay Kings, & Quéenes are framed of no better stuffe then the dust and dirt of ye earth; which themselues, nay euen bruite beasts tread vnder their féete: yea, wée are below the beasts in this, that they were but brought out of ye earth, as out of their originall place: Man made of the earth, as of a base and brittle matter. Why art ye proud of a péece of dirt? & so prankest vp thy painted sheath? Let thine
owne bosome teach thée humility, for thou art dust: and let it also teach thée thy frail∣ty, that thou must die:Gen. 3.19. for to dust thou shalt returne. Quest. What is the Soule of man, which you spake of? Ans. The Soule of man is a Spirituall substance,Ecc. 12.7. Heb. 12.7. Mat. 10.28. Psa. 103.2. Zach. 12.1. Gen. 2.7. 1. Cor. 15.45. Immortall; endued with Vnder∣standing, Memory, Conscience, and Will: Created in the Humane Body, to make the Person of Man, and to enable Man to know, and worshippe his Crea∣tor. Expl. Euery man hath a Soule, the originall whereof is of nothing; and it is the better part of man, without the which, the body is a dead lump of the earth, the Immortality whereof is to be beléeued a∣gainst all Epicures, or else all Religion & Piety vanisheth. Though therefore the body die, yet the Soule existeth, being dis∣solued from the body, being so farre from death, that it neuer falleth a sléepe,Mat. 10.28 Mat. 22.32.33. Luk. 16.29 Phil. 1.23. &c. which is the image of death. The immortality of the Soule might be made manifest by rea∣son: but Scriptures to proue it (for I write to Christians.) are When Moses speaketh of the creation
of the Soule, and the infusing of it into the body, hee saith: God breathed into his face the breath of life: Which must not bée vnderstood, as though God had any mouth to breath, but that God by his omnipotent power made the man to breath, and yet héereby wée may perceiue, that that which was thus crea∣ted is a Spirit, not drawne out of the matter, but immediatly procéeding, as out of the mouth of God.Psa. 33.15. Zach. 12.1. Iob. 33.4. Ezech. 12.7. Heb. 12.9. And if any shall aske how our soules are now crea∣ted, and whether wée receiue them as our bodies, from our parents or no? The an∣swere is, that we receiue onely our bodies from our parents, our soules still imme∣diately from God. God is called the Fa∣ther of the Spirits of men; because, though hee bée the Authour of their bo∣dies also: yet of these by meanes; of them immediately. And whereas some might thinke that héereby God might bée in dan∣ger to be made guilty of the sinne of man, when hée putteth a soule into the body be∣gotten by vnlawfull copulation: It is answered, that God is no more héereby guilty, then hée is pertaker of the fault of the Théefe, when hée causeth stollen
corne to grow, as well as that which is truely bought. These things being to bée considered not Morally, but Na∣turally in regard of their Being. And because the guiltinesse wée receiued from Adam, may séeme to approue that our Soules come from Adam also: else how should they bée guilty? Wée are to vnderstand, that the sinne and guilti¦nesse is not in the Soule alone, or in the Body alone, but in the whole Man, consisting of Body and Soule; so the Soule is infused of God voide of sinne: Though euen then, when it is put into the Body, it bée guilty of owing, though not of doing: euen as the debt of the Fa∣ther is to bée paid by the Heire, and hée lyable thereunto. Thus is the Soule subiect to guilt, so also is it faulty; not as it is created of God, for so it is pure; nor as it is reasonable, but as it is ioyned to the Body, making the per∣son of a Man, who hath not the Image of GOD which hee should haue, but the corrupt image of Adam, which hée should not haue. This Soule is the forme of Man, by the which wee Vnderstand, Remember, Will, Discourse; by the
which wée differ from the beasts; being wonderfully ioyned to the body: A Spiri∣tuall Essence to a Bodily, without any thing to hold the same, but the onely com∣mandement of God: Being, not in one part of the body in regard of the Essence, and in another in regard of the Faculties; but being after a wonderfull manner, wholy in euery part: yea, all the Facul∣ties of the Soule being wholly in euery part, in regard of their originall, though not in regard of their proper subiect. Vse 1. Thou hast a Soule, which is en∣dued with Vnderstanding and Will; the proper obiect of thy Vnderstanding is Truth; of thy Will, Goodnesse: If yu béest a man, then all thy labour should bée to increase in ye knowledge of the Truth: and in the approbation, election, and pra∣ctise of that which is Good. Vse. 2. Remember thou hast an immor∣tall part, which is thy Soule, bée carefull then so to adorne it with grace and vertue that thou maist liue immortally in ioy and happinesse, and not in misery and paine. Many will say they haue Soules to saue, so haue they Soules giuen them to know God, and to worship him according to his
Word: But as the most part haue no care to glorifie God, in and with their Soules: so (whatsoeuer they say) they shew by their liues, they haue Soules to bée dam∣ned rather then saued: For as saluation is promised to them which beléeue and obey God; so to them which do not, is damna∣tion denounced by the word of God. Quest. You said that Conscience is a Facul∣ty of the Soule, declare further what Consci∣ence is. Ans. Conscience is a Faculty of the Soule, taking notice of all that is in Man,Eccl. 7.24. 1. Cor. 2.11 Rom. 2.15. or that passeth through his whole life, and so determining thereof, accusing or excu∣sing before God. Ex. All men haue Conscience, which is proper to euery reasonable creatures: yea, euery seuerall man or woman, hath his, or her, owne seuerall Conscience within them; which is a Naturall Faculty, or Created Quality in the Minde, borne with vs: And whereas wée vse to say, that some are men of no Conscience, or haue no Conscience; the meaning is not, that they haue no conscience at all, but no good Conscience. Conscience is diuersly distinguished:
In regard of the light whereby it is in∣formed, it is either a Naturall Consci∣ence, which hath onely the light of Na∣ture for direction; or it is a Christian Conscience, and better enlightened (as you may call it) which besides Nature, hath the Holy Scriptures, more large∣ly and distinctly, guiding and directing it. In regard of this direction: Conscience is either informed, or discerning; or not enformed and blinde: and this according to two degrées thereof, is either a Doub∣ting Conscience; when, for want of eui∣dent light to direct, wée cannot resolue: or an Erring Conscience; when a man mi∣stakes through ignorance, good for euill, or euill for good: or when out of knowne principles and true, we conclude and infer erroniously. Againe, Conscience is in regard of the quality thereof, either Good, or Bad: the Good Conscience, is that which is sprin∣kled with the bloud of Christ, and rege∣nerate: and is according to a two-fold e∣state thereof; either a good quiet Consci∣ence, when vpon good grounds wée true∣ly beléeue, and vnfeignedly repent,
enioying peace, and confidence, and bold∣nesse before God: or a good troubled con∣science; when, though we beléeue and re∣pent, yet through some sin that we haue committed, or through our in-bred infi∣delity, we are troubled and in doubt: and this is called Good; not because it is trou∣bled, but because of the true grace where∣by it is renewed, with the which true grace, may and is oftentimes, yea for the most part, and that in the best men and women, trouble ioyned: as Dauids heart fainting him, and Pauls crying out: O wretched man! Bad conscience is that which is not renewed: for euery man till he bée in Christ, hath a bad conscience: and this also, according to a two-fold e∣state thereof, is either an euill quiet con∣science, whereof there are two degrées: first, a slumbring conscience, that stirres not but when death comes, or in some grieuous affliction:Gen. 42.21 as the brethren of Io∣seph. Secondly, a seared conscience, which hath no more sence and féeling then a stone, no not in death, as may appeare by ye example of Nabal.1. Sam. 25.37. Or an euill trou∣bled conscience, which is two-fold: either a large conscience, that makes no bones
of small sinnes (as they are called) but stirres or stickes only at monstrous sins: as which trembles at murder, but makes nothing of anger, reuiling and reuenging, so it be not in bloud. Such is the con∣science also, which refraines from bloudy oathes; but as for Faith & Troth, Bread, Drinke, the light that shines, &c. neuer féeles or checkes for them: or a narrow conscience: and this is, when the consci∣ence féeles not greater sinnes, and yet is very sensible of small things, or trifles: as the Pharisaicall conscience, making great conscience of tithing Mint and An∣nice,Mat. 23.24 but neglecting Mercy, Faith and Iudgement: or as the Popish conscience, streyning at a little flesh on a Friday, but swallowing blasphemies, whooredomes, and other grieuous sinnes, without any trouble. That faculty of our soule, which take∣eth knowledge, and determineth of all our actions, is called Conscience, either because it is a partner with another in the knowledge of a secret (which Another is God) or because it is ioyned with certaine Principles and Rules of the Law, in the minde, and with memory; vsing the helpe
of these in the execution of the office ther∣of. The office of Conscience is two-fold: First, to know all things in a man, or done, and omitted by man: all thoughts, words, déeds, affections, and the omit∣ting of all duties: the soule by conscience séeking it selfe, as by a reflection. As for instance: The Soule by science kno∣weth a thing; the Conscience, it knowes that it knowes such a thing. The Heart thinkes a thought, good or euill: by con∣science the heart knowes that it thinkes such a thought. By Faith the heart be∣leeues: by Conscience, the heart knowes it doth beléeue. By affectious the Soule grieues, or ioyes: by conscience we know we do so.Rom. 9.1. And hence the conscience is cal∣led a Register, or Notary. The second office of conscience is to de∣termine of the thoughts, words & deedes of men: which things as they are diuers, in regard of time, so is the action of consci∣ence diuers concerning them. The actions (to insist onely of them) are either past, or to come: Of actions past, conscience de∣termineth two wayes: according to double consideration, or question, of such
actions. As first, whether they were done or not done: secondly, whether they were well or euilly done. For the first question, whether an acti∣on were done or no, Conscience within most certainly certifieth: As in Caine, when his Tongue said, I know not where my brother is, his Conscience said, Thou knowest wherere he is: for thou hast kil∣led him. So in Dauid, when he was accu∣sed as a Traytor against Saul: his consci∣ence said, that he was no Traytor, nor had conspired against him. So in Iob, when his friends said, he was an Hypo∣crite: his conscience witnessed within him before God, that he was none. And hence is conscience called a witnesse: yea, a thousand witnesses. For the second question, whether a thing be well or ill done: Conscience, with the helpe of certaine Principles in the Minde, iudgeth in euill things, as a Witnesse accusing, and as a Iudge condemning: In things well done, as a Witnesse excusing, and as a Iudge acquiting: And both these, after the man∣ner of Practicall Reasoning, as Paul sheweth.Rom. 2.15. Of euill things thus: In the
example of Caine, Hee that killes his Brother sinneth grieuously (saith the Principle in the minde.) But thou Caine hast killed thy Brother, (saith Consci∣ence as a Witnesse by the helpe of Me∣mory) therefore thou hast sinned grie∣uously, saith Conscience an Accuser. A∣gaine, murtherers must be damned (saith the Principle of the minde) by the Law. But thou Caine art a murtherer (saith conscience as an Accuser:) therefore thou shalt be damned, saith Conscience as a Iudge condemning. And from these acti∣ons of cōscience come more or lesse, feare, griefe, sadnesse, desperation, & other feare∣full consequents. Of good things thus: in ye example of Manasses, or Mary Magda∣len. He that sorroweth truly for sin, & lea∣ueth it, and followeth righteousnesse, re∣penteth (saith the Principle, or Rule in the minde.) But thou M. or M. M. dost so, (saith conscience as a witnesse,) there∣fore thou repentest (saith conscience excu∣sing) Againe, he that repents shal be saued (saith the rule.) But thou M. or M. M. re∣pentest (saith cōscience excusing:) therfore ye shalt be saued (saith conscience acqui∣ting) And hence come peace of conscience,
Ioy, boldnesse to come into the presence of God, &c. The actions to come, of which Consci∣ence determineth, are either good or had: The conscience, in regard of her Iudge∣ment of good actions, may be called aspur∣ring or prouoking conscience: As thus, if the question be concerning kéeping of the Sabaoth: the commaundement of God must be kept, saith the Rule; but to kéepe the Sabaoth is a commandement of God, saith the Iudgement of Reason, therefore kéepe the Sabaoth, saith Con∣science. In regard of had things, the con∣science may be called a brideling, or a re∣straining Conscience: as, if question be, whether the Sabaoth may bee broken: thus, The commandement of God may not be broken: but to breake the Saba∣oth is to breake the commandement of God, therefore breake it not saith consci∣ence. Thus by experience we féele with∣in vs, before we do a thing, a certaine po∣wer pushing vs backe, or egging vs for∣ward: or we séeme to heare a voyce in our breasts, bidding, or forbidding vs. And when we do contrary to the motion and monishing of conscience, we are said
to wound, and to sin against our consci∣ences, which is grieuous. Now remem∣ber how the Conscience determineth of Actions: So also of Thoughts and Words. Vse 1. Looke well to thy conscience, and examine it: for a good conscience is not of Nature, but of Grace, by Faith,Rom. 5.1. through the bloud of Christ. For it is the bloud of Iesus applied by Faith,Heb. 9.14. which purgeth the conscience both from the guiltinesse and filthinesse thereof. Con∣tent not thy selfe then, though thy con∣science be quyet, and trouble thée not: for it may so be, and yet be starke nought. Bee sure that the quietnesse thereof bee grounded on the righteousnesse of Christ, and the assurance of the pardon of thy sinnes: Else when it stirreth and awake∣eth, it will be like a Lyon, ready euen to rend out thy throat. Call therefore thy conscience to her office here, which if shée discharge, and being rightly informed, excuse thée, thou mayest truly haue bold∣nesse before God: Otherwise, euen as a man that hath the gout, is not healed, be∣cause for a little time he féeleth it not beat and fret: so neither doth the quietnesse of
conscience argue the health and goodnesse thereof, vnlesse it be quieted by the blood of Iesus. Better thy conscience accuse here then in the day of Iudgement, when (though it sléepe now) it will, vnlesse it be preuented, most certainely accuse and confound. For the nature of it is alwaies to take Gods part, though it be against it selfe. Make then thy concience thy friend against that day; when a good conscience will be more woorth then a whole world: The remembrance of which time, made Paul endeuoure to haue a cleare consci∣ence before God and men.Acts 24.16 Vse 2. If thou once gettest a good con∣science, kéepe it with all diligence: For as a good conscience is a continuall feast:Prou. 4.23 Pro. 15.15. 2. Cor. 1.12 Yea, a very heauen vpon earth; so an euil and guilty conscience is an vnspeakeable torment, yea a very hell, for a wounded spirit who can beare? If a man haue a good conscience,Pro. 14. he cannot want comfort in the middest of the fire: But if a man were in Paradise, as Adam, with an e∣uill conscience, hee must néedes want comfort: for as the shadow followes the body, so doth an euill conscience follow the vnrepentant sinner, alwaies dogging
him; and crying fearefully against him. Thou hast sinned: thou shalt be damned: driuing into most fearefull agonies and passions, euen vnto finall desperation, as in Iudas, if the mouth be not stopped by the merites of Christ. The Heathen thought, that those who liued ill, were haunted with furies, and fiends: Sure∣ly, this is the fiend, euen thy euill cons∣cience; gnawing vpon thy heart, and stinging as a Scorpion, neither canst thou auoyde it, but onely by faith in Christ. Kéepe therefore thy good consci∣ence (if thou hast it) as the chiefest Ie∣well: which thou shalt doe, if thou ob∣serue these Rules. First, cherish Faith: for it is the root of a good conscience: Se∣condly, auoyd all sinne, for as a moat in the eye, so sinne troubleth the peace of conscience: and as water queucheth fire, so sinne putteth out the goodnesse there∣of. And therefore when Abigaile would perswade Dauid from bloody reuenge, she vseth an argument from preseruing the peace of conscience, and perswadeth him: Thirdly, walke in the continuall practise of righteousnesse: which, that wée may be able to do, namely both to auoyde sin,Heb. 13.18 & to
liue honestly: A fourth thing must bee done, which is the right enforming of the conscience, that it be able to discerne good from euil, and mistake not one for an other: for as an vnskilfull Pilote, that knoweth not the coast, easily maketh shippewracke: and as a bad guide soone bringeth into danger, so a conscience not instructed in the truth. For if thou doub∣test, and doest doubtingly, thou sinnest: though the action be lawfull in it selfe, yet not to thée: for whatsoeuer is not of faith, is sinne.Rom. 14.23 If thy conscience erre, taking that to be good which is euill, thou canst not but sinne: for if thou dost according to thy erring conscience, thou sinnest in doing contrary to the commandement of God. If thou doest it not, thou sinnest also, because thou dost against conscience, and there is no way to helpe out of these briers, but to enforme the conscience in the truth; which is by the word of God, the rule of conscience: by which it ap∣peareth, that all such which neglect the word of God,1. Corin. 14 24, 25. must néedes haue corrupt and dangerous consciences. Vse 3. Neuer sinne in hope of secre∣cie, for thou canst not lie hidde; though
thou couldst conceale thy faults from al men, yea from the diuell, yet there is a bird in thy breast, which will tell tales, and bewray all: the conscience is a thou∣sand witnesses; happy is he which hath it to witnesse for him before God. Quest. What meane you when you say that man was created in the Image and likenesse of God? Ans. I meane that neere likenes whe∣by Adam resembled God; which consi∣sted, partly in the immortality of his soule, partly in his dominiō ouer the creatures, but principally in the gifts of his minde,Colos. 3.10 Ephe. 4.24 knowledge, holines, and righteousnes. Expli. Herein consists the chiefe hap∣pinesse of man, to be like his Creator: for God made not man like other things made, but like himselfe; like I say, hauing some sparkes of excellency, as represen∣tations of the Diuine Nature; though this likenesse be such that there remaines an vnspeakeable distance betwéene God and man, euen in his greatest perfection. Though the feature of the body bee most beautifull, yet herein we place no part of the Image of God: though wee confesse, that euen as the lanthorne is il∣lustrated
by the candle within it: euen so the body is made, in some sort, resplen∣dent, by the brightnesse of the Soule within, in which the Image of GOD chiefly resideth. And yet to speake pro∣perly, we say not, that the Soule, but that the whole man was made according to Gods Image. This Image (not to say any thing, of the spirituall Essence, and Immortalitie of the Soule) was partly in the domini∣on granted ouer the Creatures: which dominion was not direct: (for God is onely the soueraigne Lord;) but profita∣ble: consisting in his dwelling, and the vse and benefit of the Creatures: yet the extent of this, onely to the inferiour cre∣atures, as the earth, sea, ayre, and the creatures liuing in the same. Partly al∣so was the Image, in the excellent Gra∣ces of Knowledge, Holines, righteous∣nes, and Trueth, wherewith man was endowed; so that as the former resem∣bled Gods imperious maiesty, so this his infinite purity and Holinesse. And this also wée are to remember, that the wo∣man was made aswell as the man, accor∣cording to the Image of God: though in
regard of the subiection of the woman to the man, it more excellently, in that,1. Cor. 11.8. ap∣peares in the man. Vse. Labor for knowledge, and grace to liue godlily, whereby thou resemblest God himselfe: and this is commanded; Be ye holy, for I am holy, saith the Lord:1 Pet. 1.16. For though thou hast a body beautifull, and a soule endued with much vnderstan∣ding and wit; yet without wisedome and righteousnes, without knowledge of heauenly and spirituall things, and the practise of piety and dolines; thou arte not like vnto God,Iohn 8.44. 1. Iohn 3.8 but like vnto the di∣uell himselfe. Thus much of the first generall worke the Creation: now of the other, which is the preseruation of the Creature called Prouidence. Quest. What is the Prouidence of God? Ans. The Prouidence of God, is that way or manner,Hebr. 4.13 Psal. 36.6. & 104. Hebr. 1.3. Iere. 10.23 Iohn 5.17 Acts 17.28 whereby I verely beleeue that God knoweth, preserueth, gouern∣eth, and to their certaine ends directeth, all and singular the things, with their acti∣ons which he hath created. Explic. As nothing could haue béene vnlesse it had receiued a being of God, so
nothing can continue, vnlesse it be still preserued by him: Which preseruation of the Creature, is eyther generall, or spe∣ciall. The generall is that wherby he con∣tinueth the order, which he gaue the cre∣ature at the first; as the seasons and tunes of the years, that the Sunne should giue light, the fire burne, the earth yeeld fruit, bread nourish, &c. for this could not con∣tinue without the prouidence of God; as appeares in bread.Deut. 8.3. The speciall is wher∣by he ouerruleth all second causes, and the course of things, so oft as he pleaseth: as making the Sunne to stand still, and diuiding the Sea, &c. and also preserueth, and careth for, not onely the kindes of things, but also the particulars of euerie kinde, not onely of the more noble crea∣tures, as of Man (of whom more here∣after in the doctrine of Predestination) but of the least and most contemptible, with all their actions and euents:Psal. 147.8 9, 16, 17, 18, Mat. 10.29, 30. not a∣ny wind riseth, not a cloud stirreth, not any raine, snow &c. falleth, not a spar∣row or little bird dieth, or commeth in∣to the tallons of the Kite, or into the net of the Fowler, but by him, who worketh all things according to the: cunsell of his
will: yea our very haires are numbred. So that we beléeue the prouidence of God, to extend it selfe, euen to the basest worme, and least flie, as well as to the Angels in heauen, and that it is as large as his knowledge; equally containing all things, (though not giuing equall things to all) vniuersalls, singulars: things ne∣cessary, things contingent; naturall, vo∣luntary, good, euill, little, great; and that it ordereth and gouerneth all things, and actions, as he himselfe hath decréed. Neither is this to flatter God, to say that he careth for euery particular worme, flie &c. as if so be God cared onely for mul∣titudes,, and not for euery each one: when our Sauiour saieth one Sparrow. Hee is as well able to know them, and to prouide for them, as to make them, and giue them life, and the paine is all alike to him, to care for euery one, as for a mul∣titude; neither doth it derogate from his greatnesse, or goodnesse, but rather am∣plifie the same, when hee neglecteth no∣thing which he hath made. Surely if it did not impeach his Maiestie to make them, neither to preserue them. Quest. But do you beleeue that Gods pro∣uidence,
extendeth it selfe to all actions of men, euen to decree, order, and gouerne euill acti∣ons? Ans. Yes indeede, Ibeleeue that e∣uen the euill actions of men, are not only ly foreknowne,Gene. 45.5 2. Sa. 16.10 Acts 4.28 but also decreed by God. Expli. We néed not feare to attribute euill actions to the decrée of God, because the Scripture so speaketh; onely we must soberly and wisely vnderstand it: name∣ly, that Pharaohs cruelty, Sheme is cur∣sing, Absolons vncleannes, Iudas his be∣traying of Christ; are not by his reuealed wil approued, but forbidden: and yet that by his good pleasure hee will permit the same. Which permission we may not vn∣derstand to be the cessation of his care and prouidence, or an ydle wincking at the matter; but ioyned with an actiue power, not of infusing euill into men: but first of taking away or denying his grace, and of deliuering of them most iustly to Satan, and to the lusts of their owne hearts. And also of bounding their wils, purposes, and actions, and directing them to a good end. For God is so good that he would neuer suffer euill to be, if hee could not bring good out of euill; Euen as the skilfull A∣pothecary,
knoweth how to vse poyson well, and to the good of the patient. And surely, this is amost pregnant proofe of the powerfull prouidence of God herein, when those actions which are done by wicked men contrary to his will, yet are brought to serue and fulfill his holy will and purpose. For euen as in an Armie one fighteth for praise, an other for lucre of the spoyle, an other is egged forward by desire of reuenge; yet all for the victo∣rie, and for their Prince: and as in a shippe, some weigh vp Ankers, others stand at the pumpe, others at the sterne, and all by seuerall workes labour for the safety of the ship: so, whatsoeuer the wic∣ked propound to themselues, yet the Lord ordreth all to his good pleasure, will they, nill they: so that as an arrow flieth to the marke which the shooter aymeth at, with∣out any sence whither it goeth: So the Lord serueth himself by the wicked thogh they thinke not so much.Esay 10.5, 6, 7. Hence is it that though the decrée of Gods prouidence (as hath béene said) is concerning those euill actions; yet neither is God guilty, nor man guiltlesse, God is not guilty, because he putteth no euill into men, but vseth
them as he findeth them, and so maketh them to serue his glory, who may vse what creatures he will, and cannot vse them, though they be euill, but well, be∣cause he is infinitely good. Neither is man guiltlesse, notwithstanding the Decree: for sinners are not excusable, because there is no force vsed towards them, but they follow their sinnes with great plea∣sure, and a very willing minde, and ca∣sting away the care of vertue, do, of their owne accord, yeeld themselues to their owne lusts, respecting in their euill déeds onely the satisfying of their owne wils, and not the fulfilling of the will of God. The Iewes did what the hand & will of God had determined before to be done to CHRIST; but they considered not that, but were led vnto that sinne by the malice and couetousnesse of their owne wicked and enuious hearts, which were the true causes thereof. So that, (as Saint Augustine saith) In one and the selfe same thing, GOD is iust, and Man is most vniust, because in that one thing which they doe, there is not one cause for the which they do the same.
Here further it is to be marked, that the Decrée of God (in respect whereof all things are necessary) doth not take away contingency; which is, when a thing, whē it is, had a cause whereby it might haue béene otherwise. As the bones of Christ must be vnbroken in regard of Gods De∣crée, and yet they might haue béene bro∣ken in regard of their owne nature, and the fréedome of the mindes of the Soul∣diers. Neither may any thinke, that here∣by are frustrated, deliberations, prudence and vse of meanes: for as God decréeth the being of things, so also the meanes wherby such things shall be. As in regard of Gods Decrée, Lot cannot be burut in Sodome; but then he must escape, and hie him away out of the Citty. Dauid must ouercome Goliath, but then he must take his Sling, with the smooth Stones, with him. Manasses must be saued, because God hath so decréed, but then he must re∣pent and beléeue, which are the meanes of saluation appointed and decréed by God. Vse 1. Labour soundly to vnderstand, and with all thy wit to maintaine this do∣ctrine: for to deny the Prouidence is all
one as to deny God:Psal. 14.1. Psal. 10.4.11. Psa. 14.1.2 and this indéede is a maine cause of the prophanenesse of vile men. Wherefore, denying a fatall desti∣ny, whereby all things, euen God him∣selfe, should be tied to the nature of second causes, and abhorring all conceit of for∣tune and méere chaunce (which are words fitter for Heathens then Christi∣ans, which beléeue there is a GOD) let vs hold fast this Doctrine, that all things whatsoeuer are gouerned by an Ocular Prouidence:Psal. 58.11 Heb. 11.6. Yea, if any thing fall out, which wee might thinke to bee by chaunce, because wee see not the cause of it, yet to be perswaded that so it was fore-séene, and fore-appointed and decréed of GOD, as that place of Numbers 35.22. compared with that of Exodus 21.13. doth most plainely shew. Vse 2. This Doctrine also comfor∣teth many wayes: First if wee (as we ought) carefully obserue the experiences of Gods prouidence towards vs, in the often vnexpected successe of our affaires, we must needes both be confirmed in our Faith, the more stedfastly to depend
and trust on GOD, and also be hereby occasioned often to giue thankes. Secondly, if Affliction come, it tea∣cheth, that it commeth not out of the dust, but by the wise and iust appoint∣ment of GOD; And this breedeth pa∣tience. Thirdly, whereas the Church, and such as feare GOD, haue many ene∣mies, this teacheth that they can do no∣thing but as GOD pleaseth: yea, the very Diuels themselues can neither hurt Iob, nor enter into the Swine, but as they are licenced by GOD, and when he pleaseth to licence either Sathan, or e∣uill Men, or other Creatures, to hurt his Children, or Seruants, he both boun∣deth them, beyond which they cannot go, and also in the end turneth all things to the best.Rom. 8.28. Psal. 25.10 Fourthly, neglect not lawful meanes for the accomplishing of thy lawfull desires: for this were to tempt GOD: And yet trust not in the meanes, though neuer so likely: for that were to sacrifice to thy worth, and to commit a kinde of I∣dolatry. Hast thou Bread? Then that is a good meanes of Nourishing: But
God can breake the staffe of it, and make it as a stone to thee: For man liueth not by bread onely, but by the word of Pro∣mise annexed thereto.Deut. 8.3. In the vse there∣fore of all meanes concerning either Cor∣porall or Spirituall things, looke vp vnto heauen, and pray for a blessing, or else thou watchest in vaine, thou labourest in vaine,Ps. 127.1.2. in vaine thou vsest any meanes: yea, in the midst of many difficulties, though thou then sée no meanes, yet trust in God,Gen. 22.8. for God will prouide, as Abra∣ham said: Wherefore go on cheerefully in thy calling, seruing God, and casting thy care vpon him,Psal. 55.22. 1. Pet. 5.7. for hée careth for thée: Nay commit thy very Soule vnto him in wel∣doing, as vnto a most faithfull Creatour. For if God cloatheth the Grasse,1. Pet. 4.19. regar∣deth a Sparrow, and numbreth thy su∣perfluities, euen the haires of thy head, how much more will hée kéepe, and pro∣uide for thy Soule, if thou fearest and obeyest him, I say Him; who regardeth all as one, and one, as if hée were alone; who is neither detained about the care of one, nor distracted about ye care of more: to whom nothing is hard because Almighty, nor multitude of businesse can ouer∣whelme,
because infinitely Wise, to whom bée praise for euer. Amen. Thus much of the generall workes by which God is described: Creation, and Prouidence, which extend to all things. Now of the more Speciall, which con∣cerne the Church, which are Redemption, Sanctification. Quest. You said that God is the Redeemer of his Church: What is Redemption? Ans. Redemption is a worke of God, whereby hee hath fully deliuered his E∣lect, from sinne, the curse of the Law, Eternall Death, and the power of the De∣uill,1. Cor. 1.30 Col. 1.14. Tit. 2.14. by IEVS CHRIST to the praise and glory of his Name. Expl. The deliuery of Mankind from sinne and death is, significantly, by the Holy Ghost called Redemption: which signifieth, a purchasing, or buying againe, or a Ransoming at a price (as life for life) of them which are in bondage. Therefore is Christ called, a Price,Mat. 20.28 1. Tim. 2.6. Act. 20.28. a Counter-ran∣some: The Flocke of Christ is said to bee purchased with Gods owne Bloud: and Yee are bought with a price.1. Cor. 6.20 We were in bondage, euen to the very Diuell of hell, the great enemy of Man∣kind;
and therefore vngodly men and wo∣men,2. Tim. 2.26. are said to bee taken aliue, in the snare of the Deuill, at his will. Also wee were in bondage to sinne, the curse of the Law, and to eternall condemnation, from all which Christ hath deliuered vs,Heb. 2.14. Gal. 3.13. Tit. 2.14. by a Price, euen Himselfe. But heere we must know that Christ ransoming vs out of the clawes of the deuill, by a Price, paies not this Price to the deuill, but to God: who deliuers sin∣ners to the deuill, as to his executioner to bee tormented: And when this worke of Redemption is spoken onely, of taking vs from sathan, it noteth that wée are de∣liuered by power and force, not by a price: Therefore in the Gospell, Christ in com∣parison of Sathan, is called ye Stronger, who ouer-commeth him and diuideth his spoiles.Luk. 11.22. Col. 1.13. Wée are said to bée deliuered foin the power of darknesse; where the word signifieth by fine force, to deliuer or plucke away. Euen as Dauid pulled the Lambe out of the Beares mouth, so hath Christ by his Almighty power, reskued vs out of the mouth of the Roaring Ly∣on: So also hée hath destroyed the deuill,Heb. 2.14. not by abolishing his substance, but by
weakening his power, as the word there importeth: Christ then payeth his Bloud as a price to his Father, and so, forcibly deliuereth vs from the deuill: Who hath the power of death, as the Hang-man hath the power of the Gallowes; not ab∣solute, but by commission from God, for the tormenting of the wicked. This Redemption wée speake of, is so the worke of God, that wée exclude all creatures from any power, or possibility of redéeming vs.Psal. 49.7. And wée acknowledge it to bée the worke of the whole Trinity deliuering vs in the person of the Sonne, who redéemeth vs by his Merite, and by his Efficacy: by his Merite, deseruing Redemption for vs: by his Efficacy, effe∣ctually applying it vnto vs by his Spirit through Faith. Vse. First, héere wée may sée the won∣derfull misery, in the which wée are all, till wée haue our part, in the Eternall Re∣demption, purchased for vs by Iesus Christ: For first, we are vnder the power of sinne, and the tiranny of the deuill: ve∣ry Bond-slaues; more miserable then euer were the poore Iraelites in Egypt, or now are the poore Christians vnder the Turke:
for the bondage of these is onely bodily: ours more: bodily and spirituall also: our bodies and very Spirits being subiect to obey his filthy will in all things.Ephe. 2.2. Secondly, we are all our life time in feare of death; euen as is the case of one condemned to the Gallowes, hee alwaies trembles and quakes at the approach and remembrance of the houre of his execu∣tion: So wee, if God make vs sensible of our estate, in regard of sinne, are alwaies haunted with the terrours of an euill con∣science, as with Furies and Fiends of hel: as Caine, Saul, Iudas. Thurdly, wee are fire-brands of hell, subiect to eternall condemnation, for our sinnes, &c. This is our misery, which who so vnderstandeth not, nor considereth, he neuer esteemeth this wonderfull mercy of God in redeeming of vs, as he ought: For as hee that supposeth himselfe to bee mortally sicke, highly reckoneth of the Phisition which cureth him, and he which is troubled but with some light infirmity not so: Euen so, to him, to him onely is the tydings of the Gospell welcome, the Promise sweete, the Bloud of Christ vnualuable, the Loue of God vnspeake∣able,
yea, without measure, and passing all knowledge: which seeth his misery, and seeleth his heart wrung with the fet∣ters and bolts of sinne, and which consi∣dereth of those eternall torments due to the same. Vse 2. Here we ought also to consider, of the Price whereby wee are ransomed, and of the exceeding Loue of God. For the Price, it was neither gold nor siluer, nor any corruptible thing, but the preti∣ous Bloud of the Lambe vnspotted Ie∣sus Christ. Marke thou which readest:1. Pet. 1.18 19. It cost the very Heart Bloud of Iesus the Sonne of God, who was without sinne, to saue thee a vile wretch, from eternall damnation which thou deseruest by thy sinnes. The Loue of God herein appeared to be most wonderfull, in that he spared not his owne Sonne, but gaue him to death, euen for vs and in our stead, who were, not his friends, but his very enemies: See what loue the Father hath shewed;Rom. 6.7.8. that thou an Imp of the de∣uill by sinne, shouldst haue the Bloud of Gods owne Sonne shed to make thee his son or daughter. Let me speake vnto thee in ye words of Ezra,Ez. 9.13.14. which words he spake
from the occasion of a meaner deliue∣rance. Seeing God hath kept thee from being beneath for thine iniquities, and hath granted thee such deliuerance, shouldst thou continue in sinne? shouldst thou rebell, and returne to breake the Commandement of such, so mercifull a God? by drunkennesse, blasphemy, lying, pride, whoredome; or any profanenesse? Shouldest, thou despise the Saboaths, Word, Sacraments, Bloud of such a Sauiour? Shouldest thou refuse to sacri∣fice thy Body and Soule to his glory, that refused not to sacrifice his precious life for thy Saluation? Shouldest thou be a Niggard of thy duty to him, yea of thy best bloud, who was prodigall to expend and shed his Bloud to redeeme thee? Now God forbid.Luk. 1.74.75. Tit. 2.14.15. &c. Nay this, inexcusably bindeth vs all, to all thankefulnesse, and true obedience. Quest. But you said that Man was crea∣ted according to the Image of God, in a most holy and happy estate: how then comes bee to stand in need of a Redeemer? Ans. I beleeue that Adam and Eue be∣ing created by God, according to his Image, in singular happinesse, and placed
in Paradise; did notwithstanding willing∣ly, and by the enticement of the diuell, fall away, transgressing Gods commande∣ment giuen vnto them; and so made themselues, and their posteritie;Gen. chap. 2. and 3. subiect both to sinne and death, the wages of the same. Expli. Though it be farre better to in∣deuoure to come out of the misery we are in, then curiously to inquire, how wée came into the same: yet because many ne∣cessary points depend on this; and wee neuer séeke the heauenly Physition till we vnderstand and féele our disease, and the danger; Therefore it is necessary that wee should haue some good measure of knowledge hereof. Which we shall at∣taine, if we consider these two things: First, what Adams state was in his In∣nocency, and vpon what conditions it did stand. Secondly, the manner of his fall: We will héere intreate of his happinesse,Genes. 3. and the conditions thereof. The happines of our first parents may bee referred to these heads. First, that they were created in the Image of God, together with the manner of their creation; but of this be∣fore.
Secondly, that they were placed in the Garden of Eden, translated, by the Sep∣tuagint, Paradise, and commonly so cal∣led, because it was a place of singular de∣light and pleasure:Gene. 2.9. to 15. a most pleasant place, in regarde both of the variety of all plea∣sant fruits, (the Trées also of knowledge and life in the middest thereof) and also in regard of the pretious riuers watering the same: Vnto this our Sauiour allu∣deth when he saith to the Thiefe, This day thou shalt be with me in Paradise: not that Paradise wherein Adam was put, which was defaced in the flood: but Hea∣uen, so called, for the happinesse, ioy, and riuers of pleasure which are there for euermore. Thirdly, the happines of our first pa∣rents is set downe, from their fréedome from all things which might hurt their bodies, or disturbe their mindes. They were both naked and were not ashamed.Gen. 2.25. They were naked; Hereby is signified, that their bodies had a kinde of Impassi∣bilitie; so that though they were neither hairy nor woolly as other beasts, nor clad in apparrell, as now; but of a soft & smooth skinne, and naked: yet they were not sub∣iect
to the iniuries of the wether, as raine, wind, heat, cold, &c. They were not asha∣med. Not as though any vndecent thing were spoken of them, (as now he is ac∣counted a beast that is not ashamed of his nakednesse) but first, to shew, that in∣wardly in their mindes, did shine the I∣mage of God; that is, Innocencie, san∣ctity, and Integritie, &c. in which if they had continued, they should not haue née∣ded their figge-leaues, nor any apparell: Secōdly, that outwardly in their bodies, there was excéeding beautie, and perfe∣ction of all parts, so that there was no vncomelinesse, no not in those members, which after sinne, natural shame, for their deformity, and vnséemlinesse, teacheth vs to couer. Thirdly, that in the inferiour parts of the minde and body, there was no inordinat motion or appetite; all mem∣bers of the body, and inferiour desires, be∣ing ruled and gouerned by the Inward grace of the minde: So that if wée medi∣tate of these things, we can not but con∣ceiue, that the happinesse of our first pa∣rents was very great. Now we are to consider of the conditi∣ons, on which this happinesse did stand;
for they were created thus; but mutable, and changeable, & this state to continue, and in the end to be translated to a celesti∣all life,Ge. 2.16.17 if they kept the Commaunde∣ment of God; otherwise not. The Commandement was about one of the Trées which were in the middest of the Garden, namely the Tree of Know∣ledge of good and euill; which was so cal∣led, not of the effect, as though it had a quality to sharpen the wit, but of the e∣uent, being a Sacrament of triall and admonition to them, that if they did eate of it, then they should haue wofull experi∣ence, of the good they had lost, and of the euil they had gotten, they hauing before a speculatiue knowlege, but not a practical experience hereof. The other trée was called the trée of Life, both because it had a power or vertue to preserue life and health, and also more principally because it was to our first parents a Sacrament of the continuance of their life in Para∣dise, and after, of their translating vnto a heauenly life, if they continued in obe∣dience. The Commaundement concerning the Trée of Knowledge contained a Pro∣hibition,
which was this:Verse 17. Of the Tree of knowledge of good and euil thou shalt not eate. This Commaundement God inforceth by two reasons: The first from the liberty God gaue them to all the rest of the Trées of the Garden. Therefore he might wel abstaine from this one.Verse 16. The other reason, from the danger ensuing, if he did eate; Thou shalt die the death.Verse 17. that is, Thou shalt certainely die, tem∣porally here, in the seperation of the soule from the body; and spiritually in loosing the graces before spoken of, and eternal∣ly in the seperation of Body and Soule from God. This was mans happinesse: and it stoode on this condition, if he ob∣serued the Positiue Lawe giuen him of God. Vse 1. Death, to speake properly, is not naturall, namely according to the nature of man in his Creation:Rom. 5.12. but a∣gainst nature, comming in by sinne. A∣dam being created to immortality, that is in such an estate, that if he had neuer sin∣ned, he should neuer haue died. For al∣though Adams body was mortall in it selfe, & could die; yet it had a power not to die, through the gift of the Creator, name∣ly,
if he continued in his integrity. So Adam in his state of innocencie was both mortal, and immortal, in diuers respects: Immortall, hauing not an impossibilitie of dying, but a possibilitiy of not dying, which possibility he lost by his sinne, and instead thereof receiued a necessitie of dy∣ing; Thou shalt die the death. Hée was mortall, not because he should haue actually died, if he had not sinned; but because, if he sinned, it was possible hée should, or hée might die. Death then commeth not from Nature, but from Sinne. Vse 2. The remembrance of this hap∣pinesse of our first parents, which they lost to themselues, and to vs, by their fall, should moue vs, euen with teares of bloud (if it were possible) to bewaile our present misery in which we are; which is  farre from that happinesse, as the Earth, nay as Hell is from Heauen. Then Man was the Cedar of Paradise, the Picture of Heauen, the Glory of the Earth, the Ruler of the World, and Gods owne delight. But now he is the Fire-brand of Hell, the Picture of the Diuell, more base then the basest crea∣tures
on the earth: clothed with no lesse dishonour and shame, then he was before crowned with honour and glory: Not onely, as Nebuchadnezzar, trans-formed into a beast; but being made of the Tem∣ple of God, a Cage of vncleane Spirits: yea, the very habitation of the Diuell. Wherefore let vs all take vp a grieuous lamentation, when we looke backe to our first glory, and to Paradise, our antient right. And if there be any sparke of Hea∣uenly courage & wisedme in our breasts, let vs endeuour to recouer that by Christ, which we haue lost in Adam: Nay, God offers, in his beloued Sonne, more glory, better happinesse: let vs not be so besot∣ted, as to suffer Sathan to deceiue, and depriue vs of the Recouery of Gods fa∣uour, by our continuance in sinne, which first he made vs loose by commit∣ting sinne, &c. Vse 3. Man in Paradise, in the time of his Innocency, might not be idle,, nor without a positiue law, for obedience: so that neither lobour in dressing the Gar∣den, nor to be tyed to speciall duty by the law, was any impeachment of his happi∣nesse: Those therefore which place any
pleasure or happines in idlenes, or in desi∣ring to liue as they list, and to be lawlesse, do excéedingly manifest ye vile corruption of their hearts: for idlenesse, and lawlesse liberty was not permitted to Adam in Paradise. Q. I something conceiue the happinesse of man in his creation, and the conditions of the same: Now I pray you shew me, what was the manner of his fall? Ans. The fall of our first parents, was their voluntary transgression of the com∣mandement of God, in eating of the fruit of the forbidden tree; caused by the sub∣till malice of the Diuell, and their owne infidelitie, Gen. 3. through the whole chapter. Expli. Out of the third chapter of Ge∣nesis, which is called of some, The Patri∣arkes Catechisme, we are taught of the fall and sin of man, of the anger of God, of the punishment of sinne, and of the be∣ginning of mans misery, vnto the which he was not created; but into the which he fell, by the iustice of God, through his sinne: points hidden from the wise, and reuealed by the word, by which we come to know the cause of all the miseries
which follow our nature; which miseries the Philosophers saw, and confessed: but the wisest of them could neuer conceiue the cause thereof, which is sinne. In this 3d chapter is also contained a most excel∣lent (euen the first) promise of Christ. But we are briefly to consider of his fall, which is set downe in the fixe first verses: the rest of the chapter shewing the conse∣quence of the fall. The Diuell, being fallen irrecouerably, comes into the Garden, and in the forme of a Serpent, I meane speaking in, and by a true Serpent, out of a cruell enuy of Mans happinesse, and an insatiable desire of doing hurt, tempts the first Woman, and by the Woman, Man to sinne, and preuailes: He boords the Woman thus: Yea? Hath God said, ye shal not eate?Verse 1. &c. As if he should haue said; It is alikely matter, that God cares what yee eate: What? do you thinke that God stands vpon an Apple? It is not to be beleeued: Hath hee created all things for you, and would he not let you vse all things? This is the first assault: which the Woman weakely resisteth, beginning euen at the first to yeeld,Verse 2.3. as appeareth by rehearsing
the commination, or threatning, falsly: For whereas God said;Gen. 2.17. Thou shalt dye the death, nothing the certainty of it; the speaketh doubtfully: Lest yee dye. As if she began to thinke, that it might be they should dye, if they did eate, it might be not. The Diuell perceiuing the Woman to stagger, and the wall of her faith to shake, plies all his ordinance to the battry. For the word was no sooner out of her mouth, Lest yee dye:Verse 4. but he replieth: Yee shall not dye at all. As if he should haue said: What? Dye? with eating so faire in Ap∣ple? Can there be any hurt in this? Silly Woman! Yée shall not dye at all. God affirmed, Yee shall dye certainly. The Woman doubteth, Lest yee dye. The Diuell, that old Lyer, denieth; Yee shall not dye at all. Then (not giuing the Wo∣man any respite to bethinke her, or to re∣ply) he accuseth God of enuy,Verse 5. and promi∣seth Diuinity vnto them. O (saith hée) God knoweth, &c. As if he should haue said, God enuies your hahpinesse, and I cannot but tell you of it. For he knowes well inough, that if you should eate of that trée, you should sée that you neuer
saw: (O subtile deceiuer!) and that yée shall be as Gods. Impudent liar! when as by this meanes both they and their  became like vnto him. Beholde O woman (saith he) what a goodly Trée this is! how pleasant to the eye, delicate to the taste, diuine for vse. Can it doe you any hurt? would any but fooles ab∣staine? goe to, eate and feare not, Ile warrant you: And then the woman yéeldeb, and séeing that it was good for meate, pleasant to the eyes, and a Trée to bée desired to get Knowledge; she tooke of it, and did eate, and by these same rea∣sons perswaded her husband, and gaue him, and hée did eate. Ah! and Alas!Verse 6. whose heart is not moued to ruth, who mournes not that considers the fall of the Mighty? Oh! How were the Mighty ouer∣throwne in the midst of Paradice by the subtilty of the Serpent? Euen holy A∣dam by the enticement of his Wife! Tell it in the gates of the Citties, Preach it on the house tops, and publish it in the eares of all the world, till the Inhabitants of the earth mourne for the misery that is come vpon them, euen till the Elect and Beloued bee deliuered and renewed by
the strong Arme, and Grace, of their Restorer and Sauiour IESUS CHRIST. This is the fall, of our first Parents euen their most grieuoussinne: which is not to bée measured by the price of the Ap∣ple, but by the Person, whose Comman∣dement is broken; together, with the great reason they had to kéepe it, and the ea∣sines of performing the same. It is thought of some to bée the greatest sinne pardonable, that euer was committed: and surely it was most heynous, and in∣iurious to God our Creator; being called the Fall, because it is not one sinne but many: as, First, Doubting: Secondly, Infidelity: Thirdly, Security: Fourthly, Curiosity, seeking wisedome beside the Word: Fifthly, Pride: Sixthly, Idolatry, preferring the deuill and his lyes, before God and his Truth: Seuenthly, horrible Vnthankefulnesse: Eighthly, contempt of God: Ninthly, murder both of themselues and of their Posterity, &c. The consequents of this fall, followes in the seuenth verse, to the end of the chapter, viz. when they had both thus ea∣ten, then their eyes were opened, and
they saw that that were naked; and they were ashamed, & fled from God, &c. Their eyes were opened: Not that they saw not at all before, but to sée that which they saw not before, to wit, their owne misery and shame: In the act of their sinne their eyes (that of their vnderstanding) were shut by the Witch-craft of the Deuill: Af∣ter their sinne, they are opened; their con∣sciences accuse them of guiltinesse, they sensibly féele their nakednesse; that is, the corruption their nature, the losse of the Image of God; And are ashamed: Then they séeke figge leaues to couer the naked∣nesse of their bodies, flye from God, de∣ny the fact, and most impudently excuse themselues: the woman laying the blame vpon the serpent, the man vpon God. Then God sentenceth them to all man∣ner of miseries for their transgression: and yet in mercy propoundeth a Sauiour, which is ye séed of ye woman, Iesus Christ, by whom they might bée saued through faith and repentance▪ Vse 1. If Adam and Eue, hauing the Image of God shining in them, and being in Paradice, were not out of the gun-shot of Sathan, but were tempted and ouer∣come:
What person or place can then bee frée? yea, who can preuaile? but onely such which obtaine sufficient grace, continu∣ally pray for strength,1. Pet. 5.8. Epe. 6.10.11.12. 2. Cor. 12.9. &c. and watch against this deuouring enemy, putting on the whole armour of God. Vse 2. In as much as Sathan doth not at first plainly tempt Eue, to disobey God, but first cunningly, beginnes to bréed a doubt in her minde of the certaine∣ty of Gods Word, wée are taught two singular things: First to obserue the order of the deuils procéeding in temptation, for looke how hée delt with Eue, so he dea∣leth with vs, drawing vs, not bluntly and at the first dash, into euill, but by de∣grées: As when hée would kéep men from Repentance, that they might be damned with him; hée will not at first say, Ye néed not repent at all: but thus, (much like as hée dealt with Eue) Yea? beginne so soone to bée precise? What? a yong Saint? Loose your best time? The flowre of your age? Wither your body with griefe, care, stu∣dy, and melancholy? Bury your selfe quicke? Tush: giue your selfe liberty; you are yong, you shall haue time enough af∣terwards, you néed not repent as yet.
Thus doth the serpent hisse: But yéeld in this, and deferre thy Repentance, and then hée will rore out boldly; Thou néedst not repent at all, &c. Secondly, hence we are taught, that if we would be preserued in the time of temptation; then one sin∣gular meanes is to hold fast the word of God, and to beléeue it: which was the weapon wherewith Christ repelled and foyled the deuill in the Wildernesse:Mat. 4.10. when he brought Eue to doubt of this, shée was easily ouercome: so if he can bring vs to neglect, contemne, or speake euill of the Word, or but to doubt of the truth of it, hee makes reckoning we are his owne: This is, as if wee should yéeld our wea∣pons into our enemies hands, to cut our owne throats, for then we must needs bee ouercome, &c. Vse 3. From the guiltinesse of consci∣ence, corruption, shame, and other mise∣ries, issuing from the disobedience of our first Parents; we learne what it is to sin: namely, to bring our selues vnder the danger of all the curses and plagues of God. The deuill promiseth pleasure and profite, if we sinne, fulfilling our owne lusts, beléeue him if thou wilt: he that
tempts thée now, will, if thou beest ruled by him, torment thée for it afterwards. Remember how hee promised a kind of Diuinity to our first Parents, and trem∣ble. Labour what thou canst to resist him, and repent. Vse 4. When we see our nakednesse, bodily, or spirituall, or feele any cold or heat hurtfull; sickenesse, want, paine, &c. we should call to minde the originall of all these our sinnes, and be humbled, &c. Quest. What if Adam and Eue thus offended, what's that to vs? Ans. Yes very much; for though Adam actually transgressed, yet because he was not, as a priuate, but as a publique per∣son, representing, and the very roote of all Man-kind: receiuing, and loosing, not onely for himselfe, but for all his Posteri∣ty, the Grace which hee had: Therefore his fall made both Himselfe,Rom. 5.12. Rom. 5.18. Rom. 5.19. Gen. 5.3. Psal. 51.5. and all Man∣kind also, Culpable, Guilty, and Cor∣rupt, &c. Expl. In Adams sinne, three things concurred: First, the Actuall Transgressi∣on: Secondly, the Legall Guilt: Thirdly, the Naturall Prauity, or Corruption. These three are conueyed to all Poste∣rity
(the Virgin Mary not excepted) which are by Naturall Generation descended of Adam; and that, three waies. The fault by participation, For as Leui was in Abrahams Loines, so were we in Adams: Therefore the Apostle saith:Rom. 5.12. That in Adam all sinned. The guilt, by imputa∣tion; as the sonne of a Traytor, looseth the honour his father lost by his Treason: Therefore Paul saith;Rom. 5.18. By the offence of one the guilt came on all men to condem∣nation, and this is meant when wee say the sinne of Adam is imputed to vs. The Corruption by Generation; therefore it is said: By one Mans disobedience,Rom. 5.19. wee are made sinners: So Adam begat Seth, not according to ye image in which he was first created, but in his Image as he then was, corrupt; that is, a corrupt father, begat a corrupt sonne.Gen. 5.3. Ioh. 3.6. As that which is borne of the Flesh is Flesh: As a serpent engenders a serpent, so sinnefull men be∣gets sinnefull men, according to the Rule: That which is begotten followeth the na∣ture of that which doth beget. Neither doth this hinder, because some are rege∣nerated and their sinnes pardoned; for men beget not children, as they are rege∣nerate,
but as they are men: euen as a circumcised father begetteth an vncir∣cumcised sonne: and as cleane séed-Corne commeth vp with straw and chaffe, and other wrecke: so men, though they haue obtained grace, beget children which are borne and conceiued in sinne. Vse 1. Hence we learne, that children are corrupt, not onely by imitation, but also by nature: not as it was at first crea∣ted, but as it is now corrupted: none par∣taking thereof (Christ onely excepted) but being culpable, guilty, and corrupt thereby. Vse 2. This also admonisheth parents, with all care to endeuour to bring vp their children in the instruction and informati∣on of the Lord; that as they are Instru∣ments of their generation, & also of their corruption and guiltinesse, conceiued by the same: so they become instruments, by their good Education and Discipline, of their regeneration by the Spirit of God. Surely these parents which beget and bring forth children, and care not to teach them the feare of God, and to instruct them in holinesse, both by doctrine and ex∣ample, bring forth Children (as much as
in them lieth) fort the Diuell, and not for God, &c. Q. Tell me more plainly, what is that cor∣ruption that you say is conueyed vnto vs from Adam? Ans. It is that which is called Originall sinne: which is the disorder of the whole man, and the guiltinesse of Adams trans∣gression,Gen. 6.5. Rom. 7.18 Psal. 51.7. Rom. 8.7. 1. Cor. 2.14 Iam. 1.14.15. Mat. 15.19 brought vpon all mankinde by the fall of Adam; whereby they want the righteousnes which ought to be in them, and haue that vnrighteousnesse which ought not to bee in them, which makes them inclinable to actuall sinne, being the fountaine thereof. Expl. This corruption of Nature is called Originall sinne, or of beginning; because it was from the beginning, as soone as euer the fall of Adam was: and also, because it is one of the first things which is with the childe in the concepti∣on: And further, because it is the begin∣ning of all actuall sinne. Generally and more largely taken, it signifies the sinne of Adam, the guilt following, and the cor∣ruption: but more strictly, it is vsually taken, onely for the corruption of nature, which implieth the losse of the Image of
God; and in the stead thereof, in the minde, blindnesse and vanity; in yt will, stubbornnesse and rebellion; and in the affections, sences, and the whole body, grieuous disorder, contrary to that that should be, and inclinable to all euill: Yea, we may not thinke, that the substance of body and soule, or any faculties, are im∣paired; but as in a poysoned Fountaine, there is the water, and the running, one∣ly the wholesomnesse is taken away: so onely the soundnesse of these is lost, and in the roome therof, all vnsoundnesse hath taken place. This corruption, which wée thus speake of, hath truely the nature of sinne, and maketh subiect to the wrath of God, as is manifest in Infants, which die, though they haue committed no actu∣all transgression,Rom. 5.14 as Paul reasoneth. And this is further to be remembred, that it is not so deriued vnto vs, that one hath one part of originall sinne, and another ano∣ther part; but it is wholly in euery one, and is the Séed and Spawne of all sinne, euen of the Sinne against the Holy Ghost. Vse 1. Hence we sée, that we are cor∣rupt and guilty of Hell, euen in our mo∣thers
wombe: being conceiued in sinne:Psal. 51.5. so that a childe of a day old is not inno∣cent, though we call them so, in regard of any actuall rebellion in their owne per∣sons performed: for there is in them Sin, or concupiscence, in ye first act, as they say, euen as rauenousnesse in the Lyons, or Wolues Whelpe; which also afterwards will breake out into the second act in time to come. Euen as therefore, we kill an old Wolfe, or Snake, for the hurt it hath done, or is ready now to do, and also all the yong ones for the hurtfull nature they haue, which in time will shew it selfe: So God may iustly cast, euen Infants, into Hell, for the corruption of their nature, and will, all such of them, which he hath not, by election of grace, ordained to e∣ternall life. Vse 2. Seing there is in euery one, an inclination, through corruption, vnto all sinne, euen that vnpardonable one: then, if thou haue receiued grace and power to maister thy corruptions, acknowledge him who hath discerned thée: and when thou séest a Drunkard, or any other sin∣ner wallowing in his sinne, praise God; for thou art of the same Mould and Met∣tall,
and if thou doest not the like, it is not the goodnesse of thy nature; but the mercy of God, restraining, or sanctifying thy corrupt heart. Also, let it teach thée, not to despaire of thy neighbour, or rash∣ly to condemne him, that yet hath not ob∣tained grace: For as thou being, by na∣ture, in the same condemnation, hast ob∣tained mercy: so what knowest thou, how God will deale with him? Rather pray for him, and endeuour to bring him to the partaking of that grace which thou hast receiued; which is indéed a property of true grace. Vse 3. This also teacheth a singular point of Wisedome: namely, in the pra∣ctise of repentance, to strike at the roote, to crucifie the flesh, and the affections, and to destroy the body of Sinne: As Physitions, which in the curing of a dis∣ease, remoue the cause: or as a man that would destroy Wéeds, pluckes them vp Roote and Rinde; bend all thy force, stu∣dy and sorrow in repentance first this way. For from whence are Drunken∣nesse, Whooredome, Idolatry, Blasphe∣my, Lying? &c. euen from this bitter root, this vncleane fountaine of Originall
sinne.2. Reg. 2.21 As therefore Elisha healed the bit∣ter Waters, by seasoning them at the Spring: So he that would haue a sound and holy life, must labour to be sound within, and that his heart be truely sea∣soned with grace: else all is to no purpose. And here is the difference betwéen Hypo∣crites, and such as are truly renewed: they cut off the branches, these the roote: they reforme the action, these the affection of sinne. Therfore as Sara will haue Ismael put away, and the Bond-woman his mo∣ther also: so are we also, to put from vs all euill actions, and to mortifie euen the affection of sinning, if we would soundly repent. Q. You speake of Actuall and Originall sinne: what is sinne? Ans. Sinne is the transgression of the Law.1. Ioh. 3.4 Q. What is the Law you speake of? Ans. The Law which I meane, is the eternall Rule of Righteousnesse in God, manifested to man, first in the Creation, afterward repeated by the voyce of God, and written in two Tables of stone by the finger of God, containing diuine precepts what we should be, doe, and leaue vn∣done,
requiring perfect obedience vnder the hope of life,Esay 8.20. Exo. 20.1. &c. Psal. 19.11 & 119.105 Leui. 18.5 Deu. 27.27 and punishing the least disobedience with eternal death. Exp. The law is taken sundry waies in the Scripture, héere we take it for the Morall law, contained in the ten Com∣mandements: we call it an eternall Rule of righteousnesse in God: because it is a bright beame issuing from the Father of Lights, containing the summe of his wil, concerning his worshiip, and the duety of man vnto him, and to his neighbour. For Gods wil is the rule of all righteousnesse; the Law the Copy of it:Math. 6.10 and 7.21. therefore obedi∣ence of workes, is called diuerse times, doing of Gods will, in his word. This Law is an eternall rule, because it was alwayes in God, and shall for euer continue, euen vnto all eternity, perfectly to be kept in heauen; and also to distin∣guish it from the Ceremoniall and Iudi∣ciall Lawes, which are abrogated. The Ceremoniall in regard of Vse and Obser∣uation; and the Iudiciall, in regarde of Obligation: So that, as wee may, at no hand, bring into vse the Leuiticall Cere∣monies, so we are not bound to the same forme of Lawes Politicall, which were
giuen to the Common-wealth of the Iewes. And yet the generall equitie of both remaines; of the Iudicialls, that sinne is to be punished by the Magistrate: of the Ceremonialls, that God is to bee worshipped in the comelinesse himselfe hath commaunded: besides the substance of these Ceremonies, which remaines for euer, Iesus Christ. This Law was at the first printed in Adams heart; the knowledge and loue thereof, being a part of the Image of God in him. A glimmering whereof God, in his singular wisedome, continued in the heart of man after the fall: namely, so much as might serue for the continuing of fellowship and society amongst men,Rom. 1.19.2.15. and which might leaue them without ex∣cuse. This remnant we vsually call the Law of Nature, not that mans nature is the Author of it, but because it is im∣printed in the same. Afterward the Lord repeated that Law on Mount Sinai, and writ it in two tables of stone, to conuince the stony hearts of men. Quest. What are the words of this Law? Ans. The words of this Law are these; Then God spake all these words, and said, I am
the Lord thy God which brought thee, &c. as it followeth in Exodus chap. 20. from the beginning of the first verse to the end of the sixteenth. Expli. These tenne Lawes, or Lawe Sentences, are the ground and rule of all righteousnesse, with the which what∣soeuer agréeth, is good. Whatsoeuer disa∣gréeth, is euill: containing the generall heads of al duties to God and man which can be required. Diuided into two Ta∣bles, the first containing our duety to God, the summe where of is: Thou shalt loue the Lord thy God with all thy heart, &c. The second, our duety to our neigh∣bour, the summe whereof is,Matth. 22.37, 38, 39. Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. Also it is diuided into tenne Precepts. The man∣ner of giuing this law was very solemne and terrible:Deut. 10.4. Exod. 19. worthy to be often read, and marked of all. For the meaning of these Commandements, these generall Rules are to be obserued: First, they are to be vnderstood as the Prophets and Apostles haue expounded and taught them. Se∣condly, In all affirmatiue Precepts the negatiue, and in all negatiue, the affir∣matiue are to be vnderstood. Thirdly, the
maner of speach is to be obserued, as first concerning persons, by, Thou shalt, and shalt not; is meant euery one; none are exempted: Secondly, concerning things forbidden or commaunded; vnder one particular named; all of that nature, and kind, with the signes, causes, and effects, are vnderstood. Fourthly, the Lawe is spirituall, not onely brideling the hands, but the heart and first motions thereof. Fiftly, No creature can fully sée into the depth of the doctrine, and particulars con∣tained in it. Sixtly, None can dispence against this Law, but God onely, either in whole, or in part. Vse 1. First, we are to praise God for giuing the Law, without the which wee could neuer attaine to the knowledge of sinne, and so of our wretchednes thereby; for by the Law comes the knowledge of sinne. Of the which,Rom. 3.20.7.7.8. so long as wee are ignorant, we neuer séeke for remedy by Iesus Christ: euen as that man neuer séekes the Physition, which knoweth not that he is sicke: Many thinke aswell of themselues, as the Pharise, till the Law come: and then they appeare as blacke as hell. Therefore when the pride of thine
heart discouereth it selfe, by any vaine conceit of thy owne worthinesse: Looke thy selfe in the true glasse of the law, that thou maist be humbled. Vse 2. With all reuerence heare, and with all care obey this Law: for if the gi∣ning of it were so terrible; how terrible shall the reuenging of the transgressions thereof be; thinke you? Vse 3. From the number of the Pre∣cepts, being tenne, we may profitably re∣member, that as they are not many, but few; not confused, but orderly; and di∣stinct; not long and tedious, but excéed∣ing short: that we should in no wise be ignorant of them, the Lord hauing fra∣med them so: that they may be carried in minde, as readily as the number of our fingers and toes. Vse 4. In asmuch as the Lord forbid∣deth all transgressions, vnder the names of the greatest sinnes of that kinde, as all oppression vnder the name of Murther: all deceit vnder the name of Theft; &c. We are carefully to auoyde all, euen the least sinnes, euen sinfull thoughts: for (whatsoeuer we thinke) no sinne is little, but in the account of God; euen vniust
anger is murder. Extenuate not there∣fore, nor minse thy sinnes, saying; Oh this is a trifle. I would no body did doe worse. I hope I am neither whoore nor thiefe, &c. for all vnchaste and wanton lookes, speaches, &c. is whoredome, all couetousnesse, deceit, and griping in bar∣gaining, &c. is theft in the sight of God: But rather be humbled for them by true repentance, that they may be forgiuen. For the least euill thought shall damne a man, without Christ, according to the te∣nour of this law;Gal. 3.10. Cursed is euery one that continueth not in all things written in the Law to doe them. Quest. But is not this Morall Lawe ab∣rogated by Christ? Ans. Not, as it is a rule of our life, for so it is eternall, not to be abolished ey∣ther heere, or in the life to come;Math. 5.17 18. but in regard of the appurtenances of it: as the Threatnings, and Curse,Rom. 6.15. and 7.6. Galat. 3.13 and 4.5. and the seuere exaction of obedience in our persons, vn∣to Iustification, it is abolished to the chil∣dren of God. Explic. There are thrée voyces of the law: The first is, Thou shalt doe this, and auoyde that: This is neuer to be at
an end: but the law this way, as it is a doctrine commaunding good, and forbid∣ding euill, shall by vs be most perfectly fulfilled in heauen, where we shall most perfectly loue God and our neighbour, which is the whole law: and Saint Paul saith,1. Cor. 13.8. That loue neuer is to be abolished. The 2d voice of the lawis, if thou dost this in thine own person, thou shalt liue. The third: If thou doest it not, or doest the coutrary, thou arte accursed: Now the Morall law is abrogated, and the mouth thereof stopped to the children of God in these two last respects: The Gospel tea∣ching life and saluation by another, which is Christ; who also hath for vs, and in our stead, borne the curse of the law: but of the vngodly the law still exacteth their personall obedience, and thundreth out the plagues and iudgements of God a∣gainst them for the want thereof. Vse 1. Christ hath purchased thée li∣berty, but not of the flesh; that thou shouldest liue as thou list, without a law: but onely from the necessity of Iustifica∣tion by the law: and from the curse there∣of. But to the obedience thou art bound to doe thy vtmost endeuour, more then
before, euen for the Redemption sake, which thou hast obtained, &c. Vse 2. Hereby also we perceiue that Redemption from the Law is a benefite not to be valued by Gold: Wée feare sa∣than, and sinne, as wée haue great cause: But, neither sathan without sinne, nor sinne without the Law, can any way harme vs, for the sting of death is sinne,1. Cor. 15.55. and the strength of sinne is the Law. Whether the Law require perfect obedi∣ence in our owne persons, or threaten damnation for the least disobedience; the voyce of it is more vnpleasant, then the croking of the Frogs and Toads in Egypt: more terrible then the noyse of thunder, yea then the roaring of the de∣uils: For euen the Iustest men (how much more the wicked and profane) euen the Iustest men, I say, are guilty of ma∣ny sins, and if there be no meanes to qui∣et the Law, they must néeds bée subiect to the terrours of an accusing Conscience in this life (which are the very flashings of hel-fire, alas! who can beare them) and bee euerlastingly damned in ye world to come. And besides, in as much as the Law re∣quireth perfect obedience, of parts and
degrees euen to a haires bredth: What peace can the best man or woman in the world haue in any thing they do? for they must néeds méete with the curse, euen in their best actions: in as much as the best are imperfect, and that which is imperfect is cursed by the Law. No maruell then that the Papists, and our Ignorants so do vpon the Law, séeking to be iustified thereby: Surely, if there were no other way to Iustification, but by the Law, we should all be damned: but there is another way, which is the obedience of I E∣SUS CHRIST apprehended by faith, &c. Vse 3. If thou comfortably seekest the benefite of Redemption from the Law in thy conscience, labour to preserue it, by Faith, Obedience, Repentance, Prayer, and other holy exercises, and carefully be∣ware of all sinne, least thou come within the dynt of the Law: for sinne subiects vs vnto it: as therefore the burnt child dreads the fire; and euen the Bird that hath bene once shaken in the Net, is not easily taken againe; so if thou beest free, keepe thy selfe so: Sinne bringeth into bondage. As therefore wee reade how the Romanes. in
detestation of the name of proud Tar∣quine, who tyrannized ouer them, ba∣nished a good Cittizen, onely because he∣had that name; euen so, if thou truely knowest what a precious thing thy Re∣demption is, it will make thee hate the very mention (much more the practise) of sinne, which frustrateth the same, &c. Quest. What is then the vse of the Law? Ans. The vse of the Law is three-fold: First, to restraine corruption from brea∣king forth into externall transgression:Gal. 3.19. Rom. 7.7.8.9.10.11. Ezech. 20.19. Psal. 19. & 119. Se∣condly, to discouer, make worse, and con∣demne sinne: Thirdly, to instruct vs, in the true worship of God, and to rule our liues. Expl. If a man know not the vse of that which he possesseth, or haue a Iewell, and know not what it is good for, it is vnprofitable to him. So, the Law is good to him which knoweth how to vse it:1. Tim. 1.8 And a man may so vse it, that it may bee most hurtfull vnto him: as namely, if he seeke Iustification by it, which is onely by faith in Christ: It may not be vsed as a healing Plaister, for it hath no such na∣ture; but as a Corrasiue, that the dead flesh of our proud hearts being eaten out
by the sharpenesse of the Law; we may be fit to be healed by the Bloud of Christ. First therefore the Law serues, by the threates of it, to restraine vs from sinne, and to keep and containe vs in obedience: and this is the vse which the Pharisies and Hypocrites, make onely of it: being indeed proper to the vnregenerate, and therefore also dealing with the belee∣uers, so farre as they are vnregenerate: For otherwise, as they are spirituall, they are a Law to themselues, and the Law not put for them: they doing of them∣selues, by the guift of Sanctification, wil∣lingly, that which the Law enioynes vn∣der the penalty of the curse; and would also do it, though the Law threatned not: Euen as a mother loues her child of her olune accord, though the Law also require the same. Secondly, it serues to discouer sinne, and to prouoke it, and to damne it: The first and last of these three, being na∣turall to the Law, the second the effect of the law, not of it selfe, but through our corrupt nature, which takes occasion by the Law, which is good, and forbids euill, to bée the worse: Now in these respects the
Law is said to worke anger,Rom. 4.15. 1. Cor. 3.7. and to be the ministery of death. Thirdly, the Law serues for a doctrine, to instruct vs; not what to do to be iusti∣fied; but to shew vs wherein stands our duty to God and man, and what to do to shew our selues thankefull for our Iustifi∣cation by Iesus Christ. Vse 1. Héere we may take knowledge of the vilenesse of our Nature; which is the worse for that, for which it should bée the better, turning that into death which was ordained for life: For euen as a cor∣rupt stomacke, turnes good meate into the nature of the disease; so till grace come by Christ, wée are the worse for the Law, longing after that which is forbidden. Euen as there was but one Trée forbid∣den, and that must Eue haue or none: So is it with vs, our corruption iudging stollen waters swéeter then those of our Fountaine. For as a Riuer, when the course of it is stopt, it riseth and swels a∣gainst the impediment: So doth our vile nature against the Law, being so much the more euill, by how much the more the Law commands vs to be good. This should serue excéedingly to humble vs,
and to séeke for the renouation of the Spirit, that wée may loue the Law and obey it: For heere is the weakenesse of the Law, it shewes that which is good, but giues no power to do it: But the Gospell (teaching vs better then the Law) learnes vs ouer the same lesson againe, and giues power also to do the same. Vse 2. Héere also we sée how necessary the Preaching of the Law is to prepare men for Christ; though it haue no skill or power to apply him: Euen as the Néedle is necessary, to make a way for the thred whereby the rent is sowne vp; though it bée the thrid that fastheth the péece toge∣ther, not the Néedle, and without the Née∣dle the Thrid cannot do it: Euen so it is the Gospell which blesseth the Conscience with Peace; but first the Law must make way for the same. For euen as the Land is not fit to receiue the Séede, till it bee torne vp with the Plough: So neither are wée fit to receiue Grace vnto Life, till we, being humbled by the Law, be made to sée what néede we haue of a Redéemer. Of this vse of the Law wée haue example in Dauid.2. Sam. 12.1.15. Act. 2.37. Examine then how thou camest by the perswasion thou hast of grace by
Christ, if thou wert neuer vnder the ham∣mer of the law, and bruised by it, thou art not healed by Christ: but if thou camest by thy comfort this way, after an vnfeig∣ned humiliation by the law, and now thou endeuourest, and hast respect to all the commandements thereof, then thou mayest haue assurance of the goodnesse of thy estate, otherwise thou mayest iustly doubt of it. Q. Can you perfectly keepe the law? Ans. I confesse that no man liuing is a∣ble to performe that perfect obedience which the law requireth.Iames 3.2. Psa. 143.2. Expl. Adam in his innocency was able to haue performed perfect obedience to the law, both in regard of perfection of parts, and also of degrées; which in the state of corruption is impossible, euen to the regenerate, in their owne persons, in this life, though in the life to come, they shall most perfectly fulfill the same in their owne persons, when the Image of CHRIST shall perfectly be renewed in them. Now if any should say, that it is vn∣méet to thinke, that God should punish for the breach of that law which is impos∣sible
to be kept: It is answered, that the law was possible to man, as God made him; though it be vnpossible, as man made himselfe. As iustly then, as a man may require his debt of him, who through his owne vnthriftinesse, hath made him∣selfe vnable to pay it: Euen so may God most iustly require that of vs, vnto the which he did inable vs, though we wan∣tonly haue dis-inabled our selues. Wher∣fore, if at any time we read, that ye Saints are said to be perfect, and to kéepe the law: it is not to be vnderstood of perfection, or obedience legally taken, according to the strict rigor of the law; but Euangellical∣ly, or according to the mitigation of the Gospell: which is, first, when the party obeying is in Christ; in whom all our im∣perfections are expiated, and our spiritu∣all sacrifices accepted.1. Pet. 2.5. Secondly, when the heart is vpright, and sincerely affected to all the Commandements of GOD. Thirdly, in comparison of others: as Noah, a perfect and iust man: not simply, but in his generation: as Iudah cals Tha∣mar more righteous, though sinfull e∣nough. Fourthly, when we aime at perfection, the Lord in mercy accounting
vs, not as we are, according to the strict rule of his iustice, but as we would be through the worke of his Spirit in our hearts. If any shall obiect, that the workes of the Saints are the workes of the Spirit; therefore perfect: It is safely answered, that if they were the workes of the Spirit alone, it were true: but they are so the workes of the Spirit, that they are our workes also, and sauour of our corrupti∣on: as pure water is soyled by passing through a filthy channell; and good Wine (as it were) tainted by the fustinesse of the Caske: And further, our actions are to be reputed such, as are the next natu∣rall beginnings in vs from whence they procéed: which are an vnderstanding, but in part inlightened; and will, and affecti∣ons, but in part sanctified by the Spirit. Vse 1. Trust not in thine own works: for though they may be in some respect good, yet in other respect they haue euill mingled withall: so that thou hast much cause, or more, when thou hast done thy best, to aske pardon for that is wanting, then to boast of that thou hast perfor∣med, &c.
Vse 2. Perswade thy heart to ende∣uour to please him with thy best seruice, who so graciously is content through Christ, to accept of thy weake obedi∣ence, &c. Q. None then can keepe the law: what doe they deserue which breake it? Ans. They which in the least manner breake that holy Law, deserue the wrath and curse of God:Deu. 27.26 Gal. 3.10. Rom. 2.9. & 6.23. that is, all plagues, and iudgements of body and soule, in this world, and in the world to come. Vse 1. If one sinne deserue Hell, then what hast thou iust cause to feare, who art guilty of innumerable sinnes? How shalt thou escape vnder many sinnes, when the least sinne is so heauy and hey∣nous, that it cannot bee pardoned with∣out the heart bloud of Iesus Christ? &c. Vse 2. Hate sin, which bringeth with it the curse, yea all curses: and if thy vile nature taketh pleasure in any sinne, lay the momentany pleasure thereof with ye eternall paine that followeth it, and consi∣der wisely: Is sinne swéet? But Death and the Curse are bitter. Couetousnesse, Vsury, Vncleannesse, Drunkennesse, Reuenge, may please the flesh; but kno∣west
thou not, that they will bee bit∣ter in the end? Wilt thou rather separate thy selfe foreuer from God, and be accur∣sed, then leaue thy sinnes, and walke in the commandements of God? Who can dwell with continuall burnings, and en∣dure that fire? &c. Q. Wee are all sinners, and deserue the curse, what meanes is there to be freed from it? Ans. Whosoeuer are iustified in the sight of God, by the obedience of Christ,Rom. 5.1.2.3.4.5. Rom. 8.1. Gal. 3.13. through Faith, are sure to escape the curse of the Law. Q. What is iustification in the sight of God? Ans. Iustification is the sentence of God; whereby, as a Iudge, for the righte∣ousnesse of another, that is of Christ, he freely forgiueth the sins of the belieuing sinner,Rom. 3.21.22.23.24.25.26. and imputeth the righteousnesse of Christ vnto him, for his owne glory, and the sinners eternall saluation. Expl. For the vnderstanding of this wonderful point, it must be very well ob∣serued, that Iustification, or to Iustifie, signifies not to make Iust, by expelling the euill quality in vs, and infusing that which is good: but alwayes in this matter it is taken iudicially, being a tearme, or
word taken from the bench of the Iudge, and signifies by way of sentence, to pro∣nounce a person arraigned, to be cleare, quit and guiltlesse, as appeares: He that iustifies the wicked,Pro. 17.15. and condemneth the iust: both these are an abhominatiō to the Lord. Here, by the opposition of Iusti∣fying and Condemning,Psal. 14 3.2 Rom. 8.33 &c. it is manifest, that Iustification is iudicially taken: for it is no abhomination to make an euill man good: so also is the word taken. For the vnderstanding then of the an∣sweres to the two last questions, conceiue thus. Thou hast broken the Law, and art a grieuous sinner; Thou must answere it before the iudgement seate of God, the sentence of the Law is: Thou must bee damned for thy sinnes: Thy Conscience askes how thou shalt escape? The answer is: There is no way, vnlesse the Iudges fa∣uour may bee obtained to iustifie thee, that is, to absolue thée by his sentence. Which Iudge (who is God, from whose sentence there is no appeale) if he shall iustifie thée, that is, pronounce thée to be guiltlesse and Iust, and so acquite thée, then thy Conscience hath Peace. Vse 1: Diligently study this point,
which is the chiefe Tower (as it were) of Christian Religion, against all Genti∣lisme, and Superstitions: Which if it be not rightly vnderstood, it is not possible to preserue the purity of doctrine in other points: Yea, some Papists haue confessed (and it is most true) that this doctrine,Pighius. ra∣zeth the very foundation of all Popery: their Idolatrous Sacrifice of the Masse, their groundlesse Purgatory, their super∣stitious praying to Saints, and for the dead, &c. Being no more able to stand be∣fore this doctrine, sincerely taught & vn∣derstood, then the Dagon of the Philistins was able to stand before the holy Arke of Israel. This is the summe of the Bible, the ground of our peace and assurance. It were therefore a very grosse thing, that a∣ny Christians of the yeares of discretion, should be ignorant hereof. Vse 2. It is the greatest and hardest matter in ye world, for a sinner to be iusti∣fied in the sight of God. Many thinke it to be a slight and easie thing: and therfore they neither feare him, nor seriously séeke forgiuenesse. But consider thou, that thou must be arraigned, and tried, before the iudgement seat of that God, who is a
consuming fire: in whose sight the Hea∣uens are vncleane, who will not fauour iniquity, who cannot be deluded, or de∣ceiued; who cannot retract, and reuerse the sentence of condemnation manifest in the law, without satisfaction: for the law accusing sheweth that sentence alrea∣dy written with the finger of God: & thy conscience confesseth all: Consider this, and then tell me what it is to be Iustified: How shalt thou escape? Euen Dauid, a man beloued of God, and after his owne heart, when hee considereth this, crieth out, Enter not into iudgement with thy seruant, O Lord, for in thy fight shall no flesh be iustified. And againe, If thou shalt marke iniquities, who shall stand? name∣ly, in iudgement. What then canst thou say, why thou shouldst not be damnned? What shall thy conscience plead? Guilty thou art, and God must deale iustly. To whom wilt thou go? We will go euen to Iesus Christ, our Lambe, slaine from the beginning of the world: Iehouah our righteousnesse, our surety, who hath per∣fectly fulfilled the Law for vs, and fully paid, and patiently suffered all things which can be exacted of vs, or were to be
suffered by vs. Whose righteousnesse is ours (if we beléeue) euen as effectually, as if it had béene done in our owne per∣sons: and for this onely is a sinner iusti∣fied, that is pronounced to be iust before God, This if thou know it, happy arte thou if thou féele it, &c. Quest. You said that wee are instified by the righteousnesse of another; How can that be? Can I liue by another mans Soule? or be learned by the learning that is in an other? Ans. I verely beleeue, that the righ∣teousnesse, for the which I am iustified in the sight of God, is not in me,Iere. 23.6. 1. Cor. 1.30 2. Cor. 5.21 Phil. 3.9. but in Ie∣sus Christ my Redeemer and Surety. Explic. Those things, though they séeme hard, yet are easie inough to him which is willing to learne and beléeue the Scriptures, and doth not desire to make his faith subiect to his reason. We must then know that Christ is our Suretie:Hebr. 7.2 and looke; as the debter is discharged by the payment performed by the Surety, and such payment made, is imputed to tho Debter, and reckoned as if he had payed it himselfe: So God in sentence giuing, imputeth vnto vs that which our Surety hath done or suffered for vs,
and (whatsoeuer wée are in our selues) respecteth vs as if it had béene done by vs, and so dischargeth vs. If any shall obiect, and say; How can I be righteous by anothers Righteous∣nesse? Suppose Christs? Why may I not as well be said to liue by the humane Soule of Christ, as to be instified by his Righteousnesse. The answere is ready: That those two things are not like, as they are supposed to be: Because the humane Soule of Christ was not giuen him, or appointed to this end to enliue, and informe my bodie: but the Righte∣ousnesse of Christ was appointed by God to this end, that I thereby should be ac∣counted righteous before him: For the quality, property, or nature of any thing, whereby it is apt and fitte vnto this, or vnto that, is from, and depends vpon the appoyntment of God, the GOD of Nature: the affection of the Creature, whereby it naturally produceth any ef∣fect, being the effect or creation of God: So that if you aske, Why doth the Sunne shine: the Fire burne? &c. I an∣swere; Because GOD hath appoynted them so to doe: which appoyntment of
his is their very nature: As then it is naturall for the Sunne to shine, and the fire to burne, and that I should be war∣med by the heate, which is in the fire, because God hath so appointed: So also it is as naturall an effect, for the righte∣ousnesse of Christ to iustifie Beléeuers, Because God hath appoynted it to that end and purpose. For it falls not out at aduenture, that Christs Righteousnes should be ours; but God in his Eternall Counsell, appoynted Christ to be our Suretie, and for his righteousnesse sake, to accept of vs, as if we had béene per∣fitly righteous in our selues:Rom. 3.25 26. Therefore wee may bee bolde to trust to this, in asmuch as the Scriptures teach, that Christ was appoynted, and his righte∣ousnesse giuen to Beléeuers to this verie end; that in, and by it, their sinnes might be forgiuen, and they pronounced righteous in him.1. Cor. 1.30 Moreouer, we beléeue that Christ dy∣ed: What was that which made him ac∣cording to the counsell of his Father sub∣iect to death? Euen our sinnes, which were imputed to him. If therefore wée beléeue that the sinnes which were in vs,
and not subiectiuely in him, did make him die: why should we doubt, but that the righteousnesse which is in him, and not subiectiuely in vs, should instifie vs before GOD,2. Cor. 5.21 as is plaine. He a sinner by the imputation of our sinnes, wée righteous by the imputation of his righ∣teousnesse. Further, consider this: The first A∣dam was the roote, and in the steade of all mankinde, all of vs partaking of his flesh and bloud by naturall generation. The second Adam (which is Christ) is the roote, the head, and instead of all the Elect, who are made bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh, by a supernaturall grace through faith.Ephe. 5.30 If then by the first Adams sinne, we be all sinfull and guil∣ty, why should not beléeuers, by the se∣cond Adams righteousnesse be righteous, and acquitted? it being no lesse the ap∣poyntment of God (as hath béene saide) that Christ our head should supernatu∣rally conuey his righteousnesse to Belée∣uers, than it was his appoyntment, that Adam naturally should conuey his sinne and corruption vnto vs by generation.Rom. 5.12. This is plaine.
Vnderstand then in a word. The guil∣ty sinner is arraigned before Gods iudge∣ment seate: Christ his Aduocate, in the behalfe of the sinner, pleades his owne (not the sinners) righteousnesse both ac∣tiue and passiue, by the couenant, agrée∣ment, and consent of the Iudge: Then the Iudge (according to his owne ap∣pointment and couenant made) for giueth the sinner beleeuing, and imputeth the righteousnesse of Christ his Suretie vnto him: And this is the Iustification of a sinner, which is the forgiuenesse of sinnes, and the imputation of the righteousnesse of Christ, as further appeareth, Psal. 32.1, 2. compared with Rom. 4.6▪ 7, 8. If any shall say; How are we iustified fréely, when so pretious a thing as the righte∣ousnesse of Christ is payed for it: It is to be answered that whatsoeuer it cost Christ (as it cost him full deare) yet to vs Iustification is frée. Vse Build, and stablish thy Consci∣ence on this Doctrine, in as much as it sheweth such a way of iustifying sinners, wherein the exalt Iustice and bottomlesse mercy of God met together, and are de∣clared. God must be iust; therefore our
sinnes must be punished: and he must be mercifull, or else we cannot be saued. If our selues in our selues suffer for our sins, where is his mercy? if he forgiue vs with∣out Satisfaction; where is his Iustice? Here is then that mistery, which Reason cannot conceiue; the wisedome of man could neuer finde out; into the which the very Angels desire to looke: Gods iustice to the vttermost farthing satisfied in Christ: His mercy vnspeakeably decla∣red to vs for his sake. Thus the begin∣ning and end of our saluation is in God: who found out alone, this way so admi∣rable: and who effectually applyeth it to vs by the Eternall Spirit; to whom be praise for euer, Amen. Quest. It may be conceiued, that there may be such a Righteousnsse, whereby the Person that worketh it may be iustified, but is it possible, that the Righteousnesse of one, should suffice for the Iustification of thousands, euen all that shall be saued? Ans. Yes, it is very possible, if we con∣sider the worthinesse of the Person which wrought it, which is Iesus Christ. Quest. What manner rf Person then is Iesus Christ? describe this plainly vnto me.
Ans. I beleeue that Iesus Christ,Iohn 1.14. Hebr. 1.3. Iohn 1.1. Rom. 9.5. 1. Ioh. 5.20 Gene. 3.15 1. Tim. 2.5 Gen. 3.15. Iohn 1.14. Hebr. 1.9. Deu. 18.15 Mat. 13.57 Hebr. 5.5, Iohn 18.36 Matt. 21.5. Luke 1.32. Reu. 17.14. Philip. 2.8, 6. is the naturall and onely begotten Son of God. the second Person in the holy Trinitie, very God, and very Man, and that in one person; annoynted, to be our Pro∣phet, Priest, and King. Who was hum∣bled for vs to the death of the Crosse, and was exalted for vs to the right hand of his Father. Expli. The true knowledge of Christ consisteth in the knowledge of these two points: Of his Person, and of his Office. Of his Person these thrée things, must necessarily be beleeued according to the Scriptures. First, that he is that onely true God. Secondly, that he is very man, par∣taking of our flesh and bloud, with all ge∣nerall (not personall) infirmities of our Nature, being in all things like vnto vs, yet without sinne:Heb 2.14. and 4.15. 1. Pet. 1.19 and 2.22. And therefore wee reade that he was hungry, thirsty, weary, &c. And if you aske how he could partake of our nature, and yet haue no sinne? you must remember, that he was conceiued by the Holy-Ghost, and borne of the virgin Mary. The Holy-Ghost sanctify∣ing a part of the substance of the VirginsLuk. 1. & 2
Body, to be the Body of Christ; so that we beleeue he was not begotten by man, by whom corruption and sinne is propa∣gated and deriued vnto vs. Thirdly, that he is God and Man in one Person; figured by the Arke, which was of Gold and precious Wood that would not rot; noting by ye Gold ye Deity of Christ, and by the precious Wood, his Humanity without sinne: This Personall vnion of these two Natures in Christ, was thus. The Sonne of God, being from euerlasting a Person, subsisting in the Holy and vndiuided Trinity, did assume, or take, into the Vnty of his Per∣son, a Humane Nature, consisting of Body and Soule, so soone as euer it be∣ganne to be, hauing no Subsistence out of his Person, but being destitute of all Per∣sonality in it selfe, so that it becomes the very Body and Soule of the Sonne of God; and whatsoeuer is proper to either Nature (which are not by this meanes, either in Essence, or Opera∣tions, confounded) is indifferently and truely spoken of the Person: As to make it plaine to the simple. In our selues, vnderstanding and
knowledge, are effects, and workes of the Soule: eating, sleeping, &c. are workes pro∣per to the Body: Neither doth the Soule eate, or sleepe, or the Body vnderstand or know: Yet wée say well and truely, that Peter or Paul, consisting of this body and soule, vnderstand, know, eate, stéepe, &c. because these two Natures, the body and soule are vnited in their person: And for this cause, looke what is well, or ill done, by the body, or any part of it; or by the soule, or any part of it, is accounted to the whole Person, making the Person guilty or not guilty, good or bad: As if the Tongue blasphemeth, it is said the Person blasphe∣meth: or if there be euill motions in the minde, yet the whole Person is guilty. So (in some sort) is it in this Personall Vni∣on of these two Natures of Christ. As: To know all things, to be present euery where, are Proprieties of his Diuine Na∣ture: To kéep the Law, to die, and to bléed, are Proprieties of the Humane Nature of Christ. Now wée may not say that the Humane Nature of Christ knoweth all things, is omnipotent, &c. Nor that the Diuine Nature is obedient, bléedeth, dy∣eth, &c. And yet in regard of the Personall
Vnion of these two Natures in Christ: we say that the Person which hath these two Natures (which is Christ the Sonne of God) knoweth all things, is present euery where, bléedeth, dyeth, &c. and looke what is done, or suffered, by either of the Na∣tures, is truely done (and so accomited) by the whole Person: So that if you  who fulfilled the Law, who dyed for vs? we may say, the second Person in the Tri∣nity, euen God; though not according to his Diuine, but Humane Nature, as spea∣keth the Holy Ghost notably.Act. 20.28. God by his Owne Bloud, purchased the Flocke of his Elect. Whereby I beleeue, and that most infallibly and truly, that whatsoeuer Christ did for my saluation, is Gods own deed, euen the immediate worke of the se∣cond Person in the Trinity. Yet heere one thing must be remembred; that though the body and soule of Peter, make the person of Peter, yet the Hu∣mane and Diuine Nature of Christ make not his Person: for he was a Person from euerlasting, and cannot bee a Humane Person, but is still a Diuine Person; though he could not be a Mediator, or execute that Office without the Humane
Nature so assumed. This is that won∣derfull Mystery of our Sauiour IESVS CHRISTS Incarnation: Wherein con∣curred (propounded to our Faith, not to our Reason) three the greatest Miracles that euer were. First, that a Virgine con∣ceiued and brought forth a Child, remai∣nings Virgine. Secondly, that Adams flesh, and Adams sin were parted. Third∣ly, and principally, this vnsearchable My∣stery of the Personall Vnion of the God-head and Man-hood of Christ. Quest. But was it necessary, that our Mediator should be God and Man: and that in one Person, as you haue declared? Ans. Yes verely, for by this meanes, he could die for vs, and ouercome death, and deserue for vs by his obedience, the pardon of our sinnes, and eternall life. Expli. Two things necessarily requi∣red that our Mediatour should be God: First, the greatnesse of the euill, to the which we were subiect: Secondly, the greatnes of the good that we stood in néed of. Our euill was foure-folde. First, the heinousnesse of sinne. Secondly, the anger of God. Thirdly, the power of death. Fourthly, the tyranny of the Di∣uell.
Our good which we wanted Foure folde also. First, the restoring of the I∣mage of God. Secondly, the pardon of sinne. Thirdly, deliuerance from Death and Satan. Fourthly, eternall life. But to take away the Euill,Marke 2.7 Hos. 13.14. Reuel. 1.18 Zach 3.2. Ro. 16.20 Psal. 51.10 Rom. 6.23. &c. Ro. 5.17, 18 Hebr. 2.14 and bestow the Good, none is able to do but God. Ther∣fore it was necessary that our Mediatour should be God. Two Reasons also there are why he must necessarily be man; first, the Iustice of God required, that in that nature which offended, satisfaction should be made: secondly, that he might haue somthing to offer, which could not be his Godhead: therefore he must be Man: Euery high Priest must offer somewhat: therefore a Body was ordained him:Hebr. 8.3. Heb. 10.5. Hebr. 9.26 that he might offer himselfe. Two reasons also may be alleaged why he must be God and Man in one person: First, that he might be a fit Mediator be∣twéene God and Man; as it were, indiffe∣rent, and equally affected to either side: for an Vmpiere, or Wards-man may not be partiall. If he had béene onely God, wée might haue thought, that he would not enough haue respected our misery: If he had béene onely Man, not enough the iu∣stice
of God. Therefore he is to be God and Man: deare vnto both, and accoun∣ting both deare vnto him: carefull that Gods iustice be not impeached, and that our misery be relieued. Secondly, that the workes performed in the flesh of the Sonne of God, might be of an infinite price to satisfie for our sinnes, by which an infinite Maiesty was offended: which could not be, if the Person vndertaking our Redemption, had not béene God and Man in one Person. He was Man, that he might haue somewhat to offer: God in the same person, that such offring might be sufficient. For the worke of our Re∣demption was performed by the Man-hood, but the vertue and merite was from the God-head. And here we haue found out the Rea∣son why the Righteousnesse of Christ should be of merite sufficient, and effectu∣all for thousand thousands, euen all the Elect; because it is the righteousnesse, and obedience, not of a méere Man, but of God and Man in one person: euen of God himselfe, whose goodnesse and righteous∣nesse must néeds be as himselfe, of infinite merite, forre and vertue. The righteous∣nesse
then of Christ, hath this aptitude, or nature, to make all beléeuing sinners righteous; because it was so appointed of God. It hath power and sufficienty is to doe, because it is the righteousnesse of God. Vse 1. To giue thankes vnto God for the Incarnation of our Lord Iesus Christ, and our redemption by him: and to take delight to grow in the knowledge of it, according to the Scriptures: For indéed, how can he be a Christian, or Godly, who knoweth not his Sauiour, nor the great mystery of Godlinesse con∣cerning him,1. Tim. 3.16. Ioh. 8.24. 1. Ioh. 5.10 Ibid. 11.12 as it is called. Nay, wholly to be ignorant thereof, or to deny it, is to deny our sinnes, make God a lyar, and to loose eternall life. Vse 2. Is Christ God? Then tremble all yée prophane wretches, which despise his Word and Sacraments: yea, let all such tremble, who teare his Body, Bloud and Passion by their blasphemous oathes: for he is God; yea, a iealous and reuen∣ging God: yea, a consuming fire. But let all such as feare him, and trust in him, be comforted; yea, let them be merry, and ioyfull: for he is God, most true, and able
to performe all his pretious promises of saluation: And though shame, disgrace, rebukes of men, and cruell persecutions follow the profession of his Name, & Gos∣pell, shrinke not, neither be ashamed: he is able, and will both beare thée out, assist thée, and reward thee in his Kingdome. Remember Paul;2. Tim. 1.12 For the Gospell (saith he) I suffer, but I am not ashamed: for I know in whom I haue beleeued; and I am perswaded, that hee is able to keepe that which I haue committed vnto him vnto that day. Is Christ man? Then be com∣forted thou which art afflicted in body, or minde, which beleeuest: For wee haue a high Priest, which is touched with our in∣firmities,Heb. 2.17.18. & 4.15.16. and is full of compassion, who was afflicted, who suffered, and was temp∣ted, that he might be able to succour them which are tempted. Is Christ God and Man in one Person? Then let thy soule by Faith rest on his obedience, as suffi∣cient; yea, of infinite price for thy Re∣demption, &c. Qu. I conceiue in some measure (I thanke God) the exceeding worthinesse of the person of Christ, and that his righteousnesse is of a suf∣ficient merite for all the Elect: yea, (if it had
so pleased God) for a thousand worlds, but what is this Righteousnesse of Christ for the which we are iustified? Ans. It is (to speake properly) his a∣ctuall obedience, whereby he fulfilled the will of his Father, both in perfect keep∣ing of the Law, and in voluntary suffer∣ing the punishment due to our finnes.Rom. 5.19 Phil. 2.8. Explic. The Righteousnesse of Christ is two folde, vncreated, essentiall to the Godhead, which is incommunicable and cannot be imputed: and created, being either the holinesse of his nature (which improperly I would not deny to be im∣puted) or,Hebr. 7.26 of his actions, which is the a∣ctuall obedience spoken of in the Answer; which properly is imputed; and compre∣hendeth his holy life and whole humilia∣tion, vnder diuers heads deliuered in the Créede. Of the which I will not in par∣ticular inquire, because there are diuerse Expositions of these things in euerie mans hand, so plentifull and excellent, that the Authors séeme to haue left no∣thing further to be spoken therein. Vse. It is the righteousnes of Christ, for the which onely we are iustified in the sight of God: not for our owne inherent
righteousnesse, either in whole, or in part; because it is vnperfect, and wil not endure the rigor of the Law, nor is proportiona∣ble to the iustice of God, which is to be satisfied: yea, the maintaining of Iustifi∣cation by workes, ouer-turneth the foun∣dation of Religion, which whosoeuer ob∣stinately and finally holdeth, cannot possi∣bly be saued. Q. How shall I bee made partaker of this righteousnesse of Christ? Ans. Wee are made partakers of the righteousnesse of Christ by faith onely.Ioh. 1.12. Ioh. 20.28. Act. 26.18. Rom. 3.22 28. and 4.6. Gal. 2.16. &c. Expl. As the righteousnesse of our owne workes is not that for the which we are iustified: so neither is it, or the sa∣crifice of the Masse, the Instrument of applying the obedience of Christ vnto vs, but onely Faith: And faith is that instru∣ment, not for any inward dignity or me∣rit of it, neither as it is a quality, or good worke; nor because it hath Charity ioy∣ned with it, but because it receiueth and embraceth Christ.Ioh. 1.12. Rom. 1.17 And therefore we are iustified by Faith, or through Faith, but not for Faith. When therefore we say, Faith iustifieth, it is meant Correlatiue∣ly, or in regard of the obiect which it ap∣prehends;
the Righteousnesse of Christ being hence called, the Righteousnesse of Faith. Euen as it is the Treasure which maketh rich, the hand onely receiues it: euen so our Faith receiueth the Treasure of the Righteousnesse of Christ, whereby we are iustified, and enriched to eternall life. And because Faith onely hath this property, and power, to receiue the righ∣teousnesse of Christ, therefore we say, that we are iustified by Faith onely: not so to be vnderstood, as that we exclude Loue, and good Workes from Faith, but from the act of iustifying and receiuing the pro∣mise: for though Faith and good Workes agrée together in the conuersion, and re∣nouation, and obedience of a Christian, as the life, and the actions of life, the Trée and the Fruit, the Cause and the Effect: Yet in the particular of iustification, they are as contrary as fire and water,Rom. 10.3 and 11.6. and de∣stroy one another. The manner of our Iustification by Faith, is thus: God in the promise of the Gospell, offereth the Righteousnesse of Christ, and withall in the hearts of his children by his Spirit, worketh a power whereby they receiue it, which is Faith,
not onely belieuing the truth of the pro∣mise in generall, but in particular, ap∣plying to themselues; which Faith, by the sentence of God is then imputed to vs for Righteousnesse to Iustification. Vse. We are here admonished special∣ly to labour for this same Faith; without which, Christ dyed indéed, and was righ∣teous, but not for vs. The excellency of Faith cannot sufficiently be expressed: By this the Word and Sacraments are profitable vnto vs, our Prayers auaile∣able by this: By this our obedience is ac∣ceptable, we please God, we stand, we o∣uercome the world, resist the Diuell; and through this we are made partakers of the righteousnesse of Christ, and are kept to the saluation promised. No maruell then, if it be called,1 Pet. 1.7. More pretious then gold: For the vnualuable righteousnesse of Iesus Christ, which is not attained by siluer and gold, or pretious pearles, is made ours by faith: How therfore should we prize it when we haue it? When we want it, how should wee séeke it? It is wrought by hearing the word, confirmed by prayer, the vse of the Sacraments, and true obedience.
Q. Tell me then what is Faith? Ans. Faith is the gift of God, wrought by his Holy Spirit in the hearts of the e∣lect, by the Ministery of the Word ordi∣narily, whereby they take knowledge of the doctrine of saluation,Ioh. 3.8. Ephes. 2.8. Tit. 1.1. Rom. 10.9 are perswaded it is true, and that it belongeth to them in particular, and wholly relye thereon: Expli. As all other good gifts, so Faith is of God:Iam. 1.17. In which we are to consider thrée things: First, Knowledge: Se∣condly, Consent. Thirdly, Confidence: Which thrée are requisite to this Iustify∣ing Faith. The first may be without the second: the first and second without the third: but the third cannot be with∣out the first and second. A man may know that which he belieues not to be true: and a man may beléeue a thing to bée true, which yet he may be perswaded belongs not to himselfe, and therefore re∣lies not vpon it. Diuers wicked men know many things in the Scriptures, which they (like wretches) belieue not to be true: and many beléeue that to be true, which they make not their owne by application; euen as many Hypocrites, & the Diuels themselues, for they goe thus
farre; but Gods children go further: they know the promise, beléeue it to be true, and vpon good grounds are perswaded it belongs to themselues: from whence comes confidence. If the Diuell could do this: or if Iudas could haue done this, they might be saued. There are then to be obserued, three kindes of Faith: First, Historicall: to know and acknowledge the truth of the Bible: Secondly, Temporary: when there is also a perswasion (but not groun∣ded) that the promise belongs to vs. The third, True Iustifying Faith: when vnto our knowledge is ioyned acknowledge∣ment, and to this good and warrantable perswasion, from whence comes confi∣dence. And this last kinde of faith hath three properties: First, it is certaine:Eph. 3.12. Heb. 11.1. 1. Ioh. 3.2. yet there may be, and are doubts: as the man in the Gospell, Lord I beleeue, helpe my vnbeliefe: but doubt commeth from the flesh: certainty from faith, which in the end ouer-cometh. Secondly,Luk. 22.32 Rom. 11.29. Eph. 1.13.14. it continu∣eth; yet it may be ecclipsed, as it were, ra∣ked vp in the ashes, and wonderfully sha∣ken, but not totally and finally extingui∣shed
and lost.Rom. 5.1.2.3. 1. Pet. 1.8. Gal. 5.6. Iam. 2.17. 1. Tim. 1.6 Thirdly, it is liuely and working: inwardly and out wardly. Vse 1. Deceiue not thy selfe thou mayest be learned in the History of the Bible, in the grounds of Religion, in Controuersies, and yet thou may foward true Faith: for so far do the Diuels goe, which are irrecouerably dammed: The Diuels beléeue and tremble.Iam. 2.19. And there∣fore, whatsoeuer Papists, or  ob∣iect, hold thou it to be no presumption to go beyond the Diuell and Reprobates in beleeuing, if thou wouldst be saued. Vse 2. Here is comfort to those of poore estate, if they beleeue. Iustification is by Faith onely; and Faith is the gift of God, on the which the poorest is as  as the richest: yea, and in the bestowing of it, there is no respect of persons with God: The spirit bloweth wherein  And many times the Lord passeth by Rich, Noble and Mighty, and honoureth the poore and dispised. In the things of this world, he that is rich, hath all, (she poore hath the least, or no part: but it is Faith that obtaineth fauour with God. A King not prefected to haue part in the righteousnesse of Christ, because a King,
if hee want faith; nor a Beggar reiected because a Beggar, if he haue faith, &c. Vse 3. True faith iustifies thee before God by the righteousnesse of Christ: see that thou iustify thy Faith to bee true, by the workes of righteousnesse and true obedience before men, and to thy owne conscience, &c. Quest. You said that Christ was annointed to be our Prophet, Priest, and King: What meant you by it? Ans. I meant the three Offices of Christ: First, the Office of his Prophet∣ship, whereby he hath plainely opened to vs the counsell of his Father,Deu. 18.18 Esa. 61.1. Mat. 17.5. concerning our saluation. 2d. The Office of his Priest∣hood, whereby hee hath fully satisfied the Iustice of God for vs, and maketh inter∣cessiō at the right hand of his Father;Psa. 110.4. Heb. 7.5. 3d. his Kingly Office, whereby hee giueth vs his Spirit, and by the same gouernes vs, protecteth vs from our enemies,Psal. 2.6. and bringeth vs to Eternall Life. Expl. In the times of the old Testa∣ment, thrée sorts of persons were An∣nointed, Prophets, Kings, and Priests:1. Reg. 19.16. Ex. 30.30. Which was a Type or Figure of the an∣nointing of Christ, which title, signifi∣eth
Anointed, & is a name of his Person of Mediatorship,Dan. 9.25.26. not of either of his Natures. He was called so, not ye he was annointed with materiall Mile; but as Prophets, Priests, & Kings, were by ye annointing, deputed to such Offices, and fitted for the same: So Christ, tooke not those Offices by intrusion, but was annoynted, that is appointed, and also of his Father by the Spirit fitted for the same. When you reade that hee is called, A Shepe-heard, The Preacher of Peace, A Witnesse; these note his Prophet-ship: when hée is called Iesus, Sauiour, Redee∣mer, Mediator, Lambe, Sacrificer, Inter∣cessor, Aduocate, &c. these note his Priest-hood: And when he is called, Lord, King of Righteousnesse, King of Kings: These note his Kingly Office. His Prophet-ship is in the teaching of his people, in his owne Person, while hee liued on the earth, and in the continuance of the heauenly doctrine to his Church by the Ministery ordaind, to the end of the world. His Priest-hood implies two things: First, The satisfaction performed to his Father, by his obedience: euen to the death of the Crosse: Secondly, his In∣tercession,
making request for vs at the right hand of his Father;Rom. 8.33. Heb. 7.25. Heb. 9.24. not by bowing his Body, but by appearing before his Father for vs, presenting the Merite of his Obedience, and willing that it may alwaies bée effectuall for the reconciliati∣on of his Elect. The Authority of his Kingly Office may bée either vniuersally considered, by which all creatures are sub∣iect to his Rule euen the deuils: or speci∣ally, whereby hee effectually calleth his Elect, deliuereth them from the deuill, iu∣stifieth them, continueth them in grace, confoundeth their enemies, in the last day glorifieth them, and whereby he will con∣demne the Deuils and Reprobates. Vse 1. Is Christ our Prophet?Mat. 17.5. then Here him, Rest in the doctrine hée hath de∣liuered; respect not Reuelations, or Tra∣ditions, or any thing that agréeth not therewith: Yea,Gal. 1.8. if an Angell from heauen teach otherwise let him be accursed. Is Christ, our Priest, who hath taken vpon to satisfie for thee, and to make in∣tercession for thée in heauen? Then trust neither to Saint, Angell, or thy selfe: but trust perfectly on his Grace,1. Pet. 1.13. and bee of good comfort, for he is a High-priest which
is full of compassion, and it is his Office, and he is able perfectly to saue thee, seeing he liues for euer to make intercession for thée.Heb. 7.25. Is Christ the King of his Church? Yes of heauen and earth: then let the  of the earth be confounded. For Christ is King, who shall stay all  before  face,Luk. 19.27. that refuse to bee  his Word and Spirit:  in her King for euermore, . Vse 2, Learne héere why thou art cal∣led a Christian: Thou art called so of Christ, because all the Elert tereme of his Annoynting; that is of his Spirit:Heb. 1.9. Hee was annoynted with the Oyle of Glad∣nesse, aboue his Fellowes:Ioh. 3.34. For he receiued the Spirit not by measures and to this end,Ioh. 1.16. that wee of his Fulnesse might re∣ceiue Grace for Grace. So that as the oyntment powred vpon the head of Aa∣ron, ran downe to the skirts of his cloa∣thing; so wee  of the  of Christ, and of him are called Christians▪ by the which is meant, that we are made Priests and Kings to God; therefore cal∣led a Royall Priest hood.Reu. 1.6. 1. Pet. 2.9. If this were well vnderstood, and men would examine
their Christianity by this, it would soone appeare, that many are not true Chri∣stians which glory in the Name. If thou béest a Christian, then where is thy know∣ledge, whereby thou art as a Prophet to thy selfe, and to others. Grosse Ignorance cannot stand with this Title: If thou béest a Christian, then thou art a Priest, and a King: If a Priest; then thou must offer Sacrifice, Prayers, Alines, yea thy Body and Soule to the seruice of God. If a King; then thou must rule and go∣verne thy passions, affections, thy selfe, according to the rule of the Word: If thou dost not thus: if thou neuer, or sel∣domo prayest; if thou art without com∣passion toward the néedy; if thou béest pro∣fane in thy life, not sanctifying thy body and soule by Faith and Obedience to God but by drunkennesse, swearing, fil∣thinesse, cruelty, pride, lying, &c. to the de∣vill: If thou mournest not for thy corrup∣tions, and resists them; but yéeldest cowardly to the wicked motions of thine owne vile minde, being a very slaue to sin and the deuill; then thou must needs con∣clude against thy selfe, that thou art no Priest and King to God, and so no good
Christian in very deed, whatsoeuer thou esteemest of thy selfe? Quest. Is there nothing else necessary to bee knowne concerning Christ? Ans. Yes, as namely, his Resurrecti∣on, Ascension, Sitting at the right hand of his Father, and his comming to Iudge∣ment, which things may well bee referred to the Kingly Office of Christ. Expl. Christ teacheth vs as a Pro∣phet, saueth vs by his Merite as a Priest, and maketh his heauenly Doctrine and Obedience Effectuall, as he is a King and to this his Efficacy are those seuerals in the answere to bee referred: of the which there are plentifull expositions extant; and therefore I spare the particular ope∣ning of them. Thus much of the first speciall worke of God toward his Church, which is Re∣demption. Now followes the second cal∣led Sanctification. Quest. What is Sanctification? Ans. It is the worke of God by his Holy Spirit,Deut. 30.8 Ier. 31.18. & 32.39. Iob. 6.44. Act. 5.31. & 11.18. whereby the Image of God is renewed in the Elect: called also Conuer∣sion, Regeneration, Repentance, &c. Expl. There are two principall bene∣fits
which wee obtaine in this life by Christ, Iustification by Faith, and San∣ctification by the Spirit; Who is called the Holy Spirit, both Essentially and Ef∣fectually: because as he is God holy in him∣selfe; so he maketh holy whom he pleaseth,2. Thess. 2.13. 1. Pet. 1.2. which worke is therefore called the sancti∣fication of the Spirit. This worke is wrought in the minde, will, and affections, yea in the whole man: not by altering the substance of body or mind; or abolishing any naturall Faculty or Affection, as Vnderstanding, Loue, Hate, Ioy, &c. but by putting away, and purging out the euill quality in these and the like, and by creating a new holy qua∣lity in them, acceptable to God, and agrée∣able to his word, that now the vnderstan∣ding should be capable of good things, and the streame of our affections turned to the right obiect, as to hate euill, to loue good∣nesse, and to reioyce in it. Wée are to vnderstand also that this (in nature) is after Iustification, as Paul reci∣teth them: Whom he iustifieth,Rom. 8.31. hee glorifi∣eth, that is, he gloriously reneweth, which is begun here, perfected in the life to come: & yet I cōfesse ye repentance is sometimes
put before remission of sinnes: not that in Nature, but because in our sense, and fee∣ling it is first: For first we feele the bur∣den of our sinnes,Marke 1.13 Actes 5.31 and then we are eased and refreshed by the mercy of God. And also repētance is named in the first place, because it is first to bee taught, that wee may desire the mercy of God. Yet in na∣ture, Faith (which purifieth the heart) is first: though in time there bee no diffe∣rence: For our Vnion with Christ, and our partaking of his merit to Iustificati∣on, and of his Spirit to Sanctification, are wrought at the same time, euen as the Sunne and his beames. Vse 1. As the Sunne is declared by his light, the trée by his fruits; so by thy sanctification, demonstrate thy iustifica∣tion, &c. Vse 2. Boast not of thy heart, while thy life is profane, neither content thy self with an outward shew of holines, ha∣uing an euill conscience:Rom. 12.2. 2. Cor. 7.1, &c. for Sanctifica∣tion is the renewing of the minde: yea of the whole man: and therefore, labour to grow vp into a full holinesse of the flesh, and of the spirit. Quest. Is Sanctification, Conuersion, or
Repentance, so the worke of God, that we can not of our selues, by the power of our free will,  or repent? Ans. Iverely beleeue, that since the fall of Adam,1. Cor. 2.14 2. Cor. 3.5. Rom. 8.7 Iohn 15.5. there is no free will in man vnto things Spirituall and pleasing to God. Expl. For the vnderstanding of this, we are to consider of Man, as he was be∣fore his fall, or as he is now, since the fall. Free will you may call, a facultie or power of the Soule, whereby it doth fréely, without compulsion & force chuse or refuse the obiect shewne by the vnder∣standing: yet so, that we hold not this frée will to be independent, but that, as the wills of all creatures, it dependeth on God, to be inclined and moued, either immediately by him, or mediately by good or euill instruments as he please: Neither doth this dependencie hurt or di∣minish the frée dome of the will: because God inclineth the will, so that the will doth by the Iudgement of its owne rea∣son fréely and willingly moue it selfe: so that to doe a thing fréely in the Creature, is not to be frée from the gouernement of another: but to doe that which it doth,
willingly, voluntarily, and deliberately, though it be ruled by another. Before the fall this was in Adam, both to good and euill, that he might, if he would either stand or fall (the dependen∣cie before spoken of still reserued.) Since the fall, the case is altered, according to the saying of Augustine; That man abu∣sing his frée will, lost both himselfe and that: whereby, as also when we say that man hath no free will, we doe not vnder∣stand that the faculty is lost, but the good∣nesse; whereby it was able freely and willingly to chuse that which is good. For man lost no essentiall part or faculty of his nature by his fall: euen the vnrege∣nerate hauing a power freely to will or nill the obiect shewne by Reason, though they haue not power to wil and chuse spi∣ritual good things: both because their wil is wholy depraued and turned from good, and inclinable only to euill: and also be∣cause Reason, being blind, doth not shew to the will the spirituall good, or if it doe: it is not vnder the likenesse of good, but vnder the likenesse of euill. For the na∣turall man vnderstandeth not the things of God,1. Cor. 2.14 but accounteth them foolishnes.
Wherefore we confesse, that man hath stil free wil in ciuill and outward things, and vnto euill: but not vnto good: And this freedome vnto ciuill things must bee so vnderstood, that he hath power to chuse or refuse the obiect: but to do this well he hath no power. Also he hath free will vn∣to euill, not that he can will or nill euill at his pleasure; but that without any vi∣olence, he onely chuseth euill: so that as it may be called free will, because it is free from coaction, so also bond will, be∣cause it freely willeth onely that which is euill. And hence it is, that the reprobate sinne necessarily and yet freely; necessari∣ly, because they haue no power to good∣nes: freely, because they chose euill with∣out compulsion: Yea by how much the more necessarily they sinne: by so much the more voluntarily they doe it: in as much as their will hath brought vpon them this necessity. Now when this worke of Sanctifica∣tion or Repentance, or Conuersion is wrought; then we haue free will both to good and euill: to good as farre as we are regenerate by the Spirit: to euill as far as we are vnregenerate and flesh. And in
the state of Glorification, our will shall be free onely to good immutably: as the will of the damned shalbe immutably free vnto euill, as Augustine saith: The first Will was to haue power not to sinne, the last shall be to haue no power to sinne. Then for our purpose this is to be hol∣den, that till the spirit worke new grace, we haue no power of our selues; being vnto the worke of conuersion meere pati∣ents; though in the worke, when the Spirit hath changed and inclined vs, we are co-workers with the Spirit. Before conuersion we resist: In conuersion the Spirit inclineth our wills; and of vnwil∣ling makes them willing to be conuer∣ted, and to repent: God not working in vs as in stockes or stones, but as in rea∣sonable creatures. Vse 1. If thou be truly conuerted, as∣cribe al the glory of it to God: for as soone can an Ethiop change his skinne,Iere. 13.23 &c. or a Leopard his spottes, as we doe that is good, till we be changed and enabled by the Spirit. Vse 2. Beware thou neglect not the present meanes of grace offered to thee, as though thou couldest repent and doe
well when thou wouldest: No, no, it is the meere gift of God. For if thou canst not make one haire of thy head white or black, much lesse canst thou change thy vile and corrupt heart. But thou wilt say: Doth not GOD promise, that at what time soeuer a sinner doth repent, he will be mercifull? Yes; the Lord most comfortably (blessed be his name) saieth so: but he saith not that a sinner can re∣pent when he list: or that he will giue re∣pentance, whensoeuer a sinner shall but whistle for it: As Augustine excellently; He that hath promised to all repentants, pardon, hath not promised to all delin∣quents, repentance, &c. Quest. What are the parts of this Sancti∣fication or Repentance? Ans. The parts are two: First, Morti∣fication of the old man, or Hatred of sin, and turning from euill: Secondly, Viui∣fication, or Quickening of the new man; or loue of goodnesse and Turning to God. Quest. What meane you by Mortificati∣on of the old man? Ans. I meane that grace wherby there is wrought in vs, by little and little, a de∣testation
of sinne, and an extinguishing and weakening of corruption in vs, that it should not bring forth fruit vnto death. Quest. What meane you by the new man▪ Ans. I meane that Grace, whereby, by little and little we are raised to a new and spirituall life, to be able (in some mea∣sure) to liue in knowledge, holinesse, and righteousnes.Eph. 4.22, 23, 24. Col. 3.5.8, 10, 11. The summe of all these an∣swers prooued by Rom. 6. from the first verse to the twelfth. Explic. When we reade that the olde man, or the body of sinne, or our earthly members (by which and the like names, the corruption of our nature is called) are are to be mortified, that is, made to die. We are not to vnderstand it of the life of our bodies, but of the life of sinne in our bodies. So when our Sauiour saith, If thine eie offend thee, plucke it out, &c. he meaneth not that we should maime our bodies, but that by all meanes wee should purge out corruption, which ma∣nifests it selfe in such members; yea then as wee estéeme our corrupt affections as deare as our eyes. These two parts of re∣pentance are also called, putting off the olde man, and putting on the new man,
&c. whereby is signified, that as willing∣ly as a man puts off his old filthy ragges, to bee clad in sweete and rich attire, so should we willingly put away sin where∣by we are deformed, and labour to fol∣low righteousnes, which is a part of our Beauty in the sight of God. Whereas some make thrée parts of re∣pentance; first, Contrition; secondly, Confession; thirdly, Satisfaction: they deceiue the simple. For a man may haue all these, and yet be damned, as is ma∣nifest in Iudas; who grieued, confessed his sinne,Matth. 27.3, 3. and brought againe the thirty pieces of siluer, and yet was a reprobate. These may be necessary partes of Disci∣pline enioyned to sinners, to testifie their repentance, as in ancient times; but the essentiall parts of repentance, are perpe∣tually mortification of the olde man, and viuification of the new. If you shall desire to know the maner how God works repentance, vnderstand, that first by preaching of the Law, and sometimes by crosses, punishments, &c. the conscience is terrified for sinne, and is sorrowfull, but in a worldly manner for feare of wrath; for the Law can worke no
otherwise: Then, by the promise of the Gospel, the conscience is chéered through the gift of GOD, in assurance of mercy: the sense whereof bréeds an other sorrow, different from that wrought by the Law, called godly Sorrow; which is, when we are grieued for sinne, not so much because of the wrath following, as because there∣by we haue offended so gratious a father: and then followes repentance, which is a changing of the heart and purpose vnto a continuall care and indeuour to hate all e∣uill,2. Cor. 7.10 and to auoyd it: to loue all goodnes, and to follow it. So that repentance pro∣perly is the effect of the Gospel, not of the Law, though the Law be necessary to pre∣pare vs thereunto. And hence we say it is an effect of Faith, which purifies the heart. Concerning the practise of repen∣tance, Sée the Booke called the Nature and Practise of Repentance written by our worthy Maister Perkins. Vse 1. Beware of a wonderfull sub∣tilty of the Diuell, whereby he carries multitudes to hell; which is, when men and women are perswaded, that if they can sigh, sorrow, and wéep for their sins, that then they truly repent. When A∣hab
and Iudas did thus much and yet frie in hell. There is a sorrow caused by the Lawe, which may bee in a Reprobate, whose sorrow is like vnto the sorrow of a thiefe, and whose teares are whoorish teares: for as these being taken in the maner, many times, hang downe their heads, and wéepe and waile for feare of the present punishment, which when it is ouer, they returne to their former courses, their hearts not being changed; so many grieue by the preaching of the Lawe, and yet their hearts remaine as corrupt, and as willing, (if it were not for the Lawe) to sinne, as euer before; whereas the Godly Sorrow, which com∣meth from the Gospel, changeth the ve∣ry inclination and purpose of the heart, to hate sinne, and loue goodnes, and to con∣tinue increasing in such grace, though there were no Law to condemne, nor hell to torment.2. Cor. 7.11 &c. Examine then thy repen∣tance hereby, and by the notes. Vse 2. Remember that the summe of of a Christians duty, is to Eschew euill,Psal. 34.14 Esa. 1.16.17 and to do good: and deceiue not thy selfe with those same halfe Christians, whose furthest obedience is to kéepe themselues
(not vnspotted, for they regard not spots) but vndetected of grosse euils, such for the which men are carried to the Iayle: who, though they abound with small faults (as they tearme them) hauing prophane hearts, and destitute of loue to the truth, and do no good, thinke themselues among the forwardest of such who shall be saued. But soft: the first step to heauen, in the practise of obedience, is to depart from e∣uill: but he that sets but one step, (and that an ill-fauoured one too) is neuer like to come there: mend that step, and depart from all euill, and step againe, doing the good, and so walk on; & then the reward is thine. If thou holdest not vp thy hands to any strange God, but if thou worshippest not the true God, thou canst not be saued. If thou plowest not, and goest not to cart on the Sabaoth day, it is well; but if thou doest not the duties of the Sabaoth in the publique and priuate worship of God, thou maist be damned. As therefore we doe not content our selues that no wéeds be in our Gardens, vnlesse there bée good Hearbes and Flowers: so we must not onely be void of euill, but filled also with the fruits of righteousnesse;Phil. 3.11. being not
priuatiue onely, but positiue Christians. But alasse! what then shall become of them, which haue not yet learned to set the first stép, to leaue their Drunken∣nesse, Swearing, Lying, Whooredome: how farre are these from true Christians? How farre from Heauen? How néere to Hell? &c. Vse 3. Note, that Repentance, and true conuersion is a worke of great diffi∣culty: for sinne cleaues so fast vnto vs, sitting as close as our skinne, and is so familiar to our nature, that till God per∣swade the heart by the worke of his Spi∣rit, it is as easie a matter to perswade a man to leaue his sinnes, as to get him to endure his eyes to be pluckt out of his head, and his limbes to be torne from his body. Therefore called Mortification, and crucifying the flesh with the lusts, &c. It is not a sigh and away, and now and then a few sorrowfull words will serue the turne. No, sinne is impudent, and will neuer out till it be kild, and cast out. If thou makest account that Repentance is an easie worke, thou hast not yet repen∣ted as thou shouldst do. Go to: Remem∣ber thou must mortifie sinne, and destroy
it: It is a Serpent in thy bosome; kill, or be kild: if thou kilst not it, it will kill thée; euen thy Soule, &c. Q. What is the measure of sanctification which we attaine to in this life? Ans. This grace is not perfectly fini∣shed in this life,Rom. 7.18 19. 1. Cor. 13.9.12. Phil. 3.13. but here it is only in part. Expl. There are two sorts of benefites which we receiue by Christ: One, of such which are out of our selues; as Redemp∣tion, Iustification. Another of such which are in vs, as Sanctification, Con∣uersion. The first sort are perfected in this life: as, Now we are the sonnes of God. So now wee are elected,1. Ioh. 3.1.2 iustified, redee∣med. The second are not perfected in all their degrées, but onely begun: Wee are perfectly redeemed, (vnderstand in re∣gard of the price, for we looke for the re∣demption of our bodies:) We are perfect∣ly iustified (in regard of Christs righte∣ousnesse, and the sentence, for we pray for more féeling of it; and these shall bée more fully declared at the last day.) We are im∣perfectly sanctified; there remaining e∣uen in the best, a great deale of corrupti∣on, which lusteth against the Spirit, and often maketh them bitterly to mourne: as
in the example of Paul. Vse 1. Our sanctification cannot iusti∣fie vs,Rom. 7. because imperfect. Vse 2. The life of a godly man is a con∣tinuall repenting to his dying day. As a man that buyes an old house is alwayes mending: so ye true Christian, because he discouers alwaies new corruptions, is al∣waies mourning, repairing and mending somwhat. Do with thy conscience as wo∣men do in dressing vp their houses: they swéepe, and rub, and brush euery day, be∣cause euery thing gathereth dust: and e∣uer and anon, they are renewing, & strew∣ing new Hearbs and Flowers in their Windowes: euen so, because we alwayes are gathering soyle, through the corrupti∣on that is in the World, wee must alway he washing, cleansing, and purging our hearts, and euer and anon, be adding new graces vnto our former receiued. He that giues ouer this practise and care, as if hée were holy enough, giues a shrewd testi∣mony, that he hath no true holinesse in him: for the nature of true grace is to bée increasing, and true Christians are like the morning light, which is brighter and brighter vnto perfect day.Pro. 4.18.
Q. What helpes then should a man vse to hold out, and increase in sanctification? Ans. There are two principall meanes of furthering vs this way:1. Pet. 2.2. Psa. 68.29. Luk. 11.13. Rom. 10.12 Iames 1.6. The conscio∣nable vsing of the Ministery of the Word and Sacraments, and deuout prayer. Q. What is Prayer? Ans. Prayer is a worship of God,2. Chron. 6.21. Ioh. 4.21. Rom. 8 26. Mat. 21 22. Ioh. 16.23. Psal. 50.15 Math. 7.7. Coloss. 4.2. wher∣by, through the Spirit, in the name of Christ, beleeuing, we aske of God onely things needfull, and also giue thankes for that which we haue receiued. Expl. I shall not néede to be long in this, of the which, so many haue so worthi∣ly written: Onely remember, that not onely the voyce,Exo. 14.15 but the affection of the heart is prayer: yea, without this, the other is not praying,Math. 15.8 but babling, a dead sacrifice not acceptable, For God specially requires the heart:Pro. 23.26 Rom. 8.15. Math. 4.10 Ioh. 16.23. Concerning which, know that: First, it is a gift of the Spi∣rit: Secondly, that God onely is to bee prayed to: Thirdly, and that in the name of Christ. As Incense might bee offered onely on the golden Altar: so it is Christ onely which sanctifieth, and maketh ac∣ceptable our prayers:Rom. 10.14 Fourthly, that wée beléene: Fifthly, that wée wisely consider
the things, and persons, wee are to pray for: Persons, For all men,1. Tim. 2.1. while they are liuing, and till we know they haue sinned the sinne vnto death: Things,1. Ioh. 6.15. are either Gods glory, our owne saluation, or onely things belonging to this life and the body: The two first must be begged absolutely: the other, vnder condition of Gods will, and (because they are transitory) tran∣sitorily: Sixthly,1. Thess. 5.17.18. that we also bee thanke∣full. Vse 1. Pray neither to, nor by Saints, or Angels, nor for the dead: who either are in heauen, and so thy prayer is néede∣lesse; or in hell, and then impossible they should be deliuered: When therefore thou hast occasion to mention thy friends, or any departed: say not, God haue mercy on their soules, or God bee with them; For though I confesse that the words be very good, yet they are héerein abused, as is the Name of God which is good, abused by too much wicked swearing: And it sauors of grosse Ignorance, and Wil-wrship: be∣cause wee haue neither commandement nor promise, for so doing: also it wants charity towards the dead, to whom wee would séeme therein to be very charitable:
For when we pray that God would haue mercy on them, &c. it shewes, that wee thinke (if we know what we say) that they want the mercy of God: Better a great deale to say, Who is, I trust, with the Lord, or such like, then to pray for them. Vse 2. Because Prayer is an accepta∣ble sacrifice to God. Remember the com∣mandement,1. Thess. 5.17. Psal. 14.4. and pray often, publickely, priuately: It is an euident note of one very profane, not to vse prayer: And the plagues of God follow such:Psal. 70.6. Ier. 10.25. There are sixe things necessary to prayer, beware thou wantest none of them: First, Faith: for thy helpe herein, remember the com∣mandement and the promise, and beléeue: Secondly, Reuerence, for thy helpe this way consider the great Glory to which thou prayest: Thirdly, Humility, for to such God giues grace, helpe thy selfe héere, by looking into thine owne bosome, and considering thine owne corruptions and sinnes: Fourthly, Holy Affections, heere helpe thy selfe with the practise of Repen∣tance, hate sinne, which dulleth our pray∣ers, and quencheth the heate of them, as water quencheth fire,Psal. 26.6. 1. Ioh. 3.22. and kéepe a good con∣science: Fithly, Feruency: Héere thou hast
two notable helpes: first, the sence of thy owne misery, in regard of sin, the punish∣ment of it, and the malice of the deuill, which if we consider, will make vs cry aloud, as prisoners cry to the Iudge for mercy: secondly, the consideration of the great good thou receiuest by prayer: For the Spirit is giuen by prayer:Luk. 11.13. by prayer deliuérance, increase of Sanctification, glorious inward féelings, euen all good things. As Moses face shone when he had béene with God in the Mount,Act. 10.9. and as Pe∣ter was wrapt in prayer: So if euer wee shine in grace, and are rauished with in∣ward féelings, it is in prayer: Lastly,1. Thess. 17 18. Col. 4.2. Bee Thankefull: when we are in necessity, wée haue many words, and haue neuer done; but when we haue receiued, as ful Vessels, wée haue scarce a word to say: Wée go to God, as men goe to the Riuer alwaies to fetch, and as when wee haue filled our vessels we turne our backes; so when wee are blessed with our desires, we turne our backes with those Lepers,Luk. 17.17. scarce one of ten returneth to giue thankes: Wée pray oftner then we giue thankes, because wée are more affected with the sence of our wants, then of the Glory of God, and of
that wée haue receiued. Héere helpe thy selfe: First, by considering the greatnesse of the benefites which thou enioyest, as if it be but thy Sléepe, or Sight, or such like; thou thinkest, it may bee, these are but small things: Aske him thats blinde, him whose eyes God holds open but thrée or foure nights together, then shalt thou sée the greatnesse of a gift by the want of it: Secondly, by remembring the Comman∣dement: Thirdly, because thanked for grace increaseth; thankes for one good turne, is a good introduction for another: Fourthly,Psa. 50.23.5. God highly estéemes of it: Fifthly, It shall be our speciall practise in heauen, inure thy selfe therefore vnto it euen in this life, &c. Quest. What if wee obtaine this Grace of Sanctification, and continue in it? Ans. Then wee shall bee sure to haue Eternall Life.Math. 5.8. Heb. 12.14. Rom. 6.22. Expl. There is nothing more ordina∣ry in the Scriptures, then that such shall be blessed, which endeuour to holinesse: which must not bee so vnderstood, as though we could merite thereby Eternall life, but wee must vnderstand it as a con∣dition, necessarily required in such (being
of discretion) which shall be saued. By which spéeches is not meant to shew why a man is saued, but who they are which shall be saued. When therefore eternall life is called a Reward, it is not meant, as though we could deserue it by our good workes; no not by our faith; but by reward is meant a frée gift, or a gift due by couenant, or promise. For there is a double reward: Due, or vndue and frée: the first proper∣ly, the second improperly so called. That which is due, by order of iustice, for the dignity of the worke, is properly a debt, or due Reward: That also is so called, which is due by fauour, and by promise. To our good workes is eternall life as a reward due: not the first, but the second way: For God hath made himselfe our debter, not by receiuing from vs, but by promising to vs. So that if you take debt, or reward, pro∣perly, we affirme, that nothing is due to our best works: for there are foure things necessary to make a worke meritorious in the first acception of debt: First, that the grace whereby we do it, be our owne: for if we receiue it from another, it is against
reason, that he that giues, should thereby be indebted to giue more:1. Cor. 4.7. But wee haue no grace, but we haue receiued it. Se∣condly, it must not be due, or duty to per∣forme it: for that is contrary to merit; but all that we are able to doe, if it were more, is due, in regard of Creation, and Redemption.Luk. 17.10 Thirdly, it must be profita∣ble to him, to whom it is done: But God is not benefited by vs.Psal. 16.2. & 50.11.12 13. Rom. 8.18. Fourthly, it must be proportionable to the reward: but so are not our best workes. Therefore it is well called of the Apostle, A free gift of God.Rom. 6.23. This further remember, that we teach good workes to be necessary to saluation: but not as causes thereof, but as the way thereto: as Bernard said. Q. What is eternall life? Ans. Eternall life is that glorious and most happy estate,Mat. 25.46 Ioh. 17.22.23.24. Rom. 2.10 1. Cor. 2.9. Ioh. 10.28. Heb. 13.14 1. Ioh. 2.25 in which the soules of the elect are, in heauen after this life, and in which their bodies and soules shall bee at the day of iudgement: the contrary whereof is eternall death. Q What is eternall death? Ans. Eternall death is the most horri∣ble condition in which the Reprobate
shall be for euer in Hell,Luk. 16.22.23. Mat. 25.41 2. Tess. 1.4. with the Diuell and his Angels: in their soules presently after their bodily death, and in body and soule together in the day of Iudge∣ment. Expli. There are thrée kindes of life: First, Naturall of the body, in the vnion of body and soule. Secondly, Spirituall of the soule, in the vnion of it with God, and Christ;Gal. 2.20. Eph. 2.17. whereby Christ is said to liue in vs. Thirdly, Eternall of body & soule, whereby the elect liue and reigne for euer∣more in the kingdome of Heauen. The first is common to the Reprobates, with the Elect: the other two are proper to the Elect. Eternall death is also thrée-fold: First, naturall of the body, in the separa∣tion of body and soule: called naturall, not that it doth properly procéed from na∣ture: for it is the effect of sinne; but be∣cause it is according to corrupt nature, by the iustice of God. Secondly, spirituall, in the separation of the soule from God, whereby sinne liues and reignes in the wicked, being said also to be dead in sinne. Thirdly, Eternall, whereby body and soule shall be for euer separated from God and Christ, and liue with the Diuell in
eternall torments; which kinde of life is called death, because it were ten thousand times better not to liue at all, in respect of themselues, then in such endlesse, easlesse, and remedilesse misery. For eternall life may be considered, ei∣ther in respect of the creature, as it is, and continueth by the power of the Creator, & so the wicked shal liue eternally in hell: or in respect of ye adiuncts of life, or the affe∣ction which the creature shal haue toward the Creator, and the fauour of God in Christ; and so the Elect shall only liue for euer. In a word, the happinesse of the one e∣state, and the misery of the other, is such, as no tongue is able to expresse, no heart able to conceiue: Al the glory and splen∣dor of this life, being scarce a shadow of the glory to be reuealed: the first fruits whereof are in this life, in the peace and ioy of a good conscience:Rom. 14.17. which though it be vnspeakeable, and as a Heauen vpon Earth, yet is no more, nor so much to that which shall be, then a handfull of corne is to a field of a thousand acres.1. Ioh. 3.1.2. So also the torments which we can any wayes de∣uise to bee inflicted vpon man in this
world, being but a flea-biting to Hell, and a sparke of that flame which the dam∣ned there shall endure: and yet when wicked men féele the flashings of it in their consciences, in the middest of all their worldly pleasures, they are horribly confounded, as in the example of Caine, Saul, Balthasar, Iudas,Pro. 18.14 and as Salomon sig∣nifies. As there are but two Estates, so but two places, Heauen and Hell: As for a third place, called Purgatory, neither doth the Scripture mention it, neither can the Deuisers, and first Founders of it, the Papists, tell what to make of it: and therefore wee acknowledge it not. Vse 1. Séeing such torments remaine for them in Hell which repent not of their sins, vse all possible care that thou come not there: Helpe thy selfe against sin, and all damnable security in it, by thinking of the torment following. In regard of thy selfe, it had béene better thou hadst neuer béene borne, then to haue thy a∣biding with those vgly Fiends in that same euerlasting Fire and Brimstone: Let not therefore the bitter pleasures of
sinne deceiue thée: Knowest thou not it will be bitternesse in the end: The end of thy Drunkennesse, Whooredome, Ly∣ing, Pride, Sabaoth-breaking, Negli∣gence in the seruice of God, Contempt of the Gospell, &c. will be more bitter then Worme-wood or Gall, when the very Dregges of the Wine of the fierce wrath of God shall be powred out against thée for those thy sinnes. Is sinne swéete? But death is bitter: remember it: Thy sinne, and the pleasure of it, is short: but the shame and torment following is without end: and that in Hell: where one minute of torment shall swallow vp the very memory of all fore-past plea∣sures: Labour to thinke often of Hell, it will bée some meanes to kéepe thée from thence, &c. Vse 2. Is life Eternall such a happi∣nesse? then liue godly,1. Tim. 4.8 Rom. 2.7. for that is the way to it. It is our duty to liue godly, though no reward were propounded; but when our endeuours (which yet are weake) shall bee so beyond all proportion, rewarded with such an eternall weight of glory; how should it whet on our care, and spurre vs forward to please such a God, who is
so rich to them which feare him? How should it prouoke vs to labour to be en∣tertained into his seruice, whose seruants after a little obedience here performed, are made Kings and Quéenes in Heauen for euermore? Who would not be wil∣ling through fire and water, and all the miseries of this life, to goe to that Hea∣uenly Ierusalem, the Citty of Saints, to haue eternall fellowship with the An∣gels, Patriarkes, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and all our deare friends, which haue beléeued: yea with Iesus Christ our Princely Redéemer, in the glory of the Father? If thou hast prophanely said, or thought, what profite shall I haue if I serue God? See here, and be ashamed: for such as serue God, shall partake of the swéetnesse of Abrahams bosome, of the delights of Paradise, of the melody of their Fathers house, of their Maisters Ioy, that fulnesse of Ioy, of the Riuers of pleasure for euer, of an Inheritance that neuer fadeth, but is immortal in the Hea∣uens: where whatsoeuer we can loue, we shall haue, and wee shall desire nothing which wee haue not; where there is so much happinesse, as neither the eye hath
séene, nor heart can thinke. What mayest thou thinke of thy selfe, which liuest so, as if heauen and the ioyes thereof, were not worth the while? Doest not thou loue & labour for this transitory & miserable life? Why not then much more for that which is permanent in happinesse vnconceiue∣able? Oh! if thou knewest ye good that fol∣loweth piety, and the terror of that death that followeth sin, it would make thée wil∣ling to redéeme that life, though it were with a thousand yeares torment euen in Hell; which now is offered to thée by a short cōtinuance in holy obedience. Thou séest the way of life and death: There is great difference betwéene Heauen & Hell, betwéene endlesse ioyes, and endlesse tor∣ments; betwéene the fellowship of Christ & his holy Angels, and the society of the damned and the Diuels: Bée wise, and chuse the way of life, &c. Quest. But doe you thinke indeede that there shall be such a day of generall Ludgement which you seeme to speake of? Ans. Yes, I verely beleeue that God hath appoynted a day wherein hee will iudge the world in righteousnesse by the man whom hee hath appoynted, that is,
by Iesus Christ, who shall seperate the E∣lect from the Reprobate,Act. 17.31 2. Cor. 5.10 Ro. 14.10 12. Hebr. 9.27 Iud. 14.15. adiudging them to eternall life, these to eternall death. Explic. As the Scriptures doe infal∣libly teach, that there shall be such a day of Iudgement, wherein the Church shall be crowned with eternall and full glorie: and the Diuels and wicked men senten∣ced vnto eternall condemnation, so al∣so by an inuincible Argument, drawne from the Iustice of God, the same may be concluded. It is iust ye the promise of God should be made good to the righteous, and his threatning to the vngodly: which be∣cause it is not here, must néedes euen for the iustice and trueth of God be executed in another world: Doubtlesse there is a reward laid vp for the righteous;Psal. 58.11 Doubt∣lesse there is a GOD which iudgeth the earth. The Iudge shall be the whole Trinity, in regard of the decrée and authority; but Iesus Christ the Mediatour, in regard of the visible act, promulgation, and execu∣tion of the Sentence, who shall come from heauen in maiesty and great glory, attended vpon with innumerable Saints and Angels, and in his Humane Nature
wherein he suffered, performe the same; pronouncing the definitiue sentence ac∣cording to Saint Mathews Gospel:Iohn 5.22, 27. Mat. 25.34 41. The effect of which two Sentences are euen now to be discerned in the Court of Con∣science: for the godly doe receiue here ab∣solution and certainety, and the wicked haue their mortall sentence euen in their owne breasts: but this is secret, and the equity of it appeares not,Tit. 3.11. and the pro∣fane thinke themselues wrongd: but then the mouth of all wickednesse shall be stop∣ped: and it shalbe openly manifested, that the Elect are iustly saued, and the wicked iustly damned, their workes being scan∣ned by the Bookes, and their faith and infidelity thereby appearing. The persons to be iudged are all man∣kinde, small and great, who by the dread∣full sound of a Trumpet,Iude 15.  12 14 Rom 2.16. 2 Cor. 5.10 shal be sum∣moned to appeare, neyther is it possible not to appeare; yea the very Diuels are reserued in cheines vnto the Iudgement of this great Day. The matters to be tri∣ed are Déedes, Words, yea Thoughts: whatsoouer wée haue done in our bodies, good or ill: And for a preparation, the heauen and earth shall be consumed with
fire: the heauens passing away as a scrole,2. Pet. 3.7, 10. the elements melting with feruent heat, & thearth burning with the works that are therein: whereby is not meant that the substance of the heauen and earth shall be annihilated, but only the figure changed, and the vanity purged out. The com∣ming of the Iudge shall be sodaine. The signes of his comming many. The parti∣cular day and time not knowne, nor to be inquired:Rom. 8.21. 1. Cor. 7.31 1. Thess. 5.2, 3. Mat. 24.20. Mat 24.36 Acts 1.7. Iohn 6.39, 40. But the day wherein this shall be, shall be the last day. Vse 1. This is a singular comfort to the Elect, that there shall be a day where∣in they shall haue righteous Iudgement: though here they be despised and condem∣ned before men. Then also shal appeare, to the confusion of the wicked, their la∣bour hath not béene in vaine. And cer∣tainely, what can be more comfortable, then to be iudged by him, who is our Ad∣uocate, and hath redéemed vs by his blood? Let vs therefore lift vp our heads, with trust in him, because our redempti∣on draweth neare; Let vs loue, looke for, and haste to his appearing, saying, and praying with the Church;Reu. 22.20 Come Lord Iesus, come quickely.
Vse 2. This is a terrible and blacke day to the wicked, who haue not repen∣ted, for they must appeare before the tri∣bunall seate of Iesus Christ, there to an∣swer for all their sinnes, euen such which the eie of man could neuer discerne: all shall be laied open then, and they shall smart for all. Knowing the terrour of this day, we should be perswaded. Surely, whome the remembrance of that day, of that fire, and of that wrath, which shall be throwne vpon the wicked, will not moue, nothing will moue. The day of Sodom was a grieuous day, but nothing to this day, which shall be grieuous to drunkards, vsurers, whoremongers, &c. but specially to contemners, and enemies of the Gospel.2. Thes. 1.8 If thou hast béene such a one, how wilt thou indure the counte∣nance of the Iudge, which is euen hee whose bloud, word, sacraments, ordinan∣ces, thou hast despised, deriding the pro∣fessors of his Gospel? O let not this day take thée vnawares. Preuent the wrath which shall be then reuealed. Then it wil be too late to cry for mercy, for that is a time of Iudgement. Now is the day of Saluation: If thou béet sensible of those
terrors, and the hellish torments follow∣ing, make good vse of it. Quest. But if the Soules of the Elect goe presently after their death to heauen, and the Soules of the Reprobate to hell, what neede a generall Iudgement? Ans. There must be a general Iudge∣ment notwithstanding, both that the iust∣nesse of such particular Iudgement may bee made more manifest to the glorie of God, and that the whole man, consisting of body and soule, may receiue the du re∣ward.2. Cor. 5.10 Quest. Doe you then thinke, that the bo∣dies of man shall be restored at the day of iudge∣ment? Ans. Yes verely, I beleeue the re∣surrection of the body according to the Scriptures.Act. 24.15. 1. Cori. 15.12, &c. Expli. We are firmely to hold the ge∣nerall resurrection both of good and bad; for the good shall not onely rise, though they shall rise onely to eternall life: in which regard they are saide to be the chil∣dren of the Resurrection.Luk. 20.36 The wicked shall also rise, but because they shall rise to receiue their full torments, they are not so called. Both shall rise, but in a double
difference: first, of the efficient cause; for the good shall rise by the power of Christ their head. The wicked by the power of Christ, as Iudge of quicke and dead, and by the vertue of that Sentence:Gene. 2.17 In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt die the death: secondly, of the end: for the righ∣teous shall rise to glory, the wicked to shame and perpetuall contempt. And note this carefully, that those very bodies, in which both iust and vniust li∣ued here,Dan. 12.2. Ioh. 10.27. Iohn 5.28. Mar. 10.28 2. Cor. 5.10 1. Corin. 15 53. shall be raised and restored, as appeareth by the Scripture: This cor∣ruptible shall put on incorruption: This, that is, This same in number, as if he had clapt himselfe on the breast: Now though this séeme vnpossible to reason, yet it is not so to our Faith: whereby, consider∣ing the power of God, we know, that he is able to restore the body, though burnt to ashes, deuoured by wild beasts, or tur∣ned to dust, as he was able to create them, and all the world of nothing in the begin∣ning: And this the Iustice of GOD re∣quires; namely, that that body which sinned, should be punished, and not an∣other, and that that body which hath béen tortured héere for the profession of his
Name, should be crowned with glorie at the last day. The bodies shall rise the same in sub∣stance: but the bodies of the Iust shall bée Immortall, Incorruptible, Spirituall: not in substance, but in quality or condi∣tion; not néeding meanes of bodily nou∣riture, not subiect to infirmities, but powerfull, firme, strong, and impassible, nimble to moue as well vp-wards, as downe-wards, voide of all deformity, and vncomelinesse; glorious, of perfect sta∣ture; without the vse, though not with∣out the difference, of Sexe.Mat. 13.43 Mat. 22.30 1. Cor. 15. The bodies of the vniust shall rise Immortall also, and Incorruptible, but passible, to en∣dure the due punishment inflicted vpon them. The manner of the Resurrection, con∣ceiue to be thus: On the last day Christ shall suddenly come in the clouds, in that visible forme in which He Ascended, and shall send his Angell with a Trumpet,Mat. 24.31 1. Cor. 15.31. 1. Thess. 4.15.16. at the sound whereof, first they which are dead shall be raised, and then those which are liuing, shall bée in the twinkling of an eye changed. Vse 1. If in this life onely wee had
hope, we were of all men the most mise∣rable; but we looke for a day, when our vile bodies shall gloriously rise, and bee made like the Glorious Body of our Lord Iesus Christ;1. Cor. 15.19. Phil. 3.21. Iob 19.25.26.27. comfort thy selfe against thy calamities with this: This vpheld Iob in the day of his sore trouble: So in the troubles of the Iewes vnder Antiochus Epiphanes, Many were racked and would not be deliuered, because they looked for a better Resurrection.Act. 11.35. Let this also com∣fort against the loathsomnesse of the graue, in as much, as though our bodies be laid downe for a time in the dust, they shall yet after bee restored to Life and Glory. Vse 2. Remember that euen that body which thou hast vsed as a Weapon and Instrument, to Lying, Murder, Vnclean∣nesse, Theft, Pride, and all manner of vn∣righteousnesse, shall rise againe: and as thou hast done in the same that which thou shouldst not; so shalt thou receiue in the very same, that which thou wouldst not: And if thou béest a Beléeuer, remem∣ber that that very body of thine, which hath bene vnto thy soule, an instrument of Righteousnesse, & which for righteous∣nesse
sake, hath endured Griefe, Smart, or Contempt, &c. as it hath taken part with the soule in Mortification, and in the affliction, so shall it also pertake in the bles∣sed Consolation to bee reuealed in the last day. Quest. You said that God was the Redee∣mer and Sanctifier of his Church: Do you not beleeue that the Redemption, Iustification, and Sanctification, which you haue spoken of, are vniuersall, and belonging to all? Ans. No:Eph. 5.25. &c. I verely beleeue that those Graces belong onely to the Church. Quest. What is the Church? Ans. By Church, I meane the Holy Catholique Church,1. Cor. 12.12.13. Eph. 3.15.16.17.18.19 Eph. 4.15.16. Reu. 21.27. Heb. 12.21 22. Cant. 6.8. which is the whole Company, of them which are from euer∣lasting Predestinated to Eternall Life, and which, in time, are called by the Word, and sanctified by the Bloud and Spirit of IESVS, and this is but one: part whereof is Triumphant in heauen, and part Mili∣tant on earth. Expl. As in our vsuall Créed wée are taught to beleeue, the Holy Catholique Church, to bee the company of Saints, which haue Communion, or Fellowship, in the grace of Remission of sinnes, and
Resurrection to Eternall life: So it is manifest that such onely are the Catho∣lique Church, and that such graces are proper and peculiar vnto them: As the Scriptures do euery where restraine these benefites, to Beleeuers onely, and to the Church: To Beléeuers, Ioh. 3.16. and 5.24. and 6.40.47. Act. 10.43. Ioh. 12.46. Rom. 3.22. Gal. 3.22. To the Church: Mat. 1.21. Ioh. 10.15. and 15.13. and 17.9.19. Now whereas in diuers places, the Scripture speaketh with a generall note: That Christ dyed for all, and that God lo∣ued the world, and such like: Such pla∣ces must bee vnderstood, some of the suffi∣ciency of Christs death for all, not of the Efficacy, which is onely to Beléeuers: Some of a Precept vniuersall, whereby all are commanded to beléeue: Some of the publique Ministery of the Word, whereby grace is offered to all: Some collectiuely to signifie that the benefite of Redemption extends it selfe, to Gentiles as well as to Iewes: or distributiuely, sig∣nifying that some of all Nations, Condi∣tions, Ages, Sexes, haue that benefite, not that euery singular of all kinds, but the kinds of all singulars, are made par∣takers
thereof, So then, not the world. that is, not euery man and woman in the world, haue interest in the blessing of Christ,Rom. 11.7. but onely the Elect of God. This Church is called Holy, partly be∣cause it is cloathed with the righteousnes of Christ imputed, and partly because it is gouerned by the Spirit of Christ, by the which euery member thereof is quick∣nes; and made able in some measure, in truth, to hate sinne, and to loue, and fol∣low that which is good: It is called Catho∣like, that is Vniuersall; because all the Saints and Elect, of all times and places,  vnto it, as to one Body: And this we professe to be One, because there is the Head, which is Christ, one Bo∣dy, one Spirit, one Faith, one Hope,Ephe. 4.4. one Loue, &c. Part whereof is now in heauen Triumphing, which are the Soules of the Saints departed; and part fighting and Militant here on earth, in the Spiri∣tuall wee face, against the world, the flesh and the deuill. Vse 1. All happy making promises are made onely to the Church; All shall not be saued: labour to be of that number, whose
are the promises, if thou wouldst bee sa∣ued. Vse 2. It's a great comfort, that of all sorts of men, some are of this Church, which is washed with the Blocd of Iesus, the Geatile, as well as the Iew, the Ser∣uant as well as the Maister, the Poore as well as the Rich: For there is no respect of persons with God, but in all Nations, such as feare him are accepted, be they one or other:Act. 10.34.35. As God respects none for their riches or great place, so he reiects none be∣cause they are poore and base: Indéed in this world the poore haue the least part; but in Christ benefites, the Beggar (be∣léeuing) hath as large and good right as the King: For we are Cittizens of a King∣dome which is not of this world: God is not onely the God of the Mountaines,Ioh. 18.36. but of the Vallies also: And the Spirit bloweth where it listeth. Yea, many times God breatheth Life and Grace, on a pooer contemptible wretch (as the world ac∣counts) as on Lazarus, and passeth by such as go in veluet coates, as Diues. Memem∣ber, Christ is not thine, because thou art rich, or great, or beautifull, but because thou Beléeuest. It is faith makes the poore
Beggar as rich in Christ, as thy selfe: For God hath chosen the poore also, to make them rich in faith, and pertakers of his Kingdome. Art thou rich?Iames 2.5. despise not the Beggar or poorest Beléeuer, who if thou beleeuest not, is better then thy selfe: and though in the things of this life, (accor∣ding to Gods ordinance) thou hast the start of him, yet in Christ he is thy equall, for in Christ, there is neither Circumsion, nor Vncircumcision, Bond, nor Frée,Col. 3.11. &c. Art thou rich? Labour to bée rich in faith, rather then in gold, for thou and thy mo∣ney may perish, but by faith thou shalt bée saued. Art thou poore? Comfort thy selfe: Thou hast a right in a heauenly inheri∣tance, where thou shalt equally share with the greatest King, and let it prouoke thee to so much the more care to please him in all things, who hath chosen thée so base, and called thée so vnworthy. Vse 3. The Church of Christ is a Ho∣ly Church: Marke then. If thou béest not holy, in heart and affections, in life and conuersation, but a profane wretch, thou art also a damned wretch, if thou so conti∣nuest; thou art no part of this Church, for Christ hath chosen vs that we should bée
holy,Ephe. 1.4. 2. Tim. 1.9. and hee hath called vs with a holy, making calling: Examine therefore thy selfe.Cant. 4.12.13. The Church, by Salomon, is called a Garden enclosed, full of the sweetest Flowers and Plants: Now if thou beest a Blasphemer, a Lyer, a Backe-biter, &c. If these bee the Flowers which grow in thy Garden, thou art the Deuils Dung∣hill, thou art none of the Church: The Church is called, a Doue vndefiled: If thou beest filthy,Cant. 5.2. vncleane, a Fornicator, a Strumpet, an Vsurer, an Oppressour, Couetous, Cruell, Vnmercifull, &c. Thou maist be a member of the Kite, Vulture, or rauenous Cormorant, but not of Christs spotlesse Doue, which is his Church. The Church is the Body of Christ; If thou beest a Drunkard, Ryo∣tous, a breaker of the Saboath, a contem∣ner of Religion, and such as doe professe it, &c. thou art a limbe of the deuill, not a Member of Christ, vnlesse thou wouldst make the Body of Christ a monstrous body, like the Image of Nebuchadonoser, which was part of Gold and Siluer, part of Iron and Clay. Remember then, Christ is the Head of his Church, if thou receiuest not not Grace from him to San∣ctification,
thou art none of his. Christ is the King of his Church, out of ye Church the deuill raignes: If thou obeyest not Christ, but the deuill, how art thou Christs? Nay, how art thou not the de∣uils? Quest. You say that the Church is a com∣pany of such which are Predestinated to Eter∣nall Life: What meane you by Predestina∣tion? Ans. By Predestination of men, I meane the Eternall purpose of God con∣cerning Man-kind fallen and corrupted; whereby, for the setting forth of his glo∣ry, he appointed some to Saluation, with the meanes whereby they should obtaine the same, which is called Election; and some to damnation,1. Thess. 5.9. which is called Re∣probation, Rom. 9. throughout the chap∣ter. Quest. What is Election? Ans. Election is the most free and Eter∣nall Counsell of God,Luk. 10.20. Rom. 8.30 & 9.11. & 11.5.2. Pet. 1.10. Eph. 1.2.3.4. whereby hee choo∣seth some, which were falne in Adam, and Predestinateth them to Grace and Glory by Iesus Christ. Quest. What is Reprobation? Ans. It is the most free Counsell of
God, whereby hee determined, not to chuse,Rom. 9.21.22.2. Pet. 2.8. Iude 4. but to passe by some, fallen in Adam, and to leaue them in their guilti∣nesse and corruption, and in the end to condemne them for their sinnes. Q Do you then thinke that men were or∣dained to life or death before they were borne? Ans. Yes verily that I do. Quest. Doth not this bring in a neglect of all godlinesse,Rom. 9.11. and make for them which say: If I be predestinated to life, I shall be saued what∣soeuer I do, if to death, I shall bee damned in like manner, therefore I will liue as I list? Ans. God forbid: For wee teach that men are not onely predestinated to the end, but also to the meanes. They which are ordained to Life, being also ordained to Grace, whereby they obtaine it: and they that are ordained to death, being al∣so ordained to be left in their corruption that they may be damned.Ephe. 1.4. Expl. That there is Predestination, which is an ordaining of a thing, to this or that, before it be extant: appeares in the doctrine of the Prouidence of God. And that it is to be referred to men in the two branches of it, Election and Re∣probation, is manifest in the like An∣sweres.
To deny it, were to deny that Wisedome in God, which we attribute to wise men; who thinke of nothing, but to some ends, which they haue before pro∣pounded in themselues: Much more doth God determine aforehand, what he will do, and why, appointing euery thing the fit vse to which it shall serue, and the cer∣taine end to which it shall attaine, with the meanes leading thereto. This doctrine is to bee taught in the Church soberly, and discreatly according (not to the curious inuentions of men) but the Scripture, in as much as the wisedome of God hath reuealed it, and then we are bound to take knowledge of it. And because it is the very foundation,Deu. 29.29 and ground-work of all our certainty, and assurance, in Christ, concerning heauen∣ly things: The order of Predestination I take to be this. First, that God first purposeth his owne Glory, which is the vtmost end of all things, then for the effe∣cting hereof, that he purposeth to create the world, and in it man, whom he pur∣poseth to create perfite, but mutable; to suffer him to fall, and all Man-kind in him; and then out of Man-kind fallen, to
chuse some in Iesus Christ, to manifest the glory of his mercy in them, and not to chuse the rest, but to leaue them in their guiltinesse and corruption, to mani∣fest in them the glory of his Iustice; for as it is Mercy to be elected in Christ, and so saued: So it is Iustice to be reprobated and forsaken. Here remember, that though we cannot speake, write, or con∣ceiue of the Will of God herein, but by setting downe one thing after another; yet there is no such thing in God; but af∣ter an incomprehensible manner, he doth will all these things at once. We say that Election and Reprobati∣on, are the free Counsell and Purpose of God, &c. Because we are stedfastly to ac∣knowledge, that the Will of God is ye first and principall mouing cause of all things. For nothing can be, but God willing it to be, either by effecting it, or suffering it. I make the Subiect of Predestination, in Election and Reprobation, to be Man∣kind fallen, and corrupted: which I sup∣pose, in the vttermost of my weake vn∣derstanding, to be the safest and plainest way in this intricate, and weighty Point.
With mine Opnion, I will be bold to set downe, and to proue, as briefly, and plainely as I can, willingly, and with all  respect, submitting my selfe in this, and in all the rest, to the censure and iudgement of the Learned, according to the Scriptures: I conceiue then that in , first God willeth a thing to be, before he ordaineth it to this or that end: I do not say that a thing must be extant before God determine of it, but that God willeth it to be extant, else Gods decree should be of nothing, in as much as till God will it, there is not, nor can be any shing. Then I would argue thus: When God considered Man-kind in Election or Reprobation, he considered him, either  in his created Perfection, or fallen from it: Not standing: Therefore fallen. First for ye Proposition, if any shal finde fault with it, as not sufficient, and adde a  estate of man to be considered, nei∣ther standing, nor fallen: Then, I think, they must proue that there was such an estate of man; (but I am sure there neuer was any such) vnlesse they make a double purpose of God in creating of man: One,
whereby he purposed to create him: ano∣ther, whereby he purposed to create him according to his Image; which I sup∣pose to be too curious, because at that in∣stant that man was, he was according to the Image of God: and so God conside∣red him onely and alwayes, because he ne∣uer was otherwise (vnlesse we would say, that the inward act of Gods purpose is different from the outward, which I thinke is not to be granted:) And likewise so Moses bringeth in the Trinity con∣sulting, as it were: Let vs make Man according to our Image; noting, as I thinke, one vndiuided act of the purpose of God, when he considered the Creation of Man. I would not therefore say, that the naked Masse is the subiect of Prede∣stination: nor that God passeth by men, onely as they are men, and not as they are corrupt: For this were to make the sub∣iect of Gods Predestination to be améere notion, or a conceit onely of the minde; because that man was neuer but in an e∣state of holinesse, or corruption: Neither doth the similitude of the Potter proue it as farre as I can conceiue.Rom. 9.21 The meaning of which place I take to be this: The A∣postle
thereby stoppeth the murmuring and cauilling mouth of the Reprobate, who presumptudusly say, Why are wee aproued? and why doth God complaine of vs for breaking his will? If he would haue giuen vs grace, we would also haue . Who hath resisted this his wil? To this the Apostle answereth, by a simi∣litude taken from the Potter, by a com∣parison from the lesse to the greater, thus: Who art thou that disputest with God? If the Potter haue power of the same naked lampe to make a vessell to honour, ano∣ther to dishonour: shall not God much more haue power, of a corrupted lumpe of mankinde, to make vessels of wrath? Which (in my simple vnderstanding) doth better take away all reasoning from the Reprobate, and stoppe their mouthes, then to expound it of Gods absolute Right: For similitudes are not to be pres∣sed too farre: it is brought against the Re∣probate, and there is no correspondency and likenesse betwéene the Potters naked masse, and the naked masse of mankinde; because the Potters masse, though na∣ked, is a thing really, and indéed extant by it selfe, though the Potter make neuer a
Pot of it: So is not the naked masse of mankinde extant really, but only in ima∣gination. And therfore I would not presse a similitude in that wherein there is us likenesse. If any shall obiect and say: Hath not God absolute right, authority, soueraign∣ty & power ouer his creature? I answere, Yes: and he may do with his owne, what he will; who shall let him? Neither doth any thing I haue said, inferre the contra∣ry. And yet that God doth, or will vse an absolute right toward the creature (as to cast it away without any desert of it) I sée not yet by the Scriptures. This I sée, that what God may doe, I may not dis∣pute: but what he wil do, I must enquire and beléeue according to his word, know∣ing that he can do the same. If any shall say further, God maketh vessels of wrath, but if he should consider man fallen, he should finde them made: I deny the consequence: for a man fallen in Adam, is then said to be made a vessell of wrath, when God for his sin decréeth his reiecting and punishment. Beside, to hold the corrupted masse is agréeable to that receiued doctrine of the
Ancients, that God forsakes none penal∣ly, but such as forsake him. This also best stoppeth the mouth of Reprobates, and taketh away all reasoning from them, (as was said) when they must acknow∣ledge that there was matter in them  reprobation by ye fall of Adam. So doth this best set forth the rich grace of God to the Elect, the vessels of Mercy, then they shall consider, that there was  in them deseruing Reprobation. And me thinkes, when I consider, that  are elected in Christ, it must néedes follow, that they are to be considered sal∣in: for Christ presupposeth sinne, which Christ was to satisfie for the elect. For the second Proposition, that God considered not man good, is plaine; because all promises of Gods eternal fauour, both before the fall, and after the same, are made in the Scriptures to them which are good (either by Creation, or Regenerati∣on) and which continue in the same. To conclude, Election, and Reproba∣tion may be considered eyther absolutely, as that God elected or reprobated these: or that he elected or reprobated these, and not these. If you aske why God elected
these: I answer, that his sole will, with∣out any the least respect in the Creature, was the cause of it: If you aske why God elected these, and not those, as Iacob, and not Esau: I answere after the same manner. If you aske why God reproba∣teth these rather then these: I answer as before, that there is no cause thereof in the Creature, but onely in him, which is his will. If also you shall aske why did God reprobate these: I answere, that his will also is the onely cause thereof in this sense, namely, that it was in Gods frée power notwithstanding sinne, to e∣lect, or not elect, to reprobate or not re∣probate: For God was not compelled by the sinne he considered in man to repro∣bate him, for he might haue elected the same man in Iesus Christ, if he had plea∣sed. And yet this we adde, that in repro∣bation of these, God had respect to mans sinne (not actuall infidelity or sinne, but originall) not as a principall efficient, or as a cause first moouing, for God might haue not reprobated, if he had so pleased: but as a cause deseruing reprobatiō, or as a necessary condition in the obiect, with∣out which GOD will not reprobate any.
For neither doth God in time deny his grace to any, but to those who deserue to be denied: neither decrées he before time to deny it, but vnto such. And whereas some will say, An vniuersall cause brin∣geth forth an vniuersall effect: If then sinne be vniuersall, why is not Reproba∣tion? I answer, that an vniuersall cause bringeth forth such effect actually, if it be not hindered by a superiour ouer-ruling cause. And so I yéelde that it is the na∣true of sinne to depriue all of Grace and Glorie;Rom. 3.23 and would haue this effect vpon all mankind, if God should shew no mer∣cy: and the reason it hath not, is, because God is pleased out of his botomlesse mer∣cie to accept of some, and to elect them in Christ. Vse 1. Beware of searching too farre into this déepe, without the light of the Word: The plaine way is the safest, and in as much as the Scripture hath more sparingly spoken of Reprobation then E∣lection: Doe thou labour more to make thy election sure vpon good grounds, then to conceiue euery quiddity of men con∣cerning Reprobation. Vse 2. If thou findest vpon good
grounds, that thou arte elected: for euer acknowledge the rich mercy of God vnto thée: who wert déepe enough in Adams transgression to be damned; if God had not of his frée loue discerned thée: there∣fore let it bind thée to all humilitie (séeing thou hast receiued all) and all thankeful∣nesse to him that hath shewed thée such mercy. Vse 3. Beware of that damnable speach of profane men, who say: If I be predestinated, and Gods decrée must take effect, then I may doe what I will: for if I be appointed to saluation, I shall be sa∣ued: and if to damnation, I shall be dam∣ned, whatsoeuer I doe. Which is all one, as if one should say, God hath decréed that I shall liue or die; If he hath appoynted life, I shall liue, though I eate not at all, or though I eate poyson, if he hath appoynted death, tis not eating or not eating will saue me: therefore I will ei∣ther not eate at all, or I will eate poison: then which collection there can bee no∣thing more sottish. If a man be reprobate, he shall certain∣ly be damned, doe what he can: Tis most true. But yet remember, such an one,
can (nay will) doe nothing, but that which shall more and more bring his damnation vpon him: For the horrible disease of finne, not being healed by Christ (as it is only in the Elect) must néeds bring forth fruit vnto death. Indéed if a Reprobate, had power to doe good and to repent, and yet for all that, and doing so, he should be damned by the necessitie of Gods will, there might be some colour: but to repro∣bate is to be left in originall sinne, which is the fountaine of all transgressions: and the persons so left, are iustly so left, be∣cause they are left guilty in Adam: and can do no good vnlesse God did giue them new grace, which he is not bound to doe, and they haue deserued not to receiue. Likewise, if a man be elected, hee must néedes be saued, not that God hath ele∣cted to saue any absolutely without grace; but whomsoeuer he hath elected to saue, he hath elected also to beléeue and repent, that they may be capable thereof. For God did as well decrée the meanes where∣by we should be saued, as that we should be saued: which meanes are the merite of Christ, effectuall calling, Iustificati∣on, Faith, Repentance, &c. which who∣soeuer
attaineth may certainely conclude that he is elected, and shall be saued, as he that wanteth them to the end, may cer∣tainely conclude, that he shall not be sa∣ued, and therefore neuer was elected. Wherefore, by the workes of Sanctifi∣cation, make thy Election sure, as Pe∣ter aduiseth thée:2. Pet. 1.10 Phil. 2.12. &c. And make an end of thy Saluation with feare and trembling, as Paul councelleth thée. Qu. Are then all which are in the Church of God on Earth, predestinated to life eternall and effectually sanctified? Ans. No: onely those are predestina∣ted to life,Mat. 13.24 25. Mat. 22.10 and effectualy sanctified, which are of th'inuisible church, many are in the visible which are hypocrites and profane. Quest. Are there then two Churches, one which can not be seene, and an other visible, which may be seene. Ans. No: there is but one Church, which in diuers respects is said to be Inui∣sible or Visible.Mat. 22.18 Rom. 2.28, 29. & 9.7. Expli. Whosoeuer are of the Inuisi∣ble Church, are holy; not all that are of the visible Church: which two tearmes of Visible & Inuisible, are in diuers respects giuen to the Church, which is but one: e∣uen
as if you should say, the same man to be inuisible in regard of his soule, and vi∣sible in regard of his Apparrell, and out∣ward shape. Thus the Church on Earth is said to be Inuisible, in regarde of the inward essentiall forme, which is sancti∣ty, which cannot be seene with mans eie:Hebr. 12.14 1. Ioh. 2.19. 2. Tim. 2.19 Rom. 2.29. or Visible, either in regard of the particu∣lar companies professing Christ, or in re∣gard of the outward forme, which is the ministery of the Word and Sacraments; by the which it is visible, becauss these, be∣ing the means whereby it is gathered and gouerned, are visible. Vse. Examine how thou standest in the visible Church; for many are called, but few are chosen; and many are in the visible, which are not of the inuisible, as the Lées are in the Vessell, which are not wine, nor of the wine. It is not enough to be in Gods field, vnlesse we be good corne: not enough that we be in the bo∣dy, vnlesse we be members: For if wee be wennes and spottes, we must be pur∣ged and scowred off: not enough to be in Gods floore, vnlesse we be good Corne: For hee will gather the Corne into his Barne, but the Chaffe hee will burne
with vnquenchable fire: so, not enough that thou arte among the Saints, vnlesse thou be a Saint. For Cham was in the Arke, Saul among the Prophets, Iu∣das among the Apostles, and yet these are damned: So thou mayst be baptized, and ioined to the visible company of the faith∣full: yet if thou want the Spirit, which quickens al the true members of Christs body, to holinesse and righteousnesse of life: thou art but a withered branch, to be cut off and cast into the fire: Looke therefore to thy standing. Question. What call you the Inuisible Church? Ans. It is the vniuersity of the Elect and Regenerate,Rom. 2.29. which doe at any time, or in any place, professe and truely haue faith and conuersion to God. Quest. What is the visible Church? Ans. It is a company embracing and enioying the Ministery of the Word and Sacraments,Mat. 28.19 Ephes. 4, 11 and professing the Gospel. Quest. What are the true notes of a true visible Church? Ans. The true, proper, and essentiall notes of a true Church, are two, name∣ly, The pure and incorrupt Ministerie
and profession of the Word: and,Mat. 28.19 Act. 2.42, 46. Ephe. 5.25 26. The lawfull Administration of the Sacra∣ments: to the which some adde Disci∣pline. Explic. Vnto those Scriptures in the answere, which shew that the lawfull vse of the Word and Sacraments, are the two genuine notes of a true Church: be∣cause the Primitiue Church is so in them described. You may adde concerning the Word, these; Iohn 8.31. and 10.27. and 14.23. 1. Corint. 4.15. Ephes. 2.20. 1. Tim. 3.15. And of the Sacraments, these; 1. Corin. 20.16. and 12.13. So that wheresoeuer there is a Company preaching and professing, that Iesus Christ the Sonne of Marie is the Sonne of GOD: Christ the Lord, by whom onely and alone they séeke to be saued: that Company is a true visible Church, though there be many corruptions in the same. Simon Magus was by Baptisme receiued into the Visible Church,Acts 8.13. for an outward profession of Christ in word. And the Corinthians were a true church, euen then when they abounded with grosse corruptions: as Paul denyeth not in his Epistles written vnto them.
These notes haue their degrées: the more pure they are, the more pure is the Church which hath them: the lesse pure they are, the lesse pure is a Church to bee accounted: and where they are not all, or wholely adulterated, there, either is no Church, or a very corrupt one: Now though Discipline be allowed, and necessarily required to the well being of a Church: yet a Company holding Christ, and maintaining the Scriptures, though they should want Discipline, are a true, though a defectiue Church. It is the du∣ty of the Church, to vse Discipline: but as a wife ceaseth not to be a true wife, for the neglect of houshold gouernement, so long as she kéepeth the mariage oath to herhusband vnbroken: so a Church cea∣seth not to be a true Church for some saults, or neglects, so long as she acknow∣ledgeth her head Christ according to the Word. Vse. Withdraw not thy selfe from the fellowship of the Churches of God: and if thou hast depraued the Church of Eng∣land, and separated from it: repent of thy rash and vncharitable censures: Remem∣ber what great things God hath done for
the Church thou despisest: and spit not in her face that hath brought thée forth to Christ. Remember that God hath alwaies preserued a séed of Christ in our land euer since the first conuersion therof from Hea∣thenisme: which, as a little leauen, lay a long time hid in thrée peckes of meale, as our Sauiour speaketh: till at the last, by the hand of a King,Henry 8. it began to sowre the whole lumpe. And after him, remember how God raised him vp a Iosias to finish his fathers beginnings. Afterward,Edward 6. how it was watered with the bloud of as fa∣mous Martyrs as euer the world saw. Then thinke how God miraculously pre∣serued, and gaue a Quéene to nurse this Church, labouring,Queene Elizabeth. and almost fainting vnder afflictions: yea such a Quéene as he neuer stablished in the Throne of any Kingdome, since the day of Adams Crea∣tion. And then consider, how that when we reckoned that all our happinesse had béene ended, and expected nothing but dissipation, fire, sword, bloud, and the ru∣ine of Church and Common-wealth: e∣uen then the Lord, beyond all expectation, sent amongst vs, a most tender Father, our most gratious Soueraigne King
IAMES (whom God long preserue) vn∣matchable for mildnesse of Gouernment, Vigilancy, care for the good of all his sub∣iects, déepnesse of iudgement, soundnesse of Religion, and (together with many o∣ther blessings, whereby we are blessed in him) for incomparable learning; hauing, to the admiration of the world, with his Owne Pen, defended and aduanced the truth. And if thou standest vpon a right constitution, remember that the replan∣ters of the Gospell here, were Kings and Princes, and not without the preaching of the word. Remember that the people of the land were not conuerted from Hea∣thenisme by them, as such which had no knowledge of Christ, but from Papisme, vnder which they had some knowledge of him. Remember that if the Church were not rightly constituted by Quéene Eliza∣beth, neither was it by King Henry the eighth, and King Edward the sixth, and so thou wrongest the ashes of the Martyrs, as if they were not Martyrs of Christ, but of Antichrist: And say that there was something wanting in the first constitu∣tion: cannot God forgiue it? Nay, hath he not forgiuen it? How darest thou say
the contrary? Remember these things, & stay thy tongue from reuiling Israel, and thy foot from withdrawing thy selfe from the people of God. If thou wouldst haue Discipline, we are not without it, though without that of thy deuising. If thou wouldst haue the preaching of the Word, we haue it, I may boldly say, as soundly and powerfully in all the chiefest Citties and Townes, and in many other places, as any Church in Europe, whereby thousands are taught the true knowledge of Iesus Christ, are confirmed in the faith, and continued in holy obedience, li∣uing & dying in most heauenly & certaine assurance of Gods fauour, and of eternall life. Despise not then that Church, which by the Word and Sacraments, and the Discipline she hath, bringeth forth, nur∣seth, and bringeth vp, euen to their sea∣ting in the Land of Canaan, thousands, and that not once in twenty yeares, extra∣ordinarily, but daily & ordinarily through the great blessing of God, &c. Q. Tell me what is the Ministery of the Word and Sacraments you speake of? Ans. The Ministery of the Word and Sacraments is an office ordeined by the
Holy Trinity,1. Cor. 12.28. Eph. 4.11. 1. Cor. 12.11. Mat. 28.19 20. 1. Cor. 13.9.10. 1. Cor. 14.34. 1. Tim. 3.2 &c. Tit. 1.6.7.8. 1. Tim. 3.2. 2. Tim. 2.15.24. Ro. 10.14. Heb. 5.4 5 Mat. 28.19 the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost to be in the Church to the end of the world: whereby men of vn∣blameable conuersation, able and apt to teach, being lawfully called, doe admini∣ster holy things in publique Prayer, and thankes-giuing, dispensing the Word and Sacraments. Expli. The Ministery of the Word and Sacraments is not an Inuention of man, hut of God himselfe, for the saluati∣on of man most necessary, not in regard of God, who is able without it, to effect his purpose: but of vs, who ordinarily without it cannot be saued, in as much as God hath once ordained by the foolishnes of Preaching to saue then which beléeue, called foolishnesse, when indéed it is the wisedome of God, because ignorant and euill men so account of it. This calling is either Inward or Out∣ward. The Inward is the good testimo∣ny of our hearts, that not through ambi∣tion, or couetousnesse, &c. we séeke and accept of such office, but onely through a sincere desire in the feare of God, to edi∣fie and build vp Gods Church. And this calling must be in all who would approue
their Ministery to God. The outward is that which is according to the comely or∣der of the Church, and it is Ordinary, or Extraordinary.1. Tim. 3. Titus. 1. The Ordinary is that calling which by men is administred, ac∣cording to such a comely order which is a∣gréeable to the word. Extraordinary calling is that which is immediately from God, without the mi∣nistery of man before spoken of, as the calling of Iohn Baptist, And this is not to be expected, or pretended in an establi∣shed Church: But when the state of a Church is wholly decayed, or interrup∣ted: God doth extraordinarily stirre vp, and endue with answerable gifts, some to restore the same. There are foure rules to be obserued in the examining of such a Calling: The first is concerning the time and place; whether it be there and then: where, and when, there is no vse or possi∣bility of lawfull ordinary calling: Se∣condly, concerning the life and doctrine of such:Ioh. 5.39. Mat. 7.20. that they be in more then ordinary manner answerable to the Word: Third∣ly, concerning their gifts; as Knowledge, Wisedome, Utterance, vndantable Cou∣rage, that these be manifestly extraordina∣ry
in them: Fourthly, for the successe, effect, and continuance: that it bring an incredible and vnexpected blessing, in Re∣formation and Conuersion; notwith∣standing any opposition made by the whole world, and the deuill himselfe. Where there is an extraordinary calling pretended, and not according to these Rules, it is to be accounted a deceit and wicked imposture, and such which pretend the same to be of the number of those of whom Paul speaketh.Rom. 16.18 Vse 1. Art thou, a Minister, enabled with gifts? Presume not, though into the Office of the Ministery, without the cal∣ling of the Church: As Esay goeth not till he be sent,Esay 6.6. and Iohn stayeth his Preaching till the appointed time, And our Sauiour Christ till he was Baptized, &c. Vse 2. Art thou enadled with gifts,Luk. 1.80. and lawfully called? Looke well to the Mi∣nistration thou hast receiued of the Lord: stirre vp the gift that is in thée, be diligent and faithfull, cast of all impediments, as too much worldlinesse, the practise of other Callings, as Phisicke, Surgery, &c. for this Calling requireth a whole man, and who is sufficient for it? The reward of the
faithfull is great; the punishment of the slothfull great also: Preach, but not thy selfe, or thy owne deuices, but the sincere Word of God; and let thy life be an ex∣ample to thy Flocke, that they may reue∣rence thee, as well, when they see thée, as when they heare thée, if thou wouldest do good, and haue comfort of thy la∣bours, &c. Vse 3. Reuerence the Ministery of the Word as the ordinance of God, and receiue the Ministers in all loue and re∣spect for their workes sake, and the do∣ctrine they deliuer, according to the Scriptures, as the word of man, but as it is indéed, the Word of the liuing God:Phil. 2.29. 1. Thess. 2.13. & 5.12.13. Speake not euill of the Ministery of the Word, neither account it as a base or bootlesse thing, for without it ordinarily thou canst not haue faith: neither canst thou be begotten vnto Christ,Rom. 10.17 Iames 1.18 1. Cor. 4.15 1. Cor. 1.21. &c. nor finally be saued: For God hath pleased by the foolishnesse of Preaching to saue them which beleeue, &c. Quest. What are the Sacraments? Ans. The Sacraments are visible and outward Signes and Seales instituted, and ordained of God, whereby he confirmeth
to the Elect the free promise of the Gos∣pell,Rom. 4.11. Gen. 17.7.10.11. 1. Cor. 11.23. and also bindeth them to the perfor∣mance of duty to himselfe. Quest. How many Sacraments hath the Church of God now? Ans. Onely two,1. Cor. 12.13. Act. 2.38.41. Baptisme and the Supper of the Lord. Quest. What is Baptisme? Ans. It is a Sacrament of the new Te∣stament, instituted by Christ, in the which the confecrated water representeth the Bloud of Christ, sealing to all that are sprinkled therewith, into the name of the Father, the Soune, and the Holy Ghost, the merite of Christ, remission of finnes,Rom. 4.11. Col. 2.12. Rom. 6.3.4.5. 1. Pet. 3.21. and Eternall Life, and testifying our grafting into Christ, and Regenerati∣on, with the repromission of our obe∣dience. Expl. God is the Authour of Sacra∣ments, and none can adde any to the Word but God: Now God added them to the Word, not that the Word was not sufficient without them, but for a helpe to our weakenesse, that wée might haue, as it were, liuely pawnes before our eyes, of those things which wee heare with our eares (as euen Adam had Sacra∣ments
in Paradice) and these he ordained to be Seales of the couenant of Grace, which was not néedfull on Gods part, who is alwaies better then his word; but it was néedfull for vs, to succour whose weakenesse (who in regard of our vnwor∣thinesse, are prone to doubting) the Lord hath added them to giue vs greater assu∣rance; euen as a Seale to a Writing makes it more Authenticall. The Essentiall parts of a Sacrament, are either outward, or inward: The out∣ward hath the signe, with the Cere∣mony ordained, and the Word: As in Baptisme, the outward signe is Water, the Ceremony is the sprinkling: The word is the word of Institution and Promise: Baptise them, &c. Whosoeuer beleeueth, and is Baptized, shall be saued.Mat. 28.19 Mark. 16.16. And the distinct pronouncing in the Mo∣ther Tongue of this forme: I Baptise thee in, or into, the Name of the Father, and of the Sonne, and of the Holy Ghost. The meaning whereof is thus much: That, (the name of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, being called vp∣on) the Person Baptized, is, through forgiuenesse of sinnes, receiued into the
fauour of God, who is Father, Soune, and Holy Ghost; and Adopted, Receiued, Sealed, Initiated, and Consecrated, into the proper Goods, Right, Family, Coue∣nant, Grace, Worship, Religion, Faith, and Fellowship, of the Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghost, God, one in Essence, thrée in Persons, to liue wholly according to his Will. The inward matter is the thing signifi∣ed: which is both the Bloud and Spirit of Christ, and our Incision, and Graf∣ting, and Incorporation into him by the Holy Ghost, with all benefites following; As imputation of Christs Righteous∣nesse, Remission of sinnes, Adoption, Receiuing into the Communion of Saints, Regeneration, &c. For as the Water washeth the filthinesse of the body, so the Bloud of Christ washeth away our spirituall filthinesse, through the Spirit: which Spirit, makes vs fruit∣full in good workes, and abateth our de∣fires of earthly things; euen as water maketh things fruitfull, and quencheth bodily thirst. And this so surely, in re∣gard of the true and Mysticall vnion, of the Signe, and Things signified, by the
bond of Faith; that for our assurance the worke of the Spirit is often attribu∣ted to the Signe (as Baptisme regenera∣teth and saueth) because such is the rela∣tion and vnion of the Signe, and the grace signified thereby, in regard of the truth of God, on the one side offering, and faith on the other side receiuing; that whosoeuer beléeueth may as verily be assured of receiuing the thing signified in his soule, as he is made partaker of the signe in his body. Vse 1. In as much as the Sacra∣ments are Significations, and Seales, of such excellent things, they are with all re∣uerence to be handled and estéemed, euen as meanes which exhibite to vs and con∣firme the best blessings of God: In regard therefore of their vse by institution, they are things vnualuable: though in regard of that which is subiect to the eye they bée of little price. Estéeme then, not according to their outward valew, but according to the blessing annexed in their lawfull vse, and looke more vnto the gift, then the meanes or manner of giuing: For God measureth our contempt, or irreuerence in the Sa∣craments,
not according to the worth of the Elements; but according to the bene∣fite offered in and by them: As the thing wherein Adam transgressed was but an Apple, but the manner of sinning, euen in that Apple, was most heynous. As therefore men estéeme of their Eui∣dences, not according to the value of the Paper and Waxe, but according to their vse: So are we to consider of the Sacra∣ments. The Water in Baptisme, and the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, are but small matters: Yet no Bread or Wine in the world, none, the most preci∣ous water that is, or can be distilled, though a drop were worth a Kingdome, may be compared vnto these, but in the like vse. Adamah and Pharphar, Riuers of Damascus, fairer then Iordan, yet can∣not cleanse the leprosy: So there are ma∣ny waters which comfort the heart; but none but this cleanseth the soule & saueth it. Wherefore all Ministers, Parents, and People, are reuerently to cary them∣selues, in, or at the administration of the holy Sacrament of Baptisme: and if they slightly reckon thereof (as in too many pla∣ces
is vsed) they are to be reproued, as heinously guilty before God. Vse 2. Thankefully receiue the holy things of God, for the confirmation of thy faith: for though not in themselues, yet by Institution they haue singular vertue hereunto: I am perswaded we of∣ten want comfort, because we do not wise∣ly vse the Sacraments to their vse for the which they were appointed: Wherefore, doubtest thou, or wantest thou comfort? Remember thy Baptisme, as Dauid when he went to fight against Goliah, in∣couraged himselfe by his Circumcision: and go with confidence to the Lords Ta∣ble, the Lord will be present with his owne Ordinance; he is able to make them effectuall, and cannot faile by them to con∣uey comfort and assurance to thée; if thou canst do him this honour, as to beléeue that he is able and true to fulfill all his Word: For God is faithfull and all his promises are sure; and as Bernard said: Neither doth his Word differ from his Meaning, because he is all Truth, nor his Deed from his Word, because hee is all Power and Strength, &c. Vse 3. Art thou baptized? then know,
that thou art bound ouer to all manner of obedience to God, and to the continuall practise of Repentance, which if thou dost not,Rom. 2.25, 26. thy baptisme is voyd. God promi∣seth in Baptisme to be our God: but not so to be, though we liue as we list; but we for our parts promise also, to renounce the Diuell, the World, and the Flesh, and to serue him. Kéep thou thy part, and be sure the Lord will not faile to kéepe all his couenants on his part. But wholely breake thou thy promise, and thou shalt neuer taste of the good blessings of GOD promised to thée. There is nothing more profitable then Baptisme, yet it profited not Simon Ma∣gus, because he wanted the inuisible wa∣shing of the Spirit: therefore, if thou wouldst make the best profite of thy bap∣tisme, walke then in all holy obedience, and vnfainedly repent of thy sinnes; yea thou arte bound vnto it: Euen as the Souldier by his preast money to serue in the warres: so thou by this holy marke and character, which thou hast receiued of God, art bound to his seruice. Thou hast solemnely before God, his holy Angels and Saints, protested as
much, so as thou must néedes be guilty of treacherous falshood if thou performest it not. Men thinke their words binds them to men; and Herod séemes to make cons∣cience of an vnlawfull oath: make thou conscience much more of thy oth to God, the breaking whereof bringeth vpon thy soule an eternall guilt. Shalt thou by thy sinnes blot out the stampe of God which thou hast receiued? Shalt thou vow ser∣uice to GOD, and be the Diuells slaue? Hast thou Gods marke in thy fore-head, and the diuels in thy heart and life? Dost thou receiue the badge of a Christian, and liuest like an Infidell? Thy Baptisme shall not saue thée, but condemne thée ra∣ther: for thy sinnes are the greater, euen as Balthasars drunken feastings were the more abhominable, for the abuse of the holy Vessells: Euen as the holy water of triall was to the suspected wife, if shée were faulty, mortall and deadly: but if not, it was a blessing:Num. 5.11 Euen so the holie water of Baptisme, to such as kéepe their promise in sinceritie bringeth a blessing, when to such as liue profanely, and feare not God, it is euen a water of bitternes vnto death.
Qu. What is the Sacrament af the Lords Supper? Ans. The Supper of the Lord, is a Sa∣crament of the New Testament, instituted by Christ, wherein by the taking and ea∣ting of the bread blessed, and broken, and by drinking the wine being blessed, is signified and sealed to vs the Communi∣on of the body of Christ crucified,Matth. 28.26, 27, 28. Luke 22.19, 20. 1. Corint. 10.16. & 11.24, 25. and his bloud shed for vs vpon the Crosse for re∣mission of sinnes: and that being incor∣porated into Christ by his Spirite, wee might be more and more strengthened in assurance of eternall life. Explic. The Supper of the Lord is that other honourable Seale of Gods co∣uenant in Christ, by whom it was insti∣tuted: wherein are, as in all Sacraments, two things: First, the visible Element, or outward signe: Second, the word. For as Augustine saith; The Word be∣ing added to the Element makes a Sa∣crament. The Element or Signe is Bread blessed, broken, distributed, and eaten: and the Wine blessed, distributed and drunke of the Church, or company present. Both those are the outward signe: which though they be two mate∣rially
(as they say) yet in regarde of the end and forme, they are but one. Our Sauiour Christ intending the nouriture of the Soule, by a similitude of the bo∣dies nourishment, which consïsteth in bread and drinke. The word is the Promise added to the Signe in these words; This is my Bodie which is giuen for you; This is my blood which &c. together with the commande∣ment in these words; Doe this, &c. The element doth represent the inuisible grace of the which the word speaketh, and the Word declareth what the inuisible grace is, which is represented and sealed by the Element. The outward Signe then in this Sacrament, is the Bread and Wine as I haue spoken. The inward Grace, is the Body and Bloud of Christ giuen, and shead for our sinnes; and the Spirituall eating and drinking of them, whereby is signified our Vnion with Christ by faith, by the which we drawe from him Righte∣ousnesse, Ioy, and eternall life, according to an excellent Analogie in this Sacra∣ment. Now these two, the Signe, and the thing signified, are vnited by the Word
in the lawfull vse of this Sacrament: which Vnion is only Sacramentall, and relatiue, wherby the signe is not changed into the thing signified; nor the thing signified contained, in, vnder, or in the place of the Signe: but by the Signe the thing signified is represented, offered, and sealed in the lawful vse to Beléeuers. For Grace is not so tied to the Sacrament, that whosoeuer partakes of the Signe, should also of the thing signified; or as none could partake of the thing signified, without the Signe: For the vnbeléeuers may haue the Lords Bread in their mouthes, which neuer haue Christ in their hearts; as Beléeuers may taste of the swéetnesse of the Lord in their soules, which (where it can not be had) partake not of the Bread and Wine, which are the outward Signe. Quest. What is required that wee may so partake of this Sacrament at the Lords Table. that we may be partakers of the inward Grace of the Sacrament? Ans. Whosoeuer would come wor∣thily to this Sacrament, and to his bene∣fite, must first examine himselfe,1. Cor. 11.28 and so eate and drinke.
Explic. To be worthy, and to come worthily to the Lords Table, are two di∣uers things: none are worthy of so great mercy; yet we come worthily whē we try our selues. Which triall is of our faith, and repentance. Concerning Faith, first, whether we haue a competent knowledge of the doctrine of the Sacrament, and why it was instituted: secondly, whe∣ther we beléeue the pardon of our sinnes by Iesus Christ. Concerning repentance, whether we haue héeretofore, or doe now vnfainedly repent of our sinnes, purpo∣sing to leade a new life: He which comes to the Lords Table without Faith and Repentance, comes vnworthily: and he which findes them in himselfe, euen in their beginnings, true,Math. 9.12. and 11.28. though small and weake, comes worthily; for such Christ inuites. Question. How often would you aduise a Christian to receiue the holy Communion? Ans. So often as there is occasion of∣fered, and liberty granted lawfully to re∣ceiue the same.1. cor. 11.25 Explic. Baptisme is but once admi∣nistred, as being the sacrament of our new Birth; euen as we are but once borne.
But as being borne, we often eate to be nourished, and to grow: so we are often to communicate and to come to the Lords Table: first, that we may grow in Faith: secondly, that we may haue occasion to stirre vp our dulnesse, both to consider of, and to be thankfull for the death of Christ: thirdly, that we may testifie our Remem∣brance of Christ: fourthly, that we may kéepe Vnity, and nourish Charity: fiftly, that wee may immitate the Apostolicall church, who seldome came together with∣out the word, prayer, breaking of bread, & almesgiuing. Neither will this holy Sa∣crament grow into contempt through the often vse to the godly,Acts 2.42. as we sée in the fre∣quent vse of the word, and euen of our daily bread. Vse 1. Prepare thy self often to come to the Lords Table, if occasion fitly be offered: that thou tempt not GOD by neglecting his ordinance appoynted for the confirmation of thy Faith: And that thou maist performe his commandement, who saith: Do this often in remembrance of me. And that thou maist shew foorth the Lords death till hee come. Consider then, is once or twice a yeare enough for
thy discharge herein? Canst thou so neg∣lect the remembrance of his torments, who was bruised for thy sins, and which bore thine iniquities? who hath deliuered thée from Hell, and purchased Heauen for thée by his bloud? Thy Sauiour passing out of this world by a most bitter passion for thée, commends himselfe to thée, and commands thée to remember him; and to testifie this, and thy thankfulnesse for his death, to come often to his Table: How then doest thou not shewe thy selfe vn∣gratefull, and forgetfull, which when occasion is offered, churlishly turnest thy backe? &c. Vse 2. He that eateth and drinketh vn∣worthily, eateth and drinketh Iudgement to himselfe. Beware therefore how thou presumest to come to the Lords Table without thy wedding garment, without preparation. Holy things require holy v∣sage: first labour for faith, both to vnder∣stand what the Mystery is, that thou mayst discerne the Lords body, and also to receiue the grace that is offered therein: which without faith thou receiuest not. He that beléeueth hath benefite vnspeake∣able by the ordinances of God: but with∣out
faith all is to vs in vaine. Euen as ye euidences of another mans land, are no∣thing auaileable to me, but to the Land∣holder they are of singular vse: So the Sacraments are part of the euidences of a beléeuers hope, and seale to him Gods fauour; but to vnbeléeuers they seale no∣thing, but their greater condemnation, if they repent not. Euen as if an vnlear∣ned man open a booke, he séeth the letters, but is neuer the better, and cannot attaine the meaning; but a man that is learned, readeth, and is instructed: So an vnbelée∣ner séeth the Bread and Wine, and eat∣eth the signe; but the beléeuer onely hath the benefite of the thing signified, through his faith: For the spirituall grace is pre∣sent, not to the signe, but to the person beléeuing. Euen as Pharoh had a dreame, but not the interpretation, and as the no∣ble man of Samaria saw the plenty, but tasted not of it: Euen se vnbeléeuers, ig∣norants, vnthankefull for the death of Christ, haue the shell, but not the kyrnell; haue that which goeth into the body, not that which blesseth the soule. First there∣fore get faith. Secondly, repent of thy sins, hauing
an vnfained and stedfast purpose alwaies hereafted to liue godlily. If thou comest with a hungring desire of the righteous∣nesse of Christ, with a broken heart for that which is past, and with a holy pur∣pose for the time to come: then thou art welcome to thy Sauiour, and shalt with∣out faile, taste of his swéetnesse; but if thou hast béene, and yet art, a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, Vncleane, Proud, Coue∣tous, Contentious, &c, and hast not vn∣feignedly repented, or at least doest not begin to repent: For this cause thou art guilty of the body and bloud of Christ; be∣ing more fit to be at the méetings of Turkes and Infidels, then of such as pro∣fesse Iesus Christ. Get therefore Repen∣tance also. And testifie this thy repentance not onely by a shew of sorrow and sobrie∣ty the day thou comest to the Lords Ta∣ble, but all the dayes of thy life after. Ma∣ny haue I séene, which on that day haue gone softly, spoken patiently, looked sor∣rowfully, behaued themselues grauely; which within a day or two, haue with the swine returned to the wallowing in the mire; and, with the dogge, to the vomit of their former euill courses. But vnder∣stand
thou, that euen as when a man hath escaped the danger of some great distem∣per of surfeit, it is not enough for him to kéepe a good dyet a day or two: So it is not a dayes obedience, or two, nor such fits of deuotion, which vanish as a flash of lightning, that will approue our faith, re∣pentance, and profession; but it is perse∣uerance in these holy duties, when the sa∣uour of the Sacrament remaines with vs all the daies of our life. Therfore euen as Daniel was the fairer and better fauoured by his dyet of Pulse: so it is required, and the Lord erpects, that if thou eate & drinke at his table, thou shouldest be the fairer by it, and the better reformed in thy conuer∣sation: And if thou béest notwithstanding ill-fauoured, that is, without Knowledge, Faith, Repentance, Obedience, Patience, Temperance, Charity, &c. it is a manifest argument that thou hast a foule and cor∣rupted conscience, that thou hast receiued vnworthily, and so art in danger of the wrath of God. Qu. You said, that some thinke Discipline to be a note of the true Church: What is that Discipline? Ans. It is that power in the Church, by
the consent and approbation of the Chri∣stian Magistrate; whereby, by persons fit and lawfully called, Constitutions are made,1. Cor. 5.3.4. & 14.40. both for comelinesse and order in the worship of God, and for the censuring of prophane liuers. Expl. Though a true Church may bée without this power of Discipline, yet bée well without it, it cannot; both that the ministery of the holy things may with the greatest reuerence and profite be perfor∣med; and also that the Church may be ho∣ly, and a maintainer thereof: First then, because without order things cannot well procéede, or continue, and God is the God of order, the hold that ye Church hath po∣wer to make Canons and Constitutions: but with a thrée-fold restraint: First, that they be onely about matters Ecclesiasti∣call: Euery man is to kéepe within the compasse of his calling. Secondly, that as concerning the worship of God, they be determinations of circumstances, necessa∣ry & profitable, as concerning time, place, order, méetings, maner of reading Scrip∣tures, &c. In all which, comelinesse, order, edification of the Church, & auoiding of of∣fence are to be respected: and such determi∣nations
in their owne nature to remaine mutable, & to be altered, as the Magistrate shall sée it make for the good of ye Church. Thirdly, that if there be a Christian Ma∣gistrate, they be with his consent and au∣thority: because the authority of making & confirming lawes, concerning both the ciuill & Ecclesiasticall good of the subiects, is principally in ye chiefe ciuil Magistrate. This order being obserued, ye Ecclesiasti∣call things, as dispensation of the Word & Sacraments, and execution of Discipline be handled; not by lay persons, but by Ec∣clesiasticall persons onely, by the authori∣ty of God and the Prince. For the other part, which concerneth Ecclesiasticall censures, this is to be re∣membred, that properly they are not exe∣cuted by mulcts, fines, hodily smart, im∣prisonment, death, & such like, which are proper to the power of a ciuill Magistrate; but by admonition,Mat. 20.25 26. 1. Pet. 5.3. reproofe, suspension, & excommunication. The highest degrée of Ecclesiasticall censures, is excommunica∣tion, when notorious & stubborne offen∣ders are cast out of the Church, the parties deseruing this censure, being notorioufly prophane, and there being extreme danger
of offence, and of the infection of others by their society. In the execution whereof, procéeding must be, as in the body, in the cutting of a member; which is, when no meanes will recouer it, and least it should procure decay to the whole body, then to cut it off, though it be with griefe. Also, excommunication is not absolute∣ly to be executed, but on the contumacy of the delinquent: for the party, as a lost shéepe is both carefully to be sought vp, & if he repent, to be with all reioycing & loue, receiued againe into the fellowship of the Church: for the end of excommunication must be: first, that holy things be not gi∣uen to dogges. Secondly,Math. 7.7. that the Church may frée herselfe from an euill fame, of suf∣fring them which dishonor God. Thirdly,1. Cor. 5. 1. Cor. 5.6. lest others be infected. Fourthly, that such as offend may be ashamed, and come to re∣pentance,2. Thess. 3.14. 1. Cor. 5.5. that their Spirits may be saued in the day of the Lord. And this order of censuring offenders, & excommunication, ought to be perpetuall in the Church; because the causes thereof are vniuersal & perpetuall, which are those foure before mentioned, together with the commandement of Christ:1. Cor. 5.4. and Paul testi∣fieth,
that the incestious person ought to be excommunicated in the name of Christ, that is, by his authority, & according to his commandement: yea, & this to be in force in all Churches, euen which are vnder Christian Magistrates: for otherwise doth the ciuill Magistrate punish, otherwise ye Church. The Church aimeth at the repen∣tance of ye offender: the ciuill Magistrate at ye execution of iustice. The Church pro∣céedeth not to excommunication, where ye delinquent repenteth & obeyeth. The ciuil Magistrate, notwithstanding the repen∣tance of the party, executeth the law, as Ioshua, notwithstanding the confession of Achan,Ioshua 7. caused him to be destroyed. Vse. 1. All such whom it concernes to deale in Ecclesiasticall censures, ought to beware of all filthy lucre, & faithfully dis∣charge yt which is cōmitted vnto thē, & to censure them which are prophane accor∣dingly, for the glory of God, the good of the Church, the repentance of them which of∣fend, and the furthering of their owne ac∣counts at the last day. Vse 2. Art thou prophane? a drunkard, a blasphemer, an vsurer, a breaker of the sabaoth, &c. & deseruest thou to be stricken
with ye thunderbolt of excommunication, & yet escapest by thy purse, or otherwaies? yet know thou, whatsoeuer thou art, that although either through the corruption of them which excecute the same Discipline, thou continuest in the fellowship of the Church, yet in the account of ye Lord, thou art excluded from all spiritual priuiledges of the Church, till thou repent, not being worthy to sit among the dogs of ye flocke, (as one may say) & the lesse thou answer∣est for here, through the silence of ye lawes, the more thou hast to answere before Iesus Christ at the day of Iudgement. Q. You seeme to say, that where there is a Christian ciuill Magistrate, there the Church ought to expect his consent, and by his authority make Constitutions, and Canons: Do you then thinke that the Clergie, or Church-men, are subiect to the Ciuill Magistrate? Ans. Yes verily do I: and so God plainly teacheth in his word:Rom. 13.1 Tit. 3.1. 1. Pet. 2.13 14.15. Let euery soule be sub∣iect, &c. Whether Apostle, Prophet or Bishop. Q. What is the ciuill Magistracy, or Go∣uernment? Ans. It is an ordinance of God for the good of men, whereby they are gouerned by good lawes, both Diuine and humane,
that publike peace may be preserued,Rom. 13.4. Pro. 8.15. Dan. 2.21. Ioh. 19.11. the good maintained, the euill punished, the worship and glory of God set forth? Q. What is the office of the ciuil Magistrate? Ans. The office of the supreme Magi∣strate is to keepe and maintaine both the Tables of the morall law:Deu. 17.18 19. 2. Chro. 19 6. and to minister right, iudgment & iustice to his subiects. Q. What is the power of the superior Ma∣gistrate? Ans. In things diuine, it is limited by the word: but in humane things, and ciuill, it is wonderfull large: as namely, to com∣mand all his subiects in matters concern∣ing the publike good of all, or the priuate good of some: To compell all orders Ec∣clesiasticall or Ciuill, to do their duties, & to punish the stubborne. To command the bodies and goods of his subiects in mat∣ters lawfull. To exact Tribute, Custome, Subsidies, Taxes, Tenthes, &c. for the maintaining of his honour and magnifi∣cence, and for the bearing of the publike charge. To make and confirme lawes for the ciuill policy of his Iurisdiction,Iob. 34.18. Eccles. 8.3 4. Dan. 5.19. and to define all matters and causes by the same. And in a word, the Ciuill supreme Magi∣strate is in all causes, and ouer all persons,
as well Ecclesiasticall as Ciuill, supreme Gouernour, next vnder Christ:1. Sam. 15.14. as also in the examples of the good Kings of Iudah appeareth. Q. What is the duty of Subiects? Ans. The duty of subiects may be re∣ferrred to these heads:1. Pet. 2.18. Rom. 13.1. Tit. 3.1, 1. Tim. 2.1. 2. Ier. 29.7. Pro. 24.21.22. Rom. 13.6. 1. Reuerence, 2. Obedience. 3. Piety. 4. Faithfulnesse. 5. Thankfulnesse. Expl. One of the greatest blessings which God hath giuen to men, is Or∣der, and Gouernment, without which through confusion, all things would soone come to ruine: For as a Ship without a Pilot, so is a Company, or Society, of men, without a King, or other lawfull Magistrate: Therefore it was well said of Tacitus; That it is better to haue an euill Prince then none: And of S. Chrysostome; It is better to haue a Tyrant, then no Go∣uernour: And ye Scripture maketh men∣tion, that the state of the people of Israel was neuer worse (while they were a free people) then when they were without con∣tinual Gouernours: Yea Nature, euen in reasonlesse & bruite creatures, acknowled∣geth Order & Gouernment, as in ye Bées, &c. This great benefite came from the
Lord, as all other good things. The prime care of the Soueraigne Ma∣gistrate must be to maintaine the first Ta∣ble of the Law: Kissing the Sonne, and do∣ing homage vnto Christ: and therefore to maintaine the true worship of God, and to forbid, and vtterly to extirpate, the con∣trary: And yet this so to be vnderstood, ye through ye necessity of dangerous times, he may suffer such as are superstitious, and do erre; that some Common-wealth and Religion may be had, rather then none at all. It belongs to the Prince, to sée ye the true Doctrine be taught; but to administer the same, & teach it in publique, it belongs to Ministers and Ecclesiasticall persons: It belongs to his Authority to appoint or∣dinary iudgements Ecclesiasticall, to maintaine Schooles, Vniuersities, &c. wherby fit Bishops & Ministers may beset ouer ye Flock of Christ, & to make lawes, whereby such Pastors & Teachers, may be directed, corrected, suspended, depriued, as matters shall require. It is his Authori∣ty which may call and moderate, Prouin∣cionall. Nationall, Generall Syneds, ap∣point Fasts, &c. Yea, he ought to punish Heretickes, Idolaters, Blasphemers, &c.
as well as Murtherers, Théeues, &c. and to do all things which may further ye Spi∣rituall good of his Subiects, and to take away the contrary:Rom. 13.4. For he beareth not the Sword in vaine. So Moses appointed the worship of God, & prescribed it to Aaron; Dauid disposed the Ministery of ye Taber∣nacle, called a Conuocation, or Synode, for the bringing of the Arke: Salomon dedicated the Temple, deposed Abiathar: Iehoshaphat commanded the Priests and Elders to visite the Churches, and to re∣store ye worship of God: As also did other good Kings of Iudah, as appeareth in their Stories, which they did not onely of Pie∣ty, but euen of Office: So also haue Chri∣stian Emperours, called Ccuncels, mode∣rated Controuersies of Religion; aduan∣ced good Bishops, repressed bad, and made Lawes concerning Bishops, Ministers, & holy things for the welfare of the Church, and the glory of God: For the Magistrate is the Father of the Common-wealth; yea Esay saith:Esa. 49.23. That Kings & Queens are nur∣sing Fathers and Mothers of the Church: Constantine the Great, said: ye the Bishops were Ouer-seers in the Church, and Hee a Bishop or Ouer-seer out of the Church.
For the Duty, or Office, of the chiefe Magistrate, in the maintaining the second Table, I néed not say any thing, for none is so ignorant, as not to know, that the procuring of the ciuill good of men be∣longs to the Supreme Gouernour. For the power of Magistrates, Sée ye Scriptures, in the Answere vnto ye Que∣stion, and for this they are called Gods, the Sonnes of the most High, not by Nature, but by Office and Dignity; being the Images of God, & his Deputies Royall on earth: The Ministers also of God, &c. Whose Power it is better, and fitter, for Subiects to feare and obey, then to dis∣pute or determine.Eccl. 8.3.4. Concerning the duties of Subiects: The first is, Reuerence, which is a godly subiection in Heart, Word, & Déed: Thin∣king and Iudging honourably of the Ma∣gistrate, euen of the lowest: Looking not to his person, whether good or bad, but the Person he representeth which is GOD. Speaking reuerently,Ex. 22.28. Act. 23.5. 1. Reg. 1.23.31. Vsing all lowly Ge∣stures: Yea this requires, that Subiects interpret the sayings and doings of the Magistrate to the best, and to conceale & couer their faults, giuing feare to whom
feare, & honour to whom honor belongeth. The second Duty is Obedience,Eccl. 8.2. to be performed by all persons, and in all things possible (the contrary whereof God com∣mandeth not) though hard and vnequall, not examining what it is which is com∣manded, but being content with this,Mat. 22.21. that it is commanded: And this obedience must be to all Gouernours, to the King as Su∣perior, and to the rest appointed by him,1. Pet. 2.13.14. and to these, whether Christian or Hea∣then, Good or Bad, Mercifull or Cruel, for there is no power but of God.Rom. 13.1. The third is Piety, that Subiects pray for their Gouernours: Yea,1. Tim. 2.1. Ier. 29.7. though they were Infidels, or Wicked: Thus did Da∣niel, Thus did the Ancient Christians for the Heathen Emperours, for their long life and safety, for their Issue & Of-spring, for their quiet Gouernment; that their Councell might bée Wise and Faithfull, their Armes Victorious, their People Loyall, &c. The fourth is Faithfulnesse, which re∣quireth that Subiects be quiet and peace∣able, and true-hearted in all Loyall Allea∣geance: that they be not Trayterous or Seditious, raising, or consenting to Tu∣mults,
Insurrections, Mutynies, &c. but that they reueale such things spéedily, and that what they can, by all good, possible, and lawfull meanes, they do defend and kéep safe, the Health, Life, Person, Cause, Crowne, Dignity, and Family of the Su∣preme Magistrate, against all Opposites whatsoeuer;2. Sam. 16.9. & 20.22. & 21.16.17 2. Reg. 11.2.4. 1. Ioh. 3.16. yea, with the losse of their owne best bloud: For if we must lay downe our liues for our Brethren, much more for our Fathers. The fift is Thankfulnes, which is a rea∣dy and chéerfulloue, which is to be shewed in a willing paying of tribute, & bearing such charges as are imposed by the King or superior magistrate: in as much as the treasure of the King is the sinew of the common wealth, and because he watcheth and careth for all,Ro. 13.6.7. and defends all: So Io∣seph and Mary trauel willingly to be tax∣ed. Yea our Sauiour Christ,Mat. 17.27. and Peter pay tribute; none are exempt, for if Christ and Peter, then why not their successors? And all these things, Subiects are to doe chéerfully and willingly, euen to wicked princes; not only for feare, but for cons∣cience toward God,1. Pet. 2.18 Rom. 13.5. who accounts him∣selfe neglected, resisted, and opposed, when
his deputies are resisted, opposed,Rom. 13. or neg∣lected. Vse 1. First, it is the duety of Mini∣sters, wel to instruct, and to put their hea∣rers in remembrance of these things, that they may know their duetie to their Go∣uernors, and performe allegeance accor∣dingly, wherein is a great part of the wel∣fare of the Common wealth.Tit. 3.1. Vse 2. Hence it appeareth that the Pope with his limbs are the great rebells of the world; for not onely pulling their neckes, as Ecclesiastical persons from the yoake of the Emperour and their Soue∣raignes; but specially for seeking to ouer∣rule, depose, and destroy, the kings, and kingdomes of the earth. Vse 3. Learne thy duty. Thy calling is to be subiect. Pray for the prosperity of the King, his children, and dominions: Speake not euill:Iude 8. but reuerence in word and déed the chiefe and all vnder-magi∣strates; yea, thinke not an euill thought:Eccles. 10.20, &c. Beware of Sedition, by the example of Corah, Absolon, Sheba &c. Obey for conscience. Quarrell not, neither mur∣mure at the commandement, though vn∣equall & hard, if not impious to be done:
yea, if it be doubtfull, examine it not, but obey. Pay all subsidies, taxes, customes, &c. willingly, yea though it goe hard with thée, and thine, and thou be faine to bor∣row it. Do it of conscience, and thou shalt be the more blessed in thy substance. Re∣member Christ had it not when it was due, and he willingly paid: and surely, if wee must willingly pay to a Heathen, much more to a Christian, religious, mer∣cifull, and renowned king. Draw not thy neeke out of the yoake, and being able, go not about to be eased of that which is thy duty in conscience to pay. It is no part of a good subiect, or of one that loueth his Prince or Common wealth, to séek to be frée, or to be eased oboue his Equalls, in a common burthen, the benefite whereof comes to himselfe. It is a thing too much practised in these dayes, to the great hin∣drance and dammage of the Kings excel∣lent Maiesty, the Countrey, and many particular men. Vse 4. Praise God, for establishing so worthy, religious, peaceable, learned, and famous a King ouer vs, through whom we enioy, peace, liberty, plenty, hope of succession, and the swéete comfort of our
Soules, the holy Gospel. And let all true hearted subiects pray, for the safety & pre∣seruation, of the person, life, crowne, and dignity of our most gracious King, Iames by the grace of God, King of great Brit∣taine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, &c. and in all Causes, and ouer all Persons, aswell Ecclesiasticall as Ci∣uill, within these his dominions, next and immediatly vnder Iesus Christ, supreme Gouernour, who is ye very breath of our nostrils: that God would blesse our most vertuous Q. Anne his wife; our hope∣full Prince Charles; the Lady Elizabeth her Highnesse, with her renowned Hus∣band: That God would direct with wise∣dome and pietie, all the Honorable of his Maiesties Priuy Councell; blesse all the reuerend Fathers of the Church; that he would endue all the Nobles & Gentrie of ye Kings dominions, with fortitude, cou∣rage, & loyalty; and all the graue & Hono∣rable Iudges; right worshipfull Iusti∣ces, and other inferior Magistrates, with the knowledge and conscience of Equity, Iustice, and Right; all the Ministers of the Word with abilitie of gifts, and cons∣cionable care, and diligence in the Lords
haruest; & all the Commons with peace∣able, loyall, and religious minds, and af∣fections: that God would hold backe the Iudgements we haue deserued; and con∣tinue and increase vpon vs and our po∣sterity his vndeserued mercies, bodily and spirituall, to his owne glory, and the tem∣porall and eternall comfort of vs all, through our princely Sauiour Iesus Christ. Amen. So be it. Now vnto the King euerlasting, im∣mortall, inuisible, vnto God onely wise, be honour,1. Tim. 1.17 and glory, for euer and euer, Amen. FINIS.
