19935 99850017 15200
THE Deposition of Don Diego Piementellj, cheefe Maister of one Regiment of the Campe of the King of Spayne, as hee deposed before, and in the presence of the chiefest Lords of the Counsaile of the Haghe in Holland. Translated out of Dutch into English, by F. M. ❧ Printed first at Delfe, and nowe reprinted at London by Iohn VVoolfe, Anno. Dom. 1588.
¶ The examination and deposition of Don Diego Piementellj, cheefe maister of the Regiment or Tertio of Sicile belonging vnto the Spanish fleete. (∵) DON Diego de Piementel, borne in Ʋalle d'Oliua, saith: that he is the Marquis of Taneras Brother: and Cosine vnto the Earle of Benauents, of his Mothers side, and Nephewe vnto the Earle of Calna, which at this present is Vice Roy of Sicile. That his Brother the Marquis, is maried with the Ladie Iohanna of Toledo, Sister vnto Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of Ʋillafranca, and Duke of Ferdinan∣dina. That his Father was of the Chamber of Don Charles, Prince of Spayne. Saith that he is a Knight of the order of Saint Iames, and that it is about a yeere agoe, that the King did giue vnto him the Crusado, whereby hee hoped that the King shoulde giue him the benefite of a Commanderie of foure thousande Duckets a yeere. Saith, that hee hath béene Commissioner generall of the Cauallerie of Sicile, and Captaine of thréescore Laun∣ces, and that the benefites and profit which hee reapeth therof, amounteth vnto two hundreth Duckets a month. Saith, that he was Gouernour of the said Regiment, about the time of two yeeres, and that he hath had in this Fléete, fifteene companies of that Regiment, and seauen∣teene of another. And that the saide Regiment, was of three thousand and foure hundred men. And that in his Shippe there were thrée companies, to wit, his owne, the companie of the Captaine Martine Daualos, and the companie of the Captaine Marques, amounting toge∣ther vnto two hundred and thréescore men.
Saith, that in his Shippe were thréescore Mariners, and fouretéene Gunners. That the Pilot was a Portingall, and a man of no skill. That there were in his Shippe three English Gentle∣men, the one named William Browne, the other Nicho∣las Raphaell, but the name of the third he knoweth not. That the foresaid Browne was maried in Spayne. That there were in his Shippe, yet two other Spanish Gentlemen, the one called Don Lewes Vanogas, the o∣ther Don Rodrigo Veniero, and bothe were of the order of Saint Iames, and that the one had fiue thousand, and the other one thousand and fiue hundred Duckets yeere∣lie incomming. Saith, he had sent them to the Duke of Medina Sido∣nia for helpe, but that they were not yet come againe. That Don Iohn de Velasco, Sonne to the Earle of Ci∣ernella, was come with him for his owne pleasure. That Don Iohn, the bastard Sonne of the Admirall of Aragone, hath twentie crownes a month of the King. And that Don Iohan de Toledo, Aluaro Garcia, Go∣uernour of Toledos sonne, had likewise so much. That the Captaine Alonso de Vergas, is taken priso∣ner with him, and likewise Don Diego de Cordua, ad∣uenturer. And so much had likewise Don Lopes de Pe∣res, and N. Cannirio. Saith, he had a hundred and thirtie crownes a month, and that it was about fiftéene monethes that he departed out of Sicile. That the Earle of Miranda his Nephew, is Vice Roy of Naples. That the Earle of Fuentes, Captaine generall of Por∣tugall called Don Pedro Henriques, is his Vncle. That Don Pedro de Toledo, Marquis of Villafranca, Generall of the Gallies of Naples, is his Nephew. That the Duke of Medina del rioseco, Admirall of Ca∣illie, is his Vncle. So hee is kindered with the principall
Lords of Spayne. Saith, that it is about two yéeres past, that this Fléete did begin, but that it neuer could be knowne whereupon they would goe, but that it was thought that it might bée for England. That they did lye the whole Month of May, in the Ri∣uer of Lisborne. That the Fléete was of the number of 145. Shyppes, of the which 110. were very great and prepared for warre, and that the other were somwhat lesser, seruing for all kind of men, & prouision, and that among the said Ships, there were 4. Galiasses, and yt in each of them were 300. Souldiours, and vpon the principall of them 400. That there were eleuen Galions of Portingall. That hee himselfe came in one of these Galions, the which was not the greatest but of the strongest. That there were 19. Galions of Andalosie, of the which was Captaine general Don Diego flores de Valdes, and that these Galions were of the garde of the fléet of India. That there was yet a great Galion, belonging to the Duke of Florence, wherupon were 600. Portingalles. That there were 20. Ships of Leuant, to wit, Venetians, Aragonians, & Catalonians, where ouer was Generall Don Pedro de Valdes, with one other, which he knoweth not. That the Squadron of the Generall Michaell de O∣quendo a Biscaine, was of 12. Shippes. That the Admirall Iohn Martins de Ricaldo, a Biscaine likewise, had vnder him, ten or eleuen Ships. That there were about twentie Hulkes, whereuppon Nicholas de Medina did commaund. Saith, that there were 4. Gallies, each of them hauing twentie foure seates, the which were lost in a tempest before they came on the Coastes of England. That the Duke of Medina Sidonia, was Captaine Ge∣nerall of the whole Fleete, and Iohan Martines de Recal∣de Admirall thereof.
out the losse of any of their Ships, and that so they depar∣ted againe, and did nothing els. Saith, that the English Armie came ye third day againe, and shot vpon theirs, & theirs vpon the English, and that with a great fury, and that the two Armies were so néere one another, that they thought there shoulde haue béene a battell. That after they had shot a certaine time very fu∣riously the one against the other, that ye two Admirals did ioyne so néere together, that they shot the one to the other. So that both the Armies drewe néere, euerie one to his Admirall to helpe them, and so ioyned togeather in such a sort, that it séemed to be a great scarmasing, continuing a large houre, and so departed the said Admiralles the one from the other, the Armies departed likewise, euerie one on the side of their Admirall. Saith, that that same day, notwithstanding that great furie, they lost none of their Ships, but that they did set on fire one of the English ships, but that it was by and by quenched. That the same night they cast their Anckers before Calice, and that he knewe not whether it was on a Tuesday or on a wednesday, and that yt same night about two houres after they had cast their Anckers, they did sée eight English ships ful of fire and burning, comming and driuing towards their fléete, the which as it séemed were tied together with chaines, for they did driue very close and equally togeather. Wheruppon their Generall & the whole fléete chopping & cutting of their Cables and Anc∣kers, drew towards the depth of the Sea. Saith, that they came the next morning againe, and did ancker before Calice, and that they of Calice did come to vi∣site their Generall the Duke of Medina, and brought to sell euerie thing for money, as bread, flesh, pasties, fruits, and other necessary things, euery one for his money to be refreshed therewith. Saith, that the English Armie, was that day somewhat more separated from them then shee was wont to bee,
but yet shee was alwaies in their sight, & that there were more Ships in it then the ordinarie, for they tolde at one time 23. ships more, of the which, there were three verie great, and the other were but meane Ships, but hee can∣not tell whether they remained there that night or not. Saith, that the next day, the English fléet came againe to méet with them, and yt they begun very early to shoote one against another on euery side, ye which continued more then foure or fiue houres, and that hee himselfe with his ship, was alwaies one of the next to the English Fleete, wherby the English were so charged, that they at last did sende two of their Admirals, and two of their principall ships, so néere vnto him, that he might haue reached with a Picke from his ship vnto theirs, and that they shot very sore the one to the other (so with Muskets, as with small shots) the space of an houre & more, so that he being depar∣ted from thē, descended downe into his ship, to visit it, and to view the same if she was in any danger, wherupon, he founde the danger so great, because there was come in so much water already, that the Ship begun to sincke. Saith, that he then sent his Sergiant Maior, towards the ship of the Generall, to aduertise him, yt his ship was in danger of sincking, desiring him to prouide thereupon, and to send some spéedy remedy. And that he incontinent∣ly after the said Sergiant was gone, (perceiuing that the water increased very much in his ship) did send two Spa∣nish Gentlemen againe, to ye saide General, to let him vn∣derstand yet more earnestly their great néede and danger wherein they were of perishing, and to bee drowned alto∣gether, if remedie did not come. That the said Sergiant Maior, did returne again vnto him, before the other two might bee vnto the Generalles Ship, and brought with him, a Boate, to saue his owne person there withall if he would. That besides that, the Duke, did send an other Creuell or boate vnto him, to knowe further his desire and neede,
Whereupon he aunswered, that hee woulde saue all hys men, and that therefore his Excelencie should sende and prouide wherewithall, or els he would perish and be cast away with them all, saying it was his duetie and right, that he should be the last that should goe and depart out of his Shippe. Saith moreouer, that then the Generall did sette out a signe or token, wherby he let them vnderstand, that they should come so neere on boorde as they could. That they came so néere, that they could speake the one vnto the other, but yet that they did remaine that whole day in the selfe same state. That towards the euening, he séeing his ship did begin to sinck, and to ware so heauie, that with her full satle she was not able to folow ye Generall, he discharged two pee∣ces, therby to certifie his great perill, but hee had no aun∣swer therupon, neither did his Sergiant Maior, and the other two Gentlemen before named, returne vnto him a∣gaine, wherby he was that whole night very desolate. Saith, that he thereupon tooke counsaile with his men, to know what theyr best remedie shoulde bee for to saue themselues. Whereupon they concluded altogether to goe backwarde, and to trie if they coulde get themselues into the Hauen of `Dunkerke, and so to be helped by the Duke of Parma, and to come by him. That thereupon they went to worke, but that his Ma∣riners and Pilot, could not tell where to direct thēselues, because they had neuer béene in those quarters. Saith, that the next day they saw lande, & they thought it was Flushing, because there came many Fisher boates out on euerie side, that they called vnto them, and desired them to come on boorde, but that they would not, but fled awaie from them, whereby hee perceiued that the same land and Sea, was vnder the enemie. That he then was but at fiue fadames water, and that his ship went foure fadames and a halfe deepe.
Saith, that after this, they met with another boate, the which did come somwhat néerer, of ye which he required to be brought into any Hauen appertaining vnto the King, and that therupon he departed from him, saying, that the Hauen of Dunkerke was right ouer against Flushing. That therupon, they went once againe from lande into the Sea, and that they knew not where they were. Saith, that the same day towardes the euening, they found another boate, the which did aboorde, and promised them, that if they would rewarde him, hee woulde bring them into Nieuport, the which was not far from thence, and did appertaine vnto the King, and that they shoulde get therein a great deale better then into Dunkerke. That the said Fisher went with his boate before theyr ship, conducting the same, making a faire demonstration, as though he would haue brought them in a good Hauen. That hee spake many times with him, shewing him a chaine of two hundred Duckets, promising vnto him that same, and any thing els what he should desire. That the Fisher said vnto him, that hee would deliuer him into the Hauen, or els he would loose his head. That he required the Fisherman to come into his ship, but that he refused it, that he thereupon did fall in suspiti∣on of him, and tooke him to be an enemie, although he did conduct him well. Saith, that towards the euening, his shippe remained still, and could goe no further, and that hee was vpon sea∣uen fadames, and did cast his Ancker, and that the Fisher came to speake with him, saying that he would come the next morning againe to helpe them, but that he wold fish that whole night. That he did ancker within their sight, and remained there about three houres, and afterwards he went his waies. That they did looke for him the next morning, but that he did not come. Saith, that they pulled vp their Ancker and hoysed vp
their sailes for to goe their waies, and that a little after they saw thrée ships, and by and by two more, sayling to∣wards them straitly, and that the one did set vp a white flag, wherupon he caused another to be set out of his ship, thinking they were friendes, & that they came vnto him in a Boate, willing him to giue himselfe ouer vnto them. Saith, that he answered therupon, yt they should depart, or els that his Musketters would shoote at them, but yt he wold not suffer it, because they were come vnder his flag. That thereupon the fiue ships did come neere, and shot all vpon him, whereby they did greatly hurt his ship, and his men, and killed aboue fortie of them. That he had lost but fiftéene men, for all the shottes of the English Fleete. Saith, that he gaue himselfe ouer for prisoner, vnto the Admiral Ionker Peter vander does, vpon his word, & that therupon he went into his ship, with all his men without Armes, and yt so they were brought where they be nowe. That during all that time, there had béen 50. of his men continually at the pompe, drawing out the water day and night. Saith, that at his departing from the Groyne, hee had thirty & eight great brasse peeces in his shippe, of the which he hath cast seauen or eight into the Sea. That he had yet a great deale of Gunpowder, but that it was spoiled with ye water, a great deale of Rice, Pease, salted Porke, Wine, Vinegre, Oyle, and fresh water, whereof the maister Stewarde, and the Captaine of hys ship, could better tell the quantity then hée himselfe. Saith, that he had no money belonging to the King, but that he had sixe great chests ful of apparell, & linen cloth, seruing for his person, & for a Table of eight persons, that he knew not in which ships the Kings money might be. Saith, that the King did daily pay for euery portion, or eache man, two Reales, and that they had paid the Soul∣diours with lesse then halfe a Reall, so that the King loo∣ses by euery man, a Reall and more euery day.
That before he was separated from the fléet, they he lost no ships yet, but only ye ship of Don Pedro de Valde the which was lost because it could not folow the others. That the Admirall of Oquendo, was set on fire, and that they did pierce him through, for to sincke him, at the en∣tring of the Channell of England. Saith, that the principall of the Galiasses, where ouer Don Pedro de Moncada was Gouernour, did remaine before Calice, vpon the sande. That hee doth not knowe whether the Dukes of Parma and of Medina, haue had any aduertisement, the one from the other or not. That the deliberation of their Armie was, to ioyne with the Duke of Parma, and then to resolue and conclude with him, on what side they might best aboorde, and set their men on lande in England. That they knew very wel, that there were some ships of warre before Dunkerke, for to hinder and to stoppe the Duke of Parma from comming foorth, That their meaning was, to saile no further then Ca∣lice, because they knewe very well, that they could not in∣to Dunkerke, for to helpe the Duke of Parma foorth, for o∣therwise they shold not haue departed thence as they did. Saith, that he knew not, if the King had commaunded, to land any men in England, before they should haue com∣municated, and concluded with the said Duke of Parma. But that he well thought that the Kinges pleasure was not, that they should land but ten thousand Spanyardes, without any Artillerie and great péeces, whereby theyr throates might be cut incontinent. Saith, that on land, no man els should haue commaun∣ded as Generall, besides the Duke of Parma. Saith, that they had vnderstanding, that the Duke of Parma had about 38000. men together, among the which there were 4000. Spaniardes, and 2000. horsemen, so that if these two Armies might haue ioyned togeather, that it should haue béene the greatest number of naturall
Spanyards that euer came out of Spayne with any King, or without: and where more men of great quality were. Saith, that they could not come to fight with the Eng∣lish fléete, because their ships were light & easie to turne, and could turne about foure or fiue times, before theyrs once, but if that they might haue come together, that they were sure of the victorie, because their shippes are very high, and the English very lowe, and that one Spanyshe shyp, was able to spoyle foure or fiue English ships, and that their shyps are one English Elle thicke of Tymber, so that no great bollet coulde goe through, except it had béene shot off very neere. That of all the yron bollets that were shotte vpon his ship▪ there were not twentie, that were gone through. That the vpper part of his ship, was strong enough a∣gainst a Muskets shot. Saith that they were determined to iuuade the whole Kingdome of Englande, to kéepe the Queenes grace in. pryson, and to serue her, as a Quéene ought to be serued, vntill their King shoulde haue appointed any other waie with her, and that this was but as he did thinke. Saith, that they were assured (hauing 50000. men on land) to bring that Kingdome very easily vnder their sub∣iection, because that the English nation is vsed to liue ve∣rie delicatly, hauing likewise no experience of war, & that therfore they shold easily haue brought them vnder their feete, with their continual trauels & troubles, the which they had not béene able to endure, as their Spanish nati∣on would haue doone, the which is vsed to suffer hunger, thirst, hardly to lie, not to sléepe, and yet neuerthelesse, al∣waies ready to their worke. That they had vnderstan∣ding, that there were many Catholiques in England, but that they made no account of them, because they knewe very well, that the Quéene had so prouided therein, that they were not able to stir, neither to come to their helpe, and that likewise the most part of thē would haue fought
for their natiue Countrey. Being asked, what they had determined to doo, if so bee that ye Duke of Parma could not come to their helpe, saith: that they neuer thought, (that ye said Duke, hauing a hun∣dred ships, so great a number of boates and Lighters, and an Armie of about forty thousand men) shold not alwaies haue come out at his owne pleasure, and that he thought it very strange. that the said Duke hauing such a power, was not come forth. Or at least, to haue set forth so many of his boates and Musketters, that they might haue kept his enemies so busie, that in the meane time his shyps of warre might haue come forth. Being asked, if they had no intelligence in anie other place or Hauen of the Lowe Countries, or of their neigh∣bour Townes. Saith, that therof was not once spoken a∣mong them and that their intention & deliberation, was neuer otherwise then to land in Englande. Saith▪ that these two Armies, so to water as to lande, did stand the King euery day in thirty thousand duckets. Being asked, if there might not be made a good peace betweene Spayne and England, he sayth no, or very hardly: except it were vpon such condition, that the King might so bridle the Queene of England, that she shoulde stirre no more therafter, and that so it were better (as he thought) to haue a sure peace, then that the King should continual∣lie keepe such an Armie for to kéepe frée the passage of the Indies, as hee hath prepared nowe, for to subdue and to o∣uercome the whole Kingdome of England. Asking him, if theyr deliberation was not, that after that they had beene the Maisters of Englande, that then they would haue come to subdue these Countries by force of Armes. Saith, that thereof was not anie remembring or speaking. Saith, that the occasions which made the King to vnder∣take these wars, were, that it was not conuenient vnto
vnto the King to suffer and forbeare, that one Drake, with two or three rotten Ships, shoulde come alwayes, and at his pleasure, to spoyle the Hauens of Spayne, and to robbe the best Townes thereof, and so to hinder the ne∣gotiation of the Indies. And that he did thinke with lesser charge to subdue and to inuade England, then yéerelie to entertaine such an Armie as this to defende himselfe of such inuasions, and that if so bee that this Fléete doth not spéede at this time vpon England, that the King doth in∣tende to sende the same there againe against next Lent. Béeing asked if he knew not what the Duke of Parma woulde doo, now when he did sée, that this Armie and his could not ioyne together. Saith, that hee will kéepe his men close together in good Garisons, and that he will not be so bolde to separate them in any wise, neither to vnder∣take with them any other enterprise: saying he knoweth, that the King is resolued, to continue and to pursue this warre vpon England. FINIS. Examined in the presence of my Lordes. The President Vander Mylen, President of the Prouinciall Counsell of Holland. D. Barneuelt, Aduocat of Hollande. The Lord of Ʋilliers. And of my Lorde of Famaes, Generall of the Artillerie of the vnited Prouinces.
