20852 99854995 20465
THE Solace of SION, and Joy of IERVSALEM. Or Consolation of Gods Church in the latter age, redeemed by the preaching of the Gospell vniuersallye. Beeing a godly and learned exposition of the Lxxxvij. Psalme of the Princelye Prophet DAVID: Written in Latine by the reue∣rend Doctor VRBANVS REGIVS Pastor of Christes Church at Zelle, in Saxo∣nie. 1536. Translated into english by R. Robinson Citizen of London, 1587. Ioel 2. vers. 32.But whosoeuer shall call vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued. For in Mount SION and in Ierusalem, shall be deliuerance as the Lorde hath said, and in the remnant whome the Lord shall call.
Psal. 45. egina à dextris i. &c▪ vers. 9. Psal. 113. Qui facit muli∣erem orbā ha∣bitare cum fami¦lia sua, matrē{que} filiorum laetam fore. vers. 9. ex concupiscet ecorem tuum. . vers. 11. es 2. a. 2. heb. 9 ay. 49.Qui Structor Ecclesiae suae est, Angul ris{que} Lapis, Rex SION & Salem, Leo Iudae, Flos{que} Iessae. Nutritios{que} creat Reges, Nutrices{que} Reginas, Ecclesiae suae, protegat (inquam) CHRISTVS: Reginam ELIZABETH, Scuta & Regalia sua. at▪ 3. eb. 13.Liberae vt SARA▪ filij multi fiant. Donec nos in SION Dei, Ciuitate{que} Viui, SALEM sic Caelesti coagaudeanus omnes. CIVITAS LONDON. Ps. 101. Annūcictur in Sion nomen Domini & laus ei{us} in Ierusalem vers. 26. Ex omnibus Ciuitatibus edificatis (O Deus) san∣
To the Right Ho∣norable, Sir George Barne Knight Lord Maior of the City of London, & to the Right worshipful his Brethren the Al∣dermen of the same, Grace, Mercy, Peace and plenitude of Temporal and eternal Beatitude in Christ Iesus our Lorde and Sauiour Euerlasting. KNOVVLEDGE of GOD by his holy wil, word, & works omnipotent conceiued, Faith in his heauenly prouidence, presence and promises al suf∣ficient perceiued, and obedi∣ent thankfulnesse for his ine∣stimable bounty, benefits & blessing permanent receiued (Right Honorable, Worshipfull, and Reuerend in the Lord) as they are three most excellent plants of deuine vertue; of whose fruite if our first Parents in Paradise, had taken, tasted and disgested aright, (as they did of a contrarie) not onely their solace there had beene without Sorrowe their ioy without anoy, and their life without death, to the inspeakable solace and infinite ioy of the eternall GOD their Crea∣tor: But also both they and all their posteritie had beene freed from the thraldome of Sathan, sinne, Death and Hell from time to time euen for euer. For thereby in steede of knowledge, wilful bold∣nes: for want of faith, incredulytie: and for obedi∣
io paine, prosperity into aduersitie, health into sicknes, life into death, and blessings into cur∣sings: Albeit the same our omnipotent Creator, mercifull Redeemer & gratious sanctifier, accor∣ding to his holy will, word and work, by his hea∣uenly prouidence, presence, and promises by hi bountie benefites and blessings, afterwarde (finding better fruites of knowledge, repentance, faith, and obedience in thē) comforted and con∣firmed both the same, our first sinfull parentes & their seede after them▪ videlize SETH, ENOS, KAINAN, MALALIEL, ARED & ENOCH with long and happie daies vpon earth. Of which seauen ENOCH especially euen aliue (the rest of the fathers beholding the same) was from thence translated into heauen, not onely for a repentance vnto the nations in this life but also to signify the immortalitie of the bodies▪ & soules of the Lord elect after this life euerlastingly: And hereupon the best approued Interpreters and writers gather that as the Lord in sixe daies created the world, & ested the seauenth day: so the same shoulde en∣dure six thousand yeares, & the seuenth thousand shold be the Sabath of eternal rest: and as the first sixe Fathers from ADAM to ENOCH died by course of nature, and the seauenth was transla∣ted aliue into Heauen, so during the first 6000. yeares death should rain the world but in the 7000 should begin th ednesse of life in the world euerlasting. Here then conseque (after ENOCH) we now mundi ▪ for our time haue great cause of consolation, To remember how yet in the first age, God calling NOAH (a rest or ceasing) with his famelye into
the Arke, and they obediently entring were saued when al the world besides were consumed. Gen. 6 And how in the second age of the worde, SH (the renoumed) of whome the first Iewes came, & IAPHETH (enlarged) of whome the first Gen∣tiles came, both the sonnes of the same NOAH, should (being blessed) ioine handes together to∣wards the building of the earthly SION and hea∣uenly IERVSALEM: when their brother CAM (crafty) for his disobedience was accursed Genes. 9Anno Mūdi 2000. And his children the Cananites an idolatrous and wicked people were confounded in their presum∣tuous building of the earthly BABEL. How also the second age expired, and in the 23. yeare of the third beginning▪ ABRAHAM (the father of a multitude) being called by God out of the Citie of HARAN in Mesopotomia, into Palestine euē there amongst the infidels receiued the promise concerning Christ incarnate of his seed, that the world shoulde by him recouer the blessings that it lost through ADAM: Genes, 12. Which was by the will of God more amply perfourmed in the Lords couenāt vnto Dauid (beloued) of the tribe of IVDA, the yongest sonne of ISHAY: Who from keeping of sheepe being called to be a king ruled in SION and in IERVSALEM with great solace and ioy of his people: a Conqueror of their enemies, a comforter of their friendes, and as a princely deuine  Lords annointed, re∣ceiued the effectual promise concerning Christ incarnate to come of his , and the sure & safe stability of his euerlasting kingdome. 2 Sam. 7. and though he builded not the Lord a materiall Temple, yet hee endeuoured most religiously to
aduance Gods glorie in his congregation with de uine seruice and worship, according to the holie will of the Lord, solemply celebrating the same with heauēly harmony of sacred songes, and with Psalmes of prayer and praise: appointing ASAPH, HMAN, IDITHVM, and the sonnes of KORACH, most skilful Musitions, to play vpon and sing to melodious instruments, with sweet solace & ioy in the Lord. After whom SOLOMON (peaceable) his sonn succeeding being appointed of the Lord to builde and beautify the Temple, for religion, wisedome, wealth, power, and prosperitie, incom∣parably florished at the first: But in his elder years forgetting God and falling vnto Idolatrie, he pro¦cured Gods displeasure, the hatred of his enemies and decay of his kingdome. And in the third age the Lorde thinking vpon his promise made vnto Dauid aforesaid, by his prouidence ordained the most godly, wise, prosperous and victoriousAnno mundi oo. Regni Asa. 10 kinges of IVDA, as Asa, Iosaphat, Ioathan, Ezechi∣as, and Iosias, and after them, Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, kings of Persia: with Zerubbabel, Ne hemias, & Esdias, their helpers to build the Lords house, destroy all Idolatry, bring the people out of Babilonical thraldome, and set them forwards in the way of the promised heauenly SION, and Ierusalē In whose daies also the Lord stirred vp his holy Prophets Esay, Ieremy, Ezechiel, Daniell and the rest to pronounce vnto the Nations his holy wil word & works, to preach vnto al true be∣leeuers his prouidēce, presence, & promises in his church & kingdome by Christ, and his Gospel of euerlasting saluation. In the fourth age of the
the Prophets Christ Iesus the sonne of God came into the world for the saluation of al true beleeuers: whōanno Chri∣sti. 1. Anno mu di, 3970. the very Gentiles of the ast, at his first comming ac∣knowledged & worshipped, the Iewes afterwards sca∣tered here and there among the Gentiles, and many of their Rulers beleeued in him. Though the Pharises, Scribes and Hipocrites with other wicked Iewes de∣spised his doctrine and persecuted his person, and his Apostles also: of whom the denying Peter, a penitent Pastor among the Iewes; and the persecuting Saule a conuert Paul among the Gentiles, were also mightie messengers & workmen of their maister Christ, when with thē the other Appostles and many christian Do∣ctors, Martires and mēbers of the Primitiue Church, vnder 12. persecutions for the same causes and effectes, liued and died the faithfull seruants of Christ, and In∣heritours of the promised heauenly SION and Ierusa∣lem. And as euen in that age the Romane Antechriste began his kingdome to constitute mans traditions a boue Christs institutions: whome Tyrants, Epicures, Sophisters, and manifolde miscreantes vpheld & hadAnno Chri¦sti. 1004, Mundi 5004. in honor. So euen then & in the fift age of the world the Lord God stirred vp good and gratious Emperors and kinges, godly spiritual persons, and religious mē¦bers of his Church, to settle and defend his trueth and aduance the glory of his heauenly kingdome, to the subduing of the same Antichrist. And now are almost 600 yeares entred into the sixt age of the world, the Lordin his holy wil, word and work perfourming his prouidence, presence, and promises in his church and kingdome euerlasting (by gathering the same out of euery Nation, the faithful of his flock) who shal par∣take with him of the celestial solace & infinite ioy in the heauenly SION and▪ Ierusalem, in the Sabaoth of
eternall rest. Towardes the well wishing wherevnto (Right honorable worshipful, & reuerēd in the Lord) like as the Apostle Paul writ his louing salutatiōs vn∣to the Romanes, at that time the chosen church of Christ, and (amongst some of them engrafted in the true faith before himselfe was called) praied thē to sa∣lute VRBANVS his fellow helper in Christ: So do om. 16. most humbly, and hartely, reuerently, & dutifully re∣cōmend vnto your honour and worships godly & fa∣uourable acceptations of this short, but sweet Psalm, this little but learned labour, published by so faithful a fellow helpen of Paul, this VRBANVS REGIVS or king¦ly Citizen of Christ in our time. who as he being pre∣sent in spirite, though absent in body for two yeares, sent the same in latine as a token of remēbrance vnto the worshipful Senators of Hamborow, his friēds: So I a poore Citizen of LONDON, & wel willer of your worships my good benefactors, doe dedicate & conse∣crate this my translation of the same In perperuam Mnemosinā prōptitudinis meae in praecatione & prax∣in pro pietatibus vestris. And so humbly beseeching your honour & worships to accept my great good wil in so smal a substance, though great in effect. I hartely pray for the happy & long encrease of Gods benefites and blessings vpon this City terrestiall & for the end les perfruitiō therof with Christ the immaculate Lāb▪el. 5. his Angels, elders, & thousandes thousandes of his e∣lect vnto whome with the father and the holy Ghost, they incessantly shal ascribe all power, & riches, and wisedome, and strength, and honor, and glory, and praise. For euer, and euer. So be it. Your honors and worships humble Orator. Richard Robinson.
The Lxxxvii Psal. according to the Hebrues: Whereof the Title is attributed A Psalme or Songe of the SONNES of KORACH. Tom 2. op rum suorū in∣terpretant Psalmo.AVGVSTINE saide well, that this Psalme was verye briefe in circumstance of wordes, but greate in substance of all the sentences. For whereas it hath but sea∣uen verses onely, yet notwithstanding it describeth profoundlie the Churche of Christ, the Heauenly Ierusalem, the spi∣rituall Sion, as the fruitfull Mother both of the Iewes and Gentiles: what a one, & how large she shall be, when as she shal not only haue Citizens from among the Iewes, but from among the Gentiles al∣so, throughout the whole worlde. And out of this Psalme learne we that Arti∣cle of our faith, I beleeue there is one Catholike holy Church, the Cōmunion
of Saintes: And I suppose this is euen very specially necessary for this ou age, that we may exactlye learne, and daylie handle this Article out of the holy Scrip¦tures, leaste we be seduced either by the certain sect which belee∣ued that Christ should raign 2000. yeares onely. Anabaptistes and Chiliasts of our time, carnally vnderstanding the predictions of Prophets concerning the Church: ei∣ther els be carried away with admirati∣on of their glorious and stately Titles, who at this day thruste foorth into Chri∣stians the inuentions of mans braine, for, and in steede of the true worshippingChiliastae in gipto exorti anno mundi. 261. of GOD, vnder pretēce of the Church. As if the Church (of whome we daylie make mention in the Apostolike Créede) were either a worldlye pollicye, or the Author of infinite tradicions, which atAnabaptist, in Germania. anno Christi▪ 534▪ this day false and tyranicall teachers of this latter age do cast (as it were snares into the consciences of christian people, (like as the Prophet Ezechiell in his 13. Chap. speaketh of those deceiuers) That they mighte slaye the Soules of them which die not, and giue life to the soules that liue not: in lying to my People which beleeue their lies▪ Verse▪ 19.
The Lxxxvii Psal. vers. 1.Her foundations are vpon the holy Hilles. Pars 1.The Lord loueth the Gates of Sion more, thē al the dwel∣lings of Iacob. Pars 2. PAVLE the Apostle wrote in 1▪ Cor. 10. That all thinges happened to the Iewes in Type or figure (as it were) vnto a People Tipicall or figuratiue: wherfore we will herehence enter our purpose, from the Type vnto the trueth, and from the shadowe vnto the Light it selfe. What notable thing soeuer is any-wheare in the Scripture mentioned as touching Sion, Ierusalem.The shadow of the Lawe without saith cannot be vnderstood Iuda and Israel, what so deuine promises of Christ and his euerlasting Kingdome are any wheare set downe) all this doth the carnall People of the Iewes referre vnto themselues, and the earthly Sion & Ierusalem. Wherefore in these and such like Prophesies, the Iewes notably flat∣ter themselues, and most arrogantly de∣spise the Gentiles in comparison of them selues. Because as S. Paule sayeth 2. Cor. . Those Gentiles haue the oei
vntaken from their hearts, as in the rea∣ding of the Olde Testament, and the Kingdome of God is taken from them. They also erre not knowing the Scrip∣tures, neither shall the Veile or Coue∣ring of their vngodly ignorance be ta∣ken away, except they first be conuer∣ted vnto the Lord. verses 14. 15. 16. So as whiles they imbrace not IESVS of Nazareth for theire true Messias or Sauiour, fore promised in the Lawe and the Prophets, and sente vnto vs from God in the last wek of the yeares which Daniell declareth Cap 9. vers. 27.) but i∣magine themselues another Sauiour or Sacrifice offered I know not whom) it is impossible for them to vnderstande the sacred misteries of the Gaspell in the Prophets, which are not vnderstoode but by the gouernment and guide of ye spirit of Christ, who speaketh in the Prophets. And none haue the spirit of Christ, but they which beleeue in Iesus Christ. Wherefore, also in this Psalme as yet still pleasantly dreame they, of that same auncient Cittye of Sion in time past ouerthrowne and laide waste by the ▪  (as Daniell also witnesseth)
neuer to be restoryd againe. But the Church of Christe which hath the holye Ghost, and thereby also true vnderstan∣ding of the Scripture, knoweth indeede, that, Ierusalem and Sion was in time past beloued of God: For, at Ierusalem was the Priesthoode of the Leuites, the Sanctuarie propiciatorie, a place dedi∣cated for religion or true worshipping of God, that same notable treasure of sa∣cred Scriptures, the Law and the Pro∣phets, wherein is the Gospell of eternall saluation. And in Ierusalem was the Kings royall Throane, vpon the which should sit that same true King of Israell, the Messias which was to be born of the seede of Dauid: but, all this should come to passe in a certaine other order, then other Kinges had their gouernment: In this Sion were glorious thinges begun: For the same Ruler ouer Israell (Iesus Christ) came into this Sion, and into his holy Temple. Malachy. 3: Ther∣in preached he the vnsearcheable Riches of his grace: Therein beganne he that mighty Kingdome of his, by the woorde of his Gospell and by his spirite, which was miraculously powred vpon his A∣postles
in Sion. The Law and the Pro∣phets were in that place accomplished: For, Iesus of Nazareth the sonne of Da∣uid after the flesh, the true Messias came into Sion, riding vhon an Asses Colte,at. 21. Mark. 11. ke, 19. ohn 12. the true and eternall King of Sion: and in the same Cittie celebrated the true feast of Passouer, and néer vnto the same offered vppe himselfe to GOD his Fa∣ther, the full accomplishment of all figu∣ratiue sacrifices: the sacrifice of true re∣demption, and the verye immaculate Lambe died he at the feast of Easter for the sinnes of all the worlde: and all this did he the alone high Prieste, who with one onely oblation purchased euerla∣sting redemption vnto Israell. Out of Sion afterwards plentifully issued the Gospell of Gods grace intosay. 2. the worlde, by the Apostles: And the Primitiue Church, which at the firste was but very small in number, wenteMicheas. 4▪ out of Sion, and disperst her selfe into the four partes of the world, that the Scrip∣tures might be fulfilled, Concerning the calling of the Gentiles vnto the grace of the Gospell. The Church (I say) knewe en the earthly Sion to ee
for a season beloued & preserued of God, vntill Siloh, (that is) the promised Sa∣uiour came into her: and out of her (by the remnants of Israll saued:) should Si∣on the true Church of Christ come foorth into all the worlde, as the mother of all true beléeuers in Christe. And shee also knewe euen that same Sion in Canaan to haue ben a figure of the true Sion, the Church of God dispearsed throughout the world, which is the heauenly Ierusa∣lem: As it is also saide by S. Paule 13. Hebr. Ye are come vnto the hil of Sion, and to the Cittye of the liuing God, the heauenly Ierualem &c. Although therefore the Holy Ghoste fore-prophested these things touching the earthly Ierusalem, and the earthly Sion, as by a Type or Figure: yet he intitu∣led this Psalme especiallye of the true Sion, the Church of Christ, which is to be gathered from among the Iewes, and Gentiles also: neither had he respect on∣ly vnto the earthly Cittie, & her walles of stone, but vnto the spirituall Cittye, and her spirituall Scituacions, and vnto farre greater matters, then the faithlesse Jewes could conceiue of.
The holye Ghost chieflye recorded this, touching The holy Cittie the newe Ie∣rusalem, descended from Heauen, pre∣pared as a Bride, trimmed for her Hus∣bande: Apoc. 21. vers. 2. And as S. Paul saith in the former Epistle and 11. Cap. Heb. Hauing the foundations of the Cit¦tie, whose Builder and maker is not man alone, but GOD himselfe made man, verse. 10, The holy Ghost premeditated this, as concerning the true foundation of Si∣on, The liuely stone, of men indeed re∣fused, but of God chosen, and had in reputation. Mat 21. He foresignified theEphes. 2. The founda∣tion of the Holy Cittie. liuely stones also builded (vpon the ap∣prooued corner stone, chosen, precious, and liuely.) as that spirituall house, the Tabernacle and Temple of the liuing God. Yea, he prefigureth The Moun∣taine of the house of the Lord, prepared in the toppe of the Mountaines, exalted aboue the Hilles: wherunto the People shal ronne, and many nations shal make haste, as it were vnto a Fort of refuge, to learne the waies of the Lorde, and to walke in his pathes. Micheas 4. vers. 1 and 2.
He in whome and for whome God hath promised true and assured benefites vnto his elect, is King not of this world,By Christ we are nombre amōst the Ci∣tizens of th heauenly Ie∣rusalem▪ or an earthly person, but is spirituall, heauenly and eternall. Wherefore, the elect ones of GOD are not to looke after the benefites of this worlde, for the which we neither were baptized, nor haue beleeued. But we must seeke for the assured good things vncorrupt and eternall. Undoubtedly Augustine saieth verie godlily, writing vpon the 91. Psalme. We are not Christiās, but for the world to come: Let no man hope for the good things in this life, let no mā promise himAugustin' i psal. 91. selfe the prosperity of the world because be is a Christian. No Cittie vpon earth (which shal soone perish) must we look for, but the true Cittie, whose walle and foūdation God himselfe is: vpon whom all the praiers of the godly ones do rest, of whome, (in the exilement of this life) they are continually mindfull, as of the true Cuntrey: To the possession wher∣of they refer and wholy bend all the de∣teminations and deedes of their life. For they seeke after true glory▪ honour▪ and
blessed immortalitie, which they finde not in Citties and transitorie benefites of this Countrey, but in the heauenlie Kingdome or Cittie of God. Herehence hath this Psalme that same his abropt beginning, for it saieth. Her foundations when as not withstanding there is not any one word goeth efore in the verse, concerning the same Cittie. Wherfore the Pronoune Relatiue (Her) is to bee referred vnto the Church of God: which hee nowe not as a Guest or inhabitantDauid. but as a felow▪ Citizen of the Saintes and housholde Seruants of God, (by the spirite reueiling) sawe with the eyes of Faith, and sore sighed after with moste seruent prayers: as he which knew that there is no rest, peace, life, nor saluation without the Limittes of this Cittie of God. Such cogitations Christians haue, (whose conuersations are in heauen) as Paule saieth, Philip. 3. Who when they are risen from the death of sinne, seeke for and are carefull after heauēly things and not earthly thinges. Colos. 3. Whoe also ay with S. Paul. Now liue I not but Christ liueth in me. The world is to me
crucified, through Christ and so am I to2▪ Gallat. 20. verse. the world. Galat. 6 Therefore this same Citizen of theWhat mane Citizens they of the heauen¦ly leruselē be heauenly Ierusalem, meditating many things with himselfe, of the blessed Citty of the holy ones (being full of the holye Ghoste) bursteth out into the wordes of this Psalme: which Psalme is a conti∣nuall testimony of the godly cogitations of that man, concerning the Article of the faith, I beleeue the holy Catholike Church, the Communion of Saintes: For, what thing we loue from our hart, of this we thinke continually, and wee kéepe it not in secret: but we afewards spare no speach euen vnto the full publi∣shing thereof, according to that saying: Out of the aboundance of the heart, the mouth speaketh. Math. 12. vers. 34. Da∣uid therefore saith. Her foundations (vn∣derstand of the Citty) which I loue with most earnest minde, wherein but (vn∣knowne to me) I am yet made safe or preserued by hope: wherein for euer (the Sauiour of the world so vouchsafeing) I shall still remaine, are in the hill of Ho∣linesse, for so saith the Iewe, we shoulde say in the holy Hilles.
Citties of this mortall life, bee theyIn worldlye or humane thing no∣thing perpe∣tually firme. fenced or defended with how strong so e∣uer muniments or Bulwarkes, are yet not withstanding builded vpon the sand: For whatsoeuer mans hand buildeth, the same can it also cast downe. There∣fore, Citizens of earthly Citties cannot dwell in sufficient safetie: all their Rit∣ches, yea life, and finally whatsoeuer they haue, are laid open to their enemies. Wherefore we rightly then say, that no earthly Cittie hath her foundation in theThe holy Citty hath all things perpe∣tual, firm and ure in the Hilles. Hilles: For although no enemies assault the same, yet time is the consumer of thinges, and corruption at length wa∣steth those thinges which haue bene in this world most strong: but the founda∣tions of this Cittie are sound, firme, and perpetuall, because they are in the Hilles. What then? are not earthly Citties also in the hilles? is the Citty safe which is scituate on the hilles? Why then saith the Lord by his Prophet Abdias, To theAbdias. Cap. 1 Hilles of Seyr, and the dwellers thereon▪ The pride of thy heart puffed thee vp, because thon dwelst in the clefts of the Rockes, whose habitation is hie, tho
sayest in thine hart, who shall bring me vnto the ground? The Lord maketh an∣swere to the bragging of the Edomites: If thou exalt thy selfe as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the starres, thence will I bring thee downe (saith the Lord) And surelye though Ierusalem were in the olde time builded in the mount Sion and the little hilles: yet notwithstan∣ding it was easie to be assaulted and bea¦ten downe of their enemies▪ the Chalde∣ans and the Romans. All earthly buildings be they neuer so strong and stablished in the hilles and Rockes, are yet builded vpon the sand: Because they shal in time fal to y• groūd and perish. Wherefore the Prophet here speaketh of other hilles, as the HebrueCarass▪ oun declareth, which signifieth holines Therefore those foundations are in theHilles of ho∣lines. hilles of holinesse, that is, not in earthlie hils, but in the Heauens. For y• foūdatiō which this citty hath, Is that immouableChrist▪ is the foundation of the church Rocke (Mat. 16.) whereupon the Church is builded, and standes to the vtmost a∣gainst the gates of hell. Whereof the A∣postle mentioneth. No man can lay any other foundation, then that which is laid
euen Christ Iesus▪ 1 Cor 3. Wherfore the Apostle when he speaketh of that blessed Cittie, sheweth openly this foundation: and saieth. Those Cittizens (that is Chi∣stians)Ephes 2 verse. 20. 21. & 22. are builded vpon that foundati∣on of the Apostles and Prophets, Christ Iesus himselfe being the Head corner stone, in whom, what building soeuer is coupled together, groweth vnto àn holy Temple in the Lord: In whome ye also are built together, to be the Habitation of God▪ by the Spirite. The Cittie is holye, firme, and eter∣nal,Why the Citty is cal∣led holy. & it hath Cittizens euē the holy ones as the Apostle euery where calleth them: For although they be sinners born, yet in that Cittie they are regenerate of wa∣ter & of the spirite: yea, They are iustifi∣ed by faith, and sanctified by the name of1 Cor. 6. vers. 11. Iesus, and by the spirite of our God. And all things which are without this Cittie are prophane and abhominable before God. In this Cittie onely is true holi∣nesse, (as the Phophete Abdias saieth vers. 17) But vpon mount Sion shall bee delierance, and it shall bee holye. And the Prophete Esay declareth, Cap. 4, Then hee that shall bee left in SION▪
nd hee that shall be lefte in Ierusalem shall be called holie, and euerie one shall bee written among the liuing in Ieru∣salem, when the LORD shall wash the filthinesse of the daughters of Sion▪ verses 3. & 4.The Lordeloueth the Gates of Sion▪ &c. Pars. 2▪ THis latter parte of the first verse sheweth how fatherly the Lord lo∣ueth vs for Christs sake, the foun∣dation of this Cittie▪ vpon whomeWe are belo∣ued of God▪ for Christs sake. we are builded, as a spirituall house. The Lord saieth he loueth the Gates of Sion (that is) the Church of Christe. For, we are beloued of God, for his sons sake▪ Through whom we haue obtained reconciliation: when as (before we were not yet reconciled through the death of his sonne) we were the enemies of God. Ephes. 1. Rom. 5. And he loueth vs aboue all the Tabernacles of IACOB: So much as to the figure or outward shewe pertaineth, wee know out of the Law of Moises▪ howe the Gates of the earthly SION or the Cittie Ierusalem was so
ordained for the worshipping ▪of GODerusalē was rdained for euine seruice in the olde age, That it should not bee lawfull for any to offer sacrfice, but with in the sanctuary of the Cittie▪ Deut. 12. 2. Par. 6. Wherfore, although there were ma∣ny Sinagogues in Canaan, and many places wherevnto the people resorted by companies, yet not withstanding Ierusa∣lem alone had the Temple, and Pallace royall of Dauid, and was called the holy Cittie, as the Prophet Esay sheweth cap 52. Put on thy Garments of beautie O Ierusalem, thou holie Cittie: for hence∣forth there shal no more come into thee the vncircumcised and the vnclean ver. 1 And in his 26. Cap. he saieth, The Citti∣zens of that Cittie, are called an holye people, redeemed of the Lord. verse. 12. And this Prophet Dauid in his 78. Psal singeth The LORD hath chosen the tribe of IVDA, the hill of SION, whom he loued. vers. 69. Al those things which are spoken of the earthlye Ierusa∣lem, in figure, are to be referred vnto Christs Catholike Church: which spiri∣tuall Cittie the Lord loueth aboue al the dwelling places of Iacob, which long
goe wer shadowes and figurers, things temporall, by which notwithstanding the heauenly Cittie of Christians (euer during) was here shadowed. verse. 2Verye excellent thinges are spoken of thee thou Cittie of God, alwaies. IF we learne this verse aright, we shal moreouer recite y• Article of the Cat∣holike Church in the Simbole of our Créede, daily not vainely and without faith: For, the Church is in this place called the Citty of God. But some would say, is not God euery where? yea euen a∣mong the Turks, why thē is the Church onely (that is) the congregation of Chri∣stians, called the Cittie of GOD? For, Esay the Prophet saieth Cap. 66. Heauen is my seat and the earth is my footstool. I answere, God is euery wheare byGod though he be euerie wher by pow¦er & eslence yet he is by grace present with the  power and essence, but not euery whear by grace, but in Christians onely, whoe beléeue in Christ the Mediator: There∣is God saide to dwell in his Church, be∣cause the Church is that peculier people of God, sanctified in the blood of Christ▪ &
consecrated to God in Baptisme, by the holy Ghost: that it may be a liuely Tem∣ple and Tabernacle of God, wherin hée dwelleth, whereinto he powreth out his holy spirit with his guitts, & on which he bestoweth (through Christ) incorruptibi∣lity and eternitie. For, as touching Chri∣stians, God specially faith in 26. Leuit. I will set my Tabernacle in the middest of you, and my soule shall not loath you: I will walk amōgst you, and I wil be your God, and you shal be my people. vers. 11 which place ye holy Apostle S. Paul 2 cor 6. referreth vnto all Christiās which are the people of God & the true Church of Christ. ver. 19 And ye holy Euangelist S. Iohn. in reuel. cap 11. writeth. Behold, the tabernacle of god is with mē, & he wilbe with thē, & they shall be his people, and God himselfe shal be their god with thē And the Prophet Ezechiel saith cap. 37. My tabernacle shall be in thē, and I will be their God, & they shal be my people vers. 27. After this maner doe the Pro∣phets cal Christians the Citty of God: As it is in the 46. Psalme, The riches of the flood shal make glad the city of god the most highest hath sanctified his Ta∣bernacle
God is in the midst of her ther fore she shal not be remooued, God will giue help vnto her and that right early. And herevpon Aurelius Augustinus that reuerend and most exercised deuine in Scriptures, when as he did confute ye Romanes blasphemies (by reason of the irruptions of ye Goathes) slaundering the way of trueth, calleth the Church, that is the cōgregation of Christiās (because she is predestinate to raign wt God for euer) the city of God, as in his first booke vnto Marcellinus appeareth, for, he was per∣suaded by the sacred Scriptures, yt there wer two cities: One, the church of God which (here amongst the vngodly in this world) liuing by faith in Christ, hath her perigrination or soiourning frō time to time & place to place: the other is of this world, or pertaineth to the Deuil, which hath y• vngodlie ones, not beleeuing in ye gospel of christ, vessels of wrath, prepared for euerlasting destruction wt the deuill & his angels. He deriueth y• City of God as beginning at Abell, who was a Soiour∣ner in this worlde, by grace predestinate vnto life, by grace a Straunger on
The other he bringeth from Cain the murtherer, which was first borne a Cit∣tizen of this world, of whome it is read, that he builded a Cittie: But of Abell a Pilgrim in this world, we read not that he builded any Cittie. This Cittie then of the holie ones is from aboue, although it bringeth foorth Cittizens heare in this worlde, in whom it liueth Stranger-like, vntill the time of her Kingdome come: when as she shall gather together all her Cittizens rising againe to life euen in their bodies, when the Kingdome promised shall be geuen them, where with their Prince the King of all holie ones they shall raigne worlde without end, as the saide Augustine dili∣gentlie handleth in Lib 15. Cap. 2. De Ciuitate Dei. The Psalmograph therefore here sai∣eth▪ Very excellent things are spoken of thee, thou Cittie of God: Nowe except wee sleepe all too sluggishly, and neglect our benefites to come, it shall wel please vs to search out and discerne, what glo∣rious thinges these may bee, which are spoken off, touching, or in the Church of  spoken of v which e
leeue in Christ, and confesse Christ. First and for most, who hath at any time explaned this praise-worthy Title euen by dignity, That Christians are cal∣ledChristians are called the City of God the Cittye of God? For in this one Tytle all good thinges are vnderstoode, namely, y• she inioyeth very good Lawes,Her Excellēt Members▪ a most wise Magistrate, faithfull & mosts learned Teachers, inuintible Warriors a quiet and most obedient People, true Peace, and Safetie, true Holinesse, Righ∣teousnes, true Joy, sure or certain know¦ledge of speciall things, and brieflye true life and Saluation: for so is this Citie called, because God dwelleth in her, as in his owne house, his beloued and holye Tabernacle. And where God after this manner dwelleth by grace, I praye ys, what good things may be wanting? doth not such a one dwell safelie? And the Cittie so safe insulteth with S. Paule a∣gainst her enemies on this manner: If God be on our side, who can be against vs. Rom 8. Wherfore, if God be King and Lord in her, there must ueedes be in her abso∣lute felicitie by al meanes: that is to say, Righteousnesse and euerlasting saluatiō.
Christ the king of glorie with al his good graces dwel in the Church: by good right then doth Paul, first a persecutor, and af∣terwardes a builder and defender of the Church, call her glorious, as in Ephes 5. And what are these Glorious thinges which are spoken of in or touching this Church? The Church is called The holy and beloued spouse of Christ. Ephes 5. whomThe glorious Titles of the holy Church. (as Oseas saith) Christ the king of glory hath maried vnto himselfe for euer, in righteousnes, in iudgemēt, and in mercy and cōpassiō & faith, that she may know how he is the Lord. cap 2. vers. 19 & 20. The Church is thus diuersly also called. The City of the liuing God. Heb 13. Esa. 60. The city of the great king, a beauti∣full place, and the ioy of all the whole earth. Psal. 47: vers. 2. The people that dwell therin shall haue their iniquity forgeuen. Esay. 33. vers. 24. The body of Christ. 1 cor. 12. Ephes cap 1. The piller and groūd of truth. 1 Tim. 3. Mount Sion, the heauenlye Ierusalem. Heb. 12. vers 22. The hill of the Lord, the holy hill. Esay. . & 63.
The Temple of God. 1 Cor. 3. vers. 17. The Horne of saluation exalted in the house of Dauid, the seruāt of God. Luk. 1 The house of God. Heb 3. 1 Tim. 3. The house of Iacob, the seat of Dauid. Esay. 9. Luk. 1. A City sought out, and not forsaken. Esay. 62. vers. 12. Of this Ierusalem it is said Psal. 147 Thy God hath made the Barres of thy Gates strong: he hath blessed thy Chil∣dren in thee: He setteth peace in thy bor¦ders, and satisfieth thee with the flower of wheat. verses. 13. and 14. The Queene on the right hand of God in a vesture of golde of Ophyr, wrought with needle worke: Psal 45. The King shall haue pleasure in thy beautie. ibidem. verses 9 and 11, Of this City (saith the Lord) I will be a wall of fire round about her, and wil be the Glorie in the middest of her. Zach. 2. In Sion wil I giue saluation and my glo∣ry vnto Israell. Esa. 46. vers. 13. The vineyard of the Lord. Esa 5. vers. 1 The Sister of Christ, Canti: 5. vers. 1. My Doue is alone, and my vndefiled Cap, 6. vers. 8. The Garden enclosed, a Spring shutivp,
and a Fountaine sealed vp. Cantic. 4. verse 12 An Orcharde of Poungranets, with sweet fruites. &c. Cantic. 4. vers. 14. The peculier people of Cod, and fol∣owers of good works. 2. Titus. ve. 14. A Sprituall House. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. A holy Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. A Chosen Generation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. A Royall Priesthood. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. A Holy Nation. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. A People which haue come out of darknesse into light. 1 Pet. 2. cap. vers. 9. The Heritage of God. Esay. cap. 19. Of this Cittie it is saide. I will make an euerlasting couenant with you, euen the sure mercies of Dauid my faith seruant. Esay 60. The Nation and Kingdome which wil not serue thee, shal perish from the earth Esay. 60. I will giue my lawe in their inwarde partes, and write it in their heartes, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Ieremy. 31. verse. 33. And they shall all knowe me from the least to the greatest, and I wil forgiue their iniquity
and remember their sinnes no more verse 34. But to knowe GOD is eternall life. Iohn 17. The Lord buildeth SION. Psal 102 vers. 16. In SION is the Lords name decla∣red, and his praise in Ierusalem▪ ibidem. vers 21. The blessed of my Father. Math. 25. For whom the kingdome of God is pre∣pared from the beginning of the world. vers▪ 34. The Chlldrē of God. Hosea 1. Iohn. 1 Galat 3. phil 2. The Heires nf Christ, and Co-heires with Christ. Rom. 8. The fellow-Citizens with the Saints, The housholde seruants of God. Ephes 2 vers. 19. The Vessels of glorie. Rom 9. vers 23. As Lights shining in the world, 2 phi verse 25. Iuda and Israell. Hosea 1. Rom. 2. and 9. Which names are full of misteries, The Children of promise. Gallat 3. vers 29. 4. and 28. The Children of SARA the free
woman. Gal. 4 vers. 31. The Church builded vpon the Rock, a∣gainst which the Gates of Hell shall not preuaile. Math. 16. ver. 18. Called Christians as of the Lord Christ. Act. 11. vers. 26. The seed of Abraham, Gal 3. vers. 29. The kingdome euerlasting of the Messi∣as. Abdias. cap. 1. ver. 21. 2. Pet. 1. The brethren of Christ. Psal. ar The holy ones. Rom. 1. The new man. Ephes. 2. New Creature in Christ. Gal. 6. A Garland of glory shalt thou be in the hande of the Lord, and a royal Diadem in the handes of thy God Esa. 62. vers. 3. And thou shalt be called Hiphzibah (that is) My delight is in thee. vers. 4. Of her it is said by the Prophet Esay cap 54, Feare not, for thou shalt not be aThe fauor of God towards his Church. shamed, neither shalt thou be confoun∣ded. vers. 4. For a momēt, in mine anger, I hid my face from thee for a little sea∣son, but with euerlasting mercie haue I had compassion on thee. saith the Lorde thy Redeemer. vers. 8. My mercy shall not depart from thee neither shall the couenant of my peace,
fall away (saith the Lord) that hath com∣passion on thee. vers. 10. Of her againe, Esay. 60. I will make thee an eternall glorie, and a y from Generation to Generation, vers. 15. Thou shalt call Saluation thy Wa les, and Praise thy Gates. vers. 18. The Lord shal be thine euerlasting light. vers. 20. Iuda shall be saued, and Israell shall dwell safely. Ieremy. 23. vers, 6. And in E∣say againe cap 49. Though a woman for get her Childe, yet will not I forget thee O SION. vers. 15. Beholde, I haue grauē thee vpon the palm of mine hands thy walles are euer in my sight. vers. 16. Briefly, out of Sion was the true Messias, and Sauiour of Israel looked for,The Messias promised  of, SION. as Dauid singeth in the 14. Psal. Who shal giue saluation out of SION vnto Israell? vers. 7. And S. PAVLE saieth Rom. 11. Out of SION shall hee come which shall deliuer. &c. vers. 29. And GOD by his seruants the Pro¦phets & Apostles throughout al y• Scrip∣tures hath spoken glorious thinges in figures, and euident promises: For shee hath Promises of this present life, and
of the life to come. 1. Tim, 4. After this maner hath the gréeke text as in Latine (de te of thée) But the true meani of ye Hebrue hath (in te) in thée:ar. & this preiudiceth nothing to vs, for both are true. Those excellent things which I haue made mencion off, are spoken of the Church, by the Prophets and Apostles, and in the Church: For, what other thing are they, but sacred holy misteries of the Gospell, touching euerlasting life & sal∣uation, which surely are dailie preached and sounded foorth both of the Church, and in the Church, that by hearing of so great matters, faith might come vnto vs and by Faith, Justification and Salua∣tion. The Hebrue text addeth Selah whichSelah. S. Ierome translateth Semper, alwaies: For, the Church as a Bride glorious in her Husband, shal euermore be preached off: glorious things shal be spoken of her and in her shall be continually sung the ineffable glorie of the euerlasting grace of God in Christ our Lord. And so the Iewes for the most parte interpret the word Selah for euerlasting like as it is euident in their Epitaphes,
as the Iewish Epitaph is in Hebrue, at Basill, His soule continue in Paradice, Amen, Amen, Amen For euer and euer. For it is vnderstood by that verse in the 84. Psalme. They shall praise thee for e∣uer and euer: And so likewise by Thar∣gus the Hebrue writer vpon this 87. Psalme. Rabbi, Aben Ezra expoundeth it for trueth or truelie. Dauid Kimhi writeth,Ama. that it is a token of lifting vp the voice, in this Psalme from the roote, to lift vp.Salal. So as indéed by this persuasion, the cogi∣taciō of ye mind is moued ernestly to way & cōsider a great matter: for in this place it is a worthy little verse, to the medita∣tion wherof, all the powers of the minde may be profoūdly and earnestly moued. For our matter is now in making, weeThe Riches of the church are that Church, the excellent Cittie of God, cōcerning which so glorious things are spoked off: Al which things are pro∣mised and surelye giuen vs from God in Christ: For so greate and vnspaakeable are they, that the Prophet Esay, and the Apostle Paule write of these. That for them which loue God, such thinges are prepared, which neither eie hath seene
nor eare hath hard, neither yet the heart of man conceiued. Esa 64. 1 Cor. 2. Now let vs ioine the Hebrue phraseIn what pointes the Church of Christ is glorious. vnto the Gréeke tet, and you shall see a goodly consonancy, Glorious sayinges are ther of thee, but, in thee, O City of God. For without thée, & of thée is all euil spo∣ken. For those same glorious thinges which are spoken off touching ye Church, are vndoubtedly not spoken of her, but in the Church: for without the Church▪ the world, that is, the cōgregation of the vn∣godly, the spouse of the deuil, the enemie of Christ, with her Ruler is not glorious but speake meer & extreame infamies or slaunders of the Church. Without the Church (wher the Gospell is scorned and hissed out of doores) so soundeth the verse, Reprochful things are spoken of thee O city of Satan? For so also ye vngodly ones flatter thēselues that they are the Catho∣like Children of God, the ancient Chri∣stians and the City of God: But others (not honouring the Pope) them doe they cal the children of Satan: yea, they con∣demne the Gospel of the grace of God, or as the damnable doctrine and errour of Satan.
At Augusta, one of those Papistes a Doctor of the Popes Diuinity by sugge∣stion, in presence of Duke▪ Maurice cried out vpon thē which beleeued in ye Gospel of Christ, (which hee called the new Do∣ctrine) as persons infamous, and vnwor∣thely requested rightly to beare witnesse of y• Truth before Judges or Magistrats as we say in Duch, Sie sollen mir zukey er warheit odder zeugknus gut genug sein. So Paul that most excellēt light of the Church, was contēptibly reckoned for a Sower of strange doctrine. Actes. 17. Paule and Silas were called Distur∣bers of the whole worlde. ibidem Andn times past as it appeareth in ye Apollogie of Tertullian against the Gen∣tiles, the Christians were of Gentiles na∣medThe Church of God is rai¦led on by the vngodly ones murtherers, Church-robbers, ince∣stuous persons, publique enemies, mur∣therers of Infants, procurers of wic∣ked lusts, Bawdes, and Asse-heades: in that they worshipped an Asses head as it were a God: which suspition Cornelius Tacitus had stirred vp. The assemblye of Christians to the Supper of the Lord was counted of the vngodly ones, a Faction.
Christians were named the cause of all publique mischiefe, and of all inconue¦nience amongst the people of the world: If the riuer Tiber rose vp to the walles:Christians bearing the blame of all euill happes. If the riuer Nilus flowed not vp ouer the fleldes, if the Skies stood still, if the earth quaked, if euer any Famine or pestilence were, by and by it was denounced, Cast those Christians to the Lions. Finally,Christianos ad Leonem. they were reprochfully called vnfruitful in their businesse, and not good for any thing. They were also called, Sarmentitij & Semitij because being boūd to a block of greate waight, standing vpright and compassed about with fier wood they werNot. brent to ashes: And for this cause also they were accompted desperate, and cast away. In Ciprians time there was among the enemies of the Christians one De∣mitrianus, a man of great name, which saide, that all misschiefes whereby the world was tossed and turmoiled, was to be imputed vnto the Christians, for that the Boddes of the Gentiles wer not wor∣shipped amongst them: And then it was an offence to be a Christian. Iulianus the Apostate in respecte of
reproch called the Christians Galileans, as Nazianzenus writeth. The Iewes at Rome called the Chri∣stian faith and that congregation, a Sett, Of this sect (say they vnto Paule) it is knowen vnto vs, that in euery place, men speake against it. Act. 28. Christ the head of the Church, the hus∣band and foundation thereof, heard him∣selfe called of the Iewes,, a Samaritane, a∣Seducer and deceiuer of the people, one hauing a Deuill, aud a sedicious person. And in our time such as beleeue the Gos∣pell and reiect the doctrines of men disa∣gréeable to y• Gospel, (y• I may omit infi∣nite other slaunders) are called of the vn∣godly ones Lutherane Heretikes: But Christ the husband of the Church, in this world despised and abiect, (such is his vn¦searcheable wisedome) turneth euen these slaunders also into glorie for the Christi∣ans. For who had not rather heare tenne hundreth thousande reproches of the vn∣prais-worthy Gentiles and vngodly per∣sons abhominable before God (and that for the name of Christ) then to beare the state of a king, and enioy at ease all the honoures and benefites of this worlde
This one blessing of Christe confoundeth all the cruell curses of this worlde. Bles∣sed are you whē men reuile you and shall speake all euill against you for my names sake falsly: Reioice and bee glad, because your rewarde is greate in heauen. Math. 5. verses. 11. and. 14. I will thinke vpon Rahab and Babilon with thē that knowe me. Beholde the Philistines also and they of Tyre, with the Morians, loe, ther was hee borne. FIrst of al, the names of the aforesaid Nations must be declared, and the meaning of the Prophet shall more easily appeare: Rahab therefore is a Sirname which Esay also in his 30 chap. giueth vnto Egipt, because it was a proud People, in whome when the Iewes put their hope and confidence, they were de∣ceiued. Wherfore Esayas saieth, For the Egip∣tiansare vanitie, and they shall help in
vaine. Their (Rahab or) strength is to sitCay stil. And in the 51 chap. Art not thou that same (Arme) that hath smitten the proud (Egipt?) Arnobius and Augustine vnder∣stand by that same Strumpet in Iericho, those y• are wise in their owne conceites: Unto the other Doctors Rahab see∣meth to signifie rashnesse and insolency or pride wherewith the Egiptians▪ are by good right entituled as the speciall Ene∣mies of the the Iewes. And Thargus the Hebrue writer in this place hath Mitsarri that is to say Egipt for Rahab.Mitsarri. Raab. Those persons called Allophili (as it is in y• Gréeke translation) are Philistines For the Hebrue text hath Phelesser, whichPhelesser. S. Hierome translateth▪ for Palestine. And the same Hierome vpon the first Chapiter of Amos, giueth to note that the 70 Interpreters called the Philistines al∣waies Strangers borne: For wheresoe∣uer (saith he) in the olde Testament w read Straungers borne, they are to bee vnderstoode not commonlye, as touch∣ing all forraine Nations, but properly of Philistines which nowe are called
These Nations, that is to say Egipti∣ans, Babilonians, Palestines, Tyrians and Ethiopians were well knowen to the Iewes for their Neighbourhoode and for their malignant mindes towardes them. Hereby therefore y• Prophet teacheth in the person of God, that the before men∣tioned people, although hetherto they knewe not God and were manifestly vn∣godly and accursed (as all other Nations being without hope, and wanting know∣ledge of God in the world) shall yet not∣withstanding be receiued into the grace & fauour of the Gospell. As if he saide I wil remember those Nations amongst them which will knowe me: that is, amongst my elect & true Christians, which knowe and worship me by Faith in Christ. Bles∣sed is he which God so thinketh vpon, that he is written in the booke of life, & what maner of life soeuer he led before, hee yet through grace by Christ may be reckoned amongst the people of GOD, that is, the Church of Christ, Our Scholemaister D. Martin Lu∣ther, that he might also open the mister of the calling of the Gentiles, in this place vnto the ares of y• Germanes doth th
translate it, Ich will predigen lassen Ra∣hab vnd Babell, das sie mich kennen sollē: that is to say▪ I will let prch Rahab & Babilon that they may knowe me. And this rightlie and perspicuously so he doth: For, that this is the rule of a good Interpreter, S. Ierome writing vnto Summa and Fretela teacheth vs: That he might expresse the phrase of an other language in the proprietie of his owne tongue, which thing also amōgst y• anciēts y• be slearned writers haue done: as Tul∣ly in Protagora Platonis▪ & in Oeconomi∣o Xenophontis▪ & in Demosthenes his o∣ration against Aeschines, & many others. In which place heare that folly bragging of the outragions Sinagogue is beaten backe wheras it crieth, Abraham is our father, we are the heritage of GOD, the Gentiles are accursed. Iohn. 8, vers. 39. For it is a cleare and euident Testi∣monie of the calling of the Gentiles out ofThe Gospell pertaineth vn to al nations. the whole world, to the Gospel of Christ: For by the calling of the aforesaide Nati∣ons, in this place are all other Nations also to be vnderstood wheresoeuer they be thronghout the worlde. And like as the Prophets do prophesi
of the grace of Christ to be imparted vnto the Nations that the kingdome of Christ may be Catholike or vniuersall: There∣fore not onely shall God remember the posteritie of ABRAHAM, after the flesh, but also the Gentiles in the whole worlde, out of whome by faith he maketh the sonnes of Abraham, that if not in con∣sanguinitye, yet in the same Faith they may resemble their true beleeuing father Abraham: Therefore doeth the Apostle call Abraham the Father of all the faith∣full by Circumsision, that vnto them al∣so Righteousnesse might bee imputed, euen as (vnto him beleeuing the pro∣mise concerning Christ) Faith is impu∣ted vnto righteousnesse. Rom. 4. 16. vers. 9. 7. Gal. 3. vers. 7. 22. The Lawe worketh nothing theare nor the generation as touching the flesh: For the promise happened not vnto Abra¦ham, by the Lawe, nor to his seede, That hee should be the heire of the worlde, but by righteousnesse of faith. Like as in 3. cap. Gal. vers. 7. he saith, They which are of faith, are the Children of Abraham. Wee vnderstande here, that the flesh hathe no prerogatiue in respecte of iusti∣fication
but faith in Christe: Wherefore wee which were taken from among the Gentiles, and (which as the same Apostle saieth) were once farre off, are now made neere by the blood of Christe. Ephes. 2. vers. 13. Who from out both Iewes and Gen∣tiles hath made one, and hath broken the stoppe of the partition wall. vers. 14. Nowe wee both through him haue an Enterance vnto the Father of mercies by one spirite. vers. 18. This doth the promise of God in this Psalme, I will thinke vpon Rahab and Babilon. &c. that is to say, I will call and take vnto me Children from out of al the Nations in the world, and not out of Ca∣naan onely: which surely ought to be rec∣koned by good right amongst the glori∣ous thinges which are spoken off touch∣ing the Churche of Christ. For the Apostle also in the third cha∣piter to the Ephesians, fearmeth the cal∣ling of the Gentiles into the Church or Congregation of ISRAEL, a Miste∣rye: which was not alwayes knowen vnto the Sonnes of men, but is reuey∣led vnto the Holye ones, the Apostles of
Christ and his Prophets, by his holy spi∣rite, namely that the Gentiles are fellow∣heires with the Iewes, members of one bo¦dy, and Coo-partners of the promise of life in Christ. And the Prophet Dauid here addeth in the ende of this verse Loe, there is hee borne (that is to say▪) the people of the na∣tions▪ before remembred: Where are they borne? I answere, wher¦as hee reconeth vp by the name of those Nations▪ it is certaine, that he speaketh of them which are now borne: but he af∣firmeth▪ the misterie of regeneration To be by water & the Sperite, as in Iohn 3. And he teacheth also that those Nations borne anew theare, that is (within the gates of SION, in the citie of God) haue giuen their name vnto Christ, forsaking their Idols, and are to be conuerted from darknesse vnto light, and from the pow∣er of Satan vnto the true and liuing God that they may also receiue forgiuenesse of Sinnes, and inheritance amongst them which are sanctified by faith in Christ.
Vers. 5And of SION, it shal be re¦ported, that manie are borne in her: And hee euen the most high shal stablish her. IN this place the translation (as S. Hierome sayeth to Summa and Frete∣la) according to the places, times and pleasures of olde writers, differeth frō the Hebrue veritie: For, that saith, Vnto SION it shall be reported, many are borne in her. But the Greeke translation hath it thus, The Mother Sion shall say many persons are borne in her. Finallie, the west church hath now for a long time read, Shal Sion say many are borne. &c?The notable negligence of the Popish Prelates for spirituall mat¦ters in this Authors time In which place not without cause do we detest the negligence of the Prelates of the Church, in whose power at this day consisteth the chéefe regarde of thinges who do surmount the Princes of the Em¦pire both in wealth and reuenues: much more are equal vnto them, and yet in so many ages not euen one hath bene sound who at the charge of the Church goodes, hath reformed the exemplars of the Byble or at least wise the Psalter▪ within all the
Churches is song nightes and daies: such faithfull Stewardes of God are they for sooth? But let vs suffer them to fill vp the measure of their Fathers indeede, the Pharises: whoe euen themselues with like periurye gouerned their Sinagogue in time past so long, that whiles they woulde not repent them, they vtterly pe∣rished from the face of the earth. Firste, wee will showe foorth what meaninges the Hebrue Text hath. Of SION it shall bee reported, that is, of the Church of Christe it shall bee prea∣ched, Manye are borne in her. That is e∣uerye one that is regenerate by the Spi∣rite, is borne in that SION: For, inWithout the Church of Christe is no saluation. the Church are, the worde of life, and the Sacramentes of our saluation. Wherefore, they which remaine out of the Church, are the Children of wrath, the Children of olde ADAM, yea car∣nallThe Sonnes of Adam. Children dead in sinnes and subiect vnto eternall damnation. But they which in SION addresse or reedifye the Cittye of GOD, doe finde the Gospell of Saluation, and the Sacramentes by the whiche they are borne anewe and are made the Children
of grace, the Sonnes of GOD, and new men, are raised vppe from the Death ofWe are rege¦nerate, by th Gospell and Sataments. Sinne, and made Spirituall heires of eternall life. The Hebrue Phrase is, Vir & Vir, Homo & Homo, for the worde Vnus∣quisque. Luther whome the Spirite of Christe taught, by moste grieuous tribulations not onely to singe with the voice, but also with the spirite and trueth, expressed this verse to the Germanes, vnderstanding on this maner: Man wirt von Zion sagen, das aller ley leut drinnē geboren werden. It shall be said of Sion, all Nations shall be borne therein: which we out of the He∣brue text doe thus expound, Vir & Vir, that is, euery one in whatsoeuer Nation he be borne, at length yet againe hee is borne anewe in SION. As Peter al∣so in the Actes Cap. 10. sayeth, Of trueth I perceiue that GOD is no  of Persons, but in euerye  that feareth him and worketh Righ∣ousnesse is accepted with him. vers. 34. and 35. According to ye Gréeke edetion we read, The mother Sion, y is ye church which is
the spiritual mother (For within y• hurch we were borne a new with wter and of the Spirite, and in the lap of the Church, as infantes are in their mothers bellie:) And first we are nourished with milke, & afterward with strong meat that is with the word of God preached vnto vs accor∣ding to our capacitie: vntill we all meete together in the vnity of faith and know∣ledge of the sonne of God, vnto a perfect man, and vnto the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christe▪ as the Apostle S. Paul saith Ephes. 4. Unto this spirituall byrth by or from God, had Esay respect: with whome in his 49. thay, The Church (marueiling at the multitude of her Children) crieth thus: Who hath begotten these? Seing I am barraine, and desolate, a Captiue and a Wanderer to and fro, and who hath  them? And the Lord God answereth her, , I will lift vp mine hande to the Gentiles, and set vp my Standerde to the people, and they shall bring thy Sonnes in their armes, and they shall carrie thy Daughters vpon their shoulders, ibidem. vers. 22.
And the Apostle S. Paule in the 4. Gal speaking of the Church saith, But Ierusa∣lem which is aboue is free, which is the Mother of vs all: For it is written, Re∣ioice thou barraine that bearest no Chil∣dren: Breake forth and crie thou that tra∣ueilest not: For the desolate hath many mo children then she which hath an hus∣band. Esay 54. Augustine in this place vnderstandeth by the word Homo, Christ, by reason of the disposing of the nature humane taken vpon him: which though it haue a godlye sere or meaning, yet is it not spoken in place. Arnobius (not marking the Hebrue sence, Homo & Homo) vnderstandeth Adam begetting sonnes which may pos∣sesse the earth, & Christ begetting sonnes which may possesse the Heauens: But these wordes make nothing for the pur∣pose. For, he rehearseth before, diuers na∣tions▪ purposing to shewe that not onelye the Iewes but also the Gentiles (wheresoe∣uer in the world they be) shal fully attain to that Citie of God, and shall be borne a∣new in her, that this second and spiritual byrth may not onely pertaine to Israell,
after the flesh, but without respect of any person euen vnto all Nations: For, by the Commaundement of Christe, The Gospell was to be preached vnto all Cre∣atures. Which thinge sith it bringeth re∣generation, all Nations are altogether to be admitted into this Citty, That they might be borne anewe (as Peter sayeth) not of mortal seed, but of immortal seed, by the worde of the liuing GOD, which abideth for euer. 1. Peter. 1. vers. 23. For so our Lorde himselfe openeth openeth vnto vs all the Prophesies touching the saluation of the Gentiles in Math. 8. and Luke. 13. Manye shall come from the Easte, and the West, from the North, and the South, and shall rest them with A∣braham, Isaac, and Iacob, in the King∣dome of GOD. Mathew. 8, verse. 11▪ Luke. 13. vers. 29. Wee haue also in this place a moste strong weapon against the argumentes of the Iewes, and those which embrace Iu∣daisme: who doe wrest and arrogate the promises (made vnto this Spirituall SION) to them and to their earthlye IERVSALEM: as if these so great cōmendations were spoken of the earthly
Cittie. And in our age the newe Do∣natistes and secte of Chiliastes, most foo∣lishlie also dreame with the Uncircum∣cised, promising themselues earthelye thinges: where the Spirite of Christe promiseth in the Prophetes (with moste swéet allegories) spirituall and celestiall thinges. Unto which fanaticall per∣sons also the moste delicate Table of the worde of GOD is turned into a Snare and Trappe, yea into an offence and Re∣taliation: Their eies are darkened that they sée not, and their backes are alwaies made crooked, that they sée nothing but earthlye thinges, whereas meere Cele∣stiall thinges are promised vnto the elect ones of GOD. For those Nations whome the Prophet and Psalmograph here reckoneth vp, and affirmeth to bee borne in SION for a trueth are not borne in that earthlye SION and IE∣RVSALEM: Wherfore we doe most necessarilye vnderstande the verse to bee set downe as concerning the Spirituall SION. For so the Apostles and EuangelistesThe king∣dome of Christ is spi∣rituall. (as the Interpreters of the Prophetes taught by GOD) haue instructed
vs to vnderstand and handle the Oracles of the Prophets on that maner. Christ the spirituall king, a high Prieste of good thinges to come, promised in the Gospell vnto a spirituall people, thinges spiritual and eternall and not méere temporall good things. wherfore, as Augustine wri∣ting vpon the 39. Psal admonisheth vs: Let no man promise himselfe that, which the Gospel promiseth him not: The scrip tures promise vs not in this worlde but tribulations, persecutions, Calamities, en∣crease of sorrowes, aboundance of temp∣tations: to these thinges let vs speciallye prepare vs, least vnprepared wee vtterly fall. These saith he. That halfe verse, (The most High, e∣uen hee shall stablish the same) hath in it more consolation, then our slender capaci∣ty can comprehend: It is a certaine spe∣cial thing of those glorious ytles which are declared of y• City of God. For, what can bee spoken more glorious and more excellent of the Church of God then that the same is not founded and estabished by humane handes, strengthes or counsels, but of the selfe same GOD the work∣maister and preseruer of all things.
For euen he Iesus Christ the sonne of the highest God, the power and wisedome of God the father was sent to be a Rocke & foundation, a Wall and couering of this holy Citie. Here vpon it followeth, that this Citie shall alwayes be safe, from the tyranny of death and of the Diuel, which hath dominion ouer Death: much more then shall shee be safe from ickle fading and britle power of this world. For, see∣ing that God himselfe is the founder, con∣firmer, and defender thereof, it cannot be destroyed nor subuerted, yea, the founda∣tion of this Citie shall stand vnshaken or immoueable, euen to the vtmost, and for euer. As it is in the 47. Psal. God hath founded the same Citie, (his Church) for euer. vers. 7. Therefore although it bée oppugned or assaulted of most cruell and most mighty enimies without all tuces, namely of Sinne, feare of Death, the De∣uell, the World and the Flesh, yet it shall not be cast downe at any time, but it shal stand firme and mightie through Christ. Who is a fierie Wall in the compasse of his new Ierusalem: And he that toucheth her, toucheth the apple of Christs eye, as Zachary saith. Cap. 2. vers. 5.
Hereupon learne we that the building of that Citie is not begotten, continued,God is the master buil∣der of the Church. & confirmed with any strength of men, but with the alone power of God: For he hath laid y• first stone, & not only frameth in order all the building thereof, but also kéepeth & preserueth the same: Altogether it depēdeth of y• same God, not of vs, least any man should boast therof. For whiles the vngodly is conuerted vnto Christ, héeThe Church of God is beutified by Christ. is builded vpon Christ, he is made a liue∣ly stone of that spiritual building, but hée is cōuerted by the alone power of Christ: whiles Christ sendeth his Gospel, giueth harty sorow or repentance, faith & his ho∣ly spirit. As without the Spirit of Christ we can do nothing Ioh. 15. And the Apo∣stle Paul openly confesseth in 2. Tim. 2.The begin∣ning of our iustification is of God and not of our selues. That the beginning of repentance is not in our power, but is giuen from aboue: If at any time (saith he) God giue thē repen∣tance to know the truth, & recouer them∣selues from out of the snare of the deuil, wherin they are holdē of him at his plea∣sure. ver. 26. If God then lay y• foundation of this cito, y• is, if he make thē of y• childrē of wrath, y• childrē of grace, & not they thē∣selues, If God draw sinners vnto him &
fréely iustifie them for Christs ake, y• they may be conuerted from their vngodlines, & beleeue, & in beleuing may be made fit stones to y• building of this spiritual Sion: If he (I say) ay y• stones himselfe & polishFreewill i nothing in the cs of Iustification them, & build & stablih the whole City al∣so, I pray you what glory hath free wil  y• case of Iustification? Hath not he which buildeth & confirmeth this City all y• glo∣ry? whiles y• holy Ghost beginneth in vs Iustification, & conserueth the same, to the1. Cor. 1. vers. end y• he which glorifieth, should not glory in y• Law, nor in Works, nor in Strength, but in y• Lord? Whē as No man can come vnto Christ the corner Stone of that buil∣ding, except the heauēly Father do draw him Ioh. 6. And no man can come vntoIohn. 6. the Father but by this corner Stone Iesus Christ. Ioh. 14 Here are the new & old Pe∣lagiansNew and old Pelagians confounded. confounded and vtterly fal downe which go about to build & ground this ci∣ty by their own works, merits & passions which blasphemously affirme that Grace is giuen according to our merits▪ & most arrogantly cast away the grace of Christ.The opinion of choole Doctors in meriting  If a man shal aske of these howe they are cōuerted? They answere, they do y• which is in their power to do, & endeuor toward
wel doing wt natural strēgth or ability of vnderstanding & wil, & so they merit Pri∣mā gratiam de congruo: And whē fréewil is helped of grace (by deede brought forth from freewill and grace) they affirme,Their opini∣on of meri∣ting ex Con∣digno. that they deserue euerlasting life. de con∣digno. Nowe, some men are ashamed of such blasphemous doctrine, and deny that they euer taught so, to the end they might deceiue simple soules. But I appeale vn∣toSo is that booke of the master of the Sentences called. the bookes of the Aduersaries, I ima∣gine no vntruth: Let the schoole Doctors be perused ouer (in dist. 25 26. 27. 28.) of the second, touching thcological Senten∣ces & you shall there see that same where vpon S. Paul speaketh in the 2. Coloss. verse 8. saying: They haue spoyled vsWhat it is to builde the Church of God vppon u nane er∣. through Philosophy & vaine deceiuing. But, truely, so to extol the nature of man (not yet borne a new through the spirite of Christ,) what other thing else is this then to desire to builde and grounde the Church by their own powers & strengths without Christ the foundation? For, to builde and ground the Citie of God, is no other thing, but, of vngodly ones, to make godly ones, to translate sinners from out of the kingdome of sin and death, into the
kingdome of righteousnes and saluation, to pardon sins & to implant mēbers of the Church iustified to build vpon the Rocke Christ, & in the faith of Christ & hope of the gospel so to preserue them, yt they may not fal away, but cōtinue stil in the faith. And this work (as Augustin strongly proueth in his book de Bono perseuerantiae) is the gift of God alone. Therefore y• alone most high buildeth, bewtifieth, stablisheth, & pre¦serueth this city, as al scriptures do beare witnes. Not vnto vs Lord, not vnto vs (inPsal. 115. vers. 1. ye beginning, continuance & conseruation of iustification) but vnto thy name, giue the glory. We will gladly confesse then, that all foundations of saluation, which hetherto euil bewitched persons haue de∣uised by mans wisedome, (to the end that we should be iustified and saued by them) are not onely ruynous, but also the verie deuowring gulfe of hell: whereinto are o∣uer whelmed so manie as embrase not Christ the head and foundation: so many as by the workes and traditions of men goe about to builde and establish this Ci∣tie. For they are most pestilent builders, such as in times past the Phariseys and Scribes were: who when they ought to
haue bene builders (most vnfaithfully re∣itcted the corner stone, without the which the spiritual building cannot stand at all. Learne moreouer, that the Church shalThe Church of Christ is eternall. stil continue alwayes, though infinite of∣fences dayly escape in her, which threaten destruction & downefal to the city of God. For, we which are citizens of so excellent a City do euen yet make warre (as it se∣meth) in a doubtful battel, and more inffr∣mity ē strength is seene in vs. And that bewtiful City is obscured with innume∣rable kinds of Crosse & infirmity in this world. Sathan assaults the same by a thou∣sand sleights: The members & Apostles of Satan disturb the same with errors: Ty∣rants with open hostility inuade & spoils the same. But this is our consolation, (what manner of forme soeuer this Citie beareth in this world) god who hath foun¦ded & stablished the same is of more might then al the enimies which assault it. Wherefore she shall still continue in∣vincible, and at length most gloriously (in the power of her chiefe founder, & King, Christ) she shall triumph ouer al her eni∣mies, the world, the deuill, & death▪ which thing Dauid saw in y• spirit▪ & singeth in y•
62. Psal. He (euē god) is my strength & my saluation, &c. vers. 7. And he exhorteth the Church y• she would always wt confidēce flee for refuge vnto her founder, saying. Put your trust in him alwayes, &c. ver. 8. Vers. 6.The Lorde shall rehearse it when hee writeth vp the people, that hee was borne there. Sela. NOw sée in what estimation Chri∣stians are had, whether Iewes or Gentiles, when they are borne a new in SION: God himself hath registred them in the book of life and doth reckon them vp name by name, as his peculiar people, as his inheritance pur∣chased with the precious blood of Christ. The Lord (saith he) in writing the people born a new in Sion, shal reckon them vp among the Catalogue of his saints or Chil¦dren: Out of this book of life shal he num∣ber or name them, saying. There was he borne, namely in Sion. This is the Citi∣zen prescribed & predestinate vnto ye num¦ber of ye heauēly citizens: him do I know, & acknowledge as a Citizen of my Citie▪
Luther translateth it thus: Der herr writ predigen laslen in allerley sprachen, das cleretlich auch claselb, gebcren wer∣den. which may thus be englished. The Lord wil let preach in all manner of spée∣ches, that some shalbe borne there. That was begunne by the Apostles in the day of Pentecost, when being inspirtdActes. . by the power of the holy Ghost from a∣boue, they published forth ye great works of God, in diuers languages: & the same thing comes to passe at this day, and shal be accomplished in the world, euen to the fulnesse of the Messias his kingdome. O holy and most louely Register: ForThrough faith in Christ we are enrol∣led in the Booke of life. they that shalbe on this manner enrolled by God in the Catalogue of his Sainctes (who are partakers of the Sacrament of regeneration in SION, and are made alredie Citizens) ought not to doubt of Gods grace towards them, and of their saluation: For the giftes and callings of God are such and in such manner. That he can neuer repent him of them. Rom. 11 If thou beleeuest in Christ, thou findest thy selfe in the booke of life, Thou art a Citizen of ye heauēly IERVSALEM thou art borne of God. Concerning such,
Christ saith. Luke. 10. Reioyce that your names are written in the heauens. Them doth hee acknowledge and reckon as his household: For although there is nothingWhom, God is said to knowe. vnknowne to God, but al things are eui∣dent before the eyes of God, yet, he is said in the scriptures to know those persons, whom be loueth as his Sonnes, which do the wil of their Father, and shal dwel in the house of their father for euer. 1. Ioh. 2. So. S. Paul. 2. Tim 2. saith, The foun∣dation of God remaineth sure, and hath this Seale, the Lord knoweth who are his. And in Iohn 10. Christ calleth his sheepe by their names and bringeth them foorth vnto the Pastures of life. But as touching the vngodly he saith, I neuer knewe you. Math 7. And in the end of this verse the worde Sela is added: To the intent that not so much the word it selfe as the cogitations and meditation of so blessed a writing & mysterie of our Regeneration might bee vnderstood: Least so great matters should be negligently as it were ouerlooked. For if we bée wise wee will alwayesThe profi we haue of our Baptis consider most earnestly the grace or bene∣fite of our Baptisme: That we are bapti∣zed
vnto the redéeming death of Christ Ie∣sus, whereas all our sins, and euen death the reward of sins are vtterly swallowed vp. We ought neuer to forget, that in SI∣ON wée are well borne who were first euill borne in the Babilon of this worlde: Namely the children of wrath, enimies of God, accursed and the bondslaues of sa∣than. And will you heare that excellent Citizen of this blessed SION, Paul, how much he esteemeth this his allotted hap∣pinesse? howe worthily hee estéemeth the most ample gift of our regeneratiō 3. Tit. But (saith he) when the bountifulnes and loue of God our Sauiour, towards man appeared not by the works of righteous∣nes which we had done, but according to his mercy he saued vs by the washing of the new birth & the renewing of the ho∣ly Ghost Which he shedde on vs aboun∣dantly,Tit. vers. 4. 6. 7. through Iesus Christ our sauiour. That wee being iustified by his grace should be made heires, according to the hope of eternal life. This is a true saying. And S. Peter 1. Pet. 3▪ saith. To the whichPet 3. also the figure that now saueth vs (euen Baptisme) agreeth, not the putting awayers. 21. & 22. of the filth of the flesh, but in that a good
conscience maketh request to God by the resurrection of Iesus Christ. Which is at the right hand of God gone into heauen, and swallowing vp death that we might be made heires of eternal life. Therefore our dulnesse is to be abborred who (for so great a grace of the fountaine of regene∣ration wherein wee haue put vppon vs Christ & God hauing nowe elected vs for his children borne a new vnto the life ce∣lestiall, in the number of his Citizens) do not continually render him thanks: And finally who doe not endeuour our selues that being clensed by the bloode of Christ from our sinnes we might liue, soberlie, iustly and godly in this present world. Glory be to God our most merciful fa∣ther for the exceeding riches of his longa∣nimity, whereby he inuiteth vs vnto re∣pentāce and a life worthy of baptisme, & continually beareth with sinners. The same God perform in vs, so as with wor∣thy thanksgiuing wee may alwayes re∣member That, we are born there in Sion: That is in the Catholike Church by the spirite, & that there by faith we may fully continue in the same City, wherein both Prophets & al righteous soules euē before
the incarnation of the Sonne of God, are regenerate or borne a newe by the Cir∣cumsition of the heart: which Consisteth in the Spirit, and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men but of God. Rom. 2. vers. 29. Verse. 7The Singers also & Trom∣peters shal he rehearse: All my fresh springs shall bee in thee. HEre again the Translations var∣rie: The Hebrew text hath Kehil∣lim, which some doe translate as it were for shalmes, others, like as they which dance for ioy: Hlal in dad signifieth to leade the Dance, to reioyce. And where the Hebrewe hath Migniny. (my fountaines or welsprings,) y• Greeke word signifieth (an habitation): although this varietie doeth nothing impugne the Catholike veriy, for both of them are taught as true. Yet it is very good to de∣scerne the meaning of the Prophet in the sacred phrase: for, where as the Greeke translation which is read in the Church
at this day is not the pure or sincere tran¦slation of the 70. Interpreters, but is va∣rying and corrupt, we do well by y• coun∣sell of S. Ierome, if in the reading of the Law and the Prophets wee shall returne vnto the Original, That is, vnto the He∣brew language: The meaning then of the Prophet Dauid in this verse (according to the Hebrew phrase) is, And the singers are there (vnderstande in that SION) whereas people of all Nations are borne a new, and not the Iewes only. But what sing they? Undoubtedly these glorious & most magnificent workes of God, which he as the most high founder and preseruer of the Church worketh in the Church to the saluation of the Church. And seeing that those thinges which God promiseth and performeth in Christ to and for his church, are such and in such manner, that they exceede al humane per∣seuerance, and vnderstanding of all crea∣turesHow other ioyes do be∣gin in the Spirit. in respect of their excellency, The Prophet saith heere That those singers in SION are like vnto them which dance for ioy, who for the immoderate ioyes y• they haue conceiued by the preaching of y• Gospel, do euen leape & dance for ioy.
But he speaketh of a spirituall ioy which issueth out of faith in Christ, (whiles wée are perswaded of the holy Ghost that our sins are abolished by the death of Christ) that wee are so reconcyled vnto God the Father by his sonne incarnate, suffering for vs and rysen from death to life, that he would vouchsafe to be our Father for euer and euer. This grace or benefite of adoption so chéerefully comforteth Chri∣stians, that they despise all worldly ioyes in respect of the syncere ioy of the Spirit: And doe esteme them as no other thing else then lamentation and sorow. Which thing it selfe Spiritual persons wil testi∣e, who haue felt sometimes in their con∣sciences both the wrath of God, and also his mercye in Christ promised, and haue fasted the sweete worde of God, and the vertues and effects of the world to come. Wherfore he saith not only The singers, but he addeth there are also, Trompeters, that hee may more clearely expresse the greatnesse of that spiritual Joy. And where as he addeth (Al my fresh springes shalbe in thee) he speaketh of the manifolde & diuerse graces or gifts of the holy Ghost, which the father for his sons
ake most aboundantly powreth out vp∣onThe spirite o God impar∣teth his gifts most ichlie vnto his Church. his Church: neither in déede doe those Welsprings flow elsewhere, without his Church although the most gratious God, doth euen power out also vpon the Gen∣tiles diuerse giftes of body and soule, yet the welspring of Christs grace iustifying, the Welspring of grace, of knowledging our sinnes and of acknowledging gods goodnes, The welspring of spiritual peace and true Joy, The welspring of thankes, of prayers & thanksgiuing, the welspring of the gift of daily praising the Lord that welspring most largely opening to y• te of Charitye, and the residew of the Wel∣springs of the gifts of the holy Ghost flow not nor gush not out in the wildernesse of the vngodly ones, but in the enclosed and most pleasant garden of the Church: con∣cerning which welspringes euery where we reade many things in the Scriptures as in the 68. Psal. He is gon vp on high, he hath led captiuitie captiue and giuen gifts vnto men. vers. 18. In elder dayes before the fulnesse of time had appeared. when as yet the elect ones looked for the Messias & sauiour (and that wt doubtful desires to come in y• flesh,
those welsprings of Graces then flowed in SION, and in the Synagogue of the people. For, In Iury was God knowne,Psal. 76. ver. 1. and his name was great in Israel. The Gentiles were an horrible and drye Desart, without knowledge, how to glorifie God: as in Rom. 1. Concerning whom is said in the Psal. Powre out thy wrath vpon the Gentiles which haue notPsal. 68. & . 10. ver. 25 knowne thee. In the Synagogue or Congregation was the sacred Scripture, therin was the true vnderstanding of the Prophecies concerning Christe which should come, yea the Prophecyes, Faith, Hope & other free giftes according to the reason of that time. Nowe when Christ the saluation of God was sent into the world, not a fewe little iding streames and small well∣springs of the giftes of the Holy Ghost, but the wide windowes of heauen being opened, great floods and seas of free gifts plentifully flowed foorth in the Churches of Christ: And the predictions of the Pro∣phets were in deede fulfilled, as touching the most ample effusion (of the spirite of the Messias glorified) in and vppon his Chuch: as in the foresaid 68. Psalm. He
hath giuen gifts vnto men. ver. 18. And as in Esay. 12. vers. 3. You shal draw out wa∣ters with ioy out of the fountaines of the Sauiour, And as in the 32. Chap. vers. 15. Vntill the Spirite bee powred vppon vs from aboue, and the wildernesse become Carmel, or a fruitful field, and the plenti∣ous fielde be counted as a Forest. ver. 17. And the worke of Iustice shall be peace, euen the worke of Iustice and quietnesse and assurance for euer. vers. 18. And my people shall dwell in the tabernacle of peace, and in sure dwellings and in safe resting places. And as it is said in the 44. Cap. vers. 3. And I will powre out water vpon the thirsty, and floodes vppon the drie grounde: I will powre out my spirite vppon thy seede, and my blessing on thy buddes. And they shall growe as among the grasse, and as the Willowes by the ry∣uers of water. vers. 4. And againe in the 35. Chap. vers. 6. 7. thus. In the wildernes shall waters breake out, and ryuers in the Dezart. And the drie ground shalbe as a Poole and the thirsty as Springs of wa∣ter. Also as the Prophet Ezechiel in his 36. Chap. saith. vers. 25. Then wil I powre cleane water vpon you, and yee shall bee
cleane: yea from al your filthines, & from all your Idols will I cleanse you. A newe heart also will I giue you, and a new spi∣rite will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your body, & I wil giue you an heart of flesh. ver. 26. There speaketh he of Baptisme and of the holy Ghost which in Baptisme is be∣stowed vppon vs. Moreouer in the Pro∣phecy of Ioel Chap. 2. as it is said: And it shall come to passe that after this▪ I will power out my Spirit vpon al flesh ver. 28 And in Acts▪ 2. appeareth. Finally as in the Prophecy of Zachary and 13. Chapter is written. And in that day there shalbe a fountaine opened, to the house of Da∣uid, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, to wash away their sins & filthines ver. 1. This Fountaine is Baptisme and the holy Spirit, with his gifts, whereby also commeth the washing away of spirituall vncleanenesse, and the knowledge of the Scriptures to the edifying of the Church. Unto this fountain of water of life, flow∣ing out to life euerlasting, are wee called by Christ in the 7. of S. Iohns Gospel. If any man thirst, let him come vnto mee and drinke: Who so beleeueth in me (as
the Scripture saith) out of his body shal flowe euen fountaines of liuely water: Which thing he spake as concerning the Spirit, which true beleeuers in him were to receiue and enioy, To be briefe, in Sion, (that is) in the Church, God himselfe dwelleth as in his spirituall Temple: what meruaile is it then, if in the Church onely liuely foun∣taines or welsprings of al gracesd burst foorth and water this Paradise vnto fru∣ctifying in this Spirituall SION? We do héere finde assuredly the word of God in a Catholique sence, the spirit of Christ faith, true righteousnes, remission of sins, peace of Conscience, Joy of the Spirite, Loue, and fulfilling of the law, and what soeuer spirituall benefites may bée: Be∣cause wée finde the neuer failing foun∣taine of all benefites God himselfe, who is the most liuely blessednesse. But the Gretians doe reade this verse, thus, The dwelling in thee is as it were of all them that doe reioyce. The Prophet Dauid héere speaketh of a Spirituall Joy which true beleeuers onely in Christe, doe possesse: Concer∣ning which S. Peter in 1. Epist. Chapt. 1
saith: Whom yee haue not seene, and yet loue him, in whom nowe though yee see him not, yet do you beleeue and reioyce with ioy vnspeakable and glorious. ver. 8 Receiuing the end of your faith, euen the saluation of your soules. vers. 9. True ioy cannot be but where the sorowfull person is deliuered from all euils. The greatest mischiefes are, to be cast away from god, to remaine in sinne, to suffer the tyranny of death and to bee reserued to eternall damnation. For al the euils of this world being compared to these horrible and e∣ternall euils are euen scracely shadowes of Euils. But true deliuerance from vndoubtedTrue ioy is in the Church alone. and greatest Euils may no where else be found, but in SION, as it is said by the Prophet Ioel. 2. Chap. Euery one which shall call vpon the name of the Lord shal shall bee saued. For in Mount Sion and Ierusalem shalbe deliuerance (as the Lord hath said) and in the remnant, whom the Lord shall call. vers. 32. No where else then but in the Church the true SION can there bee true ioye: Wherefore the dwelling or habitation of al them (which truely reioyce by reason,
their sins are forgiuen thē through Christ and saluation by him restored vnto them) is in SION alone: They that are with out Sion, are in their sinnes, therfore they are the bondslaues of death and the deuil. When as therefore they lye in most grée∣uous & eternall paines enthralled, what place of true ioy may be ther, yea, though they fully & wholly possesse in the meane time euen al the pleasures of this world? Marke also that he saith (Of all themThe righte∣ousnesse of Christ pertai¦neth not onl vnto the Iew but also to the Gentile that reioyce,) is to vnderstand, not onelie that the Iewes, but also the Gentiles are to bee admitted to the true Joy of SION, by the promise of God: which thing the Scripture euery where witnesseth. In ye 46. Psal. The Gentiles are called by name vnto this heauenly ioye. O clappe your hands together all yee people, O sing vn∣to God with the voyce of melody. Hee is the great King ouer all the earth. vers. 1. & 2. And Paul in 15. Rom. Praise the lord all ye Gentiles, and laud yee him all peo∣ple together. vers. 11. And the Prophet E∣say. Chap. 11. The Gentiles shall put their trust in him: according to the translation of the 70. Interpreters. And this Pro∣phet Dauid singeth in his 63. Psalm. The
righteous shal reioyce in the Lord & put his trust in him, and all they that are true of heart shalbe glad. vers. 10. Beholde he saith not, the lewe onely shall reioyce in the Lord but the iust: is no man iust then but the Iew? Aske of Paul, who in Rom. 3. teacheth, That the Iew is not iustified by the workes of the Lawe, but by faith in Christ the righteous and onely iustifier. And by and by hee after that saieth. Is hee the God of the Iewes onely? Is hee not also the God of the Gentiles? verses. 29 30. Yes of the Gentiles is he also God, which iustifieth Circumcision by faith and vncircumfition through faith. And in the 9. Rom. ver. 30. he saith: What shal wee say then? That the Gentiles which followed not righteousnes, haue attained vnto righteousnes, euen the righteousnes which is of faith. Heere the Scripture openly teacheth (so farre as vnto iustification pertaineth) that there is no difference betweene the Iew and the Gentile: all haue sinned, and haue neede of the glory of God, but by the alone grace of Christ they are iustified. And as S. Peter in Acts 15. confesseth, god (so much as to iustification belongeth)
made no difference betweene the Iewes and the Gentiles. vers 9. If hee made no difference betwéene them, if he also iusti∣fie the Gentiles by faith in Christ, euen then againe shall the Gentiles be founde iust by Christ: If they be iust, then also do they reioyce in the Lorde, they reioyce in SION: They haue aswel their dwel¦ling place as the Iewes the flesh of Abra∣ham haue in SION: out of which citie no man is excluded but by that incredu∣litie which with the vnfaithfull Iewes he reiecteth, because they embraced not Ie∣sus Christ the king of SION, Whome the Father himselfe (as Dauid saith) ap∣pointedPsal. 2. ruler ouer Syon his holy hill: And placed him as the head of the Gen∣tiles.Psal. 17. Therefore the dwelling place of all which truely reioyce, (that is to say of Christians) is in SION, namely the Church of Christe: concerning which ioy of y• Christians, the Prophet Esay thus Prophecyeth in the 51. Chapiter. Ioye and gladnesse shal be founde in SION, thanksgiuing & the voice of praise. ver. 3. And the redeemed of the Lorde shall re∣turne and come with ioy vnto Sion, and uerlasting ioy shall be vpon their heades
they shall obtaine ioy and gladnesse, and sorrow and mourning shal flee away. ver. 11. I euen I am he that comfort you, Who art thou, that thou shouldest feare a mor∣tall man, and the son of man which shall be as withered grasse. ver. 12. Which true and perfite ioy (neuer to bee taken away from vs. Ioh. 16.) Christ our Lord & God (who be blessed for euer) vouchsafe to giue vs heereby true faith in him, and in the world to come by the cleare and manifest beholding of him. Amen. They that impugne our Catholique faith, which we haue confessed sixe yéeres agone, in a very great assembly before y•he Church neither at Seuen∣hilled , nor, yet a  Mo∣rchy. Emperour & States of the Romane Em∣pyre at Augusta, & will haue themselues accounted onely Catholique, doe tye the Church to the Seuenhilled Babilon, and so describe her, that she may be seene and pr¦ceiued with our very eyes, as if indeede shée were a worldly Monarchy, wherein a visible heade and Uicar generall might beare rule: They (I say) with their finger point at that Spirituall SION. But the Scripture both heere in this place and elsewhere often ynough teacheth, that the Head, the builder and King of that Sion
is Spiritual, and the City Spirituall, not earthly, also the Citizens of that glorious Citie to bée newe creatures in Christ re∣ioysing, singing and leaping for ioy, not openly ryding on stately stéedes, in kings Pallaces, & al prodigalitie of this world, but in the Spirit: for, being saued throughTitus. cap. 2. hope (as S. Peter saith) with inward ioy, they looke for that blessed hope and ap∣pearance of the glorie of the great God, and our Sauiour Iesus Christ in the day of our ful redemption. But in the meane time, they wéepe & lament in this world: Contrariwise the world reioyceth and is glad. And as Christ saith, in the worlde they Finde affliction, but in themseluesIoh. 16. ver. 33 peace, through Christ the ouercommer of the worlde. For, if a man beholde the Church according to her outward shewe, shée shall not beséeme the dwelling place of them which reioice, but a lothsome pri∣son of sorrowfull and afflicted persons. Therefore the blessings of that spirituall habitation do excéede all vnderstandings, and are not perceiued with fleshly eyes: And the vngodly ones in this worlde ac not worthy to sée no not euen the least ci∣tizē of this holy City▪ ado
her true blessinges which wée haue in Christ. The Worlde séeth the outwarde man which is corrupted, but hée séeth not the heauenly Ierusalem with her citizens borne a newe of the Spirite. The rich glutton in Luke. 16. seeth, Lazarus a begger, full of sores, and fami∣shed with hunger at his gate: but I pray you what carnall eye sight, yea, what hu∣mane reason woulde knowe so wretched and abiect a person in outward shewe to be the beloued childe of God to raigne wt Christ, and whom the verye AngelicallChristians lie couered with figures of ca∣lamitie. Spirits did attende vppon? with such fi∣gures of calamity lye Christians couered in this worlde. The Apostles those most excellent and noble Princes in Christes kingdome, how afflicted were they in the kingdome of this worlde? They séemed outwardly the vylest persons of all men, they were buffited wt blowes, they wan∣dered vncertaine coasts, they were railed on & became as the most lothsome things of the worlde. Where (I pray you) were then the eyes which could perceiue such & so great compéeres of the heauenly king∣dome? finally how vnknown was Christ
vnto the children of this world, in y• Sy∣nagogue of his people? For as it is saide by Peter, if carnall eyes could haue seene and known the Lord of glorie, the Iewes would not haue crucified him. And in the 32. Psal. he telleth vs what maner of per∣son he was reputed in the worlde. I am aPsal. 22. ver.  worme (saith hee) and no man, a reproch of men, and the outcast of the people, all they which see mee, haue laughed mee to scorne. vers. 6. This one thing therfore let vs be care full of, That we may still continue in the Citie of God, (euen by faith in Christ) let vs redily embrace affliction, as the com∣panion of the Gospel and for the name of Christ as the heauenly watchword and badge of his kingdome, let vs not estéeme or passe any thing, what blinde iudge∣ments of this worlde are giuen vpon vs, but let the determination of ye holy Ghost touching vs in this Psalme be onely set before our eyes. videliz. The Lorde lo∣ueth the gates of SION: what shal the most pestilent enuie of the enimies then hurt vs, which cryeth that wee are gone backe from God, and from his Church? The Lorde himselfe
wherein wee are, although then in the sight of the Children of this worlde shee séeme outwardly vile and a dongeon, yet is she an excellent and impregnable city. The Aduersaries reproch vs wt errors, but heare, they that acknowledge Christ doe wel vnderstand, that all fountaines of Gods graces do flow in this City of God Therefore euen then also doth the sounde doctrine of Christ, a right and true faith, yea good workes indeede and studie after godlines here hence flowe forth likewise. yet doubtles faith is far more lukewarm in vs thē is expedient. But we must pray vnto the Lord, & that instantly, that what he hath mercifully begun in vs he would make perfit the same. That we séeme not to haue receiued in vain so great grace of God in our Sion, and that the most glori∣ous name of Christ be not for our sakes blasphemed: According to Peters admoni∣tion therfore. Let vs abstaine from fleshly1. Pet. 2. ver. 11. lusts which striue against the Soule, and as straungers and Pilgrims in this world, (whose glory passeth away) let vs séeke wt earnest desire after a future and perma∣nent City. Wherein (as S. Iohn saith) There shalbe no more death▪ nor mour∣ning
nor crying, nor sorow, but God shal wipe away in her all teares from the eyes of his true beleeuers. Apoc. 21. vers. 4. Let the Children of this worlde takeThe Authors comfortable Conclusion to the elect of God. their delightes in earthly Cities, and fill their mindes with pleasures which shall soone haue an ende, for they shalbe consu∣med from of y• earth▪ which now they vn∣iustly occupie and enioy: Let vs (whomEphe. ver. 1. God hath called to the rich glory of hea∣uenly inheritance) seeke for things which are aboue. Where Christ our king andColos. 3. ver. 1▪ high Prieste sitteth at the right hande of God. Which the same King of glory vouchsafe to accomplish & performe: For into this City (concerning which so glo∣rious things are spoken) except we beere in this life do enter by Faith, we shal not possesse the same in Deede, when this world shall haue an end: which without doubt shall not long endure. FINIS. Vrbanus Regius. Psal. 135. Praised be the Lorde out of SION, which dwelleth in Ierusalem: Praise ye the Lord. vers. 6. R. R.
