21775 99851923 17218
THE LOVE AND ARMES OF THE GREEKE PRINCES. OR, THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS. Written in French by Monsieur Verdere, And Translated for the Right Honourable, Philip, Earle of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlaine to his Majesty. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Walkley, and ae to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the flying Horse, neere Yorke House, 1640.
CHAP. I. The wonder that ensued the great battell of Aleppo. THe night comming on, with a lamentable griefe in those which were the victors, for the losse of so many Princes, by the valour of whom, all Christendome was so much glorified: and with an extreame amazement of all the Pa∣gans to see such a flaughter of so many Kings, Gyants, and Knights, who had gathered themselves together for the ru∣ine of the Christian Empire. Amadis of Greece unwilling to expose his souldiers to the hazard of the darknesse of the night, commanded the retreat to be sounded; whereupon fires were made in every part of the campe, good Courts of Guard were setled, and the charge of the watch being commit∣ted to the trust of the King Melinda, and him of the Ile of Magera, (as those which wee lesse tyred than the rest) all those Princes whom the heavens had preserved from the fury of the sword, rendred themselves at the Tent of the Emperour Amadis of Greece: who unable to take the care of Councell upon him, by reason of the multitude of his wounds, remitted it wholly to the wisedome of Prince Florisell, of Niquea his sonne; he desiring in some sort to mittigate the sorrow he was in for the losse of his insmen, by the utter ruine of the Pagans, determined no longer to deferre his revenge, and therefore commanded that Don Rogell should march by the first breake of day, with the Army of the King Melinda, and Olidor his brother, which consisted of thirty thousand horse, for that purpose. And finding that of so infinite a number of people, which had fol∣lowed the Christian Colours, there remained onley 36000. men; he appointed 4000. horse, & 12000. foot for the guard of the camp, and securing the person of the Emperour Amadis of Greece. Among which was the valiant Alastaxerea, Ci∣linda, wife to Dorigell, of the fortunate Ilands, Gelodan, King of Moldavia, Atletta his wife, the Kings of Sardamira and Catay, with their wives, resolving to passe on with the Emperour Sheramond, the fayre Salvagesse, Dorigell, the two Ceno∣phales, Ginldan, Amanio, d'Astro, Silvan, Liseard King of Licaonia, Filadard, Prince of Poland, Parmenian of Cyprus, Ladazan of Numidia, Garmanti the Duke of Laiazga, Anaxandr, Flrdin his brother, and twenty thousand horse, which remained of so great a slaughter. Things thus ordered, every man was a∣bout to withdraw to his Tent to repose himselfe, when as a fearefull noyse was heard in the middle region of the ayre, the claps of thunder did so hideously rore, flashes of lightning followed one another so close, and the windes contested with such violence, that all men beleeved the world was going to returne into the first confusion of its chaos. The Princes asonished with the strangenesse hereof, be∣holding one another, expected the issue of this tempest: and beleeved already that the beavens having care of their quiet, did meane to take them to themselves, that they might not over-live the anguish of the losse of so many Princes their dearest friends. But after a while the wides we laid, the noyse ceased, and the
ayre before full of lightning flashes, grew so blacke, that all the fires which they had kindled in the campe, to cheare and refresh the souldiers, being extinguished in an instant, they could not discerne at all what the matter was. This second ac∣cident would have made them tremble, if their hearts had been capable of feare: but having alwayes stood firme before the appearance of the greatest dangers, they remained with a couragious resolution to endure what God should please to lay upon them. This darkenesse having endured three or foure houres, the day drew on, with an universall amazement of them all. For in the midst of the field where the battell had beene found, they saw a building erected of a strange fa∣brique. The forme thereof was round, divided by sixty five towers of christall, which altogether did make a Hall of a portentuous greatnesse. Into it there was a passage by one onely gate, before the which stood two great Lyons of brasse, who seemed as if they had beene there placed to teare in pieces such as should of∣fer to come neere it. Two columnes were fixed about ten paces from them, on either side one, whereof each had a Table hanging on it, in which these words were written. The Prophecie. The glory of all humane knowledge shall never be knowne, untill the new Lyons shall with their roring, fill the darkesome Forrest: then shall all the Crowes gather themselves together to possesse the neasts of the sleeping Eagles; the earth shall open it selfe to restore the treasure which it keepeth hidden, and the teares shed for a losse not befallen, shall be converted into joy. The other spake thus. When the dead shall awake to joyne themselves with the living, then shall valour be at her height, and beauty in the supreamest poynt of her glory. These Princes as much ravished to see that great field cleared of a million of bodies, which had beene slaine there the day before, as with the rarity of the worke, did instantly draw neere to the columnes, read these Prophecies, and pas∣sing on to the Gate, saw in the first towre, the great King Amadis of Gaule, ar∣med at all peeces, except his hands, upon one of which he rested his head, sitting in a chayre, in the posture as of one asleepe: Esplandian was in the opposite tower over against him on the other side of the Gate, but not in a like posture to his fathers, for he was laid along, with his armes acrosse, on the hilt of his sword, the point whereof reached to his feet: the Emperour Lisward was in the third tower, in the same fashion as his father; and Don Silves de la Silve, in the fourth seated as Amadis of Gaule. Vpon the same side, and in the same manner, were A∣gesilan, Amadis d' Astre, Astrapole, Fortunian, Anaxartes, Penthasilea, Argantes, Florarlan, Lucencio, Falanges, d' Astre, Arlantog Arlanges of Spaine his sonne, Lu∣cidamon of Boetia, Florenio Emperour of Rome, Filisul de Montaspin, Zain, Don Flores of Greece, Filin, Artaure, and Lindamart: and on the other side laid along as Esplandian was, were Galaor, Lucidor, the Kings of Mesopotamia, and of Tra∣ramata, Brimart of Syria, Don Brunco de bonne mer, the two Gyants sonnes of Pla∣nacoldo, Olrius of Spaine, Farron the second sonne of Amadis of Gaule; the kings of Corinthe, of Magadena, and of Paloman, the Prince of Palomar his sonne, Agrayes, the Kings of Mont Libanus, of oliemia, Galatia, Pantapolis, and of the Garamantes, Guillan the Penfif, Don Galdes of Rhodes, Vatliades, Circi of
Ireland, the gyant Girafer, Stilpon, Talanque, Don Frisas of Lusitania, Faenix of Corinthe, Albion of Bugia, Astibell of Mesopotamia, Brimart of Syria, Garinter King of Dacia, Dinerpio, Emperour of Rome, Florestan his sonne, Brian of Mo∣niasta, Galvanes, sonne of Agrayes, Pintiquinestro, and Calafio, who fill'd the towres that compassed the whole body of the edifice. This object renewed their griefe, and drew from them some sighes: but being certaine of their loss, and suf∣ficiently generous to beare all the blowes of fortune, they resolved to shew the least resentment thereof that was possible. Neverthelesse, desirous to see what was within the Hall, Florisull drew to the gate, with his sword in his hand, and knocked at it with the pommell, but was deceived in his hope, for no word of an∣swer was returned him, and therefore was constrained to retire himselfe, with some discontent, for having effected so little in his attempt. Following his ex∣ample, Don Rogel advanced, but being no more fortunate therein than his father, he sheathed his sword, and made roome for all those yong Princes, who speeding no better, were upon the point of quitting the place: when they saw the excellent  of Greece approach, that notwithstanding the advice of his Physitians, forbidding him to go abroad, would not excuse himselfe from the labour of this adventure, no lose the contentment of the honour which out of it  hoped to gaine. This brave Prince, despising the greatnesse of his wounds, and marching with the same courage that he ever carried in the most difficult enter prises of his youth, et his hand bravely to his sword, and being come close to the gate, raised his ame to have knocked, but seeing that it ope∣ned of it selfe, he presently  without any resistance. As soone as he was in, the gt closed , with such a trembling of the earth, that all these Prin∣ces, more  then they were before, could not keepe themselves from falling downe. Neverthelesse thr amazement continuing not long, they rose up againe much grieved th they knew not whether that clap of thunder were a signe of that great Emperours death, or that his entring into that Hall were for the preservation of his life. See (said Florisull) how fortune makes her selfe sport with crossing us thus, but she must not prevaile. We are to be victorious over her malice: and make her bend under the power of our vertue. Let us then pursue our former resolution: give che to our enemies, and not pardon their insolence. They are so dejected, as they will hardly be able to raise themselves againe. At these words, all men dispos'd themselves to follow their colours: when as a Dam∣sell appeared, who making her addresse to Don Florisull, delivered him a paper which she had in her hand, and without expecting any answer, immediatly tur∣ned bridle and departed. Th  at this  others, but desiring to know what this letter contained, they presently environed Florisull, who read these words aloud unto them. To the Greeke Princes: I doe not write to you with a purpose to raise up your spirits, nor to comfort you in your affliction: for∣tune and your verte have already . But to advertise you that the heaven take care of your quiet, by the preservation of a treasure of infi∣nite value, which you shall one day finde with so much contentment, that you shall not remember your passed . If I had liberty to speake more free∣ly, I would adde to your joy,  power being restrained within these onely words, which I nw speake: you shall i you please malie use of them to keep you from afflicting youselve too . In the meane time doe not prosecute the designe you ▪ The  more compleat revenge is not yet come, and the sa will have i , to mae it a more memorable day. Keepe that which you have  and  things to time. It is by this
prudence that you must live, and I testifie the desire which I have to doe you ser∣vice. Alcander. This Letter held the Prince a while in suspence, for the name being unknown to them, they were not sure that this advice was without some practise. Our ene∣mies (said Dorigell) have invented this tricke to retard our revenge, and having no more strength to resist us, they flye to their tricks; let us follow our fortune. She prospers such as lay hold of occasions, & they that make themselves unwor∣thy of her favours, never encounter them according to their desires. Speaking thus, he had almost perswaded all those Lords to neglect the counsell that was given them, and to pursue the fortune of their victory: but Florisell, who was en∣dued with no lesse prudence than valour, fairely demonstrating that with preci∣pitation they might too much indanger themselves, and that matters were to be weighed with more deliberation, staid the fury of these Princes. It is true (said he) that we may with reason suspect this counsell, since we know not him that gives it. But when I consider this tombe wherein all our ancestors doe now re∣pose with so much glory, I cannot thinke there is any deceit intended against us. Where are the bodies of so many Pagan Kings, and what honour is done them in their obsequies? I see nothing that can be to their advantage, and all these wonders serve but to increase our greatnesse. The advice that is given us, is very good: let us I beseech you follow it. And not busying our thoughts with the conquest of Pagan Empires, let us wisely preserve those estates which heaven hath bestowed upon us. For mine owne part I am resolved to take into my care the governement of Greece, my sister Alastaxeree shall command in Trebisond, till the destinies doe restore us the Emperour my Lord and Father: my sonne shall be resident in Persia, and Spheramond shall maintaine the authority that he hath among the Parthians; the rest of you (my Lords) shall every one retire into the Province, which either his birth or valour hath acquired him. The opinion of this judicious Prince being well approved of, they left twenty thousand men with the Kings Anaxander and Floradin, to keepe the kingdomes lately conque∣red in awe, fifteene thousand with Ginoldan and Amano D. Astre; and the re∣mainder being otherwise divided, Florisell set forth for Constantinople, Ala∣straxeree for Trebifond, Don Rogell for Persia, Dorigell for the fortunate Iland, Melinde and Olidor for their kingdomes, Gulodan for Moldavia, Fladard for Po∣land, Gadard for Hungary, and the rest in generall, as either their affaires or their affections drew them. CHAP. II. Who Alcander was, his inchanting Don Belianis of Greece, the Knight of the Sunne, King Amadis, and the bravest Knights of their time. IT is most necessary for the understanding of this our history, that you should know who this Alcander was, of whom we spake be∣fore, for that thereupon depends one of the foundations of our worke: he came into the world in the time of Don Belianis, Empe∣rour of Greece, and from his childehood gave himselfe to the knowledge of letters, particularly to the secrets of Magicke, but with such ear∣nestnesse of affection, that having bestowed certaine yeares therein, he became
so perfect an Artist, as he surpassed all those that had travelled in those studies before him, aswell as those that came after him: yet was it not his purpose to make use thereof, as many doe, to the hurt or ruine of any, but for the glory of Christendome, which he so tooke to heart, that all his actions had no other ayme, but the preservation of those, whose worth was able to mayntayne it at the due heigth, as you may well judge by the sequele of this History. Seeing then that Don Belianis, a Prince as vertuous and valiant as could be named, was somewhat enfeebled by the battell that he had fought before Constantinople, with Perineo, Soldan of Persia, the most valiant of all the Pagans that then li∣ved, the Empresse of Almayne, Claristea, who might also bee termed the mir∣rour of Armes, and Ariobarcan Emperour of Tartary, he wrought so powerful∣ly upon the mindes of that brave Pagan, and of that valorous Lady, as admi∣ring the vertue of so gallant a man, they determined to turne Christians, and become his friends, upon condition, that the Persian should marry the Infanta of Greece, named Sirenna: which was accomplished presently after his Bap∣tisme. In which holy Sacrament he was accompanied with Salinterne, without Farre, his sonne, and the bastard of Don Belianis, Polistor of Nubia, and Polistea de la Selva, whom he had by the Queene of the Garamantes, and had followed the Pagan colours before they knew Don Belianis for their Father. This peace and this marriage cheered all Greece, and particularly our Alcander, who then thought it well and sufficiently supported. But being continually carefull for the quiet of these Princes, he had one day a curious desire to understand what good fortune was to attend their designes and life; withdrawing therefore himselfe from all resort of company, hee began to make his ordinary invoca∣tions, and found onely by the motion and aspect of the starres, that the house of Greece was to suffer a totall ruine; and that these Princes were threatned with an eminent death. The knowledge heereof did mightily afflict him; but carrying a greater minde then to yeeld to this calamity, hee made new conju∣rations: the spirits were invoked, and all the powers of Hell were summoned to appeare: neverthelesse he saw nothing but signes of death, and presages of misfortune. Let the starres, sayd hee, bee froward, let all the Divels in Hell conspire together, to subvert the Empire of the Christians, yet will I change their influences, and overturne their designes. For having sometimes restored life to those which breathed no more, I may be permitted to preserve such as are yet in the world. Thus speaking, hee enfolded himselfe in a cloud, and transported himselfe into the dangerous forrests of the great kingdom of Mar∣tan, neere to the Empire of Mexico, where long before he had built a Castle of wondrous workmanship. But doubting that the charms which he had set upon it, were not powerfull enough for the great purpose he had in hand, hee em∣ploied all his skill, which surpassed that of all other men, layd such strong en∣chantments upon three divisions of lodgings, that hee had built in a triangular forme, as those which should be inclosed therein, should not grow old, or bee impayred in any sort whatsoever; yet not desiring that this his worke should last till the end of the world; for hee well foresaw that the necessity of Chri∣stendome, would one day oblige him to suffer it to be dissolved, ordayned that the enchantment should be defeated by the valour of sixe the bravest Knights, accompanied with as many the fayrest Ladyes of the world. Thinking then that he had done enough, hee presently transported himselfe to Constantino∣ple: and having talked a while in private with Don Belianis, hee desired him to goe into his Chariot, and with him his Sonne Belforan, Fortiman of Greece,
his grandchilde Polistor of Nubia, Polistea de la Selva, Policentes sonne to Perineo, Don Clarinell Don Astrides his sonne, Perineo, Furibond the brave Giant, Salin∣tern without feare, Hermiliana, the Amazon, wife to Don Clarinel, Florisbella, wife to Don Belanis, the Princesse Belianisa, wife to Belforan, Sirenna wife to Pe∣rineo, and the fayre Bergeline her daughter. This done, having touched the Griffons with a rod that he had in his hand, they cut the ayre, with incredible swiftnesse, and carried him to the house, which hee would have called by the name of the Castle of Treasure. Where with some teares, hee enclosed these Princes in one quarter of the Lodgings, assuring them that they should bee en∣larged after certayne ages, and at such time as Christendome should have ex∣treame need of their assistance. These things being done, his minde might wel have beene contented, but the exceeding care that he had to effect his designes, not suffering him to be quiet, hee againe turned over his bookes: And finding, that before the time these Princes should be disinchanted, certayne most excel∣lent Knights should be borne, which yet should not arrive to the perfection necessary for the putting an end to his enchantments, hee resolved also to pre∣serve them in the same Castle with the Emperour Don Belianis. For which cause therefore, as soone as the incomparable warriour, the Knight of the Sun was borne, he was infinitely carefull of his safety, assisted him with his Arte without his privity, and knowing that after certayne yeeres, hee was threatned with a disastrous end, by the practise of some traytors, who should murther him one night in his bed, he carried him also away, as he had done Don Belia∣nis, and with him all the principall Knights of his Court, who were to run no lesse hazard; and placing them in the second division of the lodgings, hee re∣served them for that furious encounter, wherein the glory of all Christen∣dome, or the ruine of the Pagans was to be disputed. The names of those en∣chanted with him, were, his sonne Claridiano of the Spheare, Rosiclere, Clara∣mant, Poliphebo, Don Eleno of Dacia, Rosabell sonne to Rosiclere, Clarabel bastard to Rosabel, and Leobant his brother, Besson, Bramidor the brave Giant, the Em∣presse Claridiana, and the Princesse Olivia, wife to Rosicleere. Their life was pleasant, and the contentment of Alcander infinite. For as often as hee consi∣dered, that Christendome should one day triumph over her enemies, by his as∣sistance, he esteemed himselfe blessed, to be so favoured by heaven, and deter∣mining not to neglect such grace hee persevered in his good desire, whence it came that after certayne ages were past, being in the castle of Treasure, he un∣derstood the lamentable losse, which the Christians were to sustayne, and the death of those great Monarchs, Amadis of Gaule and of Greece, with many o∣thers of their blood. Which, for the reasons before alledged, being desirous to remedy, hee transported himselfe, the same night as that great battell was fought in the fields of the Soldan of Aleppo, to the place where so many bo∣dies lay extended; gave an honourable sepulture to those Christian Princes which were dead, as you have heard in the first Chapter; and carryed away those, in whom he found any hope of life, to that wonderfull Castle, appoin∣ting them the third division of lodgings; the names of whom were; The great King Amadis of Gaule, Amadis of Greece, enchanted as you have heard, Don Silves de la Selva, Agesilan, Amadis d' Astre, Astropolo, Fortiman, Anaxartes, Penthesilea, Argantes, Florartan, Lucentio, Falanges d' Astre, Arlantes, his sonne Arlanges of Spayne, Lucidamor of Boetia, Floreni Emperour of Rome, Fili∣sel of Montespin, Zayr, Flores of Greece, second sonne to Esplandian, Filon King of Sibila, Artaur his Brother, King of Mount Libanus, and Lindamart
of Rhodes. But because there may arise a doubt in this Discourse, for that all these which I now have named, were inclosed in the Monument, that ap∣peared in the field of the battell after the darkenesse was past, the Reader may remember, if he please, that these, of whom I now speake, were in a posture there, diering from theirs, who were fully and really dead; and that the wise man did so order it, to comfort those great Knights, after so heavy a losse. These Princes then being enchanted with Don Belianis, and the Knight of the Sunne, though they knew it not, Alcander, who would not doe a curtesie to halfes, first healed them of their wounds. And then desiring, they should not be lesse happy then the rest, presented them a little while after, with some of the Princesses they loved, whom he had brought from Constantinople, to the extreame discontent of those that remayned be∣hinde. There was the Queene Oriana, the Empresse Niquea, delivered not long before of a sonne, whose birth was celebrated by an infinity of fires appearing in the ayre; and whom at his Baptisme shee named Amadis of Trebisond, Diana, Axiana, the Princesse Oriana, wife of Anaxartes, Cleosila, Sestiliana, Radiana, Oristila, Anaxarea, Theodorina, Belisaura, Claire estoille, Sclarimena, and Timbria. Having then prepared soveraigne baths for them, made with a million of rare simples, gathered at such time as they were in most vertue, he bathed them eight dayes together; at the end whereof King Amadis and his wife seemed to bee but forty yeeres old; and every man as fresh and lovely, as they were at that age; the Emperour Amadis of Greece, and the Princesse Niquea, but thirty five: Don Silves Agesilan, and the rest, not above thirty. This done, he carried them all into a fayre chamber, and thus spake unto them: Mighty Princes, you perceive by the helpe that you have already received at my hands, the desire I have to doe you service: I will not there∣fore excuse my selfe unto you, for holding you restrayned in this maner, since I have no other end for it, but the augmentation of your glory: All things must have their course, and the malignant influences of the starres, must have time to passe over. The day will come, when you will see your off-spring with more contentment then ever; expect it with so much the more patience. In the meane time I will go from hence to take care for the affayres of those which concerne you neerely. Saying thus, hee went out of the doore, which shut of it selfe with a strange violence, leaving those Princes and Princesses so inchanted, as they did not remember any thing without that place whatsoever. CHAP. III. Most of the Prin of Greece die: Alcander goes to visit the wise Alquif and Urganda. THE newes of the death of so many Kings, Princes, and Em∣perours, and the carrying away of the Queene Oriana, with the rest, which were enchanted in the Castle of Treasure, was the cause of so much griefe to those Ladyes that remay∣ned at Constantinople, expecting what would be the issue of
that warre, as not able to withstand the violence thereof, they yeelded to the necessity of death, leaving Christendome a world of sorrow for so great a losse. The Empresse Leonine was the first that payd that tribute of nature, but followed so close by the yong Princesse of Sardamyra, the wife of Sistra, that the funerals of the one served also for the other. After them died al∣most at the same time, the Empresse Arbra, Briolania, the Queene of France wife to Lucidor, the Queene of Traramate and Mesopotamia, Melicia wife to Bruneo of the good Sea, Lardenia, Laciana, Gricelarie, Olinde, the Queenes of Corinth, Saba, Bohemia, the wife of Guillan the pensive, the Queenes of the Garamantes, of Pentapoly, Galacia and Ireland, the wives of Girafer, of Vail∣lades, of Don Frisus of Lusitania, the Queene of Dacia, the Empresse Brisen∣ne, Darayde Queene of Cores, the wife of Stilpon, and the Queene of Rhodes: who were all interred in the Emperours great Chapell, with so many com∣playnts and teares, that nothing was heard in any part of the City but cries and lamentatios. Now whilest the ceremonies of so many obsequies were performing, Alcander, who had no care more pressing, then the preservati∣on of those Princes, went in his Chariot of the Griffons, to the unknowne Island, whre the wise Alquif was, with Vrganda, Zirzea, and Zirenna; but not desiring to present himselfe unto them without some demonstration of his skill, he in a moment raysed such horrible flashes of lightning in the aire, so great an earthquake, as those reverend old folkes seeing so furious a tem∣pest beyond the order of nature, beleeved that those thunders were presa∣ges of their deaths. So that disposing themselves to seeke the mercy of hea∣ven, which never refuseth grace to us, when with humility we seeke it, they fell upon the earth, and lifting up their eyes they met with a new terrour when as they espied the fearefull Chariot in which Alcander appeared, sea∣ted with such a majesty, that if they had not beene instructed by the light of fayth, that one only God was to be acknowledged, they had adored him: never so much as dreaming that it was done by art Magicke, or that this in∣counter could proceed from the skill of any mortall man. For beleeving that none in the world was more expert in that art then they, they could ne∣ver imagine that any man could finde them out in their Island, unlesse they pleased to permit it. Alcander reading their amazement in their lookes and motions, would not keepe them any longer in payne: Most venerable persons, sayd he, be not dismayd to see me heere at this present, and in this maner: That almighty God who hath endued you with the knowledge of things above nature for the good of his people, hath imparted to mee the same favours which he hath bestowed upon you, and made me no lesse zea∣lous of his glory and service: I am not come hither now to trouble you, as you imagine, but indeed to conferre with you about certayne things, which shall be necessary for the welfare of the Princes of Greece, whose ver∣tue hath begotten such an affection in me towards them, as I will not enter∣tayne a thought but for the augmentation of their glory. I know that you have alwayes infinitely loved them; that your assistance was never wanting to them; and that without your ayd they could not so easily have endured those labours they have passed thorow. Wherefore I will endevour to re∣compence you for it; imparting to you certayne secrets, that as yet are not come to your knowledge, and that I know you will not a little esteeme: But because your preservation is no lesse deare to me then their quiet, I doe de∣sire you all to goe with me to a Palace that I have, whither wee will carry
with us your Bookes, and such instruments as are fit for those of our pro∣fession; to the end, that my sabour being added to your learning, wee may the more easily finde out what shall most conduce to our designe. I cannot doubt but you may have some cause to feare the undertaking of this voyage in the company of a man, whom you never heard spoken of, and that you may finde reason to decline it in the incommodity of your age; but the good service I have done to Christendome, which hath not undergone so great a losse as you beleeve, and that also I intend to you in your owne par∣ticular, may oblige you not to suspect any malice in me: I love vertue too well to be a traytor, and your lives are with mee no lesse considerable then mine owne. Resolve with your selves then, my deare friends, and make no difficulty in following my advice: Time will make you know mee better, and experience; assure you of my zeale to that, which concernes the affaire I have in hand. How pleasing is rest after labour, and how sweet is assu∣rance after feare? These good folkes, who expected nothing lesse then so gentle a language, and that made no great account of their lives, judging by Alcanders courage, that he had no bad disposition, gave him as many thanks as the favour he did in visiting them seemed great. It is most true, sayd Al∣quif, that we would never have thought any other could have outgone us in the knowledge of the secrets of Magicke. But your comming hither hath freed us of that error: for this our Island being indivisible to all the world, and so easily discovered by you, our selves also in a maner bereft of our judgement in beholding you, we cannot doubt but your knowledge is farre beyond ours. Wherefore without any maner of distrust of you, wee doe withall acknowledgement accept the honour of your company, and the of∣fer that you make of acquainting us with such secrets, as have beene hither∣to concealed from us. And to testifie unto you that I speake ingenuously and freely, I protest henceforth to depend wholly upon you, so that if wee doe heereafter undertake any thing, it shall not bee but by your advice: and if our weake indevours may be of use to the greatnesse of your intentions, we will joine them to yours, without expecting of any part in the glory of your actions, but that which shall redound from having been your servants. Let us goe then, when you please, wee will carry with us what shall bee re∣quisite; and if you thinke good, leave nothing behinde us in this Island. No, no, answered Alcander, that shall not need: The best of your bookes will be sufficient. Vrganda then having made up a bundle of them, they all went into the Chariot of the Griffons, that is to say, Alquif, Vrganda, Zir∣za, Zirenna, Alquifa, and the yong Cassandra, who afterwards by the ayde of Alcander, became so perfect in that art, as she much excelled her parents. The beasts having their load, began to cut the ayre with an incredible swift∣nesse, and in a little time arrived at the Castle of Treasure, which appeared to these Magicians so magnificent, that they had never seene building equal to it. As soone as they were come thither, Alcander not to lose time, desired them to put off their clothes, and made them goe into those pretious baths, which hee had formerly prepared to restore the Princes of Greece to the most flourishing estate of their age; where after hee had kept them eyght dayes, the wrinkles which covered their faces, were cleane defaced; their limbes enfeebled by a troublesome old age, became firme; their backes bending under the weight of yeeres, were straightned; their hayre whited with time, changed colour; in briefe, they found themselves wholly altered
from what they were in the unknowne Island. Behold, sayd then this great Prince of Philosophers, the first favour I will doe to you, that to me seemes of no meane importance: But because wee are not assembled heere onely for our selves, let us take a little paynes, and see how wee may hinder the mischiefe which is yet to fall upon the house of Greece, by the losse of some certayne yong Princes, who are one day to be the strongest pillars of Christendome. I propound this unto you, though I thinke it unprofitable, for the ordinances of heaven are inevitable; howbeit our labour shall not bee without fruit; and though wee cannot keepe them from imprisonment, yet shall wee doe somewhat to helpe and preserve them among their ene∣mies. This sayd, they began to make their conjurations apart, which were not altogether unusefull, as you shall know by the sequel of this Discourse. That done, Alcander thought good to returne his friends to their Island, not discovering to them the enchantment of the Princes of Greece. And having desired them to watch as till then they had done, for the benefit of Christendome, hee went away, carrying Cassandra along with him, to shew her all the secrets of Magicke, and to render her perfect in that Art. CHAP. IV. The Adventures of the Greeke Princes returning into their Empires. FLorisel of Niquea, approoving of the wise Alcanders ad∣vice, did wholly desist from the purpose he had of ra∣vaging the estate of the Pagans, thereby to render his revenge the more memorable; and resolved by break of day to depart for Greece: ordering Alastraxerea to goe unto Trebisond, Don Rogell into Persia, Sphera∣mond into the Empire of Parthia, Lucendus into France, Dorigell into the Fortunate Islands, the King Gadart into the Island Megera, Anaxander, Florador, Melindo, Olidor, Ginoldan, Ama∣nio d'Astre, for their kingdomes, and the rest whither fortune called them. But fearing lest some new warre might breake foorth after his departure, he left the moiety of his troopes with those, whose Provinces were surroun∣ded with the Pagans estates, that they might not be surprised with any new garboyle, and also might preserve the Countreys they had gotten. Matters being thus disposed, they attended the next rising Sunne, which presented to them no lesse wonder then the day before had done: for that vast and stately edifice, wherein all those Kings, Princes, and Emperours, were en∣closed, appeared no more, nor was there any thing seene in the place there∣of, but onely the playne ground, as it was before the battell. This second losse had afflicted them, for they receyved no meane consolation in seeing their parents interred with so much glory, but straightway considered that this was some new device of that Magician, who had written unto them, they were no whit dismayed; and taking it for a good testimony of his love to them in that he had not left those bodies in the middest of so many ene∣mies, they prepared for their departure with the lesse griefe. The time then of their remoove being come, all those troopes began to march severall
wayes. For Spheramond, Dorigell, Sylvan, Amanio d'Astre, and the fayre Sa∣vage, tooke a way farre different from that, which the others had, determi∣ning to spend some time in seeking adventures abroad. The beauteous Sa∣vage seeing her self alone, renewed her sorrow for the losse of her husband, whilest Silvan travelled with no lesse discontent for that of his fayre Lici∣nia, of whose death he had heard; and that Spheramond, Amanio d'Astre, and Dorigell lamented so great a disaster, although the glorious death of their kinsmen did yeeld them some comfort. Having thus passed two or three dayes without meeting any adventure worthy their undertaking, Sphera∣mond about the time that the Sunne was in the middest of his course, felt himselfe so drowsie, that he was constrayned to lie downe to sleepe, com∣manding his Squire to let their horses graze. The extreame paines that be∣fore he had taken, and the delicacy of the place, made his rest so pleasing unto him, as he did not wake till night, nor would peradventure have done till the next day, if the noyse of a Chariot passing by him, had not made him to rise in all haste; he was about to have called his Squire for to bridle his horse, but the voyce of one that lamented, stayd him for to learne the cause thereof. Listening then attentively, and looking that way the voyce came, he saw a Chariot passe by him drawne with sixe great horses, wher∣in sate three dreadfull Giants, every one of them holding a Lady in his armes; two of the which seemed to be rather dead then alive; and the third was she that made those cries and lamentations which hee had heard. Iust Heaven, sayd she, will you not send some succour to these great though mi∣serable Princesses? Or will you permit them to remayne in the hands of these villayns, who questionlesse will without respect of their quality strive by force to robbe them of what is most deare unto them? O God! what a losse will Christendome receyve? And you, brave Princes, how much will it grieve you to heare of this disaster? I lament your misfortune asmuch as the death they are going to suffer. This voyce being lost in the ayre, left nodesse pity then anger in the minde of this Prince: For finding by this speech that they were Christians of eminent quality, and thinking also that he had beene acquaynted with the sound of that voyce, he was moved with an extreame desire to succour them: So calling his Squire, hee made his horse to be brought him; and quickly mounting upon him, he galloped the same way that he saw the Chariot take, hoping to reach those Giants in a little time, and to fight with them at any rate whatsoever. But the night was so darke, that not knowing which way he tooke, hee entred into a Forrest, where the first that he met with, was a reverend old man, holding a torch in his hand, who taking his horse by the bridle, sayde unto him: Valiant Prince, be not offended if I take the liberty to stay you at this present; For desiring your safety, as much as my owne welfare, I cannot let you passe without advertising you, that you are infallibly lost, if you obinately pur∣sue the designe you have in hand, and light upon those this night whom you now are following: The day will bee more fit for your purpose, then this darkenesse: and patience alone is that must procure you what you now so earnestly wish for: Enquire not what I am, nor why I meddle thus with youraffayres. It is not yet time that you should know mee, nor that you should thorowly understand my intentions, as I doe your thoughts. Onely alight, and goe into this Tent, that you see heere; and tarry for day light to finish your enterprise, which is of more importance then yet you con∣ceive.
I do not know, answered Spheramond, (somewhat wondring to meet that man in such a place, and at so unseasonable an howre) how you can bee obliged to wish and seeke my good, with so much demonstration of friend∣ship, since I doe not remember that ever I saw you before: But happen what may, I will gladly obey you, my necessity and the time also advising mee therunto: Thus speaking he alighted, leaving his horse with a little Dwarfe who was there as of purpose, and entred the Tent, which hee thought was the fayrest that ever he had seene. Without doubt, sayd hee then, you love me not a little, that have provided me so magnificent a lodging: for I did not expect to be so well accommodated to night: But beleeve it, you shall not find me ungratefull, if you please to make use of me. Saying so, he went to embrace this man, but he was no more to be seene: wherat he was some∣what amazed, yet supposing all this to bee done by inchantment, hee began to survey the Tent, and found in one of the corners of it, a Table covered with plenty of delicate meat, which so whetted his stomacke, that hee sate him downe to supper; where having well asswaged his hunger, hee walked about the Tent, and finding a bed ready made hee layd him downe upon it, and fell into so sound a sleepe, that the sunne was of a good height before he awaked; and then being much amazed to find himselfe armed with new and excellent Armes, his Squire snoring at his feet, and neyther Wood nor Tent to be seene, but a playne, so large as it could not limit his view: how∣beit his wonder ceasing by the remembrance of such like encounters, when as hee was a Knight errant, hee jogd his Squire to waken him. And having not forgotten the adventure that he met with the night before, nor the dis∣course of the old man, he quickly got to horse, and tooke the first way hee lighted upon, wherein he rode till Sunne setting, when as hee perceived a Castle before him garnished with twelve towres, so fayre and strong that it was impossible to better them: this curiosity inviting him to view this buil∣ding neerer hand he approached to it, and going about it he was so attentive in observing it, as hee could hardly give over. But seeing night now come on, he tooke the hammer of the gate, and knocked very hard: At the noyse whereof a Giant appeared upon the Battlements, who with a hoarse and dreadfull voyce sayd unto him: Withdraw thy selfe, wretched creature, and come not hither to seeke that which all men else are afrayd to find: the gate may not be opened this night, for so are wee commanded, what ever occasion shall fall out; but if thou wilt tarry till tomorrow, I will bee con∣tent to heare what thou hast to say: Therewith he retyred himselfe leaving Spheramond ill satisfied with that his arrogant behaviour. Neverthelesse, not being able to quit his longing to know what was within the Castle, hee fell off to certayne trees, that were not farre off from it: and commanding his Squire to discharge the part of a carefull Sentinell, with much adoe he fell on sleepe.
CHAP. V. What happened to the Princes Dorigell, Silvan, and Amanio d'Astre. DOrigell and Silvan having taken almost one and the same way entertayned themselves with divers thoughts; the one meditated upon the losse of his dearest halfe, and the other on the absence of the fayre Cilinda, his wife, to whom he had left the command of his troopes, and the government of his Kingdome. They were two dayes without lighting on any adventure, at the end whereof Dorigell entring into a great field met with a Dwarfe mounted upon the bravest horse that ever hee had seene: but him∣selfe so mishapen and ill favoured, that he wondered how nature could pro∣duce a rationall creature with so much deformity: He was about to questi∣on him concerning the occasion of his journey, but the Dwarfe prevented him: For drawing neere and saluting him in a more gracefull maner, then he expected, he sayd unto him; Knight, I marvell much to see you ride a∣lone through these Launds, which are commonly called The Fearfull, in re∣gard of the strange adventures which doe happen dayly, by reason of a Ca∣stle scituate in the middest of them, belonging to an old Sorceresse, who doth entrap all the Knights that passe this way, finding meanes to entice them to her house, where all their valour will not serve to free them from captivity, if they bee not slaine in fight. For to that end shee keepes there twelve Giants of a monstrous stature, and so strong withall, as they alone are able to defeat the mightiest Emperour of the World; You shall there∣fore, if you please, bend your course some other way, and not tempt For∣tune: For it is no lesse honour to eschew with discretion an unresistable danger, then being ingaged to fight couragiously. Dorigell more delighted with the discourse then with the person of this gallant, answered him, Thy counsell might indeed be usefull to me, if I had lesse respect to my honour, then my life; but doest thou not know that worthy Knights must never re∣cuile for any consideration of danger whatsoever: that glory is not to bee found but in the most difficult enterprises; and that victory is then most ho∣nourable, when it is purchased with bloud. I will therfore follow this way, since fortune hath put me into it: but yet before I part with you, I would entreat you to enforme me more particularly concerning this Castle; and why this Enchantresse doeth live there, to worke so much mischiefe to Knights that have not wrongd her. You could not, replyde hee, have ad∣dressed your selfe better then to me, at the least to be satisfied in your curio∣sity; For I doe belong to a man, who is no lesse a friend to brave Knights, then this woman their enemy, and one whose knowledge is asmuch as hers: She is sister to the King of the Frozen Islands, that was slaine in the late and memorable battell of Aleppo, where all the Pagan Kings ended their lives, except him of Pentapoly, who saved himselfe with sixe thousand men, which were under his command, for the guard of the Campe. The desire she hath alwayes had to ruine the Christians, causing her often to turne over her Ma∣gicall
bookes (in which she is very expert) she foresaw the generall defea∣ture of the Pagans, that should unite themselves for that warre; And for that reason would have diverted her brother from it, assuring him of his death, if he should bee present there: but hee preferring an honourable end before the ill report that otherwise hee should have incurred by absenting himselfe from thence, would needs make one in that expedition, and was there slaine, as I have related: which did so inrage this old Sorceresse, that she withdrew her selfe to these Launds, where by Enchantment she built this Castle: and for the guard thereof drew hither twelve of the mightiest Giants in the world; who, without regard to any lawes of Chivalry, do all of them commonly fall upon any one man that presents himselfe, if the first that encounters him be not able to defeat him: hoping to surprise in their passing this way some of those famous Knights of Greece, and with a thou∣sand tortures which she meanes to make them suffer, in some sort to mitigate the griefe she feeles for the losse of the King her brother. Iudge now, I pray you, whether my advice doe not concerne you, and whether it be not a good testimony of my love, in desiring you to retire out of these parts, where you can meet with nothing but mischiefe. Thou hast, sayd Dorigell, so fully satisfied me, that I will confesse my selfe much obliged unto thee for thy labour. Thy counsell I acknowledge for very good, but yet me thinks my reasons against it are much better: so that I am resolved to passe on, and see what the heavens have preordained for me. Speaking thus, he would have put his horse forward, but the Dwarfe taking him by the bridle sayd, Stay a little, Sir Knight, and permit me to speake a few words unto you; He that appointed me to be heere now, hath commanded me to present you with this horse, and the shield which you see hanging at my saddle bow, assuring you that you will have occasion to use them in an extreame necessity. Say∣ing so, he vanished away, leaving the horse and shield with Dorigell: who not more wondring, then pleased with so brave a present, gave his own to his Squire; and mounting upon his new horse, found him upon managing, so ready and light, that he liked him much better then he did before. Fol∣lowing then his way he rendred many thankes in his heart to him that had so deeply obliged him: but we will let him goe with this sense of the cur∣tesie done him, and return to Silvan amidst his sorrowfull meditations. This yong Knight perpetually thinking on his Licinia, whom death had untime∣ly ravisht from him, was even lost in the anguish of his minde, when as he heard the voyce of one that cried for helpe: whereupon he turned head, and galloping mainely away, he came to certain trees, to one of the which he saw a handsome woman bound with cords, and a yong Squire of a pro∣mising presence, that held his sword at her throat to make her confesse the truth of something which he desired to wring out of her. Verily, said he then, speaking to the Squire, Nature forgat her selfe when she framed you with any kind of perfection, since you have so little curtesie in you: Why do you so ill intreat one of those whom we are all bound to protect? with∣draw your self, I say, for beleeve it if you were a Knight, I would punish you for so great a villany. I would, answered the Squire without being at all dismayd, you had known the mischievous disposition of this woman, be∣fore you had been so mooved as you are; for then, Sir Knight, you would not so readily have engaged your selfe in her defence. I met with her this morning, and having conversed a while with her, I perceived by her cariage
that the little beauty Nature hath bestowed upon me, had wrought some al∣teration in her, wherewith I must confesse I was well enough pleased: Not that I found any thing in her which gave me the least satisfaction, but that from her love I gathered a testimony of some merit in my self: Our dis∣course at the first was ordinary, but as her passion transported her, she at length could not conceale her damnable intentions, but confessed freely to me that she was upon her way onely to wait for some Knight of quality, for to bring him to be butchered at the Castle of the Towers, where a thou∣sand sorts of cruelties are daily practised. I am a friend to vertue, and would with the hazard of my life preserve a worthy Knight, so that desiring to prevent her wicked purposes, I bound her as you see, with a resolution to make an end of her, which I had certainly done: for the point of my sword having forced her to confesse that her principall plot was upon the Princes of Greece, whose vertue all the world loves and admires: I determined to let her breath no longer then would serve to recommend her soule into the hands of heaven: you may now dispose of her as you please; but I advise you to looke well to your self, and consider that you shall be guilty of all the mischiefes that ever she shall heerafter commit, since you give her her life, which for her treacheries she justly deserves to lose. With that imme∣diately mounting on his horse he departed, leaving Silvan somewhat per∣plexed: for his reasons seemed so good, and with such appearance of truth, that he was about to passe on, and leave the Wench in the estate he found her: But being moved with her teares, and not able to perswade himselfe, that so fair a creature could be possessed with so much malice, he comman∣ded his Squire to unbind her: and forgetting the advice of him that but then parted from them, he began to comfort her, in stead of representing her vice unto her. I will never beleeve, said he unto her, that a woman e∣dued with so many beauties, can be so wicked as was but now reported unto me. Wherefore give over afflicting your self, and tell me truely the cause why this Squire entreated you in that fashion. Not to dissemble, said she, this cunning was but too well disguised. For according to the report of the base villaine made of me, you have reason not to trust me, and to believe that I am the falsest woman in the world: but the matter is quite otherwise then he hath delivered: for as soon as he saw me, he protested that he was extreamly enamored of me; and not being able (as he swore) to endure the violence of his passion, he besought me to receive him into my favour, and to afford him some more particular grace; which having refused him, he tooke me from my horse, and notwithstanding all my best resistance, bound me as you saw, threatning to kill me if I did not grant his desire, whereunto without doubt, I should at the last have yielded, not having courage enough to suffer death, if you had tarried any whit longer. Behold, noble Knight, the truth of this affair, which I have freely and simply delivered unto you, hoping that you will not do a curtesie to halfes, and leave me without assi∣stance in a Countrey so dangerous, where I travell without any acquain∣tance by the command of a Lady, that is ready to perish for the love of a brave Christian Knight whom I may not name: having so vowed at my de∣parture for the reputation of her that emploies me. What cannot the per∣swasions of a villanous woman effect? Silvan tasting this discourse far other∣wise then was for his behoofe, was so taken with the faire pretext of her reasons, that casting away the ill conceit he had of her, he determined to
accompany her till she were in some place of safety; So causing her to be set on horseback, he went along with her towards the dangerous Castle, where questionlesse he had been lost, if heaven that took a particular care of him, had not miraculously diverted the mischief that hung over his head. In the meane time, the gentle Amanio d'Astre followed somewhat a different way from that of Silvan, being no lesse busied with his unquiet thoughts: but he was driven out of his dumps by a Dwarf, who taking his horse by, the bridle turned him aside, and giving him a jerk with a wand, said; Knight, take this way, I pray you, and let not the night stay you: for your retard∣ment would be the cause of perpetuall sorrow to you. Saying so he passed on, leaving Amanio infinitely amazed with this speech, whereof he would gladly have known the meaning, but finding no means to be satisfied there∣in, for that the Dwarf was no longer appearing, he put on his horse with more haste then before; resolving not to discontinue his travell till he might see what the end of this adventure would be. CHAP. VI. The Emperour Spheramond being in extream danger, i relieved by certaine Knights. SPheramond, not able to rest by reason of the choler wher∣into the arrogance of the Giant had put him, rose as soon as he saw the day appear: and having made him∣self ready to fight, drew to the gate where he knock∣ed with more violence then he had done the evening before, which caused him that already had spoken to him to look out at a window, and with an audacious tone to say unto him: Wretched Knight, I thought that sleepe and the night would have setled thy brain; But since thou wilt needs lose thy selfe out of humour, do but stay till I am armed, and I will quickly cure thee of thy madnesse: with that he angerly clapt to the win∣dow, and shortly after sallied out with so furious a countenance, as had been sufficient to have affrighted any one lesse assured then this Prince, who see∣ing him come on horseback, with a Lance like a mast of a ship in his hand, took as much of the field as was necessary for his course, and encountred him with such fury as having pierced his shield, he made him with a dangerous wound in his side lie over the crupper of his horse: but his own fortune was not much better; for constrained he was to kisse the earth, as well as the Gi∣ant, not being able to bear the violence of that shock, yet remembring that he was not laid there to sleep, he quickly got up, and bravely laying hold on his sword he drew to the enemy; who found himself so astonished with his fall, as he was not able to stir: whereupon Spheramond was going to present his sword to his throat for to make him yield up the victory unto him; but hearing a great noise at the gate, he turned about his head, and instantly saw two other monsters, like him that he had overthrown, come running to∣wards him with their Cymitars in their hands, and threatning him with no lesse then the losse of his life: This object somewhat troubled him, but im∣mediatly
resolving himself, he sheathed his sword in the body of his first man, who was striving to get up, and straightway mounting on his horse the better and more easily to defend himself, he made towards them, but they were by that time so neer unto him, as he was constrained rather to think of warding their blows, then offending them. For the one of them laid upon his shield, and the other upon his cask with such violence, as but for the goodnesse of his new armes, his life had then been at its period: neverthe∣lesse he was not much dismaied, yet thinking that such violent incounters might at length be attended with death, he resolved to fight with judge∣ment, and to stand carefull upon his guard; making them therefore spend the most part of their blows in vain, he took so good choice of his times, as he often drew bloud of them, not giving a blow which pierced not the flesh, and put them in doubt of their lives: whereat they were so enraged, as in stead of striking on his armes, they hewed the stones in pieces, and filled the ground about them full of clefts. Whilest their fury did thus transport them, the Emperor not willing to let slip any occasion that presented it self, took his time when as one of them stooped to pull his Courtelasse out of the earth, whereinto he had sunk it three foot deep, and hit him with a reverse so just upon the neck, that he laid his great head at his feet; leaving his com∣panion much amazed to see himself alone, covered with bloud and wounds, and with little or no power to defend himself any longer, howbeit he reco∣vered some heart with the sight of three other Giants, that came out of the same Castle; who having encompast his enemy, began to charge him with such fury, that not being able to ward so many blows which bruised his bones, he thought that he must needs fall under such an oppressing violence, but resolving to sell his life at a dear rate, he defended himself with such courage, and charged them with such force, that he grievously wounded two of them, when as the third gave him so insupportable a blow on his hel∣met, that he laid him quite void of sense on the crupper of his horse, voiding bloud in abundance at his nose and ears. The Giant, proud of his fortune, followed him with his sword advanced for to finish the work, when as a great Knight arriving in the instant charged his Lance against him, and run∣ning it clean through his body tumbled him dead upon the ground. Sphera∣mond who while this was a doing, had some leisure a little to recover his spirits, seeing himself so opportunely seconded, clasped his sword fast in his hand, and with an infinit rage for having been reduced into that estate, he let it descend with such force upon the first Giant, that he divided his head in twaine, just at such time as he which came to his succour, having di∣spatched the other against whom he was opposed, taking a new Lance from his Squire, turnd himself gallantly to receive thirty Knights, that sallied out of the Castle, under the conduct of three dreadfull Giants, who made such a noise as the earth seemed to tremble under them. The courage of these Knights encreasing with the difficulty of enterprises, Spheramond carri∣ed with extraordinard fury addressed himself to one of the Giants, and dis∣charged a blow upon his arm, with such force as he sent it together with his sword to the ground. That done, falling in amidst those Knights, he kild the two first that presented themselves before him. On the other side, the black Knight (so was he called that sided with him) made the Giant whom he encountred lose his stirrop, and dealt such blows amongst the rest, as he laid three of them at his f: but the two remaining Giants held them so
short, that with the assistance of those rascals, which would not suffer them so much as to breath, they had been in extream danger of their lives, if two Knights had not at one time arrived there by severall wayes, who seeing a fight managed with so much unequality, presently layd hands on their swords, and attaching the Giants that exceedingly molested the Princes, charged them with such furious blows, that they were fain to turn head for to defend themselves, leaving Spheramond and his companion amidst their other Knights; of whom they made so great a slaughter, that there remai∣ned but two of them alive, who fearing to lose their lives as their compani∣ons had done, threw away their weapons and craved mercy. You shall (said Spheramond) have it granted you, upon condition that you put us in possessi∣on of this Castle. You may, said they, enter it freely, and without fear, For you shall find no body there to resist you, so as Argenea the Mistresse of the place, doth not frame some new inchantment to make you purchase it with more danger and pain: howbeit I can assure you that she is not now in the Castle, she having gone from thence not long since, (as I conjecture) to find some means from hindring it to be taken. For her spirits (without) let∣ting her know the time) had advertised her of the misfortune that hath this day befallen us: you may therefore boldly enter in, and your best course will be first to seaze upon the ports for your more security. This counsell seeming good to the Knights, the blacke Knight staid at the gate, *whilest Spheramond searched all about the house. But finding nothing, he returned presently to view the combat between the two Knights and the Giants, which continued with so much fury, that it was not easie to determine what the issue of it was like to be. But ere long they perceived the advantage on their side that came last. For their enemies had lost so much bloud, as they fell both almost at one instant so weak, that there was no need of any wea∣pon to make an end of them. Spheramond extreamly satisfied with this vi∣ctory, lifted up the visier of his helmet and addressing himself to the Knight that had first succoured him: Valiant Sir, said he, You have so infinitly ob∣liged me, as I cannot doubt of your affection to me: but to render the plea∣sure of your assistance and my preservation accomplished, tell me who you are, that in recompence thereof, I may heerafter seek out occasions to be commanded by you. Excellent Prince, answered the black Knight, disco∣vering his face, I will never acknowledge that you are any way engaged to my arms, in the least obligation: For your valour alone was able to defeat your enemies without my aid, yet I cannot but give humble thanks unto heaven for bringing me hither so opportunely to testifie the desire I have to do you service; I am your most humble servant Dorigell, Prince of the For∣tunate Island, and more contented for meeting you heer at this time, then I could have been for the conquest of any enemies Empire. With these words they embraced, as if they had not been together in a long time before: and were about to draw toward the other two Knights to give them thanks for their succours; when as they who knew them, came to them with all de∣monstrations of respect: My Lords, said they, give us leave to kisse your victorious hands, as those which will ever depend upon you: You see heer Amanio d'Astre and Silvan, brought hither by most strange means, but excee∣ding happy in that our arrivall hath not been altogether unusefull to you. Then unlacing their helmets they would have humbled themselves to Sphe∣ramond, but he embraced them with such expressions of love, as more could
not be. The entertainment of these fowr Knights having lasted a while, they all entred the Castle: and having shut the gates, they were conducted by the two Knights whom they had saved to the prisons, from whence they enlarged thirty or forty Knights; amongst the which were Parmenian of Cyprus, and Ladazan of Numidia, who determining to seek adventures a∣broad, had left the Army the evening before their dislodging: and as their fortune directed them, met neer the Castle of the twelve Towrs; where they were surprised by two of the Giants, who having astonied them with two blows, enclosed them in a Dungeon, with an intention ere long to sa∣crifice them to their Gods, in satisfaction of Argeneaes revenge. The con∣tent of these Princes was not small, in having thus delivered two of their friends; nor did they take care for any thing more, then how to find out some one that could dresse their wounds. For Dorigell was hurt in three pla∣ces, Spheramond very much bruised with the blows he had received (the goodnesse of his arms having arrested the edge of his enemies swords,) and Amanio d'Astre had a slash on his shoulder nothing so dangerous as great; but instantly they had word brought them, that at the gate there was a Dwarf who desired to speak with them: Let him in, said Spheramond, his presence will not affright us; only have a care that he be not followed by any other. For the two Knights we spared have assured me, that three of the guard of this Castle are yet abroad, and that it is likely they will return this evening. The Sentinell then perceiving no body but the Dwarf ope∣ned the gate, and from thence he was brought to the Princes, where at first addressing himself to Dorigell he said, Do you know me, Sir Knight? Yes truly, said Dorigell, you gave me yesterday the best horse and the bravest shield in the world; for which curtesie you may ask of me what you please: and be assured you shall not be refused in any thing that lies in my power. I do not come hither, answered he, to request any reward for my service, but to do you some more: Go, I pray you presently to bed, together with these Princes that are hurt, and I will dresse you. For knowing that your wounds would extreamly incommodate you without looking to, I am come to cure you. You have already done so much for me, said Dorigel, that I will not now refuse your assistance, neither for my self nor my friends. Ma∣king then three beds to be set up in one Chamber, that the time might seem the lesse tedious unto them, they went to bed and were drest by this Dwarf, who enjoining them to rest till the morning, went out with Silvan that took upon him the charge of the Castle, appointing Parmenian of Cyprus, and Ladazan of Numidia, to keep the watch with twelve Knights for fear of being surprised. But little need there was of that care; for the day came on and nothing appeared to disturb them. Now were all these Princes risn, as whole and sound as if they had not been hurt at all the evening before, and much wondring they could not see their Chyrurgian that was not any more to be found, when as the Sentinell brought them word that he saw a Chariot come almost to the gate, wherein were three Giants, and three La∣dies, who fild the aire with sighs and lamentations: but that withall there appeared a brave and able Knight that made no difficulty to set on the Gi∣ants, for the relief of those afflicted women. Thereat the Princes cald for their arms, fearing lest that Knight should not be able to withstand the fury of those monsters: and therefore made all the haste they possible could. The yong Silvan who was first ready, knowing the Giants to be on foot,
went out only with his sword in his hand, wherewith he entertained his ene∣mies in so rude a fashion, aided by the valiant Emperour of the Parthians, that followed him, as he made them not only despair of the victory, but stand in fear of a neer approaching death. The Knight whom before they had circled about, seeing himself so well and beyond his hope seconded, did so gallantly bestir himself, and charged him that opposed him, with such fury, as the grasse round about him was died with his bloud. In like sort, Silvan entreated his man, and Spheramond gave his enemy not so much lea∣sure as to breath; but the honour of this combat was so well disputed with them, as they could not vaunt to have lent any thing but upon very good pawns. He that fought with the first Knight, despaired of his safety, and defying heaven for being so ill intreated by one man alone, took his curtel∣ax in both his hands, and discharged so violent a blow on his adversaries helmet, that he laid him in the dust altogether deprived of sense. That blow naving given him some hope of victory, he was going to disarm him, but having in that rage and straining of himself, spent all his bloud and strength, he reeling tumbled down on the other side with apparant signes of death. Spheramond that had observed the misfortune of the Knight whō he thoght to be dead, was so transported with choler, that griping his sword fast in his hand he made it descend with such fury on the cask of his enemy, as divi∣ding it together with his head in two pieces, he laid him stark dead upon the earth. Thence presently flying to the Knight, that lay extended by the slain Giant, he unlaced his helmet, to see if he yet breathed, and found it was the beauteous Savage, who feeling the freshnes of the air, immediatly ope∣ned her eies: His amazement to see her there, was no lesse then his content to find her with some remainder of life; but thinking that she stood in more need of succour then of complement, he went about to help her up, when as remembring the combat she had begun, she rose with such force and agi∣lity as made them all to wonder that beheld her; and laying hold of her sword that was fastned to her arm, she was going to fall furiously on the Giant that fought with Silvan; but she saw him sink under a terrible blow which he gave him. I am, said she then, fully revenged of my enemies: but yet I desire to know unto whom I am indebted for this assistance. To your own vertue, said Spheramond, which had no great need of our arms. God, said she, What do I see? and what strange encounter is this? Tell me, my Lord, what good fortune brought you hither? What Knights are these in your company? and what have your adventures been these three daies? Even such, answered Spheramond, as those that have rendred you heer; we arrived heer without any particular design, and have rooted out of this Country a crew of mischievous fellows: but that which gives me the most content is, that we fell upon this place so happily for your safety, and the increase of our glory. These that you see heer with me are at your dispo∣sing. Heer is Silvan, who shewed himself the most forward to do you ser∣vice, being the first that sallied foorth to your succour. This is Dorigell, Prince of the Fortunate Island: the third is Amanio d'Astre; and these two Knights are Parmenian of Cyprus and Ladazan of Numidia, whom we have freed out of prison. Then he told her all the circumstances of his coming thither, his combat, and how without the assistance of those brave Princes, he had infallibly lost his life. This discourse having perswaded them, that all those occurrences had fallen out by the providence of some Magician
their friend, she was about after she had infinitely caressed those Knights to enter the Castle; but remembring the women in favour of whom she had undertaken the combat, although she know not who they were, she desired Parmenian and Ladazan to go and seek them out; for she had observed that at the beginning of the fight they fled away from that place: This they un∣dertook most willingly, and did discharge it so happily, as the same day they returned with unspeakable content of all the company, as shall be re∣lated to you in the Chapter following. CHAP. VII. Who thse Princesses were that were frcibly carried away by the Giants: as also the Emperour Spheramonds return into Parthia. WE have in the preceding Chapter told you, that Argen sister to the King of the Frozen Island, foreseeing the ruine of the Pagan Princes, withdrew herself into the borders of the Soldan of Aleppo his Countrey, where by enchantment she built that proud Castle of the twelve Towrs, and for the guard thereof drew thi∣ther twelve of the mightiest Giants in all the army, in hope by that means to surprise some of the Greek Prin∣ces, and so to revenge her self. But God whose providence reacheth to e∣very thing, overthrew all her designs, making the Emperour Spheramond fall with that place, and after him Dorigell, Silvan, and the gallant Knight of the Bridge, by the procurement of the great Alcander; who desiring to prevent the mischiefs which this woman intended to Christendome, and which without all doubt had happened in the losse of Spheramond, did provide that Dorigell should be met withall by a Dwarf, the Knight of the Bridge by a Squire, and Silvan by a Damsell, to the end they might be conducted thi∣ther to succour that great Emperour. It remains now that we relate unto you the new designe she had to render her malice the more memorable: As soone as the building was brought to perfection, she took her books, where∣with she often entertained her self, and straining her skill to the highest pitch, she found that the Empresse Richarda, and the Princesse Rosaliana, her sister, were with childe with two sonnes, who one day should be the support of Christendome, and the ruine of Paganism; which did so vex her, as she resolved to destroy them before they should come into the world: Having sought out then from among the cunningest of her thoughts, for some sub∣tile invention to bring her desires to passe, she departed with three of her Giants a little before those two great Armies came to meet, and imbarked her self in a ship, which by the guiding of three Dwarffes, she caused to sail so shiftly, that in two daies she was in the Empire of Parthia at the foot of a Castle by the Sea side, where by chance the Empresse Richarda with her si∣ster were at that time, to find some diversion from the grief they were in for the absence of their Husbands: Being arrived at her desired ort, she made certain Characters upon the poop of her Bark; and redobling her
charms, she enchanted her Giants that she carried with her in such sort, as they appeared in the shape of Spheramond, Amadis d' Astre, and the Duke of Arbamont; that done, she disarmed their heads, caused them to shew them∣selves upon the hatches, and commanding two of her Dwarfs to sound a fanfara to awake the Princesses, she sent the third well instructed with his message, to advertise them of the return of those Princes. Upon the noise of the trumpets the Ladies looked out at the window that opened to the sea, with a great desire to know what the businesse might be: but unable at that distance to discern the countenance of these transformed people, they did with some delight lend an ear to the Musick, that seemed to presage some good fortune unto them: and whilest they thus suffered their souls to be drawn out at their ears, a damsell came to enform them, that there was a Dwarf desired admittance, to advertise them of some affair which neerly concerned them: wherupon having commanded him to be brought in, they withdrew from the window to understand what the Dwarf would say unto them; who being too well taught for to fail Argenea in her design, presen∣ted himself with much respect: and having made an humble obeisance with a cheerfull countenance he said to the Empresse Richard: Madam, what will you give me for the contentment which my coming will bring you? The Emperour Spheramond with his cousin Amadis d' Astre, is at the foot of this Castle: but because they have in their company a beautifull Princesse whom they chanced to meet with at sea, that will not land this e∣vening, in regard she desires to visit you to morrow with the more magnifi∣cence, they humbly beseech you not to be displeased with their retardment in saluting you, since it is against their wils and only to discharge themselves of the promise they have made to this Lady. They have reason to keep their word, answered Richarda, who was transported with joy and content; no will I render them perjured by commanding them to come hither. But let me not live if I go not my self to visit them, though for a penance I serve in the morning to glorifie the triumph of this forrein Beauty they bring with them. Having then caused their horses to be brought, she went down to the haven accompanied only with her sister, and one maid, where seeing the lovely face of her Husband, she could not without some trouble bear the little delay which she was forced to endure, before she could be set aboord the ship; into the which she was with her company no sooner entred but the Giants reassumed their former shapes, which did so amaze them, that with grief to find themselves so wofully abused, they fell down more then half dead upon the deck; Argenea seeing that which she so much desired in her power, immediatly covered the ship with a cloud, took her way back again with the same speed she had made thither, and landed at the same port from whence she had weighed ancor not above five daies before. But her house being ten leagues from thence, she presently caused a Chariot to ap∣pear, drawn by six horses of a monstrous greatnesse; and having found by her last incantations she was threatned with a terrible mischief, she willed her Giants to passe on and to bestow the Ladies in safe custody, whilest she went to consult with a great Magician, with whom she had formerly been very conversant, to the end that by the help of his skill she might divert the storm which was ready to fall upon her; yet all her devices were to no pur∣pose: for Alcander (to whose knowledge all other mortall mens gave place) having foreseen the mischievous intentions of this Hagg, had first turned
the Chariot somwhat out of the right way to make it come within the view of Spheramond, to whom also he gave the same day those excellent arms, by means wherof he escaped death, which was otherwise inevitable, being to fight with three or fowr of the most able Giants in the world, all at one instant, assembled all those Princes who had been separated from the Army into that one place being assured that Spheramond would at length be una∣ble to resist so many Knights as were to combat him together. These then were the Princesses which he saw passe by when overtaken with the night, he was sleeping under the trees, and the very same that were brought to the Castle of the twelve Towrs, by the Giants, when as those Princes sallied foorth to second the fair Savage, who having met the Chariot followed the Giants to fight with them, being mooved with pity at the lamentations of those Ladies. But it is time to return to our former Discourse of Parmenian of Cyprus and Ladazan finding these Princesses under a tree who trembled with fear, alighted from their horses, and putting off their helmets, that the Ladies might by seeing who they were, be the better assured, they kneeled down to kisse their hands: but they were so amazed with the encounter of them, as they were not able to speak a word; which Parmenian observing, to restore them to themselves he said: I cannot but much wonder (excellent Ladies) to meet you in these uninhabited parts, and so far remooved from your own Countries. But you will be no lesse amazed when I tell you, that the Emperour Spheramond is at the Castle, which you see yonder, accom∣panied with certain Princes of Greece, who are merrier then the losse they have endured might seem to permit, not knowing as yet of your being in these quarters. Do not then I beseech you, afflict your selves any further; those that brought you hither are dead; nor shall you find in that house any but such as were born to do you service. At these words the Princesses re∣covered a little courage, yet fearing such another treacherous trick, as had been plaid them before, they made but little shew of resenting that news, and rested as it were in an extasie, when Ladazan, who marvailed at that coldnesse of theirs thus pursued his discourse: Why how now, Ladies, are not these newes pleasing unto you? and will you not return with us to glad the Emperour? Verily this cariage of yours doth amaze me; nor can I ima∣gine from whence it should proceed, since all feare of danger is past. Let us go, I beseech you, without any more delay. Well, let us go, said the Em∣presse Richarda, who was somwhat the heartier of the three, since you will have it so, at the worst we can be but once more abused: with that they ad∣vanced toward the Castle, before the gate whereof stood Spheramond with Dorigell and the rest. He at the first sight knowing them was strangely ama∣zed at so unexpected an encounter. O God! said he, can I imagin or believe that my fair mistrisse is heer, or can any man perswade me that I am not in a dream? Tell me, Madam, am I in the Parthian Empire? or is it possible that I should meet you in these desert plains, which are not neer it by three hundred leagues? Certainly I am so confounded and besides my self, as I dare not embrace you, fearing that you are heer through some enchantment. I should have, replied she my dear heart, a great deal more cause to be asto∣nished beholding you heer, seeing it is not above six daies since you were with me in Parthia: but you did so suddenly change your aspect, that the pleasure of your sight was instantly followed with an infinit grief for not finding you any more like unto your self; yet I do not now wonder any
longer at it, for by the way I learned that a Sorceres our enemy had plotted this treason against us, an that she had framed that enchantment for to sur∣prise us; She threatned me with death, and to destroy with me the fruit that you left with me at your departure. But since I see you heer with me, I do no more fear her charms, and care as little for her menaces: speaking thus, she gave him a million of kisses, and did so hang upon his lips as he could hardly have leisure to answer the Infanta Rosaliana, who came to entertain him, and enquired for some news of her Husband. I would, said he, gladly satisfie you if I knew how to do it with assurance: but not being able to say any thing certainly, I beseech you seek not to be informed but with as little curiosity as your love will permit. In the mean time comfort your self in his absence, and beleeve that heaven will not be so much an enemy to your quiet, as not to render him unto you ere it be long, with more content then ever you had. These words were extreamly sensible unto her, for she ima∣gined that he was dead among so many other Princes; and did therefore bewail him in her mind: but unwilling to disturb her sisters contentment, or make it appear that she distrusted the words of Spheramond, she restrained her tears to return the salutes which she received from Silvan, Dorigell, and Amanio d' Astre, who presented their service unto her, having before tendred the same respect to the Empresse Richarda. Some time then being spent a∣midst these complements, the Empresse would needs visit the fair Savagesse, who was in her bed with three wounds, being much troubled that she could meet with no body that could dresse them. But as they were consulting a∣bout finding out some Chyrurgion, they saw the little Doctor come in that had cured them the night before; who commanding them all out, applied such sovereign salves to her wounds, as after eight howrs sleep, she waked without any pain, and as able to bear arms, as ever she was in her life. The wonder therof being no lesse then their content, they passed on that night without any fear of Argenaes power. But in the morning upon consultation they resolved, that this place being in the midst of the enemies Countrey, was with much diffiulty to be kept, so that Spheramond determing to quit it, returned towards his Empire, accompanied with the beautuous Empresse his wife, her sister, and her maid, as also with Parmenian, Ladazan, and thir∣ty Christian Knights, which would needs attend him; the rest took such o∣ther waies as fortune pleased to guide them. CHAP. VIII. The arrivall of the Princes of Greece in their Countries: and the conveying away of little Amadis of Trebisond. FLorisell of Niquea being arrived at Constantinople, A∣lastraxeree in Trebisond, Don Rogel in Persi, Sphera∣mond with the Empresse Richarda in the Empire of Parthia, and the other Christian Princes in their seve∣rall Countreys: tears of joy and grief were mingled together. Sidonia with all kindnes welcommed her Husband, and the Empresse of Persia shewed no lesse
content for the return of hers. But seeing that their Courts (in former time so flourishing by the presence of such a number of excellent Princes) now seemed forlorn by their deaths, and the absence of so many Princesses as were partly deceased, and partly carried away, they were not able to master their sorrow; howbeit time, the common Physitian of miseries, and the consolations they continually received from those brave Princes, having somwhat sweetned the bitternes of their anguish, they began to restrain their tears and asswage their grief; seeing that necessity enforced them to so cou∣ragious a resolution. When as fortune that was not yet weary of vexing them prepared them a new occasion of sorrow: you have seen how the Empresse Niquea, before she was enchanted in the Castle of Treasure, was delivered of a yong son, whom she called by his fathers name, for that he much resembled him in face; and that at his birth there appeared in the air certain signs which seemed to presage the excellency of that child. It re∣mains now to tell you what became of him after the transporting of his mo∣ther away. The Chronicle of Alquif reports, that in those daies lived a great Magician of the Pagan sect, who (though he came short of Alcanders perfection) yet was master of many admirable secrets, unknown to those of his profession: This man named Dorion, holding nothing in higher esteem then the propagation of his law, took the same care for the preservation of the Pagans, as our Alcander did for the welfare of Christendome: so that one night bestowing himself in the invocation of his spirits, he learned of them the birth of the little Amadis of Trebisond, knew by his art that he would surpasse his father in valour, and that he should one day be the second pillar of the Empire of the faithfull, as also the subverter of Paganism. This infinitely afflicted him, and from thencefoorth he vowed his death, prote∣sting to employ all the secrets of his art rather then fail of his purpose. But he continued not long in this mind: for turning over his books to find by what means he might best bring his desire to passe, he found that he whose destruction he sought, should one day shed his bloud for to save him from an extream danger: changing then his mischievous intention, he became more carefull of his life, then he had before been eager of his death; yet ha∣ving the love of his Religion deeply rooted in his heart, and being unwil∣ling for the respect of his own preservation to see the ruine of it, he took a middle way between the fear of seeing the glory of the Pagans defaced, and his desire to live. This infant, said he, may one day indeed relieve me, for the influence of the celestiall bodies are never fall, but yet I will keep him from destroying those which professe the same law that I do. I will ther∣fore go and take him out of his mothers bosom, bring him into these deserts, where I reside, draw out of him the service that he is predestined to do me, and then will set such strong enchantments upon him, as he shall never be seen by any man but my self. Having thus spoken he inclosed himself in a cloud, and went directly to Constantinople, where the little Amadis was brought up. As soon as he came there, the Sun began to lose his light, the daies brightnes was turned into darknes, and from the cloud wherin he was, such claps of thunder roare foorth, that every man feared to be grownd into powder. Whilest all these wonders strook the world with astonish∣ment, Dorion descended, entred the chamber of little Amadis, who then was but three months old▪ took him in his arms, and in the presence of Florisel, that with excessive gref saw him go out and was not able to hinder it, retur∣ned
into the midst of his cloud, which immediatly rising up in the air carri∣ed him to the monstrous Island his own habitation, where being setled, he presently caused a woman to nurse him, commanding her with his milk to infuse into him the directions of their Law, so soon as she found him capable of any impression of it: howbeit his design there sorted not to his desire. For Alcander who was not able to hinder the carrying of him away, for that the decrees of heaven are not to be crossed, made him understand by cer∣tain secret impressions, that one only God was by him to be worshipped. When the cloud was gone, the Sun resumed his former splendor, and the air became as calm as before, but with exceeding grief to Sidonio, who see∣ing the new losse she had sustained, so exceedingly renewed her sighes and tears, that if Prince Florisell, which was better able to undergo such cros∣ses, had not fallen again to his former reasons for to comfort her, she would undoubtedly have buried her self with her grief. Whilest the people la∣mented this misfortune, Florisell to seek some diversion from these sorrows, resolved to go on hunting, and to that end departing out of the palace for to take horse, a maid presented herself, and kissing a paper which she had in her hand, delivered it to him, telling him withall that it came from the wise Vrganda; with that word he trembled, for not having heard of her since the losse of his friends, he thought she had not been living, but had accom∣panied them in death, whom so faithfully she had served during their lives. But this his perturbation being of no long continuance, he opened the pa∣per, and therin read these words. Vrganda to the Greek Princes. SOvereign Princes: If you had not learned by so many crosses as you have met withall in the World, what men of corage ought to know, I would comfort you in your losses, and specially for that which hath this day befallen you: But knowing you to be every way invincible, and that you make little account of fortunes worst attempts against you, I will not present you with reasons to mitigate your just re∣sentments, though I should be glad that you could reach unto the meaning of these obscure words. The Prophecie. When the strange Lion shall amaze the World with his roaring, and shall meet with him of the Grecian Forrests, the fourth of that name shall see the day for to render you presently after the lost Treasure. If you did understand these words, without doubt, you would, brave Princes, perceive that the counsels of heaven are wonderfull, and living with quieter minds give me means to continue my doing you service with more affection then ever. See, sayd Florisel, how the Sunne shines againe after cloudy weather: These good Magicians are still living; and as far as I can perceive by this scroul, though I do not fully understand it, we shall not suffer so much as we imagined: Let God that governs our actions, be pleased to direct them to his Glory; for I will neither murmur at his corrections, nor grow insolent with his favors. This said, he went down the stairs, mounted on horsback,
and better cheered then he had been in a long time before, went to the for∣rest, where he had not been long, but he heard one that lamented not far from him, which made him to gallop that way the voice directed him, so that within a little while he arrived at a place where under a tree he found a good handsome woman, which held in herlap a dead Knight, over whom she made exceeding strange moan. Gentlewoman, said he being moved with pity, if your sorrow be capable of comfort, I would intreat you to consider that you afflict your self to no purpose, & that it were fit you should demonstrate your love to this Knight some other way rather then by your tears, wherof he is now insensible. That which he now is to expect from your hands is a grave; Let us, I beseech you, bestow it upon him, and that done we will think of what remains. If he be slain by the treachery of any, I will, if it be in my power, work your revenge, otherwise it may be a com∣fort to you that you have seen him die like a good Knight, which is the most honourable departure out of this life. And if I shall not be troublesome to you, I will beseech you to let me know his name, and who it is that hath brought him into this estate. For being ingaged by my word to revenge it, I should be glad to understand if with reason I may do it. This afflicted wo∣man then lifting up her eies all drownd in tears, beheld him a while without speaking a word, but judging by his countenance that he was not a Knight of any mean quality, at length she very modestly replied to him in this ma∣ner: Do not beleeve, noble Knight, that my complaint is excessive; for the valour and fidelity of him whose death I now lament, deserves that my tears should be perpetuall, and might justly perswade me to lend no ear to any comfort whatsoever. But since with so much curtesie you make a tender to me of your assistance, I will not be so ingratefull as to refuse you the satisfa∣ction you desire. Know then, my Lord, that this Knight whose head you see divided in two pieces, was called Balard of Catabatmon, grandchild to the good King Manely, who in the time of the Emperour Esplandian was held in the esteem of a brave Knight; he some moneths since left his fathers house to be at that great battell, where the rest of all Christendome was set up; but falling very sick in a Town of Macedon, he could not bring his pur∣pose to passe, his malady still increasing, there was little hope of his life, when as his Squire (the faithfullest that ever served in that kind) remem∣bring that there needed no more to cheer him up but only to speak of me, assured him that I was upon the way to visit him, having had advertisement of his sicknes: as soon as he heard my name, his love which yet in the ex∣tremity of his disease was still the same, made him instantly rayse himself up, imagining that I had been come. But not seeing me, he gently laid his head down again upon his pillow, and began to take a little rest. In the mean time his Squire not intending to lose the benefit of his invention, instantly dispatched a post to me, knowing full well that my love was powerfull e∣nough to make me undertake more then a voyage of fowre daies journey; And having gives me notice of the estate his master was in, he put me in a strange perplexity: for loving him to infinity, I almost died at the first news of his sicknes: but fortifying my self with a couragious resolution, I wiped my eies, and taking a good pacing nag, I made such haste, that three daies after I was by his bed side, though wonderfully troubled to see him brought so low; yet did my presence so work with him, that his bloud returning to all the parts of his body he began to shew some signes of amendment. To
what end should I entertain you with longer discourse of his malady? Time restored him to his health, and when he found himself able to bear Armes, he departed from thence with me, who would by no means quit him. For I lesse valued the opinion of the world then the obligation wherein I was tied to my affection. Having travelled then twelve daies without meeting any adventure, his courage coupled with his love, made him undertake to guard this passage for my sake, and to force all Knights that should passe this way to confesse that I was the fairest maiden in the world. This his enter∣prise though full of danger, passed with him very happily, and divers were vanquished by him: but alas! Fortune forsook him this morning. For a great Knight in flaming coloured armes arrived heer; who not satisfied with the conditions of the combat proposed by him, said unto him. Knight, there are two strong reasons that oblige me to sight with you; One is, the faith that I ow to my mistrisse much more beautifull then yours; and the o∣ther an oath, which I have taken never to spare any that are enemies to my Religion. The device which I see painted in your shield is an infallible ar∣gument that you are a Christian, and I know you have an unjust cause to maintain in affirming your Mistrisse to be the fairest living; seeing then that you are in case to combat I am ready to follow your example. Balard, who wanted no courage, not enduring the arrogance of this Knight, presently set hand to his sword, and a long time made his party good; but alas! not ha∣ving a cask of proof sufficient to bear the furious and weighty blows of his adversary, he was in the end brought into the estate wherein you now see him. Iudge now if I have not reason to torment my self, since I have lost by his death all that can be dear unto me: and do not condemn my sorrow, which to me appears but too just and reasonable. I rather said Florisel, do commend your resentment of such a losse; howbeit I have no great reason to combat this Knight upon the quarrell, since it hath been fairly carried, and according to the lawes of Knighthood, but seeing he professeth himself an enemy to Christians, whose protector I am bound to be, I promise you to seek him to the worlds end for to revenge the death of Balard, and to rid this Country of so pernicious a Knight. Saying thus, he sent for his arms, nor would he returne to the City, but went his way with Lidora (so was the Gentlewoman called) not being to be diverted from this enterprise for any entreaty could be made him. CHAP. IX. Who the Knight ardant was, and why be hated the Christians. THey that have bestowed any time in reading this famous history, have found in the twelfth book of Amadis, that Don Rogel of Greece, being at sea with Persea, Princesse of Persia, and Don Brianges of Boetia, was one day so tossed with a tempest, that after they had with no good successe, used all the labour and skill of the mariners, he at the last found himself hurried away with the storm, and thrown into the billows;
from whence yet he escaped, rather by the permission of God, then by the strength and addresse of his swimming, it being the pleasure of the Almigh∣ty that he should not at that time miscarry. That afterwards he fell in love with Florelle Queen of Canabea, who died the same day that he left her. And that the great Giant Exceladus opened her womb to take out the child whereof she was ready to be delivered, being gone nine months and above of her time; which after he had wrapped up in a virgin parchment, he carri∣ed away with him, and in brief all the rest that is particularized in the 97. Chapter of that Book. But for that the History of that miraculous Infant is not as yet come to light, at least only vented by an ignorant Translator, I held it no lost labour to acquaint you with what I have found in an old frag∣ment, written by Alquif (entituled, the Orientall History of the Imperiall House of Greece) which was found in Constantinople when it was taken by the French, in the time of Baldwin of Flanders, and afterwards brought into France by Geffrey de Ville Hardovin, Marshall of Champaigne, who compiled the history of that expedition, the rather for that the sequell of my discourse doth not permit me to passe by his name and acts in silence. This Infant then (as you have known) was called Fulgoran, by reason of a little blaze, which being cut out of his mothers belly, appeared upon his breast, and brought up with all maner of care by that Magician Giant, who found by his art that he would be infinitely valiant, and one day do some great mischief to Christendome: he daily instructed him in the handling of his arms; and often enformed him of the honor that brave Knights had ac∣quired to themselves, to the end to render him ambitious of such glory and vertue by their example. And in brief he had so trained up his youth, that except the hate of the name of a Christian, which he had deeply engraven in his soul, he might boldly vaunt that he had framed a master piece of him. As soon as he perceived that he was able to beare arms, he made him a Cui∣race of the colour of flaming fire, a cask of the best temper in the world, and a shield of so good proof, as with that greatnesse of courage and ability of body which he knew him endued withal, he might well believe that he was invincible. These being all in a readines, he took him one day aside, and thus spke to him: It is in my opinion time, my sonne, that you should be∣gin to attempt the effecting those things which the destinies have promised unto you, to the end you may not frustrate the hope that I have conceived of your valour. You shall the refore this night watch the Arms that I will give you, and prepare your self to depart to morrow for to seek the adven∣ture of the world. Be gentle and easily intreated to pardon, patient in la∣bour, love your Religion, and above all things take heed that conversing with Christians do not one day make you of another faith. I shall have my share with you in the glory that you shall gain, and shall be infinitely plea∣sed if your praises may reach to the furthest end of the world. This yong Prince, who had naturally a disposition to goodnes, with a courage no∣thing inferiour to his father, promised the Giant with care to remember his instructions, watcht his Arms, was the next morning Knighted by the Gi∣ant, and loth to lose time mounted on a hors, that had not many fellows on the earth, and departed the same day under the protection of his Gods. Passing then along with an extream desire of meeting with some adventure worthy of his courage, he spent three hours in crossing certain forrests with∣ou lighting upon any one of whom he might enquire where he was: but at
the end therof he entred into a great plain, where under certain trees he saw an old man sitting; who rising up with incredible nimblenes thus saluted him: Gentle Prince, I have ever since morning waited heer for you, to dis∣cover unto you a secret that much imports you: You beleeve that Enceladus is your father, because he hath hitherto had the education of you; but from hencefoorth be not any more of that opinion; for you are sonne to one of the bravest and greatest Princes in the World, and whom you shall never know but with an extream hazard of your life. For the rest, remember the good counsell your foster Father gave you; I mean, be liberall, curteous, patient in adversity, easily intreated to forgive, and ready to relieve those that are distressed: But do not follow his advice of never being an enemy to the Religion which you now professe. The time shall come wherin you shall feel so much delight in another that is better and more conducing to your happines then this is, that you will quickly find how much my counsel is more profitable for you then his. You are amazed to hear me talk to you in this maner, and it may be will make little account of what I speak be∣cause you know me not; but you will one day see how much my meeting with you at this time did concern you. Follow now the way you are in, since the destinies have put you into it, and be assured that in the greatest danger I will not be far from you, as well for your own merit, as for the af∣fection which Iow to the vertue of your Father. This said, he vanished out of his sight, leaving our new Knight much astonished at that he had seen, and extreamly pleased to understand that his parents were of such eminent quality, although as yet he knew them not. Going on then very joyfully, he intertained his thoughts with infinite designs, when as he heard a great clashing of arms in a forrest that was not far from him: wherupon clapping spurs to his hors, he entred the wood, where at first he spied a Coach wher∣in were two Ladies wofully weeping; and a little beside them three fearful Giants amongst fifteen or twenty Knights, who (as was easie to be conje∣ctured) disputed with them the liberty of those women: Fulgoran having a while beheld them, and seeing that as often as the Giants Curtelaxes light∣ed upon any of them, some of those Knights fell dead to the earth, couched his launce with so good both addresse and fortune against one of them, that having pierced him clean through, he laid him dead in the dust. This happy blow, the first essay of his chivalry, having added to his courage, he set hand to his sword which he emploied so gallantly, that he staid the fury of the second, leaving the third in the midst of fowrteen Knights, who did extreamly trouble him. But he was therwith so enraged, that as many as he fully lighted upon, he laid on the grasse: so that having dispatched eight of them, all the rest betook them to their heels saving one, who being richly armed, and obstinately pursuing his revenge, received so furious a blow up∣on his helmet, that he fell from his hors voiding bloud at his nose and ears: That so cruell a blow having extreamly affrighted the women, who were before somwhat cheered upon the comming in of the burning Knight, made them shrike out so lowd that Fulgoran hearing it, gave his opposit so forci∣ble a thrust, as having run him clean through the body, he laid him on the ground in the same estate his companion was in. Turning him then about, he perceived that he which survived, was going to unbuckle the Knights helmet whom he had overthrown, which was the cause of the womens la∣mentations: this put him in such choler, as instantly running to him, and not
giving him leisure to rise (for he had one knee upon the ground) he strook him so just on the neck, that he laid his head at his feet. This execution done, he drew to the Ladies, and began to comfort them, telling them that their enemies being dead, they had now no more cause to fear: But one of them who appeared beautifull in perfection, although her sorrow and tears hindred in some sort the discerning of her excellencies, interrupted him, saying: Good Knight, the time doth not now give me leave to render you condign thanks for this happy relief you have given us, for the fear I am in lest the King my Lord be dead, doth so transport me as I scarce know what I speak: Continue if you please, your assisting me, and help me presently to alight, that if there be any remainder of life in him, I may preserve it with such help as in this necessity I may give him. Fulgoran who was naturally very curteous, took her instantly in his arms, out of the chariot, and led her to him whom the last Giant would have killed; and pulling off his helmet, he used such means to him, as he brought him to himself again, being much amazed to find himself in that estate. Clairangia (for so was that beautifull Princesse called) seeing her husband breathe, recovered somwhat both her colour and courage: so that perceiving a yong Squire whom the Giant had bound behind the chariot, she presently caused him to be freed, and com∣manded him with all diligence to seek out those Knights, who by flying had sought their safety, and will them to return unto her. In the mean time Ful∣goran held the King in his arms, perswading him not to be dismaid with his wounds, which would easily be cured. The Squire having gladly underta∣ken this charge, immediatly ran into the wood, but meeting them returning with a resolution to lose themselves with their master, since he would not save himself with them, he staid his pace, and having informed them of the issue of the businesse, he brought them to the King, where full of shame for the cowardise they had shewed, they began to frame an arm litter, in which they took up Dardanr (so was the King named) Fulgoran going into the Coach with Clairgia, who much wondring to find such valour in a Knight so yong and lovely, did gently enquire of him what good fortune had brought him into that Country for to bind her to him in so eternall an obli∣gation. That Madam, said he, which doth ordinarily bind such Knights, as without defign do go about the world seeking strange adventures. But if you marvell at my comming hither in so seasonable a time, beleeve it I am no lesse amazed to have found you in so much danger. For your beauty and the greatnes of your estate, were in my opinion likely to have kept you from any sinister accidet: although I well know, that fortune doth not alwaies consider either the merit, or the quality of those with whom she means to make her self sport. For this cause Madam, I would gladly know of you (provided my request heerin may not be offensive) by what mischance you fell into this mischief. I am too much engaged to your valour, said she, to refuse you any thing you shall desire. Know then, myord, that Dardanr and my self being possest of the Crown and Scepter of Romerie, which is but two easie daies journey from hence, did live happily together in our match; for it is but two months since we were joined in mariage, and had nothing to complain of, but that we could not free our Court of one of these Giants which now you have slain: for being passonately in love with the Princesse Alixea, my sister, whom you see heer, we were extreamly discon∣tented at his pretension, which yet we durst not but under hand oppose. For
knowing that his brothers were our neighbours, and exceedingly redoubt∣ed by all the provinces thereabout, we very much feared that a refusall would so enrage them, as they would make a war upon us, and so peradven∣ture dispossesse us of the estate of Romerie. And indeed we could by no means have avoided that misfortune without your aid, considering the e∣state wherin you met with us: for Bracandor my sisters amoroso not able longer to endure the violence of his desire, one day took the boldnesse to move the King therein after this fashion: Sir, you are not ignorant of my descent, and you also know (for you have been a witnes of my valour) that I am able to purchase Principalities to my self, and when I please can set a roiall Crown upon my head. I will not therfore fear to discover my inten∣tions unto you, wherof I make no doubt but you have had some conjecture already: I have long loved your sister Alixea, and gladly would I be so far obliged to your favour as to be pleased with my alliance, which will not be of mean importance to you. For the consideration of my self and my brothers, will make you to be so redoubted, that all your neighbours will tremble at the very rumour of your arms, and from my self you shall still receive so many and so agreeable services, that you shall never have cause to repent of affording me that honour. This discourse did extreamly perplex Dardanor; for the bad conditions of this Giant made us so to loath him as we resolved to run any hazard rather then yield my sister unto him, whom by no means she could affect: howbeit not to make him utterly despair, he answered him, that being a King who desired to do nothing but that which was good and just, he could not absolutely determine of a matter of such consequence, without the consent of my sister, and his people: and that therfore he would first propound the busines to the Counsell of his Estates: and that in the mean time it would be fit for him to go and communicate the matter with his brothers, to the end he might not render them his ene∣mies by neglecting their authority. Bracandor being heerby perswaded that all went according to his desire, was easily carried to take his leave of us, nothing dreaming of the Kings secret intentions, who not to lose time did presently after his departure send foorth commissions for the raising of sol∣diers, fortified his ports and frontier Towns; and with all diligence prepa∣red himself for a war. Our Amoroso being heerof advertised, was extream∣ly amazed, and instantly perceived, to what end the King had perswaded him to remove; which did so inrage him, that he vowed to die, or be reven∣ged of us all. But seeing the carefull order that Dardanor had taken thorow∣out his Kingdome, and that it would be impossible for him to bring his de∣signs to passe, he made as if he had quite forgotten Alixea, so as he suffered six months to passe without declaring himself any way sensible of my hus∣bands proceeding with him; who in the mean while not thinking any more of him, determined about twelve daies since to go a progresse to all the good Towns in his ngdome; and taking his journey, with the Princesse my sister, and my self, under the guard of two hundred Knights, he visited some places of most importance: and finding upon his way a very plasing forrest, he resolved to spend some daies in hunting in it. This while Bra∣candor was not sleeping, for being advertised by some, which he intertained in our Court, of all these passages, as you know that palaces are never un∣furnished of such traitors, he came thither accompanied with his bro∣thers, where finding us attended only by thirty Knights of our guard, they
put us into this Chariot, and after they had massacred our people, hurrying us away, they threatned us with no lesse then ravishment and death. Some of our servants that had escaped from the fury of their swords, having gi∣ven notice of our misfortune to the King, he presently drew together as many of his Knights as possibly he might, and following us with all dili∣gence, he overtook us to his certain ruine, without the happy assistance which you, Sir, so luckily brought him. See heer, my Lord, the true narra∣tion of our disaster, which I conclude with a protestation, that I shall never be sparing of any thing in my power whatsoever your service shall com∣mand in, since you have hazarded your life so nobly for my preservation. While Clairangia was thus discoursing to him, Fulgoran who never had be∣held such beauty before, observed her with a strange and unusuall motion, and in his heart said thus to himself. Good gods, how blessed a man is Dar∣danor to be possest of a creature so full of perfections? and how much to my prejudice am I to fear the incountring and seeing of her at this time? I cannot chuse but love her, though she be dedicated to the contentment of a∣nother: and spite of my teeth I must yeeld to the impulsions of that proud deity which triumphs over all men. Mighty Love, do not, I beseech thee, refuse me thy aid; and since it is thy pleasure to be acknowledged by me, grant that the heart of this Lady may prove as pliant, as the glances of her eies are pleasing; I will then with a liberall hand present sacrifice to thy al∣tars, and proclaim to all the world that thou art of more power then all the gods that we adore. On the other side Clairangia finding him wonderfully agreeable to her, did insensibly passe from a due acknowledgement of his assistance, to an heigth of liking him, being unable with all her modesty to keep her self from dearly loving him, and wishing that she might in that manes possesse him, as she might one day receive the contentments which Love doth give us in the fruition of our desires. Neverthelesse not being willing to leave a bad impression in him of her weaknesse, she concealed her mind, and kept him well enough from discerning her affection. Thus shortning the length of the way, with the sweet entertainment of their thoughts, they arrived at a village, where the King had a mind to rest, and cause his wounds to be carefully looked unto. But having intelligence that some kinsmen of the Giants had a design to surprize him in that place, and so to be revenged on him, he presently dislodged, being much troubled, that he had no more of his people about him to assist him, if the enemy should charge him: but he was quickly freed of that care, by the comming in of the Knights that he had left in the forrest, who incountred him on the way an howr after: much rejoicing to find him alive, whom they had given for dead, as soon as they heard he was gone to set upon the Giants. When he saw them he commanded his tent to be pitched, that he might repose himself being then out of all fear of danger, since he had in his company the burning Knight, to whom he did all the honour that possibly he could devise. The night past sweetly away with every one, but these two hearts so lately wounded: for fixing their imaginations, she upon the considerati∣on of what she ought to her honour; he upon the fear of not being inter∣tained with favour, and the danger that his enterprise might draw upon him, they were both of them kept waking till day, amidst the perplexity of a world of thoughts: but if they were tormented that night, the next was so them much more full of torture. For their conversing familiarly together
all that day, having added no little fuell to their fire, made them feel their desires much more violent, and so rendred their pains more insupportable. Shamefastnesse sealed up the lips of Clairangia, and a due respect brideled Fulgoran, but remembring that lovers are commonly fortunate, when they are adventrous, he desired to trie whether boldnesse would acquire him that, which his faintnesse had not hitherto permitted him to ask. Wherup∣on calling for pen and inck he wrot these lines to discover his love unto her, not being confident enough to do it by word of mouth. Fulgorans Letter to his Lady the faire Clairangia. Madam, I Beleeve you will think me very rash in acquainting you thus with my thoughts, but when you shall consider your own power and my weaknesse, without question you will hold me excused; and say, that I have reason being sick, to seek for recove∣ry, which is in your hands, and the content of my life depends upon your favour. Do not. I beseech you, refuse it to the passion of a lover, who never knew what it was to sigh but for you, nor desires any greater felicity in the world, then the honour of your service. Your eies in which shines so much beauty, promise me no lesse: make not them then the authors of my despair, as they have been of my captivity, but let your sense of my suffering, give me ease to blesse my good fortune: so shall you put new life into my courage, and my arms shall make all the earth to know, that it is your beauty alone which deserves to command the burning Knight, who doth not wish a condition more eminent then to be Your Servant. This Letter being by the means of Silesia, the trusty secretary of her pri∣vatest thoughts, cunningly conveied into Clairangiaes hands, was read with some perturbation; but unresolved as yet to declare her self, she returned no answer unto it, leaving the burning Knight in such disquiet, as his humor before so pleasing and sociable, became altogether untractable: he was sel∣dome seen in the Court, little in his chamber, but commonly in the woods and unfrequented places, where he entertained himself with the sad consi∣deration of his miserable estate; in which being denied the happinesse of knowing his parents, he was now also refused the enjoying the first thing that ever he had loved. Unfortunate Knight, said he, what dost thou now dream of, or what canst thou think of that gives thee not occasion to com∣plain? Thou canst not be happy, only because thou art not worthy of so much glory. Retire then in time, and rather blame thy boldnesse, then the cruelty of thy Mistris: she is not guilty of thy misery, it is thy destiny that thou must accuse for it. But alas! what counsell is this thou harknest unto? Is it likely that thou canst leave her, and love her so dearly? Thou must ei∣ther die, or vanquish this hard heart of hers: women do not so easily yield themselves; they will be entreated, and do often times feign themselves cruell, to trie our constancy. If thou shouldst possesse her without pain, her caresses would not be so sweet, nor thy contentment so compleat. Where∣fore thou must not be weary of serving her, since the recompence well de∣serves thy labour. This Knight thus losing himself in his meditations made all the Court to wonder at this change of his. The King was much troubled with it, as admiring his vertue, but Clairangia much more. For knowing that she only was the cause therof, she participated with him in her grief
and suffering, which much amazed Silesia, who not approoving this reser∣vednesse of hers, did one day thus speak to her: I wonder at you, Madam, and cannot imagine why you afflict your self in this maner, when you may live contented. You love Fulgoran, he adores you; and you have often told me, that you would not be ingratefull to the good offices he hath done you. His valour, beauty, love, and the infinite respect that he serves you withall, fill you full of desire; why then do you not seek for the accomplish∣ment therof? and to what end is this modesty, seeing it is so troublesome unto you? Madam, it is not well done, you tyrannize your life to no pur∣pose; occasions are to be laid hold on when they present themselves. This Knight hath too many perfections to be despised: open your arms to him, since he offers himself to you; and as he hath not been spring of his bloud for your preservation, deny him not your favour for the conservation of his life, which cannot be long, if you continue this course with him: his death could be no pleasure to you, but condemning your rigour, you would say that you had committed an irreparable fault. Ah! how dangerous it is to meet with one that will push us on when we have our foot upon the preci∣pice: Clairangia, whom the respect of her greatnesse, and the consideration of a husband, did as yet contain, beleeving that her weaknesse might be somwhat warranted by Silesiaes reasons, soon yielding up her self promised this wench no longer to reject Fulgoran; and permitted her to tell him that she would the next day go to Celbana, a house of pleasure that she had some three leagues from thence, where she thought she might have more liberty to confer her favours on him, then amongst a thousand observers, which are ordinarily in Court. This office Silesia willingly undertook; for as soon as she had her commission, she past three or fowre times before Ful∣gorans chamber door, till she found an opportunity of meeting him, to let him know how all things were disposed for his content: how her Mistrisse desired to see him at Celibana, that there she might give some asswagement to his sorrows: and that he was happy if he could manage his fortune with discretion. This advertisement made him to change his countenance, as the fear of being ill used had altered his humour, he became more jolly then he had been in a good while before, and at last went to bed with lesse un∣quietnesse then before. CHAP. X. The Queen Clairangia going to Celibana, is twice surprised, and rescued by Fulgoran. THE Queen departing with the Kings consent, under the guard of the Earl of Clina and twenty Knights, Fulgo∣ran (who had not forgotten Silesiaes directions) went out armed, as he was accustomed to do, and seeming to be caried by his ordinary fancies, followed a way a little wide of that which the Queen with her train had taken, meditating upon the good fortune he was to have in finding his Lady more gentle then she used to be to him. She on
the other side went with no lesse contentment thinking on the caresses she was to receive from a lover of such perfections. But her joy was quickly turned into sorrow: for she espied a Giant comming out of the wood of a goodly proportion, and not of any monstrous greatnesse, but every way so handsome, that notwithstanding the trouble she was in by the appearance of such an object, yet took she some pleasure in beholding his gallant de∣meanour; howbeit considering that such kind of persons are for the most part cruell and uncurteous, she began to say: O ye Gods! how much I doubt the meeting with this great Knight? and I am much afraid that the death of our enemies will be revenged by this incounter. Sister, we are un∣fortunate, and can expect nothing from this mischance, but either to be for∣cibly bere of that which we ought to hold most dear, or to bee reduced into the misery of a long captivity. Wherfore, said she to her attendants, prepare your selves to fight, and shew in what esteem you hold my safety. Reward shall wait on the valiant, and punishment on those that are cowards, and that prefer their lives before their honors. At these words every one made him ready to do his duty; but the Giant making no account of this troop, first of all addrest himself to the Coachman, whose brains he pre∣sently knockt out with a blow of his armed fist; then drawing out his Cy∣mitar the first that presented himself to him had his head cloven in sunder: after that falling in amongst the rest, he dealt his blows in such maner, as from one he cut off an head, from another an arm, cleft a third down to the middle, so that within lesse then half an howr he had laid fowrteen at his feet; and amongst them the Count of Clina so far from himself, as he re∣membred not that he was in the world. The six that survived hoping for no better entertainment then their companions had received, fled into the wood, leaving their Queen a prisoner, when as two Giants by much far greater then the first, came to the place where this fight had been; one of the which having beheld the excellent beauty of Clairangia, was so far in love wi her as he resolved either to die, or make her his own; Wherfore adressing himself to the Conquerour, who was going to play the Coach∣man, and had the whip already in his hand, he said: Do not think, Knight, that a treasure of such value as you think to have, is to be purchased with so little labour: you have in your opinion, made it yours by the slaughter of these men, the defeature of whom can give you no true glory; but if you mean to possesse it without doubt of a competitor, it is my death that must give you assurance: therfore you must resolve to fight for it with me, or ac∣knowledging your self unworthy of such a happinesse, give over any fur∣ther claim to it, and suffer me to carry it whither I please. The advantage you have, answered he, of a second, makes you speak with so much arro∣gance; for if you were alone, you would rather think of defending your self, then offer to brave a man of my fashion: howsoever do not perswade your self that I will so easily yield you the fruit of my labours, neither hope to be the conducter of these Ladies, to whom I have so just a title; for I in∣tend not to make way to you for it, but upon very strict conditions. At these words enraged like two Bulls that were ready to fight for an heyfer, they at one instant discharged two such heavy blows each upon the other, as they both staggered ready to fall, had not the shame of being overcome in the presence of her whom they loved transported them. This beginning but incensing them the more, they laid upon one another with such fury, as by
the noise they made, one would have thought there had been fifty Knight together by the ears. If the one gave a blow, the other was not asleep. In In brief, they were so eager, that their bloud running down on every side, did nothing at all a bate their courage. He that came first not enduring to be disputed with about a thing he had gotten, struck so furious a blow upon his enemies shield, that having divided it in two the sword descended upon his casque which it entred, giving him a slight wound in the head: but well of∣fered was as well returned, he being paid at the same instant with so rude a thrust that pierced through his armour a good way into the flesh, which put him into such a rage, as grinding his teeth, he took his Cymitar in both his hands, and gave his enemy so horrible a blow upon the head, that without doubt he had determined the combat if he had made it home. Neverthe∣lesse it served not only to give him a slash in the face, but the point passing on with an incredible violence opened his cuirace and wounded him dange∣rously in his breast. This blow somwhat amazing the other, who yet had not drawn his sword, but was with the Ladies, intreating them not to be troubled with their meeting them, caused him to lay hand on his Curtelax, wherwith very rudely he intertained his enemy; who little caring for this assistance, redoubled his strokes with more fury then before. In the mean time Clairangia was more liker a dead then a living woman; for well per∣ceiving that which side soever fortune should favour, her danger was inevi∣table, she afflicted her self in such extremity as would have moved any the most insensible heart to have pitied her, but her sorrow lasted not long; for a while after she perceived the brave Knight ardant come galloping in, who seeing so many dead bodies scattered on the ground, his Lady all drenched in tears, and stretching out her hands as imploring his aid, he became so en∣raged, that drawing forth his sword he let it fall with such force upon the head of the last Giant that he clove him to the teeth overthrowing him dead to the earth. This brave blow having reinforced his courage, he made so smart a thrust at the breast of his companion, as meeting just with the wound which the first Giant had given him there, the point of his sword came out at his back, together with his life and that little bloud he had lest: howbeit not contented to see himself delivered from those two, he turned him to the first comer for to serve him with the same sawce; but he retiring a little back said unto him: I cannot worthy Knight, with reason imploy my arms against you; for having given me my life which was undoubtedly far engaged by the force of these two Knights whom you have slain, it were base in me to defend it against you, and in you a cruelty to deprive me of it, after you have so generously preserved it: if you have any interest in this fair Lady I will no longer pretend to any part in her, but will rest contented with the honour of your service. Fulgoran admiring the humility of this Giant, (for he could not doubt his courage having before his eies such ap∣parant proofs of his valour) let down his sword which was advanced to strike him, and very gently answered: I did not look, Sir, to be vanquisht by your curtesie, as I doubted to have been by your arms, wherwith having made two of the terriblest Giants in the World to tremble, I might very well fear a bad successe of our combat. But since you will have this glory over me, I willingly grant it you, and shall be well contnted to accept of this obligation, in hope one day to find a means to requite it: let us then, I pray you, be friends, since you will have it so, and believe it that I shall ever
hold my self honoured in your acquaintance. Heerupon with open arms they embraced one another, to the infinit satisfaction of the Queen, who see∣ing this businesse ended according to her wish, and contrary to the fear she was in about the issue therof, knew not well how to look. See, said she to her Knight, who came to kisse her hands after his victory, and to present the Giant to her; See, my Lord, how I am doubly engaged to you for my li; But you shall not find me ungratefull, and your services shall be so wel recompenced, as you shall have cause to command my acknowledgement of them; I do willingly receive this great Knight, although he hath strange∣ly perplexed me, but the happinesse to see you by me, and my self at liber∣ty, which I was so lately in despair of, doth not suffer me to think of any passed misfortune; Let us go on, since we are so neer to Celibana, but first it were good to see if among so many Knights as lie heer in the dust, there be any one yet living: for it were not well done to leave any neglected that have so faithfully discharged their duties. Fulgoran then lighting from his horse viewed them all over, but found none to breath saving the Count of Clina, who shewed some signs of life assoon as he had air given him, wher∣at the Queen very much rejoiced, though I believe she would have helped to make an end of him her self, if she could have foreseen the mischiefs which by his occasion did afterwards befall her. The Count being thorow∣ly recovered, for he had no wound upon him, they began to set on towards Celibana, where they quickly arrived with much contentment. The news of the Queens misfortune being carried to Dardanor, the Courtiers were all up in arms, and every one was ready to get to horse for to succor her, when word was brought to the King, that she was freed by the valour of the Knight ardant, who entertaining himself in his melancholy fancies not far from the way which the Queen went, had heard the noise of arms, and came in just as the combat of the three Giants was in the highest fury: two of the which passed by the edge of his sword, the third becomming his friend for the assistance he had given him. This second advertisement much more welcome then the former, having quieted Dardanors mind, he sent his Phy∣sitians and Chyrurgians to Celibana to look to those which were wounded. In the mean time our Lovers began to caresse one another; for Clairangia no longer able to hinder the felicity of the Knight ardant, whom she thoght worthy of her love, assoon as he was unarmed thus amorously said unto him: I should be ungratefull indeed, if I should not answer your affection or now refuse you a recompense for those good services you have rendred me, your valour doth inforce me aswell as it doth Knights that incounter you; and I am constrained to confesse that you deserve my favours, I will therefore confer them on you, so as you do manage them with discretion, and will delay your delight no longer then the evening. You shall follow Silesia when time serves, but take heed you lose not your self in the excesse of your joy, nor let your actions testifie the content of your heart. O ye Gods! said Fulgoran, rapt into a heaven of blisse, how pleasing is this pro∣mise to me, and what cause have I to esteem my self the happiest man on the earth? Not all the gods, Madam, shalbe able to attain to this glory of mine, and I may well say that all my travels are fully rewarded with these words alone: you assure me unexpressable felicities, and such as questionles might easily transport me from my self (for no mortall man can receive them without passion.) But Madam, I will carry my self (sinc you command
me to do so) with such prudence as you shall never repent your so infinitely obliging of me. But alas! I fear that the time may change, and pardon me. If I say that I doubt that I am not fortunate enough to merit so much grace. This is, answered she, to afflict your self without cause: Doubt not, my Knight, that I will fail of my word, since I am to have a share in the plea∣sure you hope for; but that we may begin our love with discretion, I would not have you tarry heer any longer, for fear of giving suspition to any. There is the Earl of Clina, hold good correspondence with him if it be pos∣sible, for he is a man of whom I stand in doubt, and that questionlesse ob∣serves our actions. These words making Fulgoran to withdraw, he went in∣to the garden, not now any more to passe his time among the trees with ru∣minating upon the cause of his discontent, but to meditate with the lesse di∣version upon the good fortune that was promised him. Having spent some hours in this entertainment the night approached, which he with so much impatience had expected, to render him contented: For Silesia whom the Queen had fully informed of her intentions, came to him, and having lead him to certain trees that made a delicate arbour, willed him not to stir from thence till she returned to him. His impatience making him think the time long, he accused his Mistris of sloth, and would willingly have gone to ha∣sten her, but fearing to offend with much ado he refrained, and staid till at last he saw the Queen appear, having nothing but a loose white sattin gar∣ment on, and so gentle a night dressing on her head, as would have forced the dullest soul in the world to have loved her. Ravished then with delight he went and fell on his knees before hir, kissing her hands a thousand times: But she that could not endure to see him in that posture, joined her lips to his with such ardency, as did well testifie that she was no lesse pressed with her desires then he. These first caresses serving only to waken their appe∣tites, they sate down upon the grasse, where Fulgoran immediatly took pos∣session of his desired blisse, with so much sweet dalliance, as the Reader must not wonder if I do not take upon me to describe the pleasure thereof, since all the words in the world are not sufficient to expresse it. Having thus past the greater part of the night with all the content that may be wished for in this world, they withdrew themselves with a promise to meet there eve∣ry night, which accordingly they performed with much secrecie; and cer∣tainly their delights had been of longer continuance, if Fulgoran had well observed the advice his Mistris gave him. But with this good fortune his humour changed, he was no longer melancholy, he was not to be found in the woods, he frequented not the fields, he was more curious in his appa∣rell then he was wont to be; If he spake it was alwaies in the defense of the beauty of Ladies; briefly in his eies was to be read the tranquility of his mind, and all his actions being full of jollity, made men judge that joy was more predominant in his heart then fadnes, so that every man wondered at this strange alteration in him. The Count of Clina observing him more narrowly then the rest, because he had a particular design upon him, soon discovered the secret, and was confident (seeing the Queen so often to eye him) that the metamorphosis proceeded from some speciall familiarity that was between them, which made him infinitely discontented. For being somewhat in love with the Queen, wherof nevertheles he never durst make any shew, it madded him to see another more happy then himself. What, said he all enraged, shall a stranger gather the roses, whilest I feel the prick
of the thorns? It is unreasonable, I must at leastwise have a share in her favours, since I cannot wholly possesse them; and she cannot refuse me that, seeing she gives her self to another: but say she should be so vain as to slight my affection, I have the means to be revenged of her, and make her fel the effects of an incensd spirit. Being carried then by this heady reso∣lution, he went directly to the Quens Chamber, where by chance she was alone, and with a low reverence said unto her: I am come, Madam, to put my life into your hands, and to acquaint you wtth a secret, which I scarse dare trust my self withall; I am over-rash (it is true) but who would not be so, when so great a reward is proposed? I love you, Madam, and the consi∣deration of your greatnes, or my duty, could ever divert me from it, though in so doing I have, as it were foreseen my ruine, but who would be loth to die for so excellent a cause? No, I will fear no punishments, that it may ap∣pear I am not insensible of the force of your beauty; my sighes do testifie rather your power then my insolence, and from my passion can nothing re∣dound but your glory. Consider me, Madam, I beseech you, as this great light of the world beholds all creatures, and remember that the least and meanest of them is as much obliged to him as the mightiest Monarks: The Gods that have made you so fair for the contentment of a King, have never forbidden you the conferring of a like grace on such as have not scepters, but yet many vertues; so that it lies in your power to make one happy; think me then worthy of that favour, and let my vow of an eternall fidelity give me a place in your good opinion; I will never passe by the respect that I ow to your greatnes, and the humility of my services shall so content you, that you shall more esteem the possessing of me, then regard the satisfaction of another, though greater, yet lesse vertuous then I. So kneeling down before her as if he would have demanded some further grace, he attended not the answer which he hoped for, but that which in all reason he was to fear. What n insolence said the offended Princesse, is this? And how shall I ever endure to look on thee again after so enormous a crime? Get thee gone, wicked man, and do not force me to shew thee how much I am dis∣plea; my cariage I am sure could never put this boldnesse into thee, and thy duty should have restrained this affrontednesse. If you must needs have passion, let it be for one of your own rank; they that resemble me cannot behold such as you are but with contempt: howbeit I will excuse the love which you say forceth you in this sort, provided my gentlenes do not puffe you up; and that I may see you reduced within the tearms of your duty, I shall then forget your folly, and forbearing to question you for it, will say that you have erred after the ordinary custome of other men; withdraw your self then with this testimony of my clemency, and never abuse my patience again, if you mean not to feel the punishments which use to be in∣flicted on those that remember not their own condition. With these words shutting her self into her cabinet, she left him mightily grieved to see him∣self despised, which he resolved either to revenge or lose his life. Retiring therefore to his lodging, he began to plot the villany wherwith I will ac∣quaint you in the Chapter following.
CHAP. XI. Clairangia and Fulgran are betraid by the Count of Clina. The Queen i imprisoned. Fulgrans adventures after he had left Celibana. THE Count of Clina's spite being greater then his love, he went away full of infinit discontent. I am, said he, all transported with choler, slighted for a stranger, and my boldnes in discovering my self is threatned with punishment; but I will make it appear that I am sensi∣ble of affronts. The Queen abusing the easines of the King, doth give her self over to the Knight ardant, and refusing to let me share in her caresses gives me just cause to resent it, and dis∣cover this secret. I will do it then, but with so much safety for my self, that without any hazard I will tast the pleasure of a sweet revenge. I will ac∣cuse these adulterers, and putting them in the Kings hand will not give this Knight leisure who trusts in his valor, to make use of his courage, his arms; for the Law doth not allow any man the combat in his own quarrell. And if the remembrance which the King owes to his precedent services, or the respect of the Queen, do draw him to dispense with the Law and permit him to combat himself, I will confront him with the redoubtable brothers of the two Giants that he last slew, who will be right glad to meet such an occasion to be revenged of their enemy. They are three, and able alone to defeat a whole army; I do therefore perswade my self that he will not stand long before them, what companion soever he gets to assist him. His choler then keeping him from considering how dangerous the issue of his enterprise might be, he instantly sent a messenger to Bracandors three bro∣thers giving them notice of his design, wherewith they were so pleased, as without further delay they came presently to meet him in the wood, where their conspiracy being contrived and agreed upon, the Count returned to the Castle to write a letter to the King, the tenor wherof was as followeth. The Count of Clina's Letter to King Dardanor. SIR, It much grieves me that in performing the office of a good subject, I must give you occasion to afflict your self: but since I cannot fail in this duty without being a traitor, I have resolved to passe by all considerations whatsoever, rather then have that spot stuck upon me. The Knight Ardant, whom you have so graced beyond his merits, not being so sensible a he should be of your favours, changes the respect which he owes you into ingratitude, and forgetting how much he stands in∣debted to your goodnesse, hath ingaged the Queen to love him with all the most a∣greeable services he is able to do her; which have already so gained upon her, as she hath wholly given her self unto him, reserving nothing for you but the appear∣ances of her affection. They are ordinarily together, their countenances do but too much discover their thoughts, and their actions are so little concealed, that only those who will not take the pains to observe them, cannot frame any sinister con∣struction
of them. I have indeavoured as a faithfull servant ought to do, to divert the Queen from this course, remonstrating unto her the quality she is of, the estate of the Knight Ardant, and withall her duty to your Majesty. But my advice hath been entertained with such coldnes, or as I might better say, with such choler, as in stead of the thanks which I expected for my fidelity, I received nothing but me∣naces so that unable to endure this wrong to your Majesty, I have been constrained to advertise you of it, that you may take present order for your quiet by the resent∣ment which you are to have of so grievous an offence. What extreams will not the choler of a King run into, that beleeves him∣self ffronted? Dardanor having read this letter suffered his passion so to trans∣port him, that not considering what he owed to the reputation of his wife, and Fulgorans services, he dispatched away immediatly fowr hundred Knights (having first written a ticket to the Count of Clina) and comman∣ded them to be at Celibana two howrs after midnight, and obey the Count in all his directions. Thus was all in disorder, except our lovers, who lived so contented amidst their ordinary delights, and not imagining they were subject to fortunes power, did study nothing but how to caresse one ano∣ther, to the infinit vexation of the Count of Clina, who tore his hair for despite, but his pain was of no long continuance: For seeing in the Com∣mission the King had sent him what means he had to be revenged, his grief was turned into joy: neverthelesse not intending to discover his thoughts he kept the same countenance as before, till his succour were arrived. This while Clairangia who dreamt not of the mischief that was to fall upon her head, having not forgotten the place where she met with such delight, was lying upon the grasse with Fulgoran, striving to make her caresses more plea∣sing to him with a world of dalliance, when as all on a sudden she heard a great noise of arms in the Castle. Sin ordinarily makes the guilty fearfull, and we often see that fear doth discover a bad design. The Queen guessing at the cause of all this hurly-burly instantly arose, and shewing the Knight Ardant a place of the wall commodious for him to get out, she besought him to save himself rather then to lose his life out of too much courage. Dear friend, said she to him, you may much better relieve me, having the liberty of the fields then fettred in irons void of all power to make use of your valour against our enemies. Time presseth us, and forbids us any long discourse: wherefore I will take my leave of you with this kisse, then joy∣ning her lips to his, she speedily retired by a secret pair of stairs up to her chamber; where she found Silesia neerer dead then alive, with the affright of hearing the Count bouncing at the door and threatning to break it open. The escape of the Knight Ardant having rendred the Queen somwhat con∣fident, she freely opened the door: and seeing the Count come in attended by a number of soldiers, she said to him with a countenance that testified her displeasure: What is it (disloiall as thou art) that thou intendst to do, and what means so many men at arms at this unseasonable howr when eve∣ry one should be at rest? If you had, Madam, replied he with a like confi∣dence, continued still in your virtue, I should be bound to render you an account of my actions, but that now being wanting in you, I will not tell you the reason why in the Kings name I arest you as his prisoner, being as∣sured that your offence tels you what is the cause therof. Prisoner by the Kings command, said she then all amazed? Oh traitor! this mischief comes
not but from thy villany. If I would have given ear to thy base praiers, I should not have received this affront, but the Gods which never forsake the innocent, will deliver me out of thy hands, and from this unadvised King, who gives so much credit to thy slnderous reports. I will go to prison then, since it must be so, but remember that chastisement alwaies followes the offence, and that thy crime will not remain unpunished. Saying so, she was going out to take her Coach, when as she espied the Knight Ardants Squire in the custody of thirty or forty souldiers, who intreated him with such indignity, as she could not forbear saying to the Count: Base man, Is this poor gentleman also guilty with me? Oh heavens! what injustice is this? and how is it that you do not punish such enorm iniquities? I would, replide the Count without being any whit abashed, that his master were in his room, we would make him know that strangers cannot defile a Princes bed without danger; but perhaps he may fall into our fingers heereafter. Yes, said Clairangia, or els thou into his: but I will not wish thee that ho∣nour, for thou deservest no better an executioner then a hangman. With that these speeches serving but to put the Count into further choler, he pre∣sently thrust her into the Coach, with Silesia, the Squire, and the Knight Ardants arms, and so took his way to the Court, not a little vexed that he carried not with him the principall piece of his busines. The Giant Gran∣dimore who was become Fulgorans true friend, did not approve of this pro∣ceeding, and had it not been that he was not as yet thorowly recovered of his wounds, so as he was not able to wear his arms, he would never have suffered the Queen to be entreated with so much cruelty: but he was con∣strained with patience to expect the issue of this affair, resolved neverthe∣lesse, either to lose his life, or to defend the Knight Ardants right, who on the other side was no lesse troubled. For seeing himself without arms, with∣out hors, and not dring to shew himself for fear of being made a prisoner he was so transported with grief, at he was almost beside himself. What, said he all inraged, and looking toward the town whither they were carry∣ing away his mistris, is it possible that I should leave my Lady unrelieved? and can I be satisfied with shedding of tears in stead of spending my bloud for her service? It is not possible that I should be so base? My love is the cause of her misfortune: my resenting it must also be the cause of her pre∣servation: I have a sword yet left me, that is enough, for courage cannot be wanting to me in this occasion: I will break through these armed troops that convoy her, and make it appear that I am more sensible of her misery, then of her affection. Therewith he laid hand on his sword and began to follow the Count and his company, when as he heard the voice of one that called to him, that made him presently at a stand, imagining that perhaps it might be his Lady, who being unwilling to fall into the Kings hands, had made an escape as he had done, and was come to seek him determining to run one and the same fortune with him: but he continued not long in this er∣ror, for though it were night and dark he might yet discern a maid, that ha∣ving saluted him, said: Good Knight, I come to divert you from your de∣sign, and to tell you that it is no lesse glory for a man to do all things with prudence, then to encounter his enemies with courage: you are in the way to an inevitable ruine, and of making your Lady culpable in your death: rea∣son should alwaies predominate in us, and to her should our passions ever submit: Take this way into the wood, where you shall find a Cave, out of
which you are not to go till you have direction to do it. For you cannot now be seen without extream hazard of your life: the time will not seem so tedious unto you as you apprehend, and believe it you shall find such plea∣sing diversions there, as you will never repent the following of my advice. Wth that she vanished out of his sight, leaving him so amazed as he could hardly perswace himself that he was not in a dream: how beit determining to follow her counsell he took the way which had been shewed him, and walked along till the Sun arose, when as he found himself at the foot of a little rock wherein there was a cleft, wide enough for two men to enter a front, thinking then that this was the Cave of which she spake, he looked round about, and seeing a little pair of stairs cut out of the rock he went down, without any apprehension of fear, and at length came into a court so fair and compassed about with buildings so large and magnificent, that he remained much astonished: the walls were round about adorned with most exquisire pictures that represented the heroique acts of Amadis of Gaul, and of all the Princes of his bloud, in the contemplation wherof he took such delight as he would have thought of nothing els, had he not been interrupt∣ed by three damsels of admirable beauty, one of which spake thus unto him: It should seem, Sir Knight, that we have nothing in this house worth your regard but these pictures, Follow us, I pray you, and we will shew you that which will no lesse transport you? With that she took him gently by the hand and led him through the Garden, where a thousand sorts of delicate flowrs divided a great number of quarters, into so stately an hall, that he was even lost with the admiration of it. For besides the limming of gold and azure, the walls were adorned about with threescore marble statues of Knights, which holding up one of their hands supported a throne of chry∣stall, wherupon Cupid was seated in state, as it were thereby demonstrating that he had triumphed over al those the most valiant Knights of the World. Being arested a while with the consideration heerof, he went out of that in∣to another room, which seemed no lesse glorious to him then the former, where immediatly six other damsels served a great deal of excellent meat to the Table: but me thinks it is fit to leave him a while amongst these delica∣cies, from whence we shall bring him in convenient time, to relate unto you the lamentations which in the mean space the beautifull Queen of Romerie made. This Princesse being conducted to the City in all rigorous maner, was yet still in hope to mollifie the King by her tears, and to make him lose the bad conceit he had of her; but her hope was in vain, for Dardanor be∣ing too sensible of his disgrace, refused to see her, and having committed her to prison determined without further delay to put her to death, seeking no better proofs against her then the Count of Clina's information, and the flight of Fulgoran, had not the Lords of his Kingdome opposed them∣selves to this injustice of his. The Law, Sir, said one of his ancienst Coun∣sailor, doth indeed adjudge the Adulterer to death, but yet commands us to proceed upon better evidence then bare opinion; who doth assure us of the Queens offence, besides the words of the Count of Clina? and who can truly swear that this is not a treachery in him? Silesia maintains that she is innocent, and no body presents himself as her accuser but only one man, who is not to be relied upon in this case; why then should we be more led by his motion then by Law and Custome? Sir, there is no likely hood of it, (pardon me if the consideration of right makes me speak in this maner) and
the conjecture which you frame upon the flight of the Knight Ardant, is not forcible enough to prove her guilty; He was not found in the Castle, that is rather a sign of my mistrsses innocency, then an evidence of her guilt. I, but he presents not himself: it is true, and in my judgement he hath reason; For being a stranger, and not expecting to be supported in his right, since you have failed him after he had so infinitely obliged you, he hath withdrawn himself, knowing how dangerous it is to fall into the hands of an incensed Prince. Sir, you have my opinion freely delivered to you: the place that I hold by your Majesties command, gives me that liberty. And since there is question of your quiet, and my conscience, I say, that your Majesty ought not to refuse the Queen the benefit of the Law, which is, that a woman accused may justifie her self by the arms of a Champion. This liberty then she hath if her accusers appear. I am heer said then the Count of Clina, ready to accept of this condition, and to enter the combat with three seconds against an equall number: for being certain of the thing I shall never fear that the victory should not be of my side. Heerupon the King seeing that the most apparant of the kingdome were of his opinion, and that the Count of Clina accepted of the combat, he Decreed, That he should accompanied with three gentlemen, within fifteen daies maintain his accusation; And that the Queen should within the same tearm, present the like number, upon pain of being held culpable and liable to punishment. Matters thus ordered every one withdrew: The Count of Clina to send for his Giants, and Silesia who was enlarged, to enquire and search for the Knight Atdant. CHAP. XII. The horrible combat between the Giant Grandimore, the Count of Clina; and the three brothers: Grandimore being in extream danger of his life, is relieved first by a strange Knight, and then by Fulgoran. THE Count of Clina highly pleased for that the combat was granted him as he desired, dispatched presently a servant of his to Bracandors kinsemen, advertising them of the conditions of the combat, and what day they were to be in the City for the finishing of their enterprise; being so confident of the victory, as he made no doubt of being revenged to the full, since Fulgoran appeared not, to take upon him the defence of his own honour and his Ladies; who amidst the grief to see herself in captivity had no other recourse but to her tears; howbeit judging it fit to give them over for to think of some means for her delivery, she dispatched away Silesia with a command to seek the Knight Ardant where ever he were, and to acquaint him with the resolution that was taken concerning this combat, but all her labour was in vain: for having emploied two daies in that search without any news of him, she was ready to make her self a∣way, determining rather to die so then to return to her mistris with so little
satisfaction. Great Gods, said she lifting up her hands, can you suffer so beautifull a Queen to be lost for want of succour? and what may be heer∣after expected from any man, when the Knight Ardant not only fails of his promise, but is also wanting both to the life of his Lady, and his own ho∣nour? Is this the recompense of all her love? and how can he excuse so great a basenes? If he have not feared the hazard of his life for the relief of privat persons, why doth he now refuse to employ his valour for a mat∣ter that so neerly concerns him? Truly I know not what to say, and am ex∣treamly amazed to see him thus abandon us without any sense of that affe∣ction which lately was so violent in him. But alas! it may be he is not still in this country, and so is ignorant of the resolution is taken concerning this affair: wherfore I may blame him wrongfully: and yet not so, but I have just cause; for the fear of all the tortures in the world should not have made him quit this kingdome before he knew whether his presence heer were ne∣cessary or no. He is guilty, and my complaint of him not unjust: but what shall I say to this afflicted Princesse? Shall I carry her the certain news of her ruine, by the default of her Knight? Or shall I perswade her to save her life by yeelding to the desires of this Traitor that accuseth her? Neither of them, for so should I be either guilty of her crimes, or of her punishment, and be the destruction both of her honour and her life: die I must then, (for without her I desire no happinesse in this world) and declare by a generous resolution that I loved her more in my death then whilest I lived. Die then Silesia, and let the sacrifice of thy bloud appease the Gods, and make them look upon thy mistris with an eie of pity. With that she took a little knife that hung at her girdle, with a purpose to sheath it in her bosome, when as on the sudden she espied hard by her a maid, that thus spake unto her: Dam∣sell, do not persist in this furious design which you are about to execute up∣on your self: The Gods would rather be highly displeased with the effusi∣on of your bloud, then any way reconciled to your desires by such a heady violence. They are to be humbly intreated and not provoked by our des∣peration. Leave then this course which would be to no purpose, and ere long you shall meet with a Knight that will be of much use to you in your businesse. He is full of curtesie, and will not refuse to be a second therein; touching the rest never trouble your self, for the first being found, a third will appear in so due time as these tears will be converted into joy. This said, she so suddenly left her, as Silesia had not leisure to reply, being very much grieved that she understood not the meaning of her speech; never∣thelesse taking a little better heart upon her promise, she forgot the nymphs advice, but went into the thickest of the wood, where she had not gone far before she found a yong Knight sleeping under the shadow of certain trees: He was so lovely, and seemed so handsome asleep, as she could not chuse but behold him with passion. Oh heavens! said she to her self, how liberall hath nature shewed her self to this Knight, if he be as brave and valiant as the nymph would make me believe, I do not think that any one in the world can match him, except it be Fulgoran, who is nothing behind him in those perfections which I observe in him? and me thinks he looks very like him; or if there be any difference, it is that our Knight is somewhat fairer, and hath a more majesticall aspect. Shall I wake him to judge a little better of his excellencies in observing the gracefulnesse of hs motion? that were somewhat uncivill. But alas! I am as it were bound to do so: for besides
my desire, the businesse about which I am sent doth presse me unto it, and doth not permit me to trifle out the time in this maner. I must then inter∣rupt him to procure mine own quiet, but it must be done in such sort as I may not be taxed of incivility. Wherupon retiring a little aside, she began to lament so lowd, that the sleeping Knight awaked, and not well come to himself, laced on his helmet, took his sword in his hand, and drew directly to the place whither the voice called him. She that saw him coming in that fashion presently arose, and throwing herself at his feet embraced his knees without any other speaking then by sighs, which made the Knight take her up by the arm, and say unto her: Gentlewoman be pleased to rise, and tell me if you have any occasion to use me, that I may dispose my self to do you service. For having taken arms for no other end, I shall hold it a glory to be emploied in drawing you out of that affliction wherin you seem to be at this present. Noble Knight, replied she, the Gods reward you for this so generous an offer: I am indeed afflicted, and perhaps you shall never meet with an occasion more worthy of your arms and valour then this, to which you have presented your self: I belong to the beautuous Queen of Rome∣ria, one of the compleatest Ladies on the earth; who, for slighting the affe∣ction of the most treacherous man that lives, is falsly accused to have forfei∣ted her honour: and the King himself more heady then discreet, hath ad∣judged her to the fire, if some Knight do not undertake her defence. See heer the first and principall cause of my grief, and the next is, for that I can∣not find a Knight whom I have sought these two daies; for I am assured that he would not fail us at our need, and that with your assistance our ene∣mies would come much short of their reckoning. But if we do not meet with him we shall not find any in the Court that will undertake the combat for the Queen: not for that they do not hold her innocent, but because the report is that three horrible Giants will second the traitor, who is the cause of all these mischiefs; now if your courage be suteable to the beauty which I see in your face, you can never have a braver occasion to gain honor in the world, nor will you let me return without hope of seeing my mistris soon rid of the trouble. Do not believe, Gentlewoman said he, that the fear of any danger can make me be wanting to the duty of a good Knight; we ne∣ver leave our homes, nor put on arms, but with a solemn oath not to forsake the innocent in their misery. Wherefore I will not only assist you in this, where the life and honor of so excellent a Princesse is in question, but in whatsoever els you will employ me: Let us then when you please make for the town, provided that we may reach it in time, I shall never complain of my labour. I could not, replied she wiping her eies, expect an answer lesse vertuous from so gallant a Knight. Let us go then, since you are pleased, without any further stay, for in truth I fear that we shall not get there but with the latest. Away then went they towards the Town, entertaining one another with pleasing discourses, to make their journey seem the lesse tedi∣ous. In this mean time Fulgoran was in the Palace of the rock, amidst the greatest delights that might be; one while being entertained by the dam∣sels, who recounted to him the admirable deeds of arms of the Grek Prin∣ces, to the end he might thereby be drawn to love them: another while di∣verted by the pleasing object of a thousand varieties which he met with in every part. Love did not then disquiet him, he was free in his thoughts, and the remembrance of no one thing whatsoever, was of force to bar him
from enjoying a most happy content. Fourteen daies being spent amidst so much sweetnes, that fair Lady which did first welcome him at his arrivall there, took him by the hand and said, I could passionately wish, gentle Prince, that the Fates would permit you a perpetuall abode in this house, that I might not be deprived of your conversation, which is most agreeable to me: but you were not brought hither for my satisfaction, nor for to passe the rest of your daies in solitarines; your valour is necessary in the world, and I should be guilty of much mischief if I should retain you heer any longer: Wherfore you shall presently depart, for the preservation of that which your merit hath gotten you, I mean that beautuous Queen who feared not to hazard her life to oblige you: She is in an extream danger of death, which she cannot avoid but by your assistance: Do not fail her then in this necessity, lest you incur the name of ingratefull. The estate wherin you now are doth trouble you, I well perceive, for to enter a com∣bat in the case you are now in were not agreeable to your merit. But be not dismaid, for those which brought you hither from amongst the middest of your enemies, have taken a care of your affairs; behold, heer are arms, that were made for you and worthy of your valour: with that she opened a little Cabinet and took out of it an azur'd armour, covered all over with golden starrs, and an helmet of the same so rich and of so excellent a temper, as was hard to be matched. You must, said she continuing her discourse, instantly am your self, whilest I give order to make ready a horse for you; with that she departed, leaving the Knight Ardant as much amazed as contented: but remembring that it was no time to loiter, since the busines was pressing, he put on those arms, which he found so light as he could hardly beleeve that they were proof enough against the blow of a sword; yet unwilling to shew any mistrust of them which had entertained him with so much curtesie, he made an end of arming himself, and instantly came down the stairs: but when he thought to come into the Court, he no longer saw those stately buildings, or the rock, but a very spacious plain. Good God! said he then all astonished, where am I now? and how in a moment comes so goodly a house to be lost? Either I sleep, or all that was done heer proceeded from the art of some person that loves me. Howsoever I am armed now, and therfore fear not the encounter of my enemies: then looking round about him he saw on of the bravest horses that ever he had beheld, tied at a tree not far off. This Lady, said he is no liar, for the horse is not inferior to the arms: with that he drew to him, and finding him sadled and brideled, got up on him, took a lance that was reared against the tree, and rode away towards the Town. In this mean time the Giant Grandimores wounds were healed, and Clairdngia's sorrows increased. For having no news either of her Knight or of Silesia, she was in utter despair of her life, the rather in regard that the next day was the very same which was designed her for the maintenance of her innocency; that her enemies were come, and that no Knight presented himself to defend her right. Poor distressed Queen, said she tearing of her hair, into what extremity art thou now reduced? Thou hast but one gasp of life remaining, which also thou must lose ignominiously; and that which with reason may most torment thee is, that thy misery proceeds from thy sence of anothers pains, who now hath no feeling of thine. O ingratefull Knight! I could never have beleeved that thy love would have been extin∣guished by my misfortune, since that was the only cause of it: but thy perfi∣diousnes
doth teach me, that nothing is more unsure then the promises of men. Thou oughtest to lose a thousand lives (for so thou hast often sworn to me) and run any danger whatsoever for my service; and thy affection ought to be as lasting as thy life, yet now thou wantest either love or cou∣rage: the presence of three men doth affright thee, or forgetfull of my ca∣resses, thou art now lying at the foot of some other Lady, whom thou mea∣nest to bring into the like miserable condition. But what do I say? Fulgo∣ran, Thou art no coward, I have seen too great proofs of thy valour for to doubt of it: nor can I by any means perswade my self that thou dost not love me still. Thou comest not then to relieve me, because thou art detai∣ned by some unlucky fate, and so it is not in thy power: I am therefore too blame in accusing thee; for I know thou wouldst not shun the encounter of a thousand armed Knights when my preservation were in question. No I can accuse none for my ill fortune but my self; I will die then in this opi∣nion, and will beseech the Gods that they will deliver thee if thou beest in captivity, and alwaies blesse thy enterprises. The Princesse being thus re∣solved for death expected but the next day, which came on with much con∣tentment to the Count of Clina, who believing that he should not find any opposit, caused himself to be armed with rich arms, and mounted upon a mighty horse came into the field with such arrogance, as there was not one of the assistants that did not curse him in his heart, seeing with what boldnes he marched in the midst of his three Giants: as soon as he was entred the field the Queen was sent for; but she not expecting any help would have gone straight to the place of execution and not to the lists: but in that instant the Giant Grandimore presented himself to her, armd at all pieces to desire her leave that he might undertake the combat for her. Madam, said he, it is with much grief that I see your fair eies drenched in tears, and that the Knights of your Court are so base as not to assist you in this necessity: I am the Knight Ardants friend, and will with his quarrell which now is in dis∣pute, maintain against your enemies, that you are innocent of the crime is imputed unto you: be pleased then to give me power so to do, and distrust not the mercy of the Gods who never leave the afflicted in their miseries. These couragious words giving Clairangia some hope, she replied in this maner: Vertuous Knight, this good will of yours to me doth so oblige me, as I am most willing to put all my right into your hands; you go alone to fight with fowr redoubted enemies, nevertheles I hope you will be victori∣ous: For they are traitors, and the God will fight on my side, giving you as much courage as they have malice. But let us know with what conditions this combat is to begin: Then calling for the Iudges, she sent to the King to beseech him that Grandimore might be permitted to encounter his enemies one by one, and not altogether, since the lawes of Chivalry did not permit a combat upon advantage: wherunto the King answered, that the busines was not in his power to dispose of, but depended wholly upon the pleasure of his adversaries; howbeit he would no way hinder him from being se∣conded by any Knight that should happen to arrive whilest the combat la∣sted. Since it is in the choice of our enemies, said Grandimore, incensed with this answer, let us Madam, go and see if there be more curtesie in them then in the King: wherupon entring within the lists he set himself just against the Count of Clina and his Giants; one of whom desired the first course, remonstrating to his companions that it were a basenes for fowr of them to
join in the defeature of one single Knight. But the Count of Clina would none of that, knowing the abilities of Grandimore, and the importance of the victory. Those which are wicked, said he, desiring to cloke his malice with some shew of reason, do not deserve to be intreated like persons of ho∣nour; we therfore may lawfully make use of our fortune that is presented unto us: Saying so, he furiously elapt spurs to his horse, and the others by his example did the like. But Grandimore disdaining the Count directed his lance against one of the Giants, and that so luckily, as he ran him clean tho∣row, laying him upon the ground: yet being unable to sit the shock of fowr lances, which had at one and the same instant incountred him, he was un∣horsed spite of his heart, and fell with a slight wound in his arm; neverthe∣les being more active then the greatnes of his body did seem to permit, he very lightly got up, and was remounted on his horse by that time the others had ended their course: Having then no feeling of his hurt, he couragiously drew out his sword, wherwith he gave the Count such a blow, as cutting his arm sheer off he sent him without sence to the ground. That done, he made head to the Giants, who battered him more rudely then he desired, and be∣gan one of the cruellest fights in the world; sometimes striking, sometimes foining, and then again with an admirable dexterity avoiding their blows: In brief, he so carried himself that it was not perceived to whom the victo∣ry did incline; when as the first Giant whom he had overthrown, then ha∣ving recovered his spirits came to charge him with strange fury; his coming in making him dispair of his life, he graspt his sword fast in his hand, and determining to sell his skin as dear as he could, he let it fall with such rage upon him that first came within his distance, as he gave him a dangerous wound in his head. And not therwith satisfied he was raising his sword a∣gain to dispatch him, but at that very instant he received two such blows, one on the head and the other on the arm, that letting his sword fall he re∣mained in his saddle deprived of all sence, his horse carrying him about the field so as the Giants could not come to fasten the least blow upon him. Things being at this passe, every one accounted the victory sure; for the Count of Clina who now began to move, when as a damsell was seen to enter the field accompanied with a Knight, who understanding the state of the combat, and the conditions whereunto it was begun, approached to the Giants that pursued Grandimore, and charged them in such sort, as they were glad to turn head to defend themselves. Grandimore coming to himself then at the noise of their blows, was as much astonished to see himself brought to that estate, as pleased with that assistance, wherof meaning to make use, he took hold of his sword that hung at his arm, and renewed the combat with so much fury, as every body wondred at the courage he shewed in this fight: which having indured about an howr without advantage, was ready to end with the death of Grandimore and his fellow, if in the instant there had not appeared in the field a Knight in azur'd armor, powdred with little starrs of gold, so brave, and carrying himself so handsomly in his seat, that every body was delighted with the view of him: his coming in was plea∣sing to all the spectators; for as soon as he was entred the lists, and that fal∣ling to work, they saw him light upon one of the Giants with a blow, that divided his helmet and head in two pieces, they all presently assured them∣selves that the victory would fall on the Queens side, who then began to hope well: and attentively beholding him, she believed that it was her Ful∣goran,
whom she had so long wished for. The more she eied him, and consi∣dered the force of his blows, the more she setled her self in that opinion. But he that obserued her alteration, immediately imagined that she knew him: which did so fire his courage, as not enduring that two men alone should so long dispute with him the honour of a combat, upon the successe wherof depended all his contentment, together with the life of his Mistris, threw so violent a thrust at him that was opposed to Grandimore, as he ran him quite through the body, and laid him dead upon the ground. From him then turning presently to the third, which was hand to hand with the strange Knight, he let flie at him so furious a blow, as he clove his cask and head down to the teeth. Then looking upon the Count of Clina, who was not able to rise, he leapt from his horse, went and disarmed his head, and put∣ting the point of his sword to his throat, wretch as thou art, said he, confesse thy villany if thou wilt hope for any favour. For Gods sake, good Knight, answered he, be not so cruell as to take away my life: Content your self with my being thus wofully dismembred; I will freely discover the truth of this affair, so you will but cause the Iudge to come down to me. Heer∣with the Duke of Rozolia descending from his scaffold, the Count decla∣red, that the excellent beauty of the Queen, having powerfully mastered his reason, he had sought for relief at her hands: but his suit being rejected by her with indignation, he was so sensible of that disgrace, as he had plotted this treason in revenge of his despised affection. That he had never seen the actions of the Knight Ardant without respect, nor the cariage of the Queen without modesty; and that he most humbly besought the King to pardon this his offence for his repentance sake. Let the Gods, said Darda∣nor, when they reported this confession to him, never be favourable to me, if once more I give ear to a man so wicked: he shall suffer the punishment that he had ordained for my Wife, to the end that traitors may by his ex∣ample learn to be wise. Having then caused him to be thrown into the fire, he turned to receive the Queen, unto whom he shewed all the kindnes that might be, desiring her utterly to forget the curelty he had exercised towards her. Afterwards addressing himself to the three Knights; I confesse, said he, that I am engaged to you as much as I could have been for the reserva∣tion of mine own life: But Gentlemen, since you already have done so much for me, please you oblige me further, by letting me know who you are. If my innocence were not apparant, answered he in the azure arms, and with∣all unbuckling his helmet, I should not thus present my self before you, Sir, to entreat you to restore me the honour of your favour: but the Count of Clina's confession giving me that boldnesse, I come to continue my services if they may be acceptable unto you. I am Sir, the Knight Ardant, who is not a little grieved that he hath been at any time the subject of your displea∣sure. This great Knight is Grandimore, whom the last day I purchased my friend in my way to Celibana. This other is a stranger, whom good fortune hath brought hither, and whose name, as yet I know not. Pardon me then, Sir, if you please, and make it appear, that the malice of my enemies hath not been of power to take away your favour from me. Nor shall it, by the faith of a Prince, said the King embracing him again, and I am more trou∣bled for having so lightly given credit to this caly, then for any thing that ever I did in all my life: you are most truly welcome, and so are these Cavaliers, whom one day I will recompence for their pis: but since it is
a time of rejoicing, let us talk no more of our passed misfortunes. See where my Wife comes to entertain you: you shall from her receive the acknow∣ledgement that is due to your valour. Wherupon he withdrew, leaving the three Knights with the Queen, who made infinitly much of them, wondring at the beauty of the strange Knight, that was so like to Fulgoran, as there was no great difference between them. Some time being sweetly spent in these complements, the Knights were conducted to their Chambers, there to be unarmed, to the extream vexation of these Lovers; who, for fear of reviving the suspition that had touched upon them, passed this interview slightly over, holding no other discourse together, but with their eyes and thoughts. As soon as they were retired to their Lodgings, the Physitians and Chyrurgians by order from the King, came to visit their wounds. But the strange Knight and Fulgoran had not that need of their aid which the Giant Grandimore had, whom they found hurt in fowr places: whereat the Knight Ardant was much grieved, in regard he loved him dearly for his vir∣tue: how beit his displeasure consisted not only in that, but rather for that he was barred from his Mistris, who suffered no lesse then he; and that durst not look familiarly on him, for fear of falling again into the danger which so lately she had escaped. Living then in this vexing restraint, all maner of delights were unpleasing to them, and perhaps this sadnes of theirs, might have turned to their ruine, if the Gods, who take care of all things, had not given them a remedy thereunto, as I will presently shew you. CHAP. XIII. A Damsell comes to the Court of Dardanor, for to obtain a gift of the Queen, by whose means she carries away the Knight Ardant and the stranger. Their ensuing adventures. THE Court of Romeria being full of extraordinary joy, for the declaration of the Queens innocency, a Damsel of an indifferent beauty entred one way into the great Hall of the Palace, and falling on her knees before the Queen, she thus said unto her: Madam, if the misfor∣tunes which oppresse me, were of force enough to make me stoop to weak and base expressions of my sorrow, I would powr a river of tears at your feet to make you pity my mishaps, and stir up a desire in you to succour me by the multiplicity of my complaints. But knowing that Art is needles to the in∣gaging of a generous mind, I only come humbly beseeching you to grant me one boon wherby I hope to get out of those my sighs, wherinto the trea∣son of certain wicked persons have plunged me. The gentle maner of your request, said the Queen, doth not permit me to refuse you. Say then, sweet heart, what is it that you desire of me, for I am most ready to grant it? I did not expect an answer lesse noble from your Majesty, replied the Damsell, & therfore will presently begin the acknowledgements that I ow for this fa∣vor, with a protestation of continuing them all my life. That which I desire at your gracious hands is, that you will command these two Knights (poin∣ting
to Fulgoran and the stranger) to follow me for the freeing of my Fa∣ther, whom the most distoiall man in the world holds prisoner, with an in∣tent to deprive him of the Dutchy of Matran, which after his death is to discend upon me. It may be you will think me uncivill, for craving a thing of you that depends on the will of another: but, Madam, you will not so much wonder at me, when you shall well understand the reason I have to make this suit unto you. Worthy Knights are alwaies obliged to lend suc∣cour indifferently to all afflicted persons what soever; but yet I am assured that they go more willingly to the undertaking of the most difficile enter∣prises, when as they are commanded so to do by some Lady of your merit: I therfore thought it sitter to addresse my self to you, then to importune them to quit this Court, where their vertues are held in so high an esteem. You know, answered Clairangia, extreamly sorry for the promise she had made, that they being no subjects to the King, we have no farther force over them, then what their curtesie is pleased to afford us; so that I should think it an abusing of their good will they bear us, if I should lay any command upon them heerin: but that I may not be wanting to my word, I desire them to employ their valour in your service, and to follow you for my sake. Ma∣dam, said Fulgoran then, I receive no little content in the leave you give me to serve this Damsell, to whom in truth both your Majesty and my self are much obliged: for it was she that furnished me with the arms and horse, which you saw me use the day of your deliverance. I did not think, said the Damsell smiling, that so small a service as that which I rendred you then would have been so long remembred: but now I see by experience that a good turn is never cast away, since one way or other we alwaies meet with a recompence for it: your kind acknowledgement pleaseth me so well, that I am resolved to do more for you then ever I did, and you shall one day find it: In the mean time, I pray you prepare your self to go with me to morow in company of this strange Knight; for if we tary heer any longer, my la∣bour would be lost, and we shall not find him alive whom we go to deliver. The departure of these Knights being thus resolved on, the Queen remained in a strange perplexity: for the absence of Fulgoran afflicted her extreamly before it came; and that which most vext her was, that she durst not bring him into her chamber to take her last farewell of him: which this strange Damsell knowing, said unto her: If I had not Madam, a particular science for to penetrate into the secretest thoughts of men, I would not offer to speak with such privacy to you, but understanding both what they do, and what they resolve to do before they communicate it to any one: you may not wonder if I tell you that I know the pain you are in at this instant, for the departure of this Knight whom I am to carry away with me. I am the cause of your sorrow, but I will now let you see that I have alwaies desired your contentment: you long, and blush not at it, to enjoy the Knight Ar∣dants company with the same liberty you have heertofore had; I will pro∣cure it for you, knowing full well that he disires it with no lesse passion then you: but do not send for him before night, for otherwise I should not have time enough for my conjurations, and so you might be surprised: you shall have the whole night at your dispose, and him to continue safely with you till break of day. These words mightily troubled the Queen; for women would not have their counsels known, and are well pleased that people should be blind in their affairs: but being unable to help it, and on the other
side most contented with the promise was made her, she very much blushing answered: If you were ignorant of the weaknes of women, of the power of that haughty deitie which triumphs over all men, or of the merits of Fulgo∣ran, I would never confesse my error, or would seek excuses to make it seem lesse distastfull to you; but being assured that none of these things have esca∣ped your consideration, I will not trouble my self with studying for rea∣sons to perswade you that I have not done much amisse: and rendring you thanks for the assistance you proffer me, which indeed I cannot refuse, since you are so well read in my privatest intention; I will wholly rest upon your promises, for the execution wherof, I will instantly go and send Silesia to my Knight to give him advertisement of our resolution. This enamoured Queen retiring therupon to her Chamber, with much impatience attended the evening, which was no sooner come, but she sent for her Knight, whom she caressed more then ever she had done; conjuring him by the infinity of her love to shorten his voiage as much as possibly he could, and not to de∣prive her longer then of necessity he must, of the pleasure she took in his company; and the more to oblige him thereunto, she informed him that their embraces at Celibana had left her with child. The night then being insensibly slipt away amidst the sweetest delights that two lovers can enjoy, they parted with tears, and protestations to love one another eternally. Having taken their leaves and bidden Grandimore farewell, that lay of his wounds, our Knights presently left the Town, with the strange Damsell, who seeing her self a great way distant from the Town, made a stand, and said thus to Fulgoran; Valiant Knight, marvell not if I speak somwhat free∣ly to you; they which love you and desire to have a share in the glory of your fame, out of the interest that their affection doth chalenge therin, have commanded me to tell you, that a worthy and well bred Knight ought not to be caried away by any disordered love, which never produceth but mis∣chievous effects. Your passion for the Queen of Romeria, would infallibly have been your ruine, and her imprisonment was no other then a presage o the misfortune that ere long would have befallen you, had not I retired you in this sort from the Court, not with any purpose to conduct you to some enterprise, as you have hitherto believed, but only to shew you how you may clear your self of that obligation wherin you stand ingaged to your ho∣nor: for without doubt you had not armour put on your back to let it hang rusting on a pin, while you lie languishing at the feet of a Lady. This which I give you is the advice of a friend; for you may well imagine, that it is more for your glory, then for any profit I may reap therby: And if you re∣member with what affection I received you lately in the palace of the in∣chanted rock, you will judge that I rather did it to conceal you from them that sought for you, and who would without doubt have taken away your life without any regard of your former services, then for any hope of draw∣ing assistance from you. Weigh my reasons well, I pray you, and do not yield so much to your passion as to forget what you are. Go seek abroad in the world the renown that your predecessors have acquired. Imitate your Father and Brother, which qustionles are two of the greatest and valiantest Princes on the earth. And above all take heed you return not to Romeria, till your fate bring you thither when as you least think of it; otherwise you will perish there by the jealousie of Dardanor, and will be the cause of such mischiefs, as will make your memory most odious amongst men. I am not
afraid to speak thus unto you before this Knight, who is your neer kinsman, though you know him not to be so, to the end that if you follow not my ad∣vice, he may with reason blame you for it. Saying so, she vanished away, leaving them both much amazed, but principally Fulgoran, who was ex∣treamly grieved that he had not first learned the names of his so brave and eminent kinsmen; but hoping that fortune would one day let him know them, he turned him to the Knight that accompanied him, and embracing him thus spake: Dear Cousin, you may please to pardon me, if till now you have been no better entertained by me; if I have erred it was out of igno∣rance, but time shall let you see that I do highly value your being of kin to me, and the services that I will render you shall give you cause to think my actions void of malice; with that they embraced a fresh: which done, Ful∣goran did in this maner prosecute his discourse: Were it reason to stick in so fair a way? I verily believe we are of kin, but know not which way; Fa∣vour me in letting me know who you are: for by the knowledge therof, I shall it may be, learn somwhat of my own discent. Verily, answered he, the more I consider the words of this woman, the more find I my self in confusion, not being able any way to imagin how you and I should be of the same bloud as she delivers, in regard that my Father and Mother (who for the present hold the Scepter of Canabea) never had either brother or sister, but the Queen Florella, who died without children; and yet, as I remember, I have often heard it spoken, that the same Queen dying with child by one of the most esteemed Princes of Christendome, who it may be should have married her, was ript up by a Magician Giant, that took out the child, wher∣of she had not been conceived full eight months, and wrapping it in a vir∣gin parchment, carried it away no man being able to hinder him: howbeit he promised the Prince Brazanges my father, that he would one day return him, and let him see him with all the perfections to be required in a brave Knight. It now rests that you instruct me where you have bestowed your yonger yeers, that out of this incertainty we may (if possible) draw a truth for our content. Doubtles, said Fulgoran, this womans words are true: The great Eceladus did bring me up, and though he told me not who were my parents, yet he many times assured me that he did cut me out of my mothers belly: See now whether I ought not to be the sonne of Florella, and conse∣quently your kinsman. At these words they embraced again with much e∣xpression of love, and travailing on entertained themselves with variety of pleasing discourses: but night comming on sooner then they deired, for there was never a house in sight to retire unto, they resolved to rest under certain trees there by, and alighting from their horses, they sat them down neer to a little brook, and began to stay their stomacks with such meat as their Squires had brought with them, when as they heard a voice that did sweetly suit it self to the musick of a Lute: That made them pause a while, but the distance of the place being too much for them perfectly to enjoy the pleasure therof, they presently arose, and following the voice that drew them to it, they approached to certain trees, under the which by the help of fowr torches that stood lighted by them they perceived two Ladies with a Knight in their company, who appeared so lovely, as they much admired him: Their curiosity to come neerer them had already carried them so fr as they easily heard the same voice, after a little pause, begin again to sing.
As soon as the song was ended, she that had sung threw the Lute upon the grasse, took the Knight by the hand and sat down so close to Fulgoran, and his cousin Florimond, that they could not stir without being perceived. This approach according with their desire, they stood still in expectation of what would ensue heerupon, and had not long continued so before they heard the Lady speak in this maner: I am with much reason afraid that you may slight my favours because they are freely offered you, and think me shamelesse forthus discovering my thoughts unto you. But Sir, when you shall consider the weaknes of women, and your own merit, you will never condemn my boldnes, but will love me so much the more willingly, in that I do not stick to tell you that I will give my self absolutely unto you with∣out any reservation at all. My beauty is not so small that you can despise it, without being cruell; and did I want that perfection, yet can I glory of a greater, which is, that I love you with passion. The time is seasonable, the darknes favours us, and this place seems to be made for such an occasion: let it not then slip, I beseech you, and I will render my caresses so pleasing to you, as you shall account your self happy in the fruition of them. Let us begin with this kisse, which heer I tender you, and not suffering me to con∣sume in this flame, so requite me that I never have occasion to say that you are ingratefull, and most unworthy of the beauty which doth so adorn you. With that word she drew neer with her lips to his, and already had put her arm about his neck, when as the Knight modestly withdrawing himself thus replied: Madam, please you to pardon me if I do not receive your fa∣vours with the same height of affection wherwith they are now presented to me; you are deceived by my outward appearance, and believing me to be what I am not, you give me more cause to be sorry in your behalf, then to smile at your discourse. I am of the same sex that you are, and conse∣quently incapable of yielding you the contentment you expect: I freely dis∣cover this secret for to testifie unto you that I have no will to be ingratefull to your affection, which I do not entertain because I am unable so to do: you wonder now at this, I believe, for there are but few women seen in these parts to follow arms: but yet it is not a thing impossible, and I assure my self that you are not so ignorant of the world as not to know that the Ama∣zons do passe up and down every where as Knights errant use to do. How∣beit, if you give not credit to my words, I will not make dainty to let you see such evidence upon my breast as shall assure you of this truth, and by this means curing you will be very glad to let you understand, how it is no little discontentment to me that nature hath framed me such as I am. You may say (replide the Lady) what you please, but upon my faith I shall still take you for a Knight, untill I see some better assurance of the contrary: where∣fore you shall oblige me (though this may seem somewhat uncivill) if you will put off your cuirasse, that so I may be disabused; and in the mean time tell me your name, for it may be I shall know you by the fame that goes of you. That is the only way, answered she, not to know me at all; for my name is not so renowned in the world, as that you might know me by tel∣ling it you: yet to obey you, please you to know that I am called the great Savagesse, wife to the mighty King of Lidia, who died at the battell of A∣leppo, and am fitter to do you service with my arms in my hand, then as you have desired. Saying this she unlaced her cuirasse, and took the Ladies hand to put it into her bosome, when as three Giants and twelve Knights,
who had long dogd them, and now found them by the light of the torches, seazed upon them both, and put them into a Chariot, notwithstanding all the resistance that the fair Savagesse, who had not leisure to draw her sword, could make. The Knights much troubled for the want of their helmets at this so unexpected an incounter, speedily recovered for to make them ready to follow the Giants, who went away infinitly pleased with their booty. But it was so dark that they knew not where they were, and therfore it was a good while before they could find their Squires, who likewise were so drowsie, as it was long before they could bridle their horses, by means wherof their enemies were gotten a great way before them, ere they were able to set forth in pursuit of them: neverthelesse desirous to see the end of this adventure, they rode all night with incredible speed, insomuch that two howrs after Sun rising they came to a valley, in the bottom wherof they saw the Coach standing still, and the three Giants with their followers bat∣tering a Knight, who defended himself bravely, and had already laid fowr of their Knights dead at his feet. Oh heavens! said Fulgoran, madded to see this unequall match, what do I behold? and why do not I assist so gal∣lant a man? Come Cousin, let us make these base creatures know, that the justice of the Gods is alwaies armed for the succour of the oppressed. This said, they fell upon the Giants with such fury, as at the first shock they tum∣bled two of them to the earth, so wounded, as one was troden to death with the horses feet; the other getting up again a little after with much ado: the Knight that was first ingaged in the ight seeing this favourable aid, and de∣termining to make a profitable use therof bestird himself so lustily amongst those rascals, that he laid three more of them dead at his feet, whilest Ful∣goran and his Cousin combatted the other two Giants. The valor of these three warriours being at the highest, the combat lasted not long; for the first Knight having made his enemies turn their backs, he discharged so furious a blow upon the arm of the Giant that fought with Florimond, as he sent it together with his sword to the ground, just as Fulgoran had made an end of his. The victory being thus gloriously atchieved, the Ladies which were bound with cords were presently delivered, to the great astonishment of the Knight that began the fight. For knowing the fair Savagesse, he presently unlaced his helmet, and imbracing her said: Ah Madam! how I detest these inhumane villanes that have bound you, who are able to bind all the world▪ A thousand times I give thanks to heaven that brought me thus seasonably to encounter you, for to begin your deliverance: nor am I lesse engaged to these brave warriors, who have in seconding me shewed so much valor: for the which I will go and vow a perpetuall service to them. Be you also plea∣sed to yield them the like regard, that it may appear you are as curteous as you are beautifull; wherwith he was turning to them when as the fair Sa∣vagesse being free of her bonds, took him in her arms and kissed him with such affection, as made her somthing jealous that was with her: My Lord, said she, it is I that is made happy in this meeting, and your geneous hand doth every day ingage me in new obligations. I acknowledge that these Cavaliers have done much for us, and am therfore willing to render them thanks for their assistance; wherupon she leaped down from the Chariot to go to Fulgoran and Florimond, who were amazed at her beauty: but they prevented her with so much respectivenes as rendred her almost ashamed of it. Madam, said Fulgoran to her, you honour us too much in esteeming us
worthy to serve you; and this poor pains we have taken, is nothing in com∣parison of that which we desire to undergo for you. This day is most for∣tunate, since it hath furnished us with means to see you: but that our con∣tentment may be compleat, tell us, I beseech you, who this yong Knight is, the bravest and most valiant that ever I beheld. It is not without reason, answered the fair Savagesse, that you commend and desire to know him; for besides the merit of his valour, wherof your selves are judges, he is discen∣ded of the noblest race in the world, being grandchild to the excellent Em∣perour Amadis of Greece, who fils all the earth with astonishment at the recitall of his glorious deeds of arms, and son to the valorous Penthesi∣lea, the most invincible Princesse of the world, and the never conquered Don Silves de la Silva. His name is Silvan, accomplished with all those rare endowments, that can honour a gentleman; and so obliged to the assistance you have given him, as he will not fear to engage his life for your service, nor my self to employ these arms for you which you see me cary. Fulgo∣ran exceedingly pleased with this incounter, for he had an extream desire to prove himself against some of the Greek Princes, answered: Madam, the praises that you give this Knight, are great, because they come from you, but too little for the excellency of his valor, wherof there needs no better testimony then this field covered with dead bodies; wherfore I shall gladly receive the honor of his affection, together with yours, although I could have wished that our acquaintance had been begun in another fashion, I mean by a combat between him and me: For being of a contrary faith to mine, we could hardly have continued friends but by such an adventure. Silvan who was no lesse discreet then valiant, and that would not appear in∣sensible, being so touched, answered him modestly: Vertuous Knight, I should be very sorry to lift my sword against a person to whom I am so ex∣ceedingly obliged: but if for the quiet of your conscience you desire the combat I will not refuse you. These words would without question have embarked them further, if they had not at that instant spied a maid come ri∣ding towards them as fast as she could drive, who without other ceremony said to Fulgoran: Knight Ardant, take this way presently, with the Prince of Canabea your Cousin, and by the command of the Lady of the inchan∣ted rock follow three damsels that are in the hands of an horrible Giant: and you gentle Silvan, prepare your self for an affair no lesse dangerous then that, and let the fair Savagesse accompany you, for she will be of much use to you therin. These Ladies shall in the mean time withdraw to this house, which you see heer by, and my self will watch for the safety of all. The earnestnes of this woman having quickly put them in readines, each one took the way that was shewed him, and so they seperated themselves. Be∣ing gone a little way, Silvan heard a noise behind him, which made him turn suddenly about, thinking he had been among his enemies: but seeing no body save that one woman whom he had lately left, he staid and said unto her: Gentlewoman, you follow us, I perceive, wheras I thought you had been otherwhere imploied; is it your pleasure that I take any other way? No, replied she, I only come to salute you from the wise Vrganda, who sends you word that you should not be troubled, that you are not in com∣batting with the Knight Ardant, for that could not have been done without an irreparable losse. Keep on your way till you arrive in the Parthian Em∣pire, with this beautuous Queen: your presence will shortly be necessary
there. In the mean time I will advise the other Knight to travell no further in vain: for the adventure which I told him of▪ proceeded wholly from my own invention. Saying so, she turned about her horse without tarrying for any answer, and went to the Knight Ardant, to whom she made the like di∣scourse, informing him that her Mistris would not for some reasons, which she would one day let him know, suffer him to fight with Silvan; and giving him no time to speak a word, she left him with such speed, as Fulgoran pre∣sently lost sight of her, infinitly grieved for that he had not asked her his fathers name. But hoping to meet her again some other time, he passed on with Florimond, whilest the fair Savagesse and Silvan followed their way, intertaining themselves with an infinity of pleasing discourses. CHAP. XIV. The adventures that befell Fulgoran, and Florimond of Canabea, after their departure from Silvan. LOve is bred by occasions, and a familiar conversation doth oftentimes force our inclinations: Silvan did not believe he could possibly be enthralled again by the power of any beauty whatsoever, after the losse of his dearest moiety, and had taken a resolution to passe the rest of his daies in the exercise of arms; but he was soon taught that our designs are ineffectuall when that proud deity will not authorise them; and that the will of men doth alwaies depend on his power: for being ordinarily in company with the fair Savagesse, who had charms sufficient to make her be beloved, he could not preserve his liberty, but was constrained to revive the same flames wherwith he had been so sweetly consumed before in the love of his Licina: evermore sighing then, and becomming much sadder then he used to be, he made this Lady wonder at it it: who not thinking her self to be the cause of this change, one day she spake thus to him: My Lord, I am much amazed to see you in this humour, and cannot conceive how you should be transported with your passions in so weak a maner. What are these sighs good for, and to what end is this silence? Do you still think of the losse you have endured? Hath not time as yet wrought its due effect in you? And have you not obeied the advice of your reason which ought to represent unto you that tears do no good at all in any misfortune; and that we are not to make use of them but only to ease nature a little: cast your eie upon me, I pray you, and you shall see that I have more courage: you have lost a lovely and beloved wife, it is true; neither shall I any more behold a worthy Husband such as my Lord the King of Lidia was; I have then as great cause to complain as you, and in me it would be more pardonable to afflict my self, in regard such strong resolutions are not expected from my sex as from yours, yet I restrain my tears, I smother my sighs, and do cary the same countenance which I did in my prosperity. Imitate then this pa∣tience, and give me not occasion to say that my company displeaseth you: I speak both for your content and mine own, for seeing you lesse disquieted
then before I shall be much the merrier. Alas! said he, casting an amorous eie upon her, now I perceive you have no the gift of Prophecy, or that you rightly understand my grief: fair Queen I do not sigh for the dead (althogh my losse be ever present before me) for I know well how we ought to bear an affliction, and that heaven forbids an excesse in our mourning, but feeling a new grief I cannot forbear venting some part of my sorrow in sighs, since my discretion forbids me to do it in words: howbeit I might with reason condemn my self as long as I lived, and ascribe all my misery to my own cowardise, if the way to my preservation be opened, I should not passe on for fear of meeting with thorns in it. Madam, I must unlock my bosom to you, since your self hath given me the occasion to do it: I have not been a∣ble to refuse that to your beauty which all the men in the world do render it; and my grief proceeds from my not daring to hope that you will receive me in to your service: for knowing that such an ambition becomes none but the prime Knights of the earth, I have alwaies feared to beg that grace of you. My ill humour doth not please you, it is in your power to change it: my sighs and tears are troublesome to you; you may quickly stop the cur∣rant of them: and if you have no lesse pity then you have attracting charms you will presently command me to live at more quiet heerafter, by telling me that I shall not love ungratefully. This fair Amazon that was not infen∣sible of Loves power, considering the merits, the perfections, and the birth of this Knight, who had made no difficulty to expose himself to danger for her succour, that she could hardly passe the rest of her daies in widowhood, and that she knew not where to find a man more agreeable to her humour, or better suited to her condition, answered him with much modesty. See, my Lord Silvan, how our opinions do many times abuse us; I had thought your discourse had been of another quality then it is, nor did I believe that the little beauty which I have, could have prevailed so much over you. You love me, and say that you breath not but for the honour of my favor, I will grant it to your merit; and not to be ingratefull, do even now receive you not only for my Knight, but for the lord of my affections, assuring my self that you will not seek the possession of them but according to the laws of honour. No certainly, said Silvan all overjoid, for it were a sacriledge to serve you with any hopes of a base alloy: Madam, I accept of the grace which you now do me, with a true and pefect sence of the worth therof, and do heer plight you that faith, which another day I will tender to you with more solemnity in the presence of those upon whom I depend. Saying so, he disarmed his hand, and giving it to her he pursued his discourse in this sort: Now Madam, it is in you to render me in effect the happiest Knight on the earth, as already I am in hope. Dear friend, said she smiling, time will give us leisure to think of that point: in the mean space live in this belief, that being perfectly beloved of me, I will not passe by any occasion that may tend to your content and mine own. Whilest these Lovers rode on with all the delights that two such persons might injoy, Fulgoran and his Cousin on the other side were giving end to a number of brave adventures, which made their name so glorious, as the whole world was full of their re∣nown. And indeed there was no other talk but of the Knight Ardant, and him of the Flowrets: they were sought for every where, and continually imploied in divers enterprises, whereof they so worthily acquited them∣selves, as the most excellent Knights of the earth were jealous of them.
Travelling up and down thus with a world of praises one morning at the entry into a forrest they met with two damsels, each of which demanded a boon of them. Those that resemble you, answered Florimond, are not to be refused; say then what it is that you desire of us. That you presently will follow us, replied she that spake to him, you to deliver my brother who is marked out for death with all the injustice that may be, and this Knight to do the like office for the beautifull Princesse of Clodamira, called Alixenna, that with much reason fears to be ravisht of that which she ought above all things to hold most dear. Wherupon these two Knights parted with some discontent: Fulgoran entred into a wood where a while after he met with Balard of Catabatmon, whom he slew, as I have related in the eighth Cha∣pter, because he carried a red crose upon his shield: which engaged Florisel of Niquea, that found Lidora weeping over the body of Balard, to pursue him in revenge of the death of so good a Knight. CHAP. XV. Florisel of Niquea finding the Knight Ardant in an extream danger relieves him, and after fights a cruell combat with him upon the death of Balard. FLeisel of Niquea extreamly desiring to meet with the Knight Ardant had travelled two daies without ligh∣ting upon any adventure worthy of his imploiment, when as he saw a damsell comming towards him that grievously lamented, did not spare the hair of her head, which she tore off with much violence: His good and sweet nature not permitting him to behold her in that plight, without offering her his assistance, he presently made to her, and perceiving she took no heed of him he said unto her: Gentlewoman, do not afflict your self so excessively, but tell me the cause of so violent a grief, that I may do you some service if it lie in my power. Yes, said she looking up, you may divert a great mischief by assist∣ing one of the best Knights in the world, whom a horrible Giant accompa∣nied with thirty or forty of his men, doth hold invested in that Castle which you see yonder before you, and if your courage be answerable to your gallant aspect, you will not suffer him to perish in that maner. At these words Florisel without any further stay in regard the danger was pres∣sing, set spurs to his horse, and finding the gate open, entred into a large Court, where he saw a Knight armed with a Cuirasse of the colour of fire, who bestirring himself bravely, did one while lay upon a Giant, and ano∣ther while send an arm or a head of a Knight to the earth. His valour be∣getting in him no lesse wonder then it did desire to succour him, (although he knew him to be the Knight Ardant whom he sought) he instantly couch∣ed his lance, and aiming it at the bever of the Giants helmet, he hit him with such force as he made him take three or fowr turns on the ground, so that if the shame to see himself overthrown had not animated him with rage he had lien there longer: but spite rendring him insensible of all pain, he
arose though with some difficulty, and incountring Don Florisel who in the mean space had dispatched three of his followers, he charging them with such violence, as much amazed him; howbeit not failing in courage, and knowing full well how to carry a businesse as that was, he avoided half of his blows, and made him feel his so waighty that he had no cause to brag of his advantage. Hammering upon one another in this sort, they kept so close together, that the Giant had no opportunity to assist his people, of whom the Knight Ardant did in the interim make a strange slaughter; whereat he was so enraged, that he bestowed the most part of his blows in vain, with horrible menaces to overthrow the altars which he had erected for the ado∣ration of his Gods, which gave him not powr to vanquish one single Knight. His fury augmnting with the sight of his bloud, that ran down all along his armour, he resolved either not to live, or to determine this combat by the death of his enemy; so that taking his curtleax in both his hands, he let it fall with such force upon Don Florisels shield, as he made him go staggering three or fowr steps back, & so astonied that he knew not where he was: from thence flying to the Knight Ardant, who by this time had not above ten or eleven enemies to deal with, he advanced his arm to have given him a dan∣gerous and weighty blow, when as Florisel enraged for having been so rude∣ly intreated, struck him with such fury on the back, as cutting through his armour he gave him a great wound on the shoulder: this blow, the sorest that ever he had felt, making him turn head their combat began to be more cruell then before, whilest Fulgoran having cut all those rascals in pieces, went speedily up the stairs hearing a great noise above: Florisel seeing this great execution, was so transported with anger at the resistance his adversa∣ry made him, that he made a stockado at his belly with such violence, as he ran him thorow and thorow, laying him stark dead on the pavement. That done he instantly returned forth of the Castle, for that he would not be known of the Knight Ardant, lest the resentment of the succour he had gi∣ven him, should oblige him to refuse the combat which he intended to have with him: and withdrawing himself to the edge of the forrest he lighted upon the cottage of a yong shepheard, who receiving him very courteously gave him the best entertainment he could. But whilest he took a little rest, Fulgoran was in no great ease: for meeting with an old Giantesse who had a mace in her hand wherwith she was beating in pieces the door of a chamber where the Princesse Alixenna had locked up her self, he was by that Mege∣ra charged with such violence, that he was somewhat amazed at it. The re∣spect he carried to women made him endure some blows, and would wil∣lingly have freed himself without striking her; but fearing some mischief from this fury he sustained a mighty blow that she struck with her mace up∣on his shield, and closing with her gave her such a knock with the pommell of his sword under the ear, as he laid her dead upon the floor. That done, he caused the Princesse Alixenna to open the dore, who with tears of joy would have cast her self at his feet to have kissed his hand. But having pre∣vented her he said: Madam, Knights errant do not receive such homage, which is not due but to persons of your merit; If I have done any thing for you, I am sufficiently recompensed in that my endevours are acceptable to you. But leaving these complements tell me what I am to do more for your safety, for I am heer to no other end but to obey you? If necessity did not constrain me, replied she, I should not so far presse upon your goodnes: but
being left heer alone by the death of my people who were all cut in pieces, when the Giant took me, I may not refuse the honour of your conucting me to Constantinople, if so be your occasions will permit you to travell thi∣ther with me. The Emperour Florisel will give you thanks for me, and no∣bly recompence the succour you have given me. I am somewhat of kin to the fair Queen Sidenia his wife, and came now from Guindaia, to visit and comfort her after so many losses as she hath lately sustained: but tell me, I beseech you, whether I be not too importunat in this request of mine, or whether I shall hazard my self in this journey, only with the damsell that brought you hither in so lucky an howr? Madam, answered Fulgoran, I will go with you most willingly to Constantinople, not to receive as you pro∣pound, any recompence: for good Knights are to content themselves with the glory of their actions; but to preserve you from falling again under the mercy of some wicked men, who without sufficient regard to your beauty might strive to get that of you by violence, which ought to be given for love. Wherfore we will depart presently, if you please, unlesse you had ra∣ther stay till to morrow. I should, said she be uncivill, if I should not allow you some time to refresh your self after the labour you have this day endu∣red, the rather for that our chiefest enemies are dead, and that now there is no body heer but such as are at your service; we will then, if you please, ta∣ry till to morrow, and in the mean time I will take care to have you looked unto by my maid, who knows how to cure a wound, that you may be dres∣sed if need be. Fulgoran assuring her that he felt no hurt, they both went down the stairs to give thanks unto the Knight that had so bravely assisted them, but not finding him they were extreamly grieved with his absence. Howbeit seeing it could not be helped, they went to free certain Knights, whom the Giant held in prison, to whose care the charge of the Castle was committed. That done every one retired to his rest, whilest Florisel to whom the length of the day seemed tedious, in the company of his host that had not wherwithall to divert his thoughts by his discourse, entred into the thic∣kest part of the wood, where he walked a great while interaining himself with the little assurance that men ought to place in the things of this world, which for the most part renders our pleasures but passant, our pains of long continuance, our good without sweetnes, our evils without hope, and our lives subject to all the accidents of fortune. This contemplation having held him till it was almost night, he was upon returning to his lodging, when as he saw a damsell making towards him, followed at the heels by a Giant, armed at all pieces: He that had no other arms but his sword, would without question have been amazed at this encounter, had he been capable of fear; but his gallant heart despising all dangers, he was advancing to∣wards them with his sword in his hand, when as the maid thus spake to him: Hold, my Lord Florisel, arms and valour are of no use, where there are no enemies; we are heer rather to do you service, then to offend you. I confesse said he, stretching out his arms to embrace her, I confesse, Gentlewoman, that I was in the wrong, for I did not at the first sight know you to be our dear friend Alquifa: Tell me, I pray you, are your parents yet living, and what occasion brings you hither at this time? I have already told you, an∣swered she, that it is in some sort to oblige you this I am heer: My Father and Mother were never more affectionated to your service: all their study and care is for the good of you, and those of your house. They have com∣manded
me to present you with this pack, wherin you shall find arms very necessary for your design, which doubtles is of greater consequence then you believe it to be, and withall to advertise you, That The new Lions shall shortly come with such strong claws, as they shall tear up the greatest foundations of the earth, discovering the Treasure that hath so long time been hidden, for the glory of those from whom they are extracted. To give you a clearer understanding of these words is that I may not do. Wherfore not to trouble you any longer about it, I will only say, that you must alwaies cary in mind what you ow to your name and glory; with that she went away so suddenly, as she gave him not the leasure to return her any answer, leaving him somwhat displeased with so abrupt a parting: howbeit considering that all the actions of those sages were done for some reason, he was the better satisfied by viewing those fair arms, which he immediatly put on, and so returned to his cottage. The night being then quietly passed over, he arose very early, and taking up his station at the edge of the wood, he remained there till such time as he saw the Knight Ardant come out of the Castle, and then advancing fair and softly he met him in the midst of the way, and thus spake to him: Knight, it is with some grief that I desire to combat with you, for such as resemble you are to be honoured. But I am so sensible of the death of a Gentleman, whom some few daies since you slew, because he carried a red Crosse on his shield, that I cannot suffer you to be at quiet, nor let slip so fair an occasion of revenging his death: you are provided for the combat, our incounter is without advantage; Let us see then to whom fortune will be most favourable. Fulgoran that heard himself defied in such modest tearms, much commending in his mind the gallant de∣meanour of his adversary, would willingly have declined the fight, but fea∣ring to leave an ill impression of his courage, he answered him very discreet∣ly: I assure you, Knight, our discontent is equall, for a discourse so free from passion as yours is, doth inform me that you are no lesse valiant then curtu∣ous, and makes me with some doubt apprehend the issue of this our combat: which no longer defer since you will have it so. Saying thus, they retired a little to take the field, and turning head they met so bravely, that their lan∣ces were shivered to their very gantlets, neither of them being unhorsed: This so rude and furious an incounter having but animated their courages, out of an esteem that each of them had of his enemies courage, they charged one another with such rage, as their helmets seemed to be all fire. The Knight Ardant that had never met with so strong a party, displaied all his force and cunning, and laid so mightily at him, that Florisel was much ama∣zed at it, holding him worthy of the fame that ran of him: but knowing not how to be vanquished, he returned him such an exchange, and prest him so lively, as he began to doubt of the issue of the combat. O immortall Gods! said he full of despite, have you then vowed my ruine? and intend you that this combat shall bereave me of all the glory of my former adventures? I have seen the stoutest Giants in the world at my feet, and now am reduced to the fear of seeing my enemy triumphing over me: this is faintnes in me, I confesse, but I am resolved either to overcome or die. Which thought inflaming choler, he redoubled his blows with such violence, as Florisel had never escaped with life, had it not been for those good arms given him by
Alquif, Fulgorans sword was not able to pierce, no more then his could that fier armour he had on. Hammering thus upon one another with more passion then judgement, they continued their combat fowr howrs together without breathing, or being able to discern who had the advantage, which so enraged them, as letting go their swords, they closed together and fell to wrastle in that violent maner one with another, that at length they fell both of them to the ground, where they tumbled a long time up and down, some while a top, and some while underneath, not knowing who should prevail: at last, neither of them being able that way to master each other, they rose both together, and returned to their swords, wherwith they laid on a fresh with so much fury, that after they had continued two howrs in this second charge, they were inforced to fall off a little to refresh them∣selves. Whilest thus they took breath, each of them had leisure to wonder at the bravery of his adversary: and willingly would they have left the combat in the estate wherin it then was, had not honour defended it: but either of them unwilling to give any advantage to the other, they recom∣menced their fight more furiously then before. And so obstinately were they bent upon it, that nothing could be expected from the end of this fight but the death of them both, if heaven which reserved them for its glory, had not secured them by the goodnes of their arms. Eight howrs being al∣ready spent since the beginning of their combat, each of them feared to see himself vanquished; so that making no further account of their lives, they at one instant delivered two such mighty and dangerous blows at each o∣ther, as they both fell to the earth quite deprived of sence. As soon as they were fallen, so thick a mist arose, that for two howrs space no man was able to discern any thing; but at the end therof, the air reassuming its former light, the combatants were no more to be seen. Florisel finding himself in Constantinople with Alixena and Lida, extreamly vexed for that he knew not what the end of the fight had been. And Fulgoran with no lesse discon∣tent in the Kingdome of Canabea, where he found his Cousin Florimond, who caused him to be received with all the magnificence that might be, in∣vesting him with the Crown and Scepter of that Kingdome, as he that was the apparant and legitimate heir therof. CHAP. XVI. The Triumphs made in the Parthian Empire, for the births of Rozalmond of Greece, and a great many other yong Princes and Princesses. THE heavens with providence sends us favours, aswell as corrections, and having afflicted us for a time, do afterwards give us such consolations as are necessary for our sorrows. The generall losse of so many Prin∣ces, upon whose valour Christendome had so long depended, having filled every one with astonishment, their Empires breathed nothing but fears, when as God to cease the deluge of tears, changed their peoples griefs into accla∣mations
of gladnes and rejoicing. The Empresse Richarda was delivered of a son, the most lovely that ever the Sun had seen, called Rozalmond, by rea∣son of a globe which he had upon his left pap, wherin appeared three red Roses. And the Infanta Rozaliana, her sister o another, named Rozabel, who was not much behind him in beauty. The birth of these two Princes did so overjoy the Parthians, that they resolved to lay aside all mourning, and to demonstrate as it were in emulation one of another, the contentment of so great a felicity. To this end they were making preparations, when as the Emperour Spheramond was advertised that the Empresse of Persia was also brought to bed of two sons, the one called Persides and the other Flori∣dan; the Queen Sidonia of one called Clarisel of Guindaia; The Infanta For∣tuna of one called Florisbel of the star; The Princesse Timbria of one called Agesipolis; The Queen of Clotona, of one called Flamides; The Queen of Castara of one called Formozel of Sitanquia; The Queen of the fortunate Island of one called Cilindor; The Queen of Samothracia of one called A∣gramant; The Queen of Licaonia of one called Fidamant; The Dutchesse of Laiazza of one called Lucian; The Empresse of Rome of one called Sclerimond; The Queen of Dacia of one called Lascaris; The Queen of Fe∣nicia of one called Doristan; and the Queen of Cathaia of a daughter called Anticlia: which news so increased the content of Spheramond, as he deter∣mined to keep open Court eight daies together, and to hold a joust and tournay for all commers, at the end of these magnificences. This was in∣deed a just occasion of rejoicing for the Christians, but this happines was yet greater then they were aware of: for at the same time the fair Clairestoil∣la, who was inchanted in the Castle of the incomparable Treasure, with all the delights that might be, had brought into the world a son of extraordi∣nary beauty, called Lucibel of France; The Empresse of Almain one called Alazian; The Queen of Sibilia one called Sestilian; The Queen of Trinacria one called Lucidan; The Princesse Anaxara one called Hercules of Niquea; The Queen of Armenia one called Abvaran; and the Queen of Rhodes one called Onoxander; who were all brought up with great care by Alcander, un∣till the inchantments of the incomparable Treasure were dissolved by the valour of those two bright lights of the World, Rozalmond of Greece, and the gentle Alcidamant. But to return to my discourse: All things being thus in order for the Triumphs which were to begin within two daies, the Em∣perour one morning was going out on hunting, when as he perceived fifteen or sixteen Gentlemen entring the Palace, who comming to him fell on their knees desiring his hand to kisse; Nay, said he unto them, I shall be more curteous then so, for by your noble countenances I cannot but judge you to be persons of more then ordinary quality: Free me, I pray you, of this doubt, and let me know who you are, as also what design brings you hither. Excellent Prince, answered one, that spake for them all, we will most wil∣lingly content you heerin, but upon condition that you will not refuse us a favour which we desire at your hands. I will not upon the faith of a Prince, said the Emperour; for I am confident you will not ask me any thing but what is in my power. We could hope for no lesse, replied he, and therfore I will presently begin to give you satisfaction, by letling you know that this yong Gentleman is called Perion of Gaul, grandchild to the Sovereign king of Great Britain: this other is Esquilan of Poland, heir to King Filadart, with whom you are acquainted: these two are the grandchildren of Gala,
the first named Florian of Sobradisa, and the other Eriston: he that follow them is called Florestan of Sardinia, son to the deceased King therof: this heer is the heir of Saba bearing his fathers name: this other is Don Agrian, of Scotland, son to Agriers: these two are called Dardan, son to Galdes King of Rhodes, and Florizart of Taproban, whom the valiant Artaxerxes had by the fair Lardenia: the other is Melfort son to Gadard King of Hunga∣rie: these remaining fowrate, Frisel of Arcadia, Aies of Ireland, Leonidas of Mesopotami, Armond of Bohemia, and he that now speaks to you is a Gentleman unknown, and called Russian of Media. We altogether met a∣bout fowrdaies since, with  and the same design; namely, to be made Knights by your hand, which is the bon we crave of your Majesty, and which you have been so graciously pleased to promise us. My good Lords, said Spheramond, having intertained them with all curtesie, the pains you have taken in comming to see me so far, doth so oblige me that you shall have no cause to be discontented with me: I grant you that which you desire, and commnd the generous design you have to follow your predecessors, who have acquired so much glory in the World, as their fames shall ever last be∣yond their lives: You shall therfore refresh your selves heer this day; to morrow I will give order for the fitting of you for that Ceremony: and the next day I will arm you Knights, together with the fair Alteria, daughter to Calafia, who hath already been a suitor to me for the like favour: to the end you may enter with her into the jousts, that are to be holden for the celebra∣tion of the birth of a son, which the heavens have bestowed on me. Having thus spoken, he commanded the Duke of Liazza, to take care that they might be accommodated in with all things necessary: and so passing on he went into the forrest, where he tarried till night amidst all the pleasures that hunting can afford. The next day being pa with much impatience by these yong Lords, they were all armed in white after the fashion of new Knights, took their oaths before the Emperour, and having received their swords from the beautifull Empresse Richarda, and the Infanta Rozaliana, her sister, who were there present for to do them honour, they went presently to din∣ner, to be the sooner ready for the jousts. Now was the feast ended, and the yong Knights with some impatience called for their helmets, when as a Dwarf came into the Hall, who kneeling down before the Emperour thus spake: Sovereign Monarch of the Parthians, the two black Knights, whose names with good reason slies about the World, desiring to bring some addi∣tion to the magnificence of your Triumphs, do most humbly beseech, that you will be pleased they may maintain with the lance against all commers, that love gives all the contentments in the world, and that men cannot pro∣pose a more worthy object to themselves, then that of so powerfull a deity. The condition shall be very easie: Those which shall be unhorsed with the Lance, may not require a further triall with the sword: every one may win six courses; the conquerors shall have nothing but the glory of the action; nor the vanquished but the constraint to acknowledge, that to sigh for the favour of a mistris is not to be inthralled. This is (Sir) the intention of the black Knights, touching that you may be pleased to let me know your reso∣lution, to the end that if your Majesty allow of them, they may instantly appear in the Lists. Their enterprise, said Spheramond, is too generous to be denied the liberty they desire; If they come they shall obli me to them, and I will promise the performance of the conditions you have pro∣pounded,
but you may advise them not to forget any thing necessary be∣hind them at their lodging, for heer you see new Knights that will not give them leave long to repose themselves. These yong Lords, taking this the Emperours answer for an especiall favour, gave him most humble thanks, for the good opinion he had of them, and having fitted themselves with all things requisite, they mounted on horsback to go and incounter the black Knights, who having set themselves at one end of the Lists, had already laid fowr of the most remarkable Knights of the Parthian Empire on the ground the addresse of these Knights extreamly contenting them each one in par∣ticular, resolved to incounter them; so that Florian of Sobradisa, and Tristr his brother, advancing ran one course, very pleasing to Spheramond, for they brake their staves bravely, without losing their saddles; but the second staff sunck them to the earth. Perion of Turkie, and Florestan had greater honor, but a like disgrace; for having run twice in a gallant maner, they wre at the third course constrained to kisse the ground, however they had resolved to keep their seats better. Quedragant and Fulurtin succeeded them in the same misfortune, accompanied with Florizart of Taprobana, and Don A∣grian in their fall. Dardanio and the brave Melfort hoping for better fortune, put themselves presently in play, determining to revenge their companions, but their luck being no better, they were unhorsed; and so were at the se∣cond course Frisel of Arcadia, Abies of Ireland, Armond of Bohemia, and Leoni das a little after. These Knights having been so eafily overthrown, every one began to give the honour to the black Knights, when as the vali∣ant Esquilan of Polonia, and the brave Russian of Media, who had reserved themselves till the last, advanced with a kind of I know not what hope in the spectators, that the glory of the jousts might yet remain to the Court by the valour of these two gallant Princes, who taking strong and stiff lances, went and encountred the black Knights with such fury, as the earth seemed to tremble under them. Their encounter was remarkable, all fowr of them brake upon their shields with such equall fortune, as there appeared not more addresse or lesse courage and force in any of them then in the other. Those staves being in shivers, the second were brought them, which they brake as the first, the Knights not seeming to be any whit moved with these so furious shocks, howbeit this resistance inflaming their courages they ran yet three other courses, with as much fury as grace; but being extreamly enraged for doing so little before so great an Emperour, they charged new staves, wherwith they encountred so violently that all fowr of them quit their saddles, infinitly grieved at so great a misfortune; neverthelesse sud∣denly getting up they were going to repair that default with their swords, when as they that were appointed for the Tournay came in, and separated them. The yong Knights divided themselves, and being placed in the head of two squadrons of two hundred men a piece, they encountred together so bravely, that many were unhorsed at the first brant, and every one stri∣ving for the honour of the day, they laid lustily about them: the yong Knights performed wonders, one while they were seen in the middest of the presse, another while in the front, striking furiously and warding gallant∣ly. In brief the party was so well disputed, that a full howr was past, ere any man could judge who had the better of it. If the brave Russian of Me∣dia, and the generous Esquilan, cleared all before them, the two black Knights on the other side performed their parts no lesse bravely, in such sort
that all was in equall ballance, when at the beginning of a combat between the two black Knights and Russian of Media with Esquilan, who had met to∣gether, they saw a Knight armed all in white armour appear in the Lists, who joining with Peron of Turkie, so furiously bestirred himself, that he made the advantage lean to that side, notwithstanding any resistance the contrary party could make. The black Knights foreseeing their losse, re∣doubled their blows with extream violence, but they were opposed by such strong enemies, as they could not promise themselves the victory: on the other side Russian and his companion fearing that the honour of the Tour∣ney might rest upon the white Knight whom they knew not, assailed their adversaries most valiantly, whence it ensued that being resolved either to die, or vanquish, all fowr discharged at one and the same instant such terri∣ble blows upon each other, as the swords of Esquilan and Russian brake in eight or nine pieces, and the black Knights helmets flew from their heads; whereupon they were presently known by Spheramond, for the gentle Sil∣van, and the fair Savagesse, who were about fowr daies before arrived in the Empire of the Parthians, after they had run many fortunes, of which we have not spoken, because we would not omit those other passages, that more neerly concerned our design. CHAP. XVII. The continuation of the Tourney in  of the mariage of Silvan with the fair Savagesse, and the interruption therof upon the news of the losse of yong Clorisel of Guindaia, sonne to Florisel of Niquea. THE arrivall of this fair warriouresse and Silvan, was ex∣ceedingly pleasing to the Emperour, who putting an end to the Tourney, received them with all the love and curtefie that might be, highly commending the valour which those yong Princes had shewen in this beginning of their arms; especially Russian and Esqui∣lan, with the white Knight, who was found to be the fair Amazon Alteria. Verily, said he, embracing them, you have this day done so much, as you may well be ranked in the number of the best Knights of this age; and I believe that when time hath rendred you more active and stronger, you will find but few your matches in the world. Persist, I pray you, and suffer not this brave courage of yours to grow dull, that the glory of your actions may not be inferiour to that, which your Fathers in their time have obtained: I will divide the honor of the Tourney amongst you all; and that of the jousts shall remain only to those that have so valiantly maintained them. Saying thus, he took the fair Savagesse by the hand, and willing Silvan to go on the other side of him, he returned to the Palace, where their welcoms were renewed by the beau∣tifull Empresse Richarda, and her sister the Infanta zaliana, who remem∣bring that this generous Lady was the first that came in to their late rescue, they did her so much honour as she was almost ashamed of it. Some howrs being spent amidst these complements, the Knig  retired to disarm them∣selves,
Silvan being extreamly grieved to be separated from his Mistris, but fortune was more favourable to him then he expected; for their Chambers were so neer together, as they might meet without being discovered by a∣ny; which Silvan well observing, he quickly put off his arms, and not en∣during the delay of so much time as to refresh himself, he instantly went to his Mistris, and thus spake to her: Madam, if the glory of your favours were not as dear to me as my life, I should not labour to possesse them with∣out suspition; but having too much love to dissemble it, and fearing to take the same liberty heer which I had with you abroad, I beseech you be plea∣sed to let me keep you from slander, and render my delights more pleasing by enjoying them without fear: We might depend only upon our selves, and legitimate our mariage by a mutuall consent of our wills, but we shall do more discreetly to yeeld that respect unto those who have so much obli∣ged us, and seeking their approbation rather out of good maners, then for necessity, we shall not only make them alwaies ready to assist us, but also therby increase their affection towards us. The Emperour doth highly ho∣nour you, and esteems of me no lesse; wherfore I beseech you be pleased to let me make him my intercessor to you, for your love and favour: what shall be resolved upon by his advice will, as I suppose, cary the more weight with it; not in regard of us, for being reciprocally assured of our affections, the opinion of others should be indifferent to us, but only to have it said, that we know how to render due honor to such as deserve it. Dearest friend, answered she, you are assured that my will is yours, and that I wholly de∣pend on you, having reserved nothing to my self, since I first engaged my faith unto you; therfore you may dispose of all things at your pleasure: and if the Emperour shall speak to me in your behalf, my answer shall be so modest, as it shall neither swarve from the respect I ow unto him, nor from the duty wherunto your love obligeth me. This resolution being taken, not without some kisses, Silvan went to the Emperour, to whom in the first place he gave an account of all his adventures which he had passed since he left the great Castle of the twelve Towrs; that done, he began a speech to him of this tenor: Sir, you are a competent judge of the powers of Love, nor do I believe that any man can speak more experimentally therof, then your Majesty. My parents that were not long since inclosed in their tombs, nor the late losse of so many Princes, whom Christendome doth to this day lament, have not been able to divert this passion growing in me by the object of a pleasing beauty, so that I am enforced to confesse unto you, that the merits of that fair Queen whom you saw not long since fighting with me, are accompanied with such unresistable charms, as I have been constrai∣ned to yeeld up my liberty unto them: I know you have a mighty power over her, and that you may freely dispose of her determination. In which regard, Sir, I most humbly beseech you that you will be the author of my happines, that you will contribute to my content, entreat her graciously to accept of my affection, and in a word engage her to give me with her self, the scepter of Lidia, which she now enjoieth by the death of her husband. It is true that I have not deserved this grace, but the favour you shall do me heerin shall so firmly oblige me, as I shall never have any desire but for your service. Cousin, answered Spheramond, the lawes of Love are so plea∣sing, that I do not wonder if men do prefer them before those of conveni∣ency: our parents are dead, for they could not live ever, and what should
lessen our grief for that losse, is, that they have left the world with so much glory and honour, as their fame shall continue in the mouths of men to all eternity; so that we are not to afflict our selves excessively for losing them, nor refuse our good fortune when it is presented, the rather for that they are not sensible of our actions; wherfore you shall not wrong their memo∣ry if now you take a wife, since heaven hath too soon deprived you of her whom your merits had purchased for you: and to testifie unto you that I speak according to my heart, I will share in the fault which you think to commit. You shall enjoy what you earnestly desire, or this fair one shall reject my praiers, for she is well worthy of you, and you of the delights which you hope for from her. Saying so he left him, and without protra∣cting time, went into the fair Savagesses chamber, who had that day at the request of her Lover, attired her self like a woman. See now said he, find∣ing her in that habit, see now fair Queen, your self in case more likely to force a thousand Knights to your obedience, then you were of late with your sword in your hand, although you can well make it redoubtable to your enemies; and in truth I do not now marvell that Silvan is charmed by so many excellencies, since I my self do begin to have the like desires, al∣though I am heer rather to do him service, then to suffer my self to be van∣quished. I know not how you value his kindred, or the merits of his person, but I am not ignorant how much he loves you with passion, and if I did not think I should trench too much upon the sweetnes of your disposition, I would willingly beseech you to do him so much honour as to receive him for your Husband. Sovereign Prince, replied she with a deep blush, I did in the beginning of your discourse beleeve, that you were pleased to divert your cares with some gentle passage of wit, but these words are past jesting, so that I am obliged to answer as seriously: you render me a husband so worthily vertuous, as the greatest Princesse on the earth could not refuse him without imputation of vanity, nor do I mean to leave the election of him to any other; I do therfore most willingly accept of him, aswell in consideration of the pain your Majesty hath taken in speaking to me for him, as for his own merit and love; and do account all those poor services that I have done to your Crown, abundantly rewarded in this only favour: which is as much as you may expect from me, who do humbly beseech you absolutely to dispose of all that concerns me, being most assured that you shall never see me disobey your commandements. Spheramond having re∣ceived an answer to his wishes, and unwilling to give fortune leisure to in∣terpose any malice for the disturbance of these Lovers content, he caused them to be contracted the same night, and the next day to be maried with great solemnity. This wedding renewed the former pleasures, and the new Knights not being weary of well doing, armed themselves presently after dinner, and divided into two troops, Russian commanded the one, and the gallant Esquilan the other: all these yong Princes behaving themselves so bravely, as after a long dispute of the honour of the Tourney, it could not be discerned which of the parties had the better, so as they retired with e∣quall commendation: the day being then spent in all kind of delight, the two Lovers were by the Emperour and Empresse brought to their Cham∣ber, where they presently went to bed, for to reap the fruit of their amo∣rous trauels. All things being thus disposed to delight, and the next day inviting every man to get up for the continuance of the former sports, For∣tune,
who never gives good without evill, would needs mingle some bitter amongst this sweetnes; a Gentleman arrived from Greece, which brought the Emperour word, that yong Clarisel of Guindaia, was stollen away by a Sorceresse the very same day wherin the Tourney was held at Constanti∣nople, in honour of his birth; and that Florisel and Sidonia were extreamly afflcted with sorrow for this losse. These displeasing news caused great trouble in the Court, all pastimes ceased, complaints were renewed, and e∣very one grieved according to the measure of his love: the new Knights de∣sirous to shew their affection to the services of the house of Greece, imme∣diatly armed themselves, and comming altogether before the Emperour, they besought his permission to go in search both of this yong Prince, and of the adventures of the World; which request being granted them, they departed the same day with a resolution to run over all Countries, rather then to fail of their enterprise; but their design was to no purpose, for the Enchantresse Creonda, in whose hands he was, and that had not taken him away, but only for that she foresaw by her Art, that of her daughter Grisoli∣ta, he should beget a Prince excelling all of his time, had so enchanted him, as by the sequel of this Discourse will appear, that none but Alcander could know the place of his retreat, or be able to contribute to his deliverance. The Court being in mourning for this bad news, and for the absence of so many Princes, Spheramond had no contentment left him but in the conver∣sation of Silvan, who not willing to abandon him so soon, endeavoured to make the time more pleasing, and his losse lesse sensible unto him. Howbeit forced by the necessity of his affairs, he was constrained to depart, together with his wife, for to reduce the people of Lidia to their duties; who seeing neither King nor Queen, rendred but little obedience to their governours, and began to rise in tumultuous maner. Their departure made the Court very solitary, but the Emperour knowing how to live every where with contentment, never troubled himself with the consideration of so many losses as he had endured, and began to attend the care of his subjects, when a second advertisement gave him a fresh cause of discontent. CHAP. XVIII. The adventures of the new Knights after they had left the Court: the Emperour Spheramond is advertised that the King of Canabea raised a mighty army to invade the Empire of Trebisond. FOrtune is seldome satisfied with one attempt upon us; she redoubles her assaults to see if she can overthrow us, and never shews her face, if we do not force her to it by the greatnes of our courage. The losse of the little Clarisel of Guindaia not able to suffice her rage she would needs once again arm the Pagans for the ruine of those brave Princes, who shewed still the same countenance in their afflictions, as they had car∣ried in their prosperity, and were not troubled for being crost, since it did
but render their vertues the more eminent, by ministring to them occasions of glory; the new Knights going out at severall parts to seek adventures in the world, Russian riding along with Esquilan on a plain, hard by the Sea, perceived a damsell flying from a tall old man that pursued her with a sword in his hand: As I live said he, at the view of so discurteous an act, I would never have believed that a man so neer his grave, could have done a thing so unworthy of himself: Let us by no means leave this maid in this distresse; wherfore put on I pray you, that we may free her from the hands of this barbarous man, which without doubt will never spare her, being so inraged as he is. Heerwith they set spurs to their horses, but make what haste they could they were not able to overtake them before they came to the sea side, where they saw the wench leap in a Bark and the old man after her, who ha∣ving taken her by the hair made as though he would have cut off her head. The Knights much grieved for that they could not aid her, in regard the Bark was put off a little from land, they approached to them as neer as they could; and thinking to alay his fury with intreaties, began to conjure him to consider what he himself was, and how little honour he should gain by dipping his hands in the bloud of a woman. I know very well, answered he, what every man ows to his reputation, but withall I am not ignorant of the content that revenge affoords: This woman cannot escape death for satisfaction of the wrong I have received from her, except you grant me one boon: You shall have it said Esquilan, whatever it be that you desire of us: Come aboard this Bark then, replied he, and go with me, I shall have time enough to let you know what I will require of you. Wherupon not staying for further entreaty, they presently lighted from their horses, and by the advice of the old man leaving them upon the strand, they entred that little Bark, which without attending any more lading, began to cut the waves with incredible speed. The Knights much amazed to see themselves caried away in that sort, looked round about them, and seeing no Sailers for the steering and conducting this vessell, they desired to be informed by what means it was done, but they found no body to satisfie them therin; the old man and the damsell no longer appearing, nor any thing to be found in the Bark but two little Beds, and a Table furnished with exquisit meat. Ve∣rily, said Esquilan, this is one of the wise Alquifs, or the unknown Vrganda's devices, but never credit me if for fear of any inchantment, I forbear now to eat of this meat; wherwith he drew to the Table, and finding a paper upon it, he opened it and therin read these words: Excellent Princes, do not wonder at the novelties you have seen this day: all is done for your glory, and we have with Art disposed you to follow the influ∣ences of the Stars; for which our care of you, you will then give us thanks, when as you shall with the hazard of your lives, give us that you have this day promised us. If I had not, said Russian, oftentimes heard of the like incounters, I should be somwhat mistrustfull, and could not touch this meat fearing the malice of some enemy, but I entend not to be more cautelous then your self; with that they sat down, and finding the meat agreeable to their pa∣lt, they fell to with a good appetite, and their repast being ended, with thanks to heaven, which never leaves his without relief in their necessities,
they saw a Dwarf come in to them, who shewing a spirit much greater then his body, thus spake unto them: My Lords, it is time for you to rowse up your selves, and worthily to employ these arms you wear. Heerwith they arose, and looking about them they perceived two ships grapled together; in one of the which were two Knights, invironed with about twenty soul∣diers, and two horrible Giants, that charged them with such fury, as they were amazed to see what resistance they made. Their Bark laying them a∣boord just as they had laced on their helmets, they leapt into that ship wher∣in the two Knights were, and assailing the two Giants, they laid upon them so lustily, as they quickly made them dispair of the victory. The combat was very hot between these fowr, but no whit lesse dangerous on the other side: for the two Knights desirous to make use of time, charged their ene∣mies with so much fury, as they cut them all in pieces, except one, that was very richly armed, who unwilling to die with the rest, though he had beha∣ved himself very bravely before, intreated for life and liberty. You shall have it, said one of them, provided you let us know both who you are, and why you caused us to be thus assaulted. It is, said he, the least that I can do since I am in your power, but I could wish that these fowr Knights who are fighting together might be seperated, for the death of the two Giants would be very grievous to me; with that he stept forward to put himself between them, when as he saw them tumble into the sea, with two fearfull blows which at one instant they had received. See, said he, with tears in his eies, that which I feared more then the losse of min own life, but the matter be∣ing now past remedy, I must have patience, & remembring the estate wher∣in I am, I will give you an account of what you require of me. I am a kins∣man to the mighty King of Canabea, the Christian Princes capitall enemy, and am now come from treating with the great Cariff of Affrica, and the King of Coriza, to whom I was emploied, for to invite them to a war a∣gainst the Princes of Greece; the cause wherof is, rather for religion then conquest, and my voiage was successefull enough, had I not lighted upon you: for having obtained all that I desired, namely fifty thousand men to fall upon the Empire of Trebisond, besides an hundred and thirty thousand more, which are already levied in the Kingdomes of Canabea, Romeria, and Calican, I returned extreamly well satisfied, in the company of those two Giants, which the King of Coriza had given me, by whose aid I did not doubt but to see the Crown of Trebisond placed on my masters head: the rather for that I knew the principall defenders of that Empire are dead, so as the Christians have been constrained to commit the government ther∣of to an Amazonian woman; and that those which survive will not willing∣ly quit their own provinces, for fear of being invaded by other Pagan Kings. Behold what you can expect from me in discharge of my promise; it remaineth now that you make yours good, and restore me to my former liberty, as you have preserved my life. The Princes of Greece, answered one of the first Knights, aretrue of their words, and stand in no doubt of their enemies: Experience should have made them wiser, and so many bat∣tels as they have lost, should me thinks, be able to break that obstinate de∣sire they have to die in this quarrell; but since they will not guide them∣selves by reason, they shall not be more gently entertained then they have been heertofore. They have reason to say that the bravest Knights in the world are dead, but there yet remain enough to trample on the heads of all
such as shall dare to provoke them. And to testifie unto you that we do not much regard their menaces, we will give you leave to proceed on your voi∣age, and you may tell your kinsman that for a beginning of the war you have met with Greek Princes as full of curtesie as courage. This said, he com∣manded to weigh anchor, and letting them go he turned to the two Knights, with no little admiration to see them so yong and so excellent. Esquilan ha∣ving observed them very attentively, desired them not to be displeased if his curiosity caried him to demand of them who they were, to the end they might the better know to what persons they were engaged for so many ca∣resses and praises, wherwith they had rewarded the poor service they had done them. We are said one of them, too much obliged to you, to refuse to let you understand who we are: I am Dorigel, King of the fortunat Islands, and this other is the valiant Amanio d'Astre; at these words they redoubled their embraces, and continuing their discourse they resolved to take several waies, Dorigel commanded to steer for the fortunat Island, for to raise some forces in aid of the Greek Princes; Russian and the Polack reentred their Bark in pursuit of their fortune; and the gentle Amanio took his way to∣wards the Parthian Empire, from which he was not then far distant, to ad∣vertise Spheramond of the Pagans design, as he did within a few daies after: these news having diverted that great Emperour from his ordinary passions, made him give order for the raising of men, for dispatching away speedily of certain Gentlemen unto Greece and Trebisond, lest they should be sur∣prised by the enemy, and sewing an exceeding affection to the welfare of Christendome, he hastned his levies, and in person set forward with ten thousand horse and twenty thousand foot. On the other side Florisel and Rogel were no lesse carefull; and beyond them all Alastraxarea; for see∣ing their estates exhausted by so many former wars, they were much grieved to behold their people thus continually subject to alarums; but not able to force the destinies, they suddenly gave order for their affairs, Don Rogel dislodging with thirty thousand men at arms, and Don Florisel with fifteen thousand horse and twenty thousand foot. In the mean time the ship wher∣in Russian was, having ran two daies without meeting any adventure, arrived at the foot of a little mountain which seemed to the Knights so pleasant, that they presently landed, much admiring to see their horses upon the shore in the same equipage that they had left them in; but ceasing their wonder by the remembrance of what they had seen the old man and the damsell do not long before, they presently mounted upon them, and taking a beaten way that lead up to the top of the mountain, they spent about an howr or more, at the end wherof they found a Cave, whose mouth was stopt with certain pieces of wood, which made them conjecture that there was some secret within it, their curiosity then not permitting them to go a∣ny further, without knowing whether there were any adventure within it worthy their courages, they alighted; and tying their horses to a Tree they thrust away the bars, so as with little difficulty they made that entry free for them, but that not being large enough for two to passe in front, Russian drew out his sword, and intreating Esquilan to stay there till his return, he went on a pretty way in that darknes not without some apprehension of fal∣ling into some precipice, out of which he should never be able to disingage himself, but then presently espying a lamp he marched with more assurance by the light therof, till he came into a vault of about five and twenty or
thirty paces broad, in one corner wherof upon some stones raised in form of an altar was a fire burning, & making a stand to look about him he disco∣vered two damsels comming, one of the which kneeling down before him, thus spake: If it be by the order of that barbarous man, who now desires to glut himself with my bloud, as he hath heertofore done with my embra∣ces, if it be, I say, from Ormand that you come, do not, Sir, make me lan∣guish any longer; my bosome is ready to receive the blow of mercy, and it will lesse grieve me to die by your hands, then once more to come in the sight of so wicked and base a man. Fortune hath brought me hither, said Russian, taking her by the hand to raise her from the ground, not with an in∣tent to shorten your daies, and much lesse to put you into the power of a man that you have no cause to love. Be not therfore afraid, but rather be confident in my company, and be assured, Gentlewoman, that I will have an account of the wrong that hath been done you, if you will make use of my arms; and let me know the occasion of your retirement to this desolate place, so far remooved from all conversation of men. Good Knight repli∣ed she, my misery is past remedy, and the aid you proffer me can no other∣wise serve but only to oblige me unto you for your good will; yet will I not be so little sensible of the favour you do me, as to deny your curiosity the relation of my misfortunes. Let us sit down then upon this bed of leaves that so you may with the more ease attend to my discourse. Me thinks, said Russian, we should be much better abroad where the clear day will more content us then this darknes, the rather for that a Gentleman my friend, who staies without for guard of the entry of this darksome lodging may perhaps be discontented with our longer stay. All places are to me indifferent, said she, and if I desired to stay you in this cave it was because I thought it a fit∣ter place for the rehearsall of my woes, then any other whatsoever. But I am well contented to go out with you that the Sun which for these fowr and twenty daies hath not troubled my sight, may let you behold in my face the signs of a most extream sorrow; wherupon going forth they went and set them down in the shadow of certain trees, where she began to speak in this maner: Do not, I beseech you, expect a long discourse, although the histo∣ry of my misfortunes be infinit; for I will not Sir, abuse your patience, but succinctly let you know the cause of my dispair; I was not five weeks since Countesse of Haute fleur, rich and beautifull enough, at least as I thought, to cause my self to be beloved of any, now ugly and more likely to fright people with my looks, then to beget the least affection in their hearts, and deprived of all conveniences in the world, but what these trees do yield me for my sustenance, and that of this maid which keeps me company, who not being ingratefull for some favours received of me in the time of my prosperity would needs bear a share in my miseries to comfort me. This is a strange change, and such as men might well wonder at, if they did not know that fortune disposeth of all things, and that she daily maketh greater metamorphosis, but I will not lay the blame on her, because I must confesse that all the fault was wholly in my self; for if I had not given credit to the words of Ormand a yong Prince, and one of my neighbours, I might still have flourished amidst the delights which those of my condition daily en∣joy. This Knight, valiant of his person, and fully compleat in all those per∣fections that can render a Gentleman commendable, if he had been sensible of a lawfull affection, happening to be in a forrest where I intended to spend
some daies in hunting, was assailed by fowr Knights, who pressed him very hard, and without question would have laid him in his grave, if I had not chanced to come in during their combat, but unable to endure the sight of so unequall a party, I went to his enemies, and curteously desired them for my sake to forbear, and to consider that they much wronged the order of Knighthood, but they were so obstinatly bent, as they would not give ear to me, wherwithall being displeased I commanded three Knights of my fol∣lowers to take the busines in hand, which they did so fortunately as in lesse then half an howr these arrogants were cut in pieces. That execution done, I was going towards Ormand, whom I had never seen before, meaning to invite him home with me, to have his wounds looked unto, but he prevent∣ed me, and lifting up his cask said unto me: You have Madam, nobly pre∣served my life, which doubtlesse was otherwise in my enemies power, but I desire you will be pleased to imploy it in your service, and not to spare it whensoever you shall think me fit for any design of yours; I am heer with∣out all acquaintance, and find my self constrained to presse yet once more upon your goodnesse, beseeching you to spare me one of your servants for to guide me where I may have my bloud stanched, which runs out at three or fowr wounds. I should but half oblige you if I should leave you in the estate you are in; but Sir, I will make you see that I esteem more of your life then you think for, wherfore go along with me and you shall find all that is needfull for you: wherupon departing with all speed we got in lesse then an howr to Heautefleur, where I put him into the hands of a Physician, that within a month so recovered him, as he was able to bear arms; during which time I visited him daily, and finding him to be of a most gentle cari∣age, I conceived a certain kind of good will towards him, which converted into a violent love assoon as he had told me who he was, and that he had sworn to affect me more then all the world beside: I will not heer tell you the pleasure I received in hearing him sigh, nor the contentment I had in the praises he gave me; for taking all his actions for testimonies of his love and my merit, I felt such infinit sweetnes in his conversation, as all other de∣lights whatsoever were nothing to me in comparison therof. To what end should I spin out this discourse any longer? Opportunities being fit, and our passions violent, I yielded him up that which I ought to have held most dear, under the assurance of a thousand oaths that he made me to marry me publikely, when he had craved the consent and permission of his Father, whose authority he held not fit to be contemned; which seeming to me ve∣ry reasonable, I gave him leave to return into his Country after he had tar∣ried five months with me, hoping that ere long he would have returned a∣gain: but the traitor never thinking more of his promises, but with sorrow for that he had made them, and despising my caresses because he had too easily injoied them, not only refused to write to me, but having done a world of indignity to a Gentleman whom I sent to presse his return and to advertise me of his health, he signified to me by word of mouth that the beauty of my Country, much more then that of my person, did make him desire to revisit it, but that it should be with a powerfull army to annex it to those estates that fortune had conferred upon him; and as for me that I should do better to place my self amongst those that attend the sacrifices of the Gods, then to think of living any more to the world: Imagine, I pray you, what an astonishment I was in when the Gentleman delivered this unto
me: Verily, I had much ado to beleeve him, for remembring the loving speeches that he had so often entertained me with, and the innumerable oaths that he had sworn to me, I could not be perswaded that his affection was entinguished, and that he could be so fearles of the justice of heaven, but alas! I found to my grief, that the good opinion which I had of him did a∣buse me; for adding effects to his words not long after, he invaded my Country with two and twenty thousand men, seazed upon all the places that depended upon my command, except the Castle of Heautefleur, wher∣into a Cousin of mine hath put himself with three thousand foot resolving to die or to keep it for me: but fearing to fall into the hands of this wicked wretch, who threatned to abandon me to the lust of his souldiers, I rather chose to make my retreat to this place then to serve once again for the sub∣ject of his scorn. You are now, brave Knight, fully informed of my infor∣tunat estate, which can have no end but with the losse of my life. In extream dangers Madam, said Russian, we must put on strange resolutions; your mi∣series I confesse are great, yet do I not hold them past remedy, for you will be at quiet when this vile man shall be no longer living, and that may be within a few daies; the Heavens are just and alwaies armed for the defence of oppressed innocence, to whom I render humble thanks for bringing us hither to assist you in so just a quarrell, for the maintenance wherof, this Knight and my self will either die or reinvest you in your former greatnes. Is your Castle far from hence? But one daies journey replied she. Be then assured, said he, that your enemies shall shortly see us; in the mean time, keep you close heer, that we may know where to give you an account of our proceedings when time shall serve: with that they tooke their leaves of her, and getting to horse made such speed as they were at the Camp by break of day, and just as the enemies were raising of their ladders to assault the place; that occasion seeming to favour their approach to the walls without suspi∣cion, they followed Ormand, and seeing those of the Castle make a sally at the very same instant even as they desired, they presently turned head and began the skirmish so lustily as the souldiers on both sides were amazed at it, Russian advisedly judging that the quiet of the Countrey depended upon the life or death of Ormand, perceiving him advance with certain troops, he discharged so dangerous a blow upon his helmet, that he overthrew him to the ground amongst the feet of a thousand horses, but not willing to let him die in that maner, he caused him presently to be taken up, and commanding two Knights to carry him to the Castle, they pursued their good fortune with such fury as the enemies being in disorder for want of their Generall, betook them to their heels, leaving above three thousand dead upon the place. Those of the Castle being by the direction of these two Knights, retired, there were bonefires made for joy of so remarkable a victory, but especially for the taking of Ormand prisoner; who seeing himself in the hands of a people that had no cause to love him, could not well brok his misfortune, and did extreamly fear the displeasure of the fair Isolinda, for he could not beleeve that after so much scorn as he had put upon her, it was possible for her to continue her affection still to him, nevertheles resolving patiently to endure the worst of fate, he expected what his enemies would determine of him. In the mean space the two Knights not willing to lose time, made all the garrison to arm, leaving the inhabitants to favour their retreat if they were pursued, and determined to waken their enemies by the
break of day, but assured by their spies, that they were dis-lodged in the night, Russian departed onely with three Knights, not acquainting any bo∣dy with his designe but his companion, whom he desired to remain there by his presence to restrain the fury of the people, who out of the remem∣brance of the mischiefes he had caused them to suffer, were otherwise like enough to do some violence to their prisoner; and returning the same way, he came the night before he arrived at the caves mouth; where the fair Isolinda, hearing the noyse of the horses, had hidden her self, with an ex∣tream apprehension of falling into the hands of her enemies: and entring into the vault, he found her all trembling so that to assure her he said thus: Madam, this is no time for you to be afflicted, Fortune hath changed her countenance, and you now hold Ormand in a stronger prison then that of your eyes, at least he shall not so easily get out of it: whereupon rendring her account of all that had past, he so amazed her with the strangenesse of this change, as she could hardly have beleeved it, had not her Knights, whom she well knew, with new protestations, given her assurance of the truth thereof. Revived with these newes, she returned a thousand thanks to Russian, and getting on horseback, she went presently away with him to Hauteer; where, with unspeakable joy, she was received by her sub∣jects, who besought her to deliver Ormand into their hands, that they might punish him as he deserved: but thereunto the two Knights opposed themselves, remonstrating the mischiefes which might result out of such an execution, she that could not for all that had passed, totally extinguish her love to him, yeelded to their advice with so much felicity, as the two Knights resolved to endeavour the reuniting of their affections; and indeed wrought so effectually, as Ormand having solemnly protested to love her ever, and without dissimulation, she was pleased to pardon him, and he to take her to wife, which was presently done with the generall applause of her people, who proclaimed the valour of our Knights to be worthy of Altars. An assured peace th being setled, Russian and his companion, that loved not to be idle, took their leaves of the new mried couple, and not having forgotten their way to the Bark, they put to sea again, commit∣ting the care of their voyage to those sages that had been their conductors thither.
CHAP. XIX. The arrivall of the Pagan Princes in the Empire of Trebisond: the fight between the Greek Princes and them at their landing: the assault given to the town, and the resolution that the Pagans took. THE Queen Alastraxerea being advertised, as I have re∣lated, that Fulgoran armed the Pagans against the Empire of Trebisond, did all that a warlike and dis∣creet Lady could do to crosse the designes of the enemy; the ports were fortified, the townes furni∣shed with munition and souldiers, and the fields co∣vered with a number of gallant Knights. On the other part Fulgoran was not idle: for upon the return of Gonzaldin, whom Russian and Esquilan had defeated, when they succou∣red Dorigell, and the gentle Amanio d' Astre, he drew together the forces of Canabea to the number of thirty thousand men: and those which King Dardanor had sent him, being about fourty thousand more, together with the troops of the Prince of Calican of thirty thousand; with these forces, consisting of threescore thousand horse, fourty thousand foot, and two and twenty furious Giants, who alone thought themselves able to co∣quer the whole world, he embarked himself to go meet with those of the great Cariffe of Africa, and the King of Coriza, amounting to foursoore thousand horse, and thirty five thousand foot, in whose company they sai∣led together with so fair a winde for three weeks space, as they began to make the land of Trebisond. The valiant Alastraerea, who looked daily for them, and therefore held in readinesse some forty thousand horse, be∣sides sufficient garrisons for the townes, being by frigates of advice infor∣med of the approach of this mighty Fleet, presented her selfe with her forces at the Port. And determining bravely to dispute with the enemy his first footing upon her territories, attended while the winde should bring them to shore. The skirmish then began to grow hot on both sides: the Christians encouraged by the presence of that valorous Princesse, who like a flash of lightning made her way through as many enemies as she en∣countred, bestirred themselves very bravely, and standing very firm upon the shore, would have made a strange butchery of their adversaries, if Ful∣goran, accompanied with Florimond, Bruzanges, and the fair Arifleura, had not lea'd to land in spight of all resistance, and the King Dardanor, the Cariffe of Africa, with twelve Giants, done the like in another place; these Knights clearing the place with incredible fury, in a short time made room for more then twenty thousand men to land, who seconding the Giants, that ruined all before them, they made the Christians give ground, when as five Knights armed in white, presenting themselves with their lances in their rests, gave in upon the enemy with such courage, as they raised the spirits of those who before trembled with fear; these five joyning with Alastraxerea, who seemed a Fury to the Pagans, maintained the fight a long time; howbeit, the greatest part of the Army being landed, Ala∣straxerea
thought good to make her retreat; but still fighting, wherein she was wel seconded by the arrivall of two Knights in gray armour, who at the same instant flying in among the enemies, presently laid two horrible Giants dead upon the earth, and rendred themselves so redoubted to the other Knights, as they durst not come near them: this retreat, so full both of courage and discretion, bred admiration in their enemies, which extol∣ling the valour of the Christians, mourned for their own losse, being but too great for a first encounter: for in the sea, and on the shore fell about thelve thousand men and four Giants, besides the Kings of Coriza, and Romeria, dangerously wounded, whereas the Christians got off with the losse of two thousand men. The army thus landed, the Citie was present∣ly invected, the Pagans fortifying their camp with more judgement then ever any of their forces had done before upon any Christian land; and as one side made their preparations for an assault, the other disposed them∣selves to make a gallant defence, Alastraxerea finding her selfe assisted by the five Knights, who were Perion of Turkie, Florizart of Taprobana, Quedragant, Florertan and Dardani, as also by these two thunderbolts of warre, in the gray armour, which were quickly known to be Russian of Media, and the brave Esquiln of Polonia, thought herself much more as∣sured then before; and therefore was lesse afraid to skirmish with the ene∣my, so as no day passed without the death of some, and for the most part of the Pagans, who more guided by rage then judgement, did hazard all to get nothing, which so vexed Flg, seeing his people diminish, as much as the honour of the Christians augmented, he resolved to lose all, or win all: and therefore he disposed his forces for an assault, comman∣ding them either to die or vanquish, to which end having caused a great number of ladders to be prepared, he went himselfe the formost to the fight, being followed by his Giants, by Florimond, Bruzanges, Dardanor, the great Cariffe; and the Kings of Coriza and Calican, when as advertise∣ment was given him, that a great fleet of Christians was under saile, ente∣ring the harbour. These newes made him pause a while: for Captains can∣not, without blame, despise any intelligence brought them; but being no lesse wise then couragious, he commanded the Kings of Coriza and Cali∣can, to take six of the Giants, and an hundred thousand men to attacque the town, whilst with the rest of the armie in good order falling out of his trenches, he marched to the shore; where Florizel, accompanied with the incomparable Emperour of the Parthians, whom he had a little before met at sea, was landing with fourscore thousand men. This brave Prince, seeing such a multitude of enemies, instantly drew his forces into Battaglia, and not intending to give his opposites leave to discover that the half of his people were not yet disembarked, he advanced together with Sphera∣mond, and the gallant Amanio d' Astre, encountring Fulgoran so furiously, that their horses not able to bear the shock, fell backe three or four paces, to come on again afterward with the greater violence; Spheramond running against one of the Giants, passed his lance clean through his body, Amanio d' Astre having made Florimond of Canabea to lose his stirop; on the other side, the Cariffe of Africa, Bruzanges, and the Giants, finding none but or∣dinary Knights in their way, made so great a slaughter of them, that with∣out the assistance of Spheramond, who came in to their aid with ten thou∣sand men, the Christians had suffered much; but his arrivall stayed the
fury of the Pagans in such sort, as they began to give him ground; which Fulgoran perceiving, who then was combatting Florizel with so much va∣lour, as he was amazed at it, he delivered such a dangerous blow upon his helmet, as astonied him, and throwing himself among the Parthians, he re∣covered again what his men by their default had lost; whereupon Sphara∣mond carried with a strange rage to see the massacre of his people, dis∣charged a bow upon his helmet with such fury, as laid him upon his hor∣ses crupper, so farre besides himself, that he had no judgement or memory left him: This blow so affrighted the enemy, that they had certainly reti∣red to their trenches, if the Cariffe of Affrica, attended by his Gi∣ants, had not presently come into their second: his presence diminished their fear, and terrified the Christians; but Florizel and the valiant Ama∣nio d' Astre advancing to their succour, so revived their courages, that the fight was renewed more sharply then before. Whilst thus they disputed the honour of the landing the other were not at quiet: for the Kings of Coriza and Calican, made the assault to be maintained with so much ob∣stinacie, as it seemed they resolved not to live, or be victorious; the dead which fell in the ditches feared them not, and their losse augmenting their courage, made them so adventurous, as Alastraxerea avowed afterwards, that she never had seen a wall better assailed; howbeit, their labour was in vain, and the Christians resistance such, as they were constrained to fall off just at the time that their fellows, who fought upon the shore, retired into their trenches. Florizell seeing their retreat, and considering that his souldiers were as yet not recovered of their travail, by sea, would not presse them any further, but encamping hard by them, commanded necessary in∣struments to be made, caused the hurt men to be looked unto, took order for the guard of his camp, and desirous to see the Princesse Alastraxerea, his sister, mounted upon his horse with Spheramond to go to the Citie, but but they met her in the mid way, accompanied with the new Knights, you may well imagine how kindly they entertained one another; and withall, the content that Spheramond took in seeing these young Princes, on whom he had lately conferred the order of Knighthood, discharge themselves so bravely for the honour of the Christian name. I will not therefore dwell any longer hereupon, but following my discourse, will tell you what the Pagan Princes resolved to do, being grieved with the losse of eighteen thousand men, and three Giants, which died in this encounter, wherein also there fell of the Christians, no lesse then eight thousand and five hundred Knights, Fulgoran performing the duty of a right commander, that will not be frighted for one misfortune, seeing the courage of his men grow cold, and that the names of the Greek Princes was become redoubted in his Ar∣my, caused the principall Knights of his troops to be called together, and when they were assembled, with a confident countenance thus spake unto them: As it is no little griefe to me to see your lookes so pale, and that so slight a losse should any whit amaze you; as yet we have had no cause to complain; and so many of our enemies slaughtered before these walls, should, me thinks, oblige us not to fear the encountring of them. Have they any advantage of us? Do their swords cut better then ours? Have they better courages, or Arms of better proofe? Verily, we no way yield to them, in reolution of doing bravely, their curtelaxes carry no keener edge then our scymeters; and the greatnesse of
our blowes doe testifie that our armes are as of much weight as theirs; you will say that they have never beene assailed wihout danger, and that so many armies as have beene routed in these fields, doe witnesse their valor, and may justly make us apprehend a like successe of our enterprize. It is true that they have ever hitherto shewed themselves invincible, and that few kings have affronted them without their owne extreame damage, but shall we from thence infallibly, conclude, that fortune must therfore per∣petually favour them, nothing lesse, she delights in inconstancy, and makes her selfe sport in abasing those whom she hath for a time raised to the high∣est pitch of eminency; the glory which they have acquired in the pro∣ceeding battailes, should make us rather strive with obstinacy for victory over them, then daunt our courages, for triumphing over them that stoope under the weight of so many law ells shall render our names, so glorious in the world, that all the sorraine nations will shrinke when they but heae us named. Throw off therefore, I pray you, this fear, which I see in your faces, re-kindle that generous fire which made you slight your ease to bring your selves into businesse of honour, and giving the enemy no leisure to streng∣then himself by the comming in of any fresh supplies, go pull him out of his trenches, and make it appear to them that you were never afraid to meet them in the plain field. For my own part I am of opinion to present them battell with our whole army, and by a triall of all the forces on both sides, see what we may hope for from our enterprise. This, answered the Cariffe of Affrica, this brave Prince, is the best advice that now can be gi∣ven, for a long siege, or a tedious war, cannot be but very dangerous, and if we spend our time in beating of walls in stead of turning our swords up∣on our enemies, we shall never avoid the misfortune of those, which have come hither with the same designe that brought us hither, who left all their honour behinde them in our enemies hands; the Princes of Greece are full of courage, and will never shun the fight, since the Emperours of Par∣tia, and Greece, are arrived to their succour, but if we be good men we cannot fail of the honour of the day. The number of our souldiers doth far exceed theirs, our hearts are good, we have Giants and Knights to be redoubted, Why then should we not be conquerours? Either the victo∣ry, Excellent Prince, must be ours, or we must all die in seeking to atchieve it: As for me, I prize my life at lesse then nought in this occasion, and do beleeve that all these Lords hee assembled will be as resolute as my self; you may therefore, when you please, send to offer them battell, with this assurance, that we will dispute the honour of it with a great deal of courage. This opinion being approved by them all, they dispatched presently a He∣rauld to Don Florizell of Niquea, who received him very courteously, and a little after returned him with assurance of a generall battell, the fourth day following, for the preparations whereof, a truce was in the mean time concluded on either side.
CHAP. XX. The joy of the Greek Princes for the arrivall of the Excellent Emperour of Persia, and the successe of the battell. THe two armies disposing themselves equally for victo∣ry, prepared all things necessary for the fight, the Pa∣gans with a certain assurance of triumphing through the multitude of their men, and the Christians of de∣feating their enemies, more by the assistance of hea∣ven, then by the force of their arms, the day being al∣ready passed, they saw the seas covered with ships comming in very good order; whereupon; both sides were in fear alike, for neither of them knew to whether part they were in fa∣vour inclined; but they dwelt not long in that doubt, for as soon as the Vantguard approached the Port, the red Crosse with the arms of Persia were discerned in their flags, whereby it was judged to be the valiant Don Rogel of Greece; his arrivall brought no lesse fear to the Pagans, then con∣tentment to his friends, who being free to go whether they pleased, for that the truce was yet on foot, went to meet him in the strand with a thou∣sand signes of joy; the ceremonies of entertainment being over, the Prin∣ces, not to lose time, met presently in councell, for to deliberate on the courses which was to be held for the future battell, wherein all their opi∣nions, in a manner, concurring, they resolved to make four equall battalia's, each of them consisting of five and twenty thousand horse, and eight thou∣sand foot; the first or which should be commanded by Spheramond, accom∣panied with Amanio d' Astre, and Perion of Turkie; the second by the va∣liant Prince of Persia his father, with Russian of Media, and Dardanio; the third by the royall Alastraxerea, with Esquilan, and Quedragant of Sansue∣ga; and the last by the excellent Florizell of Niquea, with Florestan, and Florizart; the command and guard of the town was intrusted to the Count of Argamond, with ten thousand foot, and the Campe to the Duke of Sile∣sia, with the like number of Infanterie: On the other side, the Pagans were not drowfie, but knowing that the losse of that day would be the end∣ing of their honours, and lives, they incouraged their souldiers, one while with promise of rewards, another while with hope of glory, so as the most cowardly resolved to fight it out bravely, both for reputation and spoil; their spies having informed them of the order the Greek Princes determi∣ned to hold in imbattelling their army; they also concluded to frame four battalia's of their forces, each of them composed of thirty eight thousand horse, and fifteen thousand foot; whereof the first was to be led by the Prince Bruzanges, Florimond his son, the valourous Arifleura, and three Giants; the second by the great Cariffe of Africa, Dardanor King of Ro∣meria, and three Giants; the third and fourth by the King of Coriza and Fulgoran, with a like number of men; the King of Calican remaining with twelve thousand foot for the guard of their Camp. These things thus de∣creed, every man bestirred himself, some making clean their arms, some
whetting their swords, and others looking to their horses: In brief, none was idle, and every one passionately wished for the next day, that they might imploy their forces. Assoon then as the morning appeared, Sphera∣mond, who had the foreward, covered the field with his horse, and not in∣tending to stay untill the trumpets sounded a charge, he espied on his right hand five Knights armed all in white, present themselves with incredible courage against the enemy, to the no little joy of the Christians; whereup∣on, perceiving Florimond begin his career, he set spurs to his horse, and so strongly incountered him in the midst of his race, as their lances flew into a thousand shivers, Florimond still keeping his seat, though he was twice or thrice ready to fall; such was not Bruzanges fortune with the valiant A∣manio d' Astre, for he was laid upon the earth, so dangerously hurt, that without the succour of his son, he had been stifled under the horses feet; Perion of Turkie, and the white Knight, directed their staves against the Giants, whereby two of them were wounded, but so slightly, as they pre∣sently laid hands on their scymiters, and disdaining to fight with ordinary men, they began a furious combat with three of the white Knights, whilst Spheramond, in the midst of the preasse, thundered wheresoever he came, neither was Florimond any way behinde him, for as often as he advanced his sword, the death of some Christians ensued; whence it followed, that his people in imitation of him, laboured exceedingly to make good the place they fought upon; but they were so pressd by Spheramond, Peri, Amanio d' Astre, and the white Knights, that they began to give ground with extream discontent to the Giants, who could not relive them, being too far ingaged in their combat with the new come Knights; neverthelesse, enraged to see themselves staid in that sort, they all at one instant diseharged three such blows on their adversaries heads, as they laid them on the ground almost void of sense; with that, taking the opportunity of the time, they went to have made their people turn head, which they perhaps had done, if they had not been stopt by the brave Emperour of the Par∣thians, Amanio d' Astre, and Peri, who not giving them leave to passe any further, charged them so stoutly, as they were constrained to look to their own defence; then it was, that Florimond re-incouraging his men, over∣threw as many Christians as stood in his way, but the white Knights being come to themselves again, and infinitely inraged that they had been so ill intreated, flew into the throng, with their two companions, and made such a slaughter among them, as the enemies were fain to retreat to avoid their fury, notwithstanding all that Florimond could do to stay them: The great Cariffe of Africa, accounted one of the most valourous among the Pagans, seeing the first troop in disorder, caused those which he led to advance, a∣gainst whom the Excellent Emperour of the Persians opposed himself, and with that greatnesse of courage, which made him so admired in the world, charged his lance against the Cariffe, whom he made to lose his stirrups, Russian of Media having run one of the Giants quite thorow and thorow; upon the encounter of these new troops, the earth was quickly covered with arms, legs, weapons, and the field with horses that had lost their ma∣sters, the air ecchoed with the cries of dying and wounded men, the ground shook with the noise of drums and trumpets, all was full of hor∣rour and fear, and wheresoever D Rgel and Russian passed, they left be∣hinde them evident marks of their valour▪ the ranks grew thin before the
great Cariffe and his Giants; in brief, all was in confusion, and the bloud streamed so over all the field, as it filled every one with astonishment: the King of Calican, and Fulgoran, impatient to see others imployed in busi∣nesse of glory, caused their troops presently to advance, the like did Ala∣straxerea, and Don Florizell; then it was, that the earth, and the heavens seemed to be but one thing, and so many Knights were overthrown at this encounter, as no man could stir a foot without treading on the dead; the Knight Ardant carried ruine in his hand, Florizell passed along like lighten∣ing, the Giants cut all in pieces that stood in their way, Alastraxerea, Esqui∣lan, Russian, Rogell, Spheramond, Quedragant, and Prion, seemed furies; in summe, nothing appeared but bloud and slaughter. The King of Calican, meeting with Alastraxerea, and Fulgoran with Florizell, began a furious com∣bat, but it lasted not long, for they were divided by a troop of Pagans, which invironing this valiant Prince and his sister, reduced them into very great danger of their lives, had not Spheramond, and the gallant Amanio d'A∣stre, come in just at the time, when as their horses were killed under them; these two Princes knowing Florizell and his sister, slew in suddenly amidst their enemies, and so wonderfully behaved themselves, as they gave their friends leave to breathe a while; howbeit, their succour had little prevai∣led against so great a multitude, amongst the which were three Gi∣ants; if the brave Russian of Media, together with the five white Knights, had not put himself in the head of fifty Knights, wherewith he charged the enemy so furiously, that after they had slain above two hundred of them, even before Fulgorans face, they re-mounted Florizell, and the valorous Alastraxerea, who renewing the fight with more rage then before, seemed not be wearied at all with their former toil. Whilst matters past thus in this part, Don Rogell, with Esquilan, Florerian, Dardanio, Quedragant, and Florizart, arrested the fury of the Cariffes Giants, and Florimond, where∣by their people were so heartened, as they were no whit dismayed with the sight of so many corpes as lay dead before them. The slaughter ha∣ving continued all the day with the Combattants incredible pain, the night came on, which parted them without knowing unto whom fortune was most favourable, the Pagans retired to their Camp, and the Christians to their tents, not a little glad to see the principall Knights preserved from the fury of this best debated battell that ever was fought. The number of the dead being calculated on both sides, it was found, that the Pagans had lost ninety two thousand men, with seven Giants, and the Princes Bruzan∣ges, Florimond, and the Cariffe sore wounded; the Christians for their part having fifty seven thousand men slain, Florizell and Alastraxerea both hurt, the one in the shoulder, the other in the arm. The retreat thus made, the Christian Princes, after they had caressed the new Knights, which were Florian, and Tristor of Sobradiza, Agrian of Scotland, Fulurtin, and Melfort, met in counsell about their affairs, where every one agreeing to Don Rogells advice, who perswaded the renewing of the fight by break of day, to let the enemy see, that neither losse nor labour could affright them, word was brought, that an Ambassadour was come from the Knight Ardant. Let him, said Don Rogell, come in, his presence will not scare us. The Ambas∣sadour then being admitted, spake to them all in this manner: Princes of Greece, the King of Canabea, beleeving that you have need of rest, as well as himself, and that you will be as willing to do all fair offices to those
which have lost their lives on your side, as well as he would be to such as died on his, he hath sent me hither to require a trce for eight dayes, to the end every man may bestow  upon his friends: that time expired, he will let you understand the designe he hath resolved on, for to give an end to this war. Don Rogell, that was chie in the counsell, by reason of the absence of Florizel of Niquea his father, who was retired into the citie, by reason of his hurt, would have had the advice of the other Princes upon this demand; but they all protesting to be wholly gided by him, he thus answered the Em∣bassadour, We had resolved before your comming, to have seen to morrow morning what the issue of our warre would have been; and to that end had commanded our men to be ready by break of day; but now we will let your master know, that the Princes of Greece will never be wanting in courtesie no more then in courage. The truce then which in his name you require, we are content to grant you, and will be glad to understand what his designe is, that we may contribute thereunto all that is necessarie on our part. This an∣swer being returned to Fulgoran, very much contented his army, and the Christians retired into their tents to refresh themselves at leasure. CHAP. XXI. Vpon the point of a combat between Fulgoran, the Cariffe, Florimond, and the unknown Knight, with Spheramond, Amanio d'Astre, Russian and Esquilan, two Damsels interrupting them, carried them away. THe field being cleared of the dead bodies, Fulgoran, who had no greater desire then to be victor in that war, in∣cessantly studied how to bring that to passe; one while he was inclined to put his army once more to the haz∣zard of a battle, but straight remembring the horrible slaughter which had been made of his men, he had compassion of so many innocent people, and desired to triumph with lesse effusion of bloud; but not knowing which way to iattain thereunto, he passed the most part of his time in these meditations, without drawing any resolution out of an in∣finity of thoughts: At the last, returning one day from the forrest, where he often used to walk, with a determination to raise his siege, and after∣wards to dispute, by a combat of two to two; not the Empire, which now he durst not hope for, but the glory of the victory, he heard the voyce of one that complained, wherewith his heart being moved to pitty, he sudden∣ly turned his horse that way, and approaching to certain trees, which Na∣ture had set very close together, he saw thorow the branches a Knight laid upon the grasse, armed at all peeces, except his hand and head; his eyes were full of tears, his face pale, yet did not that hinder him from appearing very handsome. The sadnesse of this object, not leaving him without re∣senting the griefe which he saw him endure, moved him to alight for to present his best assistance unto him, when as he saw him rise from the ground, and take a Lute that hung upon the boughes of one of the trees,
whereunto he sung a very mournfull ditty, which being ended, he returned his Lute to the former place, and throwing himselfe upon the grasse, he said, Is it possible to finde a more unhappy man then my selfe in the world? and who can say that I am not the worst required of any that ever sighed for love? Hope mitigates the torments of lovers; and if they suf∣fer, it is with a certain opinion that time will change their misfortune, and that patience will render the end of their desires happy; but alas! my mi∣sery is not of that quality, I languish without possibility of hope, and the death of Arthemisa deprives me of all the blisse that man can expect: I love her as much in the grave as when she lived, and foolishly imagining, that she will one day revive to set me at rest, I cannot resolve to entertain any affection for another Mistresse. Good Gods! is not my destiny very deplorable herein? Have I not cause to complain of my hard fortune? And is it not with reason that I hold my selfe the most wretched creature breathing? Yes doubtlesse, I may well blame mine own weaknesse, and accuse you of injustice; you ought to force this humour, that renders me repugnant to my selfe, work miracles on me, not permit me to be obstinate in mine owne ruine, or restore me that which you unjustly detain from me. But I wrongfully complain of you, it is Death to whom I should addresse these reproaches, she hath ravished my treasure, and left me nothing but the remembrance of my Arthemisa; she, she it is that is capable of my sor∣row, of my tears and sighs; It is through her that fury overcomes my reason; briefly, she alone is the cause of my udoing. This speech ending with an alas! he remained a good while silent, leaving Fgran extreamly grieved to see a Knight of so brave a presence reduced to such extremity; howbeit, his silence lasted not long: Fairest Arthemisa, continued he, what tears have you cost me? you have but one tomb, one sepulchre, and my griefe prepares for me every day an infinity; you partake of the glory of the Gods, I am amongst the miseries o the world; you are hap∣py in your death, and I unhappy in my life; what inequality do we now suf∣fer, that have heretofore been so comfortable in all things? You are in plea∣sure, I am in pain; I sigh, you are contented: verily I am much amazd at this change, and cannot comprehend how we should live so at this present, where∣as our love would not permit us to do so in times past. It is true, O Arthemi∣sa, that I should be much amazed at it, if I did not call to minde your merit, which doubtlesse hath with reason acquired all these advantages: wherefore I ought not to envie your glory, but contrarily rejoyce to see you with the Gods, and to offer the same sacrifices to you, as we do daily to them, which this Desart place will not suffer me to do, neverthelesse, I will at the least offer something, untill such time as my valour may lay the bravest Knights of the earth upon your tomb. Saying so, he rose up, brake the branches of the nee∣rest trees, which hee piled one upon another, and falling down on his knees, he was again going to complain anew, had not Fulgoran, grieving to see him lose himselfe in that manner, advanced towards him just at the instant; Knight, said he unto him, I wish that you could so relish my speech, as it might bring you that consolation which is necessary for your griefe, and then you would see how great a fault you commit to love an insensible thing, and that com∣plaints are not fit for you, you may well retain the memory of a beauty that you have so long adored; but to fancie to your selfe a returning of it, for your satisfaction is that, which with reason should never enter into your
thoughts; and besides, do not beleeve that it is a glory to you to be thus opi∣nionate in your passion▪ not that it can purchase to you the reputation of a perfect lover: the way to merit that commendation lies in those things where our judgement doth not erre, and you shall never meet with any that will ap∣prove of this course of yours, and that will not freely tell you how it is a kinde of madnesse. Follow the first motions of your reason, let it not be lost in your afflction, and re-entring into the exercise of Arms, divert your sor∣rows by the undertaking of generous enterprises. Now it may be your pas∣sion will not brook the liberty of this discourse; but if I fail therein, it is out of the compassion which I have of your sufferings, so that if you have any power yet left over your self, you will embrace my counsel, and go along with me to refresh you in my tents, where I shall endevour to free you from these fancies. Verily, answered he somewhat coldly, were my sorrow lesse, I should willingly make use of your offer; but what should I do in the world, since I am too well assured that I shall never meet Arthemisa there? Sir, I should see nothing that could please me, all objects would renew my grief, and the advertisements you speak of would be torments to me when I should consi∣der that I did not carry arms for the service of my Mistrisse: you say that I should have a better heart after this losse; but alas! it too neerly concerns my life, nor may I, without basenesse, resolve to live more contentedly then now you see me: howbeit, were I able to do you any service in recompence of your courtesie, I would follow you, and let you one day see that I am not insensible of a benefit. But what can you hope from the weaknesse of these arms, which an extream sorrow hath deprived of all vigour? Truly nothing, and your good will would be unprofitably imployed; wherefore be pleased to leave me heer in a continuall martyrdome, and goe you away with the glory of having exceedingly obliged me, though I entertain not your assistance. Fulgoran, that attentively observed him during this discourse▪ which seemed not to proceed from a man besides himselfe, seeing him of a ve∣ry goodly presence, was more desiro then before o prevent the mischief that menaced him, so as persisting in his perswasions, he laid so many reasons be∣fore him, that at length he promised not to afflict himselfe so excessively, but with patience to attend how the Gods would dispose of his life. This brave resolution was so pleasing to our Pagan, as embracing him, he protested to love him eternally; and making him get on horseback, they together ode on towards his tents: but whilst they were upon the way, Fulgoran observed his carriage, and seeing how gallantly he sate his horse, he could not forbere saying thus unto him; Truly it would be a great losse to see  man of your parts passe the best of his dayes in Desarts, not do I little oblige the world by restoring so brave a knight unto it; your behaviour contents me much, and makes me desire to know you better then yet I do; you shall then, if you please, do me the favour, to tell me more particularly who you are. It is, an∣swered he, that which at this present I cannot do, without breaking an oath I have made; but not to be so ingrateful as to refuse you the information of what I may lawfully relate, I will tell you, that I am every where called, the Vn∣knowen, a name indeed that very well befits me, who have not given men oc∣casion to speake of mee, and that having a long tie traveled thorow the world for the execution of enterprises, that may crown with glory Knights er∣ran, I arrived some months since in the land of Mocassi, which was then all covered over with the forces of enemies: My first encounter was a very lovely
maid, who not without confidence presented her selfe before me, and that in so gracefull a manner, as begat in me an extream desire to speak unto her; and as I was opening my lips so to do, after she had a little viewed me, she pre∣vented me, thus: If you be, Sir, as courteous as handsome, you will not re∣fuse me a Boon I desire of you. Men use not, replied I, to send away those of your merit with discontent, you may therefore freely command of me what you please, and be assured not to be denied. You shall then follow me presently, said she, to Nicopolis, the capitall citie of this kingdome, and there put your selfe into the hand of Arthemisa, with protestation to defend her a∣gainst the King of Nicomena, a dreadfull Giant, and ugly as may be exprest, who now holds her besieged in that place, because she will not give him the title of her husband: She is a Princesse so faire, and withall so nobly enclined to acknowledge any service done unto her, as you will never repent any assi∣stance you may give her. To what end should I spin out my discourse any further, she did so highly extoll the beauties and perfections of this Princesse, as I loved her before I saw her; so that I rode away most desirously to Nico∣polis, whereinto I entred with much facility by the cunning and direction of this wench. I had a little affection to her before, as I told you, but as soone as I saw so many charms in the eyes of Arthemisa, I reserved no more power o∣ver my selfe, but well contented to present her with my liberty, never to re∣demand it again. The King of Morcassia her father, was much afflicted to see the enemy so neer his walls, yet did he a little cheer up himselfe when he saw in a skirmish that fell out two dayes after my arrivall, that my blows were weightier then those of all his Knights, and that the King of Nicomena's people did no lesse redoubt the incountring with me, then his did that of the Giant; whereupon he made extreamly much of me, all things were directed by my advice, but that which gave me most satisfaction, was that I saw Ar∣themisa did love me, and was delighted to see me sigh at her feet. Leaving them with this tranquillity of minde, I accounted my selfe the most fortunate Knight of the earth, especially when as a little after, I was the cause of all their happinesse by the death of Balistan, so was their capitall enemy called, whom I slew in single combat, routing afterward his whole army with a horrible slaughter. This victory gained me the hearts of the Morcassians, and absolute∣ly possessed me of the good graces of Arthemisa, who, to tell you in few words, being no lesse in love with me then I was with her, yeelded up herselfe wholly unto me, and so made me taste the sweetnesse which is found in the caresses of an amorous woman. Two months past amidst this felicity, at the end where∣of she counselld me to demand her of her father, to the end our secret priva∣cies might not at length be the cause of our ruine. The assurance that I had of the Kings favour, made me approve of her opinion, so that I went presently to him, and putting him in minde of the service I had done him, I besought him to reward me for them by the possession of Arthemisa. Your vertue, an∣swered he, doth oblige me to give you all contentment; but first for the satis∣faction both of my self and my subjects, I desire to know who you are. This request, replied I, seemes so reasonable, that I cannot refuse it, without wrong to my self. My father is called nomander, Prince—O ye Gods! said he, step∣ping back two or three paces, say no more, that name is no stranger to mine eares; O heavens! have you suffered me to be obliged for my life to the son of the greatest enemy I have? Get you gone, continued he unto me, get you gone, Knight, and that instantly: for Arthemisa shall never be your wife. And
were not the memory of your services a bar to my displeasure, I would make you feel what is due to the hate of your father. Think now, I beseech you, how I was vexed at the hearing of these words, so contrary to my hope: In truth, I was ready to die, but my rage kept me alive to make him this reply. Ingratefull King, thou hast forgot that without my assistance thou hadst now been a slave, and not knowing what curtesie means, thou refusest me that which I have justly purchased; but thou shalt one day see what thy heady fury will avail thee, and that it had been more expedient for thee, to have past by the enmity which thou carriest to my father, and a thousand times repent the little esteem thou makest of me; for be assured, I know the way to abase what I have so generously exalted: Thou threatenest me here in thine own Palace, but beware of comming neer me, for I carry the same sword that spilt the bloud of thine enemies, and think not my courage any whit abated by two moneths rest. Saying thus, I past into my cham∣ber, armed my self, and mounting on horsback, I retired into a forrest which was not far from thence, with a designe to return the same night, for to know of Arthemisa, how I should bear my self in this affair: But alas! I found her not alive, for having been acquainted with the quarrell between her father and me, she fell upon the floor with so violent a grief, as she was therewith suffocated before she could be succoured: From hence proceeds the excessive sorrow that I have now these three moneths endured, and from this so untimely death of hers, are those hourly complaints deri∣ved, which you have heard, and which I would have continued to the end of my dayes, had not your perswasions diverted me from them. This discourse ending with many sighes, Fulgoran began afresh to com∣fort him, remonstrating unto him, that a noble courage ought equally to receive the assaults and caresses of fortune; and thus discoursing, they arri∣ved at the Army, which the unknown Knight liked very well of, when he knew the occasion wherefore it was there. Not long after, Fulgoran, per∣ceiving the terme of the truce ready to expire, called the chiefest of his Commanders into his tent, and with a Majestick countenance, thus spake unto them: Excellent Princes, did not the bloud of the innocent rather move us to pity, then carry us to cruelty, I should advise you once again to hazard that remainder of our men, which the fury of our enemies hath left us, and seek in their destruction the honour of an happy victory; but una∣ble to see them suffer so for the satisfying of our pleasure, I am of opinion, that it is best our quarrell be determined by a company of selected persons, and that we should secure our people with the venture of our lives; I am the authour of this proposition, and therefore it is reason, that I also should be the first in the danger. Our adversaries are valiant, it is true, and all the world ascribes to them the glory of knowing how to fight well; how∣beit, we have heer so many brave spirits, that we need not fear to meet them with equall number, for otherwise, the good conduct of their armies will make them alwayes triumphant; let us then arm three or four of us against so many of the Greek Princes, and let not the rest that are ex∣cluded from the fight be troubled, for it shall be no lesse glory to be placed in the government of an Army, then to dispute the honour of acombat; I desire to be the first, the unknown Knight shall second me, the other two may be elected: If my advice be good, you may follow it; if not, coun∣sell
me, I will most willingly break off my designe, to let you see, that my resolutions depend upon yours. Valiant Prince, then answered Darda∣nor, who spake for them all; It was onely our respect of you that put our swords into our hands, and without regard of your passion, or to say bet∣ter of your zeal, since the glory of our Altars is in question, we would ne∣ver have entered into any dispute with the Grecian Princes, we will there∣fore obey your pleasure, as we have hitherto your commandements upon all occasions presented: Dispose of the persons and the number, they which do not accompany you in this action, shall have their share in what∣soever shall befall you, and all of us together shall suffer with you in your victory. This is, said Fulgoran, no lesse then I expected from your wis∣dom; my Cousin Florimond, and the great Cariffe of Africa, shall make up the number of four, the King of Calican shall be our Iudge, and you mine Unkle, said he to Bruzanges of Canabea, shall with the Kings of Co∣riza, and Romeria, see our forces imbarked, and with them attend us at the at the neerest Countrey of the Pagans, in case that fortune shall be favoura∣ble unto us. This resolution being taken, each one departed untill the next day that Fulgoran arose to write these lines unto the Princes of Greece. The King of Canabea's Challenge to the Princes of Greece. WE ought to have a care of our people, and to prefer their quiet before our own preservation, I am grieved for the death of so many brave Knights, that lie now in these fields, wherefore I will not hazzard the rest of my souldiers that are left me in a second battell, but being loath to retire with so little satisfaction of the pains I have taken to come and see you, I desire that the honour of this enterprise may depend on the combat of four of us against a like number of yours; Consult with your courages, and belie not the opinion which the world hath of your valour: This bearer hath power to signe for me whatsoever you shall require touching the conditions of this fight, whereof you may dispose, and for your assurance relie on my faith. Verily, said Don Rogel, it is not without much reason that this Prince is esteemed to be valiant, and more advised, then his age doth feem to per∣mit, for I cannot remember that ever I saw a defiance more courteous then this he hath sent us; We accept of it, and are very well contented with the number he propounds. Whereupon, calling for ink and paper (with Flori∣zells consent) he returned him this answer. The Greek Princes Answer to the King of Canabea. VVE finde your reasons so just, as we cannot refuse that you desire, without wrong to our honours; you shall therefore have the combat on the third day after this, with the same assurances you give us; for the conditions, we leave them to your arbitrement; and desiring to imitate your curtesie, we remit the election of the arms and field to you, for the securitie whereof, we do, as you, ingage our faiths. The Ambassadour being returned herewith, Fulgoran drew his army in∣to battalia, and causing it to march to the sea side, where it was presently
imbarked, onely the four Knights, that were to fight, remaining in the port, with the King of Calican for Iudge on their part, and the Queen Alastraxe∣rea for the Christians; which were, Spheramond Emperour of the Parthi∣ans, Amani d' Astre, Russian of Media, and the brave Esquilan of Poland. The Grecian Princes seeing the enemies Armie under sail, and understand∣ing that the principall Knights amongst them were those that staid behinde, sent to invite them to lodge in the City till the day appointed for the Com∣bat, but they refused the offer with thanks, and chose rather to rest in Ful∣gorans tent, which was left for them. The third day being come, with the incredible content of the Combatants, they presented themselves in the field, armed at all parts, and expected nothing but the sound of the trum∣pet to charge their lances, when as they saw two Damsels enter, who in∣stantly addressing themselves to the Princes of Greece, demanded a boon of them. We are too courteous, answered Spheramond, to refuse you any thing, therefore acquaint us with your desire, and we will most willingly grant it. We are then well satisfied on your part, answered one of them, we must now try whither we shall obtain as much of your enemies; so tur∣ning them about, they went to Fulgoran, and said unto him: My Lord, we come to crave a boon of you in the behalf of the Damsell that entertained you in the Castle of the Rock, when you sought to escape the Count of Clina's surprisall. As I live, said he, you shall not be denied, for I am too sensible of the favours which I received from her at that time, speak onely, and let me now what I may do for her service. That which I desire, re∣plyed she, is, that you will follow me presently, together with these three Knights that accompany you, to the end you may give her what then you promised her. Gentlewoman, answered he, somewhat perplexed, I ac∣knowledge that I am mightily ingaged to her, but I am tied by my word to those Knights that are there, and the estate wherein you see us, will not suffer us to stir from hence before we know unto whom the Gods will grant the victory. No, no, replied she straight, they are as much obliged to me by promise, as you are, and will not make any difficulty to defer the combat to another time. No indeed, said Spheramond, who was come to them, since we are ingaged thereunto by our oath; howbeit, you shall do us a singular favour, i you will at the least permit us to break these staves in our hands together, and strike three blows with the swords. To use your swords, answered she, is a thing I will never give way to, but that I may in some sort content you, I will not be against one career, upon condi∣tion that the weaker shall not be offended with their misfortune, nor hin∣der my businesse. The Knights remaining agreed thereupon, returned to their places, and from thence suddenly dislodged with such fury, as the earth trembled under them. The incounter of Spheramond and Fulgoran was e∣quall, their lances being broken to the very gantlets, without so much as once moved in their saddles; Russian, that ran against the great Cariffe of Africa, made him lose his stirrups, and had pierced him thorow and tho∣row had not his staffe broke upon his shield; Amanio d' Astre, and the un∣known Knight, were both overthrown to the ground; and the brave Es∣quilan, having incountered Florimond on the helmet, made him see the stars in plain day, and so to stagger, that he was ready to kisse the earth; but his enemies blow being not effectlesse, he lost one stirrup, which yet he so speedily recovered, as fewtook notice of it. This course being per∣formed
with some advantage to the Grecian Princes, the Pgans were not well pleased, and would willingly have proceeded to a further triall by the sword, but perceiving these two women advance, unto whom they were in∣gaged by their word, they followed them, though extreamly grieved for having been thus diverted from their enterprise: Neverthelesse, desing not to appear discontented, they comforted themselves with the hope, that time would furnish them with occasions to satisfie their wills. Assoon as they were gone a league, these Damsels staid at the meeting of two wayes, and one of them turning to Fulgoran, said unto him: Excellent Prince, you and I, with the unknown Knight, must follow this addresse, whilst my com∣panion leads the other Knights this way, to a place where their presence will be very necessary. I have told you, answered Fulgoran, that I will never decline your Mistresses commands; let us then proceed in the way, since you will have it so, and let these Lords take the other; herewith, imbracing with some shew of sorrow, they parted, and followed their guides. She that conducted Fulgoran, observing by his countenance that he was melan∣choly, said unto him: Sir, be not troubled for that my Mistris hath not suf∣fered you to fight with the Princes of Greece, it was not done without good consideration, the day would have been fatall, and your enterprise could not have been ended without great mischief: when you shall know your self, you will think that she hath done nothing without reason, and you will thank her for the care she hath alwayes had of your content; she loves you, though as yet you cannot say wherefore, but you shall understand it from her the first day that you shall see her, which shall be the happiest, and the most dangerous, of your whole life, and behold new testimonies of her af∣fection. Thereat Fulgoran, who lent an attentive ear to her discourse, lift up his eies and saw two Dwarfs, the one upon the fairest courser in the world, the other much lesse, and more deformed, with a great pack on his back: This, said she, taking the horse by the bridle, and presenting it unto him, is that which now she gives you; she will not change your arms, because they are excellent, but knowing that you desire others, for that you would not be known, she hath committed a secret unto me to quench these burning co∣lours; whereupon, pouring a violl of water upon them, she rendered them quite black; but so polished, as one might see himself in them. This now, continued she, doth represent the grief you are in, for that you do not know who you are, and remember I tell you that these arms shall not lose this co∣lour till you be known; at which time they shall re-assume their ardent flames to make you burn with a new fire, and be assured that this change will not let you doubt of your dissent, when you shall call to minde these my words: Now this is all that you may learn from me at this present. As for you, brave Knight, speaking to the unknown, you may beleeve that she loves you also, and for some instance thereof, she hath commanded me to present you with these arms, which are in this pack, that are far fitter for the adventures you are to undergo, then those you have on you; you shall do well to accept of them from her accordingly, and to be confident that they will be very usefull to you; you may not leave this way, because it is not without a mysterie that you are brought into it, and doing that which belongs to the duty of good Knights, yield more to the glory of your name, then to your passions. Saying so, she vanished away, together with the Dwarfs, leaving the horse under Fulgoran, and the arms upon the back of the unknown Knight.
CHAP. XXII. Fulgoran and the unknown Knight arriving at the Castle of Argenea, sister to the King of the frzen Islands, force her guards, destroy her inchantments, and free many good Knights there imprisoned. FVlgoran no lesse astonished with the alteration of his Arms, then contented to see himself master of so brave an horse, looked a pretty while upon the unknown Knight, without a word speaking, as if he would have demanded of him what he thought of the affaire; but knowing full well the great power of the Damsell, whom he had seen in the palace of the rock, which was no other then Vrganda the unknown, he ceased from further marvell for to think of her words that lately left him. I am perswaded, said he to himselfe, that I am the son of some Christian Prince, and I have rea∣son to think so: for this Lady, that favours my enterprises, would not now twice have diverted me from fighting with those famous Knights of Greece, if I might have done it without offence: Moreover, if I call to minde the speech of that old man whom I met withall the same day I received the order of Knighthood; and at my coming to the Crown of Canabea, I cannot doubt of it: for the most part of my Barons do affirm, that the Queen Florella, my mother, contracted a marriage in private with the brother of the greatest Prince of Christendome, and for that onely consideration, did they put the Scepter into my hands, as being the lawfull heire of the countries under her obedience. If it be so, I ought to serve them, and not seek to ruine them by my Arms. But what do I say? Serve them? that were to be base, and insensi∣ble of indignities; They have beguiled the simplicity of an amorous woman, and made her ardours serve to end her life: wherefore me thinks it were more reasonable for me to lose my selfe with her, then leave this crime unpunished. Howbeit, there is no remedy for that which is past, and my revenge would but increase my griefe and shame: things therefore must be left as they are, and I must labour to finde out the truth of the matter, rather then run indis∣creetly into actions of perpetuall repentance. Having been long entertained with these thoughts, he came to himself, and cheering the unknown Knight, who was no lesse transported with his imaginations, they continued on their way till night, which they passed in a sound sleep under the trees after they had fed on such cates as their Squires had provided. Rising the next mor∣ning with the Sun, they got to horse, and travelled so long till they came to the sea side, discovering nothing round about them, save a little Brke, where∣into they entred with their horses; immediatly whereupon the unknowne Knights Squire going to take an Oare for to row off the vessell, she suddenly went away with such swiftnesse, as they were amazed at it. Behold, said Ful∣goran, a new miracle for us, and the Gods seem to authorize our enterprizes, yet I fear our teeth will grow longer, if our fortune do not the sooner bring us to some land: for I am exceeding hungry already. And so am I, said the
unknown, so that if our Squires have some provision yet in store, we shall be very much obliged to their providence; whereupon their Squires opening their males, where they looked for no more then a sittle bread that was lest, were mightily astonished to finde them full of good meat, the sight whereof so whetted their stomcks, as they presently fell to it, which was not yet so delicate, but that the wine of their bottles did every way equall it. Their ap∣petites being satisfied, they were about to have taken a little rest; but their Bark staying at an Island, that seemed marvellous beautifull and pleasant, they went on shore, and mounting their good horses, they entred into a forrest of goodly trees, planted with admirable Art: the musicke which the birds made them from the trees, and the diversitie of flowers they trampled on, so enter∣tained their eares and eyes, as they seemed not to consider any other thing. Having travelled so an howr, with all the content that might be, they arrived neer to a mountain, on the top whereof they saw one of the most stately Castles in the world; five towers equally distant an hundred & fifty paces one from the other, framed on the fore-front of the building, whose walls were of white and black Marble, and the covering of a mettall so glistering, as one could not behold it with lesse pain then the Sun. Between these towres an hall appeared, so high, as it seemed to surpasse the clouds; and the gardens made all in discent, possessed them with an extream desire to be in so sweet a place. The wonder of these rarities inviting them to passe on, they advanced a flight shoot further, where they met with a great Arch, that gave passage to a Bridge, before the which stood a pillar, whereon hung a Table of Brasse with these words inscribed therein: When the two unknowne shall arrive at the cruell Castle, all shall be at liberty. This adventure, said Fulgoran, is questionlesse reserved for us: for you are unknown by name, and I by birth: wherefore I am perswaded, the Destinies have established it for our glory, let us proceed then if you please, and see what is promised us: So going to the bridge, they perceived a little stream running under it, that seemed to be swoln with the bloud of a great many murdered persons. O me! said Fulgoran, how much doth this object so full of hor∣rour abase the glory of these proud buildings, which doubtlesse were not ere∣cted but to draw Knights hither, and then to destroy them; neverthelesse I will increase the number of those that are here sacrificed, or overthrow the power of it. Scarcely had he spoken thus, when as he saw coming in two se∣verall wayes, a furious Giant with a mighty club in his hand, and the most dreadfull Serpent that can be imagined; he was covered all over with green scales, that were proofe against the cuttingst steele in the world; his throat, whereinto a man might easily enter seemed to be a fornace, and the ground was so violently beaten by his tail, eight foot in length, that it trembled round about him. Fulgoran, whose courage was incapable of feare, thinking the defeat of this creature more difficult then that of the Giant, marched against him, leaving the other combat to his companion, and instantly discharged so mighty a blow on his head, that he was constrained with it to shut his mouth, which before he held wide open to devour him. The Knight much vexed for having imployed so much force in vain, struck him again on the body with such violence, that he made him recoil three or four paces back. Now this
blow serving but to incense him the more, he flew upon him so furiously, as he overthrew him to the earth, tearing his shield from his arm. Fear doth fur∣nish us with wings, and many times is cause of our preservation: Fulgoran finding himselfe in that plight, and without a shield, was in some doubt of his life; but suddenly getting up, and feeling his strength increase with his chol∣ler, he gave the Serpent such a smart thrust in his eye, as he passed his sword a foot deep into his head. The beast growing mad with the pain of his wound, made three or four steps back, and with his huge long tail smote the Knight so terribly on the helmet, that he was once more compelled to kisse the ground with an opinion that a tower had fallen upon him; the violence of the blow having somewhat astonished him, he was not able presently to rise, so that the Serpent seeing him lying along, leapt to him, and seizing on him with his teeth laboured to bite his armour in pieces; but Fulgoran that had not lost his judgement gave him another thrust where there were no scales, running his sword up to the hilts in his belly. The pangs of death making this fierce ani∣mal fall off three or four paces from him, the Knight much troubled to behold himselfe without a sword, stood in a maze, when as Fortune presented him with the means, not onely to save himselfe, but to conquer also: for the Giant, that combated the unknown Knight, being exceedingly vexed to see his bloud trickle out from divers parts of his body, came up so close to him, as think∣ing to discharge a blow on his enemies head, he bit his arm on his helmet with such force, that it quite stund it, so that his club fell out of his hand close by Fulgoran, who speedily catching of it up, gave the Serpent such a deadly stroke with it just between both the eyes, as his brains flew out. This victory, as glorious as little expected, serving but to increase his courage, he turned him about, having first plucked his sword out of the Serpents belly, to go unto the succour of the unknown Knight, but perceiving his adversaries head at his feet, he went and sate him down on a great stone to take breath, thinking that so painful a beginning would have a more difficult ending. The desire he had to see the issue of this adventure, and the glory which he hoped for from it, not suffering him long to rest, he arose little after, and passing under another Arch which he saw on his left hand, he was ready to enter into a little wood, when as he perceived ten hideous Salvages come out of it, whereof five began to assault him terribly with their massie clubs, the other five giving the un∣known Knight the same welcome; who finding himselfe amongst such dread∣full enemies, was in some doubt of his life: neverthelesse, resolving to sell it dearly, he bestirred himselfe with much valour and dexterity. But it much in∣raged him for that his sword could not make way thorow the shaggy hair of these monsters, which crushed his bones with their heavie clubs. On the o∣ther side Fulgoran laid fearfully about him: for desiring either to dye or to vanquish, he had already overthrown two of them dead at his feet, defending himself couragiously from the rest that pressed him with incredible fury. The combat being in this dangerous estate, the unknown Knight enraged for that he could not as yet see any bloud drawn from his enemies, gave one of them such a thrust in the belly, as he ran him quite thorow and thorow, laying him dead on the grasse; but he had not time to rejoyce at this his lucky dispatch of that monster, for the rest charged him at the very same instant with two such cruell blows, as they extended him on the earth quite void of sense; be∣leeving then that he was dead, they yelled forth such a dreadfull cry, as the whole Island resouded therewith, whereby Fulgoran being drawn to look a∣bout
for to see whence it might proceed, perceived the misfortune of his com∣panion, whereat he was so exceedingly incensed, that taking his sword in both hands, he discharged it so forcibly upon one of them, as the hair not able to withstand the edge thereof, it divided his head in two pieces; whereupon, not regarding the rest, he ran suddenly to the unknown Knight, whom his adver∣saries were a disarming; and carried with the same fury as before, he struck one of them so terribly on the shoulder, as he cut him down to the very girdle. The other three beholding this terrible blow, presently forsook their former man, and joyning with them that remained, they assailed him so furiously, that they gave him no leave to breathe, their strokes descending so thick upon him, as his shield seemed to be an anvill whereon 5 or 6 Smiths were a hammering. Seeing himself pressed in this sort, & fearing that at length he should fall under the weight of these strokes, he began to retire by little and little towards the Arch, that so he might avoid fighting with them all at once, when as a big Knight in gray Armour presented himselfe, who seeing the inequality of this fray, drew out his sword, and therewith charged one of the Salvages with such strength, as he sent his club arm and all unto the ground; not contented there∣with, he gave another such a thrust just in the throat, as the point of his sword came out at the nape of his neck, laying him dead on the grasse. Fulgoran no lesse amazed then pleased with the valour of this new commer, took his sword again in both hands, and fearing lest the glory of this adventure might be ra∣vished from him, he struck one of them that pursued him very hard, with such violence on the thigh, as cut it sheere off, placing him in the number of those that live not. The two that still remained, beholding the horrible butchery of thir companions, would have saved themselves by flight; howbeit they were followed so close by the two Knights, as their deaths were not deferred but to the third blow they received. This victory being thus gloriously obtai∣ned, Fulgoran going to the grey Knight, spake in this manner: Noble sir, I must render that unto your valour which all the world cannot refuse you, and give you thanks for my deliverance: if I live, it is through you, but I will gladly spend so much bloud for your service as you have now preserved in my body; pursue the good fortune which brought you hither, the glory of this adventure is reserved for you, and the beginning that I have given to it, shall not make me desire to oppose your enterprize. I have not done any thing, sir, answered he embracing him, for your succour, but what the Law of Knight∣hood commanded me. So many enemies as you have extended heer on the earth, and that dreadfull serpent which lies dead yonder, are assured testimo∣nies that you can vanquish without me, and defeat your enemies without my assistance; wherefore I will never attribute unto my selfe the honour due to your courage, which verily is more then humane, but shall be glad to go on with you, and in all things be governed by your command: Herewith they embraced again, and were disposing of themselves to proceed in their en∣terprize, when as Fulgoran bethinking him of his companion, went presently unto him, to see whether he were yet in case to receive any service from him. Having then unlaced his helmet, he found his face all covered with bloud, but yet was much cheered to see him still breathe. Courage, said he unto him, our enemies are slain, and you revenged for the outrage they did you. This victo∣ry, answered he somewhat faintly, would be a great contentment unto me, were I sure that it had not cost you too much of your bloud. I feel much pain, replied Fulgoran, from so many blowes that I have received; but the
Clubs being unable to to pierce my Armes, I have not lost one drop of bloud, the only thing that now troubles me, is to see you so ill. It is true, answered he, that I am very light headed, but time wil restore me my judge∣ment, with my strength, and if our Squires were heer to tend me, I am per∣swaded I should be well again in a little time. Fulgoran, who highly pri∣zed him, ran incontinently to the first Arch of the bridge to call them, and leaving him in their hands, he passed on with the gray Knight, till they came to the Marble walls, where they parted upon the encounter of two wayes, Fulgoran taking that on the right hand, and the gray Knight the left; going then on, with wonder to see so strong walls, and dangerous guards, they came much about the same time unto two gates, the gray Knight to that on the west side, and Fulgoran to the other that looked towards the Sun rising, so that the sound of their knocking was heard both at one in∣stant, whereupon the gates flew open with a most dreadfull noyse; which notwithstanding, stayed not from entring in with their shields on their arms, and their swords in their hands: But they had not made three steps, when as Fulgoran saw one of the hugest and most deformed Giants that might be, advance towards him with an Axe of ten foot long, which he discharged at his head, with a confident beliefe to cleave him to the middle, notwithstanding the goodnesse of his Arms; howbeit he nimbly avoided the blow by leaping aside, so that it lighted upon the ground, whereinto it entred a great deph: Fulgoran laying hold on that advantage, struck him so furiously on the arm, that he separated it from his body; and not satisfied therewith, he was going to double his blow when as the Giant more through rage then judgement, closed with him, and with his left hand ar∣resting the stroke, lifted him up, mangre all his resistance, with a purpose to batter him against the ground; but the Knight perceiving himselfe in that extremity, drew out a short dagger that he had, and stab'd it into his belly which was unarmed. This stroke bringing death with it, the Giant tumbled presently down, but with such ill fortune for Fulgoran, as he fell under him, being almost stifled with the weight of his body: neverthelesse, collecting all his forces together, he so heaved at his dead enemy, that he turned him aside, thereby clearing himselfe of such an heavie burthen; howbeit he was constrained to sit down and rest himselfe till he was raised again by a new occasion. In the mean time, the gray Knight was not idle, for passing in just when Fulgoran did, he was incountered with a furious Bull, and a most fearfull Dragon, which shewing him his teeth, that were a cubit long, and as sharp as a razor, menaced him with a approaching death; yet being as valiant as could be, he was no whit abashed, but presented the point of his sword to the Dragon, that thinking to swallow up his arm, received a dangerous wound in the throat: This hurt inraging the beast, he retired a little, to cast up the bloud that choked him; but the Knight knowing he must lose no time, presently advanced, and guided by his good fortune, gave such ano∣ther thrust in his belly, as his guts came presently forth with his life: That done, he made head to the Bull; but he was so neer him, that he could nei∣ther avoid the push of his horns, nor make use of his sword; so as all that he could do was again to present him with his shield, but the beast came running at him with so much fury, as the Knight was inforced to tumble three or four times over upon the sand, with extream danger of his life,
had not the Bull, leaping and bounding, gone a good way from him to fetch his course with the more fury at him, gave him leisure to rise, but in so due a season, as with a light leap he avoided the second incounter of his horns, upon the point whereof he thought the hazard of his life did hang: not willing to sticke in so fair a way, he made as though he would stand his return, but stepping aside, he struck him so right upon the neck, that he cut it half in sunder, letting him run about the court with the pangs of death, which was not long deferred, for passing by Fulgoran, who then was up, he received another blow in the very same place, which laid his head upon the earth. The two Knights, that saw not one another, the house being between them, having no more imployment below, went up by two pair of stairs, and found themselves, the gray Knight in one of the fairest chambers that ever he had seen, and Fulgoran in a hall, where the first object that his eyes lighted on, was the beautifull wife of Dardanor, chained in a corner, half naked, and almost covered over with bloud. Good Gods, said he, stepping a little back! Where am I? Do I not see Clairangia, the Queen of my de∣sires, as well as of Romeria, in chains, that are onely fit for slaves? Ah Ma∣dam! Those that have thus intreated you, understand not your merit: But do not, I beseech you, afflict your self any further, See heer your Fulgoran, who vows by all the Deities, that he adores, either to revenge your wrongs, or to die with you. Alas! said she with a sigh, and no lesse rapt with asto∣nishment, then delight, to see this Knight there, whom she loved as much as her life, it is most true, that the Gods never forsake them that in their af∣flictions crave their aid: Dear friend, I alwayes hoped that my freedom would be procured by your hand, and though the strength of this place was very great, yet I beleeved that your vertue could meet with nothing able to resist it: you are come just as it should be, for I had not long to live, the torments I save suffered have been so grievous, as I wonder how I could have patience to endure them: You are doubly bound to a revenge; but be∣cause you know not yet this secret, I must tell you that our private caresses at Celibana, made my belly so to swell, that you may see good testimony of it ere it be long; howbeit, Dardanor was free from all suspition of it, till an old Sorceresse, sister to the King of the frozen Isles, who died at the great battell of Aleppo, came into the Court the same day that he returned from the warre of Greece, and said to him: Knowest thou (King of Romeria) that thy wife is with child of a son, which is none of thine, and that shall one day, when he comes to know his father, ruine the Altars of the Gods whom we adore? No, thy knowledge doth not extend so far; but for that I am obliged to preserve the Pagan name, I came to thee to advertise thee of the affront done unto thee. And the better to clear this point, remember the Count of China, he spake but out of suspition, yet was his accusation most true, and therefore would advise thee to choak this brat before it be able to do mischiefe; but because it would be a dishonour for thee to defile thy hands in the bloud of thy wife, leave thy revenge to me, and give me permission to punish her my way: you know the violent humour of Dardanor. This discourse having rekindled the displeasure that he had conceived against me, at the time when you delivered me, he presently put me into this womans hand, who making me go with her into a Chariot drawn by four Griffions, brought me to this house, chained me by the neck, as now you see me, and ever since hath daily whipped me with rods, threatning to put me and my child to one of the cruellest deaths
that ever was seen, which she would questionlesse have done long since, but that she still told me, how the stars did not as yet give way to her desires, so as I beleeve our lives are limitted by the onely pleasure of the gods. This is a case, answered Fulgoran, whereof we are not now to speak; let us rather seek out this old witch, to punish her as she deserves: But pardon me, Madam, if this desire be more pressing with me, then the care of free∣ing you now from these chains, for so long as she lives, we shall have no∣thing but troubles here, I will therefore pursue that businesse with all the speed I may: So making obeisance to his Lady, he went up a little paire of stairs, which carried him to the top of the house, where at his first com∣ming he espied this Enchantresse, drawing figures and characters upon the floor. As I live, said he, old Megara, taking her fast by the hair, which hung about her ears, your devils shall not now serve your turn, but you shall give an account of your cruelty to a Lady which you have held so long heer in fetters: Dragging her then down the stairs, he came into the hall, at the end whereof he saw a Knight, who comming upon the cry of that Sorceresse, said: Ah, Sir Knight, do not imploy your self in fighting with a woman. Fulgoran mad angry, to see his revenge deferred, gave her such a blow upon the stomack, as he laid her half dead upon the floor; and not considering, that the Knight which spake to him, was the same, who so lately had afflicted him, and that forced by the charms of this woman was come thither, laid hand on his sword, and began so cruell a combat with him, that all the hall rang with the noise of their blows, Fulgoran fought very bravely, for that the preservation of his Mistris was in que∣stion, but his opposite was so stout, as he durst not hope for the victory, which put him in such a rage, as he redoubled his blows with infinite vio∣lence; but he was no lesse pressed by his adversary, who charged him so fiercely, that he did not remember he had ever been so harldly laid to un∣lesse it were when he fought with Florisel about the death of Balard; the combat growing furious, through their choler, they continued in that man∣ner almost three hours, without discerning to whom fortune would be most favourable: But as they were in this dispute, the old woman gat up, all a∣mazed, and thinking to escape into her Cabinet, where the prime of all her charms remained, cast her self between the Knights, who having their swords advanced to charge one another, did let them descend in one instant upon her head, which they divided into three or four pieces. Where∣upon, the earth trembled, and the foundations of that building, which were laid by Art Magick, were scattered with a thunder clap; the Knights finding themselves in the field, wondered much at their combat, which they well remembered, and much more that they saw neither marble nor towers, but onely the bodies of the Savages, of the Giants, and the monsters, which were naturall, and not forged, an infinite number of bones of men, devou∣red by those creatures, Clairangia bound to a tree, with thirty or forty Knights in the same plight hard by her, and the body of the Sorceresse di∣vided, as I have told you; Fulgoran, who had nothing more pressing, then the misfortune of his Mistris, ran presently to her, cut the cords that tied her, besought her to accept the desire he had to do her service, and not be troubled though her habits were not sutable to her royall greatnesse. I am, said she, so contented to see my self free, and so neer to you, as I no more complain of my passed torments; Let us onely think of getting
out of this place, and afterwards we will consider of the means to be reven∣ged of the ingratitude of a man, that did not merit the honour of my com∣pany, as well as we are delivered from her whose malice sought our destru∣ction. Whilst these discourses were re-inkindling the fires of their former loves, the gray Knight unbound all those prisoners, whom that hag had re∣served for a torture far worse then death; and finding amongst them four very young, and exceeding handsome, he courteously demanded of them, whence they were: We are, said one of them, Christian Princes, knighted but a few moneths since, but so infortunate in the beginning of our arms, (being unhappily fallen upon this place, where without your aid we had certainly found our graves) as we cannot hardly say, that we have given the least proof of the valour which our fathers demonstrated in an age far younger then ours; This first is called Leonidas, son to Astibel of Mesopo∣tamia, the next is Abies of Ireland, son to King Cildadan, the third is Frizell of Arcadia, son to Giorntes, nephew to the good King Lisard, and my self am an Amason, daughter to Celafia, of whom perhaps, you have sometimes heard: We came, drawn by the beauty of the place, into these parts, were made prisoners by the Giants or the Savages, and are now all dispo∣sed to serve you, since your valour hath given us the means so to do. The gray Knight, finding himself obliged by this offer, very curteously thanked them, and knowing them to be Christians, left them to the liberty of their actions, departing from them to Fulgoran, who having not seen him yet without his helmet, spake thus unto him: Brave warrior, It is time, me thinks, that I should know him, to whom I ow so much service; be pleased then to tell me your name, and to let me see your face. I cannot, answered he, refuse you so small a request; and now you see me, said he, taking off his helmet, and discovering a face, brown indeed, but grave and amiable, as might be wished; but if I must proceed farther, and tell you also who I am, you shall know that I am called Prigmaleon, son to the great Emperour of Aethiopia, and more pleased with your acquaintance, then with the possession of the best part of the world; with that they embra∣ced, and letting the young Knights depart in Prigmaleons Frigot, they went to the unknown Knight, who was now well recovered, and so all three, with Clairangia, imbarked themselves in Fulgorans vessell, which with its wonted celerity, made to the main sea, whilst they were furnished with good meat for their repast, and good beds for their repose.
CHAP. XXIII. Fulgoran and Prigmaleon meet with two Fleets at sea in fight together, one of the which by their assistance gets the victory. THE Bark wherein Fulgoran and Prigmaleon were passing on, with incredible speed, to the great contentment of all the company, had now sailed three dayes with∣out any stop; when as about break of the fourth day, Fulgoran, that could not sleep, being troubled with his amorous fires, hich were every minute increased by the continuall sight of his Lady, saw a Bark passe hard by him, in which was a great Knight, and a very beautifull maid, who seemed to take no delight in any thing but her tears, nor to finde any ease for her grief, but in her sighes, which so moved him to compassion, that he would presently have leaped into the Bark for to succour her, out of a perswasion that her sorrows proceeded from the force which that great Knight intended unto her, had not the wind, which drove away the vessell, crossed his desire: but seeing her gone, and not knowing how to tack about for to follow her, he was so inraged to be in that sort carried away by anothers pleasure, rather then his own, that a thousand times in his minde he cursed the power of Magick, though it had so often given him assistance; wherefore in a great chae he was going to steer himself, and had commanded his Squires, whom he had called up, to bring the sails about, when as he saw a Dwarf at the helm, that said unto him: Suffer not your self, Sir, to be so transported with passion; those by whose Art you are now guided, will not suffer you to slip any occasion that may adde to your glory, but such affairs, as are both of importance, and pressing, must precede them that may be deferred without danger: ha∣ving thus spoken, he vanished out of his sight, leaving the Knight more quieted in his minde then before; and not a little wondering at the vast knowledge of those, to whose skill it seemed his fortune was inseparably attracted: Laying himself down then upon his bed, he quickly fell asleep, but he did not continue so long, for his Squire, waking them all, shewed them afar off a great number of ships, in battell array, ready to attacque another fleet, which in the like order appeared against them. Their vessell sailing that way, as they desired, they saw these vessels meet together, and begin a furious Sea-fight; in which at the first, they medled not, being as yet uncertain, in favour of whether side they were to employ their arms: But discerning white crosses in the flags of those on the right hand, they resolved to be for the other side, and accordingly had their swords in their hands, to give a charge, when as they saw a man in the midst of the waves, who laying hold of their ship, besought them, to take him up, and not to suffer him to perish in that pitifull element: The Squires having drawn him aboord, Fulgoran, that guessed him to be a Pagan, came to him, and asked him whom he served. He answered, that he was a subject to Darda∣nor, King of Romeria, who having raised a mighty army, and shipped it in
the fleet which they saw to invade the kingdom of Canabea, in revenge of the affront done him by the King thereof, through his too much famliarity with the Queen his wife, contrary to the respects of the friendshp between them, had met with this fleet of Christians bound for Trebisond; and being a mortall enemy to that profession, hath charged them in hope to defeat them. As I live, said Fulgoran, your master is a villain, and though by my religion I an obliged to the ruine of the Christians, yet for this once will I be their ser∣vat. Get you then into the fist of your ships that you come to (for I will not out of my bate to your master make you lose your life after I have saved it) and tell Dardanor that heer is the King of Canabea, who will not put him to the trouble of going so far, since he hath so conveniently met with forces heer, so turning to Prigmalion, he thus spake unto him: Deare friend, I am extreamly grieved that I must employ my sword for the enemies of our Gods, but the wrong which this Prince hath done his wife, which is she that is here aboord us, and that which he intended to me, raising this mighty Ar∣my to ruine my countrey, do not permit me to incounter him without re∣venge: for we to make use of the times and occasions that Fortune presents us wth: If you will assist me, I shall take it for a singular favour, if not, at least wise affoord it to the afflction of a Lady, unjustly banished her countrey, which as a Soveraigne she possessed, and as a malefactor basely entreated by a jealous and cruell husband. How fir? said Prigmaleon, do you think that I will leave you in the fight, and turn my Arms against a side for which you shall declare your selfe? Be assured, never: for I do not consider with whom, but why I fight; Dardanor is your enemy, therefore I cannot love him; he hath raised these forces against you, we must endevour to defeat them; and, as you said, mke use of time and occasion: Let us then follow our fortune, which offers it self so fairly unto us: And since the Christians have diverted the storme which was intended should fall upon you, let us, if we can, procure them the victory, and overthrow the malitious designe of this ingratefull and barbarous Prince. With these words they passed into the middest of the two armies, and seeing the fight hottest between two great ships, which were grapled together, the one bea∣ring the Ames of Romeria in their tops; and the other wit Crosses with Eagles, they boorded the Pagans ship all three together, leaving their Squires in guard of their bak, and of Clrangia, who seemed more dead then alive, and began to make such a slaughter, as the deck was covered with bloud and dead karkasses. The Christians making use of the advantage which the Knights gave them, followed them close, and entring with them among their enemies, continued the butchery with so much fury, that the sea round about them was died all red with blood. Fulgoran knowing Dardanor by his rich Armor, in despight of all that were about him could do, got up to him, and letting flye a mighty blow at his head, he cut it in two pieces, laying him stark dead on the hatches. That done, he entred another ship of the enemies, which made a strong resistance, and beginning a like destruction, as in the for∣mer, he overthrew so many dead into the sea, as the water was ful of them. This execution having continued above five hours, and the death of the King of Romeria being known, they presently tacked about, and the Captains de∣siring to save that which remained after so furious a charge, retired to the next prt whence they came the same morning. Fulgoran being no lesse discreet then brave and able, taking a sudden resolution upon this retreat of the ene∣my,
turned himselfe about, and addressing himselfe to the Generall of the Chri∣stians, whose valour, during the fight, he had admired, said unto him: Ex∣cellent Prince, I know not whether you will think me bold to crave any thing of you, not having obliged you by precedent services to grant it, and being be∣sides a worshipper of other Gods then yours; but vertue is to be exercised e∣very where, and the duty which we ow to our religion, doth no prohibite us to be courteous, and to help one another when occasion is offered: my ene∣mies are defeated as well as yours; for you must know that this Fleet was in∣tended against my countrey in revenge of a wrong that King Dardanor said he had received at my hands; howbeit, that the victory which you have glo∣riously gotten, may be well managed, and that I may also make my benefit of it, for the reliefe of a distressed Queen, unto whom, as a Knight of worth, you also are bound not to refuse your assistance, be pleased to put your army again into battle array, and present it rather to fear, then wholly to destroy them: In the mean time I will go and visit them with their Queen, whom Fortune not long since put into my hands, to the end I may (if possibly I can) restore her to the Crown of Romeria, wherof she was deprived by the jealous humour of her husband, and bring her subjects to receive her commands, with as much obedience as heretofore. Brave warriour, answered he, I so approve of your compassion of an ill intreated Princesses misery, that in stead of denying you, I will my selfe accompany you into the countrey, that if her subjects will bee rebellious, we may with force reduce them to their duties, and leaving my course for Trebisond, where I beleeve I might be very necessary, in regard of the multitude of enemies, which i may be do now ravage that countrey, I shall think it a glory to oblige you to that end, without sticking at the consideration of our different religions. As for the victory which you ascribe to me, I will not receive the honour of it, since you and your friends have the best part therein: for this army being levied against you, I will beleeve that I have only been an assistance to you, without whom I could never have vanqushed it. Let us then advance when you please, onely do me the favour I pray you, to tell me your nmes. I am, said Fulgoran, so much obliged to you, as I cannot conceal my self from you; I am the King of Canabea, who not three months since held your Empire of rebisd in fear. But the losse of a very great num∣ber of brave men of both sides, in the battle and skirmish between us, ma∣king me desirous to decide our difference by a combat of four with so many of the Greek Princes, I sent presently to the Citie, where my offer was accep∣ted. My men then being all embarked, except those that were of the party, we were in the field, and within the lists, when expecting nothing but sounding of the trumpers, we saw two damsels enter, who obtained a Boon both of us & our adversaries, carried us presently away, not permitting us any other triall then that of the lance, wherin the honour was equall▪ and now sailing in this sea, guided by Fortune and the waves, we discovered you this morning, and were ready to side with your enemies, your white crosses for bidding us to assist you against those of our religion; but understanding Dardanors designe, I followed your colours, and have left him in that case, as he shall never attempt again upon the estates of his neighbours: For these two Knights, said he, pointing unto Prigmalion and to the unknown Knight, I cannot dispense with the oath which they have taken not to reveale themselves: be pleased then, to ex∣cuse me though I tell you no more, and that the favour you do me, may be compleat, refuse not the samething you required of me, I mean the knowing
of you. Nor will I, answered he: for your freenesse with me, doth oblige me to more then that: I am Dorigel, King of the fortunate Island; and this A∣mazon, which you see with her helmet on, is my wife, and called Cilinda, we came out of our countrey to carry aid to the Princes of Greece our kinsmen; neverthelesse, since the siege as you say, is raised, we will proceed no further in our intended voyage, but changing our designe, will employ this Army for the re-establishment of the Queen of Romeria. Commanding then his Fleet to go on, toward the evening the Army drew into order within a bow shot of them, giving Fulgoran time for the effecting of his designe: where∣upon he departed in the same Bark that brought him thither, onely with his two friends, and the faire Queen of Romeria in his company. And holding up a gantlet in signe of parly, he went aboord the Admirall, where all the principall commanders were assembled; and adressing himselfe in particular to some that he knew, holding Clairangia by the hand, he so well remonstrated their duty unto them, that they all submitted to her as their Soveraigne Prin∣cesse, protesting they were never so much discontented with any thing as her absence. Fulgoran infinitely pleased to see a new oath of allegeance unto her, and the affection that her subjects did beare her, besought her to give him leave to returne to the Christian Army, that hee might give Dorigel thanks for his assistance, which she could not well refuse him; yet granted it upon his promise of returning the next morning to conduct her into Romeria with a troop there to possesse him of the crown thereof, together with her selfe. But Fortune suffered him not to dispose of himselfe: for as he was with Prigmalion and the unknown Knight aboord his Bark, she put to sea in sight of both the Armies, with such celerity, as immediatly they had lost sight of her. Fulgoran was vexed at this sudden parting: for his amorous passions left him not in quiet, and gladly would he have returned to bthe himselfe in those delights which he had before with so much pleasure tasted. But calling to minde, that all things were disposed of by the ordinances of heaven, he grew more patient, seeming lesse troubled then he was by the secret conversa∣tion of the two Knights that accompanied him. On the other side, the Queen was more grieved with separation, for feare that she should not see him again of a long time, she was ready to despaire; but desiring to have the cause of hr grief concealed, lest otherwise she might be condemned for it, she carried her selfe so discreetly that it was beleeved she was not troubled with his absence, but onely in regard it much disordered her affairs. Dorigel seeing this his de∣parture, and well knowing there was in that Bark no sailer, lesse wondered at it then others, for that he conceived, as the truth was, all this was done by the care which some Magician had of him. Being therefore advertised by a light Frigot which he had sent to the enemy, that Clairangia's affairs were setled, and she in security, he returned his Army into the fortunate Island, under the command of his wife Cilinda, and shipping himselfe with onely one Squire, sailed towards Constantinople, whither he understood all the Greek Princes were gone.
CHAP. XXIV. Fulgorans and Prigmalions adventure in the fearfull Isle. FVlgora being carried away by the winde, so much against his will, continually bestowed his thoughts in considering how lovers are alwayes crost in their affections, from whence drowing an infallible con∣clusion of the uncertainty of things, discreetly re∣solved, never more to hold himselfe assured of any, and to receive the disgraces and favours of the world with an equall minde. Having entertained himselfe the restof the day with these cogitations, night drew on, which gave him occasion to lay himselfe down upon his bed, where the labour he had endured being more powerfull then his fancies, he fell into a long and sound sleep. No man can doubt but that our imaginations do work strongly upon our senses, and that whilst our bodies are at rest, our souls do fix on the objects wherunto waking we were most intentive. This Knight being fallen asleep in discotent for the absence of his mistrisse, dreamed about break of day, that he found her sleeping on the fairest flowers that ever he had seen; & that when he drew towards her to enjoy the same privacies with her he had used to do, a Giant of a most horrid and hideous aspect, caught her up, and in spight of h carrying her away, threw her and himselfe into a great lake, which was at the corner of the goodliest orchard in the world, and that transported with a furious despaire, he ran to cast himself after, that he might not overlive such a losse; when as o of the la a Nymph of most exqsite beauty, with her haire dispread over her neck and shoulders, appeared, who said to him: Fulgoran, remember, th good men are not born to be slaves to their passions, and that a worthy Knight should never give himself over to in∣considerate affections, which oftentimes bring along with them strange mis∣fortunes. Mark well my beauty, which is by the heavens reserved for thee. It shall one day extinguish the unchast flames wherewith thou now art scor∣ched, and make thee tste the sweetnesse which is found in the embraces of a chast and vertuous woman. Saying so, she dived under water, leaving him so displeased to see her so soon berest him, that his body laboured no lesse them his minde: so as a waking a little after sun rising, he found himself all in a sweat, and his eyes full of teares. O yee Gods! said he to himselfe, recording what he had seen, are these the effects of my dreame? or rather the favour of the Gods, who desiring to preserve me from ruine, command me to shun all occa∣sions of offending them by my cris? Spirits have indeed some shadow of truth, but they use not to appeare with so many circumstances, nor for the most part do we see them for our good. These are without doubt, revelations upon which I must settle my cotent. I am advised to shun all foolish love, I will do it; I am counselled to len more wit by mine own sufferings, it is but reason; and out of this faithful advertisement I must take a good lesson, to love for the glory of a love, both more pious and better grounded. Farewell then all witlesse passions, which have so often troubled me, I will make my selfe no
more a slave to your commands, I am now again mine own, or at least I sub∣ject my self to a more pleasing and secure Empire. Rising then free from all care, unlesse it were to finde out that fair one, whose image was ingraven in his heart, he waked Prigmaleon, and the un∣known Knight, that were still sleeping, and shewing them an Iland afar off, put them in some hope that their Bark might bring them thither to meet with some adventure. Within two hours they came to land, not more wondering at the beauty of the place, wherein, about a flight shot off, they saw a stately Castle, then to finde a big Knight in the sea up to the knees, couragiously defending himself from two Giants, and forty or fifty vil∣lins, armed with murrions and halberts, who pressing him very sorely, made him despair both of victory and life. The inequality of this fight perswading them to relieve him, they instantly leaped on shore, where straight way a Gentlewoman presented her self at their feet: My Lords, said she, with sighs and tears, have pity upon my grief, and do not lave this good Knight in the hand of these villains: I brought him hither upon the word of Scarafand, the Master of this place, and the most perfidious man breathing, with an opinion that he should combat with none but him∣self, for the deliverance of a Gentleman, whom I infinitely love; but the traitour without regard of his protested fith, hath engaged him as you see, after that he had in single combat slain one of his sons, so as I can expect nothing but his death, if you assist him not. Rise, Gentlewoman, said Prigmaleon, and be assured that we will not fail to succour him in this di∣stresse. Herewith they drew out their swords, and began to march toward the enemy: But they met one of the Giants, with five and twenty halber∣tiers, comming to stop their passage, which Fulgoran considering, and fear∣ing the big Knight would not be able longer to endure the violence of so many opposites, flw in amongst them, with the unknown Knight, leaving Prigmaleon to incounter the Giant, and laid upon them with such fury, that he presently sent five or six of them dead to the earth; having scattered them in that sort, he passed on running, till he came to those that fought with the big Knight, where, at his first comming in, he gave the Giant such a blow upon the head, as he tumbled him into the water, out of which he never rose again, for the weight of his arms keeping him down, he was there drowned, receiving in that maner the punishment of his wickednesse. The great Knight seeing himself so opportunely seconded, quickly got out of the water, and thrusting himself into the midst of those rascalls, in a short time laid seven or eight of them at his feet, imitating Fulgoran, who to their horrour, making them feel both the edge and point of his sword, cut halberts, shields, cuirasses, murrions, in pieces, so that in a little while he had strewed the ground with armour that he had hewen in sunder, and with arms, legs, and heads, that he divided from bodies. Those which remained, seeing with what rage these Knights did massacre them, fled with all speed into the Castle, and quickly locked themselves up therein, expecting what fortune would befall their companions: In the mean time, Prigmaleon combatted Scarafand (one of the most furious Giants of the earth) with so much valour, as Fulgoran was amazed at it; for he had made so many breaches in his arms, as he had scarce any bloud left in him; so that he fell by the violence of a blow that lighted on his helmet, at the same time that Fulgoran, and the great Knight, beholding the unknown
Knight shrewdly pressed by these rogues, recommenced their butchery, which was such, as there survived not one, but onely the four that had be∣fore recovered the Castle: This execution ended, the great Knight unla∣ced his helmet, and craved the Knights hand to kisse, in acknowledgement of their favour in succouing him. When as Fulgoran, who knew him, cast his arms about his neck, crying out: O ye Gods! said he, What a happy meeting is this? And how am I ingaged to these Sages, by whose direction our ship hath been guided to this Island, since by my arrivall here I receive such a benefit? My dear friend, Grandimore, I never thought to finde you in such danger, and I was amazed at the valour which you shewed in your combat with so many mighty enemies; yet, having otherwhere seen grea∣ter proof thereof, I cannot doubt, but in the end, the victory would have been yours though the number of them were excessive: Neverthelesse, I heartily thank the Gods for bringing me hither, where I might in some sort requite you for that which you did for me, when you undertook the combat against the Count of Clina in my behalf. At these words, Gran∣dimore, who till then knew him not, opened his arms, and embracing him with much affection, remained a good while unable to speak, through ex∣cesse of joy, but when his tongue was at liberty, he said: My content in thus meeting you, is no lesse then that you testifie in beholding of me: My Lord, I wandered about the world onely to seek you, that I might do you service; and beleeve me, I am not more glad of the saving of my life (which is preserved onely by your valour, and that of these brave war∣rios in your company) then that I am to see you now in the estate I have alwayes wished to finde you; but we shall have time enough to confer of these things hereafter, let us now, if you please, go on with our businesse, and see what we have more to do in this Island, for the enlarging of a Knight whom I must render to this Gentlewoman. All of them agreeing with him in opinion, they advanced toward the Castle, which they found close shut against them; and not knowing how to get in, they promised life to as many as were there; when as a horrible Giantesse, who was come out of a secret postern, came behinde Prigmaleon, and struck him so mighty a blow with a mace, that she laid him quite astonished in the dust, and re∣doubling Fulgorans helmet, before he could ward it with his shield, she left him in the same estate, which put Grandimore in such a rage, as laying hand on his sword, without remembring her sex, he discharged a blow at her head with such violence, as he clove her in sunder to the girdle; whereup∣on he ran presently to Fugoran, took him in his arms, and unlaced his hel∣met to give him air; whilst the unknown Knight did as much to Prigmaleon: Time, and the helps which they used to them, having restored the Knights to their senses, with the infinite content of the other two and the Gentle∣woman. Grandimore being vexed for that they would not open the gate, took up the Giantesses mace, and therewith began to knock so at it, as all the shore resounded again; but the unknown Knight, remembering that the Giantesse came forth by a back way, went about the house, till findng the place whence she issued, he went in without any fear. And having gone a while under ground, he met with a pair of stairs, which brought him into a great court, where he saw a young Giant, of eight or ten yeers old, with three Knights, and the four villains, that had saved themselves by flight, busily imployed in bringing pieces of wood to rampire up the gate
against Grandimores blows; The ratling that his arms made comming into the Court, caused the Knights to turn unto him, when as thinking that some other followed him, they presently fell on their knees, craved their lives; which was freely granted them, upon condition the prisoners should be opened, and all that were there detained set at liberty. This promise ha∣ving assured them, they opened to Grandimore, whose chiefest care being to satisfie the Gentlewoman, he commanded all the prisoners to be brought forth, which were about threescore, as well men as women, the most part of whom had been deflowred by the two Giants, and then cast into the dungeon. The Knight, which was the occasion of this enterprise, com∣ming out with the rest, and knowing how much he was obliged to the Gen∣tlewoman, whom he also loved, besought these Knights that he might marry her before they left the Castle, which was granted them, to their infinite content. The prisoners being freed, and the Knights having need of some rest, they went up into the lodgings, after they had committed the charge of the Castle to Celisdan, (so was the Gentlewomans sweet heart called) and renewing their caresses, they related their adventures, with as much satisfaction as wonder to all the company: In such discourse they passed away the time till supper, after which every man retired to his rest, till two howrs after midnight, that the Sentinell came, and awaking them, declared, how he had seen a chariot, drawn with six great horses, go by, wherein were five or six women, that made the strangest moan in the world, the fear of two dreadfull Giants, and twenty Knights, that rode by, and threatened them, not being able to make them hold their peace. These Princes, alwayes forward to succour such as were in distresse, having re∣ceived this intelligence, instantly arose, and commanding the grooms to make ready the best horses that the Giants had in the stable, armed them∣selves with all speed possible, and guided by a fair and clear moon-light, followed the way that the Sentinell had shewed them; when as they had ridden hard two howrs and better, about day break they came to a port, where they found the horses and the chariot, but that empty, and without any to guide it: This somewhat troubled them, but when they espied not far off a ship, newly under sail, they presently conjectured, that they whom they sought for were aboord her, wherewith they were extreamly vexed, because they could not succour those afflicted women: Whilst they looked one at another, without speaking, as it were lamenting their want of some vessell to carry them; Fulgoran turning about, descried a Bark afar off, which comforted him a little, especially when he observed, that it stood right with them: but when it was come neerer, and that he percei∣ved it to be the same in which he had navigated so long before, he quickly alighted, and addressing himself to Prigmaleon; See, Sir, said he, our friends do not leave us without their assistance; behold heer our little Bark which comes so pat for us to pursue these theeves according to our desire; Let us lose no time then, but make use of the occasion that so favourably presents it self; whereupon, having all left their horses, they presently with their Squires got aboord the vessell, which not tarrying for any other lading, put off straight to sea, following the ship where the Giants were, to the in∣finite contentment of the Knights, who entertained the time with discour∣ses of the admirable knowledge of those Sages, which in this sort were able to command the winds, and order the inconstancy of that mercilesse
element, highly commending the care which they shewed in directing all their designes onely to the honouring of vertue. The one half of the day being pleasingly spent in these discourses, they saw the ship which they had in chase, grapled with another, and hearing a terrible noise, presently conjectured that it proceeded from the fight of some Knights, who meeting with the Giants, and not enduring the lamentation of those captive women, had set upon them, with a resolvtion to revenge their wrongs. That conceit having put them in a readinesse, they immediatly came up close to those vessels, in one of the which they saw onely four Knights, two very big, who had taken the Giants to taske, and other two of a lesser proportion, that opposed the fury of twenty strong Knights. The courage wherewith these four Knights maintained the combat giving them exceeding satisfaction, they stood a good while looking on them, admiring the horrible blows of the first four, and the gracefull activity which the other two shewed in holding so many play: But doubting their too long stay might perhaps be prejudiciall to these four brave warriors, they leapt into the Giants ship in despight of their Knights resistance. And at the first boording of it laid four of them upon the deck, which might have affrighted the rest, if one of the Giants, seeing that slaughter, had not left his enemy almost deprived of sense, with a mighty blow that he gave him, come in to their succor; his presence animating them they began to fly upon our Knight with more fury then before, whilst their Master combated Grandimore: But being fallen into the hands of the most valiant Knights in the world, their utmost indeavour nothing availed them; for within a while, the hatches were covered with their armour cut in a thousand pie∣ces, and the water, with heads and quarters which every minute they made flie over boord, so as none remained alive save the two Giants, who be∣holding their troops defeated, redoubled their blows with such fury, as the Knights were amazed at it; but straining themselves to discharge their blows with their utmost force, caused the bloud to issue so abundantly out of the many wounds they had received, that they both fell down dead, al∣most at one instant, the one at the feet of Grandimore, and the other into the sea, by the valour of him with whom he fought. Fulgoran then with Prigmaleon, advanced towards the Knights to salute them, but hearing a great noise in their own ship, they suddenly turned about, and seeing the unknown Knights Squire fallen into the sea, they all made what haste they could to save him: which when they had done, and taken him up, their ship flew off from the other, with such celerity, as the Knights had no time either to give them thanks for their assistance, or to enquire of their names and fortunes. Now whilst their Bark carried them away in this sort to a Port of Greece, where within two dayes after they arrived, to the ex∣ceeding contentment of Grandimore, that was sore wounded, and had none in their vessell who knew how to cure him: The other Conquerours, ha∣ving romaged the Giants ship, met with a most beautifull Lady, accompa∣nied with six maids, so sad and disfigured with the fear they were in, that there appeared no bloud in their faces: Going then to comfort her, and bringing her forth into the light, one of the Knights kneeling down, and kissing her hand, said unto her: Madam, put away all fear, for your ene∣mies are dead, and heer are none but such as onely breathe for your safety. We will let you understand who we are, as we well know that you are the
peerlesse Princesse Fontanea, daughter to the great Emperour Amadis of Greece, and now Queen of France, assuring you that there are not any in the world more devoted to your service then our selves; I am your Nephew Silvan, and this brave warriouresse is the fair Savagesse, lately become my wife: These two great Knights, are the Cenophales, whom the Em∣perour Spheramond, and the valiant Amadis d' Astre made purchase of in the wars of Pesia, and whom I met at sea bound for Constantinople: If I did not know that Fortune taketh delight in crossing those which are raised to any greatnesse, I should be amazed to finde you a prisoner, and in danger of suffering violence from the base vilains into whose hands you were fallen: But, not being ignorant of her malice, I take your misfor∣tune to be such as may befall to any man, onely this is it I wonder at, how these Giants could take you out of your own Kingdom, and from amongst your subjects, a valiant people. Ah, dear Nephew, said she, imbracing and kissing him with much affection, this mishap did not befall me in France, but in an Island of this sea, whether a storm had driven me, with thirty Gentlemen that at∣tended on me, who gave but too good proof of their fidelity; for after they had slain one of three Giants, and twelve Knights, they maintained the fight with the rest to the last gasp: I was going by the consent of the Prince Lucendus my husband, who intends to follow me presently, towards Constantinople; but my voiage was at an end, and my life at the last pe∣riod, had I not met with you. I commend the election you have made of this gallant Amazon, whom I will ever love and cherish, as I have alwayes done your mother: And for these two brave Giants, that ac∣company you, let them be assured, I will never forget the pains they have taken to set me free. Then going to the fair Savagesse, she enter∣tained her with as much kindnesse and respect, as her valour, and their al∣liance meritted: then giving these two Cenophales her hands to kisse, she received them very graciously. These complements over, she went in∣to Silvans ship with all her women, who seemed as if they had been ri∣sen from death to life, and commanding the Marriners to hoise up all their sails, she made directly for Constantinople; where within two dayes she landed, to the infinite joy of all those Princes, who were thither returned from Trebisond, about ten or twelve dayes before her arrivall there.
CHAP. XXV. Florizell of Niquea proclaims a Trnament in honour of the French Queens arrivall: the end thereof, with the brave actions of a number of gallant Knights. THE arrivall of this matchlesse Queen, with Silvan, and the beautifull Savagesse his wife, causing a publick re∣jycing, Florizell determined to keep open Court or eight dayes together; during which time a Iust was or∣dained for the young Knights, and a Tourney for the conclusion thereof, with a safe conduct for all strangers. Messengers were therefore sent into every quarter, that these first magnificences, after the death of so many Princes, might be the more glorious, and that those which survived, might in this sort demonstrate, that their courages were nothing abated by afflictions. All things being disposed to pleasure, a multitude of good Knghts flocked thither from all parts: Artificers were set on work, horses were mana∣ged for the Tilt, the trumpets sounded in every corner: In briefe, no∣thing was spoken of but mirth, and all men strove to shew their gladnesse for the greater contentment of the Princes. The first day of the Iusts being come, and Florizell of Niquea set at Table with all those Kings, a Squire came into the Hall and kneeling down, thus spake unto him: Excellent Prince, the two Knights of the Crowns, as valiant peradventure as any on the erth, do by me beseech you to grant them a favour, in contemplation of the desire they have to do you service. They know that these three next dayes are de∣dicated to exercises of Arms, the two first for the Iusts, and the third for the Tourney: They therefore humbly crave, that they may be permitted to main∣tain with the lance against all that will run with them during those two daies; not that their Ladies are the fairest in the world, (for they will not offend those unto whom nature hath affoorded a like advantage of beauty) but that their fidelty doth render them more worthy of those favours, which lovers may re∣ceive in recompence of any remarkable services, then any other Knights in the world. The conditions shall besuch, as are usuall in the like occasions, tht is, none shall require of them the combat of the sword, so long as they shall have the better at the lance; That if their fortune be equall in the course, and both they and their adversaries unhorsed, then they may dispute the ho∣nour of the day with the sword; but with this reservation, that if at the time of their being dismounted, new Knights shall happen to enter, equall in num∣ber to them, the two assailants shall remount themselves, and siding with the maintainers, shall altogether oppose the last commers, to the end they may not be deprived of the honour of the Iusts: The said Knights desiring no o∣ther benefit of their victory, then onely the names of those that shall be un∣horsed, that it may be known how far the valour of every one will extend. Verily, said Florizell, this gentile proceeding doth infinitely please me; where∣fore not enquiring after the names of your masters (who cannot be other then gallant Knights) I grant them all that they desire: Let them come then when
they please, they shall finde the lists ready for them; and if the incommodity of their journey have not permitted them to bring a tent with them, I will see them furnished with what shall be necessary for their service. The Squire re∣turning with an answer so gracious, the young Knights prepared themselves for the Iusts, and every one lookt for their comming, to see if their deeds would make good the bravery of their words. The people having already fil∣led the place, and the Princes being set at the windows, they saw how the Knights, armed in azure coloured Arms, powdered all over with innumera∣ble golden Crowns, came in, with such a grace, and so gallantly sitting their horses, as better cannot be imagined. As soon as they were entred the lists, a Gentlewoman much richer in clothes, then either in good fashion or beauty, presented her selfe unto them, and said: Gentlemen, if you be as sull of cour∣tesie as you seem to be able and brave, you will not refuse me one request I am to make you. No upon my faith, answered one of them smiling, provided that it be in our power: for your merit doth oblige us to giue you all satisfa∣ction. That which I require of you, replied she, is, that all the courses which which you shall run this after noone, may be onely for my honour, that I may one day glory, that I have seen a number of good Knights unhorsed upon the quarrell of my beauty. These words having made all that were within hea∣ring, ready to burst with laughter, the Knight returned her this answer: Gen∣tlewoman, we are sory that it is not in our power to satisfie your demand: for the conditions which we have propounded for this Iust, have already so bound us, as we cannot be permitted to run a course for your sake, wherefore you may be pleased to excuse us for this present, and expect some other occa∣sion wherein we may do you service. See, said she in choller, just the answer which ill bred Knights, and without judgement, use to make; you refuse to serve me though you have very much reason for it: but I doubt not to meet with some others more courteous then you, that punishing this basenesse, will revenge the wrong you do to my beauty. Then going out of the lists, with a million of reproches that she gave the Knights, she made all the assembly to renew their laughter: and so getting to horse departed with speed. In the mean time, ten Knights, that were newly seen to come out of the forrest, entred the field, two of which taking their place over against the defendants, attended the sound of the trumpet, which was no sooner heard, but they dislodged with a very good grace, breaking their staves on their adversaries shields; who, therewith not moved, although the incounter was strong, layd them in the dust, giving by this their first course, a very fair demonstration of their valour. The two adventurers being thus unhorsed, two others took their room, who were entertained more favourably then their fellows: for at the first course they fell not, yet the second staffe made them quit their saddles, to the extream discontent of their companions, who attempting to revenge them, had a share in their disgrace, and found themselves also extended on the earth. The spectators admiring the bravery of the Knights of the Crown, expected what the two next would do that presented themselves; but they were not long in suspence: for they gained no more then those which preceded them, but were rudely overthrown after they had made their opposers lose their stir∣rops. The two last advancing, with no lesse gallantry then full of despight, ran their first course with extream fury, and meeting all four in the middest thereof, brake their staves bravely, and so passed on without any advantage on either side. This course being fairer then any of the former, did highly
please all the assistants; when as new staves being brought them, they came to encounter with the same violence as before, but with the same good for∣tune: for the new commers lost their stirrops, and were fain to catch hold of their horses manes to save themselves from falling, whereas the challengers onely bended a little in their saddles. The resistance which the one found, and the disadvantage the others had, serving them but to increase the rage of either party, they took new staves, both stronger and stiffer then the former, and spurring on furiously, they incountred with such violence, as their staves being broken to their very gantlets, they met with their shields and bodies so forci∣bly, as the strangers kissed the ground, leaving the others something troubled with so furious an encounter. The courses ended, the Knights unaced their helmets, and presented their names; the two first were Armond of Bohemia, and Florizart of Taprobana, the next, Melfort and Aegrian; after them Flo∣rian and his brother Triston; then Quedragant and Dardanio; and the last, Florestan of Sardinia, and Prion of Turkie, gran-childe to Amadis of Gaule. They going up to the Emperours, extreamly troubled for that they had the foyle in their presence, were by them received with all courtesie, and comfor∣ted in their misfortune, as that which was common to all Knights in the world. The Knights of the Crownes returning to their places, highly pleased with the praises that the world gave them, were not long at rest: For within two hours they unhorsed above thirty of the best Knights, as well of the Em∣pire as of strangers. And now all the company were perswaded, that the ho∣nour of the Iusts would be certainly theirs, when as there entred into the lists three Knights armed in white, and by another gate two more in gilt Armour, sitting their horses in such a gallant and sprightly manner, as all men beheld them with admiration: arriving all at one time, those in the white came to the other, and fairly entreated their leave for the first course; which being easily granted them, two of them presented themselves, and ran with a good grace, but with no better fortune then the other before them: for at the first incounter they were both unhorsed. Their companion resolving to shae in their misfortune, if such were his hap, put himselfe forward, and running with incredible fury, encountred one of the Knights of the Crownes so brave∣ly, that he brake his staffe in a thousand shivers, but was so shaken by the lance of the adversary, that he staggered as if hee would have fallen, yet he quickly recovered himselfe, and made an end of his course with the estimation of a good Knight. Having taken a new staffe, he came to him with whom he had run, and thus said: Knight I am sufficiently satisfied of your valour: where∣fore, if you please, I will now make triall of your companions. That, answe∣red he, depends on your choyce, though I beleeve your bargain will be no∣thing bettered by it. Fortune, replied the Knight, shll determine of that; wherewith returning to his place, he spurred lustily against the second, and in∣countring him with the like fury as before, brake upon his shield, but the Knight aiming his lace at his helmet, hit him with such force, as he brake the laces of it, and made it flye from his head: whereupon there fell scatte∣red about his shoulders goodly tresses of haire, which declared that it was no Knight, but a most beautifull Amazon, whose name the Knight would not re∣ceive, though she twice presented it. Those which accompanied her, seeing her discovered, made themselves known to the Princes of Greece, the one be∣ing Leonidas of Mesopotamia, the other Abis of Ireland; and the Amazon, Altaria, who was very kindly received by the Emperour, & particularly by the
Queens of Guindaya, France, and Lydia, who placed her amongst them after they had highly commended her. The two Knights in the gilt ar∣mour, upon whom all men eyes were cst, seeing Alteri's combat thus ended, presently advanced, and setting spurs to their horses, encountered them of the crown so furiously, as one would have said, that four towres torn from their foundations, by so many whirlwinds, had shocked toge∣ther; Fortune was indifferent to them all, for they remained firm in their seats, & passed their course with so much bravery as made the whole assem∣bly admire them; but the desire they had of victory, caused them sudden∣ly to turn head, and then taking new staves, they setled themselves to run the second time, when as there was seen come into the place, three Knights and a Giant, of a gallant and a warlike aspect, in the company of the Gentle∣woman, before mentioned, who addressing her self to the Knights of the Crowns, with a very furious garb that well demonstrated how much she was displeased, thus spake: Discourteous Knights, I have brought these with me heer, that are more ready to do service unto Ladies then you have been, and that will revenge the disgrace you have put upon me. In good time be it, said one of them, we shall see what they are able to do, provided these Knights heer, our opposies, will give way thereun∣to. Wit that, not entering into further iscourse, they made a signe to their adversaries to prepare themselves, and dislodged at one instant with such fury, as not able to stand so violent an incounter, they were constrai∣ned to come all of them together to the ground: Choller, and the shame to be overthrown, in the presence of so great Princes, having suddenly rai∣sed them up, they couragiously laid hands on their swords, to try whose the victory should be: But the four last, that came with the Gentlewo∣man, advanced, and interposing between them, said: That they were not to proceed any further, since the conditions of the justs did forbid the com∣bat with the sword, so long as there remain any in the place on horsback: whereupon, the Iudges being called, their reasons were approved of, as very just, in regard it was one of the principall Articles thereof, expressed in these tearms: That if fortune made the encounter equall, and they were all at one time unhor∣sed, they might try it out with the sword; but if at the time of their being dis∣mounted new commers arrived, in number equall to them, the assailants should take new lances and siding with the maintainers, shuld all together make head against the last attempters, that the first might not be defrauded of their due ho∣nour. And that therefore the number on both sides being equall, the Knights had reason to hinder the combat with the sword, untill they had tryed themselves with the lance; it still remaining in their power, to recom∣mence their combat, in case the last commers were overthrown, but other∣wise not. The Knights in the gilt arms, not desiring to shew themselves refractory, since the Iudges would have it so, ranked themselves with those of the Crowns, who took fresh horses, conceiving by the countenance of their adversaries, that they had a hard party to deal withall; and placing themselves over against them, attended the sound of the trumpet for their dislodging. Whilst the questions were deciding, Alteria, observing those
which came last in, knew them for the same, that had delivered her out of the power of Argenea (as indeed they were Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the un∣known Knight, and Grandimore, who arriving in Greece, as I told you in the former Chapter, were drawn to Constantinople upon the report of the triumphs there proclaimed:) So that turning to Don Rogel, who sat not far from her, she said to him: Beleeve it, Sir, you will by and by receive much contentment in the sight of these eight Knights combat; for if those two of the Crowns have hitherto rendered themselves remarkable, they in the gray and black armour are excellent in the supremest degree, and few their equalls are to be found in the world: By their valour the dange∣rous guards of the Castle of Argenea were vanquished, and these two youn∣ger Princes, with my self, delivered from a prison, where we certainly be∣leeved to finde our graves; but since the trumpets now begin to sound, you will quickly see the proof of my words. Don Rogell then turning his eye a∣bout to the lists, saw them begin their course at one instant, and meet in the midst of it with such fury, as the earth seemed to tremble under them; their fortune was equall, for they all lost their saddles, the unknown Knight remaining wounded by the lance of one of the Knights of the Crowns, and one of them in the gilt armour by that of the Giant Grandimore: The shame to see themselves dismounted in the presence of so many excellent Princes, having suddenly raised them, they began one of the most furious combats that ever was beheld. Nothing appeared but sparks of fire in the air, and cantles of armour and shields on the ground. If Fulgoran and Prigmaleon charged with violence, they felt themselves so closely followed, as they wondered at the valour of their enemies; nothing was to be heard but hor∣rible blows, one part laid on load, another was forced to set their knees to the ground: In brief, this sight might truly be tearmed the most furious that ever had been seen between eight persons. Prigmaleon, who had one of those of the gilt arms to deal with, being mad at the resistance he found from him, let his sword descend with such rage on his helmet, as he made him recoil two or three paces with the sight of a million of stars at midday; but he had not time to glory much of that advantage, for his adversary re∣covering his spirits, came and charged him with such force, as his shield being divided in two pieces, the sword fell so heavy on his shoulder, that he was fain to set one knee to the ground, to save himself from falling; but quickly getting up again, he rendered the combat far more cruell then ever it was. In the mean time, Fulgoran and his adversary intreated one ano∣ther with the like fury; Grandimor, and the unknown Knight, disputed the victory with very much courage; howbeit, they were so pressed by their opposites, as they had little leisure to think of their consciences; neverthe∣lesse, desiring rather to die then to shew any signe of faintnesse, they fought two howrs without any advantage to their enemies, who still resolving to vanquish, redoubled their blows, and so sharply followed them, that these two Pagan Knights, after another hours combat, fell almost both at one time to the ground, to the great content of the conquerours, who having made them confesse the victory, helped them up, and delivered them into the hands of two Chirurgians, which Don Florisell had appointed to be ready, for the relief of such as should chance to be wounded: The misfor∣tune of these two Knights, augmented the rage of Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, their blows became more weighty then before, so as often times their ene∣mies
were forced to knocke their chins against their breasts, and to set their knes to the ground. But they had so good a share in those courtesies, that e∣very one was amazed at the sight of so dangerous a combat, which every one thought could never be ended, but by the eath of them all. And indeed they were so eager as they continued seven hours without taking of breath, or that any one could discerne any the least signe of wearinesse or of advantage in them, which so madded them, as carried by an unusuall rage, they all quit∣ted their swords, and grapled together, hoping by meer strength to get the victory; but little prevailing that way, they were at length constrained, after they had tumbled on the ground, sometimes above, and another while be∣low, to rise as by agreement, and recommence their combat, which lasted till night, no man being able to attribute the honour of it more to the one then the other. Don Rogell, who infinitely admired the valour of these Knights, perceiving them obstinately bent not to give over for all that it grew dark, caused the retreat be sounded. But their rage not permitting them to heare it, they went on with their businesse, and continued battering one another more cruelly then they had done all the day before: so that Don Rogell was inforced to discend with Spheramond, and intreat them to part for his sake, shewing them, hat the cause of their contention being so slight, their enmity had no reason to be so bitter; but they lent a deafe care to all that he could say, so as at last he was constrained to put himselfe between them, which so much dis∣pleased Prigmaleon, as turning himselfe somewhat hastily to Don Rogell, he said in some choller: I would fain have intreated you to have let Fortune work her will; but seeing your authority opposes the designe of those that combat before you, remember that it shall not be able to hinder me when I shall visit you with an hundred thousand men, to require an account of the distaste you now give me. Neither will I, said Fulgoran, who was as much displeased, promise them better dealing: for I will once more cover your fields with brave and warlike Souldiers. Wherefore, Princes of Greece, receive these words for a defiance, and pre∣pare for a war. But that you may understand who are your enemies, this Knight is Prigmaleon, the great Emperour of Ethiopia, whom you see in these gray Arms, and I am the King of Canabea, by which name you cannot chuse but know me. Yes, said Don Rogel, without being any way distempered, we have cause not to be ignorant of what you are; but it may be time will qualifie this heat, and that little you gained before our walls, perhaps will keep you from pursuing the second designe. But if you be so resolved, we have friends enough not to care much for your Armes: yet shall not that keep me from in∣treating you, since it is now dark night, to take a lodging in our Palace, untill you have a little refreshed your selves after the great toyle you have this day endured. That is ordinary with us, answered Fulgoran, so that your courte∣sie may well be spared; wherewith somewhat coldly retiring, they went to their friends, who with more despight then paine, quickly got to horse: and, notwithstanding they were shrewdly wounded, travelled till about midnight, that they came to a Gentlemans house; where, when they had stayed two dayes, they left Grandimore and the unknown Knight to be cured of their hurts, and the morrow after they parted with a promise of meeting at the end of two moneths, in Natolia, with each of them an hundred and fifty thousand men, to be in one body transported to Constantinople. In the mean time Don Rogel and Spheramond, who were not much troubled with their menaces, ad∣drest
themselves to the other Knights, and with such curtesie intreated them to let themselves be known, as they were content to satisfie them. Having then unlaced their helmets, they let them see that those two of the Crownes were Lucendus Prince of France, and Drigel King of the fortunate Island. The other in the gilt Arm were the valiant Russian of Media, and the migh∣ty Esquilan of Polonia. You may well imagine the contentment which the Greek Princes, and especially the Infanta Fortuna, received by the comming of these Knights, though I do not put my selfe to the trouble of relating it. In summe, a thousand caresses were not for born amongst so many friends, nor any thing forgotten which might serve for the contentment of those Princes; who, for the present, treading all care of their more important affairs, under foot, pas∣sed two or three dayes more in tourneys, and all the delights that could be imagined. At the end whereof that happened, which in the next Chapter shall be related. CHAP. XXVI. The adventure of the Pyramide is ended to the honour of the brave Russian of Media, who is known to be the sonne of Don Rogel, and the faire Queen Giranda. WHilst all thing were thus disposed unto pleasure, and Flo∣risell with the other Princes were sitting in the Palace Hall, there entred four Lions, carrying a Pyramide of indifferent height, and made after a strange fashion: It was composed of two severall materials, as it was divi∣ded into two stories, the highest being of transparant Christall, inclosed the body of a young Lady of most excellent beauty, that seemed to sleep: The lower made of a black Marble, suffered nothing to be seen that was within it, yet was there a gate to give passage into it. The beasts being come, with amazement of all that were present, into the middest of the Hall, by little and little discharged themselves of their load, and keeping still their places, turned them towards the company, which so affrighted them, that except the Princes, who could not be scared, every one was about to shift for himselfe; when as a Damsell presenting herselfe, kneeled down before Florisell, and thus spake, Excellent Prince, I do not think that your courage, so often tried with infinite dangers, can be moved with this wonder which here you see: the Fortunes of men are various and great, and seldome are they at quiet after an infinitie of crosses, The Gods did seem to promise to the Princesse, whom you see inclosed in this Christall, unspeakable contentments: for having made her by birth a Prin∣cesse, and, as yet you may perceive, beautifull in the highest degree of excel∣lence, she should, me thought, have been exempted from those misfortunes that attend our life. But alas! all these attributes of so raised a condition, have served onely to make her miserable; and this ornament of beauty hath rende∣red her in the estate wherein you now see her, as I will presently inform you. Her father, a vertuous Prince, being forced to pay that debt unto nature which is due by all men, left her under the charge of the great Emperour of
Guardacia (whose crown she might one day pretend to, if the Gods should call the 2 daughters which he now hath, & those the faiest on the earth) and dyig charged her not so much to regard the greatnesse, as the vertue of a valian husband; so that in a while all the Countrey knew, that for Agriclea, so is she named, not a rich but a worthy man is required, that could couragiously conserve the Scepter that should be put into his hands. The umour running not only through the countrey subject to her crowne, but to other kingdomes far removed, came to the knowledge of a yong Giant, an ugly man, and very debauched, who beleeving (as many do often flatter themselves) that he had not his match in the world, presented himselfe not long since unto her, and of∣fered to maintaine, that all the Knights in the world came short of him in valour: This Princesse (who questionlesse deserveth to be better besto∣wed) not brooking this his vanity, somewhat coldly desired him not to tempt his fortune for her occasion. But the Giant, having too much fancie in his brain, not admitting of that excuse, presented himselfe six moneths together in the lists; where, to speak truth, he purchased the esteem of a valiant per∣son, howbeit he lost his labour: for Agriclea, who dyed as often as she saw him triumph over his enemies, and that could not approve of his cruelty, to the vanquished, one evening when hee troubled her with the discourse of his passions: Fulgosan, said shee, for that was his name, I know not how you can imagine that I should ever love you, since I cannot finde any thing in you that might move mee unto it; what likelyhood is there that I should subject my contentment to the kisses of a man so deformed? or that my delights should depend upon your caresses. The very thought thereof is distastefull unto me, and if you had had any judgement all, you would have considered the inequa∣lity of our conditions, and persons, before you had engaged your affection: I here permitted you to combate many times for the merit of my beauty, I confesse, but I have done it rather to winne you glory, then any way to oblige my selfe unto you: Nor thinke it an argument of good will in me towards you, because I was willing to appeare courteous, you may therefore retire your selfe when you please, and never stnd on my fathers will for that which shall alwaies depend on my choyce. It is against my mind, that I pay your service in this sort for perswading my self that you fough not in hope of reward, I doe not present you withany. In summe my own contentment is dearer to me then yours, nor shall my torment spring from your satisfaction. Brave Prince, I will not insist upon informing you what rage these discreet & modest words kindled in the breast of this proud Knight: for you may well imagine with what impatience he heard them; but going on with my discourse, will tel you, that departing with strange menaces, hee was seene not long after to returne, accompanied with an Aunt of his, very expert in magicke, who taking this faire Princesse by the arme (no body there present being able to succour her) placed her where at this present you behold her, using these very words: Thou shalt know, Agriclea, that the affection of one that loves, is not to bee dispised, and that the difference of condition, dispenses not with the duty of a well bred soule; thou oughtest to have loved my Nephew, since thy beauty was the onely soveraigne of his thoughts, but having eene to diacknow∣ledging as to recompence him with injuries, thou shal a long time suffer that which he now indures: And for that I will not pardon him the fault he hath comitted in loving thee with too much fidelity, my pleasure is that he shal still he follow thee, that shall heare thy lamentations, d perpetually upbraid thee
with thy ingratitude. Thus speaking, she made him go in at the doore in the black Marble, which instantly closed of it selfe; and calling me, who had al∣wayes had the government of this Princesse in charge: I will not, said she, de∣prive you of the office that you have formerly enjoyed, and that still you de∣serve, go therfore to the Courts of the greatest Princes in the world with her, and know that you shall never see an end of your travels, nor the re-establish∣ment of your Mistrisse into her former estate, untill The bastard Lion be disco∣vered in the bloud of this miserable man that I have here lockt up, who shall come out to figt as often as any shall knock at the doore with the pummell of his sword. Saying so, she touched the Lions with a rod which she had in her hand, and made me presently go out with them, willing me to take no care for the way. Thus have I, excellent Prince, delivered the cause of my comming into your dominions, where my hope is to see this Princesse freed by the hand of some one of those which render your Court the most glorious, and the most re∣doubted in the world. But if it be your pleasure that the triall of this adven∣ture shall be made in your presence, then I humbly desire that you will permit that I may obtain a Boon of your Knights, which notwithstanding shall not oblige any but him that shall undo this inchantment. That shall not hinder you, said Florisell, from finding that contentment heer you desire: and with all my heart I wish that this fair Princesse may in this place meet with an ease of all her pains; to the furtherance wherof I promise you, in the name of all mine, that you shall not be denied your request, so as it be in our power to perform. Hereupon all those Knights, who desired nothing but occasions of winning honor, were to arm themselves for to begin the triall. The first that presen∣ted himselfe, was the gentile Perion of Turkie, who knocking at the Marble gate with his sword, they saw a Knight come forth all armed, not so great as most Giants, but much exceeding the stature of most men, that setting hand to a rich sword, advanced his shield against the fury of a blow which Perion delivered at his head, and at the same instant charging him, made him perceive, that his valour was extream, so that the combat began to be both dangerous and delightfull: for if the one shewed a rare agility in avoiding his adversaries blows, the other demonstrated an excessive force. Having battered one ano∣ther then above an hour in that fashion, Perion determined to see the game upon a cast, and with his sword in both hands, to lay upon his enemies helmet; but he was prevented: for the Giant having discharged an horrible blow on his head, laid him all along upon the floor, and was going to return into his prison, when as Florian of Sopradisa advanced; who, to be short, had no bet∣ter fortune, no more had Tristor, Florestan, Quedragant, and all these new Knights, which were all served in the same manner, after they had stood a fight more or lesse, according to the proportion of their strengths. The va∣liant Esquilon of Polonia would needs succed his companions in their misfor∣tunes, but not till after two hours fight, and with some hope of the assistants, that he would carry away the honour of the adventure. His fall having possessed the gallant Russian with more choller then fear, he drew to Fulgo∣son with his sword drawn; whereupon they began to charge one another with such mighty blows, that the room shook under them, pieces of armour flew about, their shields were hewen in pieces, and the pavement sprinkled with bloud, testified the valour of the combatants; who bravely disputing for their lives, and the victory, made all the spectators amazed at it, especially the Greek Princes, who judging Russians manner of fight both more furious, and more
pleasing then any of the former, exceedingly desired to know him: Three howrs being past away, since the beginning of the combat Russian grew in∣raged, and chusing rather to die then not to overcome in the presence of so many excellent Princes, he delivered a full blow upon the Giant with such violence, that it divided his body in twain, to the infinite contentment of the Gentlewoman, and of the fair Infanta Agriclea, who instantly recover∣ing her spirits, and a great clap of thunder breaking forth, just as Fulgoson fell, the Pyramid was found in a thousand pieces, and Agriclea in the arms of her woman, who comming to Russian; Brave warrior, said she to him, you have this day gained so much honour, as we will speak eternally of your valour; but you know withall to what your word doth oblige you. I do, said he, ravished with the singular beauty of Agriclea, I know that I am ingaged to you for a boon, and am ready to grant it presently. The time for it, said she, is not yet come; but you shall, if you please, one day make good your promise, either at my intreaty, or at the command of this Prin∣cesse; with that, a new clap of thunder being heard, they saw Agriclea and her woman, together with the body of the Giant, and the fragments of the Pyramid taken away in a cloud, nothing remaining of them in the room, but the bloud that Fulgoson shed, upon the last blow he received; In which, as it had been in a table of brasse or marble, were written these words: Russian of Media, the son of Rogell of Greece, and of the fair Queen Grianda. O me! (said Spheramond, who had noted the Gentlewomans discourse, and therefore was come to look upon that bloud, imagining that it was not left there without some mysterie) What a wonder is this? And by what a strange adventure are we acquainted with a secret of such importance? Come hither brother, said he, offering to embrace Russian, and give me the first caresses that are due to our neernesse in bloud; you can no longer con∣ceal your self, for your descent is written here; and my Lord, my Father, hath just cause to rejoyce to see one of his race with so much good fortune. Russian, thus suddenly surprised, kneeled down before his father, and kis∣sing his hands, confessed that he had determined not to reveal that he was his son, supposing that his valour had not as yet rendered him worthy of that glory: but since the heavens had thus discovered him, he thought himself most happy in this adventure, and would endeavour to honour the name that he carried. I should never have done, if I should go about to particularize the caresses which Russian received from Florisel, from those Princes his kinsmen, from the Queens of Guindaya, France, and Lydia, and from all the Court; wherefore I will not stand upon it, but following my discourse will tell you, that Russian was not more contented with the ho∣nour which he had gained in this adventure, and with the notice that his kindred had taken of him, then he was grieved for the departure of Agri∣clea, whose incomparable beauty had made a deep impression in his heart: but hoping that time would furnish him with occasions to see her again, he comforted himself as well as he might, and laboured to finde out reasons to quiet his minde.
CHAP. XXVII. The Princes of Greece consult of the war; the mustering of Fulgorans and Prigmaleons armies; a Damsell carries Russian of Media from Constantinople. WIse men forestall the time, and their prudent foresight doth often times free them from dangers. Our Princes more intentive to what concerned them in honour, then to continue their pleasures, assembled one day together, and calling to minde Fulgorans and Prigmaleons threats, they consulted of the means they had to oppose the violence of their forces. Our Empires, said Florisel, as the principall person in that counsell, are not unfurnished of good souldiers; we have a number of brave Princes still alive, and our Courts are full of gallant Knights; wherefore we have no great cause to be troubled with our enemies coming, so as we take care to hasten our levies in due time; as for our selves, I am not of opinion that we should stir from hence, since the Governours of our Provinces, and our subjects, will not be wanting in point of obedience to all our com∣mands: So that the thing which doth most presse us for the present, is, that to dispatch away speedily some Gentlemen, to the Lievtenants of those countreys, which are subject unto us, commanding them to raise as many men as they may without disfurnishing the places of importance of their necessary garrisons. This advice being approved of, as the best they might think of, every one withdrew to expedite the businesse, and accord∣ingly the same day, the Emperour Don Rogell sent into Persia, Spheramond to the Empire of the Parthians, Dorigell to the fortune Island, Lucendus in∣to France, and Alestraxerea into Treisond, Florisel also gave out Com∣missions for the Empire of Greece, dispatched Posts to Rome, to great Britain, to Guindaya, to the Kings of Dardania, Comagenia, India, Samo∣thracia, Cathaya, Poland, Hungary, Moldavia, and Scotland; and giving order for the fortifying of the Ports and frontire towns, he rested in expe∣ctation of what the heavens would determine in an affair of such great con∣sequence. Whilst they were thus imployed in Greece, Fulgoran and Prig∣maleon were not idle, for having parted with a resolution not to enter any combat except extream necessity inforced them to it, they arrived almost at one instant, the one in the Empire of Aethiopia, and the other in the Kingdom of Canabea, where the first things they did, was, to send to all their neighbour Kings, to intreat that they would together with them im∣brace the revenge of those outrages, which from time to time all Pa∣ganisme had received from the Emperours of Greece: Their request was without any difficulty granted, for a multitude of Kings and Princes that had not been parties in the former leagues, determined to joyn with them, utterly to exterminate the Christian name for ever. The first that at the motion of Fulgoran arrived in Canabea, were the great King of Mauritania, with two thousand horse, and three Giants; the King of Canaria, with the
like number of horses and Giants; those of Mlarra, and Tremiscen, with twelve thousand foot, and five Giants; those of Zaphir, Zambar, and Car∣thagena, with fifteen thousand horse, and seven Giants; those of Mloc, ramaza, Panonia, Aganazes, and Budomell, with thirty thousand Ar∣chers; the Tamberlen of Moraria, the Kings of Libia, Arcania, Barbary, Anguly, Argier, Numidia, and Carthage, with fourcore thousand horse, and thirty Giants; those of Bisancia, Marocco, Thunes, Thenery, and and Miramolin, with fifty thousand foot; and the Kings of Tll, and Ba∣zana, with fifteen thousand horse, and thirteen Giants. So that the Gene∣rall muster of these troops being taken, with those which Fulgoran had rai∣sd in his own Kingdom, consisting of ten thousand horse, and eighteen thousand foot, amounted to one hundred and forty thousand horse, and an hundred and ten thousand foot, threescore Giants, and thirty Kings, who alone would with confidence have undertaken the conquest of the whole world with the moity of these troops, which being embarked with a favourable wind, stood for Natolia, as it was before agreed with Prigma∣lon: who in the mean time took no lesse care, for having called his friends togther, he put to sea with the Kings of Guine, Morlavia, Bnazar, Sa∣photir, Merove, Cyrcia, the Soldan of Cayre, the Princes of Colidonia, Tergadan, and Ardania, with an hundred and thirty thousand horse, forty thousand foot, and seven and thirty Giants, whom we will leave to the conduct of Neptune, that they may have time to arrive, and return to the Greek Court, which in the mean space had made their preparations for the war, and as yet had onely a body of fifty thousand horse, Florisel having disposed his infntery in the good towns, as that which was fitter to de∣fend a rampire, then to fight in field: Whilst all was thus inclining to war, the Christian Princes sought all kindes of diversions, for the caes of those fai Queens, who seemed to have lost the better part of their lustre, with the fear of insuing dangers; Iusts and Tourneys were not wanting, wherein those young Knights, to their infinite commendations, appeared as it were in emulation of one another: In brief, the Court was full of pastimes, and it seemed that the news which was brought them of the incredible multi∣tude of enemies that were comming to them, served but to animate them the more. One day when as all the world was intentive on the Iusts, that Tristor of Sopradisa maintained, in honour of Alteria, of whom he was passinatly inamoured, there came in a Damsell, her hair scattered about her shoulders, her eyes full of tears, and with so sad a countenance, as she movd as much pity, as desire to know from what mishp her sighes and la∣mentations proceeded. As soon as she drew neer these Princes, she wiped her eyes, and stood a good while viewing them, without speakng a word; But Spheramond, imagining that her grief made er so silent: Gentlewo∣man, said he, the estte in which we see you, makes us beleeve that you are opprest with some affliction, and that you desire relief. Speak, and make use of us, for there is no man-heer, but will gladly contribute to your re∣dresse. That onely hope, said she, made me come hither, for knowing that you never refused your assistance to those that intreated you for it, I am come to crave revenge of a wrong that hath been done me in this country. I travelled by the command of a Lady, whose principall care doth aim at the preservation of a vertuous man, and in a scarff carried a sword, the fai∣rest that may be found, and at my saddle bowe, an helmet, so rich, that it is
not to be valued, hoping erelong to have met with them for whom these presents were designed: But passing thorow a forrest, some two dayes journey from hence, I lighted on a great Knight, who neither respecting my weaknesse, nor the little profit that he could reap of his injurious deal∣ing (for I had told him that neither the sword nor helmet could serve for any but onely those two for whom they were made) seased upon them, and told me with a harsh voyce, that the Destinies had forged these arms for him, since they were appointed for two of the bravest Knights in the world. How beir, I besought him to render them back to me, bidding him try and he should see, that they would be of no use to him; but he rdely replied, that if this adventure were not ordained for him, the valour of who so ever it were could not repair his default; and that therefore I should as∣sure my self, they should never go out of his hands but upon a strict ac∣count; so withdrawing to a tree that stands by the high wayes side, on whose branches he hung the helmet and the sword, he vowed to tarry there eight whole dayes, and not suffer any Knight to passe without trying this adventure: Now you know the losse that I have endured, and the onely cause of my tears, in regard whereof, I demand some Knight, who by pu∣nishing this offence, may make me as joyfull, as now you see me afflicted. Your desire, said Spheramond, appears to me so just, as I will gladly do you service in it, if you will but give me time to take my arms. Certainly it seems, my Lord, said Russian then, that you intend to have all the glory of the world to your self alone; Have you not honour enough already? Or will a petty adventure adde any wit to the praises that are now given you? Not at all, your name doth sufficiently fli abroad i every mans mouth, no is there any need that you should labour to purchase more fame: Leave, I beseech you, the care of this affair to me, and permit me to seek occasions to imitate your vertue. You shall do as you will, said Spheramond, nor will I ever oppose so brave an ambition: Go then when you please, but remember to return, I pray you, and not suffering your self to be carried away with any new fansie, think that ere long we shall have occasion to imploy you. Be assured, said Russian, extreamly glad with the leave he had gotten, I will not, but upon necessity, go far, and that our ene∣mies shall see me the first in the field; with that, doing reverence to all those Princes, he leaped on horsback, and left them all much grieved at his de∣parture: For remembring a number of surprises wherewith they had been otherwhiles caught themselves, they with reason feared he might be car∣ried somewhither, where the danger might be greater then to incounter one Knight alone; Neverthelesse, retaining the same greatnesse of courage which they ever carried in all their actions, they made no shew of any sad∣nesse, but committing the care of his good fortune to heaven, they setled themselves to behold the justs; where Tristor shewed so much valour, as he was commended of all men. In the mean time, Russian meditating more of his new passion, which he felt for the fair Agriclea, then of the affair wherein he wa imployed, ravelled with some discontent to the Damsell, who not approving that silence of his, as if it had testified a kinde of faintnesse in him, she th said: I will not condemn your humour before I know you better; but I would gladly understand the occasion of your sad∣nesse, to the end I might serve you with as much freenesse, as you have shewed courage i undertaking the revenge of my wrong. You must im∣pute
it to time, answered he, which doth not give us leave to be alwayes of one temper, and not to any ill disposition of nature. It is a fault, I confesse: for you have enough to divert a troubled mind, but I shall desire you, not to be offended with it, since I fail not out of malice, and that I am ready to make a∣amends for my errour. It was not to constrain your actions, that I set this discourse on foot, replied he, but knowing that the withdrawing one from melancholy thoughts, doth many times oblige a man. I took the boldnesse to call you, that you might do better to be merry, then thus to lose your selfe in such cogitations. Riding on then in this sort, they past away the day with many pleasing discourses, and the night in a sound sleep, though they had no other covering then the trees. But the Sun having waked them, they pursued their former way, and travelled till noon, when as they came to the tree where the Damsell hoped to finde her gallant, and to make him give an account of the Armes that he had taken from her: howbeit, she was extreamly amazed when she saw neither the sword nor the helmet hanging on the boughes. I am most certain, said she, looking Russian in the face, that my griefe, as great as it was, did not take my understanding from me, and that this tree is the witnesse of the wrong which the robber did me of whom I now complain, as well as of the oathes which he swore to tarry eight dayes for me here. No, I am not mistaken: for see where the grasse is pressed down with the weight of his bo∣dy. This is the bough whereon that pretious sword hung, and these the same stones upon which he sate down to try if the helmet would fit his head, yet I wonder he should be gone, considering how he boasted of his valour; ne∣verthlesse, to speak truth, I have no great reason to think it strange: for could I hope that a thiefe would stand upon respect of honor, and that he would prize his faith above his profit; people of that metall use to promise any thing, and perpetually fail: he is gotten away to hide his booty, and keeping out of my sight, beleeves that he shall never be forced to restore it again. But I am resolved either to lose my selfe, or to be revenged: wherefore, if you please, let us go on, and seke him so long till we heare some newes of him. I am ready, said Russian, to do as you shall command me, since your enemy is not heer, let us go and learn what is become of him. Being about then to depart, they spied a Dwarse so little, that the grasse whereon he lay, covered half of his body. It may be, said the Damsell laugh∣ing, that we may have some notice here of what we seek: let us enquire, sir, of this little ugly fellow, what is become of the Knight. As I live, said the Dwarf, rising up in haste, I would not so much as open my mouth to give you the satisfacton you desire, did not the worth of this Knight perswade me to it as much as your injuries disswade me from it; wherupon turning to Russian, Knight, said he, will you command me any service? I desire, answered Rus∣sian, that you would be pleased to tell us where we are, and if you have seen any Knight under this tree. You are, said the Dwars, in the Kingdome of Macedon, this Oke is called, the tree of adventure; because that ordinarily here falls out one novelty or other: and the Knight after whom you enquire, is this morning gone away at the request of a damsell, who hath carried him to the guard of the castle of Love from hence. I am, said Russian, satisfied in few words: but my friend, you may adde one greater obligation yet to that wherein I stand already indebted unto you by giving me information of the Castle you speake of. I would, replied he, if it were in my power to satisfie you, but truly, sir, my curiosity did never stretch so far, onely my opinion is,
that it is called the Castle of Love, because there is to be seen in an inchanted room there, that proud Deity which triumphs over the hearts of lovers, sea∣ted upon a throne of Marble; at the end whereof are two Arches, where∣into no living man could ever yet enter. Now if you be not contented here∣with, and that you aske me why the entring into that house is forbidden, I will tell you, that as far as I could gather by the Damsels discourse which car∣ried the Knight away, that it is to hinder a great happinesse to Christendome, predestined to it by the ruine of this inchantment, which is shortly to come to an end. I could not, said Russian, be more clearly informed in what I desired to know, so that I will trouble you no further. Saying so, he passed on with his guide, determining to go into the Castle, and see the end of that adven∣ture. CHAP. XXV. Don Rogell by a strange meanes is brought to the Castle of Love, and having, with Russian of Media, given an end to the inchant∣ment, they both remained inchanted under the arches of the  of lovers. DVring the time that Russian was going to the Castle of Love, Don Rgel weary of the City, had a minde to re∣fresh his spirits on hunting; commanding therefore the dogges to be brought to the wood, and with some gen∣tlemen getting to horse, he entred into a Coppice; where, within a while, he saw a Stgge come out, one of the greatest that ever he had seen. Passion, that often hurries us after what we desire, made him so run his horse after the Deer, as presently he had lost his company, and thought they followed him hard; yet none of them knew what was become of him: for being better mounted then they, he quickly got a great deal of ground of them, and stopt not, but upon occasion of a new incounter, as full of danger, as of wonder; he saw comming out of the wood fix Savages, which carried a great pack upon their shoulders, and two terrible Giants, that conducted them, with so horrid an aspect, that the onely view of them might have af∣frighted any heart lesse couragious then that of this valiant Prince. But being incapable of feare, he observed them a good while: and at last was advan∣cing with an extream desire to know what was in that pack, had he not with∣all remembred, that he was without Arms, that therefore reason did forbid him the committing so rash a part, and that  an indiscreet act would bring him much more blame then commendation. Returning then into the wood, with∣out any further thought of hunting, but onely with a purpose to finde out his people, among whom was  Sqre, who alwayes carried a compleat armour for him: he made many returns in it with infinite discontent that he was not then in case to fight: for fearing he should not meet with this adventure again, he thought himselfe unfortunate, and carried with an unusuall rage, he deter∣mined to turn head, and try his fortune onely with his sword; whereas casting his eye about n every side, to see which way he were best to take for his pr∣suit
of the Savages, he spled a green cuirasle at the foot of the tree, with an hel∣met and shield of the same colour. That fortune, no lesse expected then wi∣shed for, changing his displeasure into joy, made him instantly alight, and ta∣king up the cuirasle, with the rest of the Arms that belonged to it, he armd himselfe from head to foot. Hereupon being more contented then he had been of a long time, he speedily remounted his horse; and never thinking of the discontent his friends would be in for his departure, he travelled so long, that night came upon him nee to the cabbine of a young Shepheard, who received him with much courtesie, giving him such entertainment as his narrow for∣tunes were able to affoord. The desire he had to reap the fruit of his labour, not permitting him to sleep soundly, he gat up by break of day, and proceeded in his former way, till tht about two hours after noon he saw a proud Castle, before the which two Knights were in fight with very much courage: The neerer he drew to them, the crueller their combat appeared to be: for the ter∣rible blows they gave one another, shewed an extream force, and made him think that the death of them both would perhaps be the end of their combat. Being delighted with this furious fight, he staid a while to observe the vio∣lence, and adresse, wherewith these Knights struck and avoided the blows of one another. But hearing a noyse on the left hand, he turned suddenly about, & seeing the Savages and the Giants whom he soght for, ready to enter into the Castle by another gate, far greater then that before which this combat was begun, he spurred away so hard, that he got into the gate just as the last Giant entred; who giving him no leasure to informe himselfe of this adventure, char∣ged him very furiously with a beliefe that he should dispatch him at the first blow. But this Prince, that knew the way to vanquish, lifting up his shield o∣ver his head, bre off the violence of his sword, that descended without har∣ming him, and at the same instant made so strange a thrust at him, that hee gave his enemy a deep wound in his side. The other Giant turning about at the noyse of this fight, and seeing his brothers bloud, ran immediatly at Don Rogel, who nothing amazed to have two such adversaries upon him, with a quick change of his ground, avoided a blow which he let flye at his head, and made another thrust at him, hoping to have as good fortune with it as he had at the first; but it was without effect: for that meeting with his shield▪ entred but a little way. Whilst this combat grew hot, by reason of the Giants rage, and the government of the Prince, who fought with more judgement then force, that of the two Knights having endued above three hours, conti∣nued still with all fury that may be imagined between two valiant men, who would rather have been in their graves, then misse the glory of being conquerours. Their blows fell alike, heavie and dangerous, the sight of their bloud enflamed their choler, and the resistance which they found from one another, rendred them so obstinate, as they would not speake of breathing, though they were both in case to desire it. But me thinks it is time to tell who these two excellent Princes were, that the reader may no longer be held in suspence; Russian of Media was one, and the other was Mandajar the proud Pagan, that took the sword and helmet from the Damell, and afterward was carried to guard the castle of love, as you have heard in the precedent chapter. Passing therefore from this to the prosecution of my discourse, you must know, that these Knights attering one another, continued their combat a∣bove an hour longer. At the end wherof Mandajar feeling his enemies sword too often in his flesh, and hoping for no safety, but in dsparation tooke his
sword in both his hands, and let drive with such fury at the Prince of Media his shield, as he forced him to set one knee to the ground, with an opinion that he would never rise again. But he had little time to rejoyce: for his sword brake in three peeces, and Russian getting up in an extraordinary rage, made him beleeve that his death was no further from him, then till he received the next blow, so that valuing his life more then his honour, he shamefully turned his back, and not daring to stand the fury of our Christian, he ran away through the Court of the Castle, at the very same time when as Don Rogel gave one of the Giants his deaths wound, and got him into the inchanted Hall, as into a place of refuge, or sanctuary. Russian following him, and fin∣ding one of the Giants in his way, gave him so terrible a blow upon his head, that he clave him to the very teeth, and suddenly withall entred the Hall where Mandajar was; who seeing himself followed so close, went up the stairs, which led to the throne of love: and taking that copper Idoll in his hand, he was going to throw it at Russian, but was prevented by his sword, which di∣vided his body in two. The Knight was no sooner fallen with the image in his hand, but a terrible clap of thunder was heard, which was followed with so thick a smoke, as nothing could be discovered a good while after: howbeit, an hour being past in that darknesse, and the day recovering its for∣mer brightnesse, the place of the throne was seen to be strangely changed: for in stead thereof was a fine covered Fountain, of the same Marble which the two Arches underneath it were framed, which contained a most clear and transparant water; whereinto Russian looking, beheld the fair Neece of the Emperour of Guardacia, just as he saw her at Constantinople at such time as he delivered her from the inchantment, in which she was held for Fulgoso cause. This object ravisht him, and that beauty so pleasing to his soule, tran∣sporting him from the thought of all other contentments, he was about to dis∣cover his love unto her, as if she had indeed been present, when a the noyse that a man in Armes comming towards him, made, awaked him out of this pleasing dream, and possessed him with despight and rag to be so interrup∣ted. Rash and presumptu, said he, looking up, and not knowing that it was the Emperour his father, why come you to trouble my delight, and to di∣vert me from the greatest pleasure that a  may meet with in his life? As I live, I will chastice you for this insolence, and you shall pay me interest for the content you have deprived me off. Don Rogel, who knew him by his Arms, could not forbear laughing▪ and answered: You have no reason to threaten me: for you shall never finde a Knight more ready to do you pleasure then my selfe. These are excuses, said Russian, which wil hardly serve your turn, and to think of satisfying me with words, is to deceive your self, you must therefore provide for your defence. Nay, said Don Rogel, I had rather yeeld you the victory presently: for there is no reason I should take away that life which I have given you, or that you should bereave me of mine, from whom you hold yours. Your words, replied Russian, do amaze me: for either you are the Emperour Don Rogel, and my Lord, or I understand you not. It is true, said Don Rogel, lifting up his Bever that I am your father, brought hi∣ther by the strangest accident in the world, and infinitely pleased with the honour which you have gained by the ruine of these inchantments. But pray tell me, what delight was that from which I hindred you? Your eyes my Lord, said Russian, after he had modestly excused himselfe upon his ignorance, will better inform you then my words. If you please to look into
this fountain, which was set heer in the time of the mist, perhaps you will have cause to say with me, that it is one of the rarest wonders that may be seen: Don Rogel then, more curious then before, went presently up the steps, and looking into the water, he beheld the fair Emperesse of Persia his wife, who with a sad countenance declared, that his absence was not little grievous to her, that loved him so truly; Fair-Mistris, said he then, it is not without extream sorrow that I am thus esloigned from you; But alas! I am compelled to it by the necessity of occasions, that will not suffer me to enjoy the happinesse of your presence, as your felicity seems to depend on mine: Comfort your self, I beseech you, for a time, the common Father of all things, will render us that contentment, and our delights will be the more pleasing after the displeasure of so long an absence; with that look∣ing down, he espied the sword and helmet, whereof we have heertofore spoken, hanging over the two marble arches, he had a desire to prove if those arms were reserved for his glory, but perceiving a Damsell comming in with two Lions in a lease, he went speedily down to entertain her, and to go the neerest way, passed under one of the arches, where he presently lost the remembrance of all things, remaining inchanted, without any will to go out, but for to combat those which should touch him with their swords. Rssian, who thought that some new matter of wonder had made him stay there, straightway entered under the other, as desiring to partici∣pate of his fathers good fortune; but he was also enchanted in the same sort, and finding a chair there, he sat him down, withou any thought of his Agriclea. As soon as these two Princes were thus arrested, the Dam∣sell fstening two iron chains unto two buckles that appeared at the ends of that frame, and struck the Lions with a rod she had in her hand; which done, the fountain, seated upon four iron wheels, began to move with the drawing of the Lions, who were no sooner out of the Castle, but the whole building sunk into the earth, the Damsell being left in a corniche of the frame, with the rains in her hand, and the coffer, which the savages had brought in, between the two arches, but so close shut, that no body could possibly come to see what was within it. CHAP. XXIX. That which befell Esquilan of Poland and Perion of Turkie, going in quest of Den Rogel. THE Gentlemen, that accompanied Don Rogel on hunt∣ing, having made a thousand turns in the wood with∣out hearing any news of him, determined to return to the City, beleeving that they should finde him there; but when they came thither, and found him not, they advertised Don Florisel of his losse, who was very much grieved thereat, and would certainly have gone himself the same day to seek him, had he not counted it an unpardonable fault to have left his Empire, and his people, to the mercy of their enemies, whose comming he every howr expected, having
had intelligence that they were at sea, and might with a fair wind be quick∣ly there: Determining therefore not to stir, he called Esquilan and Perion to him, commanded them to get to horse, and to seek Don Rogel four dayes, with a charge, that if in that time they heard not of him, they should not fal to return back: These young Princes thinking it an honour for them to receive this command, went presently to arm themselves, and being well mounted, travelled till it was late, without meeting any adventure worth the relating; but toward night they saw a Shepherdesse passing by them, who in the midst of her age, had some lines yet left in her face of a loving beauty, which in her youth had made her beesteemed: a young Shepherd, handsome, and well proportioned, followed her, with his eyes drowned in tears: What, said he, fair Oristea, will you alwayes flie me, and shall my tears never soften that marble which you have lodged in your breast? Stay, I beseech you, and by my actions judge of my sufferings, too long indeed for so slight a fault; My sighs do crave that grace which sometimes you granted me, and which now I have lost, rather by misfortune, then malice; Do not deny it to this violent affection I bear you, your quiet, and my con∣tentment depend on your facility in receiving me at this present, for love having heertofore tied us together with such fast bonds, I cannot see how ever we should live contentedly in this separation. That is it, said the Shepherdesse, with a disdainfull countenance, which without doubt abuses you; for I am now more capable of hate, then ever I was of love, neither do you imagine, that my happinesse consists in your glory, or my pain in your misfortune; you are to me me so indifferent, that I will never have a share in any thing that may be fall you; your excuses therefore, and the im∣portunities wherewith you thus vex me, are altogether unprofitable: Leave me then to live with the liberty of my thoughts, and study some artifice with which you may appease Cloria, who hath no lesse cause to banish you her presence, and not to love you, then my self. With that she was go∣ing away, when as Peri, who was highly delighted with her discourse, and as much desired to know the occasion of it: Fair Shepherdesse, said he, I know not what fault this young man hath committed, but I finde his pe∣nance very sharp, and your heart a little to blame, for we do alwayes me∣rit pardon, when we confesse our errour, and protest never to offend again. If you have heertofore loved him, you would doubtlesse have loved him still, had not some crime of his rendered him unworthy of your affection; his repentance doth blot out his offence, wherefore you ought to love him as much now, as heertofore you have done, nor think more of his fault, since his sorrow for it hath cancelled it. I should willingly, answered she, allow of your reasons, if I were lesse sensible of the grief I am in, for ha∣ving been so fouly deceived, or could build any assurance on the oaths of men: but can it be likely I should ever put any trust in the oaths of a Shep∣herd, whose humour I too well know to be so inconstant and full of levity; these tears, which you see in his eyes, are onely to reduce me once more into the captivity wherein his love hath for three yeers detained me; and his sighs, serve but for charms, to keep my reason from discerning the mis∣chief which he would bring upon me; I must not therefore regard them, but having paid for my learning, take my self out a good lesson from his fault, and my misfortune, to injoy the happinesse of my liberty. It may be you will not approve  discourse, and will say that my humour is too
valiant; but I will let you see, that I have all the reason in the world to han∣dle him in this sort, and firmly to resolve, either never to love again, or to live no more for the world, since there is no security to be found in it, so your occasions will give you leisure to hear me, and that you disdain not a poor cottage for your lodging this night. Your request is so fair, answered Esquilan, that we are bound to accept of your currsie, wherefore we will wait on you, with a longing desire to hear the relation of your adventure. Taking then a path on the right hand, and guided by the Shepherd, who, out of civility, had given over his sighing and lamentions, they came to a little village, where they were better entertained by Oriste, then they could have hoped for from one of that quality: Their suppr ended, she caused caused them to sit down under certain trees, where when her self and Filis∣mnd had also taken their places, she thus began: Do not wonder▪ Knights, to hear me say, that I am nobly descended, because you see me not in a ha∣bit sutable to that condition; Love and Fortune do often work greater mi∣racles then this; I came into the world, with so malignant an aspect of the stars, that I cannot with reason say, that ever I enjoyed any contentment long: My parents losing themselves in that common blindnesse of the world, which thinks wealth to be the soveraign good, made me be called a wife, at the time, when onely the title of a childe was fit for me; and at se∣ven yeers of age married me to a man, whose kindnesse, in that tender age, was very unpleasing unto me; but much more when I arrived at yeers of discretion, and was able to discern the defects which were in him: Com∣plaining then, not to those, upon whom my will should in right have de∣pended, (for hardly should I by my prayers and tears have drawn them to break that which they had once done) but to them that had the power of justice in their hands; and demonstrating unto them, that it was but reason to suffer me to enjoy the rights which heaven bestows on all men that are born into the world, I got them, after much debting, and with many dif∣ficulties, to dissolve this marriage, and gave me power to chuse a husband to my own liking, wherein truly I chanced very happily, by the possession of a Gentleman, as good and accomplished a Cavalier as the earth this day bears: But the Fates envying the felicities which I then began to taste, too suddenly ravished him from me, and gave me cause to die with him if so I might have done without displeasing the Gods, who will with absolute power dispose of our dayes, not permitting us to shorten them, no more then we are able to prolong them. My tears, and the continuance of my mourning, sufficiently demonstrated my sorrow, but my undestanding, and time, the common Physician of our sorrows, having somewhat eased my grief, I confidered that it was but weaknesse of spirit so to lose my self in the anguish of my minde; and finding some ease in my ptience, resolved to afflict my self no more so excessively; I lived then with lesse disquiet then before: But alas! This happinesse was not of long continuance: The proud tyrant of our souls, Love, would once more triumph over me by the means of this Cavalier, whom you see heer, in this simple habit of a Shep∣herd, which within these few dayes he hath assumed, though with a pur∣pose far different from mine: for I wear it to exempt my self from the cres of the world, and to seek for pleasures in these woods; and he with∣out doubt to make me beleeve that he loved me in this change of condition, as that of his affection made me hold him inconstant and perfidious; He
was worthy of my love, I do confesse, for his fault shall not keep me from giving him his deserved commendations; but his light and sickle humour hath made him incapable of so good a fortune. He saw me, and finding (as he pretended) charms in my eyes, came to present his service to me with so good a grace, that from that time forth it was impossible for me to ap∣prove of the resolution I had taken, never to love again, for fear of being once more in the danger of the misfortune, which had made me complain so long; howbeit, good manners obliging me, not to accept him at the first tender of himself, nor my affection permitting me to reject him with too much rigour, I made him an ordinary answer, which yet might let him perceive that I had no inclination to neglect his good will: To what end should I spin out my discourse, with delivering the particulars of the be∣ginning of our passions? Our love did so increase, that every body held our marriage for concluded, and that it would be consummated as soon as the yeer was expired, which the modesty of the world allows to the mourning for the dead, and indeed I had resolved upon it, s I told you but now, had not his inconstancie put him by that fortune: The faithlesse man, seeing among the Ladies, which my quality had made my friends, and that often bestowed visits upon me, a maid called Cloria, beautifull in∣deed, and of parts to make the most insensible feel the power of love, could not refuse to yeeld her that, which she was able to command from all those that looked on her; and did in such sort become her slve, as he scarce re∣membered that ever he had sighed for me: If he came into my company, it was with a ceremonious respectivenesse; now he no longer besought me to quench that fire which I had indled in his soul, his lips where unto he was wont to rivet me, did no more meet with mine; our looks no more in∣countered together, I was no more acquainted with his minde, though I did clearly let him see what was in my heart: In brief, his discourses, being of a strain clean diffrent from what they had been before, made me suspect▪ not any ill in him, (for I was too full of love to think him a villain) but that some mishp had caused this change. What il you Filismond, said I to him, and why do you appear so cold? Hath any man told you tales to the prejudice of the good opinion which you had of me? Or do you not think me as beautifull, as for these three moneths past you have done? If it be repentance that you have loved me, which doth trouble you, and that you hold me unworthy of your affction, you are yet in your own power to make a fair retreat, for I will never force your humour, but rather do my best for your content, nor will I be displeased with the liberty you shall take to ingage you other where, so as the cause thereof may excuse this mu∣tability in you: Now if you have heard any mis-report in me, give me leave to clear your minde of any doubts may be in it; and I make no que∣stion, but you shall finde me without aint, or shame, for any fault I have committed. I should wrong my judgement, as well as all theirs that know you, answored he, if I should think you other then discreet; that is not the cause, Orstea, of this change in me, no more then my being sorry for that I have loved you; for you deserve to be served by a more accomplished and eminent man then my self; but I must accuse mine own weaknesse, and by confessing my fault, lbour to obtain your parcton. I love, but alas! it is not you: , possees me with an absolute power, and that Deity, which disposeth of our affections, is not pleased that I shall have any con∣tent
in this world, but in enjoying her: Iudge, I beseech you, what my misfortune is, that cannot move, but by the impulsion of another, and that am constrained to crave favours of Cloria by your mediation: Verily, I blush for shame, and know well that it were better for me to seek them in your imbraces; but I have not power to dispose of my self, and can think of nothing, more conducing to my happinesse, then your assistance, which you promise me: But alas! I fear you are not so minded. My promises are in∣violable, answered I, without any shew of discontent for his bsnsse, and it may be, Filismond, Cloria will love you sooner at my intreaty, then for your services; wherefore, I will go presently to her, to begin the making good of my word: Ging out thn, exceeding full of grief, I went to Cloria, unto whom I discovered the desires of my waverer, praying her to have respect to his mei, and to the advantage that his affection might bring her. This discourse of mine, semed a fiction to her at first, for she was not ignorant with what passion Filismond had wooed me; but seeing that I spake seriously, and withall found some other pretences for cause of our se∣paration; she answered me, that time and my advice should resolve her of this businesse, and that in the mean while she would entertain Filismond at my request. This good news I delivered to my Turn-coat, and though displeasd with the office, the next moning carried him to his new Mist is; to whom, and in my presence, he made the same protestation of love, that at other times I had received of him. O ye Gods! said I, when I heard him, What traitours are men, and what fools are we to give any credit to their promises? Hark if these be not the very same speeches that Filismond hath used a thousand times to me, all which the wind hath blown away, as without doubt another puffe will do these; he swears only that he may be perjured, whereof I am to make my benefit, grow wise with my losse, ne∣ver trust any but my self, and draw my fuure content out of the knowledge of Filismonds treacherie. Entertaining my self in this fashion, whilst these lovers were laying the first foundations of their affctions; the day insensi∣bly slipt away, and night comming on, made me return home in a strange distmper; for, not to dissemble, all my resolutions could not keep me from wishing, that these new fansies had never come into Filismonds Head; but be∣ing, as then fuller of despght then love, I determined to live no more in the wrld, since the lives of those of quality were subject to so many muta∣tions, and from hence orth onely to frequent the woods, where people live without ambition. This designe contenting me best, I took a good summe of money, and with a wench in my company, who was content to run my fortune, I came and bought a cottage in this Hamlet; taking care for nothing but to feed my sheep, and by that imployment divert my self from more troublesome thoughts. Living thus quietly, and pleased with mine own profession, I was at good ease, till within these fowr dayes, that Cloria ha∣ving given Filismond some occasion of distate, he came to crosse my con∣tent with his continuali importunities; thinking that I will change my minde, and consent as easily to his return, as I did to his departure: But he is deceived, the resenting of my wrong will not let me endure his sight, and his levity forbids me ever to accept of him again. You now know, Gen∣tlemen, the cause of his complaint, and my displeasure, which I think to be just; and that also you will not condemn, when you remember, that nature and reason both forbid us ever to impose any trust in those which have
once betrayed us. I excuse not my fault, answered Filismond, when he saw that she had done speaking, and will with you avow, that I do not deserve the grace that I crave. But, Orisea, I must say, that it is yet due to my repentance, that so you may avoid the name of being cruell: and for that consideration, I will never cease following you, and perpetually powring out my teares before you, in hope that they may one day mollifie your heart. And if I cannot ob∣tain that blisse, I will gladly end my dayes in the acknowledgement of my er∣rour, and in my desire to do you service. Time, said Oristea, may do that mi∣racle; but now, because it is the hour of rest, you shall retire your selfe with these Knights; who, if you please, may lodge in your cottage. With that, ma∣king a courtsie to the Princes, that were exceedingly delighted with her dis∣course, she left them to go with Filismond, who carried them home, where they lay that night, and the next morning very early getting to horse, procee∣ded on their voyage, which they finished without any news of Don Rogel, to the exceeding griefe of Florisel, for that it hapned in a time wherein Greece had such need of his presence. CHAP. XXIX. The Pagans arrivall at Constantinople, with a cruell fight upon their landing. THE return of these Princes having brought a generall dis∣content to the whole Court, and in particular to Don Florisel, who judged the Empire of Greece to be in bad case, not being supported with those invincible courages which had rendered it every where redoubtable: but having fortitude enough to endure the wost of fortune, he well resolved not to murmure against God, and to receive his chastisements as an assured signe of his fa∣vour; which was very mch confirmed by the arrivall of the forces of great Britain and Rome. The last commanded by Sclarimond, sonne to Florenio, and the other by Garmnt, Ladazan, of Numidia, Don Sinald, and Gciladr. This succour of twenty five thousand horse, and ten thousand foot, did some∣what encourage those, which were before in feare of the multitude of the ene∣mies, and much cheered the Greek Princes. But their contentment, was com∣pleat, when the next day word was brought them, that the two Empresses of Perfia, and of the Parthians, were in the Port, with thirty thousand horse, and Fifteen thousand foot. Vpon this advertisement, Florisel, Spheramond, and all the young Princes, quickly madethem ready, and presently went down to the shore, where no sort of kindest entertainment, or embraces were preter∣mitted; Spheramond seemed as if he had been fastened to the lips of his beau∣tifull wife: But when he saw Rzal of Greece, his sonne, who with Ro∣zanel d' Astre presented themselves to do their duty to him, he ran to embrace them with a world of joy to behold them so lovely and well made. Florisel on the other side▪ no lesse kindly entertained the Empresse Persea, wondring at the goodly disposition of Persides and Floridan her sonnes, whom she had brought with her. But when he saw that she looked round about, as if she de∣manded
why her husband was not in the company, he told her, that he was a few dayes since gone abroad into the countrey, with purpose not to make a∣ny long stay. In the mean time Don Lucendus entertained the fair Infanta Ro∣zaliana: briefly, there was nothing but complements, and still were some armes stretched out to reiterate their embraces. Those caresses being over, Spheramond led the Empresse Persea, Florisel and Silvan, the fair Ricarda; and Lucendus and Dorigel, the Infanta Rozaliana, the young Knights tooke the charge of their women, and Rozalmond with the three young Princes his companions, putting themselves in the head of the troop, marched with an admirable grace, and were the first that came into the Palace, where the ca∣resses were by those Queenes renewed, with so many expressions of love, that not to be tedious, I will passe them over in silence. In the mean time Flo∣rizel, to whose care all the affairs were left, made these aids be landed, which he joyned to those of great Britain and Rome. And having given order for the making of strange trenches to lodge them in, he returned to the Citie, to continue the pleasures which the comming of so brave a company had begun. But that lasted not long: for the next morning they saw the sea covered with ships, and the Princes were forced to arme, and suddenly to marshall their Souldiers upon the shore, to impeach the landing of the Pagans. The Empe∣rour Spheramond put himselfe first of all in the head of five and twenty thou∣sand horse, accompanied with the valiant Dorigel, the Duke of Laiazza, Que∣dragant of Sansueque, and the brave Florestan of Sardinia. The brave Ala∣straxerea had the second place assisted by Silvan, the faire Savagesse his wise, Florian with his brother Tristor, and Dardanio King of Rhodes. The third Squadron consisting onely of twenty thousand horse, was led by Lucendus, Prince of France, accompanied by the gallant Esquilan of Poland, Perion of Turkie, Florizart of Taproban, Agrian, Abies of Ireland, and Frizel of Ar∣cadia. And the last troop of the same number, by the valorous Florizel of Niquea, who was followed by the two Cenophales, Armond of Bohemia, Alteria, Malford, Leonida, and Ladazan of Numidia. The Infantery, which were onely five and twenty thousand men, remained in guard of the towne and camp, under the charge of Garmant, Sinaldo and Gucilador. The shore thus covered with these Troops in good order, it was presently discovered by the Pagans, who came on with swelling sails; whereupon Fulgoran and Prigmaleon (who were joyned five dayes before) gave order to their Fleet to make ready for fight. Arriving then with incredible fury, in an instant was heard a confusion of voyces, mingled with a dreadfull noyse of trumpers and drums; and the aire was presently darkned with millions of arrows. The Pagans proud of their multitude, and thrusting on with courage, under the favour of their Archers, threw out bridges and ladders to get to the strand. But the Christian Princes, and those brave Knights, received them upon their lances, made them tumble into the sea as fast as they left their ships; and not fearing their Archers, who but very seldome pierced their Arms, put them∣selves into the water, the better to make use of the swords. The fight then be∣gun to be very cruell: for the Giants and the Kings in a rage to see the water died red with the bloud of their men, leaped all at once on land, in spight of all their enemies resistance, and with them above fourty or fifty thousand men. Then was the encounter very bloudy: for as many Pagans as the swords of our Christian Princes did light upon, found their graves in the sands; and the catholiques had not a much better bargain under the scymiters of the Giants,
whereof two were at this first meeting slain; and with them the Kings of Zambar, Carthage, and Nabagaz. Prigleon and Fulgor, who desi∣red to signalize their valour at their enemies cost, cut in pieces all that they met with; and followed by a multitude of people which were gotten to land, they had fallen upon Alastraxerea's Squadron, if Spheramond had not arre∣sted the fury of Prigleon, and Silvan that of the King of Canabea. These four Knights being thus incountred, began a most furious combat; during the which, Alastraxerea, the fair Savagesse, Florian, Dorigel, Quedragant, Altaria and Dardanio, were on the one side gotten together, to take the Giants in hand, while their Knights made a strange massacre of the Pagans; and on the other side Florizel, Lucendus, Esquilan, Florestan, Florizart, Leonidas, Melfort, Sclarimond, and some o the most remarkable in the Army, rendred them∣selves dreadfull even to those proud Knights, who thought that all the men in the world assembled together, were not able to resist their forces: so that no∣thing was seen but dead bodies and horses on the ground. The fight having thus continued above two hours with horrible slaughter, Florisel perceiving a battallion of three or fourscore thousand horse, which had landed below the place where they fought, ready to charge him, caused presently a retreat to be sounded, being unwilling to engage himselfe amongst such a multitude of ene∣mies. And falling into the rear of his Army, with all those brave Knights, he bare off the fury of the Giants and the Kings, who not enduring the losse they had suffered, charged themselves like desperate men; but seeing twenty thousand foot advance, which Don Siald and Garmant had drawn out to fa∣vour the retreat of the Christian Princes, they made a stand, and rallying themselves together, went in good order to plant their Army before the towne. Florizel having put the greatest part of his men into the fortifications which he had caused to be made, and the rest into the town, desired to know what this battell had cost him; and by the report of the Captains, he found, that seven thousand Christian were dead on the place; but he was advertised by the spies which he had in the nemies camp, that the Pagans had lost two and twenty thousand men, fifteen Giants, and thirteen Kings; at which they were so enraged, that if it had not been so neer night, they would not have tar∣ried till the next day for giving the assault to the town; yet necessity enforcing it, they were glad to set a good face on the matter, for fear of disanimating their Souldiers, promising themselves to do wonders upon the first occasion, since their Army was now out of feate of the sea, and that they might fight at large upon firme ground. But they were beguiled in their hopes: for the Greeke Princes, who well knew how to follow their fortune, and to vanquish as well by industry as courage, gave them a new occasion of despight, as I will pre∣sently deliver.
CHAP. XXXI. The wonderfull deeds of Armes that were done both in a sally, and in the assault given to Constantinople, with the great losse that the Pa∣gans suffered by an Army newly arrived in favour of the Christians. THis mighty Fleet of enemies having landed, as hath been told you, passed the night without any rest, being im∣ployed in setting up of tents, and making retrench∣ments for their security: so that about the break of day the fortifications being finished, the Souldiers ti∣red with the sea, as well as with their precedent labour; and besides, pressed with an extream desire of sleep, laid themselves downe to take a little rest; but they were quickly rowsed: for the Princes of Greece being infatigable, and ever casting for the victory, and how to weaken their enemies, having withdrawn to the town for to cheer up those timerous Princesses, after they had supped, went to counsell; where the couragious Florisel remonstrating in few words, what benefit would result from a surprisall of drowsie enemies, determined to get to horse before Sun rising, and meaning to play his game with as much losse and hazard of the enemy as he could, he gave order that Spheramond should ally forth at the east port, with ten thousand choyce horse, the two Cenophales, the brave Esquilan of Poland, Perion of Turkie, Florian and Tri∣stor of Sopradisa; that the Prince Lucendus, with the like number, should fall out of the south port, followed by Silvan, the fair Savagesse, Quedragant, Florestan, Agrian, Alteria and Dardani: and that at the same time he would be in the fild with twelve thousand horse, in the head of which should be the valiant Dorigel, Florizart, Frizel Abies, Melfort, Armond, and Leo∣nidas; appointing the Queen Alastraxerea to be ready with two thou∣sand horse to favour his retreat; as also Parmenian of Cyprus with the like num∣ber to support Spheramond; and Ladazan of Numidia to do as much for the Prince of France, if the enemies approched to the walls. Things being in this sort disposed, and direction given to such as were to be of the party, every one withdrew till the houre appointed, when as they sallied out with a designe to make a strange havock among the Pagans. The first that began to stirre was the invincible Emperour of the Parthians, who findng the enemy sleeping, and almost disarmed, did such execution on them, as the fild was all strewed over with dead bodies. Prigmaleon & Fulgoran who were asleep in their arms, but a great way asunder, hearing this fearfull alarm, presently took each of them ten thousand horse, which they held ready about them for all occasions, and joyning together, went to oppose the violence of these indomptable Greekes, who bare all down before them, when as a fresh noyse on the south side, made them make a stand, as uncertain which way to bend themselves; but being met just at that instant, Prigmaleon with fifteen Giants, and twelve Kings, who had put themselves into his troop, whilst the others took care of drawing the rest of the forces to Arms, turned to that side where Spheramond
acted wonders, desiring Fulgoran to encounter the enemy which gave in up∣on the south quarter: matching then with incredible fury, they began a most cruell bickering: for the Greekes imitating their Princes, who never let their swords fall without the death of some one, followed their businesse so close, that the Pagans wanting courage to defend themselves, were already wavering and ready to quit their ground, had not 20000 horse come in presently to their second. But that also served them to little purpose: for Florisel of Ni∣quea being at that instant likewise fallen upon their quarters, caused such a confusion, as no  knew which way to turn himselfe; howbeit, Fulgoran no way losing his judgement, left the great King of Mauritania in his stead, to make head to the brave Prince of France, who still got ground upon his ene∣mies, and taking with him two dreadfull Giants, with fifteen thousand horse, went to charge the Squadron which Florisel led, had not that great Captain, more carefull of the preservation of his men, then of satisfying his own passi∣on, wisely retreated, after he had bothed the earth with the bloud of his ene∣mies. The gallant Pagan vexed to death with the sight of such a massacre a∣mong his men, could not bridle his rage, but without observing how the Christians retired in a safe orderly manner, gave in upon them with the Gi∣ants, hoping to break them, and to enter the town pell ell with them: But Alastraxerea with her two thousand horse comming in at the same time, char∣ged him in flank whilst Florisel making his men turn head, stood his shocke with unspeakable valour, and not onely rendred his designe effectlesse, but al∣so forced him to quit the place with extream losse. In the mean time Sphera∣mond was but in an ill taking: for intending to retire to save his men from the terrible blows of Prigle and his Giants, who found nothing able to resist them, was by the obstinate eagernesse of the enemy so engaged, that some mis∣fortune had befallen him, if the valiant Parmenian of Cyprus, and Don Si∣naldo, advancing with strange fury, had not valiantly freed him out of their hands. Lucendus also having bravely delivered himselfe from an incredible multitude that most violently charged him, the Citie ports were shut to the great contentment of the Princesses, who seeing all the principal knights safely come off, received them so lovingly, that the sweetnesse of their entertainment made all their labor seem almost nothing. The losse which the Christians had made, somwhat troubled them, when as they considered, that one Knight was of greater importance to them, then three to the enemy; but having learned that seventeen thousand Pagans, three Kings, and twelve Giants remained slain in the field, and that they wanted of their men but three thousand and seven hundred, they comforted themselves, hoping that God would not for∣sake them, since the question was as much for his glory as for the preservation of their estates. On the other side, the Pagans were mad with spight to see the adacity of the enemy, and their own losse; but yet having too much courage to be daunted therewith, they made shew of lesse griefe then inwardly they felt. But not intending to sit down without revenge, they assembled that day in counsell, and there resolved either to carry the town, or dye at the assault; whereupon secretly commanding all the Captains to be ready by breake of day, that so they might by a camssado pay the Christians in their owne com, they withdrew till two hours after midnight, when as they rose according to the order given, armd their Souldiers with the least noyse that might be, and divided their forces in this manner: Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, and the great Kings of Mauritania, made three battalions, each of an hundred thousand Souldiers,
twenty Giants, and fourteen Kings, to assail the town in three severall parts, and gave the Tamberlan of Moraria in charge to keep them of the Fort im∣ployed with thirty thousand foot, and fifteen thousand horse, thereby to impeach them from assisting those that were to defend the walls. Now they perswaded themselves that they should finde the Greeks asleep, but Florisel being advertised of their designe by the spis which he had in their camp, placed Alaslraxerea at the Conduct-gate with twenty thousand men, and part of the young Knights, charging them not to shew themselves till the ladders were set up, and laden with enemies; Spheramond at the Dra∣gon-gate, with the like number, and the same direction; and Lucendus at the East-port in the like sort provided; so commanding Silvan to take four thousand horse, for to round the tower, he went out of the City with Dori∣gel, Parmenian of Cyprus, Ladazan of Numidia, and the brave Esquilon of Poland, and finding twenty thousand horse, and twelve thousand foot in his fortifications, he presently put them in arms, to make use of them as time and occasion should require. The Pagans drawing toward the Town, and hearing no noise in it, thought the Christians had been sleeping, so that in a moment their ladders were reared, whereupon, the Giants first mounted, to encourage the soul∣diers to follow them: But straightway they saw the enemy shew himself, and with a tempest of stones, boiling oyl, sulphur and pitch, overthrew those which thought to lay hold of the parapet, so that the ditch began to be filled with dead men; then it was that the assault grew to be furious and cruell, for the Giants enraged to see their fellows repulsed and slain, not ca∣ring for their lives pressed forward, and divers times to the sword with the Christian Princes, who, under favour of the wall, discharged most horrible and mortall blows; especialy Spheramond, that never lighted on a Giant, with∣out depriving him of life. Neverthelesse, lacking room to lay about him, according to his minde, he took a new resolution, and leaving the charge of his quarter to Don Sinaldo, as also Lucendus that of his to Garmant, they both sallied forth with six thousand horse apiece, and gave upon the enemy with such fury, that finding them in disorder, the field was infinitely cove∣red with dead carcasses. Then was the valiant Prince of France seen breaking into that mighty battalion of the enemies, and charging them with such courage, as made his friends admire, and his enemies fear him: On the other side, the invincible Emperour of the Parthians seemed a thun∣derbolt of war, one while sending arms and heads to the ground, another while dividing a Giants body in two pieces. In brief, nothing was to be seen round about them, but dead bodies, nor any thing to be heard, but a confusion of voices, and the cryes of such as lay dying under the horses feet. The valourous Aethiopian, and the mighty King of Canabea, whom these two little squadrons attacqued, followed by the Kings and Giants that accompanied them, did wonders, piercing into the Christians squadrons with a great and terrible slaughter, and were very glad to see them abroad, in hope to beat them in, and enter the Town with them: But Florisel, that considered the consequence of this enterprise, caused eight thousand horse to slip along by the Town, without being per∣ceived by the Tamberlan of Moraria, put Esquilan in the head of the one moity, and sending him to second Spheramond, himself with the rest, charged the enemy, and assisted the Prince of France, who then was
fighting with Fulgoran, with as much courage as force and dexterity: these troops, having renewed the fight with much cruelty, and so continued it a pretty while, were about to make their retreat upon advertisement that a great piece of the wall was fallen down, and that there was great danger in it, by reason of the enemies obstinate pressing on there; when as on the sudden, a terrible noise and tumult was heard at the sea side, which put a fear into both sides; the Christians doubting that it was some new succour against them, and the Pagans mistrusted as much; but it was soon known what it was; for presently the Pagans army was seen to be in disorder, and a little while after, a Knight came up to the trenches, that certified Florisel of the arrivall of the brave Amanio d' Astre, of Ginoldan, the Kings of Dar∣dania and Comagena, the Kings Melinda, and Olidor his brother, with sixty thousand horse, and forty thousand foot, who knowing in what estate the fight stood, had landed with a determination to charge the enemy back. As I live, said Florisel, this is good news; Come, let us close up our enemies, and keep them from putting themselves in array. Saying so, he advanced with forty thousand horse, drawn out of the Towns and trea∣ches, and put himself into the field with a resolution to fight, but Prigma∣leon and Fulgoran, as discreet as valiant, perceiving the disorder their peo∣ple were in by reason of this new-come army, which made an incredible flaughter amongst them, kept their souldiers within their trenches, under the command of the King of Thenes, and of the Island of Till, and run∣ning where the Christian Princes were arrived, arrested their fury, draw∣ing the rest of their men within their works. Florisel, commending the discretion of Princes so young, went to receive his kinsmen with a world of contentment, and causing a quarter to be set out under the walls for their forces, carried the Kings to the City with him, where the entertainments were renewed at their meeting with those beautifull Princesses. That done, they fell to burying the dead, which on the Christian part, was found to be nine thousand three hundred Knights, and seven hundred foot; and on the enemies, twenty seven thousand souldiers, fourteen Giants, and five Kings, which so much the more vexed the Pagans, as our Princes had cause to re∣joice. Neverthelesse, concealing their thoughts, they shewed but little ressentment of it, divulging that they were glad of the comming of these troops, for that thereby the Grek Princes would be drawn to a set battell, whereunto before they had no reason to hearken.
CHAP. XXXII. The Pagans send to present the Christians with battell, which is accepted, and the successe of it. THE discontent of the Pagans not suffering them to be at quiet, the Princes assembled together after they had given order for the buriall of their dead; and trusting as much in the greatnesse of their spirits, as in the multitude of their people, sent an Herauld with a bloudy gantlet, to require assignation of a day for a generall battell, which these invincible Princes of Greece would not refuse them, because they would not leave any bad impression of their courages: Florisel of Niquea then having accepted it, and appointed next morning for the same, a truce in the mean time being agreed on, all men were commanded to prepare themselves for the fight, and the Ladies bestowed themselves in prayers unto God for his mercy and blessing to be powred down upon his peo∣ple. And now all men making ready, when as on the second day, they descried a Fleet at sea, sailing in good order, no man knowing in whose fa∣vour they were come, both the armies expecting them, equally affected with hope and fear; these forces landed, and marching in good order, sent to the Pagan Princes, to let them understand, that they were come to serve them against the common enemy of their Gods, under the command of the great Cariffe of Africa, the Kings of Tincifroc and Marocco, and the Princes of Gamall and Aridamia, as also their dear friends, the Giant Gran∣dimore, and the unknown Knight were with them; whereupon Fulgoran and Prigmaleon, with great joy, went presently to give them thanks for their assistance. If this supply, consisting of forty thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot, pleased the enemy, you may well beleeve it gave no content to our Princes; neverthelesse, being uncapable of fear, they resol∣ved to submit themselves under the hand of God, and not to murmure at his providence. Commanding then publike prayers to be made, and go∣ing to sit in Councell about the approaching battell, word was brought them that a mighty Fleet was descried at sea, comming thither with full sails. Their desire to know who they might be, breaking off their former designe, they presently repaired to the walls, where they had not long been before they discerned a world of colours, and flags, with white and red crosses, which made them quickly come down to go to the Port, but in the way thither, they met a Gentleman, who informed them, that in the first ships were the young Prince of France, Florisbel of the Star, second son to Prince Lucendus, and the Infanta Fortuna, and Lucibel of France, son to Fortanian, and the beautious Chireestoille, with five and twenty thousand choice Knights; That the second squadron came from Trebisond, with twlve thousand foot; The third from Hungary and Poland, with ten thousand horse, under the conduct of Gadard, and Filadart; The fourth from the fortunate Iland, with six thousand foot, commanded by the brave
Cilinda, who brought with her her little son Cilindor. The fifth from Cathay, with eight thousand horse, led by Orthea and her husband. The sixt from Almayne, with six thousand horse, under the charge of Alozian, eldest sonne of Don Argantes and the fair Scharimen. The seventh of twelve thousand Spanish horse whose Generall was Sestilian, sonne to Don Arlanges of Spain. And the last from Guindaya with seven thousand foot, commanded by the Duke of Affarte: these newes having given them far more content, then the arrivall of the enemies succour, had brought them sadnesse; the Princes went to the Port where these young Cavaliers and the Kings were entertai∣ned with a million of welcomes; and from thence conveyed to the Citie, to the infinite joy of the Ladies, who received them with a world of caresses. The welcomes once at an end, all these Christian Kings and Knights assem∣bled together to consult of these affairs; because the day of battell drew neer: but they all referring themselves to the prudence of Don Florizel, he ordered things in this manner: Their whole forces consisting of an hundred and three∣score thousand horse, and an hundred and sixteen thousand foot; having first drawn out sixteen thousand of the foot for the guard of the town, he divided into five battalions, each of them containing thirty thousand horse, and twen∣ty thousand foot; of which he committed the first to the Emperour Sphera∣mond, accompanied with the two Cenophales the King of Numidia his wife Cassinna, Olidor of Siranquea, Armond of Bohemia, and Florizart of Tapro∣bana. Don Lucendu had the second, with the brave Alastraxerea, Peri of Turkie, Florian and Tristor of Sopradisa, Quedragant and Leonida of Me∣sopotamia. Dorigl had the third, with his wife the faire Cilinda, Florestan of Sardinia, Agrian of Scotland, Alteria and Dardani. The fourth was led by the Kings of Hungary and Poland, accompanied with their sonnes Melfort and Esqui, Parnenian the Duke of Laiazza, and Abies of Ireland. The last he reserved for himselfe with the King of Cathay, and his wife, the Princes of Dardania and Comagena, and Frizel of Arcadia. Then ordering that Silvan and the fair Savagesse his wife, should command ten thousand horse upon the wings, to releeve such as they saw overpressed: he commanded every man to look well to his horse and arms, and to be in a readinesse by the break of the next day. In the mean time the Pagans were busied with the same care: for knowing of what importance this battell would be, they ende∣voured to fit themselves in every particular for it, and to omit nothing through negligence. Being then informed of the order that the Christians intended to hold, they thought it best to observe the same, and not to make any superfluous bodies; for they considered, that united forces were harder to be broken then when they were dispersed: so that finding their Army to be three hundred thousand horse, and an hundred and sixtie thousand foot: they made five Squadrons of it, each consisting of sixty thousand horse, and twenty five thousand foot. The first led by the great Cariffe of Africa, with whom were the Kings of Tingefort, of Morque, Calisan, Nzamo, Argosana, Meroūe, and of the Tragonites, as also twelve dreadfull Giants. The great King of Mauritania commanded the second, and with him the Kings of Zizima, Dragon, Cezi∣phala, Barnazar, Saphotir, of the Island of Till, Bazana, and twelve other Giants, no lesse huge and terrible then the former. The Tamberlan of Mo∣raria brought on the third, with the Kings of Libia, Bisaura, Argier, Numidia, Thunes, Mirain, and twelve Giants. Fulgoran and Prigmaleon led the
fourth and fifth, with the like number of Giants, Kings and Knights. The Kings of Budomel and Arcania had the guard of the camp, with thirty five thousand foot. All things thus setled on either part, they expected the day of battell; which being come, to the generall content of both the Armies, the Pagans began to draw into the field, not a little wondring to see their enemies there before them, who already had had their troops there embattaild with admirable judgement: The first that shewed himselfe of the Pagans party was the great Cariffe of Africa, who marching gloriously under a num∣ber of colours, wherein appeared two Lyons slain by one man, intimating his valour, that had made him twice to triumph over those beasts, caused a charge to be sounded as soon as he saw the Emperour Spheramond with a brave Ca∣vallerys set forth against him. The incounter of these two leaders was very gallant: for the African was brave & daring but having the prime Knight of the world in hand, was wounded in the shoulder, and ready to lose his saddle, had he not been sustained by one of his Giants that followed him; neverthe∣lesse his wound being such as would not permit him to keep the field, he was constrained to retire, leaving his men very ill handled at the first shock: for the Cenophales, the King Melinda, Cassiana, and Olidor, laid five of the Gi∣ants dead upon the earth, Armond of Bohemia, and Florizart, having been as fortunate against the Kings of Tincefort and Calisan, who were overthrown at the first incounter with a multitude of Pagans beside, who were not com∣parable to the Greekes that had been inured to the war so many years to∣gether, wherein their enemies had forced them to bear Arms. This fight grow∣ing furious on the one part by the terrible blowes of Spheramond, and the Princes that accompanied him, and on the other by those of the Giants their adversaries, there was nothing to be seen but karkasses strewed on the ground, and the cries of dying men filled the aire with groans & lamentations. Where∣soever the Princes went, death attended on their swords; and on the other side, the Giants made such a massacre, that it was hard to passe over the heaps of slin men. But the numbers of the enemie giving way to the valour of our Princes, they were already wavering, and ready to turn their backes, had not Prigmaleon caused the second battalion to advance, commanded by the great King of Mauritania: to encounter whom the excellent Prince of France drew forward his; and with that greatnesse of courage wherewith his youn∣ger years was endued, at the very first course he ran his lance clean thorow his enemies body, depriving this second Squadron both of an head and hope; yet being maintained by so many Kings and Giants, the battell began to be very bloudy: the valiant Alastraxerea, Ginoldan, Perion, Florian, Tristor and Quedragant, laid about them so terribly, that for all their multitude of Kings, and the bravery of their Giants, of whom five were at this second charge kil∣led in the place, the Pagans were about to retire with shame, had not the Tamberlan of Moraria presently set forth with incredible fury. To oppose whom Dorigel of the fortunate Island came on, with a confident hope of vi∣ctory, since his friends had begun so luckily: for this King resolving not to degenerate from the valour of the excellent emperour of Persia his brother, performed such wonders as he was much redoubted by his enemies; who, not∣withstanding their losse, so disputed the victory, as no man knew to which side it would incline, when as the brave King of Lidia followed by his wife, the faire Savagesse, and his six thousand horse, gave in upon them with such violence, as having disordered this third Squadron with an unspeakeable
slaughter, both that and the two former had all passed by the edge of the sword, if the invincible King of Canabea had not come into play, with so much valour, and acting such marvellous deeds, as notwithstanding all the resistance the King of Hungary and Poland could make, who advanced at the very same time, he maintained the battell in an equall balance: his presence cleared the ranks, and the souldiers shunned his sword, as they would have done a thunderbolt from heaven; close by him marched Flo∣rimond, Grandimore, and the brave unknown Knight, making such a ha∣vock, as was most lamentable to behold. Then were above twenty thou∣sand Knights seen lie dead on the ground, and such was the confusion in every part, as it cannot be exprest. The valiant Esquilan of Poland did miracles, and not parting from his father, who gave strange proof of his courage, ran to oppose the Giants that ruined all before them, but the va∣lour of the Prince of Canabea, and of the Giants that accompanied him, held the battell longer in suspence then could have been hoped for from the weaknesse of the former troops; howbeit, in the end he was constrai∣ned to give way to force, by the comming in of Silvan, who that cay ren∣dered good proof of a wonderous vertue: and carrying ruine along with him whithersoever he went, he made the victory incline to the Christians, when as the mighty Emperour of Aethiopia entered the field, and like a torrent rushing on our troops, quickly changed the face of all things; but he was soon incountered by Florisel of Niquea, with his last battalia: These two Princes, as valiant as possibly might be, encountering in the midst of their course, bare one another to the earth; but fearing to be troden under the horses feet, they instantly got up again; the fall of these two great cap∣tains, having drawn all the bravest Knights of their squadrons to that place, there began a most dangerous fight; for the Kings of Cathay, Dardania, and Comgena, laboured all they could to remount Florisel, but they were so pressed by the Giants, and the Pagan Kings, who were very excellent warriors, that their valour little availed them: For having thrown them∣selves into the midst of so many enemies, they were unhorsed as well as Florisel, and constrained to defend themselves on foot with him a long time; howbeit, tired at length with the killing of men round about them, whose bodies served them for a rampire, they expected nothing but a glo∣rious death to crown their future renown; when as the valiant Silvan, con∣ducted by the Queen Orothea, (who could not get her souldiers, that stood in fear of the Giants, to follow her) came in with such fury, to see Florisel in that danger, as at the first blow he laid a Giants head at his feet, redou∣bling another terrible one on Prigmaleons helmet, he made him see the stars at midday. Perion, Orothea, and the fair Savagesse, acting things no lesse wonderfull, this squadron was presently seen in disorder, and the Princes remounted upon good horses, revenging the trouble they had been put to with their enemies lives. Whilst the victory hung in this incertainty, the Emperour Spheramond, Lucendus, Dorigell, Ginoldan, Amanio d'Astre, and the brave Alastraxerea, made such a slaughter, having killed the greatest part of the Giants, that infallibly the Christians had gotten the day, if ad∣vertisement had not been brought to both the Armies, that the sea was co∣vered with ships, and the shore with men; who embattelling themselves, declared, that they ment to have a share in the businesse: This news cau∣sed either side to give over, and draw to their colours; the Pagans retired
to their trenches, and the Christian Princes toward the town, just at that time when as they saw these troops composed of about sixty thousand horse, move to charge them in the flank, whereby it appeared that their comming was against the Christians, to the great rejocing of the enemy; whereupon, Fulgoran and Prigmalen advanced towards them, and under∣standing that it was the Emperour of Melly, accompanied with fifteen Kings, they gave him the kindest welcome in the world, offered him the absolute command of all their forces, and related unto him the successe of the late battell, which had been very bloudy; for the number of the slain being taken, it was found that they had lost an hundred and forty thousand horse, thirty seven thousand foot, seven and twenty Giants, and fourteen Kings: The Christians having got off for seventy two thousand horse, and two and twenty thousand of their infantery. CHAP. XXXIII. During a truce agreed upon between the two Armies, the Emperour of Melly sends to demand a combat of five to five, which is ac∣cepted, and the issue of it. THE grief of our Christian Princes was no lesse, for pay∣ing so dear for the victory, then it was for the arrivall of such a multitude of new enemies: But having placed all their hope on God, who never leaves the afflicted in their miseries, so as their patience redered them worthy of his aid, they busied themselves more, with refreshing their surviving souldiers, then in mourning for those which were dead; for doubting a second assault from these troops, that yet had not fought, they sought to encourage their men by the care they took of their health, and by that means prevent the inconveniences which might arise by their negligence: On the other side, the Pagans were not very well pleased, for knowing full well that the end of the battell would have been unfortunate unto them, in regard of the losse they had made; notwithstanding, the great advantage which they had in the beginning, they gnawed their fingers for very spight, and if their wounds had not kept them in their beds, they would questionlesse either have renewed the assault, or presented a new battell the next morning: But being able to do no more then they could, they resol∣ved to expect time, and in the mean space give their hurt men leisure to be cured; for which purpose, sending to the Christian Princes, they obtai∣ned a truce for fifteen dayes. But the Emperour of Melly, as able, and va∣liant, as any of the Pagans, and that could not endure to continue idle so long, desired Fulgoran, and Prigmaleon, whom the Army acknowledged for their Generall, that they would permit him, during the truce, to fight a particular combat of five on his fide, against as many of the Greek Princes, of whom there ran such a glorious fame. Your determinations depend on∣ly upon your selves, answered Prigmaleon, and therefore you may (mighty Prince) dispose of this affair as you shall think good; Fulgoran and my self
would willingly have waited upon you in it, if our wounds would have suffered us; howbeit, if you please to tarry but eight dayes, we will double the number, and adde some conditions to our combat which may be for the benefit of either Army. There were no reason, replied he, that a Ge∣nerall should tie himself to the passions of a private man, you shall have time enough for that, and this first combat will be no impediment to a se∣cond, wherefore since you do not disapprove of it, I will go and waken the Princes our enemies a little; whereupon, calling for paper, he wrote this cartell to them, and sent it the same day. The Emperour of Melly to the Princes of Greece. The honour of the world, and the glory of our Altars, obliging me from losing of time, makes me desire to see you in the field with the ordinary arms of a Cava∣lier; but without comprising any thing in thi combat, which concerns your diffe∣rences with the mighty Princes of Aethiopia, and Canabea, I will be tomorrow un∣der your walls, accompanied with four Gentlemen, so as you will meet me there with the like number, and with the assurances usuall in such cases. This Ticket being delivered to Don Florisel, that kept his bed of two hurts he received, the young Knights, which desired nothing more, then to win honour and glory, pressed forward to be of the number of the com∣batants, perswading themselves that Florisel would not refuse this offer; but he, that by the relation of his spies, was assured, how the Emperour had the estimation of a very valiant Prince, and that his seconds were of the most redoubted Giants in the world, made some difficulty at first of ac∣cepting it; for he thought that this combat would be of great importance to the Pagans, if they went away with the honour of it; howbeit, withall considering, that to put it off with an excuse, would blemish the reputation which in so many occasions he had purchased; he promised the messenger, that he would give his Master all possible satisfaction, and that he would command the field to be chained in; and that for assurance, he could give him no greater assurance then his faith, and the continution of the truce. The messenger being thus dispatched, and highly pleased with this answer, and the brave gallant demeanour of the Princes, which he exceedingly commended to the Emperour, as most worthy of the fame that ran of them. Florisel desiring his friends not to be displeased if they were not comprised in the number, named for the first of the combatants, Silvan, with Amanio d' stre, Esquilan, Ginoldan, Perion: These five Princes, more pleased with this election, then the possession of a Kingdom, went present∣ly to view their arms, and preparing themselves like good Christians, they attended the next day with much impatience, which no sooner appeared to the infinite contentment of both parties; but the Emperour of Melly came into the field, in the midst of four dreadfull Giants, matching in so grave and majesticall a fashion, as his carriage did well denote his great∣nesse; and on the otherside, the Christian Princes so gallantly presented themselves, that every one took pleasure in beholding them: The Iudges, who were the valiant Alastraxerea, and the beautious Areura, Aunt to Fl∣goan, having divided the Sun between them, Silvan charged his lance a∣gainst the Emperour, and the rest in like sort doing the same, at the third
sound of the trumpets, they suriously set spurs to their horses, meeting in the midst of their course so bravely, that they were all overthrown to the earth, without any other hurt, then onely the astonishment of their falls, but they lay not long there, for getting up, with exream rage to be so disgraced  the of presence such great Princes, they began to charge one another, with such mighty blows, that all the shore resounded with the terrible nise thereof. The Princesses of Greece, who stood upon the walls to encourage the Christians, seeing the fury of the lances past, were not a little glad, for that the enemy had nothing to boast of in that encounter, and began to ob∣serve with what dexterity those brave Knigt, avoided the horrible blows of the Giants, who suffering themselves to be transported with choler, which moved but heavily by that time the combat had lasted an hour; when our Knights seemed to have drawn fresh forces out of their labour. Silvan, calling to minde that he was before the flower of all the Knights in the world, laid such furious blows on the great Emperour of Melly, and he again charged him with so much force and valour, as all men were amazed at the cruelty of their fight: On the other side, the vaiant Amanio d' Astre, Ginoldan, and their fellows, acted wonders against their adversaries: and now was their armour on both sides died red with their own bloud, when as the Gian Fulmander, with whom Perion fought, delivered so terrible a blow on his enemies shield, that being unable to resist the violence thereof, it was divided into two pieces, and the point of the sword falling on his helmet, laid him quite astonished in the dust; Silvan beholding that terri∣ble blow, discharged so sound a one on the Emprour of Melly, that with a great wound in the head he deprived him of sense, and suddenly running t Fulmander, who was driving at Ginoldan behinde, he struck him so cou∣ragiously on the arm, that both it and his sword flew together to the ground: In the mean time, Perion having leisure to rise, approached to his enemy, who was taking his scymiter in his left hand, and smote him with such violence, as he laid his head at his feet. This combat thus ended, he set himself to observe Ginoldan, Amanio d' Astre, and Esquilan, who fought wih admirable dexterity, and every minute drawing from the Giants bloud, and enfebling them, as he concluded their victory to be infallible: but he was wonderfully amazed at the fury of Silvan, and the Emperour of Melly, who not regarding their wounds, continued battering one another with unspeakable cruelty: The fight having lasted two howrs and more in this outragious manner, Silvan, that could not endure to have the victory disputed with him so long, took his sword in both his hands, and dischar∣ged it with such fury on his enemies helmet, as he laid him on the earth, where when he had him, he presently put the point of his sword to his throat, making him confesse that he was overcome: And just at the same time, Amanio, Ginoldan, and Esquilan, had their enemies heads in their hands; whereupon, the Christian Conquerers were conducted to the town, with a world of triumph, and the Emperour of Melly, with the bo∣dies of the four Giants, carried to his tent; to the extream discontent of the Pagans, who then vowed, either to die, or totally to ruine the Princes of Greece. Neverthelesse, within a little while a strange mutation of things happened, as I will presently tell you.
CHAP. XXXIV. The Fountain of Lovers comes to Constantinople, and what Knights be∣gan the triall of it. BOth the Armies taking breath, under the favour of the truce, and every one keeping within their tren∣ches, that they might not give any cause of jea∣lousie to their enemies, one morning two Lions were seen to passe thorow the Pagans Army, which drew a little edifice of marble; from the top whereof there fell a pure and cleare water into a Fountain, cut into five angles; two arches were at the ends of it, up∣on one of the which there hung a most excellent fair sword, and on the o∣ther one of the richest helmets that ever was seen; under them, two Knights appeared, of a warlike aspect, and in the midst was a corniche of indifferent greatnesse, where sat a Damsell that in her left hand held the rains, with which she governed the beasts; and in her right a little golden wand, wherewith sometimes she touched them to make them go. This object arrested the eyes of those forrain Kings with wonder, to behold so rare a thing, and gladly they would have seen the Lions take their way into their teeth, that they might have had the content to have considered it neerer: But seeing them go towards the City they forbare, and would not follow them: Some of the Greek Princes, being without the walls, to clear the ditches, and gave order for the repairing of the breaches which the enemy had made, presently conceived that it was some brave adventure: and there∣fore commanded the gates to be opened: which done, the Lions entered, and passing the streets with marvellous speed, they came into the court of the Palace, where they stood still. The noise that the people made having caused the Princes, and the most part of those great Laies, to look out of the windows, they saw the Damsell, of whom we spake before, descend from her seat, and go straight to Florisel, unto whom, with such reverence as belonged to his greatnesse, she said: Excellent Prince, may it please you, not to be offended at my repair hither without your leave; for being conducted by the power of certain Magicians, I can neither dispose of my desires, nor of the course these Lions take, onely they have set me heer to tell such as will attempt this adventure, wherein the labour lies that they must undergo, to gain both the satisfaction, which they desire, and the re∣ward proposed to them that shall have the fortune to end it: You shall finde heer strange secrets, the chiefest whereof shall not be revealed, till the fairest light in the world comes to discover the excellencie of the trea∣sure which is hidden in this Coffer: The second is in this inchanted Foun∣tain, wherein is represented unto you, not onely your thoughts, but also those of the Lady whom you best Love. The honour is to vanquish these two Knights, whom you see under the arches, and the reward of the Con∣querours, that sword, and the inchanted helmet, which you see there a∣bove, the Fountain remaining free to all men that have a minde to see it: It
rests now, brave Prince, that you let me know, whether it be your pleasure to give way to the trill of it, for if you shall not like so to do, I shall presently return to my seat and be gone; whereas otherwise we cannot stir from hence, so long as there is any Knight worthy to draw his sword against mine. I would to God, answered Florisel, that the end of this adventure depended onely on my word; for then, sweet heart, I would soon ease you of the pains you take in travelling over so many strange Countreys, and would give this company the content of never doubting hereafter of their actions, by the view of this admirable Fountain; but since so great a happinesse cannot be at∣tained without danger, I am willing my Knights shall hazzard their lives, for the glory of this adventure, neither will I my self be exempted, if some of these young Princes have not the fortune to conclude it. Herewith, every one got him to his arms, whilst Florisel, and those, who were by age conjoyned to more reservednesse, bestowed themselves in viewing this little edifice neerer at hand. The impatience of these young Lords being alike, they returned al∣most at one time; but Florisel, foreseeing the confusion which might arise out of their generous emulation, ordered, that Triston, and Florian, should be the first in the triall; they then advanced, and having touched the two Knights, who sat as if they had been sleeping under the arches, gave them lei∣sure to rise and come out; which they presently did in so brave a manner, as made all the Greek Princes wonder at them; who observing in how grace∣full a fashion they began their fight, commended them for the ablest Knights that ever they had seen: The two brothers performed their parts very gal∣lantly, and nothing amazed at the valour of their adversaries, continued their combat with an extream desire of victory; but having to do with so strong a party, they were both at one instant overthrown to the ground quite deprived of sense, so as they were fain to be carried away to their chambers. Their misfortune not affrighting such as were to succeed them, Florizart & Darda∣nio stept forward, and began a brave fight, giving those, which were able to judge, occasion to render them in the number of good Knights; but having maintained it almost an hour, they were overthrown as the two brothers had been. And after them, Armond, and Frizel of Arcadia; Abies and Leonid; Florestan and Quedragant; Agrian and Melfort, to the great discontent of the King of Hungary his father, who desiring to revenge his disgrace, advan∣ced with Perion of Turkie, and charged the two Knights so stoutly, that their combat lasted above an hour; yet in the end they were laid along, with ex∣tream grie of minde, for that they had by their own defeat augmented the glo∣ry of the inchanted Knights. Filadard of Poland, who with his son Esqui∣lan, was in readinesse, took the next turn, and began as brave a fight as might be seen; their blows were more weighty then those of the Knights that were vanquished before, and if their adversaries shewed an admirable dexterity, they appeared no lesse able and active, laying on so lustily both with edge and point, and maintaining the combat in such a fashion, as the spectatours were all of opinion they would have a share in the triumph; but two hours being thus spent, the inchanted Knights were seen to redouble their blows, with such violence, as within a while the Polonians were sent to the earth as well as the rest; to the great wonder of Florisel, who held Esquilan for one of the best Knights in the world; and because night was hard at hand, he put off all further triall till the next morning. Now whilst things thus past in the City, Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were mightily troubled; for having heard talk of
this adventure, he exceedingly desired to have the honour of it, beleeving it was due to them, if valour might have any share in it: But how to carry the businesse they knew not, for on the one side, they were unwilling to go into the City, lest thereby they should put themselves into their enemies hands; and contrarily, they were in doubt never to meet with the like opportunity a∣gain. It is, said Fulgoran to himself, a sure means for me to learn how I am descended, nor need I doubt of seeing in that water what I wish to know, since it presents both the face and the thoughts of the woman one is to have; and to feare that I should be known of the Princes of Greece, I have little reason, for they are so generous, that if fortune should denie me the victory, they would never retaine me a prisoner, since I was not made so fairely. I must then passe by all these poore considerations, and at any rate see what the fates promise me. I will change my arms and horse, and pretending that I come from farre, require the gates may be opened for me, onely for so long time as I may make triall of the valour of these inchanted Knights. Meeting then with Prigmaleon who was labouring of the same disease, he discovered his intenti∣on freely to him, and so well they agreed together that an howre before day they went out of their trenches, not acquainting any man with their purpose. Fulgoran in his blacke, which he had not put on since the warre began, and Prigmaleon in azure armes. Then taking a way some three leagues about, they came to the North gate, where all the Christian forces were intrenched, and sent to let the Greeke Princes know, that two stranger Knights having heard talke of the fountaine of Lovers, did entreat they might bee permitted to trie their fortune. Their desire, said Florizel, seems so just, that I cannot refuse them, were I sure they were our enemies: Let them enter then when they please. The Pagan Princes having received this answer, went on to the Palace Court, where seeing two Knights ready to begin the triall, they staid to behold the issue of it, and tying their horses to the railes they made them∣selves ready to second those Knights, that were going to fight, if they sped not well. And turning toward the fountain, they perceived the two inchanted Knights arm from underneath the arches, who began one of the most furious combats that ever had been seen; for they charged one another with such vio∣lence, as all the assistants were amazed at it, and extreamly wondered to see with what activity all four of them avoided their adversaries blows; the lon∣ger they sought the lustier, and more able they seemed to be, and all the Gre∣cian Princes said they had never seen a braver combat: having then continued in that sort, above two hours and a half, the two assailants resolving either to conquer, or die, took their swords in both their hands; but their enemies no lesse enraged at the refistance they found in them, and transported with the same fury, delivered two such terrible blows on their heads, as they laid them on the pavement, to the extream grief of all the spectatours, that thought they were dead, especially the Kings of Lidia, and the Fortunate Island, who when their heads were disarmed, saw that they were their dear wives, the fair Savagesse, and the King of Nyeger his valiant sister; who desiring to be con∣cealed, had taken unknown rms, hoping to carry the honour of the businesse; yet was their sorrow somewhat mitigated, when they perceived them to breathe, and by and by heard them say, that they ailed nothing; but onely that their heads were somewhat dizze: howbeit, not satisfied therewith, they presently went to arm themselves, resolving to be revenged for their wives, or serve likewise for a triumph to the inchanted Knights; but Fulgoran and
Prigmaleon being in a readinesse, as I told you, straightway advanced, and saved them that labour, as you shall see in the next Chapter. CHAP. XXXV. The end of the adventure, and Fulgoran known. THE griefe, which was conceived for the misfortune of these two warlike Queenes, being as soone past, as their harme, the Kings and those beauteous Princes∣ses, returned to the windowes, being informed that the strange Knights advanced, against whom they presently saw the enchanted Knights come foorth, in the same gallant maner as before, and begin one of the terriblest combats that ever the world had beheld, being maintained with so much courage and judgement, as Florizel who had never seene a braver fight, went downe into the Court, that hee might better observe all that past. Their blows were delivered with a wonderfull force, and joining grace and skill to their strength, they ad the eyes of all the beholders fastned unto them. Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, who saw them∣selves before the Princes of Greece, so glorious for an infinity of brave deeds, which they had performed, forgot nothing of what they were able to doe: but they were opposed by such mighty enemies, as they durst not so much as hope, which so set them on fire, that in stead of growing wea∣ry, their swords fell still with more violence then at the first. The inchan∣ted Knights, behaved themselves so bravely, and delivered their blowes with such fury, that every one expected no other end of that fight, but by the death of them all. Fowr howrs being spent in this sort without any shew made by these Knights of taking any breath, the place was strewed with their armes, the bloud ran down their sides, millions of sparkles flew about their eares, and their swords descended alwayes with such violence, as their lives seemd to depend on every stroake. Entreating one another thus, sometimes in hope of victory, and then againe in fear of death or in∣famy, two howrs more being past away, and yet no advantage to be discer∣ned between them, which putting them into an excesse of impatience and rage, they all fowr quitted their swords, and closing with one another, they began a very dangerous wrastling: but skill no more availing then force, by a common generall consent they let go their hold, and renewed their com∣bat, wherein they bestowed yet two howres more, which rendred Fulgoran so mad, that desiring rather to die then not to vanquish, he clasped his sword fast in his hand, and laid it with such rage on his enemies helmet, as having made it to flie from his head, the blade brake in seven or eight peeces. The enchanted Knight being thus discovered, and withall known to be the ex∣cellent Emperour of Persia, Don Rogel, was so exceedingly vexed to see himselfe made so to stagger two or three steps back (by the violence of that blow) that he discharged on his adversary with such fury, as he forced him to set one foot to the ground; and going to redouble upon him, Fulgoran suddenly getting up, nimbly avoided that mortall stroke: and finding him∣selfe
disfurnisht of a sword, he instantly laid hold on that which hung upon the Arch, and drew it out with ease at the same time as Don Rogel finding his head also disarmed, and his enemy provided of new Armes, tooke the helmet which was fastened to the other Arch, and quickly covered his head with it: Thereupon both of them going to renew their combat, a mighty clap of thunder was presently heard, wherewith all the four Knights fell to the ground, and were straight way covered with a thicke mst. Out of which a little after, came a reverend old man, with a beard reaching downe to his girdle, marching between two women, with such a majesty, as amazed all the standers by. Florisel who observed him, and knew the two women to be Vrganda the unknowne, and the faire Cassandra her daughter, arose from his chaire, seeing they drew toward him, and o∣pened his Armes to embrace them; but the old man bending himselfe to the ground: said, Most excellent Prince, you should have some reason to shew that you are pleased with my comming, if you knew how far my de∣sire extends to do you service, but not having hitherto given you much notice of it, I will acknowledge the favours you now do me, do pro∣ceed meerly from your courtesie, not having any way deserved them. And if I present my selfe before you thus, without command, it is onely to as∣sure you, that without me you would lose very much to day. You see this mist, it doth enfold some great matter, and is that which a faire Sun must dissipate; wherefore be pleased that Polixena may come hither, and then we will make an end of our worke. Reverend sir, said Florisel, your ser∣vices are the more recommendable, in that they are without obligation; and this inclination you have to do something for my content, so much ob∣liges me, that not to be ingratefull, I must tender you all that lies in my power. If my daughter may be usefull for any great designe of yours, she shall presently be here: But in the mean time, suffer me, I pray you, to complain a little of these Ladies that accompany you, for leaving me so long without hearing any newes of them. It is true, answered Vrganda, after some usuall complements, that we have not been heere, but it was be∣cause the welfare of Christendome would not permit us to desert our studies, whereof you shall hereafter reap the benefit, and for the present you shall see that we have done more for you then you thinke. Polixena then being come downe with all those Princesses, the old man tooke her by the hand, and led her into the mist, whilst Vrganda saluted the Princesse, and spake these words to Florisel: Believe it, my Lord, that you are not a little obliged to this wise man, who is called Alcander, and is the most knowing personage that ever bestowed time on good bookes, and that will do more for you in two dayes, then we have been able to do in so many years. I thinke no lesse, said Florisel: But you must also be assured, that he shall want no recompence, if he will re∣ceive it from our hand: For I finde my selfe so engaged to his knowledge, whereby the bodies of our fathers are interred with so much honour, as I will be master of nothing in the world, that shall not be at his disposing. But, Madam, what means this youth, which I see in your face, and in the rest of your person? whereat I cannot but wonder, if it be not done by Art. That is a secret, said she laughing, which you shall know in due time. In the mean while, let us, if you please, go to Alcander, since we see the dark∣nesse is gone; with that they drew toward the foure Knights, and saw, that
Polixena having powred a viall of water, which she had in her hand, upon Fulgoran his armes, they immediatly were turned to their former colour of fire, even at the very same instant. When as the other three Knights a∣arose, much abashed to see themselves without helmets, and not knowing how their combat was determined, Don Rogel and the brave bastard of Me∣dia, who were the two enchanted Knights, looked about on Florisel, and all their kinsmen, without a word speaking, as if they still had been restrained by some charme. And on the other side, Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were no lesse astonished, beleeving that they were in prison. But Alcander, not to keep them longer in suspence, addressed himselfe to Fulgoran, said, Sir, have you ever seen me in any other place? Yea, replied he, you are the same that I met with the very day that I first put on these Armes, and that then gave me an advice, of which I have at times made good use. And I, Vrganda, taking him by the hand, what place do I hold in your memory? Such, Madam, answered he, as I owe to the assistance which I have a thou∣sand times received from you in my occasions: for I am not ignorant, that you are the Lady of the enchanted Rock, and by the means of whose Art, all my enterprises have succeeded happily. But, Madam, I beleeve, that it is not without some mystery, that you now are heer. No certainly, an∣swered she: for I am come to make you understand certaine words, which a damsell whom I sent to you, spake when she changed the colour of your armes. She told you, if you well remember, that when your armes should reassume the former colour of fire, you should know what you were; and that the first day of our enterview, should be the happiest, and yet the most dangerous of your whole life: you see now the experience of it; your ar∣mour is now no longer blacke, and I beleeve you will freely confesse, that you were never in more danger of death, then when you fought with this Knight, pointing to Don Rogel, who is your Father; and all these Princes which you see heere, are your kinsmen: but that you may have no occasi∣on to doubt, give me that sword which you have in your hand, that I may shew you more certaine evidence of the truth heereof. Taking it then from him, she shewed him graven upon the blade: Fulgoran, Sonne of Don Rogel of Greece, and of Florella of Canabea. And if you desire yet more certain proof, added she, go up these stairs, and look into the water of this fountain, it will shew you the truth. That would shew, answered he, but too much obstinacy, to distrust such power∣full witnesses: I will never make a doubt, Madam, of that you shall tell me; nor doe I desire more assurance of this verity, then the sorrow that I feel for having lifted up my arms against him, for whose preservation the Gods and Nature, command me to die a thousand times, if I were capable of so many lives. But my Lord, said he kneeling down to Don Rogel, you will impute the fault to my ignorance, and be pleased to pardon me, if hitherto I have sought the ruine of your Empire, for the glory of the Gods, whom my education made me adore; which henceforward I shall be ready to pre∣serve, and repair the damages which my arms have brought them. My son, said Don Rogel, most lovingly embracing him, I am so pleased with this accident, that setting a part all care of the wars, I will not think of any thing, but of rejoicing with you, and for you. See heer, my Lord and Fa∣ther,
Prince Florisel, the second is your Brother the Emperour of the Par∣thians, and all these other are your so neer kinsmen, as you are bound to re∣spect them equally with my self. Fulgoran then going toward Don Florisel to kisse his hands, he held him a long while infolded in his arms, shewing the infinite content he took in knowing of him. Spheramond caressed him with no lesse affection. Dorigel, Lucendus, Silvan, and the rest in generall let him see the incomparable pleasure they received by this adventure. Du∣ring these complements, Prigmleon was transported from himself: one while he observed the Princes of Greece with wonder, and then again be∣holding so great a change, he was much amazed at the vicissitude of things: but that which most arrested him, was the excellent beauty of Polixena, that working powerfully on his soule, made him wish for the amity of the Grecian Princes, that he might not be esloigned from that sun, whose light he already so adored. His new desires then not permitting him to think of his return, he expected the issue of the businesse; when as Fulgoran, who a∣midst his excesse of joy, could not forget him, turning most, kindly to him thus spake: My worthy Lord, and Companion, I am extreamly afraid, that the knowledge of my parents, obliging me to be baptised, wil make me lose the honour of your love, and cause you to hate me as much as ever you affected me. That is a thing, answered Prigmaleon, which you are not to doubt; for your vertue onely having given birth to our friendship, I cannot beleeve it can be so easily broken by any difference of religion; on the contrary, I think it good reason that you imitate your parents, and that it is just in you to testifie the content you take in knowing them; for these being the prime Princes in the world, no man can descend from them without glory; we have troubled them very much, and our arms have caused great disorder in their States, but we may amend that fault; you shall serve them out of duty, as I will out of af∣fection; for from henceforth I vow to hold a firm peace with them if they be pleased with it; and am very willing to be their friend, provided they judge me worthy of that favour. Now on my soul, said Fulgoran, embracing him again, this is that which most I could wish for in the world, and your freenesse so obligeth me, that, not to be ingratefull, I most heartily offer you all that lies in my power: but come and let us go to these my Lords, who for that they know you not, have not rendered you that which your birth and valour deserve. Repairing to Don Florisel, he briefly acquainted him with the quality of Prigmaleon, whereup∣on, Florisel, excusing himself on his ignorance, caressed him in such manner, as he held himself much indebted to his ctesie. These ceremonies having la∣sted a good while, the Princes would needs look into the inchanted Fountain, and wondered at the secrets which it revealed to them; but he that seemed to receive most satisfaction from it, was Prigmaleon; for seeing in it the fair Po∣lixena, with a smiling and cheerfulnesse countenance, he conceived that his af∣fection would not be paid with ingratitude, and that this fair one had already harboured a good opinion of him; which so delighted him, that going with Florisel (who would needs give him the upper hand) to the palace, where he was magnificently entertained, he continued in all the contentment that might be desired, till it was bed time; when as he was, by the greatest part of the young Knights, conducted to a chamber that was prepared for him.
CHAP. XXXVI. The Pagan Kings understanding that Prigmaleon and Fulgoran were become friends to the Greek Princes, conspire to massacre their troops; they are prevented, and their Army defeated. FVlgoran and Prigmaleon not suffering themselves to be so transported with pleasure, the one by seeing his kinred of a quality so eminent, and the other with those de∣lights, which his new fancies begat in him, as not to think of that so much concerned them, they arose early in the morning, and with the approbation of the Greek Princes, returned to their quarter, where when they had called together all the principall Commanders of the Army; Fulgoran began this discourse to them: There is not, My Lords, any one heer so little experienced in affairs, as, by the revolution of things in the world, hath not learned, that often times our wills, and our desires, do not depend upon our selves; and that the heavens, and fortune, have reserved a power to dispose of them, either for our good, or for a chastisement of our of∣fences: It is not long since, that intending to arm, for the glory of our Al∣tars, and to gain my self a reputation in the world, I laboured to procure your assistance, with a purpose that you should share with me in the honour, as well as in the labour of my enterprise; but now you see me heer with other incli∣nations, my speech no longer demands bloud and revenge, nor my heart wi∣shes for the ruine of this Empire, and lesse for the destruction of the Princes of Greece; this makes you wonder, and by your faces I see, that you would wil∣lingly know from whence this change doth proceed: My Lords, it is most reasonable that I reveal it to you, and that I now deliver you the cause of my amity, as well as heertofore I did that of my hate. Yesterday, the Prince of Aethiopia, and my self, carried with a strong desire to see the rarities of a Foun∣tain, which the day before passed thorow our Army, required that we might be admitted to the triall thereof, which our enemies, who are full of curtefie, and truly generous, freely granted, not desiring to know us, or otherwise to be informed of our condition, so that we entered into Constantinople, where, in few words, to come to the point, we began a very dangerous com∣bat with the Knight of the Fountain, which having lasted eight howrs was ended by the greatest wonder in the world: My sword flying in pieces by the violence of a blow which I gave my adversary on the helmet, which also there∣with fel from his head, leaving him discovered, I presently laid hold on a sword that hung upon the Arch; and my enemy seeing himself without a head∣peece, took one that was fastened to the other Arch; so being furnished with new arms, we were about to renew our fight with more fury then before, when as a clap of thunder laid us both on the ground, deprived of all sense; and with us the other two, that then were still ighting together, whereof one was the valiant Prince of Aethiopia heer present, a thick mist so covering us for a while, as none that were present could discern us; but ere long we were seen all four without our helmets; and these arms, which I now have on me, did in an in∣stant
re-assume their former colour, whereat, I confesse, I was exceedingly a∣mazed; for not knowing how our combat ended, I beleeved I was a prisoner; but beholding certain Magicians, whom I have long time known, come to∣ward me, I was somewhat better assured; and saluting them, intreated them to tell me, at what rate I should be quit for the folly I had committed, in so rashly abandoning our trenches. Oh how happy a fault, said an old Wise-man to me, is this you have done! for you shall presently see the be∣nefit that will arise to you out of it: Requiring me then to deliver him this sword, that you see heer (laying his hand upon the hilt) he shewed me these words, which you also, if you please, may read upon the blade. Fulgoran son of Regel of Greece, and of Florella Queen of Canabea. Seeing such good evidence of my extraction, which may also be confirmed by the Prince Bruzinges heer, my uncle, and having consulted with the water of the Fountain, that fains not, remembring withall the words that a great Magician, and my friend, had spoken to me, how my arms should never recover this burning hue, that first it had, till my kindred were known; I did my duty to the Emperour Don Rgel, my Lord, with whom it was that I had fought, and besought him that he would not refuse me the name of Father; protesting, that I would indeavour to render my self worthy of that grace: To what end should I particularize all that then passed amongst us? The Prince of Aethiopia, and my self, were received with so much kindnesse, as that I, in regard of the obligation of bloud and nature, wherein I am tied to them, and he for the ity which he means to contract with them, are come out of Constantinople, with a purpose to beseech you, as humbly we do, that for our sakes you will raise the siege, as you came hither at our intreaties; in recompense whereof, time I hope will furnish us with occasions to serve you, and one day return you the favour which now you shall do us. This said, Prigmaleon, and he, stood up, expecting when one would speak for the rest: But perceiving them to be all silent, they modest∣ly retired, and with them Bruznges, Florimond, Grandimore, and the un∣known Knight; beleeving that their presence hindered them from taking some resolution in an affair of that consequence: They being come then out of the room, the other Princes were a great while in dispute; some advised that every man should repair to his home, remonstrating, that to persist any longer in that siege would be their manifest ruine, since they had lost those two Princes, who joyning their forces with the Christians, they could hope for nothing but a totall destruction of their Army: Howbeit, this opinion nothing approved of, the rest perswaded the prosecution of their enterprise; affirming, that now to give over after so much labour and charge, would prove the greatest basenesse that might be; yet considering the importance of those two Armies, which might much offend them, in case they should turn to the enemy, they resolved to cut them in pieces the next night, and after∣wards to do as occasion should invite them. This concluded upon, all those Kings rose from Counsell, and one of them went to Prigmaleon & Fulgoran, to tell them, that the votes being equall, they had put off the resolution to the day following You my do therein as you think good, said they: But if you would well consider the event of things, and the means you have to oblige us by it, you would be carried more readily o it then you are; whereupon, going away,
with Florimond, and the unknown Knight, who would needs accompany them to them to the City, they took leave of Bruzanges and Grandimore, and returned to the Greek Princes, who made it appear, that they cared not much whether the enemy continued stil before their wals, or was on the sea returning homeward, since they had drawn from them the best part of their strength. Re∣newing then their feasting and sports, they passed away the day with all de∣light, till toward evening, when as word was brought, that there was a Knight at the gate, who desired to speak with Prigmaleon. Let him come in, said Florisel, it may be he comes to be merry with us, as being weary of lying so long in his tent, and seeing nothing but arms. Vpon this command, the Knight was brought into the room, where kissing a paper which he had in his hand, he presented it to Prigmaleon, from the King of Zizinia; who having opened and read it, said to him, Knight, your master tells me, that, the busi∣nesse being of importance, he hath committed it onely to your fidelity; let us know then, I pray you, what the matter is: More, I assure you, answered he, then you imagine; and by the care my Master takes of you, you may per∣ceive how much he loves you. He was this day present at the Counsell, wherein it was concluded, to cut your troops and those of Canabea in pieces; but he not intending to be a traitour to you, nor able to endure such wicked∣nesse, hath advertised you of their designe, to the end that with the assistance of your new friends, you may turn that hurt upon them, which they intend to you: He will favour your enterprise, nor shall his men draw a sword against you; and when the alarm is given, he will draw to the sea side and embark his souldiers: It rests now, that you make good use of the advertisement that he givees you, and carry the matter with such discretion, as it may not be known that your enemies counsell is revealed by his means. Assure him, said Prig∣maleon, much amazed at the soul design of those Pagan Kings, that I will die rather then prejudice him for the favour he doth me; he doth indeed oblige me as you see, but I will never be ingratefull, and hope one day to require him: in the mean time, I will prevent this mischief if I can, and beleeve it, the traitours shall have no great cause to brag of their villany. Having then acquainted the Greek Princes with the businesse, he sent the unknown Knight to his quarter, to give private directions to his Commanders, and intelligence of the enemies designe; Florimond having received the like Commission for the Canabeans, with order to put on white shirts upon their arms, that they might know their own men in the dark. This Knight being returned to the Pagans Camp, Don Florisel of Niquea, desiring to let Prigmaleon know how much he esteemed his friendship, seeing the night reasonable dark, put thirty thousand horse out of the North-gate, and divided them into two squadrons, in one of which he commanded himself, with Prigmaleon, the two Cena∣phales, Lucendus, Filadard, Esquilan, Gadard, Dorigel, Melfort, Abies, Ar∣mond, Leonidas, Florizart, & Dardanio: The other he left to the leading of Don Rogel, Spheramond, Melinda, Olidor, Ginoldan, Amanio, Silvan, Anaxander, Floradin, Perion, Florian, Tristor, Quedragant, Agrian, and Florestan, ha∣ving all of them white linnen upon their arms, now with his squadron he ad∣vanced towards Prigmaleons quarter, and Rogel with the other, toward Ful∣gorans: But thinking it fit to stay till the fight began, they made a stand about a mile off, tarrying for nothing but the noise to make them give in upon them. On the other side, the Pagan Kings did not slumber, for having made two battalia's of their men, each of them of seventy two thousand horse, and four∣teen
thousand foot, they fell to march very quietly, and thinking to finde the Aethiopians and Canabeans sleeping in their beds, they charged furiously up∣on them; but they were better entertained then they expected; for the un∣known Knight, and Grandimore, on the one party, and Brazanges, with his son Florimond, Arfleura and Larella on the other, who had kept their men in arms, and in good order to fight, gave them so rude a welcome, that they presently knew that they were out of their reckoning. The battell then grow∣ing sharp, and the noise every moment increasing, the Princes of Greece flew in among the enemies with such fury, as above ten thousand Pagans lost their lives at that first encounter; for thinking of nothing lesse then this surprise, they were extreamly amazed to see their enemy on every side them: Florisel, Prigmaleon, Rogel, Spheramond, Fulgoran, the Cenophales, Russian, Lucen∣dus, and the rest of these invincible Princes, like lightning shattered as many souldiers as they lighted upon, and grew so terrible, that within an howr the Pagans betook them to flight, where the slaughter grew so great, all being in disorder, that a little after Sun-rising, the fields of Greece were strewed with the bodies of an hundered and eight thousand men fallen under the edge of the sword; the rest having luckily recovered their ships, to receive and shelter them from that tempest: The Christian Princes then retiring to the town, with much joy for so happy a victory, which had not cost them above fifteen thousand men, return to the City with great triumph. CHAP. XXXVII. The Baptisme of Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, together with the inchanting of the most part of the Princes and Ladies of Greece. THE Court being full of rejoycing, and our Princes seeking daily new diversions to passe away the time, all their for∣ces were dismist, the Citizens of Constantinople took the liberty to go into the Countrey, to repair the ruines which the enemy had made in their lands about the Ci∣ty; and the Peasas seeing no more souldiers a forraging, carried their cattell, as they were wont, into the fields to feed. Thus all things being at quiet and peace, Fulgo∣ran, who was desirous that the content of his being known should not be im∣perfect, resolved to be washed in that Fountain of salvation by water whereof man was regenerated into grace, and no longer to think of his idols, who till then had mis-led him, but to begin to adore one true and Almighty God; which determination of his, infinitely pleased Don Rogel, and generally all the rest of the Princes, who desiring to celebrate that Sacrament with all kinde of magnificence, gave order accordingly for the Ceremonies thereof. And now every thing being in a readinesse, the streets and windows full of people, and the Patriarch of Constantinople attending their comming in the Church, Prigmaleon intreated the Princes of Greece to give him a little audience, and thus spake on to them: Excellent Princes, I do not think you will imagine that any weaknesse or fear doth carry me to that I am about to do, seeing I am heer intreated amongst you with so much kindnesse and honour, whereas I
might in reason have expected a resenting of the wrongs that you have re∣ceived from me; but that you will rather say, it proceeds from the provi∣dence of that God whom you adore, who desiring my salvation, hath made me with patience to hearken unto the reasons which you used to my com∣pnion, for to draw him out of the errour wherein he hath lived so long; I have profited by them as he hath done, and am determined to receive the same character which you intend to conferre on him this morning. And as we have been fellowes together in many dangers: so will we be also in this action wherein the grace of heaven is to be communicated unto us. This is, said Florisel embracing him; this is, brave Prince, indeed so great a grace, that you may draw more glory from this holy motion, then fromall the brave exploits that your courage hath hitherto performed. God which hath raised you above such multitudes of people, and endowed you with all the rare perfections that are able to render a man of your quality worthy of all commendations, hath not left you in your blindnesse, but determining to make use of your service for the glory of his religion, the ruine whereof you have heretofore sought, hath knit this bond of friendship between you and my soone, that you might share with him in the happinesse, which by his being known for what he is, was to befall him; wherewith we are in∣finitely contented: And as we had determined freely to employ our selves for your service, meerly out of the consideration of your vertue and great∣nesse, we will now do it the more willingly, for that you shall become our brother in bptisme, whereunto let us go then presently, and be pleased that I may conduct you to the Church, as your God-father, and that the beauti∣full Empresse of the Persians may be my partner. I will not spend time, an∣swered he, in protractations of doing you service, because I will not delay so good a worke. But I beleeve, sir, that Fulgoran and I shall not be the sole parties in it, Bruzanges, Arflera, Florimond, Larmella, Grandimore, and the unknown Kight wil also partake of it. All the better, said Florisel, God shall have so much the more glory; howsoever, let us proceed to this holy acti∣on: with that they went toward the Church, Prigmaleon between Florisel and the Empresse of Persia; Fulgoran between the Prince of France, and the faire Queen Sidonia; Bruzanges led by Rogel and the beauteous Queen of France; Arfleura by Spheramond and the faire Savagesse; the unknown Knight by Silvan and the fair Cilinda; Grandimore by Dorigel and the Em∣presse of the Parthians; and Larmella by Filadard, and the beauteous Polix∣ena, who went with some content to see Prigmaleon figh for her. For being exceeding lovely, valiant, and a very mightie Prince, she could not despise his affection; & in her heart counted it a glory to her beauty to be honored with so great a triumph. The ceremonics ended, all the Princes returned to the Palace, where they were magnificently feasted. And intending to deferre the exercise of Armes till some other day, they were speaking of going to dance, when as Alcander rising up with Vrganda, and addressig himselfe to Florisel, thus spake: It is true, great Prince, that I let you see the desire I have to do somewhat for your good, and that you should know how the studies both of my self and these Ladies (pointing to Vrganda and young Cassandra) have not been fruitlesse: wherefore follow us, and if you love your lives, give us leave to dispose of you as we thinke fit. I have re∣solved, answered he with a cheerfull countenance, never to swerve from your directions, being most assured, by the many testimonies you have
given us of your love, that you desire our happinesse; you may command then when you please, and I will be in a readinesse, as soon as you have spo∣ken. Stay then here, said Alcander, till I have given order for every thing: then taking Sidnia by the hand, he placed her by her husband, made Don Rogel and the Empresse of the Persians follow them; after them Lcend, and the faire Infanta Fortnna; Spheramond and the Princesse Richarda his wife; Alastraxarea and Rozlian, the two Cenophales, Gadard and Fila∣dard, and putting himselfe with Vrganda, in the head of them all, he mar∣ched to the fountain of lovers, made all those Princesses go with Vrganda, under one of the Arches, whilst himselfe with the Princes, were under the other; which done, he spake before them all in this fashion: My Lords, you have lived many yeares, and the defects that use to accompany a life subject to crosses, would ere long bereave you of that heroicall vigor which hath made you triumphant in so many enterprises, if out of my love I had not found out certain secrets able to restore you to the flower of your age, to preserve in you that admirable force you have, and to keep you from decaying with age, till threescore yeares be past; see heer bathes prepared for that purpose, go into them, I pray you, and come not out of them till the hearbs, which were gathered in their due seasons, have per∣fected their operation on you; Vrganda is under the other Arch, with the Princesses that accompanied you hither, they shall en∣joy the same prerogative with you, and that wise Lady shall render them the same beauty which they enjoyed when they were twenty years old, as I will restore you to the estate that you were in at your five and twentieth yeare of your age. At these words they stripped themselves without re∣plying, and went into the bathes, whilst all the young Princes that follow∣ed them, wondered to see the fountaine and the place about it, covered with a thick mist: wherupon they looked one upon another without spea∣king a word, and would have gone into it, to know what was become of that troop, if Cassandra had not told them that all was done for the glory of the Grecian family, and that the time to require the freeing of those great personages, was not yet come. And whether it be so or no, read I pray you, in this writing. They then looking a little forward, saw a co∣lumne of Iasper, upon which hung a table of Brasse, with these words engraven it it, Death is threatned to all those that are so adacio as to approch thee cloud of secrets, Nor shall this cloud be dispelled, till the young Lion comes out of his den: then shall the hidden treasures be discovered, and the old creatures having chan∣ged their skins, shall behold the Sunne again to the glory of their young ones. Now on my life, said Dorigel, addressing himselfe to Cassandra, if the faithfull services you have done us, did not well secure me, I would either die presently, or my fortune should be the same with these Princes. But since it were a crime to be jealous of you, I will have patience, expecting the time wherein the heavens will restore us what we this day have lost. This losse, gently replied Cassandra, shall not hinder your pleasures, nor shall you so much as ressent it for the present, as you shall ere long finde it the more comfortable to you: Wherefore let us returne unto the palace, and continuing our former triumphs and feasting, make it appeare, that if
need be, we can master even Fortune her selfe. The freenesse of these words, and the grace of her pronouncing them, having somewhat quieted those Knights, they returned unto the Palace determining not to stir from thnce in ten dayes space, and in the mean time to employ themselves in some vertuous exercises. CHAP. XXXVIII. Prigmaleon transported by the violence of his desires, discovers his affection to Polixena: Her answer. WHilst Russian meditates on means to see Agriclea, whose absence very much troubled him, & that Dorigel with the rest, sought to divert their cares by noble exerci∣ses, Prigmaleon entertaining himselfe with his private thoughts, and delighting onely in solitary places, told the trees, that the occasion of his disquiet was an ex∣tream apprehension, that Polixena, who held all his desires engaged, would refuse to accept of his affecti∣on, as being most unworthy of her merit; bestowing his thoughts then in this manner, and not daring to reveal his sufferings to the Princesse, he expe∣cted till love should take pity of his grief, and that good fortune should send him some help: howbeit, better considering that confidence was to bring him content, and that where fear was there could be no hope, he resolved to open his heart upon the first occasion that should present it self, & to seek a remedy for his grief some more speedy way then by silence: Beleeving then that this was his best course, he began to frame a speech in his minde to that purpose; when as a confused sound of voices, talking together, put him out of his ima∣ginations; whereupon, he rose up presently from under the trees, where he was laid, and looking round about he spied Polixena, with seven or eight young Ladies, that were going to take the air of the garden. O me! said he, How luckily doth this fall out? It seems that love doth favour my designe, now is the time wherein my courage must appear; if Polixena rejects me, a resolute death shall free me from so many pains, which will be far more ho∣nourable for me then a languishing life. This ardour carrying him on, he came to his Mistris, thinking that he should have his tongue as free as his thought; but after a Good-even, he stuck fast, and leaving his eyes to disco∣ver his passion, he was not able to utter a word. Polixena, who took this ti∣morousnesse for a signe of his love, seeing him in that case, took him by the hand, and said: My Lord, I beleeve we have surprised you, for the amaze you are in makes me imagine so much. Do not wonder, Madam, answered he, at seeing me disordered in this encountring you, the weaknesse of my sight is not able to endure the glit∣tering of so many beauties as I behold. This excuse, said Polixena, is none of the best: for if I had the power that you speak of, I should indifferently trouble as many as look on me: but none complaines of me save you, and your palenesse declares that it is some secret malady which you will not have not knowne. It is true, replied he all trembling, that a secret griefe
doth consume me. But, Madam, I should have just reason to blame my want of courage, and to impute all my vexation to my cowardice, if I should not seek for a remedy when it is in my power to do it. I have suffe∣red infinitely since I saw you, and the powerfull charms of your eyes have left me nothing that is mine, but my desire to doe you service. You may say, I am too bold, that a greater respect belongs to your greatnesse, and that I ought to have endured my suffering without declaring it. But alas! I do not speake but by the impulsion of a passion that forces me to it. Love hath untied my tongue, which you saw was dumbe when you came hither: and that is it which now constraines me to beseech you, that you will be as sensible of pitty as I am of affection. If I had not given you occasion to speake, coldly replied Polixena, I should be displeased with this your discourse. Maidens in these daies, and especially those of my qua∣lity, doe not take a liberty of engaging themselves without the consent of their fathers; neither willingly permit any to talk to them of love, for fear of being deceived, and infortunate by trusting the oaths of a lover of three daies standing. If I receive a command to looke on you with these conditi∣ons, you have merrit enough in you of power to make me willing to obey it; otherwise doe not expect any kinder language from me. In the meane time live with lesse disquiet, and out of this my answer extract reasons to procure your ease. Therewith she passed on, leaving him much perplexed; for he found both bitter and sweet equally mixed in her words, and durst not hope without fear. Neverthelesse, being somwhat pleased that he had revealed his thoughts, he retired quietly to his chamber, and remembring that townes doe ordinarily endure the first assault, that yet will afterwards yeeld to a persisting beleager, he tooke paper, and in it wrote these lines. Prigmaleons Letter to Polixena. THink it not strange if I shew more love then obedience: I am brought to that extremity that all considerations in the world must give way to the violence of my suffering. I write this because you have forbidden me to speak to you, and do crave the same pitty of you which you would wish for if you were in the pain you have seen me; If you judge rightly of my passion, you will not be offended at this re∣quest. Honour doth guide it, nor do I desire any felicity, but according to the or∣dinance of heaven that may legitimate it: Let not your refusall then make me des∣perate, but permitting me from hence forward to call my selfe your Knight, give me leave to expect the return of those upon whom you so absolutely depend. This Letter, written and sealed, he committed to the fidelity of a Dwarf, who certainly had a greater spirit then a body, and that could so well chuse his time, as the next morning he found Polixena in her chamber, unto whom kneeling down, he said: If it were fit for me, Madam, to relate to you what one of the most completest Princes of the earth doth suffer for you, I would recount to you his sighes, his griefs, his transports, and his disquiets, and let∣ting you know the miserable estate whereinto despair hath reduced him, since you forbad him to complain to you, I should perhaps possesse you with as much pity, as he hath love; but perswading my self that his passion hath found reasons enough to let you see it, I will content my self with presenting this paper to you from him: Be pleased, Madam, to view it with a gentle eye,
and return him so favourable an answer as may cause him to live conten∣ted; you shall tye the world to you in no mean obligation, by preserving in it so brave a Knight; who, I assure you, desires nothing so much as the honour of doing you service. I will not, answered she, be so farre an enemy to his content, as not to be willing to read what occasion he takes to com∣plain of me: wherefore give me the paper; with that she took and opened it, and having well considered it, said to the Dwarfe: My friend, the an¦swer that I must returne to thy master, consists of so few words, as I need not take a pen in hand to let him know my minde, onely bid him hope, that time bring him content, and that fidelity alone can procure him that which with so much impatience he wishes? for. It is enough, answered the Dwarfe, I will go tell him that he is happy, and that he is not to com∣plain any more. So going out with a curtsie that made the Princesse laugh, he went to Prigmaleon who expected his returne with a panting heart, and returning him that answer, he rendred him so contented, that not remem∣bring himselfe to be Emperour of Aethiopia, he imbrced him three or foure times, ever and anon enquiring of him, if he had observed any cold∣nesse in her actions, or rather love in her words. What, said the Dwarfe, coldnesse? Beleeve it, you may be happy if you will, if you be not happy already, me thinkes I see you in the midst of those delights which will bring you to a very paradise. For having seen that faire hand which tou∣ched mine when she tooke the letter from me, and imagining that her cloathes concealed wonders, I was almost transported with her. And if the respect of your passions had not staid me, I had assuredly besought her with some favour to quench that flame which already began to scorch my heart. But not intending to be a traytor, nor to seek my contentment with the losse of your quiet, I surmounted those unruly passions, and quickly withdrew my selfe for feare that the violence of my desires should make us commit some errour. See, said Prigmaleon, laughing heartily at the grace wherewith this little thing vented his fooleries. See my Mussardin, assured proofs of thy fidelity, which I have also observed in other things. But be confident, that thou obligest not an ingratefull man, and that I will one day recompense the labour thou tookest in mastering thine own appe∣tite for my sake. I know well, said the Dwarfe, that my affection doth highly oblige you; howbeit withall, I extreamly feare that you will not give me the reward for it that I desire. But I will upon the faith of a Knight, said Prigmaleon, so that I may do it without prejudice to my love, and that it be in my power. Nay, I will quickly ease you of that fear, said the Darfe, nor shall you find any friend more faithfull to endeavour the bringing of your wishes to their desired part, then my self, if you will assist me: for as for Polixena, I will wholly quit her to you; but I would fain have a place in the good grace of Castibella, daughter to that peerlesse Diana, who once filled the world with such wonders of her beauty. It is a rising Sunne, that promises great things in her course; and that to be briefe, hath struck me dead in the eye. Perswade her to love me, and setling a good impression on her of my courage (for you know I would rather dye then be wanting to my occasion of honour) tell her, that my alliance with her will be for her glory, and that she shall finde herselfe most happy in my services. So will I never complaine of my pains in furthering your satis∣faction, and you shall see how faithfully I will serve you. This is, said
Prigmaleon, almost burst with laughter, the happest passage that may be, for now I shall not be jealous of thee; do thou but labour secretly to purchase the favour of Polixena for me, and I will do the like to thee to Castibella, who truly would accommodate thee excellent wel if she were not a little too young. Make not that your excuse, said the Dwarf, true love never stands upon time, I will stay till yeers have better ripened her judgement, and in the mean space will finde a thousand wayes to make my intentions not unpleasing to her. This discourse finishing, with certain frisks that the Dwarf made to shew his agility, Prigmaleon returned to his thoughts, where we will leave him to fol∣low the course of our History. CHAP. XXXIX. A Damsell arrives at Constantinople with the head of the great Marandr, slain by the Knight of the Savage. EVery one seeking diversions from their cares, the Court seemed not to ressent the absence of the Princes that were inchanted, because they hoped to see them delive∣red ere it were long. When as there came into the Hall a Damsell reasonably handsome, carrying in her hand the head of a Giant, who beholding the company a good while, with wonder to see Knights of so brave a presence, and Ladies of such beauty, enquired ve∣ry modestly which was the Emperour of the Parthians. Gentlewo∣man, answered Russian, to whom she then spake, he hath been absent from hence some few dayes, but if your affairs cannot permit you to attend his re∣turn, and that you stand in need of his aid, I will willingly supply his place, and with a free heart do you service. I am said she, much bound to your cur∣tesie, but God be thanked, I have heer in my hand an occasion of rejoycing, rather then of complaining; nor am I come hither to crave the help of any whatsoever, but to present to that Excellent Emperour the head of the grea∣test enemy he had, brought to this passe by the incomparable valour of a Knight, that bears a wilde man in his shield, whom I may justly vaunt to be one of the valiantest men upon the earth, and the Phoenix of those that this day bear arms. This Knight, meeting with me in the confines of Macedon, could not passe by me, without enquiring after the cause of some tears which he saw me shed: I freely told him, that the villany of a Giant, who had ravi∣shed me, did wring them from me, and that I was going to Constantinople to crave reparation of that wrong; knowing well that the Princes of Greece did never refuse their assistance to Ladies in distresse, and that particularly I in∣tended to addresse my self to the Emperor Spheramond, both for that he holds
the reputation of surpassing all Knights of this age, and that the Giant had told me, how all the villanies which he then committed, were done by him, in some sort to revenge the death of another Giant, whom the Emperour had slain, when as a Knight errant he followed adventures abroad in the world. With∣out doubt, then answered this courtous Knight, you could not make your re∣venge more certain, then by referring it to the hands of that brave Prince, who hath with all reason acquired those praises which the wold doth give him. But if you be pleased to make use of me, I shall most willingly imploy my self in your service; It is a long journey from hence to Constantinople, your ene∣my may finde occasion to get him further off, you will take a great deal of pains in vain, and not be satisfied in your desire: On the other side, I do pas∣sionately long to demonstrate unto that valorous Prince, how I do love his vertue as much as other men do honour his birth, and that I will labour so long as I live to ruine his enemies. To what end should I trouble you with our discourse? This gentlenesse of his so wrought upon me, that after I had thorowly considered him, and judged him fit for any great attempt, I carrid him straight to the Giants Castle, where, to be short, he did wonders: For not satisfied with laying that foul masse of flesh on the earth, in a very dange∣rous combat, he defeated thirty or forty Knights, who were seldome out of that Robbers company; it was to me an unspeakable delight, to see some arms flie to the ground, some men cut asunder in the midst, others cloven to the girdle, the boldest of them stoutly scattered; and the gallantry of this Knight did so please me, that if I had not acquainted him with the misfortune that by the Giant had befallen me, I had endeavoured to make him love me; but fea∣ting to be slighted, I passed from love to the resentment of his good will; vow∣ing to serve him upon all occasions, and to that end intreated him to lay some command upon me. I would not have you, said he, give me so many thanks for a thing whereunto I was bound by the laws of Chivalrie; but since you will needs oblige me, take the head of your enemy, and for a further satisfaction of your minde, carry it to Constantinople, present it to that warlike Prince, and render your grief the lesse, by publishing the revenge you have had for it. I shall with a good will, replied I, undertake that journey, but then Sir, will you be pleased to tell me who you are, to the end I may know to whom I am so infinitely indebted. See heer, my name in my shield, said he, shewing a Sa∣vage pourtrayed thereupon, for a more perfect knowledge of me, at this pre∣sent, I may not give: Follow on your way, whilst I go some other where to seek occasion of imploying my arms; with that, not thinking it convenient to be troublesome, I took the head of Marandor, (for so was the Giant named) and began my journey to this place, where I am arrived with grief, for that I finde not the Emperour of the Parthians to give him an account of this brave Knight; but, if you please, I will leave it in your charge to do it, upon condi∣tion that I shall at any time be ready to deserve it of you in all possibly I may. Whereupon, she laid the head of Marandor on the floor, and making a very humble reverence, immediatly departed, leaving all the Princes extreamly de∣sirous to know this so valiant and brave new Knight: Whilst they were all commending the valour of the Knight of the Savage, Russian, who still had Agriclea in his memory, could not be at rest, and would certainly have been gone, had it not been for the desire he had to see his father and his kinsfolks at liberty: but that respect prevailing with him, he passed the most part of his dayes unquietly enough; contrarily Prigmaleon, who interpreting Polixena's
answer to his advantage, felt so many delights amidst his pain, that he bles∣sed love every minute, being pleased with the change of his condition, as the cause of all his felicity. If he walked in the woods or gardens, it was not with any purpose to complaine, but to entertain himselfe with the con∣templation of his good forune, and to grave the names of Polixena and himselfe on the barkes of trees: his actions were altogether amorous. And if he suffered any thing at all, her sole impatience was the cause thereof; howbeit hoping that time would bring him remedy, he gently supported the violence of his desires. Pleasing himself then in this fashion, with the entertainmen of his owne thoughts, and sometimes in the remembrance of his Lady, the time slipt so sweetly away, that they were insensibly come to the Eve of these Princes enfranchisement, whereof I will relate you the wonder, when I have en∣formed you of some occurrents that did precede it. CHAP. XL. A Damsell comming to Constantinople, carries away Prigmaleon to combat with Griolani, surnamed the fae Knight: The successe thereof. ALL these Princes being assembled together to consult of the order that was to be kept for the reception of these enchanted Princes; who, as Cassandra assured them, were to be freed within two dayes, they saw a strange Dmsell come in; who, pausing upon the view of so many brave Knights, considered them a while without speaking a word. But observing that they all had their eyes fixt on her, and that they were silent, as it were, to give her leave to speak, she said: Now on my faith, I never saw so gallant, nor fo well shap'd men in all my life; nor do I wonder that this Court is so etold through the world. But I would gladly know which is the most amorous amongst you. There is not any here, said Prigmaleon, to whom the Damsell seemed especially to addresse her selfe, that would not appeare to be a lover, and that in regard thereof would not willingly draw his sword against his companion, if it were to be justified by Armes. But unable to tell assuredly how farre another mans suffring extends, I may confidently affirme, that I am he, who perhaps endureth most, that loves with most passion, as he that hath devoted himselfe to one, who kindles no ordinary ames, and that to save a thousand lives, would not let any thing passe to the prejudice of my Lady, the most beautifull that treads upon the earth. Follow me then, answered the Damsel, to do her service. For yesterday passing by a crosse way, some three leagues
from hence, I saw two pavillions set up, a number of shields hanging upon the next trees, and lances enough to maintaine a passage for three moneths space, which made me draw neerer to heare what all this preparation inten∣ded; and seeing a Squire issue forth of one of the pavillions, I made a signe to him that he should come and speak with me, which in a very civill fashi∣on he did, and told me, that his Mistris, whom he would by no meanes name, though I divers times intreated him unto it, being passionately in love with one that was called the fair Knight, had engaged him to main∣tain a Iust in her favour; to which end she was come neer unto Constanti∣nople, in hope that the Greek Princes hearing of it, would come to a trill with her Knight, whom she held to be the most valorous in the world, as without question he is the most lovely of all that this day lives: whereby this warriour should gain immortall praise, and that she should have a shre in the glory which he acquired by his valour, as being the principall cause thereof. These words begetting a desire in me to see this Knight, I freely went into his tent, where seeing him with his head unarmed, I indeed ob∣served in him so pleasing an eye, a beauty so lovely, and so goodly a pre∣sence, as I may with truth averre, that I had never beheld any thing more amible. But that which exeedingly vexed me, was, to see, that the Lady, in whose favour he had taken up armes, had not any one of those perfections. Her face was pale and lean, no charmes were in her eyes, no grace in her actions: her stature was defectve, her smiles unbecoming, and her voice harsh and unpleasant. In briefe, observing all this in her, I could not for∣beare laughing, and withall told that gallant Knight, how his valour was ill employed, how he should never gain much glory by his labour, having undertaken it upon an occasion that could not deserve it, and that being sen∣sible of the injury which he did to all the faire ones that passed by, rendring them subject to acknowledge the preheminence of a creature so little ad∣vantaged by nature, I would go to the Court of Greece, to require reason for this injustice. And indeed I am now here for no other cause, but onely to carry you with me to revenge the wrong of those that have merits in them, and particularly of the fair one whom you adore with so much re∣spect and love. I was never more willing to put on Armes, said Prigma∣leon, then now, that my Ladies beauty is in question. Let us go then, Gen∣tlewoman, and we shall know ere it be long, if this Knight be as valiant and strong as you thinke him lovely. Whereupon having called for a horse, he mounted on him, departed with the Damsell, and travelled till night, which constrained him to rest under certaine trees, and to sup with the pro∣vision which his squire had brought. When it grew dark, the damsell whom the good grace and conversti∣on of the Knight had made very much in love with him, seeing him with∣draw apart from her to sleepe, and not approving that reservednesse which in her heart she called simplicity, she followed him, and lying down by him said: In faith, I must complain of your neglect of me, and not forbear tel∣ling you that you want judgement in not making use of time, occasion, and of the good will of a wnch, that loves you with pssion; what sence were it to passe the night in languishing, when we may make it full of content? Entertaine the good fortune that presents it self to you, and do not foolishly imagine as the most part of our Greek Princes do (who are more gloriously
proud of their loialty in love, then of all the great things which they have done in armes) that to afford any part of your affection to more then one, is in any kind of fault. It is an errour, at which those of little judgement doe stumble, and which the more discreet doe laugh at. I will mingle so much sweetnesse with my kisses, and such dalliance with my caresses, as you shll with reason think your self happy in so favourable an incounter. Suffer then our lips to meet, receive my embraces, and doe not disdain a love be∣cause it is freely profered you. Doe not beleeve, answered Prigmaleon, ex∣treamly amazed to see himself thus assaulted; Do not I say, beleeve, if I an∣swer not your desire, that it is out of the consideration of the liberty which you take in discovering your passions: I know how weake men are when love hath resolved to master them, and that it is not in their power to go∣vern their passions, if once they have submitted them to the tyranny of so great a power; and yet lesse then that would I have you beleeve, that I en∣tend to follow any man for a patern of my actions, for they shall ever de∣pend onely upon my owne humour: but to tell you freely what is in my heart, I cannot make vse of your good will, because I doe infinitely love a Lady, that permits me not so to dispose of my will, as you, without doubt, neither could now love the first that should present himselfe to you. Let this reason serve for my excuse, and do not, I pray you, call me ingrate∣full. The service that I will do you with my arms, shall make amends for this default; in the mean time if you have a minde to tarry heere, I will re∣move further, that I may not trouble your repose. Thus it is, said shee in choler, that poore spirits use to excuse themselves. Sleep, since you care more for a nap, then you do for my life. The Gods who are alwaies just, will one time or other revenge your despising of me, and make you thorow∣ly feel the pain that I suffer by your ingratitude. Saying so, she withdrew under another tree with extream discontent, leaving Prigmaleon in no lesse disquiet of mind: for remembring his Polixena, from whom he durst not assure himselfe a better entertainment then now he had given that amorous damsell, he never could shut his eies; and in that trouble he continued, till the sun being risen made him get to horse, where entring into a forrest, that befell him, which shall be deliverd to you in the next Chapter.
CHAP. XLI. Prigmaleon meets with Melina; she gives him an account of Griolanis his fortunes, with the issue of the combat between him and the Knight of the Savage. PRigmaleon travelling in the forrest, under the shadow of the trees, entertained himselfe with his ordinary fan∣cies, and thought of nothing lesse then the damsell, which still followed him, though it were with much discontent; and ashamed for having been so refused, when as on the sudden he heard the voice of a person, who seemed to be much afflicted. Those laments comming to his ear, put him out of his musing, and made him presently goe to a bush, from whence the noise did come; where at the foot of it he saw a Lady, that holding a ponyard in her hand, spake these words: Melina it is time for thee to die, since thy Knight is lost; for thy dayes would be but anguish, and every thought of him an insupportable torture, when thou shalt remember that thou wert the cause of his death, by putting him upon a busines, which could no way conduce to thy content. It had beene much better done to have kept him still in thy house, amidst a thousand pleasures, then to carry him abroad to the hazard of his life. But since this mischief is not to be remedied, thy desire to accompany him, must be without fear; neither must thou shrinke from death to follow him. Lifting up then her hands, she was ready to strike the dagger into her bo∣some, if Prigmaleon, who perceived her intent, and therefore was lighted from his horse, had not suddenly laid hold of her; and remonstrated that despair was a greater offence, then that for which she so much sorrowed. Stay Madam, said he, stay your hand, I beseech you, and do not in this sort run headlong to perdition. The shortest follies are the best; and when you have well considered that the shedding of your bloud, will not restore him to life, whose death you lament, you will, without doubt preserve it; and beleeve that it were better to appease his ghost with some other kind of du∣ty, then to incense the Gods with a new murther. Alas! answered she, loo∣king upon him, if you knew the occasion I have to desire to die, you would not now divert me from this designe. I do not doubt, said he, but the cause of your grief is very important, but yet I say that it ought not to transport you from your reason; and if you could give your self some relaxation in imparting it to me, you should doe much for my satisfaction, and perhaps not a little for the ease of your mind. I am content to do it, answered she, letting the poniard go, but it shall be upon condition, that you shall leave me at liberty to do what I please, if you find the occasions that I have to be just. Prigmaleon having promised her not to crosse her will, provided hee
might do it with reason, she sat down upon the grasse, and thus began her discourse. Walking one evening in a wood neere the house, in which I am ordinarily resident, I met a Knight, who being strayed out of his way, did so curteously entreat me to grant him lodging for that night, as beside the law of charity, which doth bind us not to refuse our helpe to those that doe need it: I felt my self also forced by the fair language, and by the grace that he used in his request, to give him my hand, and to lead him to my house, assuring him that there he should receive the best entertainmen hat I could possibly give him. As soon as we were come there, and that by the light of the torches I had seen his face, I found him so lovely, and all h a∣ctions so pleased me, that not to dissemble, I could not keep my self from falling in love with him. I then made him to be served at the Table, and sometimes serving him my self with the strength of my affection, I so obli∣ged him to my curtesie, that assuredly hee did beare mee some good will, which infinitely rejoiced me; but fearing to lose him, as soon as I had got∣ten him, my contentment was thereby much weakened: To remedy that doubt, I resolved to arrest him with my caresses, I mean, to give my selfe wholly to him without any reservation at all. Taking him then by the hand, after he had supped, I went and fate down with him upon the beds feet, be∣sought him to tell me his name, his quality, and passing from those ordinary tearms to those of love, I made an ostentation, not of my bounty, for of that his eyes could be judge, but of my birth and quality, eminent enough for the ambition of any Knight, that were not a Prince; the conveniencies that I was Mistrisse of, my estate, my humour not unpleasing: and briefly, all that came in my head, and which I beleeved might serve to make him to affect me; but fearing all these charmes would not be able to stay him, I entreated him to grant me one favour, which I intended to desire of him. The entertainment, said he, which I have heer received from you, doth not permit me to be ingratefull in refusing you; Madam, you shall have of me all that you please to command. As for the first point of your desire, I will tell you freely, that I am called Griolanis, born in Macedon, of parents unto whom fortune truly hath done wrong in not conferring scepters on them for a recom∣pence of their vertue; I travell thorow the world to purchase glory, and raise my ambition beyond the limits of my birth, and should reckon my self most happy, if I might deserve the greatnesse of your fortune in possessing of you; but not thinking it fit to aim so high, before my valour hath made me wor∣thy of so great a favour, I will put off the further treating thereof till some o∣ther time, and in the mean while beseech you to let me freely know what you desire of me. To have you maintain a justs in favour of me, answered I, ex∣ceedingly satisfied with his discourse, which confirmed my hope, not in this Castle, but neer Constantinople, that the glory of my beauty may flee about, together with the praise which you will acquire by your noble deeds. Your request, said he, is so much to my advantage, as I will not fear to intreat you that we may be gone about it in the morning. This answer having quieted my minde, I brought him to his chamber, where I left him to take his rest, and having given order for some affairs of mine, after Sun-rising I departed with him, and came to a crosse way not far from hence, where this fair Knight, for three weeks space, acted wonders, and won such glory, that round about there was no talk save of him; but the Destinies, envying my content, brought a
Knight to us yesterday, that bare a Savage in his shield, who defied my lover upon the injustice of his enterprise. Griolanis alwaies accustomed to be conque∣rour, judging by the aspect of his adversary, that he was like to be very vali∣ant, tok the strongest lance that he had, and set himself over against this his able enemy, who seeing him dislodge, set spurs to his horse, & incountered him with such fury, as he laid him on the ground; but Griolanis his blows, being not easily born, he of the Savage also lost his saddle, and all amazed lay in the dust. Choler then having quickly raised these two brave warriors, they pre∣presently drew their swords, and so stoutly charged one another, that all the wood resounded with it; I saw their heads continually covered with fire, pie∣ces of their armour fell to the ground; if one struck with force, the other with dexterity rebated it; blows followed thrusts, their shields were so hewed, that but a little of them was left upon their arms, their helmets were all battered, their cuirasses pierced, and the grasse was stained with their bloud; as often as the Knight of the Savage advanced his sword, I grew pale, and lifting mine eyes to heaven implored the aid of the Gods for my Knight; I was many times rising to part them, and instantly fell down again with fear and weaknesse; briefly, I beheld this combat more dead then alive. Six howrs now being spent between them in this fashion, and yet no advantage to be discerned on either side, both quitted their swords, and taking one another about the middle, they fell to wrestling together with extream fury; sometimes one was above, sometimes another; so that having toiled thus a while with incredible despight to see their victory no more advanced, they by a mutuall consent arose, and ta∣king their swords againe, renewed the combat in a crueller and more fear∣full manner then before: Griolanis did his part to the height, and well de∣clared that he was one of the prime Knights in the world: but the Savage was nothing behinde him. So that having continued the fight in this sort, three or foure houres longer, they advanced both their swords, and at one and the same instant discharged them with such violence on each other, as Griolanis not able to support the weight of the blow, fell to the ground quite deprived of sense, just as his enemy staggering did the like. The fall of these two Knights so amazed me, as I was not able to go presently to Griolanis▪ but love prevailing over feare, I at last arose, and being about to unlace his helmet, I saw two women come riding in a Caroch, who taking them both up, put them into it, and then immediatly going in themselves, without speaking a word to me, went their wayes with such speed, as that, and the astonishment wherein I was, made me that I could not observe what way they took. But having within a while recovered my spirits, I made a horse be brought me, and getting up, I put my selfe into the wood, and sought them all the night, without hearing any newes of them. From hence proceeds my resolution to dye: for since Griolanis lives not, what should I do in the world? So holding her peace, shee went to seeking of her ponyard; but Prigmaleon fell again to comfort her, and so powerfully prevailed with her, as in the end she promised him to do no violence upon herselfe: whereupon bidding the Damsell that follo∣wed him farewell, since the occasion of his journey was removed, he retur∣ned to Constantinople, where we will give him leasure to relate what he had learned from the Gentlewoman, to speake of these two incomparable warriours.
CHAP. XLII. What became of Griolanis and him of the wilde man after their combat. THE combat between these two valiant Knights being en∣ded, as I have told you, Alcander, in whose power they were, and that desired their preservation, as much importing the good of Christendom, placed them se∣parately in a palace, which (by the power of his charms) he made appear in a large plain; and having rubbed them with an excellent Balsamum, he let them sleep all the night; at the end whereof, and about the time when the Sun began to gild the earth, Grian awaking, was strangely amazed to see himself laid in a very rich bed, and not to feel any pain of his wounds, received in the combat the day before, which he had not forgotten. O me! said he, casting his eye on every side, and perceiving nothing but gold and azure, par∣ting a number of excellent pictures that filled the room where he was. What do I see? Where am I, or who could bring me into a place of such delicacie? I remember very well, that I fought with one of the valiantest Knights of the world, and that his sword had pierced my flesh in a number of places, yet now I feel not a wound, nor can I imagine how we were pated, nor who could bring me hither: Certainly this is very marvellous! But I may quickly free my self of all doubt: This stately Palace, is not without inhabitants, and I shall surely finde some body in it, that will inform me how things have past: Leaping then out of his bed, he took certain clothes that lay upon a table, and having put them on, he went down into a dainty garden, where all the excel∣lent flowers of the earth were set in a most strange and artificiall order; he beheld with admiration a multitude of trees, loaden with all manner of fruit, heard with pleasure the musick of a million of birds, who seemed to strive for to render that place most delectable; and viewed with wonder, a many of fountains, which made a fair lake, wherein a world of swans did sport them∣selves: but that which he thought the greatest wonder, was that, among all these rarities, he found not any one person of whom he might be satisfied in what he desirēd: In the end, having visited all the allies, he saw come forth from the other side of the house a Gentleman, so handsome; of so sweet a coun∣tenance, and of so brave a presence, as he beleeved that nature was not able to frame such another piece; his carriage exceedingly pleasing him, he went to salute him, and not knowing him for that incomparable warrior, that had made him so sweat in his armour the day before, he said to him: Sir, you shall much oblige me if you will be pleased to tell me where I am, and who is the Master of this place. Verily, answered the fair Knight, I am in the same trou∣ble that you are, and being heer without knowing how I came hither, was seeking some body that might satisfie me in what you enquire after. As far as I perceive, said Grien, our case is much one, and since a like fortune hath made us (not expecting it) to incounter thus, a like means, it may be, will make us finde the cause of it: Yet me thinks I see a man under those trees; let us, I pray
you, go to him, he may perhaps satisfie our desire: The Knight then, who was no other then Griolanis, looking behinde him, spied an old man com∣ming towards them, of a tall stature, in whose face appeared a Majesty not common with other men, who when heapproached to them, said: Sir Knights, your meeting doth yeeld me matchlesse contentment, for seeing you so kinde friends after so great an animosity, I may with reason esteem my self happy, that I have entertained you in my house. For my part, said Griolanis, who by those words knew that this Knight whom he beheld, was the redoubted Knight of the Savage, that had so late made him despair of his life, I can bear no ill will to this brave warrior, out of the consideration of our late combat; but if he please to love me, I shall gladly do him all service. Love you, said Grian, yes without question I will love you, for it were a crime to hate your vertue; beleeve it then that I am wholly yours: Whereupon, they imbraced one another with as much affection as could be desired, which so contented Alcander, that carrying them into a Cabinet, after he had royally feasted them, with abundance of delicate meats, he thus spake to them: Brave warriors, be not amazed at what you have lately seen; the heavens, that would have you preserved for their glory, made me yesterday seek to save you in a time when you had little reason to hope for it; your choler brought you even to deaths door, my care hath returned you back from it, seek not any occasion of diffe∣rence heerafter; but rather imploy those mighty abilities which God hath en∣dowed you with, to the ruine of those that would overthrow his religion, he will reward your zeal, and you shall see a happy end of all your enterprises. At these words he vanished out of their fight, those stately buildings were now no more to be seen, those delicious gardens changed their form, the Knights found themselves mounted upon their horses, and armed at all peeces, exceedingly astonished at that which had befallen them: But not forgetting the counsell that had been given them, they again protested to love one ano∣ther eternally; and taking the first way that came to hand, they went directly to Constantinople, as you shall see in the Chapter ensuing. CHAP. XLIII. The Princes of Greece are disinchanted: Rozalmond of Greece departs with Alcander: the brave deeds of Arms at the Tourney that was made upon the Knighting of the young Princes. TEN dayes being insensibly past away since the inchant∣ment of the Princes and Ladies of Greece, Cassandra, who knew the time fit for their deliverance, called to∣gether all the rest that were not there inclosed, tooke Rozalmond of Greece in one hand, and the faire Polixena by the other, and leading them very neer the Arches, made them cast certaine vials upon them, full of a marvellous water; which donethey heard a multitude of sweet voyces, that ravished the eares of all that were present:
whilst all the Court expected the issue of so many wonders, whilst the cloud was dispersing, and that they began to behold that admirable foun∣taine, Rozalmond, by the advice of Cassandra, laid hold of a rich sword, which was found planted between the Arches, and having easily puld it out, with the pommell of it struck such a blow upon the inchanted coffer, as he brake it in a thousand pieces; which were no sooner on the ground, but he was seen covered with the richest Armour, and of the strongest fa∣shion that was ever seen: It was made of the bones of a fish that is found in the Atlantike sea, white as snow, and harder then a Diamond: the joynts thereof were overlaid with pretious stones of a strange workmanship; and that which most shewed it selfe, was the gold, curiously inlaid, and parting a thousand delicate figures. This being done in view of all that were in the great Court of the Palace, every one with impatience attended what would be the end of this adventure; when as they saw four fearfull Dragons ap∣peare in the aire, that drawing after them a great Chariot, went and tooke their stand before the Arches, with such an affighting of the people, that every one for his afety was about to run away, had they not beheld the venerable Alcander on the one side, comming out in the head of all those Princes; and on the other side Vrganda, a little before those excellent Qeens. That object assured all the world, but a new occasion of astonish∣ment and displeasure, troubled them anew: Alcander, Vrganda, the young Cassandra and Rozalmond, entred into the chaire, and in few words bidding all those Princes farewell, were carried into the clouds, with such speed, as no man could make them any answer. Sosudden a departure would certainly have very much discontented all the Court, if that yong Prince had been in the power of anyother. But every one being assured that those Sages had not carried him away in that sort, but for his honor, they shewed but little grief for his absence, especially Florisel & the rest of those Princes, who seeing themselves without wrinkles, and with the same beauty and abilities which they had when they were five and twenty years old, did view themselves with wonder, & could not tell how to comprehend such prodigious things. All men cast their eyes upon the fair Queen of France, who having the same charmes about her, that she had when she was called the Basiliske of man∣kinde, strucke every eye with infinite amazement: they also admired the renewed beauty of the excellent Queen of Guindaya, of the matchlesse A∣lastraxarea, which had for so long a time kept the Prince of Colchos her idolatrizer, of the faire Empresse of Persia, the peerlesse Empresse of the Parthians, and the Infanta Rozaliana her sister: and in brief, of them all, who had as well as they experienced how farre the power of Alcander▪ ex∣tended. Dorigel and the rest were no lesse transported with beholding so great a change in those Princes: they did nothing but caresse them every minute, they redoubled their kisses and embraces; and not knowing how to put an end to their complements, spake the same thing a thousand times over. All being thus set upon pleasure, the young Princes who as yet were not knighted, desiring to demonstrate that they were no lesse joyfull then the rest, presented themselves upon their knees together, all armed in white armour, before Florisel of Niquea, and by Persides, whom they had made their spokesman, thus delivered their request. Excellent Prince, it is time that we should appeare in the world as you have done, and by a triall in sport, give an essay of our Armes, and testifie how much we rejoyce to see
you in that estate you are in. Be pleased to make us Knights, we are in case to receive that sacred Order, and determined to fight so well, that you shall not grieve to acknowledge we are descended of your race. My good chil∣dren, (said Florisel, who was highly pleased to see them in that sort) this generous disposition doth so content us, as notwithstanding your youth▪ I will not delay the giving you satisfaction. Sweare then all of you, with one accord, that you will not at any time faile to succour the weake, such as are oppressed, but principally women. When they had all promised rather to dye then be wanting to the duty of a good Knight, he gave them his be∣nediction, knighted them, and left it to their choyce to receive the sword from the hand of any of the Princesses they best liked. That done, he tur∣ned himselfe afresh, to make much of his friends, who seemed to be trans∣ported beyond all joy. These new Knights rising from their knees, with incredible satisfaction, for that they had met with so little difficulty in their designe, went to take a slight repast with the Emperours; and having fitted themselves with all that was necessary, entred the list, where Prigmaleon being chosen for the Captain of two hundred Greek Knights▪ in the head of whom were Russian, Fulgoran, Esquilan, Florizart, Abies, Frizel, Leoni∣das, Armond and Melfort; and Persides with the like number of French and Persians, assisted by his brother Floridan, Rozanel d'Astre, Lucibel, Sestilian, Perion, Florian, Tristor, Quedragant, Dardanio and the gentle Florestan of Sardinia. Vpon the third sound of the trumpet they began the bravest course in the world, Persides, Floridan, Rozanel and the young Prince of France, brake very gallantly upon the Emperour of Aethiopia, Fulgoran, Russian of Media, & the stout Polonian. And passing forwards without once bending in the faddle, for all the encounter of four such famous warriours, they bravely set hand to their swords, wherewith they began to cleare the rankes, in such sort, as already men fore-judged that with time they would prove equall with the prime Knights of the world: Every blow that they gave, laid a man upon the ground, and nothing could have stood before them, if the same foure with whom they ran their courses, had not opposed themselves, and arrested their fury. The brave bastard of Media having Persides in hand, charged him with very much force and grace; but his ene∣my behaved himselfe so well, as he was esteemed no lesse valiant then him∣selfe. Prigmaleon, being opposed to Rozanel, confessed, that he had never seen a man more active, or more able. And the valiant Princes of Canabea, & Poland, had enough to do to ward the blows which Lucibel and Floridan laid incessantly upon them. The honour of the victory being generally disputed by these young Lords, everyone was highly delighted with their behaviour, and more then all the rest, the Princes of Greece, who observing them with wonder, and infinitely admiring such ability in tender yeers, did heartily wish that the honour of the tourney might be theirs, which undoubtedly had befallen them, notwithstan∣ding all that Melfort and the rest could do, who by little and little yeelded to the blows of Sestilian, which that day gave great proof of an admirable valour, when as they saw two Knights enter the field in watchet arms, so gentile, and so gallantly seated in their saddles, that all men had a good opinion of them; their gracefull carriage drawing the most part of the assistants to observe them, it was quickly known, by a Savage appearing in a shield of one of them, that they were the famous Grian, and the fair Knight, of whom such miracles had
been reported. These two warriors seeing that every body observed them with expectation of what they would do, couched their lances, and taking part with the weaker side, at the first course laid Perion of Turky, and Flore∣stan in the dust; and drawing forth their swords, in a moment overthrew Flo∣rian, Tristr, and Dardanio, which so incouraged the side that saw themselves so well assisted, as they had made their enemies to give ground, if Persides and Rozanel, enraged at it, had not astonished Russian and Prigmaleon with each of them a blow; these two young warriors, seeing the disorder which these new commers caused in their troops, charged them with strange fury; but the two invincible Knights received them so bravely, as every one began to be∣hold them with admiration: Persides, who remembered the glory that his fa∣ther had gained in the hardest enterprises, charged him with such mighty blows, as a man of lesse abilities could never have sustained them: But Grian, whom he had to deal with, that was not to be moved with a little, held him so short, as he made him despair of the victory. On the other side, Rozanel and Griolanis entreated one another with a like fury; their swords were perpetual∣ly in motion, their shields fell in pieces, and a thousand flames flew continual∣ly about their heads: If fear of being overcome rendered the Greek Princes strong and hardy, the desire which the others had of acquiring glory in the presence of the most gallant warriors of the world, did so enflame their cou∣rages, as their blows seemed lightening which falls from heaven upon the highest tow. At length the combat having lasted above an howr, Grian madded that he met with so strong resistance, delivered so weighty a blow up∣on Don Persides his helmet, that he made his head touch the crupper of his horse; then flying into the midst of the troops, he met with the valiant Esqui∣lan, upon whose shield he discharged so uriously, as he laid him in the dust; and not satisfied therewith, he ran in among the rest, intending to have used them in the like sort, but that he met with Griolanis, who having overthrown his adversary, deprived Florizart and Leoid of sense, went out of the field with him upon hearing of the trumpet, which sounded a rereat: Spurring then together out of the lists, they took the way to the forrest, leaving a won∣derfull admiration in the Greek Princes of their valour, and mighty displea∣sure in the minde of those young Princes, who had been so roughly handled by them. Four of which, that is to say, Lucibel, Persides, Prigmaleon, and Russian, presently followed them, with a resolution to die, or revenge the disgrace they had received. The end of the first Part.
THE LOVE AND ARMES OF THE GREEKE PRINCES. OR, THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS. Written in French by Monsieur Verdere, And Translated for the Right Honourable, Philip, Earle of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlaine to his Majesty. Tome II. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at the signe of the flying Horse, neere Yorke House, 1640▪
CHAP. I. Rozalmond of Greece being carried by Alcanders Griffons, arrives in the Empire of Gardacia, receives the order of Knighthood from the Emperour, and is entertained by the beautifull Arma∣zia, for her Knight. ROzalmond of Greece being carried by Alcanders Grif∣fons (as I have delivered in the last Chapter of our first Part) divided the air with an incredible content to behold the disposing of the earth and the seas, to∣gether with the order which nature observed in their scituation; If the waters seemed pleasing unto him in their calm, and under the shadow of a multitude of sails which the winds drove sundry waies; the earth separated by mountains covered with trees, by valleies which amiable streams peopled with flowrs, and by plains delectable in the division of towns and fruits wherwithall they were charged, gave him no lesse delight, and left him in a deep astonishment to view over all the marveilous effects of the powerfull hand of God. Two daies being sweetly spent in this ma∣ner, Alcander (who disposed of his leisure according to the event of things which he fore saw by an admirable knowledge) caused his Griffons to stay in the unknown Island of the sage Vrganda, and alighting with her and lea∣ving Rozalmond in the Chariot, accompanied with the fair Cassandra, he said unto him: Excellent Prince, it is time to give a beginning to the wonders which your valour is to bring into the world, your labours shall be great, but as great shall be your reward, and the glory you shall reap by them will make them so acceptable unto you that in stead of being danted with the pains you will every day seek new occasions to employ your self and ren∣der your name more famous. I will not speak heer of the care you are to have of the service of God, knowing full well that your good education hath not been without that instruction, and lesse will I recommend those parts unto your memory which a good Knight ought to be indued withall, the greatnes of your birth having naturally given you a powerfull impressi∣on of vertue; but I earnestly beseech you not to abandon the counsell which this damsell your follower shall give you, untill such time as your destiny shall call you to the place where her presence can no longer serve you: Her parents have alwaies watched for the safety of your predecessors, she shall continue the same care, and her succour shall be no lesse importing your en∣terprises, then that of her mothers was to the designs of Amadis the Great. At these words the Griffons extending forth their wings, rose up so sudden∣ly, that Rozalmond had not time to render the thanks which he thought was due to the affection of this man: wherwithall undoubtedly he had been much discontented if Cassandra had not advertised him that so sudden a de∣parture
was not without some secret mysterie. Comforting himself then with his entertainment, three dayes past away with the same delight as be∣fore, at the end whereof he saw the Griffons, which drew him gently to stay their flight, and alight down neer to a city, the stateliest and most de∣lectable that ever he had beheld; it being composed of beautifull build∣ings, framed after another fashion then at Constantinople, or in the Em∣pire of the Parthians, where he had been brought up. This ovelty plea∣sing him, his eyes were diversly carried according to the variety of the ob∣jects, which ravished him in such sort, that he never thought of alighting out of his chariot; but Cassandra taking him by the hand to divert him from so profound a thought, said unto him; It is no time, brave Prince, it is no time to wonder at such petty matters, by and by you will see far greater marvells: onely let us enter into the city, and be mindfull to reserve so much power over your self, that you fail in nothing when you come be∣fore an Emperour that is to make you Knight, and are to appear before the fairest Princesse of the world, who will this day triumph as much over you, as you in time to come shall triumph over the greatest Knights of the earth. I should fear the encounter of these persons (answered he) if I did not march under your conduct; but Madam, what apparance is there that I can fail in your presence, or that my passion should transport me so far as to forget my duty? I know how to carry my self towards persons of the qua∣lity of this Emperour, and how a Princesse of her merit, whom you so highly commend, is to be admired; so that if I must learn to love, time and my fidelity shall one day make me expert: in the mean season, I will never be troubled to see her sigh for another, and reject my services; for if her heart be other wayes ingaged, you have charms of power to alter her minde, and to subject her unto me in despight of her ablest resistance. Your merits can do more (said Cassandra) then my Art: But not to loose time, give me your sword and helmet, and let us go on. Then advancing towards the city, they went unto the Palace, before which they found four hundred Knights all armed, and mounted in such sort, as if they had been ready to charge some enemy. This encounter amazed them, and they could wil∣lingly have stayed to demand what occasion had assembled them in that manner; but fearing to offend by this curiosity, they past on, and mounting up the staires, came into the hall, where the first object they met withall, was an old man, high seated in a throne of gold, wearing an Imperiall dia∣dem on his head, having by his side a wife of his own age, and a little be∣low a daughter so fair, that nature seemed to have imploied all the power she had left for to make her accomplished. Rozalmond who had pro∣pounded a world of assurance in his actions unto himself, beholding a beau∣ty so rare and excellent, made a stand in the midst of the hall, as if he would have taken time to admire her; but instantly remembring Cassandra's ad∣vice, he continued his pace with a sweet modestie; and seeing himself at the foot of the throne, he kneeled down, where with an admirable grace craving the Emperours hand to kisse, he besought him not to refuse him one boon he would demand of him. You shall have it (said the Emperour, ri∣sing out of his seat for to imbrace him, with astonishment at his so extraor∣dinary feature) and I will never refuse a gentleman of so goodly a presence as yours, albeit my scepter and my crown were at stake for it. I am not heer to ask riches of you (said Rozalmond) Fortune doth give them to us
when we have deserved them, and a man ought to be contented when he is vertuous, but I am now at your Majesties feet to obtain the power to im∣ploy these armes upon my back; first, for the service of God, and then for the succour of those which shall be any wayes afflicted: In a word, Sir, I desire you, if you please to make me Knight, to the end I may in some sort imitate my Ancestours, who by their worthy acts have acquired immor∣tall glory in the world. Your demand seems so just (answered the Empe∣rour) that I should hold it a very great errour to deny you; but it grives me not a little, noble Sir, that I cannot give you so sacred an order with those ceremonies I desire, for having so just an occasion to be afflicted, by reason of the importunity of an accident, that now lies heavie upon me, I cannot any way shew that joy which otherwise I would. The silence I every where observe (said Rozalmond) & that array wherin I beheld some of your people, made me think that you had some great affair in hand, but I could not imagine, Sir, that your Majestie being so puissant in friends, in means, in men, could fear any disaster whatsoever: howbeit, now I learn that the highest are most subject to mishap, and your affliction makes me say, that the condition of men is miserable, seeing it depends onely upon fortune: the most violent diseases finde their remedies, so shall your griefe ere it be long, and time shall restore you to your former peace. The Gods (said the Emperour, shedding some tears) shall if it be their pleasures authorize your words and my wishes, and take pity of my suffering, whilst I comfort my self in that hope. And that you may not complain of me, I will make you Knight yet before dinner, since you desire it so much. Then taking him by the hand, he led him to the Temple, where his Gods were worshipped, and giving him the Oath, he made him Knight after his fashion. All the while the Ceremonies were in doing, Rozalmond had his eies firmly fixed on this beautious Princesse, whom his soul already adored; and perceiving her looks in like manner to be fastened on him, as amazed at the goodli∣nesse of his person, he kneeled down before her, and said; Madam, there is but one thing now wanting to make me compleatly happy, namely, that I may receive the sword from you, who are, in my judgement, the fairest Lady in the world, as I have received the Order from the greatest Empe∣rour of the earth; this favour will so incourage me in the midst of dangers, that I shall draw glory out of the most difficile enterprises. Would to the Gods (said she, amorously sighing) that this were able to adde any thing to your valour; be assured then, Sir Knight, that your good fortune should be∣gin with mine own preservation, and that I would give you forces sufficient to draw us out of the perplexity wherein we are now so miserably plunged; but knowing mine own weaknesse, and the little power I have in the world, I can hope for nothing that way: nevertheles, not to be so far ingratefull, as to refuse you any thing which may become me to grant you, I wil willingly gird you with the sword, & withall humbly beseech the Gods, that you may worthily imploy it, for the glory of their Altars, and the succour of the afflicted; saying so, she took it from the sage Cassandra, hung it at his girdle, and presently would have retired; but the love of this new Knight was more, then to leave her with any distaste for want of an answer: so that bowing himself, and kissing her hand, he said unto her; Excellent Lady, I may truly say, that the bravest Knights of the earth never received fa∣vours equall to those you have been graciously pleased to confer on me
this day, but render my content perfect, I beseech you, and permit me to importune you so far, as to demand why you told me that my good for∣tune should begin with your preservation, if you could adde any thing to my forces; for it is just, that I serve you at this time with the sword where∣withall you have armed me, and I should finde supreme glory in the com∣mandment which you should be pleased to lay upon me, for to undertake some combat, with the title of your Knight. If I did not value your life (replied she with a delicate blush, and a little withdrawing her self aside) I should make no difficulty to expose you to the fury of a man, the most re∣doubted of the earth; who lately encountring the Emperour my father in a forrest, whither for his pleasure he was gone to hunt, cut an hundred Knights, which accompanied him, in pieces; and having struck him down with a blow of his sword, made him promise that I should be the price of his life and liberty, and that he should marry me within fifteen dayes; but desiring to reserve you for an affair lesse dangerous, if I cannot avoid this, I will never permit you to ingage your self so rashly, and I shall be very well contented that you will leave this controversie to be decided by all those Cavaliers, whom you saw before the Court gate when you entred in. I do not think (answered Rozalmond) that the promise of all the Empires in the world would be half so dear to me, as the assurance which you have now given of your fair respect to me. But, Madam, could I merit this grace, or could you ever regard me, if I should be so base as to leave the glory of your service to another? That shall never be, and well might you repute me most unworthy of your esteem, if this occasion should passe over so. My vertue must give me this treasure, and my valour must make me the lawfull master of it; your enemy is a man, and consequently subject to the same accidents which thwart others; I will see him, not with those ar∣med troops, but alone; to the end that the reputation of his defeat may not be divided with others; I most humbly beseech you therefore not to respect my life, which cannot be more generously imploied, and be confi∣dent, that marching for your interest, you will receive satisfaction from my enterprise. These words pronounced with more then an ordinary grace of spirit, gave much content to the Princesse, who took them for powerfull testimonies of love; but her affection making her apprehensive of his losse, she was about to have commanded him not to undertake this combat, when as the Emperour sent for him to sit down at the table, who not enduring to hear the sighes of the afflicted people amidst his own joy, seeing the meat come in, he went and kneeling down before the Emperour, said unto him: Mighty Prince, the honour that you have done me this day, obligeth me to take part of your distresse, nor will it permit me to quit these armes un∣till I have imploied them against this barbarous stranger, who thus dis∣quiets you. He is before the walls of the Town, and it is said, that he hath made a vow never to depart thence till you have performed your promise; let us make good his words, and permit me to send him to a grave, rather then into the armes of a creature so divine, from whom he doth not merit so much as a look: I am in case to fight, there is yet day enough, if he have much strength, I do not want courage; make use, Sir, of a stranger, who hath not the honour to be known of you, nor so much as can tell where he is: If fortune prove mine enemy, you will be the lesse sensible of my losse, in regard you know me not; and if the dice chance to turn, from how much
care will you be delivered. The knowledge which I have (said the Empe∣rour) of the incomparable forces of this warrior, will not suffer me to per∣mit you the combat with him, and the reasons you bring to perswade me thereunto, are proper to disswademe from it; for if you undertake a busi∣nesse out of the onely pity which you have of my affliction, have not I much cause to lament you, if for my sake you should die? Yea, I should be∣wail the losse of you more then of a thousand other men, who it may be could attempt the danger out of the hope of recompence, whereas you pro∣pound nothing to your self, but the glory you expect from your travell: put your self in head of those armed troops, that they may take assurance from this courage; this way you will much more endear me unto you then any other. Sir (answered Rozalmond) the Knights of our countrey never fight with advantage, at leastwise those who hope for honour from their actions: your enemy is accompanied but with one Squire, and with your favour I will carry none along with me but this damsell, who hath alwayes followed me; onely in regard I am on foot, permit me to chuse an horse in your stable. Seeing you will have it so (said the Emperour) I will no lon∣ger oppose you, and the Gods I humbly beseech to favour your valour, and return you with as much glory, as you have justice in this quarrell. This resolution of Rozalmond, having astonished all the Knights of the Court, who beheld him as a wonder, seeing with what confidence he went to affront a man, that scorned to draw his sword against whole troops, greatly troubled the Princesse, who discontented with her fathers consent, would fain have drawn the Knight aside, absolutely to forbid him the fight, but seeing she could not possibly do it without discovering her affection, she was constrained to retire, and have recourse unto teares for the easing of her grief. CHAP. II. Rozalmond combats and defeats the dreadfull Fulmigadan, who would have married Armazia against her fathers will. WHilest the Princesse bewailed the losse of her Knight, which she held to be inevitable, he went to finde out his rivall, with an incredible content for that he had so suddenly met with an occasion to employ his sword for the service of a beauty which his soul ado∣red; but he was vexed with himself, for that he had not been so curious as to demand her, and her fathers name. Intertaining himself in this manner, the thought of his Mistris, from whose fight he was not absented, made him fetch some sighes; whereupon, Cassandra took occasion to say unto him; Ah Sir, did not I assure you that you should see strange things to day, and you should not come out of the city again with the same power you had of your self in the morning? You have been but too true (answered he) for ac∣knowledging my captivity, I may say to you, that now I have seen the fairest thing in the world: But Madam, Why do you not tell me in what
countrey we are, the name of this courteous Prince who hath made me Knight, and that of this incomparable beauty, which hath left me nothing free, but the will to serve her? Why what important affair had you (an∣swered Cassandra, smiling) that hindered you from informing your self thereof? My passion, replied he, may serve to excuse me for that: and I, said she, was restrained by the respect I had, not to withdraw you out of the rapture, wherein the object of this Princesse had cast you: but to satis∣fie your desire, Know that you are now in the mighty Empire of Gardacia, which is so far distant from the Kingdoms of Christendom, that they have never heard so much as speak of it: the Sovereign thereof is this Prince, by whom you were Knighted, valiant in his younger yeers, and so redoubted by all his neighbours, that never any one durst offer to trouble the quiet of his state, but Fulmigadan, the same against whom you now go to fight: who not being able to look upon Armazia, so is your Mistris named, without rendring unto her that which is due to her from all men in the world, found means to surprise her father, and oblige him, by the restitution of his liber∣ty, to make him master of the felicities, which he imagines to himself in the possession of a thing so rare: But it is time to leave off this discourse for an∣other, which touches you somewhat neerer; you are approaching an ene∣my so pissant and hardy, that the Emperour hath, with a great deal of rea∣son, made difficulty to let you go single to so dangerous an enterprise: howbeit, doubt not but this combat will bring you very much glory, so as you call to minde the renown which your fathers have acquired in the world, and that this affair doth mainly import you, in regard it so much concerns Armazia, who if she were in place where she might behold the fight, would questionlesse much advantage you; for her presence would exceedingly augment your forces, and give you far greater courage; wherefore I am minded to request so much of her in your behalf. Then will you oblige me much more then you think for, said Rozalmond, but I fear she will not willingly take so much pains. Leave me the care of that, said Cassandra, and I am perswaded she will make no difficulty at all of it. Whereupon returning presently to the Court, she went to Armazia in her chamber, and perceiving some tears upon her cheeks, she said unto her; Beautious Princesse, I imagine that the pity which you have of our Knight, makes you lament his losse as inevitable, being to encounter Fulmigadan; but it lies in you to hinder that mishap, and to make him this day triumph over so brave an enemy. Would you know how? By not disdaining to ap∣pear upon the city walls; your presence will animate his forces, redouble his courage, and I am perswaded render him invincible; upon this favour, your own good and his life depend: wherefore, Madam, seek assurance in his victorie, as he will finde glory in your service; you shall not repent any pains you can take to go and see him fight for you, for I am confident that you will return with more content then you have grief at this present. I were not worthy to live, if I would not contribute to mine own safety, an∣swered she; Will my presence avail this Knight, say you? It is most just that I give him this small satisfaction, seeing he contemns his own life to save mine; let us go then when you please, but with this assurance, that for eve∣rv drop of bloud his enemies sword shall draw from him, so many tears shall I shed: so being attended by certain Ladies, she appeared upon the walls just at the time, when Rozalmond, being come to Fulmigadan, said un∣to
him. Knight, it is time for you to say, that Armazia is too fair to fall into the power of a man so ill made as your self; she hath sent me hither to free you of the error you are in, that she may one day affect you, howsoever her father hath been constrained by fear to promise the contrary; but thinking that these words would not be very pleasing unto you, I am come provi∣ded to answer you other wayes. What do I hear, said Fulmigadan in won∣derfull fury, doth Armazia disdain the honour of my favour, and do I see my self defied by one man alone? O ye Gods! How will I be revenged on her and you for this affront; but thou, insolent Knight, shalt begin the dance for bringing me so harsh a message. Saying so, he unsheathed a long and heavie Scimiter, wherewithall he struck at Rozalmonds head, but he observing his action, threw away his lance, and laying his hand suddenly on his sword, opposed his left arm to the fury of the blow, which was so great, that it made him bow to the crupper of his horse with extreme pain; but he presently setled himself again, and desiring to be revenged, he struck him with such fury, that the Pagan receiving the blow upon his shield, thought he had been under the ruines of a tower overthrown by lightning, and indeed he so astonished him, that had it not been for his horse that car∣ried him away, Rozalmond, who had his sword aloft, might easily have vanquished and slain him. This first blow amazing Armazia, inflamed her with the love of this Knight, and mde her wish that his enemy might ne∣ver come to himself again; but seeing him re-settle himself in his saddle, and with a world of madnesse make head against his adversary, that pur∣sued him, her bloud congealed in her vains, with the apprehension of so mortall a blow as the ininitenesse of his choler did threaten, nd in truth the rage of the Pagan was such, that Rozalmonda arms, though the best of the world, could not have resisted the fury of the blow; but lightly avoiding it, and making use of the opportunity, he charged full upon the body of Fulmigadan, which he opened, and gave passage to his bloud to issue forth in great abundance: Thus the battell waxing every minute hotter and hotter, the ground was strewed with pieces of their armor, the grasse was died with their bloud, & the skie enlightened with the fire which sparkled from their helmets, and the encounter of their swords. If the force of Fulmlgadan seemed monstrous, no lesse admirable appeared the addresse of his adversa∣ry, both in abating, and shifting his blows; briefly, this combat brought a generall astonishment, and every one expected the end of it by some dread∣full blow. In the mean time, the two combatants charged one another with extream fury, and taking no time to breathe, so quick were their strokes, that their swords were neverseen but in the air, or on their armour. Fulmi∣gadan, far more enraged then can be exprest, and striking with passion, and not with judgement, railed against heaven and earth for producing a man so puissant and couragious, as to be able to withstand his force, that made the whole world to shake; and seeing that four hours were already spent since the combat first began, and yet had gotten no advantage of his ene∣my, he gave such desperate blows that made Rozalmond amazed at his fury; but being no lesse incensed to see that in the beginning of his arms, the vi∣ctory was so long disputed in the presence, and for the preservation of Ar∣mazia, to whom his soul was so far ingaged, he resolved either to die, or suddenly to vanquish; clasping his sword then fast in his hand, he began to presse the Pagan with such terrible blows, that his forces seemed to in∣crease
with his travell, whereat Fulmigadan was so transported with rage, that he took his Scimiter in both his hands, and discharged it so furiously upon Rozalmonds helmet, as it made him fall backward upon the crupper of his horse, casting out great quantity of bloud at his mouth, and nose; whereupon every one thought him to be dead, and the Emperour com∣manded his Knights to assail his enemy, who seemed to be all covered over with bloud and dust; but even as the troops were about to march, they be∣held Rozalmond raise himself up, and make towards Fulmigadan with such horrible fury, that he, who contemned the dreadfull thunder of the Gods, began to fear, seeing him arrive with so much rage, and indeed the blow which he discharged on his head was such, that it cleaved him down to the very shoulders, overthrowing him stark dead to the ground. This victory thus generously obtained, brought a world of contentment to the Emperor, but much more to the beautifull Armazia, who not able to contain her joy, so published the praises of this Knight, as if she had neither voice nor speech but for his glory; howbeit, every one thinking that she did it in regard of the interest which she had in the death of Fulmigadan, it was not supposed that her love made her speak in that maner, but she could not possibly con∣tain her self in the excesse of her passion; for seeing Rozalmond come with some wounds upon him, she made it appear that she would be partaker of his pain, and not enduring to stay till the Emperour had entertained and ca∣ressed him, she went, and with an amorous countenance asked of him whe∣ther his wounds were dangerous. Madam, answered he, I am not so ill, but that if I were to begin another combat for your service, I would most gladly undertake it. The Gods, said she, forbid such another accident; you have done so much this day that your name shall never die in this Empire, so long as the world doth last; but I fear I shall abuse your patience, if I do not permit your wounds to be visited; wherefore I will leave you, having first entreated you to make use of all things heer, as if you were in your own house: the obligation wherein we stand ingaged unto you gives you this power, and commands me to seek out the means to shew my self acknowleding in particular, which assure your self I will do; in the mean time have regard to your health; so with most amourous looks she de∣parted, leaving him more contented with the care she had of him, then with a Monarchie. The Emperours Chyrurgeons being arrived, would have dressed his wounds, but Cassandra desiring them to leave that unto her, she caused him presently to be laid into a bed, and making use of a precious balm, which she ordinarily carried about her, she willed him to rest untill such time as the medicine had wrought its operation.
CHAP. III. The discourse between Armazia and Rozalmond, the reciprcall assurances of their loves: his departure from Cardacia, with the extream discon∣tent of the Princesse, and what were his adventures. CAssandra leaving Rozalmond to his rest, walked into the orchard, where the trees diversly ranged, yeelded an in∣credible delight, and devising with her self what means she might use to get from this Court without giving too much discontent to these new lovers; she espied Arma∣zia, who being carried with clean contrary thoughts, was entertaining her self with the pleasure she conceived to be in the possessing of a man, on whom the heavens seemed to have con∣ferred all the beauty, comelinesse, and valour of the world. Should I not be happy indeed (said she to her self) if this Knight were born for me, and should I not have cause to praise my good fortune, if his condition should prove equall to mine, that so my parents might one day grant me unto him in recompence of his services? Yes no doubt, and I should think that my content would surpasse all the pleasures of the earth, nor would I envy the very glory of the Gods: But alas, I am afraid, considering the misery de∣rived unto us from the fault of the first man, that Fortune hath not given Scepters to his being, and that in regard thereof he will be lesse acceptable to my father, who erring with others, will more esteem greatnesse then vertue, and will make me wretched in his avarice: Howbeit, I cannot think, that a valour so great, a countenance so promising, a presence so a∣miable, and actions so majesticall, may possibly be encountred in a vile and base person: Vertue delights in the highest places, and doth not commu∣nicate her self to such as know not how to acknowledge her; it cannot be but that his birth doth equall his merits, and sure I commit no fault in lo∣ving him: neverthelesse, it were not amisse to clear this point instantly, and so free my self of this unquietnesse that thus afflicts me; which may ea∣sily be done, for this damsell that follows him will not refuse, I hope, to give me this satisfaction: I will send for her then, and under colour of in∣forming my self of the fashions of his countrey, draw her to acquaint me with that which I so much desire to know; whereupon, turning about to command some of her women to fetch her unto her, she perceived her de∣clining that walk, as it were for fear to interrupt her in her meditations; wherewithall being very glad, she called her unto her, and taking her by the hand, said thus; Sweet heart, you shall do me a singular favour, if du∣ring our walk amongst these trees, you will first recount unto me who this young Knight is, being the valiantest that ever bare arms, and unto whose courage we are bound in so powerfull an obligation; and afterwards falling upon the fashions of your Countrey you will faithfully deliver how the Knights live there with their mistrisses. Madam (answered Cassandra) I will content you in a few words; Our lands are happy, because they pro∣duce excellent Knights, and most beautifull women (though I must con∣fesse
I never saw any that might compare with your Highnesse) but that which addes unto our happinesse, is the freedom wherein we live, we know not what suspicion means; the Gallants frequent the Ladies, and the Ladies converse with them, and are ordinarily seen in company together, either in the woods, or fields, free from any conjecture that may any way redound to the prejudice of their honour. It is certain that vertue is not al∣wayes found in all kinde of persons: if any undiscreet Knight shall offend any Gentlewoman whom he shall meet alone, she shall be presently righted by the next that passeth by, and so is the insolence of a dishonourable fel∣low revenged: concerning the situation of the countrey, I will speak brief∣ly, onely saying, that it is very goodly, fertile in fruits, replenished with beautifull and strong towns, pleasant rivers and woods: Now the merit of this Knight, the knowledge of whom you desire; Madam, he is come of the noblest race in the world, and his parents are at this day so great, that the earth trembles at the onely report of their arms; for his valour, you have had the first proofs of it; you are judge of his person, but in re∣gard you are as yet ignorant of his disposition, I will assure you that imagi∣nation is not able to conceive a sweeter, or more pleasing; more I may not say, a precedent Oath forbids me, and without breach of my faith, I may not name him, untill such time as he hath finished some warlike adventures, for the execution whereof I conduct him; and therefore, Madam, I hum∣bly desire you that you will be pleased that he may depart to morrow. How, to morrow? (said Armazia) he is not in case to go so soon, but say he were, you could not in any reason carry him away before the Emperour my father have bethought him of the recompences which are due to his va∣lour. Madam (answered Cassandra) men of this Knights condition under∣take nothing for gain, honour directs their enterprises, and all the riches of the world could not make him step one foot; you are the treasure he de∣sires, and the glory of your service will be far more dear to him, then all the kingdoms of the earth: This makes you blush, but Madam (please you to pardon me if I go farther) it is no time now to disguise your thoughts; I know them as well as your self, and can tell that the perfections of this Knight have gotten him good place in your favour, as your beauty hath not left him without passion. You love him, but it is not fit that your affe∣ction should deprive the world of the fruit of his vertue, him of the honour that he is to reap thereby, you of the content you are to hope from it, and his friends of the satisfaction which they shall finde in the praises every where published of him: the Ordinances of the Destinies, Madam, must be pursued, wherefore let your patience make your pleasures, which you are to enjoy by his alliance, more sweet: I will return him unto you, within a certain time, so full of glory, that you shall think you had been very unhap∣py, if you had hindered his designes; Weigh these reasons, Madam, and never stand upon the consideration of his wounds, they are healed by this time; and let me obtain that favour from you, as to trust your secrets in my hands, I may do you more service therein then you are aware of, and with∣out me you will hardly see your desires fulfilled. It is true indeed (said Ar∣mazia) that I did not think you had had such knowledge, and that being surprized in this manner, my colour rose in my face; but since nothing can be concealed from you, I will deal freely with you, and confesse that the merits of this Knight have wounded me with love, and desire you to be
very mindfull of the promise you have made me, to take care of our affecti∣ons, and of his return, in the hope whereof, not opposing my self to the de∣crees of heaven which govern all things with an admirable prudence, I will permit him to depart when you will, provided that I have to morrow for to see him heer after dinner, and draw from him the vows which I desire for my assurance, at which time you shal bring him hither if you please, and you shall oblige me not to let him know that it is with my privity, to the end he may not take advantage of my weaknesse. Madam, answered Cassandra, he hath too much love and judgement to make so vain a use of that favour, and my self too much devotion unto your service to disobey the command∣ment you have laid upon me; we will be heer presently after dinner, and in the mean time I wish that may be alwayes propitious to your desires▪ Saying so, night being come, she withdrew, and getting to bed, betook her to her rest. This while Rozalmond, having slept six hours, awaked; and feeling no pain from his wounds, was much abashed at the first; but con∣ceiving that this powerfull operation proceeded from Cassandra's salves, he fell to think of his Lady, and his imagination representing unto him the charms of her eyes, the lovely feature of her face, and the delicacie of her complexion, he said; Mighty Love, that disposest the hearts of men as thou pleasest, leave me not now without succour, and make this fair one as sensible of my passion, as my soul is of her beauty, then will I proclaim thy praises amidst my content, and acknowledge no power to be greater then thine; I will publish to every one that thou art justly stiled the Master of the Gods. Entertaining himself thus with such pleasing fancies, he never ob∣served that it was far day, and had continued longer in his bed, if Cassandra had not come in, but her arrivall took him from his thoughts, for to tell her that all his wounds were cured, save onely that of his heart. I do beleeve it (said she unto him) but think you that I cannot cure that of your heart as well as those of your body? I conceive that you are perswaded so, and that my power doth not extend so far; but I will make it good to your ex∣perience in the presence of Armazia, who assuring you anon that she loves you, will make it appear that I have power over all things: then setting her self down at his beds feet, she declared unto him the encounter which she had had with his Mistris, the discourse that past between them, and briefly the commandment she had received to bring him into the orchard, which gave him such content, that all his speech seemed too little to give her thanks for her assistance; he imbraced her, protested that he would never forget this favour, and not being able to contain himself in the excesse of his joy, he called for his clothes, in all haste to run unto the place which should be the witnesse of his glory: but Cassandra wisely delivering, that he ought not to be so transported by his passion, which might over∣throw all his future happinesse, staied him and said: Consider better of your own good, go not on so precipitiously, and remember that honoura∣ble loves are preserved and made perfect by direction. Armazia affects you, it is true, but she would not have it known, and she might justly be of∣fended if your passion should discover her secret, wherefore you see how you are to carry your self with more judgement. I hold your counsell to be very good, answered he, but alas! I cannot command my self; and my joy is such, that thereby my reason is lost: howbeit, I will be more advised since it concerns me so much, and by my government hereafter you shall
known the greatnesse of my affection. Entertaining themselves thus with a world of pleasing discourses, they past away the time with much con∣tent, till Rozalmond went into the great Hall, where the Emperour received him with so much demonstration of kindnesse, that he was even ashamed of his favours. Behold (said he, kissing him on the forehead) one of my chiefest wishes are accomplished, for seeing you in good health after I had doubted of your life, me thinks I have nothing else to desire, but the means how to recompence you worthily: But whilst the Gods shall be pleased to grant it me, make use, Sir, freely of the authority which I enjoy in my Em∣pire; I give you the same power over it which I my self have, and be assu∣red I hold you every way as dear as I do my Armazia: I will not ask you who you are, time and my fair respect will perswade you to acquaint me with it. Yes Sir (answered Rozalmond) and at this instant I would give you that satisfaction, if I could do it without the breach of the vow, which I have made not to discover my self, untill I return from a voiage I had undertaken for the damsell whom you see accompanying me: at which time, Sir, I promise you, not onely to tell you who I am, but to serve you as long as I live, if you will be pleased to do me so much honour, as to ad∣mit me into the number of your Knights. How (said the Emperour) will you leave me so soon? My word obligeth me (answered Rozalmond) and I beseech you be pleased that I depart to morrow, about an affair of conse∣quence, and if Fortune favour my arms, it shall not be long before I return again to wait on your Majestie. I should have been very glad, said the Em∣perour, to have kept you longer heer; howbeit, I will not interrupt your designes, but will rest contented with your promise: howsoever, will you not take leave of the Ladies? My duty bindes me to that, said Rozalmond, and the rather because you are pleased to permit me: So making a very low re∣verence unto him, he went unto the Emperesses chamber, who received him no lesse graciously, and would likewise have perswaded his longer stay; but making the same excuses which he had used to the Emperour, he walk∣ed forth, attending the time that he was to see Armazia; who having with∣drawn her self presently after dinner, entred into the orchard, with the at∣tendance onely of one woman, and came to Rozalnond, who with impati∣ence expected her; and seeing her approach kneeled down for to kisse her hand. I will not permit you to use such humility, said she, for desiring to live freely and plainly with you, I hold these ceremonies unfit; arise then, and tell me whether you desire any thing of me? I desire (answered he, with a trembling that thorowly witnessed his love) Madam, I desire that, passing by the excellency of your merits, you will be pleased to make me your Knight, and receive all the glory which shall arrive to me by my en∣terprises. I have found you so valourous (answered she) that your request redounds to my advantage; wherfore I receive you very willingly, and not onely your arms shall be imploied by my commandment, but if your loial∣ty renders you worthy of more, I shall be glad to let you know that I love you: speaking to you in this manner, you see, Sir Knight, how much I ob∣lige you to behave your self in like sort towards me: Engage not your self elswhere, nor sigh for the favours of another Mistris, you shall for ever finde me firm in that which I have told you, and that I may relie upon your word, tell me, What are your designes? Rather a thousand times to die (answered he) then to make my self unworthy the favour you have done
me; Madam, I will serve you so faithfully, that you shall never repent your affection to me. That is all which I desire, said she; in the mean time, I beseech the Gods to blesse the successe of your enterprises, and quickly to let me see my content in your return; so amourously kissing him, she went away with tears in her eyes; and Rozalmond, being no lesse discon∣tented, got him to his chamber, from whence he stirred not till the next morning about the break of day, when with Cassandra he set forward on his way. CHAP. IV. How Rozalmond and Cassandra put themselves to sea in the goodly vessell of the Sun, and of the marvells which they saw therein. ROzalmond very sorrowfully abandoning Gardacia, ever and anon looked back, and sometimes fixing his eies on the Palace, he said; O Gods! How happy is it being there, and what would not I give to continue there for ever, if I might do it without wrong to mine honour? But the world will not permit me to have more passion for love, then ambition for glory; and spite of my teeth I must leave Armazia, who only can render me contented, and give my soul her full desire. Howbit, I should suffer more willingly, if I durst assure my self that she will love ne but me, and that no rivall shall ever possesse her by her fathers authority; so she hath promised: But alas! Who can rely upon the protestation of a woman, which hath not memory for a day, when a fair offer presents it self, and that many times is carried with the first wind: The object makes her love, her passion draws a thou∣sand promises from her, and the presence of a lover encourages her to the resolution of suffering any torment whatsoever, rather then be disloiall; but time and absence do easily deface these determinations, and her purpo∣ses hold no longer, but till she meet with a subject to make her perjured. Then sighing, as if he conceived such a like misfortune could never crosse his affections, he lift up his eies to heaven, and instantly changing his opi∣nion, he pursued his discourse thus: It is true indeed that the most part of women are possest with such weaknesse, but I should offend infinitely a∣gainst Armazia, to beleeve she can ever be of that disposition. I trouble my self too much, beget occasions of mine own discontent, and foolishly de∣stroy that which she hath built for my glory: I have observed so much freedom in her speech, so much love in her actions, and so much sweet∣nesse in her charms, that I cannot with any reason suspect her of any fals∣hood; I must chase away then thoe thoughts which so disquiet me, be∣leeve that she will never ingage her self unto two, and from thence derive a resolution to serve her faithfully as she well deserves. Cassana, who perceived how he was transped with these fancies, would not interrupt him in regard of the content, she imagined, he took therein; but seeing half the day spent, and no talk of meat, she took him by the arm, and said unto him: My Lord, What do you get by these thoughts, which carry you so
away? Both pleasure and pain (answered he) for if I be well satisfied with the remembrance of the beauties of Armazia, I am as much vexed at my esloignment from her, not having bestowed that time in her service which my affection desired. This should not trouble you (said she) for Fortune prepares you so much pain for that occasion, that you will one day wish you had lesse; I do not speak this to terrifie you, knowing well that you will never fear, come what danger can, but to allay the griefe you are in for your departure from the Court of Gardacia, having acquired no more re∣nown. Howbeit, if I shall proceed, and say something for your comfort, be sure that you afflict your self to no purpose, whensoever you doubt the power of a rivall, Armazia being born to love you with as much fidelity as you professe constancie unto her. But it is time to leave off this discourse, the sea appears, and now we must rowl according to Fortunes pleasure, that so you may give a beginning to the wonders which your actions shall pro∣duce. Approaching then to the sea shore, they beheld the waters begin up∣on an instant, out of a setled calm, to swell with mighty billows, which vio∣lently encountering one with another, made a dreadfull noise. So sudden a tempest amazed Rozalmond, who turning to Cassandra for to ask of her from whence it should proceed, he saw a ship of the strangest fashion that ever eie beheld; it was round, and carved all over, at each window stood a strong and furious savage with an oar in his hand, the outside was azure fil∣led with characters of gold, and roses of the same metall, and in the midst of it was a mast, on whose top appeared a little Sun, shining so bright, that it was not possible for one to look upon it. He was strangely ravished with this marvell, and his eies were so fastned to the beauty of the vessell, that he seemed immoveable; which Cassandra considering, and desiring not to loose time, she alighted, and said unto him: Sir, do not you think now that the wise Alcander loves you well, having sent you so goodly a ship for the execution of your enterprises? I never doubted of his good affection to me (said he) nor of the devotion you have to the advancement of our house (for I am perswaded that you have a hand in the fashion of this work) but in truth, I must acknowledge that this care is none of the least favours, which I may hope both from you and him, seeing it is a mean to open me the way of glory: let us go into it then, if it be made for us, and let us begin to seek our Fortune. Saying thus, he saw six savages open a port, and pre∣sent him a plank; whereupon, going in he became more astonished then before, finding himself immediatly in a room, the richest that ever he had seen; he looked all about, wondering at a thousand rarities which he be∣held there; but that which most delighted him, was six pictures hanging together on a row; whereupon fixing his eie, in the first he observed the very same feature, love had powerfully graven in his heart, which so trans∣ported him, that kneeling down, he said aloud; Beautious Armazia, now am I happy indeed, and there is nothing wanting to my felicity, but that you will be pleased once more to tell me that you live for my content: But alas! You do not speak? From whence doth this silence proceed? From your passion (said Cassandra, who followed him) that doth not per∣mit you to consider how you speak to the picture of Armazia, more proper to feed your eies, then to give you a more fensible satisfaction. It is true (said he, rising up) that the excesse of my joy made me beleeve that this was Armazia indeed, but you are not to marvell at it; for if lovers be blinde,
how would you have me to see the fault which I committed, in adoring the shadow for the substance? Madam, I am not blameable for this action, which testifies the violence of my affection, and if I have any way failed, it is in that I have done it before you, unto whom, me thinks, I should ow more respect. Your greatnesse (answered she) gives you far more power then you speak of; for being heer but to serve you, there were no reason that my presence should bring any constraint to your actions, neither was it the occasion that drew me to put you out of those fancies, but what I did was onely to shew you these other pictures, and to ask your opinion of them; tell me then, I pray you, what you think of the Princesse which is next to Armazia? That Nature (answered he) never framed a more beau∣tifull piece, and if my Mistris were not in the world, no doubt, this fame which equalls her, would bear away the prize from all the beauties of the earth; and that which makes me more to wonder, is, how all the rest may justly boast of the like advantage: What could be desired more in the face of this third, who seems to carry charms in her eyes, powerfull enough for the captivity of all men? Questionlesse nothing, and I hold that Knight most happy, which is one day to enjoy her: but come let us view this Shep∣herdesse a little, and tell me whether ever you saw ever so much grace and majesty under such a rude and unhandsome habit? I am perswaded that the heavens have taken exceeding pleasure in making her so fair, thereby to inform us, that their treasures are not alwayes imparted to the greatest. How contented will the fields be whither she shall drive her flocks, how how happy the trees under whose shadow she shall rest; but far more for∣tunate shall the Shepherd be, whose lips shall be prest with so delicate a mouth! Without dissembling, I envie him, and were Nature wise, she would furnish her with matches worthy such an excellence. For the fifth, truth shall save me the labour of commending her, modesty not permitting me to say that Penamond of Greece, my sier, is worthy to be of their number, which are the wonder of the world. And as for the last, he hath not eies that will say, her beauty deserves not praises equall to the rest. But Madam, will not you tell me who those four be which I know not? Most willingly, answered she; The first is Trasiclea, the excellent Princesse of Tramazond, who hath none to be compared with her but your Armazia, and which may be said to be the most valiant Lady that this day beareth arms, being promised by the Destinies to him, who alone may also be pa∣ralelled to you in feats of chivalrie. The next is Palmirenna, the heir of Martaria. This Shepherdesse so beautifull, is called Miralinda, whom France brought forth, and which shall hereafter fill the world with asto∣nishment. And she that appears with so sweet an aspect, is the stately Queen Corolandaya, worthy of the place where you see her ranked. But, Sir, me thinks, it is time to take a little repast. In good faith, said he, I could wil∣lingly content my self with beholding my Armazia, but seeing it is your pleasure I shall eat, let us do so; whereupon, going to a table set full with exquisite meat, they sat them down, whilst their vessell swiftly cut the waves, being carried, as it seemed, moreby the dexterity of the savages, who rowed with a wonderfull strength, then by the wind that filled the sails: after their repast, they fell to discourse upon a world of pleasing sub∣jects, which past away the day in such sort, that might came upon them far sooner then they were aware of; so that Cassandra withdrawing to a
chamber, and Rozalmond to another, no lesse rich then the room where he had been all the day, they got them to bed for to take their rest. CHAP. V. Rozalmond and Cassandra arrive at the secret Iland, where Clarisel of Guindaya was retained by inchantment in the embraces of Crisolita the Inchantresse. EIght daies being sweetly spent in this manner, their ves∣sell staied neer to an Island, wherein they beheld a stately Castle on a little hill, the foot whereof was planted with a thousand sorts of beautifull trees, which made the place so delightfull, that they presently land∣ed, being resolved to view it at leisure; leaving then their horses behinde them, they went on fair and soft∣ly, very much marvelling to see a number of walks, of almost an incredi∣ble length, into which the Sun never so much as looked: but they not gone far, when turning on the left hand, they met with an arbour, where∣into as Rozalmond would have entered, he perceived a young man asleep, so accomplished, that he stood a good while earnestly gazing on him without uttering a word; he was of a large making, uniform in the disposition of his members; and though his eyes were shut, his face shewed a warlike countenance. Upon my soul (said Rozalmond, speaking softly to Cassandra) here is one of the handsomest Gentlemen on the earth, his shape very much contents me, and me thinks I cannot chuse but love him. No doubt you have reason for it (said Cassandra) for he touches you so neer, that you should deny nature, if you had not some affection to him; in a word he is your kinsman, and is named Clarisel of Guindaya, son to the famous Flori∣sel of Niquea, carried away (as you have heard) when he was in his swad∣ling clothes, and now kept heer by the charms of an Inchantresse, who loves him no lesse then Ginolda did in times past the valiant Prince of France; but it is high time to free him from so long a captivity, to the end his vertue may be manifest to the world; and for that regard, I caused the ship to stay heer, knowing that your valour was necessary for his deliverance. Me thinks (said he) there needs no great labour to bear away a man that sleeps, and that is without arms to defend himself, if he had power to do it; shall I carry him aboard the vessell? No (said she) let us stay and hear what this damsell will say to him that is coming; it is Crisolita, she that captivateth him as much by the charms of her beauty, as he is otherwise held by those of her mother Creonda; then softly retiring, and hiding themselves be∣hinde the trees they let this Nymph passe, who seeing Clarisel asleep, put her mouth presently to his, and finding that this touch did not awake him, she said somewhat aloud with a sigh. Alas! It seems your cares are not like unto mine; you take your rest, whilst I am disquieted; your eies are closed, whereas mine are covered with teares; sleep no longer, dear Clarisel, but come and take part of my pain, and let us seek the means to divert the storm wherewithall we are threatned. At these words Clarisel arose, and
seeing Crisolita's cheeks all bedewed with tears, he said unto her: Whence comes this change? What cause have you to look so sad, and why do you thus complain? Because the end of our content is come (said she) for my mother told me in the morning that your Destnies will not permit you any longer abode heer, and that a Knight will arrive very suddenly, who shall carry you from hence; judge then whether I have not reason to weep, and just occasion to wish my self out of my life; for what pleasure can I take in the world, if I may not see you, my dear heart; all delights will be trouble some to me, my griefe will make those joyes, that would even ravish others, distastfull unto me, and the memory of our imbraces will torment me, when I am deprived of the hope any more to enjoy such happinesse. I do not think (said Clarisel) that any man can take me from hence against my will; wherefore do not you afflict your self in this sort, for be assured my love is too much for me to forsake you so: but I wonder that your mother, who can stay the Sun in his course, force even the devils themselves, and do what else she please against the law of nature, doth not shew her self more carefull of our good, by impeaching the arrivall of this Knight. The Ordinances of heaven are inviolable (answered Crisolita) for you may be confident that she hath imploied the utmost of her skill, and yet cannot come to know how, or by whom you are to be carried from hence; which makes me conjecture that a Magician, more cunning then her self, hath un∣dertaken the care of this affair: wherefore I must resolve to lose you, and so I will; but first I desire to obtain this promise from you, which wil be infi∣nite comfort to me in your absence, that you wil alwaies love me, and return hither sometimes unto me. Let the Gods, who are judges of our thoughts (said Clarisel) refuse me in my greatest occasions, if ever I forget the fa∣vours you have done me; Madam, they are of too much esteem with me, and I am more sensible of benefits then to affect the name of ingratefull; but since the Destinies will separate us, let us make use of the time we yet injoy, and by a thousand new delights, assure our love against the common weaknesse of an absence. Then beginning their caresse with a million of kisses, I doubt they would have proceeded farther, had not Rozalmond, whose mouth peradventure began to water, broken the bough of a tree, to give them a tacite notice, that they were seen. The lovers surprised with this noise, arose straightway from the ground where they lay, and running towards the Castle, got immediatly out of sight; whereat Cassandra, laugh∣ing, turned to the Prince, and said; Behold, Sir, a testimony of that power called Love, which oftentimes carries us into extreamities, not per∣mitting us to consider of things, but let that passe; you are now to imploy your sword for the rendring of a man to the world, who question∣lesse will prove very necessary in it. Let us go, Madam (said Rozalmond) for I shall most willingly undertake this enterprise, and receive infinite con∣tent to serve mine unkle upon so worthy an occasion: using some speed then, they arrived neer to the Castle, where under the first gate they en∣countered a man of a goodly stature, who seeing Rozalmond advance, said unto him; Knight, you cannot enter heer, unlesse you overcome me; wherefore let us try unto whom Fortune will be most favourable. I will not commit such an errour (said Rozalmond) as to trifle out the time unpro∣fitably in talk; so that using no farther speech, they presently charged one another with two such mighty blows, that thereby either of them knew the
force of his enemy; the Knight of the Bridge, as valiant and couragious as could be, offended his adversary, and defended himself with marvellous dexterity; but he was exceedingly vexed for that his sword could not fa∣sten on Rozalmonds armour, who giving him sometimes a thrust at the brest, then a down right blow on the shield, cut all his arms in pieces, and drew the bloud from divers parts of his body, which put him in such a rage, that not regarding his life, he struck such blows, as oftentimes made Rozalmond see Stars, though the Sun were but in the midst of his course. The combat continued in this manner very cruell and dangerous, each imploying his uttermost force, especially the Knight of the Bridge; who being mad for that he saw no bloud on his enemies armour, and resolved either to van∣quish or to die; he set both his hands to his sword, and struck his enemy so rudely on the helmet, that he made him stoop with one knee to the earth, whereat he was so mightily incensed, that rising in fury, he discharged such a terrible blow on the Knight of the Bridges shield, that having divided it in two, he made him to stagger, and put both his hands to the ground, whereon questionlesse he had fallen, had not the shame of being overcome, and the apprehension of death caused him quickly to get up again. Re∣newing the fight then with more cruelty then before, they held out three long hours without any shew of taking breath; but Rozalmond, who began to enter into fury; and mad at the resistance which he found in his enemy, gave him so dangerous a blow upon the helmet, that had not his sword turned in his hand, his head had been cloven in pieces; howbeit, not being able to support the violence of such a stroke, he tumbled to the ground as if he had been dead. This fall without doubt had brought a great deal of con∣tentment to the victour, if he had not pitied the misfortune of so strong and valiant a Knight; but desiring much to save him, he stepped instantly unto him, and unled his helmet to see whether he were in case to receive any assistance, which at the first he greatly doubted, perceiving his face to be covered all over with bloud; howbeit, not to omit any thing that might serve for his preservation, he intreated Cassandra to wipe him, and to em∣ploy her utmost skill in Chyrurgerie for to recover him if there were any hope of it; and so not stopping at this first victory, he went on with his sword in his hand, resolved either to see the end of the adventure, or to die in the attempt; approaching then to the second gate, he was about to have knocked, when he perceived Crisolita coming forth, followed by the old Creonda (leading a furious serpent, of the strangest form that ever was be∣held, in a chain) who modestly making towards him, said: Excellent Prince, it is not fit that we should longer oppose your desire, or hazard your life in the claws of this serpent, which is so inchanted, that you could not triumph over it without a world of pain; for knowing now who you are, I cannot, me thinks, endure to see you in any extremity, my love to your kinsman wills me to serve you in stead of seeking to hurt you; sheath your sword then, and be assured heer is none but thse that will gladly re∣ceive the honor of your cōmandments. Madam (answered Rozalmond, who little expected such gentle language) without dissembling, I did not think to finde so facile an entrance, considering the dangerousnesse of the guards; but since you will free me from that labour, and do also say that you love me, not having any way obliged you thereunto, I receive this favour with all respect, and do protest to serve you, so far forth as not to demand your
lover of you, for whose deliverance I come hither: your meeknesse makes me ready to leave him to your caresses, until such time as some other Knight lesse courteous and sensible of obligations, shall come and pluck him from you. No my Lord (said Crisolita) I have more love then passion, and will never prefer mine own satisfaction before Clarisels glory, it is time for him to see the world, and pursue his fathers steps, that so the Oracles, which publish wonders of him, may be made good. Madam (said Rozalmond) you are as generous as fair, and my unkle is most happy in your acquain∣tance; but you shall very much oblige me, to let me rid the world of so dangerous a creature as is that same your mother holds there. My Lord (answered Creonda) we have easier waies, for having kept him hitherto but onely to oppose him to the violence of such as sought after your kinsman, it is in our power to famish him now that he is no longer fit for that pur∣pose; wherefore, I pray you, be not offended if I deprive you of this glo∣ry, which you would adde to the triumphs which are due to you, all your actions being so many miracles; you must not be displeased then if we hinder this combat, since our weaknesse, and the good wil we bear you, will not permit us to behold you in any danger whatsoever. Madam (answered Rozalmond) your fair respect to me obligeth me so much, that I am con∣tented with what you please; and seeing you hold it not fit for me to im∣ploy my sword upon this serpent, let us go in; but see, heer comes my unkle, unto whom I must by any means tender my service. Clarisel then ar∣riving, they entertained one another with all the demonstrations of kind∣nesse that might be, each of them admiring the goodly presence of the other: and as they were thus complementing, the fair Cassandra approach∣ed, who assured them that the valiant Silveri of the Desert (so was the good Knight named, whom Rozalmond had combatted at the first gate) was out of all danger, whereat they were not a little joyfull; and so they continued caressing one another, till it was time to go to supper; where they were roially entertained, and from thence conducted to their cham∣bers to take their rest after their painfull travells. CHAP. VI. Clarisel of Guindaya, being made Knight, departed with Rozalmond, Silverin of the Desert, and Cassandra; he becomes iamoured of the fair Miralinda the French Shepherdesse; the furiou combat that he had against four dreadfull Giants and twenty Knights. THe night being sweetly past away by every one, but by Carisel and Crisolita, who interrupted their usuall plea∣sures with an infinity of fighs and tears, drawn from them by the grief to see themselves so soon to be sepa∣rated; each one arose with the day: Clarisel put on a white armour, which Creonda with her conjurations had made sufficient proof against any stroke whatsoe∣ver, and withdrawing himself into a place where Creonda kept her Idols, he
fell to praying unto God (whom he began now to know by the means of his Nephew, which most part of the evening had instructed him there∣about) that he would be pleased to blesse his arms for the glory of his ser∣vice, and the honour of his house. In the mean time Crisolita, well resol∣ved for his absence (since the heavens would have it so) went into Rozal∣monds chamber, and perceiving he was not asleep, approached to his beds side, and kneeling down, said unto him: Excellent Prince, I am come to importune you for a thing, which I must desire to obtain of you, and which I intreat you not to refuse me upon the condition that I will never alter the resolution I made yesterday. Provided Madam (said Rozalmond) that you arise from the place where you are, I will with all my heart grant whatso∣ever you can demand of me, but this humility of yours displeases me (par∣don me for speaking so) I being of no such recommendation in the world as to be complemented with so much submission. I cannot (answered Crisolita) yeeld you so much honour, but that you yet deserve far more; howbeit, since you command me to carry my self otherwise towards you, I hope I shall not erre in obeying you. That which I desire of you, my Lord, (said she, being risen up) is, that you will pleased to give Clarisel the Order, to the end that the memory of being made Knight by so excellent a hand, may render him worthy the renown which his father hath acquired in the world; for if he must go along with you, I shall think my self happy that he may take courage from your presence to combat bravely whensoever fortune shall offer him the occasion in your voiage. Madam (answered Ro∣zalmond) the merit of your beauty obliged me to respect you before, but I never esteemed you as I do now, nor was perswaded that it was possible any woman could love so generously as you have done, which makes me once more to say that mine unkle is happy in your affection, seeing you pre∣fer glory before your own satisfaction, and his honour before the content∣ment you might have in him; you desire to have him Knighted, if he be ready, your pleasure shall be presently fulfilled. You shall finde him all ar∣med (answered she) and when your leisure will permit, my mother shall wait upon you to conduct you to the Temple of our Gods (whom for his sake I utterly renounce) whither I will go with Cassandra, that my prayers, be∣ing conjoined with hers, may the better obtain from heaven those graces, which are requisite to so sacred an Order. Departing then with a very low obeysance, she went to seek out Clarisel, who observing as much love in her patience, as he had found in her caresses, he could not contain himself from kissing her; notwithstanding, the presence of Cassandra, who seeming not to see them, kneeled down after she had wished him all good fortune; having spent an hour in prayers, Rozalmond arrived, who finding Clarisel on his knees, demanded of him whether he would be Knighted? That is it (answered he) which I most desire in the world: Swear then (replied Rozalmond) that the fear of no danger whatsoever, shall at any time make you decline the duty of a good Knight, which owth his assistance to all kinde of persons, and chiefly to women, without any regard to their conditi∣on. I promise so much (answered Clarisel:) Be a Knight then said Rozalmond (imbracing him with the usuall Ceremonies, and making the signe of the Crosse on his forehead:) Let you arms alwayes tend to the glory of God, the service of the feeble, and be your enterprises as successefull as you can wish. Whereupon having kissed him on the cheek, he asked of him from
what hands he would receive the sword, and the rest of his arms: from these twins (said Crisolita) the onely cause of his first carrying away, and the pledges of our love: At these words, Rozalmond turning him about, per∣ceived a little girle about five or six yeers old, the fairest that ever he had seen of that age, whom a page followed with an excellent sword, which she took, after she had made obeisance to the company, and with an admirable grace hanging it on Don Clarisels girdle, she retired to give place to a little boy of the same bignesse, and so accomplished, that Rozalmond wondered to see him take the helmet with a kinde of brave confidence, and put it on the head of the new Knight, who having received the gantlets from Cassan∣dra and Crisolita, he rose up to give thanks unto Rozalmond for this favour; but he was so transported with the sweet entertainment of these pretty children, whose beauty he justly admired, that he marked not the halfe of his complements. All the Ceremonies being finished, Crisolita obtained of Rozalmond that he would stay there eight daies longer, which past away very pleasingly, sometimes in the company of the valiant Silverin of the Desert, whom Rozalmond much affected, and that was now thorowly cured of his wounds, and sometimes with the entertainment which Cassandra and Creonda gave him by some ingenious trick of their Art: But the day of de∣parture being come, Crisolita's resolution began to faint under the grief she had to see that her lover was to be divided from her. Ever and anon she sighed, and not able to stop the course of her tears, it appeared how insen∣sible she was of the reasons Clorisel gave for to comfort her; howbeit, yeelding unto her judgement that represented unto her the necessity of this departure, she made some truce with her sorrow, and accompanying him to the ship, she received the kisses of a farewell, which made her return home extreamly sad, for that she should no longer behold the Sun there, from whence the life of her soul was derived. Whilst she bestowed the time in lamenting, Rozalmond, Clarisel, Silverin of the Desert, and Cassandra, made way thorow the waves in the great vessell of the Sun, with the beauty whereof Clarisel was so taken, that observing the rrities of it, by fortune he cast his eie on the delicate Shepherdesse of France, whose charms were so pleasing to him, that by little and little forgetting Crisolita's caresses, he suffered himself to be altogether captived, giving the glory of his freedom to the innocent features of this countrey in beauty. Good God (said he to himself) how defective is Nature in the dividing of her treasures, and how little providence seem the heavens to have in the distribution of their gra∣ces? Why should a beauty so excellent be born with so much misery, and what reason is there that she should one day serve for the contentment of a Shepherd, who shall not have the judgement to know the value of so inesti∣mable a jewell? Questionlesse it is unjust, and it were unworthy in me to suffer it; if Nature have made a fault, I will repair it; I am born a Prince, it is in my power to raise a base condition, and to place her in the rank where she ought to be: I must then, without any regard at all to the opi∣nion of men, who more respect greatnesse then vertue, riches then merit, and gold then contentment; make no difficulty to love her, provided her ingratitude do not render her incapable of that fortune; now if any man will condemn me for this action, my fathers example shall serve to excuse me, who was no lesse inamoured of Silvia, then I am now of this same; and without doubt he had married her, never sticking at her poverty, if the
providence of Vrganda, who knew she was his aunt, had not hindered him. This young Prince entertaining himself with these new fancies, took infi∣nite delight in the object of this picture, whereupon his eies were incessant∣ly fixed; but that which most troubled him, was that he durst not ask of Cassandra the place of her abode, lest he should seem inconstant, and little sensible of Crisolita's love: neverthelesse, shewing more curiosity then affe∣ction, he learned the names of Armazia and Trasicle, and discovered that his Mistris was French, which gave him some satisfaction, hoping to see her one day, and rather then fail, to traverse all the fields of that great king∣dom for to finde her out: comforting himself then upon this assurance, & in the sweet conversation of Rozalmond, Cassandra, & Silverin, eight daies were insensibly spent; at the end whereof, they saw a ship arrive, manned with fifty Knights, and four terrible Giants, who laying hands on their swords, commanded our Knights to quit their arms, and willingly suffer themselves to be chained. By heaven (said Rozalmond) you are unlike to have us at so easie a rate, nor shall your audaciousnesse carry away the victory without some pain: so quickly lacing on their helmets, they opposed the Giants with their swords drawn, and charged them so fiercely, that it amazed them at first; but thinking that all the forces of the world united together could not withstand them, they began to showr so many blows upon them, that without the goodnesse of their arms, which resisted the sharpnesse of their blades, they had been in very great danger, howbeit, fighting without fear, they sent many an arm into the sea, cut Knights in sunder, and many times drew bloud from the Giants, who railing on the Destinies, and their Gods, struck most of their blows on the ship side (being hindered by a thick smoak, which issued out of their visers, from smiting where they would:) Silverin fought with a great deal of valour, Clarisel did wonders in the com∣mencement of his arms, and Rozalmond amazed every one; his blows were so many thunderbolts, and his sword never lighted without the bloud of his enemies. Whilst the fight was at the hottest, one of the Giants percei∣ving Cassandra where she sat in the vessell of the Sun, leaped suddenly in, and laying fast hold on her, carried her into his ship, when one of the sava∣ges discharged his oar so strongly on his head, that he struck him into the sea, whereinto Cassandra had tumbled with him, if she had not been suc∣coured by Clarisel, who marking the Giants enterance into their vessell, at the very instant ran his enemy clean thorow the body, who therewith fell down dead in the place: this young Knight having caught her by the gown, and placed her again in the ship, returned suddenly to the fight; exceeding∣ly amazed to behold with what grace Rozalmond imploied his sword, and in what manner, having eleft the Giants head with whom he had to do, he bestirred himself amongst the fouldiers; following him then with the like courage, he performed such wonders, that Rozalmond stood a while to con∣sider him amongst those Knights, who fell before him as the grasse before the mower; so as not being able to hold out any longer, they were quickly cut into a thousand pieces: In the mean time Silverin, who was in fight with a Giant, seeing his friends glorious by the defeature of all the rest, be∣came so furious, that making no account of his life, he put both his hands to his sword, and therewith smote his enemy so dangerously on the body, that he opened him even to the very back, tumbling him into the sea with his companions. This so glorious a victory having given them incredible con∣tent,
they would have gone down into the hold of the ship for to have deli∣vered such prisoners as they should have found there, but that they were staid by a noise they heard; and as they were about to learn the cause ther∣of, they saw a window open in the side of the ship, out of the which a Gi∣antesse threw her selfe headlong into the sea, holding in her arms a damsell reasonable handsome, who seeing her self in such danger, cried out alowd for help: At her crie all the Knights suddenly reached forth their hands for to have saved her, but their pity was to no purpose; for the Giantesse sink∣ing to the bottom, she was drownd with her, whereat the Princes were ex∣ceedingly greeved; neverthelesse being comforted by the little knowledge they had of her, they reentred into their own ship, which running her first course had quickly left that coast, and sooner far then Cassandra could visit those Princes, who were all unhurt except Silverin of the desert, that had received a cut on his left arm, but the wound not being great he made little reckoning of it, and sat down at the Table with the rest, where we will leave them, and take a little breath. CHAP. VII. Clarisel of Guinday a incountring by night with a strong adventure, forsakes the ship of the Sunne, and departs for to go into France to the succour of the brave Alcidas. THE ship of the Sunne cutting the waves wonderfull swiftly, Rozalmond and the Knight of the desert past away the time with much content, whilest Clarisel not without unquietnes intertained his thoughts with the perfections o his fair shepheardesse, and the extream desire that he had to see her, made him to wake when others tooke their rest; so that one night not being a∣ble to sleep, he forsook his bed, and getting up to the deck, he began to speak unto the waves (as if he would have demanded their assistance against the flames which consumed him) when a voice broght to him by the wind from a far, drew him out of his thoughts to give eare un∣to that which she said; the neerer he approached, the better he understood the accents of the voice, which interrupted by an infinity of sighs, made him conclude that they proceeded from a person very much afflicted: wher∣withall he was so moved to pity, that he presently descended into his cham∣ber, took his arms without speaking a word to his companions, instantly re∣mounted up, and seeing a bark passe by wherin was a woman lamenting, he said unto her: Gentlewoman, if you will let your vessell come neerer, and take me in, I willingly offer you my sword, if you can make any use of it for your content. Alas! (said she fighing) the complaint which I make now proceeds from my not meeting with any one that is sensible of my sorrow, and that will undertake the deliverance of a Lover, the faithfullest that ever sighed at the feet of a beautifull mistris; wherfore I will not refuse your no∣ble offer. Saying so, she drew neer with her bark, received Clarisel in very curteously; and commanding the mariners to hoise up sails, and run on their
former course, she thus proceeded: I imagin that the only compassion of my pain, and the glory which is to be expected from a generous enterprise have given you the desire to succour me; but beleeve me, Sir Knight, you wilbe caried therunto with more affection when you understand the occasi∣on of it. The time was that I lived very contentedly, and free from the cares of the world, beleeving that fortune was not able to crosse this my happi∣nes: but that powerfull divinity which alwaies triumphs over men, made me feel that our good or harm depend on his favour and frown. I walked forth one day into a wood adjoining to one of the fairest houses of France (whither I am now conducting you) and little thinking of love, I went ad∣miring the providence of nature, that produceth all things either for the profit or pleasure of man, when through the trees I perceived a Knightly∣ing upon the grasse: I was about to have turned back (and would to God I had, for then you had not seen me at this present so sigh and complain) but being a little too curious, and having my woman with me, I ventured to go close unto him; as soon as I had seen his face which seemed marvellous beautifull, it was impossible for me (O Gods! can I say it without shame? yes, since my fortune will have it so) it was impossible for me, Knight, any longer to maintain my liberty, but even then I received the hurt which time hath made incurable. I had taken exceeding delight in beholding of him, if some tears that trickled down his cheeks had not troubled me, but there by apprehending the misery which now I am in, I found pain in this pleasure; howbeit having more love then feare, and foolishly imagining that I had beauty sufficient to alter him, in case he were in passion for ano∣ther, I went to awake him with a kisse, when I perceived him to open his lips, and complain in this maner: O Gods! must our love yeeld to the fury of a barbarous mother, and shall our desires depend upon her avarice? Fair Clitia, I cannot beleeve but that the memory of our delights are dearer to you then her commandements, and that you prefer your vowes before her menaces. But your silence doth much amaze me, and I am not able to say whether I am to fear a change in you, or some mischance in your person. Mighty Love, divert both the one and the other of these accidents, and suf∣fer not humanity to be of more power then thy selfe. These complaints infinitely displeased me, and I would fain have retired, if my new passion would have permitted me; but being no longer Mistris of my will, I came inconsiderately to mine owne ruine, neverthelesse knowing that modesty is a powerfull charm to win mens affections, I would not seem impudent, but withdrew my self under some trees fast by, and began to sing, hoping that he would repair to the voice as he did; for not giving me so much lea∣sure as to sing out fowr verses, he arose, and creeping from oak to oak he came very neer unto me. I marked him well, but making as though I did not, I continued my song, at the end whereof he shewed himself, and salu∣ting me with an excellent grace, demanded of me whether I would accept of his company. Another would have been affraid at the sudden approach of a man unknown, but not desiring to make use of any such cunning, I an∣swered him with a smile (which might very well have testified my thoghts) that it were simplicity to refuse a Knight of so fair a presence as his. To what end should I relate the discourse we had then, and how I applied all my allurements and charms for to render our disease common? Without doubt it would but adde unto my misery; wherefore I will only let you
know, that taking occasion to discover unto him what I thought of certain sighs he had fetched, I told him that his good parts had possest me with a great desire to love him, and that I intreated him to consider what good he had gotten without any labour at all. My speech ending with a mighty blush, he looked upon me, and answering me with a sigh. Alas! Madam, said he unto me, what a world of cause have I now to complain of my ill fortune, which having ingaged my affection in another place, will not suffer me to receive the favours you would confer upon me. These eies wherein you yet see tears do witnes but too well, that my heart is not at quiet, and that a woman possesseth it: be pleased then not to accuse me, if I doe not dispose of it according to your desire, seeing I have not the power so to do; but if in any other thing you can think me fit for your service, Madam com∣mand, I will recompence the honour of your love, with my bloud, and will gladly die to assure you that I am much obliged by your favour. Imagine, I pray you, whether I took any pleasure in this answer, whereby the death of all my hopes was concluded. No questionles, for I was almost ready to swound with grief at it, but my anger preserved my judgement, for to complain of him, and I began to tearm him cruell, when I saw a woman appear, who knowing him alighted at that very instant, and presenting him a letter said, that Clitia, (so was my rivall called) remembred her service unto him. At these words I perceived him grow pale, and his legs became so feeble, that he had fallen down had not that woman upheld him. I was almost as sensible of his indisposition as himself, but desiring to make use of the opportunity it gave me, I took the letter out of his hand, and knew by the contents thereof, that Clitia being ready to be delivered of a child, derived from their stollen pleasures, desired him to return in all haste both for to legitimate the birth of it, as also by that way to deserve the favour which her mother had alwaies denied them, protesting in case he were dis∣loiall, not to survive her delivery, but to poison her self. I was violently in love with him, I must confesse, but when I considered the reason that he had to affect this woman, who upon his faith had made no difficulty to give him that, which ought of all things to be most dear unto us, I set by mine own interest, and shewing more pity then love, I counselled him to depart instantly away, since it so much concerned his Mistris life and honor. This is to love nobly, said he being come to himself again, but Madam, my mis∣fortune will not suffer me to expedite my journey, my horse being slain in a combat which I had yesterday just without this wood. That shall not hin∣der you, replied I, for I that would give you my self, cannot refuse you an horse. Then bringing him to my stable, I bestowed one of the best Cour∣sers of the Kingdome on him, and so letting him go, I returned to my cham∣ber for to complain of my destiny, that had made me to love a man, who had not the power to recompence my affection, and for to seek out reasons to divert me from these fancies, in the continuance whereof I saw my assu∣red ruine, but to speak truth I could not resolve so much as to say that I would never love him: proceeding then in my former passion, I presently dispatched away a Squire, and charged him expresly to enquire what be∣came of Alcidas (so is that worthy Knight named) which he performed with so much care, that about six daies after he reported unto me the death of Clitia, who had poisoned her self, thinking that the retardment of her lover was a sign of his disloialty; and further, which much perplexed me,
he delivered that the mother of this Lady had caused Alcidas to be appre∣hended (as he was shedding an ocean of tears on his Mistrisses tombe) and imprisoning him, had condemned him shamefully to lose his head, if within three moneths he did not finde a Knight that would combat Farna∣bazan, a terrible and mighty Giant, who came not long since to inhabit up∣on this womans lands, no man knowing wherefore. If the death of Clitia was pleasing to me, because it opened a door to my hopes, you may as well beleeve that the captivity of Alcidas afflicted me; howbeit, loving him too much onely to bestow tears on him, I put my self to sea two daies after, with a purpose to go unto Constantinople, to demand the assistance of some one of those brave Princes, which seek the like occasions of glory; but I am sufficiently satisfied for all my travell, having incountred you in the strangest manner that ever was, and applauding my good fortune, I will hope that ere long you will restore me to the supremest degree of my felicity, seeing justice accompanies your arms. Madam, assure your self (answered Clarisel) that I will gladly fight for his preservation, and your contentment; but if you would oblige me, make truce with your com∣plaints, and restrain these tears a little, that so our voiage may seem the lesse tedious. It is fit (said she) that having found a remedy for my grief, I should shew a merrier countenance; I will no longer complain then, but ap∣ply my self to make the time, if I can more pleasing unto you. Whilest they discoursed in this manner, Rozalmond and the Knight of the Desert, being risen with the Sun, marvelled very much that they could not see Clarisel, and purposed to go and wake him, thinking that he was yet in his bed; but Cassandra arriving thereupon, told them, that he had imbarked himself with a strange Gentlewoman, for to assist her in an important affair; whereat doubtlesse Rozalmond had been discontented, but that he considered, it was not without great cause he was carried away by so extraordinary an adven∣ture, so tha shewing himself not much sensible of it, he fell into talk with Cassandra and Silverin till it was dinner time, which was no sooner done, but they landed hard by Constantinople with no small content. CHAP. VIII. Rozalmond and Silverin being in the Empire of Greece, combat with the valiant Knight of the Savage, and Griolanis: they are parted by our Princes of Greece, the quarrell that grew between them by the cunning of a Damsell, and the end of the dangerous fight which was betwixt these eight incomparable warriors. ROzalmond, who sought not the praise of men, and that ascribed all the glory of his actions onely to vertue, perceiving that he was in the Empire of Greece, tur∣ned him to Cassandra, and said unto her: Madam, I much desire not to be discovered here, untill my valour have rendred me worthy of my birth; but how is that likely to be, seeing the arms I wear, which are the best in the world, will presently be known by all that saw me depart with them from the Court; I would
therefore intreat you, as an addition to your other favours, to go and buy me some others where you think they may be had, otherwise I am resolved to seek my fortune elsewhere, because I will not be constrained by the im∣portunity and intreaties of my friends, to make any longer abode here. I knew very well (answered she) that you would request this of me, which made me to take order for it aforehand; and I marvell how all the while that you were aboard, you never observed an armour which the wise Al∣cander hath provided for you: whereupon, returning with him into the ship, she shewed him certain arms hanging on a pin, the fairest and the ri∣chest that ever he had seen; they were zure, all covered over with white roses, raised up with small strings of gold, whose ends made an A. and an R. so neatly interlaced, that he stood a good while admiring the workman∣ship of them; imagining, and that rightly, that those were the first letters of his fair Armazia's and his own names; but having an extream desire to see them on, he doft those which first belonged to Meridian, and after∣wards to the Knight of the Sun, and immediatly put on them, greatly mar∣velling to finde them so exceeding light, and fit for him, as if he had but a dublet on. I should never hazard my self in any combat with these arms (said he to Cassandra) if any other saving your self had given them to me; but wholly relying upon your judgement, I will make no scruple to use them, and will beleeve that the temper will supply the defect of the mat∣ter. Your safety (said she) is dearer to me then that I should be any way carelesse of it, and if these arms be light, it is to accommodate you the bet∣ter in fight, you shall know the goodnesse of them ere it be long; in the mean while, you must remember that a valiant man is to apply himself to the time, not to yeeld to any labour, and to take all things in good part: I speak this to you, because we are to part one from another immediatly, for I am to bestow my self in an affair that tends very much to the good of your house; but before I go, I will advise you by no means to be afflicted for your absence from the beautiful Armazia, time and your loialty wil give you those felicities which is expected by a vertuous love. At these words Rozalmond found himself close by Silverin, who attended him on the shore, very much marvelling that he could neither see the ship of the Sun, nor any body living, but two dwarfs, that held a couple of brave strong hor∣ses, upon which Silverin and he presently mounted, taking the first way they met withall, which brought them in lesse then an hour into a goodly forrest, where on the fudden they met with a Damsell and two Knights; one of them carried a Savage on his shield, and the other a Moore in chains; whereby you may easily guesse them to be the renowned Knight of the Savage, and Don Griolanis, called the fair Knight, who came from the justs at Constantinople, as you heard in the last Chapter of the prece∣dent Book, and had by chance incountered a Damsell, unto whom Griola∣nis spake thus: It grieves me not a little that I cannot satisfie your desire, but Gentlewoman you must blame your self for it, who require a thing which is not in my power. Your excuses are to no purpose (answered she) and all the reasons of the world shall not release you from your promises: follow me then to perform my pleasure, otherwise I will endeavour to de∣prive you of your life, and will request your head of these Knights that are coming heer. By heaven (answered he) they are not able to give it you; and if it were as easie for me to content you, as to defend my self from
them, I should soon be delivered from a great importunity. You are a lit∣tle rash (said the good Knight of the Roses, so we will call Rozalmond heer∣after) for it seems that after you have failed in your promise to this Dam∣sell, you will also defie us upon that quarrell, I do not willingly undertake a combat without knowing whether it be just or no, but if this Gentlewoman intreats me, you shall see it had been better for you to have used gentler language, for you shall either die for it, or satisfie her in what she desires of you. Who are you (said Grian the Savage then in scornfull manner?) Who are you that kills men so fast? I am (answered Rozalmond, netled with this disdainfull speech of his:) I am a Knight can do more then I say. That will I know by experience, said Grian: when as turning their horses about, they encountered one another so bravely, that each of them thought he had run against a rock, finding themselves both with great a∣mazement on the ground: for Rozalmond and Grian, not being used to such falls, could hardly be perswaded they were unhorsed; howbeit, seeing themselves lie all along, they instantly arose, and carried with an unaccu∣stomed fury, they discharged two such blows with their swords each on the other, that both of them bnded their knees, even ready to tumble down, had they not been supported by shame; but presently recovering themselves, they began to assail one another so fiercely, that either of them wondered at his enemies force; their blades being alwayes in continuall motion, and guided still by a like rage: This while Silverin and Griolanis combatted with no lesse courage and addresse, sometimes one made two or three steps back, sometime the other was astonied, their armour was all over hacked, and if the bloud ran down on one of their arms, the other pre∣sently beheld his on the ground. Having thus continued fighting three hours together, and no advantage perceived on either side, when the Dam∣sell, who had so ingaged them, seeing four very gallant Knights arrive, ran suddenly unto them, and bedewing her cheeks with tears, besought them to grant her one thing she would request of them. We will not deny you (said one of them, who spake for the rest) provided your request be just, and that it be in our power. I should be unworthy of your favour (answered she) if I should require an impossibility of you; my desire then is, that you will tell me your names, and that you will speedily part these Knights, who outrage one another, as you see, for my occasion. You would have made us beholding unto you (said the Knight) if you had not desired our names, but not to fail in our promise, know that this great Knight is Prigmaleon, Soveraigne of the Empire of Aethiopia; the second is Persides, son to the excellent Emperour of Persia, Don Rogel; the third is the valiant Lucibel, Prince of France; and for my self, I am called Russian, of Media: touching the quarrell of these Knights, we will labour to pacifie it, or die in the at∣tempt. Whereupon, advancing towards them, who were still in fight, they wondered to see with what fury and addresse they managed their combat, and especially with what grace he of the Roses bestowed his blows, which seemed far more terrible then those of Grian, who had gotten him such glo∣ry at Constantinople, and gently declaring unto them, that she that was the cause of their difference desired their attonement, they intreated them to become friends, and to part with equall reputation. I am content (said Griolanis) so as this woman will quit me of the boon which she hath cun∣ningly obtained from me. How, answered the damsell, would not my
love suffer me to see you in danger, have I sought the means to draw you out of it, and are you so ingratefull not to acknowledge such favor? Knight it shall cost you your life, since I can hope for nothing els from you. Then having desired the new commers to do her right, one might presently see the case altered. Rozalmond, Grian, Griolanis, and Silverin, forgetting their former quarrel, made head against these fowr Princes of Greece, who abandoning their lances had betaken them to their swords, and began a most dangerous bic∣kering; if Rozalmond admired the dexterity of Persides, Persides redoubted his fury, the force of the Savage astonished the bastard of Media, and no lesse was he apprehensive of his addresse; if Griolanis blows seemed weigh∣ty to Prigmaleon, his had no lesse violence; and if the Knight of the Desert struck with courage, Lucibel could answer him as readily; their helmets were all fire, the ground was strewed with pieces of their arms, the woods resounded with the impetuousnes of their blowes; briefly, it was the dread∣fullest combat that ever was seen in Greece, for indeed such strong and va∣liant champions never appeared there before; the more they fought, the more terrible they seemed, and their fury increasing with their travail, it might well be concluded that the end of this fray would determin the most part, or it may be all their lives. Rozalmond vexed to find so much resi∣stance in his enemy, imploied all his might, but Persides fought so well that he perceived he had met with his match, and durst not assure himselfe the victory, which so enraged him, that he seemed to be even desperate; wher∣fore resolving either to die or quickly to vanquish, he gave his enemy so dangerous a blow on his shield, that being not able to sustain the fury of it, he was constrained to fall backward on his saddle bow, deprived of sence; but he was not long in that posture, for raysing himself up far more incen∣sed then ever he was in his life, he gave Rozalmond so strong a thrust, that his horse recoiled a step back: this while Russian and the Knight of the Sa∣vage assailed one another very furiously, now the one bowed down to the crupper of his horse, by and by the other hit his chin against his breast; if Griolanis astonished the valiant Aethiopian, he was oftentimes compelled to lose his stirrups, and stagger under the weight of his blows; and if Lucibel drew bloud from Silverin, he saw his own at the same instant upon his arms: thus was the combat so equall, so cruell, and full of fury, that no other but some unlucky end of it could have been expected, if at the end of six howrs the night had not arrived, which growing very dark made them retire, with some content to the Greek Princes, who thought their enemies a little too strong, and that this battell could not have beene concluded with their ho∣nour. Being parted then the one from the other, howbeit resolved to at∣tend the next morning for to see unto whom fortune would give the victo∣ry, the fowr first combatants went to lie down together under certain trees, when they saw a Giant passe along by them, who carrying a torch in the one hand, held a very fair damsell by the other, that wept bitterly, crying out for help unto the Gods, and it seemed to Rozalmond that it was his beau∣tious Armazia, which put him into such a rage, that instantly he got him to horse again, galloping after the Giant, whom he had threatned with a mil∣lion of deaths, if he had been able to suffer so many, but the busines being carried by enchantment, and by the sole wisdome of Alcander, who labou∣red in this maner to divert the mischief which might have ensued if these
Princes had fought again together, Rozalmond could by no means meet with this Giant, and finding himself not long after in the Cote of a yong shep∣heard, who received him very courteously, he forgot this affair, and betook him to his rest, whilst the others which had had clean contrary visions, strai∣ed one from another severall waies. CHAP. IX. The marvels which Griolanis encounters, pursuing the fantosmes of Alcander. THE valiant Knight of the Savage and Griolanis having an extream desire to overtake two Centaurs, which seemed to carry away certain damsels, rode so hard that by break of day they found themselves close to a great and spacious forrest, at the entrance wherof, perceiving two waies alike beaten, they separated themselves though somewhat unwillingly; Grian ta∣king the right hand, and Griolanis the left, pursuing their course with the same desire to succor these afflicted women, which they thought were in the hands of those monsters. Griolanis having been two howrs in the wood, sometimes standing still to hearken if the cries of the damsels could bring him to the retreat of these Centaurs, sometimes to mark the tract on the ground that might make him guesse the way he was to hold, he espied three Knights riding a front before a litter crownd with crimson velvet, on the one side thereof a big Knight richly armed, and of a haughty look, on the other a reasonable handsome damsell, & fowr Knights behind. This equipage having made him turn aside the better to observe it, begot such an earnest desire in him to know what was in the litter, that ap∣proaching it and addressing himself unto him, who appeared to be of so good a presence, he said unto him: Knight, be pleased to tell me what it is you conduct in this Litter. It is that which you may not know (answered he in an arrogant maner) unles first you vanquish me, and afterward these seven Knights together, & that also you grant a boon to this damsell. Now think whether your forces are capable of so great a charge, or whether you have sufficient courage to undertake it; if not, depart, for all the praiers in the world shall get you no other satisfaction. You are so discurteous (an∣swered Don Griolanis) that if I had not a desire to undertake this adventure, your arrogance would make me fight with you, therefore I will know by e∣xperience what is in you, and look into this Litter spite of your teeth: wher∣upon placing themselves in the middle of the way just one against the o∣ther, they charged their lances and incountered so strongly that the stran∣ger flew to the ground; Griolanis having lost both his stirrups, was so asto∣nished with the violence of the shock, that his course was finished before he could come to himself; howbeit considering that it was no time to com∣plain, he quickly recovered his spirits, alighted from his horse, drew his sword, and seeing his enemy that was risen, come towards him with an ex∣tream desire to revenge his disgrace, he met him, and withall gave him two
such terrible blows, that he was compelled to knock his chin against his breast, which so incensed him that clasping his sword fast in his hand he smote him so furiously that he smote his shield in two. Griolanis stroaks were dreadfull, no lesse impetuous were those of the Knight of the Litter; if the one struck, the other gave a thrust, they cunningly avoided blows, their dexterity was admirable, their force extream, their rage so great that to see them hew one another in that maner, nothing els could be expected thence but death: two howrs being spent since the beginning of the com∣bat, Griolanis enraged with this protraction, redoubled his blows most furi∣ously, and perceiving his enemy grow weary, he gave him such a cruell cut three fingers deep on the shoulder, that he staggered with it, and not per∣mitting him to come to himself again, he struck him with such a mighty force upon the head, that he laid him stark dead in the place. Behold, said he, the reward of pride, and the punishment which attends the unadvised: it may be lawfull for me now, I hope, to see what I have so much desired. Our deaths, answered one of the Knights, must first accompany our con∣ductor. Truly, said Griolanis, it is much against my will if I sight at this pre∣sent, but since you constrain me, you shall suffer for it. Saying so, he quick∣ly leapt into his saddle, and taking a lance from his Squire, he ran against the seven Knights, who incountred him furiously all at once, and brake all their spears upon him without moving him any more then if they had resi∣sted against some rock; but it fell out otherwise with him, at whom he aim∣ed his lance, for he was run quite through and through, and overthrown dead to the earth. Having ended his course he returned with his sword a∣loft, and seeing himself invironed by six men, who seemed to be fearles of death, he began to lay about him; now he foind at one, then he cut another on the head, heer fell a leg, there flew off an arm, and briefly he quartered them with such fury, that in lesse then half an howr three of them were laid dead on the ground; the rest notwithstanding grew more obstinate, and drawing strength from their grief for the losse of their friends, they seemed to fight with the more rage and fury, but being in the hands of one of the prime Knights of the world, all that they could do was to no purpose; for they were soon cut in pieces, and there remained none but the damsell, who being much amazed at the incomparable valour of this Knight, beheld him with wonder. Gentlewoman, said he approaching to her, may I now be permitted to see that which I have so deerly bought with the death of these discurteous Knights? Yes Sir, answered she, so as you promise me one boon. Most willingly, said Griolanis, for I was born for the service of Ladies. You may approach then when you please, said she. Griolanis having lift up the covering beheld in the bottom of the Litter the pourtrait of a Queen so marvellous fair, that he was almost beside himself considering her with so much perfection. Good God, cried he, what a world of beauties are heer assembled together? and how happy is the Knight that can hope for the possession of so invaluable a treasure? Gentlewoman, be pleased I pray you, to let me understand the name of this excellent Princesse, and why you cary her picture about in this fashion. It is fit, said she, that I give you this satisfa∣ction, seeing you have nobly promised to grant me what I shall desire of you: You see the face and features, but not all the beauties and graces of the mighty Queen of Corolandaya; for her actions are so winning, that they render her accomplishments far greater and more commendable: As
for that which concerns our voiage, I will deliver you the cause of it. The Kingdome of this Princesse consisting of one of the most spacious and fer∣tile Islands in the world, accommodated with safe harbors, strong places, valiant warriors, and exceeding lovely dames, gave her a number of excel∣lent Knights for servants, some carried by the consideration of this crown, and others to injoy a thing so rare, whereupon depended the former. The fame of the beauties and graces of this Queen every day bringing one Knight or other to present his service unto her, it hapned that at one time there were two and thirty which caried with a like desire to shew their va∣lor before her, made a turnament, where, in few words, jealousie incensing their fury, they hewed one another so cruelly, that notwithstanding all the praiers of Adelazia (so is my Mistris named) who wept and took on piti∣ously, there was but one remained alive, all the rest having past by the edge of the sword: the Queen was so sensible of this massacre, that she swore never to admit of any man more, and to that end she caused thirty soldiers to be placed at each port of her Kingdome, with expresse commandement not to suffer any Knight whatsoever to land; and conceiving that one vali∣ant person might vanquish them, she made a law whereby she ordayned, that not any one of those which should be so fortunate as to passe in despite of her guards, should see her before they had submitted unto one comman∣dement of three, the choice whereof she left unto them (assuring her selfe that the least of the three was impossible for any man whatsoever to per∣form) or that they had overcome an hundred armed men, which should be alwaies ready waiting at the gates of the town where she pleased to make her residence. Since that time many have presented themselves at the port, some of purpose, others driven in by fowl weather, but being vanquished by the guards, they retired with disgrace; only this miserable man whom you have slain, the Prince of Argilles named Silvion, subdued the thirty Knights, and entred into the Island, where the Queen causing three most difficile things to be propounded unto him, namely, either to give her the scepter of Greece by the death of all the Princes which possesse it, or pre∣sent her with the goodliest Knight, & the most exquisit beauty of the earth, or conduct her portrait through all the Provinces of the Orient, in the ma∣ner that you have seen, maintain in all the Courts of Kings, that she was the fairest Lady in the World, and at the end of six yeers return unconquered, which done she promised he should see her, and that with her self she would give him the Crown of Corolandaya. This infortunate Prince finding an extream favor in this last commandement, most willingly undertook that charge (albeit that the term of six yeers was grievous unto him) and there∣fore desired that she would be pleased to appoint some one to accompany him who might be judge of his actions, and give her account therof; which she granted, sending me along with him, and expresly commanding me to write all the names of such as should be vanquished upon this quarrell, and present her with a list of all the Princesses for whose service they under∣took the combat: the which accordingly I have performed, having already the names of threescore and twelve daughters to Sovereign Potentates, and of two hundred Knights bravely fought withall and overcome, but the end of my commission arriving by the death of this Knight, I am constrained instantly to return, and carry back this Litter to Corolandaya, whither you shall accompany me if you please, suffering no man to see the portrait of my
Lady, wherunto you are obliged by the boon you have promised me. Gen∣tlewoman, said Griolanis, there needed no promise to make me undertake this voyage with you, for I feel my self already so much the servant of this Princesse, that if it like you, I will eyther continue the enterpriz of this Knight I have slain, or otherwise fulfill your pleasure, protesting according to your desire, that no man shall have the content to behold so delicate a face, without he buy it at the same rate it cost me. The damsell then com∣manding a little dwarf to drive on the horses, put her self behind the Litter with the Knight, who having doft his helmet for to refresh himsel, made this Gentlewoman so amazed that she could not contain from crying out. O Gods! what an incounter is this? I beheld even now in the combat of this Knight all the valor that may be wished for in a man; now I see all the charms and all the graces that can be desired in the sweetest face of the World. Ah Sir! if the Prince of Argilles had beheld you without an hel∣met, and that he could have prevailed more by his praiers, then he hath done by his sword, doubtlesse he had shewed my Mistris that which she most desires, & placing you by her, he had assembled the goodliest Knight, and the beautifullest Lady in the earth; but it much rejoices me that she shall not be deprived of this contentment, seeing I am conducting you unto her. Griolanis laughing at this speech, began to entertain her with other di∣scourse, and so sweetly passing away the time, they arrived at the Sea side, where they imbarqued themselves, sailing towards the Island of Coro∣landaya, whither we will leave them going, for to overtake Grian the Savage. CHAP. X. The Adventures which happened to Grian the Savage, after he was separated from Griolanis: the Loves of Arliana and Zelandion, and the beginning of his own with the fair Brandimanda Queen of the Amazns. THE Knight of the Savage being separated from Grio∣lanis as you saw in the precedent Chapter, travelled all the day not meeting with any adventure, and per∣ceiving himself when it began to wax dark at the foot of a rock, upon the which he discerned a little house; he took a path that he thought would lead him to it, and went about so long till he came to the door of it, where at the first knock two yong Her∣mites appeared, who having received him very curteously brought him to a chamber, and helped him to unarm himself, whilst his Squire set up his horses in a little hovell there by. Grian finding more meat then he could hope for that barren place, fell to with a good stomack, howbeit he was not so attentive to his pallat, but that he observed how the actions, speech, and countenance of these Religious persons did not shew to be of men able to endure the austerity of a solitary life; having then a very great desire to know what he was ignorant of, he said unto them: Excuse me, I pray you,
if I suspect that you are not such as you seem to be, your voices and youth perswade me that you are some women, abused, and reduced by despair, to so desert a place; let me obtain of you not to conceal any thing from me, declare your misfortunes, and I vow by the Order of Knighthood, which I have received, to assist you in all that shall be necessary to your content. Your judgement doth not deceive you (answered one of them, with her eies full of tears) we are the unhappiest creatures in the world, she by per∣taking my miserie, and I by giving too light beleefe unto the words of a man, the most disloiall that ever breathed, he is called Zelandion, Count of Matage, and I am named Arliana, no lesse rich, and as well derived as he, but it may be not so fair as was requisite to settle his fickle humour; it was my ill fortune to see him at a turnament made in honour of the nupti∣alls of a kinswoman of mine, where most unluckily he chose me out from all the rest to combat under my favour; I accepted him for my Knight, be∣leeving that his merits and civility commanded me to do him that grace, and then I began to love him so extreamly, that from thence doth the occasion of all my complaints proceed. He was adjudged the best man at arms, and I the fairst woman of the assembly, which was the reason that we willing∣ly grew acquainted together, finding a certain kinde of, I know not what, sweetnesse in our conversation, which reciprocally informing our know∣ledge with the perfections of the minde, as the eie had done by those of the body, it begot so great an amity betwixt us, that we were never quiet when we were absent one from another, either by some accident, or mode∣stie; the trees carried a thousand marks of our loves, every day he received my letters in answer of his, our parents authorized our affections, all things seemed disposed to our desire, and in my heart I named my self already his wife; as without doubt I had been, if he had well remembred the oathes which he had sworn to me a million of times: But this traitour having drawn from me all that he had desired, upon promise of marriage, left me with childe; and under colour of some affairs he got him to his friends, whither having sent letter upon letter to certifie him of the case I was in, the disgrace I was like to run, how much he owed to my affection and his own faith, the desperate estate whereunto I should be reduced in the end, not daring to appear before my friends with a bastard in my belly; and briefly, all that might be said upon the like occasion, I received no other return but contempt, and an advertisement to shew my self wiser when I would have an husband. I will not deliver the sorrow which this cruell answer brought me, you will imagine it well enough, but it wrought so powerfully upon me, that I was delivered of a son, which born before his time, died the same day, redoubling my grief and lamentation, (for I hoped he might one day serve to make this wretch acknowledge his fault) who understanding this acci∣dent, & thinking that I would never let him be quiet, departed one morning from his fathers, and went to seek adventures, as Knights errant use to do; which coming to my knowledge, I resolved to leave the world, not able to endure the menaces and hatred of my parents, who never looking upon me, but with an eie of contempt and scorn, made me wish for death a thou∣sand times a day: wherefore taking all the money I could make, I got out one night, and in two daies travelled so far, that I arrived at this house, where, finding it empty, I staied; and because I would not be known, I
changed my habit, resolving to spend the rest of my daies in continuall tears. And thus, good Sir, have you had the sad, but true story of my mis∣fortune, which me thinks, deserves as much pity, as I have misery. Cer∣tainly, answered Grian, Zelandions treacherie is greater then your weak∣nesse, for ordinarily we have not considerations strong enough to keep us from erring when we love, wherefore I protest unto you, that if I can meet and know him, either to be the death of him, or he shall make good his promise to you of marriage; live then with his hope, and suffer me to take a little rest, for this is the third night that I have not so much as closed an eie. Then Arliana bidding him good night, withdrew into another cham∣ber with her companion, and left Grian to sleep till the next day, when he took the first way that presented it self after he had courteously taken leave of his disguised hostesses. His horse carrying him according to chance, rather then by his own direction, he travelled till noon, when he discovered a stately Castle, unto the which addressing himself, he incoun∣tered a damsell making most pitifull moan. Gentlewoman, said he unto her, this great sorrow of yours argues some extraordinary affliction, but if your relief may lie in the power of a Knight, let me quickly know what troubles you, and be assured of present succour. Alas, said she, I will not relate the occasion of my laments, because I will not stay you to no pur∣pose; enter into this unluckie house, and preserve one from death, who it may be will render you the like another time. Herewith Grian setting spurs to his horse, gallopped into the base court of the Castle, where at one side he saw seven souldiers and a giant lie dead, and fast by, a Knight of goodly presence, in the midst of three giants, who discharging three ter∣rible blows upon his head, felled him to the ground; whereat Grian being exceedingly discontented, suddenly advanced, for fear they should make an end of dispatching him, and couching his lance, very luckilieran one of them clean thorow; the other two with horrible cries, which were able to have feared some Knight lesse confident then this Champion, charged him presently; but he no more daunted then a bird of prey would be at the sight of a sillie partridge, drew out his sword, and combating with no lesse judge∣ment then fury, made them not onely despair of the victory, but so dread∣full were his strokes, that whensoever they saw his arm elevated, they straight began to apprehend the end of their lives: the combat waxed fiercer and fiercer, the place was strowed with the pieces of their armour, the giants bloud died the pavement, and Gria so held them to it, that they ta∣sted oftner of the edge of his blade, then willingly they would; howbeit, ashamed to see themselves reduced under the power of one man alone, they recovered new forces, and assailed him in such sort, that they gave him two dangerous wounds, the one in the thigh, the other on the arm; which so in∣raged him, that taking his sword in both his hands, he let fall so mighty a blow upon the head of one of them, that he divided it in two; and instant∣ly advancing his arm with the like fury, he had paid the third in the same coin, had he not been prevented by his flight; neverthelesse, it little availed him, for Grian following him close, with one dreadfull blow, almost cut his body in sunder: this done, he looked about him to see if he had any more enemies to fight withall, but perceiving no body to appear, he presently sheathed up his sword, and approaching the Knight, whose fall he had be∣held, he disarmed his head, remaining even ravished with the extream
beauty of his face, which being at that instant overspread with golden hair, made him think that he held not a Knight, but a woman fair, beyond all excellencie; he called the damsell at whose request he entered, and was about to ask her for some water to fetch her again, but seeing her open her eies, he took her under the arm, and holding her up a little, he said unto her; Madam, take courage, your enemies are not in case now to offend you. Where are they, said she, rising with fury, where are these wicked wretches, that would upon such extream odds have taken away my life? Madam, answered Grian, I have used them as you see, with more content∣ment then can be imagined, in that I have diverted the destruction which they meant you. What powerfull obligations are these, said she, with a gentler countenance? and questionlesse you are a most valiant Knight, that could prevail over three such monsters as these. I have done nothing, answered he, but what I would most desirously recommence for your ser∣vice, and to deserve the honour of your commandments; wherefore if you be any whit sensible of so little, Madam, furnish me with means to do more, and favour me so much, as now to name me your Knight, you shall I hope no more recent that choice, then I shall complain of my captivity; in the mean time let us look, whether there be any thing else for us to do heer. It is very well advised, said she, lacing on her helmet, let us go then, as for your request, time shall resolve me; so mounting up a pair os stairs, they visited all the chambers, and finding no body, but onely one woman with a bunch of keyes, they made her immediatly descend into the dun∣geon, from whence she brought up one and thirty Knights, whereof one seeming to Grian of a better presence then the rest, made him desirous to know him. Gentleman, said he unto him, I pray you tell me your name, and how you fell into the hands of these Giants. I should be very ingrate∣full, answered he, if I should refuse you so small a matter, receiving so much good from you; I am called Zelandion. How (said Grian, laying hold of him at that word) are you then that disloial man, which betraied the affections of Arliana, after you had had your pleasure of her? By my best hopes, if you were armed, as you are not, you should either die, or confesse that you have dealt lewdly. My Lord, said Zelandion, very much troubled with this menace, it is not likely I should offer to fight with him that saves my life, if I were in case so to do; it is true, that the bad counsell of some pernicious persons, drew me to abuse the love of Arliana, but chastised by a long captivity, I fully purpose quickly to repair that fault if I may finde her alive. Your repentance, said Grian, perswades me to pardon your weaknesse; but do not think to deceive heaven once more, for if you do not keep your word which you have given me now, be assured that I will not stick to ride a thousand miles to inflict a just punishment upon you: And to let you know that I have a speciall care of this businesse, go instantly and take the best horse you can finde heer, following my Squire into a desert place, whether despair hath reduced Arliana, and marry her, whereby you shall give me occasion to serve you. Now heer is, said he, the happiest com∣mandment that ever I could have received: My Lord, you shall be obey∣ed, saying so, he caused a horse to be sadled, got up, and following Grians Squire, arrived in four hours at his Mistresses hermitage, whom he married after a world of protestations to love her eternally. Whilst he made this voiage, the gentle Knight of the Savage caused his
wounds to be looked unto, learned the quality of his Lady, knew that she was named Brandimanda, a Princesse among the Amazons, and representing the beginning of his love unto her with such a grace, that considering the obligations wherein she was tied to his assistance, she received him for her Knight, being content to seek adventures with him, upon condition, that their familiarity should not passe the limits of respect, and that he should not take the liberty at any time to importune her, that she might not be ob∣liged to do any thing repugnant to the duty of a wise and modest virgin; which being most freely promised by him, as soon as Grian was recovered of his hurts they departed, and began to travell the world doing wonders in emulation one of another, and nourishing their loves in this maner, untill such time as the brave acts of this great warriour advanced him to his Mi∣strisses Crown, as you may perceive by the sequel of this discourse, which I will continue with the adventures of Clarisel of Guindaya, seeing he is one of the prime subjects of our discourse. CHAP. XI. Clarisel of Guindaya being arrived in France, succours Alcidas: his combat with the Giant Farnabazan: he hath news of Mira∣linda, at the nuptialls of Alcidas with Orizenna. WE left Clarisel at sea going to succour Alcidas in favour of a French Lady, whom he had incountred in the night, we are now to conduct him unto a good port, and prosecute the history with his fortunes. This brave Prince seeing himself a shore, after a tedious voiage at sea, and knowing that the term prefixed for the safety of this Knight approached, he used very great expedition, declining all occasions that might divert him from the execution of his enterprise. Having travelled then eight daies with his guide, who was named Orixenna, at length he saw him∣self in the town where Alcidas was prisoner: but Orixenna exceedingly dis∣maid to behold all the people assembled in the market place, waxed pale, and so weak, that if Clarisel had not held her, without doubt she had fallen from her horse. What ails you, said he, and what can trouble you now when you have such cause to rejoice? Alas! said she with a sigh, the con∣course of this people gives me occasion to fear that Alcidas is not alive. That were an extream mischief, said Clarisel, but do not thus afflict your self be∣fore you be more certain of the truth: I will go and inquire of some body, in the mean time do you stay heer and be comforted. Saying so he was ri∣ding away, but perceiving divers persons running on the other side of the street, he made a stop, and immediatly after he discovered a yong Gentle∣man in the middest between two hangmen, and guarded by twenty archers, he marched with so confident a countenance, that his innocence evidently appeared by the contempt of an infamous death. Madam, said Clarisel, do you know this prisoner? Yes, said she exceedingly troubled, it is Alcidas; wherefore good Knight, be pleased to remember your promise. At these
words Clarisel advancing towards the officers of justice, modestly deman∣ded, whether he might be admitted to combat for the justification of Alci∣das. You cannot be denied that, answered one, so as he will commit it to your armes. With all my heart, said Alcides little expecting this good hap, and I protest before heaven, which alwaies takes in hand the defence of in∣nocents, that I am no way guilty of the crime wherewithall I am charged. I am satisfied, said Clarisel, and therefore all that I require now is, that I may encounter your enemy; with that he passed on to the place where proud Farnabazan was walking, with the opinion that no man durst affront him; but seeing this Knight appear so bravely disposed, and of so gallant a presence, he said unto him: Comest thou, unadvised Knight, to defend Al∣cidas? I do, answered Clarisel; and I am heer to make thee die like a trai∣tor, replied the Giant, wherefore let us not spend the time any longer idly. Then taking the field and charging their lances they met so furiously that the earth seemed to tremble under them: their encounters had different ef∣fects; Farnabazans spear rested in the Princes shield, who lost his stirrups, but Clarisels entred into his body above fowr fingers deep, overthrowing him to the ground with a noise like to the ruines of a mighty building, which amazed all the assistants, who shouting for joy testified their unspeakable content to behold this insolent man overthrown. These acclamations aug∣mented Don Clarisels courage, and the Giants shame, who blaspheming a∣gainst heaven, rose up to receive his enemy, that scorning advantage, was a∣lighted, and making towards him with his sword in his hand. Farnabazan confidently perswading himself to repair the default of his lance with the first stroke he should strike, thought to discharge his great fauchion on Cla∣risels head, and cleave it in two, but the Prince wisely letting it slip by, de∣clined this storme, and taking hold of the occasion gave him a great wound on the left arm, which dying the ground with his bloud so incensed the Gi∣ant, that he advanced his sword again with more fury then before; and fol∣lowed Clarisel so close that he could not eschew the blow which was so vi∣olent, that it made him recoil two or three steps back, and shewed him a thousand stars more then there are in the element. Those which beheld him stagger in this maner were extreamly grieved, being verily perswaded that a second stroke would make an end of him, but they rejoiced when they saw him recollect himself, and charge his enemy so furiously, that his hel∣met being cut in many places, the bloud ran down upon his eies and blind∣ed him in such sort as he struck his blows in vain, which Don Clarisel percei∣ving, who would not give him leisure to recover, pressed him so far that in lesse then an howr he drew out all the rest of the bloud of his body, and o∣verthrew him stark dead in the place, to the infinite contentment of the peo∣ple, and principally of Orizenna and Alcidas, who seeing himself free from his chains, and without fear of any further suffering, he approached unto Don Clarisel, and thanked him for his assistance, with all the humility he could possibly expresse. But Clarisel knowing Orizenna's mind, said unto him: The glory of your deliverance is to be ascribed to God, who never forsakes the innocent in their distresse, howbeit next to him you are indebt∣ed to the care of this Lady, which hath travelled above five hundred leagues to find out some Knight that might combat Farnabazan, and deliver you; wherefore you shall do wisely to shew your self gratefull for so much fa∣vour, Alcidas then turning about to Orizenna, and having well observed
her, remembred that it was she whom he had incountered in the wood, and which surmounting her own desires, had nobly assisted him with an horse, that he might not be wanting in his engagement unto Clitia; wherewithall considering the new and powerfull obligation wherein he was bound to her affection, he resolved to let her see how sensible he was of a benefit. Madam, said he unto her, my happinesse would be compleat, if you will be pleased now to passe by the little satisfaction I gave you, when you ho∣noured me so much, as to say that you loved me; then I was a captive, now I m free, and can repair that fault, if you be as well inclined to me as you were; for, me thinks, it is more then reason I should be liberall unto you of that, which you have gotten with so much pains: command then what you please, and drawing me out of the abisme of wretchednesse, wherein I was plunged, raise me to the supremest degree of felicity that love can give us. If I had more regarded your vertue then mine own passion, answered Orizenna, without doubt my spight had been added to the malice of your enemies, and I had not laboured so much to finde you an assured succour; but not able to blame your fidelity, I desired you should know that I was not offended with your refusall, since you had not the power to give your self twice: As for your resentment of the good offices I have done you, I approve of it, and shall be very well satisfied, to see you sigh for me with the same sincerity as you have heretofore done for Clitia; but now is no time to speak of this matter, let us go to my house, and seek to restore you a little, after the enduring of so much incommoditie as imprisonment brings along with it, and then we will consider of the rest. This amorous dis∣course being very pleasing to Clarisel (whose valour Alcidas commended to the skies) they all left the town, and for that Orizenna's house was but four leagues from thence, they got thither by that time it was night, which was no sooner past, but Alcidas, who could not endure the violence of his new desires, fell upon the point of his marriage with Orizenna, which was celebrated the third day after, with a world of magnificence, and brave en∣tertainment; howbeit, that which most contented Clarisel, was to behold six strong lusty shepherds enter into the hall, whereof one advancing before the rest, desired he might be admitted to maintain at wrestling, that Miralin∣da was the fairest maid in the world. I know very well; replied Alcidas, that this Shepherdesse is incomparably fair, but my friend you are too weak to undergo such a businesse; neverthelesse, I will not hinder you from shewing your strength heer, and to witnesse that I am pleased with your designe, I promise a scarf to the victor. At those words of Shepherdesse, and Mira∣linda, Clarisel, who was then in talk with Orizenna, changed colour three or four times, which very much troubled her at first, and going to prevent what she feared, Clarisel, that suspected her meaning, took her by the hand, and leading her to a window, said thus: Madam, I make no question but you have discerned some alteration in me, and that the goodnesse of your disposition hath made you partaker of my suffering; but the way to re∣lieve me, is other then you imagine, and if I fail now of your assistance, there is no hope of remedy for me, but in death; I assure my self you marvell at this language, and that you will demand an explication of it from me; but if you had not known what it is to love, you may think I would never ac∣quaint you with my thoughts, for fear you should laugh at me. In a word, I am in love, and the perfections of this Shepherdesse, for whose sake these
men dispose themselves to wrastle, have ever since I saw her picture, which was about some three weeks ago given me so much passion, that it is impos∣sible for me to hear her spoken of but that I am troubled because I cannot come to the sight of her: it may be you will condemn this affection of mine, and say with the most part of persons, that I am but poorly spirited not to consider her birth and my condition, howbeit I will reply that it is the fault of fortune, which doth not impart her favours as she ought, and that finding in her all that may be desired in the rarest Princesse of the earth, she is alike to be regarded. Howsoever it is no question with me whether I do well or ill, but I freely communicate my heart to you, to the end you may assist me with your counsell, acquaint me with her abode, give me a safe retreat in your house, and so recompence that which you think is due to my desert. In good faith, said she laughing, I will confesse my weaknes to you; when I saw you change colour, I beleeved you had not been well, but altering this opinion upon the beginning of your discourse, I lightly imagined that you had been in love with me, and was bethinking my self whether I should yeeld more to your merit, then to the faith I ow to my Alcidas, but now being freed from this care, it is easie for me to tell you that you love with reason; for the beauty of this shepherdesse may excuse the affection of any Knight whatsoever; she dwels not above three leagues hence, and lives with such contempt of the shepherds that adore her, as she seems to be born to triumph over all and love none. Now if you will follow my counsell heerein, you shall not present your self before her in the estate you are; your habit would beget suspition, and your presence mistrust, but accom∣modating your self to her life, take upon you as she doth the care of some flocks, that so you may have the more occasion to see her, and lesse impedi∣ment to your content. Truly, said he, I hold this to be the best course I can take; but Madam, it were fit me thinks that she should once see me first as a Knight, to the end that beholding me change my condition for her sake, she might be the more obliged to love me. That will not be amisse, answe∣red she, and if you can find the opportunity to meet with her alone when you go in that fashion, your design no doubt will speed the better; but we will think of that at more leasure, in the mean time let us take our part, if you please, of this wrastling sport. Then turning about to the shepherds, whereof two were a wrastling together, they tooke marvellous delight to see what falls they gave one another, tumbling together on the grasse, and afterwards dispute with their fists who should be the victor. This pastime having lasted two howrs, the night according to these Lovers wishes arri∣ved, which gave every one occasion to betake them to their rest.
CHAP. XII. Clarisel sees his fair Mistris: their first discourse. THE night too short unto these Lovers was very tedious to Don Clarisel, who troubled with an amorous impa∣tience slept not, and would have departed before day to have given some quiet to his mind by the sight of his fair shepherdesse, but fearing to go without a guide left he should misse his way, he staied till Alci∣das (whom Orizenna had acquainted with his resolu∣tion) came to bid him good morrow. The content∣ment which he shewed in his countenance made Clarisel sigh, and say unto him: O God! how happy were I if I could boast the caresses of Miralinda as you do in your thoughts the kisses of your Orizenna. Your love doth make you hope for the like successe, answered Alcidas, and time will give it you, let us make use of it then, and beginning to trie our fortune let us see whether you shalbe as happy a lover, as you are a valiant Knight. Heerwith they got to horse, and rode straight to Bellombre where Miralinda lived; Alcidas endevored to make the way seem short unto him with a deal of plea∣sing discourse, but it gave him no gust at all, his mind was so taken up with expectation of the content which he was to have ere long in beholding the beauties of his Mistris: two howrsbeing spent in this maner, they past out of the wood, & began to discover one of the delicatest places of the world: On the one side a champion full of corn, on the other a dainty rising hill planted with fruit trees, below a river, which gently winding watered two meadows wherwithall his banks were bounded, upon the decline of the hill a number of houses appeared, which made a pretty village, and at one side a little wood of firre trees reaching almost to the clouds. Well Sir, said Alcidas, what say to this place? That it is worthy of Miralinda, answered Clarisel, and that nature seems to have made it for to render my abode heer lesse irksome, albeit the only presence of my shepherdesse is able to make it most delightfull unto me were it not composed as it is, but I very much fear we shall not easily meet with that we seek for. Let us follow our for∣tune, said Alcidas, Love is never wanting to them that adore him. Then ha∣ving past the river they came to certain sallows, which gave a very pleasant shade, at the end of one of those meadows where Alcidas alighting, said un∣to Don Clarisel: Sir, I hold it fit that we should stay heer a while for to see if Miralinda will passe by; for commonly she goes this way, and grazes her flock upon this fresh pasture. Do as you think good, answered Clarisel, for I am so little my self, that I am not able to say any thing to purpose; wher∣upon he alighted, took his horse by the bridle, as Alcidas had done, and letting him feed amongst the trees, he returned close to the high way, where he espied a yong shepherd who folding his arms acrosse, and lifting up his eies to heaven, said: O heavens! how long will you suffer me to be the o∣bject of the scorn of this shepherdesse, and when will you render her more sensible of my affection? I have willingly forsaken that which ambition
might make men desire, I have put on an habit unworthy of my estate that so I might enjoy the sight of her with lesse suspition, and I serve her with the same respects which should be used to a person more eminent, yet she forbids me her presence, shuns me, and will not permit me so much as to say that I die for her. This is extream ingratitude, and if I complain thus it is not without a great deal of reason. As I live, said Clarisel, I shall never be jealous of this shepherd, and if all that suffer for her find no better enter∣tainment, I have cause already to complain. You are to hope better, said Alcidas, for all those that she hath seen have not that worth in them which you have; but let us speak softer, I pray you, for questionles I see her com∣ming. At these words Clarisel grew pale, and perceiving her not far off, he trembled like a leaf shaken by the wind, nevertheles thinking how much it conduced to his future happines to be bold in this first encounter, he coura∣giously resolved to boord er without fear, and was going to meet her had he not been retained by Alcidas, who seeing him offer to set forward, drew him back whilest Miralinda approached, and sitting down upon the grasse untied her golden hair for to make it up again with the more grace. Clarisel that beheld her through the trees, was ravished in the contemplation of such wonderfull beauty, but apprehending a greater content in her conver∣sation, he went towards her, leaving Alcidas behind. The noise which he made treading upon some leaves, drew Miralinda suddenly to divide her hair, that so she might with the lesse impediment look about her, she was somewhat amazed seeing a Knight so goodly, and of so gallant a grace to appear, but accompanying her actions with an extraordinary discretion, she presently rose up, and making him a low reverence demanded what chance had conducted him to that place. My passion brought me hither, answered he, for to tell you fair shepherdesse, that you are not to marvell hearing me truly to sigh for you, though our conditions seem to be so dif∣ferent; Love doth greater miracles, and the wonders which I see in your eies shall alwaies excuse me before the severest Iudge that can be. Look, said she no whit abashed, how a silly shepherdesse may be jeered: no doubt, Sir, I have cause to complain of fortune for giving me no better a being; but withall I must praise her for sending me into the world with so much judge∣ment as to know how to put the difference that is requisit between your greatnes and my poverty, which forbids me to be perswaded that ever I can merit the honour you would do me. I am without name, without pa∣rents, and have nothing els to relie upon this day in the world then the on∣ly goodnes of an old shepherdesse, who doth bring me up, upon condition that I shall feed her flocks, in regard whereof I will never beleeve that you love me but to undo me, which I will avoid if I can, and will wisely con∣serve that which can make me live happily in my unhappines. Now if you fondly suppose with them who think that promotion may one day per∣swade me to accept of the advantages they propound unto me, without doubt you will be deceived, and lose your labour, for at length you shall know that the desire of greatnes shall never prevail with me. If you take feigning for truth, answered Clarisel, without doubt you will intreat me as you have done all those which have hitherto presented them∣selves before you; but if you please to make use of your reason, you will discern the difference that is to be made between my affection and their passions. I love you without desiring any thing of you but what honour
will permit you to confer on me, and that which I most wish for at this pre∣sent is, that you will suffer me to live by you with the liberty to keep a flock in another habit then this I have on; and that you will not refuse to see both in my respect and in my actions, the integrity of this love. Provided, an∣swered she, that your quality be not known heer, which at last might make me unhappy; and that you will live modestly according to your promise, I will never oppose your desire: for I will give my self the glory of your captivity, and beleeve that your intentions are as sincere, as I am innocent. Beauteous shepherdesse, answered Clarisel, kissing her hand whether she would or no, I receive this grace from you with more satisfaction, then if you had made me Monarch of the whole earth: You command discretion in my actions, you will have my affection to be unfeigned, and my vows inviolable; such is my desire to, and I wish that thunderbolts from heaven may strike me, if ever, you see me sigh otherwise then you would have me; and from henceforward I will approve of your anger and my banishment, if I give you any occasion to abridge these favours which I hold so dear. Well, said Miralinda, our accord is half made, but can you counterfet the shepherd well? The best in the world, answered he, and if I had the habit now, I verily think you would take me for one, at leastwise I should accom∣modate my self far better to the cariage of a swain, then one of your Lo∣vers doth, who came this way a little before you, and mightily complained of your rigour. It is the son of Count Moligny, named Cesander, answered she, who questionles wishes me well, but his humor is intolerable; he is jea∣lous when he beholds me cast an eie upon any shepherd, he importunes me continually, and is alwaies chanting unto me the greatnes of his race, as if I were obliged to love him, for that only consideration, rather then for the merit of his person, and renders himself so odious in his waies, that I can∣not endure to look upon him, which is the reason I flie him as I would do a wolf. But let us leave off this discourse, I pray you, and tell me how you lighted on this place. The destinies conducted me hither, said he, and from their providence is this good fortune of mine derived. Then making a brief relation of his adventures, of his condition, of the beginning of his love, and of the violent passions he had undergone since that time, he much amazed her, & put her almost out of hope of ever enjoying him; but setting up her rest upon a contrary opinion, she sweetly replied thus: Verily I am of the same faith with you, that there is a kind of fare in our affections: for if you were stricken in love by my picture, I was no lesse wounded therewith by yours, which I saw not many daies past in this very place, it being shewed to me by a damsell, who told me that within a while I should no longer be mine own; wherefore I do not marvell now, that I have not been more dif∣ficult to receive you, seeing the heavens governed my thoughts, and dispo∣sed of my will: I acquaint you with this secret, not to give you more bold∣nes, & lesse respect, but to let you know that we are not to falsifie the effect of so many promises, if we will live contented, since it is the only mean to assure you those felicities which you hope for in me, and to render me the satisfaction that I expect from your thraldome. Fear not, fairest shepher∣desse, answered he, wonderfully contented with these assurances, fear not that I will ever passe the bounds of your commandements, I feel such infi∣nite joy in being yours, that I am resolved to die a thousand deaths before I will give you the least occasion to complain of me, and to testifie how far
I am from abusing your favour, I will depart, if you please, with promise to be heer again in two daies for to continue my services unto you. Go my shepherd, said she, (for so will I call you heerafter) and let Love, whom we begin to adore, favour our designs. Heerewith Clarisel kissing her hand a∣gain, went to find out Alcidas, who seeing him return with so merry a coun∣tenance, asked him if he should be happy. Yes, said he, if heaven do not oppose mine enterprise: Miralinda wishes me well, and trusting in my pro∣mises makes me hope for that which I most desire in the world; let us get to horse, we shall have leisure enough to talk of this matter. Then returning to their way they began to discourse of the means Clarisel was to use for to fall in with some shepherd, and left the beautifull Miralinda to a million of new thoughts, which giving her occasion to consider of all things, made her sometimes apprehend the misery of a deceit, and by and by confirm her a∣new against the assaults of that weaknes. CHAP. XIII. Clarisel turns shepherd: his contentment, and the jealousie of Cesander. IN the mean time Clarisel being returned home publish∣ed his good fortune before Orizenna, who seeing him in so pleasing a humor, gave order to make him up in∣stantly a caslock and hole of white fustian tied toge∣ther with cornation ribands; provided the next day a flock of sheep for him, put a very curious sheephook in his hand, a scrip at his side, and giving him a boy of fifteen yeers of age to tend his sheep, whilest he entertained his shepherdesse, she sent him to a Farmer (unto whom she had communicated the secret with a charge not to disclose it to any body living) beseeching love to render his intentions prosperous. As soon as he was in the field, he reflected on himself, and considering the habit he was in, it see∣med to accuse him of imprudence and weaknes, wherfore he said: O God! How great is the imbecility of man, and how justly are Lovers condemn∣ed, who renounce their own wills, for to give themselves over to their pas∣sions? Doubtles I am now subject to the mockeries of the wise, and though I may find some excuse in the example of an infinity of great personages, who have erred like my self, yet can I not hinder the jeering of those which are more advised, and that will say with reason too, how I should rather draw instruction from the misery of others, then imitate them in their faults: Howbeit if I consider the recompence which I am to attend from my design, I cannot be charged with folly, nor guilty of blame; but I may maintain before all the world, that the beauties of so accomplished a shep∣herdesse, may extenuate this act of mine. I must pursue my course then, not stand upon such weak considerations, and yeeld more to mine own satisfa∣ction, then to the opinion of those that are fools, and think themselves wise. Thus intertaining himself with a world of thoughts, he arrived at the plea∣sant meadows of Bellombre, where extreamly desirous to find his shepher∣desse, he looked round about, and not seeing her appear, he was strangely
troubled, not knowing whither to go, when he heard a rebeck, the sound whereof came from out certain Ems which he perceived on the left hand, whence he conjectured that Miralinda might be there, and that some amo∣rous shepherd courted her in that maner. Driving on his flock then within a little while he came to those trees, at the foot wherof he saw his shepher∣desse with another, nothing neer so fair, and two shepheards upon their knees, who seemed to implore her pity. His goodly presence, and the grace wherewithall he saluted this company, fastened every ones eies upon him; but Miralinda knowing him, arose contrary to her custome, and giving him an amorous look, asked him what occasion brought him thither. That is not to be questioned, answered he, since it is most sure that I come as others do to sigh out my passions, and to tell you that you never saw shepherd before that adores you with more respect then my self. She hath more cause to re∣compence my services, answered one, then to hear you make these protesta∣tions; but I beleeve you will reap no more benefit by them then I have done by my complaints. If the defect of your merit and the judgement of this shepherdesse, answered Clarisel, have given you no part in her favour, you must not think, shepherd, that others are as unhappy as your self; the condition of our service obligeth a woman, and when our actions are dispo∣sed to please her, we are to expect an acknowledgement of them. If I can∣not constrain her to love me, I will be contented with the sight of her; and if my presence offend her, you shall see me continually upon these banks singing my misfortune, and her beauty: behold, shepherd, how I will ac∣commodate my desires to hers, accusing my self without rendring her cul∣pable: and if I receive any thing from so great an obedience, I will beleeve it proceedeth rather from her goodnesse, then mine own merit, otherwise I will say that I am justly punished for having been too daring. How now, shepherd, said Miralinda, is any man so light as you are, thus freely to disco∣ver his thoughts? I never saw you till now, and will you already have eve∣ry one to know that you love me? Yes without doubt, answered Clarisel, and if I should use lesse freedome, I should not have so much affection. Is it likely that I should be heer for your service, and it not be known? my de∣signs would then be without honour, and my ambition without glory; I can no more forbear, beauteous shepherdesse, to publish my captivity, then to suffer; and if you be displeased with it, I will hold my peace, and think to profit more by my silence, then by my speech. Shepherd, answered Miralinda, reaching him her hand for to make him sit down by her, I do not purpose to forbid you to speak, and what I said was but to let you know that I love a man that is discreet, howbeit let us leave this discourse, and tell me from whence you are come, whither you go, and what accident brought you to this place. Your beauty which is so famed over all, answered he, hath made me to forsake the banks of Seine, with a resolution never to aban∣dn this Country without you, or at the least till I see you ingaged under the power of some shepherd, which is the reason why I crave your leave to deliver my passions as love shall make me feel them. I will not refuse to speak unto you, answered she, but never be importunate, if you hope for a∣ny part in my favour. O God! said the shepherd who had not spoken yet, what cause have I to complain? I have served you these two yeers with all the fidelity that can be imagined, and yet you have never done me the grace which now you have shewed unto this shepherd, who is but newly arrived:
for advising him to live according to your humor, you seem to take care of his content. Ah! that I were permitted to let him see, even at this instant, how unworthy he is of so great a blsse, I would throw him at the first bout, and by his fall conserve unto my self that good which I think is belonging unto me. Miralinda not being able to forbear laughing at this shepherds anger, that seemed to be extreamly jealous, cast her eie upon Clarisel, who conceiving he was bound to answer him, said unto him rising up: Foolish shepherd, I would it were as easie for me to obtain some part in the good grace of Miralinda, as to throw thee; nevertheles I will not wrastle with thee but upon condition, that the weakest shall yeeld his pretensions to the victor. I am content, said Celidon, so was this shepherd named, and I wish that the meads may want pasture for my ocks, if I do not make these fair shpherdesses laugh at thy cost. Then seazing on Clarisel he gave him two or three rough twitches, which made him give back a step, but Clarisel ta∣king good hold on the wings of his dublet, flung him all along on the ground, and gave him such a cruell fall, that every one thought he had been dead; whereupon the other shepherd, of whom we have spoken before, ran instantly to succour him, howbeit Celidon being risen with pain, told him that he felt no hurt, and that in regard he was not fallen but by accident, he was not resolved to quit Miralinda, whom he would make judge of their difference; but she laughed so heartily that she could not utter a word; at length seeing her self constrained to speak, she agreed them so, that each of them should remain in his hopes. After that time Clarisel was ordinarily present in the places where Miralinda fed her flock; sometimes alone, som∣times with a number of shepherds, who oftentimes accorded their rebocks and hoboys together, for to make the length of the daies seem lesse tedious to this shepherdesse, who loving none but the handsome shepherd (so Cla∣risel was called) cared only for his conversation, and avoided as much as she could the rest; to the end she might not be importuned by their usuall com∣plaints; so that if she were obliged by the way of civility to see them, it was very coldly, being unwilling to give her Clarisel any cause of suspition, who in the mean while graved upon the bark of all the trees (under whose sha∣dows they met) the name of his beautifull shepherdesse, little regarding the solicitations of his rivals, as unworthy of his jealousie. Having past some time in this maner, alwaies accompanying Miralinda at the fountains, at the rivers side, in the woods and in the meadows, oftentimes taking the care of grazing her flocks, every one perceived that Clarisel was beloved of this cruell one, before inexorable to any shepheard whatsoever; so that jealou∣sie putting them often into choler, some new match at wrastling was every day seen, wherein Clarisel shewed himself so accomplished, that all the Country gave way unto him, each one judging him worthy of the fortune he enjoied, Cesander only excepted, who openly declared himself his ene∣my, sought all maner of occasions to annoy him, and delivered a thousand lies to Miralinda, thinking to divert her from loving him; but she very well knowing whereunto it tended, and the fidelity of Clarisel would give no ear to him, and daily made demonstration of some new passion for her shep∣herd, which so vexed Cesander that he resolved to run into the uttermost of extreams, as you shall see by and by.
CHAP. XIV. The fair Miralinda is carried away forcibly: the admirable deeds of Arms done by Clarisel for her rescue. THese two Lovers conversing with a great deal of free∣dome and love, lead a most happy life, their plea∣sures were without care, and they never troubled themselves with any thing more, then to let both God and man be witnesses of the sincerity of their thoughts, only the violence of our shepherds desires, who would willingly in a more sovereign manner have possessed his shepherdesse, interposed some un∣quietnes amidst his content, but the hope to see himself one day in the port of so much felicity made him suffer with patience; complaining then but lightly all his discourse was of new assurances of his love, or of praiers, that God would divert from his shepherdesse the misfortunes which ordinarily follow men; and verily I am perswaded that these vows so often sent to heaven, were the means to make him foresee in a dream the storm which threatned both his love, and his life, that so he might prevent the effect therof in despite of fortune, which never giveth sweets without some sowr. This amorous shepherd driving his ock one morning to their pasture, went with a sadder look then he was wont, and was so carried away by certain visions which he had had the night before, as he never perceived Miralinda, who staied for him under the Elms for to do him all the noble favors their fair affection would permit her; but perceiving him walk very melancholy, his hat over his eies, and using some action with his hands as if he had been transported with anger, she was at first much troubled, in that she could not imagin the cause of his discontent, and began to fear lest some misreport of her had displeased him; nevertheles being confident of her own innocence, and not able any longer to suffer him in this posture, she presently made to∣wards him, and taking him by the hand, said unto him: What mean these fancies, my shepherd, whence comes this indisposition, and why do you passe by without bidding me good morrow? have you lesse love then you had yesterday, am I lesse fair, more unpleasing then I was used to be, or have you observed any thing in my carriage that is distastfull to you? No, my dearest shepherdesse, answered he, I have no cause for to complain of you; alike is your beauty, and the sence of my passions, which are no whit lesse to day then they were before; but you know that time and accidents do not alwaies leave us in case to laugh or complain. You will say that our content should not be subject therunto, and that our love may exempt us from a million of miseries, as an assured port from the surges of a troubled sea, my sweetest shepherdesse it is true, but can we triumph without labors? Questionles we cannot, and the best affections are most subject to crosses: That which afflicts me (I will not conceal it from you) is a dream which I had the last night, very ominous in my judgement, and that hath reduced me to the passe wherein you have seen me; although I know very well
that no regard is to be had to such frivolous things, which oftentimes arise from the weaknes of our brain, yet I will not slight it, but take it as an ad∣vice from heaven, that it may be lets me foresee a mischief, to decline it. I dreamt then an howr before day that I saw six Lions come into these plains who tearing your cloths in a thousand peeces, dragd you up and down the wood, without any fear of the noise and cries the shepherds of this Coun∣try made, that they were gotten into a den for to have fed on your body▪ but that a great Bear defended you, and that I comming in to his aid, drew you out of their paws; judge now whether I have not reason to fear some mishap in your person, and whether I can live contented after these mena∣ces. No doubtles, nor shall I ever be in quiet, till I have put my self in case to serve you, if by chance any thing should arrive unto you beyond expe∣ctation. But what can you do heerin, said Miralinda, a little troubled? Keep my self ready upon all occasions, answered he, and have my horse and my arms in my lodging; for I never told you yet, my fairest shepherdesse, that I am a Knight, and son to the great Emperour of Greece Florisel of Niquea, a thousand times more satisfied in being yours, then in the possession of all the Kingdoms of the World. O God! said Miralinda, what tears will these words one day cost me, and what sorrow will this great inequality make me endure? I would your condition, my Clarisel, were lower, or mine more eminent, I might then expect that which my judgement doth now prohibit me to hope for. No, no, said he, do not imagin, my excellent shep∣herdesse, that ever this difference shall alter my resolution, or that it shall one day cause me to despise that, which you see me so adore at this present. I do not love you for the consideration of any means that you may have, but for the sole merit of your beauty, by which I swear in the sight of hea∣ven, whom I call to witnes, that I will alwaies hold you as dear as mine own life; and that I will never have other wife then your self, if so be you wilbe contented with my fortune. Relie upon these assurances, I beseech you, and do not kill me with greeving at your doubt of my faith. I will give, said she with a cheerfuller countenance, my Lord, I will give more to your oath, then to my fear; for you would not take pleasure to beguile the simplicity of a maid that loves you with passion, howsoever you shall per∣mit me, if you please, to carry my self with much more respect to you then formerly I have done, to the end that my humility may render me worthy of your affection. It would be the utter undoing of all our pleasures, an∣swered he, if you take away the liberty of our actions, wherefore we will live, if you please, as hitherto we have done. But my shepherdesse, shall we not seal these promises of marriage with some kisses? It is reason, said she, that I should grant you this little, since you have reserved nothing but to give me all. And my Lord, added she after she had amorously joined her lips to his, I would I might give you sweeter and greater contentments, verily you should then perceive that I am most sensible of your passions, but mine honour doth forbid me the granting of any thing more, and wills me humbly to intreat you to be contented with this, untill such time as the de∣stinies have resolved to make us happy. You shall never see me swerve from the respect which you require in my actions, said Clarisel; but my shepher∣desse, seeing this article is concluded according to our desire, let us return to our former talk. Have you not observed the absence of Cesander? He hath not appeared these three daies, and I am confident he hath some dan∣gerous
plot upon you, induced thereunto by the favourable intertainment you have given me, and by the neglect of the services which he hath so of∣ten tendered unto you. Assure you, Sir, said Miralinda, that loving none but you, I never thought of others, and not to lie to you Cesander was quite out of my head; but now I call to mind that I have not seen him a good while, which makes me approve of your suspition, wherefore we shall do well to stand upon our guard. For my self, said Clarisel, I resolve to go pre∣sently to Alcidas house, where all my furniture is ready; but in regard I may not absent my self without your leave, I desire you to grant it me. Go, said she weeping, and all the Protectors of our woods be propitious to your de∣signs; as for me, I will passe away the rest of this day by entertaining my thoughts with the favors which the heavens have conferred on me in your affection. Clarisel then departing, arrived within a few howrs after at Alci∣das Castle, who by chance was gone the very same day upon a certain en∣terprise, and conferring a long time with Orizenna, recounted unto her the pleasantnes of his life, the contentment which he had in the continuall be∣holding of so lovely a shepherdesse, and commending her disposition that was far from all kind of rudenes, he swore that he had never seen any thing so worthy the affection of the greatest Prince; insomuch that he made Ori∣zenna in love with Miralinda, and extreamly desirous to see her. This dis∣course having continued till the evening, he caused his horse and arms to be brought him, and taking leave of Orizenna, unto whom he had declared his dream, he returned to Bellombre, wherein desiring to enter in by dark, because he would not be discovered in that equipage, he got him to bed hoping to sleep better then he had done the night before, howbeit the ex∣ceeding desire he had to see his shepherdesse again, not suffering him to take much rest, made him rise by break of day to wait for her at the Elms; but she that had no lesse unquietnes was there first, so that incountring in this maner, they renewed their salutes a thousand times, and sitting down on the grasse gave account of their thoughts in such amorous words, that they were able no doubt to make them live contented in the midst of infinit cros∣ses; having sat then a long time thus sweetly entertaining one another, they rose up for to gather their sheep together which were scattered, but they were eased of that labour, and remained somewhat amazed to behold two yong unknown shepherds do them that office; and that advancing them∣selves both at one instant fell upon their knees before Miralinda, and said un∣to her: Fair shepherdesse, the fame of you which filleth our hamlets with wonder and astonishment, having stricken this shepherds heart and mine both at a time, we revealed our passions one to the other at one instant, but with so much ill fortune, that a marvellous great friendship which tied us together like brothers, was suddenly converted into hatred, jealousie not suffering either of us to indure a rivall; so that in brief after we had recipro∣cally and in vain intreated each other to yeeld up his pretensions, we came three or fowr times to blows, alwaies giving over with a like advantage; and questionles, we had seen the end of one another, if our parents grieved with this enmity had not laboured to accord us; but the prize of our quar∣rell being great, each one stood firm in his purpose, so as the assistance of our friends had been without effect had they not had recourse to the ora∣cle, which told them that our remedy lay in your hands; we are come ther∣fore, fair shepherdesse, that you may pronounce in favour of the one or the
other of us: Our conditions are alike, our states equall, there rests nothing but the consideration of our persons, wherof you may be judge. So finish∣ing this discourse they both kneeled down before Miralinda, who kindly turning to Don Clarisel, smiled and said unto him: Shepherd, I will not make the Oracle a liar, I will presently heal these sick Lovers, but know you how my friends? By commanding you both never to appear again before me, nor hope that ever I will love you. O cruell! said he that had not yet spoken, you heal us indeed: but alas! it is with extream remedies; for our love not permitting us to disobey you, we will retire our selves for to die instantly: Saying thus they rose up, and taking severall paths went away, and were never seen more at Bellombre. These shepherds being dispatched in this maner, Miralinda sate down again in the shadow, and began to talk with Celidon, that was come to the Elms to seek her out for to complain of her rigor, when she perceived two armed men making directly to her: the sight of them much amazing her, she cast her eies upon Don Clarisel, who remembring his dream presently laid hold of a great bat that lay on the bank of the river, and approaching to his shepherdesse told her, that it was expedient for her to turn back to Bellombre. Miralinda very much troubled was running away, but the two Knights comming in, the one intercepted her passage, whilest the other taking her by the arm, would have set her up∣on his horse; nevertheles she resisted and cried out for help, which put Cla∣risel into such a rage, that advancing his bat he discharged it so strongly on him which held his shepherdesse, that he overthrew him dead to the ground. This greatly animating him he instantly seazed on the dead Knights sword, ran after the other, cut off one of his arms, and with the second blow clea∣ving his head in twain, he thought that he had freed his shepherdesse, when he discerned six other Knights come galloping towards him, from whom he could expect nothing but death. I must, said he then, make use of new counsell upon new occasions; if I expose my self to the fury of these trai∣tors which are comming, Miralinda would be lost, and my death would but add to her sorrow; I will therefore preserve my self if I can, for to succor her to some purpose, and not rashly. Wherupon taking his course towards Bellombre, he entred speedily into his lodging, suddenly armed himself, mounted upon his horse which he found ready, and getting out of the back gate he galloped after these villains, who this while had forcibly conveied away Miralinda, and were led as fast as their horses could run. Clarisel sol∣lowed them close, and carried with extream rage, thought of nothing, save how to catch them; but his ill fortune making him take somewhat a differ∣ent way, he was six howrs before he could overtake them; and questionles he had never met with them if being in the midst of the wood, he had not resolved to stand still a little for to listen if he could hear any noise they might make, letting his horse then take a little breath, though it were with much impatience, he remained a pretty while with very great attention, but hearing the wood resound with the violence of some blows which seemed to be stricken upon armor, he spurred away through the trees, and came in∣to a great way, in the midst whereof he saw a Knight that was valiantly combatting with fowr of those whom he sought. By heaven, said he, you rakehels, ye shall pay deerly for it now I have met with you; so drawing his sword he smot one of them with such fury on the helmet, that he clove him to the very shoulders; and instantly redoubling a back blow on ano∣ther
he cut his armor as if it had been single paper, and divided his body in twain, therewith giving another a thrust in the belly, he ran him quite through the guts sending him dead to the other two. Not satified with this execution, he raised his sword again to have dispatched the fourth, when as the Knight intreated him to leave him that small part of the glory, and fol∣low a shepherdesse which three other theeves had carried away. At this word of shepherdesse, he turned about, and keeping the same way as fast as his horse could carry him, within half an howr he perceived his fair mistris in the arms of a Knight who seemed invincible amidst two others, which so enraged him, that with the first blow he sent the sword and arm of one of them to the ground; and fearing to strike the other, because he held Mi∣ralinda, he discharged upon the crupper of his horse, which he cut in two peeces, by that means staying him: the third seeing so sudden an execution slunk presently into the wood to avoid pursuing; but Clarisel who thought of nothing but his shepherdesse, alighted instantly, and approaching to the Knight that having left Miralinda had drawn his sword for to defend him∣self, he discharged so terrible a blow upon his head, that his brains flying a∣bout, he tumbled dead in the place. This done he looked round about to see if there were any more enemies to fight withall, but no body appearing before him save Miralinda, who seemed more dead then alive, he went pre∣sently unto her, and lifting up his bever, that she might know him, he said unto her: What sy you now, my beauteous shepherdesse, to dreams? Without doubt we had been lost, if I had not thought upon my arms, but thanks be to God we are now out of danger. I my Lord said she, imbra∣cing him as it were the better to assure her self, I have no cause to fear now that I am so neer you, and that you know so well how to chastise those that offend you: but alas! you are to fight yet, for the half of our enemies are behind. I think, said Clarisel, they will never trouble you more; for they have beaten the way to their Captain; and having encountred them first, I cut them first in peeces; one thing only grieves me that I do not know the author of this villany. The author, said she was Cesander, he that held me, and that was the last which past by the edge of your sword: This wretch made me suffer strangely, for all his discourse was nothing but reproaches of my ingratitude, and threning to be revenged at leasure of my neglect of him, and giving you the better part of my heart. As I live, said Clarisel, I am wonderfull glad that he is in the case I behold him; more for to see you freed from his importunities, then for any fear I had that he could ever have obtained place in your favour, for you have too much judgement to love a man so ill disposed; but let us leave of this discourse, and think of getting out of this wood that we be not nighted in it, at leastwise we will go and render the thanks which we ow to the assistance of a good Knight whom we shall find hard by, and that peradventure is still in fight with one of these raskals. Saying so, he led his horse with one hand, and held Mi∣ralinda by the other, when they perceived the Knight of whom they spake, come towards them as fast as he could drive; but as soon as he discerned them, he presently stopt; and alighting embraced Don Clarisel, to whom he said: My Lord, I was making all the haste I could to your succor, but I see you had no need of my sword. Truly said Clarisel▪ not knowing him, I am more obliged to you then you think for, and you shall do me a singular plea∣sure to make use of me, and freely to tell me your name. Do you not know
Alcidas then, said the Knight? O me! said Clarisel, how forgetfull am I? These arms I saw at your house, but I was before in such a rage, and am now so full of joy, that I had then no desire but to be revenged, nor at this present have any will but to render thanks unto God for my good successe, which was the reason why I knew you no sooner. I but I did your Miralin∣da, said Alcidas, for seeing her in the power of these Knights, and hearing her crie out, I fell in amongst them to rescue her, being assured that I should oblige you in her assistance, but without your arrivall, we had both been lost. Let us speak no more of this misfortune, since we have avoided it, said Clarisel, and tell me whether we may find any lodging heerabout; night is at hand, and I am sensible already of the incommodity this shepherdesse would receive, should she lie abroad. I am not able to assure you any, said Alcidas, only let us keep this way, perchance it will bring us ere long to some village: then Clarisel having taken up Miralinda behind him, Alcidas rode along with them, and was musing on this treacherous plot, when as a Knight came against him as hard as he could run, and incountred him so fu∣riously that he cast him out of his saddle to the ground, passing on as if he had been carried by lightning. By my life, said Alcidas, being much aba∣shed to see himself overthrown in that maner, you have taken me at una∣wares, but if I live Ile crie quittance with you; whereupon having desired Clarisel not to be displeased with his departure, he rode after this discurte∣ous Knight, and left the Lovers in the midst of the wood, who unable to find any way by reason of the darknes of the night, they went aside, and alighting under a tree, they resolved to rest there till day. CHAP. XV. The passions of Clarisel finding himself alone with his shepherdesse: Alcidamant is made Knight. CLarisel seeing himself alone with his shepherdesse, was so contented that he never felt the discommodity of hun∣ger and his hard lodging, but men are never void of crosses, his desires made war with him, and labouring to have as much respect as love, he found his pain to be every way equall unto the pleasure which he had to find himself beloved: his words were so many assu∣rances of his affection; his thoughts so many wishes that Love would afford him some assistance, & all his actions assured proofs of a violent passion, he took the delicate hands of his shepherdesse, carried them often to his lips, sometimes bathed them with tears, sighed incessant∣ly, and then by a deep silence testified that his soul was opprest with great unquietnes: fain he would have complained, but he durst not, fear contai∣ned his tongue, and when he would have opened his heart he was restrained by the consideration that he was not to be importunate: Miralinda whose affection was innocent, guessing by his carriage that he suffered much, was perswaded that he had received some wound, which he would not discover for grieving her, insomuch that she was afraid, and desiring to know the
truth, she said unto him: Why do you weep, my Shepherd, whence grow these sighs, and what means this silence? are you hurt, and do your wounds pain you? Alas! said he, beautious Shepherdesse, now you inforce me, I was resolved to have suffered silently; but since you will understand the cause of my griefe, I will not refuse you the knowledge of it, to the end I may not accuse my cowardise for my suffering. I consider the misery whereunto I am reduced, in that I dare not tell you, how it is time that you should recompense my services; the place favours my thoughts, but my feare to offend you, will not permit me to reveal them: I love passionately, you doubt not of it I assure my self, your beauty gives me violent passions, I am in continuall torment, I feel a million of flames which consume me, yet I endure and do not so much as open my mouth; and hitherto I never gave you any cause to complain of my actions: But it is time, I, my Shep∣herdesse, it is time to be more hardy, and I should think my self miserable, if I should overslip this opportunity, without knowing how far your love extends. We are in a wood, barred from all eies that may disclose our se∣crets, this darknesse will warrant our delights, my faith will make them lawfull, you will free me from a perpetuall fear, that another more happy then my self may one day possesse you, you will oblige me to live con∣tented, and this way I shall assure you the greatnesse which is due to your merit; do not suffer me, my dearest Shepherdesse, to languish any longer, & keep me from dying with grief, at your being insensible of my endurings; give your self wholly to me, as I protest again, before God, to be onely yours, and never to have other wife; let us take hold of occasion, that is bald, and which seldom offers it self twice; give not your self time to ac∣cuse your fear, nor me cause to complain of you; and now calling to minde the integrity of all my passed actions, draw from thence an infallible con∣clusion, that I love you sincerely, and that you shall not be deceived; this is the way to assure our happinesse, all your future content depends on your discretion, which ought to accomodate you to the time: think on it, my Shepherdesse, and lose not yourself with light considerations, which are never well accepted of amongst lovers: I am now in a state to receive grace, said he kneeling down, coner it on me, I beleech you, and be per∣swaded that my death is tied to your deniall. Miralinda, observing him thus disposed, was exceedingly troubled, her affection made her think his impatience just, would have her consent to his imbraces, and counselled her to give up her self to him upon assurance of these promises; but then, her ho∣nor represented unto her, how she was to love otherwise, if she meant not to give this Prince just cause to despise her another day, when he should finde her so facile; resting then on this resolution, she answered him: Ah Sir, do you make more account of your pleasure then my reputation, and do not you consider that I should be most unworthy of your love, if my affection were not innocent and pure? What could you wish for more, if you had once the spoil of me, and how could you love me, if there were nothing left for you to hope from me? I will never beleeve that you love me for to be my ruine, or that you have weighed that well which you have said; your desires, and opportunity, that tempts men, have made you speak in that manner I know, but recollect your self, I pray you, judge whether I may give you that with reason, which you demand with passion; I love you infinitely, I confesse it; howbeit, nature teacheth me, that I ought to
love my self better, and that we are not to seck the satisfaction of another, with our own overthrow; moreover fortune hath bestowed nothing on me but mine honour for to releeve the miseries of my birth, and will you de∣prive me of that? Ah Clarisel! you will make me beleeve that your love was alwaies feigned, that so many oaths were not sworn but to deceive me, and that you would now triumph over me, for to make me the object of re∣proach, as I am of ill fortune. If you have spoken to that end, proceed shepherd, I put my self into your hands, and my undoing shall testifie that I was not insensible of the honour you have done me, and that I have not refused you a satisfaction, but for to make it one day a thousand times more acceptable unto you, by giving it you without sorrow or shame, howbeit that I may not have occasion to complain of my weaknes, be assured that this night you shal have all that ever you can hope for from me. Then shed∣ding some tears, which she accompanied with so many sighs, she put Clari∣sel into such a confusion, that he would have given the best part of his bloud he had never been so unadvised; nevertheles thinking that his repentance might deface his offence, he replied unto her in this sort. I am extreamly grieved at the discontent you have received from my speeches, which were deived from my passion, and not from the end you spake of; for I should hold my el the most disloiall Knight of the earth, if I had so much as en∣tertained a thought to draw favours from you for to make you the scorn of the world, as now you are the wonder of it, you will have me wait upon time, and leave the recompence of my services to the pleasure of the desti∣nies; it is most just that I obey their ordinances and your commandments, be confident then, my shepherdesse, that you shall never have cause to fear a like discourse, and that amidst all kind of occasions you may live secure by me, so as you will now promise me never to remember my fault. I were void of love, said she, if I should not excuse your passion. No my shepherd, I will never think on it, but love you the more, for this obedience doth so please me, that now I think my self far happier in possessing of you, then I did at the first; and that you may see I will not be sparing of the favours, which a pure affection may permit me to give you, I will recompence the victory you have gotten over your desires, with a kisse. Saying so, she drew neerer to him, and joined her lips so sweetly to his that the excesse of so in∣finite a content transported him beyond all that could be desired of pleasure in the world, wherein doubtles he had continued a long time if Miralinda, plucking him by the arm had not put him in mind that the night was more then half spent, and that it was time to betake them to their rest, thought the place was not very proper for it. Sitting down then one close by another they fell asleep upon the assurance that Clrisels horse would make a noise to awake them if any beast chanced to approach them. Having endured so much the day before, they had rested longer, but that the sun piercing through the branches shined upon their faces, wherefore awaking both at one time they arose, and were ready to proceed in their former way, when they perceived two yong Squires comming along, and that staying neer the tree under which they were, seemed as if they would confer of some important fair. As I live said one, I can no longer endure these delais, and to be thus hindred so troubles me, that I am resolved to go far enough till I find some valiant and curteous Knight, who will confer that on me which I shall not receive God knows when, if I attend the Kings return, who can∣not
so easily part with Greece, from so many friends as he hath there to come hither. But I doubt  you mean to forsake me, and that the fear of my mothers displeas will more prevail with you then the consi∣deration of the promises which I have made you. You judge not well of my affection, answered he, let us go when you please, Sir, you shall find me more ready to travell abroad, then to keep at home; howbeit I see no great likelyhood of effecting your purpose; for having neither money, horses, nor arms, how will you be fitted to receive the order which you so much desie? Fortune will assist us, said he, only let us get away, and then put our selves upon the care of heaven; wherupon turning about they espied Miralinda, and Don Clarisel, who during their discourse were admired: this gentleman being wonderfull handsome, of a great deal lesse stature then Clarisel, but squarer set, demonstrating in his look an alacrity of spirit, a sweetnes in his speech, an admirable grace in his cariage, a resolute courage in his countenance, and briefly a majesty not ordinary amongst ordinary Knights. Espying, I say, this Knight so well proportioned, and his shep∣herdsse so fair, they stood still as it were ravished with the sight of so rare an object, but Clarisel that would not leave them in that amaze approached to them, and addressing himself unto him that seemed so hopefull, he said thus: Gentleman, whither are you going at this present? To seek out some boy, said he, that will make me Knight; for it is time to fall upon actions that may bring forth glory, but I will go no further, if you will do me that favour, and I should hold my self much honored to receive the order from your hand, for your aspect doth shew you to be strong and valiant. I am very sorry, said Clarisel, that we have  arms heer to put upon you, but if you will go three or fowr miles with me I will promise to accommodate you worthily to morrow. I had rather follow you tendaies said he, then fail in this busines, do but lead the way, and I will wait upon you most wil∣lingly. Give me leave then said Clarisel, to fit my horse for the ease of this shepherdesse, in the mean time I pray tell me who you are: Very gladly, answered he; my name is Alcid, son to the Marquesse of Mnteclare, a man of consideration in France, which is obliged unto him for many great services, but that you may not marvell to seeme at this present so ill accommodated, be it known to you that not able to contain my mothers permission for to be made a Knight untill the return of my father, who hath been a good while with the king  at Constantinople, I was going to seek out some one that would give me an horse and arms, it seeming unde∣cent to me to spend the best part of my daies in idlenes, but thanks be to God I have encountred that I wished for when I least expected it. By the faith of a Knight, answered Clarisel, if you be as valiant as you are hand∣some, I shall not repent the pains which I purpose to take in accompanying you on foot. My Lord, said then a damsell which appeared on a sudden, you shall never trouble your self in that maner; for some that honour you, and respect this Gentleman with whom you talk, have taken the care upon them of this affair; these brave arms which the destinies have reserved for his valor, and that have hung upon this tree above these hundred yeers, shal serve his occasion, and these horses which you see heer before you shall keep you from being lackies. The presence of this woman had amazed them, but the horses and the arm which were the fairest in the world, made them no lesse to wonder, so that they behld one another without speaking
a word, when as the damsell pursuing her discourse, said unto Don Clarisel: My Lord, the learned Nerea, who loves this Gentleman, because he is to be one of the prime Knights of the world, desires you to give him the or∣der. I do not know the Lady, said Clarisel, but I will honour her merit, depend wholly on her power, and serve her in some better occasion then this, although I think I shall do much, by giving to the world a Knight of so extraordinary an esteem as he is of whose great worth ye foretell, where∣fore I will defer the effect of it no longer. Alcidamant being armed the with his rich arms, whereof the shield was shadowed with three palms, from whence his sirname was afterward derived, kneeled down before Clarisel, took his oath never to be wanting to the duty of a good Knight, re∣ceived the benediction from him, which being done, Clarisel called Mira∣linda, desiring her to gird the sword unto him: This request made her blush, for she had never been present at such a Ceremonie; but the dam∣sell approaching to her, said: Fair Shepherdesse, make no difficulty to do this honour unto this Knight, he touches you neerer then you think for, and the time will come, that you will hold your self most happy to know him as I do; so that you shall do wisely, to place this day, and this action in your memory, the better to remember it all your life. I do not understand your language, said Miralinda, taking the sword; but I beseech God that all may redound to his glory, and that he will be pleased to make this Knight as vertuous, as he is handsome; herewith she hung his sword at his side, and having gently kissed him, she retired towards Clarisel, unto whom Alci∣damant protested a world of service, desiring his permission that he might begin to travell, as his good fortune should direct him. Go, said Clarisel, imbracing him again, and heaven grant you to prove as I hope you will. Alcidamant then valting into the saddle, sat his horse with such a grace, that Clarisel admired him, and thought he had never seen a Knight so comely in his arms; but he spurring into the thickest of the wood, left Clarisel very much satisfied with his gallant demeanour, and with the encounter of an ambling nag which the damsell had left, upon the which he set Miralinda, returning very covertly to Bellombre, with an opinion that it would not be known he was a Knight, and that the honour of the deliverance of this Shepherdesse, would be ascribed to some other rather then to him; but the truth cannot be hid, for it was presently divulged thorowout all France, that the village of Bellombre was honoured with the fairest maid, and with the valiantest knight of the world; so that all the talk thereabout, was of the excellency of these lovers, every body commending as well the va∣lour of the one, as the incomparable beauty of the other.
CHAP. XVI. The sweet life which Clarisel leads with his Shepherdesse; the incounter of Mascarin the Dwarf, his buffoonries upon occasion of his love to Miralinda. CLarisel and his fair Shepherdesse, living with incredible pleasure, past away the time insensibly, and feeling no other distaste, but what they found in the violence of their desires, that forced them to wish for a greater content, they attended with patience the felicitie, which they hoped either time or fortune would one day bring them. They were ordinarily together at the river side under the willows, or in a little wood of fir trees, whose tops were wrapt within the clouds, and which seemed to be disposed for the contentment of the beholder, where their usuall dis∣course was of new assurances of their loves. One day as their flocks were laid in the long and spacious alleys, which separated these fir trees, making them appear sometimes in triangle, and many times in little ovalls, Mira∣linda was arising for to catch a pretty ew that she loved, and which com∣monly wore her colours; but seeing a little ill-favoured and mishapen man upon a great and mighty horse, she cast her self suddenly into her Shep∣herds arms, as if fear had made her seek a place of refuge. Clarisel rising up, laid hold on his sheephook, and looked round about him, as it were doubting a second misfortune; howbeit, perceiving no body but a little piece of a man, he fell a laughing at his Shpherdesses fear, and approach∣ing to him, said: Friend, what would ye have, or why do you stay heer? To admire, said he, the excellencie of this Shepherdesse, who seems to me so fair, and hath such a dlicate grace, that I am already no longer mine own. By my faith, said Clarisel, she shews a marvellous power in this en∣counter, and your captivity gives her no little glory; but do you think it is wisely done of you to come and trench upon my rights, and are you not afraid that I will be revenged on you, for daring thus boldly to trespasse me? Afraid said he? I would not fear a thousand deaths, if I were to suffer them for her service, and the consideration of you, does not hinder me from telling her, that I love her more then all the men of the earth; it is for her to chuse whom she shall like best, and I assure my self, she will soon forsake you, when she shall know who I am, and that her judgement shall make her apprehend the advantages which she may have in the ele∣ction of me. Make your self known then, said Clarisel, and do not so un∣dervalue me before I know wherefore. I am, said he, Mascarin the amo∣rous (that sirname will I assume for the love of this Shepherdesse) other∣wise called the little Favourite; because my Master, the Count d' Aglas, re∣specting me above all his other servants, imparts his secrets to me, and im∣ploies me in matters of consequence; will you have a testimony of it? Why I come now by his commandment, from a very fair Gentlewoman, whom he loves passionately, having thought none worthy of this charge but my
self. By my faith, said Clarisel, these are qualities very eminent indeed, but yet my friend, you must seek out greater, if you mean to enjoy this Shepherdesse, her beauty renders her glorious, and raises her thoughts to desire a Knight, that is excellent in arms, for to match with her; I am one my self, howbeit without hope, and my want of merit obligeth her to de∣ny me that which she ows to my affection. Are you a Knight said Masa∣rin? Never take me for an honest manif I be not so ere long; wherefore prepare your self to just with me, for I like not a rivall of so handsome a presence as yours, and your death shall free my suit of all competition. Saying so, he bowed himself below the pommell of his saddle, for his chin was but a little above it, in that manner doing obey sance to Miralinda, and leaving them almost burst with laughter, he past on with more love, then body, or good grace. Being strucken then to the heart, he made in∣credible haste, and the same day came to his Master, before whom he knee∣led down, and in stead of giving him an account of his journey, he said un∣to him: My Lord, if the consideration of my services, have begotten a will in you to give me some recompence, do not refuse me one boon which I will demand of you, for the good news I bring you. His Master, that saw him so earnest, was somewhat amazed at his speech, but desirous to know the businesse, he promised him all that he would require. You shall make me Knight, then said he, within these four or five dayes, and bestow∣ing arms on me answerable to the proportion of my body, leave me power to obtain a Mistris, I will not say the fairest she pherdesse, but the rarest wo∣man on the earth; I have already placed her in my heart, and there is no∣thing wanting to the absolute possession of her, but the courage to defeat an audacious Shepherd that follows her, and brags he is a Knight; for my part, the overthrow of most horrible Gants were possible for me, out of the new power infused into me, by the vertue of this beauty; so that I am most assured very easily to vanquish this rivall, and to see my self shortly the happiest man of the world. The Count not being able to forbear laughing at his Favourites pssion, said unto him: Thou hast talkt enough of thine owne love, Mascarin; but thou sayest nothing to me of my Lady: Marvell not at that, answered he, I am so taken with this Shepherdesse, that I can think of nothing else; yet it is fit that I should satisfie you touching your demand: Your Mistris is wholly yours, and as I may conclude by her carriage towards me, there wants nothing but your presence to render you contented; Would you have better news then this? No, said the Count, for I am happy indeed if it be true. Why, do you doubt of my fi∣delty, said Mascarin? That I do not, answered the Count, for I finde that thy new passion doth not transport thee so, as to make thee speak otherwise then thou shouldest. You may build upon it, said the Dwarf; and do but take order that I may be furnished with arms, upon my life Ile lodge you in your Mistrisses bed assoon as you have made me Knight. This discourse being past, not without a world of laughter, the Dwarf retired himself, in expectation of the next morning, which was no sooner come, but he so prest his Lord, that he sent him to the next town, caused light arms to be made fit for him, who having put them on with such Ceremonies as his Master had devised, for to make himself sport, stood upon such puntillioes, as if he would have made all the world to fall by the edge of his sword. I will see now, said he, taking a lance greater then himself, whether this
Shepherd dare affront me, or be my rivall; and let me not live, if I do not overthrow him at the first encounter; wherefore my good Lord, said he to his Master, give me leave to commence my knighthood with the most glo∣rious conquest of the earth. I will not hinder thee, said the Count, who took wonderfull delight in his humour, but I foresee that thou wilt catch a fall. No, no, said he, couragiously getting up on his horse, the prize will animate my forces: therewith setting spurs to an old jade, upon the which he was mounted, away he went to Bellombre with all the speed he could, and came thither just at such time, as Miralinda and Clarisel, sitting under the shadow of those lofty firretrees, were singing an air upon the happy incounter of their loves. By heaven, said he, addressing his speech to Don Clarisel, and shaking a lance, which might be of the length of an ell, in stead of singing, thou hadst need begin the lamentations of thy death, or else re∣solve never to love my Shepherdesse more. O me, said Clarisel, laughing in good earnest with Miralinda, to behold the equipage of this piece of man: what new Knight have we here, and with what a grace does he man∣age a lance? Shepherd, answered he, in a mighty rage, it is no time to jeer, I mean to be the death of thee, wherefore betake thee to thy arms, and then thou shalt see, that though my body be lesse, my courage is grea∣ter then thine. Why, doest thou think that I shall need arms to vanquish thee, said Clarisel? I arms, said Mascarin, for I would be loth to fight with thee upon advantage; but if thou wilt make thy self unworthy of the fa∣vour which I offer, Ile soon rid the world of thee. Wherewithall he char∣ged his lance, set spurs to his horse, and ran against Clarisel, who taking wonderfull delight in this sport, stept aside, and with a little rap of his sheephook tumbled him so prettily out of his saddle, that Miralinda thought she should have killed her self with laughing. Now art thou my prisoner, said Clarisel, taking him by the collar, and therefore yeeld me up the Shep∣herdesse, or resolve to die. That were against reason, answered the Dwarf, for thou camest behinde me, and didst not vanquish me fairly. Well, said Clarisel, wilt thou run once morethen, and quit thy pretensions if thou art overthrown? I▪ by my knighthood, said he, and will never crosse thee more, if I chance to be so unhappy as to tumble once again, So mounting on his horse, he charged his little lance, and ran very couragiously against Clarisel; but receiving another rap on his head with the sheephook, he fell to the ground, so astonied, that if Miralinda had not opened his helmet to give him aire, he had beene deprived of his senses. How do you feel your self, my Knight, said she, after your fall? Too well, said he, for the con∣tent of this Shepherd, whosetreachery to me begins to be punished, for ac∣knowledging me to be your Knight, his hopes are utterly undone, so that he may go seek him another Mistris elsewhere. How, said Clarisel, ready to burst with laughing, do you threaten me af∣ter I have given you your life? Come, come, said Miralinda, I will make a peace between you: Friend Mascarin I wilbe alwaies glad to see you, and receiving your vows with affection, I will call you my favourite, as you are already to the Count d' Aglas; but I desire that this shepherd should be my Knight, for he can defend me better than you, and so I entreat you to live friends. By my life, fair shepherdesse said Mascarin, I will never appeal from your sentence, for it were not fit you should discard this shepherd for me, at leastwise before you know how far my services may extend, so that
if he will render you as much obedience as I do, our quarrell is at an end. I am very well pleased with this accord, said Clarisel, for I should never have slept quietly having so dangerous an enemy as thy self; let us drink then together for a confirmation of this agreement. In good faith said Ma∣scarin, thou shalt do me a singular curtesie to bestow a little wine on me, if thou hast any in thy bottle, this armor hath put me into such a heat, and the choler I was in, made me so drie, that I am ready to die for thirst. Therwith Clarisel reaching him a leather bottle which he had ordinarily in his scrip, so tempered him, that he talkt of nothing but of combatting all the shep∣herds of the Province to maintain that he was more amiable then they. Li∣ving in this maner with Miralinda, he gave her incredible content, pleasant∣ly interrupted Don Clarisels cares, and serving for sport to all the shepherds of Bellombre, went up and down along the rivers side extolling the incom∣parable beauty of his shpherdesse, sometimes graving her name on the barks of trees, and sometimes at her feet demanding one grace or other for the mitigation of his suffering. But it is time to leave this shepherd amidst such infinite delights, for to give a beginning unto the report of the marvel∣lous acts done by the excellent Knight of the Palms. CHAP. XVII. The adventures of Alcidamant, called the Knight of the Palmes, after he parted fom Clarisel: his first combat against Narsander the Inchanter in the behalf of Melania. ALcidamant departing, as you have heard, wonderfull well satisfied at his being made Knight, travelled with an extream desire to meet some accident worthy his courage, and the commencement of his arms, but be∣cause the absence of the King made adventures little frequent in France, it was two daies ere he could light on any, at the end whereof he encountred a yong Squire, who bitterly weeping complained very much of the injustice of the destinies: the sight of his tears moved him to pity, and imagining that so grievous a complaint proceeded from some great occasi∣on, curteously asked of him if he could do any thing for him. Yes Sir, said he wiping his eies, it lies in you to oblige me unto you for ever, if you please to imploy your sword for the service of one of the fairest Ladies of this Kingdome, unjustly disinherited, and likely to be most miserable all her life time, if the succour of strangers do not render her that of which her friends have deprived her. She is the sole heir of the Count of Maran, excellently fair, as I told you, and for a long time adored by most of the yong gallants of the Court, now neglected by all through the practice of one of the wic∣kedest men of the world. Narsander (so is this wretch called) Unkle to Me∣lania, (which is the poor afflcted creatures name) having an extream desire to possesse the lands of Maran, which had been managed by him about some fowr yeers (for so long it is since the decease of the father and mother of Melania) hath laid as damnable a plot to beeave his neece of them, as hath
been heard of: for he hath accused her not only for offending against the duty of a maid well born, but for being culpable of the death of a child, which he produced, and affirmed to be hers, and to confirm his speeches he hath so inchanted Melania (for he is very skilfull in Negromancy) that she her self avouches how she hath murdered that child, although it is most cer∣tain that she had never seen it, but at that time when the Iudges commanded her to be brought to look upon it. This confession of hers, the accusation of an Unkle, who seems to be carried thereunto by a just resentment of her dishonour, and the testimony of a servant that he hath, more wicked then himself, hath caused this maid to be condemned to death, and the Earldom of Maran to be confiscated unto this Inchanter, if some friends of hers by the mothers side had not opposed this sentence; shewing that there was no regard to be had to the saying of the maid, who questionles spake by the power of witchcraft which Narsander had used, neither to the false accusa∣tion of this man whom avarice had provoked therunto, as was easily to be judged by the demand he had made of the lands of Maran, and lesse to the testimony of that servant who was known to be a most lewd rascall, and that had said nothing but upon promise of recompence. These reasons were fa∣vourably heard, and all means have been used to discover the truth of this affair; but the Iudges not finding anything to prove the innocence of Me∣lania, as they have witnes of her offence, have confirmed their first sentence of death; howbeit desiring to give something to the birth of this maid, and to the request of her friends, who still maintain that she is bewitched, they have added these conditions, that within three months she shall bring a Knight for to combat Narsander, in whose victory or overthrow her life or death consists, which hath been accepted both by her friends, and Narsan∣der, who questionles is very valiant and couragious, and that with reason beleeves how she will meet with none in all the Country that either dares affront him or that will not fall under his sword, which very much troubles Melania's friends, who unwilling to hazard her honour and life upon the weaknes of their arms, have sent me to seek some adventurous Knight for to undertake this combat; and had commanded me to find out the hand∣some shepherd, who is much spoken of alate; but I will go no further ha∣ving thus luckily incountred you, only now it resteth that you will through∣ly examin your forces, and consider whether you are able to give an end to so great a busines. The honour of combats, said Alcidamant, depends on the grace of heaven, rather then on the vanity of men, which is the reason why I will not rashly promise thee the victory; but I wil confidently assure thee to undertake this quarrell with courage, and not to be diverted from it by the commendation thou hast given this inchanter. Let us away then if you please, said the Squire, for to morow is the last day of the term prefixed, but my comfort is, we may get thither to night if we use a little speed; whereupon setting spurs to their horses, they rode discoursing of the many mischiefs occasioned in the world by the treachery of men, when they met a yong damsell, who saluting Alcidamant said unto him: Brave warrior, I am commanded to present you with this Ring; it is a mean to discover the innocence of Melania: you may put it on her finger, and then make her speak to the Iudges before you combat for her; howbeit leave it not with her, but conserve it carefully, for it will stand you in stead other where. She that sends me so rare a present very much obliges me, said Alcidamant,
and assure her that she shall dispose of me whensoever, or howsoever she pleaseth, and so shall you for your pains in bringing it to me. Saying thus, he past on, as it were fearing that the least stay might interrupt his enter∣prise, but his Squire seeing him post away so suddenly, said unto him: Do you not know this damsell that spake to you but now? No, said Alcidamant, for I never saw her to my remembrance before. That is very strange, said Armidas, for it is even she which gave you these arms, and me thinks you gave her but cold intertainment, for such powerfull obligations. By my hopes said Alcidamant, I am very sorry for it, I would she were heer again, thou shouldst see then I would soon repair this fault; but since it is now too late, I must expect some other opportunity to shew my self more acknow∣ledging unto her. Talking thus in this maner, sometimes of one thing, som∣times of another, they arrived at a house where Melania's friends were as∣sembled with a purpose to chuse out some one amongst themselves for to hazard the combat with Narsander, but the Squire alighting and telling them of the incounter he had made of Alcidamant, they all came forth to receive him, wondring very much to behold one so yong to follow arms, and they could not be perswaded that he was of force sufficient to resist the fury of a man, who had made himself redoubted every where; howbeit observing him very exctly, and seeing him to be of so goodly a stature, well made, and of a confident look, they hoped for something extraordinary from him, so as they honoured him exceedingly; and having given him marvel∣lous noble entertainment, they conducted him to a chamber for to repose himself; but so great was his desire to combat, that he slept not long. Rising then very early in the morning, he disposed of himself, as a good Christi∣an ought to do that means to hazard his life; and afterwards being armed at all points, he went straight to the field, which the Iudges had caused to be prepared, in whose presence he approached to Melania, who was set upon a scaffold, and said unto her: Madam, assure me of your innocence, that so I may have the assistance of heaven fighting for your preservation. Why do you speak of my innocency, answered she, have not I said a thousand times at least that I have murthered my child, what would you of me more? that were too much, replied Alcidamant, if what you say were true: But my Lords, said he, addressing his speech to the Iudges, I will let you see what cunning this wicked man, to whom you have granted the honour of the field, hath used to undo this maid: whereupon, taking the Ring which Ne∣rea had sent him, he put it upon Melania's finger, and then said unto her: Madam, Is it true that you have murdered a childe? That I have murdered a childe, answered she, with a setled judgement; O God, never suffer me, I beseech thee, to be charged with such a crime; but, Sir, what childe is this that you speak to me of? Of one that you brought into the world, and murdered instantly, answered the Iudges. Alas! said she, lifting up her eies: may heaven, that never suffers such a crime to go unpunished, strike me dead with thunder, if this whereof I am accused be true: Are all this people then assembled for that, and must this ax do vengeance on me for a sin which I have not committed? My Lords, do not precipitate my daies in this manner, at leastwise let me know the authour of so great a wicked∣nesse. Narsander, said Alcidamant, is he that would ruine you, that charges you with this fact, that by the power of his charms hath made you say, that you are culpable of it, and that labours to have you put to death; but
we will chastice him if you will remit your right unto my arms. I would ne∣ver permit you to fight upon this occasion, answered she, if I were not con∣fident of his assistance that never forsakes the innocent, but assuring my self both of his justice and your valour, you may proceed to the combat when you please. Whereupon Alcidamant taking the Ring from her as he was ad∣vised by Nerea, Melania required afresh to be put to death as she that was guilty; wherby the assistants plainly perceived how Narsander had bewit∣ched her, in such sort that all the people were so incensed against him as they had torn him in peeces, had it not been for Alcidamant, who desiring a little silence, advanced towards him; and finding him full of rage and de∣spite to see his secrets discovered said unto him: I have laid open thy villa∣ny, not to exempt my self from the combat with thee; for I will oblige the world by thy death, and free all honest persons heerafter from thy de∣ceits, but to clear Melania from all imputation whereunto she might be sub∣ject in the opinion of those that neither could discover nor beleeve thy wic∣kednes, wherefore defend thy self from me. Therewithall taking the field, he charged his lance, and setting spurs to his horse, he met him so strongly in the midst of the course, that he cast him out of his saddle, though not without some staggering by the incounter he had received. Narsander fin∣ding himself on the ground suddenly rose up, and drawing out his sword he let fall a blow with such fury on his enemies shield, that thorowly made him to feel the force of his arm; but not to fail in the first combat that ever he had undertaken, he began to charge Narsander so fiercely, that every one admired to see him fight with such grace and courage against a man so re∣doubted, and that was scarcely to be matched again in France: if his enemy struck at him, he either warded it with his sword, or opposed with his shield to it, and for the most part avoided it with such agility, as he gave most of his blows in vain, wheras his never fell but to purpose; so that having cut Narsanders shield in an hundred peeces, he drew bloud from him in I know not how many places. Having then a quick eie, a confident judgement, a strong arm, and a resolute courage, his addresse gave marvellous content∣ment to the people, who beholding his youth prophecied, that in time he would prove one of the most accomplished Knights of the world. Narsan∣der almost in despair to see himself reduced into so ill a plight, and cursing his spirits, for neglecting to advertise him of the force of this Knight, ve∣rily beleeved that the justice of heaven was armed for to punish his wicked∣nes; nevertheles hoping yet to prevail, he took his sword in both his hands, and therwith struck Alcidamant so dangerously on the helmet, that he made him knock his chin against his breast, almost despairing of his sences, and without doubt if he had quickly redoubled upon him he had been in perill, but the Knight having time to resettle and come again to himself, grew so furious that Narsander was exceedingly troubled with the apprehension of a most horrible blow, which lighting on his head overthrew him in the place without moving either hand or foot, wherewithall the Knight not be∣ing satisfied was going to disarm him, for to take his head from his shoul∣ders, when as the Iudges declaring Melania to be innocent, desired him to save his life. So wicked a creature as this is, answered he, deserves no fa∣vour, howbeit deliver this gentlewoman into the hands of her friends with the ceremonies requisit in such a case, and then at your request I will spare him. Heereupon they caused Melania to be conducted to the house where
her friends were assembled, into the which she was no sooner entred, but she was presently restored to her former understanding, free from the charms of her Unkle, who being come to himself would not suffer his wounds, though very dangerous, to be looked unto; the grief to see himself vanqui∣shed making him desire rather to die then to live. CHAP. XVIII. The loves of Alcidamant and Melania. WHilest the people talked of the exceeding valour of Alci∣damant, and that Narsander infinitely enraged vowed to revenge his disgrace, Melania suffered her self to be carried with the perfections which she found in her Knight, his person was a wonder to her eie, she admi∣red such unmatchable force in an age so tender, a ma∣tute and setled judgement in this youth, an extraordi∣nary prudence in his actions, and briefly observing no∣thing in him that was not capable of love, she felt the violence of certain desires that touched her to the quick, and that seemed even to enform her to discover her thoughts unto him, nevertheles retained by shame she resol∣ved to suffer with silence, and in the mean time to let him see that she loved him; Emploied then whatsoever she had of charm and attraction in her, and all the art that maidens use for the captivity of men, she indevoured to gain and possesse him, but there needed no great labour to bring her designs to passe; for Alcidamant being naturally amorous, seeing so beautifull a crea∣ture, and occasion so favorable, said unto her one day as they were walking alone under the trees of a fair and pleasant orchyard: Madam, I did not think that my ruine should have been drawn out of your preservation, and that your deliverance should have been the cause of my thraldome; but now I perceive to my grief, that I have not freed you, but to suffer the more my self, unles you be as sensible of my pain as I was of your misfortune. I do not know answered she, exceedingly contented to hear him upon those terms which she so much desired, what cause you have to complain of me, for I have laboured to serve you, and by all waies sought to give you that, which your assistance hath deserved; but if what I have done doth not suf∣fice, Sir, you may dispose of all that is mine, and there is nothing in my po∣wer, that I do not most willingly make you the Master of, that so at least I may not rest unthankfull. And if so be this house be distastfull to you, as indeed it is not very pleasing, I am to be excused, in regard I have not staid you heer, but only to shew you how desirous I am to give you some enter∣tainment befitting your merit. Alas! said he, that is not the cause of my complaint; for these pleasant walks, these delicate gardens, curious water works, stately buildings, and even this very orchard wherein we are, set with a multitude of excellent trees, might give content to the saddest dispo∣sition that could be, much more to me that can never be enough satisfied of them, but I will explane my self, seeing it is your pleasure. I said that I did not think my ruine would have been drawn out of your preservation. Ah
Madam! will you not soon understand the meaning of these words, when I shall tell you that your beauty hath left me nothing free, but the will to do you service, and a desire to enjoy you? Yes, and will think I have rea∣son to complain, if you should leave me in distresse, from whence I have delivered you. I did not know my power till now, answered she with a smile, nor could ever imagine that my eies had been of more force then the fury of the bravest Knights of the earth, neither did I think of bringing any remedy to your disease, because I was not acquainted with the cause; but now that I am assured of it, I will take time to resolve my self, and let you see that I cannot be ingratefull. You shall never meet with better op∣portunity to make me happy, said Alcidamant; and this place, free, as I conceive, from all danger of discovery, may invite you not to let me lan∣gush any longer. Look now, replied Melania, how your impatience would wrong us; would you have the Sun be a witnesse of my dishonour, or would you have me espie some one peeping on us in the midst of our pleasures, which could never taste well, accompanied with such fear? We will finde a more seasonable time, and safer place, till when, I shall intreat you to rest contented; with this assurance, that I am won to your desire: and withall, that you will give me the satisfaction, to look more merrily upon me. Why this, said he, kissing her hand, is as much as I can wish, whereof I were most unworthy, if my looks hereafter do not give you the content you require; onely be mindfull of me, and make the way to my felicity, as short as possibly may be. You shall not complain of me, answered she, and I shall hold my self most happy in your affection, provided you be constant, and do not forsake me to sigh for another. Sigh for another, said he? Ah, Madam, never fear that, for I have not the power so to do though I would, and if my ho∣nour would permit me to leave following of arms, I would not stir from you whilst I have a day to lve; howsoever, you shall never see me mount on horsback but by your commandment. I mistrusted, said she, that I should finde the defect in you, which ordinarily accompanies the weaknesse of men, who oftentimes suffer themselves to be carried away with new ob∣jects; but your vow hath relieved that doubt, and perswaded me to be∣leeve, that you will be as perfect in love, as you are in arms; which makes me resolve to care more for your contentment, then my own reputation. This discourse having lasted somewhat long, they walked in, where a sumptuous supper waited ready for them on the table; that done, they had entertained themselves with some pleasing discourse, had not Melania, de∣sirous to loose no time, feigned some little indisposition, thereby to send her family to bed: Being then alone with a chambermaid, whom she had made the Secretary of her thoughts, and perceiving a generall silence over all the house, she accomodated her hair in a delicate manner, perfumed it with a most exquisite odour, and putting on a cloak of white satten over her smock, she went forth without any light, but that of her eies, and slipt secretly into Alcidamants chamber, who seeing her come with such a grace, lept suddenly out of his bed, and giving her a kisse, whereby she might ea∣sily discern the gretnesse of his passion; he laid her immediatly between the sheets, where their embraces began with all the delight, that may be imagined by any one tht hath had the happinesse to be at such a banquet. Their first fires being extinguished, they instantly re-kindled them with a
million of kisses, and with all the dalliance that can be used in such actions, they rendered their pleasure so full, that the length of the night, was but a moment to their desires; insomuch, that they parted lesse satisfied, and with much more will to meet again then before, so the next night being come, as they had wished for a thousand times, they renewed their sport with such pleasure, that Melania became with childe of a most beautifull daughter, which was named Lucilea, and afterwards married to Sonabel of Fenuz, as more at large shall be related in the prosecution of this history: but to come where we left. These Lovers drowned in delight, thought of nothing, but how to please one another; Alcidamant talked no more of horses and arms, Melania had forgotten her passed miseries, and finding her self in the supremst degree of worldly felicity, had no other desire, but every day to adde some grace to her actions for the contentment of her Knight: Howbeit, Fortune, that never gives a sweet without some sowr, not enduring to see them triumph over her inconstancie, resolved to inter∣rupt the course of so much happinesse, and send Alcidamant away when least they expected it. CHAP. XIX. The Knight of the Palms arrives at the dangerous Bridge, forces the guards there, and bravely delivers Florimond of Canabea with a mul∣titude of prisoners. ONE moneth being sweetly past away in these sweet de∣lights, Alcidamant, who desired to join the pleasure of hunting with his content in love, getting to horse one morning, rode into the woods of Maran, attend∣ed by five or six huntsmen; but wandering from his company, and thinking to take a way which he saw on his left hand, he perceived a little Dwarf, who laying hold on his bridle, said with a surly counte∣nance: Thou wilt make the Destinies liars if thou continuest long in this manner, and the exercises which thou hast used of late, will not give thee that glory they have promised thee. Shall the bosom of a woman, limit thy ambition, and in stead of nobly sweating under the weight of an ar∣mour, wilt thou die inglorious in her imbraces? Remember, Knight, that fame is not acquired with unmanly courses, and that God hath not given thee such incomparable force to imploy it ill. With these words he va∣nished, leaving Alcidamant in a strange confusion; for reflecting on his life, and judging it indeed most unbeseeming a man that desired to be in esteem with persons of worth, he resolved to quit Melania, and follow the voice of the Destinies: howbeit, finding no little difficulty therein, and fearing this wenches extream love would oppose his designe; he knew not whe∣ther he should depart without leave, or whether it were better for him to perswade her with reasons to allow of his going. This last opinion, seem∣ing fairest unto him, in regard that this way, he avoided all occasion she might have to reproach him for deceiving her, as also any misfortune that
otherwise peradventure might arise from such his neglect of her; he con∣cluded to proceed ingenuously with her, and to undertake nothing but with permission; being perswaded he ought that respect unto so many favours which he had received from her. Pursuing then the cry of the hounds, and finding as full a grown Boar as ever he had seen, he presently advanced towards him, and not giving him time to enter into the toils, he struck him to the heart with his Boar spear; whereupon, commanding the huntsmen to bring him away, he returned home, where at first he discovered not his intent to Melania; but night being come, and they together in bed, he be∣gan his discourse with a sigh, and said unto her: Madam, it is with extream grief, that I desire you to consider the reasons I bring for to induce you no longer to keep me heer. We are not born for our selves, much lesse for pleasure and idlenesse, nor is a man to put on arms for once, and ever after to let them hang ignobly rusting: The greatest Knights that are, have lo∣ved like my self, but their love never kept them from seeking adventures in the world; contrarily, they have rendred themselves famous by an infinity of enterprises atchieved by the sole remembrance of their Mistrisses; sweet Madam give me this power, permit me to raise my name with your praises, and that I may make the world say, how France produceth excellent war∣riors, and incomparable beauties; you shall have a share in my triumphs, and when you shall hear the greatnesse of my acts reported, you will re∣ceive a thousand times more contentment, then that you can expect from my stay. I speak not thus, because I am weary of your caresses, they have too much charm and delight in them; but truly mine honour will not suf∣fer me to give the best part of my daies to rest and ease; for so should I ren∣my self the fable of the world, whereas I should desire to be the wonder of it. You love me in regard you hold me to be vertuous, should I not then be most unworthy of your favours, if I should be basly effeminate▪ Verily, Madam, you might justly despise me: wherefore, I beseech you, to leave me the liberty to merit them, and generously testifie, that you prefer my honour before own satisfaction: This way you shall oblige me, never to forget your noble carriage to me, and furnishing me with occasion to com∣mend you, you will make me desire to return to serve you, after I have crowned my self with a million of laurells. Alas! said Melania, I feared nothing in the world so much as this discourse, the doubt whereof, hath many times interrupted the pleasure I took in you. What do you think will become of me, for can I live without a soul? Ah no, dear heart, I cannot, your departure will procure my death, as your coming prevented it: Ne∣verthelesse, I cannot blame you, your reasons appear most just unto me, and though my love cannot allow of them, yet I must needs confesse, that you ought to live for glory, and not for pleasure. Why will not you then, said Alcidamant, suffer a little, since it is for my good? My weaknesse, an∣swered she, will not permit me so to do; howbeit, seeing reason com∣mands, I will resolve my self for it: Go then when you please, I will seek for consolation in my patience, in the praises which I shall hear published of you, and most of all, in the promise you have made me to return hither again another day. But alas, I fear, and with reason, that your merits, which make you so lovely, will furnish you with as many Mistrisses, as you shall meet with fair women, and that you will utterly forget me. Madam, said Alcidamant, kissing her very amorously, you are then troubled to no
purpose, your beauty may well assure you against this fear, and the know∣ledge of my disposition will keep you from beleeving that ever I can be so far ingratefull: If I am much indebted to the favour you have done me, I must add to that account as none of the least, this last resolution of yours, wherein I find as much love as courage, and from thence draw upon my self most powerfull obligations to make me despise all kind of objects for your sake. Accompanying these words then with a world of kindnes, he somewhat pacified the grief of this poor afflicted creature, but her sorrows renewed when she saw her self alone in bed, and that she considered how her Lover was arming himself to be gone, whereupon not enduring the place, and de∣siring to enjoy the sight of him as long as possible might be, she presently got forth, covered only with a little cloak, and went to the chamber where our Knight was, and would once again have bid him adieu, howbeit not a∣ble to speak but with sighs, she let him go to horse, somwhat pleased, yet in her displeasure to have seen a few tears on his cheeks as assured testimonies of his grief so to leave her, and returned to her bed, where the memory of the pleasures she had there formerly enjoied refreshing her torment, she continued a long time weeping, whilest Alcidamant followed his good for∣tune. This generous warrior being alone was no doubt very sensible of the so∣row he had left at Maran, but on the other side it gladded him asmuch, that he was at liberty, and bethinking him of the time which he had unprofita∣bly spent, it vexed him to see how little he had done in the commencement of his chivalry, neverthelesse he comforted himself with the resolution to do such deeds of arms as should deface this fault, and give occasion to all the world to talk of him. Travelling then with this intention, he bestowed all the rest of the day without meeting of any adventure, and at night took up his lodging in a village, where being at supper a yong Squire came in, and with a very sad countenance desired entertainment. As God help me, seid he moved with pity to behold him, your affliction displeases me, and if you will acquaint me with the cause of it, I will gladly indevour to assist you if you have need of my succour. Sir, said the Squire, your good will doth much oblige me, but alas! it brings me not the satisfaction I desire, and which I cannot hope for but from heaven: If I be greeved it is with a great deal of reason; for having to day lost my master, one of the best Knights in the world, I can never look for any contentment heerafter. By what misfortune did you lose him, said Alcidamant? Through the treason of a wicked villain, answered the Squire, who causes a bridge to be guard∣ed some three leaues hence, for to surprise a Knight, from whom it seems he hath received some displeasure, but others that come there are not ex∣empted from his trechery; for assoon as ever any one is advanced upon the bridge, he makes the barrier by which he entred, to be shut upon him, and straightway he is opposed by fowr strong Knights, who stop him from passing on, till such time as another, that I assure you is very valiant and cou∣ragious, comes and joins with them to combat him if he will not render up his arms. My Master unluckily arriving there, went in boldly never drea∣ming of any such matter; but he had not made twenty steps when the Knight of whom I last mentioned, came against him, & threatned him with present death if he would not yeeld himself to prison. What do you talk
of death and prison to me, answered my Master? By my life you shall not triumph so easily of me, and as long as I am able to weild a sword, no man living shall command my liberty. Saying so, my Master having given me his lance, because the Knight was without one, couragiously drew his sword, and not to use many words he began a fierce combat with him, who behaved himself, marvellous well, both in defending and charging my Ma∣ster, that surpassing him in valour, had brought him to an ill passe having al∣ready drawn bloud from divers parts of his body, when as those that guar∣ded the barrier advanced, and having charged him altogether, overthrew him from his horse, manacled his hands, and cast him into a dungeon, with a resolution to plague him thorowly for the pain he had put them unto: now because their meaning is not to take any but Knights, they presently turned me out, and told me that I was set at liberty in hope I would find our some valiant man or other for to deliver my Master out of their hands; but they shall misse of their purpose, for I will never make the misfortune grea∣tr, by conducting any Knight thither, unles it be the valorous Fulgoran of Canabea, my Masters neer kinsman, or in his absence the brave bastard of Media: now judge, Sir, whither I have not great cause to complain. That you have in good faith, said Alcidamant, and I much commend the affection which you carry to the service of that good Knight; but me thinks you should not so afflict your self by despairing of his recovery, seeing it may happen that he may be delivered; and to oblige you thereunto, I promise you so as you will conduct me to that bridge, to trie my fortune there to morrow, and save you the labour of going so far to seek relief. Now God defend, said the Squire I would rather cosll you to forbear; for I should undo you, be guilty of the mischief that should betide you, and your death would augment my grief and displeasure. It were an honour for Knights chiefly of your ag (pardon me for speaking to you in this maner, and telling you that your youth doth not permit you to have much experience in arms) it were an honour, I say, for Knights to undertuke adventures, whereof the power of a man is capable, but they are held to be rash and unadvised when they venture upon such as are above their forces, they are to leave those great executions unto such, as by little and little have given end to difficult enterprises, and to remember that nature hath taught yong birds not to soar high till their wings be strong and able. If we venture nothing, said Alcida∣mant, what can we do worthy of commendation, and if glory be not to be acquired by common adventures, we are without fear to attempt such as are dangerous? wherefore, honest youth, never trouble your self for me, nor enquire whether I can, or cannot; the order I have received obliges me to this design, which I will execute without you, conducted thither by some other, howbeit if you love your Master, I know you cannot stir a foot till you have made this journy. My pity of you, said the Squire, drew me to give you this advice, but seeing you have so much courage as to contemn it, I will not fail to be your guide. Whereupon bidding him good night, he retired, leaving Alcidamant with an extream desire to break so pernicious a custome. Having slept then bt a little, he arose very early, and conducted by the Squire, he arrived at the Bridge, upon which he entred boldly with∣out any fear, although he saw the barrier shut after him, and advancing for∣wards he incountred a great Knight, who perceiving those three palms up∣on his shield, cried out: Come, come, my Masters, heer is the bird for
which we laid our nets. At these words, Alcidamant was assured, that this custom was established for to take away his life; and observing the Knight well, he perceived that it was Narsander the inchanter, which having made him draw his sword, he advanced to him with this speech: By heaven, traitor, thou shalt not escape me now, neither shall the power of thy friends avail thee, for it is more then time to make thee give an account of all the wickednesse that thou hast committed. Wherewithall, he discharged his sword so furiously upon his shield, that he divided it in two, the point there∣of lighting with such volence on his head-peece, that it overthrew him quite astonished to the ground, where doubtlesse he had trode him in pie∣ces under his horses feet, if the Knights of the Bridge had not arrived to his succour. Those four Knights exceedingly vexed to behold their Master in that case, charged Alcidamant all at once, making no question to subdue him with ease; but he despising their assauits, which made not so much as any print upon his arms, began a most dangerous bickering with them; now he gave a down right blow on the head of one, by and by he ran ano∣ther clean thorow the body; howbeit, not having room enough to lay a∣bout him, his blows fell not half so strongly as otherwise they would have done, insomuch, that the combat endured longer then he defired; never∣thelesse, growing into choler to see Narsander come again to himself, and offer to arise, he bestirred himself so terribly amongst his enemies, that with the first blow he discharged he cut one of them in twain, and present∣ly sent the arm of another to the earth. This expedition had amazed them, and they were even upon the point of betaking themselves to flight, when as Narsander joined with them, charging Alcidamant very fiercely; who becoming more furious by the resistance he found, struck one of them with such force, that he clave him down to the very teeth, thereby so terrifying those which remained, that Narsander began to flie one way, whilst the Knight laboured to save himself by another. Alcidamant, who cared for nothing but to dispatch this inchanter, followed him close, and cried to him: Turn about, traitor, and adde not cowatdise to so many thy other vices; neverthelesse, he ran away still, striving to get the Castle on his head, for to shelter him from that furious tempest; but the Knight held him so to it, that entering in at the first gate, he discharged such a terrible blow on him behinde, as having made him a wound on his shoulder half a foot deep, he laid him once more on the earth, where instantly going with a resolution to take off his head, and about to unlace his helmet, he beheld a reasonable handsome gentlewoman, and of a gracious presence, make hastily towards him, who falling upon her knees, said unto him: Excellent Knight, have pity, I beseech you, on me, and for her sake whom you love best in the world, grant me the head of this Knight whom I see in your power. As I live, said he, Madam, he doth not deserve such grace, but you so straitly conjure me, that I may not refuse you: howbeit, I must have the naughty custom that is kept heer abrogated, and you shall presently de∣liver the prisoners which are in your custodie. My Lord, answered the gentlewoman, I confesse with you, that Narsander is be to blamed for many of his actions, and you may be sure, that it is a grief unto me to see him live in this manner: But alas! my condition doth not permit me to dispose of it otherwise, and my love to him makes me desire his welfare. You are plea∣sed that the custom of the Bridge shall be broken, and the passage left free
heerafter, assure your self, that shall be the first request I will make unto him; and as for the prisoners, it is reasonable that they should be set at li∣berty, seeing it is your pleasure, unto whom all obedience is more then due heer. Commanding then some of her servants to open the dungeons, they brought forth above forty Knights, who presently departing, went pub∣lishing the valour of this Knight of the Palms, in so many places, that all France resounded again with the report of his famous deeds; onely the Squires Master remained behinde, in regard that Alcidamant, observing his gallant disposition, had intreated him to make himself known to him. That will I most gladly, answered he; My name is Florimond, son to Bru∣zanges of Canabea, and Cousin to the burning Knight, of whom it may be you have heard talk, as of one of the valiantest Gentlemen of the earth, and who not long since was acknowledged to be the son of the Excellent Em∣perour of Persia, Don Rogel; I went forth of Constantinople a good while since, for the execution of a difficult enterprise, and made account to re∣turn again instantly, but the ordinary adventures, which befall Knights errant, having carried me from one Countrey to another, I arrived in this goodly Kingdom, where the first incounte I met withall, was a very beau∣tifull Gentlewoman, who understanding by my speech that I was a stran∣ger, invited me very courteously to repose some time in her house, to the which I consented in a most unluckie time, (well may I say so, for my tor∣ments will not suffer me to speak better;) I was conducted then to my chamber, where being disarmed, I presently saw Claristea enter (so is this cruell fir named) who seemed to be curious after novelties, asked me a thousand questions, whereunto I answered, as I conceived, very fully. Whilst she talked thus with me, I marked her very heedfully, and obser∣ving powerfull charms in hereies, a marvellous delicate face, a winning grace in her carriage, and a certain kinde of Majestie in her countenance, I could not chuse but love her. To what end should I hold you longer with discousing my pssions? I discovered my thoughts unto her (Alas! Love would needs force me to it, for to make me suffer afterwards a tor∣ment worse then death) by a million of sighs I made her understand the power she had over me, and a thousand times besought her to take some compassion of my endurings; but she was so far from beleeving my pro∣testations, or regarding my pain, that she would at no hand grant me the honour to be her Knight. If ever you have loved, you may easily con∣jecture how great my sorrow was, seeing all my hopes so frustrate; truly it was such, that no whit respecting my life, since I was not pleasing to whom I adored, I resolved to appear no more before her; and so one morning I departed, with a purpose to undergo things impossible for a man to perform, to the end I might free my self from farther languishing; and indeed, I never complained of the rigour of my imprisonment, from which you have delivered me, in hope that death would give an end to all my troubles. Behold, Sr, this is that which you have desired of me, and if there be any other thing wherein I may serve you, I would desire you to command me before I get me to some desert, where I may with more li∣berty bewail my misfortune. This is a resolution, said Alcidamant, very unbefitting the honour of a good Knight, wherefore you shall never put it in practice if you will be ruled by me, rather hope for something from your merit, and compell this insensible creature to blame her ingratitude,
and acknowledge your services; a small matter pleases a woman, a far lesse displeases her, and oftentimes she loves us in our neglect of her, as she despiseth us when we adore her beauty. My grief, replied Florimond, made me wish for death, but your discourse makes me desire life, for to imploy it in your service. This is as it should be, said Alcidamant, now it were not amisse, we began to think of dislodging from hence, where so little good is meant us. Truly, answered Florimond, I was about to advise you unto it, for the lesse while we stay here, the easier will it be for us: Whereupon, Florimond having himself caused the barrier to be opened, and followed Alcidamant to a village not far off, where they met with the adventures, which shall be recounted in the ensuing Chapter. CHAP. XX. The strange adventure which happened to the Knight of the Palms and Flo∣rimond, with the deiverance of Claristea, and her love to Alcidamant. THE Knight of the Palms having endued so much the day before, fell asleep assoon as he was a bed; but Florimond, more oppest with care and sorrow, could take no rest; his ill fortune presented it self continu∣ally before him, and Claristea's rigour so tormented him, that he found no ease save in his complaints: arising then, he walked about the chamber, but that being too strait for the liberty of his thoughts, he went unto certain trees that bordered on the high way which led unto the village, and there was so ingaged in his passions, as he thought on nothing else. What a weakesse is this in me, said he, to sigh for an ingratefull creature, that takes pleasure in my sufferings; her cruelty should make me despise her as much, as her beauty hath made me love her, and my just dis∣dain should give me that content, which her neglect and my fidelity deny me. Ah Claristea! my anger should make me happy, it should make me forget you, so to deliver my self out of the pain wherein I am, or at least∣wise not to think of you, but to hate you, seeing you take the course to un∣do me: But alas! it is not in my power, my desires are tied to my misfor∣tune; I love my misery because you are the occasion of it, and shall never resolve for hate, as I do for patience: Live then, as you please, either in∣gratefull, or inclined to favour me; alter your minde, or persevere in your purpose to destroy me; I will never breathe, but for you, nor shall my de∣sires be bestowed any other where. So, concluding to die, rather then to be wanting in loialty, he was devising some way how he might come to see Claristea again; when as a great noise made him give ear to certain voices he heard; but suddenly remembring, that the Moon shone clear enough to let him see what he desired, he abandoned the shadow of those trees, and got him into the midst of the high way, where he perceived three Giants coming on, which seemed three towers, leading five or six damsels bound, who crying to heaven for help, filled the air with their complaints.
This object amazed him, and if he had been armed without doubt he had set upon these Giants, although he had been sure to die for it, but having not so much as his sword about him, he returned instantly unto the trees with a resolution to follow and succor those afflicted women assoone as ever he was armed. Concealing himself then under a walnut tree he patiently suf∣fered them to passe by, but he was marvellously astonished, when as they were just against him, to hear the voice of his fair Mistris amongst the con∣fusion of their lamentations, and observe the very garments, as he thought, which she wore the day he parted from her. Either I am enchanted said he to himself, or I see Claristea a captive. Ah beauteous mistris! My death shall testifie the greatnes of my passion, for I will free you from those chains which are nothing so hard as they that bind my heart, or I will die coura∣giously, that I may not survive my misfortune. Whereupon he was about to have pluckt away a branch from the tee under which he stood, and be∣gun the fight therwih, but knowing he should lose himself so to no purpose he forbore, and stealing softly from one tree to another, he got to the house where his horse and arms stood, before the door wherof these women staid, as if some good spirit had told them that they should find succour there; howbeit they were constrained to set forwards instantly out of the fear they had of one of those Giants, who switching them ever and anon with a wand said unto them with a terrible voice: On, on, ye baggages or I will cut you in a thousand peeces. These words and this action put Florimond into such a rage that immediatly he got into his lodging, and finding his Squire by good fortune awake, commanded him to saddle his horse with all expediti∣on, armed himself, and never minding the Knight of the Palms, who was fast asleep in an inner chamber, mounted on his steed, and straightway gal∣loped after the Giants. In the mean time Arnides having heard the noise was got forth to know the cause thereof, where seeing Florimond depart in such haste, and understanding part of this adventure by his Squire, he sud∣denly returned in to Altidamant chamber, and pulling him by the arm for to awake him he said unto him: Do you sleep, Sir, whilest others are upon brave emploiment? For Gods sake arise, and ride after Florimond, who to succor certain damsels that are led away captive by three Giants, hath put himself into a danger out of which he cannot escape unlesse he be gene∣rously assisted. At these words Alcidamant leapt out of his bed, and whilest Arnides was making ready his horses, hastily armed himself, vaulted into his saddle, and spurred as hard as he could drive afer Florimond, who ha∣ving made wonderfull speed had overtaken the Giants, just as the Sun began to appear. These three Colosses seeing themselves pursued but by one Knight alone, fell a laughing outright, and continued on their way as it were disdaining to draw their swords; but one of them not able to endure this presumption turned him about, and said unto the others: This Woodcock will needs be taken in the net which we have not pitcht for him; go you on, Ile soon give him his psport, and be with you presently. Wherupon draw∣ing out his curtelax he attended Florimonds approach, and seeing him come running at him with his lance in his rest, he thought to have slipt aside and cut it in two, howbeit he was not so quick but that he was surprized and en∣countred with such force, as he was fain to recoil two or three steps back for to save himself from falling, which put him into so great a fury, that cursing his Gods, he advanced to cleave him in twain. But Florimond resol∣ving
to fight with judgement and not with passion, lightly avoided the blow and letting it fall to no purpose, gave his enemy so home a thrust under the left arm, that it entred three fingers deep into his body. When as the Giant beheld his armor all besmeared with bloud he was ready to burst with cho∣ler and rage; and lifting up his heavy curtelax, he laboured to let it descend on Florimond, who knowing that death attended on that weapon, somtimes leapt aside, and somtimes slipt under his enemies arm, so making it still to fall in vain. This combat growing more cruell and furious, through the force and dexterity of these warriors, it continued so long till the incompa∣rable Alcidamant came galloping to them, who staying to behold the fight Florimonds Squire said unto him: Alas Sir! you see not the worst of the adventure in this combat, two monsters like to this heer, have carried away certain Ladies who are sure to be ravished by them, without your assistance. I will die, said Alcidamant, before that shalbe, and if their safety may de∣pend on me, no man els shall run the hazard of their deliverance but my self. Heerwith he posted away, and rode almost an howr without discove∣ring that which he sought for, wherupon beginning to fear lest he should fail of his enterprise, in regard he was entring into a great and spacious for∣rest, he heard the cries of a woman that sounded very brief amidst the si∣lence of those woods: turning then to that part whither the voice seemed to call him, he approached to certain oaks, under the which he saw a Giant that held five damsels bound with a cord, and another more dreadfull then he, who strove to violate a maid fair beyond excellence, and which made those outcris he had heard. By heaven said he, aiming the point of his lance at this Giants throat, I will be as good as thou art wicked; this steell shall be the death of thee, that art so base as to go about to ravish a woman that infinitely deserves to be served. How now, said this proud Giant, da∣rest thou offer to disturb me from enjoying a pleasure, wherein I placed a sovereign happines. By all my Gods Ile teach thee better manners, and re∣spit thy death no longer then to the first blow I shall give thee: whereupon drawing out his curtelax he thought to divide the Knight of the Palms in two peeces, but he was turned aside to receive the encounter of the other, who having tied those damsels to the foot of a tree, ran furiously at him with his lance charged. Their encounter was dangerous, Alcidamant som∣what astonished had much ado to keep his saddle, but he more fortunat past his lance quite through the body of his enemy, who was overthrown dead in the place, and that in good time; for the first Giant arriving the mean while, gave him so terrible a blow, that it made his head bow to his saddle bowe: great was the pain that he felt therby, but raising up himself more furious then ever he had been in all his life, he gave his enemy so dangerous a stroak on his shield, that his arm being too weak to sustain the brunt of it, carried it to his head with such violence, that it made him knock his chin a∣ginst his breast, and see a thousand stars more then ever he had beheld. The Giant amzed therewith, advanced his heavy curtelax again, but the Knight of the Palms not intending to abide the fury of it, slipt aside, and seeing that his choler made him to neglect the guarding of himself, he discharged so mighty a blow on his left arm, that it made way to the quick, and gave him a great wound a little under the elbow. Wherupon the Giant entring into extream rage, would have closed with his enemy, but the point of Alci∣damants sword made another deep entrance into his body, so that not able
to get within him as he desired, he had recourse again to his cimiter, where∣with he laid about him more dangerously then before. This while the dam∣sell who had seen her self so neer to be ravished was got up, and having un∣bound her companions, was fallen on her knees, heartily praying unto hea∣ven to assist their Knight; and beginning to be in some hope by the death of the first Giant, and the bad estate whereinto the other was reduced, she observed this valiant Knight of the Palms, admired his addresse and force, and comparing him to God Mars, it begot a well willing in her towards him, which by little and little converting into love, made her wish him the victory, that so she might be liable to a recompence. Have you ever, said she to those that accompanied her, have you ever seen a Knight fight with more grace? and who could imagin that a Giant so dreadfull should passe by the sword of one man alone? It amazes me, and the danger I was so lately in keeps me not from considering this combat with pleasure; see you not his strange force, and that he never gives blow in vaine; but especially mark his addresse, he diverts his enemies strokes, wisely avoids the edge of his curtelax, and when he is surprised he seems a towr that contemns all as∣saults, no travell wearies him, he appears stronger then he was but now; briefly I observe in this Knight all that is most commendable and rare in o∣thers. This beauty speaking thus in the behalf of this warrior, fell insensi∣bly in love with him, rendred the fear of her companions much lesse, and made them hope for speedy safety: The mean while Alcidamant and the Giant hewd one another, and each of them desiring the victory entreated his adversary as hardly as he could; howbeit our champion seemed to have the better; for the Giant grew more unweldy, and the great quantity of bloud that issued from his wounds made him so weak that his blows were not discharged with that fury as at the beginning of the fight, wheras Alci∣damants courage augmented every minute, which put the Giant into such an excesse of rage, that resolving either to die or presently to vanquish, he took his curtelax in both his hands thinking therwith to cleave the Knight to the very teeth, but Alcidamant making his horse to leap aside the weapon did only whistle in the air; and because the Giant had emploied all his strength on this blow, he bowed forward even to his horses mane, at which very instant of time Alcidamant having his sword aloft let it fall with such fury just on his neck, as he divided his head from his body, to the infinite contentment of these damsels, who fell on their knees before him. Valiant Knight, said the fair damsell, you have done miracles for our deliverance; but you shall not lose the glory of it, for we will publish over all France that you are the bravest gentleman that this day bears arms. Lady, answe∣red he having caused her and the rest to rise, you may do and say what you please, but the recompence already exceeds the pains. I have freed you, I ought to do it, and I do not think I have any way obliged you; wherefore your acknowledgement me thinks is to no purpose, let us therefore leave speaking of that, and go to see the end of a combat wherein a Knight is in∣gaged, with whom I was lodged when you past by the village, and that di∣scovering you before me generously began the fight. On my faith, said Ar∣nidas thereupon, I doubt of some ill news from him, for his Squire comes galloping heer, and I fear he is slain. Now God defend, said Alcidamant, howsoever we must resolve for patience: then meeting the Squire, he lear∣ned that Florimond was the victor, but had lost so much bloud that he was
not able to sit his horse, nor likely to live if he were not quickly assisted. Take my Squire with you, and get him to be carried to the village where we lay, said Alcidamant, and send with all speed for the best Chyrurgians of the Country; as soon as I have placed these Ladies in safety, I will come and look to him my self, for his valour deserves this care. He intreats you, said the Squire, to have as much pity of his sufferings, as of his life, and to indevour to make his Mistris more tractable. His Mistris, said Alcidamant, is she one of these Ladies? It is that fair one which spke to you but now, said the Squire. I am very glad of it, said Alcidamant, assure him that he is happy if my reasons may prevail with her. Whereupon, having dispatched away Arnides with Florimonds Squire, he returned to Claristea (so was that Lady named whom the Giant would have forced) and having secured her against all fear which she might have conceived, he walked along fair and softly with her towards a house which she had some two leagues from thence. She was beautifull, he was amorous, she had good experience of his valour, his opinion was no lesse of her me∣rit; beholding then powerfull charms in her eies, and being carried with the remembrance of those two alablaster thighs which he had seen bare under the Giant, as she likewise was transported with the memory of what she had seen him perform, their love was reciprocall, and their actions decla∣red their thoughts sufficiently without speech; she looked amorously up∣on him, expecting to be sued unto; he beheld her with the like affction, and designe; but their silence seeming to accuse them of too little love, and too much respect they began to speak both at an instant, and presently stopt, each of them desiring to give that advantage to the other. At length, Claristea thinking she was obliged to speak first, said unto him: What shall we give you, Sir, for a recompence of so much pain? I would willingly ask, answered he, having quite forgotten Melania, and holding change no crime; I would willingly ask, I say, that which you could have conserved without me; but, Madam, I fear the same punishment, which you gave to the temerity of a Knight, who adores none in the wold but you; you speak of Florimond, said she, for I observed that that was his Squire which lately parted from you; but let us enter no farther upon that discourse, I pray you, I know how to put a difference between your valour and his, and your merit will not suffer my favours to be shared equally betwixt you: Say then, What is it you desire of me? That you will love me, said he, and that taking pity of my pain, you will not make me languish in the expectation of that I so infinitely desire. You would deserve that grace, answered she, provided that you had love enough. Love enough, replied he instantly; Ah Madam! Do not make that your excuse, I beseech you, your beauy makes no small wounds, neither doth my heart receive light impressions, I can love more in a moment, then another in a whole yeer. I, said she, but such violence will not last. No, if I die quickly, answered he: I do not mean so, said Claristea, nor have I spoken in that manner, but as fearing a change in you. Never think of that, Madam, said Alcidamant, when you know my disposition, you will not accuse me thus. Time will clear this point, said she, in the mean time, hope well, and beleeve I este highly of you. Discoursing in this manner, they arrived at Claristea's house, where a many of Knights were assembled, consulting in what sort they might recover their kinswoman out of the Giants hands, but infinitely
contented to see her delivered; and understanding that it was the valour of the Knight of the Palms, they honoured him with exceeding much respect, wondering to behold him so young, so fair, and indued with such extraor∣dinary forces; in so much, that every day one or other arrived for to visit him: the fame of this warlike act running from Province to Province with such infinite applause, that nothing was talked of, but the marvellous va∣lour of this Knight. CHAP. XXI. Alcidamant visits Claristea in the night, obtains his desire, and by a strange adventure is constrained to depart from her. CErtain dayes being but sadly past away for these lovers, who in regard of the multitude of those which every minute came in and out, had not the leisure to dis∣course of their passions, much lesse the liberty to be so private together, as they extreamly desired: Alcida∣mant, very much discontented, finding Claristea busie one night in entertaining certain companies, went forth into the garden to take the air, and walking along the alleys, he was a devising, how he might avoid those which continually im∣portuned him with their visitations, and so get some time to content him∣self with his Mistris; but fortune, that seemed to watch more for his good then he expected, made him incounter Claristea's chambermaid, who espy∣ing him, went softly to him, and taking him by the arm, said unto him: Knight, you are surprised, and you can hardly deny, but that you are now thinking of love. In good faith, said he, I should wrong my self if I did, for my carriage then would give me the lie, and much more to disguise my self to you, upon whose assistance I resolve to place all my hope. Melita (so was she called) you beleeve that I am infinitely in love, it is true: But alas! it may be I am so unhappy, that I am not beloved again; for I fear left the excellencie of my Lady, and my little merit, should restrain her from gi∣ving remedy to my sufferings: Dear friend, it lies in you to oblige me as much as my life comes unto. And how, said this wench, who seemed to understand him? By being my advocate to Claristea, answered he, and de∣siring that favour for me, which may mitigate my pain, and render my love everlasting. I did not think, said Mileta, that my Mistrisles beauty had wounded you, and that you had sighed for her; but I will no longer doubt it, now that I have such testimony of it from your self. You crave my assi∣stance, you shall have it, and I promise to contribute as much to your satis∣faction as possibly I may, being perswaded that I am obliged thereunto, by the good office I received from your valour, when as you delivered me, with my Mistris, out of the power of these dreadfull Giants, where we were sure to have lost both honour and life: But what shall I demand for you? That she will do me the favour to receive me into her chamber, said he, at such time as all the world is at rest, that I may represent the great∣nesse of my affection unto her, seeing that the arrivall of so many persons
that continually come to visit her, will not permit me to talk freely with her. You demand very much, said Melita, for the knowledge of this action, could not but redound to the prejudice of her honour; neverthelesse, I will labour to satisfie you, and shewing her how she oweth all that she hath to your succour, I will oblige her, if I can, not to refuse you such a grace; live then in this hope, and in the mean time be patient. Beleeve me, Melita, said he, kissing her more affectionately then she expected, your services shall not be without recompence; go and make good your promise, whilst I com∣fort my self with my thoughts. Saying so, he entered into an arbour of Iasemines, ravished with the apprehension of a happinesse, which he ho∣ped to injoy ere long; and Melita went directly to Claristea's chamber, who withdrawing thither, a little after made her unready to go to bed; whereupon, Melita said unto her, being assured that she should please her extreamly in talking to her of her Knight; Madam, the honour you have done me, by freely imparting your secrets unto me, obliges me not to con∣ceal my thoughts from you: walking but now in the garden, I found your Lover in a case that made me exceedingly to pity him; his arms acrosse, his hat over his eies, wherein I espied some tears to stand, his pace full of stops, which, with a thousand sighes, testified a marvellous distemper of minde; I approached to him, guessing well enough what might be the cause of this his behaviour, but making as though I understood it not, I demanded from whence it was derived; from my fear not to be loved as I love, answered he; and if I do not the sooner finde relief in my passions, my life will quickly be at an end. Then he declared unto me, that his grief proceeded from the want of liberty, to discover unto you what lay upon his heart, as he wonderfully desired; and finishing his discourse with a sigh, he conju∣red me to be a suiter for him, that you would be pleased to let him come and see you this evening, to the end he may have the felicity of contempla∣ting your beauty at the full, as likewise be free from all interruption in his talk: now it is for you to resolve, whether you have love enough to grant him this favour. Melita, answered she, a little troubled, thou knowest too well that I love him infinitely; but how can we bring him hither, without fear of incountering some body that might discover our secrets; I see no likelihood thereof, and lesse yet, when I consider, that he hath not bought so much grace with the price it ought to be rated at; me thinks, it were it∣ter that difficulties should make it more precious to him. Heer be reasons indeed, said Melita, a little moved with choler; Madam, these fond hu∣mours which would make things seem otherwise then they be, are seldom approved of; you love him passionately, you would have him in your arms, and if he sued not to you, it may be you would do that office for him; notwithstanding, you will defer him this happinesse, out of such weak con∣siderations that I am ashamed of; it is no time to dissemble, when our pur∣poses are discovered, and those Artificers serve for nothing, but to make us oftentimes to be otherwise judged of then we ought; let him be fetcht hither, the opportunity fits, for all the house are at rest, and if your love ob∣liges you, refuse him not the recompence which is due to his valour. I am contented he shall come and see me, said she; wherefore thou myest go for him when thou wilt; but beleeve that I will not be carried so easily as thou sayest, and that I am resolved to vanquish my self, for to triumph over him. In good faith, said Melita, if I were in his room, I would not return
with empty hands, but would well consider the time, the places, and the persons. Whereupon, going out, she left Claristea strangely troubled; sometimes resolving to conserve her self, and then by and by, not to lose so favourable an occasion, which is not to be recovered, when it is once past. This while Melita entertained Alcidamant, and leading him by the hand, she said unto him: Sir, I am carrying you to Claristea, but remmber that modestie is a reproach to lovers, that it renders them unworthy of any favour whatsoever, and that to be happy one must be somewhat bold; this speech ended at the door, she entered first, and approaching to Claristea's bed, she said unto her: This prisoner demands grace, Madam, please you to grant it him, whilst I go and draw up his pardon; saying so, she got her into the ward robe, it may be with some grief for that she had not also a se∣cond, and left our Knight upon his knees, who holding one of his Mistris∣ses hands, kissed it, not being able to speak a word; on the other side, she was no lesse moved; for seeing him so handsome with humility by the beds side, and calling to minde how much she was obliged to him, she felt her self provoked with mighty desire, and was even upon the point to have joined her lips to his, for to let him know her minde; but desiring to ap∣pear more contained, she forbare; howbeit, having too much love to leave him in that posture, she said unto him: Knight, I pray arise, for I am resol∣ved not to hear you till you be at ease. That shall I never be, answered he, but by the fruition of so many beauties as I behold: Ah Madam, take pity of my suffering, opportunity speaks for me, and seems to say that you are not to deny me this favour; whereupon, laying his mouth to hers, he was fastned there for a while, with such extream delight, that he could not for∣bear putting his hand on her delicate breast, with the exceeding smooth whitenesse whereof, he was marvellously taken; and finding himself in case not to stay there, he slipt off a night-gown that he had on, and getting into bed, he made her feel incredible pleasures in loosing the name of maid. The first course being finished, she began to sigh, and said: Alas! I was resolved to defend my self better, but, Sir, accuse your merits for this weaknesse, and take not occasion thereupon, to make the lesse esteem of me; I have given you that which was most dear to me, preserve it, I be∣seech you, with as much love as discretion. Assure your self, Madam, said he, redoubling his courses, that you shall never see me disobey so sweet a commandment, and that I will never lose the memory of so powerfull an obligation; but in the mean time, permit me, I pray you, to visit you thus every night. You shall alwaies have as much power of this chamber as my self, answered she, nor shall it be at any time shut against you, onely remember to carry your self advisedly. Continuing their kisses thus, they perceived the day to appear, whereat they were grieved; but hoping to meet again ere long, Alcidamant returned to his chamber, and left Claristea, who finding her self weary, slept till dinner time; when as she was wa∣kened by her chamber maid, who bidding her good morrow, fell a laugh∣ing, and said: Madam, is this Knight as couragious with women, as he is valiant amongst Giants? Come, you are jeering now, said she, whereas you are guilty of that fault, for if you had staid heer, I should have had no cause to complain of his boldnesse. That is no answer to my question, re∣plied Melita, for you desired to be forced I know, but do you hold him worthy of your favours? Never seek to be so curiously informed, I pray,
said she, but give me my cloths, since it is so late, another time we will talk of that at easure. Thereupon having quickly made her self ready she ap∣peared in the dining room, where her Knight was alone; she blusht at first, but seeing that the matter was past remedy she fell into discourse with him whilest meat was serving to the table, which being taken away they with∣drew into a cabinet where their kisses and caresses were renewed with a world of content. Living thus in all the pleasure which can be enjoied by Lovers nineteen or twenty daies past sweetly away, at the end wherof, for∣tune that delights in change, would needs separate them; for being one evening at supper together, and thinking of nothing lesse then any crosse that might arrive to their desires, a lacky came in and told them, that the Marchionesse of Monteclare was at the gate, desiring accesse to Claristea. At these wods Alcidamant changed colour, which she perceiving, asked him whether he were not well. Yes, said he, but Madam, this news displea∣ses me, for it concerns us much; and if you will oblige me, charge all your house that a word be not spoken of my being heer, in the mean time, so please it you, I will reie and shut my self up in my chamber. You will be bete in my Cabinet, said she, for I will know the cause of such fear in you, and beleeve me I should be jealous did not the age of the Marchionesse whose neer kinswoman I am, retain me from imagining that you can have any affction for her. Whereupon Alcidamant being past into his Ladies Cabinet, and Arnides into his masters chamber, Claristea went to receive her kinswoman, giving her a thousand thanks for the pains she had taken to come and visit her, and commanding the table to be covered again, she gave her all the best entertainment she could. Whilest she was at supper Claristea calling to mind her Lovers behaviour, very attentively observed the Marchionesse, and seeing some remains of beauty yet abiding in her, she was not without some unquietnes, insensibly suffering her self to be per∣swaded that she had some interest in her Knight, and that the only cause of her journey thither was to see him, so she wisht her far enough off, and was vexed in her mind to hear her say that she would stay nine or ten daies in that plce: but not to appear incivill, she made no shew of it, hoping to learn the truth from her Lovers own mouth: desiring then to free her self of so weighty a care, she conducted the Marchionesse to the chamber which she had caused to be made ready for her, and telling her that the consideration of her health invited her to bid her good night, she left her, and went to find out her Knight, whom she presently kift, but in such a manner as testi∣fied some discontent, which very much troubled Alcidamant, who not in∣during to see her melancholy, demanded of her why she was so sad. Be∣cause I cannot wholly enjoy you, answered she, for the fear you are in to appear before the Marchionesse of Monteclare, who makes shew of visit∣ing me, that she may the better without suspition see you, hath, to speak the truth, much distasted me. I love you too well, for to let any other share with me; I love you too well, dear heart, to possesse you by halfs, seeing I am entirely yours. If you will remember my caresses, and call to mind with what a heart I have received you, how I have contemned all men to love you only, doubtlesse you cannot sigh for any other, since I live not but for your content. Alas Madam! said he holding her in his arms, permit me to tell you, that your complaints are without cause, and consider what wrong may be done one out of a suspition not rightly grounded. You imagine
that I love the Marchionesse of Monteclare, I confesse I do, but in such sort as a son should love his mother, she hath brought me into the world, and I ow her as much affction as is due by nature to parents. And if I do not appear before her, it is because I will not be constrained to absent my self from you, and quit the desire I have to follow arms; nevertheles since she hath resolved, as I am informed, to abide heer with you some time, I think it fit for me to depart before day, and bestow my self elswhere whilst she continues heer, that I may not be hindred in my designs. You make me wonder, said Claristea, to hear you say that the Marchionesse of Monteclare is your mother, and I should hardly beleeve it, but that I am confident you would not take pleasure in deceiving a maid that loves you so much. Ma∣dam, said Alcidamant, give credit to my words, for I honor you too much to tell you an untruth; but if you would be further satisfied therin, talk with my Squire about it, to whom I have not spoken since supper. I desire no better assurance, said Claristea, then your protestation, but pardon me, sweet heart, I pray you, for love is ever accompanied with fear, and my distrust was rather a sign of passion, then weaknes. I am not offended with it, said Alcidamant, and though I receive great contentment in knowing my self to be your kinsman, yet is it much more satisfaction to me that I enjoy your favour, which I will alwaies preserve with the uttermost hazard of my life. If my love could augment, said Claristea, this new tie of kindred would add unto the glory of it, but it is at the heighth of its perfection, and cannot pos∣sibly be greater. Whereupon getting to bed they renewed their delights with such amorous dalliance, that the day surprised them before they were aware, which made Alcidamant take leave of his Mistris, so that retiring in∣to his chamber, he armed himself, and mounting his horse, he left both her and his mother, who was afterward wonderfully joifull when she under∣stood by Claristea, that the Knight of whom so much was spoken of tho∣rowout France, was her son. CHAP. XXII. The Knight of the Palms is by a wile conducted to the Castle of Towers, and by the means of a damsell he the second time avoids the plot which Narsander had laid to take away his life. ALcidamant mixing the grief of his esloignment with the content he had to see himself in the flate of acquiring glory, rode till noon and never thought of eating, but Arnides that neither approved of this silence or auste∣rity, said unto him: Sir, I know not what pleasure you take in your fancies, but sure I am my stomack complains of this abstinence, and the hunger that op∣presses me, makes me think that you likewise suffer that way; wherefore, I beseech you, let us get up to this mountain, where I espie a little hermitage, and there I hope we shall meet with some holy personage that will give us to eat. If thou feelest any incommodity, said Alcidamant, thank thy self, for it should be thy care to make provision. That is good indeed, answered Arnides, for how could I make provision
upon so sudden a departure as yours was? Do but call to mind, Sir, that you could scarce give me time to saddle our horses, and then you will not accuse me in this sort. Thou art in the right, said Alcidamant, but I am not resolved to quit my way for such poor entertainment as we are like to find there; therefore let us go on, it may be we shall meet with some house or other, where we may stay our stomacks. I am afraid, said Arnides, that this good fortune will fail us, or that it will be too long ere we shall attain to it; but since it is your pleasure to have it so, I must be contented to obey. Thus rendring their travell lesse tedious, they continued two howrs on horsback, which seemed two ages to the famished Squire, but then they met a dam∣sell followed by a little Dwarf, who casting her eie upon Alcidamant, and viewing that famous ensign of the Palms, leapt presently from her palfrey, and falling on her knees, said unto him: Worthy Knight, if I be not de∣ceived you are he that I have so long sought for. It may be so, said Alcida∣mant, but Gentlewoman by what token would you know me better, and what it is you desire of me? If you be the Knight, said she, that lately freed the prisoners which Narsander the Inchanter detained at the dangerous bridge, I shall beeech you not to refuse me one boon I will ask of you. I grant it you, said Alcidamant, for I am he that restored them to their liber∣ty, which they had lost for my sake. You shall follow me then instantly, said she, to a kinswomans house of mine, which is not above two leagues from hence, where you shall be well entertained, and to morrow morning we will go to draw a Knight, whom I infinitely affect, out of this Inchant∣ers prison. I am most ready, said Alcidamant, to do all that I may for your service; and so am I, said Arnides, to intreat you gentlewoman, to shew us the neerest way, for my belly will make these two leagues seem longer then six. This made Alcidamant and the damsell to laugh, who speedily remoun∣ting on her horse galloped away amain, so that within a little time they ar∣rived before a Castle, flanked with fowr great towrs, which answered to fowr high waies, and encompassed with broad deep trenches, very proper to defend the master of it from the fury of his enemies. Where alighting, certain grooms took their horses for to carry them to the stable, and the damsell going over a little woodden bride, which gave a passage to the Ca∣stle, lead the Knight into a hall, where he met a very fair gentlewoman, who having curteously entertained him, caused him to unarm himself, and to put on a watchet satten gown, which became him so excellently well, that she beheld him with astonishment; the more she confidered him, the more handsome and accomplished she found him; his language contented her infinitely, his carriage seemed most amiable to her, and the grace of his countenance pleased her in such sort that she resolved to love him, and to divert the mischief which was hanging over his head: wherefore after sup∣per taking him aside, as if she would confer with him about the busines which he had undertaken for her kinswoman, she said unto him: Sir, your youth makes me to pity you, and the perfections which I observe in you in∣duce me to do you a singular pleasure, and to save you from a dangerous storm that threatens you, provided you promise me one boon. Madam, answered he, your discourse would amaze me, did not the noble freedome wherewithall you have received me to day, make me confident; but I can fear no malice, where I see so much grace and beauty, promising then to grant you whatsoever you can desire of me, be pleased, I pray you to ex∣pound
your self, and let me see my danger that I may avoid it. It is greater then you think for, replied she, and you cannot possibly decline it without my assistance; for you are in the hands of a man that hates you to the death, and that being out of hope to be revenged on you by arms, having found you too able that way, hath used policy to enrap you. You are, I say, in the power of Narsander; I am his sister, she that drew you hither is his cousin, and the intention of us all was to take you unarmed, seeing you are other∣wise invincible; judge now whether you could escape death being without arms in the hands of thity Knights, which are shut up in these towrs, that they may the more easily, and without suspition surprise you. Without doubt your courage could not avail you, and your resistance would be to no purpose; let us carry things wisely, and let us without more words go into your chamber, where you shall give me that you promised me, which is your love; then arm your self against all accidents that may happen, and command you quire to be ready with your horses, whilest I take care to have the wicket kept open for you. But by my best hopes, Madam, said Al∣cidamant, very much astonished to see himself in so dangerous a place, this is even the notablest peece of treachery that can be imagined; and never did damsell carry a busines more dexterously then this little cunning thing hath done, to bring me to my end. Your pity infinitely obliges me, and this life of mine whereof you have such care, shall be preserved but only to be employed for your service; and whereas you are pleased to oblige me with the honour of your favour, let us go Madam, and I will ever labour to che∣rish the possession of i: whereupon pssing into a chamber which joined un∣to the hall, Alcidamant made the doors sure after him to avoid all surprisall, and finding himself safe with this gentlewoman, he let her feel that the ap∣prehension of death had not power to deprive him of the use of his courage. This Lady wonderfull well satisfied with two courses lustily performed, suffered him to arm himself, and having advertised him that Narsander was not yet returned home, she counselled him to get forth into the court assoon as he heard a noise, and not to let himself be assaulted in the chamber. This done, she went unto the towrs, and caused only fifteen Knights to advance, which heard by Alcidamant, he drew out his sword, and covering himself with his shield, he got him into the Court, cleaving the head of the first in two pieces. At this blow the rest which were scattered before, closed in∣stantly together, but this incomparable warrior flying amongst them, cut off the arm of one, sent the head of another to the ground, and kept them in such aw that the hardiest man amongst them durst not approach him; the rumor of this fight ran over all the Castle, whereat the rest descended, and encompassed Alcidamant with incredible fury, but he that grew every mo∣ment more couragious and stronger cut them in pieces, and made so great a slaughter of them, that some of their bodies served him for a bulwark a∣gainst the violence of the rest. Night arriving thereupon, the servants of the place came running in with a number of torches, by the light whereof the battell renewed so dangerously, that above twenty men were in lesse then an howr laid dead on the earth, whereby the rest were terrified in such sort, that they betook them to their heels for to eschew the mortall blows of this invincible Knight; who finding no enemy to oppose him, went out for to go directly to the stable, howbeit meeting a great Knight upon the bridge that would not suffer him to passe, he discharged so furious a blow
on his helmet, that he overturned him into the water, where questionles he had been drowned, if some of the servants that knew him to be Narsander, had not suddenly helped him. Alcidamant then finding no impediment went to his Squire, mounted on his horse, and taking the first way he met withall, travelled all night as his good fortune led him. CHAP. XXIII. The Knight of the Palms at the sollicitation of two damsels embarques himself for Greece: his dangerous combat with Ariston: he slaies a Giant in the defence of a Frenchwoman, and sends his head to Constantinople. THis right valiant warrior, having in this maner avoided the snares which Narsander had laid for him, resolved to quit France, and see the rest of the world, for to make the whole earth a witnes of his valour. Having travelled then certain daies without the incounter of any adventure, worthy of his courage or my relati∣on, he saw himself at the sea side, much grieved in that he could not find a vessell to imbarque himself in, neverthelesse hoping that the winds would drive some one or other upon that coast, which seemed to be much frequented, he rode along by the shore till the evening, when as he met with two damsels, wherof one of them bo∣wed her self even to the pommell of her saddle, out of an extraordinary respect in saluting him, and said: Noble Sir, what do you heer? I hoped to have found a barque, answered he, and was resolved to passe the seas for to have searched in forrain Countries such adventures, as of late are not to be encountred in this Kingdome; but my ill fortune will keep me heer for want of accommodation that way, so that I am constrained to go even as my horse pleaseth to carry me. If you will promise this damsell a boon, and me another, said she, we will soon furnish you with a ship, that shall car∣ry you safely whithersoever you will go. In good faith, said he, that is the greatest pleasure can be done me, wherefore I will promise you any thing you shall desire of me. Let us descend then to the foot of the rock, said the damsell, that we may lose no time. I beleeve, answered he, you do not con∣sider well what you say; for what shall we do at the foot of the rock, seeing I can discern nothing proper for our voiage. Do not you trouble your self for that, said she, you shall not lose your labour. Whereupon leading the way, she was followed by the other, Arnides and Alcidamant, who when he came down, was marvellously abashed to see a great Dragon upon the waves, whose wings were extended, as it were to receive the assistance of the winds. Behold, said the damsell, a vessell fit for your purpose. God refuse me, said Arnides, if ever I come neer it; Ile rather return again into my mothers womb, then bury my self in the intrails of this creature. How now, said the damsell, laughing at the fear he was in, will you be more faint hearted then I, and fear a danger which I will passe thorow? Not more faint hearted, said he, but wiser, and more advised then to cast my self away after
your example; do or say what you please, you shall never perswade me to be so desperat; and if my master will be ruled by me, we will soon take a safer course. Alcidamant who took exceeding delight to hear him talk thus, and that was well assured this vessell was made by enchantment, said unto him; Wilt thou forsake me then Arnides? That I will, said he, rather then die in this fashion; for I pray you tell me, what glory is there to be gotten by putting our selves in the claws of this Dragon? Let us go away, Sir, and leave these women heer, which are alwaies more ready to deceive Knights, then to succour them in their enterprises. Thou art in the wrong, said Alcidamant, for women have no malice in them. No have, answered Arnides in choler, what say you to her that put you t'other day in the hands of your enemy; trust them not too much, I beseech you, for if we are to beware by other mens harms, we are to make use of our own not to fall into the mischief we have once avoided. It is true indeed, said Alcidamant, that a woman brought me into the danger wherof thou speakest, but a woman also was the cause of my deliverance: you are rather to thank your own handsomnes for that, which charmed her, answe∣red the Squire, then her good nature; for if you had wanted that perfecti∣on, by my faith I know how it had gone with you. What, said the damsel, shall the fault of one naughty one, make all others guilty? It is no conse∣quent, said Arnides, but alwaies note this, gentlewoman, that we usually mi∣strust a naughty generation; and talk as much as you will, I resolve never to lodge my self there. And for my part, said Alcidamant, I purpose to question the entring into it no longer, for I will not give that offence unto these Ladies, as to doubt either their goodnes, or good will; whereupon ta∣king her unto whom he had spoken, by the hand, he past along upon the neck of the Dragon, who held it stretched out upon the strand; and find∣ing himself presently in one of the richest chambers that ever he had seen, he stood a good while observing a thousand rarities, which presented them∣selves to his view; but missing Arnides, he mounted upon the wings of this dragon for to call him, where he saw him stamp with his foot on the ground and listning to what he spake, he heard him say, Well it is all one, if I do cast my self away now, I shall not need to fear another time: whereupon cros∣sing himself three or fowr times, he was about to have thrown himself into this Dragons throat, when as he saw him plunge his head into the water, and so vanish away in an instant. Oh God! said he tearing his hair for grief thinking his master was drowned: Oh God! what a losse have I made, and wht comfort is there now left me in the world? Oh! that so great a Knight should be thus cast away by the instigation of a woman, after he had proved the malice of so many. Accursed sex! that bringest forth nothing but mischief, I utterly detest you all, and I protest never to look upon you more but with hatred: well did my fear presage this unlucky accident, and how much wiser was I then my infortunat master, that hath lost himself by contemning dangers? But what say I wiser? No, I am far more unhappy then he; I remain in the miseries of the world with just occasion to lament all the daies of my life: he is now in the Elizian walks, where souls enjoy a sweet and pleasing rest: I must follow him into the same tombe, and pertake the felicities which he finds in his new life, as I was ready to suffer with him all the pains and miseries of this. With these words he was casting himself into the sea, when as he beheld a burning rock come out of the
calm waters, the top whereof served Love for a throne, who leaning upon an armed man seemed to draw his power and glory from him. Three maids of marvellous beauty appeared sitting at his feet, one bearing his bow, the second his arrows, and the third a multitude of hearts in her lap. Twelve Syrens, guided by Neptune drew him, a little esloigned from the rock; be∣hind the which were two Tritons, who seemed to publish the greatnes of this mighty God. This wonder arrested his fury, and suffered him not to put his purpose in execution; but that which most troubled him was to see his master in the middle of the flames of the rock, and to hear him call him. The same weaknes which made him fear the teeth of the Dragon, not per∣mitting him to enter into the fire, he was ready to run away when as he fel himself taken up by a wind that set him at the feet of his Master, who ha∣ving been much astonished at these marvellous things, could not chuse not∣withstanding but laugh to behold his Squire so pale and trembling. Arnides said he unto him, i thou confessest the truth, sure thou wilt not die at this time without fear. How without fear, answered he being grown somwhat more hardy by the presence of his master: I know no body in the world but would be afraid; for who could be confident in such apparant danger? my countenance doth suffiiently witnes that the best part of my bloud is congealed, and I doubt we shall meet with no wine heer, to restore it unto its former heat again. Heerat all fell a laughing, especially the damsell, who perceiving it to wax dark, furnished the table with exquisit meat, and having satisfied their stomacks therwith, she and her company retired, leaving the Knight to take his rest. Certain daies being sweetly past in this maner, the rock staid in a port of Greece, to the infinit content of Alcidamant, who re∣solved to leave glorious marks behind him there of his incomparable valor. Landing then, and seeing their horses, which came as it were out of the dra∣gons breast, they presently mounted upon them, crossed over a large plain, and came neer to a great forrest, at the entrance whereinto they espied two pavilions pitched, a great many lances reared up, and a number of shields hanging on the trees all about. We shall not passe heer without combat, said Alcidamant. No doubtles, said one of the damsels that followed him; for to that end only we brought you hither, and the boon which you pro∣mised me, is to deliver my mistris out of the power of the great Ariston, one of the most edoubted men of the earth, who retains her against her will, with a purpose to marry her after he hath defended this passage six months together. My mistris doth not love him, because he is very ill favoured, and of an insupportable humour, but in regard she could not be rid of him, she made him undertake this enterprise for the glory of her beauty, hoping that the Princes of Greece, who are not far off, would deliver her assoon as they heard of the violence that is offred to her will; and indeed she was sending me to seek the gallant bastard of Media, or the good Knight Ar∣dant, but a woman that very much loves her, and that may justly vaunt to have excellent skill in Art Magick, counselled her to send me into France, to finde out the Knight of the Palms, and to obtain a promise of whatsoever I should demand of him; and now behold, the enemy is before you, nor is it so neer night, but that you may well have time to exchange some blows with him; do not then I beseech you, defer the effect of your promise, and make it appear that we have not made choice of you but out of a confidence of your valour. I am very glad, said Alcidamant, that I may acquit my
self by obliging you; and if the safety of your Mistris doth depend on me, be assured that I will soon restore her into her own power. Heerwith ta∣king his lance he approached his enemy, who ready to meet him encountred him so furiously in the midst of the course, that he made him lose his stir∣rups, but his fortune was worse, for he was thrown from his horse, making two or three turns on the grasse, that was bedewed with his bloud, which issued out of a great wound given him by Alcidamants lance on the right side; howbeit nothing amazed for this hurt, he arose more incensed then ever he was in all his life, went to his adversary whom he found alighted, because he would not combat with advantage, and gave him so terrible a blow upon his shield, that his arm unable to support the fury of it was fain to yeeld, whereby it fell with such violence on his helmet that he was som∣what astonied therewith, which put him into such a rage that clasping his sword fast in his hand, he discharged it so mightily on his head that he ope∣ned his helmet, razing both the hair and skin. This so dangerous a blow made the great Ariston to stagger, but being as couragious as possibly might be, he renewed the fight with so much valour, that he made it continue two howrs to the great amazement of Alcidamant, who confessed that he never met with so strong a man before. The time and the desire to vanquish ren∣dred their blows still more redoubtable. The ground was strewed with peeces of their arms, and if the bloud issued from Alcidamants left arm, A∣riston lost his out of five or six places, whence it proceeded that being much weaker then at the beginning of the combat, he could not support the fury of a blow which his enemy gave him on the head, but tumbled down dead cloven to the very teeth. This victory gave no lesse contentment to Cilina, the damsels mistris, then glory to the Knight of the Palms. They saluted one another, he satisfied with her beauty, she with his exceeding valor. But as they passed thorow the forrest to seek out some village, that they might lodge more commodiously then in the wood, Alcidamant heard the voice of a person complaining, which carried him presently into the thicket, where he beheld a furious Giant whipping of a damsell that was tied to a tree, so cruelly, as the bloud trickled down from all the parts of her body. This o∣bject provoking him to no lesse rage then pity, he drew out his sword, and discharged it with such force on the Giant, that he made him set one knee to the ground; howbeit suddenly rising up he began a dangerous combat, which neverthelesse lasted not long; for Alcidamant being in a rage cut his arms into a thousand pieces, and finally gave him his dispatch with a blow that opened him from the shoulder to the very stomack, and taking off his head he gave it to the Lady for whose sake he had made the first combat, desiring her carry it to Constantinople, & present it from him to the Prince of France, with the relation of all that had happened upon occasion of that quarrell, which she very willingly undertook. Departing then from the Knight she used such speed, that she arrived within two daies after at Con∣stantinople, and went unto the great Hall of the Palace, where finding a number of gallant Knights, she demanded which was the Prince of France. I am he, said Lucendus, most ready to serve you if you have occasion to use me. Excellent Prince, answered she, the necessity of no misfortune hath brought me hither to desire your assistance, but I come with a present to you from the Knight of the Palms, one of the best without doubt now li∣ving in the world. Whereupon turning about to a Squire that followed her,
she took the head of a dead man, and setting it on the floor pursued her dis∣course in this maner: The Knight, of whom I spake, comming some three daies since to enter into a combat for my sake, where his glory was not smal, having easily triumphed over the great Ariston, who was feared of all the world, followed on his way to find out some lodging, when the voice of one complaining carried him into the thickest of a forrest, where he en∣countred a great and dreadfull Giant, as you may perceive by his head, whipping of a damsll whom he had tied to a tree, in despite of you, having understood that she was of your Kingdome, and that she was comming hi∣ther to give you intelligence of some matters which had past in France to the prejudice of that sidelity subjects ow to a gratious Prince; and to give some colour to this act of his, he said, that having left his home to revenge the death of his father upon you, whom you had surprised without arms, and wretchedly murthered, he might with good reason kill all that apper∣tained unto you. This good Knight not able to endure such wickednes, as∣sailed the Giant, who for that his revenge was diverted, grew insolent and mad, threatning to cut him in a thousand peeces, and struck him so furiously on the head, tht he astonished him with this first blow, and I my self be∣leeved that the battell had been at an end, seeing him to reel as if he would have pitched his nose into the ground; nevertheles instantly reassuming courage, and giving most horrible and heavy blows, he had rendred the bu∣sines very doubtful, had not the good Knight avoided the most part of them by his agility, and abated the fury of the rest with incredible force. Main∣taining himself then in this sort, and bestowing not a blow in vain, I soon saw this great masse of flesh opened in five or six places, and the grasse all died with his bloud, which made me admire the valour of this Knight, who fought with an admirable grace, and seemed to recover new forces with time, nothing moved with the fury of his enemy, who despairing of safety took his huge curtelx in both his hands, and let it descend with such vio∣lence upon the Knights shield, that he made him recoil two or three steps back, upon which advantage he approched to the damsell, whom this brave warriors Squire had untied, and who was then recounting unto me how she fell into that misfortune, and at one stroke divided her head and body in two peeces; the like he had done to me, for to that end he had advanced his curtelax, had I not by switching my Nag avoided the blow, which light upon the buttocks of my horse, who presently fell down dead. Imagine I pray you, what extremity I was in seeing my self on the ground; truly, I thought I should die no other death: but the Knight of the Palms arriving therupon, delivered me instantly from that fear; for having taken his sword in both his hands, he discharged it so furiously upon the Giants shoulder, that he cleft him to the very wast. This victory giving me no lesse content then it did him glory, we rode on, I being mounted on the damsels horse, because mine was slain; howbeit this valiant Knight having understood from me what I told you but now, returned presently to the place of the combat, caused that French damsell to be interred, and committing the Gi∣ants head unto me, desired me in recompence of the service he had done me, by freeing me from the captivity of Ariston, to come and present this head unto you, and assure you that you shall never met with a Knight that is more at your commandment then himself: I am discharged of my pro∣mise, and now Sir, there rests nothing but to know of you whether I may
be able to serve you according to your greatnesse, and the respect which I bear to that good Knight, to whom I am tied in such powerfull obligati∣ons. Your pains much oblige me, answered Lucendus, and no lesse am I indebted to the affection of that worthy Knight, who hath delivered me from the danger of such an eaemy; wherefore I wish he were heer, that I might know him, and render him that honour which is due to his vertue: in the mean time, if you see him, let him know, that whensoever I shall have the happinesse to encounter with him, it shall well appear that I am sensible of curtesies: And for your own particular, think whether I am able to do any thing for you, be confident that you shall not be denied. What I most desire, said the Damsell, is the honour of your favour, with the assurance whereof, I humbly kisse your hands. Saying so, she made a low obeisance to all the Princes there present, and departed; leaving the Emperour with an extream desire to see this valiant Knight of the Palms, and to know whe∣ther the effect did answer so many praises which this Damsell gave him. CHAP. XXIV. The marvellous acts done by the Knight of the Palms at his entrance into the Castle of Serpents, from whence he delivers four young Princes of Greece, with the excellent Amadis of Prebisond, son to Amadis of Greece and Niquea, inchanted in the monstrous Island, ever since he was four months old. WHilst Cilena was travelling on in her journey, Alcidaman, having lost his way in a forrest, rode extreamly dis∣contented for that he had not followed the Damsell inchantresse; but thinking that she knew well enough how to finde him out upon any occasion, it did some∣what mitigate his displeasure. Having then passed thorow the Empire of Greece, he incountred upon a day with two Squires, who with their tears, giving testimony of much sorrow, made him to draw neer unto them for to com∣fort them. Questionlesse, said he unto them, you are not afflicted thus with∣out some just cause, but when you shall consider that your weeping is to no purpose, you will then be appeased, for to think on the remedies which shall be necessary for your misfortune. Noble Sir, said one of them, you may judge our tears to be immoderate; But alas! We shall never be able to shed so many as may serve worthily to bewail, both our own losse, and that which the whole world hath received, by being this day dprived of four Knights, which undoubtedly might boast themselves to be of the best on the face of the earth. How came they by their ends, said Alcidamant. By the greatest treason that can be imagined, answered the Squire, and no man breathing could possibly avoid such a like mischance, unlesse he had warning of it. They went out all four out of Constantinople, some three dayes since, with a purpose to seek such adventures, as may give reputation unto men, and had the same day a dangerous combat with four other ex∣cellent
Knights, the honour whereof was so generously disputed, that the night surprizing them, they retired with equall advantage into a wood, re∣solving to finish their battell the next morning assoon as they could see; but having strange visions, they arose all at one instant, and taking their horses, they followed the first way that they met withall, which led them at length to a house about six miles hence; where, as they were going in, at the in∣treaty of a wicked damsell, who pretended to do them honour and service, they fell into certain fosses, from whence they cannot hope to be redeemed, but by death. Truly, said Alcidamant, though I hold the mishap of these Knights to be so great, as to oblige you to bewail them; yet you must la∣bour their deliverance, and not stand vainly complaining in this manner: Go back, I pray you, and guide me, for I will either die, or succour them. Now God vouchsafe to prosper so great a designe, answered they, falling on their knees before him, and reward the good you intend to these Knights: Come, Sir, we will most willingly conduct you, but beware of those false bridges, which overturn assoon as one sets a foot upon them, lest you be overtaken, as our Masters were. Ile take as good heed as I can, said Alcidamant, but in the mean time let us make haste, lest the night prevent us in our enterprise: Whereupon, setting spurs to their horses, they rode so fast, that in an hour they discovered the Castle; whereinto as the Knight was about to enter, he heard one call to him; looking therefore all about to see who it might be, he perceived in the way that he came, the damsell in∣chantresse, who had brought him out of France; whereof he was exceed∣ing glad, and turning about to meet her, he said: In good faith, sweet heart, your absence hath much troubled me, but now I am well satisfied in this your return. It is in good time for you, said she, for you are underta∣king, a most dangerous adventure, which you cannot easily accomplish without my help; shun the great gate of the house, as these Squires have advised you, for otherwise all the world shall not be able to deliver you out of captivity; enter in at a little wicket you see on the left hand, leave the shield you bear, and make use of this at my saddle bow; be sure you part not from the same Ring which was given you, when you fought the first combat for Melania; yeeld not to the intreaty, tears, nor sighes of any wo∣man whatsoever; and above all things, make much of the new sword, which shall come to your hand, for it is the best on the earth, and without it you should never see an end to the adventures which are to befall you. This said, Alcidamant, having curteously thanked the damsell, took the shield which she gave him, whereupon there was no figure presented; and alighting from his horse, with his sword in his hand, he drew towards the wicket, which he saw stood open; when as a damsel issuing out of the Castle, said unto him: Knight, whether run you so, and why do you use your arms, where you shall be gladly entertained with all respect? Sheath up your sword, for heer is none that means to oppose you; and not to disac∣commodate your self with stooping at the wicket, take the way that leadeth to the great gate, where you may enter at pleasure. Yes, no doubt, said Alcidamant, if I would make you sport with a leap; I am too well infor∣med of your villany, and if you get you not packing the sooner, I will quic∣ly take your head from your shoulders, to revenge an infinite number of good Knights, which you have betrayed under colour of giving them fair entertainment. What, said she, stepping in again, do you threaten me in
mine own house? Come, come, my masters, cut me this rascall in pieces, and revenge me of his insolence: Herewith, Alcidamant, being in the Ca∣stle yard, heard a great noise, and saw thirty armed men come forth, who suddenly incompassed him about, and endeavoured to smite him to the ground; but this incomparable warrior, nothing amazed, set upon them so furiously, that at three strokes he laid three of them stretch'd along upon the earth, and pressing in amongst the rest, he cut off the arm of one, and the leg of another, cleft the third to the teeth, divided the body of the fourth in two pieces, and made so great a slaughter, that his very enemies wondered at it, and came no more neer him but in fear; which so incensed the Mistris of the house, that opening an iron door, she let forth two Ser∣pents, of twenty foot in length, and twelve in heighth, and of such an hor∣rible shape, that they would have daunted the most assured courage of the world: These Monsters being at liberty, began to run up and down the Court, and meeting with those Knights, crush'd some of them between their teeth, and tore the rest with their claws; In the mean time the Knight of the Palms, who could hope for no better usage, making towards one of them, whilst the other was sucking the bloud of those he had slain, by good fortune gave him such a thrust in the flank, that he sheathed half of his sword within his body; which made him so mad, that lifting up his tail of ten foot in length, he let it flie at the Knight with such violence, that he laid him on the ground three strices off, and opening his fearfull jaws, was like to have swallowed him; if, retaining his judgement amidst the danger, he had not thrust his sword into his throat, wherewith he gave him a wound as great as the former, and overthrew him dead in the place. This blow coming in season, the Knight got suddenly up, and taking his good sword in hand again, which the Serpent, in the pangs of death, had made him let go, he ran presently towards the other, and discharged so weighty a blow upon his head, that he made him sink to the ground; but the scales being hard, the blade rebounded in the air, as if he had struck upon an anvill; with this, the Serpent shewing his bloudy teeth, came fiercely upon him, and put him in such distresse, that he was about half an hour, shifting some∣times on the one side, and then on the other, to shun the fury of the beast; but thinking that he must either die, or instantly vanquish, and remember∣ing that he had not found the belly of the other so hard as the scales of this, he thrust him into the flank with such fury, that his guts came forth with the sword, which put him into such a rage, that making a number of horrible leaps, he filled the air with a most dreadfull noise. The Knight judging this to be the stroak of death, withdrew aside to pre∣vent further inconvenience, and wiping his sword in the grasse, thought to have rested himself, when it came into his mind that glory is not to be ac∣quired but in the finishing of an enterprise; wherfore seeing a great pair of stairs he ran couragiously up, and finding a door open entred into a great Hll, where six furious Savages, who seemed to uphold the building on their shoulders, assaulted him, with each of them a massie club in his hand: It was then that he was most amazed, not imagining that ever he should be able to overcome so many monsters at once, but assuming new courage he opposed his left arm and his shield against the fury of some blows of the clubs, which they discharged at his head, and clasping his sword fast in his hand, he gave the first so dangerous a stroak, that he opened him even to th
very wast. This happy blow reviving his forces, he began to lay about him on all sides, and bare himself so generously, that in three howrs he put them all to the sword, howbeit so wearied, that if the night had not come to give him leave to breath a little, he could not have passed on to undertake any further combat. Remaining then somewhat amazed in the dark, he stood leaning a while upon the pomell of his sword, but hearing no stir in the Hall, he sate him down upon the pavement, where the pains he had taken would have invited him to sleep, but thinking it not safe to rest in so dange∣rous a place, he continued as a man that looks every minute to be assailed by his enemy. Having been three howrs and more in this estate, he beheld five or six damsels come in, with each of them a torch in her hand, whereof one, which seemed to be Claristea, said unto him: How now dear heart, can you be so neer me, and never desire to see me? truly I have great cause to complain of you, and to say that all my caresses have been very ill imploid. Pardon me, Madam said he rising up, Ignorance must excuse my fault, for to tell you true, I thought you to be rather in France then heer. We have been taken, said she, by a Magician, and are so restrained, that we shall never get hence, if you do not give us the Ring, wherwith you undid the enchant∣ments of Narsander. Be assured, Madam said he, then remembring the dam∣sels advertisement, that I will deliver you if I can, but it may not be this way; for if the Ring were once off from my finger we were in danger to abide heer till Doomsday. Out upon thee, base fellow, said she, dost thou refuse me so small a matter, having given thee all, thy death shall revenge this ingratitude? With that those damsels seemed to be so many fantosms, who with their torches laid such heavy blows upon Alcidamant, that he was much troubled; but that which troubled him and vexed him was, that he felt his armor as hot as if it had newly come out of the forge: not knowing then what to do, he whirled about his sword, and defended himself the best he could, but all his addresse was in vain, his force served to no purpose, and he had no hope but in his courage, which carried him skirmishing all the length of the Hall to the door, where those damsels went out, before the which as he was taking new counsell, a great Giant presented himself, who striking him on the shoulder with his club, made him fall on his hands to the ground, but he quickly got up again, and with his sword discharged so furious a blow on the Giants shield, that he parted it in two, giving him a great gash in the arm. The combat growing very fierce, all the Castle rang with the violence of their stroaks, Alcidamant made use of his skill with judgement, the Giant emploied his strength. If the one struck, the other had his answer ready, each of them redoubted the blows of his enemy, and though the torches of the fantosms, who had ranged themselves round a∣bout the Hall had given no light, yet the fire which flew out of their hel∣mets, was able to make them see where to place their blows. This terrible combat having endured above two howrs, Alciadmant who was displeased with so long a delay, took his sword in both his hands, and let it descend with such fury, that he had cleft him to the shoulders, if it had fallen accor∣ding to the Knights intention, but turning in his hand, and striking but with the flat, it broke in five or six pecces to the extream discontentment of Alci∣damant; neverthelesse the stroak was so violent, that it overthrew the Gi∣ant to the ground in a swown: The Knight, who desired to make use of oc∣casion, seeing his enemy senceles, went to disarm his head, and with his own
sword to separate it from the body, when as those fantosms came about him with much more noise and din then before. The Knight stood amazed at this charge, and thought himself now lost, having not wherewithall to defend him, howbeit casting his eie all about, as if he would seek for some place of refuge, he espied a tomb raised in the midst of a chamber, which shewed it self on the left hand, wherupon there lay a yong gentleman thrust thorow with a sword, therichest one of them in the world; now finding himself opprest by those furies, which would not let him rest, he went cou∣ragiously in, and laying hold on that fair sword, he drew it forth without a∣ny difficulty at all, which gave him such content, that immediatly he retur∣ned into the Hall, and would have run in again amongst those fantosms, but they presently vanished, as fearing the keenesse of that rich steel; which Al∣cidamant seeing, turned to the Giant being yet in a trance, disarmd his head, and was going to dispatch him, when as the gentleman whom he had left lying upon the tomb, approaching to him took hold of his arm, and intrea∣ted him to spare him for his sake. Truly, said Alcidamant, wondring much at his beauty, I am sorry that he is not, as I fear, capable of so small a grace, your merit being worthy of a far greater. I humbly thank you, said the gen∣tleman, for I am confident he is not dead, and that shortly we shall see him thorowly recovered. But Sir, since you have granted me one boon, I be∣seech you refuse me not another. That will I not, said Alcidamant, for there is nothing in my power which is not at your command. These Sir, said he, are powerfull obligations: now what my further request unto you is, I will let you understand, when you have rested your self a little in my chamber, whilst I give order for the recovery of this Knight, who kept me not heer, but with an intent to oblige me, although his first resolution was to take a∣way my life. Do what you please, said Alcidamant, and I shall gladly se∣cond you in so charitable an office. Then giving the Giant air, he revived presently, and rising up humbly excused himself to the Knight of the Palms, whom he advised to unarm, the better to refresh himself, but he would not by any means yeeld to it till the arrivall of the damsell, which accompanied him, and that she should authorize him thereunto, by assuring him there was nothing further to be feared. Having at length then unarm∣ed himself, but not willing to go to bed, because it was yet fair day light, the Giant was intreated to set at liberty all such as were imprisoned in the Castle, which being done, there came forth above fowrscore Knights, who wondring at the horrible slaughter they beheld in the Court, as well of the men, as of the serpents, whose deformity they admired, presented them∣selves before the Knight of the Palms, no lesse taken with his goodly pre∣sence, then with his unmatchable valour in so tender yeers, and besought him since they had their liberty by his means, that he would be pleased to command them something. I will not dispose of you otherwise, answered he, but if you will take the pains to passe by Constantinople, when you go hence, and present your selves on my part to the fair Queen of France, you shall do me a singular pleasure. Heerwith fowr yong Knights stept forth, one of the which said unto him: Valiant Sir, I do not know what acquain∣tance you have with that Princesse, but you have this day more obliged her then you think for, having delivered her nephew there, called Persides, son to the excellent Emperour of the Persians Don Rgell, these two Princes Russian of Media, and Prigmalen Emperour of the Aethiopians, and in par∣ticular
my self, who am her grandchild. Truly gentlemen, said Aleidamant, bowing himself down for to kisse their hands, and wondring to see them so bravely accomplished, I am more glad of your safety, then of the glory I have acquired by this adventure, and should be very sorry to injoin you so long a voiage, knowing well that your designs are all warlike, and that you would not willingly return to your friends, because you would not be di∣verted from your enterprises: I will lay this charge upon some other, and do earnestly intreat you to command me something, out of this assurance, that I am a Knight wholly devoted to your service. These ceremonies are to no purpose, said the damsell that conducted Alcidamant, you must defer them till another time, and rejoice now at a secret you are ignorant of. Do you know that gentleman, pointing to him that Alcidamant had found lying on the tomb; no surely, answered Persides. I doubt not of it, said the dam∣sell, for he knows not himself, nor hath not known hitherto, that he is son to the puissant Amadis of Greece, and the beautifull Empresse Niquea; but it is time to acquaint him with it, that the glory of his predecessors may ren∣der him desirous to be such as they have been, and greater too, if it may be. He was taken away, as you have heard, when he was in his cradle, and the intent of his ravisher (who is this Giant heer, named Dorion) was to prevent the destruction of the altars of his Gods, which must be overthrown by the valour of this gentleman, how beit they that have taken upon them the pro∣tection of the house of Greece, have not only preserved him in the midst of his enemies, but have changed their minds, and have purposely brought hither this famous Knight (casting her i on Alcidamant) for whom this adventure was reserved, and have given me in charge to declare unto him, that his name is Amadis of Trebisond; that he must now acknowledge one only God, denying them whom his foster father hath made him to worship untill now, and be presently made Knight, to give a happy beginning to the wonders which shall be performed by him. Heerwith those fowr Knights went and saluted Amadis, who exceedingly well satisfied with the know∣ledge of his estate, very kindly returned their complements with the like. Whereupon Amadis, who would lose no time, leaving all the rest of the company, went and kneeled before Alcidamant, and desired him to remem∣ber the boon which he had promised him. Ask, said Alcidamant, and you shall not be denied. Make me then instantly Knight, said Amadis, and give me leave to depart to morrow for to begin to imitate you. Most willingly, said Alcidamant, and beleeve it I may boast then, that I have made one of the best Knights in the world. But how will you do for arms? We shall find some in the tomb, said the Giant, which are worthy of so generous a Knight, and though I give them somewhat unwillingly at this present, yet I am perswaded that one day they will much avail me: howbeit Sir, we shal have need of your assistance for to get them out. Whereupon Alcidamant breaking the christall of the tomb with the pomell of his rich sword, Ama∣dis drew forth of it certain blew arms, covered all over with ciphers of gold, in the midst wherof appeared a P. where withall he presently armed himself, and kneeling down at the feet of Alcidamant, who gave him his oath, and afterwards blessed and imbraced him, he then received the sword from Persides his Unkle, the helmet from Lucibel of France, and the rest of his arms from Prigmaleon and Russian; which being done they saw a cha∣rior descend from the clouds, drawn by fowr furious Griffons, whereinto
the damsell Inchantresse having taken leave of Alcidmant and the Princes of Greece, caused Amadis to enter with her, and immediatly they were ca∣rled out of sight, to the great amazement of those Knights, who forth with separated themselves: Alcidamant went his way attended only by Arnides; Persides and Lucibel tooke a clean contrary way; Prigmaleon and Russian ano∣ther, and all the strange Knights directed their courle towards Costni∣nople with the skins of the Serpents, which they had caused to be stuffed with straw, to acquit themselves of the promise wherein they were ingaged to Alcidamant, whom heer we will leave for to speak again of the Knight of the Roses. CHAP. XXV. Rozalmond following after the fantesms of Alcander, arrives at an Hermitage, understands the loves of Argenia with Meliander and Clidor, and departs for to combat Orfuron. THE Knight of the Roses having all night followed the fantosms which represented Armazia unto him in the arms of a horrible and cruell Giant, as you have for∣merly read, found himself at break of day upon a wild vast plain, where being much troubled for that he had no hope in so desert a place to meet with any bo∣dy that might tell him any news of that he sought for, he was much amazed, perceiving his horse upon a so∣dain to make a stand, when looking all about he esped a dwarf holding him by the bridle, and saying thus: Knight, coorse not up and down in this maner, for thou art in an error to think that Armazia is in the power of an e∣nemy; that which thou hast seen is but an illusion, and they which have practised it upon thee, did it but to prevent a mischief, which would have given thee cause to repent all te daies of thy life. Keep the way thou art in, since fortune hath presented it unto thee, and heerafter be better armed a∣gainst the crosses of the world. Heerwith the dwarf vanished, leaving the Knight more contented then amazed, who giving his horse a little breath, rode on fair and softly till about two of the clock in the afternoon he disco∣vered an Hermitage, towards the which he directed his course, with a pur∣pose to refresh himself there, if he found any body in it. Alighting then, and knocking at the door, it was opened unto him by one in a gray gown, who seemed by his countenance and spech to be a man that had not been long exercised in praier and austerity. Father, said the Knight, pardon me, I pray you, if constrained by necessity I do thus interrupt your devotions; it is now full two daies since I have eaten, wherefore let me intreat you to supplie me with a bit of something. God doth not give us that which we have, only for our selves, answered the Hermit, but to impart it to such as want, in regard whereof you may be assured to command whatsoever this desert place doth furnish me withall, which it is liely, that at this time you will find more favoury, then the delicate meats you are every day cloied withall. Saying so, he laid a clean napkin by a fountains side, and setting
him bread and apples upon it, he went and tied his steed unto a bush. Rozal∣mond observing somthing in this man more then ordinary in Hermits, could not forbear saying unto him: Father, I must beseech you not to be offended with the desire I have to know somewhat of you: your youth, and fair de∣meanor will not suffer me to beleeve, that devotion hath brought you into this desert; now if it be otherwise, do me the favour to discover the cause which hath made you to change your life, and what have been your for∣tunes whilest you were in the world? Your judgement is not amisse, answe∣red the Hermit, for indeed I never was inclined to this solitude; and he that would have told me two or three months since, that I should have lived as now I do, and clad with this gown, I should have laughed at him; but now I know, that heaven, whose secrets fall not within the reach of mans under∣standing, opens us severall waies, the better to conduct us to his glory; by afflctions he makes the wicked to acknowledge him; he inspires the good with heavenly motions, and gently withdrawing them from the miseries of the world, leaves them his greatnes for object, and makes them live with a happy trnquility of spirit. The fortunes of some serve for examples to those, which neither decline altogether vice, nor yet arrive to the perfecti∣on of others: briefly, he makes use of a thousand means, and many times intreats us according to our own humors. The estate wherein I have been, and wherein I am at this present, teaches me this holy Philosophie; for be∣ing not born, as I thought, to be tied to the care of that, which is due from us to God, dispair hath drawn me to it, and from an abism, wherein the most part of men are lost, I have mounted by degrees to that blessed rest, where felicities never die, where our joy is without grief, our daies without fear, and our hope without crosses, which thus came to passe: That powerfull Demon of our souls, Love; desiring an acknowledge∣ment from me, as from all other men, made me cast mine eie, some two yeers since upon a damsell, questionlesse poor (if that which Fortune gives may be called treasure) but extreamly rich, if grace and beauty ought to take place of such perishable things: I loved her, finding her worthy of my affection, and resolved, without sticking at the considerations of those that are too much carried away with avarice, to marry her; howbeit, desirous to know whether her disposition would well accommodate with mine; meeting her upon a time with some Gentlewomen of my acquaintance, I gently told her, that Fortune had done her much wrong, but withall, that her merits were of power to win upon some, who were able to right her, provided she could be contented to imbrace a fair offer. Her answer was very modest, and such as I could wish for, letting me know, that she had so much understanding, as not to refuse the honour would be done her, nor be in sensible of a benefit, I soon made an end of giving her all the rest which I had of power over my self: after that time I went to see her at her fathers house by his permission, but my visits were not frequent, to take away all su∣spition from my mother, whose covetous disposition would have had more wealth, and lesse merit; nevertheles provoked by my desires, I made often use of the night to conceal my designs. Every day added some grace or other to so many beauties; for unwilling to see her in a habit unworthy of my love, and knowing that her fathers ability would not extend to be∣stow on her all that I thought necessary to adorn her, I liberally imparted of mine own unto her, insomuch that my affection seemed to augment with
time, and indeed I had no felicity but in the sight of her. Feeling then my flame continually to encrease, I would fain have obtained some further grace of her, and authorised it with the faith which ties men in marriage, but she wisely represented unto me, how that was the way to run insensibly to her undoing, and utterly to ruine her under colour of her good. My love was violent, I confesse, and my passion possessed me with desires that won∣derfully provoked me, but this government of hers so pleased me, that I blamed mine own impatience, in stead of accusing her of having too little resentment. Wherefore being infinitely satisfied with this modesty, I resol∣ved to wait upon time, so that whensoever I saw her it was with such re∣spect, that if she had had judgement enough to have discerned her own good, she was obliged to prefer my affection before any Princes whatsoe∣ver: but alas! this vertue is rarely incountred amongst women, and seldom do they make the best choice, she receives the visits of another, fairer indeed then I, if the features of the face be more to be regarded then the vertues, and good presence of a man, but much lesse accomplished and rich, if I may say so without vanity. I observed the actions of this maid in regard of the interest which I pretended to have had in her, and all the speeches which she used to this new commer I considered in my mind, from thence to draw infallible conjectures of my fear or hope, so that within five or six daies, I found that the beauty of this minion, called Cli had wrought more pow∣erfully with this ingratefull creature, then all my precedent services; wher∣upon my jealousie became far greater then ever was my love: howbeit de∣siring to divert this growing mischief, I took her one day aside, and loving∣ly shewing her the obligations wherein she stood ingaged to my affection, and the disposition of this yong gallant, who would be weary of her assoon as he had but once injoied her: I complained of the liberty that she used in her carriage, and yeelding her infinit reasons, which not to abuse your pa∣tience, I will omit for the present, I had no question obliged her to some re∣morse, but that being desperatly setled in her resolution, she past it over lightly, and never thought of it an  after, howbeit holding it not fit to leave me with an ill conceit, she laboured to colour her ends, protesting ne∣ver to love any but me, and that she entertained Clidor only to conceal my visits, promising utterly to discard him whensoever I pleased. Briefly, she so charmed me with a few tears and some kisses, that I was almost perswa∣ded she did not love him, and casting away all jealousie, I imagined that she could not chuse but be very sensible of my dear esteem of her ever since I was her servant. I was a long time in this error, because she would never let Clidor come home to her after, to take away all suspition from me; but Oh God! who is able to guard himself from the deceits of inconstant women? she went oftentimes out of the town under colour of giving order for some affairs, and feigning strange care touching the managing of her fahers e∣state, she retired with Clidor into a grot, which is not above six miles from hence, and called the Lovers grot, but more justly the sacrifice of the wic∣ked, where the most part of the day was spent in kisses, and more secret ca∣resses. Passion, which mabes Lovers blind, not suffering them to betray me with discretion, I perceived their tricks, and in brief I took them in the ma∣cer; whereupon I was about to have killed them both, but better conside∣ring the foulnesse of the fact, I left them after I had wonderfully reviled her, and wisht that Heaven in justice would severely punish such horrible
perfidiousnes. My desires therein were accomplished, for their pleasures carrying them to a neglect of all care of their reputtion, they met openly almost every day in this grot, so that Argenia (which was the name of this ingratefull) was surprised there by a dreadfull Giant, who espying her go∣ing thither followed her, and finding her to his mind would have enjoied her; howbeit she, that wanted no wit, knowing that menaces would serve to no pupose, gently shewed him, that he was not to use force unto a wo∣man that might be woon by love, and in so sweet a maner intreated a day or two of him, the better to acquaint her self with his humours, that hoping to perfect his delight with a voluntary fruition, he promised her to attend that time, during the which he would accompany her withersoever she went. And indeed he followed her to a little country house of her Fathers, where this gallant left him; having used means to make him drunk, and so got a∣way. I am not able to declare the havock which this Giant made when he awaked, and saw himself cousened in this sort, but going in a rage to an old Inchantresse of his acquaintance, unto whom he discoursed the whole bu∣sines, she came some fowr months since into this country, and finding Clidor and this false Argenia in the grot together, she inchanted them after a very strange maner: She made them strip themselves stark naked, and putting great whips into their hands, left them with an extream desire to scourge one another therwith, which they put in execution most cruelly. Eight howrs at a time they abide in this exercise; at the end whereof they give o∣ver, and fall a railing for the cruelty they use upon each other. This is the punishment inflicted on them, wherewithall the Giant not being satisfied, hath sworn not to spare a woman he can find; and accordingly he remains heer in this Country with two other Giants, no lesse great and formidable them himself, and assoon as he catches any he carries them to the grot, de∣flowrs them before Argenia's face, and then takes off their heads from their shoulders, in revenge of the deceit which this false one practised on him. Hence I have taken occasion not to be curell, though I were abused as he was, but to forsake the world, where is nothing certain but grief and mise∣ry; and making a good use of my dotage of this ingratefull fair, I have set up a blessed rest for my future daies. Without doubt, said the Knight well satisfied with this discourse, they which can turn all things to their profit, as you have done, are worthy of great commendation; and I much approve of your resolution to make Heaven your only object, since the earth is pe∣rishable, and produceth nothing but vanity and vexation of spirit; live hap∣py in this mind, and never alter it. I hope I shall not, said the Hermit; but Sir, the travell you have endured requirs some repose; go and lie down up∣on a bed which you shall find in my chamber, and there rest you for an howr or two, and I will endevour to make you better chear at supper. I can not refuse so good an offer, said Rozalmond, though I have an extream desire to go presently to the Lovers grot. To morrow, said the Hermit, you may take this journey more commodiously then to day; and if the ha∣bit which I wear would permit me to accompany you, I would willingly go along to be an ocular witnes of the punishment inflicted on this perfidi∣ous creature, though the estate wherein now I am forbids me so much as to speak of revenge. You may do as you please, said the Knight; in the mean time I will follow your counsell, and as secure in this little lodging as in the palace of a King, I will go and take my rest. Saying so he unsadled his horse,
and then unarming himself, he fell into so profound a sleep, that he never awaked till the next morning. CHAP. XXVI. The Knight of the Roses combats Orfuron and his brothers: ends the adventure of the Lovers grt, and sends them to Constantinople. THE Knight of the Roses rising with some amazement for that he had slept so long, speedily armed himself, and finding that ready which the Hermit had provi∣ded for his supper, he fell too with a good appetite; but the desire he had to see the Lovers grot, not suffe∣ring him to sit long at table, he gave his host a thou∣sand thanks, and getting to horse took the way which was presented uno him; wherein intertaining him∣self with the remembrance of his fairest Armazia, at length he arrived neer to that famous rock, which he presently knew, both by the two Lions, who by enchantment were made to keep the gate, not permitting any one what∣soever to enter, except the Giants, as also by a number of womens heads, set all about upon the neighboring trees. These objects full of horror made him resolve to deliver those two afflicted persons, and to cut off the course of such inhumane cruelty; whereupon he alighted, and couragiously ad∣vancing with his sword in his hand, he approached unto two great pillars, which supported an arch, where hung a Table, on the which was written these words: Knight, Enter not heer, if thou be not the chief of the World. Truly, said he, I should be very vain, if I should be perswaded that there were not a better Knight on the earth then my self; but come what can come, I will not stop now for any regard of these menaces, and if I may, I will give an end to the long pains of these Lovers. So he would have past along under the arch, but he felt himself charged all at one instant with so many blows, that he was forced to set one knee to the ground, being unable to support the fury of them; howbeit no whit amazed he quickly rose a∣gain, and covering himself with his shield, he swung his sword about his head, for he could see no body whereon he might fasten a blow; and per∣ceiving that he felt resistance, as if he struck upon armour, he flew up and down with his sword; heer he discharged a down right blow, there he gave a thrust, and so bestird himself, that he seemed to make some great defeat; howbeit the more he advanced, the more opposition he met withall, and the blows of his invincible enemies became more heavy, laying upon him in such maner, as if he had been assaulted by a thousand armed men. His courage which alwaies augmented in the greatest difficulties, not able to en∣dure
so much resistance, put him into such a rage, that he redoubled his blows, and advancing three or fowrpaces forward, in despite of those he saw not, he arrived at the entry of the grot, where all this fury ceased, but he had not leisure to take breath after so painfull an encounter; for at that very instant the Lions set upon him, and seizing the one upon his shield, the other upon his body, laboured to pull him down, howbeit being as strong and lusty as any Knight in the world, he sustained the violence of him that held his shield, and with a blow full upon the mane of the other, laid his head in the dust. Animated with this lucky stroak, he suddenly turned the point of his sword against the first that had hold of his shield, and thrust it so strongly into his belly, that he sent him dead to the ground, with excee∣ding content to see himself so soon delivered from two such mighty ene∣mies. Seeing the grot then open and free, he would willingly have entred in without further delay, for to have seen Argenia and Clidor, but fearing he should meet there with some new occasion to employ his sword, he sat him down upon a stone to take a little breath, howbeit the cries of these Lovers, which he heard, not permitting him to stay long, he rose up for to go in and deliver them, when as he beheld three dreadfull Giants, who held seven damsels tied with cords: calling to mind then that these were those cruell men which made so great a massacre of all the women that fell into their hands, he came presently to his horse, got up, took his lance, and approach∣ing to Orfuron (so was the great lover of Argenia called) he said unto him: Wicked monster, whither leadest thou these damsels? Set them instantly at liberty or defend thy self. O Gods! said the Giant, what do I hear? One man alone dares threaten me, and will have me give him an account of my actions. Come vile creature, and receive the reward of thy temerity: with that he charged his lance, and encountred Rozalmond so furiously in the midst of the course, that he made him bow to the crupper of his horse, tum∣bling on the ground himself with a great wound in his side. The other two, seeing their brother in this plight presently advanced, and surprising the Knight before he could finish his course discharged two such dangerous blows upon him, that with the amazement he was in by the incounter of the lance he was like to have quit his saddle; neverthelesse comming spee∣dily to himself again, he re-setled him in his seat far more furious then a Ty∣ger that hath lost her whelps, and drawing out his sword, he struck the first that presented himself before him, so cruell a blow, that he cut off above half his left arm, and being about to redouble upon the other, he was char∣ged by Orfurn in so dangerous a maner with a great and heavy mace, that he was constrained to knock his chin against his breast; heerupon his horse as if he had been able to conceive, that such another blow would have ran∣ked him amongst the number of the dead, carrying him away saved him from the fury of a merciles sword, which was falling upon him, and ha∣ving esloigned him from his enemies gave him time to come to himself, be∣ing well recollected then, and trembling with choler and rage, he set spurs to his horse, and comming to Orfurn he discharged with such violence up∣on his head, that he divided him to the waste, sending him dead to the ground, with no lesse noise then if a towr had been overthrown by light∣ning to the very foundation. This dreadfull blow amazed the other Giants, but fury succeeding instantly to fear, they approached him being carried by dispair, and began to presse him harder then ever he had been in all his life.
He was wonderfully troubled in receiving the blows of the one upon his shield, and warding himself from the others curtelax, managing occasions and time with such judgement, that the bravest Knights of the earth would no doubt have admired his fight, but thinking that the length of the combat might prove dangerous, although he saw his enemies bloud appearing on every part of their bodies, he resolved to put all in hazard: wherfore taking his sword in both his hands, he struck one of them in such a terrible maner, that he cut his body just in twain, the one half tumbling down on the grasse, and the other remaining in the saddle. This horrible stroak possessing him that had no longer use of his left arm, with extream fear, he would have sa∣ved himself in the grot; but Rozalmond alighting, gave his horse unto the damsels to hold, who all this while had been upon their knees invoking hea∣ven for his good successe, and got in as soon as he, where he was much a∣mazed to behold Argenia and Clidor giving over scourging one another, and with their whips laying upon the Giant, who appeared then to be na∣ked without arms or cloths, and never offering to resist. He stood still a while taking pleasure in this sight, but not to lose time, and fearing to be o∣vertaken with the night in that place, he went to the Lovers, pluckt the whips out of their hands, and threw them out at the mouth of the cav which was no sooner done, but a great clap of thunder and lightning fell upon the grot, beat the Giant in peeces, broke asunder the inchantment, and made the poor wretches understand how ill they had used one another by the power of charms. Their love nevertheles continuing in the same state it  in before, Argenia desired Clidor to forgive her the wrong she had done him; Clidor besought his Love to forget his cruelty towards her; and both kneeling down before Rozalmond made those acknowledgements which were due to his assistance. I should not endure you, said he to the fairest Argenia, in regard of your ingratitude to Meleander, (so was the Her∣mit named that had entertained him) did I not consider the power of Love, who absolutely disposeth of our hearts; but since it was his pleasure you should commit this fault, I will pardon you upon condition, that Clidor shall render those favours legitimate, which he shall receive from you heer∣after. It is that which I most desire in the world, answered Clidor, and even now I plight her my faith, referring the consummation therof till such time as we shall be healed of our hurts; in the mean space if you please to com∣mand us any thing, my Lord, we will most gladly obey you, in some sort to acquite us of the obligation wherein we stand so deeply ingaged to your valour. I should be very well contented, said he, that you would take the pains to go unto Constantinople, with certain damsels which are without, and present your selves on my behalf to the Empresse Richarda, recounting the successe of your adventures, together with that which hath past in this grot since my arrivall. These Lovers finding honour in this request, pro∣mised not to fail therein, and going forth after they had put on their clothes, were very much abashed at the slaughter which they saw without the grot. The greatnes of the Lions, the two horrible blows wherewithall the Gi∣ants were slain, and above threescore heads, a number of arms and legs cut off from Knights, that no man living had seen, no not Rozalmond himself, who had made this massacre, upon the resistance he had met with at the pil∣lars, as you have heard before, made them admire the rare valour of so in∣comparable a Knight, who addressing himself to the damsels, desired them
to accompany these Lovers to Constantinople, which they willingly un∣dertook, as they that were bound to publish unto all the world the grace they had received in his succour. Taking the way then which would bring them thither, they lef Rozalmond, who returned to Melanders Hrinitage, and related unto him all that past concerning the adventure of the grot, for the which he could never commend him enough, though he were som∣what discontented to hear that Argenia and Clidor were to live happily in the sweet fruition of one another. CHAP. XXVII. Clidor and Argenia arrive at Constantinople, just at the same time when as the Knights sen by Alcdamant from the Castle of the Serpents, came thther. The mrvellous contentment which those messages brought to the Princes of Greece. CLidor and Argenia exceedingly desirous to see themselves in the liberty of their caresses, used incredible speed to get to Constantinople, and even then the steepls and towrs of that stately City appeared unto them, when as they encountred thee Knights riding along with two covered chariots, who beholding so many dam∣sels with one unarmed man, approached unto them, and having saluted them with respect curteously en∣treated them to let them know whither they were bound. To seek out the Princes of Greece, answered one, and acquaint them with the wonders which a Knight hath performed in the deliverance of these Lovers, (point∣ing to Clidor and Argenia) whom ill fortune detained inchanted in a Cave, which for that cause is to this day called, The Lovers grot. Will you be pleased, said the Knight, to render the way lsse tedious by the recitll of this adventure. Truly I am sorry, answere she, that I am not able to sats∣fi your desire; for having in charge to addresse my self only unto the beau∣tifull Princesse of the Parthians, I should think I did gretly amisse, if I should communicate it unto any other; but if you be so desirous to hear it, as you seem to be, go with us to Constantinople, and there you shall be ful∣ly satisfied. Most willingly, said he, will I accompany you thither; for in∣deed I have likewise in charge to wait upon, not the Epresse of the Par∣thians, but the excellent Queen of France, from a Knight, who not long since hath done such marvellous acts, as are of power to make him live for ever. Why this is as it should be, said the damsell, for I shall have part in the content which you will bring to these Princes, and you shall have your desire in the knowledge of those memorable things which the Knight, of whom I spake to you of, hath lately actd: come then, let us make a little more haste, that we may present our selves unto them before they rise from the Table. Wherupon putting their horses to it, they arrived not long after at the City, went unto the palce, and entred into the Hall, where the pre∣sence of so many Princes, and beautifull Ladies amazed them at the first
but desiring to acquit themselves worthily of their charge, they advanced forward, and kneeling all down, demanded at one instant for the fair Em∣presse of the Parthians, and the beauteous Queen of France. We cannot hear you all together, said Florisel, seeing you come upon severall occasi∣ons. Speak damsell said he, looking upon Argenia, relate unto the Empresse of the Parthians the cause of your comming▪ and then we will give the like audience unto these Knights. Sovereign Princesse, said Argenia then, kissing Richarda's delicate hands, the Knight of the Roses, then whom I do not think there is a more valiant under heaven, hath commanded me to wait up∣on you for to acquaint you with his glory, and my fortunes, which truly rather deserve pity, then that you should inflict any new punishment upon me; for that I did not acknowledge, as I ought, the affection of a Lord, to whom I was greatly obliged. Beginning then the discourse of her love with Meleander, she delivered at large the good offices which she had recei∣ved from his assistance, protested that she had a full intention to recompence him with what was most dear unto her, had she not been constrained by a sovereing power to love Clidor, whose passions were no lesse violent then Meleanders, spoke of her incounter with Orfuron, of the subtlety which she used to get out of his hands, of the revenge which he took of his disdain, and falling upon her deliverance, concluded with the praises of Rozalmond, whom she placed in the highest degree of glory, particularizing his com∣bats against the invisible Knights, the Lions, and the Giants, not forgetting the horrible blows which she had seen, and discoursed in such sort for the advantage of this warriour, that she made the Princes of Greece amazed, and possessed them with an extream desire to know him better. I should blame your ingratitude, and bemone Meleander, said the Empresse Richarda, if I did not think him wise enough to lay this fault upon Love, but knowing well, that none can dispose of their will, when that proud tirant of our minds holds them ingaged; I will not ordain you any further penance then that which you suffered in the grot, and for this Knights sake, whom I know not, and to whom I am much obliged without any desert at all, I remit you to the rights of your freedome, and do counsell you to follow the advice which he hath given you, for the consummation of your mariage. Madam, answered Clidor, That is it we desire, and to effect the which we humbly receive that liberty your Majesty hath been so graciously pleased to grant us, with a protestation to publish unto every one both your vertues, and the acts of that most renowned Knight of the Roses. Saying thus, he bowed himself even to the ground for to kisse her hands, and so gave place to the Knights that were to speak unto the Infanta Fortuna, whereof one began for the rest, and said; Mighty Queen of France, I acknowledge that Ar∣genia's discourse hath given great content to this excellent presence, and that the valour of that famous Knight whose praises she hath worthily publish∣ed, doth deserve one of the chiefest ranks amongst the best Knights of the world; but I am addressed unto you by the commandement of another, no lesse generous and valiant, and that a few daies since hath done miracles able to astonish the whole earth, and to fill this Court with all the joy that can be expected from good news. He cme lately to the Castle of Serpents, wherof it may be you have heard: Yes, answered Lucendus, we under∣stand that it is one of the most dangerous houses in the World. Questionles, there was reason to say so three weeks since, said the Knight; but the cu∣stome
is well changed since that unmatchable Knight came thither. Being neer to that Castle, as I said before, he met with two Squires, that lamented the losse of fowr excellent Knights, whom they had seen fall into certain fosses made of purpose to entrap such as came that way. He was sensible of their complaints, and their tears moved him to such pity, that immediatly he alighted, and with his sword in his hand entred into the Castle, not by the gate of the fosses, for he had been made acquainted with the deceit, but by a wicket which was on the left hand; his arrivall was encountred with thirty armed men, who prepared to assault him altogether, but he quickly made them know that he was incapable of fear, for he couragiously pre∣vents them, and beginning the bickering himself, he lais fowr of them at his feet with the fowr first blows he gave, which had terrified the rest, had they not been restrained by shame in regard of their number. They char∣ged him then with more fury then before, but he fought with so much force and courage, that to make short, seven and twenty of them past by the edge of his sword, and the other three were in case not to survive their compa∣nions long, when as a damsell let loose two furious and very dreadfull Ser∣pents, whereof if you please you shall see both the greatnes and the form, having brought hither the skins of them stuft with straw. These monsters being at liberty ran up and down the court, and finding these rascals flying from their enemies sword, tore them presently in pieces, freeing the Knight from all further care of them; but he had little time to breath, for one of these horrible beasts set upon him, whilest the other was devouring those he had killed, and was ready to have swallowed him alive, had he not shift∣ed his incounter, slipping then aside he let him passe by, and upon his turn∣ing about, thrust his sword into his flank, which put him into such a rage, that with a blow of his tail, ten foot long, the Knight was overthrown to the ground, from whence quickly arising, he sheathed his sword again in his belly, and laid him stark dead on the earth. This lucky blow having aug∣mented his courage, he intreated the other in such sort, that within an howr he left him in the like case. His desire to see the end of this adventure not permitting him to rest long, he went up a pair of stairs, entred into a Hall, where seven furious Savages presented themselves, and charged him so strongly, that he was somewhat amazed with the violence of the blows, which with their clubs they laid upon him; nevertheles he was quit with them, and at length with incredible pain he kild them all: night arriving thereupon gave him good cause to fear had he been capable of it, but confi∣dent in dangers, he leaned upon his sword, untill such time as he beheld six damsels appear, who turning suddenly into so many hideous fantosms, char∣ged him with torches, which they held in their hands, making him suffer exceedingly with extreamity of heat in his armour: being much troubled in defending himself from these spirits, he espied a very dreadfull Giant come out of the next chamber, with whom he had a dangerous combat, wherein his sword breaking through the violence of a blow which had laid the Giant on the floor, he entred the chamber, and beholding a sword, the best and richest that ever was, in the breast of a yong gentleman enchanted on a tomb, lais presently hold of it, draws it out very easily, and returning to his enemy, was about to have taken his head from his shoulders, when as the gentleman, of whom I spake but now, being freed from his enchant∣ment, came and with intreaty obtained his life, upon condition that all the
prisoners should be set liberty, we were then brought out of the dungeons to the number of threescore, all destined for food to those serpents, and as we had leave given us to dispose of our selves at our pleasure, we saw fowr brave Knights brought forth of another prison; the first of which, was your grandchilde, Lucibel of France, the second Persides nephew to the re∣nowned Emperour of the Persians, the third Russian of Media, and the last, Prigmaleon Prince of Aethiopia, who the same day were entrapped by means of the fosses▪ whereof I spake before. These are the good news, which I said but now, would bring so much joy to this Court, but this is not all the fruit of the labours of the most va∣liant Knight of the Palms (so is that great warrior named, who was the author of our preservation) for it was known by the means of a damsell en∣chantresse, that the young inchanted Gentleman, was called Amadis of Trebisond, son to the famous Amadis of Greece and Niquea, and your bro∣ther, excellent Queen, in which regard your son and his companions made wonderfull much of him, and accompanied him in the ceremonies that were performed in conferring the order of Knighthood upon him, which he received from the invincible Knight of the Palms, Persides gave him his sword, Lucibel his helmet, and Russian and Prigmaleon the rest of his arms. Being knighted in this sort, and all rejoycing with him, and talking of the happy successe of this adventure, they saw a chariot descend out of the clouds, drawn by four Griffons, whereinto the damsell enchantresse entred with Amadis, and mounting into the air, said that his acts should begin in the Empire of Martaria, a Countrey unknown, it seems, to all that live heer. His departure having altered the resolution of these young Princes, they armed themselves, mounted on horsback, and went away two and two to∣gether, leaving the Knight of the Palms; who following shortly after, only accompanied with his Squire, commanded us to come hither for to ac∣quaint you with these accidents, and to present you with the Serpents from him. Truly, said the beautious Infanta, both your news and you are very welcome, and I would give the best town of my kingdom, that the Knight you speak of were now heer; we should then endeavour to acknowledge so great a favour, as also give him hearty thanks for the head of an insolent Giant, that spoke ill of my Lord the King, which he sent me the other day; if ever it be our good fortune to meet with him, we shall shew our selves solvent for such powerfull obligations: in the mean time, you may assure him, if you chance to see him, that the Princes of Greece finde themselves indebted to his valour. Whereunto adde this, said Rogel, that all of us will gladly serve him, and will seek out all occasions so to do. Hereupon, the Knights taking their leave, went away, bountifully rewarded with rich presents, and all the Princes descended into the Palace Court for to be∣hold the figure of those serpents, which appeared wonderfull strange; and causing them to be set on the gates of the City, they admired the valour of this Knight, whom they knew not, and which in the mean while spread his valour in so many places, that there was no other talke all abroad, but of him, of the Knight of the Roses, of the Knight of the Savage, and of the fair Knight, as the onely prime men in the world. Florisel having well ob∣served the Serpents, was going up again, when as he espied a Knight to ar∣rive; who alighting, made himself known to be the Prince of Aethiopia; that unable to endure so long an absence from his Polixena, was returned
for to see her, and demand some ease for his sufferings. His coming rejoy∣ced the whole company, and the praises of the Knight of the Palms, re∣newed in his discourse, for publishing the marvells which had been acted at the Castle of the Serpents, he left so good an odour of this warrior, that every one extreamly desired to see him. CHAP. XXVIII. Prigmaleons sufferings for Polixena, their meeting in the garden, their dis∣course, with the conclusion of their marriage. THE whole Court being full of joy for these good newes, each one seemed to be content, but the Prince of the Moors; who tormented with the vio∣lence of his desires, and knowing that remedy of his disease depended on the assurance of Polixena's fa∣vour, he resolves to sue unto her for it. Walking then up and down in his chamber, to devise some dis∣course proper for his purpose, he was above three hours before he could settle on any thing that he liked; sometimes he thought it best to suffer with so much respect, as to let his silence speak for him, and not he himself; then again, he was minded to write unto her, and so commit his secrets into her hand, fearing his tongue would never ex∣presse them according to his desire. At last, approving neither of these re∣solutions, he got him forth, to seek out some diversions from these thoughts; when as Love, who seemed to be satisfied with his endurings, advanced his felicity at such time as he least expected it. For going down from his chamber into a delicious garden, and falling upon his former ima∣ginations, he perceived his Mistris in one of the alleys, who it may be was entertaining her self with the glory of his captivity; the first sight of her made him to tremble, but presently conceiving that his good fortune had not made him to meet her so opportunely in that place without some my∣sterie, he grew more confident, and said to himself: How happily doth occasion offer it self unto me, and what an errour should I commit to over∣slip it: I was troubled how to come to speak to Polixena, and see, Love fur∣nishes me with the means, and presents her to me alone, according to my desire; she must be spoken to then, and acquainted with my thoughts. Whereupon, going to her with this resolution, he modestly kneeled down, and with a charming voice, said unto her: How long, Madam, is it your pleasure that I shall suffer? Is my pleasure that you should suffer, said she? Am I the cause of your pain? Have I done you any displeasure? Have you found any thing in the innocencie of my actions that hath given you of∣fence? No, Madam, answered he, but it is your grace that I am so hum∣ble a suiter for. I must know wherein you have offended me, said she smi∣ling, before I can grant you any grace, for I do not mean to pardon you, if you have committed any thing that is hainous. Alas! Madam, said he, make not a jest of miserie, all the quiet of my soul rests in your hands, and if I beg for grace of you, I do not presuppose any forgiving offence,
but I desire you should take pity of the pain I endure for your sake: Excel∣lent Mistris, permit me, I beseech you, to say that I love you, that my de∣sires are violent, that they will never suffer me to be at rest, and that my grief must needs be more, except your favours to me be greater, then heer∣tofore they have been. You are too much transported with passion, answe∣red she, for whereas you speak of favours, do you think I can do you any further, without wrong to that modesty which is to accompany all my acti∣ons; and if you loved me, as truly you affirm, you would not use any spee unto me, which my greatnesse may not bear. Why do you indure su tyrannie? Why do you not represse the insolencie of these passions which molest you so, or why do you not make you strong enough to vanquish your self, which all the Knights that have presented themselves to the fury of your sword, could never yet do? Your desires must be confined with discretion, and governed by reason; but if you suffer in such sort, and are so much in love with me, Why do you not seek for ease and satisfaction by the wayes which honour allows you? My will my Lord, is subject to a fa∣thers, who, I am perswaded, would not refuse your alliance; if you require my consent, I willingly give it you, and do assure you, that the glory to possesse you, shall be dearer to me then your Empire. Beautious Mistris, answered he, setting one knee to the ground, I could not wish for more in this world then you have promised me, and the grace which I sued unto you for, was no other but this which you have granted me. I loved you as much as it was possible for one to love a Lady, yet I should never have dis∣covered my thoughts, had not you authorized me to do it; I complained, but your noble bounty hath relieved me; and if I have cause to do so again, I will never accuse you for it, neither shall any neglect in me be any occa∣sion of it heerafter; for I will presently go seek the means of my content: but first, let me obtain of my fairest Mistris, that she will be pleased to give me a testimony of her love in a kisse. The hope which I have, said she, to give you a more ample power over me ere it be long, shall so far dispense with me, as not to deny you this favour, which is of no little esteem with me. Whereupon, she joyned her lips to his, with such infinite content to this Prince, that his soul was ready to part from him with this kisse. Polixe∣na seeing him thus transported, was exceedingly satisfied, knowing that this rapture was meerly an excesse of love; but fearing lest she should not be able to resist her lovers intreaties, if he should beg any further matter, considering withall, how favourable the place was to such a liberty, she departed from him, and went to her chamber, leaving the Prince in the garden, calling the trees to be witnesse of the happinesse he had incountered contrary to his expectation. Her absence somewhat displeased him, but remembring the speech she had used, he began to think of that which touched him more neerly: Wherefore considering how the iron is to bea∣ten, whilst it is hot, he went directly unto Florisel, unto whom he first re∣monstrated his birth, the change of his religion, and passing on to his affe∣ction unto Polixena, besought him not to refuse him his alliance. Valorous Prince, answered Florisel, if your fortune had not given you so transcendent a greatnesse to your birth, your vertue would have deserved more then my daughter; wherefore since you think her worthy of you, she shall most willingly be yours; onely permit me to be so good a father, as to know how she is inclined towards you; for though nature hath given me an abso∣lute
power over her, yet she will not have me to be a tyrant to her, for∣cing her affection in so important a matter, and whereon the good of all her future life depends. This answer being marvellous acceptable to Prig∣maleon, he gave him a thousand thanks for the facility he brought to his re∣quest, and protesting to hold the same obedience unto him, which he could attend from his daughter, he departed the most contented man in the world. In the mean time Florisel, who held this fortune to be advan∣tagious for Polixena, considering the valour and merit of the Prince, called unto him Don Rogel, Lucendus, Spheramond, Dorigel, Silvan, and some others, communicated this affair with them, and desired them to deliver their ad∣vice therein; they all approved of the match, and Polixena being present, declared, that after the consent of so many of her friends, she was well pleased to lead her life with this Prince; insomuch, that he being sent for, they were affianced presently; the celebration of the nuptials being defer∣red till the fifteenth day after; against which time, Florisel caused a turna∣ment to be proclaimed, gave safe conduct to all manner of Knights that would come thither, and promised one of the richest tents on the earth for a prize, to him that should be victour. This fortnight seemed short to pre∣pare all that was necessary for the magnificence of a marriage so profitable to all Christendom; but too long to these lovers, who conversing more fa∣miliarly together then before, it rendred their desires insupportable; but submitting to necessity, they resolved to attend with patience that so much wished for howr; and in the mean while, they prepared to appear in their highest lustre on their wedding day, wherein those wonders happened, which shall be recounted to you in the Chapter following. CHAP. XXIX. The wonders which happened at the justs held in Constantinople for the celebration of the nuptials between Prigmaleon and the fair Infanta of Greece. THE report of the turnament and justs, which were to honour the nuptials of the Infanta of Greece, and the brave Aethiopian, running thorow all the Coun∣treys adjoyning, the wayes were all full of Knights and Ladies travelling to Constantinople, some in discharge of their duty to their Prince, and others to receive the content of beholding some memorable combat; so that the City was replenished every where with strangers, and a thousand pavillions pitched in the fields, made it seem as though Constantinople were besieged. This while all was in preparation, Prigmaleons suffering passed away insensibly; the Knights that meant to combat, fitted their arms; the Ladies studied how to make them∣selves more beautifull with ornaments, and every thing conduced to inex∣pressable delight. The day, which was to make up the lovers happinesse, being arrived, Prigmaleon came forth, aparelled in a dublet of cloth of sil∣ver, and his hose of black velvet laid over with gold lace, a cloak of the
same, the cape set with great diamonds which sparkled in a marvellous ma∣ner. He went in the midst between the great King of France, and Florisel of Niquea, being followed by all the other Princes of Greece: In like sort Polixena clothed in a gown of cloth of gold, whose ground was white, was seen led to Church amongst all the rest of the excellent Princesses, where the Patriarch of Constantinople married them with all such ceremonies as are used in the like cases. That done, as they were returning to the Palace again in the same order, an unknown Squire presented himself on his knee before Prigmaleon, and said unto him. Great Prince, the three Knights of the Serpents desirous to bring some thing to the solemnity of your nuptialls, do humbly beseech, that you will be pleased they may be chosen out of so many Knights, as are heer assembled, for to maintain with the lance, that the world doth not pro∣duce fairer Ladies, then are now to be found in Greece. They shall have their desire, said Prigmaleon, since they undertake this in favour of the La∣dies of Greece; and drawing an assured judgement of their vertue from so great a design, tell them that they may dispose of the conditions of the justs. I have in charge, answered the Squire, to let you understand, that they de∣sire but two; the first, that they which shall be unhorsed, may not demand the combat with the sword, if so be they be not likewise unhorsed; the o∣ther, that if they three be overthrown by so many strangers, the victors shalbe obliged to finish the enterprise for the glory of the Ladies of this court; to the end that their weaknes shall be no cause to make them loe that which nature hath bestowed on them. This is as it should be, said Prigmale∣on, and this request seems so just unto me, that they have power to enter in∣to the Lists whensoever they please. The Squire having this favourable answer carried it presently to his masters, who caused a great Pavilion to be pitched in the field, whilest the Princes of Greece were at dinner, where all the delicacies of the earth were abundantly served in. The feast ending with a world of instruments and voices, which resounded all about, the trumpers called all the Princes and Ladies to the windows, to be hold that which should be acted by the three Knights of the Serpents, who present∣ing themselves in azure arms, upon great and furious Coursers, gave extra∣ordinary satisfaction to the beholders with their goodly presence, and pos∣sessed the Princes of Greece with a marvellous dee to see whether the ef∣fect was answerable to so brave a carriage. The Ladies being then placed, the Lists were opened to twelve Knights, who promising very much en∣tred, but not one of them endured the second , being so easily unhors∣ed that every one wondred, either at their weaknes, or the great prowesse of the challengers, who in lesse then two howrs had laid fifty Knights in the dust, to the much amazement of the assistants, which were giving them the honour of the day, when as three Knights were seen to appear in the Lists, whose gallant demeanour carried away the eies of all there present. The first bore a Savage in his shield, whereby he was judged to be the valiant Grian, who had done wonders in Constantinople at the last Tournament. The second shewed a Dragon, whom a beautifull maid held in a chain, and the third carried a swelling sea, in which regard he was called the Knight of the waves. These three warriours, who were no other then Grian the Sa∣vage, his fairest Brandimanda, and the gentle Silverin of the desert, present∣ing themselves with an admirable grace, all the people with great attention
expected what would become of this course, and every ones eie was fixed on these six, when as they were seen to set forth with fury, and incounter in the midst of the Lists with no lesse noise then is made by a violent con∣course of raging waters. The lances brake in a thousand pieces, and each Knight thought his enemy on the ground, howbeit not one of them so much as moved, and all of them past bravely on, without shew of any the least a∣mazement, for so dangerous a shock. This incounter having possest them with asmuch anger, as the assistants with wonder, they took new staves, and met one another again with the same desire to vanquish, but there was no advantage again perceived on either side; and their fortune proving to be equall amongst them all, they were constrained to have recourse unto the third lances, which being stronger then the former, and managed with more fury then before, they were all six overthrown from their horses in such a dangerous maner, that many doubted they had been slain: neverthelesse, they were seen quickly to rise again with no lesse rage then shame, and drawing out their swords they were about to charge one another, when as eight Giants arrived in the place, who seeming to be so many Colosses put the people in a marvellous fright. The insolence of these monsters, that with great cudgels overthrew all in their way to make themselves a free passage, incensing the Knights, with one accord they sheathed up their swords, and choosing out the greatest lances they could find, they opposed themselves to the fury of these barbarous men, just at such time as they saw a big Knight appear in the place, that carried three Roses in the midst of his shield; by this device so famous in the Empire of Greece, and by his gal∣lant carriage, he was instantly known to be the valiant Knight of the Ro∣ses, of whom every one spake as of the prime man of the earth. Florisel and the Princes of Greece were infinitely glad at the arrivall of so braves warrior, aswell for the desire which they had to see him, as for to know whether his valour did equall his renown. This noble Knight having noted the outragious demeanor of these Giants, ranged himself presently on Gri∣ans side; and to lose no time ran with such incredible fury against him hapt to be his opposite, as he past his lance quite thorow his body, sending him stark dead to the ground. Now beleeve me, said Spheramond, this incounter doth not belie the report which runs of this Knight; and if his companions second him, these insole that come to trouble our sports will quickly be brought to reason. Thi being spoken somewhat lowd, it was overheard by Grian, who at that very  setting forth with the rest, incountred the Giants, upon whom they brake their spears, without so much as once mo∣ving them; whereat they were so incensed, that drawing out their swords, they began one of the rudest combats that ever had been seen in Constan∣tinople. As often as the Giants lifted up their swords, it was like so many thunderbolts that should fall; and if the Knights had not been agil and quick the fight had not long endured, but their addresse made them subsist, and rendred them dreadfull to their enemies. Grian the Savage bestirred him∣self with strange fury. Brandimanda by little and little triumphed over her enemy; Silverin of the desert, made good his party; the brave Knights of the Serpents fought with an admirable grace, and gave certain hope of vi∣ctory; but the most part of the assistants had their eies fixed on the combat of the valiant Knight of the Roses, whose sword seemed more heavy to his adversary, then the fall of a towr overthrown by the violence of the winds.
Every one admired his blows; if he struck upon his shield, the moiety of it went to the ground; if upon his armor, the bloud straight gushed out; if fu∣ry made him bestow any otherwise, the Giant seemed to be astonished with so fearfull a charge; briefly, every time that he advanced his sword, they were sure to see some abridgement of his daies. Florisel wondred at his fighting with such force, the other Princes did the like; aud all the people stood amazed at it. At length the combat having endured two howrs, his enemy was laid along with the violence of a blow, which divided his head in two. Grian the Savage desiring to appear no lesse valiant, ran his quite thorow; Brandimanda dispatched hers with a dangerous blow in the thigh, and another full in the breast; the three Knights of the Serpents took off the heads of their enemies from their shoulders; and Silverin of the desert most generously ranked his in the number of the dead, with a stroak that cleft him even to the shoulders. This done the three Knights of the Ser∣pents were returning to their first place for to renew the combat with Gri∣an, Brandimanda, and Silverin, when as Don Rogel having caused some of the Giants servants to be arrested, desired them to stay till he had discove∣red the intent of these insolent men. At this request sheathing up their swords, they went to a yong Squire, who seeing himself among so many persons spake fearlesly in this maner. The victory which you have gottea to day should not make you rejoice as you do; for of thirteen Brothers, which peaceably govern the redoubted Islands of Barrocand, the five stron∣gest are yet living, whereof you shall find two so puissant, that they will make you give an account of the lives of these whom you behold there laid on the earth. Sirrha, said Don Rogel, your threats shall not trouble us a whit and if your masters come, we shall receive them otherwise then they think for: whereupon turning him to the three Knights of the Serpents, and their adversaries, he said unto them: Gentlemen, I know you purpose to end your difference with the sword, but the night is at hand, and me thinks, if you hold it sit, it were more expedient that you should share the honour of the justs betwixt you (which questionlesis equall to you both as yet) then to dispute it longer; your valour is too well known, for any further proof to be made of it, and the advantage which you should seek to get of one ano∣ther, would rather be a point of vanity, then a mark of glory. We are wholly at your commandement, answered one of the Knights of the Ser∣pents, wherefore if our enemies be of our mind, we will separate our selves with equall fortune; but I desire that the conditions of the justs may be ob∣served, and that the Ladies of Greece may carry away the content, to be e∣steemed the fairest of the World. Sir, answered Grian, we ow as much re∣spect to this great Emperour, and are no lesse servants to the Ladies then you, so that we shall not be very scrupulous to sign this accord, considering how fairly it is concluded: wherupon he turned about for to go and enter∣tain the Knight of the Roses, but finding him departed he was extreamly discontented, because he had not honoured him according to the merit of his vertue; neverthelesse hoping to meet him again the next day at the tur∣nament, he returned to the Palace, where every body was talking of the incomparable valour of the Knight of the Roses, of the three companions of the Serpents, and their adversaries, whom they ranked in the number of the best on the earth. The Tables having been more sumptuously served, then in the morning, the dancing began in the Hall, whilest the fair Polix∣ena
being stollen away by the Empresse Richarda, and the Infanta Rosaliana, was laid into a rich bed with the valiant Aethiopian; where we will leave them to enjoy the content which is incountred in the first embraces of two persons that unfeignedly love one another, for to prepare our selves to de∣scribe the wonderfull feats of arms which were performed the next day. CHAP. XXX. The admirable feats of arms performed at the Turnament in Constantinople by the most excellent warriors of the World: The dreadfull com∣bat between the Knight of the Roses, and him of the Palms, with the strange end thereof. THE day appearing fair and bright, the Trumpets raised the Knights, the place was in a moment covered with arms and horses, the barriers surrounded with a mul∣titude of people, the scaffolds which had been pre∣pared for the Ladies, were almost full, and every thing seemed ready for the justs, when as the Prin∣cesses of Greece went to see the beautifull Empresse of Aethiopia, who testified in the serenity of her look, though her colour was somwhat altered, that she had received content in losing the name of a maid; howbeit seeming ashamed to be found in the arms of a husband, she got her quickly out of bed, and past into another chamber, where whilest she was putting on new garments, far richer then those she wore the day before, the Ladies asked her a world of questions, which renewing the memory of the pleasure she had enjoied, made her ac∣cuse the Sun for having been too hasty to enlighten the World. At length being quite ready, she was conducted to Church with wonderfull magnifi∣cence, and from thence led back to the Palace, where dinner was short, in regard of the turnament, which in every mans opinion was like to prove a brave one; for Don Rogel to avoid the confusion which might arise from such a multitude of combattants, caused five hundred Greek Knights to en∣ter the camp at one gate, before whom the Knights of the Serpents placed themselves, together with the gentle Esquilan of Poland, who by chance was then at Constantinople; and at another a like number of strangers un∣der the conduct of Grian and his companions. These two troops equall in number, and almost in valour, being ordered according to the direction of their Commanders, and attending nothing but the sound of the trumpets; a Knight was seen to enter the Camp, whose very presence gave a good opinion of his valour. He was moun∣ted upon a great and furious Courser, whom he sat with such a grace, and in so warlike a manner, that one would have thought it had been the God of battles, appearing in this sort for to be admired of men. Every one ca∣sting their eyes upon so accomplished a Knight, who had placed himself a∣midst the two troops, as though he had had no intention to fight; it was ob∣served that his shield carried those redoubted Palms; whereupon, Prigma∣leon
turning him to Don Florisel, said: Verily, I think that most of the bra∣vest Knights of the world are assembled heer at this time, and beleeve it you shall see wonders to day if this new commer takes a side. This is he that freed us out of the Castle of Serpents, and that delivered your brother Amadis with such extraordinarie chivalrie. I vow, said Don Rogel, that I would not for the best town of this Empire misse the content of seeing him heer now, whore, if it be possible, I will requite the good office he hath done us; but I would very fain see him fight, though, by siding with nei∣ party, it seems he doth not purpose it. We shall soon be resolved of , said Prigmaleon, for this is the last sound of the trumpets, and these oops are even upon settting forth to meet one another. Heerwith, the wo squadrons dislodged with a dreadfull noise, the place was covered with a number of Knights, who were not able to support the fury of the first course; the air was darkened with the splinters of the spears, which the violence of the incounters sent up, and the earth trembled under the horses feet. The Knight of the Roses, and he of the Savage having run one against another, brake their staves even to the very ganlets, without so much as once moved for it. Brandimanda, Silverin, and two of the Knights of the Serpents, encountered in the midst of the course with equall advantage, but they which justed against the third, and the brave Esquilan of Poland, were unhorsed very easily. All then was in confusion, they were mingled one a∣mongst another, Grian cleared the ranks on the one side, the Knight of the Roses thundered every where on the other side, his companions seconded him with the like courage. The fairest Brandimanda and Silverin, over∣threw all that stood in their way, briefly the combat was equally maintai∣ned, and it seemed that the sole valour of the Chiestains, made it subsist in this manner. The strangers being all choice men, that purposely appeared there to obtain glory, seemed at the beginning to have some little advan∣tage of the Greeks; but the extream valour of the Knight of the Roses, of the Serpents, and of the brave Esquilan of Poland relieved their fainting▪ and made them shew themselves every was as strong, in such sort, that all went in equall ballance; when as the Knight of the Savage, who judged that the honor of the turnament depended on the Knight of the Roses, went to incounter him; and with his sword charged him so hotly, that he was constrained to turn head, and defend himself in stead of overthrowing his enemies, which put him into such choler, that clasping his sword fast in his hand, he discharged it very dangerously on Grians shield, who nothing amazed with that blow, advanced his blade, and let it descend so roughly on his enemies casque, that he made him see stars in stead of the Sun; how∣beit, he boasted not long of it, for the Knight of the Roses being much in∣censed, gave him another blow on his shield, with such strength, that he made him bow with his head to the pommell of his saddle. This combat continued in a gallant manner, if one struck, the other knew how to ward, and many times their swords advanced now both at one instant, and de∣scended on each others helmet with equall fury. Whilst they intreated one another thus bravely, the Knights of the Serpents, seconded by Esqui∣lan of Poland, performed wonders; they overthrew mn and horses, and became dreadfull every where: But the valiant Brandimanda and Silverin, seeing themselves opposed to these adventures, who fought with infinite courage, pressed them so close, that notwithstanding their extraordinary
valour, the Greeks by little and little were fain to give ground, which so incensed the Knight of the Roses, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it with such fury on the Knight of the Savages his head, that he overturned him on the crupper of his horse, so far from him∣self, as it was a quarter of an hour before he could recover his senses; from thence, putting himself in the front of the Greeks, he overthrew all that he met withall; in such sort, that with the aid of the valiant Knights of e Serpents, the strangers began to recoil, and then did every one expect to  them chased out of the field; when as the incomparable Knight  Palms, set spurs to his horse, and came against Esquilan of Poland,  he cast out of his saddle, do what he could to keep in it. The Princ  Greece, who were much distasted to behold him stand still, whilst the  were in action, were exceeding glad to see him enter into the combat; and of his valour by the first incounter, having so easily overthrown a Knight, whom they lightly esteemed, they all bent their eyes upon him, and per∣ceived how having drawn forth his sword, he seemed a thunderbolt that drives all into ruine. This glorious warrior, conceiving that the honour of the turnament consisted not in the multitude of men, but in the courage of the Chieftains, made head against the Knights of the Serpents, whose va∣lour he had admired, and knowing that great trees are not overturned with a little wind, or with one silly blow of an a, he displayed the force of his arm, and gave one of them such a violent blow, that he laid him in the dust senslsse, and instantly with the like fury redoubling another, he over∣threw the second on the cruppet of his horse, casting bloud out of his eyes and ears. Hereupon, the stranger re-assumed new courage, and laboured to imitate so valiant a leader, who in the mean time pursuing his victory, made such open way wheresoever he went, that the Princes of Greece were constrained to acknowledge they had never beheld the like. The Knight of the Roses, who was then in fight with Brandimanda, that had set upon him for to revenge her lover, perceiving the disorder whereinto this Knight had brought his troops, became wonderfully enaged, and gnash∣ing his teeth for anger, to see himself now in dispute for the honour of the turnament, which all mens opinion had given him before; he left Brandi∣manda, astonied with a blow, and calling for a strong lance to be brought him, he cryed to the Knight of the Palms to defend himself; whereat, urning him about, he sheathed up his sword, and withall, took the staffe which his Squire carried after him, infinitely contented to hear himself called upon by a man, whom he held to be one of the bravest and valiantest Knights of the earth, and whose gallant demeanour had filled him with wonder: settling himself then sure in his saddle, and desiring to display all the valour and addresse that he had, he set sprs to his horse, perceiving his enemy comming on, and met him in the midst of the course, with such marvellous fury, that their lances shivering into a thousand pieces, their horses recoiled three or four paces back, unable to support so terrible a shock, the Knights remaining firm in their saddles, without any shew of amazement upon so violent a carriere. O me, said Florisel then, what an incounter was this! If two towers had met with such force together, we should have seen the oh ruined, and yet these Champions appear no more moved, then if they had carried glasses in their hands. It is marvel∣lous indeed, said Spheramond, but let us see unto which of them Fortune
will give the honour of the combat, for they are going to it with their swords. Whereupon, these valorous Knights began to charge one ano∣ther, not as in a turnament, but as two, whose hatred would be the death of each other. The Knight of the Roses considering that he fought before his friends, who had alwayes shewed themselves insensible, did wonders, imployed his sword with fury, and used all the sleights that are practised in combats; but his adversary was so cunning, that if he reached him one blow, he was sure to receive another, as dangerous and weighty antly; if the one shewed himself ready and nimble, the other expressed esse agility; their blows were dreadfull, they joyned anger to force, d time so kindled their courage, that in stead of being weary, their swords were seen to descend with more violence, then at the beginning of the fight, that every minute began more terrible, to the great astonishment of the two troops, which had withdrawn themselves apart, the better to judge of this combat. The valiant Prince of Greece, who had never seen a fight main∣tained with like fury, held thse two warriors for the most redoubted, that either their times or antiquity had produced. Fowr hours being spent, without any shew of desiring to rest themselves, the ground was strewed with their armour, the bloud flowed from divers parts of their bodies, mil∣lions of sparkles flew about their ears, and as every one conceived, their forces to be alike, nothing could be expected from their rage, but dange∣rous and mortall blows. The Knight of the Roses mad, to finde such resi∣stance in one man, set both his hands to his sword, and stretching himself forth upon his stirrups, discharged it so manly on his shield, that he divided it in two, the point thereof falling with such fury on his casque, that he was constrained to strike his head against the crupper of his horse, so far from himself, that the most part of the assistants beleeved he was dead; never∣thelesse, he was seen quickly to re-settle himself up, and clasping his sword fast in his hānd, he gave his enemy such a terrible blow, that it struck the Princes of Greece into admiration, making the Knight to bow with his head to the pommell of the saddle; so astonied, that the bloud gushed out of his mouth and eyes, every one thought him to be neer dead. By my life, said Spheramond, this is one of the dreadfullest blows that ever I saw given; and if the Knight of the Roses receives many such, without all doubt he is not far from his end. I do not know, said Rogel, what wil become of this com∣bat, I see no cause the one hath to brag more then the other, for if the Knight of the Palms shews strength, he of the Roses manifests but little weaknesse. As he thus spake, Rozalmond, trāsported with rage to see himself in the state he was in, flew at his enemy, wherupon, they charged one another more fu∣riously then before, insomuch that six hours was past, & they never spake of resting themselves; the more they fought, the more courage and force they shewed: Neverthelesse, seeing the night approach, they redoubled their blows, and little regarding the trumpets, that sounded a retreat, they con∣tinued labouring to kill one another. Don Rogel, perceiving them to be so wilfully bent, descended with Lucendus and Spheramond, desiring them to part, and become friends for his sake; but their rage being uncapable of reason, they made as though they did not hear him, intreating one another more cruelly then before; howbeit, considering that at length they should be obliged to yeeld unto him, they stood up in their stirrups, and taking their swords in both their hands, they discharged them both at one time,
with such wonderfull fury, that they overthrew one another to the ground at the same instant, giving great appearance of death in their fall. This ac∣cident infinitely displeased the Princes of Greece, who held the losse of those Knights to be irrepairable, and therefore went in all haste to succour them; Spheramond to the Knight of the Roses, unto whom he bore a parti∣cular inclination, not knowing wherefore, & Lucendus to him of the Palms, unto whom he thought he was obliged, when as a damsell appeared a∣mongst them, that addressing her self unto Spheramond, said thus unto him: Excellent Prince, you do well to seek the safety of this Knight, for ∣deed he is your son, cause him presently to be caried in, and use all mea necessary to bring him to himself again; Ile take care for the other, and wil render him ere it be long, in as good case to fight as ever he was. Gentle∣woman, said Spheramond, much amazed to hear that he held his son Rozal∣mond in his arms, give us, I beseech you, the same remedy which you have promised to that Knight. His vertue deserves it, said she, and therefore I may not deny you: anoint his face and wounds with that which you shall find heer, said she, giving him a little glasse viall, and then let time work. Saying thus, she caused Alcidamant to be laid upon a blanket, which two Dwarfs carried between them, who retiring out of the prease went with him towards the wood, and entred into a shepherds cottage, where she loo∣ked so carefully to him, that within two howrs he came to himself again; but so infinitely grieved in that he had not vanquished his enemy (for he did not know that he was in as bad a state as himself) that it is likely he would have advanced his own death, had not the damsell assured him of the truth. Suffering himself then to be drest he sept till the next day, when he found himself perfectly healed, and as able to ride as ever he was; which so amazed him, that if he had not certainly remembred his former actions, he might well have been perswaded that all had been but a dream. This while some of the Princes of Greece were imploied in caressing the brave Knights of the Serpents, which were Persides, Lucibel, and Russian; and the rest laboured to bring Rozalmond to himself again; who within two howrs being some what recovered, and finding himself between a pair of sheets, and not knowing how he came there, he began to detest his wicked fortune that had not permitted him to triumph over his enemy. Shall I live, said he, with the shame of one vanquished? and that which is more, shall I dare to appear before Princes, which never learnt so base a lesson? No, I will ne∣ver survive the losse of mine honour, and the glory of the combat, which mine adversary hath carried from me. Adiu, my fairest Armazia, thou hast as just cause to abhor such a recreant, as he hath reason never to present him∣self more before thee. Whereupon throwing off the cloths, he leapt furi∣ously out of bed, took his sword which he found lying upon the table, and having drawn it forth, continued on his speech in this manner: It is fit that this blade should deprive me of life, which could not take it away from a better Knight then my self; howsoever my friends shall know that I did not want courage. There with he was running himself upon it, when as he perceived his Father comming in, unto whom his Squire had discovered this fury. His presence staid him, and falling on his knees, he said: Ah Sir! Come you to see a wretch that doth not merit the honour to be called your son; you have alwaies triumphed over all the enemies that euer have pre∣sented themselves before you, whereas I could not vanquish one single
Knight, in the presence of so many Princes that command the Empire of Arms. Oh! what a hell and vexation is this to me, and that I might be per∣mitted to revenge upon my self, the wrong I do you? Son, said Sphera∣mond, I know not what cause you have to complain, but you have this day got more honour by combatting the Knight of the Palms, then ever I did by all my past adventures; you have not prevailed over your adversary, I confsse, but he hath no advantage of you, and the estate into which you have put him is no lesse pitifull then that wherein you are; you were over∣thrown both at one instant, and the Iudges have pronounced your honour to be equall, as your forces are alike; comfort your self then, and without passion, which much abates of your judgement, consider that the destinies have not promised to let all things succeed according to our desire. Rozal∣mond weighing his fathers reasons, understanding that he was not over∣come, as he imagined, was somewhat pacified, and returning to his bed pro∣mised to afflict himself no further; but calling to mind that this Knight had deprived him of the honour of the turnament, he conceived such hatred a∣gainst him, that it was a long time before it could be rooted out of his mind, so that laying himself to rest with a resolution to be revenged on him, and rather to travell over all the World, then not to meet with him once again, he fell into so sound a sleep that he waked not till eight of the clock the next morning; at which time he arose without any pains at all of his wounds, that were so well healed as the scars of them were hardly to be discerned, whereat all the company exceedingly rejoiced, and were resolved to renew their sports in testimony of the content they received at the return of this Prince, so valorous in arms, if his departure had not prevented them, as shall be related by and by. CHAP. XXXI. Rozalmond departs secretly out of Constantinople, to pursue and one more to combat the Knight of the Palms, and the strange ad∣venture that he incountred. ROzalmonds displeasure continuing still amidst the cares∣ses which he received all that day from an infinity of Lords and Ladies, he withdrew himself somewhat betimes to his chamber, where he called to him a yong gentleman, the son of the Duke of Arbamont, whose carriage and disposition he liked well, and said unto him: Artander, so was he named, hast thou any mind to my service? Yes more, answered the yong gentleman, then to any others in the world; wherefore my Lord, you may absolutely command of me. Be secret then, said Rozalmond, and be sure that I will largely recompence thy services; the night favours the resoluti∣on I have taken to be gone from hence, for to revenge the injury I have re∣ceived from the Knight of the Palms, and I want nothing at this present but my own horse, and another for thee: Go therefore to the Stables, and find out some device to bring me out two unto the well gate, that we may travel
abroad to see the world a little. Now verily, answered the Squire, this is as I desired, and all the favours that possibly might be done me, could not be comparable to so sweet a commandement as this. Arm your self, my Lord, and beleeve it you shall not want horses. Whereupon going to the Stables, he took two extraordinary horses, and went presently with them to the place appointed, where Rozalmond straightway met him wonderfully well satisfied to see himself at liberty. Getting to horse then he rode all night, and made such haste that he was ten leagues from Constantinople, when as every body thought him to be still asleep. I will not stand heer to declare the grief the Princes of Greece were in, when he was missing in his chamber, much lesse speak of the adventures which befell Persides, Lucibel of France, Russian of Media, Esquilan of Poland, and others that put them∣selves in quest of him; but referring this discourse to some other time, I wil assure you that having taken a little rest in a shepherds cottage whilest his horses grased, he travelled on, choosing the most unusuall waies, because he would not be sound, if pe adventure he was followed and sought after. Where fore being gotten into a forrest the way which he took, brought him by that time it was night into a place so obscured by the thicknes of the trees, that he could not see a whit, whereby he was constrained for fear of falling into some precipice to alight, to unbridle his horses, and to lay him down upon the grasse in expectation of the next day. Armazia comming then into his mind, his passion carried him to complain in this maner: Un∣happy Knight, why dost thou absent thee from so fair a sun, to live thus in darknes? The desire of glory deprives thee of a sovereign felicity; in the mean time thou dost nothing that can excuse thy absence; one Knight ar∣rests thy ambition, opposes thy conquests, and takes the lawrell from thy head to appropriate it to his valour. It is true indeed that the grief heerof ought to kill thee, but thou must live to be revenged, and thou art to under∣take nothing till that be decided to thy contentment, since so to do thou hast abandoned all thy friends. Whereupon his anger increasing with the ha∣tred that he bore to the Knight of the Palms, he wished for day, that he might go seek him out; howbeit as he turned him on the other side the bet∣ter to rest himself, he perceived a little glimps of light to shoot thorow the trees; at first he was somewhat amazed, as unable to imagin from whence it should proceed, nevertheles, he presently start up, and listned attentively, but meeting with nothing but silence, he went very softly towards certain trees, which Nature had planted in maner of a round, so neer together that they even touched one another, except one place which seemed to be re∣served for to give an entrance to this cabinet, and saw by the light of a torch two damsels, the one laid upon the grasse leaning with her cheek on her left hand, which was bedewed with the tears that trickled from her eies, and the other reading of a letter; the noise which he made treading on some leaves, having easily been overheard by her that was reading, she suddenly de∣manded, who goes there? Gentlewoman, answered Rozalmond, It is a Knight arrested in this wood by the night, and that would willingly do you service if it lay in his power. Come in, saies she no whit abashed, and let us see what you are. Rozalmond advancing then saluted her very curteously, receiving the like entertainment from the damsell, who seeing him carry so brave a presence said unto him: Sir, let me intreat you to fit eer down by me on the grasse with as little noise as you may, for fear of waking this gen∣tlewoman,
whose grief doth seldome permit her to ke such good rest. Your fair demeanour doth oblige me to render the tediousnes of the night lesse irksom to you by some pleasing discourse, the occasion I will draw from this paper in my hand, sent to this Gentlewoman by the most ingrate∣full man of the world; you shall hear the contents, and then I will acquaint you with the particulars, whereupon she read thus: Clerastes Letter to Carinda. I Held it no little glory to be beloved of you, nor did I think any delight on the earth comparable to that which I found in your caresses, but since you deride them, and that the ambition triumph ver a King, hath made you false to my affection, I must tell you Carinda, that I will sigh no longer for you, but will for ever quit you, and live for some other that will be more faithfull. Men often seek excuses for their malice, and they will take hold of the least occasions to serve their turns, as you may perceive by this traitor, cal∣led Clerastes, who seigning some jealousie, hath made this Gentlewoman, whom you behold heer, the miserablest creature in the World. He is the King of Florertans favourite, and in his grace hath found more wealth and dignity then he hath deserved; she was neer unto the Queen, cherished by her out of the consideration of her merits, and was likely to have  with some good fortune, had not this man undone her. Her beauty, wherof you may judge still, though it be much  by her affliction, having made a deep impression in the heart of this gallant, she was adored by him for a time with exceeding respect, his actions wre full of love, his wos assu∣red his captivity, his sighes testifid a violent passion; nor was there any day seen to passe without some proof rendred of his affection: these devoirs joined to the place he held in Court, at length forced Carinda, so is she na∣med, to entertain some liking to him, which by little and little converting into Love left her no poer over her self. If Cleraster heart were all ire, hers was notices i he suffered, she was not at rest; if e adore her, she ido∣latized him; if he gave her kisses▪ she was not back ward to render him the like. What should I say more  othing was wanting to their desires, but oppornity, whereupon she hah ecourse to that affection which I have lwaies born her, opens hr heart  me, and lling me that Clerastes wou marry her, prs me to acilia the means that they might meet without suspition.  nothing more then her good, I rreated her to consider well what she did, and not lightly to cast her self away: I put her in mind of  inconstancy, of the dissimulation they commonly use to bring their desires to passe; but seeing her resolved, I suffered Clerastes to come, who cleared  of all doubt by the solemn promise which he made her  my presence, for to marry her so soon as he could obtain licence of the King; leaving them together then to the liberty of their actions, I ab∣sented my self for two or three hors; at the end whereof causing them to par, I promised to give them the same accommodation whensoever Ca∣rinda could meet. Fowr months past in this manner, with all the content that two lovers could enjoy, nothing wanting but the day wherein a happy mariage might render their ibraces legitimate. But ! I saw allthings
in disorder, when I thought them most sure; for Carinda being every way very amiable, the King fell in love with her, who taking pleasure in his pas∣sion one day discovered himself unto her, desiring she would give him some case to his pain. She was much amazed with the discourse of this Prince, and her affection to Clerastes commanded her to return him but a sharp an∣swer; neverthelesse considering what respect she ought to use both in her speech and cariage towards him, she modestly replied, that she could not be so vain as to beleeve, that she was able to triumph over a Prince, who knew well how to vanquish his enemies, and not to yeeld to any body, so that this demand being but to prove her discretion she hoped to make it alwaies ap∣pear to him, that she would never be failing therein. Some would have been driven away with this answer, and for spite would have dispised a cru∣ell ingratefull woman, but it wrought a contrary effect in this Prince, who finding more glory in the difficulty, never left praying and importuning; every day she had a Page, letters were continually walking, there was no spare of presents, but firm in her affection she made no reckoning of all these things, because she would not offend against her Lover. Only one fault she committed, which was that she made him not acquainted with this pursuit; for if she had, without doubt he had proceeded in another fashion, and never been so wickedly transported with jealousie. Clerastes then ha∣ving upon a time found his Mistris Cabinet open, chanced to fall upon cer∣tain papers, amongst the which by ill fortune were the two last letters which the King had sent to Carinda, wherewith he was wonderfully astonished. Hath Carinda said he, being gone out to walk in the garden, hath Carinda intelligence with the King, and doth she thus forget the vowes she hath so often made me? Ah I will never indure it, Ile change as she doth, and cea∣sing to love her, I will not be a rivall to him, to whom I am indebted for all my fortunes. And this she shall know, that she may not say I have left her without reason, or that I am ingratefull. In the heat heerof going to his chamber, without any further deliberation, he wrot these lines, which com∣ming to the hands of this poor gentlewoman, it so afflicted her that she fell into a swown, out of the which with much ado being brought, she brake out into all those lamentations which a deceived maid might justly make. I had been the secretary of her pleasures, and so I was of her complaints, and misfortune; she came to me, and shedding a river of tears she obliged me to talk with this faithles man, and fully inform him of the truth of the busines, but he rejected all that I could say, shewed me the Kings letters, and swea∣ring he would not be perswaded that ever it was done without some affecti∣on on her part, he willed me to tell Carinda that she should seek her another husband, an answer that reduced this poor creature to such dispair, as aban∣doning the Court under pretence of going to visit her friends, she departed out of the Kingdome with me in her company, who could not find in my heart to let her go alone; and she is resolved to travell every day a little un∣till she hath found out some desert to her mind, where she purposeth to spend the rest of her life in complaining against the ingratitude of her Lo∣ver. Behold Sir, the occasion both of the tears which you see standing on her cheeks, and of our voiage; so that if you had as much pity of her case, as you have promised me assistance, you will counsell her to change her de∣termination. That I will indeed, said Rozalmond, I will advise her unto it, and if she please to make use of me to be revenged of this disloiall man, that
upon a simple supposition forsakes her after such powerfull obligations, I will promise her his head. I do not think she will consent to that, said the damsell, but of these extremities we will chuse that which shall be most expedient. Herewith Carinda, awaking, was much amazed to see so good∣ly a Knight talking with Darimella (so was the secretary of her love named) but growing somewhat more confident, with a pleasing voice she said unto him: Sir, how came you thus to arrive in a place so full of horrour, heer to behold the wretchedest maid now living? Fortune, that conducts such as make the same profession I do, answered he, hath brought me hither, it may be for your good, for having understood what cause you have to com∣plain of the ingratitude of a man which hath deceived you, I am most rea∣dy to right you upon him, with his destruction. My resentment, replied she, is not so strong, but that it yeelds to the love which still I bear to this disloiall, and will not permit me to desire his death; my absence peradven∣ture hath made him acknowledge his fault, and therefore I purpose so far to imbrace your noble curtesie, as to return with you to the Kingdom of Florertan, where we may govern our selves according as occurrences shall fall out; in the mean season, please you to take your rest untill the morning, at which time, my companion and I will be ready to wait upon you. I am desirous in all things to obey you, said Rozalmond, so bidding them good night, he retired to his Squire, and laid him down upon the grasse to sleep. CHAP. XXXII. Rozalmond arrives in the Kingdom of Florertan with Carinda, findes out Clerastes, and marries them together. THE singing of a multitude of birds declaring the day, rather then the Sun, whose beams were not able to pierce thorow the thicknesse of those trees, Rozal∣mond arose, and repairing to the damsels, they moun∣ted all on horsback, and travelled together for the space of fowr dayes without meeting any adventure, at the end whereof, comming to the sea side, they im∣barked themselves for the kingdom of Florertan: Fifteen dayes being sweetly spent in this navigation, during the which Ro∣zalmond had generously slain two Giants, which would have made them∣selves Masters of their ship, they arrived at the desired Port; and causing their horses to be landed, they entered upon their journey, having first changed their habits, to be unknown, that so they might without suspicion learn what was said at Court of the flight of these two damsels. Having rode all day long, then they turned aside unto certain houses which they espied on the left hand, with a purpose to lodge there; when as they met a Squire, who staying to observe them, because their apparell and arms were strange, Rozalmond said unto him: Sweet heart, I could wish you would do me the curtesie to tell me some news of this countrey, the name whereof I do not know, as also, whither you go, and from whence you
came to day. Your fair demeanour, answered the Squire; obliges me to satisfie you in few words; you are in the kingdom of Florertan, neer to the Capitall city thereof, called Valderic; there is no great news stirring, for the King by his wisdom maintains all in peace; as for the occasion of my journey, I think I shall not give you much satisfaction in relating it, I am going to seek a Gentlewoman of this Countrey, who hath not been heard of these two moneths. What is her name, said Rozalmond? Carin∣da, answered the Squire; as fair as any in this Kingdom, but unhappy, in loving a man, that now dies with grief, for building her dispair upon a false opinion. Explain your self a little, I pray you, said Rozalmond, and disco∣ver this matter more clearly unto me. That can I easily do, answered the Squire, Clerastes and (so is he called of whom I speak) loved Carinda, Ca∣rinda no lesse affected him, each joyed in the other, and now both expect∣ing the hour that should fully make up their happinesse, when as fortune would needs divide two united hearts; the King of Florertan became ena∣mored of Carinda, solicites her a thousand wayes, by speech, by letters, and by the charms of presents: Neverthelesse, this maid firm in affection to her lover, never yeelds to his desires, but wisely defends her self; how∣beit, she kept some letters written unto her by the King, rather out of vani∣ty, I am perswaded, then any inclination she had to cherish any thing that came from him; which falling afterwards into Clerastes hands, rendred him so jealous, that without further informing himself of the businesse, he sent Carinda word that he would love her no longer; whereat the poor maid fell into such dispair, as she quite abandoned this Countrey, at least∣wise must think so; for Clerastes having caused her to be sought in vain, even to the uttermost parts of Florertan, it is presumed that she is not in it. Why does he seek for her now, said Rozalmond, since he does not care for her? Excuse me, Sir, said the Squire, he loves her more then ever he did, and her absence hath made him see that he was jealous without a cause; for having been surprised by the King in his complaints against the inconstan∣cie of women, his Majestie assured him, that she had alwayes with an un∣tainted modestie refused his affection; howbeit, desiring to be further cleared, presuming that the King out of his discretion, and to preserve her reputation, might be drawn to make these protestations, he sent for an old inchantresse, who for a summe of money, made him behold in a glasse, all the actions which Carinda had done in her life; amidst the which, obser∣ving nothing but respect in the Kings suit to her, he condemned his rash humour, and blaming himself for having been so credulous and cruell, he wrote a letter full of amorous lines, tending all to asking of pardon; caused forty or fifty copies to be made, and giving them to severall messengers, he sent them to all parts of the Kingdom; but hearing no news of her, he had recourse unto the said inchantresse, who told him that he shall meet with her at a time when he least hopes for it, and counselled him in the mean space, to have some still watching at the sea ports; which is the rea∣son, that amongst others, I am now going by his commandment to wait there in expectation of some good fortune for him that way. This said, he spurred on, leaving Carinda as much contented, as she had been troubled all the time of his discourse. What say you to this, Madam, said Rozal∣mond? Do not you beleeve now, that after a tempest follows a calm, and that there is no bitternesse but is accompanied with some sweet? Yes, an∣answered
she, with a smiling countenance, I confesse, that the Gods do give us blessings after crosses, and that they recompense our miseries with contentments; but I feel a new care arising, and know not how I should present my self at Court; for to write to Clerastes, I do not hold it fit, and still to conceal my self is not the way to my happinesse: What shall I do in this case? Madam, answered Rozalmond, leave this to me, I beseech you, I will so carry things, that you shall have as great cause to commend me, and when Clerastes understands of your return, it shall be for your glory. By this time, being come to a village, they were kindly entertained by a rich shepherd, who having given them a good supper, prepared two chambers for them to lie in; but Rozalmond having another designe in his head, desired the shepherd to ride along with him, and leaving Artander behinde him, caused him to conduct him to Valderic; where arriving very early in the morning, he went to the Court, and there enquired for Clera∣stes, who being awake, was informed by his Squire, that a man armed at all points required to speak with him. Let him come in, said he, for he comes not so early but upon some important occasion. Whereupon, Ro∣zalmond entring the chamber, and finding Clerastes out of his bed in his night-gown, he said unto him: Sir, get on your clothes, and, as I am, arm your self, that I may receive satisfaction for the wrong you have done Ca∣rinda, in refusing to acknowledge her for your wife, after you have obtained all your desires of her under a promise of marriage. Alas, Sir! answered he, I would to God she were heer, and then we should enter into no quar∣rell upon this occasion; for there is nothing grieves me so much, as that I cannot discharge my duty in that regard. Are you resolved to give her all content, said Rozalmond? Yes verily, answered he, and if you knew what I suffered since I fell into that fault, you would rather pity then destroy me. Follow me then without more delay, said Rozalmond, and I shall quickly make you happy, since you will become an honest man, as I was ready to have spoiled you, if you had persisted in your malice, for Carinda is hard by. Is my Carinda hard by said Clerastes? Ah Sir, how am I obliged to you! Come, bring me my clothes, and let one saddle an horse for me. Whereupon, having suddenly made himself ready, he rode away with Ro∣zalmond, unto whom he gave a million of thanks by the way, and they made such speed, that within five or six hours they arrived at the shepherds house; where at the first approach, Clerastes fell on his knees before Carin∣da, and made demonstration of his true repentan, with a world of sighes and tears, whereof Carinda was so sensible, that with the love besides which she loved him, it was impossible for her to complain any further; a thousand kisses signed their accord, and their return to the City was in∣stantly concluded; where their nuptialls were celebrated, to the great con∣tent of all the Court, especially of the King, who admiring the goodly per∣son of Rozalmond, received him very graciously, and honoured him as if he had been well acquainted with his worth.
CHAP. XXXIII. Rozalmond maintaining the Iusts in the Kingdome of Florertan, combats and vanquishes a Giant with much honour and glory. CArinda's return brought exceeding content to the whole Court, where her vertue had rendred her of such e∣steem, that the yong Knights presented themselves be∣fore the King, and besought him he would be pleased to permit some of them to maintain with the lance that they deserved the favour of their Ladies, and that the next day a turnament might be held, the prize wherof should be a crown of lawrell to be given by the Queen unto the Conquerour, with some other present befitting his courage and worth. By the faith of a Prince, answered the King, your enterprise seems so noble unto me, that I could find in my heart to be one of the party, but that I purpose to be the Iudge thereof, and observe who shall behave him self best; wherefore I authorize you to order it as you shall think good. The Knights having obtained their desire, withdrew themselves, caused Lists to be prepared with all expedition, and giving direction for fitting of their arms, enriching their helmets, furnishing their horses, and the rest of their equipage; they went into their Mistresses, and craved some favours of them whereby they might be obliged to combat with the more courage and better successe. Each one was well pleased, and all in generall wished that the Knight of the Roses, by every one so esteemed, would make one. The Queen who could not behold him without affection, desired it much more then all the rest, and therefore could willingly had intreated him ther∣unto, but not knowing well how to acquaint him with her mind, she was much troubled; nevertheles enforced by her desire, she called Carinda unto her, and making shew of intreating her with some discourse, she fell to speak of the justs which were to be made the next day in honour of her nuptials; and demanded of her, as it were by chance, whether the Knight of the Ro∣ses would combat in favour of the Ladies of the Court, or of the strangers. Madam, answered Carinda, I do not think he means to be on any side, either in the justs, or turnament, which are devised only by your Courtiers for to shew their courage; but if your Majesty desire to see what he can do, upon notice of your pleasure, without doubt he will soon give your Majesty that satisfaction; and think himself happy that he may receive your commands. I would be loath to shew my self uncivill, said the Queen, not knowing what quality this Knight is of, but truly I very much long to see whether the effect be answerable to the bravery of his presence and demeanour. Madam, said Carinda, leave this care to me, Ile oblige him thereunto with∣out more ado; looking about then, and perceiving him not far from her, she winked to him, whereupon he approaching with a great deal of respect unto the Queen, she said unto him: Sir, will you be one of them that runs to morrow? Alas Madam! answered he, I am not so fortunate to be belo∣ved, and therefore have no purpose to be of this amorous troop; howbeit
if you please to command me, I shall soon alter my resolution, and obey you. Why then, said the Queen with a little blush, I am contented to be your Mistris to morrow, and to behold you there as my Knight. Madam, answered he, bowing himself very low for to kisse her hands, I shall never merit such glory; but seeing you are pleased to make me capable of it, I wil not refuse this honour; wherefore you shall see me there amongst the fore∣most, and if I perform any thing worthy of regard, beleeve Madam, it will proceed meerly from your favour. I am quite of another opinion, answe∣red she, for if fortune proves contrary unto you, I shall attribute it to the defects which every one acknowledgeth to be in me. He would have re∣plied, but the King comming out of his cabinet called him unto him, and not dreaming of his wives desire, asked him whether he would be of the number of the Combattants. Sir, answered he, I might justly be condem∣ned if I should sit still whilst others were at so noble an exercise. I am ve∣ry glad of it, said the King, and if you want any thing, you have the power to command it. Rozalmond having given him very humble thanks with∣drew himself, leaving the Courtiers wonderfully well contented with this resolution of his. The next day appearing, the Trumpets awaked the Knights, the town was full of arms and horses, the place was covered with people, and the chalengers (two of the chiefest of the Realm) attended no∣thing but the presence of the King, who having made a slight dinner, pla∣ced himself at the window, and saw that the first course was much for the advantage of the undertakers, who continuing their victory laid two and twenty Knights on the ground, without so much as being once moved, ac∣quiring such glory that most part of the assistants cried them up already for conquerours. Whilest they had just occasion to rejoice in their valour, the Knight of the Roses arrived in the place, with so gallant and martiall a coun∣tenance, that the people began to clap their hands, as it were congratulating the victory, which he had not yet obtained. The Count Folsue, one of the chalengers, took a fresh horse, and choosing out a great and strong lance he ran with such a grace that he brake it very bravely in peeces, finding asmuch resistance as if he had met with a tower, but not able to support the fury of his adversaries lance, he was overthrown so rudely, that he made two or three turns in the dust, so much astonished as he was fain to be taken up. His companion having beheld this rough incounter, would gladly have been e∣xempted from his course, but not to lose the honour, which he had gene∣rously gained through cowardise, he spurd on against him, breaking as the former had done, and as infortunate as he, was thrown three or fowr paces beyond the crupper of his horse. Whereupon Rozalmond put himself in their place, and opposing all such as presented themselves, he laid eight and fifty on the earth, with such wonder to the King, so infinite content to the Queen, and great amazement of all the people, that every one strived who might most magnifie him. The King then having declared him conqueror, in regard no man appeared against him, the most part of those whom he had overthrown ranged themselves on his fide for to conduct him in triumph to the Palace, when as a damsell presented her self, accompanied with one of the greatest and most formidable Giants of the world, who making his way as he came, said with an horrible voice: Let no man think to part from hence with the glory of Conquerour, unles he will confesse this Lady to be fairer then his mistris, for otherwise Ile put you all to the sword. Proud
Knight, answered Rozalmond, on whom all mens eies were fixed, dost thou think to perform what thou so vainly boastest to do? There is not the mea∣nest Knight heer, but can take thy head from thy shoulders, whereas thou presumest to defeat them all, as if they were a company of fearfull women, thou deceivest thy self insolent creature; and to testifie that we make no re∣koning of thee, take the field, and let us see thy valour, otherwise then in bravadoes. O ye Gods! said then the Giant, do you permit one only Knight to be so daring as to outrage me with injuries? I vow I wilbe reven∣ged on you, and all the assistance you can give him shall not keep him from being cut in a thousand pieces. Saying so, he turned about to take the field, leaving all the assistants more amazed at Rozalmonds confidence, then to be∣hold so dreadfull a monster. His Course was very dangerous; for the girths not being strong enough to endure so rude an encounter, Rozalmond saw himself upon the ground, with his saddle betwixt his legs; but the Gi∣ant found himself laid in the dust with a deep wound in his side; which possessing him with more anger then fear, made him rise much enraged, and charged the Knight so terribly, that every minute his death was expected; nevertheles, when they beheld how he displaid his force, and that he drew bloud of his enemy, they were of another opinion. His blows were delive∣red with such infinite fury, that the place was strewed with pieces of the Giants armour, and the fire flying out of his helmet and cuirace, made men judge that the Knight would carry away the victory. At length three quar∣ters of an howr being spent, Rozalmond vext at such resistance, raised him∣self in his stirrups, and advancing his sword, he let it fall with such strength that he cleft him to the very teeth, sending him stark dead to the earth with no lesse noise then if it had been a Towr overthrown by Lightning. Wher∣upon the people with a world of acclamations extolled him to the heavens, conducted him to the Palace with as much magnificence as if one of their Gods had been descended unto them; and leaving him at the feet of their King, who received him with unspeakable content, they went to make bonefires for joy of the death of this Giant, the scourge of the Realm, and the terror of the neighbouring Provinces.
CHAP. XXXIV. The Queen of Florertan offers her selfe to Rozalmond, the answer which he makes. ALl things were disposed to pleasure, the King of Florer∣tan to the acknowledgement of the obligations wher∣in he stood ingaged to the valour of Rozalmond, and the Queen to the affection wherunto she was constrai∣ned by the rare perfection which she found in him; nothing was spoken of, but of the beauty, vertue, goodly personage, and gallant grace of this brave stranger, who was beheld with wonder and astonish∣ment. Whilest the most amorous were entertaining their mistrisses, those that were free from that passion thought fit to desire the Knight of the Ro∣ses, that he would not enter into the turnament, which was to begin the next morning; addressing themselves then unto him, one in the behalf of the rest said: Noble Sir, you have this day given such powerfull proof of your valour, that your name shall ever live in the memory of men, especi∣ally of those of this Kingdome, where Altars are justly to be reared unto you; so that having no need to signalize your self any further for to make you more renowned amongst us, we humbly beseech you that you will not arm your self for to combat in the turnament; for we yeeld you the glory of it before hand, well knowing that we are not able to acquire any honor but in imitating of you. By the faith of a Prince, said the King, laying his hand on Rozalmonds shoulder, they have reason to make this request unto you; and if you will oblige me, you shall to morrow be judge of the blows. Sir, answered Rozalmond, I did not run but by your commandment, neither will I combat, since it is your pleasure I shall not. Heerupon all the Knights dividing themselves made an equall party of an hundred against an hun∣dred, and so going to order their affairs, they left Rozalmond with the King, who finding himself somewhat indisposed, bad the Knight good night, and got him to bed, where he entertained the Queen with extolling the excel∣lencies of this stranger. This Princesse hearing him so highly commended, received the character which Love had imprinted in her heart, and unable to resist her desires she said: Why should not I affect a man, whom even men themselves seem passionately to love? and who would condemn me if my thoughts should chance to be known? My weaknes would easily find excuses in the merits of this Knight; he shall understand then that I love him, and seeking mine own satisfaction, amidst the content which he is to attend from my caresses, I will recompence the travell he hath undergone for me, entring into the justs as my Knight; and to give a beginning to this design, I will oblige him by a present that shall be far greater and rarer then I would have bestowed on any other which had remained victorious. This resolution seeming to quiet her thoughts, she slept till morning, when she caused a crown of lawrell to be made, wreathed about with a chain of pearl, of very great price, the end whereof was closed up with a diamond of in∣estimable
valew, and giving it to a damsell whom she had chosen for the se∣cretary of her desires, to the end she should present it from her to the Knight she commanded her carefully to observe with what countenance he recei∣ved it. This wench too well instructed with her Ladies wil, went and found out the Knight before he was fully ready, and making a very low obeisance unto him, she said: Brave Warrior, my Mistris meeting with no recom∣pence worthy of your invincible courage, hath commanded me to present you this lawrell, with a certain assurance of more if you be willing to de∣serve it. This present proceeding from the hand of so fair a Queen, answe∣red he, much exceeds my expectation; but I will strive to render her grea∣ter services, that she may not repent her of her liberality: please you then to return her my humble thanks, and to tell her, that I will most charily keep this lawrell for her sake, and that she shall never be willing to imploy me, but that she shall find me very readily disposed to obey her command∣ments. The damsell returning with this so favourable an answer, gave the Queen unspeakable content, who finding it according to her desire, trickt up her self with all the art she possibly could use to make her appear more beautifull; and indeed she went forth so curiously drest, that she seemed not to be the same she was the day before. The sacrifices done, the King after a short dinner was placed at a window with Rozalmond, and the Queen hard by at another; but unable to endure the esloignment of her Knight, she tur∣ned to the King, and with a grace that could give no suspition, she said unto him: Sir, this Knight was not born for you alone, lend him me a little that he may inform me which are the valiantest Knights amongst our Courtiers. In good faith little one, answered the King, your request is so reasonable, that I am willing to quit his company, though I very much desire it, for to give you satisfaction. Wherefore go, said he, deer friend, and content the curiosity of this woman. Whereupon Rozalmond making a very low obei∣sance unto him, went to the Queens window, who seeing him so neer her, could not chuse but change colour, being much perplexed in that she knew not how to discover her thoughts unto him, at length vanquished by her passion, she said pointing to the comabttants: Perceive you not, Sir, how our Courtiers blows are not delivered with so good a grace as they parted from your hand; I considered yesterday your addresse, the admirable strength of your arm, and I wondred how the Gods could impart so much force to a mortall wight, but I was no lesle displeased, when I saw that in∣solent Giant arrive, my bloud congealed in my veins, and the fear I had of your danger, left me neither colour nor motion, beholding you resolved for the combat. Madam, answered he, these were the effects of the good∣nes of your sweet disposition, which made you doubt the losse of that which is yours. Mine, said she, O Gods! that this speech were true, I should then think my self far happier then I am. Madam, said he, I cannot beleeve that ever you had any just cause hitherto to charge me with disobeing your com∣mands. I do not accuse you, my Knight answered she, but we will talk of this another time, for this is not a place proper for it; well, what is your o∣pinion of these Knights? That they combat bravely, said he, but those that questionles will carry away the honour of the turnament, are they which maintained the justs yesterday; for see you not how their enemies are in dis∣order, and that they had got on the better part of the field. Their blows are stronger then the others, their addresse greater, and their fight more
lively. Heerwith Count Folsuc having overthrown the adverse chief, the rest were chased out of the field, and the turnament ended with exceeding content to the King, who approaching the Queen, said unto her: Now Ma∣dam, will you render me this Knight again? It is equall, said she, that you should have him in your turn; but let me not live, I had taken no great plea∣sure in the sight if he had not let me understand the valour of these Knights, more by discourse, then by that which I observed. The King laughing heerat took the Knight by the hand, and led him to walk in a gallery, where he intertained him till supper, which was not long; for the King feeling his old indisposition, withdrew suddenly, to the extream grief of some Cour∣tiers, and infinite content to the Queen, who not to lose this opportunity, sent Rozalmond word, that she would speak with him. This Knight knowing but too well by her former speeches whereto her purpose tended, would not willingly have been present with her in a place, which might favour her designe; howbeit, not daring to refuse, he fol∣lowed the damsell, and beholding the Queen alone sitting on her beds feet, he advanced very modestly, and with a grace able to strike any heart in love, he wished her a good night. It will be the sweetest, answered she, so as you will correspond to my desire: Knight, I love you, and all the re∣sistance I could make was not able to preserve me from the charms of your so excellent parts, I am compelled to blush, but I finde so much excuse for my fault, that I can speak this without shame; you see an effect of your merit, and not of my weaknesse, as peradventure you may conceive. Think of the favour is presented to you, and be not precipitious in your answer; but first consider, that it is a Queen which intreats you, a woman fair e∣nough to enamour a God, and one that it may be loves you more then all the world besides. Madam, said he, with a confident countenance, pardon me, I beseech you, if I answer otherwise then you desire, I should commit many irreproveable faults in this action, I should be a traitour, and unworthy the favours which the King hath conferred on me, I should incur assured death if ever it were known, as well it might be by any the least accident, I should wrong you in stead of honouring and serving you, I should incense the Gods, who are grievous punishers of adulteries, and should lose that good opinion which your people have of me, who cannot beleeve that I am capable of so great a wickednesse. Madam, make some other use of me, and do not ruine me under colour of loving me; the pleasure you de∣sire, is so soon past, that we are not to offend for so momentany a delight; let us shew our government then, in commanding over our selves therein; Madam, I beseech you, said he, falling on his knees, force your self so far, as to desire the contrary of that which you demand, and do not think that it is out of ingratitude that I give you this good counsell, I had too much understanding not to acknowledge the honour you do me, but you are also to consider, that I have more respect and fidelity to your service, then to undo you in stead of giving you content. Your reasons, said she, with a countenance that testified her displeasure, are so weak, that not taking them in good paiment, I will study how I may clear my self otherwise out of these toiles, wherefore get you gone, and remember how much you have neglected me to day. Whereupon, Rozalmond with a most humble obei∣sance departing, retired to his chamber, extreamly vext at that which had past; and resolving not to stay long in that Court, he got him to bed, where
after he had made a thousand turns, with strange unquietnesse, he slept till the next day; when as he had such a good morrow, as shall be related in the next Chapter. CHAP. XXXV. The Queen of Florertan incensed with Rozalmonds refusall, would have caused him to be murdered, the marvellous slaughter which he makes of his enemies, and his departure from Court. WHat will not the neglect of a womans affections do? It ordinarily filleth her heart with anger, her mind with rage, and disposeth all her actions to murther, where∣of we have a world of examples in antiquity; and not to go so far, we see our own times full of acci∣dents, which the madnes of women in that kind hath rendred most tragicall. This incensed Queen seeing her Knight gone, at first had recourse unto her tears, but thinking that unprofitable, and unfit for the resentment of an offence so great, she wiped her eies, and walking up and down very fast in her cham∣ber, she said: Shall I be so simple as to afflict my self thus for one that is in∣gratefull? Nay rather let me remember that his refusall obliges me to grea∣ter matters? I must seek his death with more passion then ever I have done his caresses; shew that it is not a Queen intreating, but revenging; a Lover languishing in expectation of her desire, but a woman that receives not an affront without a home resentment of it; and that will make it appear that dispite hath more power in her soul, then all the flames of a childish God. Whereupon causing one to be sent for, whose wicked disposition she very well knew, she gave him a round sum of money, and enjoined him to sur∣prise and stab the Knight of the Roses the next day, wheresoever he could meet with him. Madam, said this cursed wretch, I do not desire to know what cause of displeasure you have against him; sufficeth it that I go upon your commandment; his last howr is at hand, and I assure your Majesty that you shall have the satisfaction you require, I the glory of serving you faith∣fully, and he the punishment which he hath deserved; for I have those that will help to do the feat. Heerwith he departed the chamber, leaving the Queen ready to go to bed, wherein she was no sooner laid, but the Secreta∣ry of her affections, who more advisedly considered the event of things, went directly to Rozalmonds chamber, where finding his Squire at the door, she advertised him of the mischief was preparing for his Master. Gentle∣woman, answered Artander softly, my master is very much indebted to your pity, and his condition is not so poor, but that you may expect more good from him in a day, then your mistris can do you in all your life; but beleeve it, if any man dare attempt him upon this occasion, he shall not so easily escape, as he imagins. I shall acquaint him with the busines, and take my word it shall never be known that you discovered it. Saying so, he went into his chamber after he had made the outter door sure, and arising by break of day he laid his masters arms upon the table, which observed by
Rozalmond that slept not, he asked him what he did. Why preparing, an∣swered he, for your departure, because you cannot stay longer heer, with∣out apparant danger of your life. Then he declared, how the Queen would have him killed, and that the Captain of her Guard had undertaken to do it. Now by my life, said Rozalmond, I could never have beleeved that a wo∣man could have been so urious, and that neglect could have carried her to such tragicall actions; but since it is so, I must prevent it as I may: Come help me up, and then go and see my horses be ready against such time as I have taken my leave of the King. Whereupon, being wholly armed, and descen∣ding into the Palace Court-yard, for to bid Clerastes and his beautifull Ca∣rinda farewell, he met with him that sought for him, and seconded by threescore men, assailed our Knight; who having drawn his sword, dis∣charged his first blow upon the Captain, knowing him to be the authour of the disorder, and he struck him so dangerously, that he divided his head in twain; and from thence, putting himself amongst the rest, he scattered them in a strange manner. The noise increasing, the whole Court was in an uproar, and every man rose to see what the matter was; Clerastes, whose lodging was not far off, looked also out of his window, and perceiving his friend in such danger, he presently armed himself, and went forth with di∣ligence to his succour, where finding this troop to be the Queens Guard, he cryed to them: Rogues, how dare you assault this Knight? By my life, Ile have you all hanged; but they neither regarding him, nor his words, he joined himself to the valiant Knight of the Roses, that seemed a thunder∣bolt amongst these rascals; whereof, he laid twenty three dead on the ground: and seconding him with a marvellous courage, three parts of this multitude was diminished; when as the King, being advertised of this hur∣ly burly, descended in his night-gown, and commanded a surcease. At his presence every one withdrew, and he going to the Knight of the Roses, demanded of him the cause of this quarrell. Sir, said he, you may well ima∣gine that I could not be the authour of it, being a stranger, who durst not be so hardy, as foolishly to fight with your subjects, had it not been to defend my life; but the Law permitting us, without any respect, to kill such as endeavour to murder us, I hope your majestie wil not be offended at their deaths: I never saw them before to my knowledge, so that having done them no displeasure, I wonder what should move them to go about to take away my life. I remembered the last night that I had ingaged my self for the execution of an adventure, to the performance whereof, being resolved to go, and making account to depart assoon as your Majestie had been stir∣ring, and that I had received the honour of your commandments, as I was to take my leave of Clerastes, all these folks invironed me with their swords drawn, charged me most furiously, without saying wherefore, Sir, we bear arms for our own preservation, and am sorry that I have made use of them against such as appertain unto you; but your Highnesse knows, as I said even now, that it is lawfull to repell force with force; in which regard, I hope your Majestie will not take it ill, that I have saved my self by their losse. Not I, said the King, but by the faith of a Prince am well pleased with that you have done; and to make this good to you, I will hang up all those which your fury hath left alive, for I will have your person as much respected heer as mine own, nor hath Clerastes ever done me such service as now, in succouring you, though you had no great no need of it. Sir, said
Clerastes, being so infinitely obliged to this Knight, and knowing that your Majestie loves him, I armed my self in this sort, for to run his fortune: wherein, if I have done any thing against the respect which I ow to your service, by laying hands on such as belong to the Queen, I humbly beseech your pardon. No, no, said the King, you have done me a singular pleasure in it; but come, let us go to my chamber, in the mean time let these gal∣lants be carried to prison, for to teach them not to undertake any thing, but by order. Sir, said Rozalmond, I am ready to depart, please it your Majestie to do me the honour that I may receive your commandments. Now on my faith, answered the King, this sudden departure of yours troubles me; how∣beit, I will not oppose your designes, but whensoever you think good to come and see us, you shall alwayes have an absolute power heer. Your Ma∣jesties most humble servant, said Rozalmond, hath never deserved this grace; so kissing his hand, he waited on him to his chamber door, where making another low obeisance, he returned with Claristes, for go and take his leave of Carinda, never speaking so much as a word of the cause of his desloign∣ment, though he were much intreated to it. These lovers shed tears at the departure of this Knight, but it was nothing in regard of the Queen, who bursting with spite to see things fall out otherwise then she desired, lamented, railed on Rozalmond, and was even mad with rage; nevertheles, being advised by her Secretary, to make no shew at all of any displeasure for the departure of this brave warrior, lest thereby her love, together with her malice, might be discovered, she forbare weeping, and setting a modest countenance on the matter, and shewing little alteration, she wisely covered that which was observed, with a seeming disposition; so letting this Knight go, of whom she was much more fond then before, sending every where to seek him, with excuses of all that was past, and comforting her self, with the hope, that upon the receit of her letters, his minde would alter, and and that one day she should enjoy him, she remained better contented then this accident seemed to permit. CHAP. XXXVI. Rozalmond delivers Basiliana from the power of Dramant, leaves her in dispair, for that he would not yeeld unto her desires: incounters Alcidamant, with whom he hath again a dangerous combat, with with the end thereof. THis while our Knight thinking on the mischief which the fury of an incensed woman produceth, esloigned him∣self by little and little from the City, and travelled till noon without the encountering of any thing worthy his undertaking; but espying a Castle somewhat far off, he took his way to it, with a resolution to refresh himself there, if he found the Master thereof so cour∣teous as to entertain him: riding then an easie pace, and being within a slight shoot of it, he perceived two peasants running from thence, that would by no intreaty of his, be perswaded to stay and tell him
the occasion of that their hasty slight: This behaviour of theirs made him judge, that there was something more then ordinary to do there within, and indeed being entred into the base court, he found the great gate of the place shut, over the which was a reasonable handsome Gentlewoman, who having descried him, said to him with abundance of tears: Sir, if there be any valour in you succour me, and suffer not a wicked Knight, that hath surprised me heer, to obtain that by violence, which by love he hath never deserved. Gentlewoman, answered Rozalmond, cause but this gate to be opened, and I will chastise him in such sort, that he shall never attempt to force a woman again. Alas! said she, the gate is in the power of mine ene∣mies, and they guard it. If they will not open it at my request, said Rozal∣mond, Ile set fire on it, and punish them rigorously for their treason. Who you, said a big Knight, that instantly came forth, thinking to destroy him easily being alone, who are you that so audaciously menaceth folks whom you do not know? You have but ill luck to fall into the snares which were not laid for you, and the pity which you seem to have of this woman, is like to cost you your life; wherefore you may enter, if you have such a mind to it. Rozalmond, that desired nothing else, presently alighting, past in, never fearing the fury of five or six men, whom he beheld attending him with their swords drawn, and placed himself in the midst of the Court, where these Knights straightway invironing him, charged him on all sides: Five blows descended at one instant upon him, three on his shield, and two on his head; but contemning these attempts, as too weak to move him, he gave one of them, that would seem to be more valiant then the rest, so rude a blow on his helmet, that he divided his head in twain, the second he o∣pened from the shoulder to the waste, and ran the third quite thorow the body. This so sudden an execution astonied the rest of his enemies, which would gladly have saved themselves by slight, had they not been restrained by shame, and the presence of the big Knight, who inraged at the defeat of the others, was newly advanced to second these; and with his first stroke, which lighted on Rozalmonds head, he made his eyes to sparkle; but he boasted not long of this advantage, for Rozalmond quickly recollecting him∣self, discharged his sword with such violence on his shield, that not resting there, it almost cut off half his left arm; whereat he grew so furious, as he ran upon him thinking to get within him, and overthrow him that way; but Ro∣zalmond that fought with judgement, and that held it not safe to be seised upon by his adversary, gave him such a thrust in the belly, that he fell down stark dead in the place: The other three, to avoid these horrible blows, betook them to flight, trusting more to their heels then totheir weapons; but it would not serve their turns, for Rozalmond following them close, made two pieces of the body of the first he overtook, and having cut off the se∣conds head, was constrained to let the third escape, for to give ear unto the shrikes of a woman that cryed out for help: Hearing then a great noise a∣bove, he presently got up the stairs, and found a man of a wilde and terrible aspect, his colour swart, his eies deep sunk into his head, the motions where∣of were full of horrour and fear, his stature tall, but wonderfully mishapen, his countenance furious, and his voice most dreadfull; in his hands he bare a club, wherewithall he had broken up one door, and was beginning to deal so with the second, for to get into the chamber whither the Gentlewo∣man was fled; when as Rozalmond approached, who wishing him to arm
himself, was saluted by him with so dangerous a blow, that he was com∣plled to set one knee to the ground, for to save himself from falling. God refuse me, said he, arising in rage, if I use any curtesie to thee that so ill de∣serves it: Whereupon, advancing his arm for to make an end of him, ano∣ther blow made him discharge his sword in vain; whereat he was so trans∣ported, that getting within him, he struck him in that horrible manner, with the pomell of his sword, on the forehead, as his brains flew out, sending his soul to the devill. Worthy Sir, said the Gentlewoman, having beheld the blow, you have freed the world even of the wickedst man that was in all this Countrey, which is infinitely obliged to you for his death, and my self more particularly, who had by this time lost my honour or my life, if you had been lesse strong and valiant. I am exceeding glad, said Rozalmond, that I have diverted so great a mischief; But how fell you into it? By my disdain of this traitors affections, answered she, whom I would never suffer to visit me, being perswaded that so il-favoured, loath some, and vicious a man was uncapble of love, and most unworthy the affection of a woman of my quality. He was indeed, said Rozalmond, too ugly, and you too fair, to have any part in your good grace. Wherefore I was resolved to die, said she, and would hve cst my slf out of the window headlong, before he should hav satisfied his beastly appetite upon me; for having been adverti∣sed that he had surprised my house, I suddenly fled into these chambers up∣on the confidence of three doors fast locked & barred upon me, with a pur∣pose neverthelesse, if it came to the worft, to break mine own neck, and by an honourable death, prevent the grief of enduring the approaches and vio∣lence of so mishapen a monster, who hath met with the justice of the Gods in his crime, and his defeat having rendered me mistris again of my house, I assure you, Sir, that you may absolutely command it. Whereup∣on, taking him by the hand, she led him into a goodly chamber, where Ar∣tander having unarmed him, she caused him to put on a rich cloak, which be∣came him so well, that this Gentlewoman, named Basiliana, could not be∣hold him, without the feeling of a secret fire that began to consume her heart. Good Gods, said she to her self, how happy were I if this gallant Knight would love me as much as Dramant did, I should soon change my minde, and would not forbid him to represent his passions unto me; I must incourage him unto it then, and by my carriage let him know, that I will be more facile to his desires, then I was to his whom he hath slain, which I may do without shame; for covering my boldnesse with the resentment I ow to his assistance, I may make him beleeve, that my caresses are without artifice, and so carry him insensibly to crave some more particular favours. This resolution seeming proper to her for her contentment, and having presented him with confects, she drew him to walk in the garden, whilst preparation was made for supper, and buriall for the dead bodies. Seeing her self alone with him, and in the liberty to speak, she would fain have be∣gun, and discovered her thoughts, but bashfulnesse stopt her wouth as of∣ten as she opened it for that purpose; ever and anon she changed colour, and remaining silent, she left her eyes to perform that office, whereby Ro∣zalmond judged easily of her pain; but remembering his Armazia, and not permitting his heart to conceive a thought to the prejudice of his love, he made as though he understood not the mysterie of so great a silence, and entertained her with ordinary discourse; wherewithall not being conten∣ted,
it made her at last resolve to break the ice, and begin this language to him, with a sigh: I have reason to rejoyce at your arrivall in these parts, whereby your valour hath preserved me; but withall, I am much afraid, Sir, that it hath drawn me out of one danger, to plunge me into another far greater; for loving you more passionately then the small time of my ac∣quaintance with you will seem to permit, and doubting to finde your affe∣ctions ingaged to some happier beauty, I can expect no other then a wret∣ched death from the refusall you will make me of corresponding to my de∣sires: I have discovered this secret unto you, being unable to conceal it, not with an opinion that you will despise what is so freely offered you, but to olige you to be acknowledging for it: Weigh this well, Sir, for my life and death is in your hands, and upon your answer depends all that I can hope for, or fear in this world: This discourse ending with tears, whereby she thought to move him unto pity, she would have fallen on her knees before him, but Rozalmond not permitting it, sid unto her. Madam, the truth is your speech doth not only amaze but much per∣plexe me, for knowing how far the power of love doth extend, I would gladly both give you some reliefe, and yet not offend against mine own duty, but considering to what I am obliged, I may not for many rea∣sons satisfie your desire. The first is, that I am forbidden by the religion which I hold to love any other woman but her whom heaven hath law∣fully legitimated me, especially Idolaters as you are: the second is, that I am not permitted as a Knight to spoyle a woman of her honour after I have nobly preserved it, since our order is chiefely instituted for the pre∣servation of Ladyes; the third and most important of all is, that my heart be∣ing ingaged under the power of another that loves me, I may not to please you deceive her, unlesse I will become a disloyall traitor; thus have I dealt as frely with you as you have done with me, and letting you see what cause I have to deny you, it must oblige you to clear me from all ingratitude: the meeknesse of men I confesse is great, but we are to doe all things with reason: and never so to subject our selves as not to be our owne masters still. What glory should I gaine by the succour I have given you, if I should now undo you, and what were you the better for escaping Dra∣mants violence, if under the colour of my services I should do you the like wrong? Not a whit (Madam) nor could your beauty that might seeme to excuse me before the world leave me without blame before heaven; I must be then more constant and you more generous, to the end that the vi∣ctory obtained over our own desires may settle a quiet peace in our consci∣ences. You have given me reasons, answered she with a sad countenance, which are but so many shifts, for to excuse your self upon the difference of our religions is nothing; men are generally borne for the satisfaction of one another, and a single opinion ought not to be denied them in that point; to say also that it were a dishonour for you to cast me away after you have saved me from shipwrack is but a poore obligation: for it is not to ruine but to preserve what is frely given you; that only & that alone which you may insist upon is that you will not betray a Lady that truly loves you, but thereunto likewise I answer, how you shall do her no wrong in loving me at at this time, since my intention is not to deprive her absolutely of the power which her merit hath assuredly given her over you; neverthelesse I will not presse you further, but leaving you to the liberty, either of con∣tenting
me, or making me to dye, I will only beseech you to read in my eies that which I shall suffer in your deniall. Whereupon going out of the garden she lead him into a Parlor where the best of the meat was the de∣light she tooke in beholding him, still observing some one perfection or other that rendred her love far greater. Rozalmond, who feared that o∣portunity and the teares of this mayd might overcome him at length, with∣drew to bed, being resolved to get him a way the next morning by break of day, as he did, notwithstanding all the lamentation and prayers of Basi∣liana to the contrary. Being departed thence he rode three howrs in a great thick forrest, out of which he was no sooner past but he espied a Knight of so goodly a representation, that he stayed to observe him, being mar∣vellously well pleased with the grace wherewithall he sate his horse; mar∣king then attentively all the parts of his arms he perceived three Palms amidst his shield, which gave him assurance that this was the Knight whom he sought, and that he so much desired to be revenged of, as in∣deed it was Alcidamant, who having been healed by the damsell that had carried him out of Constantinople, and conducted by his adventures, was partly by land, and partly by sea, arrived in the kingdom of Florertan; the sight of him renewed Rozalmonds hatred, and incensed him in such sort, that not seeking for any pretext of ataquing him, he cryed to him to defend himself. In good faith, said he, touching his lance, you have challenged me without cause, but I hope you will be the first that shall repent it, so setting spurs to his horse, they met in the middle of the course with such fury, that tumbling down both together, they made two or three turns up∣on the grasse, with so much displeasure, for that they had never done the like before, that rising extreamly transported with choller, they drew their swords, and charged one another so cruelly, as the meeting of two raging seas could not have made a more dreadfull noise. Hate animated Rozal∣mond, Alcidamant combated for glory, and imployed his arm with so much force, that the weight of his blows, equalled the violence of his enemies; their shields fell away in pieces, lightening flew from their helmets, and as often as their swords descended, the bloud coloured their armour; one gave a down-right blow, the other a thrust; briefly, they were so set upon one anothers destruction, that their lives seemed to depend upon every stroke they gave. Good God, said Rozalmond to himself, is this warrior come into the world to bear away the honour of all the brave deeds of arms that are to be performed in his time? Yes verily, for his match is not to be met withall; and questionlesse he will carry the glory of being the best combatant in the world; his blows do not onely make me despair of the victory, but every minute possesses me with a fear of death: What speak I of the fear of death, I am resolved to vanquish, or to die? Charging then with more fury then before, he left Alcidamant in the same minde, and the same discourse, very much afraid of the end of this battell. Having entertained themselves five howrs together in this manner, sometimes set∣ting a knee, sometimes an hand to the ground, knocking their chins against their brest, recoiling two or three steps back, they forsook their swords, fell to grapsing with one another, and began a most dangerous wrestling. Rozalmond seemed to have an advantage in his stature, but Alcidamants for∣ces being contracted in a more well set body, rendered their encounter quall, they laboured with all the strength and slight they had to overthrow
each other, but as towers they never wagged, unlesse it were to get better footing. Some time being spent without any advantage to be discened on either part, they set to it so hard that they both fell together on the ground; there they rouled up and down for a good space, sometimes above, and sometimes beneath; but seeing that neither of them could prevail, they consented to part, btook them to their swords, and renewed their combat with more cruelty then before; being equally wounded, and weary, they would fain have taken breath, but to decline all advantage, neither of them would demand of the other to do it; so that they continued charging, and hewing one another, when as they perceived a damsell come gallopping in, who suddenly thrusting her self between them, said: Knights, let me intreat one boon o you. I will never refuse you, said Rozalmond, who knew her to be Cassandra. No more will I, said Alcidamant, for I hold my self infinitely indbted to your assistance, at my entering into the Castle of Serpents. Separate your selves then presently, said she, and each one follow his adventures, till such time as heaven shall otherwise dispose of your incounter again. Truly, said Rozalmond, although I was resolved to have died, or have been revenged of the wrong that this Knight did me at Constantinople, sharing the honour of the turnament, which be∣fore I had obtained, yet at your request I will be gone. Therewith setting spurs to his horse, as if he had been much vexed for that he had not given an end to this combat, he rode away: And Alcidamant entered into the wood, after he had received a box of salve from the damsell, who follow∣ed Rozalmond. CHAP. XXXVII. The Knight of the Palms is conducted to the Iland of Merodiana: The me∣morable feats of arms that he performs for to enter into the city of Alfart, besieged by Fangomadan King of Licagena. THese two incomparable warriors being separated in the manner before related, Cassanara followed Rozal∣mond, who was in a mighty rage for that he could not vanquish his enemy; and our Frenchman, cros∣sing thorow the wood, entered into a gentlemans house whom he met very opportunely, where be∣ing unarmed, his wounds were visited by Arnides, who drest them with a precious balm which Cassan∣dra had given him, and left him to his rest, till the next morning, when he arose fresher, and better disposed then ever he was in all his life. Arming himself then, and taking leave of his hoast, he mounted on his horse, which carried him at random, untill about noon he incountered a damsell, who having saluted him, said unto him with a marvellous good grace: Sir Knight, what seek you for in these parts? Such adventures as may give a man-glory, replied Alcidamant. If that be the end of your travell, said she, you have met with a favourable occasion to acquire honour, imploying
your arms for the service of a young Princesse, worthy no doubt of your succour, besieged within Alfarta, the capitall city of her Countrey, by the great King of Licagena, named Fangomadan, who is like ere it be long to re∣duce her under his power, if the Gods do not in the mean time assist her. She is fair beyond all excellence, of a most lovely and sweet disposition, and this Giant is as ugly, and deformed, as can be imagined; his bristled hair stares on his monstrous head, his eyes are hollow and sunk into his very head, his nose is flat and a span long, his lips wan and very huge, his beard ugly, and his whole shape dreadfull; briefly, he is so hideous, that the most confident even tremble to behold him, and yet he perswades himself that he is amiable, and for such he presented himself before this young Princesse, in hope to make her inamoured of him: imagine, I pray, whe∣ther there were not reason for it, since I cannot beleeve that the poorest damsell in the world would subject her self to such a man for an Empire. It is true that Crowns and Scepters have powerfull charms in them, and that ambition makes greatnesse to be far more regarded then content; but this incomparable beauty, who more esteems her own satisfaction then all the Kingdoms of the earth, refuseth the Soveraignty of Licagena, and not to buy that honour with the price of her liberty, she dismissed certain Ambas∣sadours whom this Giant had deputed for the marriage of him and her, which so inraged her, that he vowed to be revenged of her neglect, adde her State to his Crown, have that by force which he sought for in love, and afterwards put her to the horriblest torments that can be devised by the wit of man. And indeed, he hath but too well began his revenge, for he hath brought forty thousand men into the field, the moity whereof are before Alfr with him, the rest under the conduct of a Cousin of his, as wicked as himself, have already taken in the best places of the Iland of Me∣rodiana (so is that Countrey called, whereof my Mistris beareth the name) and it is every howr expected that Arfarta will be taken with a strange and bloudy slughter; for all the souldiers, consisting of four or five thousand, and the inhabitants of the City are resolved to die for the conservation of their liberty and Princesse, that they would never accept of the offers made unto them by Fangomadan, for the saving of their lives and goods. So that if you have as much courage as your person doth promise, you will gene∣rously imbrace the defence of her, and not suffer her to fall into the hands of so beastly a creature. If her remedy lie in my power, said Alcidamant, be assured, sweet heart, that this Giant shall not long boast of the cruelties which he commits in her Countrey, for I am ready to go along with you, and would to God we were now in the city. We may be there to morrow, said the damsell, if we will but put our horses a little to it. So riding on, they travelled till it was towards evening, when as they espied a big Knight a little before them, who admiring the gallantry of Alcidamant, stayed for to observe him more exactly. The damsell judging him by his demeanour to be valiant, went and besought him to grant her one boon. I should be very sorry, said he, to deny one of your merit, wherefore you may be confident to obtain your desire. You shall accompany me then, said she, in an enterprise, whereunto I am conducting this Knight, and joyning your forces with his, you may make them dreadfull to the enemies of a young Princesse likely to be disinherited. Let us set forward when you please, said he, I will serve her most willingly, and will not spare the little valour I may have for to deliver out of the troubles she is in.
Whereupon the two Knights having saluted one another very courte ously, the new commer would faine have discoursed, but Alcidamant per∣ceiving that he could not well expresse himselfe, said unto him, Sir, I see you are a stranger, and that in another language you might be better under∣stood; wherefore be pleased not to force your selfe, but speake as they do in your own countrey. I doubt, said he, you will understand me worse: for the kingdome of France, whereof I am native, is so remote from this place, that no man heer is acquainted with the language. Why? are you a Frenchman, said Alcidamant? Yes, answered he, and I was never abroad, till that about some four or five moneths since, I put my selfe to sea, with a purpose to travell through the world for to raise my glory a∣bove my fortune, which is so mean, that it hath furnished me with no∣thing but the order of Knighthood, and the power to become great by my Arms. My name is Troilus: Of the house whereof I am descended, I will not speak; having no other eminent title, than that I am nobly born, my resolution is to cast my self into the most difficile enterprises, and to at∣chieve honour by my valour. You cannot chuse, replied Alcidamant, but become great, and of estimation, being possessed with so worthy a de∣sire of doing bravely; and no doubt Fortune will be constrained to look with a favourable eye upon you one day: therefore let nothing discourage you, but persevere in your noble designe. I have taken leave to speak thus freely unto you, because I am a Frenchman as you are, and one that infinitely desires to see you raised according to your merit. Worthy Sir, said Troilus, then being extreamly contented to understand that they were both of one countrey, how much am I satisfied with this encounter of you, and what an obligation hath this Damosell laid upon me, for bringing us thus luckily together. The acknowledgement is equall, said Alcidamant: for I so esteem of your company, that I must needs share with you in the joy you take to meet with me. These two warriours entertaining them∣selves in this manner with a great deal of pleasing discourse, sometimes talking of the affairs of France, sometimes of the adventures which they had encountred, passed away the night before they were aware, and never alighted till about dinner time; when desiring to refresh themselves a little in the house of a Forrester which they found in the middest of a wood, they let their horses repose themselves whilest they slept a matter of three or four hours; at the end whereof understanding that they were not a∣bove five leagues from Alfarta, they took horse again, and used such ex∣pedition, that they discovered both the Citie and the enemies Camp: Whereupon the Damosell which conducted them, making a stand, said, that to avoid the encounter of the enemies troops, they were to take a by way, which she shewed them, that would bring them, without danger, to the very walls thereof: But Alcidamant desiring to signalize his comming with some memorable act of valour, told her, that his reputation obliged him to enter honourably into the town, that he was resolved to passe through the midst of so many enemies; and that therefore she might go before, and desire the fair Merodiana to cause four hundred horse to sally forth for to favour their retreat. This maid by no means approving these Knights enterprise, debated very strongly with them for to conduct them more safely; bu seeing her self importuned by Alcidamant, she went away very covertly to the gates of the Citie; which as soon as she was known,
were instantly opened unto her: from whence she took her way directly to the Court, where finding Merodiana in her chamber she fell on her knees before her, and beseeching her to be of good chear, desired her hands to kisse for the good news she brought her. Alas Cistenia, said she with a sorrowfull countenance, I know not what thou wilt say; but the state whereunto I am reduced, will not permit me to hope for much, how∣soever, tell me, I prethee, wherein consist these good news? In the arrivall of two Knights, answered Cistenia, the bravest and most valiant, in my opinion, upon the earth: and that taking pitty of the wrong which this ty∣rant does you, are come with a resolution to sucour you. How knowest thou that they are valiant, said Merodiana, since thou never sawst them fight? I judge so by their brave carriage, answered she; and I may well say, that you never beheld Knights of so gallant a disposition, especially one of them that bears three Palms on his Shield: He hath a marvelous good face, an excellent shape, and a brave warlicke countenance. These are parts indeed common to many men, said Merodiana, and if the effect be an∣swerable to the commendations thou givest him, it may be I shall find some consolation in his presence. But where hast thou left them Cistenia? Fast by the enemies Camp, answered she, resolved to make way through it with their swords, and give you some proof of their valour before they enter the towne; and therefore do desire you to favour their retreat, by sending forth four hundred Knights when the alarm shall begin, among the the enemies. Good gods, said she, make way through the enemies camp! why thou amazest me, Cistenia, either they are mad men, or valiant beyond expression. Do not think, answered she, that this resolution of theirs pro∣ceeds from any rashnesse: among all the qualities which recommend the Knight of the Palmes, I have alwayes found him to be very discreet and advised, wherefore I imagine that he hath undertaken this onely out of greatnesse of courage, which makes him despise all common and inglorious designes. I know not what will become of this enterprise, said Merodiana, but I will be most carefull to secure their retreat; wherefore cause some of my Commanders to come hither. Whereupon five or six of the chief of her Court presenting themselves before her, she related unto them how two stranger Knights purposed to assail the enemies camp: and therefore having commanded them to sally forth with the number they had requi∣red, and to charge the enemy at such time as they should perceive any up∣rore in their camp, she retired into her cabinet, where she began to think of the speech which Cistenia had used concerning the Knight of the Palms: Sometimes sh figured unto herselfe the beauty of his person; and then again presently imagined that she saw him thundring amidst a squadron of armed forces, and found herself possessed with I know not what kinde of good will towards him, which converting into love, made her infinitely desire the presence of this gallant Knight. If he be worthy of me, said she, I am ready resolved to love him, and his services are to attend their recompence in my favours. But what if the eminence of his race should be responsible to my condition? without doubt I would marry him: and say he should be poor of means, his vertue would supply that great default of fortune. Well, he must be seene, and then time shall advise. Saying thus, she called Cistenia to help her to bed, when as news was brought her, that the enemies camp was all in a tumult; She trembled at this report:
for she feared that her Knight would not bring his enterprizes to passe; howbeit taking better heart, she commanded her Cptains to fally forth, and put her head out of the window, to see whether the Moon would dis∣cover her lover amongst a world of fighting men. The noyse increased, the camp was up in Arms, the souldiers ran confusedly up and down: Some asked what quarter it was that the enemy had assailed, and with what numbers, but no man could return any answer, they knew not from whence their destruction came, and their terrour was no lesse then if twenty thou∣sand men had fallen upon their trenches. The most part notwithstanding being advertised that two Knights only were the cause of this hurly-burly, they returned into their tents, laughing at their own fear, and thinking themselves dishonoured for having been frighted by the temerity of two men. In the mean time the two invincible Knights bestowed their blows with such fury, that all passed under the edge of their blades; they over∣threw as many enemies as presented themselves before them, cut off the arms of some, divided the heads of others in pieces, made so great a havock amongst them, that every one feared their swords as if they had been thun∣derbolts, the wayes were free, none opposed their rage; and if any one durst stand before them, he was sure to be slain but with one blow. Alci∣damant many times observed that great Knight of the Lions, (so was Troi∣lus named) and seeing with what grace he massacred his enemies, put the most confident to flight, commended him as one of the valiantst Gentle∣men on the earth: but the other wondred at Alcidamants dreadfull blows, and thinking no mortall man was capable of so much force, beheld him as a prodigie, and worthy of all marvell. The slaughter having endured above two howrs, Merodiana's Knights appeared, and gave so furiously on the enemy, that with the feare they were in, they layd above three hundred on the earth. But the Gyant who would not stir forth upon the first bruit, arriving thereupon, Alcidamant and the Knight of the Lions put themselves in the Rear, and causing a retreat to be sounded, sustained the brunt of his troops, untill such time as they had gotten to the walls, from whence, a thousand Crosse-bows discharged such a multitude of shot upon the ene∣my, that he was constrained to retire, extreamly vexed to have been so beaten by two Knights, who seeing themselves within the gates, demanded whether Merodiana were withdrawn to bed. No answered Cistenia, that came forth to receive them amidst the troops, she attends you in her cham∣ber, for to begin the thankes which she owes to your valour. So taking them by the hand, she conducted them to the Court, where Alcidamant finding Merodiana much fairer then Cistenia had described her, would have saluted her upon his knees; but she that through this warlicke countenance was strucken with the flashes of an unresistable beauty, stayed him from doing so, and said, Valiant Knight, in all right I ow that respect unto you, if you would receive it from me: for being come to the succour of an Or∣phan maid, which expected nothing but death to avoid the violence of a wicked man, I cannot use too much submission for to honour you: but be∣ing fully resolved to shew my self more sensible of benefits, then offici∣ous in my complements, I will leave it to another time, and in the mean while do desire you to repose your selfe at leasure, after such painfull tra∣travell. Madam, said Alcidamant, I could dispute a long time with you upon that point, where you would seem to be obliged when as you are not,
and could tell you, that having done nothing, whereunto I was not tied by the law of Knighthood, I could not expect any thank for it, no more then this good Knight, that accompanies me; but referring my reasons to such time as you shall be pleased to take for to speake unto us, we humbly be∣seech you to accept of the little service which we shall do you. You will every way remain invincible; but, Sir, you must suffer me to say thus much in your presence, that I am exceedingly indebted to your pity, and so be pleased, I pray you, to let me shew you the lodging where you shall lie: Then, taking him by the hand, she led them to a very fair and rich cham∣ber (notwithstanding all the intreaty the Knights made her to the contrary) where having bid them good rest, she retired, so much besides her self, that she walked up and down a long time without speaking a word. Cistenia beholding her lost in this sort, and guessing from whence it proceeded, said unto her: Wll, Madam, what think you of these Knights? More a thou∣sand times then thou hast reported of them, said she, and I cannot but con∣fesse with grief, that the beauty and goodly presence of him which carries the Palms, hath made me in love. O Madam! said Cistenia, I swear to you on my faith, that I divined as much before, and was confident that his sight would beget a desire in you to enjoy him. I do not wonder at your capti∣vity, but it is to be well thought upon how you shall carry your self in this case; for if you appear too facile, you will give him cause to despise you; if too harsh, you will drive him away; so that your actions must testfie as much discretion as love. O you philosophize daintily! said Merodiana, but we are not to speak of these matters now, for time and occasions are to dispose of this busines, come and let it alone, and help me to make me un∣ready. Hereupon she laid her down, hoping to take some rest, but her bed grew irksome to her, and a world of thoughts entertained her till morning; when wearied with a thousand turnings that she had made in the night, she fell fast asleep. CHAP. XXXVIII. The Knight of the Palms desires favours of Merodiana, she promiseth to ad∣mit him into her bed he sets upon the enemies camp, and re∣turning victorious is received by her with a world of joy. THE morning being far spent, Merodiana got up, and put∣ting on far richer apparell then she usually wore, for to appear with the more lustre and grace in the eyes of her lover, she entered into the presence, where the Knights attended for her, and shewed her self with such a majesticall beauty, that it made Alci∣damant wonder at her, which had never seen her be∣before. Alcidamant beheld her with some apprehen∣sion of love, and advancing towards her, with Troilus, he would have kist her hand again; but seeing him so lovely, and observing a most extraordi∣nary sweetnesse in all his actions, she suddenly withdrew her hand, and
curteously returning his salute, she asked him how he did. Exceeding well, Madam, answered he, and am ready with this Knight to go and visit your enemies again, for to let them know that you no longer stand in fear of them: I have caused the most part of your Captains to meet heer, be plea∣sed to take their advice with ours, and permit us begin to serve you. The time of their punishment is not yet come, replied she, and I shall desire you not to stir from hence, untill the succours which I expect from the Iland of Silvana be arrived; for if the chance of war should fall amisse on you, I am sure that there would be no more hope left for me in the world; wherefore refresh your selves a little after your travells past, and if you will be but pa∣tient a while, we will finde out entertainments to passe away the time with∣all. Madam, answered Troilus, we are heer to obey your commandments, and you may as freely dispose of us as of the simplest souldier in the town; howbeit, you would have done us a great deal of favour, if you would have suffered us to have freed you instantly from the tyranny of your enemies, and to have imployed our arms for that effect. You shall have your desire, said she, but we must take time for it. Discoursing in this manner, there en∣tered a souldier, that came from the enemies Campe, who recounting the slaughter which the two Knights had made of four hundred seventy and two Knights, cut in pieces by them as they past along, those excepted which fell upon the arrivall of the troops sent forth by Merodiana, amount∣ing to the number of three hundred; as also the rage Fangomadan was in, not so much for the losse, whereof he made no great account, as for shame, that he was not able to arrest the fury of two men alone, rejoyced all the Court, which admired the exceeding valour of these Knights, whom eve∣ry one beheld as a wonder. This talk continued untill dinner time; when having sumptuously feasted them, Merodiana fell into discourse of the war, renewing the praises given unto these strangers; but desiring extreamly to talk in private with him of the Palms, she took him by the hand, and lean∣ing with him at a window which looked towards the enemies Camp, she entertained him with such a grace, that she soon triumphed over his liberty, giving him no lesse passion then she had affection. Fixing his eyes many times upon hers, he observed most powerfull charms in them, found won∣ders in the rest of her face, and already feeling the violence of certain de∣sires, he would fain have discovered his disease to have gotten remedy for it; but thinking that respect would advantage him more then boldnesse, he contained himself within the bounds of modestie, and was contented to speak with his eyes; neverthelesse, desiring to make use of opportunity, and lay some foundation for his hopes, he took occasion when this Prin∣cesse pointing to the enemies Camp, said unto him, that those fields would be witnesses of his valour to the end of the world; to answer her in this sort: If this small service doth please you, Madam, furnish me with means to do you greater, and make me the happiest man living, by permitting me to fight with your enemies under the savour of your commandments, and as your Knight. It were a crime to refuse you, said she, smiling; wherefore I most willingly receive you: but think now what you oblige your self un∣to, for you are no longer in your own power, all your desires being heeraf∣ter to depend wholly upon mine. If I would have reserved any thing un∣to my self, said he, Madam, I had not given you all; my obedience shall render you as much content, as my self glory; and be assured, that I will never
give you cause to complain of me. Neither will I give you any, answered she, for to deny me your services. Whereupon, Alcidamant taking her hands, kissed them a thousand times with incredible delight, and had suf∣fered himself to be transported with the excesse of his joy, if she had not on a sudden retired for to take away all occasion of suspect. After that they met often, sometimes publikely, sometimes in the walks, where our Frenchman discovering his passion by his looks and sighs, begot an exceed∣ing desire in her to relieve him, had she not been retained by that bashful∣nesse which ordinarily accompnies maidens. Madam, said he ever and anon, I languish away, my heart is compassed with a fire that consumes it, strange ancies intercept my sleep, my grief grows greater and greater, and I die a thousand times a day, yet you are not sensible of my sufferings, and harder then the rock you leave me in my torment, not affording me the re∣medy I so much want. Could you be content to see me lost, or to hear it said another day, that your rigour was the cause of my death? No, Ma∣dam, it would be a grief to you, and when you should call to minde, that the world could not give you a servant more faithfully yours, you would lament to no purpose; attend not this repentance, I beseech you, let me receive your grace before time or sorrow make me uncapable of it, & con∣ferring more particular favours on me then hitherto you have done, make e sy that I am the happiest Knight living. Sweet heart, answered she, with a smile, it troubles me exceedingly to hear you complain thus of me with∣out a cause, and would it were fitting for me to let you know, that I love you no lesse then my self: But what can I do for you, and what would you hope for from me? Do I refuse to hear the assurances which continually you give me of your affections? Do I intreat you neglectfully, or can you think that my actions are governed more by cruelty then honour? Que∣stionlesse, if you be not blinded with passion, you cannot chuse but see that I o not want love, and you shall never finde my disposition guilty of in∣gratitue; be pacified then, I pray you, live better satisfied for my sake, and terupt not my content with your unquietnesse. I desire, said he, to ap∣pear before you more contained; But alas! Madam, my grief will not permit it, and spite of my teeth my looks must shew you what is in my heart. You say I have no cause to complain; have I not, think you, when I may not see you, but in fear? You are alwayes in the midst of your Cap∣tains, how can I tell you then before them that my soul is all of a flame? Your minde is continually carried away with the care of affairs that every minute are presented unto you, what place can there be left then for a thought of me? No, Madam, you scarce think of me at any time, and that is it which makes me despair of all remedy. I acknowledge with you, that I never deserved the grace which I demand, but you are the onely cause of it, and the little power which you have left me, hath not permitted me to have cut your enemies Camp already in pieces: if that be it you look for, Madam, keep me no longer heer, I will soon rid them away, and deliver you, though every souldier were converted into a Giant. What a misery is this, answered she, I thought I had obliged you to live wi more content, by the assurance I have given you of my affection; but it ms your impatience is thereby the more increased, and that the care which I take to have you alwayes in my sight, proves a trouble unto you. You say that it is alwayes in the presence of my Commanders: Do you
hold it fit that I should deny them accesse when they come to speak with me about my affairs? For my part I do not, but am perswaded, that gi∣ving them occasion to talk to my disadvantage, I should ruine that which I am raising for your glory; we are to carry our selves more advisedly, and with better discretion, neverthelesse I am resolved to commit an errour ra∣ther then discontent you. What is it you require of me? That you would be pleased, said he, to grant me admittance into your chamber when all the house is at rest, to the end I may discover my sufferings with that liber∣ty which a lover ought to have. That were too much, answered she, if I loved you lesse; but relying on your vertue, I will be contented to grant it you, so as you will presently swear unto me to attempt nothing but with leave. That respect you alwayes bear about you, said Alcidamant, where∣fore, Madam, I protest unto you, by the faith of a Knight, no way to offend you. Be ready then for to morrow night, said Merodiana, and follow Ci∣stenia when she comes for you. Madam, said Alcidamant, kissing her hands, this is the happiest promise that ever was made; howbeit I must beseech you to add yet something more to my felicitie. That I will, said she, pro∣vided that it do no way contravenne the protestation you have made to be contain'd. No Madam, answered he: for my request is, that you will render me worthy of this grace by the defeat of some of your enemies; and that you will not hinder me from waking them to morrow morning. I speak not this without reason, we came hither for your service, we have enterprised nothing these three weeks that we have been heer, your people begin to lose the good opinion which they had of us, and some stick not to say, that this course of ours is not correspondent to our great words. Moreover, I should not find so much pleasure in the favour you purpose to do me, if I should not appeare before you like a generous and valiant Knight: Sweet Madam, be carried by these considerations, to yeeld unto this intreaty of mine, whereby you shall infinitly oblige me, and testifie that you repose confidence in me. I will not hinder you, said she, seeing my word is past; howbeit tempt not Fortune, nor hazzard your self too far, if you love me, but carefully preserve your life, whereupon depends all the happinesse of my dayes. This discourse finishing with our French∣mans infinite content, he assembled the Captains, communicated to them his designe; and finding them well disposed to his mind, he chose out two thousand of the most resolute men, and commanded them to be ready an howr before day, and so retiring with Troilus, he went to take a little rest. This designe running in his mind, he slept not long, but arose, armed him∣selfe, put Troilus in the head of a thousand horse, caused him to sally forth at one gate, and making a shorter cut, went and charged the enemies with such fury, that being surprised, he made an horrible slaughter of them before they had the leasure to put themselves in array. The first that he encountred being dispatched, all the Camp was in an uprore, every place rang with crying, Arm, arm: Heer ran the souldiers to their Colours, there the Knights call'd out for their horses; briefly, all was in confusion. In the mean time Alcidamant gained ground, killed, massacred, cut off legs and arms, and making large way to his Knights, overthrew tents and pavi∣lions, putting the whole Camp in such fear, that it was thought all had been lost. Time & necessitie having quickly ranged the enemy into order, the most part of the armie conducted by Fangomadan, went to fall upon Al∣cidamant,
when a new uprore began on the north side, the troops felt them∣selves charged in flank, and the slaughter grew so great, that the formost squadrons betook them to flight. Fangomadan amazed with this surpri∣sall, know not which way to turn himself, finding the danger to be no lesse on the one side, then on the other: But being a man of courage and expe∣rience, he presently drew out eight thousand men, and sending them away under the leading of some of his most expert Commanders, against the last commers, he marched with the rest to arrest the fury of our Knight; when as he, being every way as wise as valiant, caused the retreat to be sounded, thinking it not fit to attend the shock of this Squadron, and reti∣red into the town, maugre all that Fangomadan could do, who cursing Heaven and Nature, carried himselfe so furiously, that not one of his fa∣vourits durst come neer him. He would have turned head for to be re∣venged of the others, whom he saw yet in the field; but word being brought him, that they also were retired, he entred into his tent with a protestation to overthrow all his Gods, and never to suffer his enemies to be at rest; causing all things to be prepared then that seemed necessary for an assault, he called his Captains before him, and commanded them to die or take the Town, vowing with strange menaces, to cut them in pieces which should recoile but a step back, and to give extraordinary recompen∣ces to such as should be valiant and couragious; whereupon every man put himself in readinesse to fight. But the Gyant thinking it fit to surprise his adversaries, as he had been surprized by them, forbore all preparations till night, to the end the enemies should not be advertised of his designe: who in the mean time, little regarding his rage, made Bonfires for joy of so glorious a victory, which having cost them but threescore and five Knights, had laid two thousand and six hundred of the contrary part dead in the place, with infinite contentment to the beautifull Merodiana, who re∣ceived these gallants with so much kindnesse, that they were almost asha∣med of it. CHAP. XXXIX. Alcidamant, amidst Merodiana's embraces, is drawn away by Fangomadan, who assaulted the Citie: He sallies forth, and with Troilus his assistance, puts all the enemies Camp into disorder. THE day being spent in feasting and bonfires, to the generall satisfaction of all but Alcidamant, who thought every minute to be a tedious year, Merodiana retired herself, and remembring the promise she had made her lover, dismissed all her Ladies save onely Cistenia, on whose fidelitie she altogether relied, and seeing herself alone, said unto her, Cistenia, being confident of thy faith, I will discover a secret unto thee, which very much concerns me: The Knight of the Palms importuned me yesterday with such a grace, that he made me promise to receive him this night into my
chamber, that so he might have the liberty to deliver his passions more freely: wherefore I would have thee go and see whether every body be at rest, that thou maist fetch him hither. It were fit then, said Cistenia, that you went to bed. That were a seemly thing indeed, replied Merodiana, for me to entertain his discourse in bed; Ile but give him the hearing for an howr, or two at the most: for a man may say enough in that time, neither shalt thou stir out of the chamber the while. O Madam, said Cistenia, how you deceive your self, to think that a lover will be satisfied with words, and let slip a favourable opportunity: you must make your account otherwise, and resolve upon some free course. I think him to be vertu∣ous, but would I might not live, if he should be such a dastard, as to pro∣ceed no further then you speak of, I would never look upon him with a good eye again. Let me not be tusted, for any thing I shall say, answered Merodiana, if my promise be not limited with the condition, that he shall not attempt any thing upon me without leave. I vely think so, said Ci∣stenia, neverthelesse I will not beleeve that ver he wil observe that respect unto you; which if he should, you would not be very well pleased with it. Never blush for the matter, I pray you, nor issemble to no purpose, place and occasion will be favourable to you, make use of them as love shall ad∣vise you, and think that once lost, they are not so easily recovered again, as also that neglect makes mn oftentimes repent. Go, go, said Merodiana laughing, I shall find him so modest, that it will never come to that passe. By my faith, answered Cistenia,  would be then to your grief: howsoever let us leave off this discouse, and get you to bed, that I may go about my businesse. I think, said Merodiana▪ it will be best for me to do so: for being at case, I shall not be so trouble with a pain that I feel in my head already. Heer is the beginning of my prophsi, d Cistenia, let me not live if the rest do not follow: Whereupon udressing her Mistresse, she put her hand upon her brests, and in a waggsh manner said, O fortunate Knight of the Palms, how should I envie thy happinesse, were I a man? What a content to feele these two delitious worlds? What blisse to kisse so delicate a mouth? And what infinite felicity to be united to this body, the abstract of all the beauties of the earth? The delights, Madam, which are prepared for him, are preferrable to Empires; and were it in my power to change sex, I would never do it, but onely to enjoy for one day, such incompara∣ble pleasures. Merodiana not being able to forbeare laughing, many times held her hand before , as if she were ashamed to hear her talk so; but Cistenia knowing her mind well enough, left her in her bed, and went to Alcidamant; who ebracing her, promised never to be ingratefull for so many services. Their chambers not being far asunder, he was instantly in that of Merodiana; who seeing him come with such a grace, was so mo∣ved, that one might easily perceive by her face what her heart desired. Mine honour, said she unto him, forbad me to see you at this time of night thus alone; but your vertue hath prevailed with me: wherefore sit down in this chair, and then we will talk with you at leasure. Madam, answered he, kneeling down by her beds side, and beholding her with an amorous eye, your command may alwayes dispose of me, and I shall think my selfe most happy to see you in any sort whatsoever: But, O God! if you would be pleased to vouchsafe me a better place more neer unto you, I should e∣steem my glory to be far greater then the felicities of a Paradise. Do you
remember your promise, Knight, said she unto him? Yes, Madam, said he, I have sworn to attempt nothing upon you; but you have not forbidden me from intreating you: Consider me, I beseech you, in torment, neer my happinesse, and cannot enjoy it, between hope and fear, and expecting either life or death from your answer. Rise, Knight, said she, you have no lesse grace in delivering your passions, then valour in vanquishing them that encounter you; and your parts have no lesse power over me, then your arm hath over mine enemies. I was resolved to have conserved my selfe, but you have won me, and I am constrained to tell you, that you may dispose of my bed as you please, I will not complain of the losse of that which I hold most dear, so as your disloyaltie give me no cause to do. Never fear, said he, casting his doublet on the table, with an ex∣cesse of content: No, Madam, never fear that you shall see me sigh for another: you have too many charms in your eyes for to leave me that li∣berty, and I too much sense of the favour you doe me. Saying so, he got in to bed to her, where their embraces began with unspeakable de∣light; kisses succeeded words, feeling followed kisses, and a thousand a∣morous wantonizing, to stirre up their spirits, that every minute fur∣nished fresh pleasures. Five howrs being spent in these delights, they were about to have given themselves new testimonies of their loves, when For∣tune desiring to crosse their happinesse a little, a great noyse was heard all over the Citie, and the confusion of certain voyces, that cried, Arm, arm, amazed them. Never beleeve me, said Alcidmant, if our enemies be not upon some enterprise, for to be quit with us: But I swear by your love, (the most religious oth I can make) that I will so chastise their insolence, and make them pay interest for the wrong they do me, by ravishing me thus from out of your arms. Whereupon having kst her with a world of affection, he went instantly out of her chamber with his clothes un∣der his arm▪ and entring into his own, he met Cistenia in her smock, comming out of her closet. Whence commest thou Cistenia, said he, mar∣velling to see her in that fashion? From seeking a second, answered she: for your Squires gentle carriage having made me as far in love with him as you are with my Lady, I thought it not amisse to keep Sentinell with him. In good faith, said he laughing, I like this humour well in thee; but go in presently to thy Mistrsse, and desire her not to be moved at this noyse. Then being ready, he armed himself, and causing three or four torches to be born before him, in regard the night was very dark, he marched to the Market place, whither all the Knights repaired unto him; and understanding the enemy was preparing to give an assault, he manned the walls with good Souldiers, exhorting them to fear nothing, and commanding a thousand horse to be ready upon all occasions, he pre∣sented himself the first upon the Battlements; where perceiving that the enemy laboured to fill up the ditch, the more commodiously to plant their ladders, he caused the Archers to shoot: wherewithall in a little time they slew so many, that the earth was covered with them; ne∣verthelesse the Pioners doing their uttermost, filled up the ditches, and gave their Companies means to advance: Whereupon a world of lad∣ders were instantly reared against the walls, and the Souldiers encouraged by the threatnings and promises of the Gyant, strived who could soonest mount up, beginning a most dangerous fight.
Fangomadan not able to accuse his men, was almost distracted to see how fast they tumbled down one in the neck of another; but desiring to bring them on again by his example, he took a ladder, mounted on it, and pre∣senting himself on the battlements, grew dreadfull to the defendants, who fearing his getting into the City, gave present notice thereof to the valiant Knight of the Palms; he forthwith making to the place, where the Giant slew all that he met withall, discharged so mighty a blow on his head, that not able to abide the fury of it, he was overthrown to the ground, and there no doubt he had been killed, had he not fallen upon five or six of his Cap∣tains, who were getting up on the ladder after him, and that were sfld un∣der the weight of his body. This fall of his might have discouraged him, had he had lesse rage, but rising up with a million of execrations against his Gods, he re-mounted on the ladder, resolving to die, or enter into the Ci∣ty: But Alcidamant leaving the Knight of the Lions to oppose him, whilst Mardiana's Captains defended other places, put himself in the head of the thousand horse, which he had reserved for that purpose, sallied forth at a back gate, and giving furiously on the enemies back, so disordered them, that they began to betake themselves to flight with an horrible slaughter, all the ladders being in the power of those of the City, with such grief to Fangomadan, that he would have held himself happy to have been rid of his life. The assault ceasing, then by this retreat Alcidamant returned glo∣rious, and was received with such applause, that the people seemed to have no tongues but for to publish his valour and renown, which gave infinite content to Merdiana, who thought her self most fortunate in possssing so brave and valiant a Knight; and never blushing at her fault, received him, when he came to the Court, with most extraordinary testimonies of love, which every one ascribed to the acknowledgement wherein she stood in∣gaged to his assistance, and the valour he had shewn in the fight, wherein there fell three thousand and three hundred Knights, to the incredible ter∣rour of the adverse troops, (who beleeved he was some God come down in favour of this Princesse right) so that the brandishing of his sword was more dreadfull, then the lightning which ordinarily precedes thunder. She could have found in her heart to have kist him before all the Comman∣ders that invironed him, and would willingly have discharged him of his arms; but referring that office to the night, she contained her self till every body was gone to rest, when as she received him into her bed, where their pleasures were renewed with such delight, that not able to expresse the thousandths part of it, I must leave it to be imagined by those who at any time have injoyed so much happinesse.
CHAP. XL. Alcidamant combts the King of Licagena, kills him, and seconded by the succours of the Iland of Silvana, gives so furiously on the enemy, that he obtains the victory with incredible slaughter. THE fury of Fangomadan giving no further fear to Me∣rodiana, by reason of the assurance which she took in the arms of her lover, her content was without care, and he joy without any doubt. On the other side, Alcidamant mingling a generous fire with the flmes of love, desired nothing more then occasion to fight, that so he might equall his glory with the plea∣sures which he found in the imbraces of his Mistris: Displesed then that Fangomadn reigned so long, and that his arms should imbroil the affairs of a people, whom he could not chuse but love for his Ladies sake, he resolved to cobat him hand to hand; and to that end, go∣ing one day unto Merodiana for to undertake that businesse by her permis∣sion, he was told that an Hrauld was come to pley with the Princesse from Fangomadan. Let him be admitted, sid Alcidamant, it may he brings us good news. Whereupon, the Hal entring into the hall, where Me∣rodiana sat, attended by the most part of her Captains, without whose ad∣vice she would conclude nothing, he said unto hr: Madam, the mighty King of Licagena, my Lord, desiring to end this war, which depends ei∣ther on his life, or on the lives of two strange Knights that are heer, he defies them both togete, and will make triall of his person against them, alledging that they are traitours, that cunning is more familiar with them then force o valour, and that they fight not like good Knights; further he desires, that this combat may be performed under the walls of the City, to the end you may judge whether he be not worthy of your love; he permits them to make choice of the arms, and protests that he will retie with his army if he be vanquished, looking for no harder condi∣tion from you, if he defeats them (as he makes no doubt) then that you are to expect from the sense which he saith he hath of your neglect, or rather of the violence of his passion. This speech wrought a strange confusion in the minde of Merodana, who was not ignorant of Fangomadans forces, and that for any thing in the world would not have exposed her lover to such danger, so that she knew not what to answer; when as Alcidamant kneeling down, said unto her: Madam, if my services be of any consideration with you, refuse me not, I beseech you, one boon, the first that ever I have asked. Knight, said she, exceedingly troubled, and guessing at his designe, I grant it you whatsoever it be; howbeit, think, I pray you, not onely of your own, but of my peoples, and particularly of my preservation. That is the onely care I take, answered he, and there is nothing so dear to me as your safety. Wherefore (addressing his speech to the Herauld) you may tell your Master, that I was resolved to free this Countrey from his ty∣ranny,
and that I am infinitly glad he hath furnished me with the means to do it. I will encounter him to morrow under these walls, with the arms common among good Knights; namely, the Lance and Sword, not with a companion: for generous and valiant men never fight with advantage, but single, and with courage enough to make him pay for the spoil which he hath made of this Princesse territories. These words bravely pronoun∣ced, no lesse amazed the enemy then the assistants, who knowing how pro∣digious the strength of Fangomadan was, could hardly beleeve that any one man durst threaten him, much lesse present himselfe before him; howbeit, seeing with what assurance this valiant Knight spake, and calling to mind what he had done in the passed encounters, they beheld him as a wonder, the most part with pitty, as if his death had been fastned to the first blow he should receive from his enemy, and others with some hope of good successe. Merodiana being here with extreamly afflicted in her mind, stood a good while beholding him with an eye that sufficiently testified the trou∣ble she was in; but doubting that thus she might offend him, she set a good face on the matter, and speaking to the Herault, said unto him, Friend, this Knight hath given you your answer, which I avow; and to shew the confi∣dence I have in him, I am contented (making no more account of my e∣state then his life) that it be comprized within the hazzard of the combat, and that this Iland be united to your Masters crown, if he prove the victor; reserving nothing but the power to dispose of my self according to mine own fancie, if my Knight be flain. The Herauld departing herewith, Al∣cidamant kneeled down again, and rendring a thousand thankes to Merodia∣na for her good opinion of him, he promised her, by Gods assistance, not to deceive her hope. Going then to his chamber for to visit his arms, he aw a Damsell enter with a Dwarfe, carrying a trunk on his shoulder, who making him a very low reverence, said, Brave warriour, the learned Ne∣rea, who loves you well, knowing what is to betide you in your enterpri∣ses, hath commanded me to give you this armour, and to tell you, that you should not be troubled for the losse of the Arms which she caused to be brought in to you in the wood where you were made Knight, your former combats have made them in case to do you but small service in the busi∣nesse you have now in hand, which hath induced her to furnish you with these new ones. This is not the first favour she hath done me, said Alci∣damant, having no way obliged her thereunto: but you may assure her, she may dispose of me when or however she pleaseth. Whereupon, having re∣ceived from the Dwarfe a green cuirasse, set all over with double hearts, wherein appeared an A and a T, an helmet of the same, the richest that could be, and a shield whereon were three Palms, as in the other, he was better pleased then if he had obtained a Kingdome; howbeit, he marvelled to see them so thin and light: whereat the Damsell smiling, said unto him, Sir, never wonder at that: for my Mistresse hath caused them to be made so of purpose, that you may fight with the lesse pain and more ease. But if you dare not credit my words, make triall of them your self, and see if the strength of your arm and the goodnesse of your sword can open them. Here with she vanished away leaving Merodiana no lesse amazed then con∣tented; who finding herself at night with her Knight, could not forbear shedding of some tears at the remembrance of the danger wherein he was to be the next day: Whereupon our Frenchman taking occasion to carresse
her, told her, that she was not to afflict her self so, nor consider the dispro∣portion of his body, and that of his enemy, that vertue consisting in cou∣rage rather then in the largenesse of limbs, she was not to doubt, but that love would furnish him with new forces, seeing her life and welfare were in question. Comforting her thus with sufficient strong reasons, he ren∣dred her fearlesse, and her hope greater. The time which he could stay with her, being sweetly past away, he retired to his chamber, and slept two howrs; at the end whereof the Sun growing somewhat high, he arose, ar∣med himself with his rich armour, wherein he seemed a Mars: and going to take horse, he was told, that the forces of the Iland of Silvana, amoun∣ting to six thousand choyce Knights, were arrived. New occasions, said he, then speaking to the Captains that followed him, must have new reso∣lutions: this supply comes very opportunely, and not to let them cool, put them presently in battell aray with four thousand of ours, the rest shall serve to guard the walls, with the inhabitants; but be sure to commence no fight till the combat between Fangomadan and me be ended; my com∣panion will take care to dispose of you as you should be. Herewith the Knight of the Lions being particularly advertised of his designe, gave his Lance that he carried in honour to his Squire, and letting him go, instantly ordained that which was to be done, and put ten thousand men in order after he had given notice thereof to Merodiana, who being richly attired, was already on the walls, for to encourage her lover, and be judge of his valour. I am resolved, said she, when she was acquainted with the busines, in all things to follow the counsell of the valiant Knight of the Palms; there∣fore let his command be executed. The Knight of the Lions seeing his men disposed, and being very well satisfied with this answer, went out to behold the combat of his companion; who finding the Giant in the Lists, met him so roughly with his Lance, that he made him lie to the ground, himself remaining somewhat astonished with the encounter. The Giant seeing himself overthrown, contrary to his expectation, rose sooner then could be imagined of so huge a masse of flesh, and drawing out a great and weighty courtelax, struck such furious blows at his enemy, that the least of them had been able to have cut him asunder, if he had received it; but ha∣ving avoided them with an admirable dexteritie, he charged him so brave∣ly both with point and edge, that he amazed both the Armies. The Giant stormed exceedingly for that he could not fasten one stroke on his adversary; and casting a thick smoke out of the visor of his helmet, he hindred himself from seeing where to place his blows: whereas Alci∣damant, that fought with judgement, spent not a minute unprofitably. The first fury of these warriours having endured above two howrs, the place was covered with the Giants Arms, which went to pieces whensoever the rich sword of his enemy fell upon them: the bloud trickled down from three or four parts of his body; and that which carried his choller to the highest degree of rage, was, that his adversaries armour appeared entire. Merodiana beheld this combat with strange motions; if the Giants courte∣lax were aloft, she feared the violence of it, and she rejoyced when she saw it light without effect; she considered the valour of her Knight, ad∣mired his agility in saving himself from his enemies sword, wondred at the force of the blows which he gave; and above all, took extream pleasure in the grace of his fight. Am I not very happy, said she to her self, to enjoy
a Knight the bravest of all that live; and is it not exceeding glory for me to triumph over him, under whom the strongest Giants of the earth are constrained to bow? Yes, without doubt, and I doe not repent the giving of him that which he hath nobly gotten: would to God Fangomadan were dispatched out of the way, that my content might be perfect, I would then embrace this gallant warriour, and in despight of detraction declare before all, that I love him infinitely. Entertaining her selfe with these thoughts, she fixed her eyes upon him, and perceiving the Giant to be more unwel∣dy, and her lover far abler, as she conceived, then at the beginning of the combat, she was transported with excesse of joy. This while Alcidamant pursued his advantage, charged his enemy more furiously then before; and observing that Merodiana beheld him, accused himself for being so long defeating a man in the presence of her, whose favours had made him most happy. Vext then then to see the victory so long disputed, he took his sword in both his hands, and letting it fall terribly on his enemies shield, he so astonished him, that he made him reel three or four steps backward: whereupon taking his advantage, he redoubled such a dangerous blow on his head, that he cleft it in twain, to the unspeakable contentment of Mero∣diana and her subjects, who seeing the good Knight of the Lions in the head of their troops, set forth in good array, and following the Conque∣rour of the Giant, who made them way with his sword, they fell so furi∣ously upon the enemies, amazed with the death of their master, that they slew above two thousand at the fist bout, the rest betook themselves in∣stantly to flight; where the slaughter was so great, that of seventeen thou∣sand, there escaped not fully two hundred, who got to the Armie of Fangomadans cousin, relating unto him the absolute defeature of the other forces, with the death of the King; which put him into such a rage, that drawing all the garrisons out of the strong places which he held, into one body of an Army, he resolved to affront the Conquerours, and in their o∣verthrow, revenge the losse of his companions. Advancing then whilst the two strangers refreshed themselves with the Armie, which commen∣ded them to the skies, and especially him of the Palms, whom they would fain have adored, if he would have permitted it; he presented himself three dayes after before Alfarta, where the fight commencing by light skirmi∣shes, grew so hot upon the arrivall of the two invincible warriours, who were accompanied with eight hundred horse, that they came to a generall battell; in the which the army of these new enemies, greater by the half then the former, were all cut in pieces by the exceeding valour of Alci∣damant and his companion, who thundring wheresoever they went, assu∣red their souldiers, made them fight without feare, and so terrified their adversaries, that they were dead before the swords of these lightnings of warre fell upon them. The enemies being in this manner utterly defeated, the whole Island reverted to the obedience of the fairest Merodiana; who daily found out new entertainments for her lover: and having no other care but to please him, held her selfe the happiest Princesse of the world.
CHAP. XLI. The Infanta Silvana falls in love with Alcidamant, goes from her Iland to Merodiana for to see him, and having found him a hunting, she enjoyes him by a notable trick. THE people breathing now in peace after so many trou∣bles, the Companies were discharged, and especially those of the Iland of Silvana, who giving account to their Mistris of the successe of the war, so published the praises of the Knight of the Palms, and raised his valour to so high a pitch, that the fir Silvana, sister to Merodiana, admiring him, began to seek the same effects which they endure which are in love. She made them describe unto her his stature, the proportion of his body, his countenance, the colour of his hair, and the beauty of his face; and consi∣dering that Nature had made him every way compleat, she her self kind∣led the fire which by little and little consumed her; but passing to the de∣sire for to know what marvells he had done for her sister, she caused them to recount unto her the manner of his fight, his courage, his skill, his blows, how he had most valiantly slain the King of Licagena, and put his armies to flight at the only sight of his arms, which fully imprinted the character of love in her heart, and made her care for nothing so much as to finde out some occasion to see him, and render him enamoured of her. O Gods, said she, how accomplished is this knight, if he have all those parts which re∣port confers upon him! Have I not reason to wish I may enjoy him? No question I have, he is worthy of my favours, and deserves to be made par∣taker of my bed, if he will accept of it. But alas! I very much fear my si∣ster hath already prevented me of that fortune, and unable to resist what I suffer, that she hath given her self to him, bereaving me of the means so to do. Yes, yes, I doubt it is but too true, for this Knight being every way so compleat, who could forbear loving him? Questionlesse my sister doth enjoy him, and I am out of hope to see the end of my desires successefull; howbeit, the dice are cast, I am no longer mine own, and this consideration must not stay my designes; if my sister love him, I may love him too, in∣joy him as she doth, and cover my desires with a pretended ignorance of their affections. This amorous and jealous Princesse, entertaining her self after this manner, in the beginning of her passion, lived with strange un∣quietnesse, sometimes she resolved to send a damsell unto him to de∣sire him not refuse her his succour, for the delivering of her Iland from a dreadfull monster, that rendered it almost inhabitable; and then imagining that her sister would never permit him to undertake that voiage, because she would not let him go out of her sight, she was of another minde, and purposed to have him by some other wile; but not meeting with any, that was not either too long for the impatience of her desires, or too difficult for any good successe she could hope from it, or too hazardous for to endanger all, she could not draw any resolution out of such contra∣riety
of thoughts. At length having more affection then to undertake no∣thing, she concluded to quit her Island, and to see him at her sisters, under colour of going to congratulate with her for the happy issue of so dange∣rous a war, hoping there to finde out some invention or other for to bring her designe to passe. Taking along with her then twelve Knights and six damsels, for she had but an arm of the sea to crosse over, she embarked her self, and within four dayes after landed in her sisters Island, whom she would not acquaint with her comming; but mounting upon a delicate nag, she rode along till she came to a forrest, neer unto the which, causing certain pavillions to be pitched, she resolved to passe away the night there. Walk∣ing then alone by her self in the evening, and continually thinking on the means she might use for to bring her businesse wisely about, she perceived a huntsman passe by, of whom she demanded what news there was at Me∣rodiana's Court. I can deliver you no better, answered he, then that which is reported of the excellencie of the Knight of the Palms, whom it seems hath a purpose to become Lord of this Countrey, whereunto our Princesse will not be much averse, as every one probably conjectures, for there is no∣thing at this instant in the world which she regards so much, as the content of this Knight, with whose conversation she is infinitely taken, she leads him forth into the gardens and walks, where most of the trees carry marks of their loves, in a million of characters, graven on their barks; and when the heat of the day will not suffer them to walk, they withdraw into her chamber, where the time is insensibly spent in the assurances which they interchangably give of loving one another eternally. These words were so many mortall wounds that renewed the grief and jealousie of Silvana, who saw apparant proofs of that which she had alwayes feared; she scrat∣ched her head, changed her colour every minute, many times bit her fin∣gers for anger, and testified (if the huntsman had well observed her acti∣ons) that this news touched her to the quick; but he whose minde was al∣together upon his discourse, went on thus: Briefly, these so great familia∣rites induce us to beleeve that they are resolved to make a marriage, in con∣sideration whereof, we honour him already as if he were our Master, car∣rying no lesse respect to his commandements, then to those which come from Merodiana: And to witnesse the truth of that I say, assure your self I would not walk thus with a purpose to lie all night in the wood, if it were not to lodge him Deer which to morrow he means to hunt in this Forrest very early in the morning. But, Madam, time calls me away, wherefore you must excuse me, if I break off thus abruptly. Silvana being better sa∣tisfied with the conclusion of this discourse, then with the beginning, would not stay him any longer, but returned to her pavillion; where being arrived, she called one of her Damsels whom she favoured most, unto her, and said, Falerina (so was she named) out of the confidence which I repose in thee, I come to impart a secret unto thee; wherein, without any confi∣deration of the importance of the matter, I would have thee to serve me, not according to thy opinion, or as reason shall counsell thee, but according to my desire and fansie. I am desperately in love with that brave Knight of the Palms, of whom such wonders are reported of late: and whereas I have undertaken this voyage, it was not as I gave out, to congratulate with my sister for her good successe, but to see him, and to dispose him to love me: to effect the which, a favourable occasion presents it self, where∣by
it lies in thee to make me happy if thou wilt. To morrow he is to hunt a Stag in this wood; but let us make him take another way, and find out some invention to draw him hither, where, I doubt not, but I shall with little diffieultie, obtaine what I desire: for I have beauty enough to make the most invincible man in the world to affect me. And this may easily be done: for thou shalt encounter him at his beginning to hunt, thou shalt humbly demand a boon of him, and withdrawing him from his company, thou shalt conduct him hither, where thou shalt find me alone, accompa∣nied with none but Elania, whom I can dispose well enough to my plea∣sure. For I will command my train to set forth by break of day, and at∣tend for me three leagues hence, and not to stir from that place, till they hear further from me. Falerina amazed with this speech (for she had al∣wayes observed a great deal of modesty in her Mistresses actions) would willingly have replied for to have reduced her to a better regard of her honour; but perceiving that the venome had wrought its effect, and that her remedies would be to no purpose, she promised her no lesse fidelity then diligence. Sleeping then but a little, she arose with the day, and get∣ting to horse, placed her self in the way which the hunters were to take; where she had not continued halfe an howr, but she discovered a troop of Gentlemen, before whom she presented her self, and easily discerning the Knight of the Palms from the rest, she acosted him with a very good grace, and said unto him, Noble Sir, I know not whether you be as cour∣teous as you are gallant. Gentlewoman, answered he with a smile, you shall understand that better if you thinke good to make use of me. Follow me then, replied she, and be pleased to exchange the pleasure of your hun∣ting for a greater adventure, this enterprise will take you up but for one day: and if these Gentlemen be troubled with your departure, let this pro∣mise comfort them, that they shall see you again to night, or to morrow at the furthest within Alfarta. Knights cannot limit their return, said he, because they are ignorant of what will betide them in their adventures; howbeit seeing you assure them of my return by to morrow, I will not bid them farewell but till then: Whereupon the Damsell leading the way, he followed her with a marvellous desire to know whither he was conducted; neverthelesse she would reveal nothing till she came within sight of her Mistresse pavillion. Here it is, said she, where you are to enter for to make satisfaction concerning a wrong that you have done. At these words the Knight alighting, and thinking that he was to fight, advanced with his sword drawne, and his shield on his arm; but beholding in stead of ene∣mies, a most beautifull Lady, who carried a million of charms in her eyes, made a stand, and being amazed, said unto her, Madam, I am conducted hither for your service. Yes, said she, reaching him her hand, but not with an intent to make you enter into combat with any: The commendations which the world gives you, have begot an extream desire in me to see you; and to that end I have left my countrey, throughly satisfied in finding ma∣ny more perfections in you, then report delivered. Madam, answered he, you may commend me as you please; but there is nothing in me which is not wholly at your service: And be assured, that if I had known your mind, I would have gone to the utmost part of the earth for to have found you out, rather then you should have taken the pains to come hither. I shall think it well bestowed, replied she, so as you do not prove ingrate∣full,
and be not offended with my saying so, till you are acquainted with my meaning. Sir, I love you, and all the considerations I could bring for to contain me within the limits of modesty and my duty, have been too weak against the force of your merits, which having deprived me of all power over my self, have constrained me to come out of my State, to seek relief in your pitty,. It may be you will despise me, because I present my self thus unto you; and you may make an ill construction of my carriage to∣wards you: but if you understand your self well, you wil excuse my weak∣nesse. Say that I have reason to love you, and not holding me immodest, will recompence my affection with the like, as also give me just cause to publish, that you are the most accomplished Knight that this day bears Arms. Alcidamant, to whom the like encounters were soveraigne favours, seeing such amiable beauty in his power, did not so much as stand on the considerations which she brought, to render her action the more allowa∣ble; but protesting in what great obligations he was ingaged to her favour, the more powerfull in regard he had so little deserved it, he disarmed him∣self with all the haste he could; and beginning his caresses with a kisse, made her a woman to both their incredible contents. After a world of dalliance, she declared unto him, how she was sister to Merodiana, and ex∣pressing the fear she had, lest his long conversation with her sister, and their privacie together, might keep him from affecting her, it had somewhat troubled him, but that he remembred how an understanding lover seldome wants cunning devices to palliate his designes. Assuring her then, with a thousand oathes and promises, never to lose the memory of her favours, and to hold her as dear, or dearer, then her sister, he past away the rest of that day, and the night following with her, not so much as thinking how Merodiana would take his absence, and found this content so pleasing, that it grieved him to be deprived of it. Neverthelesse, being constrained to consider what might follow of so long a stay, he took his Arms, went a little beyond the village where Silvana had commanded her train to abide, and placing himself under certain trees, waited till he saw her appear: then advancing into the middest of the high way, and desiring to give this his new Mistresse some entertainment, he sent his Squire to her Knights, for to tell them, that he would not permit them to passe without breaking a Lance for their sakes whom they best loved in the world. This message made the Knights to laugh: for they could not imagine that one man alone could subdue them, and each of them strove for the first course, when as one of Silvana's Damsels being got before the rest, returned suddenly to acquaint them, that this Champion was the Knight of the Palms, so much redoubted over all the countrey. By my faith, said then the forwardest of them, we will not encounter him: for so should we be more fool-hardy then he is valiant. What, said Silvana, that much desired to see how far the valour of this Knight extended, will none of you run against him? Yes that we will, answered one, if you would take pleasure in our defeat. Your misfortune would no way please me, said Silvana, but it would much con∣tent me to see whether that be true which is so published of this Knight; and if you desire to oblige me, run one course with him. I will obey you Madam, said he, though I am sure before hand of a fall; howsoever it will be glory to me, that I have run against the best Knight living: whereupon putting down his Bever, he advanced towards Alcidamant, who encoun∣tred
him so bravely, that he made him quit his saddle, and cast him four or five paces of. I knew well enough, said he, rising lesse hurt then was imagined, that I should give my fellows occasion to laugh; and that I should not resist that incomparable force which is dreadfull to the strong∣gest Giants upon the earth; but I will be more charitable then they: for I will let you know, that this Princesse which you see, is sister to the beauti∣full Merodiana, to the end you may not employ your Lance against her Knights. You have reason, said Alcidamant, to beleeve that I will not run against them, and if I had known you, I had not justed with you; and that you may not complain of your fall, I am ready to repair that fault when you please. Whereupon advancing towards the fair Silvana, he saluted her as though he had never seen her before: and riding along by her, they took the way to Alfarta, where the fairest Merodiana received them at the first very heartily, never doubting of the prank which was plaid to her preju∣dice; but who can blind the eyes of a lover? This Lady calling to mind the absence of her Knight, led away, as she was informed, by a Damsell which was shewed to her a little after, presently suspected, not the matter as it was, but something near unto it, insomuch that she observed their acti∣ons, and therein finding but too much proof of their love, she grew so jea∣lous, that she could not rest. On the other side, Silvana was in the like per∣plexity: for seeing how coldly her Knight spake to her in the presence of Merodiana, and marking the amorous looks they gave one another, it mad∣ded her; neverthelesse, they concealed their thoughts, and watched for more pregnant testimonies, to complain upon a sure ground; but Alcida∣mant was so discreet, that he deceived them both. My dearest Knight, said Merodiana sighing when she had him in bed, take it not ill, I pray you, if the extremity of my passion constrains me to be a little jealous of you, you look upon my sister with too affectionate an eye; and the care which you seem to have of her service appears to me more then good will, she is amiable, you deserve to be sought unto, what may I then think of your fa∣miliarity? Too much I fear for my content; but if you will consider what you owe to so many carresses which you have received from me, how I undo my self to oblige you, that regard no slanderous tongue to give you satisfaction, and how I have freely bestowed on you what was most dear unto me for to please you, I hope you will not be my ruine, nor impart your imbraces to another, seeing no man partakes of my kisses, but will be pleased to let me onely enjoy you, that seeks for nothing save occa∣sion how to delight you. These words finishing with tears, made our Frenchman somewhat to repent, who seeking to excuse his fault, covered it with the name of respect, represented that in regard she was her sister, he was to carry himself fairly towards her, protesting that he had never so much as a thought of that which she imagined, he somewhat pacified her, and interrupted the course of her complaints; after which he was sure to have the like of the fair Silvana. Dearest love, said she when she could speak particularly to him. I have great cause to complain, my sister hath all your caresses, she hath dayes to enjoy your company, whereas I have not minutes; your eyes are alwayes fixed on her, and I but a few glances; if you speak to me, it is with too much respect, and too little love: what have I done to deserve so cold an entertainment? or what have I not done to be more kindly intreated? I have freely given my self to you, but alas! it
may be your neglect proceeds from thence. I have left my countrey for to see you, and yet I cannot enjoy that, but anothers caresses makes you find no delight in my embraces. Now I would fain know what is the cause of it, she hath no advantage of me, we are sisters, her beauty exceeds not mine (at leastwise I think so) I accompany my kisses with as much Art as a woman can use, to render them more pleasing; love you as much, or rather more then she doth (for I know that all the affections of the earth do not equall the violence of my flames) yet I must suffer whilst another lives contented, and reaps the reward of my travels. Ah, this is great in∣justice, carry lesse respect to persons, and be more equall. If you think your self obliged by the consideration of your being here with her, shall not I give you in the Iland o Silvana the same pleasures which you find here? Yes, my dearest, I will find out, if it be possible, far greater delights, and so behave my self that you shall not repent your abandoning her for to follow me. He that beholds a rock between two seas, sometimes bea∣ten with the one, and then again with the other, may figure out this Knight between these two sisters, equally importuned with either of their com∣plaints. He loved Merodiana very much; Silvana's kisses were of no lesse power with him, her reasons moved him, the others sighes found him not insensible, his heart was divided betwixt them, and taking pleasure in Me∣rodiana's caresses, he met with as much content in those of her beautifull sister. At length this last speech which Silvana made, had prevailed with him, had he not called to mind the resolution he had taken to carry himself in such manner, as he would lose neither the one nor the other of them. Returning then the same reasons, the same excuses, the same dissembling, the same oathes, and the same caresses which he had used to Merodiana, he somewhat appeased her displeasure; neverthelesse he could not so emean himself, but that there remained so powerfull a suspition in the minds of these sisters, as converting into jealousie, it made them odious one to ano∣ther, though they laboured wisely o disguise their thoughts. If Merodiana was alone, she presently imagined that her Knight was in her sisters arms. If Silvana saw him not, she beleeved he was in private with her sister, they went to one anothers chamber, and met oftentimes in the mid-way: they were sisters, love made them secretly rivals. Merodiana observed all Silvanas actions, Silvana had a continuall desire to understand what her sister did; briefly, all their motions were suspitions, their suspitions strong jealousies, and their jealousies insupportable griefs. It is not a care of my honour, said Merodiana, that induces my sister to watch me in this fashion, much lesse any excesse of affection to me: for I know her thoughts but too well, it must be then the spite she bears me for crossing her desire; but why should I give entertainment to a controller of my actions? she is amorous of my Knight, she loves him passionatly, and would fain deprive me of him, but I will not endure her boldnesse; and quietly desiring her to re∣turn unto her Iland, I shall appeare rather an angred sister then an ill lover; howbeit I will wait a fit opportunity, and in the mean time use some spee∣ches to her that may make her acknowledge her fault; but if she prove ob∣stinate, we will part never to see one another again as sisters; and love, who admits of no consideration, that will have one regardlesse of times, per∣sons, places, and conditions shall authorize my resentment. Whilst she entertained her selfe in this manner, Silvana did the like. I perceive well
enough, said she to her self, that my sister looks not upon me but with dis∣dain, that she forbids this Knight to talk with me, and that I expect nothing save displeasure: wherefore I resolve to return home, howbeit if be possi∣ble, I will be accompanied with him, so shall I be no longer crost in my de∣sires. He is courteous, he is obliged to me, he will deny me nothing I shall demand of him: wherefore covering my designe with the pitty I take of my people and countries, which every day fall to ruine by the cruelty of a monster that continually destroyes them, I will beseech him to suc∣cour me, like a valiant and generous Knight; and if I can get him once out of my sisters hands, I will never permit him to undertake so dangerous an enterprise, but preserve him for my future contentment. Insisting then on this resolution, as the best she could desire, she said unto him one day in the presence of Merediana, who commended to every one the assistance which she had received from him, Sir, you see how your benefits are acknow∣ledged, that praises are alwayes in the mouthes of such as are obliged, and generous Knights doe ordinarily find some recompence in the glory is gi∣ven to their vertues: If you had done any thing for me, I should speak of you as others do, and would raise your name to heaven, holding the world unworthy to retain the greatnesse of it. Madam, answered he, interrup∣ting her there, the fault shall not be mine if you have not the satisfaction to see me combat for your service; doe but furnish me with occasion, and you shall find me ready whensoever you please. My people, said she, af∣flicted by a cruell monster, reach out their hands unto you; now advise with your self whether you will oblige me by succouring them. Most willingly, Madam, answered he, and shall think my self most happy to serve you in this occasion. We will depart then to morrow, replied she, in the mean time take order for your journey. Merodiana hearing this dis∣course, and seeing a departure resolved so soon, knew not what to say, she would have accused her lover, but having very great testimonies of his af∣fection, she laid all the fault upon her sisters malice, whom she blamed in very plain tearms, saying that she ought not to precipitate the dayes of so brave a Knight, who could not enter into that combat without apparant losse of his life; but Silvana resolved the contrary, and caring for nothing but how to draw him from thence, made no reckoning of her anger. All this night was bestowed in sighs and tears, and Merodiana a thousand times curst her sisters comming to see her. I will not let you go to imminent death, said she, and notwithstanding any promise you have made my sister, you shall not stir from hence, she is too impudent to be obeyed, and I knew her comming too well for to leave her the liberty to put it in practise: but if you be resolved to go with her, be confident that I will follow you, and crosse the pleasures which she expects, as much as she hath done my con∣tent. O God, Madam, said he, kissing her most amorously, do you make doubt of my faith? now truly you do me infinite wrong, for so many oathes and protestations as I have made to you, should, me thinks, remove this false opinion out of your imagination, I must go, because I am obliged therunto by my promise; but Madam, be assured it shall be to return in∣continently again, if I happen to live after the combat which I purpose to enter into against the Serpent; and to perswade you to beleeve what I say, behold your self in your glasse, then think upon Silvana, and you shall find that your beauties being unlike, that she having lesse charms then you, lesse
love, and lesse merit, I shall never abandon you to follow her: Live con∣tented in the expectation of my return, and in the mean time permit me to imbrace occasions that may acquire my glory; so shall you testifie a true affection to me, and oblige me to esteem my self happy in your love. These so powerfull reasons having mitigated, but not defaced Merodiana's grief, she slept till morning, when giving him a farewell kisse, he retired to arm himself, leaving her in tears and sorrow. CHAP. XLII. The grief which the fairest Merodiana took at the departure of her Knight, who went with her sister for to combat the monster, that ravagod the the Island of Silvana, the loves of this Princesse and the Knight, and the danger wherein he found himself in the combat. SIlvana departing with as much glory, as she left discon∣tent in her sisters Court, travelled a while between the Knight of the Palms, and him of the Lions, en∣tertaining him with a world of pleasing talk, how∣beit, her passion making her desire no other ear but her lovers, she many times went and spoke softly to him, as if she were willing none else should hear her, which the gentle Toilu perceiving, modestly with∣drew himself, and left them to the liberty of their actions and discourse. Then this amorous Lady, more openly shewing the joy she conceived for being freed from a concurrent in her love, rendered the length of the way so short by a million of oaths to love him eternally, and by as many com∣plaints against her sisters jealousie, that he found himself almost out of the wood, before he thought of being in it. The place representing to his me∣mory the pleasure which he had received at his first acquaintance with Sil∣vana, he would fain have stept aside with her for to alight under some bush; but conceiving that they could not blinde the eyes of so many persons which followed them, they travelled to the sea side, where a ship attended to transport them over; howbeit, Silvana would not imbark this night, be∣cause she knew she should not have the liberty aboord as in her tents; never∣thelesse, to avoid all fear of discoverie, she caused her train to be shipped, reserving no body about her, but Falerina, Alderia, her Knight, and him of the Lions, who having good intelligence with Falerina, made but one bed with her and the fair Alderia, which was not more squemish then the other, whilst his companion took up a place by Silvana's side. The night being spent with many more caresses and kisses then I am able to deliver, the Knights armed themselves at break of day, and seeing that a favourable gale sollicited their departure, they took their Ladies by the arm, and con∣veyed them aboord; whereupon, commanding the Master to hoist sail, they began to cut the waves, which on a sudden swelling very high, had exceed∣ingly frighted the women, but that they were cheared with the presence
and speech of the Knights. Howbeit, the storm increasing, the noise of the waters growing every minute more dreadfull, and the night, which rendered every thing full of horrour, arriving thereupon, gave them new fears of shipwrack; insomuch, that Silvana cast her self into Alcidamants arms, who desiring to make use of the darknesse, without any apprehen∣sion at all of the tempest, he fell a kissing of her, laid his hand on her breasts, and finding his spirit raised, he caressed her so sweetly, that she vowed afterward, she never felt so much pleasure in so little time. Whilst they drew their delight out of a subject dreadfull, and full of danger, Troi∣lus intreated Falerina in the same manner, and making her lose her self in his imbraces, kept her so, till the day and calm weather arriving together, caused them to retire wonderfully satisfied with the love of each other. The Master, finding himself neer to the Island of Silvana, yet far enough from the place where he meant to have put in, advertised his Lady thereof, who understanding that it was on that coast which the monster had ruined, she would with all haste have made from it, but that she was retained by the Knight of the Palms. How Madam, said he, will you oppose my glory, and make more esteem of my life, then of mine honour? What would all the world say, and particularly your sister, whom I left onely to defeat this creature, if I should part hence without seeing it? Not to lie, I should in a moment lose all the honour I have acquired by so many labours; let us land a Gods name, or if for your own part you be afraid, permit me to do that which becomes a good Knight, who will not be wanting to his pro∣mise, nor fail in his duty. Ah, my Knight, said she, with her eyes full of tears, will you yeild more to your own desires then to mine? Have you forgotten how you have told me a thousand times that you would never disobey any commandment I should lay upon you? And yet you will now do a thing which infinitely displeases me, and more cruell then can be exprest, you seek my destruction, in running headlong to your own. Do but consider beforehand what danger there is in affronting this mon∣ster, the most horrible and dredfull that ever was; whole squadrons of armed men flie at the very sight of him, will you then undertake this enter∣prise? I make a dear account (as I ought) of my people, and countrey; but you are not of that consideration, as to prefer common men and lands before your safety; Let them perish, I beseech you, and tempt not the power of the Gods, to go to meet dangers, which without blame, and wise∣ly, you may avoid. The glory you aspire unto, is to be found in actions that one man may bring to passe, not in desparation. But if you will not be retained by the care of your self, yet at leastwise be moved with my tears, with my sighs, with the regard of my very life it self, which shal not be long if you persist in your wilfulnesse. Madam, said Alcidamant, pardon me, I be∣seech you, if I say that your request is unjust, and that you wrongfully complain of me for not rendering that obedience to your commandments which I ought. You brought me hither for the good of your people, and now you are offended that I indeavour to relieve them. I know not what to say to this humour, and although the pity which you seem to have of me obliges me; neverthelesse, it is so repugnant to my reputation, that I can∣not allow of it without infinite blame. You affirm, that we are to seek ad∣ventures which are easie; such will never give us glory, and therefore we present our selves to those which seem impossible; you think to divert me
from this designe, by figuring forth unto me a monster, dreadfull beyond all that ever was; that, Madam, works in me a contrary effect: If an ordi∣nary Knight could overcome it, I would not vouchsafe to land heer for to fight with it, the difficulty which I meet with in this enterprise, gives me a marvellous desire to undertake it to day rather then to morrow. Cease then, I beseech you, from afflicting your self, and restraining these tears, which more reproach your weaknesse, then testifie your love, command me to march on couragiously, that I may triumph over this terrible enemy under the favour of your beauty. Your reasons seem so just, answered she, that I am not able to with-hold you any longer from this adventure; but ah! my Knight, when I think how I behold you crash: between the teeth of this horrible Serpent, or torn in pieces by his mercilesse claws, I cannot forbear weeping, when I call to mind how I was the cause of this your death; howbeit, seeing you are resolved to attempt this combat, go under the protection of the Gods, my Knights shall assist you. By no means, Madam, said he: for I will be accompanied with none but my friend heer, and my Squire, that shall onely go to know what will become of me. Whereupon causing himself to be landed with Troilus and Arnides, after he had desired the beauteous Silva∣na to stay for him in the same part, they got to horse, and rode along ex∣ceedingly astonished to see all the countrey round about disinhabited, a multitude of houses ruined, and trees every where overthrown by the wonderfull force of this formidable Monster. Having travelled certaine howrs, they approched to a forrest, entertaining themselves with ordinary discourse, when as their horses began to snore, prick up their cars, and re∣coil back, maugre all the spurring they could use, for to make them advance into the wood. Never credit me, said Alcidamant, if this beast bee not amongst these trees; whereupon listning attentively, they heard a dreadfull noyse, with some horrible hissing, and seeing two or three little trees overturn, they perceived the monster whom they sought, comming forth with a strange fury: he had the body of a Dragon, as big as an Ele∣phant, covered with scales of divers colours; he had two heads, the one of a Serpent with a three forked tongue, the other of a furious Lion: his legges were different the one from the other; one of the foremost had the claws of a Serpent, two foot and a half long, and so sharp, that they would pierce even steele; the other was armed with the paws of a Lion, able to crush Iron, and tear armour in pieces; behind he was supported with two legges of an horse, wonderfull great; after which he trailed a tail so long and strong, that therewith he easily overthrew all the trees which stood in his way. Alcidamants courage was new put to the test: for beholding a creature so deformed and monstrous, he marvelled how Nature could pro∣duce it in such a form, and could not chuse but fear to fall into the danger of his paws or teeth, which were in each head a cubit long and more; but assuming confidence from the glory which he should acquire by defeating this monster, he desired his companion to retire, and recommending him∣self to God, he set spurs to his horse, who staring up with his mane, ran clean away with him, do what he could to retain him: but at length having stayed him, he quickly alighted, took his Lance, and making head to the Monster, which followed him with incredible celerity, he ran it so furi∣ously into one of his chops that stood wide gaping, as it past into his
throat, where it brake, after it had made a very deep wound; but not able to withstand the violence of the encounter, he was overthrown to the ground, with such pain, that he thought his body had been all crushed: ne∣verthelesse rising up suddenly, for the Monster was gone on, he drew out his rich sword, and with a resolute courage waited to charge him as he should passe by; but considering that his legerity would more advantage him then his force, he concluded to combat him with judgement, stepping lightly aside, then when he saw him return with rage, he gave him so migh∣ty a blow full upon the body, that it was able to have cleft a rock; how∣beit in vain: for he found his scales so hard, as the Sword left no mark be∣hind of the stroke. O God! said he then astonished, what can I expect from this combat, but the death which Silvana so many times foretold me to day, Lord assist me, and punish me not according to the greatnesse of my sinnes? Whilst he made this short prayer, the dangerous Monster spared him not: for presently turning about, he laid hold on his shield with his Serpents claws, and having torn it from his arm, laboured to bite it in pieces with his teeth, offering at the same instant to seaze on the Knights armour with his Lions paw; but he that with reason feared these approa∣ches, leapt wonderfully quick a tone side, and grieved to see himself thus destitute of a shield, he took his sword in both his hands, and therewith cut his paw sheer off at one blow; whereat he gave so lowd a cry, that it was heard 3 leagues off. Alas! said then the beauteous Silvana, here is a sign of my Knights death; wretch that I was to propound so dangerous an en∣terprise unto him, for other wise he had lived, and I might still have conti∣nued happy in the world. Alcidamant seeing this good effect of the stroke which he had given, was in hope of better, and esiring to make use of the astonishment the Monster was in, gave him another blow on the Lions mane, thinking to have no worse successe then before, but the thicknesse of his clotted hair withstanding the passe of the steel, it made him onely bow with his head a little, and so provoked his fury, that making a skip of ten foot high into the aire, the Knight found himself overthrown on the ground; where this dreadfull creature perceiving him to lye, got him be∣tween his teeth for to devour him; and indeed he had already entred them in his live flsh, when as the Knight being out of all hope of life, advanced his good sword, and thrust it with such violence into his flank, that he past it quite through his bowels. The Monster feeling so dangerous a wound, mounted once again into the aire, with such an incredible force, that hee lighted ten paces off when he came to ground, which gave our Frenchman leasure to rise, so bruised with his fall, and suffering such pain from the hurts the Monster had made with his teeth, that he could hardly stand; howbeit forcing himself, and drawing new strength out of his generous courage, he approached the Monster again, who made a most horrible noyse, and by good fortune giving him a thrust just in the eye, ran him to the very brain, but being surprized before he could retire him, the Mon∣ster caught him with his Serpents claws, and in the pangs of death that tormented him, drag'd him up and down a good while: then taking him between his teeth, as if he would make a sepulchre for him of his throat, he made way for his bloud to issue out at sundry places, and had without doubt killed him in this sort, had not the wound which he had received in the belly, caused him to tumble down, breathing out his last. Alcidamant
who had not lost his understanding in this danger, seeing this monster fal∣len, had courage enough to rise, and withdraw aside; but the venome which came forth of the body of this creature, and his own losse of bloud, had not left him long alive, if Troilus and his Squire, who were not far off, had not come suddenly to his aid. Arnides remembring then the box which Cassandra had given him when he laft fought with Rozalmond, took it out of his pocket, and quickly disarming him, annointed him with that balm, which working a marvllous effect, brought him instantly to himself again. Whereupon, the good Troilus gathered a great heap of leaves together, laid him upon it, and charging Arnides not to stir from him, galloped amain to∣wards the port. Silvana, whom love kept alwayes in care, seeing him arrive in that man∣ner, and beleeving that he fled from the jaws of the Serpent, was ready to tumble into the sea, imagining that her lover was in the belly of the mon∣ster, and the words and complaints of a despairing woman were even at her mouth, when Troilus boording her with a chearfull countenance, said: Ma∣dam, be of good chear, the Knight of the Palms is alive, and more glorious by the death of the monster, then ever Knight was by the most dangerous adventure that hath been; but you must know that this victory is bought at a dear rate, for the Knight hath lost most of his bloud, and was very neer his end; howbeit, he is far better then he was, by means of an ointment wherewith his Squire hath dressed his wounds, so that now he wants no∣thing but your assistance, that he may be carried to some house, where he may be more commodiously looked unto then in your ships. Silvana, at first, distracted between hope and fear, and that expected nothing lesse then so happy a successe, hearing that her lover was alive after the death of so horrible a monster, fell into such an extasie of joy, that she could neither speak nor move: she beheld Troilus, as if she would have said that she did not beleeve his report; but observing him to be in good earnest, she in∣stantly recollected her spirits, and causing her self to be forthwith set on shore, she commanded some quilts to be made ready; and not able to at∣tend so long while her train was landed, away she went with the Knight of the Lions; and being winged by her affection, she alighted within a little af∣ter where the Knight reposed himself; howbit, understanding that he was asleep, she would by no means disturb him, but fell to considering of this dreadfull creature, which made her afraid being dead, and admiring the courage of her Knight, who had made no difficulty to undertake him. Hereupon her people arrived, who thinking it almost incredible, that one man could kill so great, so furious, and so formidable a monster, published his praises in such manner, as if they had no tongues but to proclaim him for the most excellent Knight of the earth. Whilst every one was thus commending, he awaked, and finding himself better then he was, he would have risen, seeing Silvana comming towards him, but she, not able to for∣bear kissing of him before all the company, forbad him with such a grace, that he suffered himself to be laid upon the quilts, for to be carried to a Ca∣stle about two leagues from thence, where Silvana purposing to abide some time, sent her Knights over all the countrey, to assure the death of that dangerous Serpent; whereupon, a world of men and women came in locks, who wondering at the valour and features of this Knight, would willingly have prostrated themselves before him, as the chief of all their
Gods, if he would have permitted such idolatry; but rendering the glory unto God, to whom it was due, he modestly dismissed them, and was con∣tented that the monster should be flayed, and that his skin, stuft with straw, should be set over the principall gate of the Capitall City of the Island of Silvana, whither a little after he went to the unspeakable satisfaction of the people, who strewing sweet herbs and flowers in his way, as he passed tho∣row the streets, cryed him up to heaven with their acclamations, naming him the Saviour of their countrey, and their Tutelar God. CHAP. XLIII. Trasiclea the valourous Princesse of Tramazond, hearing the world talk of the valour of the Knight of the Palms, sends to seek him, the mes∣senger findes him out, shews him the picture of this Princesse, he parts with her from the Island of Silvana, and goes to meet with her. WHilst these lovers lived thus without crosse or fear, whilst the trees and gardens were witnesses of their pleasures, whilst they bathed themselves in their de∣lights, and every day incountered some new way or other to render them more pleasing, all forrain parts were filled with admiration, and the name of the Knight of the Palms became so famous, that there was no other talk but of his valour; the pictures of the monster ran from countrey to countrey, his figure was wondered at, his greatnesse and force was considered, and every one held it for a miracle, that one man alone had the courage to affront him, forces sufficient to com∣bat him, and so much valour as to kill him. Merodiana having sent Cistenia to observe the carriage of her Knight, was advertised of this victory, which made her resolve to passe into the Island of Silvana, for to draw her lover out of her sisters arms; but she lost her labour, for the Destinies, that meant to dispose otherwise of the exploits and fortunes of this Knight, would not permit her to see him, for to hinder his happinesse, and thus it was: The fame of the glorious victory, which he had obtained, running from countrey to countrey with pictures thereof, as I have related before, came to the cars of Trasiclea, the fairest and most valourous, but withall the proudest Princesse of the world. She was daughter to the Emperour of Tramazond, a mighty Potentate, and that deriving his originall from the Sun, found the antiquity of his house in the race of the Gods, an opi∣nion that rendered this beauty so glorious, that she esteemed no mortall wight capable of her alliance, nor worthy of so great and precious a trea∣sure. This Princesse then, who despised men, and ranked her self among the Deities, who thought she deserved Altars, and that held nothing so glo∣rious nor redoubtable as her arms; hearing the commendations which eve∣ry one gave to this Knight, could not beleeve at first that he was so strong,
so valiant, and every way so compleat as was reported; but having usde the means to have his picture made to the life, together with that of the Monster which he had slain, she beheld it often with wonder, and finding nothing to be added to the proportion of his body, and lesse to the perfe∣ction of his beauty, she said; If the Painter hath not flattered this Knight, he is in my mind the most accomplished under heaven: But that which most amazes me, is to see him so young, and to hear tell how he hath defea∣ted this Monster, whose figure alone gives terrour to the most confident; verily he is worthy of a place among our Gods, the world may adore him, and if I were at any time to bow unto the affection of a mortall wight, I should never chuse any other to sort my greatnesse withall. But good Gods! what do I say, if I were to bow unto the affection of a mortal wight? me thinks I feel already a new passion that torments me; & by what I could comprehend from the complaints of them that have been in love, it must needs be that love whose power hath been so vaunted of, and that means to triumph over me, as over all the rest of humane kind. For having al∣wayes disdained to set mine eyes upon any one, I am marvellously satisfied with this picture, the sight of this warriour pleaseth me, and I find such powerfull charms in him, that I love him with an extream desire to see him. O ye Gods! from whence comes so great a change, Trasiclea? Where is that spirit which made thee raise thy thoughts to the heavens? Art thou so weak as to suffer thy self to be vanquished by a man, nay to take delight in confessing it? Where are those high resolutions of thine, to joyn thy self to none but one of the greatest of the Gods, as capable alone to enjoy the merit of thy beauty? I vow this is a strange basenesse in thee, where∣fore altering thy mind, reassume thy former motions. My former moti∣ons? why this is the way to follow my former motions: for there is no∣thing in the Gods which I meet not withall in this Knight: behold, here is the best face in the world, this grace contents me wonderfully, this gentle eye demonstrates an agreeable disposition, this warlicke counte∣nance a most generous courage, and this shape an incomparable valour: What shall hinder me then from loving him with such infinite perfections? Nothing, nor shall I ever be perswaded that I fail in my choyce, since I find in him all that can be wished for in a divinity. But to what end serves all this, if he do not know my mind? For nothing but to trouble me, wherefore I will no longer forbear to let him understand that I am resol∣ved to love him, so shall I be no way accessary to my own suffering. In this manner did this proud beauty, forcing her naturall inclination, con∣clude to see our Frenchman; but desiring first to be satisfied, how far his valour extended, she took her Arms, where with she was as much redoubted as with the charms of her eyes; and encharging a Damsell with a picture which represented her so well to the life, that there wanted nothing but speech: she left her fathers Court, and rode four dayes together with little or no intermission, till she came neere the Island of Silvana, where she re∣sted her self in a shepheards cottage, that joyned close to a bridge, over the which he was necessarily to passe; and giving her Damsell, that followed her, ample instructions of her pleasure, as also assuring her that she should find her in that place, she sent her into the Island of Silvana for to draw the Knight of the Palms from thence. This Damsell then proceeding in her journey, travelled three dayes with much amazement to hear nothing
spoken of but the commendations of this warriour; and being come neer to the capitall Citie of the Island, she met with twelve Damsels, and as many Knights, whereof one having kindly saluted her, demanded whither she went: I am going, said she, to see the wonder of the world, the excel∣lent Knight of the Palms, the Hercules of this Island, and the Mars of the earth, that I may one day boast I have seen the onely rarity of our time. Now beleeve me, said the Knight, you do not praise him without cause: for if you had beheld him in the middest of Armies, as I have often done, when he fought for the beautifull Merodiana, who is going heer in this lit∣ter for to see him, you would say more if it were possible. I have heard, said the Damsell, what he did in the wars: for it is bruited every where, that in single cobat he defeated the so redoubted King of Licagena, and routed his forces with such marvellous valour, that in an army of thirty or fourty thousand men which he had, scarce two hundred escaped: But it is strange, that neither in all this countrey, nor of any one that ever I did meet withall yet, could I never learn what he is Marvell not at that, said the Knight, these great warriours go alwayes unknown through the world, nor ever discover themselves, but upon some extream necessity. I have known him divers months together in Merodiana's court, yet could I never learn his name, or condition, nor do I think, our Mistresse, who question∣lesse hath a great power over him, can so much as tell of whence he is. He is very reserved, said the Damsell; but I imagine that he conceales him∣self so, to decline all diversions from his enterprises: howsoever we must conclude, that he is the prime Knight of the world. This discourse ha∣ving carried them to the Citie, the Damsell followed Merodiana, who was received by her sister with much shew of gladnesse, though in her heart a thousand times she cursed her comming; howbeit understanding that the Knight of the Palms was gone a hunting, and would not return again till the next day, she presently got to horse again, thinking she should have more liberty to speak with him in the woods, then at the Court; and in∣forming her self which way he went, she got to the Forrest, where having rode up and down a good while, at length she incountred a place where the Knight of the Palms, in a hunters habit, was staying to refresh himself. Sir, said she, guessing by his goodly presence it was he, can you tell me where I may finde the Knight of the Palms, who they say is in this forrest? Gentlewoman, answered he, you see him heer before you, ready to do you any service, if you please to employ him. Why then, said she, my travell is at an end, and my mind at rest. My Lord, I do not seek you to importune you with any request, but to let you see a peece, the like, I am perswaded, is not in the world again: Whereupon opening the box, she presented him the picture of Trasiclea; which as soon as ever he had cast his eye upon it, so transported and troubled him, that he staggered as if he had been struck with thunder. Ah! what a beauty is here, said he, and who would beleeve that Nature could be so prodigal in the distribution of her graces? Surely all her treasures are here assembled, to make this creature perfect; and, questionlesse, she took the patern of her out of heaven. You may well imagine so, said the Damsell: for she derives her originall from the father of the starres; but alas! you cannot judge of half her perfections: for this peece represents not the grace which she giveth to her actions, and deprives her of the moity of her glory. I easily beleeve it, said Alcidamant,
but had she lesse then I behold, it were enough to force the most insensible soul of the world. Boast then, said she, that you have seen the rarest thing in the earth, and restore me my picture, for I mean to take my leave of you, that I may not be benighted before I get me a lodging. How Gentlewo∣man, said he, will you so soon bereave me of a thing whereon all my con∣tent depends? Be not so cruell, I beseech you, but let me injoy the sight of this Goddesse a little longer. By my faith, said she, smiling, Ile make no bargain with you, untill you have sworn to grant me such a boon as I shall one day ask of you. You shall have all that you can desire of me, answered he. Why then this picture is yours, said she, and further to oblige you, I will bring you to the speech of her whom it represents, and place you in her fa∣vour. O God, said he, can I be so happy! Yes that you shall, answered she, and if you will go presently along with me, Ile not onely let you see her ere it be long, but so work, that you shall receive assurances of her love. I would abandon all other felicity, said Alcidamant, to undertake this enterprise; wherefore, do but give me leave to arm my self, and I will wait upon you presently. Ile stay for you as long as you will, said she, pro∣vided you return not again to the City. Whereupon, Alcidamant setting his horn to his mouth, winded it so loud, that it was heard of Arnides▪ Troi∣lus, and some other Gentlemen, who immediatly repairing unto him, were much amazed to see him arm himself. Gentlemen, said he, and you my noble friend, (speaking to the Knight of the Lions) I shall desire you to return unto my Lady, the Infanta Silva∣na, and excusing me to her, please you to let her know, that the necssity of certain affairs, which concern the good of this Gentlewoman, will not permit me to go and receive her commandments, for I am instantly to de∣part, and that I am not able to prescribe my return; which neverthelesse, shall be as soon as possibly I can. Herewith, being quite  med, he took his leave of them, and followed by his Squire, he rode away with the dam∣sell, who to make the time seem sort, fell to entertain him with a discourse of the greatnesse of her Mistris, whilst Troilus and Silvana's Knights re∣turned to the City. Their news extreamly discontented the two sisters, who having recourse unto their tears, reciprocally accused each other of so great a misfortune: Their grief was alike, their complaints were the same, and so was their opinion, that they were betrayed by one anothers malice. My Knight unwilling to displease my sister, said Silvana, hath absented himself, because he will not caresse me before her, though I think he will will return again assoon as she is gone; but I have great cause to complain of him, for this fear testifies love, and puts me in a jealousie. The absence of my servant, said Merodiana, gives me no lesse content then vexation, it shews both respect and weaknesse, it makes me suspect some familiarity be∣tween my sister and him, and yet declares that his affection lives still for me: They have been inward together, I beleeve it, neverthelesse, I will not impute that fault unto him, for it is a hard matter for a Gentleman to a∣void the surprises of a shamelesse woman; my sister hath presented her self unto him, occasions tempt men, and make the most resolved to erre; but I must divert this mischief, retire my self, and send to him to come unto me; he is much indebted to my favours, and I have alwayes known him too amorous for to fail me. Whereupon, calling for ink and paper she wrote a letter, such as her passion indited, and commanding Cistenia not to
stir from thence till she understood of his return, or if his stay were long to seek him out; she went back to her own Island, leaving no lesse content by her departure, then her coming had brought trouble to her sister, who being confident that she should quickly see her lover again, remained wel satisfied. CHAP. XLIII. Alcidamant combatting the Knight of the Phoenix, neer to a bridge, is set upon by three Giants, whom with incredible valour he slayes, and then he knows the Knight of the Phoenix. THE Knight of the Palms travelling with an amorous impatience, found ages in minutes, and thinking of the soveraigne beauties of this Princesse, he said: O God! What Spirit possesses me, and why do I per∣swade my self that I may obtain a favour worthy the birth of the greatest Monarch of the world. I know that mn ascribe little to merit, and that they look upon the greatnes rather then the vertue of per∣sons; in the mean time I flatter my self, and foolishly presuming upon that, which I should never hope for, I run to my ruine under the false apparance of a good: me thinks it were fitter for me not to try this hazard, and seek a fortune that becomes me, rather then lose my self in this vain ambition, so should I live at quiet, and out of fear; whereas otherwise, I can expect nothing butreproaches, for being so much wanting in judgement. But what is this I say? Why do I travell up and down the world, if it be not with an intent to equall my fortune with the greatest, and one day to re∣ceive a recompence answerable to my vertue? If I should retire now, I were more to be blamed for my cowardize then for my presumption, I must pursue the good fortune which reaches a hand to me, of a mean Knight become a mighty Prince, if heaven please to favour me, and above all endeavour, with the venture of my life, to obtain those felicities, which are promised him tha shall possesse so incomparable a beauty. Entertaining himself in this manner, and with the Damsells discourse, three dayes past away without any adventure at all; but on the fourth, approaching a bridge, he saw a Knight presenting himself with a Phoenix in the midst of his shield, sitting his horse in such a comely manner, of so brave a presence, and so rich armed, that it did him good to behold him. Now on my faith, said he, turning him to the Damsell, yonder is the gallantest Knight that ever I beheld; but I doubt, in regard of the desire I have to meet with no impediment in my journey, that I must be forced to combat with him be∣fore we shall have our passage free; howsoever, if I be constrained to it, I carry the key at the end of my lance. Herewith, the Knight approach∣ing within a pikes length of him, said: Noble Sir, I am obliged by the commandment of a Lady, that soveraignizes over me, to die upon this bridge in maintaining that she is the fairest in the world, or bring her the shields of all such as shall passe over it; wherefore I am come to demand yours, and in case you deny it me, then to wish you to prepare your self to
fight with me, though I am very loath to hinder the designes of so brave a Knight as you seem to be. Verily, answered he, if the condition of your enterprise did not extend to the glory of Ladies, your gentle language would peradventure have made me take my shield from off my arm, and given it you without fighting; but seeing there is question of the honour of beauties, we must see which of us two is the strongest, for having been so happy as of late to serve the fairest and most accomplished Princesse of the earth, I cannot leave you in the errour you are in, nor suffer any other to be preferred before her Excellence. We may perchance have one and the same Mistris, said the Knight of the Phoenix, and she whom you adore, may be her that I serve. So much the worse for you, said the Knight of the Palms, that being a just occasion to make us everlasting enemies, for not enduring a concurrent, the dispatch of you shall free me of all compe∣tition, or I shall leave you without jealousie by my death. Herewith, tur∣ning about their horses, they came to encounter one another with such fu∣ry, that the ground trembled under them; their fortune was equall, and their lances were broken upon each others shield without any other effect, so as they passed by one another unmoved, like two strong towers shock'd together by the violence of the winds. Alcidamant being extreamly vext to see his adversary in his saddle, couragiously drew out his sword with an intent to assault him; but he of the Phoenix desired him to run still untill such time as one of them was overthrown. By my life, said he, wood is too weak for our desires, and the importance of the quarrell; neverthe∣lesse, do as you please; whereupon the Knight of the Bridge having caused four lances to be brought, each of them chose that which he thought was the strongest, and taking the field again, they incountered once more in such a rude manner, both with shields and bodies, that they seemed to have hit against great rocks; the Knight of the Bridge lost a stirrup, passing along with some astonishment, and the Frenchman finished his course somewhat amazed at the valour of his enemy, whom he commended in his thoughts for the strongest that ever he m withall, next to the incomparable Knight of the Roses, whom he tearmed the Phoenix of warriors. Howbeit, rage and jealousie together made him take up the third lance, wherewithall he resolved to vanquish, or to die; when as he perceived three furious Giants to appear, whereof one espying the Palms on his shield, cryed out: Mighty Gods, how much am I bound to thank you for putting the murderer of Fan∣gomadan into my hands, that I may inict some horrible vengeance upon him. Herewith Alcidamant perceiving him to make towards him, turned his horse about, and setting spurs hard to him, ran his Lance so just against this new commers visor, that he past it quite thorow his head, sending him stark dead to the earth, to the infinite discontent of the other two, who charging him both at one instant with two heavie and terrible blows, made him bend with his shoulders even to the saddle bow; but raising himself quickly up again, he drew out his rich sword, and laying at him that first presented himself, he cut his Shield in two, and gave him a great gash in the arm, whence the bloud trickled down apace upon his armour: therewith presently striking at the others head, he had cleft him to the brain, if his sword had not turned in his hand; neverthelesse the blow was such, as it astonished him, and forced the bloud out of his ears and eyes. In the
mean time the Knight of the Phoenix, who was advancing to succour him, if need were, observed him with wonder, he was amazed at his confidence in the middest of such danger, marvelled at the dreadfulnesse of his blows, but especially admired his dexteity in striking, and avoyding the swords of his enemies, upon whom his never fell in vain: the ground was strewed with peeces of their armour, the bloud issued out of five or six places of their bodies, and they found themselves so weary and weak, that their strokes fell not with such fury as at the beginning of the combat; which the Knight of the Palms perceiving, he discharged so terribly on the helmet of him that prest him most, as he clove him to the teeth: and carried with the same rage, he advanced his sword immediatly to strike the other, who in extream fear would fain have avoyded the blow, but being to slow, he received it with so great violence, that it divided his body in two pieces, one moity remaining in the saddle, and the other tumbling to the ground, with such amazement to the Knight of the Phoenix, who beheld it, that he was lost in the admiration of these horrible blows. Alcidamant seeing himself delivered from his enemies, put up his sword, gave thanks to God for his victory, and approaching to the Knight against whom he was run∣ning, when as the Giants assaulted him, he said, Now it is time for us to decide our difference. I, said the other, who wondred at the greatnesse of his courage, if you were in better case; but the pains you have taken in this combat, will not permit you to begin another at this instant; take time to breath and refresh your self, to morrow we will try for the mastery; to ob∣tain it now, would be no glory to me. In the mean while passe the bridge, if you mean to get a lodging to night. What, said Alcidamant, shall I leave a rivall behinde me? and is it thus that you defend the beauty of your Mi∣stresse? Now as I live, you shall not escape me so: I esteem of mine better then to testifie so little love unto her; your excuses shall not serve your turn, you must either confesse my Mistresse to be fairer then yours, or if the beauty we adore be the same, you shall swear to pretend no interest unto her, else resolve your selfe to fight: for I have courage enough to van∣qush you upon this quarrell. Do not too hot, said the Knight of the Phoenix, I have sworn not to combt with you to day, neither upō this nor any other occasion: you would have me speak for the advantage of your Mistresse, I am contented: for I hold her to be fairer yet then you do, and love her much more then you think for; but to tye me, by your menaces, not to love her, nor to pretend unto any part in her favour, I cannot do it, breathing but by her, and for her content: wherefore I may not promise you an impossibility. Nor may I, said Alcidamant in choller, suffer you to part from hence, but upon these conditions: and let me be forsaken at my need, if I leave you till such time as either you or I be in case not to hurt one another any further. How, said the Knight of the Phoenix, will you force me to fight against my will? I that I will, said Alcidamant, or you shall confesse before this Damsell, which hath the honour to belong unto her whom I serve, that you utterly renounce all pretence unto her. Are you so hardy, said the Knight of the Phoenix, that you dare threaten me, and think to vanquish me in the ease you are in? I know well enough, said Alcidamant, that you are strong and valiant, the triall which I have made of you, makes me not doubt, but I had rather die a thousand deaths, then offend my Lady in any maner whatsoever. It seems you love her
much, said the Knight, seeing death is of lesse consideration with you, then the losse of her favour. I, more then you imagine, said Alcidamant, but to what end is all this discourse? Knight you must satisfie me otherwise then with words, there is day enough yet to break a Lance, and two have two or three bouts with our Swords: come, let us dispatch, and be not too backward where it concerns you so much; this delay does not testifie the passion which you say you are in for her. Well, said the Knight of the Phoenix, who took great pleasure in Alcidamants choller, I am ready to give you contentment; but it shall not be before you have told me whe∣ther you know your Lady, or what her name is. I am not so happy, answe∣red he, for I never saw her but in picture. Well, I will do you a good office then, said the Knight, in letting you know her indeed: Whereupon dof∣fing her helmet, she discovered an Angelicall face; which our Frenchman beholding, observed it to be the very same that Love had engraven in his heart. O God! said he, presently alighting, and falling on his knees be∣fore her, Madam, how have I erred in imploying my Arms against you, to whose service alone they are dedicated? ascribe this fault to my igno∣rance, which may justly excuse me; and, receiving my vowes, be pleased I beseech you, that as your Knight I may give an end to all the adventures of the world under the favour of your name. Valiant warriour, said she, being alighted to raise him up, my greatnesse, which is more then humane, would not permit me to abase my self so much as to salute you, did not your vertue render you worthy of that honour: your valour, that carries your name over all the earth, hath made me desire to see and try you, that so I might know whether the effect be answerable to the praises which the world gives you; but beleeve me, you have wrong, in that you have not altars erected unto you, and your glory placed where it deserves: how∣soever it sufficeth that you are esteemed of me as you ought to be, and that I have such an opinion of you, as obliges me not to pardon you, (because you have never offended) but to grant you the favour to be my Knight. Wherefore I receive your service and your vowes, and do further promise to give you one day that place in my bed which I had reserved for some one of the Gods, being hitherto perswaded, that the earth had not a man worthy of that fortune. Madam, answered he, trembling with joy to hear the sentence of his felicity pronounced in so sweet a promise: Be sure, that to merit such grace, I will do things above the power of man; and that in my services, you shall finde all that can be expected from an obliged soule, protesting neverthelesse, never to dispence with my self for the respect which I owe to your greatnesse. No, no, said she, love will endure no constraint, and I desire we may live together without ceremony, that we may with the more sweetnesse enjoy out conversation. I will submit to such lawes as you shall prescribe me, said Alcidamant, and you shall see me eternally disposed never to fail against the obedience of your command∣ments. That is it which I desire, said Trasielea, in the mean time get you to horse, and follow me to the Emperour my father; unto whom I will pre∣sent you for to be admitted into the number of his Knights. Whereupon Alcidamant mounting on horseback, after he had very humbly kist her hands in some acknowledgement of the grace she did him, rode along with her, and entertained her with the best discourse his troubled minde would permit him to use.
CHAP. XLV. Alcidamant entertains amorous discourse with the beautifull Trasiclea, and encounters Rozanel d' Astre in the midst of a wood who relates unto him his love with Angelea of Spradisa. ALcidamant thinking no glory in the world equall to that which he had in the sight of his Lady, rode on so contented, that he esteemed himself the happiest man living; he often fixed his eyes on her, and finding her incomparably fair, whether he considered the delicate features of a perfect visage, or thought upon the orce which she had shewed in justing, he con∣ceived her to be that Pallas whom the Ancients had worshipped: She on the other side, observing a most extraordinary grace in his actions, an amorous face, a lovely eye, a sweet disposition, a warlike and majesticall countenance, imagined him to be the God of bat∣tels, whose power and arms the whole universe adored; in such sort that their content was recprocall, their glory alike, and their desires common. Trasiclea beheld the letters which in gold were embossed upon her Knights Armour, with a great minde to know the mystery thereof. Alciamant many times considered the figur which he saw in the middest of his La∣dies Shield, musing at the cause that moved her to affect that bird; both of them carried by the same desire, were opening their mouthes to inform themselves of it, and retained by a like consideration, would not seem too curious. At last Trasiclea lesse ashull, or more amorous, said unto him, Since you are my Knight, you may not refuse to impart your adventures unto me, to tell me freely who you are, and for the love of what Lady you have cused those characters to be put upon your Armour. It is more then fit, said he, that I should satisfie you herein: I am a Knight errant, na∣tive of the kingdome of France, having no better fortune then that of my hope, and most unworthy of your greatnesse, if you measure not my me∣rit by my love, strangers call me the Knight of the Palms, and my friends know me better by the name of Alcidamant: As for my parents, they are noble, but in truth not furnished with great estates, though I my say with∣out vanity, that Crowns are unjustly wanting to their worth. Touching these Arms, which were given me by a learned Inchantresse, when I was to combat Fangomadan; I conceive they were made upon the occurrence of our loves: for heer are the first letters of our names interlaced, a T, which signifies Trasiclea, and an A, which is as much to say, as Alcidamant, so that I presume with reason, that all this hath been governed by the pro∣vidence of heaven: But Madam, I have been long meditating on the de∣vice you bear in your Shield, and do therein finde no lesse a mystery then in these characters: for bearing two birds which never meet together, as being unique in their kinde, I am perswaded that you would thereby figure your merit, and my love, which separately, or together, can receive no comparison in the world, nor ever can be incountred in one and the same
affection: for your beauties, which take their originall from heaven, and my love, which is derived from your divine perfections, seem to make but one person of our two bodies, as these birds are united in such a fashion, that you think them to be but one, were it not for the difference of the heads. I do beleeve with you, said she, that there is a great deal of mystery in our incounter, for these arms were given me by a woman, who having told me, that with them I should receive a wound, whereof I should never be cured, and yet that the steel of no enemy should ever pierce them, it had disswaded me from ever using them, but that she added withall, how this wound should no way indanger my life, but contrarily, I should finde so much delight in it, that I should blesse the time wherein I got it; all which is manifestly made good at this instant, my hurt being no other then the love wherewithall I am strucken, which shall not diminish by the know∣ledge I have of your mean fortune; for being a Gentleman, vertuous and valiant, I shall affect you far more, then if you had Empires without vertue, courage, and glory; onely live with me as I have told you, and I shall prize your valour above all the Kingdoms of the earth, seeing riches and crowns ought not to be the object of a generous spirit. These lovers en∣tertaining one another in this manner, travelled with such content, that whole dayes past away insensibly, so that being not above five leagues from Tarsipolis, the Capitall City of the Empire of Tramazond, Trasiclea sent Cesarina (such was the Damsels name that conducted Alcidamant) for to see whether any adventure was befallen at the Court worthy a couragious undertaking, that their apparance there might be so much the more remark∣able. The Damsell bing departed, then these lovers, transported with the excesse of their joy, which made them think of nothing else, lost them∣selves in a forrest, where they rode so long till they were overtaken by the night, and forced to rest under the tree till morning, eating, in the mean time, of such provsions as Arides carried along with him, having no other light then that, which reciprocally shone from their eyes, they supped with more content, then if they had been separated in the richest palace of the world, with the best and most exquisite meats that possibly could be had. This small repast being done, they began to renew their discourse, when as they heard the voice of one that complained hard by them. Their curiosity thereupon causing them to arise, they took one another by the hand, and with their helmets on, went softly to the place from whence the voice came, and heard one speak in this sort: Wretch that I am! To what extremity doth fortune reduce me, bereaving me of the means to free my Lady, and reserving her deliverance to the valour of some Knight, who finding her endued with such excellent beauty, may with reason de∣mand her for the recompence of his labours, and deprive me of that hap∣pinesse, which I had promised my self in the fruition of her. What, shall I survive then the grief of her losse? Never, if I were once assured of it, but my hope in the goodnesse of heaven doth perswade some relief unto my miserie: upon that then, Rozanel, depend, and let no way be left un∣sought to succour thy distressed Angelea. This complaint, closing with a world of sighs, exceedingly moved both Trasiclea and Alcidamant, who advancing three or fowr paces, presently heard the Knight ask, Who goes there? We are Knights, answered he, who would willingly bring some
remedy to your grief, and that desire you consider, how complaints do not be seem a valiant and magnanimous man, seeing there is more glory in suffering, then in such weak expressions. The darknesse and silence of these woods are very proper, I confesse, to represent your sorrows unto you; but I shall desire you to divert them with our company, to relate un∣to us the cause of your misfortune, and afterwards to make use of us, if you think us able to succour you. I know not who you are, replied he, but your pity of my affliction doth testifie that you are noble and curteous, wherefore I shall gladly obey you, and recounting unto you my fortunes, ibrace the generous offers you have made me. I am called Rozanel d'Astre, son to the valiant Amadis d'Astre, and to the beautifull Rozaliana the Empe∣rours daughter of the Parthians; I went out of Constantinople certain moneths since, with an intent to make my self famous in the world, in imi∣tation of my father, who in his younger yeers never met but with one e∣quall to him in valour; namely, Spheramond of Greece his Cousin; I tra∣versed many Christian Kingdoms, giving an end to divers strange adven∣tures, which I will not here particularize, to avoid ostentation, and travel∣led thus glorious, without any other aim then honour; when as that proud tyrant of our soules, Love, conducted me into the Kingdom of Sopradisa, to triumph over me by the soveraigne beauty of Angelea, Grandchilde to the invincible Amadis of Gaul: I obtained her favour by killing a furious Giant, who knowing this Countrey to be destitute of good Knights, ever since the losse which the Christians received at the battell of Aleppo, com∣mitted marvellous insolencies, and would have married this fair Princesse in despight of her self and her subjects, who would by no means dispose of her without the authority of their Prince, named Florian, then abroad in travell. This victory having given me all interest in her, which a modest virgin may accord unto her lover, I lived so contented, that I did not think fortune was able to crosse me: But alas! I was not fully a moneth in this felicity, when as to my infinite grief I perceived that our happinesse or un∣happinesse depend altogether on her. For one morning, I saw three wo∣men enter into the hall of Spadisa, with their hair about their ears, each of them bearing a torch in their left hand, a guilt truncheon in the right, and viols on their heads, which tumbling down at such time as they had made a circle in the midst of the hall, there arose such a thick fog, that it was two howrs before one could discern any thing; at the end whereof, the beauteous Angelea was not to be found, only neer to the Royall Throne, a pillar was seen, whereon hung a table of brasse, with these words: In revenge of the bloud of Alifernes (so was the Giant named whom I killed) Angele▪ sha continually burn in a cruell fire, and shll not be freed from thonce, till the pair without peer deliver her, the beauty of the valourous Serpent having no lesse power therein, then the strength of the brave Lion. Imagine now what case I was in, when I mist the object of my glory and desires; verily. I was ready to die for grief; and had it not been for the ease I found in my tears and sighs, it had stifled me; but fortune, that reserved me for greater miseries, would not suffer me to end so happily. I remained then lying altogether in affliction, unable to taste the comforts which the people of Sopradisa offered unto me; and arming my self, I resolved to tra∣verse
all the earth, and seek her even in the very jaws of hell; and accord∣ingly, I have past I know not how many countreys, continually inquiring after the cause of my mishap; neverthelesse, being arrived in these unknown Kingdoms (whither I was brought by as long and furious a tempest as ever was) without any news at all thereof, I began to be in despair; when as a Damsell overtook me at the entry of this wood, and told me that the deli∣verance of Angelea was neerer then I imagined; but that the glory of it should not fall upon me, it being reserved for the best Knight of the world; wherefore she bade me stay some time in this Countrey, and follow such as shewed themselves sensible of my sufferings; in which regard, I will leave off afflicting my self, and if you please to accept of my company, I will wait upon you, and see how propitious heaven will be unto me in your assistance. Why this is nobly resolved, said Alcidamant, and I assure you we shall be any way glad of your fair conversation; and therefore, beta∣king your self quietly to your rest this night, to morrow assoon as the day shall appear, we will set forth together, and peradventure we may finde that, which you have so much sought, with all the content you can wish for: Whereupon, laying themselves down under the trees, Alcidamant caused Arnides to keep watch, and amorously kissing his Ladies hand, he slept till morning. CHAP. XLVI. Alcidamant, Rozanel, and Trasiclea leave the wood, Rozanel delivers Cesarin whom three Knights pursued, Alcidamant slayes the King of Dramir, vali∣antly gives end to the adventure of the burning Rock with the aid of Trasiclea, Angelea is recovered, and the in∣chanted Knight is known. LOve, and the inconvenience of their arms, not permit∣ting these Knights to take much rest, they arose with the Sun, and finding their horses, by Arnides dili∣gence, ready, they mounted thereon, with some a∣mazement to each other; Alcidamant and Trasiclea, observed Rozanel d'Astre, and seeing him so hand∣some, well made, and with a countenance that pro∣mised much vertue and good, they were exceeding∣ly afflicted with his misfortune; on the other side, Rozanel beheld the mar∣vellous beauty of Trasiclea, whom he thought to be a Knight, and withall admiring the martiall look of Alcidamant, each of them finding something to commend in his companion; and so they travelled together, till they got out of the forrest by the direction of a wood-seller, who set them in the way to the City. Entertaining the time then with ordinary discourse, Trasiclea discovered a Damsell that fled crosse the fields to avoid the fury of three Knights that pursued her. Being much offended with this base∣nesse, she fell a gallopping between Alcidamant and Rozanel, who desiring to make some proof of his valour before these Knights, whom he greatly esteemed, he desired them to let him chaftise these insolents, that went a∣bout to outrage women, and not to interpose in his assistance, unlesse they
found he was too weak for them. We will doe what you please, said Tra∣siclea, but if you enterprise this to give us some testimony of your valour, your very countenance doth sufficiently assure us of that. I shall be glad, said he, to maintain this good opinion of yours in the proof: wherefore, with your favour, I will undertake them single; so that being not far from those Knights, he cried unto them, Turn about you villains, and defend you from those that mean to punish this base outrage of yours to women. Yes Master foole, said they, hoping to dispatch him quickly before the other two arrived, we wil chastise your insolence, and teach you how to threaten such as we are: wherewith they all three charged their Lances at him, and incountred him in such sort, that had he been lesse strong and va∣liant, he might have kist the ground; but being not so much as once moved with this incounter, he ran his Lance quite thorow the body of him at whom he had aimed it; & advancing out his Sword at the finishing of his course, he discharged it so dangerously on the helmet of him that was most forward, as he cleft him to the very teeth; which made the third betake him to the wood, in hope to save his life from the fury of this warriours blade: but his fortune was little better; for wanting discretion to avoid Ro∣zanels companions, Trasiclea incountred him so strongly with her Lance, that she cast him out of his saddle with such mischance, as his right foot hanging in the stirrop, he was drag'd by his horse into the wood, whither none of them followed to dispatch him, each of them making to the Dam∣sell, that upon sight of the defeature of her enemies, was returned. As she came neer them, Trasiclea perceiving her to be Cesarina, whom she had sent to her fathers Cour to learn some newes, wondred much at this which was befallen her, and cried out, Cesarina, how camest thou by this misfortune? Through the insolence of Brandamar King of Dramir, answered she, who in revenge of a word I let fall, as I past by him, made these Knights pursue me for to do me some mischiefe; but that you may be the better informed of all, please you to understand, that being entred into Tarsipolis, as you had commanded me, I was much amared at the meeting of novelties wor∣thy your curiofity: for the first object appearing unto me in the hall, was a burning rock that walks of it self (at the leastwise one can see no body that conducts it) and stayes ordinarily three dayes in the Court of a King or Prince in expectation, that some Knight should make trial of the adven∣ture, which in truth gives as much occasion of pitty as of fear: for in the hollow of the rock, one may behold a very beautifull young Lady in the middest of the flames, who lamenting with a million of sighes and tears, intreats for succour, and beseeches all good Knights to draw her out of the fire, which divers have undertaken to do; but at the very instant when they go about it, a Knight all covered with fire comes out, or if there be many that attempt it together, each one findes such a one to incounter him, who having given him three or four blowes with his sword, or more, if the valour of the Knights be greater, he layes him all along in the place, where all his pain is in the heat that he feels, which is not allayed till such time as his arms be taken from him: and that which breeds the most wonder, is, that the hall is not any whit the hotter for this fire, which questionlesse is not materiall, and that no body feels the heat but onely the Knights that prove the adventure. This marvell seeming worthy of my pains, I was upon returning to acquaint you with it; but espying two of my fellowes, I
staid a while, and understood by them how all the Court was much trou∣bled with your absence, especially at a time when your presence was most necessary there in regard of the interest of your beauty: for the King of Dramir, named Brandimar, presented himself with intollerable insolencie, in the lists of Tarsipolis, where he maintained, that the beauty of his Mi∣stresse surpasseth all others whatsoever, and mads all the world to see him triumph over every one that undertakes him, having so little right on his side, and from thence proceeded the cause of my danger: for unable to conceale the anger I was in for the wrong he did you, by preferring one before you that is not worthy so much as to look on you, I said aloud as I passed by, that I would go and fetch a Knight able to remove him from that errour, and abate his pride; which put him into such a rage, that he commanded them to follow me, and do me some outrage. And this, Ma∣dam, is all the account I can give you of this journey. It is more then I could hope for, said Trasiclea, but I am glad I met with thee so opportune∣ly, as to free thee from those Knights: Touching Brandamar, I doubt not but to take such order with him, that either my Lance or Sword shall deter∣mine the punishment of his temeritie. Madam, said Alcidamant, this com∣bat appertains unto me, and I should think my self most infortunate if any other should undertake the defence of your beautie, reserve your self for more glorious interprises, and permit me to give you some small proof of my love in this action. I grant it you, said Trasiclea, and shall be very well contented to see him chastised by your hands. Whereupon doubling their pace, after they had rendred thanks to Rozanel, who wondred to behold so fair a Princesse bear Arms, they arrived at Tarsipolis; where the first thing they did, was to go straight way to the Camp to combat the King of Dramir, whereof the Emperour being advertised, betooke him present∣ly to the windows, as much admiring the gallant carriage of the Knights, as satisfied with his daughters return, whom he easily knew by her Arms; and that having espied him, went up instantly to him to do her dutie. Your long stay abroad, said he, hath extreamly discontented me; but your safe return makes a full amends for it: You will have more cause to rejoyce, Sir, answered she, when you understand how I have brought you that fa∣mous Knight, who hath filled all the regions hereabout with wonder: he that slew the mighty King of Licagena, that with a handfull of men cut his Army in pieces; that killed the monster of the Island of Silvana, and in my presence three furious Giants, with fingle might had made the greatest E∣state of the world to tremble. What a rich booty hast thou got, my daughter, said the Emperour, if thou canst keep him here. He comes with an intent to be of the number of your Knights, answered she, wherefore may it please you to affoord him as gracious entertainment as possibly may be: for I assure you, Sir, he merits it more than any other Knight whatsoe∣ver. Be confident, daughter, said he, that I will give him very much cause to abide in my court: for all my treasures shall be upon him, and my chie∣fest Princes shall yeild him place. But let us see how he will carry himself against the King of Dramir, which would prefer a common beauty far be∣fore yours, whose excellencie onely deserves the title of Divine. Where∣upon, going to the windowes, they saw Brandamar flye over the crup∣per of his horse, and the valiant Knight of the Palms passe on with an ad∣mirable grace. Behold an encounter of the Lance, said the Emperour, that
does not belye the fame which this Knight hath acquired in the world; and if he can manage a Sword as well, our Amoroso shall misse of the content he expects here. Trasiclea was about to reply, but was retained by hearke∣ning to her lover, who was alighted, because he would not fight with ad∣vantage, and said to his enemy, that made but little haste in rising, having been shrewdly shaken with his fall, Why how now King of Dramir, are you no forwarder in defendidg the beauty of your Mistresse? questionlesse she will have but little reason to caresse you: up, up, it may be you shall rest in another fashion by and by. These words, which made all the people fall a laughing at him, having put him into an extream rage, he rose as if he had received no hurt, and drawing out his Sword, went and struck at Alcidamant in a most violent manner; but he wifely avoyding it with ad∣mirable agility discharged a full blow on his left arm, cutting it off sheer from his body. Whereat this lame lover being strangely incensed, retur∣ned another with all his force on the Frenchmans Shield, which proving impenetrable, it recoiled in vain; howbeit nothing abashed therewith, he laid about him most furiously, and rendred the combat very doubtfull; but Alcidamant confidering that he fought before the Father, and for the glory of his Lady, and disdaining to have the victory any longer disputed, he advanced his Sword, and let it descend in such a terrible manner on Branda∣mar, that it divided him to the very girdle; wherwith all the assistants were so amazed, as they could not beleeve that this blow could proceed from any other then the great God of Battles, and for such would have adored him, would he have endured such vanity: but sheathing up his Sword, and going to the Palace, he presented himself to the Emperour, who received him with all the testimonies of a most extraordinary respect. Sir, said he, kneeling down before him, the report which runs of the worthy esteem your Majesty makes of good Knights, hath given me the confidence thus to become an humble suitor that you wil be graciously pleased to accept of my service. I am more contented with your presence, said the Emperour, then with the addition of another Empire: whatsoever you desire in my Court shall be yours, and my people shall honour you no lesse then mine own person. I shall never be worthy of this favour, said the Knight: But Sir, I will perform such deeds of Arms for your service, that you shall ne∣ver repent any grace you have conferred on me. Then turning himself to his fair Princesse, and kissing her hands with incredible delight, he assured her of the continuance of his vowes. This done, the Emperour would have had him conducted to his chamber; but being moved with the complaints of that beauteous Infanta which he saw in the middest of the flames of the burning rock, he besought the Emperour that he would vouchsafe to enter∣tain himselfe a while with beholding the triall of this adventure; and desi∣ring the same from his Lady, he was drawing out his Sword, when as he perceived Rozanel advancing towards the rock, with the countenance of a man half bestraught. My noble friend, said he unto him, whither run you thus? Either to dye with my Angelea, said hee, whom I see in that fire, or deliver her out of her pains. Herewith the Emperour being advertised by Alcidamant, of the love between this Knight, a great Prince among the Christians, and that beautifull Infanta which he beheld in the rock, he stood to observe the success of this enterprise; & saw, that having touched the rock with his Sword, a Knight came forth of it, whose armour
was covered all over with great flames, and that shewing a confident look, began one of the roughest combats with Rozanel, that could be between two Knights, their blows were mighty, and according to the extream fury which Rozanel expressed in his fight, every stroke he struck, gave an expe∣ctation of the end of this combat; howbeit, the glory being reserved for another, he remained a little after extended in the place, with an opinion that he should be consumed in his armour; neverthelesse, the heat allayed as soon as he touched the ground, nor was he further tormented therewith when he was once unarmed, but such was his grief and displeasure, that he would have thrown himself into the Rock, for to die with Angelea, had he not been restrained by Alcidamant; who staying him by the arm, declared unto him the fault he had committed by shewing himself so weak. Wherewithall, being somewhat pacified, Alcidamant drew his sword, and seeing a man all in flames issue forth as before, he charged him with such fury that all the hall was full of sparkles. The combat growing terri∣ble, gave a world of expectation to the beholders, every one looked with passion upon the Knight of the Palms, who preferring death before the shame of not vanquishing in the presence of his Mistris, prest the inchanted Knight so hard, that ever and  made him set his knos or his hands to the ground, and as much as he could declined the strokes of his enemies sword, because he probably conjectured that thereon depended the force of the charms, and that Rozanel had resisted longer if his arms had not been heated with the Knights blows; neverthelesse, unable to avoid them all, he received one on his armour, which beginning to burn him, as if he had lain upon the fire, put him into such a rage, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it so dangerously o his enemies helmet, that he laid him all along upon the floor, to the great contentment of th specta∣tors, and especially of Trasiclea, who finding no lesse glory in her lovers victory, then if she her self had gotten it, was going to caresse him, when she perceived a dwarf come towards her from the root of the Rock, and say: Madam, you are to have a  in this adventure, and  to shew your self no lesse couragious then this famous Knight of the Palms; for now on you alone depends the good or ill of this Lady. Lo here, the means of her deliverance, said he, presenting her with a violl full of ode∣riferous water, enter resolutely into the rock, brea this glasse upon the head of the Infanta, and then you shall s the inchantment dissolved. Whereupon the Emperour stept forth wit two of his Lords to stay Trasi∣clea, remonstrating unto her, that there was no trust to be given to sorcery, and that she would be consumed before she was half way in the Rock; not∣withstanding all which, she went with a dalesse courage thorow the flames, and broke the violl over the head of the Princesse of Soprdisa, which was no foor done, but presently the fire was quenched, Angelea felt no more pain, and the arour of the Knight whom Alcidamant had combatted, lost the colour which it had, himself standing on his feet as well as ever he was in all his life. Behold, my Lord, said Trasiclea, present∣ing Angelea to her father, behold the fruit of y courage, I have delivered this fair Princesse out of cruell torment, given new life to this Knight, pointing to Rozanel d'Astre, and shall be the cause of the happinesse of all their future being. You speak most truly, Madam, said Rozanel, transpor∣ted with an excesse of joy to see his Mistris fr from pain, you have given
us indeed a new life, & have exceedingly obliged us, not to breathe, but for your service: wherefore please you to command us somthing, that we may dispose our selves to obey you. That which I desire f you is, said Trasiclea; that you live long contented together, and that you render your affections of proof against the power of Fortune. Whereupon assuring them, that they should receive all the assistance they could possibly desire from her, she left them to entertain Alcidamant, to whom they gave a world of thanks, and commanding the Count d'Alcane to see them furnished with money and shipping for their return into Greece. After they had refreshed themselves a while in Tarsipolis, she was going to retire with Alcidamant, when as the inchanted Knight having put off his Helmet, went and kneeled down before him, humbly thanking him for the succour he had given him. The goodly presence of this Knight possessing Trasiclea with an extream desire to know him, she intreated him to tell his name. Madam, answered he, I am called Florisbel, second son to the great King of France, who lea∣ving Constantinople a while since, for to seek adventures abroad, was car∣ried by sea into Cataya; where meeting with no lesse attractions in the beautiful Semarimis, daughter to the King of that countrey, then my cousin here, meaning Rozanel d'Astre, who as yet had taken no notice of him, hath incountred the Princesse of Sopradisa, I set my self to serve her with that good fortune as she received me for her Knight; whereupon I undertook such enterprises for her sake, as were worthy the glory of my Ancestors, sent her two hundred shields, of Knights that I had overthrown at a Iust which was held for to publish her the wonder of beauties: and not satis∣fied therewith, I went up and down doing marvellous deeds of Arms un∣der the name of the Grey Knight; when as one morning I met with 3 old witches, who conducting this inchanted Rock, laid such powerfull charms upon me, that I entred all armed in it, having no other desire then to with∣stand all those that offered to deliver this fair Princesse. And this, Madam, is all the satisfaction I can give you for the present, but not all that you may expect from me hereafter: for I will seek out occasions to serve both you and this brave warriour that accompanies you. Trasiclea having courte∣ously thanked him, presented him with the same favours which she had offered to Rozanel, who by this time comming to know him, entertained him with a world of kindnesse, and had therein continued longer, but that Trasiclea desiring to accompany her Knight to his chamber, so to shew her subjects how she would have them to honour him, caused them to be con∣ducted to another, giving the fair Angelea three Damsels to attend her, with a charge to see her extraordinarily served. All things being thus happily disposed, Trasiclea left her Knight, went and unarmed her self, put on one of the richest gowns she had, drest her self wonderfull wealthy, and appeared so beautifull at supper, where the three Knights were set at table with the Emperour, that every one thought she had some divinity in her. The cloth being taken away, and the Emperour having discoursed with Rozanel and Florisbel, who then took their leave of him, whilst Alcidamant was talking with his Lady, every one withdrew till the next morning; at which time our Princes of Greece having kist Trasiclea's hand, & bidden the Knight of the Palms adieu, who would not make himself known to Florisbel, imbark themselves with Angelea for their return to Constantinople, where we will leave them for to prosecute our history.
CHAP. XLVII. Alcidamant incountring Trasiclea apart, discovered his passions unto her, and the answer she made him. ALcidamant living with unspeakable content in the mid∣dest of honours, and the praises of all men, and no lesse esteemed, then if he had been the Prince of Tramazond, had nothing further to wish for, but some more particular favours from Trasiclea; he had love and impatience enough for to desire them, but too much respect for to ask them: so that the pain of his fear equalled the pleasure of his hope. Some dayes being sweetly past away in walking, familiar discourses, and solitary entertainments, one evening he espied his Mistresse fitting in the shadow, under certain trees; where, kneeling down before her, and taking her hand to kisse, he said unto her: Madam, consider I beseech you, the extremity of my passion by the excesse of your beauty; and marvell not, if unable to support the violence of my desires, you see me in some unreasonable im∣patience: I endure all that a poore lover can undergoe; and the sight of you, which should asswage my martyrdome, encreases it: for apprehen∣ding the felicity which I am to expect from your more secret caresses, I cannot bear the retardment of them but with incredible torment. I am too forward, I am too forward, I confesse, and this complaint of mine, which seems unreasonable (since you have alwayes assured me that you live for me only) may justly offend you: But alas! that which I feel, will not permit me to be longer contained, so that I am forced to discover it, for to finde some remedy, and that wholly depends on you, which I beseech you to grant me, if you have resolved to render me one day happy, and without making me longer to languish, advance my felicity with your delitious frui∣tion. Sir, answered she, I did not think our familiarity would have car∣ried you to such insolencie, or that my affability would have made you forget the respect which you ought to have: Have you well considered that you desire, and upon what conditions doe you demand it? Alas! said he with a trembling, which thorowly testified his love, and that gave marvellous satisfaction to Trasiclea, who therein observed that which she desired in this feare: Madam, do you set down the lawes your selfe, I will never oppose them, I opened my heart to you, to make you sensible of my suffering, not to provoke you to displeasure; be not offended then, I beseech you, with this liberty I have taken: or if it be distastfull to you, command me to suffer and be silent, and you shall never hear me open my lips hereafter, but with that very respect which may be used to a Deitie. I do not require, said she in a gentler accent, that you should live after with me: for my affection will not endure such ceremonies, but you shall oblige me for hoping for any thing more from me, then what honour will permit me to grant you: for our conditions being so different, that they may well draw my father to be otherwise disposed then I am, if he were
aware of our determinations; it is very necessary, in my opinion, to wait the time, when as your services, and my perswasions may induce him to receive you as his son in law, rather then ruine them by precipitation; I do beleeve that this expectation is grievous to you, and that it leaves you not without much desire, for I judge of your suffring by mine own; but say, my Knight, will it not be worthy of your pain, and will not your pleasure taste the sweeter for your enduring? Yes verily, it will be dearer to you, having gotten it with difficulty, then if you injoyed it otherwise. Com∣plain no longer therefore, I pray you, but live with more content, and give me occasion to love you everlastingly. Madam, said he, it is no little grief to me that you should finde any of∣fence in my complaints, but since they displease you, be assured they shall never importune you more, I will suffer with silence, and if the violence of my passion shall inforce any sighes from me, I will so carry my self that none but these trees shall be witnesses of them; In the mean time be gra∣ciously pleased to sweeten the bitternesse of my displeasure with some more particular favours, and incouraging me to attend the happinesse which you make me to hope for, permit me to come and visit you in your chamber when all the world is at rest, that so I may have the content to see you without fear. I will advice with time upon that, said she, for it is a bu∣sinesse that requires good deliberation; but not to be so ingratefull as to give you nothing, receive this kisse, the first that ever man received from my divinity forbidding me the imparting of so great a favour; receive, I say, this kisse for an infallible assurance of my promise. Whereupon, laying her mouth to his lips, she ravished him with the incredible delight of so a∣morous a touch. In this manner did these lovers spend the time, and lived with such a tranquillity of minde, that never did two finde lesse distast in the birth of their affections. If they saw one another, it was with new as∣surances of their love, if therein they were hindered by any occasion, that defect was supplied with letters; Arnides and Cesarina were alwayes walking with new commissions; briefly, their discourse and conversation was a very Paradise. This contentment being without crosses, Alcidamant without jealousie, (because the pride this Princesse had esloigned all such as desired to present her with their service) she without suspition, not being able to imagine that ever he will be in any passion for another, their life was rather divine then humane, and all things disposed themselves by little and little to render them happy; when as fortune, that takes pleasure in her in∣constancie, would needs let them see that the content of men depends upon her will, and that their designes do never arrive at a good port without her assistance. Two storms arose at once, whereof one was like to have over∣thrown the greatnesse of that Empire, by reducing the Emperour and his daughter to the extremity of the losse of their lives, and the other to have utterly ruined these lovers hopes for ever injoying one another. The first happened by the treachery of Drumelia, Aunt unto Brandamar King of Dramir, slain, as you have heard, upon the quarrell of his Mistris beauty; and the second through the indiscretion of Cistenia, whom Merodiana had left in the Island of Silvana, with a letter directed to the Knight of the Palms, as I shall deliver by and by, having spoken of that which did pre∣cede this misfortune.
CHAP. XLVIII. Drumelia Aunt to the King of Dramir would have betrayed the Emperour of Tra∣mazond; Trasiclea is led away by cunning, the Emperour is assaulted by three Giants, falls down hurt: Alcidamant succours him, with increai∣ble valour, slaies the three Giants, arrives in the wood just as Trasiclea was ready to be ravished, delivers her by the death of his enemies, and returns to the Citie. DRumelia, Aunt unto Brandamar, unable with patience to endure the death of this King, whom she held as dear as her own life, had recourse unto magicall books, wherein she was wonderfully expert; and knowing that the Emperour of Tramazond, upon whom she desired to extend her rage, was too mighty for her to be revenged of by arms, she proceeded therein with cunning; wherefore desiring nothing so much as his death, and the destruction of Trasiclea, she resolved to govern her enter∣prise with such judgement, that both their ends should arrive at one instant, so that taking five dreadfull Giants, neer kinsmen to Brandamar, she caused her self and them to be carried by night, in a cloud, to the forrest of Tarsi∣polis, where making certain circles amongst the trees, she rendered her conjurations so powerfull, that the great and formidable Giants seemed little deformed Dwarfs; seeing them in the estate which she desired for to cover her malice, she put her self in the midst of them, advertised them particularly of all that they had to do; and taking the way of the City, she came thither just as the Emperour was returning out of the Temple from sacrificing to his Gods. Howbeit, not thinking it fit to present her self un∣to him any where but in the Palace, because she would not play one match without the other, she followed fair and softly after him, giving the people occasion to laugh, for to see her walk between five such ill-favoured crea∣tures; and comming to the hall, even as Trasiclea entered, she presently ad∣vanced towards her, and kneeling down, with tears and sighs, she thus be∣gan: Excellent Princesse, I am reduced to that passe, as it is not possible for a wretched woman to be more miserable; in so much, that if I do not finde some assistance of your pity, you shall see me cut off the poor remainder of my life heer in your presence, and this poniard in my hand shall second the cruelty of my fortune, which hath lately deprived me of a son, whom I may richly boast to be one of the best Knights of the earth, rendering him a prisoner in the hands of a mercilesse Giant, that loving the same Mistris, which he served, to free himself of a rivall, purposeth to take away his life, if he be not speedily succoured: Now the fame which runs of your valour, hath induced me to make this addresse unto your greatnesse, with an opi∣nion that I shall not be refused. No verily, said Trasiclea, that you shall not, for I will serve you most willingly in this extremity. Madam, said Alcidamant, extreamly discontented to see her so resolved, I beseech you
to pardon me if I say, that you promise too lightly; I am fitter for travell then you, and your divine person is not to be exposed unto hazzard, with∣out more occasion. Leave the care of this to me, and give your subjects the satisfaction of your presence, whilst I go and dispatch the affair. Why my Knight, said she smiling, are you not contented with so much glory as you have acquired in the world already, but that you would bereave me of this too? Let me intreat you to stay heer for to serve the Empe∣rour my father in my stead, and because it will not be long ere I return, you shall seek to entertain him in the mean time. Now by my Crown, said the Emperour, I am also of his minde, daughter, and do not hold it fit that you should undertake this enterprise, wherein it may be there is more danger then you think for. Sir, said Drumelia, who was very much afraid that her designes should be very much discovered, you need not doubt her esloignment, her valour exempts you from that; and to let you see that I do not venture her person lightly, as you imagine, Ile stay heer my self with you, and she shall be conducted by two of these Dwarfs, so that in case she return not safely by to morrow, with all the contentment you can desire, inflict the cruellest punishment you can upon me. Trasiclea said unto her father, My Lord, there are so few occasions of glory presented in these quarters, that I cannot without much wrong to mine honour refuse this same; therefore permit me, I beseech you, to depart with your good fa∣vour, and comfort your self the mean while in the company of this noble Knight of the Palms. Well, since you will have it so, said the Emperour, Ile no longer oppose your desire, but I am in some mistrust, I know not wherefore, and cannot be perswaded that this voiage will be prosperous. Trasiclea, having thus obtained leave, presently armed herself, little regard∣ing the suspition her father had of the enterprise, which she imputed rather to the imbecility of his age, then to any assured judgement; and therefore having cast a thousand looks on her Knight, for to bid him tacitely adieu, she departed with Cesarina and two of those Dwarfs, somewhat troubled for that she had not the company of Alcidamant: The displeasure where∣of, so took up her thoughts, that never minding her enterprise, she rode on till she came to the wood, whereinto the Giants were no sooner entred, but they re-assumed their former shape, laid two blows with their heavy maces on the head and shoulders of this Princesse, who thus surprised, fell, and kist the ground, with little or no memory at all. The Giants seeing her in this posture, instantly alighted, bound her with cords, and laying hold on Cesarina, that seemed more dead then alive, they tied her to the foot of a tree. Whilst this Tragedy was framing in the wood, a more bloudy one was acted in the City: Drumelia thinking Trasiclea sure enough in the hands of these Giants, desiring to play her part, touched the three Dwarfs with a wand she had in her hand, and making them appear with their natu∣rall greatnesse, much amazed the assistants, especially the Emperour, who going to save himself, received a blow with a scymiter on his arm, which laid him on the ground, liker to die then to live. Whereupon, a great ru∣mour arose in the hall, the Courtiers betook them to their swords by Al∣cidamants example, who, with his cloak wound about his left arm, gave one of the Giants so furious a blow on the shoulder, that he opened him to the very girdle, and instantly ran one of the other two quite thorow the body; the third, who made a horrible massacre of the unarmed Knights,
seeing the fall of his companions, in a mighty rage flew at Alcidamant, ho∣ping to cut him in pieces; but the advised Knight, whose judgement was not overcome with fury, slipt aside from the blow, and losing no time, gave him a deep and dangerous wound in the thigh. The Giant, boyling with choller, was not then much sensible of it; but a little after, advan∣cing his heavy scymiter to discharge it on the Knight, and stretching him∣self upon his feet to render his stroke the stronger, he fell all along, and carried with him more then half of our Frenchmans cloak, who receiving a light hurt on the arm, did for all that forbear the taking of his enemies head from his shoulders, and suddenly running to the door, made stay of Drumelia, who, beholding the miserable end of her kinsmen, would have saved her self. By my life, said he, you old witch, you shall not escape me so, your head shall answer for Trasiclea's life; Say, wicked creature, Whither hast thou caused her to be conducted? What, wilt thou not speak? No, I will be torn in pieces, said she, before I will discover it; her death shall yet make some satisfaction for the King of Dramirs, and the inhumane butchery of these his kinsmen. What a horrible treason is this, said Alcidamant? But the horriblenesse of thy punishment shall be answerable to it. Whereupon, dragging her into the hall, he commit∣ted her to the custody of certain Knights, whom he commanded to look well unto her, as they would answer it with the perill of their heads; and perceiving the Emperour to be come again to himself, and that the Chy∣rurgeons assured there was no danger in his hurt, he ran presently to his chamber, caused himself to be armed with all speed, and mounting on his horse, gallopped away towards the wood; where at the first arivall, he heard certain cries, which made him put himself amongst the thickest of the trees, at one of the which he saw Cesarina tied, and his beautifull Mi∣stris in the hands of two Giants, who were pulling off her armour for to ravish her. This sight possessing him with a strange fury, he alighted, and with his sword drawn, approached these two Colosses, and finding the head of the greatest unarmed, divided it in two, thinking he was not obliged to use any curtesie to persons that were not capable of it. The o∣ther, grown wiser by his companions misfortune, laced on his helmet, and cryed out: Stand, Caitiff, that I may revenge the death of a man, whom thou hast basely surprised, and let this one blow be the reward of all thy wickednesse. Saying so, he discharged his curtleax with such vio∣lence, that he stun'd the Knights arm, making him recoil a pace or two back; but his wrath increasing, and considering that the safety of his Lady was at stake, he laid at his head with such a tempest, that albeit his sword turned in his hand, and that he struck him but with the flat, yet he sent him dead to the ground, his brains flying out with the horrible violence of the blow. That done, he came speedily to Trasiclea, and cutting the cords where∣withall she was tied, he said, O God! what inhumanity is this, to inchain her that is able to captivate all the world? Madam, these barbarous vil∣lains were not ignorant of your valour, and therefore the fear of your sword had made them secure themselves by binding you: But what trick did they use to reduce you thereunto? They surprised me being in a muse, said she, and with two mighty blows laid me along; where remaining without motion, I could not hinder them from binding me: And even as
you came, these villains were unarming me, and threatned to make me serve for the satisfying of their brutish lust; but thanks be to the Gods, I am freed by your valour: yet I wonder how you could leave the Emperour, for to arrive here so luckily. How? said he, leave the Emperour? Wee have seen strange things within these two howrs. Then he recounted unto her all that had passed in Tarsipolis, whereat she remained so much amazed and contented, that she could never commend her good fortune enough, which had made her the Mistresse of so brave and valiant a Knight. Let us go my dear friend, said she unto him, let us go and release the Emperour out of the care he is in for the losse of me; and let us think upon the pains wherewithall we may sufficiently punish this wicked creature that had so cunningly betrayed us. It were fitter to think of that which I endure, an∣swered he; and if you were as just as fair, you would leave the care of that execution to the officers of the Empire, for to undertake a noble resolution to give some speedy end to our sufferings, neverthelesse, seeing you have commanded me to be ilent herein, I will proceed no further, but refer the performance of your promise to your own gracious pleasure. Why see now, said she, how time begets occasion to content you: for have you not to day done things able to oblige my father not to deny you what you so much desire? yes, my Knight, you have, and if you will be patient, you shall quickly see your self at rest: let not your complaints then diminish the obligation of your succour, but let me feel the contentment of it without grief. Whereupon Cesarina being untied, they took the way of the Ci∣tie, wherein they met with five or six troops of Knights, which the Empe∣rour had sent for the deliverance of Trasiclea, who seeing her return with the valiant stranger, (for so was Alcidamant ordinarily termed) and under∣standing how matters had past, they raised his praises to such an height, that he was ashamed of them, & Trasiclea, the most contented on the earth. The speed they made, having soon brought them to the Citie, Trasiclea went straight to see her father, who taking her by the hand, fell a weeping with extream joy. Do I see thee again, my dear child, said he, being out of all hope both of mine own safety and thy life? Ah! how much am I bound to the Gods for so great a grace? and what do I owe to this brave stranger, who hath this day done such wonders, as never will be forgotten as long as the world endures? Daughter, it is you that must requite them, I leave you the power to do it, and will no way oppose whatsoever you shall ordain for his recompence. My Lord, answered she, this service deserves no lesse then a Crown; but we shall have time enough to think of it: our present care must be to look unto your health. I finde my self so well, said he, that the joy of your return surpasseth the pain I feel of my wound: Go and refresh your selves both of you, whilst I take a little rest, as I am advi∣sed by my Physitians. Thereupon those lovers bidding him good night, went and warmed themselves, and then walked into the hall together for to behold an infinite company of Bonfires which the inhabitants of Tarfi∣polis made in every part of the Citie for joy of the good successe of this adventure; which done, they both withdrew into their chambers, Alcida∣mant studying how he might demand some ease for his sufferings, without offending his Lady, and Trasiclea what more greater favour she might con∣fer on him, then formerly she had done, and not contravenne that modesty which a vertuous and discreet mayden ought to have in her actions.
CHAP. XLIX. The complainis of Alcidamant, Trasiclea's resentment, she promiseth to esponse him the next day: Cistenia arrives in the mean time with letters from Merdian: Trasiclea by wile reads them, becommeth jealous, banisheth Alcidamant, and makes him feel the effects of her displeasure. ALcidamant dying in his impatience, and finding nothing so grievous as the command which was laid upon him, not to make any shew of his torment, was op∣prest with strange unquietnesse. He went ordinari∣ly into the gardens, walked up and down the allies, and getting many times into the orchard, he laid himself down upon the bank of a little stream which ran along by it; where, under the shadow of cer∣tain trees, his eyes full of teares, he spake thus: How I envie your nature, that doth not render you subject to the misfortunes which follow men: you know not what it is to love; insensible of lovers pains, you mock their sufferings; and never caring for the injuries of time, you let the seasons work their effects: and now behold, you are beautifully adorned with green leaves, whilst I am in matydome, and with so little hope, as makes my life a very languishment. Is not this a wonderfull misery? Doubt∣lesse it is, yea such as makes me desire to change condition with you, if I might, and wish my selfe covered with your bark, therein to spend the time which Love hath allottd to my pai, th so I ight be freed from the griefes wherewithall I am surcharged. Carrying himselfe frequently in this manner, every one marvelled that he was never seen in the Court, but at such times as he must needs be present there; yea, and his Lady sus∣pecting something, extreamly desired to know what became of him: Whereupon she caused Cesina to watch him, and understanding one day that he was in the garden, thither she went, visited all the alleyes, and not finding him, she past into the orchard, where espying him to lye under the trees, she stole as neer unto him as she could. He was then so entertained by his fancies, as he spake not a word; but his silence lasted not long: for suddenly he said, O Madam! how hard is this commandment? and what may I hope from the extremitie of my passions, if you will not permit me to shew them? Either you love me, or your promises are feigned. If you have resolved to make me happy by giving your selfe unto me upon such conditions as honour allowes of, why do you refuse me that now which you will grant me then? you will say, that respect restrains you: Ah Madam! that is but an ill opinion for to make lovers languish: and she that admits of such a consideration cowardly, deprives herselfe of happi∣nesse. I would to God, not that you should feel my pain (for I will never wish you so much hurt) but that you may know the rigour of it, that you might see a million of tears in my eyes, and that you might judge by these
infinity of sighes which ordinarily I fetch, whether I can be without grief to see my selfe so long delayed from the greatest blisse which a Knight can hope for in the world, you would then, without doubt, be more sensible of my endurings, and advancing my felicity, give end to the martyrdome wherein you had seen me. These complaints moved Trasiclea exceeding∣ly; and had she not been arrested by that bashfulnesse wherewithall maids are usually retained, questionlesse she had made use of time and place to shew her lover that she desired his contentment no lesse then himself; how∣beit, stealing softly back, she returned into the garden, where considering her lovers reasons, she sometimes resolved to give him satisfaction, and then by and by was quite of another minde. At length, having continued a good while in these extremities, she concluded to make no further diffi∣culty therein, seeing she meant to take him for her husband. This is, said she to herself, this is but to defer his contentment with too weak considera∣tions; & so many nights as passe away unprofitably, seem to accuse me of want of love, I do my self wrong to be so difficile for mine own content; but I will repair this fault, and living otherwise hereafter, I will give my Knight no more occasion to complain. This resolution carrying her back again to the orchard, she began to sing a far off, for to draw Alcidamant out of his fantasies, who was very much amazed to behold her, and to be sur∣prized with tears in his eyes; whereupon he took his hankercher for to wipe them, but Trasiclea staying his hand, sayd unto him: I am very glad, my Knight, to see you weep in this sort, not that I take pleasure in my cru∣elty, but to make it serve for your content: your complaints which I have heard, have had the power to alter both my will and minde, so that I am now resolved to give your services their recompence, to espouse you se∣cretly, and to let you enjoy all the priviledge which marriage can affoord you, untill such time as we may dispose my father to receive you more openly. Wherefore be of good cheer, and prepare your selfe to come to morrow in the evening to my chamber, where Cesarina and my Gover∣nesse shall be witnesses of the faith you shall plight me to legitimate our ca∣resses. Thus have I resolved to do, both as your merit and my affection require. O God! said Alcidamant, falling on his knees before her, can I, Madam, ever deserve this grace? and may I not well repute my selfe the happiest man of the earth? yes, without doubt, I may, nor do I think that my felicity can be matched with another whatsoever. O blessed suffe∣rings! what reward are you to have? What fruit do I gather from my tears? and what treasure have I found in my patience. O the most fortunate Knight breathing! Doest thou promise to thy selfe not onely an Empire, but the possession of a Divinity? No, no, thou couldst not, this favour surpasseth all thy hopes by far, and obliges thee never to be in∣gratefull: neither, Madam, will I ever be, I will labour to be found wor∣thy of this grace by a million of services: and the more you have exalted me, the more humbler and more acknowledging you shall finde me; give me therefore, I beseech you, these fair hands, that I may, upon their beau∣ties, imprint my thankfulnesse for the compassion you have been so gra∣ciously pleased to have of me. My dearest Knight, answered Trasiclea, see∣ing I have promised you an absolute power over the rest, sure I shall never permit you more to kisse my hands: for purposing very shortly to be your wife, I am to intreat you otherwise then heretofore: wherefore now you
shall have my lips (saying so she kist him) wherewithall I shall desire you to be contented, untill our marriage shall authorize you further. Hereupon these two lovers taking one another by the hand, walked up & down a while in the garden; but Trasiclea, to avoid all suspition that might have grown by their being met so together, modestly withdrew her selfe, and left him with such an extasie of joy, that he knew not where he was. Night ensuing thereupon, he went to see the Emperour, who finding him∣selfe healed of his hurt, and in better state of health then he had been of a long time before, resolved to hunt the next morning by the break of day; which fitted our Frenchmans disposition wonderfull well, who thinking he should that way passe the time better then to remain in the Court, pro∣mised to wait upon him; and accordingly no sooner did the Sun appear the next morning, but he got into the field, where thinking of his approa∣ching happinesse, he made his horse to bound with such a grace, that it amazed every one to see how bravely he sate him: Then calling to minde his Mistresses amorous words, and considering them severally apart, he thought no felicity could be comparable to his, nor that he could ever be subject again to the crosses of Fortune. But alas! she made him soon know, that our good or ill depend upon upon her inconstancie, and that it is a great errour in men to promise any thing of certainty to themselves in this world. Whilst he crossed the woods, following the cry of the hounds, Cistenia, the secretary of Merodiana's affections, left (as you have heard) with a letter in the Island of Silvana, arrived at Tarsipolis, and going to the palace, by ill fortune met with Cesarina, and enquired of her for the valiant Knight of the Palms. Gentlewoman, said Cesari∣na unto her, is it for the execution of any enterprize that you seek him? No, answered this unadvised maid, but onely to deliver him a letter, which I beleeve will be accptable unto him, comming from one of the fairest La∣dies of the world, and that loves him infinitely. Marry, and he is worthy of it, replied Cesarina; but he is not now in town: wherefore if you please to rest you in my chamber till his return, which will be in the eve∣ning, you may then speak with him at leasure. I shall gladly accept of your fair courtesie, said Cistenia, since you are pleased so far to olige me. Whereupon going into Cesarina's chamber, she set some to attend her whilst she went unto Trasiclea▪ whom she acquainted with all that she had learned of Cistenia. Gods me, said Trasiclea, if we could come by this letter, peradventure we might discover some extraordinary secret. There must be some Art used to get it, said Cesarina; but seeing you so desire it, it shall go hard but I will give it you in your hand ere be long. So leaving her Mistresse, she went and put a little of the juice of Poppy in∣to some broth, which was prepared for Cistenia, who had no sooner ta∣ken it, but that she found her selfe so sleepy, as she threw her self pre∣sently upon a bed; where Cesarina perceiving her to be fast enough for waking in haste, searched her Pockets, and finding Merodiana's letter, carried it with all speed to Trasiclea, who having opened it, read thus:
Merodiana's Letter to the valiant Knight of the Palms. IF I had as little affection, as you have sense of the favours you have found in my imbrces I should not only say that you were ingratefull, but I should seek to be re∣vengedof your neglect, howbeit, considering that you received them upon promise of rendering them one day legitimate, I will proceed no further then to complain of you, and to put you in minde of them, for to oblige you unto a return; and indeed it is more then time, at leastwise if you mean to be loial, neitherwil my patience suffer you to run thus any longer about the world, depriving me of the fruits of my love, which if either you have forgotten, or that your weaknesse hath carried you to other affe∣ctions, let me at leastwise know so much, to the end that I may in my death finde that onely comfort, which is left to a woman betrayed. O ye Gods! said Trasiclea, how am I this day bound to you, for the dis∣covery of a secret of such importance, you shew by this your care of me, that you are mindfull of our alliance. Alas! I was going to commit an irreparable fault, and giving my self to the most disloyall Knight that lives, had made my self a grief for all my future dayes. Art thou a deceiver, Al∣cidamant? Ah! how is that valour ill bestowed, and how unjust are the Gods in the partition of their treasures? Thou thoughtest to beguile me upon such a promise as thou madest to that unfortunate Lady, but thou art far from thy reckoning, and the happinesse which I was preparing for thee, shall be for ever withheld. Thou wilt finde out some reasons to cover thy cunning, but Ile not permit thee, nor do thee the favour to hear so much as one poor excuse; but banishing thee for ever from my sight, I will preserve my self from faulting a second time. Come then and take me away all these preparations which I have made for this wicked man, and thou Cesa∣rina give me some paper, a Letter is the cause of my good, and a Letter shall be the occasion of his pain. Whereupon, walking a great pace up and down her chamber, she remained a good while pensive; but not caring how she wrote, so as she might expresse her minde, she framed a Letter, and sealing it up, commanded Cesarina to deliver it unto the Knight assoon as ever he returned, but not to receive any answer. Which being done, she fell to walking again; and every minute finding new cause of displeasure, she rendered her passion and hatred greater, insomuch that she was more in rage, then ever she had been in love. Whilst fortune was thus putting all in disorder, Alcidamant returned most contented, thinking of nothing lesse then the mischief which was to fall upon him; and declining the Emperours ta∣ble, that he might not fail his Lady, he betook him to his chamber, where within a little after Cesarina presented her self to him. Beholding her, he was troubled with extream joy, and thought that she was come to lead him to the paradise of his delights; but she entering with a sad countenance, said unto him: My Lord, my Mistris hath commanded me to deliver you this Letter; Alcidamant taking it with a great change of colour, and kissing it, though it were with a strange suspition, which Cesarina's countenance had begot in him, he opened it, wherein he read these words.
To the most disloyall Knight in the world. I Do not write to thee in way of complaint, for thereby I should still shew my love and weaknesse; but it is to tell thee, that thy wickednesse renders thee unworthy of the favours, which thou hadst thought to have found in my pitty: I will con∣serve my self for another, it may be lesse valiant and brave, but far more faithfull then thy self, and leaving thee in the liberty to keep thy word with Merodiana, I will take the power to love some otherwhere. Get thee out of the limits of this Empire, which thou hast lost, as unworthy to possesse it, and never present thy self more before me, that thy sight may not renew the vexation which I am in, to have been deceived by thee. This Letter, so cruell, and that deprived the Knight of all hope, having seased him with too sensible a sorrow, made him sink to the ground with such apparance of death, that Cesarina leaving him in his Squires arms, re∣turned to her Mistris, infinitely discontented for that she had been the occa∣sion of this misfortune; and telling her what effect her Letter had wrought, she retired, betaking her to strange unquietnesse. CHAP. L. Alsidamants despair, the effects of his rage, by the defeat of certain Giants and Knights: he turns Hermit. WHilst Cesarina recounted unto Trasiclea the successe of her message, Alcidamant, being come to himself, by the diligence of  his Squire, made such strange lamentation, that the most inhumane soul in the world would have been sensible of his complaint. Ah why! said he, unjust heavens, why have you made me hope for a happinesse with such expectation, to deny it me now upon so little reason? Ah beautious Trasi∣clea! with what weaknesse are you carried? you draw my ruine from that which serves for my glory; for despising Merodiana for you, me thinks, I give you occasion to beleeve that you have the advantage of her; yet you make her love, the cause of your hate, and my misfortune. Is this done with justice? No, no, you are too much transported with passion, and if you did not refuse me that through anger, which the severest judges in the world could not with reason deny to the greatest offenders; I should justi∣fie my self before you, and let you see mine innocence with so much truth, that you could not but condemn this precipitation of yours; howbeit, that I may not hope for, your forbidding me ever to appear before you a∣gain, utterly bereaves me of the means to let you one day see your errour. Ah! this is to testifie more cruelty, then ever you have shewed love, and that my punishment doth far surpasse the pleasure of my hope. You will have me gone: Alas! Can I do it and live? I cannot, I cannot, yet it is fit that I prefer your commandments before my life, I wil be gone then, but
lament my absence, fair Princesse, it deprives you of a servant, that hath never had greater care, then how to honour the merit of your favour. Whereupon, charging his Squire to go and make ready his horses, he secretly armed himself, went to the stable door, mounted on horsback, and deprting out of the City, took the first way presented it self, making in∣credible lamentation. Behold, said he, how from the supremest degree of fe∣licity, I am faln into the abysmes of a misery, out of the which I cannot get without miracle. Good God! who would have thought, that having but one tedious minute to passe, for to see my self in an unmatchable glory, fortune should have found out the means to crosse me? I could never ima∣gine it, but to my cost I perceive, that man cannot assigne a time for his good, no more then for the evill that is to arrive unto him. Ah, Cistenia! How well thou makest me pay for the pleasures thou procuredst me from thy Mistris? How dearly, Merodiana, do I buy your favours? You say, that I promised to espouse you: Alas! I had never such a thought, our ca∣resses have been free, and the power of disposing our selves never parted from us; Why do you say then, that it is time to render our imbraces le∣gitimate? Can I be your sisters friend, and your husband? By no means, it is a thing whereof you ought never so much as to think; neverthelesse, I endure the pains of your folly, and my banishment proceeds from your passions; it is unjust, but I must bear it; the heavens have alwayes had a care of my life, the same regard they will have still of my actions, if they please, and will assist me with some extraordinary favour, since that I have a divine power for to make me hope for relief. Pronouncing these words, he shed so many tears, that he saw not the way which he went, though the moon shone very bright, in such sort that he crost thorow a wood, more by chance then otherwise, and finding himself, at the break of the day, in a beautifull meadow, bordered about with numbers of trees, he alighted, let his horse feed, and laying him down upon the green grasse, began to think of his ill fortune, and was about o renew his complaints and tears; when as Arnides comming to him, said: Arise, Sir, and give over playing the woman, come and chastise certain Knights that speak ill of Trasiclea, that in∣tend to revenge Drumelia, to take her from the Emperour, and to work your destruction by treason. I beleeve, said he, that thou takest me for Alcidamant, that slew Fangomadan, and the Monster of the Island Silvana, that defeated the Giants on the wooden bridge, that brought Brandimar to reason, that massacred the guards of the Sorceresse Drumelia, and that would have made no difficulty to have combatted a million of armed men; thou deceivest thy self, Arnides, I am but his shadow, and the weaknesse of my arm could not fear the meanest Knight that is. These desire to be righ∣ted of the wrong that I have done them, let them use their pleasure upon me, here is my throat, which I will most willingly offer to their swords; for loathing my life, I care not what becomes of it. Why this is spoken like a desperate man indeed, said Arnides; What a glory were it for them to vaunt in the Empire of Tramazond, that they had overcome you vali∣antly, and how might they abuse Trasiclea if fortune should give her into their hands, as such a thing may be? Now in good faith, this womanish courage of yours exceedingly grieves me; and give me leave to tell you, that you lose much of the reputation that you have acquired in the world, and particularly with Trasiclea, who peradventure is not so much displea∣sed,
as she makes shew for. Well, Arnides, said he, I see thou wilt prevail and make me once more, against my will, to draw my sword. Therewith arising, and transported with sorrow and rage, he advanced towards two Giants and three Knights, whom he saw at the other end of the meadow, and never examining the matter any further, charged the first Giant so rudely, that he made his sword, arm and all, flie to the ground together. You die, said he, for daring to attempt upon the lives of Trasiclea, and her Knight, nor shall all your Gods save you from my hands. Putting this high menace then in execution, he laid two of the Knights, that shewed themselves forwardest, dead on the earth, and striking furi∣ously at the other Giant, gave him three or four blows, which all drew bloud of him; howbeit, the first having taken his sword into his left hand, began to presse him very hard; but this brave Champion being in the su∣premest degree of his rage, overthrew them both in the place with two ter∣rible blows; and seeing but one Knight, who on his knees begged for mer∣cie, he gave him his life, upon condition that he should go to Tarsipolis, and presenting himself before the Emperour, recount the businesse how it had past. This done, he remounted on his horse, and riding along, began his lamentation and complaints, to the great discontentment of his Squire, who having eating nothing of a long time, much blamed these strange hu∣mours of his Master in his minde. Whilst Alcidamant was making thus from Tarsipolis, the Knight of the Giants arrived there, and presenting himself in the palace before the Emperour was risen from dinner, he de∣clared what he had in charge; and publishing in the presence of Trasiclea the moan which the Knight of the Palms made at his departure, it pierced so deep into the heart of this displeased Princesse, of whom the Emperour demanded the cause of his absence, that she repented hereof a thousand times for entreating him so cruelly, as to condemne him unheard. This action, said she to herself, is an infallible testimony that he loves not Mero∣diana; and in that he obeyes my command, it is clear that I do him wrong to suspect his loyaltie. It may be that this Lady, vanquished by her passion, or rather by this Knights charms, which are inevitable, hath given her self to him upon some hope of marriage; but that this Knight hath promised her, I cannot think it, he is too noble to be so wicked; and if he were ob∣liged by his word, questionlesse he would have gone to her now, but he hath taken a clean contrary way; and howsoever, his sorrow renders him innocent. Now, to be offended with him for what is secretly past between them, I have no reason at all: for their caresses were precedent to my ac∣quaintance with him, so as he was no wayes tied to observe any faith to me; wherefore I condemne my jealousie, and precipitious carriage towards him, and do protest before my Gods, to receive him into grace again, if he pre∣sent himself before me. But alas! that, I fear, he will not do, but will have more regard to my will, then the satisfaction of his own desires: howbeit I may quickly remedy that; I have committed the fault, I must make the amends; and sending Cesarina, who may easily follow him by the fame of his brave acts, let him know, that I acquit him as freely as be∣fore I condemned him unjustly. Whereupon writing a letter full of ex∣cuses, and giving it to Cesarina, commanded her to repair her errour, and to use some means for to bring back this Knight, who, in the mean time,
rode on with incredible speed, never regarding the wayes, which at length having brought him to the kingdome of Clariana, he met with a Desart, wherein the gentle current of a bubbling stream, together with the natu∣rall beauty of a savadge grot, and the shade of certain trees, which seemed to make a pretty walk from the rock to the water, so pleased him, that for∣saking his horse, he resolved there to spend his daies. Living on the fruits that he found there, and drinking of the water that pearled out of the stone, he lay upon a couch of leaves, and limiting his walk among those trees, he con∣sumed his time in his usuall complaints, accusing his ill fortune, blaming Trasiclea's cruelty, adoring her picture which Cesarina had given him in the Isle of Silvana, and which he had kept as the onely relique remaining of all his hopes; and leading a most solitary life, took pleasure in nothing but his own lamentations and ighes, where a while we will leave him, and take some time for to thinke on the prosecution of this history. The end of the Second Part.
THE LOUE AND ARMES OF THE GREEKE PRINCES. OR THE ROMANT OF ROMANTS, Written in French by Monsieur Verdere; And translated for the Right Honourable, Phillip, Earle of Pembroke and Montgomery, Lord Chamberlaine to his Majesty. Tome III. HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE printer's or publisher's device LONDON, Printed by Iohn Dawson, for Thomas Walkeley, and are to bee sold at his Shop at the signe of the flying Horse, neere Yorke House, 1640.
Amadis of Trebisond, arriving in the Empire of Martaria, saveth Floridan of Persia from drowning: Their Adventures. CHAP. 1. AMadis of Trebisond, departing from the Castle of Ser∣pents under the conduct, and in the Chariot of Cassan∣dra, as was delivered in the foure and twentieth Chap∣ter of our second Part, was somewhat amazed to see himselfe almost in a moment above the clouds, where hee might well have had cause to feare his falling into those vast Seas, which hee beheld so farre below him, or of suffering the incommodities of an element full of fire, that hee felt over his head, had hee not beene carried from such apprehensions, by the relation this damosel made him of the loves and noble acts of that renowned Emperour of Greece, his Father, and of the prodigious adventures brought to glorious ends, by the Princes of his blood. Five or sixe dayes being past away with these pleasing discourses, one morning, even as the Sunne began to enlighten the world, hee heard a dreadful noyse, proceeding from the incounter of the billowes, which the violence of the winds raised sometimes as high as Heaven, and then by and by cast down to the very center of the earth, herewith awaked he looked round about to see from whence it came, and amidst the strange disorder of these enraged waters, hee espied a Ship, whose sayles were rent all to fitters, her shrouds and Tackle torne, her Masts blowne over board, and every part of her besides so terribly shaken, and beaten with the fury of the mercilesse waves, that having no Guid but the evill fortune of those shee carried, at length she ranne against a Rocke, that was neere to an adjoyning Port, and split in a thousand pieces, leaving some thirty persons to the mercy of the cruell seas. This ob∣ject so full of pitty moved him very much; and as hee was about to bewayle the mishap of them hee had seene swallowed up, and to desire that hee could succour the rest which were also ready to perish, hee perceived that the Cha∣riot descended conducting him to the incounter of a young man, who swim∣ming tugged couragiously for his life, with that pittilesse element, making use then of this occasion, that succeeded according to his wish, he thrust his Arme into the sea, and catching hold of the young man drew him up into the Cha∣riot, which instantly landing on the shore vanished with its Guid, leaving them both on the sands very much astonished thereat. Howbeit, Amadis ever confident, would not seeme to bee troubled with so sudden a departure, but turned to his companion, whom for his beauty & comely personage he much admired, and said unto him. Gentleman, take courage, and be not dismaied,
for now you are out of the power of the waues, nor can this land you tread upon be so dangerous, though it be unknowne to you. I cannot chuse answe∣red hee, after hee was somewhat come to himselfe againe, but bee somewhat amazed with the late perill I was in; yet Sir, it hath not so deprived me of judgement, that I should not have sufficient left me, to know how much I am obliged to you for my safety; you have saved my life, which you shall al∣wayes dispose of; in the meane time may it please you to permit me to seeke out meanes to dry my selfe, for I cannot continue long thus wet without some danger to my health. Here said Amadis, unbuttoning a coat, which many times he wore over his Armour, cover your selfe with this whilst your clothes are a drying, for I will not leave you till I see you in better case. This Gentle∣man taking the coat went presently aside, and having stripped himselfe, sate downe on a stone, whither not long after Amadis came to him, whereupon wondring much at his goodly presence in such rich armes, hee arose somewhat ashamed to be seene so halfe naked, and said. Sir, what may I doe to shew my selfe gratefull for so many good offices, which I receive from your curtesie? You may, answered Amadis, pay all this debt with a few words, and by tel∣ling me who you are, and what occasion brought you hither, you may oblige me as much, as you thinke you are ingaged to me. Could I serve you, said hee, by declaring whom I am, without doubt I should soone obey your com∣mand; but Sir, my name being of so small consideration in the world, it wil import you little to know, and me much to conceale it, in which regard I shall humbly desire you, to dispence with me therein, and to be pleased if I onely say, that I am commonly called, the Knight of the Flowers: Touching my arrivall in this place, my destiny had unluckily brought mee hither, had I not met with you; for having imbarqued my selfe in a Port of Greece, with a re∣solution to travell the world, in the quest of glory I sayled very prosperous∣ly for three weekes together; during which time I never combatted but once, and that was with a Gyant for the rescue of a Gentle-woman, whom hee had forcibly carried away; presently whereupon the sea began so to rage, that all the skill and courage the Marriners had were faine to give way to the violence of this tempest, which continued very neer three moneths, and by reason we went still afore the wind, I cannot be perswaded, but that we are now on those unknown lands, whereof they of Asia and Europe speak only by conjecture. These Knights having spent a good part of the day in this and the like discourse, at length were so called upon by their stomacks, that arising from the grasse where they lay, the Knight of the Flowers with his clothes on thoroughly dryed, and Amadis in his armour, they walked almost two hours without meeting any one that could direct them the way to the next Village, in such sort that growing somewhat weary, they layd them down un∣der the shadow of certain trees, wher not long after they fell asleepe, but they continued not so long, for they were awaked with the sound of some Trum∣pets, which marched in the head of threescore hors, that were followed a good way off by four Coaches, invironed with three dreadfull Gyants, and a number of men unarmed on hors-back. O me! said Amadis, rising up some∣what amazed, what adventure is this? No very good one for you, said one of that troop, who upon discovery of them came galloping before his fel∣lowes, for landing here without the license of our Prince, you are to expect nothing but Irons for such your temerity; By my best hopes, said Amadis, I will not be fettered so easily as you thinke for, and if I must die Ile sell my
life as deare as I can: Saying so, hee drew his sword, and therewith struck his enemy so furiously, that he laid him starke dead on the ground: The blow being given in the sight of all his companions, they presently com∣passed him about for to take him, but very active as hee was, hee lightly lept into the saddle of his horse whom hee had slain, and setting spurs to him charged them home, whilest the Knight of the Flowers seazed on the dead mans shield and sword, wherwithall he overthrew three or foure of them at his feet, ere they could draw one drop of blood from them; In the meane time Amadis laid about him, broke their ranks, cut off armes and legs, made heads fly to the earth, divided men and horses in twain, and rendred himselfe so dreadfull, that the most of them having past by the edge of his sword, the remainder turned their backs, for to have beta∣ken them to flight, had they not been retained by the arrivall of the three Gyants. These Colosses marvelling to see so great a slaughter made by two men, whereof  one was unarmed, drew out their heavie Simitars, and began to chage them with so much fury, that at the very first bout the Knight of the Flowers was dangerously hurt on the shoulder, his shield not having been able to resist the violence of so terrible a blow, which somewhat amazed him, but waxing more couragious at the sight of his blood, he let drive in such manner at the Gyant that had wounded him, as hee cut off his left arm sheer from his body, and purposing to second his good beginning, he gave him a very dangerous thrust in the belly, thinking to run him up to the ilts, but his sword proving too weak to pierce his armour, it brake in five or six peeces, to the great asto∣nishment of the Knight, who now having nothing wherwithall to offend his enemies, instantly received half a dozen strokes, which overthrew him to the ground with little or no appearance of life. This while Amadis bestirred himself with an admirable grace, for beholding himself inviro∣ned with two Gyants, and three and twenty Knights, that were still re∣maining of the first troop, he avoided most part of their blowes, and let his own fall with such force, that in lesse then an houre the two Giants saw their arms all dyed with their own blood, and themselvs unable to hinder the death of twelve of those that accompanied them, which put them into such a rage, that their motions seemed to bee very thunder. Wherefore being ashamed, that in the presence of a number of Ladies which were in the Coaches, one man alone should withstand them, they discharged two such mighty blows at an instant, the one on the Helmet, the other on the Shield of Amadis, that hee vvas constrained to knock his chin against the pommel of his saddle, casting great abundance of blood out of his mouth and ears, but presently resetling himself, and more fu∣rious then ever he was in his life, he advanced his rich sword, and letting it descend on the head of him he first incountred, he cleft him down to the very wast: This dreadfull blow having terrified all the assistants, vvho beheld him with wonder, did but more incense the remaining Giant; for in the highest excesse of his rage, he took his great Curtelas in both his hands, and thinking to determine this combat with one only blow, he discharged it so strongly on his enemies Shield, that he devided it in two, and gave him a greatgash on the arm, wherat Amadis was somoved, as cast∣ing the remains of his Shield over his shoulder, he made such a lucky thrust with all his force at his belly, that he ran him quite thorow and thorow,
sending him stark dead to the ground; wherwithall not contented, he was turning him about to the rest of the Knights, when as he perceived them to gallop away, and seek their safety in their flight; which caused him persently to sheath up his sword, and approach unto the Coaches (where he beheld a many of Ladies in very great fear) for to comfort and assure them against any doubt they might be in of him; howbe it he had no more time then to see them, for before he could speak to them, their Coachmen drove away withall possible speed towards the Citie, which he discovered a little on the left hand; and so left him with extream dis∣pleasure, for so sudden a departure; his soule being deeply engaged by one small glimpse he had of a Princesse, whose eys contained a million of charms. This new passion not permitting him to see his Sun thus esoig∣ned from him, he was going to run after it; but at that very instant per∣ceiving three other Gyants to appear in the head of foure hundred horse, which were come upon the newes of the others defe: he made a stand, and holding it to be far greaterwisdome, & glory to  himself, then courage rashly to cast himself away without reason or sence; he took the way of a mountain fast by, extreamly discontented so to retyre, with∣out knowing the name of the beautie that had captived him; and leaving his companion (whose valour he had much admired) in the hands of these barbarians. Trotting then along fair and softly, that he might not seem to flee before his enemies, he rode very near an houre, before he was overtaken by those that were best mounted of the Troop; who confi∣dent of his overthrow, went to assail him with their swords drawn: But he that never knew what danger meant, when necessitie enforced him to fight; suddenly made head against them, and without try fling out the time, layd a dozen of them on the earth; howbeit, fearing to be invironed by so many enemies at once, he slipt into the wood, resolving under the shelter therof, to attend the pleasure of Heaven: But he very much marvelled that he was not pursued, and that a little after he could perceive these Troops close altogether, and return to the Citie; the occasion of which retreat and fear, shall be delivered in the next Chapter.
CHAP. II. Amadis encountring a Shepd, learnes the name of his Mistresse; his resolution thereupon. THE retreat of his enemies giving  time to breath; he began to think of the encounter he had made, and taking much content in the con∣fusion of his thoughts, he layd him down on the grasse; where the beauties of his Mistresse repre∣senting themselves to his memorie, he entertai∣ned himself in this manner, and said. Lord! what a change have I made to day? I affected nothing so much as libertie, now I wish, and seek for cap∣tivitie: I was a Souldier, now I am a lover; glory was the object of my desires, love is now the uttermost of my ambition: I love, alas! I love, but with little or no hope, and from whence I can expect nothing but in supportable sufferings. Ah, if I could promise my self to render her one day sensible of , after I had long adored her, why then I could willingly  my self to any miserie; but I do not so much as know her, or if I did know her, I durst not present my self before her, having jostly drawn her displeasure upon me, by the defeature of her people; What resolution shall I take then? to dye, rather than seek a re∣rdie in despair, so great a , is not to be purchased without great labour; and the pains I shall take to obtain it, shall never be lesse dear unto me, then the glory of the most dangerous adventures that can be. Whereupon arising somewhat comforted, he mounted on his Horse; and probably conjectaring that he should meet with no bodie in the wood, he got him into the first high-way that presented it self unto him, where he had not rode long, but he descried a yong Shepherd comming from the Citie, wherat he was very glad, hoping to learn some what of him concerning that which he desired to know; wherfore mending his pace, he came very near to him, and sayd. Friend, I prethee tell me where I am. At these words, the Shepherd who walked with his hat over his eys; started, as if he had been very much frighted, and was going to run away; had not , taking hold of his arm; stayed him; and assured him with gentle speeches, that he would do him no harm. Now in good faith, sayd the Shepherd, I was never so aear'd of the Wolfe, as I was but now to see my self so surprised by you; for I beleeved you meant to have sent me to keep company with them, that past by the edge of your sword to day. Thy fear was , said Amadis, for I am more ready to help, then hurt the, but how  thou know that I have done all that thouspeakest of; How do I know it, said the Shepherd, why I come newly from the Ciie, which is all in an uproar; and the slaughter you have made to day, hath so astonished the Emperour, that holding it incre∣dible he is come forth in person to behold it; The Courtiers tremble at
the sight of so many men slain with such horrible blows, and the courage which you shewed in combatting such dreadfull enemies, makes them talke of you, as of some prodigie: You are known not by your name, (for it is said you are a stranger) but your armes have been so well noted, that you cannot carry them here without greatdanger; wherefore I would advise you for your good, either to change them, or to get you quickly out of this Empire. Out of what Empire, said Amadis? How, answered the Shepherd, do not you know, that you are in the Empire of Martaria, one of the goodliest, and powerfullest Monarchies of the world? No verely, said Amadis, I did not know it; for being arrived here but to day by a strange accident, I could not have been informed of it, if by good fortune I had not met with thee; but letting that passe, canst not thou inform me who those Ladies were, which I saw in the Coaches du∣ring the combat, and particularly she in the green? That is said he the Prin∣cesse of this Empire, and I am perswaded the fairest of all the women li∣ving, shee is called Palmirenna, and the other two were her sisters, named Amplamira, and Archesidella, both of them so accomplished, as they may well dispute somewhat with the eldest. Thou hadst fully satisfied mee, answered Amadis, wouldest thou but resolve me of one thing more; what was the reason, say they, why the Giants and the Knights their followers, did not assaile me in the wood, having so much advantage of me as they had? The reason was apparent, answered he, for the way which you took was so dangerous, that it was wisdom for them to retire, as they did. Wherefore was it dangerous, said Amadis? In regard of a most dradfull Monster, replyed he, which arriving there not long since hath made so great a spoyl and havock, as the Emperour himself will be constrained to abandon Cardana, the capitall Citie of his Empire, for to reside in some other place. He hath sent whole squadrons of armed men under the conduct of three or four Giants against it, but still they have been torn in pieces, for the fury of this creature is so terrible, that the most confident tremble at the very sight of it: He hath a body far bigger then an Ele∣phant, covered with green and yellow scails, so hard as no steel is able to pierce them; hee hath two heads, one that casts forth a million of stink∣ing flames, through the midst of a number of teeth a cubit long, and the other armed vvith two very huge horns, wherunto the inevitable death of all such as dare assail him is fastned; his tayl is eight foot long, so strong and mighty, that with it he overthrovvs all the trees that stand in his way; briefly, he is so horrible and cruell, that if the gods do not the sooner put to their helping hand, this Province vvill shortly be laid vvast, vvhich vvere a lamentable thing, being so fertile and populous as it is: But pardon me, Sir, if I be so bold as to aske of you, hovv you having been upon the Mountain of Bears, vvhere his ordinary hauntis, could elcape his fury? for to speak truth, I hold it a kind of miracle. Heaven, that hath preserved me for his glory, said he, vvould not suffer me to fal into the power of this Monster: but leaving this discourse, tell me what is become of the Gentleman that combatted by me unarmed? I beleeve, answered he, that hee will pay for the harme you have done, for the Em∣perour having found him to be living, hath commanded the Surgeons to have a speciall care of him, reserving him as I think, for to sacrifice him to his Gods, in regard of the extraordinary beauty wherewithall he is in∣dued.
I hope hee shall do better, replyed Amadis, in the mean time not to be ingratefull for thy good information of that which I desired to know, I will give thee somewhat to relieve thy poverty, therwith hee took a Ring which he had on his finger of great value, and bestowing it on him made him no lesse amazed, then contented. Look, said the Shepherd bowing himself even to the ground for to thank him, how our opinions do many times bring forth contrary effects, I thought I should have been undone by incountring with you, and thereby I have found wherwithall to overcome the miseries of my birth. Sir, your liberality obligeth mee to have a care of your safety, passe on no further with these armes, for you shall be sure to meet with none but enemies whersoever you go, time will best advise you for your future preservation, in the mean while you shall spend this night if you please in a poor cottage of mine, wher with∣out feare of any danger you may take a little rest. Amadis seeing it was night, and perceiving the fellowes good will suffered himself to bee con∣ducted by him to a Village hard by, whereunto entring secretly, and lea∣ving the care of his horse to him, he sate him down to supper, and having fed heartily on a Kid, that was served into the table, he laid him down, all armed as hee was, on a bed, hoping to sleep quietly thereafter his hard travell; howbeit his new passion would not permit him so to do, it re∣presented the beauties of his Lady unto him, with the difficulties which appeared in his love, that so disquieted him, as hee could do nothing but tosse and tumble all the night long, at length being fully resolved, I must hope, said he, instead of complayning and afflicting my self: I fear my Mistresses, and the Emperours displeasure, in regard of the combat which I had with their Knights, but I may repair that fault, and give them as much cause to favour, as now they have to hate me; this Monster that spoyls their Territories must be fought withall; if I prevail, I shal oblige them with a service that will produce their content, and the good of their people; if I fall in this attempt it will give an end to my miseries, so that no way it can prove amisse for me to undertake this Enterprise: Conclu∣ding then with himself in this sort he fell asleep, and so continued till the Sun was of a pretty height, when arising, and finding his breakfast ready, after he had eaten a little he drew the Shepherd aside, and said unto him. Honest friend, J purpose to commit a secret un to thee, but before Ide∣clare it thou shalt swear to me, to do whatsoever I shall bid thee. Assure your self my Lord, said he, that I will make little account of my life wher it shall concern your interest, only command, and without any doubt of my fidelity, be confident that I will not fayl in obeying you. Well, said Amadis, that which I would have thee do, is to go along with me to the Mountain of Bears, to the end thou mayest be witness of my actions, so as if I dye in the Combat, which I resolve to undertake against this Monster, that destroys so goodly a countrey, thoushalt be obliged to find out the beautious Palmirenna, and shalt tell her that the Knight, who slew her Guard, stuck not to expose his life for the conservation of her people, therby to obtain her pardon, for the displeasure shee received from his sword; But if I get the victory, time shall further direct us. Good gods: said the Shepheard, starting back, what is this you say, have you lost your understanding so far forth, as to cast you self away? Ah, do not go about Sir, to employ those forces, which the gods have given
you on so despearate an adventure, reserve your self for better fortune, and seek to escape hence some otherway. Thou labourest in vain, said Ama∣dis, to divert my resolution, it is not thy counsell I demand, but a perfor∣mance of thy promise, say then, wilt thou follow me? Yes, answered he, bedewing his cheeks with tears, though it be much against my mind. Whereupon Amadis road on to the foot of the Mountain, wher the Shep∣heard taking his Horse of him, commended him to his gods. CHAP. 3. Amadis defeats the dreadfull Monster of the Mountain of Bears, his adven∣tures afterwards. WHilst the Shepheard was weeping, Amadis traver∣sed the Wood with an undaunted courage, and calling to mind the glory which his Ancestors had acquired in such like adventures, he resolved to be no whit amazed with the sight of this hor∣rible creature, whose dreadfull form made every one to tremble at the very apprehension of it; but when he saw him approach with most furi∣ous motions, he could not be so confident, but that hee began to doubt the end of his life; neverthelesse, chusing rather to dye, then shew the least token of fear, he drew out his rich sword, and discharged it full on his enemies body, hopng therwithall, considering the strength with vvhich it was delivered, to have seen an end of thc com∣bat, but perceiving it to fall without effect, by reason of the hardness of his scails wherupon it lighted, he was marvellously astonished; howbeit taking new courage hee advanced it again, whenas the horns of this crea∣ture meeting with his Shield, sent him to measure the ground, wher doubtlesse he lay not long, for knowing it would be his apparant ruin to attend such another shock in the case hee was in, he arose full of rage, and stepping lightly aside he let his enemy passe by, making such horrible leaps, that the earth seemed to groan under him, but desiring to make use of occasion, hee gave him so dangerous a blow as he vvent along, that he cut off half his tayl, though it were vvonderfull big, and covered over vvith exceeding hard scails, vvhich put him into such an excesse of fury, that returning vvith incredible svviftnesse hee seized upon the Knights Shield with his teeth, and pulling it easily from him, notwithstanding all the resistance hee made to keep it, hee scrashed it into a thousand pieces whilst hee trampled it under his feet. This generous Warrior, that was not capable of fear, in the greatest and most evident dangers, and that would not have regarded the glory of his enterprises, but for the hazard wherwith they were accompanied, not losing his judgement in such an extremity, suddenly cleared his arm from under one of the Monsters feet, and thrusting his sword into his belly, ran him up with such force, that he entred it even unto the very hilts, which made the Monster skip in so vio∣lent a manner, as hee lighted a dozen paces off, to the unspeakable content
of ou Knight, who neglecting no opportunity, speedily got up with a resolution to avoid the like incounters if hee could, but that hee was not able to do, for the Monster sensible of his hurt, flew madly at him with∣out any regard at all of his sword, wherwith hee had in vain struck him on the head, and getting him in his teeth overthrew him to the ground, pierced his armour in five or six places, and died all the grasse with his blood; Now was the Knight even at the last gaspe, being almost stifled with the stinking flames that incessantly issued out of his mouth, but the re∣membrance of his excellent Mistresse infused such strength into him, that hee so strugled with the Beast, as hee made him let go his hold, and at the same instant gave him another thrust in at the throat, that reached to his very heart. Then it was that this Monster feeling the pangs of death fell to storming, and making such horrible cryes, that they were heard even to Cardana, the Mountain shaking as if it had been strucken with a mil∣lion of thunderbolts: Wherupon the Knight perceiving him breathing forth his last, retyred aside for to kneel down, and render thanks unto God for so glorious a victory; but being exceedingly weakned by the losse of his blood, and overcome with the vile sent of the venom, which flowed out of the Monster, hee fell all along on the ground with little appearance of life in him. This while the Shepherd amazed with the strange noyse hee heard was mightily perplexed; Amadis his liberality made him desire to go and see in what estate hee was, but then again hee was retained by fear, so as hee knew not a good while what to resolve on, at length his gratitude prevayling hee set spurs to his horse, and crossing the wood arrived at the place wher the Monster lay stretched forth, and weltring in his blood: His horrible figure so terrified him, that hee was upon the point of running back again, but espying the Knight lying on the grasse a little aside, hee lighted instantly, and laboured so long, that he found the means to open his Helmet for to give him ayr; wherupon Amadis came presently to himself, at which the poor man was wonderful glad, and fain would have unarmed him, but unable to do it, he thought it best to have speedy recourse to some other mean, getting up on his horse then, he rode away to the Citie as fast as hee could drive, wher alighting at the Court, without answering those that demanded of him what hee would have; hee went directly to the Emperour, who was talking in the Hall amidst his Courtiers of the strange noyse they had heard, not conceiving from whence it should proceed, and falling on his knees, even out of breath, hee said unto him. Sir, I bring you joyfull tydings, the Monster of the Mountain of Bears is slain by the valiant stranger, that yesterday did such wonders against your people. O yee gods! said the Emperour, rising out of his seat, is it possible that so formidable a creature, whose fury thousands of men, and dreadfull Giants were not able to with∣stand, should be kild by the hand of a mortall man? verely this report is scarcely credible. Sir, answered the Shepherd, let me suffer, if I tell you an untruth, for I saw him quite dead, and will conduct you, if you please, wher that brave Knight lyes, still attending the succour of the gods, if mans assistance fail him, being so dangerously hurt that he cannot live till night, if hee be not speedily provided for. That shall hee be sure of, said the Emperour, for so powerfull an obligation, must cancel al other offen∣ces that hee hath committed against us, though I beleeve this combat was
undertaken, more by necessity, then any way to oblige us: Nay, eplied the Shepherd, your Majestie may be pleased to give me leave to assure you that hee performed it with a ful resolution to do you service, for before he entred the Wood, hee commanded mee to tell the Princesse Palmirenna in your Majesties presence, that hee went to venture his life, to obtain pa∣don, for the fault hee had done in drawing his sword against her servants; albeit, that mischance hapned by their insolencie, and much against his mind. That do I grant most willingly, sayd Palmirenna; and seeing his re∣spect to me hath made him so regardlesse of such a danger, I shall be as sensible of that good affection, as I would have been of his offence: Wherfore your Majestie (sayd she, continuing her speech unto her Fa∣ther) shall do well to command your Chyrurgions away before, whil'st we go fair and softly after to behold this miracle. The Emperour very well pleased herewith, presently dispatched away his Chyrurgions, with a great charge to employ the uttermost of their skill for the recovery of the knight; and getting into his Daughters Coach, he followed them, accompanied with all his Nobilitie, who could not wonder sufficiently at so prodigious a thing. But we will leave them (thronging the wayes, and striving which should make most haste to behold this redoubted Warriour; to whom this succour had been unprofitable, if Heaven, that reserved him for his glory, had not otherwise ordained of him) for to deliver what arrived to him after the Shepherds departure. Recovering then by little, and lit∣tle; he was rysing to unarm himself, when he pereceived a Dwarf that sayd unto him: Be of good cheer sir, this action will bring you more glory, than harm; it is true, that your wounds are very dangerous, by reason the Monsters teeth are venemous; but I have assured remedies to preserve you, and will do that for your recoverie, which the experience of the best Chyrurgions in the World would attempt in vaine; onely follow me, and let us not decline those which come to seek you, for I hold it not fit to put you into their hands; not in regard of the Emperour or his Daughter, who with good reason prefer that which you have now performed, far before yesterdaies offence, but the Gyants death having rendred their kindred your enemies, all the Princes favour cannot pro∣tect you from being treacherouslie murthered; wherfore be carefull, if you mean to abide here to keep your self unknown. Saying thus, and and reaching him his hand, he helped him up with such case; that he re∣mained very much amazed, to find so much strength in so little a bodie. Being able then to walke a little, they descended down the mountain, on that side that looked to the Sea, and entred both into a Grott, where A∣madis was instantly unarmed: that done, he layd him down upon a bed, which seemed to have been set there expressely for him, and discovered his wounds to this little man; who having bathed them with a very odoriferous liquour, and afterwards laid certain plaisters to them, he covered him, and willed him to sleep. In the mean time the Emperours Chyrurgions were much troubled, for being come where the Monster lay; and missing the knight that had been so recommended to their care, they were exceedingly afflicted; but especially the poor Shepherd, who bitterly weeping, cried out. Alas!
this is the place where I left him, the grasse is yet wet with his bloud, and it is not long since he could be taken away; surely some god came hither and hath carried him to heaven. Ah noble knight! why was not I here, that I might have participated a little of thy glory; or if some worse chance hath befaln thee, that I might then have run thy fortune? Here∣upon the Emperor arriving, and understanding how the knight could not be found, he was exceedingly discontented, but Palmirenna much more; for the matchlesse valour of this stranger, whereof she had been an eye∣witnesse, and the extream perill wherun to he had exposed himself in the combat with the monster for her sake had so taken her, as she was mar∣vellous sensible of his losse: howbeit her Father commanded his knights to disperse themselves in the search of him; she comforted her self in hope to heare of him ere it were long, and so went to observe the Beast, which seemed still so dreadfull, as it made all the assistants to tremble. O ye gods! sayd the Emperour, much astonished at the sight of so hor∣rible a figure; what a courage had he need of, that durst encounter so deformed a creature, when as being dead it terrifies all that behold it: Ah incomparable knight, then the which a more valiant never breathed upon the earth; thou art afraid to present thy selfe before me, in regard of one poor offence; but be assured no man shall ever be more welcome to me then thy self: Go then and seek him out, and place the skin of the Beast stuft with straw, on the highest Tower of Cardana, valiant persons cannot be too much honoured. Saying so, he returned into Palmirenna's Coach, where all the way to the Citie he entertained her with the praises of this knight, which he thought could never be sufficient for so tran∣scendent a merrit. CHAP. IIII. Floridan of Persiabeing delivered out of Captivitie by the victorie of Amadis, becomes enamoured of Amplamira. The invention that Amadis useth to see Palmirenna. CArdana having just occasion to resent the death of this Monster, which in short time would have rendred it desolate; was replenished in a mo∣ment with a world of bonfires, and nothing was heard but shouts of joy, confusedly ming∣led with the musick of a million of instruments, in such sort that the Emperour arriving, therupon was conducted to his Palace with more magni∣ficence, then if he had triumphed over the great∣est Monarch of the earth. This Prince beholding his people amidst their content, chaunting his greatnesse, and the praises of our Warriour; remembred the Gentleman that accompanied him in the slaughter of his servants; and being magnanimous, commanded him to his Pre∣sence; wherupon being presently brought before him in irons, he said nto him.
It were unreasonable, that in the enesse of a publike joy deriv from the valour of your Companion, you alone should have cause to complain of fortune, wherefore passing by the displeasure I received from you yesterday; It is our pleasure that you be freed from these chais, and that you have the same power here of your actions, as you had before your arrivall in these parts; provided that you let me know who the Knight is, and that you likewise conceale not your own condition. Mighty Prince, answered hee; the generosity of Kings appears alwaies in their Clmencie, and as the cruelty of Tyrants tenders them subject to a thousand kind of mischiefes, so doth mercy assure good Princes, even in the middest of greatest dangers; being a Prisoner, I expected as much reliefe from your pitty, as from mine own innocencie, for I knew that rea∣son would at length have drawn you to consider, that I was forced to fight, and that a man cannot commit a fault in preserving his life with the losse of theirs, that sought to deprive him of it; howbeit, I acknowledge my self infinitly obliged to your Majestie, for making me, without languish∣ing any longer in misery; of a slave, your most humble and faithfull ser∣vant, in which regard your Highnes shall alwayes, and absolutely dispose of the life you have now given me: And if I do not satisfie your Maje∣sties desire, by telling you the name of this Knight, to whose valour you say that you are ingaged in such powerfull obligations, bee assured Sir, that it is because I do not know it, not having had the honour of his ac∣quaintance but since yesterday, that hee drew me out of the middest of the waves; where, by the casting away of the bark which carried me, I was like to have perished: for my own particular, you behold Sir, a poor Gentleman of Persia, commonly called the Knight of the Flowers; who, having nothing at this present, but the honour of the favour, which you are pleased to promise him, will labour to deserve it by the greatnesse of his service. This good will of yours, said the Emperour, doth content mee, and beleeve that you shall have no cause given you to depart from hence; commanding him then to be accommodated with all that he should need, hee appointed him a Chamber, that opened into the Gardens, and so fell to talk of the discretion, sweet carriage, and handsomenesse he had obser∣ved in him, which seemed so extraordinary unto his Courtiers, that they were wonderfully taken with his rare perfections. Hee retired then free from those chains, which might have fettered his hands, but not from those love had prepared to bring his heart into subjection, for the excel∣lent beauty of Amplamira, second daughter to the Emperour, having bin still present before his eyes, all the while that hee was in the Hall, had made so deep an impression in his soul, that hee had wholly surrendred it into her power; But it is time to leave him to the comfort of his delive∣rance, and to the pleasing cogitations of his love, for to return unto Amadis. This generous Warriour having slept very soundly all the night, awaked Just as the Sunne began to appear in the mouth of the cave; and feeling no pain of his hurt, arose much amazed how it could be possible they should be healed in so short a space. A more mighty hand, said hee, looking upon himself, then that of a man, hath done this miracle, nature hath not so great a power, no could all the simples of the earth, gathered
in any season whatsoever give so sudden a cure to such  wounds, Cassandra certainly hath doe it, and the Dwarf that conducted mee hi∣ther was one of the creatures, which she useth upon her occasions: be it as it will, I find my self I thank Heaven in cafe to put on my Aes; But what is that I say? am I not commanded never to wear them if I mean to live? Ah  what tears will thy beauty cost me, and what pains do I see prepared fore, if I thus wilfully persist in my affection? I can∣not come neer thee without danger, nor esloign my self from thee without losse of my life; what shall I do then to be at rest? or what counsell shall I take in so great an extremity? Perill hath some hope, wheras ther is none in death, and apparant losse is ever worse then hazard: Recourse must therfore be had to that which is least to be feared, I will see Pamirena, and rather meet with destruction, then misse the favour which I must ex∣pect from her pitty. This resolution carrying him out of the grot with his sword by his side, and beginning to enter into the way that leads to the Citie, he percei∣ved something floting on the sea, and making to the shore. This object arresting him a while, hee streight perceived a little wooden Coffer cast on land, covered with fear-cloath, and a woman upon it stifled with the waves, whence judging it to be some of the relicks of the former dayes shipwrack he drew away the body with a purpose to bury it, and render that last duty unto her being dead, but desiring first to see what was in the Coffer, hee cut the cords asunder with his sword, and having very easily broken it up, hee found in it a Gown of green Velvet, whose ground vvas silver, an Head-tyre of the Greek fashion, with a number of pretty knacks, belonging to vvomen, his curiosity but little satisfied vvith this in∣counter, hee took the corps, and meeting vvith a pit made by nature, hee laid her in it, and covered her vvith a little earth, that done hee turned a∣gain towards the Citie, the remembrance of Palmirenna possessing him with an extream desire to see her, and began to walk along still casting with himself what course hee might take to have a sight of her without being known; after much musing hee resolved at last to disguise himself; whereupon calling to mind the Gown hee had left behind him, he present∣ly turned back, and said. Is it not with reason that Lovers are said to be blind? Fortune pre∣sented me with assured means to free me from the care I am in, yet I neg∣lected them, and did not conceive they were usefull for my purpose: this is that (taking up the Coffer in his arms, and carrying it into the grot wher hee had lain) this is that shall ease mee of my pain, I have no hair on my face, nor is it much to be misliked, so that having this Gown and tire on, I may easily passe for a woman. Saying so, hee stript himself out of his clothes, put on the green velvet Gown, fitted his hair under the tyre with the assistance of a glasse, and admitting nothing that might serve to set forth a beauty, tricked up himself so neatly, as hee might well have been in love with his own form, had hee not been so with Palirenna; Being perswaded then, and not vainly, that he was very handsome in this habit, hee hoped to see a good issue of his design, and thought it long till hee was in the Citie, that hee might be conducted to his Lady; but not knowing how that might be effected, he began to be troubled anew: how∣beit remembing the Dwarfs advise, he resolved to leave all unto fortune;
wherefore wrapping up his sword, which hee very much esteemed of, in some linnen clothes hee buried it in a corner of the grot under a little earth, to the end hee might find it there again upon occasion; that done, and little caring for the rest of his Armes, hee left the grot, and taking the most beaten way, hee walked on, still thinking how hee might make use of his disguise: wherupon fortune being more favourable to him then hee expected, hee heard some comming, whom hee made shew, as though hee would shun, but desiring nothing more then to fall into their hands, hee suffered himself to be seen, and then suddenly retiring under the trees, seemed to be much afraid of those hee saw, which were about some six, who setting spurs to their horses came up presently to him wher he was. Beautious stranger, said one of them that was formost, and that marvel∣led very much to behold so rare a creature, be not afraid, here are none but such as are wholly devoted to your service, be therefore pleased to de∣clare what occasion hath brought you hither; No other, alas; said hee, shedding some tears the better to beguile them, but my evill fortune, for departing from the Empire of Greece, for to go unto Sicilia to the Nup∣tials of a sister of mine; who was to be wedded to the Viceroy there, I was carried by the violence of a most furious tempest into this coast, wher not farre from hence our Ship ran against a Rock, and was cast away with all that were in her as I beleeve, my miserable self excepted, who am re∣served I fear for greater misfortune. You are to hope better, answered this Barbarian, for the Gods have not preserved you but for happier ends, as shall soon be made good unto you, if you can but love me, as I affect you. Now by my life, said one of the others, whose heart was as deeply wounded as his, shee would shew but little judgement to preferre your affection before mine, that loves her more, and hath greater credit, and authority to assist her then you. At thesewords, the first giving him a furi∣ous look, they both drew out their swords, and seconded by their compa∣nions, who instantly sided with them, they charged one another so hotly, that in a quarter of an houre four of them were laid on the ground to the great contentment of Corazinda (so had Amadis then named himself) who stepping in between the other two, desired them to become friends, and to tell him the name of the countrey. Fair Nymph, answered the one, you are in the Empire of Martaria, commanded by the best Prince of the world. Lead me to him then, said she, and not hazarding your lives for so worthless a subject, share that recompence between you, which your pre∣senting of me unto him may produce. These Knights embracing so safe an offer, and leaving the dead bodies in the place went away with her to the Citie, where arriving at the Court before the Emperour, Corazinda with a sweet and modest look fell on her knees, and making the same re∣lation to him, which shee had done before unto his Knights, she besought him to have some compassion of her fortune, not permitting her to be any way injured. Pretty one (said he, very much wondring at her beauty, and already feeling some secret flames that began to scorch him) you shall not want my favour, seeing the gods have been pleased to cast you on my ter∣ritories; and to shew that your arrivall here is acceptable unto me, I will give order that you be lodged neer my daughters, with whose company you may the better passe away the time. Oh! how pleasing was this say∣ing unto our Warriour, and how easily might one have discerned the al∣teration
of his soul by his change of colour, if one had had the least sus∣picion of his sex; verely his desire ew, and hee thought it long till h saw himself at the liberty to consider at leisure all the perfections of his Lady, but remembring that discretion was more then necessary for his designes, and that hee was to govern his actions, if hee meant to assure his happinesse; hee made little shew how much hee was transported by this speech, contrarily bowing himself even to the ground, with the best grace hee could use in acknowledgement of so much favour, he kissed his hand, and raising up himself again, he very modestly followed him that was to conduct him to his Chamber, wherein at first he fetched a thousand turns, blessing the good hap, which had so prospered his desires. In the mean time the Emperour acquainted his daughters with the acquisition he had made of one of the fairest slaves in the world. Her eyes, said he, hath so many winning charms, that my heart frozen with a multitude of yeeres, hath felt the violence of their beams, her hair sweetly set forth under a strange Attire, is not to be paraleld, her form is goodly, nothing can be desired more in a face, most delicate in her skin, briefly, next to you, who excell in all perfection, shee may vaunt her self to bee one of the most beautifull creatures of the earth, judge then whether I can think upon her without love, and whether it be not an hard matter for him that shall converse with her to preserve his liberty? without doubt, said Palmirenna, who had much adoe to forbear smiling at this her fathers rapture, being such as you describe her, shee may work great effects, even upon the most insensible; But Sir, I marvell that you will let her bee a slave, seeing shee so deserves to be served? Thinke not (said he) that I wil commit so great  fault, whereby I should ffend the gods, and my judge∣ment, which forbid mee to entreat her with rigour, shee shall have as much liberty as you, but I will call her the fair slave, till such time as we better understand who shee is: your discourse, said Amplimira then, hath possest mee with a great desire to see her, will you be pleased, Sir, to grant us this contentment. Very willingly, answered he; for I would have you acquainted with her, and use her with the respect which I am perswa∣ded shee deserves, for her carriage assures me she is nobly derived: Here∣with Amadis being called forth came out of his Chamber strangely per∣plexed, hee had resolved with himself not to be moved, but as soone as hee appeared in the Hall, and was fallen on his knees, before his Mistresse, who was exceedingly taken with the sight of such a comely person, hee found himself to be so lost, that hee was not able to utter a word, how∣beit shee that beheld him with a particular good will, which shee could not call love; and that was no lesse ravished then hee, desiring to confirm him, said unto him. Fair stranger, what ayl you, will you not let us know, who you are, and from whence you came? Madam, answered he, marvell not if I have not spoken till now, to give you humble thanks, for the honour you have done mee in receiving me thus, I had no eyes, but to admire the excellency of your beauty, which certainly cannot bee hu∣mane; you aske me who I am, vvhy here is before you a poor Damosel of Greece, the object of the mischances, and misery of the vvorld, yet not so unhappy, but that she applauds that fortune, vvhich hath brought her hither to enjoy the blessednesse of your presence. Arise, svveet heart, said Palmirea, and you shall see that vve shall so cherish and caresse you,
as you shall have no cause to complain: Saying so, shee stooped, and kissed him, wherewith Amadis was so transported, as he was ready to sound with extremity of pleasure, but recollecting his spirits, which were wandring in this extasie, hee was going to render the like unto the two incompara∣ble Infantaes, when as they prevented him with their kisses, after the ex∣ample of their elder sister, and not suffering him to kneele, led him by the Emperours permission into Palmirennaes Chamber, who began to affect him no lesse then shee did her sisters. CHAP. V. The life that Amadis led with Palmirenna. Floridans passions for Ampla∣mira. Amadis and he knowes one another. AMadis his behaviour, accompanied with most extra∣ordinary sweetnesse, made him to bee beloved of all, Palmirenna and her sisters held nothing so dear as his company, their women idolatrized him, and as his habit beguiled every one, the Gallants of the Court were as much enamoured of her, as she was of her Mistresse: Tarsander, the Prince of Balivana, Nephew to the Emperour, sighed often at her feet, howbeit so discreetly, that the Emperour, who notwithstanding his old yeeres was extreamly passionate for her, could never perceive it: Every one adored her, but hee that shewed least feare, and most affection, was Bustrafard the Gyant, whose cruell soul delighted more in blood, then in the exercise of any Gentlenesse. This Colossus having heard it often said, that handsomnesse had as much power over the will of a woman, as the continuance of services that were done her, laboured to sweeten his look, which was most dreadfull, caused his hor∣rible rough beard to be perfumed, combed his hair, that was harder then any horses Mane, painted his swarthy face, apparelled himself in the richest robes hee could get, which made him more hideous, and omitting no occasion to accost our Gentle-woman, entertained her with the dis∣course of his valour, of his wealth, and of the antiquity of his race; and propounded unto her incredible contentments in the possession of him. Behaving himself thus in the sight of all the world, it exceedingly vexed Tarsander, who would willingly have been revenged on him, had his forces been answerable to his courage; but knowing full well that it would have been in vain for him to have attempted any thing against him he concealed his mind, hoping that Corazinda had more judgement, then to suffer her self to be carried by such an ill favoured and ugly beast. Whilst all these gallants dyed for the love of her, she felt the same passions for the Lady, and because shee durst not sigh but in secret, shee spent much of her time alone in the Gardens, where shee entertained her self in this manner. To what end serves this borrowed disguise, if I have not an heart to crave a remedy, for the extremity of my grief? I see Palmirenna, it is true, I kisse
her hands, and by an excesse of good fortune, shee sometimes joynes her lips unto mine; but what doth that avayl mee, seeing she does it in regard of the habit that I were, not of the love that I bea her? Nothing questi∣onlesse, but to increase my torment, these are winds, which in stead of extinguishing my flame, make it burn with the more violence, and if I take not a stronger resolution, I have laboured in vain to get the possession of so invaluable a gmme: I must then either quit this habit, or make ano∣ther, and better use of it then hitherto I have done, womens hearts are not without pitty, and when Palmirenna shall know that I am a Knight, shee will not advance my death by manifesting it to another. But what is this I say? will shee not have just cause to blame this deceit, and to banish me from her sight for a punishment of so hainous a crime? yes, no doubt, and wheras the good will shee bore mee, whilst she thought me to be of her sex, might counsell her to do otherwise, honour and decencie will fence her to it, I do therfore ill to yield to my desires, I am more happy then I deserve; for the longer I suffer, the greater will be my glory. So resolving to be silent, and leave her remedy unt time, shee sate her down one day under a tree, upon whose bark she had graven a thousand chara∣cters, where shee began to renew her complaints, when as Palmirenna ar∣riving there by chance with three of her Ladies, caught her by the arm, and said. What, Corazinda; are you still weeping, cannot all our caresses make you forget our countrey? Truly I have reason to complain of you, and will never beleeve that you love mee so much, as you say, since you continue so sad here. Think not, answered she, (some what amazed to see her self so surprised) that I bestow these tears, on the remembrance of my countrey, or friends their absence is the least of my cares, but I grieve for that I cannot profit you by my service, nor advance my self a whit in the honour of your savour, for loving you farre more, and that beyond all comparison, as I may truly say, then all the Knights of the world put together can possibly do, I could wish that your eyes should rest no where but on mee, as my thoughts have no other object, then the excellencie of your beauty; I wonder, said Palmirenna, that you should complain thus of me without a cause, doth not my womens jealousie, who are vexed for that they cannot be so free with mee as you are; make it evidently ap∣pear how infinitly I love you? clear your self of this sinister impression, and be confident, dear Corazinda, that if your content depends on me, you shall live as happily as your own heart can wish, being resolved to give you, and that most willingly, all that you can desire of mee, provided I may see you no more thus afflicted. Now are all my sorrows at an end, answered Corazinda, for all the good of my future life is tyed to the effect of this promise, which I hope you will never forget, and to make my happinesse compleat, there wants nothing but this; that whereas herein the Court I am called the fair slave; you will be pleased, that hereafter I may bee called Palmirenna's fair slave. Here at the Princesse fell a laugh∣ing, and embracing her, said that it pleased her very well. Some houres being sweetly spent in such like discourse, which testifying more and more an extream love, that gave the Ladies great occasion to marvell from whence the heat of so powerfull an affection should proceed, these two in∣comparable beauties retired into the Palace, where the Emperour meet∣ing with them, began on a sudden to feel that fire burn which the first sight
of our fair slve bad kindled in his brest: Pretty one, said hee nto her, having withdrawn her to a window, doe not you thinke is time yet to case my pain and shall the discretion which you have sound in my carriage leave you insensible of my sufferings? consider that my love can make you the happiest Woman of the world, and that your good fortue de∣pends on the pitty which you shall have of me, and that if you be inexo∣rable, you will give mee just occasion to accuse your in gretitude, and to re∣trench you of those favours, which you receivehere. Sir answered she, (knowing full well that hee was to flatter his grief, rather than incense his choller) my judgement is not so weak, as to make me neglect the content∣ment, and advantages which the honour of your affection doth promise mee, but do you think, that having yet sighes in my mouth, and tears in my eyes, to be wayl my captivity, my esloignment from my countrey, and the losse of my friends, I can resolve for any pleasure? verely I can∣not, time the common Physician of our miseries, may alter this peevish humour, and furnish mee with other devises, bee pleased I beseech you Sir, to attend your remedy from thence, your delight will be the greater when I shall give it you without grudging, and not forcing my will you shall oblige mee to commnd your gentlenesse, in the mean while let mee obrain of you, that you will not afflict yourself, and giving mee leave to retyre from hence for to avoid the suspicion which may bee had of your intent, leave me so to manage my sorrows with time, as I may be ableere it be long, to satisfie your hopes. Go my dearest Cornkinds, said be, insinitly contented with this answer; the gods which have made you to air, make you as true. Palmirennaes fair slave having got off in this manner, went to find on her Lady; but understanding that shee was laid down to sleep, shee returned into the Garden, where having made afewturns, she pecei∣veda man lying on the grasse, under the shadow of certain trees, who thinking hee was not over-heand spake thus. Wretched Knight? what canst thou expect from thy enterprise, but insuppottabletonments? thou imaginest that time, and thy services will beget a liking of thee in this Princesse, but thou wilt be deceived, shee will receive them from thee, as from an ordinary Knight obliged by the liberality of her father, what wilt thou doe then? wilt thou discoverthy self for to serve her openly? thou wilt not be believed, but say thou wert, difference of religion would serve for a cause to refuse thee; now to leave her is not in thy power, see∣ing all thy future content depends on her favour. Powerfull love open my eyes, that I may find out the means to conserve my self, which I fear is even at an end. Here with bedewing his cheeks with tears, he fetched three or foure sighes, wherof Corakinds, who measured anothers grief by her own, was so sensible, that shee resolved to comfort him: Whereupon approaching unto him, shee perceived that it was hee whom she had taken up out of the Sea, at her arrivall in Martaia, which exceedingly rejoyced her, but making as though she knew him not, shee began to discourse of the inconstancie of things here below, that many times succeed accor∣ding to our desires, when wee least hope for them; Weak spirits, said shee, mayfail, because they are ignorant of the good which patience brings, bun a generous Knight ought to undertake without fear, and dare any thing where by hee may be able to merit; delight doth notraste well, without some proceding labour, nor is content pleasing, gotten without
pain, the resolution you have taken to pursue your design, is couragious, and from whence you cannot but attend recompence, proceed then, and be not dismayed with the difficulties of our enterprise, Love will favour your desires, and for me I will most willingly serve you therein to the ut∣most of my power. O mee said the Knight, who during this discourse had very attentively observed her, either I am greatly deceived, or I be∣hold one of the bravest Warriors on the earth, in an habit quite contrary to his valour, diftrust mee not Sir, I beseech you, I owe too much unto your assistance to be any way wanting to your service, or to disclosethat which you desire should be concealed, wherefore tell me boldly the occa∣sion of this transformation, which so amazeth me. I did not think, answe∣red Crazinda, that you could have known me thus disguised, but not to hide my self longer from you, I confess that I am indeed the same that saved you from drowning, you marvell to see me in this attire, but you know that love doth greater miracles, I wil give you a reason for it by and by, so as you will use the like courtesie towards mee, by declaring truly unto me your birth, and condition. That will I a thousand times over, if you please, said hee, I am called Floriden of Persia, sonne to Den Rogel of Greece, of whom peradventure you have heard, conducted hither by my destinie, and constrained to abide here for to obtain the favour of Am∣plamira, the Emperours second Daughter, whose beauty hath so ingaged mee, that I can never depart from hence without infinit discontent. See, said Crazinda, embracing him very kindly; how unfortunate have we bin not to know one another in this strange Countrey, where the advice of the one might greatly avayl the other; my name is Amadis of Trebisond, Sonne to the Emperour Amadis of Greece, your Fathers Grandfather, drawn hether as you have seen by a marvellous adventure, and here staied by the beauty of , for the love of whom I have taken upon me this habit, believing that it would facilitate the means to see her, and it may be to conduct my designs to a better Port, then could have been done by my Armes, which I have made odious at my arrivall in this Province, where I am now known by the name of Crazinda, though of late I am called  fair slave. Here with these two brave Warriours re∣newing their embraces, infinitly caressed one another; but the fear of be∣ing discovered, counselled them to retyre, with a promise neverthelesse to meet every day, and conferre of their Loves, at all other times carrying themselves, as unacquainted; parting then with some griefe Floridan went to his Chamber, musing on the course that hee might hold for to speak to his Lady, and the fair slave to , whose absence was so insupportable to her, that shee was almost never out of her sight.
CHAP. VI. Floridan meets with Almerina in the Emperours Garden, their discourse; Floridan discovering himselfe, writes to Amplamira. WHilst Amadis beheld himself in those eyes, which his soul adored, sighed out his passions, and under the favour of the habit that he wore stole kisses from Palmirenna's delicate lips, whilst hee lost himself at the sight of the two little unparalled Worlds, that so graced her bosome; and lan∣guished in the desire, and expectation of a greater felicity; Floridan was inraged for that he could not come to speak unto his Mistris that he might acquaint her with the secret fire which consumed him; hee recounted his sufferings unto the trees, desired relief from the Fountains, and as if these inanimate things had been capable of his cmplaints, hee besought them to comfort and assist him in so great an extremity. At length, unable lon∣ger to endure the violence of his desires, hee resolved either by death, or the assurance of enjoying of that hee desired, to make himselfe happy; My tongue dares not discover my thoughts; said hee, my hand then shal do it that office; and if I must dye in this enterprise, it is better I should do so quickly, then languish any longer amidst such tormenting passions; Whereupon getting inke and paper, hee wrote what love indited to him, but having finished his Letter, and not knowing how to convey it into his Ladies hands, hee was troubled afresh, and dispaired of all good success, howbeit his fortune proved better then hee expected, for walking soli∣tary in the Garden by himselfe, as hee used to doe; Alina (the Earl of Frisoliae's daughter, and the faithful Secretary of Amplamira's thoughts, being inamour'd of him, and therefore as much desiring to spak with him, as hee did to talke with his Misesse) came thether by chance, and espying him lying under a tree, shee approached unto him, ere hee was aware, where watch fully observing him, shee hoped to have heard some∣thing cme from him; that might discover the cause of his olitude, but finding him silent with some tears in his eyes, shee presently conceived that her heauty had wrought these effects in him, the rather because shee remembred, that hee had always sought occasions to bee present, where shee was with Amplamira, this opinion, and her affection emboldning her, she stept to him, and pulling up his hat, which hee had plucked down over his eyes, with a smiling countenance she said unto him: How now Knight of the Flowers, doe these tears become the cheek of a valiant man? and why doe you afflict your selfe in a place where you are so caressed, not an∣swerably, it may be, to your merits, but as much as may be? come, this carriage of yours rather befits a Woman, whose weaknesse is not capa∣ble
of generous resolutions, to withstand misfortune, and if you continue to doe thus, you will lose much of that good opinion, which out Cour∣tiers have conceived of you; a couragious mind seeks remedy for his disease, and never increases it by cowardise; now if the losse of your friends, or the absence of some Mistresse makes your abode here distastful, the Emprour is a Prince so gracious, that hee will not deny you leave to depart from hence at your pleasure. Alas, said hee (no whit dismayed with this surprise, but resolved to discover himselfe, since this encounter had hapned according to his wish) my displeasure proceeds not from the grief of seeing my selfe esloigned from my Countrey, since I voluntarily forsook it, for to travell the world, but I complain for that I am so un∣happy, as I cannot hope for any content whilst I live, unlesse you wil take some pitty of my suffering, I must speak, I can no longer conceale my thoughts; Almerina, in your hands rests my life or death, I have indured incredible things before I would resolve to discover my self; and the fear to offend Amplamira, whom I love beyond all comparison, far more then mine own soul, hath hitherto closed up my lips, but now the violence of my pains so terribly afflicts me, that I must impart this secret unto you; Sweet Almerina, have some compassion on me, tell her that which I say, and joyning your intreaties to my tears, render her sensible of my suffe∣ring: I am too daring, it is true, for such an accomplished beauty deserves no lesse then the affection of a God, but if her eyes might stoop to a man, my birth hath not made me so mean, but that I may justly equal my selfe with the greatest of the earth; now if I may receive a good office from you, bee assured that you shall not confer it upon an ungratefull person, nor ever repent any assistance you may give me. These words finishing in tears, marvellously astonished this Lady, who little expected such a dis∣course, and considering the speech shee had heard, which deprived her of all hope of ever possessing him, shrinking up her shoulders, she said; O ye gods, now deceitfull is the judgement of man, and with what little assu∣rance may one depend on things of this world; Indeed Sir I guessed, that Love had drawn forth those tears, which trickled down your cheeks, and as I was foolish enough to presume a little too much of my beauty, I ve∣rely beleeved that I was the cause of it, loving you with no lesse ardour, then you do your Mistris, but now knowing you better then I did, and no way doubting of the greatnesse of your discent, I will quench those amorous flames, and onely reserve such a good will for you,  may oblige you in your enterprise; wherefore Ile promise to serve you therein with passion, not for the hope of the recompences you propound, but for the glory of having done something for so noble a Gentleman, and to restifie unto you how willingly I doe this, I will presently go about it; Were it not amisse (said Floridan unto her, after some kisses, and a thousand prote∣stations, eternally to remember so powerfull an obligation) that she saw a Letter, whereby J was resolved to have discovered my selfe unto her; It cannot chuse but ayd our design, said Almerina, therfore give it mee, you shall quickly have an answer of it, and be confident that if it lye in mee, you shall have no longer cause to complain: Wherupon Almerina depar∣ting with some regret, to see all her hopes overthrown, shee went to find out Amplamira in her Chamber, who beholding her with a troubled coun∣tenance, demands of her from whence shee came? from learning out a se∣cret,
answered she, of great importance for you: What is it, said Ampla∣mira? Madam replyed Almerina, walking but now in the Emperours Garden, and thinking of nothing lesse then Love; I discovered a Gallant the most inamoured that lives, wot you who it is? That brave stranger, the Companion of him that defeated the Monster, hee lay upon the grass under the shadow of those great trees, which make a demi-circle at the first door of the walk, and spake somewhat loud, not imagining that I was so neer him; His first speeches were nothing but complaints against fortune, that spares no body, and that ordinarily fals upon the greatest, the better to demonstrate her power; but passing from that to speak of Love, hee fetched some sighes, and then proceeded in this manner. O yee gods, said hee, how fair is Amplamira, but why doth not shee know that I love her? I have a thousand times resolved to let her understand my affection, and a thousand times again hath respect shut up my mouth, fearing to offend her by the overture of my heart; nevertheless it is necessary that shee know it, at least wise if ever I will hope for content, but how shall that be, dare I be so hardy as to speak unto her? No verely, fear would tye up my tongue, and the lightning of her eyes would strike me dumbe: To acquaint her with it otherwise, alack I see little likelihood, here I am unknown; and of millions that in my own countrey would most gladly serve mee, not one is present to undertake this afair, I must dye then with this regret, that I have loved the fairest, and most excellent creature in the world, and durst not publish it. These words being drowned with a sea of tears, hee turned him about, and took a paper out of his pocket, over the which hee lamented anew. How happy wouldst thou be, said hee, if thou mightest bee permitted to touch the delicate hands of my Mistris, and what would not I give then to see my selfe in thy place? Doubtlesse J should not grieve at the loss of so much greatnesse as a tends mee; and though it should immediately preced my death, I should be no way sorry for it. What should I say more? All his motions, Madam, were full of love, hee wished a thousand, and a thousand times that hee might be beloved of you; in the middest of this Agony he rose up, and went away, leaving the paper which it seems hee forgot, behind him upon the ground, where I found it all bedewed with his tears, and which I pre∣sent here unto you, open it, peradventure you will meet with the same discourse in it, as I made you but now. Whereupon kissing the Letter, which Floridan had given her, shee delivered it to the Princesse, who made some difficulty at the first to receive it, howbeit being a little urged by Almerina, but more by the desire shee had to learn who the Knight was, shee opened it, and read this which followeth.
To the fairest Infanta of Martaria. MADAM, I Doubt not, but you will thinke it very strange, that an unknown Knight should dare so farre, as to be a Suitr to you for your love, before his services might induce you unto it; but when you shall consider, that hee is inforced so to doe, by the unresistable power of your divine beauty, questionlesse you will excuse his presump∣tion, and not think it isse, if he beg some grace from you, since it is the glory of the gods to graunt it unto the Prayers of m: Hee indures incre∣dible pains, his desires never leave him in quiet, his heart burns continually in a flame, which your fair eyes have kindled his little merit, and your greatnesse make incessant was upon him, hee hath no relief but in his sighes; in the which too hee finds a great deale of misery: Leave him not Madam, in the midst of so many Enemies that oppresse him, hee will not live but for you, prolong his dayes for your service; and because all his felicity depends thereupon, permit in the mean time that hee may be named. Your KNIGHT. Is it possible, said , that there should be so much temerity in a man! an ordinary Knight addresse himselfe to me! motion love to me! and be a Suitor to me for some favour? This is an unpardonable insolence, hee must bee relieved Almerina, but in an other manner, then hee hopes for; return presely to him, and tell him, that I am acquainted with his intent, and that it lies in me to have him most rigorously punished for it; howbeit, being more mercifull then hee deserves, I will let him live upon condition, that hee speedily void the Countrey, and never present him∣self again before me. Madam, answered Almerina, pardon me I beseech you, if J doe nor approve of this your displeasure, and justly you cannot lay so grievous a command upon me; hee is one of the greatest Princes now living upon the earth, and to intreat him so unworthily is against all reason. How doe you know, said Amplamira, that hee is such as you deliver him? I learned it by his discourse, answered  but with∣out that, the brave carriage of himself, his fair parts, and the confidence out of which hee hath dared to addresse himself unto you, and most assu∣red demonstrations of an extraordinary, and high , Permit him, Madam, to love you, for I doe not thinke, th i wh world you can meet with one that is so handsome, and so  of you. That hee is valiant you cannot doubt, the death of the A , whom he slew in your presence, being armed but with a single sword, make it good, what can you wish for more in a man? verely one of his merit is not easily sound, and if you let this occasion slip, you will be the first that will repent it. Thou pleadest so well for him, said Amplanira, who hegan to feele the first assaults of love, that I am resolved to over come my self for to affect him; but at any hand I will not have him know so much. Pish, said Almerina, what good can this affection doe him, if he must be ignorant of
it? would his sorrows be asswaged, would hee have lesse cause to com∣plain and afflict himself? No, Madam, hee must bee made acquainted with his good fortune, or else you must not love him. Why, said Am∣plamira, wouldest thou have mee contrary to all order, bee a Suitor, and demand that of him, which hee ought not to obtain of mee without a world of service and suffering. I doe not mean so neither, said Almerina, I only say, that hee is to be received favourably, when hee shall presen himself before you, and that you do not refuse him the favour e desires, which is to employ his Armes as your Knight. This cannot bet conve∣niently done, said Amplamira, for to speak openly with him would not be∣come me; since he is not known what he is, & for him to come heher is far more unfit, for so I might not only give my women occasion to talk, but peradventure all the Court: what course shall we hold then that it may be affected? A little thing troubles you, said Almerina; well take you no care, Ile bring it to a good issue, so as you will leave it to me, and follow my counsell, only be mindfull to know of him who hee is, when you see him, that you doe not ingage your self inconsiderately, nor repent the losse of your liberty. This discourse ended by the arrivall of Palmiren∣na, and her fair slave, who could not endure to be asunder, Almerina get her presently forth, and found out Floridan, to whom having delivered in few words, that hee was to hope well, and that hee should not fail to be the next day at the same place and time, where she had met with him in the Garden, shee returned, leaving him more contented, then ever hee was in all his life. CHAP. VII. Amadis unable to endure the violence of his desires, discovers himselfe to Palmirenna, her answer. Floridan is presented to Amplamira by Almerina. THe day beginning to break, Floridan to whom minutes had been unsupportable hours, got him out of bed, and having apparelled himself in the bravest fashion hee could devise to appear the more pleasing in the eyes of Amplamira, went down into the Garden, where hee walked up and down, earnestly beseeching in his heart, that proud divinitie which triumphd over his desires that hee would direct his tongue at his incounter with his Lady, and render her sensible of his pain; but imagining that she could not come so soon, he laid him down under certain trees, and fel in∣to so deep a muse of his expected happinesse, that three hours past insen∣sibly away, at the end whereof his passion making him beleeve, that the leaves driven by a sweet and gentle breath of wind proceeded from Am∣plamira's steps, he suddenly rose, and looked a thousand times about him,
howbeit, seeing no body appear, hee got into an arbour, covered with Iasemine, where the fear of meeting with new difficulties in his enterprise, assailing him, he said. In vain I attend a felicity that I have never deserved, Amplamira will not come, and the sweetnesse of those hopes, which had already placed me in the supremest degree of glory, will, I doubt, be changed into bit∣ternesse, the houre prescribed me is past, Almerina appears not, what shal I think then of so grievous a retardment, but that which hath always ac∣companied the evill fortune of my actions? I see there is no way for me, but to resolve for death, which yet would bee better then a life so full of crosses, at least wise Amplamira being the cause of it, I shall indure it with∣out grief. Herewith going out of the Arbour, as if hee would have sought for the end of his days, hee perceived that Sun to appear, whose approach he had attended with so much impatience, which so transported him with the excesse of a sudden joy, as notable to sustain himselfe hee fell on his knees, but so oportunely, that Amplamira arriving thereupon, by the cunning of Almerina (who had gotten her down into the Garden, under colour of conferring privately with her, about the last nights Affair) shee beleeved that it was purposely done to obtain that of her which hee had sued for by his Letter. Their amazement being great, they beheld one another a good while without speaking a word, Floridan trembled, Ampla∣mira found her selfe surprised by so unexpected an incounter, and knew not how to speak to this Lover, doubting to shew her selfe, either too free, or too reserved; howbeit receiving incredible content, to see him at her feet in such great humility, and judging by his fear, that hee was extream∣ly in love; shee said unto him, with a behaviour that testified more Ma∣jestie, then good will, Knight what is it that you demand? That which I can never hope for, answered he, if you shall consider the excellencie of your beauty, the greatnesse of your birth, and the merit of your vertues; I wish for a place in your heart, and that I may be permitted to bear Arms as your Knight. Why who are you, replyed she, that askes so freely what the greatest Prince of the earth could not have without infinit labour? Madam, answered he, I will boast more in being yours, and will draw more glory from your service, then from all the kingdoms of the world, neverthelesse if you will know who I am, it is fit I should obey your plea∣sure; wherefore I will declare it to you, but Madam be pleased, it may be conditionally that no body know it but your selfe, untill such time as it shall be requisite to have it published in the Court, I am named Floridan of Persia, the sonne of Rogell of Greece, Heir to the Empires of Trebi∣sond, Constantinople, and Persia, of which peradventure you have heard little spoken, in regard of the dangers which are met withall in traversing the Seas that separate them from this Countrey. Arise Prince, said Amplamira then (lending him her hand with wonder∣full content to have learnt that his birth was so transcendent) your great∣nesse will not permit me to leave you in the state where you are, the king∣doms you speak of, are indeed very remote from hence; but yet we have had some knowledge of them, for our Admirall about three yeeres since visited all those coasts, and at his return recounting a good part of the warlike exploits of the Princes of Greece, hee brought us their names,
amongst the which I well remember, how that which you give to your Father is one; come let us make a turn in this Garden, and I will tell you my resolution upon the demand, you made me: Whereupon walking a∣long the allies with incredible content to Floridan, who held and kissed his Ladies hand, whilst shee accepted of his service, and commanding him to be no lesse faithfull then loving promised to meet him oftentimes in that place; provided that it might still bee with that respect, which was to be observed to one of her quality; whereunto Floridan having deeply sworn, shee wisely retyred to avoid the incounter of any one, and left him better satisfied, then ever hee was in his life. In the mean time, Love wrought strange miracles, he made Palmirenna in love with her slave, and possessed her with as much desire as the other; beholding her continually to sigh, she likewise sighed, and said to her self; O yee gods! how cruell is my fate to make me feel the same passions for a Woman, as I should doe for a Knight! that which she indures for mee, should make me wise, and keep me from falling into the like inconveni∣ence; what else can I expect from this desire, but an impossible content∣ment, and a pain without all hope? I called thee fool Corazinda, but alas I am a greater, and yet not so, our errour is common, our miseries are equally shared, I can give thee no remedy, nor canst thou bring mee any, nature having made us so wretched, as to render us impotent to our wishes. Why art not thou a man, or why am not I one? So should wee not languish in this sort; for preferring thy merit before the greatest Crowns of the earth, I would become thy Wife, or I would soon be thy husband; wherwith looking on her fair slave, who had then the same thoughts, shee took her in her armes, and feeling some thing by chance that women have not, shee joyned her lips to hers, with such ardour, as did denote a more then ordinary passion, whereof our Warriour was so sensible, that he was about to discover himself, but being retained by the fear of precipitating his felicity, hee contented himself with giving her two kisses for one: upon the continuance of which, Palmirenna stil think∣ing of the incounter shee had made, said laughing unto him. Ah, Cora∣zinda, nature hath done us great wrong, for if you had been a Knight, we might have lived together with incredible contentment. I Madam, an∣swered hee, so as you would have conferred the same favour on me, which now I receive from you. Beleeve me, replyed she, that I have wished it a thousand times of late; whereupon rounding her in the eare, that hee might not be over-heard by Crestia, the most intimate of her Women that was by, hee said unto her, Madam, be pleased to remember this speech; the gods that heretofore have animated a work of Marble, for the satis∣faction of a mortall man, may authorise your wishes, in hope wherof I will instantly go and sacrifice unto them, for to obtain so infinit a grace. This said hee departed, and leaving a mighty suspition in the mind of this Princesse, hee retyred into a room, that was but little frequented; and walking there a good while, hee resolved to discover himself as soon as he could; and indeed not long after Palmirenna; who was much trou∣bled, comming thether with an intent to know more of the matter, he met her, and began the discourse, which he meant to make unto her, with new assurance of his love, when as she taking him by the hand, interrup∣ted him, saying.
Corazinda, I am not hereto inform my selfe, whether you love me or no, I have too certain proofes of that, but to understand the truth of a secret, whereof I have already some knowledge, your speeches have opened my eyes, and doe almost assure mee, that you are a Knight, disguised for some great design, discover your selfe freely unto me, if you desire that I should contribute to your Enterprise, I love you too much, either to reveale it, or to discover you therein. Madam, said hee, falling on his knees before her, you indeed behold a most infortunate Knight, if you stand on the offence he hath commit∣ted, appearing before you otherwise then in Armes for your service; but the happiest in the world, if you shall please to continue those favours unto him, which you have given to the beliefe of his sex. Love, who ne∣ver leaves a Lover, without some means of relief, having two dayes after I had to my griefe defeated your Guard, conducted mee to the Sea-side, made me at the very same time meet with a woodden Chest, wherin were the clothes that I had on, when I was brought hether as a slave, and fur∣nished me with the invention to fit my selfe with them, imagining as it is fallen out, that I should fall into your hands, and that Time, or my ser∣vices might oblige you to love me: I know well, that this so audacious a part deserves no lesse then death, wherunto I most willingly submit my selfe; but when you shall have considered, Madam, that it will be more blame to you, then praise, you will preserve him, in stead of seeking his ruine. It were but reason (answered she somewhat coldly, the better to disco∣ver the greatnesse of the Knights affection) that I should seek out punish∣ment to chastise this daring impudence of yours, but being more gently disposed, I will only banish you my company, with a commandement never to present your self again before mee. O this is too rigorous a sen∣tence, said hee, to leave a Lover with life, Madam. I will go and revenge you of my insolence. Therewith he fell down in the place with so little colour, and motion, that Palmirenna verely beleeved he was dead, which put her into such a confusion, as she was ready to follow him, howbeit taking a little courage to her, she got her speedily away, and calling Crestia declared what had hapned, conjuring her to assist her in so important an Affair. This Maid perceiving by her Mistris's speech, that she was deeply in love, said to her with a smiling countenance. Madam, you are too much troubled upon so little occasion, have you never heard that love hath done far greater wonders, onely tellme whither the death of this Knight will please you, or whether you desire hee should live? Alas, said hee, Crestia, dost thou not know that I was never cruelly minded. Enough Madam, answered she, leave the care of this to me, and you shall see that I will cure you both; saying so, shee took a little water in a dish, and going speedily to the room where Amadis lay in a swound, she sprinkled it on his face till he came to himself againe. Seeing him then to open his eyes, shee said unto him: Verely I did not think you had had so little heart, as to be discouraged for a word speaking: Vp, up, Love is like to favour you more then you imagine. Hereat Amadis was going to rise, but hee was so faint, that he was not able to do so, without the helpe of Crestia, who led him to his Chamber,
and having given him a little preserve to comfort him, she said. Come it is no time now to dissemble, or to conceale your thoughts from me; I know that which hitherto you have kept so secret, for the Princesse my Mistris hath discovered whatsoever hath past betwixt you unto me, I am able to doe much for you, but I will never serve you, unlesse you will sweare unto me by the faith which you owe unto the order of Knight∣hood, to acquaint mee truly with that I shall desire to know of you, for therupon depends all your future good or hurt. Let Heaven shew some strange judgement on me, answered he, somewhat faintly, if I do not tell you freely whatsoever you shall demand of me. Declare then unto me who you are, replyed she, that if it can be done with reason I may restore you into the good grace of my Lady, who doubtlesse had just cause to in∣treat you, as she did. I will obey you most willingly, said he; My name is Amadis, sonne to the great Emperour of Greece and Trebisond, but the most unhappy Knight breathing, if having such powerto helpe me, you take not some compassion of my case, dear Crestia passe by my little merit, and perswade this incensed beauty to pardon mee, or if so be my death is more agreeable to her, order it in such sort that I may receive it from her hands, or by her commandement, for it would grieve me far lesse, to have it come to me so sweet a way. Shee shall not bee so rigorous, answered Crestia, let me alone to make your peace, and be comforted, whilst I take care to render you happy. So leaving him in his bed, she went to find out Palmirenna, who trem∣bled at her comming, fearing some ill news of this Knight, whom shee infinitly affected; but seeing her look merrily, shee was confirm'd, and with-drawing her to a Window, that jetted upon the Garden, she asked her what shee had done. Much more then you think for, answered Crestia, your Knight is living, and which is more, I know him for one of the grea∣test Princes of the world, sonne to the excellent Emperour of Greece and Trebisond, of whom our Admirall hath so often spoken since his return. Good gods, said Palmivenna, what is this thou tellest me? is it possible that hee is issued out of so high, and noble a race? how great an errour have I committed to use him so cruelly, I fear Crestia, he will be too sen∣sible of this affront. Nay rather, said Crestia, it hath made him more de∣sirous to see you, but that hee dares not doe, because hee will not disobey your commandement, before hee knows that you will be pleased with it; He is in his bed, go to him after dinner, it will give you a great deale of satisfaction to talk with him. This Princesse, being carried more by her passion, then Crestia's coun∣sell failed not to visit this sick patient, as soon as she was risen from table, and perceiving some tears in his eyes, which the doubt of finding his Mistris inexorable to Crestia's perswasions, had produced, she comforted him with so amorous a grace, that he presently recovered his former hue, giving her a million of thanks for the care she took of his health. There needed no lesse a Physician, said he unto her, then you to cure so dange∣rous a disease; but, Madam, will you never remember my offence? no my Lord answered she, but to love you the more; for assuring my selfe that the violence of your affection counselled you to disguise your selfe, and that your intents were fair, I find my selfe indebted to my good for∣tune, so as you excuse me if ignorant of your quality, I have spoken
more rudely unto you then was fit. Ah, Madam! said he, kissing her hand, you kil me with talking in this manner, for you have absolute power over my life, and may intreat me as you please, at which too I may not repine: whereupon most orously interchanging kisses they vowed to love one another eternally. CHAP. VIII. The felicity of Amadis and Floridan, in the secret Marriages of Palmirenna and Amplamira. THese Lovers delighting in nothing so much, as the object of their own beauties, beheld one another with admiration; Amadis adored her, she idola∣trized Amadis, he burned, she felt no lesse violent a flame, they equally desired to see the way to their felicity open, but respect and shame stayed them from attempting it, at length our Warrior remembring that fortune derides such as doe not rightly use the favour she presents, resolved to goe on, and not make a stop in so fair a course; fixing his eyes then on his ex∣cellent Lady, hee said unto her with a countenance that testified a great deale of passion. Since it is your pleasure that I shall live, leave me not Madam, in pains, which length of time, would make most insupportable, let us make use of the means that are offered us to set our hearts at rest, and not staying till some evill chance may deprive us of the happinesse, which now wee may enjoy, let us break through this fear, that foolishly restraineth us; you assure me that I have more interest in your heart, then all the men besides in the world, I have sworn a thousand times that I never adored any, but you, and that I wil never sigh for an other, I will reiterate the same oathes, give me the same assurance, render the effects conformable to your words, and making me partaker of the glory of your bed as your husband, disdain not to be my wife, upon the promise, which now I make you before Hea∣ven, and your faithfull Crestia, to espouse you solemnly at Constantino∣ple, or as soon as wee shall have disposed your father thereunto. Why dearest Lord, said Palmire, (that was possest with no lesse powerfull desire, then hee) I have as much affection as you, to wish our present content, but pardon me, if I tell you freely that I am to bee more carefull of my selfe; I have heard of a thousand misfortunes occasioned by the inconstancie of men, I may fear the like; and when you were ab∣sent from me (as the fortune of war▪ might many times carry you abroad) I should still be in doubt, that you were in the power of some other beauty. Ah Madam, said Amadis, shedding tears, and deeply sighing, which hee knew was of marvellous force to constrain the heart of a Woman, have I not cause to be exceedingly grieved, that you will ranke me thus amongst
the worst of men? Vnworthy, and dishonourable spirits may offend so basely, but a man whose aym is reputation, will never fall into so soule a fault; I may fail, but never so much, and say I should be tempted with some such desire, have not you wherwithall to make mee sure; look but only on your eyes, and there you shall find charms, able to arrest the most fickle humour in the world, and to assure your fear: These considerations Madam, are cruell; and if you desire to see an end of me, doe but continue firm in the mind you seem to be in. Your griefe doth much afflict me, answered she, nor will my love in∣dure to see you suffer thus any longer; wherfore I am contented to espouse you this evening, but I will have my sister Amplamira, whom I hold most dear, to be present with Crestia, at the vowes and oathes you shall make, never to have any other Wife but me. Madam, answered he, infinitly transported with joy, I am not able to give you thanks worthy enough for the greatnesse of this grace, but I will serve you so faithfully, that you shall never repent the conferring of it on me, I am wonderfully well contented, that the Princesse Amplamira may be with you, for I hope ere it be long to do her the like good office. Why, said Palmirenna, will you give her an husband? Madam, answered Amadis, the excesse of my happinesse will not permit me to conceale any thing, how important soe∣ver, from you, I will acquaint you with a very great secret, but with con∣dition, that you will be pleased to assist me to bring it to passe. The Knight of the Flowers, whom you know, is my Nephew, sonne to Rogel of Greece, Emperour of Persia, he is passionately in love with your sister Amplamira, and by the means of Almerina, he hath lately had accesse unto her, in such sort, as I beleeve she will not refuse him, if you will present him unto her for a husband, let one and the same time consummate these mariages, the knowledge you have of a Lovers pains, together with my intreaties, may perswade you unto it, but when you shall consider, that it is for your sisters good, you will be carried to it with more affection. Verely this is strange, said Palmirenna, and sure this day is fatall for the happinesse of our house; my Lord, let us send for this Knight, and know of him how farre hee hath proceeded with Amplamira, afterwards we will dispose of the rest. Crestia having order then to seek out Floridan, these Lovers remained alone, to Amadis, unspeakable content, who feeling himself much pressed by his desires would fain have entred into the possession of his felicity, but Palmirenna she wing him how neer it was to night, hee was constrained to command over his appetite, and have a little patience, the rather be∣cause Crestia arrived then with Floridan, who going to Amadis, after hee had kissed Palmirenna's fair hands, he said unto him; what occasion, Cora∣zinda, keeps you thus in your bed? Nay, said Palmirenna smiling, call him boldly by his name; we have found out his tricks, and which is more, we know your greatest secrets, does Amplamira love you, and can you hope for any thing from your services? Hereat Floridan blushed, and was so dismayed, that he could not return her a word, he beheld Amadis laugh∣ing, and perceiving Palmirenna take no lesse pleasure in seeing him so tran∣sported, he could not tell whether it were a dream, or no: At last gathe∣ring his wits together, and concluding with himself, that all was discove∣red, he answered her thus. Madam, you have so surprised me, that in good
faith I scarce know yet wher I am; for that which you desire to under∣stand of me, concerns me so neer, that I could rather dye, a thousand times, then confesse it any other where; but desiring to give all obedience to your commandements, and satisfaction to the friendship of this Knight, I will not stick to acknowledge unto you, that the Princesse Amplamira wishes me well, and that she hath declared how she is pleased with my servitude. That is enough, said Palmirenna, our danger will be brought to a good port, Sir follow me, and be not troubled with the captivity wher∣into I will put you, it shall not be but to make you relish your liberty the better. Going forth then with Amadis, who had made himself ready, she went into her Cabinet, wher she shut up Floridan; and seeing her sister come, she caused all her women to leave the Chamber, retaining none but Almerina, and her trusty Crestia, that done she took Amadis by the hand, and addres∣sing her speech to Amplamira, she said. Sister I have prepared you for the marvels you shall behold, for being most assured how much you love me, and that I may trust to you in all oc∣casions, I hold it unnecessary to use many Ceremonies with you. Love, whose power is unresistable, unable to put me into passion, for any of those many Princes, which heretofore have sighed for me, hath possest me with so much for this slave, that not to lye, I was reduced to the utter∣most of dispair, thinking that my affections was mad and impossible, but my good Genius having opened mine eyes, I came this morning to know, that the habit she wore, was usurped for the love of me, and that it cove∣red the body of the valiant Knight, who cleared this Province of the dan∣ger it was in, by the death of that dreadfull Monster, which would have rendred it desolate, this hath induced me to resolve (after I had learned of him that he was the sonne of the renowned Emperour of Greece) to make him this day my husband, wherof I desire you should be participant, as well to testifie the trust I repose in you; as to intreat you to be a witnesse for me, that I do not receive him into my bed, before he hath taken a so∣lemn oath to espouse me publikely in his Empire, or here in our fathers dominions, if we can dispose him therunto: do that then (continued she speaking to Amadis) which is to be done on your part, to the end that the caresses, which you shall receive from me, may be without blame. Madam, said Amadis then, I protest before heaven, before this excellent Princesse, and before these faithfull Ladies, never to have other Wife, then you, and to espouse you solemnly, whensoever you please, as now I do espouse you. Saying this, he took a rich Diamond from off his fin∣ger, and put it on his fair Mistresses, who giving him an amorous kiss, cal∣led him her husband and Knight. O yee gods, what have I seen (said Amplamira, almost lost in the won∣der of these things) and what may not one beleeve, concerning the power of a divinity that works such strange miracles? A woman changes her sex, a slave becomes in an instant Lord of Martaria, and I have for my bro∣ther and Soveraign, the Prince of Greece, whom but even now I beheld to be a vagabond Girle. Verely I am lost, and must needs beleeve that these things are done by inchantment: Is not all this an illusion sister? or do you not tell it me to make sport with me? No indeed, said Palmirenna, I have spoken nothing but the truth, and
therefore you must be assured that this Prince here, whose name is Amadis, is my Lord and Husband. It is fit then, replyed Amplamira, that appro∣ving of your choyce, I acknowledge him for Sovereign of Martaria, and that I kiss his hands in token of the homage which he is to expect from his Subjects. Madam, said Amadis; it wil be more glory for me to be your Brother, then your Lord, wherfore you shal do me a favour, to let me have yours to kiss, by way of humble thanks, for the consent you are pleased to give unto my good fortune, for a beginning wherof I intreat you not to refuse me one boon I shal demand of you. My Lord, answe∣red she, I have no other will but yours, and therfore you may easily obtain whatsoever you shall desire of me. Confer then (replyed Amadis, stepping suddenly to Palmirenna's Cabinet, and presenting Floridan unto her) con∣fer then, Madam, the same grace on this Knight, who is my Nephew, as I have received from your Sister; the Empire of Persia attends him, and the merit of his person deserves it from you. O ye Gods! (cryed Amplamira againe, and moreamazed then before,) what second wonder is this? must I be of the partie too? That you must, Sister, answered Palmirenna straight, if you desire your own good, for this Knight being one of the handsomest, greatest, and most accomplished Princes of the world, you cannot fall into a better hand. I receive him then with all my heart, said she, but I would have the consummation of this Mariage deferred for a while. Ah, Madam, said Floridan, be not less kind then your sister, nor give her the glory of loving better then you, how miserable should I be, to sigh whilst others live happily amidst their delights: Behold me with an eye of pittie, said he, kneeling down before her, and consider that time may make an end of me with grieving. Arise, said she, joyning her lips to his, my love and your merit have overcom me. Herewith, Floridan having sworn the same to her, which Amadis had done unto his Lady; she took a Ring of him, and accepted him for her Husband. That done, they departed one from another, after they had concluded to keep this affair very secret, and to leave unto Amadis his ha∣bit, and name, under colour wherof he lay with Palmirenna without su∣spition; and so getting to bed, they appeased the violence of their desires, wherin let us leave them for to see what resolution Brustafard took, being wonderfull passionate for the love of the faire slave.
CHAP. IX. Bustrafard maintaining the jsts, for the love of Palmirenna's faire Slave, is vanquished by Floridan. WHilst our Lovers sought for delights in their kis∣ses, for sweetest satisfaction in their embraces, and whilst they met with unexpressable raptures in the height of their pleasures; Tarsander sighed out his sufferings, and Bustrafrd was lost in the ex∣cess of his passion. This Gyant, who presumed so far, as to be perswaded, that Palmirenna's fair Slave would adore him, assoon as she knew that he loved her, was much abashed at not finding her not sensible of his flame, but seeking to flatter himself in some sort, he laid the fault on the modestie which Maidens do always retain in their actions, and said that it was discretion in her, to conceale her thoughts, howbeit perceiving that time, and patience did but increase his desires, he resolved to board her, and so know wherunto he should trust; yet consi∣dering with himself, that it would be fit for him to oblige her first, by some remarkable service, to the end the might have no excuse, if she would not affect him, he presented himself before the Emperour one day, when as Palmirenna, her Sister, the fair Slave, and the most of the Lords, were in the great Hall, and kneeling down, he said unto him with a voyce that might have dismaid the most confident. Mightie Monarch of Martaria, I have often heard it said, that Love was the authour of all Gentillesses, and thereof you may now see an ex∣ample in me, that loth to let your Court bee in idleness, am resolved to put it in exercise, so as your Majestie wil be pleased therwith all; for I wil maintain for three dayes together, against all commers, both with my Launce and Sword, that next unto these three excellent Princesses, who admit no comparison, Grazinda is the fairest Maid that lives; and that of all the Knights of the earth, I am most worthy of her favour. This speech which drew laughter from all the Assistants, made our fair Slave to blush, who answered him with a smile; Knight, be wel advised upon that which now you propound, the performance wherof carries more difficul∣tie with it, then you thinke for, and the injustice of your cause may deny you the victory, which otherwise were most assured to the force you have. I never fear that, answered he, for on so just a quarrel, I would un∣dertake to vanquish the gods. But what do you hope from this enter∣prize of yours, said she unto him? Much honour in having served you, an∣swered he, and more contentment in enjoying of you, being most assured that my valour wil induce you to love me, if my affection cannot. But what if you happen to have the worst, replyed she? You may then, an∣swered he, recompence my Vanquisher with the favours I have desired from you. Your enterprise doth so much oblige me, said she, that not to be ingratefull, I will submit my elf to the conditions you have propoun∣ded.
Go then, so as it may stand with his Majesties pleasure, I wil be the prize of your victory. O ye Gods! said Tarfander to himself, what is this I heare? my hopes are at an end, nor can I wish for any thing now but death, which I wil seek for at the point of my rivals Launce. Ah! Cora∣zinda, how unadvised are you voluntarily to ingage your self in so loath∣some a captivitie? do you think to find delight in the bed of such an ugly fellow, or any sweetness in the kisses of such beastly lips? you will curse the time that ever you were so light of your promise, for had you done it with any hope, there had been comfort yet, but alas! your misfortune is remediless, the whole Empire hath not a Knight able to resist the force of this Gyant, so that of Palmirenna's, you wil become Bustrafards slave. Whilst this Lover complained in this manner; Bustrafard having easi∣ly obtained permission to Combat, went and armed himself, leaving the Courtiers not so much marvelling at his vain craking, as at Corazinda's rash promise, who turning her fair eies to Palmirenna, said unto her: Ex∣cellent Mistris, do not ye think that I had reason to entertain this gailant? No marrie do I, said Palmirenna, who seemed to be discontented with this accord, you have been a great deal to rash, for since you are mine, my Wil ought to be a Law unto you. Why, Madam, said Corazinda, do you re∣pine at my good fortune? Now on my faith, said Amplamira, who could not forbear laughing, there is no body here that wil envie you the con∣tent of so sweet a servant. Howsoever I shall have this advantage of you, replyed Corazinda, that my beautie wil do wonders, whilst you shal not be so much as spoken of. This discourse having redoubled their laughter, the Princesses led Co∣razinda in triumph to the windowes, where she and Palmirenna placed themselves together for to be hold the cariage of this valiant Lover; who in the mean time being very richly armed, appeared in the field with such a daring confidence, as no body durst undertake him. Howbeit not very long after, a big Knight arived in the Lists, who addressing himself unto Brustafard, said, Gyant, I come not hither to dispute with Corazinda for the glorie of being one of the fayrest creatures in the world, for my esti∣mation of her is as great, if not greater then thine; but to abate thy pride, which perswades thee, that no other Knight besides thy self is worthy to serve her. Now by my best hopes, said the Gyant, somwhat netled with his speech, I find thy body too little for so great an attempt; nevertheless being here to receive all commers, I hold it fit to give thee content. Say∣ing so, they turned about to take the field, and charging their Launces, they met in the midst of their course with such furie, that the big Knight having broken very bravely in the midst of his Enemies shield, was over∣thrown with his horse to the ground; the Gyant passing on somewhat astonished at so violent an encounter, howbeit setting himself wel in his saddle, he returned presently with his sword in his hand, but seeing the Knight not stir, he caused his Squire to pull off his Helmet, and so disco∣vered to all the Court, that it was the amorous Tarsander, who  spaire had made to put on Armes, with a resolution to dy, or be revenged on his ryval; the fall of this young Prince, who had no other hurt but his amazement, was so sensible to the Emperour, that had he not feared the anger of Brustafard, and his Brothers, which was dreadfull to all his neigh∣bours, the Jousts had been at an end, but concealing his displeasure, he
sent his Physicians to his Nephew, who was found more touched with despie then harme. In the mean time the Gyant, with no other but his first Launce over∣threw the King of Arbales, the Duke of Corzan, the King of Calizant, the Marquis of Bonport, the Duke of Plemond, and the Earl of Modi∣ance, brave Knights, and that had acquired much glory in the adventures of the world. These Warriours so easily unhorsed, retyred with extream discontent, and not long after the Emperour seeing no more appear, returned likwise into his Pallace, where he demanded of his Daughters what they thought of the Gyants designes. We think, answered Palmirenna, that there is more folly then courage in it, for it is an unprofitable labour, in regard we are perswaded that Corazinda wil never yeeld her self up into the power of so ugly, and il-favoured a thing, if his valour should happen to make him triumph over all that oppose him. O Madam, said Corazinda, do not judge so amiss of a Maidens promise, for why should not I love him? I find no defect in him, his hair is not yet cleane white, the perfuming of his beard takes away the ill savour of his flat nose; he affects me much, I should be very ingratefull then, to let him consume away without succou∣ring him. I but, prettie one, said the Emperour, speak you in good ear∣nest? That I do verely, answered she, laughing with Palmirenna at the Emperours fear; for if some valiant Knight do not ds-ingage me, I may not be worse then my word, though it be in my choice whether I wil love him or no. Now in good faith, said the Emperour, drawing her aside, you wil much wrong your self, to prefer his satisfaction before mine. Why Sir, said Corazinda, can you think I am so base-minded? beleeve it he shall never draw any favour from me, and if I entertaine such an opinion in him, it is but to make sport; the honour of your affection is dearer to me then my life; and if I do not satisfie your desire, yet assure your self, Sir, it is out of the consideration of a thing which you wil allow of hereafter. This discourse finishing by the arryval of Brustafard, who came glori∣ously in with the spoyls of the vanquished, which he placed at the feet of his Mistris; every one talked of this love til supper; where Palmirenna, and her Sister Amplamira, would not be present, to have the more libertie to caress their Lovers in private: Commanding a Table to be covered them in Palmirenna's chamber, they sate them down all foure; being atten∣ded by none but their Secretaries, and falling to speak of Brustafards en∣terprize; Amadis intreated Floridan to combat him the next day, which questionless had been most insupportable to his Amplamira, had she not been perswaded that Amadis would not have exposed him to such danger, if it had not been to have given him the greater reputation in the Court, wherfore arming her selfe with patience, she permitted him to undertake it, and perceiving it to be bed time, she secretly retyred with him, leaving Amadis with Palmirenna, without any suspition of her women. The night being sweetly past away, Floridan arose, and desiring Ampla∣mira to be present at his combat with Bustrafard, he went to the King of Arbales, with whom he had contracted some friendship; and being ac∣commodated by him with all that seemed necessary for his enterprize, he mounted upon a lustie Horse, and appeared in the Lists at such time as the
Gyant having overthrown the King of Arisdan, the Marquesse of Roc∣que, and the Count Cordena, with an intollerable arrogance, challenged the Knights of the Court to combat with him altogether, the brave coun∣tenance of this Warrior, that managed his Horse in a most gallant man∣ner, having turned the eys of all the assistants upon him, especially of Am∣plamira, who beheld him with motions of love and fear, he approached unto Bustrafard, and said. Knight, your insolence doth so distast me, that I resolve to be of the num∣ber of those whom you have driven out of the field, or cure your brain of the distemper, wherwithall Corazinda's beauty hath infected it. I had thought, answered he incholler, that others example would have made thee wise; but sincethou wilt needs be lost with them for company, ac∣cuse thine own folly for it. Charging his Launce then with more fury then at any time before; he met Floridan in the middest of the course, whose Shield being unable to resist the violence of so strong an incounter, was pierced in such sort, as the staffe passing under his arm, had almost put Amplamira besides her self, out of the opinion shee had, that it was run through his body, but seeing her Lover in his saddle, and his enemy on the ground, with a dangerous wound in his side, and judging by the shout∣ing, and clapping of the peoples hands, who therby testified the content∣ment they took in beholding that proud masse of flesh overthrown, shee grew somewhat confident, and prayed unto her gods, for to give her Knight the same honour in his combat on foot, as he had had on horse∣back. In the mean time, the Giant full of rage arose with strange blasphe∣mies; and in regard his enemy was alighted, because he would not fight with advantage, he advanced his sword, and thinking to divide him with the first blow, he let it fall with such force, that questionlesse the effect had answered his expectation, had not Floridan, seeing it comming, wa∣rily avoided it, letting him then cleave the ayr, and the ground in vain, he discharged so furious a stroak on his Helmet, that hee made him knock his chin against his bosom, carrying away to the very skull, all that his blade met withall. O yee gods! said the Emperour, what a horrible blow was this? doubtlesse this Knight is one of the valientest of the earth; and if he continues in this sort Corazinda will have power to bestow her favours on some other. Whilst the Emperour was saying this, the Giant, that did not beleeve he could have found so much strength in one man, staggered a little; but instantly recovering himself with an incredible rage, he began to deale such desperate blows, that every one looked each minute to see the Knight cut in pieces; howbeit he avoided them with such quick agility, and gave him so many wounds, thatall which beheld him cryed out, that the very God of battails used not more grace in his fight, nor more vio∣lence in his stroaks. Some hours being spent in the heate of this Duell, the Gyant would have retyred, to take a little breath; but Floridan, who was vexed to be so long in vanquishing before his Mistris, pressed him so hard, as he was constrained to defend himself, and renew the combat, charging one another then with greater fury, then at the beginning, they delivered a world of blows, wherof one chancing to light on Floridans shoulder, gave him a wound more large then dangerous, which put him
into such choller, that taking his sword in both his hands, and advanting it with an intent to cleave him asunder, he perceived a great Knight, ac∣companied with two dreadfull Gyants, entring the Lists, who came gal∣lopping in for to part them, but in vain; for Floridan having his sword aloft, let it descend in such terrible force on Bustrafards head, that notwith∣standing he struck but with the flat, he sent him to the earth, casting great abundance of blood out of his mouth, and ears; wherupon leaping in∣to his saddle, he made head to the Giants, who this while were won∣dring, that so furious a blow should proceed from the hand of an ordina∣ry man; howbeit, seeing that they stirred not, and guessing by their coun∣tenance, that they were not come to assault him, hee retyred to the King of Arbales, who received him with incredible content, leaving Bustrafard to the care of his brothers, that grumbling vowed to take a cruell revenge of this affront. CHAP. X. Don Rifantes, Prince of Cabilla, Brundemor, King of Corcutan, and Rozagant, King of Alfanar, demand leave to maintain the beauty of the Princesses of Martaria, the successe of their Enterprise. FLoridan's hurt being lesse then his desire to see Am∣plamira, hee stayed not long with the King of Arbales, but went in all haste to the Palace, wher the Emperour received him very graciously, and infinitly commended the adresse and valour, which he had shewed in the combat; he was a∣mongst his friends, that caressed him, he heard himself most worthily spoken of by al the Cour∣tiers; yet was he not satisfied, for not daring to speak unto his Lady, all the honour that was done him, was but so much torment; wherfore resolving to withdraw himselfe, in hope that Ampla∣mira would do the like, as he was about to depart, he perceived the Knight and the two Giants, of whom we spoke before, to enter the Hal, who gravely marching along, advanced towards the Emperours throne: That curiosity, which always accompanies the minds of men, making him stay for to know who these strangers were, he followed them close, and saw that falling all three on their knees, the Knight spake thus. Great Monarch of Martaria, the reputation you have of being as gra∣cious, and magnanimous a Prince, as any is in the world, hath drawn hither Don Rifantes the Heir of Cabilla, Brundemor King of Corcutan, and Rozagant King of Alfanar to obtain two things of your Majestie, the which you may grant with this assurance, that they shall not be requested of you, but for the good of your estate, and the glory of your Crown;
The first is, that we may be permitted to maintain both with the Launce and Sword for three days together against all Commers, that the beauty of these three excellent Princesses your Daughter, doth surpasse that of all other Women living; and because the effect of our valour ought to preceed that of the second, to the end you may willingly accord unto it; we will forbear to speak of it till such time as you have seen the power of our Armes. Brave Prince, said the Emperour, rising out of his Thron to embrace them, the pains you have taken, so much obliges mee, that I gladly con∣discend to both of your demands: my Daughters do not deserve that your Swords should be employed to recommend them in the world; never∣thelesse, since you will do them so great an honour, you shall find the Lists ready against you please, and my self disposed to refuse you nothing which lyes in me to grant. This is as much Sir, said Don Rifantes, as we can desire from you, so that if your Knights have Mistresses, wee shall not want work; departing then, notwithstanding the Emperours intreaty to have them lodge in the Court, they caused a rich Pavilion to be set up in the place wher Floridan had demeaned himself so valiantly against Bu∣strafard, and there attended the comming of some Assaylant. The Arrogance of these Knights growing odious to al the Courtiers, especially to our Lovers, who were confident what their second design would be, divers Knights went to arm themselvs for to combat them, of whom Floridan would have been the foremost, had not his Lady absolute∣ly commanded him to forbear, untill the Chyrurgions had taken order with his wound. The place being on an instant covered with a world of people, six Knights presented themselvs, wherof three seeing Don Rifantes, and his companions ready mounted, set spurs to their horses, but with such mis∣fortune for them, that they were all three overthrown to the ground, their Adversaries not so much, as seeming to be any whit moved with so furious an incounter; Their fellows exceedingly vext at this accident, put themselvs presently in their places, with some hope to revenge them, howbeit their fortune was nothing better, receiving such cruell fals, as made all the assistants talk of their enemies extraordinary force, who re∣turning to their station in a most proud manner, were perswaded that they had terrified all the Court from attempting them again; but they were not long in that mind; for Tarsander appeared in the Lists, accompanied with the the Marquesse of Bonport, the Earle of Tranates Son, the Marquesse of Rocque, the Duke of Corzan, the Prince of Balivana, a young Knight but very valiant, and couragious. These six Warriors furnished with strong Launces, planted themselves just against the Gyants, who at the sound of the Trumpet dislodged with such fury against Tarsander, the Marquesse of Bonport, and the Prince of Balivana, that they broke their staves into a thousand shivers, leaving the three Knights so shaken, that the least touch in the world had infallibly carried them to the earth; howbeit resetling themselvs, they took fresh Launces, and returned against their enemies, who vexed to see them stil in their saddles, incounterd them so rudely, that they were constrained to fly over the Cruppers of their horses, to the extreem discontent of the Duke of Corzan, who advancing then with his companions, received the same
disgrace as the former, and that at the very first course. These six of the best Knights of the Empire, being so easily vanquish∣ed, not a man more presented himself, so that night approaching, the Em∣perour was fain to retyre, marvellously commending the valour of these strangers, but particularly that of Rifantes, who having nothing so great a mass of flesh as the rest, yet had shewed as much force, and more address. All the evening being employed in this discourse every one withdrew. Floridan into Amplamia's Cabinet, who charged him not to combat til the last day, and Corazinda with Palmirenna; that having caressed one ano∣ther, with as much demonstration of affection as could be desired in two Lovers, they fell at length to talke of these Insolents, and resolved, if their designe were to demand them of their Father (as it was to be presu∣med) that Amadis should then feigne himself to be an Amazon, and should get the Emperour to give him the order of Knight-hood, to the end that seeing him sight he should have no suspition of his sex, which being con∣cluded without any difficulty they slept til morning; when as they were wakened by the sound of the Trumpet, which led those great Knights in∣to the Lists. Whereupon making hast to be up, they repayred a little af∣ter to the windowes, and observed that the strong Knight Lorgades Prince of Grizolia, the Emperours neere kinsman, who arrived but the night be∣fore, being accompanied with Rodamans and Arbalion, Bustrafards brothers, were ready to charge their Launces against the Prince of Cabilla. The gallant demeanour of this Knight, and the unmeasurable corpu∣lencie of Rodamans, and Arbalion, that opposed the two Gyants, no less dreadfull and great, perswading them, that the course would be worth their sight, they leaned together close by the Emperour, where they had not been long, but they saw those furious Warriours set forth, who mee∣ting in the middest of the course broke all alike, without so much as once moving in their saddles. Now by my life, said the Emperour, this is one of the bravest incounters that ever I beheld, and questionless Lorgades hath justly acquired the name of a very good Knight, since he is able to withstand Rifantes, but let us see what wil ensue. Here with the two Knights having taken fresh Launces spurred away, and followed by their companions that carryed Masts of ships, they broke again with extream furie; Lorgades losing his stirrops, was in dan∣ger of falling, had he not caught hold on the Horses mane; Rifantes pas∣sed gallantly on, though somewhat astonished; Arbalion and Rodamans were overturned upon their Horse cruppers; Brundamor and the King of Alfa∣nar did but how a little with the violence of the shock; the Assistants re∣mained all amazed with so furious an incounter, and exceedingly desired, that the insolence of the strangers might be abated, howbeit in vain; for these three valiant Champions transported with an excess of rage to find so much resistance before Princesses whom they adored, dislodged the third time, and encountred their enemies with such violence, that Lorgades and his friends were laid in the dust, which so filled the Victors with arro∣gance, that after two houres rest, no Knight appearing in that time, they went and presented themselves before the Emperour, where on their knees again Don Rifantes spake to him on this manner. Sir, I think that by this you have good experience of the force of our Armes, and the greatness of our courages; wherfore we desire you wil
be pleased to grant us the boon now, which yesterday you promised us. I have told you, said the Emperour, that you shal dispose of all that is in my power as I my self, do but ask, and I wil most willingly grant it you. Sir, continued Don Rifantes, you have then three sons in Law, Palmirenna is for me, Amplamira for the brave King of Corcutan, and the Infanta Archisidella for the King of Alfanar. The word of a King, answered the Emperour (a little surprized) ought doubtless to be irrevocable, but Princes, you must understand, that in matters of such high importance, I am to take the advise of my people, since all my authoritie depends on their good wil; besides, I must know whether my Daughters affections, which cannot be forced without tyran∣nie, may be accommodated to my commands; I wil propound this Affair to my Councel, speak particularly with my Daughters about it, and draw them, if I can, to receive this honour from you, after you have perfor∣med the conditions of the Jousts which you are to maintain all day to morrow. Wherupon embracing them (though much against his heart) he with∣drew into his Cabinet to resolve so difficult an Affair, leaving divers se∣verall passions in the minds of them that remained in the Hall: The Prin∣ces of the Empire were troubled; Palmirenna, and her Sisters were excee∣dingly displeased, Floridan was mad with spight, and jealousie, but every one was amazed at the furie of the faire Slave; who with eyes sparkling fire, addrest her speech unto Rifantes, and said, Prince of Cabilla, thou thinkest that Palmirenna is already in thy power, but thou wilt be decei∣ved, for be assured, that in satisfaction of the distast thou hast given her, I wil draw the bloud out of thy body, even to the last drop; and if I might combat now, as the Women of my countrey that are bred up in Armes use to do, I would let thee languish no longer, but to morrow wil come. Saying so, she depaated in a rage out of the Hall, leaving all there in wonder at her speech; the Knight and Gyants excepted, who laughed her to scorn, and causing a Nag to be brought her, she rode toward the grot, where she had left her Sword, being soon got thither, she found not the Armes which she had left, but others enamelled all over with greene and red, so rich and curiously wrought, that she was much amazed at them, howbeit conceiving that Cassandra had done this miracle, she would lose no time, making them up then in a bundle with incredible content, shee took her Sword that was fairer then ever it had been, and remounting on her Horse, she rode to Cardana, where she came in time to free Palmirenna from a great deale of feare she was in for her. From whence comes my Corazinda, said she unto her, kissing her on the forehead? from seeking out means to be revenged of these gyants inso∣lence, answered she, wherefore Madam, look here. Saying so she undid the bundle, and made them all marvell to see such rich and faire armes. Then you are resolved Corazenda, to fight, said Palmirenna? But alas, how can you scape the furie of their swords, which are so dreadfull to the vali∣antest Knights that are. Madam, answered Corazinda, I am not onely re∣solved to fight, but to dye a thousand times over, rather then let you fall into the power of a man so unworthy of your greatness and merit, do but get the Emperour to give me the order, and you shall see me cut out work enough for your enemies.
Ah Corazinda! said Amplamira, is it possible that being so delicate and faire, you should have the strength to subdue such mightie men? I cannot but wonder much at your courage, but withall I do no lesse pittie you. Ma∣dam, answered she, If I dye, it shal be with a great deal of content, since it is in the service of so high, and excellent Princesses, but these arrogants hal pay deare for their victory, and never do me the honour to love me more, if to morrow I do not make them change their note; the Knight of the Flowers wil assist me, that is enough, onely let us go and rest us a little, that we may take the Emperour early at his rising in the morning. Here∣withall the company parting, she got to bed with Palmirenna, who ming∣ling tears, with the kisses that she gave her, testified her fear; but being comforted by her Lover, she ceased to afflict her self, and slept till day. CHAP. XI. The horrible Combat between Don Rifantes with his Companions, and Palmirenna's faire Slave, the Knights of the Flowers, and of the Flower-de-Luces. The end thereof. AMadis and Floridans jealousie not permitting them to take much rest, they arose with the Sun, and be∣ing covered with their Armes, wherein Amadis car∣ried so gallant a presence, that even with the opi∣nion of his Sex, he made all the Princesses Ladyes in love with him; they entred into the Emperours Chamber, where kneeling downe, hee said unto him; Mightie Monarch, I doubt not but you mar∣vel to see me in this equipage, and that at first it seemes strange unto you, to behold a Maiden slave at your feet, to receive that order fro your hands, which makes men Knights, and that gives them power to fight in Armes, but when you shal be pleased to remem∣ber that the earth produceth women courageous, and strong enough to dispute the honour of a Combat with the valiantest Knight in the world, you will cease to wonder at it, and being moved with your Daughters tears, who justly feare to fall into the power of these arrogants, which without any desert wil have them whether they will or no, and in whose company they cannot promise themselves an houre of contentment in their whole lives, you will make no difficultie to give me this sacred or∣der, under the favour whereof I hope to set them free. My dearest Corazinda, said the Emperour, much amazed at her dis∣course, but more yet to see her so gallant, in such rich Armes, I beleeve that you have a disposition gentle enough to be sensible of the teares which my Daughters shed not without cause, nor doe I doubt but your love doth make you despise the greatest dangers for to set them at rest, but sweet-heart, your strength will not correspond to this height of courage, and of one evill which is not yet arrived, I should make two inevitable
ones, if I should condiscend to your request, in which regard I may not satisfie your desire, for it would grieve me to see you so cast away. I shall have reason to complaine of you then, answered Corazinda, and be assu∣red Sir, that I will remember this refusall of yours, which notwithstan∣ding shall be no hinderance to my designe, being resolved to demand that honour of mine enemies, if this valiant Knight of the Flowers, who is to second me in my enterprize, wil not do it for fear of displeasing your Majestie. Whereupon arising in choller, she made as though she would be gon, when as the Emperour constrained by his Daughters intreaties, stayed her by the arme, saying; Be not angry, Corazinda, for beleeve me, it was on∣ly pitty of you, that restrained me from giving you content; you would be a Knight, why be so in the name of all my gods, whom I heartily im∣plore, to render you as valorous, as you are faire. Saying so, he laid his hand upon her head, blessed her after his manner; put her on a paire of golden spurs, and kissed her on the forehead, left her to take the rest of her Armes from the hands of his Daughters, who presently invironed her, and were going to leade her to the field in triumph, when as there was a Knight seen entring into the Hall, armed in azure Armes, tall of stature, bravely disposed, of a very goodly presence, and marvellous faire of face; who at the first sight knowing Amadis and his companion, was about to embrace, and caress them, had not the Prince of Persia stayed him with a wink of his eye, which made him instantly conceive that he was to for∣bear; advancing then in a majesticall manner, he set one knee to the ground before the Princesses, and addressing his speech to Palmirenna, who went formost, he said unto her. Madam, if strangers may speak without offence, take it not ill, if being unknown to all here, I dare ask of you, to what Enterprise you conduct these two Knights, with such a train of Women? We are going to expose them to very great hazard, answered Palmirenna, and to confrom them with three most redoubted Knights, to the end they may revenge us of some insolence they have offered unto us, I will accompany them then, if you please, said the Knight, that so the party being equall, their danger may be the lesse; but I would be glad it might be by the commandement of one of you. Apply your self then to me, said Archesidella, for these two being my Sisters Knights, it is reason that now you should be mine, seeing I have no lesse interest then they in the quarrell. Madam, answe∣red he, ravished with her beauty, which from henceforth enthralled his liberty, I expected not so great an honour, but you rendring me worthy of it, I will endeavour to deserve it as long as I live; wherupon he took her hand and kissed it, in token of his servitude, and placing himself by her, he followed the rest to the field, wher all the world was in an uproar for the death of the gentle Knight Lorgades, who desiring to try his fortune again in other arms then those he wore the day before; was slain by the King of Alfanar: but the tumult ceased by their arrivall, and the griefe which the Emperour conceived, for the losse of so valianta Gentleman, was somewhat appeased by the sight of his Corazinda, who having very much caressed Lucibel of France, (being that Knight which so lately arri∣ved, and unto whom she had also in few words discovered the whole se∣cret of this Affair) mounted upon a strong and mighty Courser, she went
unto the Prince of Cabilla, unto whom she said. Don Rifantes, behold I am come hither to make good the menaces which I made unto thee yesterday, wherfore bethinke thee of thy evil life past, and call upon thy gods. Saying so, she turned about to her compa∣nions, who had planted themselvs just opposite to the Gyants, and ren∣dring all the world amazed at her gallant demeanour, she stood stil, untill such time as the Trumpets made them dislodge all six with such fury, that the earth seemed to tremble under their horses feet. These Knights being of the best on the earth, their incounter was marvellous; Rifantes made two or three turns with his horse in the dust, the Gyants were carried to the ground, wounded both in their bodies, the Princes of France and Persia, being unable to support the violence of so terrible a shock fell a little after, with extreem discontent to be unhorsed before their Mistresses, Corazinda alone remained in her saddle, to the incredible satisfaction of Palmirenna, and the Emperour, who being no lesse joyfull, then astonished, did infinitly commend the valour of this Amazon. In the mean time our Warriors equally transported with rage rose up, and drawing out their swords, began one of the most outragious combats that ever had been seen in this Empire; the Gyants whose motions were exceeding dreadfull, gave most horrible blows, and such as promised no∣thing lesse then death; but our Princes were so active, and dextrous, as they avoyded the most part of them, and warded the rest with such force, that they left no hope of prevailing to their enemies, who feeling them∣selvs hurt every minute, made such a terrible noise, as put al the Assistants in a mighty fright. On the other side, Rifantes and Corazinda (who scor∣ning advantage, had quitted her Horse) entreated one another far worse, jealousie animated their stroaks, and as often as their swords were aloft, they fell with unexpressable fury, the place was strewed with their ar∣mour, fire flew continually about their heads, they set their knees and hands to the ground, and the rage wherewithall they assayled each other, was so great, that the most confident Warriors of the assembly, were some what touched with fear. Two hours being spent in this sort, the violence of Brundamors, and Ro∣zaganss blows, began to relent, contrary to our Knights, whose strength increasing with their travell rendred their swords more dreadfull, which so madded the Gyants, that Rozagant taking his Curtelas in both his hands, discharged it with such force on Floridan, that having divided his Shield in two, and given him a great gash in the arm which sustained it; he made him set his knees to the ground, where questionlesse his life had been in no little danger had hee permitted the Gyant to redouble upon him; but getting up instantly, much ashamed that this accident was be∣fallen him before Amplamira; he struck the Gyant with such unaccusto∣med fury on the shoulder, that he cleft him to the very girdle, sending him stark dead to the earth, to the great astonishment of Brundamor, who ha∣ving wounded Lucibel in the thigh and head, couragiously disputed the honour of the combat, when as this Prince extreamly vexed, to see his arms dyed with his blood, lent him so terrible a blow on the arm, that he made it together with his Sword fly to the ground, and instantly redoub∣ling a furious thrust, he ran him quite thorow and thorow; so making him to breath out his last.
These Gyants being dispatched thus, to the incredible content of the two Infantaes, who rejoyced to see their Lovers victorious with life aud honour; every one cast their eyes upon the furious combat, between Co∣razinda and Rifantes, which was most fearfull; for Rifantes mad at the slaughter of his two Cosins, laid about him so desperately, that a Warrior less strong and couragious then our Amadis had fallen under his fury, but he no less enraged to find so much resistance in one man; & in a quarrel where Palmirenna's happiness, and his own were in question, returned him such an exchange, that his body was wounded in nine or ten places; howbeit choosing to dye a thousand times, rather then make the least shew of dis∣couragement; he maintained his party with marvellous valour; and at length being in the supremest degree of rage he resolved to set up his rest upon one only blow; wherefore taking his sword in both his hands, he struck Amadis so dangerously on his Shield, that having parted it in twain, the point thereof light upon his shoulder, and hurt it, making him with∣all to stagger in such manner, that he was fain to set one knee to the ground to save himself from falling; but suddenly arising with unspeakable fury, and gnashing his teeth for anger, he advanced his rich sword, and let it des∣cend with such violence on Rifantes Helmet, that if it had not turned in his hand, he had cleft him down to the teeth; neuerthelesse the blow was so rude, that he fell all along quite deprived of sense, and casting out so great abundance of blood at his eyes, mouth, and ears, as without doubt he had been quickly dead, had he not been instantly succord. Immortall gods, said the Emperour, what a blow was this! Thunderbolts fall not with mightier force: Ah Corazinda, had Heaven made thee a man, thou wouldest have been the prime Knight of the world. Saying thus, he abandoned the window to caresse the two Knights, and his Amazon, who keeling before the Princesses demanded their hands to kisse, but they beholding them so besmeared with their own blood, aba∣ted much of the joy, which otherwise they would have had for so impor∣tant a victory, and not willing to entertain them longer, they sent the Knight of the Flower De-luces, (so was Lucibel called) into Floridans Chamber, where Amplamira, and Achesidella, who held herself happy in meeting with our Frenchman, would fain have been present, for to have taken care of their wounds; but knowing that such liberty was unfit for them, they left the Physicians to visit them, and followed Corazinda into Palmirenna's Chamber, who not able to forbear weeping at the sight of the pretious blood, which she saw flow from her hurts, she had been lost with grief, if the Chyrurgions had not assured her, that there was no cause of fear, comforting her self then with the hope of her speedy recovery: she caused every one to voyd the room, for to leave her to her rest, and pas∣sing into her Fathers Chamber, to discourse with him of the valour of the strange Knights; and of her fair slave, who had filled every one with ad∣miration at the wonders she had performed, she learn't that Don Rifantes being come again out of his swound, had caused himself, together with the bodies of the Kings of Alfanar, and Corcutan, to be carried aboard his Ship, for to return into Cabilla, with furious resolutions, to be the death of an hundred thousand men, in revenge of the affront which he had received. Let us give him leisure then to arrive in his countrey, to muster up his friends, and subjects, and our Princes time to recover of
their hurts, and entertain themselvs with their Mistresses, who failed not to meet them every day, and let us come to the excellent Knight of the Roses, whom so long we have left. CHAP. XII. Rosalmond having quitted the combate with Alcidamant, at Cassandrae's entreatie: enters into the Dutchie of Bonnemar, his adventures there. THE combate between Rosalmond, and Alcidamant receiving such an end as was delivered in the five and thirtieth Chapter of our second part. The incomparable Knight of the Roses travel∣led on so vext to have met with a man that was able to arrest the fury of his arms, as he was o∣vertaken by the night before he had so much as thought of the place where he meant to lodge; seeing it growne dark then, and himself fast by a Shepherds cottage, he resolved to alight, and stay there till the next morning, as he did, with more rest and content then he expected: for the Shepherd amidst the services which he did him, ever and anon told one tale or another, that insensibly he forgot the occasion of his displea∣sure; and in that humour casting himself upon a bed, he slept till such time as the sun being of a good height, raised him to continue on his journey, wherin he spent six hours, and met not with one living soul that might informe him of the name of so desart a Countrey. At last having discovered a Castle, stately and fair enough to invite him to observe it neerer, he made to it with a resolution to refresh him∣self there, if the Master of it were so courteous as to give him entertain∣ment: Wherfore knocking at the gate, it was a good while ere any one would speak to him; but continuing still knocking, he perceived a yong Mayd, who looking out of the window, asked him what he would have? Gentlewoman sayd he, I am a Knight errant; that not knowing where I am, would willingly learn it of you, let me therfore obtain of you that the gate may be opened. You may not hope for that, answered she, for we admit no body here. Truly I shall have great cause then said he, to publish the discurtesie of the place, however let me know the name of it. Herewith a very fair Gentlewoman in mourning shewed her self at a win∣dow hard by, and said unto him: Sir what is that you would have? Ma∣dam, answered he, I would fain have been let in, to refresh my self a while, but being denied it, I know not how to desire it of you again. Sir, said she, very modestly, be not offended at it, for it is not done but upon great oc∣casion; howbeit you shall enter, your demeanour doth forbid me to sus∣pect any harm from you. Saying so, she caused the gate (which instantly was shut again) to be opened, and descending into the Court for to re∣ceive
him with more honour, she shewed him so good a countenance, that he could not forbear saying to her. Madam, to speak truth I find so much difference between this gracious entertainment, and your Mayds answer, that it much amazes me. Sir, answered she with tears and sighs, I have not lived hitherto without knowing what is due to the honour and assi∣stance of good Knights, nor hath this house ever been shut against them; but the strange misfortune which hath befaln me of late, hath constrained me to seem lesse courteous then I am; Ile tell you the reason in few words. This miserable beautie whereof you yet behold some reliques, maugre the injuries of time, and the discontents I have undergone, having ren∣dred me the Sun of this Dutchie of Bonnemar, wherein we are adjacent to the great Kingdome of the Island of Silvana; I saw all the great Lords of the Countrey sigh at my feet, and amongst the rest, two cousins of the Prince therof, the most disloyoll man that lives: Now the know∣ledge that I had of the many vices wherwithall they were infected, no permitting me to give them a good look; I made choice of the Marquesse of Valombre, so is this place called; and finding him courteous, va∣liant, and handsome, I married him publickly, which begot so great a de∣spight in the minds of those two cousins, that from thenceforth they conspired his death, and my undoing: and indeed three years after our marriage they surprized him in a wood, and taking him without other Arms, then his sword, they most inhumanely butchered him; where∣withall not contented (alas my hair stands an end to think of it) they went to Marcandon Duke of Bonnemar, a man apt to commit any kind of villany, and perswaded him to take his pleasure of me, in such sort as he arrived here with the two murtherers; where to make short, they ming∣led the complaints of seeing my self ravished by them, with the tears which I shed for the losse of my Husband, whom I had buried that day. This wretched fact being perpetrated, they made themselves masters of the house, and keeping me three dayes together with a dagger at my throat, if I offered to resist, they glutted their beastly appetites, and lea∣ving me in the sorrows befitting so mighty an affliction, they went away without any fear of their resentment unto whom I appertain, that farre from seeking any revenge, durst not so much as receive mee into their houses, dreading the fury of this brutish and tyrannicall Duke, who hath set such sure Guards on all the passages, as I should try in vain to escape away unto the Queen of Sylvana, to avoid his further cruelty; or to seek out some powerfull person, that might do me justice for so odious an in∣solence; judge now, Sir, whether I had not cause to lock my self up as I did. You had indeed, Madam, answered Rosalmond, but I wonder that the people will indure the tyrannie of this barbarous Prince; well, I will see him; and I promise you by the order which I have received of Knight∣hood, never to part from this countrey, till I have fully revenged you. Oh Sir, said she then, take heed how you venture upon an enterprise, where the danger is too apparant; for he himself is very valiant, his Cousins that always accompany him, are strong and couragious; and he never stirs abroad, but with a great train of souldiers. All that is nothing, said Rozalmond; God fights still against the wicked, his death is absolutely re∣solved;
and if you will permit one to conduct me even now to the place of his aboad, you shall soon see his head at your feet, in satisfaction of this crime. I may not suffer you to part from hence to day, said she; to morrow doe what you please. Saying so, she led him into a Chamber, to unarm himself, and from thence into a fair Garden, where having discoursed of the miseries that follow the licentiousnesse of a vicious Prince, they went to a table furni∣shed with very good meat, wherwithall havit, well satisfied their appe∣tite, they heard a great knocking at the Gate. Ay me, said she with a pale and frighted countenance, the Murtherers of mine honour are come. Yes Madam, said a fellow, that in a mighty fear came running in, it is the Duke of Bonnemar, and his companions. O Sir, said she, turning her to our War∣rior, have some pitty on me. Madam, answered he with a mervellous confidence, be not dismayed, but think that Heaven hath sent them hither, to receive the punishment their wickednesse hath deserved, only give me time to arm my self, and then let the Gates be opened a Gods name; yet so as presently upon their entrance they may be shut again, that they may not escape me. Wherupon going instantly to his Chamber, whilst Artander ran to the Stable, he put on his arms, and finding his Horse ready he vaulted into the saddle, commanding the Gates to be opened, where they were still knoc∣king very hard; which being done, the three cousins entred in great an∣ger, when as Rozalmond having his sword aloft, discharged it so furiously on Marcandon, (who had been so well described unto him, as he knew him from the rest) that having cut off one of his arms, he sent him to the earth under his Horses belly, to the extream discontent of his cousins, that gi∣ving him two blows at once, the one upon his Shield, and the other upon his shoulder, made him bow even to the Horses crupper; whence rising in a rage, he struck him that was next him with such force, that he divided him in two, wherwith the other was so terrified, as he turned about to have fled away, but finding the Gates shut he fell to beg for grace. Villain, said Ro∣zalmond, darest thou speak for mercy in a house that hath no Master by thy treason, and before a woman, whom thou hast wickedly ravished? I should be guilty of the mischiefs thou wouldest doe hereafter, if I should spare thee now, wherfore take this; and so advancing that dreadfull blade, which never found resistance, he cleft him down to the shoulders, and be∣ing yet more unwilling to pardon Marcandon, whom he saw getting up, he went and tyed him to an Horses tayl himself, and causing Artander to mount upon him, he made him to be dragged up and down the Court so long, till his brains flying out, his soul was sent to Hell. Having taken this so horrible a revenge, Rozalmond commanded the Dukes Squire to be locked up till the next day, and returning into the Hal the Lady Marquesse with tears of joy fell down and embraced his knees, unable to speak a word; whereat being ashamed he raised her up, and de∣sired her not to use such submissions unto him. I have done nothing, said he, but what I was obliged unto by the order of Knighthood, which was given me upon condition to employ my arms for the service of such as were oppressed, and particularly for Ladies, wherfore you are no way bound unto me; so unarming himself he talked with her about advertising her friends of what had past, and then got him to bed with a resolution to
depart the next morning very early, as he did to the exceeding grief of the Lady Marquesse, who would fain have stayed him longer. Taking the next way then that he met withall, and entertaining him∣self with the remembrance of the valiant Knight of the Palmes, whom he so mortally hated, and of his Armazia, whose absence was very grievous unto him, he arrived about evening at a Town, wher finding it fit to lodge that night, hee was entertained by a rich fellow, that having no other chil∣dren, but one daughter, a very handsome Mayd, endeavored to make him the best chear he could, but without doubt it had been the last lodging that ever he would have had, if Love that reserved him for the content∣ment of his Lady, had not rendred his Hosts Daughter passionatly in love with him. This Town being under the obedience of Marcandon, the inhabitants were immediatly advertised of his death, and understanding that the Knight, which was lately come thither, was the man that had slain him; they assembled together in an instant, and arming themselves with Hal∣berds, Pitchforks, Swords, and Iavelings, they resolved to kill Rozalmond; but considering with themselves that they should not be able to resist him, if once he set hand to his sword, they concluded to surprise him in bed, and unarmed; wherupon they sent one to the Masters of the house where he lay to advertise him of their enterprise, that he might contribute therunto on his part, and in the mean time fearing some resistance, they dispatched one in post to a Garrison, thereby to acquaint them also with it. The man, that questionlesse was sorry for his Princes death, though his vices rendred him odious to all good folks; and that on the other side was very unwilling to betray his Guest, which had trusted him, was much di∣stracted with this message; neverthelesse fearing lest the people would kill him, if he should not shew himself zealous to revenge their Lord, he received one of them into his house, and because Rozalmond was in his Chamber, ready to go to bed, he thought it the best course his Daughter should go up, and under colour of seeing whether he wanted any thing, that she should steale away his Sword; but she, that to dye would not see him harmed, being come into his Chamber, she told him in few words, how much she loved him, and the danger he was in. Rozalmond exceedingly surprized with her relation, answered her briefly thus; Sweet heart, your love doth infinitely oblige me, and it shall assu∣redly be recompenced as it ought, in the mean time wear this for my sake; saying so, he drew a rich Diamond from off his finger, and presented it unto her, and forth with arming himself, he sent her down furnished with an excuse. Alack, said she, seeming to be vext; you will not do what you desire without difficultie; the Knight is indeed on his bed, but he hath nei∣ther quit his Armes, nor his Sword, which he holds in his hand, so that I have lost my labour. What shall we do then, said the Master of the house, to him that accompanied him? why burn him in his chamber, an∣swered he, if we cannot surprize him. Will you so (said Rosalmond, who was stolne down upon them) Ile take an order with you presently; where∣upon he lift up his Sword, thinking to strike the slave; but he that had no mind to indure the blowes, fled suddenly out of dores with the good man of the house and gave the alarm unto his companions; they running to the cry that he made, fell instantly to charging of Rozalmond, who put
fourteen, or fifteen of them to the sword, whilst Artander was sadling his Horses, upon which in despight of this rabble, they mounted very sea∣sonably; for at that instant two hundred Knights arrived from the Gar∣rison, which with a terrible noyse assailed him furiously on all sides, but this Warriour that was alwayes most confident in danger, flying in amidst these troops, began to make so great a slaughter that all the streets ran with bloud; he cut off armes and heads, cleftmen down to the girdle, and quartered them in such sort, as the valiantest of the company wished themselves within their Walls again; nevertheless being ashamed, that one man alone should disorder them in that fashion, they speedily rallyed themselves, and layd so many blows on him at once, that he had much adoe to sustaine them; at length they killed his horse under him, but hee was not long on foot, for making a rampart of the dead bodyes, under the favour whereof, he retyred alwayes fighting to his Squire, who was got aside from the presse, and leaping on his horse he charged his Adver∣saries afresh with such furie, that he laid threescore at his feet, some cut off by the middle, others cleft down to the teeth, and the most of them ope∣ned even to the very wast, which put the rest in such a fear, that they took the benefit of the darkness of the night to escape away; Our Warriour then finding no more resistance, and seeing Artander well mounted upon one of the slain Knights horses, he took the contrary way to that where his enemies were gon, and rode till it was day, that hee discovered the Sea. CHAP. XIII. Rozalmond arriving in the Island, of Silvana, defeats the Guards which the Queen had established to arrest Alcidamant; his meeting after∣wards with Merodiana, and departure from her. OUr Knight finding a Ship readie according to his wish, embarqued himself therein, never regar∣ding for what place she was bound; and being wholly taken up with the thought of his dearest Armazia, he was carryed along for two dayes to∣gether with a prosperous gale, but the Sea (that seldome continues long in one state) began to swell, and rage, in such sort, that the distraction, and noyse of the Marriners, which laboured in vain, made him quickly get up to assist them, howbeit the furie of the waves being extream, his force that could do much in Combats availed him nought, for the Vessell beaten on all sides, sometimes carried up as high as the cloudes, and by and by thrown down to the Center of the deeps, no longer received direction from the guiding hand of the Pilote, and having all her sayles, and tackle torn, expected nothing but some violent gust to sink her utterly. Floting three dayes in this desperate manner, every one shut his eyes, that he might not behold this horrible death, when as heaven giving care
to the prayers of the Parthian Prince, who during all this danger never changed countenance, calmed the waves, and drove the Ship into a Port of the Island of Silvana, where he caused himself to be set ashore, giving praise unto God in his heart for his goodness in drawing him out of the danger of so dreadfull a tempest. Getting to his Horse then armed at all points, he rode into the Coun∣trey, which seemed very pleasing and delightfull unto him, and travelled till two of the clock in the afternoon, when as he met with a house very stately built, whereinto entring to refresh himself, he perceived the gates to be suddenly shut upon his back, and thirtie Knights making head against him, whereof one advancing before the rest, said unto him; Knight, we are here to make you to render your Sword, or to oblige your selfe wil∣lingly to accomplish whatsoever the Queen of Silvana shall command you. Good Knights, answered Rozalmond, wil never be inforced to pro∣mise any thing, much less be disarmed by their enemies without fighting, wherfore I am not resolved to give you any thing that appertaines unto me, till you have dearly bought it. Wee must have your head then, re∣plyed the Knight, wherwith drawing out all their swords, they fell upon Rozalmond, who little moved at it, flew in amongst them, and with the ve∣ry first stroak sent him dead to the ground, that had menaced him, to the exceeding grief of the rest, who thinking to defeat him easily, pressed him in such sort, as he knew not well where to bestow his blowes, never∣thelesse cutting off now an arme, and then an head, he had soon layd a dozen of them at his feet, and was ready to deal so with the rest, when as two dreadfull Gyants appeared in the Court, who making a little stand to observe this Warriours confident fight, were amazed to behold two men with two stroaks, extended on the earth, the one cloven down to the gir∣dle, and another brayned with the flat of his Sword. These horrible blowes making them think, that at length their Knights would have the worst, they presently set forwards, and advancing their heavy Scimitars, they discharged them so dangerously on him, that they forced him to knock his chin against the pommell of his saddle, which so incensed him, that raysing himself up in rage, he took his Sword in both his hands, and therewith struck one of the Gyants with such violence on his shield, as he divided it in two, sending his arme withall to the ground, and redoubling on the secoed, who with reason feared the tempest of that Sword, hit him so rudely on the helmet, that he made him reele three or foure paces back; whereupon perceiving the Knights had run his Horse into the belly with an Halbard, he quit his saddle instantly, and flying in amongst them, covered the ground with three or foure of them, before the Gyants were come to themselves again, both of them returning then with incredible furie, they began to charge him with such terrible blows, as he was many times constrained to bow with his knees, nevertheless he fought so couragiously, and so often drew bloud from them, that they had little cause to brag of any advantage; but being resolved either to vanquish or dye, one of them took his Scimitar in both hands, and dis∣playing all his force, strook so mainly at his head, that if he had not wise∣ly avoyded the blow, it had questionless been his death, howbeit leaping very lightly aside, he let it fall upon the ground, whereinto it entred up to the hilts, and taking hold of opportunitie, whilst the Gyant was drawing
it out again, he discharged his Sword so dangerously on his Casque, that he cleft him to the brains, overthrowing him with a noyse like to that of a Tower whose foundation sayes; the other which had but one arme, and very little bloud left, thinking that his companion had been strucken with lightning, would fain have saved himself by flight, but he was so weak, that at the very first step he fel down, breathing out his last. Our Warriour seeing himself freed from these Colosses which had exceedingly troubled him, was going to set upon the rest, when as he per∣ceived a Lady comming in, marvellous beautifull, and followed by two and twentie Knights richly armed, with a Gyant far greater than the for∣mer, who addressing her speech unto him, said; Knight, persist no further in this Combat, but put yourself into my hands, if you love your life. I know very well, that your valour makes you confident; for the slaugh∣ter I behold here may perswade you, that you can couragiously passe through any danger whatsoever, but I am able to oppresse you so with multitudes, that you must needs fall at last; besides, the Guards of this place were not established here for you, but to surprize a Knight, who though he be not so tall, yet is no way inferiour to you in valour and strength; sheath up you Sword then, and follow me with this assurance, that you shall receive no displeasure here. Madam, answered he, much amazed to behold so rare a beautie; I wil gladly submit my self to your power, for so sweet a captivitie can not be but most pleasing to me; and would I had spent more bloud then this which is in my Armour, that I had met you at the gate of your house, nei∣ther should I then have been in the state I am in, nor you have had cause to complain for the loss of your people, for yeelding all obedience to the merit of fair Ladyes, and principally of those of your qualitie, I should freely have granted whatsoever you had demanded; but their insolence having constrained me to draw my Sword, I secured my self by their deaths, wherwithall I am now infinitely displeased, because it may be an offence unto you, which I shall labour to repayr by all the best services my uttermost abilitie may be able to do you. I perceive, said she, laughing, that I shall have as much adoe to overcome you with courtesie, as my Knights have had with their Armes, wher∣fore I will debate no longer with you, but let us walke to a Chamber, that your wounds may be visited. I think they are so slight, Madam, answe∣red he, that they need no great looking to, howsoever your commande∣ment shall wholly dispose of me. Wherupon causing his Squire to un∣arme him, he discovered a small hurt on his shoulder, and another some∣what greater, but one more dangerous in his thigh, which the Chirurgions having drest, he got him to bed, where he continued till the next morning; when as he arose, feeling little or no pain, for to present his service to the fair Princess, who being wonderfully wel satisfied with his goodly perso∣nage and behaviour, entertained him awhile with ordinarie discourse; and finding him no lesse witty, then he had shewed himself before valiant, she led him into the Garden, where she freely discovered to him the secretest of her thoughts, telling him that she was Queen of the Island of Silvana, and that the Guards of this place were set to apprehend a Knight that car∣ryed three Palmes in his shield. Truly, Madam, said Rozalmond then, I do not marvell now at your as∣sembling
of so many Knights, and strong Gyants, since it was to arrest a man, whose like is hardly to be met withall in the world: why, replyed the beautifull Silvana, Do you know the Knight of whom I speak: Ma∣dam, answered Rozalmond, I neither know his name, nor original, but all the earth is acquainted with his valour; and would to God he were here now, that we might finish a Combat, which hath twice already reduced us to the extreamest peril of our lives, without discerning to whom the honour of it was justly due: wherupon relating all that had past at Con∣stantinople, and afterwards upon the confines of Florertan; he gave her marvellous contentment, to hear the prayses of this Knight so published by his greatest enemy. Verely, answered she, you have a great deal of reason to speak wel of this Knight, who hath done miracles in this King∣dome, Combatting, and killing a Monster, the hugest and most formida∣ble, that ever nature produced, but far more in my sister Merodiana's state, where the most redoubted Gyants of the world, have past under the edge of his Sword in the head of a mightie Army, which the same day was cut in pieces by the sole vertue of this Knight, and not by the multitude, or force of our souldiers, the Enemie being at the least three for one. But, Madam, (said Rozalmond, who was somewhat vexed, to hear so much glory given to his Adversarie:) if this Knight hath done so much for you, why wil you expose his life to the hazard of the furie, and mul∣titude of your men, which sure were but an ill acknowledgement of his services. O that is a secret, said she, which may not be imparted, I wil have have him if I can, not to put him to death, for I would sooner con∣sent to mine own ruine, but to oblige him to keep his faith. Your eyes, Madam, said Rozalmond (who then ghest at her disease) wil more prevail with him then your Armes, and he wil sooner be constrained by your beautie, then by your Gyants; in which regard you are to procure rather by gentleness then force. That course have I held already, said Silvaa; but, alas! to no purpose, another hath captiv'd his heart, so that I am out of hope, unless some disdain from his Mistris, shal make him think of me: Verely, said Rozalmond, I hold him as ingratefull, as valiant, since he hath broken his word with you; and be assured Madam, that I wil fight with him again upon this quarrel, whensoever I can meet with him; and if for∣tune favour me, I wil bring him back to you. Your good wil doth much oblige me, answered she; but if you desire to do me a pleasure, forbear the execution of your intent, for the Combat between you, could not be determined without an irreparable loss; wherefore if you have any com∣passion of my suffering, rather counsel him to remember his vowes, the favour which he hath received from me, and making him sorry for abusing them, represent unto him, that my Crown, one of the richest, and bravest of the earth, may arrest the ambition of any Gentleman, how great soe∣ver he be. This speach was finished with tears, but being comforted by Rozal∣mond; who promised to use his best art, and all the arguments he could think upon, to give her desire content; she dryed her eyes, and returning into the Hall, she sate down to dinner with him, intreating him a little after to make some abode in her countrey, wherunto he having willingly assented, she carryed him the next day to the Capital Citie of her King∣dome, where she did him all the honour she could possibly devise; some∣times
entertaining him with Masques and Shews, and at other times with Iousts and Turnaments, wherin he so behaved himself, that Merodiana be∣ing advertised thereof, requested him to come and see her. Leaving Silvana then in much griefe for his departure, he went unto her sister, who insensibly forgetting Alcidamant, was so taken with the beauty and comeliness of this Prince, that she took no greater care, then to ren∣der her selfe more amiable with the grace of clothes, and dressings (though nature had made her excellent that way) for to win him to love her; but he that had a constant soul, and that was wholly given up to his Armazia, was nothing moved with her passion; howbeit fearing lest his faith at length might waver by the continuall pursuits of this beautifull Queen, who questionless had charms of power to captivate the heart of the coldest affection, he resolved to depart; wherefore one day taking his leave, which he had very much adoe to obtain, he got him to Sea, leaving so good an opinion of his valour in the Kingdoms of these two sisters, as he was of no less esteem there, then the famous Knight of the Palmes. CHAP. XIV. Rozalmond landing in the Kingdom of Clariana, arrives by fortune at Alcidamants Grat, he laments over his arms beleeving him dead, and afterwards incountring him they become friends. Rozalmond having wisely avoyded the danger of Merodiana's allurements rode all the day with a resolution to travell into Gardacia, for to know whether time had defaced him out of Armazia's affection; but fortune that meant otherways to dispose of his actions, deferred the effect of this his intent, and caused him to make another voyage more profitable, and necessary for the good of Christendom: Being imbarqued then in a Ship; the wind which should have carried him one way, drove him quite contrary another, and brought him upon the coast of the Kingdom of Clariana, where the Pilot for fear of a threat∣ned Tempest, making some stay, he would needs go on shore to see the countrey, & accordingly, getting on his Horse he spent two days, without meeting of any adventure, wherupon purposing to return to the sea, he dis∣covered a Brook, whose sweet murmure invited him to alight under cer∣tain trees, that grew all along the banks therof, and cast a very pleasing shadow, causing his Horse then to be tyed, so as he might have the liberty to graze, he walked so long up against the course of the stream, that he found himself at the bottom of a Rock, whereinto there was a pretty large entrance, which gave him a desire to approach it, for to see whether there were any thing within it, worthy the employment of his courage: but he was marvellously abashed, to behold a little Crosse set up a good
heigth under a tree; for considering that this mark made glorious by the death of the Saviour of the world, was not so much as known amongst these idolatrous people, he was no lesse amazed thereat, then at some pro∣digie; howbeit finding some consolation in the hope he had to meet with Christians there; he was passing in, when as a new occasion of astonish∣ment arrested him; for at the foot of a tree he discovered a Cuirace, an Helmet, a Shield, and other the arms appertaining to a Knight. This Incounter possessing him with no lesse curiosity, then the former had done with wonder, he went presently and looking upon the Shield, which was almost covered over with rust, he perceived it to be that fa∣mous Ensign of the three Palmes, made glorious by the honour of a thou∣sand combats, most generously performed by Alcidamant; and assured himself that these were the arms, which he had found invincible thorow the courage of his enemy. Vertue that can do all in all with a noble spirit, having changed this Warriors mind in a moment, he could not forbear shedding of tears, at the sight of so sad a spectacle. Ay me, said he, kissing those Armes, with a great deale of reverence, how do I find you in a state most unworthy of your greatnesse; why doe you no longer cover the body of that valiant Knight, which so much honoured you? You were odious to me always heretofore; but now, alas, I pitty you as much as I have formerly hated you, and as the world suffers a most irreparable losse in you, so shall I grive eternally, that you should remain thus of no use hereafter. Wherupon laying all the pieces one upon another, he took that excel∣lent Sword, which was gotten at the Castle of Serpents, and that had shed many drops of his blood, and having hung it on the bough of a tree, he forth with passed into the Grot, in the middest wherof he incountred a bank of green turfs, raised in form of an Altar, upon the which he beheld the portraiture of a Lady so exquisitely fair, that he esteemed her no way inferiour to Armazia for perfection; he continued a good while obser∣ving her by the assistance of a Lamp that was burning there, but desiring nothing more, then to meet with one that might tell him some news of this Knight, whose death he greatly feared, he went on and visited every corner of the Grot, where finding nothing but a bed of leaves, he retur∣ned forth incontinently, and was going to fetch a walk under certain trees, when as he espied a young Hermit in a long Gown of gray, that was layd upon the grasse as it seemed to take some rest; howbeit his griefe not per∣mitting him to be silent, he brake out thus. Who shall hereafer rely upon any thing in this world, since I, that had but one poor minute to passe for to see my self Master of a felicity that is not to be imagined, was so suddenly cast into the extremest of misery? and who is he that at any time shall be in pleasure, that can promise to himself never to taste of the pain which shall follow it, if I am now re∣duced to utter despair, that had in my hand what might have satisfied the ambition of the most aspiring Spirit? Verely, man hath nothing lesse assured, then that which he thinks is in his power; and when fortune smiles upon him, it is then when she means to undo him. But alas! from whence proceeds my misfortune, excellent Princesse, it is from you, that once was the object of all my desires as now you are the subject of all my sufferings? yes certainly, if I would accuse you of weaknesse, and say
that you ought not to have condemned me without hearing  first, since th grace is not  the greatest offnder that is: And yet not so if I consider, that you might dispose of my will with more powerthen my self, I am now faulty only inappearance, but I should be so indeed by complayning, the respect which I owe to your greatnesse, not permitting me to  against you,  offending you, wherfore you have not done  to  me from your presence, since I have not merited the grace to enjoy that happinesse. Shall I lay the fault then on my de∣stiny, or rather on 's passion, who thinking to oblige me hath un∣done me? Ah beautious Queen, how dearly doe I buy the favours which you have done me. I will remember your kisses, but it is with extream griefe, for that I have lost ar sweeter by your means: Why were you not less loving, or more contained, so should not the world have taken notice of your want of government, neither should I have now seen my self thus languishing in this desart place, nor lamented my cruell and untimely end; howbeit I accuse you unjustly, it was no malice in you, but chance, and without condemning my self, I cannot say that your love is the cause of my misery, since I sought it with so much care; live then exempted from the reproach of my death, before which, if yet I may be permitted to desire any thing, fairest Princesse of Tramazond, know that I have suffe∣red most innocently, and that I dye without grief, seeing it is to doe you service, and by your commandement. Herewith holding his peace, he turned him about towards Rozalmnd, who being come very neer him; and that was not desirous to appear so soon, retyred a little to observe his face, which seemed to have been fair, but then so pae and wan, that it made him shed some tears again to behold so great a Knight reduced to so pittifull an estate; howbeit not able to let him be any longer in pain, he approached for to comfort him, when as Alcidamant making two or three turns upon the grasse, thorough the vio∣lence of his griefe rested close at his feet: making use then of this occasion, that sorted according to his desire, he took him by the arm for to raise him, but he that felt himself touched, incontinently start up, and stepping two or three paces back, observed him a good while without speaking a word, at length seeing him of so goodly a presence, and covered with such fair arms, he came towards him, and shewing a great deale lesse fear, then at the first, he said. Verely the sight of you did much amaze me, for this being a desart place, and having never seen any person here, but a poor Shepherd, that every week brings me a little bread to sustain me withall, and some oyl for the entertainment of a Lamp, which incessantly burns in a Grot hereby, whereinto I retyre my selfe a nights, I little expected the arrivall of so accomplished a Knight as your selfe; but you are very welcome to those poor provisions I have, only if it may not be importunate to demand it, you might doe me a singular favour to let me know, who you are. Noble Sir, answered Rozalmnd, your incounter gives me no lesse con∣tentment, then you seem to have in mine; I am a Knight errant, that knowing you better then you think for, and that but to day very much lo∣ving you, takes the liberty to tell you, that you greatly wrong the world to deprive it of you, for the satisfaction of a fickle and ingratefull woman, who wanting judgement to make esteem of you according to your merit,
doth not  compense your services as  ought, the life you lead is un∣worthy of that courage, which you have so often shewed in the extrea∣est dangers; change it S, I beseech you and consider that in the case you are, you can hope for nothing, here you languish, here you will dye, your Mistris she knows it not, or if she doe she laughs at is, from which neg∣lect draw so strong a resolution as to despise her, onto render you more happy by the knowledge of the alteration of her mind▪ it may be she is as much troubled as you, inform your self, and leaving to play the woman any longer return into the way which leads men to glory. All this cannot move me, said Alcidamant, for you know not the respect a Lover ought to carry to the commandements of his Lady or else you would not condemne me for that I doe, which is nothing but what her pleasure and my obedience require. It is true that in all likelihood I should be better in the world, where I might be usefull for the assistance of some afflicted persons; but shall I doe so when it is not pleasing to her, whom I will prefer before all that is under heaven. No verely, I must absolutely comform my self to her will, she desires my death, and I will not avoyd the occasions of it: As for that you alleage, how it may be she repents the miseries she hath made me to suffer, I can never beleeve it, for then she would have let me understood so much. Doth she know said Rozalmond interrupting him there, that your dis∣pair hath reduced you to this desart? without doubt she doth not know it, answered he, but my good genius would lead them hither that should come to seek me, if she had any mind to see me again. Look now sayd Rozalmond, how extravagantly you speak, and how your judgment is lost in the confusion of your thoughts, or with the affliction that oppres∣ses you, what likelihood is there that one may find you out in this place, whither fortune alone can addresse those that stray out of their way? Be not, I pray you, so wilfully bent to end your days wretchedly here, rather live for the service of your Princesse, and labour to make your inno∣cence appear unto her, in stead of bestowing your time unprofitably in sighing out your sorrows amidst these trees; your vertue which to day hath begot a desire in me to doe you service, contrary to the resolution which formerly I had taken for to purchase your ruin, makes me to use these words, therfore be pleased that I may be your Physician since you are so sick, and accept of the good counsell I give you for your better re∣medy. Why now, we are come just to the point I desired, said Alcidamant, for setting aside the reasons, I could oppose yours with, touching my purpose to dye here, clear me in that particular, where you say you never loved me till to day. I beleeve indeed, said Rozalmond, that you doe not know me yet, because I want my Shield; but if you call to mind the combat we had together at Constantinople, and afterwards upon the frontiers of Florertan, when we were parted by Cassandra, you will quickly under∣stand the meaning of the speeches I have used to you; then you were the object of all the anger that a man could have against another which disputed the glory of Arms with him, but finding you in so miserable an estate, I was so sensible of your misfortunes, as I could not be more for any that should arrive unto my self, so that now I love you far more then I hated you before, and doe also humbly beseech you to change your
mind in like manner, and to esteem of me no less, then of the faithfullest servant you can have. O me, said Alcidamant, what a happiness is this in the middest of my unhappiness, to have my pains thus aslayed by the presence of the excel∣lentest Knight of the earth; Ah Sir! I will no longer complain of my misfortune, and the content of this incounter is so dear unto me, that I wil pass by all remembrance of the cause of my sorrow for to caress you, if not asmuch as I would, yet as much as I can. Herewith embracing one another with a great deal of affection, they contraced a friendship, which never ended, but with their lives, and some other  having past be∣twixt them, they both returned into the Grot, where Rozalmond desiring to speak of the cause of is retyrement, for to withdraw him from it, de∣manded of him whether that which he saw there was the picture of that rigorous beautie for whom he suffered so. You behold indeed, answered he, the pleasing features of her face, you may here likwise judge of the delicacie of her complexion; but not of the grace she gives to her motions, nor of the powerfull charms of her eyes, for there nature far surpasseth the art of the Painter. Whereupon without further intreatie he discoursed unto him his whol life, and espe∣cially all that had past at Tarsipolis, after he met with Trasiclea, which was very acceptable to the Knight of the Roses, who alledged all the reasons he could any way devise to diswade him from so sad a retyrement; but perceiving that he spae to no purpose, and that his resolution was as firm as the rock wherin he lived, he bethought him of another course to be held with him. You are too wilfully set, said he, upon your own misery; nevertheless, being perswaded that you do all things with judgement, I intend, because I wil enjoy your company, which I hold so dear, to pass my dayes here with you, and never to return again into the world, after I have dispatch∣ed one voyage for an enterprize, wherunto my faith hath ingaged me; I may not limit my return, in regard we cannot dispose of time, nor of accidents that befall us, but I swear unto you by the order of Knight∣hood, to come hither again, assoon as possibly I can, so as you likewise promise me, not to depart from hence upon any occasion whatsoever. Dear Sir, said Alcidamant, it were most unreasonable to confine you so without cause, continue stil in the world, wherof you are now the wonder, for it would be far more content unto me, to know you in de∣lights absented from me, then to have you here leade a languishing life; as for me, I am accustomed therunto, and be assured I wil never abandon it for any cause whatsoever, since I doe it not at your request. This is as∣much as I desire, said Rozalmond, you shal see me again sooner then you are aware, to which end I will be gon to morrow by break of day, that I may give the speedier dispatch to the business I have undertaken. So cal∣ling Artander, who was all this while with the horses; they sate them down to supper with no other delicasies then a little bread, and afterward laid them to rest upon a few leaves, where they remained til the next mor∣ning, when taking their leaves of one another with tears, Rozalmond rode away towards Tarsipolis, from whence how he was diverted, shal be re∣lated hereafter.
CHAP. XV. The Adventures of Rozanel, and Florisbel, after their departure out of Tramazond. ROzanel departing from Tramaxond with Florisbel, and the beautiful Angeles of Sopradisa, sayled fif∣teen dayes with all the content that a Lover could have in the company of his Lady, not meeting any adventure worthy of his courage, but on the six∣teenth day they discovered two Ships fast grapled together, in one of the which was a Gyant with some thirtie, or fourtie souldiers, and in the other one Knight alone, of a reasonable big statue, who with his Sword in his hand, defending the entrance into his Vessel, some∣times charged the Gyant, and sometimes the Souldiers, wherof ever and anon he overthrew one or other of them into the Sea; the valour of this Knight giving them great satisfaction, and being moved with a Gentle∣woman that called upon the Gods for succour, they joyned the force of their Oares to the wind, and in a little time caused their Barque to board the Knights, whereinto entring with furie, they presently dispatched se∣ven or eight of the most confident of the troup; and in regard the Knight had received three or four deep wounds, from whence he had lost much bloud; Florisbel desired him to retyre, and leave him to combat the Gy∣ant, whilst his companion dealt with the rest of that bble, but his heart was so good, that he made no other answer, but gave his enemie two such cruel blowes, as with the one he wounded him very dangerously in one of his thighs, and with the other made a great gash in his shield arm, which Florisbel observing, and unwilling to stand idle, he drew to his friend, who never let fall his Sword without killing a man, and making no less havock, in a short time layd all that remained at his feet: mean while the Combat between the Gyant and the Knight continued with marvellous rage, howbeit with so much advantage on the Knights part, that they looked every minute to see that Colossus tumble into the water, when as Rozanel casting his eye aside, espyed a Knight, very little less then the Gyant, rush out of the Hold; who leaping into the Barque where Angelea was, cut the Cables that fastned it to the other Vessels, and was putting to Sea with so rich a prize, had not he suddenly advanced, skip∣ping in then almost assoon as he, and carryed with extream cholor, he gave him so strong a blow upon his Helmet, that he made him set both his knees to the Deck, where he stayed not long, for rising ful of rage, he began to charge Rozanel in such sort, that he was somewhat amazed arit; nevertheless seeing himself before his Mistress, whose safetie was in que∣stion, he became so furious, and so well employed his force, that with three blows he first sent one of his arms into the Sea, and then layd his head at his feet, to the unspeakable contentment of the fayrest. Angelea, who comming to caress him, asked him whether he were not hurt? Ma∣dam,
said he, kissing her hand, I feele no wound, but that which I have in my heart; I am very glad of it, answered she, for as for that, I wil ere it be long give it such a remedy, as you shall have no cause to complain. This short amorus passage rejoycing Rozanel not a little, he would have returned to the other Ships, but a violent wind suddenly arising carryed him away, doe what the Marriners could, to his infinite grief, for leaving his friend so in the Gyants ship, who unable to support his Adversaries strokes, fell at length under the tempest of one of them, which divided his head in twain; wherwithall Florisbel had been exceedingly satisfied, but for his separation from his friend, nevertheless holding it vain to af∣flict himself for that could not be helped; he turned him to the Knight to applaud him for a victory, so gloriously obtained; but the stranger be∣holding him without his Helmet, went to him with open arms, and em∣bracing him, said; My noble friend, how happy am I in this incounter? and indeed from whom could I hope for succour, but from you? make me partaker, I beseech you, of your Adventures; and tell me by what means you came so oportunly to deliver me out of the hands of mine enemies. Verely, said Florisbel, who then knew him to be Sestilian the Prince of Spain; I am no less amazed at my meeting with you, then you are at my arrival here; I complained of fortunes cruelty, for the loss of Rozanels company, whom the winds have carryed away, but now she hath fully made me amends with your presence; come let us goe in and visit your wounds, we wil talk at leisure afterwards of our fortune; wherupon en∣tring into a Cabbin, Sestilian got him to bed, where the Gentlewoman of whom we spake before, being very skilful in Chyrurgerie, dressed his wounds, promising to render him well in fifteen dayes at the most, to which end she advised him to betake him to his rest, but hee would by no means hear speak of sleeping till Florisbell had related the inchantment of Angelea, the manner how he himself was put into the Rock, and their de∣liverance effected by the valiant Knight of the Palmes, and the Princess of Tramazond, which very much satisfied this young Prince, who for his part likewise discovered unto him, all that had befaln him since his departure from Constantinople; Entertaining themselves in this sort, they passed away certain dayes with great content; during which time, Roza∣nel and his Angelea sayled with a prosperous wind, and at the end of two and twentie dayes, arrived at a Port of great Brittain, to the incredible joy of his beautifull Mistress, who being set on shore, and meeting with an ancient Knight, she desired him to informe her how the world went at Court. Madam, answered he, all things goe well there, and since the decease of our great King, we have not seen such magnificences, as are now pre∣paring at Windsor, for the Celebration of the Nuptials of Tristor the young Prince of Sobradiza, who within this four dayes is to be married to the fair Amazon, Alteria the Queen of California's Daughter, there will be gallant Jousts, the Tournament will be no less delightfull, the rather in regard of the arrivall of divers young Princes, which have met here by chance, and whom Garmant the Vice-roy of this Countrey la∣bours to honour asmuch as he may, this, Madam, is all the news I can deliver. It is more then I expected, answered she, having given him ma∣ny thanks,
and so going to Rozanel, she acquainted him therwith, and to testifie the truth of her affection, she counselled him to post away to Windsor, that they might be there before her Brothers Mariage, and take one and the same day to render their desires contented, getting instantly to horse then, they used such diligence, that the next morning they arryved at the Court, where Garmant, Don Sinald, Tristor, Alteria, and all the Lords which were then present, received them with asmuch honour, as if they had been the Soveraigns of this flourishing Kingdome. Sometime being spent in complements, in the recital of the inchant∣ments of Angelea, and of that which past about her deliverance; Rozanel that dyed with the impatience of his sufferings, in few words discovered unto Tristor the love he bore his Sister, and desiring him to consider by himself how dear time was to Lovers, he besought him, that the same day which hee had designed, for his, might make up their happiness, wherunto Tristor gave so good an eare, that he went presently, and impar∣ted it to Garmant. This affaire then being easily resolved upon, they were led all four the next morning to Church, so richly attyred, that their beautie struck eve∣ry one with wonder, especially that of Angelea, on whom the eies of all the world were fastned. The Ceremonies being finished, and dinner done, all the Knights of the Court went and armed themselves for to Joust with Quedragant, Agrian King of Scotland, and the gentle Abies of Ire∣land, who meeting together in great Brittain, desired to come unknown to the Court for to honour the Mariage of their friends. Let us pass by this Solemnitie till we have seen Clarisel of Guindaya, and his fair Shep∣heardess. CHAP. XVI. Clarisel of Guindaya, and his fair Shepheardess, having given an end to the adventure of the Torments of Cardoran and Lindorenna, depart from Bellombre at their request. CLarisel, and his fair Shepheardess living with incre∣dible satisfaction, and having nothing els to com∣plain of, but the aversness of Fortune in advancing their delights, continually gave one another new assurances of their loves, and so passing away their time happily, they met ordinarily at the Rivers side, whose waters served them for a glass, when their fair eyes did them not that office, sometimes under the Sallows that bordered the Meadows, and often retyring into the Wood, to sigh out their passions, they engra∣ved upon the barks of the Trees so many enterlaced characters, as they gave every one occasion to wonder at such marks, of so sweet, and unpa∣ralelled an affection, the same whereof running all over France drew so many Ladys and Knights to Bellombre, that every house there, was full
of strangers, which were strucken with no lesse marvell then coment, at the incomparable perfections of these two persons. These Lovers then having one day driven their stocks into the great and long walks, that separated the Wood of firre trees, Clarisel sighing at the feet of his delicate Shepherdesse, was about to represent his marryr∣dome unto her, when as they espyed a Damosel, comming before a Litter which was followed by a great many of Gentlewomen and Knights, who addressing her selfe unto them, said. Gentle Shepherds, the glory you have gotten, by loving more truly then all others besides in the world; hath made me forsake the Court of France, whither fortune had condu∣cted me of late, to repair unto you for the succour of two inchanted per∣sons, the History of whom is very lamentable, and that loving one ano∣ther most entirely, were conducted to the State, wherin you shall behold them, by the malice of a Sorceresse named Orgelia. This Megera, going upon a time to invoke her spirits in a wood, incoun∣tred with Cardoran, Earle of Garaman (a countrey adjoyning to the fa∣mous Kingdom of Corolandaya) and finding that in him which might strike one in love, she left the busines wherabout she went, and arresting him, entertained him first with ordinary discourse; but a little after told him most impudently, that she was no longer her own, that his beauty had ravished her; and briefly that a violent passion inforced her to offer her self unto him. Cardoran, who carried a noble mind, hearing this speech, and seeing that the eyes of this Sorceresse had no other charms, but such as were fit to captivate a Devill, had much adoe to for∣bear laughing, but desiring to appear as courteous, as she had shewed her self shamelesse, he told her that he was very sorry for the harm she had received against his will, and modestly excusing himself upon the fidelity which he owed to his dearest wife Lindorenna, he walked fair and softly away; whereupon this woman, enraged to see her self so despised, took hold of his arm, and said unto him. Cardoran, remember that no man scornes such as I, but that repentance accompanies his offence, you have kindled a fire in my heart, and will not quench it, burn eternally in the like flames, or at leastwise Vntill such time as you have found out the excellent Dove, and the royall Ger∣faulcon under a disguised Plume. Herewith taking her Girdle she knit it about his arm, and tying him to atree that was close by, she presently raised a fire full of brimstone under him, wherewithall his Horse was so frighted, that he flew away from his Master, leaving him suspended by the arm, and making such grievous la∣mentation, as all the Woods about resounded therwith. This me thinks was so cruella revenge, as might well have satisfied the anger of any furious woman, but she that would not have Lindorenna ex∣empted from torment, because Cardoran had neglected her for her sake, caused her to be advertised by one made for that purpose, of that which this wretched Gentleman suffered; wherupon she instantly dislodged with me, hoping to succour him by some means or other; But alas, as soon as she was come to the tree, she suddenly with her husband, not per∣civing by whom, was put into a Litter, where they now remain in the same sire that borned them before.
Of this their misery, I was so sensible, that I began to tear my hair in an outragious manner, when as the wicked woman comming to me, struck me with a wand that she had in her hand, and so imposing a silence to my complaints, advised me, if I desired the good of these infortunate Lovers, to carry them up and down till I could meet with such as could deliver them from so horrible a torment, the which I have now done five yeeres together, but to no purpose, for of all that presented themselves there∣unto, they always wanted either courage or fidelity, the two things re∣quired for the undoing of this inchantment. Opening the Litter then, and shewing them Cardoran, and Lindorenna amidst the flames, which made a very dreadfull noyse, and that burned them, without consuming any part of their bodies, she thus pursued her discourse. Their deliverance consists in two points, in the perfection of a pure and unspotted love between two persons, and in the confidence to goe and kisse them amidst these flames; now see gentle Shepherds whi∣ther your Love which is talked of, as of a miraculous thing, or whi∣ther the compassion of the pains wherein you behold them, can induce you to free them. I am well assured, replyed Clarisel, gently turning himself towards his Miralinda, that my love being without all defect, and as great as possibly may be, I cannot be wanting to the succour of these afflicted couple, but now it is that you must open your heart, and here satisfie the truth of those protestations, which a thousand times you have made unto me. Why Shepherd (answered she smiling) do you yet doubt of my faith? Verely, I have just cause to complain of you; but not to give you the glory of lo∣ving better then my self, I will deferre the disputing of this matter, untill I have demonstrated by the contempt of this cruell fire, that I feele one in my soule far more violent and great: Saying so, without any fear at all of the flames, she couragiously layd her lips on Cardorans, and therwithal taking him by the hand raysed him up so easily, that she struck all the assistants with wonder, who beholding Lindorenna in the same estate by Clarisels confidence, filled the ayr with a million of acclamations in the prayse of these two Lovers, at whose feet Cardoran and Lindorenna pre∣sently threw themselves, being every way in as good a disposition as they were before their misfortune, desiring them to give them their hands to kisse in acknowledgement of so remarkable a benefit. Our condition, answered Clarisel, doth not permit us to receive this duty from you; wherfore be pleased to arise, and command us any other thing, if you think us yet usefull for your service. Gentle Shepherd, said Cardoran, the honour which I have done you, I rendred to your ver∣tue rather then the habit you weare, on which I doe not much stand, but since you are so courteous, as to oblige us twise, I most humbly beseech you to grant me one boon, and this beautifull Shepherdesse another to my wife; for thereupon depends the consummation of our blisse. Demand what you will, said Clarisel, for I am so much yours, as not to deny you any thing you shall desire of me, and be assured this fair Shep∣herdesse will be no more difficill in whatsoever this Lady shall be pleased to command her. No verely (said Miralinda, who was no lesse satisfied with the proof she had made of her own love, then with the knowledge she had of her Clarisels fidelity) I have had as much courage, and I will be
as liberall as you. We must depart then from henceforthwith, said Car∣doran, for to goe unto  Enterprise▪ wher your presence will be very avayleable, and ncessary for me. You shall be obeyed, said Clarisel, for I am perswaded that we are carried from hence by a speciall providence from Heaven, that is working o good, so that we will dislodge as soon as I have armed my self. By my faith, said Mascarin, you shall have my company then, though  you had rer be without i, for the beauty of those eld would be odio to me, were the fun of it once gone. Herewith all that were present fell a laughing, our Miralinda excepted, who thinking more of the Iourney she had promised, then of the fooleries of is little Lover, was much perplexed, because she knew not what might befall her in this Enterprise; neverthelesse passing by all kind of considerations, since she should not part from her Clarisel, in whose affe∣ction she had placed all her hopes, she willingly got to Horse as soon as she saw him arrive. This small Troop then taking the way that led to the Sea, to the  grief of all the people of Bellomore, but much more of certain Knights then present, whose liberty had been captivated by the beauty of this Shepherdesse, avelled ten or eleven miles, and were in sight of the Sea, when as Miralinda looking back perceived four Knights come gal∣lopping after the, which by their demeanour seemed not to follow them for any good; wherat being somewhat troubled, she shewed them to Don Clarisel, who king his  from Mascarin, that served him as his Squire, stdown his Beaver, and stayed for them much against Cardoran's mind, that was mightily vext for that he was not in case to assist him. As soon as they had overtaken them, one of those Knights went strait o Miralinda, and in a jolly manner said unto her. Faire Shepherdesse, whither go you? why would you know, answered Clarisel, or how is she obliged to you, that she should render you an account of her actions? what is that to you good-man Cockscomb, said another; So much as I will knock his pae, answered Clarisel, and make you know how to rule your tongue better; wherupon he struck him that held Miralinda's bridle, with his sist Ganlet, and all so rudely on the head, that his brains flew abo, and drawing out his Sword after he had thrown away his Launce that did but hinder him, e began to charge the others with such valour, that at the second blow he clove one down to the teeth, whose death pos∣sessing those that remained more with fury, then fear, they let drive at him both at once; and striking both on his Helmet, made him knock his chin against his brest, wherwith he was so enraged, that grasping his sword fast in his hand, he let i fall on him that was next him with such horrible vio∣lence, that he divided his body in twain, to the great astonishment of Lin∣dorenna, and her husband, who marvailed exceedingly at so sudden an exe∣cution, which had been accompanied with the death of the fourth, had he not by setting spurs to his Horse found safety in his flight. Clarisel seeing no more enemies alive, suddenly cast his eyes on his Shepherdesse, and perceiving some tears on her cheeks, blamed her for her unnecessary fear, considering wh proofes he had formerly given her of his valour, and so shortly after, with the rest of the company they entred into a Bark, and put themselves to Sea.
CHAP. XVII. Clarisel narrowly escaping shipwrack, lands in great Brittin,  Florimond of Canabea, combats a Gyant, rescer Claristea, and marries her to Florimond. CLarisel and his company being bound for the coun∣tie of Garaman, sayled with a prosperous gale for two or three days, at the end whereof the Sea (that in nothing is more constant then in its ncon∣stancie) began so to rage with a contrary wind, that the Vessel was carried sometimes as high as the clouds, and by and by thrown down so low that they beheld mountains of water over their heads; the Marriners (who little regard dangers, and that trust in their experience, seeing such sudden and violentmotions) bestirred themselves, but unable to resist the fury of the storm, they la∣boured in vain, for the Sayls being rent to pieces, the Tackle torn, and the Mast broken over board, all were out of hope of escaping ship wrack, were they not speedily succoured by some particular grace from Heaven, which was so deafe to the cryes of these poor wretches, that it powred down such abundance of rain and hayl upon them, and thundred and lightned so fearfully, as every thing seemed to be the Image of a dreadfull and cruel death, the horror of the danger augmenting by such prodigious accidents. Miralinda more dead then alive, was in her Shepherds arms, that no∣thing moved with his own, bewayled the casting away of so fair a crea∣ture. Alas (said he kissing her eyes) what a losse will the world make of these two Suns, and why should so divine a beauty perish with humane things? O God! if my offences have begot this effect of thy displea∣sure, let it fall but upon me, and let not this Innocent, which makes thee to be admired in the world, suffer a death she hath not deserved. Herewith beleeving that the Bark was sinking under water, he took his Mistris in his arms, either to escape or drown with her; howbeit, percei∣ving that the Sea grew calmer; and that the wind drove them gently to∣wards a Port, he began to take heart again, and comforting his Shepher∣desse, he led her up to the Deck, & a little after approaching to land, he lept a shore with infinit content, to see that which he loved so much, no longer subject to the fury of a pittilesse Element, the rest landing in like man∣ner. Clarisel caused his Horse and Arms to be brought him, and beholding no habitation, and the night at hand, he made Lindorenna's Gentlewoman carry along some provisions, and taking a little path, entred into a Wood, where, it growing dark, he and his train alighted, and free from the fear of a troubled Sea, fell to that which the Gentlewoman had provided with a very good appetite. This little repast finished, they layd them all down at the feet of a tree,
and began to , who  with his pass∣  fortu, wherein he continued not long, for hea∣ring the voyce of one lameting hearose, and going softly to know who it was, he ce to five or six trees, planted in such sort, that their branches , they made a little Cabinet, from whence the ight, and complaints that he heard procded. Alas! said a man (for the tone of his voyce declared him to be so, What lover was ever so unhappy as I, and how just cause have I to com∣plaine of my dstini, that forceth me to love an ingratefull Woman, who is insensible of the  she hath done me, and that takes delight in my ruine: my services are despised, she laughs at my suffrings, and which is worse, her retyrement leaves me no hope of ever seeing an end of my miseries, but by death; Ah cruell resolution! why did it not prcede the acquisiion she madeof my heart, or stay till I was dead, so should I now have bee without , or happy in my Grave; but I must needs lose my freedome for  end my dayes wretchedly, and the Sars having de∣termined my life in this manner, I cannot avoid their decree: let Death come then when it will I shall never seek to decline it: whereupon con∣ding with a world of sighes, Clrisel could not forbear, stepping in, and saying unto him; Sir, your affliction very much grieves me, and your complaints have conducted me ither to tell you, that your courage ought not to give place to your sufferings;  is to be seen in adversitie, and men that are well acquaid with the world never faint under pressures; you love a disac∣knowledging woman, that will not recompence your services; change your mind▪ ill your affection with despight, and leaving her to repent the loss of you, be reveng'd of her neglect; But if your soul be too far in∣gaged, and that it be not in your power to get off, take a better resolution then o complain thus in vain, strive to overcome her rigour, and serving her whether she will  no, give her occasion at length to condemn her ingratitude. Alas! said he, whosoever you be that comforts me thus, know that it is not in my power to make use of the good counsell you give me, the rea∣son whereof I sal tell you, if you will vouchsafe to sit down by me a lit∣tle. That is it I much desire, answered Clarisel, laying himself down by him, but I cannot be perswaded that there is any miseie so great or strange in the world, for which there may not a remedy be ound. Sir, said the solitarie Knight, (after hee heard the clatering of his Armes) I must intreat you to pardon me, and  it to the darkness of the night, if my speech hath been less respectfull to you then it ought; No, no, replyed Clisel, you may treat with me as you please; let not any such consideration stay you, but tell me freely the cause of so great a solitude. Shee, of whom I complain, said he, being one of those ayrest of France, that may justly glory in their beauties, having on a time courte∣ously  me in her house, placed so many  in her eyes, as I was not able to look upon her with that Liber which formerly I had, for I found my heart surpried, and my desire of travelling Countries to acquire that renown so much aspy redunto by te best Knights, confine within the limits of her Walls, so that  of paing thence
without some assurance of loving  purpose,  cover my thoughts unto her, and ind meeting  op∣portunitie, I set her glass before her, and demanded what opinion  of her beautie, but perdoiving that modestie would not permit  to commend her self, I recounted unto her the passions I had induced  my arrival, and used all the art I could possible devise to draw  ∣ciprocall affection, howbeit in vain, for she returned me most rightous answer, accompanying it with a command, never to come in her sight again, I am not able to deliver the grief I was in for this so ru a change, sufficeth it that I went presently away in a despeate manner, and not ca∣ring what became of me, I fell by accident into the power and person of Narsnder the great inchaer, from whom being freed by the valour of the excllent Knight of the Palmes, it was my fortune the next day after to espy three Gyants leading five or six Gentlewomen in a chain,  the which perceiving my Claristea, (so is this inexorable sweet ) to be one, I made no difficultie to expose my life unto apparant danger, and carryed more by fury then judgement, I set upon these three dreadfull Monsters, and fought so madly with one of them, the other two disdai∣ning to meddle with me, that in few words, I sent his soule to hell, whilst the brave Knight, of whom I spake but now, comming to my succour, dispatched the world of the rest; so delivering this crue say , who fal∣ling passionatly in love with him, and feeling no les violent destr, then those that continually torment me, would fain have made him her Hus∣band, but love (being just to punish her for her pride) caused this Knight (who no doubt had some other Mistress) to goe away and have her, wherewith she was so discontented, that in stead of recompending  for so great a service, whereby she had escaped deouring by the Gyants, she shut her self up in a Cloyster, taking upon her the vay and habit of a Nunne before my face, for to deprive me utterly of all hope of enjoying her, which begot this resolution in me, to aband on the world in ke manner. Verely, answered Clarisel, your case is worthy of much pitty, but I have told you, that vertue is to be shewed in extremities, you can expect for nothing from Claristea, apply your self to some other ad,  plea∣sing, and more kind, that may make you forget that ever you loved her; This is the right, and sure mean to cure you of your miserie, for wilfully to persist in so unadvised a purpose as to dye wretchedly,  more of folly then discretion. Your counsell is so good, said the solitarie Knight, who was eve at Florimond of Canabea (of whom you have read the discourse in the nine∣teenth, and twentieth Chapter of our second part) that I am resolv'd to follow it, since reason and heaven doe seem to command it. Whereupon promising to depart with Clarisel, that told him what com∣pany he had in the Wood, they layd them to sleep, and the next morning Clarisel causing him to mount on  horse, they took the next high∣way they met withall, where a little after they overtook a Gya, who very much taken with Clarisels gallant demeour, said gently unto him; Sir, I should account it for no small happiness, that your occasions would carry you my way, therefore you may much oblige me, by setting me know whether you are bound. Your demand is so noble, answered Cla∣risel,
that I should be most ready to satisfie you, but we are strangers here, and know not so much as the name of this Countrey, where we arrived but the last night, being driven into it by a tempest. Why then I will tell you, replyed the Gyant, you are in the Kingdome of great Brittain, some two little dayes journey from Windsor, where the Court is now resi∣dent, and in preparation of great Triumphs for the celebration of cer∣tain Mariages that are forthwith to be consummated; but I beleeve some there will come short of their accompt, for I hope to interrupt their sport, and convert their laughter into tears; Upon what occasion, said Clarisel? to be reveng'd of the wrong, answered he, that my Predeces∣sors, received from Galaor King of Sobradiza, who took the rock of Gal∣tares from the Gyant of Albadan, my Grandfather, and gave it to Gan∣dalal the greatest enemie he had, and very oportunly hath fortune con∣ducted me hither at this time, with the redoubted Zrobalan my brother (who hath taken another way the more securely, and closely to atchive our enterprize) for they that are to be maried, are the grand-children of that King. Clarisel, well observing this discourse, resolved to goe to Windsor, as well to be present at the Jousts, as prevent the effect of so pernitious a de∣sign, but concealing his determination, he rode along with him aloof from the rest of the company, when as the Gyant, espying two women on horse-back that crossed the way, gallopping after them, and finding them to be marvellous beautifull, he seized on her that liked him best, purpo∣sing to take his pleasure on her instantly, if Clarisel arrived thereupon had not intreated him to forbear so detestable an act. By all my gods, said he, say what you will, you shall never perswade me to quit so faire a prey. I shall be constrained to fight with you then, said Clarisel. Fight with me, answered the Gyant (giving him a furious look) Be sure Ile chastise thy insolence for daring to say so; whereupon he houghed those Gentlewomens horses, who presently ran away to hide themselves amongst the bushes, and thinking to divide his enemy with the first blow, he discharged his courtlas with such furie at his head, that making away thorow the shield, the point of it lighted so rudely upon his Helmet, that it made him knock his chin against his brest, which put Clarisel into such a rage, that he gave him a dangerous wound in the thigh. The combat thus begun continued very cruelly for an houre and better, at the end whereof Clarisel, perceiving his shepheardesse to look with an eye of fear, and pitty on the bloud, that issued from an hurt the Gyant had given him in his arme, grew so incensed, that he advanced his sword, and let it fall with such a tempest on his enemies Helmet, as he cleft him down to the shoulders, overthrowing him with a noyse like to that of an Oake rent up by the violence of the winds. This horrible blow no less amazing Cardran, and Lindorena, then gi∣ving content to Miralinda, they all came running in to unarme him, but feeling little pain of his hurt, bethnd them for their care of him, and desiring them to goe and seek the Gentlewomen, he stayed with Lindoren∣, and his Shepheardess, who would not rest till she had got him to bare his arme, that they might take a course to stanch the bloud; that done, they walked to the bushes, for to see what was become of the Knights, and the Gentlewoman, but they had not gone far, when as they found
Florimond on his knees before her whom the Gyant would have ravished, which spake to him in this manner. Get you away imporunate man, and doe not trouble me in this sort, have I not told you a thousand times that my heart was ingaged under the Lawes of another far more pleasing to me then you; why doe you force me then to say so again to you now? I am not returned, I tell you, into the world for you. I, but you shall be, said Clarisel, (who under∣stood by her discourse that this was Claristea,) at leastwise if you will not shew your selfe the most ingratefull woman in the world, this Gentle∣man wants nothing that is worthy of a fair mistresse, why will you refuse him then after so many testimonies of his love, and such powerfull obli∣gations wherein you stand ingaged to his valour? be not so hard hearted I pray you sweet Lady, but doe that which his desert, and your dutie requires. Verely, answered she, (perceiving it was he that vanquished the Gy∣ant,) I must acknowledge that heaven hath had a speciall hand in this bu∣sinesse; for, Sir, the fame which you left behind you in France perswaded me that you were the Knight, whose image is engraven in the bostome of my heart, I forsook the Cloyster, where I had resolved to have ended my dayes, and followed you a long time with that opinion, but now see∣ing my self deceived in my hope, and thinking of nothing less then mee∣ting with this Knight, (pointing to Florimond) I must beleeve that our de∣stinie hath brought us hither, hee for to receive the recompence of his services from me, and I to be assured that I shall never enjoy the valiant Knight of the Palmes, whom hereafter I will utterly forget, wherefore at your entreatie I will accept of him for my Husband, as well for the satisfaction of the bond wherein I stand indebted to you for my pre∣sent deliverance, as for his own particular merit. O from what an abisme am I mounted, said Florimond, and can it be, that I which was this morning the most afflicted man on the earth, should in a moment be the most fortunate Lover in the world? Madam, conti∣nued he (kneeling down again before her,) you shall never repent this grace of yours to me, wherefore defer not the accomplishment, I beseech you, if you tender my life. You shall not languish long if I may, answe∣red she, for as soon as we come to any Town, I will marry you very wil∣lingly, in the mean time let us see how we shall get from hence. Madam, said Clarisel, (wonderfull well satisfied of so good an accord) so gracious a designe sure shall not be retarded for want of your horses, you shall get up behind your servant; the Damosel that accompanies you, behind this Gen∣tleman, pointing to Cardoran, and my little Squire shall walk after us faire and softly on foot. Marry your favours are sweetly dispenced, said Ms∣carin, but there is no remedie, I must have patience I see, and trust to my legs. These words having made all the company to laugh, they present∣ly mounted on horse-back, and rode to a Town not above a league from thence, where resolving to pass the rest of the day, Clarisel caused the Gy∣ants body to be fetched, and laying it in a Waggon, sent it instantly away to Windsor, there to be presented to the Prince of obradiza from him, to∣gether with the relation of all that had past. That dispatched, Florimonds mariage with Claristea was propounded, whereunto every one assenting, they were espoused the fame evening to
unspeakable , who though the  of his , and Claristea's cunning never perceived, that the  had been entred before by Alcid, CHAP. XVIII. The Massacre that was made by the dreadfull Gyant Zorobalan at the Iosts at Windser, Clarisel aiving thereupon, after a dangerous Combat kils him. THE Nuptials of Rozanel and the fairest An∣gelea, of Tristor and the vertuous Alteria being celebrated, all the Knights of great Britain were in the field, the people filled the scaffolds, Quedragant, Abies, and the gen∣tle Agrian of Scotland were in the Lists, and the Trumpets began to sound a charge, when as a Gentlewoman with two Knights appeared before a Wagon, wherein lay the body of a Gyant, whose head was divided in two; at the sight hereof every one came thronging to it; and especially Gara∣ma, Don Siald, Rozanel, and Tristor, who very much marvelled at the greatnesse of the blow which they beheld, saying that the Knight, from whose hand so violenta storm fell, must needs have a strange and extraor∣dinary force. The Gentlewoman desired she might be brought before the Prince of Sobradiza. I am he, said Tristor, will you have any thing with me? Gentle Prince, answered she, here is one of your greatest enemies in case to con∣spire no more against your person, as he had done with a brother of his, far greater and more formidable then he, who purposeth to be present at this assembly, to revenge upon you the death of Albadan, whom your Grandfather, King Gala defeated in the quarrell, that Gandalac, had with him concerning the Rock of Galtares, the handsome Shepherd (one of the best Knights of the world) sends him to you, with this advise, that you take heed you be not surprised by that dangerous enemy the surviving bro∣ther. Gentlewoman, said Tristor, I am infinitly indebted to the good will and valour of this Knight, as also very much to you for the pains you have taken in comming hither, which I will labour to acknowledge be∣fore you depart from hence, touching the advise you have brought me, it shall not be neglected, and if the Gyant come, I doubt not but he shal find some here couragious, and strong enough to arrest the fury of his arms. Whereupon, retiring with an exceeding desire to know so brave a Warrior, he caused the Waggon with the body to be fet in a corner of the Lists, and placing himself in the window, he perceived eighteen Knights come marching in three troops, the formost whereof was conducted by Aristander, Duke of South-Wales, who was passionatly in love with Flo∣ria, the daughter of Garamant, Duke of North-Wales, and desired to
shew his valour for the maintenance of her beauty; the second by Ora∣drt, Earle of Glocester, who was no lesse affected to Theiphila, the daugh∣ter of Don Sinaldo; and the third by Orian, Duke of Norfolk, who had no other Mistris but glory. These three Champions, being each of them accompanied with five of the best Knights of great Britain, ranked themselves according to their ar∣rivall in the place, and just opposite to Quedragant, Abies, and Agrian, stood Aristander and two of his troop, who at the sound of the Trumpets dislodged very bravely, and broke his staffe upon his adversaries Shield, without so much as moving Quedragant, that incountred him so strongly, as he made him lose his stirrops, whilst his two Companions were unhor∣sed by Abies and Agrian: Aristander extreamly vext for that he had done so little with his first staffe, took another that was bigger and stronger, ing to recover his honour at the second course, neverthelesse he and his Horse were both overthrown to the ground. These three being dispatched in this sort, the rest presently advanced, and ran very gallantly, but fortune was no more favourable to th, then to their Companions, for they were all layd on the grasse, and constrained to give place to Gradart, who at the third course against Agrian helped to fill up the number of the vanquished, and so did Oria, and those of his train a little after, in so much that these eighteen of the best Knights of great Brittain being defeated, they were conferring the prize on the Chal∣lengers, when as a Gyant presented himself so huge, and of so terrible an aspect, as frighted all the assistants, those warlike Princes excepted, who choosing out good Launces prepared themselves to receive him, and to maintain the honour which they had acquired: howbeit, they never used them, for the great Gyant having discovered the body that lay in the Wagon cryed out with a horrible voyce: Immortall gods? who could deale thus with my brother, since all the Knights in the world assembled together were not able to withstand him; Ah dogs, you have surprised him treacherously, but you shall all dye in satisfaction of so foul a cryme; Saying so he charged his Launce against Quedragant, and passing it through his Shield and Arm, flung him half a dozen paces over his Horses crup∣per, then suddenly returning discharged two such terrible blows on Agrian and Abies, that having wounded the one dangerously in the thigh, and the other on the head, he layed them both in the dust, from whence flying in amongst the rest he cleft Gradart down to the wast, and never re∣ver regarding upon whom his Sword lighted, he began to make so great a Massacre of Men, Women, and Knights, that he had overthrown thirty at his feet before Rozanel and Tristor, who had speedily armed themselves, could come forth. The Ladies shriked at the windows, the people fled away, the slaughter continued, and the place was almost empty, when as a Knight of a very goodly presence arrived, accompanied with two Gentlemen unarmed, a Shepherdesse, whose face was covered with a vayl, and certain Damosels richly clad, who beholding the havock that the Gyant made, drew forth his Sword, and discharged it with such violence on him, that he was for∣ced to knock his chin against the pummell of his saddle, which so rowsed the fury of this Monster, as raysing himself up full of rage, he thought to have divided his enemy with an horrible blow that he intended at him,
but the Knight, who w no lesse advised, then valiant, avoyded it by slip∣ping ade; nevertheless it being no longer in the Gyants command, it fel up on his own Horses head▪ wherwith he fell down dead, leaving his Ma∣ster on foot, which Claisel perceiving presently quitted his saddle, be∣cause he would not take any advantage, and approaching his enemy show∣rd so many blows on him, that the blood began to dye his arms in five or six places. Rozanel and Trist comming in therupon, were marvellously astonished at so cruell a conflict, and knowing by his company that this was the hand∣some Shepherd which had sent them the first Gyant, they fell to observe the manner of his fight; the force of his blows seemed extream to them, they admired his dexterity in shunning his enemies stroaks, and thought it no lesse strange to see with what assurance he supported them whersoever they lighted upon him. In the mean time the combat continued very terrible, the ground was stewed with peices of their armour, the grass was stayned with their blood, the place was all fire with sparkles that flew from their Helmets, and without taking any breath they charged one another so cruelly, that ever and anon they had much adoe to keep themselves from falling. Zoro∣bln, more ontragious then can be imagined, combatted with greater pas∣sion then judgement, and cursing the gods for producing a man able to withstand him, he roared out in that dreadfull manner, as made the very house to shake; At length transported with fury to see three houres spent fifte the beginning of the combat, without any advantage over his ad∣versary, he took his Courtelas in both his hands, and advancing it let it defeend with such force on Clarisels Shield, that dividing it in twain, it not only gave him a deep wound in the arm, but made him set his knees to the ground, wherwith being wonderfully incensed, he suddenly got up, and struck the Gyant with such extraordinary violence, that he verely be∣leeved the ruins of some building overthrown by lightning had fallen upon him, and had therwith been layd along, had he not supported him∣self upon one of his  and hands; howbeit, rising presently again, and resolving to dye or vanquish, he advanced his Courtelas, and display∣ing all his strength, he discharged it so dreadfull on Clarisels Helmet, that he sent him tumbling down three or four paces off, and casting a great deal of blood out of his mouth, which so frighted Miralinda, that she swound∣ed in Florimonds arms. Rozanel being exceedingly grieved then at so heavie an accident drew forth his Sword, and was going to oppose the Gyant, when as he percei∣ved Clarisel to rise, & instantly to part with such horrible, and unexpressa∣ble fury, that even  himself, who could not be perswaded that all the Thder bols of Heaven could ever have made him fear, began to emble at the apprehension of the threatning. Tempest of his enemies advanced Sword, which cutting off his arm, that for want of a Shield he had listed up in defnes of his head, he separated his body in two pieces, to the wonder and  of all the people, and especially of Tristor and zanel, who straight way comming in to him gave him amillion of thanks, and  him to the very skies, but Clarisel, seeing what case  was in, deied  to think him incivill if he did not  that respect was due to their uality, for to go and succour
his Shepherdesse, to whose safety his life was insrably tyed▪ Wh upon running to Miralinda he used such present remedis, as she came to her self again, filling all the assistants with no sse marvell at the excel∣lencie of her beauty, then they were at his force and valour. All things thus well resetled, Rozanel and Tristr prevailed so farre with Clarisel and his company, that they were contented to take their lodging in the Court, where Miralinda, Clarislea, and Lindorenna, were infinily ca∣ressed by the fairest Angelea and Alteri, who were sotaken with the in∣comparable beauty of our Shepherdess, as they could never satisfie them∣selves enough in beholding and admiring her. Not long after, when as Clarisel, Qudragant, Abis, and the rest were▪ cured of their wounds, the Triumphs and Iousts were renewed, where Clarisel performed such wonders, as he acquired the reputation of one of the prime Knights of the earth, and possessed all those Lords with such a desire to know him better, that one day Rozanel intreated him before them all so far to oblige them, as to let them understand his name, his countrey, and parentage. If it were to doe you any service, brave Prince, answered he, be confi∣dent, I would make no difficulty to obey you, but knowing that it will little avayl you, and that it much imports me to conceal it, I shall humbly beseech you to excuse me, only be assured that the greatest glory I desire to have in the world, is to be a Shepherd▪ for the love of this Shepherdess. Iudging by this speech that he would not discover himself, they impor∣tuned him no farther,, and laboured to give him the best entertainment they possibly could devise for to stay him amongst them; but loath to lose time, he took his leave a little after of all these Princes and Ladies▪ as also of Florimond and Clarislea, who likewise returned into France, and im∣barking himself in a Ship, that Garament had provided for him, he sayled towards the Ilands of Corolandaya. CHAP. XIX. The arrivall of the King of Cabilla, in the Empire of Mrtaria, and the furious battell that was fought on the Sea-shore, in disputing the descent of his frces. THE bad estate wherin Rifantes returned into Ca∣billa, having mightily incensed the King his Fa∣ther, he presently dispatched away Commissio∣ners for the levying of Souldiers, thoughout all the parts of his Dominions, and resolving to make use of his friends, he wrote unto the Kings of Astramer, of Zambian, of Corniban, of Ir∣cassia, of Langican, of Pripatan, of , of Fortan, of Alarmia, of Cassilana, and parti∣cularly to the redoubted Brizardan, Soldan of Atalasi, and to the power∣full King of Filzandria, Meriran, to ntreat them to embrce with him
the  so, by t Emperour of Mart∣▪  of the King of Allanar, and  also to  Ar, in such sort, that about two , there arrived in his Kingdome thirty▪ thousand Horse, in the head whereof marched Brizard with three Gyants, an two and twetie thousand Foot, condc by the Kings of Astramer, ad ▪ thirty and five thousand men under the command of the King of Coribn, and ▪ fourscore thousand Horse raysed in the Kingdoms of iptan, and Lapgi, with three Gyants, eight and twen∣ty thousand Foot, with the Kings of Urbana, Alaria, and Cassilan; twelve thousand horse of the territoi of Fotan, thirty thousand foot out of the Kingdoms of Alfanara, & Corcutan; twenty thousand Horse, and six thou∣sand Foot, conducted by the bra King of Filxandria, who was accompa∣nied with the pr ▪ o of the strongest Knights of all Paganism. These  unto two hundred and fourtie thousand men, having in wl entertained, and all the great persons extraordinarily cares∣sed, the king of Cbilla, being elected General of the whole Army, though he had long oested o have had the command therof layd upon the Sol∣d of Aralfi, caused all of them to be carefully embarqued, with a full in to bee thorowly revenged on the Emperour of Martaria, who in the mn time remembring  his oces, prepared an Army of fourescore thousand Horse, n hundred and thirty thousand Foot, and nine Gyants, through the assistance of the Kings of Arbales, of Grizolia, of Ca∣lizant, of Miria, of Tlin, of Bol, of Merlian, of Carderia, and of Ba∣livan, who sconded by  fair Slave, and the two strangers that lived with incrdible delight, in the sweet and uncontrolled fruition of their dearly-beloved Ladies, made no question of good success & victory. All things thus ordered then they expected their enemies, who being discovered one morning, gave an alarm unto the Martarians, which sud∣denly ranged themselves into three squadrons, the first conducted by the Kings of Arbales, Beltona, and Grifolia; in the head whereof Cirazinda placed her sel▪ with  Gyants; the second by the Princes of Cali∣zant, Merlian, and Blivan accompanyed with Floridan, and a like num∣ber of Gyants; the third by the Soveraign of Tolin, Miriana, and Car∣deria, unto whom Lucibel joyned himself presently, covered the Sea shore, couragiously attending the arrivall of the enemies Ships, which carried by a favourable wind, and perceiving these troups stand imbat∣telled, put themselves in order to combat and force them. Approaching then with furie, they laboured with a world of Boats, and Bridges to land, but the Imperialists withstood them for the space of two whole hres together, with such extraordinary valour, that the Sea was all blod, and full of dead bodies, whereat the Soldan of Aralifia; Rifans and the proud Arastr, were in such rage, that leaping all three to∣gether a▪ shore with above fiftie thousand men maug the resistance of their enei▪ they fell in amongst them, making no less a slaughter then famished Wolve doe amidst a ock of shep▪ Howbeit, this  lasted no long, for Czid accompanyed with two Gyants lew upon them, and meeting Arastrn, first she dischar∣ged so mighty a blow upon his Helmet, as she made him reele again, hurt∣ing▪ him dangerously▪ on the head, wherwith the Pagan, who was one of
the proudest men in the world, became so furious, that advancing his Sword, he let it descend with such a tempest on our Warrio ▪ s it cut off a good cantle of it, and made a shrewd gash in his me; on the other side the redoubted Soldan of Aralafia, and Rifantes fought wih the Gyants as bravely. In the mean season the whole fleet landed, and the noyse increased in such sort, as all the coast resounded therewith, the Gyants cut all in p∣ces; Floridan and the Prince of France seemed to be thunder  the Souldiers animated by their Captaines example, some fell in the  some on the earth, briefly all was in confusion, and the Sea shore was so covered with dead bodies, that those which landed last could hardly pass for them. Corazinda having a mightie opposite shewed all her skill, but Arastron combatted so well, that she had in everything her answer; Brizardan and Rifantes were almost mad, that they could not succou their men, and especially the valiant Souldan not enduring to be arrested so, took his sword in both his hands, and therwith struck his enemy so teribly, as hee divided his head in twain, from thence beholding Arastron to stagge with a dreadfull blow which Corazinda had discharged on his Helmet, hee smote her so dangerously on the shield, that he made her bend with her knees to the ground, where Rifantes having likewise dispatched his Gyant, charged her at the very same instant with such violence, as she was forced to save her self upon both her hands with very great jeopardie of her life, nevertheless rising again with more rage then amazement, shee went and gave the Souldan so huge a blow, that she sent him to the arth with a great wound in the shoulder, and so astomished, that he quite lost the fight of the Sun, and carryed with the same furie, she had undoubtedly made an end of Rifantes, had not the proud Arastron arrested the force of her blow with his shield, which was cut in two peeces; But this mighty Pagan much incensed to meet with one able to put his life in hazard, so redou∣bled his strokes, that accompanyed with Rifantes, and Brizardan, who was got up again, and in the highest degree of rage, Corazinda questionless had been much indangered, had not those two brave Champions, Floridan and Lucibel, glorious by the death of certain Gyants by them defeated, arri∣ved in good time for her. These two Princes seeing the evill plight Amadis was in, being on his knees with three dreadfull blowes received all at once, instantly dischar∣ged with such furie on Rifantes and Brizardan, that they were constrained to turn head, and defend themselves, much amazed to meet with men, contrary to their expectation, strong and valiant enough for to arrest the greatness of their armes. In this manner began a Combat between fix in∣comparable warriours, which might have lasted long, had no our Christi∣an Princes, perceiving their troups in disorder, by the valour of the Kings of Filzandria, and Corniban, with three horrible strokes delivered on their Enemies all at an instant so astonished them, that they had leisure to re∣mount upon their horses, and set themselves again in the head of their squadrons, with such a ruine of those they incountred, as their people resuming new courage, spake of nothing less then a retreat: how beit these Princes, being as advised, as valiant, put them presently in good order, and retyred with them into their Trenches, in despight of so many ene∣mies
having with incredible paines sustained the furie of those that pur∣sued them. This so prudent, and couragious a retreat was much admied of the enemie, which commending the extream valout of the fair Slave, and of the two strangers, lamented the loss of fourteen thousand men, three Gyants, and that of the King of Ircassia, who was sain by the hand of the Prince of France, nevertheless understanding that their Adversaries fortune was little better, and that they had left nine thousand men, two Gyants, and the Duke of Plemond on the shore, they did not much af∣flict themselves, but went and planted their Camp before Cardana, re∣solving to put all to fire, and sword, especially Arastron, Brizardan, and Rifantes, who being marvellously incensed, would have sent a Challenge (notwithstanding the danger of their wounds) to the three Knights, that to their great grief were mightily incensed by every one, but the King of Cabilla, relying more on these three Warriours, then on the rest of his Army, would by no means permit them, so as they continued keeping of their Beds ten or eleven dayes together; during which time our Champions having no less need of rest, both sides prepared all things necessarie for the Assault, and defence of the Citie, whereat the fair Prin∣cesses were much troubled, but the presence of their Lovers confirming them, they shewed more affection then fear, principally Archesidella, who being acquainted by Amadis of the qualitie of the Prince of France, re∣ceived him likewise for her Husband. At length our Warriours perceiving all the field covered with Soul∣diours ready for the Assault, they went and besought the Emperour, that nothing might be ordered, but by their counsell, and presently thereupon caused threescore thousand foot, to enter into the Towne, which they di∣vided into foure squadrons, commanded by the King of Arbales, and Mi∣riana of Calizant, and of Carderia, and then going with three Gyants in∣to their Trenches, they drew out thirtie thousand Horse, which they equally divided into three bands, and so sallying out in three severall parts they left the Kings of Balivan, of Merlian, and of Grizolia, with fourescore thousand to guard the Campe, favour their retreat and succour the Town if need were. The Enemie approaching the Walls, began a most cruell and furious assault, the great Soldan of Aralafia, Rifantes, and the proud Arastron, mounted first, followed by fiftie thousand men, but they were so valiant∣ly opposed by the foure Gyants, by the Kings, the gentle Knight Tarsan∣der, and the forces that were under their command, which remained in the Town, as the ditches were full of dead bodyes, whereat notwithstan∣ding they were so little abashed, that it seemed rather to augment their courages, in such sort, that their followers carryed by their example, be∣haved themselves so manfully, as the Citie was in danger to have been forced, had not the Faire Slave appeared in the head of ten thousand Horse, who entring furiously amidst the enemies troups ran a Gyant quite thorow and thorow, overthrew six Knights, before she brake her Launce, and thundring amongst the rest with her Sword, she so cleared their rankes, that she easily made way to the Walls, where incountring Don Ri∣fantes with thirtie thousand Horse, which he had suddenly assembled, shee gave him so mightie a blow on his Helmet, that she layd him on the crup∣per
of his Horse, utterly derived of his senses. This blow having terrified the enemies, they were ready to have beta∣ken themselves to flight, had not the proud Pagan arrived thereupon, followed by a great multitude of Souldiers, who with a dreadfull cry falling upon our Warriours troups, began to make a terrible slaughter, in the nick whereof Lucibel comming in, charged them a flanke so furiously, that he cut off four thousand of them. Brizardan seeing the confusion they were in, forsook the Wall, and went to the succour of his compani∣ons; but Floridan having surprized his men in disorder, put a number of them to the sword, nevertheless the Soldan, being an excellent Comman∣der, quickly reduced the most part of them into order, and then addres∣sed himselfe to run against Floridan, who observed his comming, incoun∣tred him so furiously in the carriere, that they were both overthrown in the dust, where our Knight had been in danger of ending his dayes, un∣der the horses feet, if the valour wherewith the Gyant, that accompanied him, arresting his enemies, had not given him leisure to remount on his horse, which Brizardan could not so soon doe because of the Gyant, ne∣vertheless, being at length relieved by the assistance of those about him, he drew out his sword, and began to make so cruel a massacre, that all the world flew from before him. In the mean time the valourous Corazinda, and the brave Prince of France did things worthy of eternall glory, they killed, they cut off arms, and heads, they cleft men down to the wast, and rendred them∣selves so terrible that the very glistering of their swords, put the most confident in fear, howbeit their number being too small to resist the furie of all these troupes, which came flocking together for to invest them, they retyred in despight of so many enemies, after whose example Floridan did the like notwithstanding all that the brave Soldan of Aralafia could doe; who understanding that his three Gyants were slain, with seven and twentie thousand men, and the Kings of Gallona and Urban, the Empe∣rour having lost but eleven thousand, he would have cast himself in the Sea, had not the King of Cabilla wisely remonstrated unto him, how it was but a trick of Fortune, that often-times opposeth our desires, and wil not suffer us to triumph, but when she pleaseth, making a vertue then of necessitie, though it were with marvellous vexation, he resolved to de∣termine the businesse with one set day, whereunto having perswaded the King of Cabilla; he sent accordingly to present the Emperour to battell, who relying on the justice of his cause, and on the supream valour of the faire Slave, and of the Knights of the Flower-de-Luces, and Flowers, ac∣cepted of it to be fought on the third day after, but at no hand would yeeld to any Truce during the time, and that by the speciall aduise of those Warriours which had undertaken an enterprize, whereof you shall see the effect in the Chapter following.
CHAP. XX. The wonderfull feats of Arms performedina sallie made by Palmirenna's fair Slave, with the end of the Generall Battail, where all the Emperours Forces were defeated by the unex∣pected arrivall of the King of the cruell Iland. TWo days being impatiently past away by the King of Cabilla's friends, who attended but the third for to be revenged of the outrages they had received, our Christian Princes considering what advantage the surprise of a carelesse Enemy doth bring, resolved to mount on Horse-back about mid-night, when as the Moon might facilitate their de∣sign, and accordingly having each of them made choise of two thousand approved Knights, they sallied out at three severall Gates, and with very great silence marched even to the enemies Sentinels, who drowned in sleep, were soon put all to the Sword, a free passage being thus opened to the Emperours troops, Palmirenna's fair slave entring first with incredible fury, made so great a slaughter, that in a moment all the field was covered with dead bodies. The brave Soldan, and the proud Arastron, that were fast asleep, hearing the dreadfull noyse of Arms, and the cryes of thousands, which were yeelding up the Ghost, lept suddenly out of their beds, and finding foure thousand Horse, that were ever kept ready in reserve for all occasions, be∣gan to make head against this invincible Championess, who overcame all, when as a new uproar arising from the East side arrested them, not know∣ing well which way to take; nevertheless being too couragious to bee amazed with any alarm, they instantly divided their forces, whilst Rifan∣tes and the King of Filzandria, separately caused the rest of the Souldiers to be armed, and marching bravely on, began a most cruell bickering; for the Knights of Martaria desiring to imitate their gallant Leaders, per∣formed their parts most valiantly, and meeting with terrified enemies made havock of them every where. On the otherside those two Thunderbolts of warre, the great Soldan of Aralafia, and the proud Arastron bestirred themselves with mighty loss to their Adversaries, but Lucibel arising thereupon, flew in amongst them with such fury, that above two thousand of their men were layd dead on the ground at the very first brunt; and lustily pursuing his advantage hee had cut eight or nine thousand of the rest in peices, had not Rifantes come presently in with thirty thousand Horse, upon the sight of whom our Warriors, that wisely managed occasions, rallied themselves altoge∣ther, and retyring in good order, so mightily incensed those three valiant
Pagans, that in a rage they followed them with all their Cavalrie, hoping to thrust in with them into the Citie; howbeit the King of Arbales arri∣ving with eight thousand Horse, and four Gyants charged them in such manner with the assistance of the three Princes, & their troops, which sud∣denly turned head against them, that rendring their designs vain, they forced them to retyre with the losse of nine thousand men, having left but seven hundred of their Knights in the place, which were slain upon the first incounter, whereat the Pagans were so infinitly inraged, that they could hardly attend the rising of the Sunne to put their Army into battail array. In the mean time our Princes being come to the Town were reserved with strange acclamations, and having somewhat refreshed themselves in Palmirenna's Chamber, whither the beautifull Amplamira, and her excel∣lent sister repaired to them at the break of day for to give them skarfes, and to intreat them not to run into unnecessary dangers, they went incon∣tinently to the trenches where the Emperour resolved to sight, and com∣mand the Battail in his own person, having learned by his espials, that the King of Cabilla had an intention to doe the like. His Forces then being by the advice of the fair slave divided into three Bands, the Vantguard consisting of twenty thousand Horse, and five and twenty thousand Foot was given to the Kings of Arbales, Arisdan, and Carderia, together with the Knight of the Flowers, and a Gyant; the re∣reward of a like number to the Kings of Grisolia, Metlina, and Cailant, with the Knight of the Flower de-Luces, and the Emperour reserving the main battail for himself, wherein were thirty thousand Horse, five and thirty thousand Foot; the Duke of Bonport, three Gyants and the fair Slave, left the Marquis de la Rocque, and the Count Vadian to guard the Town, the King of Mariana, in the Camp with fifteen thousand men, and to the gentle Knight Tarsander, and the young Prince of Balivan, he con∣signed four thousand light Horse to serve for wings unto the Army. All things being thus disposed of, they marched out of their trenches in good order to incounter their enemies, who shewing no lesse zeal to fight, then advisednesse in marshalling of their Troops, followed Rifantes that led the Vantguard with thirty thousand Horse, and fourty thousand Foot; this valiant Chieftain conceiving that a good example was the best exhortation could be made to incourage the Souldiers, setting sputs to his Horse, charged his Launce against the King of Arbales, but Floridan see∣ing him set forth, parted at the very same instant, and meeting him in the middest of the course broke his staffe very bravely, and received this Ene∣mies Incounter, without so much as once being moved in his saddle. Both Armies herewith animated, a most dangerous conflict was seen in an instant, the King of Arbales ran the King of Astramer quite through and through, and overthrew him dead to the earth: The King of Car∣deria his Companion, was by the King of Fortan cast under the Horses feet, where at length he was stifled: The Martarians considering that the safety of their Prince, their lives, and their liberties were in question, fought desperately; The adverse part trusting to their numbers, carried themselves couragiously, so as all was in confusion, nothing was seen, nor heard, but bodies extended on the ground, and the cryes of dying men, which filled the ayr with their groans and lamentations; Floridan seemed a Thunderbolt, death was ever tyed to his sword, Rifantes made such ha∣vocke▪
that way was given him whersoever he went. The blood  along instrea, nd every thing hng in suspence, when  observing, how the safety or destruction of his side depended on the whole valour of Rifantes, and the unspeakable force of a Gyant, who made a heap of dead bodies round about him, he most valiantly ap∣proached unto him, and discharged so terrible a blow on his arm, that he cut i eer off, and following his advantage he redoubled on his Helinet with such fury, that he sent him to the ground, where he was troden to pieces under the Horses feet, from whence ying amongst the enemies Troops, he so terrified them, as they began to fly, to the infinite discon∣tent or the great Soldan of Arala, and Arastron, who accompanying the King of Cabilla in the main Battail, were mad for that they were not as yet ingaged in fight, whereupon suddenly advancing with rage they were falling upon the King of Arales Squadron, but perceiving the Em∣perour of Martaria present himself with the grosse of his Army, they were constrained to alter their purpose, and make head against him; who de∣siring to shew his courage, in despight of age charged his Launce against the King of Cabilla, and met him so lustily, that he threw him over the crupper of his Horse; neverthelesse unable to support his enemies incoun∣ter, he was also compelled to fall, and that in danger to be trampled under the Horses feet, had not Palmirenna's fair Slave (who had still an eye upon him) lept suddenly down, and catching him up, remounted him in de∣spig of all the enemies fury. The fall of these Princes having drawn the bravest Commanders of the Army together, the sight grew so hot, as all the field was dyed with blood,  incountring , ran him through the body with his Launce, and disdayning to draw his Sword against ordinary Knights, flew upon Radamant his brother, who had newly slain the King of Zamblan, and began to charge him with a mtitude of dreadfull blows, but this Gyant grown furious by his brothers death, received him in such sort, as he gave him a dangerous wod in the shoulder; howbeit, the force of this Knight being more then monstrous, he endured not long before him. In the mean ti our fair Slave overthrew all that came in her way, she cut off men by the wast, cleft down others to the teeth, & made so strange an havock, that she might well have been compared to torrents, whose vio∣lence the sturdiest Oaks are not able to withstand. On the other side Bri∣zardan falling on our troops with incredible rage, rendred himself so ter∣rible, that his blows were no lesse feared then death it self, every one gave him place, and which way so ever he turned there no enemy appeared, at length beholding the wonders performed by our fair Slave, he approach∣ed to her behind, and before she was aware gave her so mighty a blow on her Helmet, as he made her bow with her head to the Saddle bow, where raising her self up again with infinit fury, she took her Sword in both her hands, and discharged it so dangerously on the Soldans Shield, that divi∣ding it she wounded him very desperately: from thence spurring on to Arastron, who held the Emperour der his arm ready to carry him away to his Tent, she stk him with such violence on the head, as she overtur∣ned him on the crupper of his Horse, casting out a great deale of blood o of his eyes and ears, whereby freeing the Emperour, she caused him presently to be horsed again.
Those two horrible blows having amaxed the enemies, they  give ground, when as the Kings of Filzandria, and  ∣manded the rereward entred with strange in: All was then in , and doubtlesse the Emperour had been in an ill cose, i  had not oportunely arrived with the Kings of Grizolia, Merlina, and thousand Gazilant, followed by twenty thousand Horse, and five and twenty Foot. Then it was that the Heaven, Earth, and Ayr, seemed but one, and the same thing, and so many Knights fell at this Incounter, that it was not possible to tread, but on dead bodies. Arastron, and Brizardan being come to themselves again, and in the su∣premest degree of rage, put all to the Sword; the fair Slave, Lbel, and Floridan on the other side made no lesse havock, the Gyants and the Kings were so many furies, the King of Filzandria fought most desperately, Tarsander and the young Prince of Balivan rode breaking the enemies ranks, briefly, nothing was seen but blood and slaughter, and the noyse of Drums and Trumpets was so great, as a thousand claps of Thunder could not have been heard. Brizardan, Arastron, and Rifantes did wonders, but our Knights so beha∣ved themselves, that the King of Cabillaes Troops began to turn their backs, when as from the Sea side there appeared four dreadfull Gyants in the head of fifteen thousand Horse, who having neither Army long in the uncertainty of whose ayd they were come unto, charged their Launces against the Emperour, in whose Army, with the assistance of the unvan∣quished, which began to take new courage, they ew above an hundred thousand men, notwithstanding the uttermost our Knights ould do, who having speedily drawn forth twelve thousand Horse ell  ese fresh Troops with such incredible fury, as one would have thought they would have been utterly defeated; howbeit the Cabillaes arriving thereupon with an horrible shout, they were pressed and chged on so many sides, as they were all cut in peices except nine thousand Horse, and seven thou∣sand Foot, wherewith the Emperour got into the Citie, in despight of so many enemies, especially of the Gyants of the new Army, that hoping to enter with them spurred on for life, but our three Champions being in the Rear, with each of them a Launce in his hand, incountred them with such force, as they ran them all three quite thorough and thorough, sending them dead to the ground, to the infinit discontent of Arastron, who se∣conding them, had some part in their disgrace; for Corazinda unable to indure his insolence, gave him so terrible a blow on his helmet, that he cut off half his cheek, and so astonished him besides, as if Rifantes had not presently come in to his ayd he had fallen from his Horse. The horrible blow having arrested those which pursued them, the three Knights had leisure to enter into the Town, where was strange lamenta∣tion made for so great a losse, which amounted to seventy two thousand foot, and fifty seven thousand horse, besides the Kings of Calizant, Mer∣lina, and Carderia, and repayring to the Emperour, who was very sensible therof, they in some sort comforted him by remonstrating, that it was but a chance of fortune, which might soon change her copie, as much to their advantage; this done they went to their Ladies, which infinitly rejoyced to see them return safe from the fury of so bloody a Battail, and having assured them against all fear, they got them instantly to the trenches, from
whence they drew all the forces that were thereinto the Town, the better to resist the assaults of their enemies, which in the mean time caressed Alferax the dreadfull Gyant of the cruel Island, who brought them this succour, by means wherof they had obtained the victorie, though dearly bought, having lost nine and fourtie thousand Horse, threescore and five thousand Foot, five Gyants, the Kings of Astramer, Zamblan, Corni∣ban, Alarmir, and Langican, but comforting themselves with the hope of easily forcing the Walls, in regard they had yet fourscore thousand men remaining, and understanding that the Emperour had not a quarter so many, they resolved not to let their Adversaries rest in quiet, but to give them an assault within two dayes at the farthest, howbeit this design was interrupted, as you shall hear by and by. CHAP. XXI. The King of Cabilla sends Ambassadours to the Emperour, a Peace is concluded; the Princesses of Martaria are granted in mariage to Rifantes, Brizar∣dans Meridoran, the Princes of Greeces resolution therupon. THE Prince of Cabilla's love being of more power then his spight, to have been vanquished before Palmirenna, councelling him not to suffer the to∣tall ruine of an Empire, the Crown wherof hee hoped to enjoy, he went unto Brizardan, that kept his bed by reason of some wounds he had received from the faire Slave, and extolling the beautie of Amplamira, and Archesidella unto him before the King of Filzandria, that was present there, after he had freely acknowledged his own passion for the Princess Palmirenna, possessed them with no less affection to these two excellent Infanta's, then that which he bore to his Mistress, in such sort, as having ad some discourse upon this subject; they resolved to send Ambassa∣dours unto Cardana conceiving that the bad estate of the Emperours af∣faires would make him willingly accept of the conditions they should propound. Having then taken the advise, and consent of the King of Cabilla, that that desired nothing so much as the contentment of his Son, they dispat∣ched away the Duke of Fransacra, and the Marquis of Robanara, fully instructed with what they were to say, who appearing before the Walls with a trumpet, were presently admitted in, and conducted to the Empe∣rour, unto whom the Duke of Transacra spake in this manner. Mightie Prince of Martaria, fortune hath shewed you that she favours your enemies, and that it is in their power to deprive you of your Scepter when they please, nevertheless she at this instant presents you with means, not only to conserve you, but to make you more redoubted then ever you were; you know the merit, and qualitie of Dn ifantes heire of Cabilla, the greatness of the valint Soldan of Aralfia, and the riches of the puis∣sant
King of Filzandria, make use of their good desire, to rendery on their Father-in-law, and doe not endure the ruine of so godly an Empire as yours is, their suit is advantageous to you, and the possession of your Daughters will give them more satisfaction then your estate, think that they will be so many Pillars, wherupon your greatness may firmly rest, and consider that it is better to caress them as your children, then to see them the enemies of your Crown; This is the business of our Ambas∣sage, wherunto be pleas'd to returne us a speedy answer, to the end that either we may conclude an absolute peace with you, or resolve for a con∣tinuance of the War. My Lords, answered the Emperour very gravely, I am not ignorant of the vertues, and qualitie of these three Princes which have sent you hi∣ther; but having hitherto defended my selfe from their violence by the as∣sistance of my friends, it is reason that I take their counsell in so impor∣tant an affair, wherfore repose you here a little I pray you, whilst I advise with them therupon. So passing to the Councel Chamber, whither his Daughters, with the Kings of Arbales, and Grizolia, Corazinda, and the Knights of the Flow∣ers, and Flower-de-Luces, being sent for, he propounded this demand, wherupon divers opinions were given; some drawn with the resentment which they were to have of the outrages received from them were whol∣ly against it, and others carryed by a better consideration of what was most convenient for the good of the State, were altogether for it, so as they could not come to any resolution at at all, when as the Emperour, being desired to deliver his mind, made it appear, that he would not be ve∣ry difficile to sign this accord, for remonstrating that his  were spent, that these mightie Princes were his neighbours, and that their alliance, would render his Crown most secure against all attempts whatsoever, hee restified that he had no greater desire then to see a Peace concluded, and his Daughters in the power of those which demanded them, wherat the fair Slave was so inraged, who perceived the utter undoing of her self, and her cousins involved in the Treatie, that rising up with sparckling eyes, she could not forbear saying to him; Sir, I wonderat you, that in the middest of all your Subjects you are afraid; what will the world say when they shal hear, that after such in∣sufferable outrages, you could so soon, and easily be perswaded to forget them? Do you fear that your Daughters being so accomplished, and beautifull, shall never meet with Princes so great and valourous, as these which now present them selves? Sir, I know some, that yeeld not to them either for merit, or birth, and from whom you may have more assistance, and content, then you hope for from these. They threaten you with a continuance of the War, are not your Walls all entire, and doe not they know to their cost, that it had been determined otherwise, had not Fortune shewed her self what she is? she hath done her worst, and therfore is not to be further feared, nor shall this arm, wherin hitherto you have found safetie, ever be wanting to your succour, provided your resolution be more generous; at leastwise understand from your Daughters, whether they like of these matches, and doe not more then the gods, which leave us a power over our own wills. Sweet-heart, answered the Emperour, I verely beleeve that the love
you bea me, mas you speak with uch passion,  that it tou∣ches my particular, when I talk of an accord with these Princes, but you doe notknow how the affaires of a King are otherwise treated of, then those of a private man, the good of my State hath counselled  to that which I say, my Daughters must conforme themselves to my pleasure, and therefore I command them to prepare themselves for these Nuptials, wherby those mischiefs may be declined which otherwayes would arise, should I wilfully persstin this War. These words o resolutely delivered, having drawn all the rest to his opinion, except the beautifull Princesses, which spake not but with their tears, the Ambassaours were called in, and so satisfied, with the promise which the Emperour made them in the presence of all his Barons, as they would have faln on their knees before these Infantas, but they not able to endure the fight of them, presently departed, and utting themselves up in their Chambers, resolved to dye a thousand deaths, rather then violate the faith which they had plighted to their beloved Lords, who in the mean time were not a little disquieted, making a milion of furious desiges upon the lives of those insolet Princes, that laboured to usurptheir right. The Ambassadours being returned then with all the content they could desire, a thousand, and a thousand Bonires were instantly made in the King of Cabilla's Camp, the gates of Cardana were set open, all passed losses were forgotten, most of the Troups were discharged, six thousand Horse onely were reserved to honour these Princes, Brizada gt out of his bed, Rifantes, and Merid King of Filzandria trickt up themselves, and deiring to enjoy the happiness of beholding their Mi∣stresses, they went all three unto the Emperour, who received them with open arms, and insensible of all that was past, conducted them himself in∣to 's Chamber, where all his Daughters were assembled, who notwithstanding their Fathers presence, could not choose but shew their discontent, speaking very coldly unto them. Howbeir these Princes willing to latter themselves, and hoping that time or necessitie would beget affection in them, they departed a little af∣ter, so prest with the desire of tasting the felicities, which the fruition of theirincomparable beauties did promise, as they humbly besought the Emperour, that their happiness might not be deferred but for a day or two at the most, which having been promised them, the Emperour re∣turned to his Daughters, who thinking to move him to pitty, fell on their knees before him, and with tears intreated him not to render them mise∣rable for all their lives, by giving them Husbands most incapable of love, and under whose pwer they could expect nothing but constraints, but all could not move him, for resolved to see the consummation of these Ma∣riages he commanded them anew, to prepare themselves therunto within two dayes, which commandement was so harsh unto them, as they would quickly have made an end of themselves, had they not the hope they had to find out some means by the counsell of their Lovers to avoid this mis∣chief, perswaded them to prolong their lives a while. Having sent for them then assoon as it was night, they shut themselves up with them into a Chamber, where lovingly joyning their lips unto theirs, the tears trickled downe their fair cheeks, whereby Amadis too well knowing their grief, said unto them; Ladyes, complaints are vain,
nor will weeping doe any good, you love us, the favours we contin∣ally receive from you, assure us of it, but yet you are to give  further proofe therof, vex not your selves at the crueltie of a barbarous Fathr, who without the regard of your content will subject you, to men you cannot love, France, Persia, and Greece, are Countreys goodly enough to invite you without sorrow to abandon the ingracefull Land, thither let us goe my excellent Mistris, and make no difficultie to follow us, I have a way to carry you hence in despight of all that would oppose my my enterprize, so as you have sufficient courage, and love to undertake it with us. Alas! my dearest Lord, answered Palmirenna, this is all that wee can wish for in the world, declare unto us the secret of so difficult an affaire, you shall find us most resolute, and if there were occasion to take away the lives of these deteshed Lovers, be assured that I would be the first to let out the heart-bloud of Rifantes, Amplamira, and Archesidella, testifying no less courage and affection for the contentment of their Lords, Amadi continued his discourse in this sort; Afflict your selves no longer then I beseech you, but when the time comes, dress you in the bravest manner you can, for to be led to Church, in which instant of time, Floridan and I will come into the Hall, in un∣known Armes, whilst Lucibel shall attend us at the gate adjoyning to the Haven, and under colour of obliging you by some promise to descend in∣to the Court yard, for the deliverance of two inchanted Lovers, whom I will feigne to be inclosed there in a Coach, you three shall goe into it; that done, six Horses shall gallop away with you to the Sea side, where we shall find the Prince of Frances Barque, which to morrow we will cause to be made ready for that effect. This enterprize seemes wonderfull difficult, said Palmirenna, for you will be in danger of exposing your selves against the power of all these Kings, and the Emperour together, howsoever wee will cast away all considerations, for if you dye in the execution therof, we will not sur∣vive you a minute, wherfore be well prepared, and we will follow you infallibly. This resolution being taken, they got them to bed, where with infinite content they lay till morning; when as Lucibel sent for the Pilot of his Barque, who promised him that it should be in a readiness against the time appointed.
CHAP. XX. Amadis of Trbisend, Floridan and Lucibel cay away the Infanta's of Martaria, the dreadfull Combat maint aied by them on the Sea short, they are strangely succoured, when they are past all hope of life. THE violence of the Pagan Princes desires exceedingly pressing them, they arose with the Sun, which was to give light to the day of their Nuptials, and putting on very rich apparell, to appear with the moregrace in their Ladies eyes, they descended into the great Hall of the Palace, whither not long after came those excellent Princesses, so fear∣full of the danger, wherinto their Lovers were ready to expose themselves, that a shivering palenesse eclipsed much of the lustre of their beauty, they felt strange pal∣pitations of heart, and beholding so much people assembled, they greatly doubted, that their Enterprise would not succeed so happily as they wished. Some small discourse being past, upon occasion of the prepared mag∣nificences, there entred two Knights in gilt Arms, who kneeling before the Emperour, desired his hands to kisse. Now truly (said the Emperour, who knew them to be Luparba, and the gentle Knight Meander, Nephew to the great Duke of Moscovie, of whose valour in the wars, between the Emperour of the Parthians, and the King of Sibilla there was so much talk) you are most heartily welcome; for I joy more in your arrivall, then I can well expresse. Sir, answered Meander, no men living can be more your Majesties humble servants then we are, saying so, they arose and went to do their duty unto the great Soldan of Aralafia, and to the King of Cabilla, by whom, and by Rifantes, and Meridoran, they were re∣ceived with as much honour as might be. Their complements being over, two other Knights entred covered with grey arms, whereof  falling on his knees before the Em∣perour, said unto him.  of Martaria, the fame of your magnanimity, and good  us hither to obtain one boon of your Majesty. Say on,  (who felt himself tickled with the prayses which the Knight gave him) it shall be granted you very wil∣lingly, I expected no lesse from you greatnesse, replyed the Knight, Sir that which I desire, is you will vouchsafe to take compassion of two Lo∣vers, who are buried alive in a Coach, which is below in your Palace∣yard, by the malice of an old Sorceresse, that maligning their faithfull affections, retains them there in most ell torments, be pleased therfore to command these fair Princesses to delver them from their sufferings, for
the end of this adventure depending on three excellent, and rare beauties, I hope to see it now finished, in regard I do not think that the whole world can furnish three such again, as your daughters are. Verely, answered the Emperour, it much contents me, that my daugh∣ters should joyn the glory of this adventure, to the triumphs that we make for the celebration of their Nuptials with these valiant Princesse; where∣fore I like it well that they go along with you, and to encourage them thereunto, I will in person accompany them down. Whereupon the Princesses, who know their Lovers, began to descend the Palace stairs, trembling as if they had not an hour to live; but remembring how much it concerned them, they assumed new courage, and taking one another by the hand, they got them suddenly into the Coach, and the  their saddles, which done, the Coach-man drove away a though he had been mad, whilst Amadis lifting up the visier of his  the Emperour thus. Prince of Martaria, think that Her will not permit thee to be the Tyrant of thy Daughters contentment, they are no in the power of Amadis, Prince of Greece, and Trebisond, and not of  womn Slave, as thou hast hitherto beleeved. Wherwith going to spur his Horse, Luparn that was next him with a proud countenance seized on his bridle, which our Warrior perceiving lift up his fist, Gauntlet, and all, and struck him on the head with such hor∣rible violence, as he layd him dead at the Emperours feet with his brains beaten out, and observing that Meander had drawn his Sword, and was striking at him, he presented his Shield to the blow, which was strong and mighty; howbeit, knowing that then he was to shew what he could doe, he discharged so terribly on his Helmet, that he divided his head in twain, and not staying till he was invironed by the presse, he gallopped away, leaving all the assistants terrified with those dreadfull blows, the Empe∣rour grieving for the death of those two Knights, and the Lovers in the su∣premest degree of rage, to see themselves so cunningly deprived of their expected felicity. O yee gods! said the Emperour, shall I receive so great an affront without some horrible revenge; To armes, Knights, to arms, and let not these villains escape so. Herewith fifty Knights, which always attended ready armed for every occasion, posting after our Warriours overtook them hard by the Sea-side, and charged their Laces all at one instant, but Amadis and Floridan that only stood them, whilst Lil conducted the Ladies into the Bark, remayning firm in their , let them breake all their staves upon them, and then  a charge them in such sort, that in an instant they had layd ten , and intreating the rest no better, they followed them  at the return of Lucibel, there were but six left, who  as fast as they could drive, rendred their retreat free, , Rifes, and Merid arrived, followed a far off by four , before whom mar∣ched the Gyant of the cruell Iland. Our warriours seeing them comming with strange fury, took three good Launces which they had reserved, and being carried with no lesse rage they incountred them so dangerously, as they were all cast out of their saddles, the Prince of France excepted, who ran his Launce quite thorow the body of Meridoran, overthrowing him dead to the earth, but the other
arising all together began so dreadfull acombat, that the shre seemed to tremble under the violence of their strokes. These Pagan Princes being infinitly incensed with jealousie, Brizardan gave  so mighty ablow on his Shield, that his arm not able to sup∣port the force thereof, it beat it so rudely against his head, as he was for∣ced to knock his chin against his breast, and Rifantes discharged his Sword so on Floridan, that notwithstanding the opposition of his Shield, which was let aunder, he received a deep wound in the shoulder, which put our Grecians into such fury, that doubting let they should be forced to sustain the assaults both of these Warriours, and of these Troops, which they saw come gallopping  on them, they discharged their Swords with such a Tempest, the  rizard Helmet, and the other on Ri∣fans Shield, that the Sold was overthrown under the horses feet, dan∣gerously wounded in the head, and Rifantes with a great gash in his arm umbled senselesse out of his saddle, close by Brizardan who was in no better case. These two horrible blows having wrought the effect, which our Cham∣pions desired, they lept presently into their saddles, and beholding them∣selves invironed with four hundred Knights, and the Gyant of the cruell Iland, a daring man, and endued with extream force, unto whom the Prince of France opposed his Launce, which he had reserved entire, they began to charge them with such fury, that in lesse then half an hour, they had layd thirty at their feet; neverthelesse the rest persisting very wilfully, they were so followed, and charged on every side, as their horses being killed under them, they were constrayned to alight, and present them∣selves to their enemies, who fell down dead as often as they encountred their blades. In the meantime the Prince of France, being withdrawn a little aside, maintained a dreadfull combat with the King of the cruell Iland, whose arms were all imbrewed in blood, and questionlesse the death of this Co∣lossus had ensued from the choller of this valiant Prince, if a dozen of Knights had not charged him so rudely behind, that unable to support the fury of an other blow given him by the Gyant at the same instant on his Helmet, he was forced to the ground, where he lay not long, for conside∣ring the danger he was in, he arose more inraged then a Bull bayted with a Company of dogs, and clasping his sword fast in his hand with four stroaks, he left four of the most confident of the Troop asunder, and flying upon the Gyant he ran him into the thigh, making him set both his knees to the ground for to save himself, which little avayled him, for this Prince calling to mind the prie for which he fought, gave him such a blow on his shoulder that he opened him to the very wast. This while  and  came again to themselves, and obser∣ving such a horrible Massacre round about them, they arose transported with rage and despight, and falling upon our Warriours, they charged them so furiously, with an hundred and fifty Knights, that were still left, as they covered their bodies all over with wounds, but being resolved to sell their lives dearly, they grew so enraged, by thinking that their deaths would leave then Ladies in the power of these Barbarians, as having gi∣ven Rifantes and  two dangerous hurts more they cut forty Knights in peices, to the strange  of the Emperour, and the
King of Cabilla, who then arrived with fifty Knights, thinking th t be rather furies, then mortall men. But to what end served the courage of their invincible hearts, ofering they were to combat an Hydra, and that they always met with  women in the places of them they slew? Truly the wonders they did we to no purpose, for being so weary, that they were scarce able to lift their arms, they expected nothing but a glorious death, for to crown all their passed labours, when as they perceived a Bark make to the land, out of the which two gallant Knights suddenly lept a shore, marvellously astonished to be∣hold so many bodies extended on the earth by the valour of three men, which still resisted the violence of such a remayning multitude. These two Warriours (which were Flsbel of the starre Lucibels uncle, and the gentle Sestilian, Prince of Spaine, whom fortune had very oportunely brought thither,) admyring the vertue of these excel∣lent Knights and not able to endure the continuance of so unequall a combat, quickly unsheathed their swords and advancing on, fell in so furiously upon those that held these Princes straightly beseiged as they layd six at their feete with the first six blowes that they gave, which so revived our Gretians courages, as they seemed to re-assume new forces, running all three then into the middest of their enemies they performed such feates of armes, as appeared even impossible to the beholders, inso∣much that threescore Knights more past by the edge of their swords. Howbeit Brizardan and Rifantes carryed with unspeakeable greife for the ravishing away of their Ladies, and the little satisfaction they could hope for of it, having taken some breath, made towards them a∣fresh accompanied which Brustafard, and fiftie Knights that came newly from the Citie, and renewed their assault with such rage that it was a prodigious matter to see five men endure so much, who nothing fayling in courage were not withstanding so weary, as unably longer to sub∣sist, they were resolved to dye a thousand times over rather then shew the least jot of fear or faint heartednes, but desiring to doe something now at the last cast, Amadis; displayed all his force, and discharged such a terrible blow on Rifantes head, that he clove him downe to the shoulders to the unexpressable greife of the King of Cabilla his father that beheld it. Floridan and Lucibel had the same designe upon the Soldan and Brustu∣fard, howbeit their arms wanting vigor their blowes wrought not the effect they desired, but contrarily finding themselves charged on every side by a multitude of Knights they were compelled to set their knees to the ground, where as well as they could they defended themselves a good while, as in the like manner did Florisbel and Sestilian, that were carceable to wagge. Amadis alone stood on his feete, so transported with fury to behold his kinsmen in that lamentable plight, but much more to be the cause of his Mistresse death, who stayed but to see him fall for to cast her selfe into the Sea, that laying desperately about him hee was even ready to fall into the same ease his companions were in, when as two brave war like Knights arrived, whereof the one carryed a Salvage pourtrayed on his sheild, wherby you may guesse that it was the redoubted Gria the Salvage, and the beautifull Bradimande his Lady who had acquired such renowne in the world, as their incomparable valor was every where spoken of.
This mighty and valiant Champion, ravished which admiration at the ight of foure hundred men and two gyants massacred by the sole valor of five knights, beleived that heaven had brought him thither for their as∣sistance, so that furiouslie setting spures to his horse, hee addressed him∣selfe against Brustafard, upon whom hee discharged his sword which such violence that hee devided his body in two peices to the great astonish∣ment of our Christian Princes, who possest which more courage then strength rose instantly up, and as if they had done nothing all that day charged their enemies afresh, who terrified which this new succor be∣tooke them all to flight, Brizardan onely excepted, that careles of his life, since hee had lost the hope of enioying Amplamira, went and with all his force struck Brandimanda so furiously on the helmet, that hee over∣threw her from her Horse to the ground, shedding great abundance of bloud, out of all the passages of her head, which put Grian into such a rage, as he returned him so terrible a blow, that if his Sword had not tur∣ned in his hand, he had cleft him to the middle, but lighting flatling on his head, it so astonished him, that he fell as it were dead upon his com∣panions. This horrible blow having mightily terrified the Emperour, and the King of Cabilla, they fled away after the rest; wherupon our Christian Princes perceiving no more enemies afoot, went to give thanks unto these incomparable Warriours, at whose valour they exceedingly wondred, especially at that of Grian, who in all hast ran to his Lady, unto whom they applyed such remedies that she began to come to her self a little: seeing her then pretty well, they fell to complementing one another; that done, our Knights having desired the rest to enter with them into their Barque, they three, and their Ladyes, got aboard first, and as Grian was going to follow them, the Cable breaking that held their Barque, she was carryed away to Sea, whether they would or no, to the extream discontent of these Princes, especially of Florisel and Sestilian, who thought they should know the Princes of France, and Persia; howbeit there being no remedie, they imbarqued themselves with the redoubted Knight of the Salvage, and his Brandimanda in their Vessell, with a reso∣lution to follow, and overtake the other, but they were disappointed of their purpose, and driven otherwhere.
CHAP. XXIII. Amadis his Ship being driven by a tempest to the Isle Du-bois, two Leagues from Cardana, the Lovers are betrayed by a Merchant, and being ready to fall into the hands of the Emperour of Martaria, they are miraculously inchanted. WEE evermore find some crosse to our content, and the sweetest delights have some intermixture of bitterness; These Princes went on betwixt joy and grief, esteeming themselves happy to be at the mercie of the winds, rather than of a sal∣vage, and cruell Emperour, but were no less troubled with the absence of those brave Cham∣pions, to whose valour, and courage, they did owe their lives. Those matchless Princesses did like wise simpathize with them in the like passions, exceedingly joying at their happy escape from so desperate an enterprize, but sorrowing no less at the number of their Lovers hurts, which for want of a skilfull Chi∣rurgion in the Ship might prove dangerous. Howbeit Amadis bethought himself of a box of pretious Balm, that he found in the Grot, where the Dwarf drest his wounds after his con∣flict with the Monster of the Mountain of Bears, which instantly he cau∣sed to be sought out and delivered it to his fair Mistris, who refused to entrust any other then her self with his cure, and attendance, and there∣fore being layd down with the other Princes, his associats, Palmirenna fil∣led his wounds with that so precious oyntment; which having done, not without some tears and kisses, she presented the Box unto her Sisters, who performed the like office unto their Lovers, and so having shut the windows, withdrew themselves, and left them asleep. Mean while the Sea growing high and boystrous, overmastered the Pilots, and in despight of their art, and industrie, drave them back to∣wards the place from whence they were departed: they not able to with∣stand their destinie, were in the end inforced to strike sayle, and to com∣ply with the present necessitie; Driving along then with the current, they came to the Isle Du-bois, two small leagues from Cardana, the Marriners not knowing what Countrey it was awakened the three Princes, who found theselves whole and sound, to the no less joy and contentment, then wonder and astonishment of the Ladyes: now, because the Sea be∣ing rough, and the Harbour exceeding open, there was no safetie in the Ship, they perswaded the Lovers to goe ashore, to which they willingly assented, in regard they thought themselves out of the reach of Fortune, and far enough from Martaria. Not long after, as they walked on, they espied a stately House, where they resolved to rest themselves untill the weather grew more calme; Comming therefore to the Master of it (a rich Merchant) he gave them very courteous entertainment, but soon after taking notice of their per∣sons,
and being thoroughly acquainted with that dayes passage, which already was grown publike, allured with hope of reward, as also therby to shun the Emperours displeasure, he resolved with himself to discover their arrivall unto him: Dissembling then his intent, and masking his countehance with chearfulness, the better to avoyd, all thought of suspiti∣on, he stayd till supper was ended, and the said lovers were retyred to their Chambers, at which time he speedily went to Cardana, where being brought to the Emperours presence, he fell at his feet, and spake in this manner; Sir, the affection I owe to your service, as your most faithfull subject; hath brought me hither for discoverie of a secret of no small importance: The Sea hath inforced your Daughters, with them that stole them away, to land in the Isle Dubois; They are in my house, and you may easily have them in your power without running the hazard of trying anew the fury of their Arms, for I left them in bed more disposed to sleep; then to fight, where I am confident they may be surprized without danger. Immortall gods I said the Emperour, how welcome are these news to me, and how much doe I owe unto their providence, that restores my honour to its first glory, by affording me the means to right my self for the outrage done unto me; Ah traytors, racks and torments, shall not be wanting to your insolence, and I shall take so horrible a revenge, that af∣ter-ages shall ever speak of it; And you, impudent and disobedient Daughters, who have preferred the inticements of strangers, before the grave admonitions of a Father, be confident that your punishment shall be proportionable to your offence; You shall find how powerfull the resentments are of a Father, and a Prince thus provoked. Friend, said he, speaking to the Merchant, thy sidelitie deserves no little recompence, wherof thou shalt be most assured, but to secure this business, fetch me hi∣ther the Captain of my Guard. Then walking in his Chamber after a strange manner, and with gestures, both of head and hands expressing much passion, he expected the Captains arrivall, under whose command having reduced all such Courtiers, as he could gather on a sudden, he departed suddenly with nine hundred Horse, and about two in the mor∣ning arriving at the Isle Dubois, he invested the Merchants house on all sides without the least noyse. The Emperour, who much desired to surprize the Lovers in bed, where they lay imbracing each other, no∣thing dreaming of this treason, caused the dores to be opened very softly; and advancing forwards, he espyed a woman with her hair discheveled, bearing two burning Torches in her hands, who on an instant having en∣compassed the house, incountred him just at the Gate, upon the which having made certain figures, the ayre was suddenly all on a fire, infinite, and most terrible claps of Thunder were heard, and a showre of Hayl fell with such violence, that above five hundred Knights were killed therwith, so that the Emperour, and the rest were inforced to seek shelter in the neighbouring house, to avoyd the fury of the storm, which having con∣tinued above two houres, ceased at the rising of the Sun, that presented to their view, not the Merchants house, whose body was found covered with Serpents, that devoured him, but a great Tower of Crystall, divi∣ded into three stories; at the foot wherof lay two Lyons, so fierce, and terrible, that none durst come neere it. This noveltie having bred a great
desire in the Emperour to behold it neerer, he  it, seeing the Lyons stirred not out of their place, and the first thing he espyed, was a Table hanging, wherin these words were written; Prophecie. THe Paradice of Love, shall last untill the inchanted Lyons dye, by the claws of the strongest Lyon in the world; then shall the glorious prisons lse their pleasures, the Doves shall be invisible, and the anger'd Cock shall burst to vo∣mit his poyson, living after the recoverie of his treasure, for the glory of an un∣known Altar. These words, too mysticall to be understood, having detained him for a while, he perceived in the bottom of the Tower, as in a Tombe, Arm∣lina, Orestia, and Melia, who seemed to slumber; in the first stage Palmiren∣na, with Amadis, in the second Amplamira with Floridan; and above that, Archesidella with Lucibel, all six in bed, kissing each other so amorously, and using such other expressions of love, as if they had no witnesses of their actions, which so enraged him, as tearing his hair, and beard, he cry∣ed out: O ye Gods! Am I not the unhappiest Prince of the earth? I have seen my power abated by three Knights alone, this day a greater affront is presented to my view, and I am become a spectator of that which I can∣not behold without shame; who could not be mad, and burst with rage at this? Come souldiers, break me this Tower in peeces, and let us be aven∣ged of these robbers, and impudent queans, in spight of all Inchant∣ments. Hereupon thirtie, or fortie of the stoutest, and most resolute of the company stept forth, and with hammers thought instantly to have bro∣ken the crystal in pieces, but the Lyons forthwith rushing upon them, made so quick a dispatch, that the rest hoping for no better usage, quitted the place to the proud Arastron, who having before disdained to pursue those Princes with so much inequalitie and advantage, ambitious of glo∣ry, advanced immediatly towards the Lyons, with whom he fought so valiantly, that having with a most furious blow strucken down the grea∣test, he was about to have dealt so with the other, when as on a sudden three Centaurs of a marvellous bigness issued forth, and discharging their massie clubs on him all at once, layd him all along on the ground, to the unspeakable grief of the Emperour, who fell into such a passion of furie, and uttered things so extravagant, that had not the Kings of Arbales and Grisolia endevoured to comfort him, he had undoubtedly become fran∣tick, but these Princes gravely remonstrating unto him, that it was a signe of their gods displeasure, which punished him for the violence he would have offered to his Daughters wills, who had just cause to despise such de∣formed persons, he commanded Arastron to be taken up, that immediatly came again to himself, and retyred to Cardana, so exceedingly grieved, that death would have been far more acceptable to him then life. In the mean time the Emperour hoping, by the valour of some excel∣lent Knight, the said Inchantment might receive a period, he proclaymed throughout all his Territories, and the Kingdomes adjacent, that whosoe∣ver could give an end to this adventure, he should have the Crown of
Martaria for his reward, judging his daughters disobedience a sufficient cause to disinherit them. This moved sundry Knights from divers for∣aign parts to repair thither, allured with the promise of an Empire, but none could ever approach the Tower with that intent, that was not straight-ways torn in peices by the Lyons, insomuch that the cruelty of those untameable beasts being no lesse notorious, then the Emperours promise, no Knight could be found that durst undertake so dangerous an attempt. CHAP. XXIV. Griolanis arrivall in Corolandaya, his combat with the Guards of the Prt, hee is entertained by the Queen, and accepted for her Knight. GRiolanis carried with a longing desire to see the real beauties of the excellent Princesse of Corolan∣daya, whose Picture he evermore kept about him, grew impatient of so long delay, but having past five weeks with a prosperous gale, and with∣out the least interruption of his intended voyage, he at last arrived at one of the Ports belonging to his fair Mistris, to the unspeakable joy and con∣tentment of his Conductresse, Arlandria, who using her wonted freedom, said unto him. Sir, I make no question, but the power of your arms will easily prevayl over our ablest Knights, yet if you will follow my advice, use no other then that of your beauty, to captivate our Queen, who for your sake will break her wonted custome, and will never permit you to hazard your life for to win a place in her fa∣vour; will you give me leave to advertise her of your arrivall? Yes, Lady, replyed he, you shall doe me a singular curtesie to assure her, that ever since I first had the honour to behold her Picture, I have burned in continuall flames, and that I have no greater ambition, then to let her know how infinitly I affect her; but withall I must desire you not to goe about to hinder me from incountring her Knights, the forbearance wherof would convince me of weaknesse and cowardice; for should I present my self before her in any other manner, then victoriously I should give but her too just occasion to deny me that, which must be the sole reward of my vertue; wherefore set forward presently, if you think good, for to mor∣row I will enter into combat with the chief Knights of the Port; I never expected other answer from you, said Arlandria, neither did I think you would judge my advice honourable, and therfore not to molest you any farther, by urging my former proposition, I shall in obedience to your commands let her know both your merit and affection. Having spoken thus she presently got to Horse, and used such dili∣gence, as the next day he came to Agricat, the Capitall Town of Coro∣landaya,
where going straight unto the Palace she fell on her knees before her Mistris, who making very much of her, demanded what wonders she had seen in her voyage. Madam, said she, they are such, that should I undertake to give you a particular relation thereof, you would hardly be induced to beleeve them: I bring you the names of two hundred brave Knights manfully overcome by Silvion, and of threescore and twelve Princesses besides, over whose beauty yours hath most justly tryumphed; but which surpasseth all, I have brought with me the fairest, stoutest, the most courteous, and most lovely Knight in the world. The Prince of Argilles, though he were rank't with the best, by reason of that extraor∣dinary prowesse, which renowned him every where, yet compared with the valour of the Champion, whereof I speak, was but as a common man, whose actions being no lesse full of sweetnesse, then of courage, makes him so amiable, that he steals the hearts of all that behold him. The praises thou givest this Knight are so great, said Adelazia, that I suspect thee to be in love with him. Alack, Madam, said Arlandria, such flowers are too precious for my wearing; neither doe his affections stoop so low, for as he is the most accomplished Knight that is, or ever was, so hath he made choise of the most absolute and peerless Mistris in the world. Dost thou know her, said Adelazia, that felt some unaccustomed motions? Yes, Madam, answered she, you are the Sun which he adores; and your beauty is it alone that ever yet could captivate his soul. How can that be, said Adelazia, since he never saw me? Your Picture replyed Arlandria, hath wrought that miracle, nor could his passion be more, had you em∣ployed all the charms of your unresistable looks on him: On shipboard his eyes were perpetually fixt thereon, he kneeled, he spake to it, and as if it had been sensible of his sufferings, he craved some asswageme of his torments: To be short, it is impossible for any man to give greater te∣stimonies of an affection, then what I have seen in him during this voyage. This fair Princesse willingly hearkning to these discourses, and pleasing her self with the thoughts of her new love, longed very much to see the effects answerable to the high commendations which this Damosel had given him; but lest her carriage should discover her mind, she kept on her former gravity; howbeit, desiring to continue this talk, she said unto her. Verely, these speeches of thine have bred a kind of desire in me to see him; for it is scarce credible, that so many perfections should concur in one man: But tell me, is he come hither? Nothing lesse, Madam, answered she, he is yet in the Port of Carican, and it may be now combatting with your Guards, for he is resolved not to present himself before you, but as a worthy Knight should do, that renders himself esteemed by his vertue. I was never a friend to cruelty, said Adelazia, and the shedding of humane blood was always abhorred by me, neverthelesse I would willingly see him fight, therby to judge impartially, whether his valour be correspon∣dent to thy prayses. Madam, answered this Mayd, you have the best oportunity that may be, I doubt not but he will make a quick riddance of all such, as this day shall dare to incounter him, since the Prince of Argilles, who came far short of him, hath been able to doe it, wherfore if you please, you may see him amongst the Knights that guard your Ports, but for your better satisfaction, if you go forth to morrow into the fields, and under pre∣tence
of walking will take the way he intends to come, you shall soon be∣hold him make through your Troops, since he may not arrive at your presence without forcing his passage, then shall you know that all I have said comes farre short of his valour and merit. Nay, said Adelazia, I may doe far better, for it being too-great a cruelty to expose one only Knight to the fury of so many, Ile exempt him from that danger, and shall rest sa∣tisfied if I may see him break five or six staves, against a dozen of the ablest of my Kingdom; and to this end I shall appoint them a rendi-vous under the great tree of the Fantosmes, which is not much out of his way. By this way I shall both content my self, and secure his life and honour: Tru∣ly, said Arlandria, (who perceived this tendernesse to proceed from love) you shew yourself no lesse wise then beautifull, for to speak troth I have often wondred how you could be so cruell, as to admit no Knight to your presence upon easier terms, then the price of his blood; keep you still in this mind, and in the mean time advise with your self what entertainment you will give him. Hereupon in most humble manner withdrawing her self she left the Queen much troubled with the blow she had given her, who calling to mind the speeches of her Damosel, which represented unto her thoughts, as well the valour, as the beauty of the Knight, remembring withall how he had behaved himself to and before her Picture, spake thus to her self. If this Knight be such as he is described unto me, I shall never be able to be Mistris of my self, since the bare fame of him hath begotten so earnest a desire in me to see him: But what a weakness doe I shew to be thus over∣come by the first motions of a passion that assayles me? And what will the world say of me when it shall be knownthat I have so suddenly chan∣ged both my mind and purpose? I shall be counted very fickle, and one that is not able to govern her affections. And yet not so, but in regard that vertue is always to be beloved, they will rather judge that I have rea∣son to affect him, and that it is not possible for a woman to resist such powerfull charms: I will therefore shew him favour, and since I am ac∣countable to none, but the gods for my actions, Ile put the Scepter of Corolandaya into his hand, if I find him worthy of that grace. This Princesse yeelding up her self in this sort unto Loves Dominion, (from which no creature living is exempted) was insensibly enamoured, and this little spark grew suddenly into a flame, when as a Souldier diver∣ting her thoughts delivered in few words the wonders Griolanis had per∣formed at his first entry into that Kingdom. Madam, said he, your Guards of Garicanae forced by the valour of the most puissant and ablest Cham∣pion in the world; And since that combat was full of prodigies, I may not rob you of the contentment you will reap by hearing the particulars therof related: This morning he presented himself with an headlesse Launce, and forced seven Knights to quit their saddles, ere it brake in shi∣vers, thence rushing through the rest with the flat of his sword only, he sent fifteen or sixteen of them to the ground, and this with that force as needed not the helpe of a second blow; Truly, Madam to relate unto you with what addresse and dexterity he seartered the rest in less then a moment is impossible, for in despight of their weapons, which left not so much as the least impression upon his armour, he made his way like Lightning, and forced his passage through all oppositions, with no lesse
violence then a Thunderbolt when it lights upon a Steeple: And to be short, he hath won the day without shedding one drop of blood, whereat your Knights being amazed, who judged this proceeding of his over mild and gentle, towards those that had withstood him, they demanded the reason thereof, wherin he expressed no lesse courtesie, and sweetness of disposition; then he had courage and valour. Sirs, said he, since we all have one Mistris, it were unfit for me to harm those whom she protects, my chiefest ambition being to win her favour, and maintain her Sove∣raignty: And if I have taken up Armes against you, necessity hath infor∣ced me thereunto, since there is no other way to serve her, or to be admit∣ted into her presence. These speeches, wherein this fair Queen took marvellous delight, be∣ing as bellows to kindle the flame that began to scorch her, she felt within her self such violent desires, as made her wonder at this sudden and unex∣pected change, but dissembling her thoughts, she began to extoll the prowess and courtesie of our Warrior, whose fame and renown had so fil∣led the Court, that most of the Knights resolved to combat him. Adela∣zia then having spent the night in confused and restlesse thoughts, in the morning a number of Knights were espyed upon the way of Garican, whereof the Queen having had notice, she arose immediatly, but could not be ready time enough to see the beginning of the fight, neverthelesse word being brought her, that the stranger was in the midst of her Knights, she hastned away, and arrived there just as Griolanis having dismounted three of them, so terrified the rest with the violence of his Incounter, as he put them all in disorder. These redoubted, and yet courteous blows, since he struck only with the flat, bred in her a wonderfull content, and no lesse astonishment, when she observed his manner of fighting, his Sword guided by judgement, lighted with violence, his motions were furious, and that which not a little de∣lighted her, was to see him keep firm in his saddle, in despight of so many Incounters, neither could she sufficiently admire to behold two and fifty Knights already layd on the earth, and thefore desiring no greater testi∣mony o his valour she advanced towards him, who quickly discerning what impression he had made in her soul, alighted suddenly from his horse, pulled off his Helmet, and falling on his knees took his Sword by the point, and presenting her with the handle: Madam, said he, it is in your power to triumph over me, as I have done over your Knights, nei∣ther shall I reap lesse glory by this victory of yours; then I have done by their defeat: This Sword, which if you please shall never be imployed but in the honour of your service, shall serve as a witnesse that I willingly submit to your power. Madam, let the tender I make thereof be accep∣table unto you, and let me hope that you will one day take pleasure in see∣ing it imployed to maintain your excellencie throughout the world. The Princess being ravisht with the sight of so beautifull a face, whose charmes were no less powerfull to captivate a Ladyes heart, then the ma∣jestie therof to work upon a Souldiers courage, did observe and behold  with strange motions, trembling with the very violence of her pasion, but forcing her self with the consideration of so many persons as attended her, she replyed. Brave Knight, I cannot refuse the glory you give me, not despise this
dreadfull Sword, since you present it me, as the merit o my beauty, ne∣vertheless I return it you, with this assurance, that I shall ever highly esteem the service therof; but left I should prove ingratefull for the paines you have taken in accompanying my picture, let me tell you, that you are most welcome to my Countrey, where I shall endevour to give you an entertainment worthy your merit. Hereupon she took him up into her Coach, and went towards the Citie, no less satisfied with his personage; then her Knights astonished at the valour he had shewed in the Combat. The fame of this warlike atchievement having spread over the whole Town, the Ladyes and Gentlemen stocked together in the streets, who be∣holding the admirable perfections of this Knight, gave him such excessive praises, as he himself was much ashamed of; on the contrary, Adelazia was exceedingly pleased therwith, esteeming her self incomparably hap∣py in his company, so that she resolved to admit him for her Knight: howbeit to keep her self within the bounds of modestie she gave him to understand, that his sole vertue was the cause of her respect to him, by no means discovering the love she bare him: Having therfore entertained him with ordinary discourse, she brought him to her Palace, where having lodged him most stately, she sent him very rich and sumptuous apparell, wherin he afterwards appeared so lovely, that all the Ladyes were ena∣moured of him, and the common sort amazed to behold so many accom∣plishments in one Knight. A few dayes being spent in passions, restless thoughts, discourses, and assurances, Adelazia not able to conceale her affection any longer, led him to a fair garden, where she could not be over-heard by any body, and thus spake unto him. Knight, I know it is impossible for me to requite the pains you have taken in my behalf according to your merit, but desire any thing within my Kingdome, and it shal be granted you as readily, as you can demand it. Madam, said he, I was never covetous of gain, ho∣nour hath been the only object of my enterprizes, and if you please to accept of my service, I shall value that favour of yours far above all the Kingdomes of the world, but if you will deign to be so liberall, as to be∣stow where you are no way obliged; then, Madam, look not upon my want of desert, make me your Knight, and permit me under the favour of your beautie, to try all adventures whatsoever; you may justly con∣demn me of rashness, but Madam, remember that our enterprizes are glo∣rious when they are high, and that it is far more honourable to fall with courage, then fail through cowardize. Knight, replyed she, did I not prize your vertue above all worldly greatness, I could not but take of∣fence at the freedome of your discourse, in regard of the respect which is alwayes due to such as resemble me, howbeit loving your perfections, and flattering my self with the conceit, that my beauty hath prevailed over you, I shall willingly pardon the passion that troubles you; and be∣leeve that it proceeded only from a desire to work your content: You are desirous to be my Knight, I admit it, but consider what obligation this draws upon you, you are no more at your own disposing, your love must be faithfull and sincere, and your will wholly subject unto mine. Alas! said he, these conditions  happy, Madam, you shall never find me without love, fidelitie, respect, and obedience; henceforth I re∣nounce all the power, which hitherto I have had over my self, and whol∣ly
surrender it into your hands, dispose of me as you please, your com∣mands shall be a law unto me, which for no occasion will I ever disobey. Begin then, replyed she, to give me some testimonie of this your prote∣station, and tell me freely, and truly, who you are, and whether you were ever in love before, for it were unfit for me to have an unknown servant. Madam, said he, (trembling with joy, that he had obtained his desire) it is very meete I should satisfie your demand. I am a Knight errant of the Kingdome of Macedon, neere unto Greece, who have no other fortune then that of my hopes, and sword, and most unworthy to behold you as a lover, unless you will vouchsafe to stoop so far, as to weigh the great∣ness of my services and affections, with that of your beauty; My name is Griolanis, my Parents noble, and eminent, but Scepters, Madam, are wanting to their merit, which to my grief I fear, considering the diffe∣rence of our conditions, will be too just a motive for you, to reject the humble tender of my service: As for any other Mistress, beleeve me, Madam, and I swear it by the soveraign power of these your eyes, whose beauteous splendor I adore, that my soule was never sensible of the al∣lurements of any beautie that ever yet I saw. Your word sufficeth with∣out swearing, replyed she, and I am exceeding glad to be the first object of your vowes, and so consequently to bee free from competitors; For what concerns our conditions, that shall put no difference betwixt us, since fortune doth not alwayes confer Crowns upon such as have best deserved them, and seeing you are a Gentleman, both valiant and ver∣tuous, I shall esteem better of you, then if you possessed whole Empyres without courage, or glory; This Kingdome is spacious enough to limit our ambitions, only carry your self with respect untill time shall produce a happier change; And so parting equally satisfied, they went to supper; after which, having recreated themselves with dauncing, each withdrew himself untill the morrow. CHAP. XXV. The brave Jousts that were held at the Court of Corolandaya, and the issue of a most wonderfull adventure that happened there. GRiolanis spending his time in most incomparable delights, highly favoured by his Mistress, bonou∣red and respected, as if he had swayed the Scep∣ter of Corolandaya, wanting nothing he could desire, but the fruition of that happiness which love doth yeeld: his impatience was great enough to make him to require it, but the doubt of dis∣pleasing his Mistress, would not suffer him to move it, in so much as the torment of his fear was no whit inferiour to the pleasure of his hope. Twelve dayes were insensibly spent in confused thoughts, in raptures, in sighs and moans, till the Knight, unable to withstand the flame that consumed him any longer, was about to seek some rest in the confidence
of his words, and by his tears to work his Mistress to a compassionate re∣gard of his sufferings, when behold, there comes into the Hall a fair and comly Damosell, who falling on her knees before Adalazia, said unto her; Beauteous Princesse, the fame which is spread abroad of the incompara∣ble valour of the strange Knight, that resides in your Court, hath bred an extream desire in four of the most warlike Princes now living, to main∣tain here two dayes together, that the Mistresses they shall bring, are the fairest in the world; The first is the valiant Armoran, Caliph of Paran, who leades with him the faire Alarina, Infanta of Zizima; The second is the mightie Grinaldo King of Pergaza, with Marselia, inheritrix of Co∣rangia; The third Falemond the brave Duke of Cardambes, with the gra∣cious Philotea, Princesse of Oriana; The fourth Crisander, the warlike Duke of Marsingues, servant to the most lovely Elymena, Daughter to the King of Filamonna; They will begin with Jousting, neither shall it be lawfull for any to use his sword, whilst they are able to keep their saddles, now what answer will you please to make us? That which their merits may expect, replyed the beautifull Queen, they shall find hearty welcome, and if any indevour of mine may requite the honour they intend to doe me, it shall not be wanting unto them. Hereupon the Damsell taking her leave in most humble manner, depar∣ted, leaving the Courtiers somewhat troubled, for knowing what reputa∣tion those Knights had acquired abroad in severall adventures, especially Almorand, and Grinaldo, esteemed the best Warriours of all the neighbou∣ring Provinces, they very much doubted, that they should not be able any longer to maintain the glory of Corolandaya, unless it were by the valour of Griolanis, who comming close to his Mistress, spake thus softly unto her. I have reason to thank Love for affording me occasion to serve you, and to purchase your beauty the just estimation it deserves; These Princes come hither fraught withglory through the numberlesse enter∣prizes they have most couragiously atchieved, and the Ladyes that ac∣company them, hold the victory of their beauties most sure in the force of their mighty arms; but, Madam, having justice on your side, I dare promise without ostentation, to bring them in triumph unto you, and to make them acknowledge you to be incomparable, so that to the right of my cause, you would be pleased to adde but the obliging me by some favour. It would be unreasonable, replyed she smiling, to refuse ought that lyes in my power, since beautie is in question, which by our sex is had in highest estimation tell me therfore freely what you desire of me. Two things, said he trembling, would infinitly satisfie me; The first, some Scarre of yours, that I might wear in the Combat; The other, that in commiseration of my sufferings, you will permit me to come to your Chamber, when your women are asleep, that so I may with more libertie represent unto you, the violence of the flame that consumes me. Ah my Knight! answered she, you doe not consider how neerely this request of yours concernes mine honour, the grant wherof when it comes to be di∣vulged, would make me odious to my people. Alack, said he, such a fear befits not your Majestie, you may do much more then that without caring what eyes, or speeches passe upon your actions, but if it be your pleasure to see me languish in my pain, I shall submit to your will without oppo∣sing
it, or repyning at my torment, yet withall youchafe to consid that when I am brought to extremitie, I shall be unfit for remedy. Well, said she, Ile rather overcome my self, then give you the least cause to com∣plain of me, to morrow you shall have your desire, but upon condition you will not be too importunate, and that all your actions shall be go∣verned with respect. Madam, replyed he, half transported with joy, my passion shall never make me abuse the freedome, which you are pleased to grant me, nor shall you ever repent this grace you have conferred on me. But a sudden noyse in the Court-yard having put a period to their dis∣course, they presently looked out, and saw four Knights in very good equipage, with each a Lady in his right hand of excellent beautie, and richly appareled, who lighting off their horses, turned their faces to∣wards the Windows to salute the fair Adelazia, that returning them the like again, sent to intreat them by the Marquis of Beltamir to take a lod∣ging in the Palace, which they modestly refused, intending not to visit her till after the Jousts: Two rich Pavilions being set up, the Knights en∣tred into the one, and the Princesses into the other: The rateliers were stored with Launces, the shields of these foure Princes were placed neere to the Barriers, that whatsoever Knight came in, might by touching ther∣of make choyce of a party to joust withall; close by hung the Pictures of those beauteous Ladyes, which were to be the prize, and reward of the Victor; This done, foure gallant Horses were brought to the Pavilion of the said Princes, who sitting ready armed, expected the arrivall of some Adversarie. This glorious Equipage having bred an extream desire in most of the Nobility of Corolandaya, to incounter these strangers, twelve Knights came forth on the sudden, at the sight whereof the Challengers getting to horse, the Trumpets began to sound, and the Knights to spur on so lustily, that incountring each other in the midst of the course the Defendants were dismounted, without so much as stirring the Challengers, which at first did much increase the good opinion of their valour, but much more when they saw the other eight reduced to the same estate, ere they brake their first staves. These twelve retyring with more grief then hurt, were seconded by the Marquis of Beltamir, and the Count of Pandolia, two of the most renowned and noblest Lords of that Iland, and Suitors to the Infantaes of Falangia, neer of kin to the Queen; whereupon the people began to hop for better successe, but the Marquis attaching the valiant Armorand, and the Count the brave Grinaldo, they were shamefully overthrown at the se∣cond Incounter, and after them fourteen of the hardiest Knights of the Kingdom, insomuch that the Challengers being left alone, Adelazia with∣drew her self, exceedingly praysing the valour and addresse of the said Warriors, who had deservedly acquired unto themselves so great a repu∣tation in the world. The evening being spent then in discourse, every one betook them to their rest, but Griolanis longing to see the day in which he might combat, and enjoy again the sight of his Mistris, could sleep but little, so that rising with the Sun he resolved to be the first within the Lists, therby to prevent the strangers from dismounting any before his arrivall, but considering
with himself how necessary it was for him to have his  a  of the Combat, he went to her Chamber all armed, his Helmet and  excepted. Here I am, said he as he came in, ready to avenge the insolence of these Knights that so much wrong your beauty, Madam, will you give me leave to incounter them? Yes, my Knight replyed she, but the day being long enough for that busines, let others begin. Then calling for a most rich scarf she tyed it crosse his Corsle, which so much transported our Lover with joy, that he thought himself in a Paradise of pleasure. Returning then all due thanks and acknowledgement for this her fa∣vour they espyed nine Knights arriving, who were all dismounted at the first Incounter, and after them the Marquis of Farlantes, and the noble Admirall of Corolandaya, both brave Warriors, and the most renowned of that Kingdom, which made the Spectators adjudge the victory to these strange Princes, when as Griolanis having leave to descend, appeared within the Lists with a most martiall countenance, and very richly armed, to the unspeakable joy and admiration of his fair Mistris, the Spectators forth∣with changing of opinion began to clap their hands, in token that all their hope rested in that Knight, but which delighted them most of all was the sight of Adelazia's Picture, that he brought in, and placed above the strange Princesses, with no small ceremony and respect. This extraordinary act of his made the four Challengers think, that it was the valiant Knight, which had filled the whole Countrey with a∣mazement, so that they exceedingly admired his brave and gallant de∣meanour, but hoping to make his glory an accessory to their former tri∣umph, they called for fresh horses, and the strongest Launces they could meet withall, in which manner they expected to see what he would doe. The Duke of Cardambes being to come first in play, because Griolanis had touched his Shield, he presented himself with a most undaunted coun∣tenance, and at the third sound of the Trumpets he put on with that vio∣lence, as at the first Incounter his Launce flew into a thousand shivers, to∣gether with his adversaries, who met him so strongly, that he made him lose both his stirrops, himselfe passing on so unmoved, that all the world applauded him. This put Falemond into such passion, as calling for a stron∣ger Launce, he began to run afresh against our Knight, but with far worse successe then before; for being dismounted with the violence of his ad∣versaries blow he fell to the ground hereft of his senses, to the excee∣ding joy of all the multitude, especially of Adelazia, who thought her self the happiest Princesse on the earth, in enjoying so handsom and so valiant a Knight. This done, Griolanis went straight to Elimen's Picture, and removing the same, placed it beneath his Mistrisses, to the great content of all the people; but Crisander succeeding Falamond, with a resolution to revenge his ill fortune, ran against Griolanis with that fury, as he made him lose one of his stirrops, himself being so terribly shaken with the Incounter, that he was forced to take hold of his horses mane to uphold himself; Taking therefore a second Launce, and breaking it to the very handle, he was so furiously incountred, that both horse and man fell back to the ground in danger to have been bruised in peeces. He that had then behld the Spectators, might have observed most different passions, the beautiful Queen of Corolandaya expressing a most
unspeakable delight in her actions, and the fair Infanta of Filamonna, to∣gether with Philotea, exceedingly grieving, the people full of acclamati∣ons and shouts of joy, and the two remayning Knights bemoaning the ill fortune of their associats, who neverthelesse hoping to revenge them, the stout Grinaldo advanced forwards, and setting spurs to his horse in a most violent manner (after that Griolanis had set Philotea's Picture below his Mistresses) was as bravely incountred, and though their Launces flew up into the ayr, yet sate they fast and unmoved: This furious Incoun∣ter giving marvellous contentment to all that were present, the two Knights called for new Launces, and meeting with greater strength each brake his staffe upon his enemy, Griolanis bowed a little with the force of the blow, but the other was so stund, that he had much adoe to save him∣self from falling, wherewith he was so vexed, that calling for a stronger Launce he charged him the third time; but so unfortunately, that his horse falling upon him bruised his leg very sorely; at which fight the beautious Princesse of Corangia was much displeased, and yet far more, when as she saw her Picture taken down and placed with the rest, which served for the glory of Adelazia's tryumph; neverthelesse reposing much confidence in the valour of the great Caliph of Paran, she supprest her grief, and caused her Lover to be taken up, who shewing more courage then hurt gat quickly on his feet, avaunting (the better to excuse his fall) that Griolanis was the prime Knight of the world. In the mean time Armorand and having taken a resolution, either to vindi∣cate, or follow his friends misfortune, set spurs to his horse, and made three of the bravest, and most furious courses, that ever was seen in Coro∣landaya, wherby he acquired unto himself the repute of one of the ablest Warriours on the earth, but Griolanis combatting for the honour of his Mistris, incountred him the fourth time so dangerously, that he cast him clean over the crupper of his horse, laying him along for dead. The victory being thus gloriously atchieved, he gave Alarina's Picture with the rest to his Squire, and taking that of his Mistris down himselfe, with no lesse respect and ceremony then before, he carried it to the Palace, laying the others at his Ladies feet to her unspeakable joy. This done he descended to welcome the strange Princes, to whom he seemed so accom∣plished and courteous, that notwithstanding their received disgrace they could not chuse but love him, telling him withall that the world did him much wrong in denying him Altars; whereupon, having imbraced one another with many testimonies of affection, Griolanis was going to the Princesses Pavilion, which exceedingly desired to see him, when as there appeared four mishapen Dwarfs, who carying each of them a great Pil∣lar of Iasper, advanced to the midst of the place, where making a stand all together, the Pillars stood up of their own accord, and instantly made an Arch, on the top wherof a little Cupid was seen holding a Garland of Roses in his hand, at the bottom was a winding stair by which one might ascend unto him, and upon the tops of of the said Pillars were those four deformed creatures, which with Instruments in their hands began to play so melodiously, as ravished all hearts and ears that heard them. These prodigious spectacles striking all the assistants with amazement, Griolanis and the strange Princes espyed a small Table hanging at the Cupids feet, where they read these words:
J will not part with this Crown, but for the glory of a faithfull Love. By all my gods, said Ad, Ile be the first that shall prove this ad∣venture, for since I was never conscious to my self of any want of love to my dearest Alarina I am perswaded this occasion is offered of purpose to mitigate my griefe, for having bin overcome in the quarrell of her beauty: Thereupon he called for his Helmet, and unsheathing his sword, he drew neer to the stairs, upon which having made but one step, he felt himselfe charged with so many blows, as he was forced to set both his knees to the ground, but rising thence in a rage he behaved himself so manfully, that he gat up to the fifth step, where the violence of the blows being redoub∣led, he was stricken down to the earth, deprived of all sense, to the un∣speakable griefe of the beautifull Alarina, who loving him most dearly was much troubled with this his disaster. The valiant Crisander, no whit discouraged therewith, advanced next, but notwithstanding his best indeavour to out-goe him, he could reach no higher then the third step, where he found no better successe then his com∣panion, and soon after Falemond and Grinaldo, who got up as high as the fourth: Whereupon Griolanis casting his eys towards his Mistris, that was then courteously entertayning the strange Princesses, & comforting them for the misfortune of their Lovers; drew forth his sword, and prest on with such violence, that without any stay he gat up to the sixth stair, but there found such resistance, as was able to discourage another; neverthelesse the contemplation of his Ladies presence, before whom he chose rather to die▪ then any way to yeeld, so revived his spirits, that  his forces, and redoubling his blows, he ascended to the ninth ▪ but there found him∣self assaulted with such strange violence, as he was ain to fall both on his hands and knees to save himself; howbeit calling to mind; how unthy he were of his Mistresses favour, if he remained in that posture, he soon reassumed new strength, and began so to lay about him, that he gat up to the last step, where his invisible enemies forbare to strike him any longer, and that very seasonably, in regard he was quite out of breath, and unable to subsist any longer. The meditation of so glorious an adventure breeding in him an extream delight, by reason of the singular proofs he had given of an extraordinary affection, he came neer the little Cupid, and laying hold on the Crown of Roses, and offering to pluck it away, his hand and arm were on a sudden so  unto it, as he could not possibly withdraw them: Whereupon the fair Princesses, conceiving immediately that the said Crown was re∣served for one of them, stepped forth. The first that ascended, was the beautifull Princesse of Corangia, on whose head Cupid and Griolanis set the Crown, which rendred a most ex∣cellentodour, but taking it off presently again she was forced, not without shame and grief, to give place to Phi, who finding no better enter∣tainment made way to Alarina, on whose head it remayned somewhat longer, but at last was constrayned to withdraw to her unexpressable  with their misfortune, refused to succeed them, whereupon the unparaleld Adelazia presenting her selfe, Cupid and
Griolanis fell on their knees before her, and instantly rising up again they left the Crown on her head, which they had no sooner done, but the mu∣sick ceased, and with a most terribleclap of Thunder all vanished away, the said precious flowers excepted, to the great amaement of all the Spe∣ctators, who were astonished at the variety of such prodigious fights; Grionalis and his Mistris remayned full of joy and coment, postposing all worldly glory to their present estate: The strange Princesses on the other side repined at the honour which that excellent Queen had acqui∣red, and wisht themselves at home; neverthelesse seeing no remedy, they thought it best to extoll and magnifie her with the rest of the company, and upon her intreaty were perswaded to goe into the Palace, where they were entertayned with a most sumptuous supper, and a Hall accompanied with all pleasure and delight. CHAP. XXVI. The dreadfull Inchantment of Griolanis, and the fair Adelazia. THE hour of rest being come, all those Prin∣ces retyred themselves unto their Cham∣bers; which were prepared for them; but of all most willingly the beautious Queen of Corolandaya, who mindfull of her pro∣mise to her Lover, that seemed by his passio∣nate looks to crave some speciall favour a her hands, sent all her women to bed, re∣tayning only Arlandria, to whom being laid down, she spake in this manner. Dear Ar∣landria, I may no longer disguise my thoughts, the confidence I have ever repo∣sed in thy trust hath bred a resolution in me, to reveal unto thee at this pre∣sent a secret of no small importance: The Knight whom thou broughtest with thee, hath captivated my soul with his beauty, my love to him is be∣yond imagination; and to be short I am resolved to make him King of Corolandaya; but since I have not yet disposed the affections and good will of my subjects thereunto, and that undoubtedly he suffers much, for want of liberty to impart himselfe unto me in publike, I conceived it most fit to shew him some favour; In confidence therefore of his love, wherof the Crown of Roses purchased me by his valour, is a proof sufficient; I have made him a promise to entertain him this night in my Chamber, on condition, that he shall have due regard to the greatnesse of my quality, and shew the same respect in his actions, which he would do in the eye of the whole world. As soon therefore as every one shall be retyred, being him to me.
In troth, Madam, said Arlandria, I marvell not that you are sensible of his pain, for so amiable is his person, and his perfections such, as it is not possible for any, not to wish him well; but Madam, will you give me leave to tell you freely what I conceive? Most willingly, replyed shee, for since I entrust thee with my secrets, I may not reject thy advice. I exceedingly wonder, said Arlandria, how you can resolve to let him lan∣guish so long, and satisfie your self with a bare discourse, since you are minded to make him your Husband; It is to lose time, Madam, which hereafter you will repent, and all this artifice, that is but the tormentor of mans felicitie, serves to no purpose; Not that I would perswade you to proffer him that, which must be the reward of his most earnest suite, but Madam, being perswaded, as it is most probable, that the heighth of his affection will not rest satisfied therewith, I would counsell you not to shew your self over-modest, and difficult. Nay, said Adelazia; I mean not to resolve on any such thing, doe what you are bidden, and leave the rest to me. I will not contest with you, Madam, replyed Arlandria, only be pleased to remember, that Lovers observe time, place, and persons, and look to make use of occasion, and fortune, when they are presented. Hereupon going forth, she left this beautifull Queen full of strong pas∣sions; Her affection perswading her to follow Arlandria's advice, and her modesty forbidding her to entertain any such thought: Amidst this irre∣solution, she wayted the comming of her brave Knight, who considering with himself, that opportunities are often lost through want of resoluti∣on and courage, and that Lovers speed best, when they are somewhat da∣ring, he kneeled down before his Mistress, and in a most trembling man∣ner taking her by the hand, he sixt his lips theron a good-while, and so not being able to utter his mind in words, he fetched three or four sighes, wherwith that fair Queen, who took no small delight to behold his re∣spect in his fear, and his love in his silence, was so affected, that growing impatient of his suffering, she thus spake unto him; Well, my Knight, is this all you have to say to me? Ah! Madam, replyed he, my heart is over-charged, and wants words to ease itself: What would you have me say? Madam, I expect some favour, shew it me as to your Husband, since you have thought me worthy of that honour. These words being uttered in such a sort, as did plainly discover a most extraordinary passion wrought such effects in that excellent Princess, that unable any longer to contain her desires, or to withstand the charm∣ing tears of her Lover, thus said unto him; Verely, your perfections have no lesse power over me, then your Sword hath had over all those whom it doth incounter; Get you up, and swear unto me before this Damosell, that you will never marry any other but me. Madam, said he, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and putting his hand within hers, I swear unto you in the presence of God, whom I adore, and of your faithfull Arlandria, that I will marry you solemnly whensoever you shall please, and will never long after other beautie, and if ever I break this oath, let heaven execute its fiercest vengeance on this head of mine. This oath having satisfied his Lady, hee straight-way threw off his doublet on the Table, and transported with joy, hee got immediatly to bed to her, where they fell to mutuall imbracements, to the incomparable delight, and satisfaction of each other: Adelazia's lips were fastned to her
Lovers, and his no less amoosy fixed on hers, she by the light of two Ta∣pers that burnt fast by, myed her self in his eyes, and he quite lo him∣self in the contemplation of their secret beauties which he beheld; To be short, a thousand blandishments entertained them with fresh delights, untill the heat of those fires being cooled, they sought out new desires in their passions, which redoubled their pleasure in such manner, as the night feeming but a moment, the day forced them to part with much regret, and far less satisfied then before, nevertheless assuring themselves they should not want meetings, since their love was reciprocall, Griolanis stole away leaving his Mistress to her rest, where she continued till noone, at which time she got up fully contented, that she had met with so lusty and gallant an Husband. Thus loving each other intirely, their minds were at quiet, their affections without disturbance, their visits frequent, their discourse wholly taken up with the mutuall assurances of their affections, and their whole life so incomparably pleasant, as they might justly have boasted their happiness before any Lovers whatsoever. But envious fortune, which takes delight in crossing of our pleasures, and bringing us in subjection, could no longer brook so happy, and so blisfull an estate; for Maxiana, the great Inchantress, Aunt of Silvion, Prince of Argilles, whom Griolanis flew in the quarrell of Adelazia's pi∣cture, as is specified in the ninth Chapter of our second part, desirous to know what state her Nephew was in, took her books, and conjuring up her spirits, had notice of death, and of all that passed in Corolandaya; wherupon growing furious, she prepared whatsoever charms her art could afford, and so transported her self into Corolandaya, where she arrived three dayes after the secret Mariage of these Lovers, and just at such time as they were all in dauncing, and every one standing by his Mistress. This Sorceresse entring into the Hall with a burning Torch in her hand, followed by three Maids all dischevelled, and carrying certain monstrous, and hideous Serpents, came to the beautious Wife of Griola∣nis, who stood quivering, and thus spake unto her; It is time thou shouldst smart for the death of the Prince of Argilles, since thy crueltie occasio∣ned it, and that he which slew him, should share with thee in the torment, His beautie made thee infringe a Law, which proved fatall to thet unhap∣py Prince; Undergoe therfore joyntly, a due and direfull vengeance for it. Saying so, she threw her Torch on the floore, which presently filled the Hall with as dreadfull a flame, as all the spectators astonished there∣with, betook them to their heels, Griolanis only excepted, who with his fair Mistresse, standing fast, and unmoved, by vertue of the Charmes, were forth with environed with a terrible fire, and six horrible Serpents, that seized on them, began to gnaw, and teare their faces and breasts, with a crueltie no whit inferiour to that of the flames, which made them break forth into such dolefull lamentations, and cryes, as was easily heard all over the Palace. Ay me! said Adelazia, that such varietie of delights, should be follow∣ed by so great a torment, and that the glory I found in the fruition of such valour, and beauty, as was in Griolanis▪ should now bee turned into griefe, by the cruell usage of such Furies; Envious fates, what had I done, or this courteous Knight committed, worthy of such hard measure? Ah I Griolanis, the loveliest of man-kind, the paines I suffer, you see is great,
but far greater are yours to me, then my own; your miserie it is which I bewayl, and not mine, but since I cannot succour you, be perswaded to patience. Dearest Lady, replyed Griolanis, it is your martyrdome, and not my torments, that draw from me these complaints; for how is it possible I should behold these wonders of nature perish before mine eyes, and not accuse the heavens of injustice? The Prince of Argilles fell by my sword, it was most fit I alone should rue it, yet are you made to partae in my sufferings, as I did in your favours, neither doth their crueltie rest here, I am made the spectator of your miserie: Hellish fend, thou oughtest to have powred out thy spite and malice on me, and have spared that beauti∣full face, those two little worlds of love, that delicate skin, and not to scorch those fair eyes, the perfection of the whole world; for mine own particular I could willingly endure thy revenge, were it crueller, and ne∣ver complain; but woe is me, thou art insensible to my moans, and are more merciless then the Tyger; thou delightest in the horrour of a thing, which might mollifie the very stones: Thou thinkest to triumph over my valour and courage; alas! thou art deceived, I will cut these Furies in a thousand pieces, and then must thou look for no better usage at my hands. With these words he layd hold on his Sword, and whilest he thought to kill those Serpents, he ran her thorow the body, and layd her groveling as if she had been dead; But she instantly getting up, and plucking the Sword out of her bosome, thrust it into Griolanis brest, being led by the same desire, to rid him of such troublesome creatures, and preserve him from being devoured, which rendred the spectacle most dolefull, and worthy of all compassion. But this divellish Witch took unspeakable delight in it, and was so well pleased to see them two butcher each other in so cruell a manner, that having remained there above half an houre, she quitted that hell, which she named, THE MARTYRDOME OF GRIOLANIS AND ADELAZIA; and meeting Falimond, Crisander, Armorand, and Grinaldo, who moved with the Lovers dolefull cryes, were hastening to their succour, she resolved to make use of them in the execution of her designes. You shall serve, said she, to further my enterprize, whefore I command you to defend the passage to these wret∣ches, against all such as would come to their rescue, for which purpose striking them all with a wand that was in her hand, she so inchanted them, as they remained fixt with their Armour on, like to four Towers, before the gate of the Palace Court, dreaming of nothing but to combat whom∣soever should appear before them. These Princes were a guard sufficient to have prolonged this Inchant∣ment, neverthelesse, this old Hag desirous, if possible, to make it last eter∣nally, raysed up at the stayres foot, a most hideous Serpent, fifteen foot long, with a most terribl Monster, as big as an Elephant, having the head and breast of a dreadfull man, the arms hairie, and great as a tree, with a very keen axe in his hand, the back parts resembling a Beares, his pawes were armd with crooked clawes a cubit long; and to render the enttry more difficult, yet she caused Griolanis armes to be brought, which she placed at the Hall dore with such powerfull Conjurations, that shee made them have the same motions, and adresse, as if the Knight had been
in them, adding moreover all that ever she could devise to make the  invincible: the spectacle having somewhat satisfied her, a Pillar appeared before the gate with a Table, hanging thereon wherein these words wee written. Prophecie, AProach not hither, unless thou be the most valiant in the world, for these Inchantments shall never cease, untill the excellent Turtle, and the dread∣ful Lyon, issuing out of the same Prison incounter each other within the flames▪ Then the strayed bloud shall be known, beauty shall resume her former glory, and the punishment of a Law violated shall be converted into pleasures and delights. And so hyding her self in the midst of a cloud, with her three atten∣dants, she became on the sudden invisible, leaving behind her plenty of tears and lamentations, and a Town full of dolefull, and confused cryes, but especially of Alarina's, Elemina's, Philoteas, and Marselina's, whose griefes for the losse of their Lovers no comfort could asswage; Howbeit considering that tears were unprofitable, and that other means of succour were to be sought out, they returned to their Countreys with a resoluti∣on to send throughout the world in the search of the bravest Knights to anull this Inchantment, which example was followed by Adelazia's Da∣mosels, whereby it came to passe, that the fame of this inchantment being spread abroad, there came from all parts a great number of Knights to Corolandaya, for to undertake the deliverance of the said Lovers. CHAP. XXVII. The Gyant Gorgophon being sent Ambassadour to Gardacia from Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, steales away the beauteous Armazia; he is driven into the Isle of Corolandaya, and proves the Adventure of the martyrdome of Adelazia. THe renowmed beautie of Armazia, Princesse of Gardacia, having filled the whole world with admiration, so inflamed the heart of Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, that without the possession of so rare a creature, he thought he should never passe his dayes in quietnesse, willing he was to see her, and become a suitor to her Father for her, being perswaded that the consideration of his power and greatnesse, above other Pagan Prin∣ces, would soon procure him what he desired, but fearing lest his extream deformitie might breed a contempt of him in the Princesse, being of ill shape, of a Salvage countenance, flat-nosed, bobber-lipt, hollow-eyed, corpulent and crooked, he conceived it much better to treat the match by Ambassadours, then to alienate her affection by the view of his defects; Having therefore considered all his Subjects, and finding none fitter for
that employment, he sent Messengers to Gorgphon, Colonel of the Gyants, who lived in the redoubted Iland, not far from his Kingdom, desiring him to rpai unto him about a busines of great importance, which he was to impart unto him. This Gyant the greatest then living, the strongest of all Pagans, the most terrible and furious amongst men, being an intimate friend of the Soldans, went straight to Circassia, where being arrived, and nobly entertayned; after a world of Ceremonies and Caresses, Moranteon thus spake unto him. I am perswaded you cannot be ignorant of the power of that little god, which challenges a right over all men living, and since your selfe have felt the power of his Scepter, you will not find it strange to see me from military exployts, and the love of my people, to settle my affection on a woman; I shall therefore tell you freely, that the Princesse of Gardacia is she that captivates my soul, and that without the fruition of that blessed∣nesse, which he only can expect that shal enjoy her I cannot possibly sub∣sist: I have a strong confidence in your love, & it is in your power exceed∣ingly to oblige me, by undertaking a voyage to the Emperour her Father, to demand her in mariage, declaring unto him, that the Crown of Circassia is a purchase sufficient to satisfie his Daughters vastest desire and ambition; Your presence, together with the feare of disobliging us, will make him seriously to consider the demand, ere he give a denial: But in case he should prove so averse, as to returne an answer not suitable to our desires, spare not to let him know our resentment, and that his indiscretion wil cost him no lesse then the losse of his Empire. Well, said Gorgophn, I intend not to amuze my self, with giving you other testimonies of my love and friendship, then by the carefull mana∣ging of the charge committed to my trust; Armazia is yours, and though her Father should prove so proudly insolent, as to reject the honour you doe him, you shall not be put to the trouble of raysing an Army, Ile cut him into a thousand peeces, and bring away his Daughter in despight of all his subjects: Let nothing therefore disturbe you, but prepare your selfe to receive us, as if we were already comming. And so causing a ship to be made ready, he imbarqued himself with a young Gyant that attended him, and with a favourable wind in few days arrived in Gardacia, where getting a shore he went towards Parmonda, the place of the Princes ordinary residence, but understanding that the Emperour and his Daughter were gone to hunt in a Forrest there by, hee caused a countrey fellow to guid him thither, and came just as they were uncoupling the Hounds. The Emperours Knights seeing these two dreadfull Gyants appear on the sudden were extreamly dismayed, and imagining that they had a pur∣pose to assault them, they prepared themselves for defence, though they were mightily terrified with their furious countenances; neverthelesse chusing rather to dye a thousand times, then leave their Pince and his Daughter in extremity, who trembled in the midst of them, they began to advance, when as Gorgophn testifying in his cariage, that he had no in∣tent to doe them any harm, said unto them. Forbear foolish Pigmies, for I could soon make an end of you if I meant to fight, but being come hi∣ther for another end, you shall not at this time feel the thunder of my Curtelas: Which of you is the Emperour? I am he, answered Aliander,
all pale and wan with fear, would you have any thing with me  Mighty Monarch, said he, the gods resolve to augment your glory and geathesse, so as you will make use of the good they intend you: You behold g∣phon, Colonel of the Gyants, Lord of the redoubted Ilands, and ervant to the great Soldan of Circassia, who hath sent me to let you know, that he very much desires to be your Son in law, and that it lyes in you to make Armazia the happiest Lady in the world, by joyning the Crown of Cir∣cassia, to that which she hopes from you, this offer if you wil not imbrace, then prepare your selfe for war: Now let me hear what answer you will return. Valiant Warriour, replyed the Emperour, who did not look forsuch gentle words, the Prince of Circassia honours me very much, in seeking my alliance, and no lesse am I obliged unto you for the pains you have ta∣ken in comming hither, to let us understand his desire, whereunto I should presently consent, if I could without blame passe by theregard, which I owe unto a people that render me great by the obedience they yeeld me, but I am first to consult with them about it, since there is question of gi∣ving them a new Prince, in expectation whereof if you please to repose your self a little with us, we will doe you all the honour we may. This answer having marvellously contented the Gyant, who could not sufficiently admire the beauty of Armazia, which already triumphed over his liberty, they went on hunting, wherein with much delight they spent above two hours, during which time Grgophon entertayned himselfe in the corner of a Wood in this manner. What, said he, can I affect Arma∣zia, after I have once demanded her for the content of another? or rather should I leave her to the hope of any whomsoever, seeing she may serve for mine? She is too fair, I have too much love, and without treason to my passion, it is not fit for me to speak otherways, but for mine own con∣tent; yet what will the Emperour her Father say, if he should hear me speak in this sort, and what cause would the Soldan have to complain of me for depriving him of a beauty that was done to his merit? They would both wonder at this change, and questionlesse they would exclaim of me, but what is that to me? I am to love my selfe more then others, and if the Father of Armazia doe not satisfie my desire, I carry that by my side which shall procure it me: And if Moranteon will not be contented with another Princesse, whereof I will make him Master ere it be long, I shall not much care; for neither am I his subject, nor doe I fear his power, if he assayl me I will defend my selfe, and were he mightier then he is I will soon make him quiet: The Emperour then must be frighted with me∣naces, if fair means will not prevayl. Whereupon getting to horse, he went to seek out Aliander, when as he heard the Forrest resound with cryes, complaints, and a very dreadfull noyse, so that advancing forwards he met with nine or ten Knights flying away as fast as they could drive, of whom not being able to learn the cause of their fear, he went on til he came where a great and furious Serpent was devouring one of Armazia's women, and promising no better entertain∣ment to that incomparable beauty, which with fear was fallen down under a bush with her cousin the excellent Agriclea. The desire he had to oblige this fair one by some service having made him suddenly to approach he drew out his Cymetar, and giving his horse, that by no means would
come on to his compani, e discharged so mighty a blow on the body of this creature, as might wll have divided an Anvile, but the scales wherewithall he was covered, being impenetrable he did but ow a little with it, neverthelesse it forced hi to quit his pray, for to make head against the Gyant, who o wit dismayed, gave him another full on the head with such a prodigeofall, as made his brains fly out in five or six places, sending him dead to the ground. This dangerous enemy being in case to hurt no body any more, Gorgo∣phon went to Armazia, and finding her in aswound, he took her up in his arms for to recover her, howbeit considering that he should never have a more a favourable opportunity he remounted on his horse, after he had set Agriclea behind his companion, and making away with incredible speed he got to the port, where his ship rode, into the which he imbarked himselfe with his rich pray, so joyfull for having brought his designs to such an happy issue, as he would not for all the Crowns of the world have exchanged the content he was in. This while the Emperour and his Knights, grown somewhat more con∣fident, returned to the succour of Armazia, but not finding her, and behol∣ding the Serpent slain in that sort, they imagined that none but Gorgophon could give that dreadfull blow, whereupon they concluded that he was gone towards the Citie with the Princesse▪ and the beauteous Infanta of Clariana, so that with this opinion they left the Forrest, but not long after they met with two Saylors, who acquainted them with all the busines, and assured them that the two Gyants were at sea with the Princesses. At this news some ran to the ships for to pursue them, others fell to crying out, and complayning in such manner, as nothing was heard but strange lamentations. On the other side Armazia and her fair cousin were in as bad a case, for comming to their senses, and beholding themselves in the power of those hideous Monsters they presently dissolved into tears, and took on most grievously, being fully resolved to cast themselves into the sea, which doubtlesse they had performed, if Gorgophon, qualifying his proud and bar∣barous humour, had not assured them that they should receive no displea∣sure. Madam, said he, to his fair Mistris, before whom he was on his knees, moderate these sighes and tears, Gorgophon is not so cruell as you, think he is, nor will he ever have any thing from you, but what what you shall be pleased freely to grant him, time shall acquaint you with his merits, and the good office he did you, snatching you out of the jaws of that Serpent, where your death was inevitable, shall be followed with so many servi∣ces, that it may be you will judge him worthy of some favour. This speech bringing a little comfort to these afflicted Ladies, they wise∣ly resolved to make use of the power their beauties had gotten over these Gyants, and to entertain them kindly, to decline the violence, which they exceedingly feared from them, in regard whereof the excellent Armazia answered him thus. Gyant, if you carry a mind noble enough to observe these promises you have made us, we may in time dispose our selvs to wish you well, but if you offer to force us in any thing, be conident that our deaths shall prevent your cruelty, nd that we will never want courage to rid our selves out of the world: Further, if you desire any way to oblige me, doe not carry me to Circassia, for the Soldn being so deformed, as it is
reported unto me, I shall never indure to come neer him; you merit me thinks far more then he; wherefore keep this good fortune for yourself, and deserve it more by respect, then by your services. Madam, replyed the Gyant (transported with extream joy at this an∣swer, which Armazia reserving her selfe for Rozalmonds content, had made of purpose to hold him in hand, hoping by some accident or other to get out of his power) Madam, be assured that I will dye a thousand deaths ra∣ther then doe any thing shall be distastfull to you, I will gladly attend all the time you shall please to ordain for my suffering, in the mean while we will goe to the redoubted Ilands, of which I am Lord, where the power of all the Monarchs of the world shall never take you from thence, being able enough to conserve my self, and defend you; But Madam, in sign of the grace that you promise me, permit me to kisse these more then de∣licate hands. Most willingly, said Armazia, who desired to acquire an ab∣solute command over his will, and I think my cousin will shew no lesse fa∣vour to your companion, saying so they tendred them their hands, which these Gyants kissed with so much ardour and affection, as they had much adoe to contain themselves from passing further, but that they were re∣strayned by the hope they had of enjoying all quietly, wherefore being marvellously contentented they fell to discourse with these Princesses, and in this sort were carried by the wind, which rising very high drove them by the will of heaven, that would not permit the undoing of these two incomparable beauties, not into the redoubted Ilands, but into the Kingdome of Corolandaya, where the fame of Griolanis and Adelazia's inchantment possessing them with a marvellous desire to see it, they lan∣ded there, and the next day went to Agricant with some hope for those La∣dies to meet with some redress of their miseries. The fire which shewed very horrible out of the windows, and the lamen∣tation of those unfortunate Lovers, having moved Armazia to pitty, she turned her to Gorgophon and said unto him; Sir, if your valour can give these poor wretches, any relief you shall doe me a most acceptable ser∣vice to succour them. Madam, you have said enough, answered Gor∣gophon, for if they were in the hands of all the Divels of hell I would goe and fetch them out, since you have commanded me unto it; wherupon having laced on his Helmet, he made bravely to the dore, where the four Pagan Knights charged him very rudely all at once, but nothing abashed therwith he gave Falemond so dangerous a blow on the head, that he ex∣tended him on the ground (from whence by the force of Inchantment, he stirred not til after the combat) but presently feeling two mighty stroaks on his Helmet layd on by the gentle Armorand, and the strong Grinaldo, he turned towards them with such furie, that if the charms had not hindered his Curtelass from drawing bloud of them, he had cleft Grinaldo to the teeth, neverthelesse the blow which he discharged on his shield was so violent, as it layd him along by his companion, to the extreame discon∣tent of Armorand, and the gallant Crisander, who suddanly charging him made him recoyle two or three steps back, wherwith he was so incensed, that with his two first blowes he overthrew them both on the floor: That done, he advanced towards the stayres, and no whit dismayed either with the Serpents fearfull hissing, or the dreadfull howling of the Monster, which made at him with horrible rage, he went to incounter them, and
began one of the most terrible combats that ever was seen; He sustained  incredible courage the blowes which the Monsters cutting hatchet layd off his shield, his Curtelas was alwayes deseending on the Serpent, and finding himselfe so shrewdly prest by two such mighty enemies, hee fought with such unreasonable furie, as made all the houses round about to shake. This bckering having lasted almost two houres, the Monster advan∣ced his mighty arms, and discharging a thundring blow at the head of Gorgophon the combat without doubt had been terminated, if warily observing the comming of this tempest he had not lightly slipt aside, let∣ting that dangerous steele enter into the earth, which flying out of the Monsters hands, he fell down instantly thereupon altogether without vi∣giouror force, whereat Gorgophon was exceeding glad, for thinking he had then no more to deale withall save that huge Serpent, he valiantly oppo∣sed his shield to him, but he presently saw a Knight descend, covered all over with fire, who giving him a cruell blow on the head, made him set his hands to the ground, and straight way redoubling another on his cui∣race, layd him all along on the earth, from whence he was suddenly car∣ryed, not knowing by whom, beyond the outer gate of the Palace. Hereat, when he came againe to himselfe, he was so mad, that he made a vow never to depart out of the Island before he saw the end of the ad∣venture, and because (said he, full of rage and despight) that the desti∣nyes have not reserved it for me, I will combat first with all such as shall present themselves to prove it; Wherupon he caused Armazia, and her cousin to be put into a little tower which was hard by the Gate, under the guard of the Gyant that accompanyed him, and compelling those of Agricant to set him up a rich Tent, he lodged himself therin, protesting anew, not to suffer any to trye the adventure before they had combatted with him, whence it came to passe, that being endued with extream for∣ces, he vanquished in the space of a moneth above fortie Knights, which came from all parts thither; But let us give him time to fill the world with the renown of his valour, and to garnish the walls of Armazia's Tower with shields, whilst we discourse a little of Rozalmond.
CHAP. XXVIII. Rozalmond arrives in Martaria, undoes the Inchantment of the Crystall Tower, delivers Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel, with their Mi∣stresses; they are afterwards driven into Crolndaya and prove the adventure of Adelazia's Martyrdome. FOrtune doth ordinarily crosse the designes of men, Rozalmond having left Alcimants Hermitage, with a resolution to goe unto Tramazond, sayled for two daies together with a prosperous gale, but but upon the appearing of the third, the wind grew high, and so contrary, as the Marriners were constrained to turn their sayles, and comply with it; Being carryed then by the ordinance of hea∣ven, he continued a whole weeke and better, in some danger of shipwrack, but at the end therof the rage of the Sea be∣ing wel allayed, he came to coast along by the Isle Du-bois in the Empire of Martaria, where the Tower of crystall, in which Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel, with their Ladyes were inchanted, possessing him with a marvel∣lous desire to know what it was, he caused himself to be landed, and going to the place, by fortune he found the Emperour newly arrived there with a Pagan Knight, who more audacious then strong and valiant, was come thither with a purpose to combat the Lyons, howbeit his courage, that contemned the greatest dangers, when he was in a chamber, proved so abject at the sight of those furious creatures, as he would not so much as touch his sword, remonstrating unto the Emperour, that to undertake a Combat, where death was so assured, was nothing els but rashly to cast away his life. Which observed by out Warriour, that could not choose but laugh at the Pagans boutade, he approached to the Tower, wherupon beholding written in letters of Gold; The Paradise of the Princes of Greece; he fixt his eyes attentively upon them, and presently knew not Amadis, whom he had never seen, but Floridan and Lucibel, whereat being wonderfully glad he was in doubt whither he should deliver them for to render them again to the world, or leave them still in a place so full of blisse; neverthelesse, considering that a Prince oweth more to his glory, then his pleasure, he resolved to employ all his strength for to bring this inchantment to an end, whereupon he was going to draw out his Sword, but desiring first to inform himself of the cause of so sweet a captivitie, he returned to the Emperour, and setting one knee to the ground, he said unto him; Great Monarch, I could be willing to undertake the finishing of this Inchant∣ment, so as your Majestie would be pleased to declare the story of it unto me. That were to renew my sorrows, answered the Emperour, notwith∣standing I will satisfie you in few words.
The Sea, that many times brings strange Vessels into these coasts, ha∣ving one day landed two Knights not far from hence, they were incoun∣tred by some of my men at Arms, who more insolent then I would have had them, set upon them for to make them my prisoners, but being very valiant, they defended themselves with such courage, as they left thirtie or fortie of them, together with two Gyants dead in the place, and which is more, one of them retyred into a wood thereby, in despight of certain troups that came to succour their friends, the other, who fought unar∣med, remained behind so wounded, that he was fain to be carried to my Palace, where I committed him to my Chirurgions care, reserving him for a sacrifice to my gods, but I quickly fell from that resolution, and set him at libertie in acknowledgement of the service his companion did me two dayes after by killing a great and dredfull Monster, which spoyled all the Countrey, and considering the exceeding valour he had shewed in the combat against my people, I began to affect him very much. In the mean time I caused the other Knight to be sought after, that I might recom∣pence him for so great a benefit, howbeit he would never present him∣self in Arms, whether it were that he feared my displeasure, or that he had some other design, as we have conjectured since, but disguising himself in the habit of a woman, he caused himself to be brought hither as a slave, and to make short, being indued with a most rarebeautie he appeared so a∣miable, as my Daughters could not to indure to be without his company, especially Palmirenna, who was to succeed unto my Crown, had not her bad life given me just cause to dis-inherit her; To tell you all that passed between them I am notable, but so it was, that mistrusting no practice a∣mongst them, I left themto so great a libertie, as Amplamira, the middle∣most of the three that you behold, being made acquainted with the secrets of her eldest Sister and her Slave, yeelded to the affection of that strange Knight, unto whom I had given his life; and the third, which would shew no more obedience than the rest, became passionately in love with the Knight whom you see there in the upper part of the Tower with her. Nature that obligeth us to the care of our childrens well-doing, ha∣ving perswaded mee to bestow them richly in mariage, I made choyce of the heir of the mightie King of Cabilla, the valorous Soldan of Arala∣fia, and the King of Filzandria, to support my Crown with their great∣ness: but being upon the point of leading them to Church, this Slave with the first Knight comming armed at all parts, under colour of succou∣ring two infortunate Lovers, which they said were at the Court-gate in a Coach, they caused my Daughters to goe thither, who being intelligent with them, got suddenly into the Coach, and galloped away with that speed, as they were instantly out of sight, wherof being exceeding sensi∣ble, I commanded them to be pursued, when as this Slave lifting up the Visier of his Helmet, told me, that he was not a woman as I had beleeved untill then, but a Knight named Amadis, Prince of Greece and Trebisond. At these words some of my Knights advanced for to stay him, howbeit he layd him that first presented himself, dead at my feet with a blow of his fist, and discharging his Sword on the Helmet of a very valiant Gentle∣man, called Meander, who arrived but that morning, he cleft him down to the shoulders, and so departed like lightning for to follow the Coach. To what end should I relate all things in particular unto you? briefly they got
to the Sea-side after they had slain above six hundred Knights, and with the assistance of three or four Knights errant, that came thither by chance, they imbarqued themselves in despite of a thousand Knights, which en∣deavoured to arrest them. Away they sayled them, as they hoped with a prosperous wind, but the gods who never suffer so foule a crime to rest unpunished, drove them the very same day into this Iland, where having invested them with four thousand Knights I had taken them in their beds, and executed some hor∣rible vengeance on them, if I had not been prevented by the arrivall of an old Sorceresse, who unexpectedly appeared with a flaming Torch in her hand, made certain circles, and muttered divers obscure words, which were no sooner uttered but there fell so cruel a storm of huge Hayl-stones, as above five hundred of my Knights were knocked down therwith, and my selfe constrayned to fly for shelter to these houses you see, from whence after the sky was cleared again, I beheld this Tower erected in the place of the house wherein they were; Now judge, Sir, whether this be not a strange affliction unto me, and whether I have not reason to wish them in my power, for to wash away the affront they have done me with their blood. Mighty Prince, said Rozalmond, (who had been much delighted with this discourse) the Heavens doe sufficiently testifie by the care they have taken of these Knights, that they doe not approve of the revenge you de∣sire, I could give you better counsell, if your Majesty could be pleased to accept of it: These Knights, of whom you speak, are all Lords of a quality, nothing inferiour to yours, of whom the first according to report, is sonne to the mighty Amadis of Greece: the second, whom I know very well, is Heir to the Soveraign Monarch of the Persians, and the third is Nephew to the great King of France; seek not their ruin then for an offence they have done you, compelled thereunto by love, but receive them like a gentle and mercifull Father, and if you wish for their delive∣rance, let it be to rejoyce with them in their alliance, which shall so secure you, as all the Princes of Paganism shall not dare to look on you, but for your service; If therefore you can carry a mind inclined to pardon, then I am ready to undertake the restoring of them unto the world, if not I wil never be the instrument of their destruction by putting them in your power. You amaze me, said the Emperor, in telling me that these three Knights are such great Princes, in which regard I blame not my daughters so much as I have done, but my resentment will not permit me so lightly to passe by such enormous an offence. O but you must Sir, replyed Rozalmond, at least wise if you will appear as generous, as I know you are, and in the assurance thereof I will no longer defer this Enterprise. Whereupon drawing out his rich sword, he advanced towards the Ly∣ons, which rose with fury, and at the first onset discharged so mighty a blow on the leg of him that was next him, that having cut thorow all the hair, he gave him a great gash in the flank, whilst the other fastning his claws on his Shield, laboured to tear it from his arm; neverthelesse he bravely resisted him, and desiring to lose no time, he struck him so strong∣ly on the paw, that he sent it divided from his body to the ground, which made him roar most dreadfully, at the noyse whereof Armelina, Orestia, and
Melia, which seemed to be asleep at the foot of the Tower, presently start up, and transforming themselves into horrible Centaurs, flew all at one in∣stant on Rozalmond, who was therewith marvellously troubled, not know∣ing well where to bestow his sword; the Lyons prest him with their claws, the Centaurs showred blows on him with their heavie clubs, and thinking to avoyd the fury of the one, he fell into the rage of the others, howbeit nothing dismayed he layd with such violence at the body of one of those Lyons, as he cut him in two peeces, and turning withall towards a Centaur, he struck him so dangerously on the head, that though his Sword lighted flatling, he overthrew him to the earth, where instantly changing her shape, she reassumed that of Almerina, who began to slumber as before, which made him resolve not to strike the Centaurs any more with the edge of his Sword, turning all his fury then against the remayn∣ing Lyon, that had plucked his Shield from his arm, he ran him so lustily into the belly, as he layd him dead by the other. Being very glad at the defeat of these enemies, and the recovery of his Shield, he made head afresh against the Centaurs, which so layd upon him, that he felt himselfe bruised all over with their heavy stroaks, neverthe∣lesse he avoyded them as well as he could, and at the length found the means to fasten a blow with the flat of his sword full upon the body of one of them, wherewith being overthrown she reassumed her former shape, and so did the other not long after, who abandoning her horrible figure, took the form of Orestia again, at which our Warriour very much rejoy∣cing advanced to the Tower, and with the pummell of his sword, he knoc∣ked the Christall with such force, as it brake into a thousand peices, ma∣king so great and dreadfull a noyse, that the Iland being covered over with a thick Fog, shaked for two hours together, at the end whereof the Sunne receiving its former light, neither the christall Tower, the Lovers, nor the ship wherein Rozalmond came were to be seen, only a Pillar appeared in the midst of the place, upon which Rozalmond read this inscribed. Vrganda to the Emperour of Martaria. GReat Monarch, wonder not if thy daughters, destined to the Princes of Greece, follow the way of their glory, thou shalt one day goe and find them in Corolandaya, whither now I conduct them, for to have thy share in the contentment of their Nuptials, and to bow after their ex∣ample before unknown Altars. Well Sir, said Rozalmond, did not I tell you that Heaven had taken the defence of these Knights in hand, and that therefore you should not wish their destruction? It hath miraculously delivered them from your power, that they might not be subjected to your displeasure, will you still persist then in opposing the ordinances thereof, and not consider that they are your children, which fly from you that they may not leave you the regret for having followed rather the motions of a Tyrant, then a Father? Without doubt, answered the Emperour, (and caressing him as if he had been his Sonne) your reasons are such, as I am resolved to yeeld unto them, but let me intreat you to stay, and refresh your felfe here a while with me, and withall to let me know who you are▪ Sir, replyed Rozal∣mond,
I have such important affairs, as I may not well sojourn here above a day at the most, yet to obey you I will make it up two, and to testifie un∣to you how much I glory in the honour of your favour, I will tell you that, which for some particular reasons I would otherwise conceale from all the world, and will freely confesse unto you, that I am Rozalmond of Greece, sonne unto Spheramond, Emperour of Parthia, and very neer of kin to those Princes, whom I desire you to call your children. Noble friend, said the Emperour, embracing him a new, I am more con∣tend with this incounter of you, than with the acquisition of a Monarchy, I am not ignorant of the glory your Fathers have gotten in the world, and yet I am perswaded that you surpasse them far in valour, wherefore I shall make a dear account of the honour of your alliance, so that with all my heart I forgive my daughters, and will goe into Corolandaya, since they are to be there, in assurance whereof you shall see (during the two dayes, which you promise to abide here) what Bonfires I will cause to be made in Cardana for joy of their mariages, which at their return shall be renewed all over my Empire: Whereupon he returned to the Citie with Rozal∣mond, who was entertayned there with a world of magnificense and try∣umph. In the mean time Amadis, Floridan and Lucibel were sayling on the Sea, so infinitly satisfied with the free enjoying of their Mistresses, as they past away eleven dayes insensibly; at the end whereof they arrived in Coro∣landaya, where the marvellous inchantment of the Queen having arrested them, they resolved to prove the adventure, and accordingly Lucibel and Floridan having been after a long and dangerous combat vanquished by Gorgophon (more by the advantage of an armour and shield, which Diabo∣lion the Inchanter had given him, as to one that he held to be the firmest Pillar of Paganism.) Amadis putting on his good arms, and presenting himselfe in the place ran against the Gyant with such force, that incountring in the midst of the course, they were both of them carried so rudely to the earth, as they remayned a pretty while astonished; neverthelesse indignation having raysed both with equall fury they drew out their swords, wherwith they began so cruelly to cut one another, that in a moment the ground was all strewed with peices of their armour: Gorgophon, who thought there was not a man in the world able to resist the fury of his Curtelas, discharged most dreadfull blows, but our Warriour knew so well how to decline them, and to make him such sharpe returns, that the combat became most terri∣ble, their arms were al dyed red with blood, and as often as their weapons were in the ayr, every one looked to see their heads thundred in peices, Gorgophon beheld Armazia, Amadis cast his eye on his Palmirenna, where∣with they were so animated, that the horrible effects of their rage drew pitty from all the assistants: Four hours being past since the beginning of the combat, Gorgophon enraged, for that he had no advantage of his enemy, took his Fauchion in both his hands, and advancing it he let it des∣cend with such violence on Amadis his shield, as dividing it in two it ope∣ned his arm that sustayned it, and forced him to set his knees to the ground, which so incensed our Knight, that rising up in a mighty chafe, he discharged such a stroke on his Helmet, as made a wound two fingers deep in his head, and constrayned him withall to stagger in that sort, as
he had much  keep himselfe from faling▪ but being  by shame,  the fight with such honour, that caused all the Spe∣ctators to tremble. In  of them possessed with equall fury, after six hours , and without taking of breath, they  their sword  in their hands, and at one  discharging upon each other with most strange force, Gorgophon with the violence of the blow fell down backward from his  to the , quite deprived of all sense, and his casque so full of blood, that  he had been , had not the Gyant his com∣panion spdily  him; on the other side Amadis not able to sup∣port the fury of that which he had received, dropt presently after to the earth in like manner, with so little appearance of , that Palmirenna tea∣ing her hay, began o  his death, but his Helmet being suddenly opened, hee came straight-way to himselfe agaie, and was carried to the Marquis of Belt's house; where the Chyrurgions having found his wouds to be very dangerous, promid notwithstanding to cure him in a moneth, and Gorgophon in six weeks. CHAP. XXIX. Rozalmond  with Trasiclea, leads  Alcidamants , her regrets upon his arms, their  and Reconciliation. Rozalmond having been three days in Cardana, most magnificently honoured, and entertayned, de∣parted with infinit discontent to the Emperour, who to testifie the esteem he made of him, con∣ducted him in person to the port, where with many protestations of service and friendship out Knight embarquing himselfe, put forth present∣ly to sea, and ayling with a prosperous gale to∣wards Tramazond, the remembrance of his Armazia, of whom he had not heard any news since he left her, representing itselfe unto his mind, helped him to passe away the time with many sweet and pleasing thoughts. Beautious Mi∣stris, said he to himselfe, you have reason to forget my services, and to ingage your selfe under the power of another, since I have absented my selfe so long from you to follow the world, and yet I am so confident of your vertue, that in stead of fearing a change in you, I will beleeve that you attend me with very great impatience, and that you still conserve me that part in your heart, which heretofore you have promised me, in re∣gard whereof I swearby that incomparable beauty of yours, not to un∣dertake any other adventure, but to return instantly unto you, as soon as I have drawn the excellent Knight of the Pal from that hermitage, where the best of his days is so unbefingly .
Having past eleven or twelve days with a favourable wind , at length he arrived in the Kingdom of Claricana, where the  having assured him that his shortest way to Tarsipolis, was to go thither by land, he caused himself with his Squite and horses to be set , and travelling along, in three days together he met with no advene, but at the end thereof, and at such time as the Sun was in the midst of his course, he perceived a Knight comming out of a Forrest, whereinto he was en∣tring, who bearing a Phenix with two heads in his shield, sate with such a grace on his Steed, and wore such brave and rich Arms, being all covered over with azure and gold, as he had a marvellous desire to know him, and to try whether he were the same he seemed to be; whereupon fair and softly advancing he desired him to break a Launce with him for the beauty of his Mistris, but this Knight returning him no answer, nor so much as taking any notice of him, rode on as his horse pleased to cary him, which at first somewhat netled Rozalmond, thinking he ought to have been more courteous, howbeit observing that he went hanging down his head, and that may be he was in some deep muse, wherby he was detayned from hearing him, he followed on the faster for to speak once more unto him, but understanding him break forth into speech, he came up close to him, and lending an attentive ear, he heard him say thus. Jealousie, false jealousie, how many tears wilt thou cost me, and what pains doe I see prepared for the punishment of so great a fault? Ah my Knight! I should have been more temperate in mine anger, I should have heard you before I had forbid you my presence, and should have conside∣red that I was too rashly displeased with that which proceded our ac∣quaintance; had I been more advised, or lesse curious, we should at this present have lived contented, a thousand pleasures would have accompa∣nied our delights, and not caring much for this Princesses complaint, I might have possest you without fear of being abandened for another. These words finishing with sighes marvellously aed Rozalmond, who could not comprehend the sense of them, wherfore he watched if any new complaint would discover this secret unto him, but perceiving him conti∣nue a good whil in silence, he took herby the arm & sd unto hi Knight it is time for you now to awake, & to tel me whither you wil break a launce for the honour of your Mistris: Now in faith, said he starting up, you have done me so great a displeasure, by interrupting me in my musing, wherein I took incredible content, that I will run most willingly against you, ra∣ther to revenge me of your insolence, then to oblige any Lady. Saying so, and taking the field he came to incounter our Warriour with such a fu∣rie, that their Launces flew into a thousand shivers, whilst they past on as unmoved as Rocks, which scorn the violence of winds and waves. Their course being finished, he drew out his sword, and returned with like rage to charge Rozalmond, who greatly marvelling at his force and valour, went rotting fair and softly towards him with a countenance that testified he had no purpose to combat with him, whereupon the Knight made a stand, and said unto him; What Sir, are you satisfied with so little, and will you not doe more for your Mistris sake? If there were question of her merit or beauty, answered Rozalmond, you should see that I would well conserve her that advantage, which nature hath given her above all that I know, but having desired to prove my selfe against you only, out of
the esteem I had of your valour, which questionlesse is nothing lesse then I judged it to be by your gallant demeanour, we will proceed no farther if you please, for one ought asmuch to decline a Combat ill grounded, as to seek out such where justice may get us glory. You comend me, said he, viewing him from head to foot, for that which I admire in you, and the force of your arme amazeth me no lesse, then that martiall criage of yours, wherfore I consent with you, that we sit down contented with the breaking of our staves, and that having no just cause to fight, we remain friends; this being concluded, I shall intreat you to grant me one boo which I very much desire of you. I will not deny you, replyed Rozal∣mond, provided you accord me another. With all my heart, said the Knight. Declare then unto me who you are, replyed Rozalmond, That is it, answered the Knight, which I desire to know of you. Being first obliged by promise, said ou Warriour, it is reason I should satisfie your demand, before I obtain mine; I am a Knight errant, born in the Empire of the Parthians, by all my friends called Rozalmond, who in the adventures of the world seeks that which a noble mind is to expect from his travels. Without doubt, said the Knight, you cannot chuse but acquire immortall same, since honour is the sole ayme of your actions, for being the strongest of all that ever I incountred, next to one with whom you may compare, I am perswaded you can find nothing on the earth, but will do homage to your Armes; Now, wheras you desire to know me; I will no longer conceale my self from you: I am Trasiclea, hei apparant to the Empire of Tramozand. O Madam! said Rozalmond, lighting presently from his Horse for to render her the greater respect, how luckie is this chance which hath brought me hither to make tryall of your valour so redoubted of all the world, I was going to seek you at Tarsipolis, for to obtaine a suit of you, but being assured that you will be as courteous here, as any where els, I will now make the same request to you, which I intended to have done at your Palace, wherfore beautious Princesse, grant me one boon I shall de∣mand of you. Valiant Warriour, answered she, discovering her face, the more civil∣ly to receive his submissions, I am very glad that I have freed you from the pain of proceeding farther, demand what you please, it shall be easily granted you, for I will deny your merit nothing, wherfore get upon your horse, and tell me what it is I must do for you. Madam, replyed Rozalmond, (vaulting into his saddle, with much won∣der at such rare beautie,) conducted lately by a young Squire, to the exe∣cution of a very dangerous enterprize, I met with a Magician of my ac∣quaintance, who stopping me in the midst of my way told me, that I tra∣velled in vain, and that the end of this adventure would never be seen, till such time as the most excellent Knight of the earth be accompanied with the strongest and fairest Lady of the world for the accomplishing of it; I am not so vain to presume, that the Destenies have made choyce of me for it, but withall not distrusting my own forces, and knowing that the earth beares not a more valourous and beautifull Princesse then your self, I come most humbly to desire you, that you will be pleased to assist my courage with yours, and undertake with me to surmount the difficulties of this enterprize, from whence if any glory redounds, it shall be wholly
yours, if the successe be not such as it should be, I will accuse any ∣nesse for it. Let us go, let us go, answered shee, the danger shall be very great if we fall under it; so taking the way Rozalmond directed, they travelled five dayes without finding any adventure that might stay them, but at the end therof, they arrived at a terrible great rock, whose bottom was bhed with a little stream, that ran along under the shadow of a great many fal∣lowes; Rozalmond alighted, and taking his shield as if hee were going to fight, he said unto Trasiclea; Madam, now is the time to shew our courage, this is the place of danger, and of our enterprize. Herewith Trasiclea forsaking her Horse, drew out her sword, and fol∣lowing Rozalmond, that went formost, she came to a Tree, at the foot wherof she beheld an Armour covered over with rust. Behold, Madam, said he, here it is where our first Combat must be, these arms you must vanquish before you can passe further. How, these arms, answered Trasi∣clea, have they any force in them lying in this sort? Do but advance, Ma∣dam, replyed Rozalmond, and you will meet with greater difficulties then you think for. Wherupon Trasiclea imagining that it was some Inchant∣ment, approched so neere unto them, that she could discern three Palmes in the middest of the shield, which so amazed her, as she let her Sword drop out of her hand. Madam, what ayles you, said Rozalmond unto her, who well enough knew the cause of her distemper? Alas! answered she with a languishing voyce, it was not without reason that you judged the danger of this en∣terprize to be great, take me from hence I beseech you, for the sight of these Arms in the state they are in, will kill me with griese, they belon∣ged to the best Knight of the world, whom my rigous without doubt hath layd in his grave, but I will not long survive the losse of him, and this desart which hides his bones, shall be strewed with my ashes. Brave Palmes (continued she throwing her Helmet on the ground, and unbuckling her Armour) brave Palmes, that never feared the tempest of blowes, sustained by a Master so strong, tell me if you can, what is be∣come of him? And thou excellent Sword, that foundst no temper hard enough to resist thy fury, declare unto me where that mighty arm is which made thee do such wonders? Thou makest me remember him, but thou canst not represent unto me the grace wherwithall he made thee descend upon his Enemies; he hath abandoned thee in these Desarts, mine also will I leave with thee, and joyn my arms to thine: Saying so, she layd her Armour by Alcidamants with so many tears and sighes, as Rozalmond could not forbear weeping. Madam, said he unto her, you must hope better, let us search the De∣sart, peradventure we may find this Knight alive. Ah! I fear it, answered she, howsoever I will omit no means that may be used for to learn the truth therof; Wherupon rising up with Rozalmonds help, she went as far as the Grot, where beholding her Picture erected with such honour, shee fell into new complaints. O! said she, how well doth this testifie the in∣justice of my anger? Alcidamant; thou wouldst not have chosen such hor∣rid Desarts for thy dwelling, hadst thou not been the loyallest of all Knights living: and had not my love been dearer to thee then all things els, thou wouldst have been now amidst Mrodiana's caresses, or in the im∣braces
of her Ser, who loves thee no lesse; Thou hast preferred my ri∣gour before the pleasures thou mightest have enjoyed with them, wher∣fore I will prefer death before the contentment of life, I will dye to satis∣fie thee, and since I could not possesse thee here, I will go and present my selfe unto thee in the Elizia field; it may be thou wilt not be so cruell as I have been, but pardon me, and forgetting that thou didst through my default, thou wil le our soules joynt, though I have heretofore refused our bodyes should do so. Herewith she swound in Rozalmonds arms, who running speedily to the brok, took some water in his Helmet, and sprinckled it so long on her face, till she came to her self again. Take courage, Madam, said he unto her, and dispair not thus without cause, the light which you see burning in this lamp, this picture so well preserved, and this bread that lyes here, are mighty proofes for to perswade you, that your Alcidamant lives, let us seek him out, I beseech you, and stand no longer spending of tears in vain, we have time enough still to afflict our selves, when we are sure of a mis∣fortune, therfore we ought not to anticipate our sorrows before their be∣ing. Your reasons, answered she, shall make me prolong my life yet a-while, go then whither you please, and I will follow you. Wherupon leaving the Grot, they walked towards the trees just at the time when as Alcidamant was returning to sigh according to his custome, before the Pi∣cture of his Lady. This poore Hermit, comming softly along in regard of his weaknesse, perceiving through the trees the glistering of Rozalmonds Arms, knew him straight, but seeing a woman in his company, with her haire about her ears, he was so moved, that he began to tremble like the leaves of the boughs under which he was, neverthelesse recollecting himself, he advan∣ced five or six paces, but having discovered the beautifull face of Trasiclea, his bloud instantly retyred into his veins, and all pale and wan, he tumb∣led in a trance to the ground; Trasiclea seeing him fall, ran suddenly to succour him, and kneeling down for to help him up, she was so amazed to see him in that miserable plight, as I think she would have been in the like case, had not Rozalmond suddenly arrived, who said unto her; Now, Ma∣dam, is this the Knight you mean? Yes, yes, replyed she, but so changed, as I can hardly know him, for he is now so unlike himself, that if love had not well engraven his image in my heart, I should never beleeve that this were my Alcidamant, but what is that I say, my Alcidamant? Alas! I doubt I shall never see him alive again; Alcidamant, speak to me, your Tra∣siclea asketh you forgivenesse, open your eyes to her, that opens her heart to you: O comfort me with one word if you will have me to live for you; What, will you not speak to me? Ay me! I am undone, his body is as cold as yce, there is no hope of life in him, one Tombe shall hold us both. Dear Sir, continued she, turning her eyes to Rozalmond, see it per∣formed I beseech you, even for that pittie which you cannot choose but have of two such unfortunate lovers. Saying so, she laid her lips to Alci∣damants, and overcome with excesse of grief, she fell down by him with∣out pulse or breath, wherat Rozalmond being exceedingly moved to com∣passion, ran again to the brook, and with the water thereof, which was marvellous fresh, the brought them in little space to themselves again. Opening their eyes then almost both at one instant, they beheld one
another without saying a word, but Trasiclea thinking it  part to  first, sate down on the grasse, and laying her arme about his eck▪ she made such pittifull moan, as would have moved a very rock, Will you not pardon me, said she, and will you see me dye repenting my cruelty unto you, and not be sensible of my tears? Remember not, my dearest Knight, what you have suffered by my fault, I will repaire the wro I have done you, and you shall never desire any thing of me, which I will refuse you. Most excellent Lady, answer this Lover transported with the excesse of a content which he never hoped for, you have no wayes failed against me, that request you make unto me, I ought to make unto you, and if I re∣ceive any grace from you, I hold it meerely from your pitty▪ A new life you give me, I will receive it, for to employ it in your service, and for∣getting all my passed paines, since I have the happinesse to see you again, I will imagine that I have been all this while in a Paradise of delight, and being lifted up from an abisme of miseries, to an heaven of felicite, I wil think that you did make me suffer for to render my glory the greater, But it was time, my dear Princesse to come, for if the remedy had been never so little more retarded, I had been uncapable of receiving it. Well, Madam, said Rozalmond then, (wonderfully well contented with that which he saw) did not I tell you true, that this adventure would ne∣ver be brought to passe, till the bravest Warriour of the earth, and the most valorous, and most beautifull Princesse of the world were assem∣bled togither, I brought you hither on purpose to behold the misery of this Knight, little thinking that you were so well inclined to relieve him, but thanks be to heaven for the good successe of my designe. Hereupon Alcidamant rysing up, went, and in a most kind manner saluted, and cares∣sed our Prince of Greece, giving him a million of thanks for the care he had had of his life and content. That done, they returned all three to the Grot, from whence Rozal∣monds Squire was sent to the next Village, to provide them meat for that night; the next day they went to Armelant, one of the fairest Towns of the Kingdome of Clariana, where they resolved to stay three or foure weeks, for to restore and cherish up Alcidamant, who during that time, ha∣ving caused his Arms to be new furbished, caused the Palmes to be taken out of his Shield, and a burning rock upon an Hermitage, to be painted in stead therof, for which cause he was alwayes afterwards called the Knight of the burning Rock.
CHAP. XXX. Rozalmonds  of Armazia's : He  Gorgophos  there very strangely ▪ being in  of his life. _ having with time, good keeping, and the care of his beautious Mistris, recovered new strength, grw to bein so good plight, as it could hdly be , that dispair and neglect had ever brought  so neer is nd, whereupon they departd all three from Armelant, with a purpose to goeunto Tarsipolis, for to render Alcidamant happy in his long desired mariage, with the excel∣lent Trasiclea, but fortune, that meant otherwise to dispose of them, put them upon a clean contrary course; for as they tra∣velled along they met with a Dosel, who in a most lamentable man∣ner thus complayned. Alas! what greater misery could befall this infortunate Princesse, then to be captived under the power of so cruell a man, whose brutish nature will not be stayed by ay consideration of her greatnesse, from offering violence to her chasty; O valint Knight of the Roses! if so strange a misfortune were come to thy knowledge, surely thou wouldest employ a thousand lives for to revenge the outrage which is done to thy Armazia. At these words Rozalmond being infinitly perpleed, observed the Da∣mosel very narrowly, and found that it was Armazia's woman, wherupon he said unto her. Dear Ormelinda, what ayls you thus to complain? Ay me, answered she, looking up, and knowing Rozalmond by the three oses in his shield, how uckily have I met with you, my Lord, you are undone if the gods doe not prevent it by some strange miracle; Gorgophon, Colo∣nel of the Gyants of the cruell Iland, hath lately carried away your Ar∣mazia, with her consin Agritlea. Ah Heaven, said Rozalmond, is Armazia, the fairest Princesse of the world, in the power of an inhumane Gyant, and must serve for the satis∣fying of his abhominable lust? Dye wretched Knight, since there is no∣thing now left for which thou shouldest desire to live. Dye doe I say? nay rather desire to live yet a while to take some horrible revenge for so un∣sufferable a wrong; Audacious Gyant, thy death shall precede mine, and were all the Ministers of hell assembled together for to succour thee, thou shalt not escape the ury of my sword. Saying so, he spurred away over the fields, and never regarding whither he went, he ran all the rest of the day with such extream rage, that his horse dying under him just as it was night, left him in a very desperate case. Ingratefull fortune, said he, tear∣ing his  for very madnesse, thou shalt not tryumph over me for al this, thou thinkest by aresting me thus here, to make me subject to the worst of thy malice, but thou lt not be able, for thou shalt see that in despight of ee I will notwithstanding goe on.
Running along then in the dark, as if he had had no armour on, he con∣tinued so till mid-night, when quite out of breath, he was constrayned to lye down on the ground to rest himselfe a little; neverthelesse so violent was his griefe, as remayning there not long he got up again, and drawing new strength from his desire to be revenged, and to succour his Mistris, he ran again till such time as the Sunne appeared, by the light whereof disco∣vering the Sea neer at hand, he began to take some little comfort, which was quickly converted into fury again, for seeing the coast desolate, with∣out either ship, or man, he fell to crying out, and roaring in that dreadfull manner, as all the shore about resounded therewith: What did  say, and how did he curse his stars? Verely his passion was so violent, that mad with desperation, he was going to throw himselfe all  was into the Sea, when as he perceived a little su arising  he waves, which displaying his beams very brightly,  esign, and his body that was tottering, and ready to fall This prodigie at first astonished him, but havin  by little and little appear, together with sayls, and Savages  in their hands, he straight-way knew that it was the Vessel of the Sune, wherein he had formerly sayled with Cassandra, which made him tremble for joy, as he had before with rage and anger: Beholding then this good∣ly ship quite discovered, he rendred a thousand thanks to thoses Sages for assisting him thus at his need; and having not the patience to stay till it came up to him, he presently lept into it, and walking from one room to another, he espyed a table very well furnished with excellent meat, upon the which there also lay a paper folded up, wherein having opened it, he read these words. Alcander to the valiant Knight of Greece. EXcellent Prince, if you consider, that vertue and greatnesse doe not ex∣empt men from the misfortunes of the world, you will take comfort not∣withstanding the just cause you have to be afflicted, and finding such remedies as are necessary for your griefe, in a resolution to receive all things patiently from the Mighty hand of God, you shall even force Heaven to per∣serve Armazia for you, whose safety will cost you so much blood, that if the ba∣stard bird, together with the amorous Fanlcens doe not arrive just in the nick to rescue you from your enemies, the Roses will lose their odour under the weighty bur∣then of their mother. This Letter giving him more consolation then fear, he fell to the meat before him, and then layd him down on a bed, for to rest and refresh him∣selfe, after his so many past-travels, leaving the ship to be conducted according to the good pleasure of the great Alcander. In the mean time Alcidamant and Trasiclea, carried by the remembrance of the powerfull obligations, wherein they stood ingaged to this Knight, followed him with a resolution to serve him in this affair, which so much concerned him; but having taken a different way they arrived at a Port of the Sea, where hearing no news of that they sought for, they imbarked themselves in a ship, commanding the Pilots to steer their course towards
the cruell Iland of Gorgophon, imagining that Rozalmond was undoubtedly gone thither, and indeed the Vessell of the Sunne, wherein he was, having for many dayes together run very swiftly through the Waves, at length aboarded that redoubted Coast, upon the which Rozalmond causing him∣selfe to be landed with an extream desire to incounter the Ravisher of his Mistris, it was his hp at the very first dash to meet with an arogant Gyant, at whose sight his blood beginning to boyl very furiously in his veins, he drew out his sword, and beleeving that it was Gorgophon he dis∣charged so mighty a blow upon his Helmet, as he cleft him down to the very shoulders, wherewith certain Mariners, that were walking on the shore, being marvellously affrighted, betook them to their heels, and fled into a great house, that was not farre off whence he presently perceived four dreadfull Gyants make towards him, whose presence possessing him with more wrath, then fear, he advanced couragiously, and demanded of them with an incensed countenance, which of them was Gorgophon? Wret∣ched creature, answered he that marched formost, what wouldest thou have with him? Marry, replyed Rozalmond, I would send his soule to hell, for the satisfaction of an offence he hath committed against the great Emperour of Gardacia, by forcibly carrying away his Daughter Arma∣zia, and a cousin of hers. O Iupiter! said the Gyant, what is this I hear? Darest thou, poor Pigmey, speak of combatting him, who would quickly cut an hundred thousand such as thou art into a million of peices? now by all the gods which we adore, I will chastise this audaciousnesse of thine so cruelly, that if all mankind were here assembled, they should tremble to behold it. Saying thus, he advanced his heavie Scimitar, that was twelve foot long, and made so horrible a blow at our Warriour, as would have pro∣ved fatall to his life, had he not warily declined it, leaping then very light∣ly at one side he let it thunder on the ground, whereinto it entred even up to the hilts, and carefull to lose no opportunity, he let drive with such force at the Gyant, that he cut off both his hands, which remayned fastned to that dreadfull weapon, whereat the others were so enraged, that instantly approaching they charged him with three such terrible stroaks, as he was constrayned to set his knees to the ground, being dangerously wounded on the shoulder; neverthelesse rising up full of despight, he began to deale such dreadfull blows, that his very enemies were astonished at them, and hacked and hewed them in that cruell manner, as dyed all their arms with their blood, that issued from their wounds: howbeit considering that he should be tyred at length, if he continued still in those tearms, he took his sword in both his hands, and let it fall so deadly on him that most troub∣led him, as he divided him in two peices, wherewith yet not being conten∣ted he discharged so dangerously on the shoulder of another, that he sepa∣rated it from the rest of his body, sending him to the earth with a noyse like to that of a Tower, overthrown by the wind. These horrible blows much amazed the fourth, but seing five more of his companions comming to his succour, hee began to assaile our Cham∣pion with more courage, than he had done all the day before, who behol∣ding himselfe invioned with these six monstrous Colosses, thought that hee was now neer unto his end, neverthelesse resolving to sell his life learly unto him, he layd about him with that fury, as he seemed rather a
devill then a mortall man, but being charged on so many sides, and hurt in five or six places, he was even ready to faint under the violence of thei blows, when as a brave Knight, who bare two Eagles in his shield, arri∣ving in a little Bark, lept suddenly on shore, and wondring to behold four Gyants extended at the feet of one man, who seemed to fight couragious∣ly enough for to reduce six more, that combatted with him, into the like estate, he layd hand on his sword, and discharging with choller upon the first that presented himselfe he cleft him to the teeth, so as he fell down close by Rozalmond, who being not a little glad of such seasonable suc∣cour took new heart, and hit another of them so dangerously on the shield, that he made it together with his arm fly to the ground; The re∣mayning four rather more incouraged, then terrified with the death of their fellows, discharged their heavie Scimitars all at one instant, two on the Knight of the Eagles, whole armour was easily pierced, and two on Rozalmond, whereby he received another hurt on the Shield arm, which so incensed these two valiant Warriours, that Rozalmond ran the next to him upto the hilts, and the Knight of the Eagles cut the leg of him that had hurt him sheer off. These dreadfull blows having layd two Gyants on the earth, gave the Knights assured hope of victory, but six other Gyants, more deformed, and greater then the former, making towards them, under the conduct of Bramartan, Gorgophons Lievtenant, rendred their deaths most inevitable, when on the other side a Bark suddenly arrived, out of which two knights, the one bearing a burning Rock on his shield, the other a Phaenix with two heads, lept a shore, and withall celerity opposing these new enemies, they charged them with such fury, that they layd two of them▪ stark dead at their feet, the first divided into two parts by the Knight of the burning Rock, and the other run through the body by him of the Phenix. Rozalmond observing the violence of these blows, perceived this suc∣cour proceeded from his friend, the brave Alcidamant, and the beautious Princesse of Tramazond, which so revived his courage, that accompanied with this Knight, he did not beleeve it was possible for all the world to de∣feat him: flying upon them then with no lesse force, then at the beginning of the combat he cleft one of them to the teeth, whilst Alcidamant desi∣rous to shew his valour unto this great Warriour, having discharged again on the mighty Bramartan, he divided his body in twain, with one of the most dreadfull stroaks that ever parted from the hand of a man; the four that remayned beholding such a prodigious execution, would fain have retyred, but the fury of our Champions was such, as after equartr of an hours resistance, they were all cut in peices, to the infinit coment of Rozalmond, who went and imbracing Alcidamant, said unto him. Dear Brother, could I hope for safety from any but you, unto whom all glory is due? Ah! how well have you now recompensed the pleasure I did you heretofore; And what doe I not owe to the incomparable valour of your Mistris? you have given me life, but I will employ it whensoever you please in acknowledgement of so great a benefit: And you, brave Warriour, continued he, turning him to the Knight of the Eagles (who looked upon them with wonder, for that he did not think the world could shew three such again) being no lesse obliged unto you, let me desire you to take the same assurances of my service.
Whereupon, putting off his Helmet a little to refresh himself, the Knighs of the Eagle presently lift up his Bever, and kneeing down be∣fore him, said; O! how happy doe I account my self for comming hi∣ther thus seasonably to doe you some service? My Lord, give me your hands to kisse, in satisfaction of the bloud I have so gloriously shed for you, I am Russian of Media, the humblest of all your servants. At these words, Rozalmond remembring that he had seen him in the Grecian Court, where he was esteemed every way as good a Knight as the Em∣perour Spheramond his Father, caressed him anew in a most loving manner. Now, Alcidamant and Trasiclea, comming by this mea to understand the qualitie of Rozalmond, would have shewed fr ore  unto him then before, but embracing them again with , he re∣fused the honour they would have done him, and  intreated Alcidamant, whom he valewed more than all the  world be∣sides, to live with him like a Brother. Some time beg  in the plea∣sure of this incounter, Alcidamant would have  and the gallant Russian of Media (unto whom e protested much ser∣vice) to the care of Ormelinda, for the looking to their wounds, whilst he and Trasiclea went to the Castle, to learn some newes of Armazia, but Rozalmond by no means would stay behind, wherefore they walked all foure thither, where finding none but certain servants, who assured them that Gorgophon was not in the Island, they returned to the Sea side, and getting aboard the Ship of the Sunne, which instantly sayled away as swiftly as before; they all admired those rare and excellent things they beheld there, especially Trasiclea, who was wonderfully taken with her own, and the other five Pictutes of those incomparable Ladyes, so perfectly represented to the life. In the mean time Rozalmond, and Russian, being unarmed, had their wounds visited by Ormelinda, who being very skilfull in Chyrurgerie, and carrying alwayes about her such things, as were necessarie for the like purpose, dressed them incontinently, and promised them by the help of God to make them sound again in twenty dayes.
CHAP. XXXI. Alcidamant and Trasiclea meets with Parmelina, who relates unto them the historie of her strange love with Clarismond. WHilst Rozalmonds and Russians wounds were inhea∣ling, twelve dayes past insensibly away, at the end whereof the Vessell of the Sun staying close to a rock, on whose top, a great smoak appeared, Al∣cidamant and Trasiclea, armed at all points, leapt on shore, and passing under certain trees, they tra∣velled above an houre without incountring any thing, but a very great silence over all, wherupon concluding that this was some Desart, they turned towards the ascent of the rock, and began to mount it with pain, in regard of the weight of their Arms, when as they perceived a huge fire from whence that smoak which they had seen proceeded; The curiositie, that had made them leave the Ship, carrying them on, they saw a woman on her knees before the fire, who lifting up her hands to heaven, seemed to beg for something with her prayers; they would fain have heard her complaints, before she should have discovered them, howbeit they could not approch to her so softly; but that she discryed them, wherupon rising up, she was going to run away, when as Alcidamant catching her by the arme, said unto her; Gentlewoman, be not frighted with our presence, for we are come hither rather to doe you service, than any hurt. Knights, answered she, having been a twelve moneth, or more, in this Desart with∣out seeing any body, truly I was affraid at the sight of your Armes, but since you have so well confirmed me, let me know I pray you, what you would have with me, to the end I may give you satisfaction therin, if it lye in my power. That which we desire, said Trasiclea to her, is that you would tell us why you kneele thus before this flame, what is the cause of your complaints, and of your retreat into this Desart place. That were to renew my sorrows, answered she, but I take such delight in the rehear∣sall of my miserie, that I shall be as ready to relate, as you are willing to heare it. This fire, which but testifies the same, that hath long consumed my heart, serues for a sacrifice to the ghost of noble Clarismon̄d, one of the loveliest Knights that was in all the Kingdome of Filamon, whose body is buried under the ashes of this fire, that every day is renewed by me just at this hour; his death is as strange, as the history of our loves, which not to abuse your patience, I will recount unto you as briefly as I can. This Knight, a great friend to one named Martander, being taken with that little beautie, wherwith it pleased heaven to indue me, shewed himself so desi∣rous to be in all places, and companies, where I had occasion to be pre∣sent, that by his looks and cariage, I easily came to know he was in love with me, howbeit being then, I may well say, blind, because I did not
consider his merit, I could not by any means affect him, but contrarily carrying some particular good liking to Martander, that cared not for me, the sight of him did very much displease me; I found fault with all that he did, and the more he laboured to serve me, the more was I incensed against him. His suit then being troublesome unto me, I resolved to let him understand, that he much dis-obliged me, by soliciting me in that manner, and accordingly taking occasion on a time, when he besought me to carry a gentler mind, and to have some compassion of his suffering, I told him how my actions were the images of my thoughts, how I had shewed sufficiently, that I did not love him, and how in vain he expected reliefe from me, for if I would give my self to any one, Martander should have more power over me, then all the Knights on the earth. Hereat Martander, who was then present with Clarismond, gave me ma∣ny humble thanks for the election I was willing to make of him; but, Madam, said he, being Clarismonds friend, I may not receive the honour of your favour, which would be better conferred where it is due, then on me. Some moneths passing away, Clarismond obstinate in his suit, I in my hate to him, and affection to Martander, these two friends plotted together how to deceive me. You may doe me a most friendly part, said Claris∣mond one day to Martander: Parmolina, (so is this miserable called that speaks to you) loves you with passion, and when you please, you can pre∣vaile with her to grant you any thing, serve me faithfully, I beseech you; feigne as much love to her, as she bears you, and labour to obtain of her that she will spend one night with you, upon promise you may make her, of rendring her kisses legitimate; the dark keeps all things unknown, I wil goe to her in your stead, and so by this means you shal save my life, which otherwise cannot long continue. Martander, who to help his friend would have made no difficultie to have gone even into Hell, most willingly undertakes this affaire, comes to me, and craving my pardon for his so long neglect of my affection, in such manner counterfeits the motions of a man transported with love and impatience, that I verely believed he was throughly taken; his sighes very much grieved me, the vows that he made never to adore any but my self, exceedingly contented me, I was sensible of his passions; what should I say more? There was nought resting to render us the happiest Lovers in the world, but the fruition of our desires, wherunto he labou∣red to arrive for the satisfaction of his friend; but finding dangerous ob∣stacles therein, by reason I lay alwayes in my Mothers chamber, in a bed apart by my self, I could not resolve to run such hazard; neverthelesse, what could not the tears of a Lover, or of one that seemed so, effect in the heart of an amorous Girle? At length I past by all respects, and promising him to leave all our dores open, I sent him away so contented, as he seemed not to envy any felicitie whatsoever: Midnight then being come, I received Clarismond in mine arms, thinking it was Martander, and losing my self in his embraces, I little thought of this change of persons, insomuch, that the next day I spake to Martander, as thinking I had acted that with him, which I had done with Clarismond, and as for him, he carryed the countenance of a man so infinitely pleased, as it was a fortnight before I knew by what cunning I was deceived, because we durst not speak but very softly, in regard of
my Mother; howbeit Clarismond not induring to tast his delight any lon∣ger under the coverture of another, discovered himself one night, as we were in the middest of our pleasure, and freely confest to me, that he was constrained to have recourse unto wiles, since he could not other wayes prevaile: I will not tell you how much I was astonished at this discourse, nor what errour I was then about, to have run into by crying out, as though I had been ravished by force, but to proceed, I will assure you, how instantly changing my mind, with the consideration that the mat∣ter was past remedy, I loved Clarismond a thousand times more than ever I had done Martander, and began to hae Martander far more, than ever I had done Clarismond, unto whom, (excusing my self upon the weaknesse of my judgement, which had not permitted me to choose the better par∣tie,) I protested so much love, and gave him such testimony therof by my most kind usage of him, and caressing of him anew, as he thought himself happy in disclosing this trick unto me. But now see what sport love makes with men, Martander hearing Cla∣rismond continually talk of the unspeakable delight he enjoyed with me, began to love me most passionatly, and preferring his affection before his friendship, he began to vow and protest that truly unto me, which he had dissembled before, hoping that the passion I had been in for him, was not yet quite extinct. I am not able to expresse what infinite content I recei∣ved to behold him sigh at my feet, and rejoyeing to see him languish through his own fault, I told him that my Mothers in-disposition detai∣ned me from receiving him a-nights, as I was wont, but at length no lon∣ger to abuse him, I plainly said unto him, how I very much wondered to heare him desire a treasure which belonged unto Clarismond, and knowing well enough that he possest it, I could hardly beleeve he could be so wic∣ked, as to seek to bereave him of it; At this speech he was so confounded, that he was ready to dye with griefe, and indeed he lay three weeks sick upon it, at the end wherof being unable any longer to indure the yiolence of his desires, it came into his head to crave the same favour of Claris∣mond, which he had received from him; Laying before him then the peril of his life, the imbecilitie of men that forced him to violate the lawes of friendship, the power of that proud divinitie, which useth to triumph over those hearts that goe about to resist him, the merit of my beautie, and briefly all that he thought could serve for his enterprize; he put Claris∣mond into a strange perplexitie, his love, and the resolution he had taken to marry me, forbad him to yeeld unto the unjust request of this friend, neverthelesse, choosing rather to dye than be ingratefull, he concluded to deprive himself both of his life and happinesse together Insomuch, that having promised to give him satisfaction in the very same manner, as he had received it, he drew this Lover from his bed, and came a little after to see me, but without so much as speaking a word of what ad past between them, howbeit having observed some extraordinary sadnesse in his coun∣tenance, and not knowing any just occasion he could have fo it, I began to suspect this practise, in regard wherof I purposed not to admit of Cla∣rismond any more, but upon safe tearmes, neverthelesse making no shew of it, I promised to entertain him as I used to doe. Night being come then, I left only the outward dore open, shutting those fast within, and standing close at a window, that looked into the
street, first I heard  very  ear, because they made  I could hear Clarismond say, farewell dear friend, the  happy than I am. Having spoken in this manner, away he  going to ou house, who finding the  return with far le∣hope, than he came. Being marvellously  with  of this busines, I was much incensed against Clarismond, and  to  him soundly for his fault, though I was fully resolved to  him, but alas! he gave me no opportunity to doe so; for never appearing again before me, he ad∣vertised me by a Letter, that wa brough me the next day, how through griefe and dispaire he was gone to end his days in a Desart. This sad and sudden departure of his derived from the excesse of his love to me, cast me into a dangerous sickness, which questionlesse had carried me out of the world, if my hope with meeting with Clarismond again, had not made me desire to live, but my love to him restored me within a little after to my health, when hearing no news of him, carelesse of mother and friends I forsook my countrey, and seven moneths toge∣ther travelled from place to place in the search of him, at the end whereof comming to this Rock, I found my Clarismond clothed in a long Hermits Gown, who hearing me  how I had begiled Martander, was so overcome with joy, as he dyed suddenly in my arms. O! who can ex∣presse the sorrow I was in then▪ Let it suffice that it cast me into a swound, and how long I continued so, I  able to deliver, but at length being reserved for greater ▪ to my,  I  my self again, howsoever  my last in this very , where e so un∣fortunately expired. Behold, noble Knight, the cause of my griefe ▪ which I earnestly beseech you, seek not to  by a  of reason, since I am obstinately bent never to admit of my . Seeing you are so minded, said , we will orhear  ouble you any further, and  of your lamenta∣ble case, we will commit you to the protection of heaven, which we hope yet may in time reduce yo to a better . Whereupon descending the hill, and going towards the Sea-side, they incountred with four  Knigh, the foremost of which, bearing a Salvage in his  unto them. Worthy Knights, necessity  you, that you will grant us room in your , untill such time, as we may  as some hbitabl place; we landed here , wherin to im∣ploy our , but  desolation; and in the mean time two  have  away the Bark we come in, leaving  hence, unlesse it be by your assistance. Noble Sir, answered , which you behold there is so  for bring∣ing you with us,  if you please. Being gotten  to the Prince of  at the,  their Helmets  Giv  your
hands to kiss, for here is Florisbel of the star, & Don Sestilian of Spain, your servants, with the redoubted knight of the Salvage, who did such wonders at the turnament at Constantinople, and the fair Amazon, his Lady Brandi∣manda: At these words Rozalmond rising up in his bed most kindly entertay∣ned the Princes of France & Spain, and with no lesse honour caressed Grian and Brandimanda. Alcidamant and Trasiclea (at whose goodly presence those four Warriours were marvellously astonished) together with Russian re∣newed their complements, and so they sayled all the rest of the day with exceeding great content, which was much augmented by the recitall that Alcidamant made of the history of Pmelina and Clarismond. Let us leave them cutting a speedy way through the waves, whilst we are preparing to declare the marvels, that were seene at their arrivall in Corolandaya. CHAP. XXXII. The dreadfull combat between Rozalmond, and Gorgophon, for the deliverance of Armazia; The wonders that Alcidamant performed in bringing the Incantment of Griolanis and Adelazia to an end. CErtain dayes being sweetly spent in the pleasure, which might well be expected from the conver∣sation of so many excellent Knights, the Vessel of the Sunne made a stay in one of the ports of Corolanday, where all those Princes disimbar∣king themselves, were very much amazed to see sixteen Salvags come out of the ship, the first eight having each of them a mighty courser in his hand, & the others, eight staves so strong and stiffe, as they seemed to have been made for some important design; being presented with these horses and launces, each of them lept into his saddle with many thanks to Alcander for this care of them, and marching two and two, they took the way that led to Agricant, being resolved to prove the adventure of the martyrdom of  and Adelazia. After they had ridden then about one hour, they arrived at the Royal Palace, where Rozalmond had but newly laced on his Helmet, desiring to be the first at the essay of the adventure,  as he heard a woman speaking to the whole Troop in this manner. Stay, said she, brave Knights, and if you have as much valour, as your presence doth promise, leave not a poor afflicted Damosel in this prison, combat you altogether that Colos∣sus, which you see there, for her deliverance, since his extream forces will not suffer him to be vanquished by one single man, the gods will re∣compense your pain, and I  one day acknowledge this service of yours. At these words;   king round about, perceived two Ladies of a marvellous beauty, stadi  the  of a little Tower, towards whom being advanced▪ so  and  them of their deliverance, he presently discerned ou of  o be  , which
so. So  like  over his liberty! O wonderfull! said he, being no lesse transported with fury , is it possible that I should find you in this  M? You shall quickly see the out-rage that is done you most horribly revenged; here is the Knight of the Roses, that having served you heretofore against the redoubted , wil like∣wise free you out of the hands of Gorgoph; whereupon turning him to At. Dear brother, said he, I am now in the supream degree of my glory, since I have met with Armaria, dispatch the Gyant that keeps her imprisoned, whilst I goe and chastise the insolence of the Ravisher of my excellent Mistris. Noble Sir, said Russia then, which likewise knew the beautifull Jn∣fanta of Clariana his Lady (whom he had disinchanted at Constantinople, when as he gave an end to the adventure of the Piramides, as hath been related in the eight and thirtieth Chapter of our first part:) Noble Sir, leave me this combat I beseech you, for I have no lesse interest in the deli∣verance of these incomparable Ladies, than the gallant Prince of Greece, as for your selfe you cannot want employment, if you please, in the triall of the adventure. I would always give more to your merit, answered Al∣cidamant, goe then and render this good office to your Mistris, whilst I seek to know whether the release of these Lovers be in my power. Whereupon casting his eyes on Rozal, and Gorgophon, who carried with equall rage were then set forth, he saw them meet like two clouds violently rushing together in the midst of the ayr, and passe by one ano∣ther like lightning, without so much as being once moved in their saddles by their Launces, which were broken in a thousand shivers: By this furi∣ous incounter guessing at the exceeding force of Gorgophon, he stayed to ob∣serve how they would intreat one another with their swords, their two first blows very much amazed him, for their shields were divided in twain, and their blades fell with such violence upon their Helmets, as they were constrayned to bow with their heads, even to the very arson of their saddles▪ from whence arising so full of choller, that it terrified all the people which beheld their combat, Rozalmond discharged such another terrible blow on Gorgophons head, as it made him see many more stars then there are in the sky, but he returned him an answer nothing lesse cruel and dangerous, for he received so mighty a stroak, that having loft one of his stirrops, he staggered as if he had been deprived of judgement; neverthe∣lesse shaming to appear any whit inferiour to his enemy before the grea∣est Knights of the earth, he quickly resetled himselfe in his saddle, and began to charge the Gyant very fiercely, who nothing abashed fought so well, that he shewed himselfe to be one of the best Knights in the world. The field was strewed all over with peices of their armour, the blood gshed out in many places of their bodies, and so dreadfull were their blows, that all the houses round about resounded therewith. The noyse which proceeded from the combat of these Warriours, and that of Rus∣sian of Media, with the other Gyant, being little lesse cruell, drew a world of people thither from al parts, and amongst others the three Princesses of Martaria, with their Lovers, who very much wondring at the fury of this Knight, admired the dexterity of the Grecian Prince, who mad for that he could not vanquish his enemy took his sword in both his hands, and let it descend so dangerously on Gorgophon, that it gave him a great gash on the
shield-arm, whereat the Gyant was so incensed, that discharging a full blow on his shoulder with all his might, he entred his Fauchion two fin∣gers deep into his flesh, and making him lose his bridle and stirrops so asto∣nished him, that if his horse by carrying him away had not prevented his enemy from seconding the former with another stroak, doubtlesse he had been in great perill of his life. Alcidamant, who was still looking on this combat, seeing this horrible blow, and knowing how far Rozalmonds forces extended, admired Grg∣phon more than before, and was very much affraid that his friend would not come time enough again to himselfe, but on a sudden he beheld him resettle him in his seat, and fly upon the Gyant with such fury, as made all the assistants to tremble; and indeed the blow which he discharged on the crest of his Helmet was so dangerous, that though it could not cleave it by reason of the Inchantment, wherewith Dibolin had framed it, he overthrew him on the crupper of his horse, casting such a deale of blood out of his ears and mouth, and his arms and legs hanging in that manner, as all the world beleeved he was dead; neverthelesse he was seen a little after to raise vp himselfe with such extream rage, for that he was so ill in∣treated by one man alone, that Rozalmonds friends were in some fear of him, howbeit our brave Champion no whit dismayed couragiously pre∣senting his face unto him, they renewed the combat with more horrour and cruelty then at first. In the mean time Russian of Media, who had not so puissant an enemy to incounter, discharged five or six blows together on him, with such a mighty force, that he layd him breathlesse at his feet, and seazing on a key that he carried about him, he presently opened the door of the Tower, mounted up a little pair of stayrs, and kneeling down before the Ladies, almost transported with joy, he said unto them. Beauteous Princesses be pleased to give me your hands to kisse, in recompense of the beginning, which I have given to your releasement, and descending with me come and assure the victory to the valiant Knight of the Roses, that is now fight∣ing for your deliverance. Sir, answered Armazia, who was not a little con∣tented to heare that her Knight was there; I may not permit you to kisse my hands, being so exceedingly obliged unto you, as I am. Command then this fair Jnfanta to doe me that favour, replyed he, seeing I have the glory to be her Knight. My Knight, said Agriclea, since when I beseech you? since I freed you from the Inchantment, whereunto you were re∣duced by Fulgosons Aunt, answered he, for then you did me the honour to avow me for your Knight, and to say that my service should alwayes be agreeable unto you. Ah my Lord, said Agriclea, pardon my ignorance I pray you, for truly I did not know you, but I shall be ready to amend this errour. Whereupon giving him her hand, rather as it were to raise him up, then for any other end, shee suffered him to kisse it a thousand times, and so descending all three they presented themselves before these War∣riours, who at the sight of Armazia became so furious, Gergoph to see her delivered after such hope of enjoying her, and Rozalmond to continue so long without vanquishing in her presence, and for her quarrell, that they discharged at one instant two such terrible blows upon one another, at they were ready to pitch with their noses on the ground; neverthelesse being retayned by shame and anger, they redoubled their mortall stroaks,
and finding new force in their rage, they hewed one another for foure houres so cruelly, that all men wondered how they could endure so long, for their armes being all covered over with bloud, the end of their lives was every minute expected. This while Alcidaman, being confident that the victory would un∣doubtedly rest on the Prince of Greece, whose courage augmented with time and danger, and desiring not to remain idle, he presented himself be∣fore the Palace gate, with a resolution to prove the adventure of Adelazia, and accordingly seeing his passage defended by the four Princes, he drew out his rich sword, ad warding himself with his shield, he discharged so rude a blow on Armorand, that if the fury of his blade had not been arre∣sted by inchantment, he had cleft him down to the teeth; neverthelesse the blow was so violent, as it made him set both his knees to the ground, but being diverted from further prosecuting his advantage on him by three dangerous blowes received all at once from the others, he suddenly made head against them, and layd so terribly on Falemonds Helmet, that he sent him to the earth quite deprived of judgement, as also Grinaldo, whom with another stroak he overthrew in like manner. The misfortune of these Knights having marvellously incensed the other two, they discharged both at once so strongly on his head, as they made him reele three or four steps backwards, with a million of lights before his eyes, wherat he was so mad, that gnashing his teeth for anger, he delivered two such blowes successively on Armrants and Crisan∣ders Helmerts, as he laid them sensless at his feet. In the mean space the fight between the Grecian Prince and Gorgophon, having lasted above six hours, was most terrible, for shame and jealousie equally animting them, they employed all their skill, and strength to be∣come victorious; Rozalmond was enraged to meet a man able enough to dispute with him for his Mstresse, and the honour of a Combat, wherun∣to all his glory was tyed▪ and Gorgophon, the most audacious Gyant of the earth, bitterly sorming, uttered strange blasphemies against his gods, and meacing the very heavens, seemed as though he would divide them with his Curtelas, which often-times lighting on Rozalmonds Armes, al∣wayes carried some piece therof along with it, his own being in no better estate, under the sword of his enemie, who being in the supreamest degree of rage, resolved either to dye or vanquish. Returning then out of an astonishment wherin he had been reduced by a most horrible blow of Gorgophns, which had overturned him on the pper of his Horse, he parted with such furie, as all the assistants terrified ther with, began to mble, and displaying all his force, he discharged so unmeaurable a blow, full on the crest of Gorgophons Helmet, that if he had struck with the edge, he had divided him to the wast in spight of all Diabolions charms, but his sword turning in his hand with choler, the flat fell so dangerously on his head, that thinking he was smitten with a thunder-bolt, he fell in a swound to the earth, making a noyse like that of some mightie Tower, which the wind hath hurled out of its place. At this bave stroak, Arzia marvellously rejoycing, advanced to∣wards her Knight, who suddenly alighting fell on his knees before her, and said; Madam, be pleased that this small service may repaire the fault, which I have committed in abandoning you so long. Alas! my dearest
Knight, said she with tears of joy, and griefe, to see him so bloudy all over, let us not speak, I pray you, of pardon, for I find my selfe so happy in meeting you thus, that I can never remember any miserie past; come let us go and visit your wounds, and know what we are to hope for of your recoverie. Madam, answered Rozalmond, I feele they are dangerous, but yet not so much as to make you to fear, or keep me from rejoycing with my friends for the good successe of mine enterprize; wherupon per∣ceiving Amadis, Floridan, and Lucibel comming to him, togither with the Princesses of Martaria, to give him thanks for their deliverance out of the crystall Tower, he went and caressed them withall the kindnesse that might be, and so did Armazia, Trasiclea, Brandimanda, and the fair Infanta of Clariana, who were no lesse amazed at the excellencie of their beauties, than they were to see them every way so accomplished. Some time being spent in these salutations and compliments (and Gor∣gophon freely suffered to be carried away by certain of his servants to his Ship, where a little after being fetched out of his swound, he was so mad, for that he had been vanquished, as they had much adoe to keep him from killing of himself) Rozalmond hearing that Alcidamant was upon proving of the adventure, he went where he beheld him ingaged against the Ser∣pent, and the Monster. This invincible Warriour seeing himself delivered from four of his first enemies, and looked upon by so many excellent persons, most cou∣ragiously boorded those two creatures, and desiring to display the utter∣most of his forces, he discharged his Sword with such violence upon the Serpents head, that though it could not pierce the hardnesse of the scales, yet it made him stoup to the very ground, presently wherupon being layd at by the Monster, he dextrously declined the blow of his axe, which fell in vain upon the floore, The first fury of those horrible beasts being in this sort avoyded, Alcidamant finding that the astonishment wherein the Ser∣pent was, gave him opportunitie to performe something the mean while upon the Monster, he took his sword in both his hands, and slipping by the danger of a second blow from him, hee let it descend with such strength, on his left arm, which was as big as a tree, that he cut it sheere from his body. This lucky stroak animating him to do better, he turned to the Ser∣pent, thinking to avoyd his fury as before, but he was so surprized, and incountred with such force, as he was layd all along in the dust, where this creature running on him, laboured to seize on his Helmet with his teeth, in which danger, still retaining his judgement, he ran him up into the belly, that made him make a mighty skip into the ayre, by means wherof our Knight had leisure to arise, but being scarce well upon his legs, he received so great a blow from the Monster, as he was constrained to set both his knees to the ground, where shame and danger not suffering him to continue long, he got up again so full of rage, that casting his shield on his shoulder, he discharged with such fury on that monstrous creature, as having incountred the handle of his axe, and cut it in two, his sword fell with that tempest on his head, that it cleft him down to the wast. O heaven! said Rozalmond, what a dreadfull blow was this, and who can be able to resist the thunder of such a mighty arm? Questionless this Warriour is the nonparil of the earth, unto whom all the world hath reason to give place.
This speach, which Alcidamant heard, having rendred him infinitely couragious, he let fall an horrible stroak on the Serpent, that came leaping towards him, and watering the floore with the bloud that issued from the wound in his belly; never thelese, having not so much as made any print on his scales, he was enforced to step suddenly aside for to give him way, and was ready with his sword aloft to have smitten him on the tayl, when as he perceived a Knight all on fire, come out of the Hall, who presently gave him so mightie a blow, that it made him stagger, and in that manner amazed, as he knew not in what world he was, howbeit instantly reco∣vering his spirits he became so inraged, that beholding the Serpent raysed on his two hinder feet for in fall upon him with all the weight of his bo∣dy, he ran him with so mortall a thrust into the flank, that he overturned him on his back, where leaving him amidst the pangs of death, and ma∣king such horrible cryes, as all the place shaked therwith, he turned to the inchanted Knight, and began to charge him with so much force and agili∣tie, as though he had not fought all the day before, neverthelesse he indu∣red strange paine, for the fire which covered the inchanted Knight so hea∣ted him, that he thought he was consumed in his arms; but what will not a valiant man suffer, that would dye a thousand times, rather then forgoe the honour of a difficult enterprize? He employed all his force, and delivering his blowes with no lesse strength, then when as he divided the body of a Gyant, he charged the inchanted Knight so terribly, that he forced him to mount up the stayrs again, which exceedingly incouraging our Warriour, he followed him, redoubling his horrible blowes, till he came up to the top of the stayres, where his enemy returned him such a stroak on his Helmet, as made him fall on his knees, ready to tumble down all the steps, but staying himself on his hands, he arose full of fury, and discharged his sword with such violence on the Knight, as it extended him on the earth, where Alcidamant going to unlace his Helmet for to take off his head in satisfaction of his anger, he perceived that they were empty Arms without a body in them, at which he would have very much marvelled, had he not been well ac∣quainted with the power of Magicians, wherfore being very much moved with the lamentable complaints of Griolanis and Adelazia, he made no further stay, but burst open the dore with the pummell of his sword, and no whit regarding those horrible flames, which appeared all over the room, he went directly to the two Lovers, hoping to carry them easily from thence; neverthelesse, he was fain to undertake a new combat, the Serpents which devoured them, flew upon him, and winding themselves about his legs, they laboured to overthrow him to the ground. This new difficultie, far more troublesome than dangerous, having held him a good while without knowing how to free himself from these creatures, he let go his sword, and closing his hand, hee knocked them down with his fist; that done, a phantosme presented it self before him, which borrowing a thousand figures one after another, laboured to af∣fright him; but he that could not be moved with any danger whatsoever, having cut the aye in vain with his sword, discharged it at length on the shoulder of a furious Bear, that was catching him by the throat, which being divided in the middle it appeared to be the body of the sorceresse Maxiana separated in two parts, that no sooner touched the floore, but a
most horrible Earthquake arose, accompanied with thunder and light∣ning, and so dreadfull a noyse, as it seemed the very Palace would have sunk into the center of the earth. This noyse, earthquake, and confusion, having continued a long time, there entred into the Court a middle-aged woman, followed by a gllant Knight, and a most beautifull Shepherdesse, who with the grace of her habit, which was of white Taffa, fastened together in sundry places with sparkling Rubies, was thought to be one of those Nimphs so ado∣red in the Forrests; wherupon, every one giving way to these three per∣sons, that Woman took a Viall out of her pocket, and presenting it to the Shepherdesse, said aloude; It is you Miralinda, that must lend the last assistance to this inchantment, you have heretofore contemned the fire that burned Lindrenna, fear not then the flame that torments Griolanis, but en∣ter into this room where you will discover a secret very much importing you, and breaking this Viall on the Armour of the Knight, who hath per∣formed such incredible wonders for to come unto these infortunate Lo∣vers, you shall find your self, before you are either lost, or sought for. This Shepherdesse then, who was no other then Miralinda, that was come thither with Clarisel, and Urganda the unknown, without whose help this inchantment would never have been ended, ascending the stayrs, en∣tred couragiously into the room, and finding Alcidamant extended fast by Griolanis and Adelazia, who seemed to be dead, she brake the Viall upon his Armour, which was no sooner done, but the ayr began to clear, the fire to be clean extinct; and the two Lovers as sound and fair as ever they had been, rose up with the same judgement they had befor their torment, and assuring themselvs that their deliverance was effected by the valour of Alcidamant, and confidence of Miralinda, who had upon her head the crown of Roses, which Adelazia had gotten in the adventure of the triumph of love, they kneeled down to thank them for their assistance, but they not in∣during such submission, presently lifted them up, just as Urganda, that was not yet known, came in with Clarisel, Rozalmond, Armazia, Trasiclea, Gri, Amadis, Palmirenna, and the rest, whom Griolanis and the fair Queen of Co∣rolandaya, caressed in that manner as is not wel able to be delivered, wher∣fore I will passe it over in silence, to tell you that an hour being spent in these compliments, during the which Urganda being known, and very much honoured by all those Lords, she desired them to give her audi∣ence, whereupon she said unto them. Incomparable Princesses, and you most excellent Knights, ye have indeed great reason to rejoyce at the presence of one another, because the whole world hath nothing so rare and precious as you, howbeit I will adde some-what yet to the glory of your contentment. Fair Shepher∣desse, said she to Miralinda (who rendred all those Princesses amazed at her marvellous beauty) give me that Crown of Roses, and remember the speech I used to you, at your ascending hither, that you should find your self, before you were either lost, or fought for: You beleeve that you are Daughter to Armedor, a Shepherd of Bellombre, behold your discent in these three Roses; so presenting the Crown, which she held in her hand, to all the company, they discerned these words written about it; Miralinda the the Daughter of the Marquis of Monteclare. O! Is it pos∣sible said Alcidamant, that I should meet with a Sister here of such valew▪
Come and let us embrace my dearest Miralinda, for I am Alcidamant your brother, and son to the Marquis of Monteclare. Hereat Miralinda being very much amazed, was not able to speak a word, but at length better re∣collecting her selfe, she fell on her knees before Alcidamant, and with tears of joy said unto him. My Lord, this is a lucky day for me, and how much doe I owe to my good fortune, which hath made me known to be the sister of so great a Knight! Ah Madam, continues she, addressing her speech to Vrganda, how wonderfull is yourskill, and what can you wish from me hereafter, which I will not most willingly give to your service? you have drawn me from out the lees of the people to raise me in this manner, but I will abase my selfe whensoever you shall please for to testifie that I will never forget so powerfull an obligation. It was not I alone, said Vrganda, that knew the secret of your birth (though no body now could discover it but I this wicked woman, whose body you see here divided in two peices, had foretold it in this Pillar, which is standing yet before the Palace gate, for this is her Prophesie. The Prophesie. WHen the excellent Turtle, and the redoubted Lyon, comming forth of one prison, shall  in the flames, the strayed blood shall be known, beauty shall re-assume her former luster, and the punishment of a vielated Law shall be converted into joy. The intelligence of these words is it not now clear? are not you that excellent Turtle? and this famous Knight, is not he that redoubted Lyon, both come from one womb, which the Inchantresse figured by a prison, and out of your own knowledge do not you see the strayed blood recovered? But let us passe farther, Beauty shall re-assume her former luster. Is not that true by the deliverance of this brave Knight, and of the soveraign Lady of this Kingdom, who are now as much in their luster, as ever they were, and the torment they have suffered, is it not changed into delight? Certainly you now know the verity of these obscure words, and no man can doubt but you are descended of that illustrious race, which produceth such wor∣thy and generous persons. Embrace then again this valiant brother of yours, and further call to mind how when he was knighted by Don Clari∣sel, a Damosel advertised you from the learned Merea, that you should not make difficulty to girt on his sword, for you should one day more esteem of the knowledge of him, then of the possession of an Empire. Hereat Alcidamant and Miralinda well remembring all that Vrganda had spoken, and embracing afresh, their caresses were renewed, Adelazia, Tra∣siclea, Palmirenna, Armazia, , Archedidella, Brandimanda, and Agriclea gave Miralinda a thousand kisses with such content to Don Clarisel, that he was even ravished with joy, to see his Shepherdesse so exceedingly honoured; Night then being come, Adelazia having caused her Palace to be adorned with her choysest furniture, assigned to those excellent Princes the chiefest part of it, and remayned with those beauteous Ladies in her own ordinary lodgings.
CHAP. XXXIII. The brave Turnament that is held at the marriage of Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and those other Princes of Greece. VRganda having closed up Rozalmonds wounds in a night, all those Princes, which infinitly desired the accomplishment of their happinesse, assem∣bled together, and resolved to take one and the same day for the consummation of their con∣tent, but having no lesse care of their Ladies sal∣vation, then of their own satisfaction, they concluded in representing their pains unto them to set before their eyes the vanity of their Idols in the greatness of that Almighty God, who vouchsafed to shed his most precious blood, for to restore us unto the way of grace, from which we were strayed by the revolt of our first parents: Entring then all with this design into the room wher the Princesses were, they perswaded them to go and walk into the Gardens, and there separating themselves into severall walks, and each one taking his Mistris by the arm, spake so passionately and effectually for himselfe, as he easily prevayled with her, to resolve upon the third day following, for the celebration of their Nuptials. This first point being determined according to their desires, they began to talke unto them of the excellency of the Christian Religion, of the mysterie of the Trinity, of the Incarnation, Death, and Resurrection of the Sonne of God, of the mission of the Holy Ghost, of the Institution of the Sacraments, and shewing them the Heavens and the Sunne, they drew them insensibly to the knowledge of the Creator of them, which could not be but farre more perfect and excellent, in so much that being assisted with the love they bore them, they were soon induced to be bap∣tized, and accordingly the same day Adelazia sent for three Christian Her∣mits, which she had suffered to live in her Kingdom, by whom being yet better instructed in the chiefest Articles of the faith, the Temple of those Idols, she had formerly adored, was cleansed of a number of several Ima∣ges, whereof three or four being beaten to peices by our Knights, confir∣med them further in the beleefe that they were of no power. Time and desire then pressing our Lovers, and making them hasten every thing. These Princes received the first Character of Christians, Armazia conducted by Alcidamant, who was her Godfather, Trasiclea by Rozalmond, Palmirenna by Florisbel, Adelazia by Amaais, Amplamira by Cla∣rismond, Brandimanda by Floridan, Archesidella by Sestilian, and the fair Agri∣clea by Griolanis, which being performed they returned to the Palace, lea∣ving those good fathers in the Church for to instruct the principal persons of Corolandaya, who after the example of their Soveraign cheerfully embraced this new Law, beleeving by what was shewed them, that it was
much better than that which they had so long a time professed. Mean while our Lovers, thinking of nothing but the day, which was to place them in the supreme degree of their glory, prepared most magni∣ficent apparell, and especially the Ladies, who desiring to make a demon∣stration of all their beauties, omitted nought that could add any thing to grace themselves withall. Nothing was heard but Violms, Haubois, consorts of Instruments, and voyces, all the shops of the Citie were shut up, the people made bon∣fires, and preparations for Masques, Playes, and Feasting; from all parts of the Kingdom arrived Knights and Ladies, that came to celebrate the deliverance and nuptials of their Queen: Briefly, all things were disposed to delight, and the third day seemed no lesse tedious to the people, then to those valiant Princes, who at length beholding it appear thorough their windows, were incontinently attyred most richly, and so entred all into the presence, whither those Princesses repayred not long after like so many Goddesses. Many sweet and amorous discourses passing between them, Rozalmond in a suit and cloak of blew velvet, embroydered with gold and pearle, placed himselfe on the right hand of Armazia, whose Gown was of the same colour, and Florisbel on the left: The brave Alcidamant followed him in a dublet of white sattin, his hose and cloak of crimson velvet, en∣riched with an embroyderie of gold, pearle, and stones, being on the right side of the beautifull Trasiclea, attyred in the same colours, whom Don Sestilian held by the left hand: Amadis was the third with his fairest Palmitenna, and the Marquis of Beltamir, having his cloak and hose of black velvet, powdered over with silver oes, amongst the which a number of sparkling diamonds being aptly placed, gave a marvellous lustre: Cla∣risel of Gunidaya was the next in a dublet, hose, and cloak of green sattin wrought al over with gold and silver, having the incomparable Miralinda, betwixt him and the Count of Pandelia, in a Gown of white sattin, cut upon carnation taffea, and all set with great diamonds. After him went Floridan with his Amplamira, and the gentle Marquis of Cardana, appa∣relled both in purple sattin most richly embroydered: Griolanis and the most beauteous Adelazia followed them, accompanied with the King of Bronzartes, neer kinsman to the Queen, so set with stones, as every one was amazed at the riches of their clothes: Then marched Lucibel, and the fair Infanta of Martaria, Grian and Brandimanda; Russian, and the delicate Agriclea, assisted by the chiefest Princes of the Kingdom, and so sumptu∣ously apparelled, as they had no cause to envy their companions. This excellent troop at length arrived at the Church, where the Her∣mits having sung Masse, they were married together with all the ceremo∣nies requisite in such cases: That done they returned to the Palace, and there dinner being prepared with all the state and magnificence that might be, they sate down attable in the same order as they went to Church. Having been entertained then with all the most exquisite and choysest meats, that water, land, or ayr could yeld, they resolved to make a turna∣ment, wherein a thousand selected Knigts should be divided into two bands, one of them to be led by zalmond, that was to be seconded by Amadis, Clarisel, Floridan, Luciel, Sestilian, Florisbel, and Russian; and the other by Alcidament, who was to be assisted by Grian, Grielamis, Trasi∣clea,
Brandimanda, Armorand, Grinaldo, Crisander, and Falemond, who being disinchanted by the valour of Alcidamant, would by no means depart be∣fore the solemnization of the nuptials of these Lords. Now dinner being done, and a thousand Knights ready within the Barriers, the Princes went and armed themselves, and a little after appea∣red in the place like so many gods of Battail: The Marquis of Beltamir, and the Admirall of Corolandaya being placed, as the Iudges in their scaffolds, and the trumpets sounding from all parts, those two troops, wherein the glory of all the Knight-hood in the world was assembled, began to set forth, and those two invincible Champions, Alcidamant, and Rozalmond, charging their Launces one against another, incountred with such fury, that the earth even trembled under their horses feet, their staves were broken into a thousand shivers, and yet they not so much as moved in their saddles, passed along like two Rocks standing firm against the vio∣lence of an enraged floud; Amadis and Grians course was performed with as much grace and force; Griolanis and Clarisel ran against each other with like fortune; equall was the honour between Trasiclea, and Floridan, be∣twixt Brandimanda and Lucibel; but Grinaldo was unhorsed by the gentle Russian of Media; Armorand and Sestilian were both overthrown to the earth, so was Crisander by the valiant Florisbel, and Falemond dismounted him against whom he addressed his Launce; In the meantime the two troops being incountred, above two hundred Knights were layd on the ground, who withdrawing aside for fear of being trampled under the horses feet, there began almost pleasant bickering: Alcidamant and Rozal∣mond put all in confusion, their swords fell like thunderbolts whersoever they lighted; Amadis overturned all that he met withall, Grian left not a Knight in his saddle; Clarisel flew about like lightning, Griolanis seemed a fury, Floridan, Lucibel, Russian, and Florisbel did wonders as they went, Trasiclea, Brandimanda, Armorand, and Grinaldo, who were horsed again, made no lesse an havock; briefly, the victory hung equally ballanced every where, and upon the sole force of the Chieftains depended the con∣tent of the turnament. Rozalmond jealous of Alcidamants glory, Amadis of Grians, and Clarisel envying the honour which Griolanis acquired, went and assayled them all at one time, and began one of the bravest combats that ever were seen a∣mongst six Knights, Rozalmonds, & Alcidamants blows were tempests, those of Amadis and Grian had little lesse fury; and when one delivered a terrible stroak, he was sure to be presently paid again in the same money; now was Alcidamant overturned on the crupper of his horse, by and by Rozalmond was strucken down to the pummell of the saddle; Amadus and Grian knoc∣ked their chins against their brests; Griolanis and Clarisel lost their stirrops; Trasiclea, Brandimanda, and the Pagan Princes valiantly sustayned the fury of Russian, and his companions; and the Knights animated by the example of their Leaders, maintayned themselves still upon equall terms, in con∣clusion this turnament wherein no blood was drawn, yeelded a most de∣lightfull spectacle: Alcidamant and Rozalmond wearied with one anothers horrible blows, Amadis, and Grian amazed at each others strength, Clarisel, and Griolanis vext for that neither of them could prevayl, separated them∣selves all at one instant, and began to fly in again amidst the troops, when as they saw thirteen most dreadfull Gyants appear, mounted on such great
Horses, as their heads seemed to touch the very clouds. The sight of these Collosses possessing them with a new resolution, the Troups rallyed together, whilst those eleven couragious Princes, accom∣panied with Trasiclea and Brandimanda, got suddenly sharp Launces, and placed themselves most opposite to those thirteen Gyants, with whose desormitie the Ladyes had been very much troubled, had not Urganda laughing, made them confident of the valour of their Knights. These Monsters then approaching, with each of them a great Mast in his hand, all those Princes set spurs to their Horses, and dislodging with fury, went to incounter them in the midst of the race, with good hope to be revenged of the interruption they had brought to their sports; but their staves being broken as slightly, as if they had been Reeds, they were marvellously astonished to behold those horrible Gyants, changed in an instant into thirteen little Dwarfs, which marched before a Chariot, wherin Rozalmond knew Cassandra, with the most beautifull Penamonda of Greece, his Sister. O my dearest friend I said he addressing his speach to Cassandra, how much am I joyed with the sight of you, but how comes it that you are thus accompanyed with my sister? My Lord, answered she, I doe not bring her without good cause, she comes to congratulate with you, for your good fortune, and to go along with you about a seven∣night hence in an adventure of very great importance. Both you, and she, are most heartily welcome, replyed Rozalmond, and I am very glad that she is here to keep my Armazia company. Hereupon the Princes alighting from their horses, went and saluted the young Princesse, who ravished them all with the wonder of her beau∣tie, which no lesse amazed the Ladyes, that came presently down to her, than she was carried with admiration at the sight of so many graces as were assembled in them. A good while being spent then in complements, these Lords and La∣dyes were ready to ascend the Palace, leaving the ending of the turnament to another time, when as they descryed two hundred Knights richly ar∣med, following a triumphant Chariot, wherin sate an old man on a gol∣den Throne, with an Imperiall Crown on his head, and a young Lady at his feet: This so stately an equipage drawing every one narrowly to ob∣serve them, Palmirenna perceived that it was the Emperour her Father, and her cousin Agiliana, the King of Arbales Daughter, wherat both she, with Amplamira, and the French Princes wife were so troubled, that they were ready to sink down in the place, wheras contrarily Rozalmond, who knew his mind well, went straight-way with Griolanis unto him, and bid him very welcome to that Court; The Emperour presently knowing that valiant Prince, and understanding that Griolanis was King of Corolan∣daya, instantly descended from his Chario, and exceedingly caressing them, demanded whether these Tryumphs were not for the celebration of the Nuptials of Palmirenna, and her Sisters. Great Monarch, answe∣red Rozalmond, they are indeed this day married, and so is also the Daughter of the mighty Emperour of Gardaci, whom it hath pleased heaven to bestow on me, as likewise that of the Sovereign Lord of Tra∣mazond to this invincible Warriour, shewing Alcidamant unto him, toge∣ther, with the Queen of this Countrey, the Princesse of Clariana, and the fair Brandimanda, Lady of the Amazons. Now verely, said the Empe∣rour,
I praise my good fortune for conducting me hither so opportunly for to have a share in this your joy and solemnitie; But where are my Children, that they doe not appeare before me? Sir, answered Rozl∣mond, the fear of your displeasure, for the fault they have committed against the authoritie of a Father and a Soveraign, no doubt keeps them away, but assuring my self that you have freely pardoned them, I will present them straight-way unto your Majestie, wherupon Amadis holding Palmirenna by the hand, Floridan Amplamira, and Lucibel Archesidella, they fell on their knees before the Emperour, so ashamed, as they durst not look him in the face, but he having very much caressed them, and testified that these Princes alliance did infinitely content him, they rose up for to entertain Agiliana, whilst the Emperour, admiring the excellent beauty of the Ladyes, went and saluted them with all the courtesie that might be. These compliments done, they returned all to the Palace, where the Emperour being very honourably lodged, left his Neipce Agiliana in the hands of Palmirenna, or to say better of Don Sestilian of Spain, who ha∣ving never made tryall of the power of love subjected his freedome to the merits of this beautifull Infanta, remaining her Knight, by the con∣sent of Palmirenna. Supper time come, and the Tables sumptuously co∣vered, all the Lovers were set as at dinner, where they began to discourse with the Emperour, of all that had past the day before, who taking great delight in the sight of this brave company, beheld them one after another, and fixing on Amadis, he could not choose but tell what passion he had been in for him, when he thought him a Wench, which made them all to laugh, especially Palmirenna, that then called to mind, the pleasure she enjoyed at that time, under the disguise of Amadis his sex, but Supper lasting too long for these Lovers, they rose and went to Dauncing, the better to entertain the Emperour, who knowing the impatience of their desires, caused them to be lighted severally to their chambers, where we will leave them gathering the fruit of their amorous pains, with such de∣light, as may be better imagined, than exprest. CHAP. XXXIIII. The marvellous adventure that happened in the Court of Corolandaya, and the strange end therof. THe night having been too short for the desires of these Lovers, especially of Rozalmond, Alcida∣mant, and Clarisel, who till then had never tasted the pleasure of their Ladyes chast embraces, they all met together in the Hall, and for divers dayes together continued their joy with such content∣ment, as Fortune seemed unable to crosse them, but that inconstant Goddesse, which alwayes mixes bitter with the sweet, changed the face of all their delight, and so overthrew the hope of this Court, that without the particular providence of heaven, all the glory of it had been lost in a moment.
One day as all this princely company were discoursing together, there entred into the Hall a young Gentlewoman with her eyes full of tears, and of so sad a countenance, as moved all that were present to pitty, in one hand she had a very rich sword, and her left arm sustained one of the goodliest Shields that ever was seen: Assoon as she was advanced to the midst of the Hall, she for a good while observed all those Lords and Prin∣cesses, ravished as it were with the sight of so rare an object, and finding that there was a generall silence over all, in expectation of that which she would say, she demanded for Griolanis, and the beautious Queen his Wife. Here we are said they, making towards her, Gentlewoman, will you have anything with us? Great King, answered she, falling on her knees before him, it is not without reason that every one talks of you, as of the prime Knight of the world, and that the beauty of this incomparable Queen, whom the gods have given to your merit, is preferred before all other on the earth, for now I see more than heretofore I could beleeve; I am come hither to ob∣tain one boon of you, and of this fair Princesse, refuse me not, I beseech you, nor let me be the only afflicted woman living that failes of succour from you. Gentlewoman, answered Griolanis, if I am able to doe any thing for you, you may speak freely, for I will most willingly grant whatsoever you shall desire of me, and so I think will the queen my Wife. Yes verely, said Adelazia, I will promise her any thing she will aske. I could expect no lesse, replyd she, wherfore Sir, be pleased to Arm your self presently, but you shall use no other Sword nor shield, then these most excellent ones which I have brought of purpose for you, and come both of you along with me, you to combat a Gyant that hath ravi∣shed me, and she to deliver a servant of mine detained in the charmes of an old Sorceresse, which torments him for disdaining her affections. It is no small displeasure, said Griolanis, to leave such good company, but since we are obliged by promise, we will follow you instantly, wherupon cau∣sing his Arms to be brought him, he took leave of all those Princes, who were exceedingly grieved at their so sudden departure, and finding in the Palace-yard the Gentlewomans coach with six lustie Horses, he and his Wife entred into it, and were carryed away with such speed, as they were instantly out of sight. The whole Court being very much troubled with this adventure, eve∣ry one spake diversly of it, and some of the Knights were already of opi∣nion to follow after them, when as Urganda, and Cassandra, comming from making their Conjurations cryed out; To Arms, Knights, to arms, and suffer not Griolanis, and his Wife to be so wretchedly cast away, they are betrayed by Lestrigond, Neipce to that Maxiana, which the other day was cut in pieces, and if they be not rescued before night, you shall never see them more. At these words the Hall was presently empty, the Knights ran all about thorow the Palace, and the astonishment was every where so great, that no body took care of comforting the Ladyes, which were mightily afflicted, whilst all the Princes were arming themselves, and their Squirs were making ready their horses, whilst the people were running to the Church to pray unto the new god, whom they adored, for the safetie of their Soveraignes.
Griolanis and his Wife being swiftly carryed away, arrived at a Forrest some three leagues from the Citie, where the Knight alighting out of the Coach at the sight of two dreadfull Gyants, drew out the Damosels rich Sword, and with greatfury discharged it upon one of them with an ex∣pectation to see him lye at his feet, but it broke into an hundred pieces as that very first blow, nothing remained in his hand but the bare hilt, wher∣at he was very much amazed, but far more when as he beheld his Shield fall all to fitters, as it had been glasse, with the stroak of the other Gyant; for all this danger yet being no way dismayed, albeit he thought he was betrayed, he caught up a great arm of a Tree to defend himselfe, but those two horrible Collossos delivering two terrible blows both at one instant on his Helmet, layd him all along on the earth, where with cords, which they had ready for the purpose, they bound him hand and foot, and so carrying him to the Coach, where Adelazia was, who tearing her hair fil∣led the ayre with her shrieks, they instantly galloped away as fast as they could drive. In the mean time Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and Grian, being sooner mounted then the rest, rode away with such speed, as in lesse than an houre they ar∣rived at the Forrest, where unluckily taking a wrong way, they rode up and down seeking in vain for Griolanis, and his Queen, who at length met with a big Knight, bearing two Bears in his shield, which moved with the cryes of the Lady, first of all cut asunder the harness of the horses that drew so rich a prey, and then sheathing up his Sword, he charged his Launce so furiously against the Gyants, whom he saw making towards him, that he ran one of them thorow the shield, and arme, overthrowing him to the ground, but being scarce able to support the violence of both their in∣counters upon him at once, he had much adoe to keep himself in his saddle, neverthelesse he re-settled himself well again, by that time the other Gyant had finished his course. This fortunate beginning possessing Griolanis with some hope, hee would fain have got out of the Coach to have succoured the Knight, in regard he beheld the ovethrown Gyant, and the other set both upon him together, but finding no means to unbind himself, Adelazia being also in the same case, he was ready to burst with grief, whilst the combat grew very cruell and dangerous: The Knight of the Bears, who had not been used to lose bloud, feeling a great gash on his left arme, discharged his sword with such fury upon him that seemed to be most eager in pursuing him, as he cut away a good piece of his Helmet, together with one of his ears, the point lighting upon his shoulder with that force, as it overturned him on the crupper of his horse, wherat the other mightily incensed struck the Knights shield so rudely against his head, that he made him knock his chin against his brest. This terrible blow rather animating, than any way discouraging the Knight of the Bears, he took his sword in both his hands, and let it de∣scend with such fury upon his shoulder that struck him last, as he opened him to the very waste, overthrowing him to the earth with a noyse like of that of a Pyne, which the violence of the winds hath torn up by the roots, wherwith the remaining Gyant, being more enaged then afraid, thundered in such sort on the Knights Helmet, as made him knock his chin against the pommell of his saddle, quite deprived of sense. O! said
Grialanis, (as much vexed with this, as he was glad at the former blow) that I should be thus unable to revenge my selfe on this Gyant, who hath unfortunately reduced this brave Knight to such an estate, as he will not be able to deliver us; whereupon striving with all his might, but in vaine, to break his cords in sunder, he descryed a gallant Knight come gallop∣ping to them, whom by the devise of his shield, he knew to be the valorous Princesse of Tramazond, which so assured him of their liberty, as he shou∣ted for joy, with the noyse wherof the knight of the bears comming out of his trance resetled himself more furious than a Bel baied with a company of dogs, and fearing lest the Knight that he saw approaching, should be∣reave him of the honour of the combat, he turned him to the Giant which pursued him, and discharged so cruell a stroak on his arm, as he sent it to∣gether with his Curtelas to the earth, and giving him no leasure to bethink himselfe, he made a thrust with such force at his belly, as it ran him quite thorow and thorow, chasing his soule to hell, there to receive the pu∣nishment of his wicked life. In the mean while the fairest Trasiclea arrived, who having with won∣der observed the valour of this invincible Warriour, to her altogether un∣known, and beholding Lestrigond save her selfe by flight, she unlooses the two Lovers, which presently went to the Knight of the Bears, and gave him all possible thanks for their deliverance. I have not done any thing, said he, but what a good Knight is bound couragiously to undertake for the succour of the afflicted; wherefore there is no thanks due unto me for it, but if you think yourselves any way obliged unto me, acknowledge it by telling me who you are. Noble Sir, answered Griolanis, that was as much taken with the beauty of his face, as with the force of his arm, I am called Griolanis, and this fair Lady is the Queen of Corolandaya, wherin you now are, both of us this day most wretchedly betrayed, & no question had served for the satisfaction of our enemies malice, without the assistance of your valour. Is the inchantment then, replyed the Knight, wherein you were retayned brought to an end? Truly I am very sorry for it, not in that you are freed from the torment you suffered, but in re∣gard I arrived not time enough, to try whether the honour of that adven∣ture, for which I have made a long Journey hither, would have lighted on me. Now who is that fortunate Knight, which hath acquired such glory? The Husband of this excellent Princesse, answered Griolanis (poynting to Trasiclea, whose exquisite beauty the stranger much admired) named the knight of the burning Rock, that formerly bore three palms on his shield. Verely, said the strange Knight, I doe not marvell at it now; for that brave Warriour, being incomparably the best Knight I have known, it was like∣ly that no other could be able to carry it from him. Ah Madam, conti∣nued he, kissing Trasicleas hands, how happy are you in the possession of so renowned a Knight. It is the greatest blisse I have in the world, an∣swered she, but Sir, I could wish it were accompanied with the knowledge of you, for the brave act, which you lately performed, obligeth so many of us together, as I cannot be without this curiosity. Madam, answered he, as it is my extream good fortune, that you desire to know me, so I must humbly beseech you for some reasons to excuse me, if I doe not obey you herein for the present.
Trasiclea perceiving that he desired to conceale himselfe, importuned him no farther, and causing Griolanis and Adelazia to mount upon one of the Gyants horses, they all rode on towards Agricant, and on the way they met with Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and Grian, who beholding Griolanis and his wife safe from all danger, went and embraced them, with such demon∣stration of joy and affection, as if they had not seen them of a long time before, and desiring to be informed of their deliverance, they shewed them the valiant Knight of the Bears, to whom Rozalmond addressing him∣selfe, said. Noble Sir, shall we not have the honour to know you? That you shall, answered the Knight, for being altogether your servant, I may by no means conceale my selfe from you; whereupon suddenly alight∣ing, and lifting up the visier of his Helmet, he discovered himselfe to be Persides, brother to Floridan of Persia, whereat Rozalmond was so exceed∣ing glad, that he held him a great while embraced in his arms, and then left him to the entertainment of the rest, who after many compliments, having related unto him all that had past in Corolandaya, they all got to horse, and rode to the Citie, where after the return of all those which were gone in the quest of Griolanis, there was such joy for that so dange∣rous an affair had (beyond all hope and expectation) so prosperous a conclusion, that nothing was to be seen but bonfires, tryumphs, and feastings. CHAP. XXXV. All the Princes depart out of Corolandaya, some to goe to the Castle of Treasure, and the rest to return into Martaria. THE arrivall of the gentle Persides of Greece, and the happy deliverance of Griolanis & A∣delazia, filling al the Court of Corolandaya with joy, the Emperor of Martaria, perswa∣ded to the imbracing of the Christian religi∣on, resolved to be baptized, & to make chois of those two Lamps of war, Alcidamant, and Rozalmond, for his Godfathers, which was performed with all the state and magnifi∣cence, that so short a time would afford: And such were the delights and pleasures of this Court, as it seemed to be an earthly Para∣dise, but who knows not that there is not any content of long continuance in this world? for fortune interposing her envie, Brandlmanda fals ex∣treamly sick, whereat every one very much grieving, begins to fear some greater misfortune, which accordingly was not long in comming. Vrganda, seeing them one day all assembled in the hall, caused silence to be made, and then spake thus unto them. Brave Princes, if you estemed more of delight then glory, I should not now tell you that it is time for
you to betake you to your arms, first for the honour of that great God, whom we adore, and then for the conservation of those Empires, which are under the obedience of your Parents; The care that I have alwayes had to maintayn them in greatnesse, having made me the last night to con∣sider the aspect of the Stars, and the motions of the Moon, I discovered some presages of a mighty misfortune towards, and all the signs which I observed were so many thunderbolts, ready to fall on Christondome, whereupon turning over my books for to come to a more particular knowledge of the mischiefe, that so I might prepare a remedy for it, I found that the storm is raysed by the instigation of Idalcan, Emperour of Melly, who being infinitely displeased, for that he was vanquished by Silvan, at such time as Fulgoran and Prigmaleon covered the fields of Greece with an innumerable multitude of souldiers, stirs up all Paganism, together with Falanzar, great Emperour and Caliph of Siconia, his neer kinsman, in revenge of that affront, taking a slight occasion in the first place, to ruin the Empire of Ethiopia, (whereby he will commence his conquests) upon the alliance which Prigmaleon, who possesseth it, hath made with the Princes of Greece, changing his Religion for to have Po∣lixena, the daughter of Don Florisel of Niquea. The Posts run up and down, and their league is like to be so great, that most of the Princes of Paganism, and of the bravest Knights that worship Idols, are shortly to assemble, for to bring an incredible number of people into the field, in which regard I have resolved to dispatch away Cassandra, presently to advertise Don Florisel thereof, to the end that draw∣ing all the Christian Princes to his party, he may labour to repell the tem∣pest, which is to fall on Ethiopia; I know that the losse will be great on both sides, but if I be not much deceived, these Infidels shall not get out of so dangerous an enterprise, in any better sort then they have done at other times, for The Prophesie. THe Lyons, that divers ages have been shut up for their own good, being free from the chains which so long a time hath detayned them, shall then come forthroaring so dreadfully, that the Crows, unable to make use of their wings, shall be torn in peeces by the claws of these resuscitated beasts. In consideration whereof it is most necessary, that fix of you dissoldge to morrow, to give an end to the inchantment of the Castle of Treasure, scituated in the dangerous Forrests of the great Kingdom of Martan, neer adjoyning to the Empire of Mexico, a most difficult adventure, but upon the atchievement whereof assuredly depends the happinesse or ruin of Christendom. You shall be the first, said she to Rozalmond, that shall be ingaged herein, as having most inerest in the busines, you shall be accom∣panied with Amdis, with Clarisol, with Alcidamant, with Grian (who shall not defer this voyage for his wives sicknesse; the care of whose recovery I will take upon me) and with the brave King of Corolandaya. You shall carry all these fair Princesses your wives along with you, who will stand you in no little stand, and because the valint Knight of the Sal∣vages
wives keeps her bed, in her place we will send Penamonda of Greece, of whom I hope he will have no lesse regard, then of his own life. Madam, answered Rozalmond, if we did not know that the proudest buildings are soonest strucken with lightning, and that fortune makes greatnesse the object of her tyrannie, we should wonder to see such flou∣rishing Empires, as are now under the protection of a Crosse, subject to the menaces of a ruin, but being well assured of the inconstancy of the things of this world, & that God wil chastise his people that take no care to serve him, weverily believe that the rage of these infidels might soon overthrow our glory, if we should not be assisted from heaven, and with your skill; wherefore wee will most readily prepare our selves for the Enterprise which you have propounded, since it is of that importance you speak of, and not staying till to morrow we will dislodge instantly if you please. It will suffice that you depart at the time I have appointed, replyed Vrganda, so that I would have you take order for your affairs, whilst I turn over my books, and see whether I may be permitted to succour you in any sort. Going then from the hall to her Chamber, she left the company asto∣nished at such unwelcome news, but the greatnesse of these Champions courages not permitting them to fear any danger whatsoever, they turned them to the Emperour of Martaria, who desiring to appear a Christian, and to shew the Princes of Greece what esteem he made of their alliance, told them that he was resolved to return into Martaria, as soon as ever they were gone, and rayse fiftie thousand horse, for to passe into Ethiopia, under the conduct of Persides, Lucibel, and Sestilian, who was very glad of this occasion, that he might not be so soon separated from the beautifull Agiliana, his Mistris, who acknowledging the merits of this young Prince loved him very dearly. This zeale of the Emperour obliging the Grecian Princes, they rendred him a thousand thanks, and protested he should never find them unmind∣ful of so great a favour. On the other side Griolanis, seeing that he was sud∣denly to depart, gave out Commissions to leavy twenty thousand foot, under the leading of the gentle Russian of Media, and of the Marquis of Beltamir, Brandimanda being resolved to joyn twenty thousand Amazon horse unto them, which she sent to have raysed in her dominions, atten∣ding her recovery in Corolandaya. Whilst our six Warriours were preparing themselves, Cassandra flew away in a Chariot, which was never wanting to her designs, and all these Princes began to feel the displeasure of so sudden a separation; Agriclea sighed for the departure of Armazia, the Jnfantaes of Martaria, for that of their sister the fairest Palmirenna, and the mirth of the Court was sud∣denly converted into tears. The next morning then, Vrganda assembled all these great Knights in the hall, whither she caused six compleat armours to be brought, all of them so rich and strong, as they amazed every one, and presenting them to the six Knights, which were ingaged for the Enterprise of the Castle of Treasure, they presently quitted their own arms, and put on them, and as they were about to take their leave of the Emperour, a little Dwarfe entred in, followed by a very handsome Squire, who beholding all these Princes without their Helmets, went and fell at the feet of Alcidamant with tears of joy in his eyes. O my Lord! said he unto him, how haypy
am I, that have found you out thus, when least I hoped for it, do not re∣fuse to own me, I beseech you, but grant me the honour, as formerly I have been, to continue still to be your servant. That thou shalt, my dear Arnides, answered Alcidamant, for I will not turn thee away now, as I did whenI was anHermit, but how didst thou know that I was here? My Lord, replyed he, when you commanded me to leave you to the libertie of your sad thoughts, and return into France, I could not indure to quit you so, wherfore I retyred to a Village some three miles off, from whence I went once a-week to your Hermitage, but because I would not displease you with the sight of me, I came into your Grot at such times, as I knew you were making your accustomed complaints abroad under the trees, and judging by the continuance of the Lampes burning; that you were still alive, I stole away again softly, by which means at length finding you departed, I betook me to travell up and down, hoping that one day I should meet with you; and hearing of the wonders which have happe∣ned in this Court of late, by good fortune I came hither. I commend thy affection asmuch, as I am well pleased to see thee, said Alcidamant, thou art come very seasonably, wherefore prepare to be gone with me instantly. This short discourse ended, the Dwarf approched to Amadis, and said unto him; My Lord, do not you know me? No verely, said Amadis, for I do not remember that ever I saw thee before. Why thus it is, answered he, to doe service unto such as you are; can you call to mind the Grot in Martaria, whither I led you, when you had defeated the Monster of the mountain of Bears? Ah! my little Bastinel, said Amadis unto him, I must now confesse my fault, thou art he indeed that healedst me in a night. It is true, answered the Dwarf, that I am he who cured your wounds in lesse time then you speak of, but you never think of the recompence which you promised then to give me. Ask what thou wilt, said Amadis, and I will grant it thee. Why then, said Bastinel, I desire nothing but the fa∣vour, to be either yours, or the fair Princesse of Martaria your Wives Squire. Verely, said Palmirenna, that for all her sorrow, to part with her Father and Sister, could not choose but laugh, I will entertain thee most willingly, and me thinks it were better for thee to be with me, then my Lord Amadis, for so thou shalt be sure to leade a quieter and pleasanter life. Be it so then, said Bastinel, but, Madam, it shall be upon condition that if I fall in love with any of your fair Maids, you shall not be offen∣ded with it. Hereat every one fell a laughing, especially Mascarin, Miralinda's little Lover, that pressing thorow all the company, fell to caressing of Bastinel, and had much increased the mirth, if the sage Urganda had not urged the departure of these Knights, who addressed themselves to the Emperour for to receive his commandments. He having embraced them, left them to take their farewell of the rest, which was not done without many tears shed by these Princesses, that were to accompany them, howbeit conside∣ring that this separation was but for a further good, they went and seated themselves in a magnificent Chariot, which with eight excellent Horses Adelazia had prepared, and attended by these Princes mounted upon their Steeds, took their journey towards the great Kingdome of Martan. Two hours after, the Emperour imbarqued himself, with his two Sons-in-law,
Persides and Lucibel, for to return into Martaria. Let us leave them traver∣sing the Land and Seas, to speak a little of the Pagans resolution, who as∣sembled with a designe, to abate the greatnesse of the Christians, and range tham to the adoration of their Idols. CHAP. XXXVII. The Emperour Falanzar, Caliph of Siconia, solicited by Idalcan, Empe∣rour of Melly, assembles all Paganisme; the resolution they take to make warre upon the Princes of Greace, with the gene∣rall muster of their Army. MEn that are generous, have nothing so tender as their honour, which they cannot endure should be any way touched without some great resent∣ment therof: Idalcan Emperour of Melly calling to mind the slaughter of the Kings, and of a flou∣rishing Army, which he had conducted to Con∣stantinople for the succour of Prigmaleon, and be∣ing no lesse grieved for having been vanquished in his own particular, by Silvan, the son of Don Silves de la Silva (as hath been related in the five and thirtieth Chapter of our first part) he resolved once more to employ all his Friends, and to Arm all the world, rather than want the revenge of so outragious an af∣front. To this effect he dispatched away Courriers to divers parts, as soon as he was arrived in his Empire, desiring all the Kings and Princes adjoyning to his Countrey, to repair unto Falanzar, great Emperour, and Caliph of Siconia, his neere kinsman, for to deliberate of certain affairs, much importing the glory of Paganism. These dispatches made, he commanded all his Captaines to come be∣fore him, unto whom he delivered commissions for the raysing and arm∣ing of threescore thousand men, and departing instantly therupon, he went into Siconia, where his rage furnishing him with reasons able to perswade very much, he so incensed Falanzar against the Christians, that he resolved to set up his rest on this quarrell, and to revenge his Kinsman at the cost of all the Pagans. Bethinking him then of those which might best serve his enterprize, he sent away messengers to the furious King of Grifalara, to Brufaldar, King of Gedrosia; and to the valourous Artogant, Soldan of Francapa; to Mar∣maran, Sophy of Bultera; to Brizardan, Soldan of Aratifia; to the grand Salvage; to the King of Russia; to Gronfalin of Moreda, King of Facea; to Gorgophon, the redoubted Colonell of the Gyants; to Marcelian, Empe∣rour of Medra; to the proud Caliph of Francapia Antomedon; to Fierastron, King of Balivan; to Asturion, the strong Soldan of Brutacon; to Furca∣mond, King of Martan; to Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, whom after∣wards he reconciled to Gorgophon about the carrying away of Armazia; to the King of Cabilla; to Palamedes, King of Cassandria; and briefly to all the Princes from whom he could hope for any assistance, in such
sort, that at the end of two moneths, there were in person at his Court, together with the Kings of Mauritania, of Tremizen, of Zamphara, of Zambar, of Cartagena, of Aganezes, of Angali, of Numidia, of Bisaura, of Thunes, of Teneri, of Miramolin; of the Isle of Till, of the Trago∣nites, of Zanfara, of Calizan, of Morlavia, of Nazamor, of Siziphala, of Tingafort, of Barnagas, of Monomatapan, of Arginare, and of Cor∣nata (all which came at the request of the Emperour of Melly) an hun∣dred and thirteen Kings, Emperours, Caliphs, Soldans, and Soveraigne Princes, from whose valours great wonders were to be expected. All these great Lords being by Falanzar assembled in a stately and spations Hall where he had caused so many Thrones to be erected, and perceiving a silence over all, he spake in this manner. The Oration of Falanzar Emperour of Siconia, to the Pagan Potentates. MIghty Princes, I have troubled you so far, as to assemble you here for to represent two things unto you, which are of great conse∣quence for us. The glory of our Altars much abated by the in∣solence of certain petty Princes of Greece, and the little resent∣ment of the outrages, we have a thousand times received ther∣upon; It is more then time, me thinks for us to rouze up our selves, to appeare more zealous in the service of the gods, more sensible, and lesse daunted for some passed losses, which have fallen upon us by the indiscreet ma∣naging of our designes, and by our neglect of taking hold of occasion, when it hath been fairly presented unto us. Wee have suffered them to grow great, for which they mock us; nay, that is worse, are so vain, as to threaten to come and share our Crowns with us at their pleasure, to put us all to the sword, to force our people to acknowledge their Dominion, and to render all the earth subject to their com∣mand. Is not this a vanity too insupportable to beare, and shall we endure to have them come and seek us in our houses, for to deprive us of our Wives, our Lands, and our liberties? Verely it amazes me, that all Paganisme being replenished with mighty Emperours, Callphs, Soldans, Princes, and excellent Knights, no man would never yet speak of over-running these insolents, and not leaving them so much as a foot of ground, upon which they might tread as Masters; For mine own part, I am resolved to exhaust all my treasures, put all my subjects in∣to Arms, and not to leave a souldier in all the Empire of my Cousin of Melly (who hath far more cause to complain, and speak as I doe) for to march into the Empire of Ethiopia (whose Prince hath of late played Bankerupt without gods, for to allie himself with their enemies) and utterly to subvert it, to the end that in some sort discharging the duty I owe unto their providence, which have made me Lord of a great people, I may not draw their displeasure upon me, so that if your zeale be like unto mine (as by your countenances I am perswaded to hope;) you will not stick at the consideration of the pains you are to suffer, but will chear∣fully go to the Empires which are destined to your valors, and appropriating the Crowns therof unto your selves, you may in such sort receive some kind of satis∣faction for your labours; Now if you apprehend the dangers which are oftentimes incident to these troublesome undertakings, remember that you shall do no more than my self; I will alwayes arch with you in Armes, I will encounter the
enemy couragiously, and ever being the first at blowes, I will still be the last, if I may, to retyre. Behold, great Kings, the Emperour of Mellyes designes, together with mine freely discovered, let us now understand your minds, to the end we may know from whom we may expect to be succoured in so just and glorious an en∣terprise. It is usual with men to differ in opinion upon the proposition of any mat∣ter whatsoever: The most part of these Princes, and especially they which desired to seek for glory in bloud and slaughter, found this designe to be generous, howbeit the rest, who weighed all things with a more mature deliberation, thought it not fit to be imbraced. Falanzar required a generall advice, but because they could not speak all at once, every man cast his eye upon the King of Cabilla, a man of age and experience, and desired him to answer for them all, who after he had often refused to deli∣ver his opinion before so many Emperours and Princes, that were far more eminent in greatnesse than himself, at length spake in this manner. The King of Cabillaes answer to Falanzar. GReat Monarch, the Designe you propound is very generous, full of zeale for the glory of our Altars, and for the honour of our Crowns, but it is no lesse difficile than great, and when I consider the mis∣chiefes that follow Wars, whereof the event is ever doubtfull, I neither can authorise, nor will counsell you to follow it. You attempt most redoubted enemies, that were never beaten, either abroad or at home, all together, or apart, and that know so well how to manage their affaires, as they will make an Elephant of a Rat, and so favoured of Fortune, that when a man thinks them at the lowest of the wheele, hee shall be sure to find them on the top. Our Predecessors have many times covered the fields of Greece with an infinitie of men; Have they thereby abated their greatnese? Nay, ather they have augmented it, and their own defeat hath served to render them more more glorious. If you will call to mind the mighty assemblies which the proge∣nitors of the great Duke of Muscovy, that now hears me, have heretofore made, or that furious voyage of Aleppo, where it was believed that all the earth would tremble at the very sight of our Standards, but not to go so far, if you will consider that here are now present, many Successours of a number of Princes slaine in these last expeditions, rashly undertaken for the King of Canabea, who at length proved to be their Kinsman, and for the young Emperour of Ethio∣pia, whom love hath turned enemie to his owne gods, without doubt you will not so lightly precipitate year selves, nor forsaking the rest you so quietly enjoy, will you go and seek out travells, whose recompence is but ill assured; the Descent to hell is easie, so is not the return, we may carry a million of men into their Territories, but how many of them can we say, that we shall save from the fury of their swords? I know that revenge is sweet, but I condemne those that desire it, when they are not able to obtain it. Nor de I speak this, because I misdoubt the valour of our Knights, and of so many Gyants as we have, whose
forces are extream, but figure  your selves I pray you, Prigmalion, Fulgoran, and the brave Bastard of Media, in the heads of an hundred thou∣sand Horse, cutting our squadrens in peeces; represent unto your selves Florisel of Niquea, Don Rogel of Greece, Spheramond Emperour of the Parthians, as three furies amongst our Troops, and fifty Princes of their blood, nothing inferiour to them in valour, overthrowing all that ever they meet withall; besides, have you not heard of those two invincible Champions? Alcidamant and Rozalmond, whose blows are no lesse violent then lightning; Aske of the mighty Gorgophon, who hath seen and encountred them in armes, what is to be expected from their fury; Demand of the redoubted Brizardine, Sol∣dan of Aralafia, and of the brave Arastron, whom here you behold, or ra∣ther of me alas! Demand I say what they thinke, and what I beleeve concerning the valour of a young Amadis, who in the Empire of Martaria, that went dis∣guised in the habit of a mayden Slave, they are witnesses of his force, and for my part I can tell to my ever lasting griefe, that his blows are so many tempests, under the fury whereof I have seen Rifantes, who might justly vaunt himselfe to be one of the best Knights of the world, cleft down to the shoulders; but to goe further yet, what thinke you of the famous Knight of the Salvage, who fils all the earth with wonder, or of a young Shepherd called Clarisel, before whom the strongest Gyants have fallen, are not they to be feared? Or will the Jncounter of the valiant King of Corolandaya, and a thousand more that I could name, whose swords would be so many thunderbolts, on the heads of our friends, leave you in assurance of victory? Verely me thinkes J see our Soul∣diers already tumbling into the Sea at the landing of our ships, I see them some cut off by the middle, others divided in twain, and all of them bathing in a Ri∣ver of blood; Wherefore J will never conclude for war, or counsell you to be Au∣thour of their destruction, for it is a greater glory to preserve, then to conquer a people. Hewbeit, if they should prove so adacious, as to come hither, for to see how our Crowns would become their heads, then would J speake no longer of rest, but would be the the first in the field, and let the world know, it was not the feare of death made me produce these reasons, which I have delivered to perswade you, that a certaine peace is better than an uncertaine victory. This discourse very powerfull, and maintained with the experience of things, having put them all in suspence, every one began to consider the consequence of this design, when as Roussardan the furious King of Gri∣salara, rose up, and casting a disdainfull look on the King of Cabilla, turned him to Falanzar, saying. GReat Emperour of Sciconia, the advice which the King of Cabilla gives you, is indeed very fit for him, that prefers his pleasures before glory, but most pernicious for a Prince, that desires to render himselfe greater by his owne vertue, than by the possession of States, and I wonder that so many excellent Knights, wherewith this place is replenished, could all this while indure such prating, as hath done nothing but undervalew us; he basts the power of our enemyes, as if ours were lesse, and measuring every ones arme by his owne, which is unable to support more then one Scepter, would perswade us that those of the Christians are stronger, and their swords better edged than ours, but we should prove as cowardly, as he to belve him, and it would for ever hereafter be a shame unto as, if we should nw retire upon so unworthy a consideration: I agree with
him, that the effect of War is doubtfull, nor will I deny but that some of their Knights are strong and valiant, but where should we seek for honour but in dan∣gers, and what shall crown our work, but the difficulty of our enterprize? That is it which must renown us, and the rememberance of the passed wars, ought to worke a contrary effect to that he speaks of, not to increase our fear, but our cou∣rage, for obtayning that which our Predecessors could not obtayne to, wee shall joyne the glory of their actions to ours, and tryumphing over those that have vanquished them, we shall fill the world with the prayses of our valour, for mine owne part I will joyne my forces with yours, and I beleeve there are few here but will doe the like. What cannot the perswasions of a valiant man doe with active spirits? All those Kings, the most part so inclined of themselves, and the rest in imitation of them, rose up and protesting for the war, marvellously re∣joyced Falanzar, who having assured them that hee expected no other from the greatnesse of their courages, gave them infinite thankes, and par∣ticularly caressed Roussardan, the Grand Salvage, and Gorgophon; where∣upon hee let them depart with a promise of return within three moneths, at which time there appeared in the playns of Siconia; first, fourscore thousand Horse raysed in the dominions of Falanzar, whose Imperiall Ensign carried two silver Doves in a field azure; threescore thousand of Idalcans subjects, the Emperour of Melly, who bore a Gerfalcon crow∣ned: Thirty thousand the followers of Artogan, Soldan of Francapa, that carried three Escallops in a golden field: Thirty thousand in the head, whereof marched the Cornet of Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, with three Griffons, struck all through with one sword; Thirty thousand under the conduct of the furious King of Grifalara, whose Armes were two Lyons in a chayn, held by the force of one hand; Thirty seven thousand that came from Aralafia, whose Soldan carried three Roses, separated by a broken cheveron; Forty thousand followed Armandor, the great Duke of Muscovy, who bore three Eagles in a sky; Twenty thousand were led by the brave Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, having three Bears in a silver field: The Grand Salvage conducted fifteen thousand, with his sonne Furiander, Tipheus, the huge and dreadfull Gyant Burcandor of the Rock, and Bucar∣quant his brother, two of the strongest and valiantest Gyants of the earth: Gorgophon followed them accompanied with thirty Gyants, and twenty thousand men; Next after marched Marcelian, Emperour of Media, bearing two fishes argent hanging at a line in a field gueles, with five and twenty thousand, two and twenty Gyants, Argantor, Lizart, Bron∣taor, and Borald the stout, most redoubted Knights, and of great esteem in Armes; The stately Caliph of Francapia, Antomedon carrying a Pan∣ther tyed in a silver chayn, appeared in the front of sixteen Gyants, and twenty thousand Knights richly armed; The strong Astrurion, Sol∣dan of Brutacan, having an Ape between three Wolves, followed next with two and twenty thousand men, Margenio, Fiortan, Brandimart, and Plaiartes, excellent Warriours; After him Policastaleon, King of Zeilan, a valiant Pagan bearing a Syren in the middest of a troubled Sea, condu∣cted fifteen thousand very brave Horse, fourteen Gyants, with the gallant Alceus, Astrenion the glorious, and Cariander the hairy; The redoubted King of Baleon, Fierastron bearing a bloody sword in his Cornets, mar∣ched
with five and twenty Gyants, and twenty five thousand men, then Gronfalin King of Pacea, presented himselfe with twelve thousand Horse, and fifteen Gyants; and last of all marched the valarous Brufaldon, King of Gedrosia, bearing a great many of Ermines in a Cressant, with seven and thirty Gyants, and two and twenty thousand men, well appointed. After the Muster of this Cavalery, which amounted to five hundred thou∣sand Horse, and more; all the Infantry advanced, conducted by the Kings of Mauritania, of Tremisen, of Zaphir, of Zambar, of Cartegena, of Aganazes, of Budomel, of Moraria, of Arger, of Angali, of Numidia, of Bizaur, of Thunes, of Teneri, of Miramlin, of the Ile of Till, of the Tragenites, of Zanfara, of Calisan, of Morlavia, of Nazamor, of Siziphalt, of Tingefort, of Barnagas, of Monomatapan, of Arginari, and of Cornate, which being composed of four hundred thousand men, and an hundred Gyants, gave infinite content to Falanzar, who was by an unanimous consent elected Generall of all those Troops, which a∣mounting to nine hundred thousand men, and upwards, were imbarqued speedily, and put to Sea, where we will leave them sayling with a pros∣perous wind, and turn to see what our Christian Princes will doe, being advertised by Cassandra, of such a dangerous expedition against them. CHAP. XXXVII. Cassandra arriveth at Constantinople, to advertise the Grecian Princes of the mighty Army the Pagans had brought into the field, to march into Ethiopia; the resolution they take thereupon. CAssandra posting as nimbly through the clouds, as a Bird, whose wings had the assistance of a favoura∣ble wind, arrived in two days at Constantinople, to the great content of all the Princes there, and especially of Don Florisel of Niquea, who cares∣sing her, demanded what good news shee had brought them of their children, and of the health of Arquiffe and Vrgand? Sir (answered Cassandra) my father and my mother were never in better estate, nor more disposed to your service, Amadis of Trebisond, Rozal∣mond, Clarisel of Guindaya your sonne, Persides, Floridan of Persia, Luci∣bel of France, and Russian of Media, have got so great a reputation, per∣forming daily such wonderfull exployts, that they are deservedly accoun∣ted the bravest Knights of the earth: It will not be long before you see them here, accompanied with their wives, the fairest Princesses alive: Your sonne enjoyes the incomparable Shepherdesse of France, Miralinda, the excellent luster of whose beauty hath filled the world with amaze∣ment, whose vertues do far exceed her birth, though that cannot be de∣nied to be most noble, she being daughter to the Marquis of Monteclare,
one of the first houses of France, and Sister to that invincible Knight of the Palmes, of whose valour your self have been some-times a witnesse; Rozalmond is the onely favourite of the matchlesse Armazia, Princesse of the great Empire of Gardacia; Amadis of Trebisond, shall succeed the Emperour of Martaria, by the enjoying of Palmirenna, heir to a multi∣tude of fruitfull and flourishing Provinces: Lucibel and Floridan of Per∣sia, shall marry the two sisters of that Princesse; and gentle Russian having taken to Wife the fair Agriclea, is possessrd of the Crown of Clariana. Deare Lady (said Florisel to Cassandra) it is no lesse content to me to hear my Son is that renowned Knight, of whom all France, and Great Brittain as speak of some prodigie, then that my Brother and Nephew have gained the Empires of Gradaria and Martaria, for I valew the merit and wisedome of Miralinda at so high a rate, that I esteem no lesse of her, than of the greatest Princesse alive. And beleeve it, when they shall pre∣sent themselves unto me, I will not fail to receive them with a hearty en∣tertainment. Without doubt (replyed Cassandra) you can do no lesse, neither can you choose but rejoyce at the happy event of these things. But Sir, it is most necessary that I should a little disturb the quiet, and content you now en∣joy, and impart unto you a secret which I fear will find but a bad wel∣come. All the Pagans are up in Arms, at the instance of Idalcan Empe∣rour of Melly, who not long since received an overthrow in this place, and so great is the number of the forces they have assembled, now ready to fall upon Ethiopia (because of the alliance the Emperour Prigmaleon hath lately made with you) that unlesst it be assisted by some peculiar providence from heaven (who never suffers his to perish for want of suc∣cour) you cannot easily prevent their ruine: I know very well the great∣nesse of your courage will contemn this danger, but take heed what you do, for all other Armies that you have seen assembled heretofore, are no∣thing in comparison of this, where so many brave Knights will be ready to encounter you, that the force of your unconquered Armies, and of your friends, were never more usefull, and necessary than now. Let them come when they will, said Florisel, we will be prepared for them, and I hope to give them such entertainment, as shall well abate the fury of their pride; and the rather, I make no doubt if you will assist us a little with some effect of your skill. Sir, answered she, you must expect succour from heaven, and your own valour; the assistance of my skill can afford you none, unlesse I should raise the dead, and bring them to fight for your safetie; but I perceive you do not understand these words, nor can I speak in plainer tearms till the Destinies give way unto it: think only up∣on those things which a good Captain ought to put in practise for the an∣noying of his enemyes, and being seconded by Fortune, who is alwayes your friend, make them know that you are still invisible. You have advised so well, answered Florisel, that if you please to go and try what entertainment our Ladyes will give you, I will in the mean time deliberate therupon; so leaving her with Sidonia, and the other Prin∣cesses that accompanied her (to whom she was forced to make a particular relation of the loves and adventures of Amadis and Clarisel, and to de∣scribe the beautiee of Armazia, Mirglinda, Palmirenna, and her Sisters.) He caused al the Princes then present at Constantinople to assemble in
the Councell chamber, where he spake to them in this manner; Sirs, I did not call you hither to resolve whither we ought to make a War or no, since necessitie enforceth us therunto, but to consult with you what means we had best use to oppose the violence of so mighty an ene∣mie, as is now ready to fall upon us: It is a matter of no small conse∣quence, our eternall glory, or absolute ruine depending therupon; Wher∣fore I am of opinion, our states having so long a time enjoyed peace, and being now furnished with a multitude of brave souldiers, who desire no∣thing more than opportunity to shew themselves so, that it will be the best way to employ our Subjects, our Allies, & all our friends, and to raise as many men as possibly we can, without taking from such garrisons as shal be necessary in important places, so to prevent the insolencies of our ene∣mies, and cause that desolation, which continually waits upon War, to fall rather upon their own, than our Territories. They aym at Ethiopia, wher∣fore (said he, addressing himself to Prigmaleon) my advise shall be, since that Empire receives your Lawes, and acknowledgeth your Soveraignty, that you depart suddenly with such forces as I will send along with you, that you employ all the friends you can make in these parts, that you cause your Ports, and Frontier Towns to be fortified with all diligence, and that you manage your affairs with such discretion, that you may be a∣ble for a while to withstand the assault of so furous an Armie; In the mean time we will hasten your succour, and cut out so much work for these In∣solents, that perhaps it may prove the last designe they shall ever under∣take against us. This oppinion meeting with no opposition, was equally received of all, as the most profitable; so every one retyred to consider of his charge. Florisel gave out Commissions for the speedy levying of fiftie thousand Horse in Greece, sent certain Gentlemen to Don Rogel, to Spheramond; to the Queen of Alaxtraxerea, to Lucondus King of France; dispatched his Courriers to Rome, to Germanie, to Sardinia, to great Brittain, to Guin∣daya, to the Kings of Dardania, of Comogena, of the greater Indies, of Samothracia, of Lydia, of Cataya, of Poland, of Hungary, of Molda∣via, of Ireland, of Scotland, of Turkey; in briefe, to all the Princes of his acquaintance; intreating them to meet him with their forces at Con∣stantinople, as soon as they possibly could. He having made all these dispatches, and being taught by experience, that the wisdome and foresight of men do oftentimes exempt them from emi∣nent dangers, he caused Prigmaleon and Fulgoran to depart in a small Fly∣boat, which cost the fair Polixena his Wife many a tear, who was forced to stay behind him; and four dayes after he sent the valiant Esquilan of Poland, in whose vertue he was most confident, with him the two Ceno∣phales, Rosanel of Astrea, who was then in the Court with the fair English Lady his Wife, lorian, Tristor, Perionaf Turkie; Quadragant, Agrian, of Scotland; Abies of Ireland; Dordanio, Florisartus, Leonidas of Mesopo∣tamia; Armond of Bohemia; nd Melford, in the head of fiftie thousand Horse, commanding them to repaire with all expedition to Saba, the chief Citie of Ethiopia; and to acknowledge Prigmaleon for their Gene∣rall, untill such time as he should be there himself in person. In the mean space whilest these troups were advancing Prigmaleon and Fulgoran, at the Sea, had the benefit of afair wind, but we seldome arrive
at our desires without some crosses, for on a sudden the Sea begins to swell, and waxeth so rough, that the Marriners foreseeing a violent tem∣pest, were forced to cast Anchor at the edge of a rock which made the point of a little Island, where these two Knights dis-imbarquing them∣selves to decline the trouble of the Seas, advanced into the Land, com∣manding the Pilot to wait their returne. The Iland seemed to be very delightfull, by reason of the abundance of Trees planted in a handsome order, upon the sides of little pleasant hills, and shadowing the crystall Rivolets, which environed the fruitfull Meadows: As they were discoursing of the wonders of God, the Crea∣tour of all those things that presented themselves to their view, they espyed a beautifull young Lady comming towards them, who ever and anon tearing her hair, uttered these sad and strange complaints; Alas! said she, must the fire consume so sweet a face, and can a womans rage be the cause of so great a disaster! O ye gods! let this day produce some mi∣racle, and if ye will preserve me alive, deliver this Knight from so cruell a death. These words disposed the hearts of the two Princes to a sensibility of compassion, so that drawing neere to her, Fulgoran spake in this manner; Lady, may it lye in our power to doe you any service in this so pressing an affliction? Yes, without doubt, replyed she, and the pains you take, will be most honourably employed, in saving from death a most deserving Knight, one of the most amiable the eyes of man ever beheld; if you please to walk forward, I'le give you the whole relation, for I fear, if we should make any stay here, we should come too late to relieve him. This Knight arrived three moneths since in this Iland, which is called the deceitfull Iland; It was his ill fortune to fall into the hands of Garga∣racia, a Giantesse, none of the largest in the world, but the cruellest that ever was, for taking pleasure in shedding of mans bloud, she continually entertains a multitude of Ruffians in a Castle, who either by surprisall, or force, seiz upon all the Knights that passe this way, and cast them into prison, from whence she bringeth out som of them once a yeare to facri∣fice to her Idols; This young Gentleman, I say, being arrived here, en∣countred twelve of her Souldiers, which thinking presently to lay hands on him, were charged with such an undaunted valour, that ten of them being cut in pieces, the other two betook themselves to their heeles; this Knight pursuing them with too much confidence, came at length before the Castle gates of this Gyantesse, who making use of me for the better accomplishing of her treasons, caused me to descend to appease his anger, and to entreat him to take the benefit of the Castle to refresh himfelf in, and to be assured that he should not receive the least wrong there. His ill fortune enduced him to beleeve me, so that he presently fol∣lowed me in, and unarming himself, he shewed me so rare a beauty, that to say the truth, I began a little to feele the power of love, which bred in me such an extream sorrow, that I had been the means to imprison him within those cruell Walls, as at the same instant, I had set him at liberty, by causing him to retyre, if Gargaracia had not then entred with a designe, rather to take from him his life, than to give him any courteous enter∣tainment; but the ravishing charms of his looks overmastering this bloud-thirsty humour, she forth-with became passionatly amorous,
resolving to spare him for the satisfying of her filthy lust, and shameles∣ly embracing him, she let him know, that her intent was to make him happy, by vouchsasing him a part in her own bed. At those words the Knight taking a full view of her, and seeing her face furrowed with wrincles, her eyes sunk into her hed, her grisly knot∣ted haires, blobberd-lips, flat nose, accompanied with all the marks of uglinesse, could hardly forbear laughter, neverthelesse considering that there might be danger in provoking her, he made this reply, that his faith obliging him to be ever true to the affections of a certain Lady whom hee loved, he humbly besought her not to take it ill, that he could not em∣brace the honour she was pleased to offer him; How, said she, in a great rage, do you slight me thus, knowing that you are now in my power? be∣leeve me you shal repent it at leisure. Then laying hands on him, she called twenty of her servants to her, by whose assistance having fast bound him, she cast him (to my great grief) into a dark Dungeon, purposing to infflict daily upon him insufferable torments; but her passion of love bearing a greater sway than that of anger, she called me to her at break of day, & tel∣ling me that the nights rest had not freed her from those unquiet thoughts whereto the beauty of the young Knight had subjected her, she desired me to visit him, and to advise him to live in her favour, otherwise he must expect no mercy. This command suiting with my wishes, I presently took a Torch in my hand, and went down to the place, where I found the Knight bound, who perceiving me comming towards him, demanded if I brought him the first news of his death,; to whom I answered, that my comming was not to afflict him, but to let him know, that in my opinion he could doe much better, to give way a little to my Ladies passion, then to submit himselfe to her cruelty; she is preparing, said I, horrible torments, avoyd them, I beseech you, since you may, and be not so cruell to your selfe, as to become your own Murderer. How, replyed he, yeeld to the affection of such a Monster! Lady, if this be the end your discourse ayms at, I must needs let you know you loose your labour; she thinks to affright me with the threats of punishment, and I am resolved to endure them all even to death, than in the least measure to satisfie her desires. You are then said I, either very faithfull, or else too wilfull in your opinion; Neither the one nor the other, answered he, for I cannot acknowledge my selfe guilty of any wilfulnesse, in refusing the imbraces of an old carkasse, the very sight whereof is a terrour to me: neither doe I decline them to keep my affections entire to any Mistris, my soule as yet being free from subje∣ction to any beauty whatsoever, and if I did to her use this diffimula∣tion, it was only in hope to escape by that means out of her hands, but since that and all other shifts faile me, let fortune dispose of me as she plea∣ses. You refuse her then, said I, because she is not beautifull. Yes, an∣swered he, for that only reason, but if I should desire to have any interest in her, I could wish for my own sake to see her deformities changed into your perfections. Vpon these words (to acknowledge the truth; and my own weaknesse) those first sparkes of love, which his sight onely had before kindled, did so inflame my heart, that laying aside the consideration of modesty, which ought never to be separated from a young Lady, I ran hastily and embra∣ced
him, promising him withall, to deliver him upon any conditions, though never so dangerous: Then leaving him somewhat comforted with the hope of escaping, I went to seeke Gargaracia, to whom I reported that the Knight began to speake a more pleasing language, and that with∣out doubt, her courteous entertaynment would prevaile much more with him than her cruelty; wherewith she being not a little satisfied, gave me commission to conduct him into a Chamber, wherof she her selfe kept the key, to whom notwithstanding I had accesse twise a day, faining continu∣ally some excuse or other, by means whereof I enjoyed sweetly the im∣braces of this young Knight, still keeping Gargaracia in a firm opinion, that she should ere long have the full fruition of him, so that we led a life full of content and happinesse, in the midst of misery. But that improvident passion, which blinds the eyes of all Lovers, ruin'd us also, even then when we had invented a way, how to escape and save our selves: for I going this morning to visit him, and forgetting to make fast the doors, left a passage open, through which Gargaracia espied us, in the hight of such amorous dalliance, as Love useth to suggest unto those, whose hearts she hath already united, which put her into such a rage, that forthwith she advanced towards us, intending with her strong boiste∣rous hands to bind us both, had she not been prevented by the Knight, who with his first blow struck her to the ground, with a resolution to strangle her, had she not suddenly called for succour; I saved my selfe among the Souldiers, who being ignorant of what had passed, sought not at all to stay me, and so crossing these fields, used the best diligence I could to fly from thence, to the end that I might not again fall into the hands of that pittilesse woman, and to see if it might be my good fortune to meet with some charitable Knight, that would undertake the rescue of this poor Gentleman, who questionlesse by this time is very neer the flames, for the cruell Hag supposing fire to be the extremest of punishments, hath taken order that he shall be suddenly cast into it. Faire Lady, said Fulgoran, comfort your selfe, and be assured of the Knights safety, if we can but arrive soon enough to find him living; then putting spurs to their horses, they presently came before the Gates of the Castle, where they saw thirty souldiers comming forth to lead this Knight to the fire; whom Fulgoran knowing to be Cilinder, the son of Dorigel, King of the fortunate Iland, of whom there had been no news heard since he received his order of Knighthood at Constantinople, he pressed to∣wards him with an incredible violence, and cleaving down to the girdle five or six of those that incompassed him, put the rest into such a fright, that on a sudden they all left him, which Fulgoran perceiving lighted from his horse to unloose the cords wherewith he was bound, deeming the force of Prigmaleon alone, sufficient enough to cut the rest of the rascals into a thousand peeces; and indeed this noble Warriour made so great a massa∣cre amongst them, that in halfe an houre, he layd eighteen dead at his feet, which Gargaracia seeing to her great griefe, and hoping to fare no better than her Champions, cast her selfe immediately into that fire, she had pre∣pared for Cilindor, who presently knowing Fulgoran and Prigmaleon, gave them a thousand thanks for his deliverance. Gargaracia being consumed, Cilindor delivered, and none else appearing to oppose the designs of these Knights, they caused the prison doors to be
all opened, where they found the Gyant  and the unknown Knight, their especiall friends, with forty or fifty more of their acquain∣tance, whom after they had saluted, they asked by what accident they were fallen into the hands of that cruell woman; by the most villanous treachery in the world, answered , for arriving both together here, and being courteously received we were led into a Chamber, where drinking of wine mingled with Poppy, which was presented unto us, we fell into so sound a sleep, that we were asily bound and carried into this Dungeon, where we lay above eight houres before we awaked. Thanks be to the gods, said Prigmaleon, who appoynted us to arrive here so oppor∣tunely for your deliverance; Come let us quit this melancholly place, and we will relate unto you at leisure, the occasion that brought us from Constantinople; then committing the care of the Castle to Milcana, Ci∣linders Mistris, who received but little joy with it, being ready to take leave of her servant, without hope of ever seeing him again, they took their way towards thesea, which at their return they found calme, and promising a quick passage into Ethiopia; where they being arrived, Prig∣maleon assembled his Councell, caused Saba to be very well fortified, layd strong Garrisons in the most important places, and joyning fifty thousand other Horse, to those which Florisel sent him, who arrived three weeks after, he expected without feare or amazement the fury of his enemies. CHAP. XXXIX. The arrival of the Pagans in the Empire of Ethiopia, the cruell fight where with all the Grecian Princes entertained them at their landing. THE Christian Princes having no greater object, than the honour of God, the glory of the world, and the preservation of those Empires they pos∣sessed, prepared themselves immediatly upon the receipt of Don Florisels Letters, and levying Forces out of each particular Kingdome, they brought to Constantinople, the bravest troopes that ever was beheld; First came Don Rogel with thirty thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Foot; the excellent Emperour of the Parthians, with twenty thousand Horse, and twenty thousand Foot; Don Lucendue, with thirty thousand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; Alastraxeret, with twenty thosand Horse, and ten thousand Foot; Derigel of the fortunate Iland, and the fair Cilin∣da his Wife, with twelve thousand Horse; Melind of Clotona, and his wife Castia, with fifteen thousand horse, his Brother Olidr with the Queen of Castora his Wife led fifteen thousand Foot; Silran and his Wife eighteen thousand Horse; Amenia of Asre, fourteen thousand Foot; Anaxander King of Dardania, twelve thousand Horse, and eight thou∣sand Foot; Flidan his Brother, King of Comogena, eighteen thousand Foot; Geldan, and the valiant Arletta, fifteenthousand Horse; Oriander,
King of Sardamira, seventeen thousand Foot; Galard, King of Megera, eight thousand Horse, and six thousand Foot; the King of Catay, nine thousand Horse, and seven thousand Foot; Liscard, King of Licaonia, twelve thousand Horse; Rozafar of Austria, eleven thousand Foot; Ga∣dard King of Hungarie, ten thousand Horse, and eight thousand Foot; Filadart, King of Poland, eight thousand horse, and ten thousand Foot; Ladazan of Nudia, and Parmenian of Ciprus, five and twenty thousand Foot; From Rome there came fifteen thousand Horse; From Germanie fifteen thousand; from Guindaya eleven thousand; and besides all these, Don Florisel had raised thirtie thousand Horse in the Empire of Greece. These Troups which amounted to the number of three hundred thou∣sand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot, being all speedily imbar∣qued; Florisel and the other Princes of Greece, took their leaves of the Ladyes, who with tears conjured them to have a speciall care in the pre∣servation of themselves, amidst so many dangers as they were sure to en∣counter; and so getting aboard, they caused the Marriners to hoist the sayles, which the wind presently began to fill with a favourable gale. In the mean time the Enemies innumerable Army were upon their voyage at Sea, sometimes driven forward violently with the threatnings of atempest, sometimes again arested with the stilnesse of a calme; so that five weeks after they were shipped in the Empire of Siconia, they disco∣vered the strong Walls of Saba, and appeared in the view of the Christian Princes there, who endevouring by the best means they could to prevent their landing, fortified the shore with fifty thousand Horse, under the command of Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, the two Cenophales, Perion, Quadragant, Florestan, Cilindor, Florian, and Tristor, which being perceived by the Pa∣gans, who made thitherwards with full sayles, they presently ranged their Ships in the best order they could, for the dis-imbarquing themselves without confusion, and advanced till they were neere enough to begin the charge with Bowes and Pikes. Roussardan, the terrible King of Grifalara, Gorgophon, the Graund Sal∣vage, Furiander, and fifteen Gyants which had the command of the for∣most Vessels, arriving with an incredible furie, there was heard even in a moment a confusion of cryes, mixed with the hideous noyse of the waves, and the shrill and loude sounds of Drums and Trumpets, the ayre being clouded as it were with a multitude of Arrows, which flew both from Sea and Land, a man could hardly discerne neither the sands that were covered with dead bodyes, nor the waters all dyed red with the bloud of those that fell therin. The Pagans being confident aswell in their numbers, as their valour, and advancing courageously, without any feare at all of the Christians shot, began to place their Bridges and scaling Ladders, to the end that they might win the bank with lesse difficulty; But Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the Cenophales, and the other young Princes that assisted them, did so stoutly repulse them, that as many as adventured to quit their Ships, they tumbled into the Sea, so that in a short time the waves were covered with such a multitude of dead bodyes, as those foure proud Pagan Knights not enduring to behold so miserable a massacre of their people, on the sud∣den with their Gyants, and a hundred thousand men, leapt on shore in spight of the Christians resistance, and fell to it pell mell, with such incre∣dible
violence, that a man might perceive more men fall than blows; all those those that stood in  way, he cleft down to the wast, Gor∣gophon cut them in peeces; Frinder and his Father made such havok, and their Fanchions were so terrible, that every one shund them like so many furies; on the other side Fulgoran, Prigmaleon, the Cenophales, Perion, and their companions, made so great a slaughter, that the most part of the Pagans cast themselves into the water, to avoyd the furious execution of their swords; In this manner the battell waxing hot, so many fell dead on every side, as was most dreadfull to behold; Fulgoran and Prigmalon being incensed marvellously, at the sight of so great a slaughter, which proceeded not so much from the multitude of their enemies, as from the force and valour of their Leaders, being accompanied with the Cenophales, and making themselves way with the death of all that opposed them, they in an instant charged them with such fury, that the fierce stroke Rossardan received from Prigmaleons sword, made him knock his chin against his brest, Gorgophon bowed his knee underthe violence of Fulgorans blow; the Grand Salvage with Friander his son, were staggered by the weighty blades of the two Geophales, and of the Gyants two were slain by Cilin∣dr, and Prion. But into what a rage were these proud Pagans driven at the resentment hereof? they rowsed up their spirits again, and became more furious than Tygers, and raysing their weapons into the ayr, they let them fall with such a tempest upon the Christian Knights, that Prigmaleons shield was cleft in two peices, with a hurt on his arm, Fulgoran wounded on the shoulder, and the two Cenophales were forced to stoop with their hands to the ground to save themselves from falling. These fearfull blows would have utterly astonished men of lesse valour and courage, but ha∣ving begotten more fury than fear in the spirits of these invincible knights, they began again to lay about them so fiercely, that these four arrogant Gyants, who thought the earth could not produce men of sufficient power to resist them, plainly perceived that the overthrow of their ene∣mies would prove a matter of more difficulty, than they expected. In the mean time whilst this tempestuous fight lasted, between these eight Combatants, Quadragant, Tristor, Florian, Florestan, Perion, and Cilin∣dor rallied their troops, but so farre had the Gyants and their assistants gayned the field, that notwithstanding the valour of those Knights, who made heads and arms fly about, and cut down and killed all that came in their way, the Christians began to retire, when in the instant there arri∣ved the valiant Esquilass of Polonia, Grandimore, the unknown Kninght, Agrian, Flisat, , Frisel, Abies, Armond, and Melfort in the head of thirty thousand Horse, who suddenly pressing into the midst of their ene∣mies troops, then confused and in disorder, slew above twenty thousand upon the place, and doubtlesse all the Pagans at that time on the shore had been put to the sword, if the haughty Antomedon, accompanied with Ma∣risgelf, thirty Gyants, and threese ore thousand men, had not speedily en∣countred the Christians, amongst whom with the very first blow he cleft Florizartus of Trapobana, down to the wast: on the other side his Gyants made such a Massacre, that the first ranks being all broken, the other be∣took themselves to flight, to avoyd the fury of their devouring swords; which so much incensed the valiant Esqit of Polonia, that hee with
Grandimore, the unknown Knight, and the rest of the young Princes that accompanied him, being all well appoynted with good Launces, at one charge ran nine of the Gyants quite through and through, and after that behaved themselves so bravely against their enemies, that they were won∣derfully amazed thereat. Neverthelesse the valour of the other Gyants being no whit abated, and the number of the Pagans being excessively great, questionlesse the Christians had been discomfited, if fourscore Vessels passing without sus∣picion through the midst of the enemies fleet, had not very opportunely disembarqued forty thousand men, who falling suddenly on the Pagans, which were deceived with an opinion, that they were part of their own forces, they put them marvellously to rout, under the conduct of two ex∣cellent Knights, which at the same instant encountring with Brandafidel, King of Brutaxia, a mighty Gyant, and Brandimart, King of Parmonda, they past their Launces quite through their bodies, so astonishing the rest of that party, as the Christians had leisure to rally their troops, and to make a handsome treatie, and yet not without very much difficulty. Prigmalcon and Fulgoran, who were no lesse discreet than valiant, see∣ing the honour of the Christians recovered by the unexpected arrivall of this Army, would have retired with their troops, but Roussardan, Gorgo∣phon, the Grand Salvage, and Furiander were so inraged, that they met with such a forceable resistance, as they began to redouble their blows with more strength then at the first, which put our Greeks into so much fury, that Prigmaleon uniting the whole strength of his body into one stroak, which he layd on Roussardans Helmet, he gave him a dangerous hurt on the head, wherewith he was so astonished, that he knew not what world he was in, and Fulgoran following his example, wounded Gorgo∣phon very dangerously in the thigh, by which means having very happi∣ly the leisure to releeve one of the Cenophales, who being unable to withstand an heavy stroak lent him by the Grand Salvage, he had fallen at his Horses feet, had he not been sustained by him; Furiander in the mean time had received a sore hurt on the arm by the other Cenophales. These astonishing strokes putting the Pagans into the extremity of rage; they addressed themselves again to be revenged, threatning no less then death with their tempestuous swords, but the Princes who well un∣derstood they were accomptable for the people under their charge, and that knew the safety of the souldiers consisted in the preservation of their Leaders, retyred to their troops, leaving the Pagans in dispair of having that revenge upon them they so much hoped for. The Christians having thus prudently made their retreat, they desired to know the names of the Commanders of the new Army, and finding that it was the brave Russian of Media, with the beautifull Amazon, Bran∣dimanda, (who departed from Corolandaya, by the advice of the wise Vrganda, before the others were in the field) gave them a million of thanks, and especially to Brandimanda, whose matchlesse beauty, joyned with that invincible prowesse, whereof they had so lately experience, they could never sufficiently admire, then causing the Amazons to be led into a quarter a part, and the Souldiers into the trenches, they conducted them to the Palace, where disarming themselvest they found every one hurt except Russia, Brandimanda, the valiant Esquilan, Cilindor, and Leonidas
of Mesopotamia, who with Alteria was left in the Town, if need were, to make good the retreat: Prigmaleons hurt was on the arm and head, Fulgrans on the shoulder, the Cenophales in two or three places, Gran∣dimore on the left arm, by the sword of the proud Gyant Antamedon; Perion and the rest in divers parts of the body; notwithstanding which, they had some cause to rejoyce for the losse the enemy had, amounting to the number of threescore and seventeen thousand men, three and twenty Gyants, and the Kings of Brutaxia, and Parmondia, as they understood by their Spyes, besides those that were hurt, in the number wherof were Roussardan, Gorgophon, the Grand Salvage, Furiander, Antomedon, and the valiant Artogant, Soldan of Francapia, with a multitude of common Knights. But when they bethought themselves of the losse of the gentle Flori∣zartus of Trapobana, and of thirty three thousand men, that remained dead in the field (the greatest part whereof perished rather by the sword of the Gyants, than the multitude of the souldiers) they could not beleeve that Fortune had much obliged them, by the advantage they had gained; neverthelesse, putting on a brave resolution, they comforted themselves with the hope of some other succours; and so placing trustie Sentinels in all places requisite, they went to refresh themselves with a small repast. Afterwards, those that had escaped without hurts, assembled them∣selves in Prigmaleon and Fulgorans Chamber, who would by no means lye asunder, where it was resolved that Russian and Brandimanda, with each of them a troope of ten thousand Horse should sally upon the Enemie two houres before day; wherupon they went to repose themselves for a while. In the mean time Falanzar enraged at the massacre of so many of his men, and for the losse of his Kings and Gyants, by so small a number, environed three parts of the Citie, and causing great Trenches to bee cast up, and covering the field with his Souldiers for the space of two myles round, he promised to himself that he would gain the Walls at the first assault, seeing all his Gyants should have now elbow-room to bestir themselves; but his opinion deceived him, as you shall see in the Chap∣ter following, and made him conclude, that the end of his enterprize would not prove so feasable as he expected.
CHAP. XXXIX. The brave feats of Arms performed in a Sally by Russian of Media, and Brandimanda; the furious assault given by the Pagan Princes unto the Town, which being reduced to extreamitie, is marvellously relieved. THis mighty Fleet of the Enemies having gained the Shore, the night was almost wholly employ∣ed in making of Trenches, and setting up Tents, and Pavillions; so that it being neere that time of the day, which chalengeth a kind of securitie over all things; the Souldiers annoyed with the Sea, wearied with their late travels, and impor∣tuned by sleep, betook themselves all to their rest, being confident that the Christians durst not so much as once peep out of their Walls; But they like brave spirits, who thought there was no glory equall to that which was gotten in the midst of dangers, and hating all rest which might be accompanied with disgrace, had no other designe than continually to be pulling some fea∣thers out of their enemies Wings, whereby they might stop the fury of their flight; they rose presently after midnight, and arming twenty thou∣sand of their best, and lustiest Horses, they divided them into two Troups, whereof one was commanded by Russian, Cilindor, and Leonidas; the other by Esquilan, Brandimanda, and the fair Alteria; and so sallying out at two severall Ports, they advanced softly towards the Pagans till it was break of day, which affording them light to discover their Sentinels all asleep, they presently cut their throats without any noyse, and so falling aboard with the rest, who were in no better estate to make resistance, they began to commit so great a slaughter, that the ground was covered over with dead bodyes, before the Alarum was taken in the Camp, Russian, Cilindor, and Leonidas, over-runall; Souldiers they cut in peeces, Knights they cleft down to the shoulders; Tents and Pavilions, they turned upside down; and meeting with little or no opposition, they made a strange havock. Falanzar Generall of the Pagan army, who lodged not far from the place where they first fell on, easily hearing the fearfull cryes and groans which came from his men, as they were dying, rose up immediatly, and finding Brufaldar King of Gedrosia, Brizardan the redoubted Soldan of Aralafia, with Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, he gave them thirty thou∣sand men to resist the fury of their enemies, whose number he conceived to be fifty thousand at the least, and so ran speedily himself thorow all parts of the Camp, to put the rest in battell array. These three proud Pagans, who had not been at the last nights service, cheerfully embracing this charge, began presently to march forward, and being conducted by the noyse which continually encreased, they forth∣with encountred the Christians, and plainly perceiving the smalnesse of
their number, divided their troups with an intent to environ them, and to charge them on every side, but those valiant Knights not affording them the leisure to put their Designe in practise, broke thorow them with such a tempest, that the blood ran along the ground in little rivers, which put the incensed Pagan Brufaldor into such a fury, that turning his horse upon Leonidas of Mesopotamia, he gave him so violent a stroke on the shoul∣der, that his sword notwithstanding his Arms, made way to his very waste, dividing his body into two parts; which so displeased Russian, who saw the sad effect of the blow, that clasping his sword fast in his hand, he returned the Pagan such an exchange, as cutting his shield in two, he gave him a great gash on the arm, and so quiting him he flew upon Moranteon Soldan of Circassia, wounding him very dangerously on the shoulder, and perceiving Brizardan grapling with his friend Cilindor, whom he doubted might be too weak to fustain so strong a charge, he made to∣wards them with an intent to discharge full on Brizardans head, but Toris∣mond the valiant Pagan prevented his blow, by giving him such a smart stroke on the arm, as made his sword fall out of his hand, and yet with∣out any other harme, save onely a slight hurt, which put him into such a choler, as suddenly taking hold again on the handle of his sword that was fastned with a riband to his wrist, he let it fly in such sort at his Adversary, that he cut him almost in two pieces, sending him dead to the ground. In the middest of these hurliburlies, the brave Esquilan entring on the other side of the Campe, strook no lesse astonishment into the minds of those that encountred him, than the other had done before; no resistance could withstand the fury of his sword. Brandimanda seconded him with equall heat and courage, and the gentle Amazon Alterea followed them both so close, that she seemed to threaten no lesse a ruine than the former. At this new alarum Falanzar, Idatcan Emperour of Melly; Armandor, King of Russia, with Fierastron the proud Gyant of Balivan, advanced themselves in the head of forty thousand men; but the fear of those that ran away, having put their souldiers which they led into disorder, the Greeks charged them with such fury, that more then six thousand of them were beaten down; the greatest part wherof were stifled under the hor∣ses feet. The unpleasing sight of this accident had driven Falanzar into de∣spair, but that he earried too generous a mind, for to harbour so base a guest, wherfore meeting with Esquilan, he discharged so terrible a blow on his Helmet, as he made him knock his chin against his breast, being ve∣ry much astonished at the mighty strength of this Pagan, but grinding his teeth together for anger, he advanced his sword, and let it descend with such a rage on this Caliph, that he overthrew him on the crupper of his horse, casting out great abundance of bloud at his mouth. In the mean while, Brandimanda and Fierastron, Iaalcan, and the gentle Alterea, charged one another home, and made a quick exchange of most fiercestroaks. But Esquilan who would not afford them any leisure to rally their troups, and who judged that to be no fit season for him to be a spectator of a single combat, let fall on Idalcan Emperour of Melly so furious a blow, that he cut his arm sheere from his body, and at the same instant with another which he layed on Fierastrons head-piece, he quite deprived him of his senses; which being done, he put his men into good order, and following the example of Russian, who took the way that led
into the Citie, he made an honourable retreate in spight of threescore thousand Horse, and fourscore Gyants, which came in the pursuit of them. This courageous, and prudent retreat, and the death of the Emperour of Melly, that ensued two houres after, with the great slaughter of their men, which amounted to the number of thirty nine thousand, the Chri∣stians having left on the place but five thousand six hundred, having en∣raged the Pagans, they resolved every man of them to dye on the place, or els that very day to win the Citie, which together with all the Christi∣ans therin, they would consume to ashes, in satisfaction of so great a losse. Their Troupes then being ranged, and every Captain having received order to charge his Company, with the carriage of a certain number of scaling-ladders, the Army was divided into three bands, each consisting of one hundred and fiftie thousand men; Falanzar led the first, with the which was Brufaldor King of Gedrosia, the proud Knight Arastron, gene∣rous Alceus, Marisgolf, that terrible and mighty Gyant, twenty Knights of the best repute in the whole Army, and threescore Gyants: The se∣cond was commanded by Astrurion the great Sultan of Brutacan, the good Knight Armorand, Brizardon Soldan of Aralafia, fifty Gyants, and twen∣ty two other Knights, who had purchased a great renown by dangerous adventures: The third by Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, with King Ar∣mandor, of Russia, of the Gyants race; Palamedes, King of Cassandria, the redoubted Tipheus, Barcandor, fifty Gyants, three and twenty Knights, of no mean esteem, and Broncaldion, King of the Arcofibrats, who had the leading of twelve hundred Elephants. The christian Princes who slept not in the mean while, seeing these pre∣sumptuous preparations, put threescore thousand Knights into the Town, and so furnishing the wals with abundance of pitch, sulphur, boyling oyle, stones, and other necessaries for their Enterprise, made up three bands; the first was conducted by Russian with Cilindor, the second by Esquilan with Algantas chiefe Generall of Ethiopia; and the third by Brandimanda with Alteria, who lodging themselves close under the wals, with a resolution not to appear before the enemies had almost gayned the top, expected the comming of their troops, which hearing no noyse at all in the Town, were perswaded that the Christians were all asleep; whereupon they presently fastned their scaling Ladders, which their Gyants and other Knights of the best spirits first ascended, to give encou∣ragement to the rest to follow them; but on the instant they perceived fifty thousand men, who with a sudden tempest of stones, oyle, pitch and sulphur, overturned all those that were then upon the Ladders, and be∣gan to dam up the Moat with dead bodies, then the assault became most violent and cruell. The Gyants enraged to see their Companies lye groveling on the ground, the Ladders broken, ten thousand Souldiers massacred, as it were in a moment, began to grow carelesse of their lives, they got upon the wall, and fell to grapling with the Christians, fighting rather like furies than mortall men, there were scarce any that durst oppose the violence of their swords, unlesse it were Russian, Esquilan, Brandimanda, Alteria, Cilin∣dor, and some few of the valiantest, who perceiving the favour the wall
afforded partly in sheltring them, and annoying their enemies, delivered such blows on the Pagans, as for the most part carried death along with them. Russians represented a Thunderbolt, overturning as many Gyants and Knights as it lighted on, neither was Esquilans or 's much lesse terrible than it; but the Pagans, the greater the number of the Christians were which they perceived on the Battelments, the more reso∣lute they began to be, and caused a multitude of Pioners to sap the wals; the Arcofibrats approached with their Elephants, and the neerer they ad∣vanced, the more blood was spilt, and the more fell dead to the ground, the Elephants being got under the wals, they quit their bows and arrows, and fell to handy stroaks: Their Cymitars lighted with such a weight on our souldiers, and the Combat grew so cruell, that there was nothing to be heard amongst them but cryes, and pittilesse groans, which did so en∣courage the Gyants, who met with little or no resistance, that three of them adventured to scale the wals in spight of all those that opposed, and began to make a terrible massacre amongst the Greeks, whose sudden flight giving Russian to understand the extremity of the danger, he and Bandi∣manda ran thither with all speed, and encountring these three Colosses, the first whereof was Arginassus, of the cold Desart, he saluted him so rudely on the head with his sword, as cleft him down to the shoulders, and gave the other such a thrust in the belly, as ran him up to the hilts. In the mean time Brandimanda animated with the like desire to revenge; had made a shift to make a separation between her adversaries head and his body; the vast trunks of these three Gyants being taken on the instant, and thrown from the wals, struck such an amazement into those that follow∣ed, that their hasty and eager desire of entring the Citie was soon abated; In the mean time the Elephants being ranged on the other side, and their Castles manned with stout and couragious souldiers, there was instantly a bloody encounter, but the Christians powring down boyling oyle upon those mighty creatures, caused a sudden confusion, for as soon as it began to pierce their skins, they quitted their stations, ranne violently into the body of their troops, broke their Battalions, and were the cause of the death of above two thousand souldiers. Amongst the rest they overthrew Barcandor of the Inhabitable Rock, who was in no small danger of being stifled; neverthelesse being speedily rescued by his brother, he received no other hurt, but the astonishment he was in by his fall, which rendring him more furious than ever he had bin in his life before, hee caused a Ladder to be fetched, and being accompa∣nied with the dreadfull Tiphes, Bucargant, and other Gyants, he went to place it with a resolution, either to dye or force the wall, howbeit percei∣ving a great peece thereof falling down, which buried above foure hun∣dred Knights, he quitted his Enterprise, and drawing out his great curtelas, he and his companions entred the Town, together with six thousand Pa∣gans more, which began to make so great a slaughter, that doubtless all had been lost, had not Russian, Brandimanda, and the brave Polander oppor∣tunely come in with ten thousand fresh men, who seeing their safety or utter ruin to be then in question. At the very first onset they cut off three thousand Knights; neverthe∣lesse Tipheus, Bucargant, Barcandor, , Bultidr, and the other Gy∣ants fought so furiously, that they beet them almost of al hopes of pre∣serving
their lives, Esquilan being wounded in three or four places, Russian in the arme and the thigh, and Brandimanda by the force of two cruell stroaks, which she received on the head, from the hands of Tipheus, and Bultendor, lying senslesse, if not breathlesse, on the ground; but at the in∣stant Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, the two Cenophales, Grandimore, the unknowne Knight, Perion, Tristor, Florian, Florestan, Abies, Quadragant, Dardanio, Flo∣risel, Agrian, Armond and Melfort hearing the rumour of it, and wel know∣ing the perill the Town then was in, roe presently, and with their Armies marched to the place of Combat. These seventeen brave Warriours beholding the extremity their friends were in, never felt the incommodity of their wounds, but set upon the Gyants with such a fury, that at the very first encounter they massacred the greatest part of them; and now the Christian troops renewing their courage at the presence and valiant example of these renowned Princes, made a speedy slaughter of seven or eight thousand men, the Gyants themselves being all cut in peeces, except Armandor, Palamedes, Tipheus, the two brothers of the Inhabitable Rock, and two and twenty others, who perswading themselves that they were yet strong enough to take the Town, began a fresh charge upon our Christian Princes, but their resi∣stance was so brave and couragious, as the greatest part of the Pagans ran upon their own deaths. Marmaran Sophy of Bultara, Tipheus, Barcandor and his brother Bucar∣gant, being the whole number that remayned alive, who considering that policie, was no lesse requisite to men of Armes, than courage, made their retreat with a resolution to bring new forces to the fight, and so at length to weary the Christians, which presently causing the breach to be re∣paired, and Brandimanda to be carried to the Palace, they made haste to the ayd of Cilindor, and the faire Alteria, that were scarce able to make any longer defence against the violence of Falanzar, who yeelding a noble example to the rest of his souldiers, with Brufaldor, Arastron, Alceus, and some few others, had wel-nigh forced the wals; but the comming of these Knights did much abate the fury of the Gyants, twelve whereof at their first arrivall fell dead to the earth, neverthelesse the wall being very low on that side, where Astrurion the mighty Soldan of Brutacan gave the assault, they could no longer have made good the Town, if on the sud∣den certain Courriers had not come to advertise Falanzar, that above four hundred thousand Christians were newly landed, and in array to fal upon their troops. Wise men make use of all advice that is given them, so Falanzar con∣ceiving that this news did much import the safetie of his Army, caused Marmaran presently to retyre from the Walls, and joyning his own troups with him, they made a body of three hundred thousand men, and wheeled about with his forces to the Seaward; howbeit not thinking these sufficient, he sent unto Marcelian Emperour of Media, and to Fiera∣stron, to repair thither with two hundred thousand more, that had not yet fought, and so making in this manner two mighty squadrons; they ex∣pected to see what resolution their Enemies would take, who were com∣manded by Florisel of Niquea, by Rogel, Spheramond, Alastraxerea, and other Christian Princes, which were very desirous forth-with to charge the Pagans; but Florisel whose valour was well tempered with experi∣ence,
and discretion, would by  give way that they should the engage themselves, both because the night dw on, and that they were also wearied with the Sea, and especially for that he knew not what con∣dition his friends were in, but withall to let them see, that what he did, was more out of experience then fear, he caused his men to advance, till they came even under the Walls, before which having caused Trenches speedily to be made for the safegard of his souldiers, he pitched his Tents and Pavilions, during which time the Pagans did not so much as make shew of stirring. In the mean while the Sultan of Brutacan having received no order to make his retreat, was perswaded to follow his good fortune, and entring the breach which he had made, to put himself into the middest of the Town, but finding a greater resistance from the Princes and Souldiers within, then they had from the wals, there began a most fierce and bloody combat; The Gyants advanced bravely, making way with their swords, and their Souldiers taking courage from their example, followed as reso∣lutely, making a vast and terrible slaughter; whereof Brandimand being advertised, and finding her selfe prettily recovered, she thought it a disho∣nour to dye in her bed; wherefore she took six thousand men, reserved for an extremity, and meeting with Cilinder and Alteria, who had retyred for a while to refresh themselves, they fell on with such a fury upon the Soldans troops, that at the very first encounter, above four thousand of their Enemies, and fourteen Gyants were cut in pecces, which so incensed the horrible Cressamagrant, that advancing his dreadfull Faulchion, he let it fall with such a violence on Frizel of Arcadia, that it cleft him down to the shoulders, and layd him dead at Prigmaleous feet, who in a great rage requited the Pagan with such another, as cutting his leg from his body, he fell to the ground with a noyse like thunder. These dreadfull stroaks giving equall courage to both parties, the fight waxed more furious than at any time before, and if the enemies could at once have made use of all their forces, without doubt they had carried the Town, but the breath being but equall, the Christians though but few in number were able to withstand those that would enter, so that they held them play untill night, which drawing on to the great griefe of Astru∣rion, it made him bestow his blows with the more violence, amongst the which one lighted so boisteroufly upon gentle Abies of Ireland, that it cleft him almost to the girdle, whereat Fulgora was so enraged, that ta∣king his sword in both his hands, he discharged such a blow upon the head of the great Soldan, as turned him over and over, and doubtlesse hee had quite made an end of him, had not fourteen Gyants, that were retyring carried him off. The Citie being thus delivered from so tedious and cruell an assault, they employed a multitude of Labouters to repaire the breaches, and cau∣sed the bodies of Frizel of Arcadia, and Abies of Treland to be carried to the Palace, the loss of whom had been much more grievous uno them, but that they were comforted with the assurance of this new succour, which they understood proceeded from the Emperour Florisel of Niquea, that was accompanied with many other Christian Princes their friends, whom they went to visit in their trenches, before they could so much as lay aside their Armes, where many kind salutations passing between them, they re∣lated
the danger the Town had been in all that day, the losse of Frixel, Florizartus, Abies, and Leonidas, and the whole story of all that had hap∣ned since they departed from Constantinople, and so for that present they departed with a resolution, to take a full revenge of their enemies. CHAP. LXI. The furious Battell between the Pagan and Christian Princes; the con∣clusion thereof, with the number of the dead. THE rage of the Pagan Princes, who had lost in this assault threescore and seven thou∣sand men, three and fifty Gyants, with Fi∣ortan, Brontaiar, Argantor, and Lizartus, all worthy Knights, not suffering them to take any rest: Falanzar gave order for the in∣terring their dead, and assembled his Cap∣taines together, to whom he spake in this manner. Mighty Princes, I see no reason why wee should be discouraged, though fortune hath not favoured our designes, we have lost Souldiers, Gyants, and many per∣sons of quality, rather by the difficulty of scaling the wals, than by the valour of our enemies, but now we have a faire occasion to revenge our selves, and to repay with interest the displeasure they have done us; wee may now give them a day for all, and this Grecian Army newly arrived, will rather further, than any way hinder our designes; let us offer them battell, they are hardy enough to entertain it, and we powerful enough to obtaine the victory, the advantage is ours on every side, wee have a multitude of brave Knights, the meanest whereof will make the strongest of our enemies sweat for it, our Souldiers are more in number, and no whit inferiour in courage, they shall be assisted by a multitude of valiant Knights, who are able to astonish even the whole world, so that we shall undoubtedly revenge our former losses; It is true, that for the present the one halfe of our bravest Knights are confined to their beds, by reason of their wounds; I hold it therefore convenient to give them some respite for their recovery: In the mean time let us enquire, whether this may agree with the consent of our friends and allies. Great Monarch, replyed Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, the proposition you make, is so good, that there need no reasons be urged for the autho∣rising your opinion, and I dare assure you, that it agrees with the desire of the whole Army, let us then if you please send to our enemies, and de∣mand a truce for eight dayes, that in the mean time time we may put every thing in good order, and to give the King of Grifala, and the rest of our friends leisure to recover their strength, that they may be the better able to doe you service: Hereupon Polidarchus King of Amazia, was intreated to take the charge of delivering this message to the Christian Princes,
which being willingly undertaken by him, he went presently to Don Flo∣risel of Niquea, presented him with a bloudy Gauntlet; and demanded seven dayes of Truce, he appointed the eighth for the set battell. We know not how to deny our Enemies, answered Florisel, when they invite us to fight, I accept of the battell on the same day that you demand it, and desiring to be more courteous, then you have been violent, com∣ming hither to seek the ruine of our Empires, without any provocation at all on our part, are content to ratifie the Truce for the terme required by you. Pilidarchus being thus returned back, every man prepared for the battell; they used all the skill that could be, for the recovering of those that were wounded, and the Captaines diligently employed themselves in advancing the courage of the Souldiers, for on the victorie of this fu∣rious day, the ruine or glory of all Christendome, or Paganisme depended. Seven dayes then being insensibly past away, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Rus∣sian, and their Companions, having quit their beds, met with the rest of the Christian Princes to consult of their affaires, where they all agreing to submit themselves to the prudence and direction of Florisel of Niquea, he ordered it all in this manner. The number of the whole Forces consisting of three hundred thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand Foot, without counting those which Prigmaleon had in the Town, for the manning of the Wals, he divided into four troups, each containing seventie thousand Horse, and forty thousand Foot; the first was commanded by Prigmaleon, Fulgan, Russian, the Ce∣nophales, Esquilan, Brandimanda, and all the young Princes that had been their assistants in the former Combats. The second was commanded by Spheramond, Alastraxerea, Melindus, Cli∣dor, his Wife Cassiana, Amanio of Arestrea, the Duke of Laiaze, the King of Cataya, his Wife Crothea; Galard, King of the barren Iland, with Ro∣zafar, and the King of Lacaonia. The third was commanded by Don Rogel, Lucendus, Drigel, Silvan, the fair Salvage his Wife, the valiant Silverin of the Desart; Gadart, King of Hungaria; Filiard, King of Polonia; Oriander, King of Sardamira, his Queen Oronsa; Parmenian, of Cyprus, and Garmantes. The fourth by Don Florisel of Niquea, with Anaxander King of Dar∣dania; Floridan, King of Comogena, his brother; Troilus, the renowned Knight of Savoy, and twelve young Princes, upon whom he had that day conferd the order of Knight-hood, with all the magnificent Cere∣monies the Camp could afford: Every thing being thus ordered, every man retyred to visit his Horse and Arms, with a command to be in readi∣nesse at break of the day. In the mean while the Pagans slept not, for knowing of what impor∣tance the issue of this battell would be, they armed themselves with a resolution to redeem their honour, though they paid their bloud for it: being advertised of the course the Christians had taken in ranging of their Troups, they held it best to observe the same order, and not to think of reserving any part, perswading themselves that it would be more diffi∣cult to rout their troups, being united than separated; and so they divided their whole Forces, consisting of eight hundred thousand into foure Bands.
The first wherof was commanded by Roussardan the furious King of Grifalara, a man of a Gyant-like nature, with grifly haire, a face covered with black patches, an ugly flat nose, and ill-fashioned legs, but withall so valiant, that next to Gorgophon, and Bravorant, King of Morimont, there lived not a braver Pagan upon the whole earth; his Associats were Mo∣ranteon, Souldan of Circassia; the grand Salvage, Furiander his son; Arte∣gant, Souldan of Francapia; the proud Arastron; Gederion, King of Argi∣naria; Furcamond, King of Martan; Aliodorus, Torismond, Arciles, and Teli∣ander; all brave Knights, with threescore Giants. The second by the valiant Marmoran, Sophy of Bultara; Bravorant, Gorgophon, Marisgolfus, Salander, King of Balsandria; Polidarchus, King of Amazia; Giracond, King of Toriana; Don Margenio, Rindar, Brandimart, threescore Gyants, and Broncaldion King of the Arcofibrats, who would no more make use of his Elephants, because in the preceding assault, they had occasioned so great a disorder. The third by stout Astrurion, Soldan of Brutacan; with the haughty Antomedon, Caliph of Francapa; Brizardan, Soldan of Aralafia; Marceli∣an, Emperour of Media; Rodomart, King of Fortan; Asmorian, King of the upper Indies; Bemond, King of Java minor, divers other Knights of qua∣litie, and threescore Gyants. The fourth was reserved for Falanzar, great Emperour, and Caliph of Siconia, with the King of Russia; Anaxamena, the valirnt Amazon his Wife; Palamedes, King of Cassandria; Fierastron, the redoubted Gyant of Balivan; Polecastaleon, King of Zeilan; Brufaldor, King of Gedrozia; the dreadfull Tipheus, Barcandor, Bucargant, and threescore Gyants; In the mean time Mambrinian King of Fornascia, with the Kings of Zamber, of Saphotir, of Siziphalt, and fourscore thousand men guarded the Camp. All things being thus resolved upon on both parties; the day of Bat∣tell was expected, which being come to the great content of both the Armies, to whom all delay was insupportable; the Pagans began to draw their men out of their Trenches, much astonished to see themselves pre∣vented of their Enemies, who already had possessed themselves of the field, and there stood in battell array. The first that appeared on the Pagans side, was the furious King of Gri∣falara, who marching in a glorious, and most magnificent manner, under a multitude of Standards, whereon were represented two Lyons chained together onely by the force of one hand, caused the charge to be sounded. At the same instant Prigmaleon, (who thought no Oration could so ani∣mate his Souldiers to behave themselves bravely, as to give a sudden te∣stimonie of an undaunted courage) gave the Signall to his troups imme∣diatly to joyn: most violent was the encounter of these two brave Warriours, who saluted each other so boistrously, that their Launces bounded into the ayre in a thousand slivers, Fulgoran and the Grand Sal∣vage fell to the ground, the one hurt on the left arm, the other on the brest; Russian of Media, and the proud Knight Arastron, broke their Launces ve∣ry furiously upon each other, and yet past on unmoved, like two rocks in the middest of the Sea. The two Cenophales, and Grandimor, running against Furiander, Artegant, Soldan of Francapia, and Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia, received such an astonishment from each others incounter,
that all six remained for a long time sensslesse; Gedereon, King of Argina∣rea, was overthrown by Esquilan, Brandimanda passed her Launce thorow the body of a Gyant, three other Pagan Knights fell down dead at the feet of Perion, Cilindr, and the unknown Knight, and so many Cavaliers fell to the ground on both sides, that the field was full of horses that ran up and down masterlesse, Launces were broken in pieces, sword blades flew into the ayre, and the Battell waxed so hot, that the dust was all tem∣pered with bloud; Roussardan, the Grand Salvage, and the proud knight Araston, cut down all they met withall, making head and arms fly about, which bred such fear in the Enemies, as they were no lesse terrible to them than thunderbolts. On the other side, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Russian, Brandimanda, Esquilan, and the two Cenophales, who disdaining to employ their Swords upon common persons, charged the vastest Gyants with so great a furie, that in an instant, three and twenty of them lay breathlesse on the earth; when as Arastron, Roussardan, and the Grand Salvage, marching in the Front like so many torrents sweeping all before them, let fly with such a violence upon Quadragant, Agrion of Scotland, and Dardanio, that they cleft them all three down to the teeth; and seeing that Prigmaleon, Russian, and Ful∣goran, (having dispatched the mighty Brucalan, with Arbadan and Pandarus his Brothers, by the force of three terrible stroaks which sent them dead to the ground) had made way into their Troups massacring all without mercy, that gave them any opposition, in great rage they clapped spurs to their horses, and making towards these three Knights, they discharged three such dangerous blows upon them, that had not their Arms been of the best in the world, they had without doubt added them to the number of the dead; neverthelesse, these rough salutations that humbled their chins to their saddle bowes, did nothing els but incite them to a sudden re∣quitall, which they returned so bravely, as there was little cause left them of boasting, and so there began the most dangerous Combat that ever man beheld between these six Knights. On the one side the Gyants made huge massacres; Esquilan, Brandiman∣da, Grandimore, and the Christian Princes, bestird themselves lustily on the other, and their brave example made the courage of their men, supply what they wanted in number; so that above threescore thousand Knights being slain both parts, the victory remained as yet doubtfull. Wherupon the Pagans impatient of delay, caused their second Battali∣on to advance, which being led by Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, accom∣panied with those incomparable Warriours, Bravorant, king of Mori∣mont, Marisgolfus and Gorgophon, Collonels of the Gyants, gave so fierce an assault upon the Christians first Squadron, that they had cut them all in pieces, if the Emperour Spheramond had not opportunly opposed their furie. By this time the ground was all covered with dead men, and the confu∣sion so great, and crpes so loude, that a thousand claps of thunder would not have been heard amongst them: Bravorant, Gorgophon, and Marisgolfus, having addressed their Launces against Galard King of the Barren Ilands, Alvida his Wife, and the Duke of Laiaret, they ran them quite thorow the body; and so did in like manner to five or six more, before they brake; but great was the slaughter they made, when as they hod drawn out their
great and heavy Fauchions, for the Lightning falls not with more vio∣lence, than did their blows, which meeting with no resistance sufficient to oppose them, they strewed all the ground with dead bodyes. Spheramond having encountred Marmoran, Sophy of Bultara, they both brake their staves upon each other, and so pressing in amongst the multi∣tude, they slew as many as had the ill hap to come within their reach, Alastraxerea made such havock amongst her enemies, that every one fled from her, as from some deadly contagion; Melindus, Clidor, and Amiano of Astrea, did no lesse wonders; But the Enemies were so mighty, and Bravorant joyning with Gorgophon, made so bloudy a massacre, that this second Squadron in spight of the best resistance, Spheramond, Alastraxerea, and the Grecian Princes could make, had been utterly routed, if Florisel wisely fore-seeing that the flight of those forces might cause a generall ruine of the whole Army, had not opportunly given order to the young Cavaliers that he had armed the day before to advance: who desirous to season their first undertakings by some memorable testimonie of their va∣lour, made so fierce a Sally upon the Gyants, that with their Launces they overthrew twelve of them to the ground, then laying their hands on their swords, they began to do such strange things, that the Greekes recove∣ring, as it were, a new courage, gave their enemies so furious a charge, as they made them begin to startle; nay, almost to betake themselves to plain flight. Neverthelesse being detayned by the only valour of Braverant, Gorgo∣phon, and Marisgolfus, and the brave Sophy of Bultara, who resembled so many furies, they continued the fight so stoutly, that the blood made large Rivers through the midst of the fields; the earth was covered with the bodies of those that were already slain, and the ayr filled with the groans of those that were then dying: Spheramond wheresoever he passed carried death on his sword; Bravorant and Gorgophon ran up and down raysing mountaines of dead bodies, Marmoran and Marifgolfus appeared like lightning: Alastraxerea, Melindus, Clidor, Cassianus met with no resi∣stance, unlesse it were from the Gyants, who did often times as well as their fellows taste the keenesse of the Christian blades; In briefe it was a spectacle full of such horrour, as the like hath seldome been beheld by the eye of man, and the slaughter so indifferent, that it was heard to say to which side the victory did most incline. The Pagans who could not endure to be idle, whilst their Companions were busie in the pursuit of glory, marched up with their third sqadron, conducted by the valiant Astrurion, Soldan of Brutacan, Antomedon the proud Caliph of Francapia, Brizardan, Soldan of Aralafia, and Mercelian, Emperour of Media: These vast troops led by such proud and mighty Commanders, fell on the Christians with such fury, as promised no lesse then utter ruin at the very first onset: But the Emperour of Persia secon∣ded by Lucendus, Dorogel, Silvian the faire Salvage, the noble Silverin of the Desart, Gadard, King of Hungaria, Filadart of Polonia, Oriander and Oroncus charged them so fiercely, that made them quickly turn their faces to defend themselves from the cruelty of their weapons. This brave Prince encountring Antomedon with his Launce, ran him through the shield and arme; yet not without great danger to himselfe, for from the Gyants Launce he received such an encounter, as tumbled
him upon the crupper of his horse, ready to have fallen to the ground, if he had not been upheld by some of his followers. Thus the third Squadrons falling to it pell mell, there continued a most cruell battell; the valiant Drigil did deeds worthy of himselfe, follow∣ing the brave example of his father, who held all the enemies in admira∣tion to see him alone act such wonders, the noble Silverin of the Desart stopped the fury of Brizardan, and behaved himselfe so bravely against him, that by those that saw him, he was judged no whit inferiour to the best Warriours of the world, Lucendus sent Marcelian Emperour of Me∣dia, to keep company with the dead; Filadart, Gadart, and the Princes that followed them fought with so much courage and vigour, that in a moment they covered the fields with the slaughtered carkasses of their enemies. In the meane time Don Rogel and Lucendus seeing the great massacre made by Antomedon, & the mericilesse Sultan of Brutacan, immediately as∣saulted these two proud pagans, who were almost ready to swim in christi∣an blood, shed by their own swords, upon whom they bestowed a couple of such violent blows, as Antomedon was layd flat upon the crupper of his horse, the blood gushing out at his mouth and eares, and the great Soldan received such a stroak from Lucendus, as rendred him in little better case then his fellow; These terrible blows, which probably should have been the cause of the Christians victory, contrariwie exposed them to extream danger, for these two great Warriours recovering themselves again, and taking their swords in both hands, advanced with so eager a desire of re∣venge, that meeting with Filadart of Polonia, and Gadart King of Hun∣garia, they fell upon them with such a tempest, as the one was cleft downe to the shoulders, the other to the girdle, which being soon perceived by Don Rogel, he made with his best speed towards Antomedon, upon whom he discharged so furiously, as he quite dismounted him, and put him in great danger of being trampled under the horses feet, but being suddenly re∣leeved by his friends, he was by them immediately carried to his tent. The retreat being known of these two mighty men, it gave a fresh sup∣ply of courage to the Greeks, Rodomart King of Fortan, Armositan King of the upper Indies, and Tarsides King of Pergazus, perished by the swords of Silvan the fair Salvage his wife, and Dorigel; and fifteen Giants being in∣stātly slain by the other christian princes, the pagans began to give ground, when in the nick arrived Falanzar, with the redoubted King of Balivan, the dreadfull Tipheus, Bucargant, Burcandar King of Russia, Palamedes King of Cassandria, the excellent Knight Artogant, and the incomparable Al∣ceus; and on the other party Don Florisel of Niquea, with his troops, who mingling themselves in a furious fight with those Pagans, caused on the sudden such a generall confusion, that the earth, the ayr, and the Heavens seemed to be but one, and the same thing; for the Leaders some of them were no lesse terrible than so many furies, others begat an stonishment in those that had the ill hap to encounter them, equall to that of thunder and lightning, and the Souldiers animated by the example of their Cap∣taines fought with so much courage and cruelty, that nothing was to be seene but blood and slaughter. Falanzar charged Florisel with an incredible fiercenesse, who was no whit behind hand with him in the requitall; Roussardan, Gorgophon, and Brave∣rant threatned such a ruin where they went, that the very glittering of
their swords frighted the faint-hearted to death; neither were Sphera∣mond, Prigmaleon, and Fulgoran lesse terrible to their enemies than they; the Grand Salvage, Furiander his son, Marmoran, Brufaldor, and Policasto∣leon charged the Christians through and through, till they scarce left a ranke unranked: Silverin of the Desart, Russian, Brandimanda, the Cen∣phales, and Brandimore did as much to the Pagan troops. In briefe these mighty Armies sustained by the valour of the Princes that commanded them, had as yet gayned little advantage of one ano∣ther, which raysing Bravorant, Gorgophon, and the proud Knight Arastron, to the utmost extremity of rage, they fell all three with such a violence upon Don Rogel, Florisel and Spheramond, that they beat them all down to the ground, where they made no long aboad, though they were much astonished, but be took themselves to their feet again, and on the instant made themselves such elbow room, that except these three mighty ene∣mies, who pressed upon them with a mad kind of fury, none durst come neer them; neverthelesse divers others of the Pagan Champions com∣ming also to assaile them, the three Princes were in danger to have made a glorious end of their days, had not Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, Russian, and Sil∣verin, seeing them in this necessity, come in to their ayd, and let fly at these three mighty Pagans with such a force, that they had almost lost their saddles, and so affording leisure to the Christian Knights to supply themselves with the next fresh horses they met, they began to cover the earth anew with dead bodies. These fearefull blows adding rather anger than feare to the bold Pa∣gans, they rose up more furious than ever they had been before, and not finding those that had put them into this disperate plight, they fell upon Oriander, Atletta his wife, and Parmenian of Cyprus, dealing such marvel∣lous stroaks, that two of them were cut in two peeces, and the third cleft downe to the teeth, so the battell waxing more bloody on every side, every thing appeared so full of horrour, that the Sun appeared as it were mourning, for the expence of so much noble blood, obscuring his face behind a cloud. The Pagans sounded a retreat, and the Christians rallied their disorde∣red troups, to the great grief of Gorgophon, Bravorant, the Grand Salvage, Arastron and Roussardan, who seeing their own wounds, and dispairing of a present victorie, retired to their Tents, and the Christians part into the Town, and part into their Trenches, where being at leisure to number up their losses, which amounted unto two hundred and threescore thousand men, besides the King of the barren Island, and his Wife; the Kings of Hungaria, of Polonia, of Licaonia, of Moldavia, of Sardimira, of Ca∣taya; the valiant Lady Arletta, Parmenian of Cyprus, Rzafar, Quadragant, Agrian of Scotland, Dardanio, of Rhodes, and the gentle Armond of Bo∣hemia, they had a just cause of lamentation; but seeing that their chief Leaders were preserved, and that it was in vain to murmure at the cha∣stisements of a mighty God, they comforted themselves, and causing their wounds to be searched, which they found to be dangerous enough, they all betook themselves to their beds, except the valiant Esquelan of Polonia, that was much afflicted with the death of the King his Father; Cilindor and the twelve new Knights, whose brave feats of Arms perfor∣med that day, had acquired them an immortall fame;
On the other side, the Pagan Princes had no lesse cause to mourn, and repine at their sad fate, having lost an hundred and sixteen Gyants, Tris∣mnd, Arcilles, Celiander, Gloridian, Celianis, Panizell, Armelion, three hun∣dred and forty thousand men, the Kings of Fortan, of Gianazana, of Sal∣berna, of Pergarus; the Emperour of Media; Polidarchus, king of Amazia; Bemond, king of the lesser Iava, the king of Sisiphalta, of Zambar, of Car∣tagena, of Maramor, of Argocana, of Zaphotir, and almost all the rest were confined to their beds, except Falanzar, (who had received onely one slight hurt in the arm by the sword of Florisel,) Palicastaleon, Fiera∣strn, and Brufaldr; but not withstanding these losses, they desiring to ap∣peare invincibles they made no shew of discontent in their countenances, lest thereby the courage of the Souldiers might be abated, and to give a testimony of the care they took for their dead, they sent immediately to demand a truce for twelve days, which being granted, and agreed on both parties, every man sought out his acquaintance to performe unto them the last office of a friend. The Christian Princes were solemnly interred; and the bodies of the Pagans burned, as their custome was; which being done, Falanzar gave Broncaldion, King of the Arcofibrats a party of fourscore thousand men, with order to surprise Goraxa, and Zeiden, two of the strongest Cities of Ethiopia, supposing that the remainder of his horses, which amounted to the number of three hundred, and threescore thousand was powerfull enough to give an absolute defeat to their enemies: And now let us leave them bewayling their losses, and devising new stratagems for the ruing of the Christians, and let our discourse return to those Knights, which are departed from Corolandaya, to goe to the surprisall of the Castle of Treasure. CHAP. XLII. Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their company arrive at the dangerous Forrests of the great Kingdome of Martan, the carrying away of the Princesses, and the adventures of Rozalmond, inextring of the Castle of Treasure. ALcidamant, Rozalmond, and the other Princes that left the Court of Corolandaya, to goe to the Castle of Treasure, having been three and twenty days upon their way without any adventure, that might yeeld them either trouble or content, they entred into the dangerous Forrests of Martan, and continuing on their Iourney, at length they arri∣ved at a place, where they met with ffoure several wayes, and there being overtaken by the darknesse of the evening, they purposed to attend the morning light, wherefore alighting from their horses they fate down together upon the grae, and
causing such meat to be set before them, as their Squires had provided, they began to feed as heartily, as if they had been feasted at the tables of the Emperours of Gardacia, or Martaria, the Knights needed no lights, the place being illuminated by the faire eyes of their Mistresses, and those excellent Ladies did not a little comfort themselves with the protection which their company gave them assurance of from all disasters that might occur. The short collation being ended, the Squires retyred to their horses, which were feeding not far off, and the Ladies overcome with the hea∣vinesse of sleep, layd themselves down under the next adjoyning trees, environed with the Princes, who rested at their feet, to secure them from any danger, that uncouth place might produce. Their past travell caused them quickly to fall into a sound sleep, and so continued till midnight, when as six dreadfull creatures laying hold on the Ladies stole them from amidst the Knights, wherewith they being wakened, and crying out with such a shrill voyce, as quickly pierced the eares of their Champions; they rose up full of amazement, which was immediately converted into fury, as soon as they perceived the Centaurs run through the thickets of trees, loden with such precious burthens; their griefe for this theft allowing them no leisure to look for their horses, they made after them on foot with the best expedition, conducted onely by the wofull cryes of those they sought to rescue, and so leaping over hedges and ditches, with a far nimbler swiftnesse, than those unto whose feet dispaire hath added wings, they wandred to their great griefe till break of day. When Rozalmond being on the top of a Mountain, saw one of these Monsters standing in the mouth of a cave, and grasping in his rude armes the beautifull Armazia, which spectacle ministring unto him no smal con∣tent but much more fury, he doubled his pase, and was not far behind him, when he drew his sword and entred the cave, with an assured confi∣dence that his first blow should take his head from his shoulders, but the place was so darke, that after he had advanced three or four steps, he could see neither Centaur nor Lady; neverthelesse being directed by the com∣plaints, which he well understood came from Armazia, he fell to running with no lesse speed, then if he had been in the plaine field, enjoying the favour of the sun-beams to direct him, and finding the vault still larger and larger, he made no stay till he came to the brink of a violent Torrent, whose swift streams made so loud a noyse, that there seemed to be some dangerous precipice before him, these dreadfull waters taking from him al hopes of passing further, he turned back and sought up and down the Vault for the Centaur, when on a sudden he heard the voyce of Armazia on the otherside of the Torrent, which with many a heavy sigh uttered these words; alas shall I meet with no reliefe, and must I perish by the vio∣lence of this Monster, who goes about to force me, helpe, helpe, noble Knight or Armazia is lost forever. Rozalmond hearing these pittifull words, transported with rage, throws himselfe into the River, whose waves tossing him for a while, to and fro, at last they landed him in a Hall of a stately Palace under ground, so ama∣zed, as if his senses had utterly forsaken him; howbeit his spirits being a little revived, he rose up and walked a turn or two up and down that ob∣scure
room, and would have gone further, if he had not there discovered the Centaure, who with a great club in his hand came to assault him; this fell object did rather rejoyce, than affright him that was uncapable of fear, so that he charged this Monster with so fierce a blow, as he thought would have divided him in two, whereat he being little or nothing asto∣nished, let fall his mercilesse club with such a might on Rozalmonds arme, as almost deprived him of the use therof. The fury of this Knight growing to extremitie, (he being now about a piece of worke of the greatest importance that ever he undertook, name∣ly the redemption of her that was dearer to him than all the world be∣sides, the combat began to be most dangerous, the Centaure avoyded the strokes of his adversary with such a skilfull nimblenesse, as hee was seldome or never ther with touched, and returned his so dexterously, and with such a force, that poore Rozalmond was often-times constrained to make use of his hand and knee to save himself from falling: Oh God, said he, am I come hither to fight in such manner, as I shall not be able to res∣cue Armazia from the cruelty of this Monster? why did not these waters that I passed rather stifle me, or the rocks beat out my brains, than that I should escape both, and live to see my Wife, my onely comfort ravished from me, and I want the power to relieve, or revenge her? give me a reso∣lution either to deliver her from him, or my self to death, since all my quiet and happinesse depends on her safetie; whereupon beholding the Centaur with knit brows, eyes sparkling out fire, and gnashing his teeth, all evident tokens of an enraged soule, he let his sword fly with such a tempest at his head, as cleft him down to the shoulders, overthrowing him to the ground with such a noyse, as seemed to threaten the ruine of the place. This fortunate blow rendred him not a little contented, but he was forth-with marvellously astonished, to see such a multitude of Sepents arise from the bloud of this Monster as covered all the roome, but ad∣vancing with his sword that never failed him, he cut half a dozen of them that were the forwardest to assault him in peeces; which begat a greater wonder, for these twelve peeces were transformed into twelve furious Lyons. Then was this incomparable Warriour in no small streight, for (being environed and assaulted by all these Lyons, and feeling the Serpents twining about his legs, wherby he was so incumbred, as he had scarce any power to stir) he knew not from which to defend himself, nor upon whom to bestow his blowes; he often lifting up his sword above his head, at∣tempted to let it fall againe with no lesse force than would have cleft down a Gyant, but the Lyons being terrified with the glittering of his blade, instantly with their pawes seized on his arm, and so prevented the blow: In brief, he knew not what course to take, but was so full of rage, that he could almost have found in his heart to have converted his fury to his own ruine; neverthelesse, calling to mind his Armazia, and some∣what comforting himself with the remembrance of his wonted courage, and the happy successe which he ever had in all difficult enterprises, he resolved to quit his sword, and clenching his fist let fall his Gantlet up∣on the head of one of the Lyons with such a force, as sent him dead to the ground, which giving him hope of the like defeat upon the rest, he layd
about him so furiously with both hands, that it was not long ere he sent the rest to keep company with the former. These dangerous enemies being dispatched, he would willingly have taken a little breath, but the cruell war which the Serpents still continued against him, offered him no leisure, so that he laid his hand again on his sword, and prepared for the slaughter of these troublesome creatures; howbeit remembring that from their pieces had sprung such fierce and ravening creatures, he let it hang at his arm, and griping these Serpents in his hands, he strangled them all one after another, but with so much pain and labour, that he was fain to fall upon his knees, not being able to sup∣port himself any longer on his legs, this victory which had made him sweat more than ever he had done in any Combat in all his life, giving him some hope of a lucky end, he sat him down on the ground, where not staying so long as to take breath, he suddenly arose, and going to a very fair Damosell, which he saw come out of the cleft of a Wall, with an opinion that it was his dearest Armazia, he said unto her, ah Madam, what care and pains hath the losse of you cost me, but I hold them all wel bestowed, since they have been able to serve you, and that I find you li∣ving, after I had utterly despayred of your safetie. My Lord, answered she, how glad am I of meeting with you thus, but that I may be a assured it is you, pull off your Helmet, that so by the light of your fair eyes, I may be cleered of all farther doubt. I never diso∣beyed you as yet, replyed he, wherfore I will bare my face, that you may know I am not here by any inchantment; wherupon going to unlace his Helmet, a woman catching him by the arm, said unto him, Knight, what mean you to do? take heed of discovering your self, for otherwise you will never get out of this place; who are you, said he, stepping a pace or two back, that counsels me to displease my Lady, by the neglect of her command? and observing her a little better, he continued saying, O me! what do I see? Sweet Cassandra, what is it hath brought you hither now? Onely the care of saving you, answered she, for if you give credit to this fantosme that represents unto you Armazia, you shall never see her again, and shall with your self lose all those excellent Knights that accompanied you out of Corolandaya, together with the glory, and greatnesse of all Christendome. At these words Rozalmond staying, cast his eyes upon the former Da∣mosell, and acknowledging in her face the very favour and beauties of Armazia, he was strangely distracted, for it grieved him to have any other will, then such as his Mistris pleased, and on the other side, he was assured that Cassandra loved him, and that her skill was most admirable, in so much that he stood looking very wistly on them both, without speaking one word, when as she that seemed to be Armazia, said unto him, how now Knight? Do you more regard the speeches of a Sorceresse that means to deceive you, than of your Wife? do you not perceive this to be the face which you have so often adored? are not these the very clothes I had on at the time of our cruell separation? Verely I have great cause to complain of you, and to say that your love was but dissimulation, be∣think you therfore, whether you will beleeve me, or no, for be assured if you refuse to give me your Sword and Helmet, I will return into Garda∣cia, and never look on you more.
Madam, answered Rozalmond, (who began to suspect her, and that knew well Armazia loved Cassandra, better than to speak ill of her) you may be confident that I will never prefer any thing on the earth before your contentment, but be pleased to consider, that men are subject to a thousand dangers, and that I should not be in case to fight, if any new ene∣mies should chance to arrive, whilst my arms were in your hands, and what good will they doe you? Let me alone with them, I beseech you, for to serve you; and to withdraw you out of this Cave with lesse danger; It imports not you much to see me now, but much it concernes me to keep me as I am, wherfore you shall have that content, as soon as we shall be in any place where the Sun may assure me that I am in the world. Uncivil Knight, answered she, thou shalt presently feele how much thou hast dis∣pleased me, saying so, she took upon her, the form of a most hideous Fan∣tosme, which with a burning Torch in her hand, began to charge him so furiously, that her blowes seemed to be so many thunderbolts, falling on his head and shoulders; he looked about for Cassandra, but perceiving her to be gone, he layd hold on his Sword, and giving a thousand, and a thou∣sand strokes in the ayre without hitting any thing, he was so weary, as he was constrained to rest himself against the Wall, where this Fantosme came, and making most villanous faces, and with most dreadfull how∣lings, assailed him again, giving him such terrible blowes, that another lesse strong and couragious would have fainted under them. Five houres being spent in this Combat, the Knight that saw nothing because the night was very dark, but by the eyes, and Torch of the Fan∣tosme, desiring to free himself from so great a vexation, flourished with his sword all about, and cutting the ayre as before, five or six turns up and down the roome, at length by chance met with an entrie, wherinto he was no sooner entred, but the Fantosme vanished away, and left him in such darknesse, that every step he made, he was in fear of falling into some precipice; whereupon he stood still, and leaning upon his Sword, rested himself for half an houre in that manner, at the end whereof being wonderfull desirous to see a period of this adventure, he went on gro∣ping with both his hands, untill about the break of day, he discovered a very stately Court, full of most admirable Pictures, and lymited with three great bodies of lodgings built triangle-wise, of which the Walls being curiously covered with Porphirie, Jasper, black Marble, and Cry∣stall, cast so bright a lustre, that he stayed the more exactly to observe the workmanship of it. Neverthelesse advancing presently forward, he past in at a Dore which he saw open before him, and had scarce set one foot within it, when as he felt two such terrible blows discharged on his Helmet, as he was fain to kisse the ground, from whence suddenly arising, he espied two dreadfull Gyants, each of them holding a mighty club aloft in the ayre, and ready to fall again upon him, if lightly leaping aside he had not avoyded them; his fall, and the sight of these great Colosses having stirred up his courage, he took his good sword in both his hands, and with it struck one of the Gyants in such manner, that having divided his iron club in two, the point therof light so rudely on his shoulder, as he was forced to set his knees and hands to the ground, and going to second the former blow, he was prevented by the other Gyant, who gave him so
cruell a stroak between the neck and shoulders, that it made him  against the Wall, but he quickly recovering himself, let drive in such sort at him that wanted a club, as he layd him lat on the earth, which presently opening, swallowed him up, and straight-way closed again. Being thus rid of one, he turned him about to the other, and thinking to avoyd his thundring club which was descending upon him, he was so surprised, that he was constrained to slide under the Gyants arm, and si on his body; then might be seen a most dangerous wrastling, the Gyant took him fast by the shoulders, and gave him such twitches, and terrible heaves, that he had many times like to have overthrown him, howbeit re∣fuming new courage in hope of acquiring immortall fame by being vi∣ctrious, he put the Gyant so many wayes to it, and so often shewed him such tricks as are practised in wrastling, as after two houres travell, he ex∣tended him on the floore, which instantly swallowed him up, as it had done the other. These two dangerous enemies being thus dispatched, our Warriou looked about him, to see whether there were any more to combat with, but perceiving none appeare, he went to observe those excellent Pictures, where he beheld Amadis of Gaule, Amadis of Greece, and other Princes of their blood, together with the glorious feats of Armes performed by them in their life time, so lively represented, that he had been lost in the contemplation of them, had he not been directed by the sight of the five Knights entring into the Court together, out of five severall doors. CHAP. XLIII. The marvellous exployts of Alcidamant, before his entrance into the Castle of Treasure. THE day appearing to Alcidamant, upon the top of a Mountain, after he had made a thousand and a thousand turnes, discovered unto him a Centaur of a prodigious greatnesse, that carried away Trasiclea towards the mouth of a cave, from whence issued huge flames of fire, which making him forget his former pains, hee began to run more lustily then hee had done all the night be∣fore, and travelled so long, till he approached the said cave, which seemed to be another Mount Aetna, where the Centaur making a stand, threw Trasiclea into the midst of the flames, and advancing his mighty club, he let it descend with such a tempest on our Champion, that he was fain to set his hands to the ground, for to save himselfe; but transported with extream fury, and desiring to be revenged on the Mon∣ster, for precipitating his Mistris in that manner, he returned him so terri∣ble a blow, as he made him stagger five or six paces backward, wherwith the Centaur marvellously incensed, discharged so terribly on his helmet, that he thought the ruins of some Tower had fallen upon him; never∣thelesse
being in the  of , he took his sword in both his hands, and therewith striing at this , couned his club first, and bat it with such violence against his hd, that it overturned him into the middest of that dreadfull Furce. Then it was when this Warriour seeing himselfe alone, without hope of taking a greater revenge for the death of his Lady, which he beleeved was reduced to ashes, that he began to cry so horribly, as made all the val∣lies about resound therewith; his actions were nothing but expressions of madnesse, and all his motions so full of rage, that the most confident Gy∣ants would have trembled at the sight of him. Why stay I any longer, (said he labouring to pluck off his Helmet, that he might tear his haire in peeces) wretch that I am, why stay I any longer, to make an end of my selfe in any sort whatsoever? my Mistris is not in the world, what should I doe in it then? no, no, I must leave it, dye the same death that she hath done, and joyn my ashes to hers: saying so, he lung his shield to the ground, and casting his eyes by chance towards the grot with such piercing sighes, as if his soule would every minute have parted from his body, he perceived a little Pillar, where beholding a table hanging, hee approached unto it, for to reade these words. Jf thou hast courage enough to passe these , thou shalt recover the Trea∣sure, which thou beleevest is lst. O me, said he, more contented than ever he had been furious, am I per∣mitted yet to hope, and can the safety of my Mistris consist in my adven∣tures? away with all regard and feare of danger, and let the world see that my soule doth burne with a far more fierce and glorious fire; where∣upon taking up his sword and shield, he went on and threw himselfe into those horrible flames, wherein having continued above a quarter of an houre, without feeling any heat at all, he found himselfe in a meadow en∣vironed with inaccessable Rocks, saving one only overture which appea∣red in the forme of a door, whither addressing himselfe he perceived three monstrous fowles come out of it, the least whereof was as big as an Oxe, which striking at him with a most dreadfull noyse, layd him all along on the ground, from whence feare and a desire to meet with his Lady, having quickly raysed him up again, he took his sword, and  when these creatures were returned with their former fury, he hit one of them so luc∣kily, just on the joynt of the wing, that he cut it off, which caused that dangerous creature to fall to the ground, where becomming more  by the sight of his blood, he r upon him with a mvellous force, but the Knight presenting the poynt of his sword, stroke him to the heart; and so sent him dead to the earth. In the mean time the other two being their mighty wings, stooped to him, and catching him in their tallon, caried him up into e ayr, where by his fall, or the fury of these Moners he could have expected nothing but assured death, had he not fortely met with the elly of one of them, where into he past his sword almost to the , by which means the pngs of death wherein he was made hi unoo his hold, and let our Knight fall in such a grievous man, that he verely thought all his boes had bee broe within hi▪ neverthelesse ing the other  towards
him, he presently got up, yet not so soon, but that having first caught him by the Helmet, he lift him up above two foot from the ground, howbeit finding him too heavie for his hold, he quit him, and forced him to fall a∣gain upon his hands, where suddenly returning, he hit him with his hoo∣ked beake so udely on the shoulders, that the club of a mighty Gyant could not more cruelly have bruised his flesh. This Champion desiring to vanquish his enemy, who by no means would now come within the reach of his sword, struck at him a thousand and a thousand times in vain; where-with-all being very much wearied, and finding how that was not the way to prevaile, he held his sword close under his shield, and watching the Monsters next stooping to catch hold on it, he thrust up his hand with such fury, that he ran him quite thorow, and thorow, laying him dead hard by him. This trouble some combat, which had lasted three houres, being glori∣ously finished, he sate him down on the grasse, where the remembrance of his Mistris not permitting him to stay long, he arose and made towards the Grot, and in pursuit of his good fortune entring into it, he felt so ma∣ny strokes upon his shield and Helmet, that he had much adoe to keep himself on his legs; howbeit standing stifly to it, and covering himself well with his shield, he laid about him with his sword, though he saw no body upon whom he could fasten a stroke, yet feeling that he found resi∣stance, and that his blade did encounter Armour, now he gave a down∣right blow, then a thrust, and bestirring himself with marvellous fury, he still made way; notwithstanding, the more he advanced, the more was he prest by his invisible enemies, which so belaboured him, that to his re∣membrance he never endured so much pain in all the combats he had fought before; his courage that never knew what danger meant, and that sought for glory in the greatest difficulties, made him redouble his blows, and goe on in despight of those he did not see, till he saw himself freed from so furious a charge. One would think now that our Knight had a great deale of reason to rest himself, but the desire he had to find out his Mistresse, made him goe on without any stay, till he came to a great dore, against the which he ran so forceably with his foot, that it flew open, and gave him entrance into a very spacious roome, where at first sight he was taken with much won∣der, for in the middest of it a crystall Coffer appeared, bordered about with twelve burning Torches, and twelve huge Pillars that supported the whole edifice, out of the which on a sudden issued as many dreadfull Salvages, with each of them a mighty club in his hand, who straight way assayled him on all sides, but he received them in such manner, that at the very first blow he layd one of them on the ground in case to doe him no harm any more, and flying in amongst the rest, he cut off three more al∣most by the waste; whereat the others being nothing dismayed, layd up∣on him like eight hammers upon an Anvill, wherewithall he was so terri∣bly battered, as his very bones seemed to be broken within his flesh, ne∣verthelesse hoping for no worse successe than he had found in his former dangers, he bestirred himselfe with such fury amongst them that he ran up one to the hilts, cleft another to the girdle, and the third had both his arms, togither with his club sent to the ground. This so sudden an execution encouraging him to doe better, he valiant∣ly
pursued his good fortune, but comming to want breath, he went and leaned against one of the Pillars, that so he might have them all before him to fight withall, presenting them his shield on the one side, and the poynt of his sword on the other, he attended the approach of these furious and cruell creatures, which in stead of assaulting him, fell to make such horrible cryes, that the very room shaked withall; by this means having opportunity to rest himselfe, hee continued about halfe an houre in that manner. But pressed with desire to see the end of so many marvels, he advanced towards these Salvages, that with their clubs were ready to receive him, and resolving either to dye, or vanquish, he cast his shield behind his back, took his sword in both his hands, and discharged it so dangerously upon one of them, as he divided his body in two, cleft another down to the shoulders, and so terrified the rest, that they began to run all up and down the room, to avoyd the fury of his blade; neverthelesse being at last overtaken with incredible paines, two were overthrown dead upon the place; and the last threw himselfe upon the great coffer of Chrystall, where by signes he would have begged for life, but Alcidamant was in such a rage, that without taking heed to what he did, he gave him so mighty a blow, as having cut him in two peeces, the poynt of his sword fell so rudely on the coffer, that it broke it into a thousand peices; whereupon there instantly ensued such a terrible clap of thunder, that our Warriour fell down upon the floor quite voyd of judgement, where having lyen some two houres, as it were in a trance, he arose without so much as feel∣ing the least wearinesse of his passed labours, and beheld instead of the coffer, a guilt Cuirace enameled with red and green, and garnished in many places withgreat Diamonds, which rendred a marvellous lustre, so excel∣lent, and of so high a valew, as all the richest and bravest Armes that ever he had seen were nothing in comparison of this, hard by was a most stately Helmet of the same mettall and colour, as also a shield with the same de∣vice as was in his own; the desire he had to possesse himselfe of these Armes pressed him so far that he was about to quit his own, for to put them on, but fearing some trick or inchantment, he began to consider them with wonder, and to observe them so narrowly, as he perceived a scrole within the Cuirace, wherein this was written in the French tongue. Alcidamant make no difficulty to take these Armes, for they are due to thy merit, and above five hundred years before thy birth, they were made for theeby the most excellent Magicians of the earth. Verely said he then, I have no reason to make any further doubt, for my name that is here written, and the devise of the shield may well assure me; therewith doffing his own, he put on that excellent armour which he found so fit for him, that he was confident, it was made for his service; whereupon being armed at all poynts, he looked round about him, and perceiving a large Alley, he entred into it, hoping to crown his designes with a happy concsiluon.
CHAP. XLIV. What hapned to the gentle Clarisel of Guindaya, before he entred the Castle of Treasure. C Larisel of Guindaya, bing mightily vexed at the carrying away of his fairest Miralinda, ran up and down so long, till he discovered a woman in the hands of three Gyants, who leading her tyed with cords, made her goe very hastily along; the violence of passion which beguiles the eyes of men, and that represents things unto them quite otherwise then they are, perswading him that it was his beautifull Shepherdesse, he cryed out, O  is it possible that I should behold her most inhumanely bound with cords, which might captivate all the world? Ah Madam, these villaines, shall not long continue the wrong they doe you, for I will punish them so cruelly, that if all the Gyants on the earth were assembled together, they should learn what it were to lay hands on a creature of your merit; stay wicked wretches, and doe not thus tire so inestimable an excellence, stay I say, or else be sure that I will cut you into a thousand peeces; whilst hee uttered these words, love and fury lending him wings, he ran with all his might, and made such speed, that within lesse then halfe an houre he saw himselfe upon the bank of a great pool, and so neer those three Colossus, as he had the means to discharge a blow on the Helmet of him, that went hindmost, with such fury that he cleft him down to the teeth. At the noyse of this terrible stroak, and the fall of that Gyant, the other two that were before drew forth their heavie Fauchions, and char∣ged our valiant Warriour so rudely, as they made him reel very much astonished three or foure steps back, but instantly calling to mind, that the safety of his Mistris was in question, for whom hee would have fought with all the world together, he instantly recovered himselfe, and returning to his enemies, he began to showre most horrible blows upon them, both one after another; neverthelesse they pressed him in such manner, and their stroaks were so heavy and thick, that if the armes he wore had not been framed by Vrganda, without doubt he had been in very great danger. This Combat having continued two houres with strange fury, the Gy∣ants were covered all over with bloud and wounds, and Clarisel began to grow feeble, by reason of the incredible travail which he had indured all the night long; but drawing new forces from the greatnesse of his courage, and the hope he had of delivering his fairest Mistress, he took his sword in both his hands, and with marvellous agilitie passing by two horrible blows, that descended upon him at one instant, he let his sword fal with such violence upon the shoulder of one of them, as he opened him to the very girdle, which possessing him that remained with more rage than fear, he discharged
on our Warriours shield with such fury, as having beaten it against his head, he made him knock his chin against his breast, and set his knees to the earth, where desiring to overthrow him quite, he abando∣ned his great Curtelas, and taking him between his mighty arms, he gave him three or four terrible twitches: neverthelesse, the Knight being in spight of him risen up again, setled himself well on his legs, and laying very fast hold on him, he began to bustle very strongly with him, and put him so to it, as he left him without hope of easily overcomming him. This dangerous wrestling having continued an houre and better, to the exceeding discontent of Clarisel, who was vext to the heart, that he could not prevail, he became so furious, as making use of all his force, he thrust the Gyant in such sort, that not able to make him let go his hold, they went both to the ground, where desire of vanquishing animating them alike, they tumbled up and down so long together, till they fell both into the Poole, where being separated he knew not how; our Warriour felt himself pulled by the feet, as if he should be drawn into some precipice, and indeed he found himself in a Cave, where treading on the carkasses of men, he was marvellously astonished, for that he perceived not the water to be any longer over his head, nor how he came there, for casting his eye round about, and perceiving neither Window nor doore, he knew not what to think, nor say, at his being in so dark and hideous a place, from whence he had little hope to get out. Neverthelesse, being uncapable of fear, he went groping by the walls some twenty or thirty paces, when as he chanced to hear most dreadfull hissings, whereat making a stop, he espied a furious Serpent of an unmea∣surable greatnesse, which scraping up the earth, stared upon him with two terrible fiery sparkling eyes, able to terrifie any other lesse confident than our Knight, who being lighted by those two horrible torches, quick∣ly presented his shield to the clawes of the Monster, and being guided by his good fortune, he thrust him so just in one of his eyes, that his sword entred three fingers deep into his head, which caused him to make such strange leapes and cryes, that all the place round about trembled again; and provoked by the smart of his wound, he flew with such fury at Clari∣sel as overthrowing him to the earth, he set his teeth, and clawes to his shield, breaking it as easily in peeces as if it had been glasse, and not con∣tented therwith, he plucked so violently at his Helmet, as if he would have disarmed him, for to devoure him, when as the Knight full of assu∣rance and judgement in the middest of such danger, gave him so sore a hurt in the belly, that feeling himselfe touched in this manner, he made a skip up to the very roofe of the Vault, and so suffered the Knight to arise sud∣denly, which was to good purpose for him, in regard that the dangerous creature lighting down presently made at him with such rage, as he could not possibly choose but have gone again to the ground, had he not wari∣ly declined him, wherfore retiring aside with more agilitie than his wea∣rinesse seemed to permit, he let him passe by like lightning, and desiring to make use of oportunitie, he discharged so mighty a blow full upon the body of him, as might well have divided an Anvile in sunder, howbeit his sword returned without effect, his scales being so hard, that it did not so much as make any dint in them, which at first somewhat amazed him.
Neverthelesse being ever most confident, where most difficulty appea∣red, he resolved to strike him no more in vain on the back, but to try his belly, and accordingly when this furious Serpent returned, he cou∣ragiously attended him, and beholding him raysed up on his tayle, he thrust his sword so strongly at his breast, that he ran him up to the very hilts, yet could not that keep him from being overturned again to the earth by this terrible creature, which in the pangs of death so crushed him with his clawes, and the weight of his body, as he thought he should have died before he could have cleared himselfe, but the greatnesse of his cou∣rage would not suffer him to continue long in that manner, for quickly ridding himselfe of so heavie a burthen, he withdrew into a corner of the Grot for to let the Serpent dye, which stormed so horribly, as the Cave seemed to fall into ruine. Halfe an houre being past with this dreadfull noyse, a generall silence succeeded, whereby Clarisel judging that the Monster was dead, followed the wall as before, so long till he felt a doore, upon the which having be∣stowed all his strength, both with his feet, and the pomell of his sword, he brake it open, and then entred through it into a spacious room, alongst the which he perceived thirty very faire Damosels comming who cour∣teously saluting him, he was incouraged to say thus unto them; Ladies, the honour you doe me, doth very much oblige me, but you would adde much unto this favour of yours, if you would tell me any newes of an incomparable beauty, which was most unfortunatly stolne from me in a certain Forrest here by. Wee will give you this content, answered one of them, but Knight, it must be upon condition that you promise us what we shall demand of you. If it be in my power, answered Clarisel, assure your selves, Ladies, you shall not be denied; That which we desire is, re∣plied she, that you put off your Helmet and kisse us one after another in way of salutation as the manner is, and that also you will lye with each of us one whole night together. Your demand, answered Clarisel (exceeding∣ly offended with this sha melesse speech) being repugnant to the faith which I have plighted to my Lady, be pleased to dispence with me if I do not satisfie your request, which in plain termes seemes not very honest unto me. How now, wicked wretch, said the Damosell, doe you reproach us to our faces, after you have violated your word to us? come sirs, lee us make this insolent Knight see that we are able to revenge our selves when we are wronged; Here with they all of them took out rods from under their coats, & environing the Knight, began to whip him so cruelly, that their blowes which fel upon his Armour, were no lesse weighty than the clubs of the strongest Gyants of the earth. Our Champion seeing himselfe intreated after this manner, was mar∣vellously abashed, for though he had his sword in his hand, yet durst he not use it against them, because they were women; on the other side feeling all his body battered with multitude of stroaks, he was mightily vext, and could not tell what to doe; for as soon as he avoyded the hands of some of them, he found others presently at his shoulders, and how to get from them he knew not, in regard they had planted themselves so close together, round about him, that they stood as strong as a wall; in the mean time their battery continued, and the Knight found himselfe in worse case then he was, under the dreadfull blows of Zorobalan, and his
brother in great Britain, so that being constrayned to resolve upon some∣what, he held his sword over his head, and running with his shield against them in a strange fury, he suddenly layd five or six of them on the ground, which making him way to advance forward, he laboured to gain a porch that he beheld on his left hand, but the rest presently overtaking him, he fell into his former suffering; whereupon doing as he did before, and ha∣ving thereby overthrown a dozen more of them, he got nine or ten paces forward, where feeling the violence of those blows, to be far greater than at the beginning, he became so incensed, that rushing forth with all his force, he passed to the entrance of the porch, in despight of them all; where thinking himselfe safe, because they were vanished away, hee per∣ceived a Knight in black Armes make towards him, who without telling him wherefore, saluted him with so terrible a blow on his shield, as made him set one knee to the ground, which so inraged him, that taking his sword in both his hands, he discharged it with such a tempest on his hel∣met, as made him fall all along, beleeving that he had made an end of him; neverthelesse, he saw him rise up instantly again, and make at him with a strange fury, as if he would be throughly revenged, but viewing that dreadfull blade aloft in the ayr, he recoyled to the end of the porch, where Clarisel having strucken him with all his strength, he sent him to the earth, which swallowed him up with a most fearefull noyse, leaving our War∣riour amazed at so many wonders, and exceedingly contented to behold a very stately Court, towards which he addressed himselfe with an assured hope to see a successefull issue of his Enterprise. CHAP. XLVII. The marvellous adventures that befell Amadis of Trebisond, in the enterprise of the Castle of Treasure. NEither bushes, trees, nor thornes being able to ar∣rest Amadis, whom the losse of Palmirenna had made desperate he ran without intermission, un∣till the Sun grown somewhat high, discovered unto him a spacious Lake, whose further banke was bordered with a number of magnificent Palaces; the opinion he had, that he might there heare some news of those Centaurs retreat, pos∣sessing him with a desire to passe the Lake, hee coasted so long till he met with a Boat, whereinto entring, he began with the oars to make way through the water; the Lake was very calm, and the wind blew with a gentle gale; but at the third stroak of his oares the waves began to swel and incounter one another with such rage, as the little skiffe was now carried up as high as the clouds, and by and by thrown as low as the center of the earth; so sudden and dangerous a tempest ha∣ving somewhat amazed the Knight, he laboured to surmount the fury of
the waters, and rowing with incredible strength and skill, he kept his Bo steady, when as a multitude of monstrous fishes ran with such violence against it, that it was five or six times ready to overturn; the hazard he was in of drowning was much; neverthelesse trusting in the mercy of Heaven, he left mastring the waves, and fell to combat those creatures with his oars, he struck one, beat down another, turned him on every side, now stept forward, then again retyred; besides the Lake was so terrible rough, as he could not stand upon his legs; but ever and anon was on his knees; briefly, he endured such fearfull payns, that he wished himselfe a thousand times in the middest of six such Monsters, as he defeated at his arrivall in the Empire of Martaria, rather than be constrayned to deale with these aquaticall horrours, which in the mean time so tossed the poor skiffe from one to another, that after they hade made it caper, I know not how often up to the very sky, they turned it over and over, casting our Knight into the midst of the proud waters, which incontinently swallow∣ed him up, being unable by reason of his armour to swim for his life. Then it was that he verely beleeved, that the end of his dayes was come, wherefore assuring himselfe that the bottome of the Lake should be his Sepulchre; he bestowed his first thoughts in bewayling his eternal separation from his Lady, and his last in repenting his sins; but hee was marvellously astonished to find himself in a round Hall very sumptuously built, and sustayned with twelve huge Arches, in the midst whereof hee beheld a dozen of Monkies making such ill-favoured faces, and playing such gambals, as notwithstanding the height of his displeasure hee could not chuse but laugh; howbeit this contentment lasted not long, for hee presently perceived those little creatures transformed on a sudden into so many furious Buls, of a prodigious greatnesse. This unexpected metamorphosis, counselling him to draw his sword, he began with it to stand upon his guard; when as they all ran together at him with such rage, that instead of overthrowing him to the ground, they hurled him up into the ayr, and then so tossed him with their hornes from one to another, that hee made ten or eleven turnes before ever he came to the ground; whereby, though his armour could not be pierced, his flesh and his bones were mightily bruised: The Knight seeing himselfe blanketed in this sort, thought he was in no lesse danger, then when he was on the water, and was exceedingly grieved for that hee could not make use of his strength and valour; but the most couragious resolutions are ordinarily found in the greatest dangers, he took hold of one of these Buls horns, and setling himselfe on his back, clasped his sides fast with his knees and legs, caught up his sword that hung at his wrist, and setting spurs to him, made him serve in lieu of an horse to combat the rest, ad∣vancing his sword then, he discharged it so dangerously upon one of them, that he divided him in two, and continuing such horrible blows, layd four of them on the ground within lesse then an houre, the rest with dreadfull bellowings so butted him on the thighes and back, that he was in extream payn; neverthelesse choosing rather to dye than not to vanquish, hee so bestirred himselfe amongst them, that he extended the rest of the eleven dead at his feet; and because that, upon which he was, troubled him infi∣nitely by not giving him leisure to alight, hee took his sword in both his hands, and let it descend with such force on his head, that having cleft it
asunder, he sent him to the earth breathing out his last, himselfe being cast five or six paces off by the violence of the beast in his pangs of death. This dangerous combat being finished in this sort, our Warriour sate him down upon one of the dead Bulls to take a little breath, but the ex∣tream desire he had to meet with some one that might tell him newes of what he sought for, not permitting him to take much rest; he got out tho∣row a very little dore, and found himselfe under a rock, from whence issued a very cleere Fountain, by the which having espied Palmirenna sit∣ting, he made towards her with incredible joy, but she perceiving him comming, rose suddenly up and began to run away, as if the feare of some mischiefe had made her fly from the Knight, who much amazed knew not what to say to it, but imagining that she did not know him, he follow∣ed after her, crying as loude as he could, Alas! Madam, why doe you fly me, and what feare you from me, that doe not breath, but for you? doe you not see that I am your slave, or to say better, that man whom you have made happy by the possession of your favours? stay, I beseech you a little, and be assured that I am here to preserve you against all the world, rather than to hurt you, and consi∣der that these my arms, are the very same which I put on for your ser∣vice, when we undertook this voyage with your friends: Doe you fly from me still Palmirenna? what may I thinke of so great a neglect, but that you have forgot your so many vowes, and that ever you loved me? Palmiren∣na I am your Amadi, why doe you run from me then with such crueltie? whence comes this change? Alas! tell me; stay and let mee know wherein I have offended you, that so I may with my death make satisfa∣ction to your displeasure. Whilst our Warriour with tears and sighes intreated thus in vain, he still mended his pace, and running with all his might, was even ready to catch Palmirenna, when as he perceived foure Beares come out of a thic∣ket, whereof one seizing her, made away with her into the Wood, which put him into such a rage, that he discharged his sword with that force on the formost of them, as having cut off both his pawes, the point of it fell so furiously on his shoulder, that it sent him dead to the earth. This blow succeeding according to his desire, he was going to set upon the rest, but being first laid hold on by them, he was overthrown to the ground; where keeping him down under their cruell clawes, they began to set their teeth to his Armour, thinking to devour him very easily; but our Knigh making use of his judgement, by little and little dis-ingaged his left hand, and drawing forth his Poinard, he struck it so far into the belly of one of these Beasts, that having reached his heart, he killed him outright, where with the third being the more enraged, caught the Poi∣nard between his teeth, biting it in pieces, assailed the Knight afresh, who finding but this enemy to encounter with, got up first on hisknees, and then rising all together, took him in his arms, and laying him on his back stab∣bed him three or four times up to the hilts. The Beares being thus dispatched, he could have found in his heart to have rested himselfe, but considering the danger his Lady was in, he flung into the thicket, where he made a thousand turnes without meeting any body, or finding any way to get out again, at length after two houres tra∣vell, he discovered three frames of building in triangle erected with mar∣vellous
art, to which there was no passage, but by a long ally, that appea∣red on his left hand wherein he went along untill he came to a gate, and finding it shut, he knocked twice or thrice, as hard as he could drive, wher∣upon he perceived one of the most hideous, and dreadfull Gyants that ever he had seen look out of a window, who with a hoarse voyce, and in an arrogant manner said unto him; Wretched Knight, what wouldest thou have? Commest thou to seek for death which all others so decline? I would wish thee to be gone, and not to trouble me thus, lest I come down, and cut thee into a thousand peeces. Audacious Gyant, answered Amadis, thy very look assured me of thy insolence, which moves me not a whit, onely descend, and open me the gate, we shall then see whether thou art able to doe that thou so much braggest of. At these words the Gyant having clapped too the Window, as if he were in a mighty chafe, came down a little after, and shewed so big to Amadis, that he wondred how nature was able to frame so huge a masse of flesh, neverthelesse insensible of feare, he gave him with all his force  most terrible blow, that cutting his shield in two, constrained him to re∣coile five or six paces backward, howbeit this Collossus quickly recol∣lected himselfe, and with a mighty Fauchion began to deale such horrible blowes, as the least of them had been able to have cleft him down to the teeth, if ever he had stood them, but avoiding them all with admirable addresse, he so mightily charged him both with point and edge, as it had been a matter of great wonder to any that had beheld the precedent la∣bours which he had undergone all the day before; The Gyant stormed for that he could not fasten a stroak on him, and casting forth a thick smoak at the visier of his Helmet, hindred himselfe from seeing where his blows should light, so that his Curtelas falling incessantly on the ground, had cleft it in fourteen or fifteen places, which put him into such infinite excess of rage, that every thing about them trembled with the very sound of his horrible roaring. Three long houres being spent in the first fury of this Combat, the Gy∣ant began to grow weary and weak, and our Champion perceiving his advantage over him, charged him afresh, but seeing him dispute the vi∣ctory still with him, he took his sword in both his hands, and struck his enemy so dangerously, as he gave him a great wound in the arme, making him to reele withall; whereat he was so mad, that resolving to determine the Combat, he also tooke his heavy Scimiter in both his hands, and ma∣king as though he would strike on the one side, discharged with such vio∣lence on the other, that Amadis being surprized therewith, fell tumbling five or six paces off voyding a great deale of blood at his mouth; This dreadfull blow having shewed our Warriour how dangerous it was to receive the like, he arose so strangely transported with rage, that this Co∣lossus, who did not think any thing in the world was able to strike him with the least touch of fear, began to apprehend the fury of his enemies sword, which descended with such a tempest on him, as it opened him to the very wast, sending him starke dead to the earth. Having performed this to his infinite content, he lift up his eyes to heaven to give thanks for the assistance he had received, and wondring much at the strangenesse of those things he had lately seen, he approached to the Gate, which being open, permitted him to behold a stately Court all plastered with Por∣phyrie,
per, black Mable, and Chryall; whereinto let us leve him with an extream desire to enter, and let us speak of the  which befell Gri the Salvage, and Grilnis. CHAP. XLVIII. The Mervails which hapned to Griolanis, and the Knight of the Salvage before their entrance into the Castle of Trasure. THe griefe wherin Grilanis and Grian the Salvage were, having made them travell six houres with incredible payn, they met together comming out of athicket, exceedingly vext for that they could not learn any news of the losse they had made; hereupon having rested themselves a little, they took the first way that presented it selfe unto them, in which they went so long, till they en∣countred certain very high wals, at the fight whereof they were wonderfull glad, hoping to hear somewhat of that they sought for; having walked then about halfe an houre, they percei∣ved two Damosels upon the battlements of the wals, unto whom Griola∣nis addressing himselfe spake in this sort. Gentle-women, if you be as courteous, as faire; tell us whether you saw any Ladies, which were forceably carried away from us the last night in a Forest hereby. Knights, answered one of them, we could soon let you see them you aske for, if you were in this Garden; but the way to come hither is so difficult, that you shall not be able to obtayn that contentment, if you be not the prime Knights of the earth. Gentlewomen, said Grain, it were a vanity for us to be perswaded that we were any of those, the best in the world; but thus much we will promise that we wil with courage undertake, that which a Knight may performe; & to come where you are, though we should passe through hel to it; wher∣fore we desire that you wil be pleased to shew us the way. I know not, said the Damosel, whether your actions will be answerable to your words; but to give you cause to adventure your selves, look here, said she (shewing Penamonda of Greece, and the gentle Adelazia at one of the cranies tyed with cords) these I think are those you seek for, they shall continue in this estate, untill you free them from their bonds, and save them from greater punishment, which they are to suffer, if your valour be wanting to them at this present: What, said the King of Corolandaya, equally seized with joy and griefe, shall we want courage in such an Enterprise? Be assured, Gentle-woman, that we will be chopt into a thousand peeces, rather then fayle in their need, onely doe but tell us where we may get in; Through a gate faid the Damosel, which you shall find about an hundred paces from hence; the same shall shew you two wayes, let each of you take that
where into his fortune shall direct him, without returning for my consi∣deration what soever. Here upon these two valiant Champions advancing forward, met with the Gate the Damosel spoke of, and couragiously entring into it they dis∣cryed two little pathes, the right Griolanis took, and Grian the Salvage the left, which lead him to a cave, where a number of lighted torches hang∣ing on the top of the roofe, plainly discovered the ground unto him, so covered with the poynts of swords, pikes, halbards, and partizans stand∣ing upright, that was impossible to make a step without treading on the sharpe steel, which somewhat troubled him at the first; neverthelesse being ashamed to make a stop at any difficulty, having been so charged to the contrary by the Damosel, he stoopst down to pull them up, as the best meane to passe along; but just as hee took hold of an Halberd it sprung out of the earth, and hit him with such violence on the brest, that it turned him over and over; where withall being much incensed he arose, set his foot in the voyd place, where the halberd had stood, and feixing with each hand the poynt of a sword, felt himselfe hit as before, with so great force, that he had again been overthrown, had he not stood stifly to it. Having then room enough to place both his feet, he was going on to doe as he had begun, when as a mighty noyse suddenly rising, he beheld all those poynts to come out of the ground, the torches in an instant ex∣ringuished, and without seeing any body, felt himselfe charged with such a tempest, as he was a long quarter of an hour on his knees, being infor∣ced to bow under an infirmity of heavie blows layd upon his shield, his shoulders, and his head; but choosing death rather than to faile in his enterprise, he arose in a rage, began to cut those pikes, partizans, halberds, and swords asunder, and by little and little gayning ground, sometimes flung his blade furiously about his head, then gave a down-right, and by and by a crosse blow; briefly, he skirmished in that manner, as if he had had a thousand Knights in head against him. This dangerous combat ha∣ving continued above two hours, with so much paine and labour, as a Knight lesse strong and valiant, could not have endured it; hee met with certain steps; upon the first whereof having but set his foot, this so ter∣rible a charge ceased, which gave him leave to fit down on the second step, so much out of breath, that he was faine to lift up the visier of his helmet to take in ayr. This while Griolanis was no lesse perplexed, for he likewise came to a cave full of lighted torches; but his adventure was far more pleasing than Grians; for he found the ground covered with exceeding fair women, which lay starke naked so close one to another, that he was of necessity to tread upon their bellies if he would passe on, whereat he was no lesse abashed, then his companion had been at the sight of the pikes and hal∣berds, so as he remayned a pretty while in suspence, not knowing what to resolve; and that which put him more into confusion was to heare these women, who one after another said thus unto him. Cruell Knight, what mean you to doe? will you adde unto our misery, and not conten∣ted to behold us in a torment, far worse than death, will you increase it by treading on our tender naked bodies? be moved with our tears, take another way we beseech you, and performe your enterprise without our paine; could you be contented to remember another day, that you have
been the destruction of an hundred Gentlewomen which never offended you? The remorse wherof questionlesse would torture your conscience, nor would you ever look upon a woman, but it would extreamly grieve you, to think that you had been wanting in pitty to them. This speech very much disquieted Griolanis, and he was upon the point to have quit them, and undertaken his Companions way, had he not cal∣led to mind that his Lady would then remain eternally in bonds, and that he had been advised to passe on notwithstanding any consideration what∣soever, wherefore thinking that he might without hurting these women, passe along by lifting them up one after anotheer, he took the first by the arm, and set her on her feet, which was no sooner done, but she gave him so terrible a blow with her fist on his Helmet, that in his opinion a thun∣derbolt could not have hit him with more violence; How now Gentle∣woman, said he, is this the recompence of my good will? forbear I pray you, and let me deliver your fellows: wherwith not able to appease her, that still continued beating him, he resolved to spend no more time in words, but took up the second, by whom he was entreated as by the for∣mer, and so proceeding to lift up those that were next, he received so ma∣ny blows on his head, breast, and back, that he had much adoe to keep himselfe on his legs: nevertheless, what is not feazable for a valiant man, that desires to draw his Mistresse out of so grievous a captivitie, as that wherein he had seen his Adelazia? His courage augmented with difficul∣ties, and though his flesh and bones were all battered and bruised, yet he laboured so long, that he rendred the passage free, and had no sooner set his foot on the first step of a paire of stayres that he beheld before him, but immediatly these women vanished, leaving him in rest, wherof doubt∣lesse he had as much need as Grian. These two Warriours then having sate awhile arose, and going up a matter of twenty steps entred just both together into a stately garden, and meeting at a Fountain, where they were about to have refreshed them∣selves with a little water, they perceived a kennell of hounds of divers colours, comming along behind two huntsmen, wherof one of them said unto them in an arrogant manner; Wretched Knights, who brought you hither without my permission, and how dare you be so bold, as to meddle with the water of my Fountain? be sure that you shall pay for your presumption; goe, said he, speaking to his Dogs, fall upon these au∣dacious fellows, and devoure them in satisfaction of their crime; where∣upon these two valiant Warriours turning about to defend themselves, saw no Dogs, but fifty or threescore Tygers, that having invironed them, flew upon them with strange fury, some bit them by the legs, some seized on their shields, and some hung on their backs, briefly they were so close pressed by them, as at first they were not able to use their Swords, but breaking from them in a mighty rage, they began to deale such desperate blows, that in lesse than an houre they had laid twenty at their feet, wher∣at the rest becomming more cruell, assaulted them in such manner, as if their arms had not been of the best in the world, these troublesome beasts had drawn blood from them, in an hundred places, but turning back to back, and renewing the fight with incredible courage, within two houres they made an end of the rest; howbeit they were so weary, that they were constrained to fit down and rest them, where with wonder they
observed how all about the Garden there were Statues of Marble placed, of severall colours, so well done, as they wanted nought but speech, and that the Fountain with most admirable art, sent forth water on every side; the desire they had to know wherfore all this cost was bestowed there not permitting them to rest any time, they arose, looked round about them, and descrying no passage out, they resolved to compasse the Wall till they met with one. Griolanis went one way, and Grian another, wherein being ravished with the marvellous things they encountred, they were an houre be∣fore they could compasse it, at the end wherof, and at such time as they were not far from one another, they met with two great Pillars, upon ei∣ther of which, was a Table hanging, where in the Greek tongue was this written; Knight, if thou wilt passe into the Castle of Treasure, and find that which is lost, cut down this Pillar, and be not dismaid at the difficulties thou shalt meet with in the alley. These words having shewed the Knights how they should bring their enterprize to passe, they with their Swords laid at these Pillars, which at the very first blow going to pieces with a most dreadfull noyse, out came two Salvages upon Griolanis, and two furious Lyons on Grian, who seizing on him with their pawes, laboured to pull his shield from his arm, but our Warriour discharged such a blow upon one of them, as he laid him dead at his feet, and a little after ran the other up to the hilts; in the mean while Griolanis more couragious than ever he had been in his life, out of hope which he was in, to find out his Mistresse after this Combat, had cleft one of the Salvages down to the waste, and cut off the other by the middle; that done, they entred into one of those alleys, which ended in a large Court of a most Sately Castle built trianglewise, and going along they felt themselves so terribly pelted with a showre of stones pou∣red down upon them from a number of great trees that were planted on each side, as notwithstanding they warded themselves well with their Shields, they had much adoe to get unto the threshold of two Gates which gave entrance to the Palace, the walls wherof were all of Por∣phyrie, Jasper, black Marble, and Crystall.
CHAP. XLIX. The adventure of the Castle of Treasure is brought to an end, whereupon all the Princes depart for Ethiopia. WEE left Rozalmond diverted from contemplating the excellent Pictures, that were in the stately Court of the Castle of Treasure, by the arrivall of five Knights, which presented themselves all at one instant out of five severall doors: Now let us tell you, that they were the incomparable Alcidamant, Clarisel of Guindaya, Amadis, Grian, and Griolanis, who having gloriously surmoun∣ted the difficulties, which they had encountred, as appeared by the precedent chapters, entred with their swords drawn, being much amazed at their unexpected meeting thus together. Hereupon these Princes having caressed one another, and made parti∣cular relations of the strange adventures that had befallen each one in this Enterprise; they resolved all to passe on, and beholding three great pair of stayrs, they were going to ascend them two and two together, when they perceived an old man with a great deale of Majesty present himself; his habit was black and long, his beard white, his hair confusedly spread upon his shoulders, in one hand a book, and in the other a golden wand, every one observing him; Amadis knew him to be the Prince of al Philo∣sophers, the great Alcander, a speciall friend to the house of Greece, whereat being wonderfully glad, he went immediately and embracing him, said. Oh father, how happily have we met with you, for to free us of a care that mightily troubles us; we have lost that which we most esteemed in the world, so that if we be not relieved by you, we are like to be the wretchedst Knights living. Excellent Princes, said this honourable old man, after he had saluted them with a great deale of reverence, you have reason to be pleased with this incounter of me, seeing I am more your servant, than all the men be∣sides in the world; but it is I that have the greater cause to rejoyce at your arrivall, having attended you here an hundred years, since I first gave be∣ginning to the inchantments of this great Castle; you have this day done such wonders as no other Knights could perform, which will make your valour to be spoken of eternally, and the difficulties which you have sur∣mounted are so great, as they will hardly be beleeved, but infinite will be the prayse for so many brave actions, and the profit which wil redound thereby to all Christendome, that could not subsist without the end of this adventure, will render you so recommendable, that you shall be the object of future ages marvell: You doe not know what good you have done; wherefore it is fit that I declare it, to the end that you may be
the more couragiously prepared for the labours you are yet to under∣goe. You shall be the means of reviving the great King Amadis of Gaule, the excellent Amadis of Greece, Don Silves de la Silva, Agesilan, and thirty Princes more of their blood, withdrawn by me out of the number of the dead, at the great battle of Aleppo, and hitherto conserved safe by my skill, as also the unparragoned Knight of the Sun, with Claridian, Poliphebo, Rosicler, Clarimant, Rozabel, Helen of Dace, Claridiana and Claribel, whose marvellous acts have filled the world with amazement; and moreover the invinsible Belianis of Greece, Belforan, Fortiman, Dolister of Nubea, Polista de la Silva, Policertes, Don Clarinel, Astridea, Periana, Furibond the brave Gyant, Saliverna without feare, and Hermiliana, being all such valiant, and accomplished Knights, that I have laboured by my inchantments to keep them alive, untill such time as Christendome by their assistance and yours, may triumph over the greatest number of enemies, that ever yet assaulted it: Is not this greater good, than can be expressed in words? without doubt it is, and be assured that the fame which you shall acquire hereby, shall ever live in the memory of men. Touching the trouble you are in, for the carrying away of the Prin∣cesses your wives, clear your minds of it, for they have been al this while, as now they are, safe from any such violence: the Centaurs, which you saw, being only fanto smes, that I caused to appeare unto you, knowing full well that you would never have precipitated your selves, the one into a dreadfull flood, amidst the horrours of a fearefull darknesse, and the other into an horrible Furnace; and briefly, that you would never have undertaken such almost impossible things as you have atchieved, had not the hope of recovering your Ladies, made you contemne such wonder∣full dangers; and for that only consideration did Vrganda cause them to come along with you, whom you shall meet with again, as soon as you have finished the adventure, which now consisteth alone in forcing these Princes, that I have named unto you out of the rooms, where they are in∣chanted, but without imploying your swords on them, or drawing drop of blood from them, which will not be effected without very great pains, but I am sure it would grieve you to leave so glorious an Enterprise in so faire a way. Ah father, said Rozalmond, how strange and mervellous is this, that you have recounted unto us, we thought that all these excellent Princes had been converted into dust long agoe; howbeit, seeing they live we will most gladly render them unto the world if it be in our power, you say it will not be done without much labour, why we are resolved to un∣dergoe any whatsoever; wherefore be pleased, but to shew us how we may get to these rooms. Then Alcandar having appointed Rozalmond, and Don Clarisel, for the deliverance of Amadis of Gaule, and Amadis of Greece; Alcidamant and Griolanis for the Knight of the Sun; Amadis and Grian for Don Belianis, hee caused them to ascend three severall pair of stayrs, whilst he himselfe remayned walking below in the Court. These six Warriours, more glorious than ever they had been in all their lives, in regard of their undertaking of the most glorious enterprize, which had at any time been spoken of in the world, being gotten up to the top of the stayrs, found the dores there fast shut, but having easily hea∣ved
them off the hinges, they entred all with their Swords unsheathed, and their bodyes well covered with their shields, where knowing what to doe, Rozalmond seized on Amadis of Greece, and Clarisel on the great King of the Gaules, with a resolution to carry them forth: but these two strong and valiant Princes began to resist them with such fury, that with good reason they had been esteemed in former times for the prime Knights of the earth. Amidst this their dangerous wrastling, Don Silves, Amadis d'Astre, Agesilan, and the rest fell upon them, and with their swords showred such an infinity of blowes upon their shields, that it made them almost despaire of effecting their enterprize, howbeit calling to mind the great Alcanders words, they stood stifly to it, and thrust those two great Knights along with such force, as at length they set them out of the room, whither they instantly returned to lay hold on Don Silves and Agesilan, who troubled them no lesse than the others; neverthelesse, they were likewise born forth, and after them all the rest, but with so much pain and labour, as questionlesse these two Warriours had never prevai∣led, had they not been prepared therunto by Alcander. This while Alcidamant and Griolsnis, Amadis and Grian, were no lesse moiled, for the great Knight of the Sun, and the brave Poliphebo his ba∣stard brother; Belianis and Belstoran, so stoutly withstood them, and were so assisted by their Companions, as they were almost out of hope of car∣rying them forth; but Alcidamant pushed the Knight of the Sun along with such fury, that with much adoc he got him out of the dore, Griolanis having done the like with Polipheb, Amdis with Belstoras, and Grian with Belianis, they returned so often unto the room, that in the end they car∣ried them all forth, which was no sooner done, but there was heard a thousand, and a thousand claps of thunder, accompanied with such dread∣full flashes of lightning, as it struck all these Knights to the ground quite deprived of their understanding, in which estate having remained a pret∣ty space, Alcander by vertue of a certain Water brought them to their senses again, when as they perceived all those goodly buildings to be vanished, and themselves in the Garden through which Grian and Griolanis past at first, (which was not made by Inchantment) so amazed, as they knew not what to say or doe; but Alcander comming to them spake thus. Excellent Princes, now am I in the height of my content, and behol∣ding you thus resussitated, as it were from death, I am notable to expresse the greatnesse of my joy. You may very well remember, said he, speak∣ing to Don Belianis, the many good offices which I have heretofore done you, and how being desirous to preserve you from a mischiefe that would have fallen on you and your friends, I carryed you from Constantinople to this place where now you have been an hundred years; You cannot likewise forget, continued he, turning himself to the valiant Knight of the Sun, that for to deliver you from the conspiracic of certain Traytours, which were to have murthered you, and yours, whilst you were in your beds; I put you into a Chariot, and conducted you hither to decline the bad influence where withall you were menaced; And I doubt not but you, said he, casting his eye upon Amodis, and his kinsmen, are mindfull yet of the service that I rendred you, when as I took you up from amongst so many thousand dead bodyes, at the furious battell of Aleppo, and that having cored your wouds, I then saved your lives, in regard wherof I
will not goe about to make any excuse for having reteyned you here so long, since it was for your preservation, and for the glory of Christen∣dome, that by your assistance shall triumph over her enemies, onely I would desire you to be friends, and not to stand upon the possession of Empires, which you had, that are to remain in the hands of those that now hold them, for the Crown of China is reserved for you, said he, speaking to the Knight of the Sun, and that of Mexico attends Belianis of Greece, which are Empires great and mightie enough to take away the memory of others, so as having no cause to be troubled at this change, you may all prepare your selves with courage for those bloudy wars, whereby the honour of the Crosse shall be maintained in its excellency, and the Altars of the Pagans overthrown. But now it is fit that I should let you know, who these six brave War∣riours are, unto whom you are obliged for your deliverance. The first is Rozalmond, the son of Spheramond of Greece, your grand-child speaking to Amadis; The second, the incomparable Alcidamant, now Emperour of Tramazond; This is Amadis of Trebisond, your son, said he, to the Emperour of Greece; This is Clarisel of Guindaya, son to Florisel of Niquea; This other is the valiant Grian the Salvage; and this last is Griola∣nis, the gentle King of Corolandaya. Upon this speech the Princes of Greece understanding that three of these Knights were of their children, embraced them with so much affection, that they shed abundance of tears for joy; In the mean time Alcidamant, Grian, and Griolanis, complemen∣ted with Belianis, the Knight of the Sun, and the rest. These Princes having thus caressed one another, the Queen Oriana, the Empresse Niquea, Diana, Pentasilia, Claridiana, Olivia, Florisabella, Bellianiza, Sirenna, Bergelina, and the other Princesses of Greece, that had been in∣chanted, as you have seen in the first Chapters of our first part; being much amazed at each others beauties, fell to kissing, and embracing one another; but all these Ladyes, and the Princes, were almost lost in won∣der at the sight of Armazia, Miralinda, Trasiclea, Palmirenna, Penamonda, and Adelazia, which were brought in by Cassandra, immediatly upon the ending of the Inchantments of the Castle of Treasure; then it was that their joyes were renewed, that these Warriours were not able to expresse their gladnesse for the recovery of their Wives whom they had bewai∣led as lost; that Amadis embraced Armazia, Miralinda, Palmirenna, and Pe∣namonda, that he humbled himself before the excellent Princesse of Tra∣mizond, and the beautifull Adelazia, that the Knight of the Sun and Belia∣nis marvelled how nature could produce creatures so rare, and that Clari∣diana, Florisbella, and the rest, did them all the honour they could possi∣bly devise. These welcomes, these complements and rejoycings having indured two hours, and more, Alcander leading them into a long and spacious grot, made them a sumptuous collation, at the end whereof placing himselfe in the middest of them, he declared unto them in few words the furious war that was in Ethiopia, as also the harm that might redound to all Chri∣stendome, if they made any longer aboad there, and then made fifty ex∣cellent white armours to be brought in with red crosses, both before and behind; and having presented them to these Princes, and to the faire Amazons, Trasiclea, Claridiana, Pentasilea, and Hermiliana, together with an
Horse and a launce to every of them, he caused them to be armed with all diligence; which was no sooner done, but that two great Chariots ap∣peared in the ayr, drawn by four strange creatures; Into one of them hee made all the Princesses to enter with Cassandra, who carried them to the Ile of Corolandaya, and bestowing himselfe in the other with all these Princes and Amazons, to made towards Ethiopia, where they arrived within three dayes after, he perform the wonders which shall be related unto you in the Chapters following. CHAP. L. Amadis of Gaule, and his companions arrive in Ethiopia, their resolution to passe through the Enemies Camp; Rozalmond and his friends being separated from them, surprise the strong Fort of Zeilan. ALcanders Chariot having made way through the clouds for two dayes together; the great Fowls that drew it abated their flight, and lighted on the ground at the entrance into a Forrest, where the reverend old man causing them to descond, said unto them. Brave Princes, you are now arrived in Ethiopia, where you are to employ your valour and awaken those forces, which have been so long time asleep; here you shall meet with the valiant Florisel of Niquea, accompanied with all the young Princes of Greece, their Allies, and three hundred thousand men, although he hath in the precedent battails lost two hundred thousand and above; but the num∣ber of the Pagans is so great, that notwithstanding the slaughter of foure hundred thousand men cut in peeces by the Christians, they have yet a∣bove five hundred thousand remayning, besides so many excellent War∣riours, as your presence is more then necessary at this time to arrest the fury of their Enterprises; I refer all to your wisedoms, take this way which will leade you directly to the enemies camp, and managing your fortune wisely, give her occasion to favour you; These six Warriours, the Authours of your deliverance shall follow you ere it be long, but they are first to performe an enterprise of great conse quence, to which end they must take this path of the left hand. Having spoken this he mounted into his Chariot, and was instantly car∣ried out of sight; whereupon these Princes dividing themselves to the great griefe of Alcidamant, that was faine to part from his Trasiclea, they began to march severall wayes. Rozalmond and his companions having traversed the Forrest, which was not very long, met with a Peasant, that discovering them would have fled away; but Clarisel having staid him, asked him why he was afraid? Alas! answered he, I have more cause then would I had, for I doubt you are some of our Princes enemies, who lye in
wait here for some surprise; but surely you will loose your labour, for your troops have so ravaged all about Zeidan, that every body is fled into the woods and mountains here about, for fear of falling into your hands, I only am the unfortunate man, who going to give advice unto our Em∣perour of taking in of that Town could not decline your encounter. Ho∣nest friend, said Clarisel unto him, thou art much mistaken; for we are Chri∣stians, and such as would willingly serve thy Master, who is a friend to the Princes of Greece. I would advise you then, said he, to advance no farther forward, the fields are all covered over with an hundred thousand men, which after the surprise of Zeidan, have layd siege to Goraxa, one of the strongest Towns of this Empire, and all the riches of the world could not ransome you out of their hands, should they once lay hold on you, which were great pitty, for by your countenances you appear more than ordinary men. God a mercy friend, said Clarisel, laughing, for thy good opinion of us, howsoever we doe purpose not to follow thy coun∣sell; so letting him goe they consulted together about the course they should hold, and resolved to goe straight into Zeidan, faining themselves to be Pagans, cut the Garrisons in peeces, and so restore that strong Town into Prigmaleons possession. Riding on then, after an hours travelling they presented themselves before the Gates, which were presently opened unto them, the Pagans never imagining that six Knights being enemies durst hazard themselves amongst eight thousand men, that kept the place; Neverthelesse Rozal∣mond which marched formost, seeing himselfe within, drew out his sword, cleft the first to the teeth, and flying among the rest, left his companions to follow his example, who desiring to shew as much force and courage, began to make such a slaughter, that threescore lay dead at their feet, be∣fore the Town took the alarum; but the hurt men running up and down with fearfull , two thousand came suddenly in, which falling furi∣ously upon them, thought to make an end of them in a trice; but these in∣comparable Warriours, that would not have been afraid of all the world together, went and met them with such confidence, as made the most cou∣ragious amongst them to tremble, they ran up and down like lightning, and keeping close one to another, they slew so many, that it was a most dreadfull sight to behold, all the streets were covered with dead bodies. The noyse increased, the number of the enemies augmented, and from every part came souldiers hurrying in, which rendred the confusion more horrible. An hour being spent in the fury of the first fight, during the which sixteen hundred men had been massacred, all the rest began to fly, when as six Gyants appeared with three thousand men, who seeing so much blood and murther, could not beleeve it was done by the hands of six Knights alone; howbeit perceiving their people to fall at their feet, as often as the swords of these Knights descended, they advanced all with such an excesse of rage, as the fire flew out of their eyes: Our Princes, who perceiving rightly, that the victory consisted in the death of those six Colossus, beholding them arrive with fury, incountred them with the like order, and desiring to display the uttermost of their force, in regard it so concerned them, discharged upon their helmets with such a tempest, that Rozalmond and Alcidamants opposites were cleft down to the girdle, and the rest to the teeth, which put such a terrour into their followers, as
they laboured to save themselves by flight, but the Inhabitants of the Town rallying themselves, and finding them in disorder charged them so rudely on the other side, that their fear increasing, they were all cut in peeces, foure hundred onely excepted, who betaking them to their heeles, fled to the grosse of their Army, and there so published the wonders which these Knights had done, that they beleeved them to be Divels. Whilst these six Princes were cryed up to heaven in the Town by the people; who promised to maintain themselves for the time to come, by the favour of their Walls and Fortifications; Amadis of Gaule, and his Companions having marched two dayes together, and one evening dis∣covered the enemies Camp, were marvellously astonished to behold so many Pavillions, and Tents; that at first they wished for Alcanders Cha∣riot to carrie them into the Citie; but being courageous enough to make their passage thither with the sword, they resolved to attend the break of day, so that they might surprize the Enemie asleep, and accordingly they entred into a little thicket, where having taken a little rest, they arose, and advancing towards their Enemies, they entred pell-mell amongst them with such fury, that above five hundred men lost their lives in lesse than halfe an houre; the Tents went to ground, Pavillions were overturned, and the massacre continued with such horrour, as the Sun seemed loth to appeare, because it would not be spectatour of so cruell a butchery. The famous Amadis of Gaule pressed thorow them like lightening, Ama∣dis of Greece thundered every where, the invincible Knight of the Sun over-run all like a torrent; Belianis of Greece carried himself like a fury, the foure excellent Ladyes, Trasiclea, Claridiana, Pentasilea, and Hermiliana did wonders, Belstoran, Rosicler, Claramant, Poliphebo, Don Silves, Fortiman of Greece, Amadis d' Astre, and he rest cut off arms, cleft men in two, hewed Knights in peeces, and nothing appeared before them but went to the ground; the uprore increased; the whole Camp put themselves in Arms, the Christians were amazed, and could not imagine from whence so great a disorder should proceed, were it not from the Army of Marta∣ria, that was every day expected; briefly all was in confusion, and the Commanders not able to be informed by those that fled of the cause of this tumult, knew not what to resolve upon; neverthelesse, Falanzar a prudent and couragious Prince, advancing with Brufaldor King of Gedro∣sia, Roussardan the furious, Bravorant, King of Morimont; Marisgolf, the grand Salvage, and Furiander his son, encountred these fifty redoubted Warriours, and seconded by twenty thousand Horse, thought to van∣quish them very easily, but Amadis of Greece, the Knight of the Sun, Amadis of Gaule, Rosiclere, Poliphebo, Belianis, and Belfloran, having arre∣sted the furie of these seven proud Pagans, that were perswaded they could carry all the world before them, the rest flew in amongst their troops so couragiously, that after they had past two and thirty Gyants by the edge of the Sword, they put them to flight with an incredible slaughter. In the mean time the Combat between these fourteen Knights became most horrible and cruell, howbeit our Pinces not meaning to stay till the whole Campe were in arms to invest them, having valiantly dif-ingaged themselves out of their hands, drew towards the Citie, but encountring the proud Knight Arastron, who came accompanied with Marmoran, So∣phy
of Bultara; Brizardan, Soldan of Aralafia; Gorgophon, , the great Caliph of Francapia; Moranteon, Soldan of Circassia; Fierson, the redoubted King of Balivan; Barcandor, and Bucarguant, their pastage thi∣ther grew more difficult than they expected; neverthelesse, Trasiclea, Don Silves, Amadis d' Astre, Claridiana, Claridian her son, Claramant, Forti, and the gentle Doliftor of Nubia opposing themselves to these nine War∣riours, there began a most cruell and furious fight between them, whilst the rest had much adoe to save them from an hundred thousand men that came in from all parts, and questionlesse they had been in great danger, if Florisel of Niquea, who imagined that they were some valiant Knights that laboured to passe unto his Camp, had not suddenly issued forth with thirty Princes of Greece, and fifty thousand Horse, which falling furi∣ously on these disordered troups, overthrew so many to the ground, as it was almost covered with them. Then it was that those brave Champions hearing Grecia cryed on all sides, took new courage, and flying amongst the Pagans, made so great a slaughter, that if Falanzar had not caused his Forces to retyre, his Ar∣my had been in danger to have been cut in peeces, although he was assi∣sted with two hundred Gyants, but this prudent Monarch, and his fol∣lowers after his example, having quit the combat, which they had with Amadis of Gaule, and his friends, the Christians had liberty to return to the Citie; where that great Amadis of Gaule, with Amadis of Greece, and Don Silves being discovered; Florisel, Don Rogel, and the other Princes of Greece, were so confounded, as they remained a good space without spea∣king a word, beleeving that this succour proceeded from the art of Alquif or Urganda, and that those personages were no other than Fantosmes, but being cleered from that, by the speech of these great Princes, who decla∣red unto them how they had been preserved in the Castle of Treasure, and delivered by Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their Companions, together with Belianis and the Knight of the Sun; whom they made known unto them; Florisel, Don Rogel, and Spheramond, were ready to swoun for joy; they fell on their knees before their Grandfathers, embraced Don Silves, Pentasilea, Amadis d' Astre, Agesilan, Fortumian, and the rest, and with much honour caressed the Knight of the Sun, Don Belianis of Greece, and their companions. My Lord, said Florisel of Niquea, embracing the knees of Amadis of Greece, am I so happy as to behold you again? I never thought it possi∣ble, and when I saw you enter into the crystall Chamber of Cenotaph, where you were inchanted, I verely beleeved that the clap of thunder which brake forth at that instant, was the signe of your death; But how true, O great Alcander, was your prediction then, and now I understand the meaning of those secret words you wrote unto me, as also the Pro∣phecie you left at Constantinople; for the Crowes, which were to assem∣ble to possesse the sleeping Eagles neast, are with out doubt these enemies that lye about our Walls; and now I see that Prophecie fulfilled which said, The Earth shall open to render forth the treasure it concealed, and the tears shed for a losse not suffered, shall be changed into gladness; The truth hereof is unquestionable, and the excess of my content past all ex∣pression. Florisel having said thus, Prigmaleon, Fulgoran, and Russian, made them∣selves
known to the new commers; and Silvan having with a thousand embraces received Don Silves, and the faire Pentasilea, his mother, some hours were spent with incredible rejoycing, at the end whereof, and just as they were sitting down at a table; a souldier entred, who as a most pro∣digious matter, delivered that Zeiden had been recovered by the valour of six Knights alone, who in one day had slain six Gyants, and seven thou∣sand five hundred Knights that guarded it; looke said Amadis of Gaule, here is new occasion of joy, which doubtlesse arrives unto us by Rozalmond, Alcidamant and their companions, who are said he, speaking to Florisel, the best Knights of the world; my Lord answered Florisel, I have seen them in fight, and must thereupon conclude, as you have done; Herewith sitting down to dinner, they were served in great state, with all the exquisite meats that possibly could be had, where we will leave them and return unto the Pagans. CHAP. LI. The Pagan Princes present the Combat of an hundred, to an hundred unto the Christians, they accept of it; the forces of Martaria, with the assistance of Rozalmond, and his friends, defeats Artogants Army, that besieged Goraxa. WHilst the Christian Princes were drowned in plea∣sure and gladnesse, the Pagans much more vexed at the hardinesse of these incomparable Warriors, which were able to represse their fury, then at the losse of three and thirty thousand men slaughtered in their Camp, were at the supremest degree of rage, but desiring some way of revenge, they assembled in Falanzars tent, who demanding their advise upon the consequence of another Battail, with a proposition to send for Arto∣gant and his Army; but Bravorant, King of Morimont, the most re∣doubted Pagan of the earth, rising up with Gorgophon, that bit his fingers for spight to have met with enemies able to resist him, he said unto him with a carriage that testified his rage. Great Monarch, when I consider that our troops are lesse by halfe, than they were at our arrivall here, I cannot choose but marvell, either at our misfortune, or at our enemies well managing of their wars, their cunning is more than their courage, their men are better than ours, and it is too evident, that numbers have stood us in little stead in our enterpri∣ses; wherefore I hold it not fit, nor will I counsell you to hazard the honour of Paganisme, and the greatnesse of our hopes any more on the weaknesse of the armes of such a multitude of souldiers as we have, which ordinarily faile us in our occasions, and are the means to make their Captains lose the glory, which otherwise they might obtain, knew they but how to obey and fight: You have here two hundred Knights, as va∣liant
as any the earth doth bear, the meanest of which would make the most valorous of our enemies to faint, embrace this as the best course, propound a combat of an hundred to an hundred, and in that manner de∣cide our differences: The Grecians are rash enough to undertake it, trust∣ing in the force of thirty or forty amongst them, whom they not a little valew, but I am confident that you will this way obtaine the victory, whereof we are else like to fayl, if by past successe we may probably conjecture of that which is to come. Your advice is such and so good, answered Falanzar, that I resolve to follow it, if the rest of these Princes here are of our opinion. Mighty Emperour, said Gorgophon then, proceed on boldly, for I will undertake that not one of this assembly, but is desirous to spare the blood of so many men, as infallibly would be spilt, if we should be so wilful as to meet the enemy once more in open field; wherefore cause a challenge to be drawn, as soon as you please; and let the conditions of the combat be, that you shall be Lord of this Empire, if the victory be ours, or that we will dislodge with all our troops, and leave it still in their possession if fortune shall favour them. This said, all the Princes rising up, as it were to authorise Gorgophons speech, Falanzar sent this which followeth, to be presented to the Grecian Princes, by Gedereon, King of Arginaria. The great Emperour, and Caliph of Sico∣niaes challenge to the Princes of Greece. THE pitty which we have of our people, and the horrour of so many dead bodies that we have seen lying in these fields, inducing us to prefer their welfare before our own fafety, doth oblige us to con∣serve it with the hazard of our lives; In which regard we have sent to present you with a combat of an hundred Knights against alike number of ours, so to determine all our differences with the victory of the one, or the other party; consult with your courages and forces, and let us know whether the world doth commend you with reason: The King of Arginaria, our Embassadour, having absolute power from us to dispose of the con∣ditions of this fight, you may take his ingagement for all our combattants, and send us a like assurance of your parts. The excellent King of great Britain, unto whom all the rest of the Princes referred themselves, having read this challenge, turned him to Gedereon, and said. King of Arginaria, you may behold the answer, that is to be returned you, in the countenances of these Warriors, which are here assembled, there is no need of further advising with them about it, they testifie sufficiently, that their desire, and yours, is one and the same; wherefore not to hold you longer in suspence we say, that we are conten∣ted with the number you have chosen, and with the conditions you pro∣pound for the possession of this Empire, though you have no right at all unto it, but if our ill fortune takes it from us, we have three or four others
to recompence our Son Prigmaleon withall; whereupon the Emperour of Aethiopia having protested to performe whatsoever Amadis had agreed unto, the Secretary was called to write this. The King of great Brittaines answer to Falan∣zar Emperour, and Caliph of Siconia. WEE are no lesse tender of our people than you, and your resentment that way seems so just unto us, that never sticking at the right you have to claim the Crown of the Empire, wee are very well contented to set it upon the end of a Launce before the Judges of the Com∣bat, which you demand, and wherunto We agree, to be performed betwixt our two Camps five dayes hence, with the same assurance, as you have given us; And because the election of the Arms is in Us, We choose those which are usuall with Knights Errant, and in the mean time Wee will make a truce for foure dayes. The King of Arginaria returning with this answer, all the Pagans were marvellously astonished at the name of Amadis of Gaule, whom they thought had been dead long before, and understanding that he was the chief of them that had made way thorow their Camp with so great a slaughter, they beleeved that so many Princes were resussitated to tor∣ment them eternally; neverthelesse, their own pride perswading them that the earth could not contain men that could resist them; Falanzar cau∣sed a List to be drawn up of those that were to Combat, and never going about to give them reasons, for to render them the more courageous, he sent them away to their Tents, there to take order that their Horses, and Armes, might be well fitted for this furious fight. Let us give them time to make their preparations, and recount the brave actions performed by the Martarians: You may remember that the Emperour of Martaria be∣ing made a Christian, departed from Corolandaya, with Persides of Greece; Floridan of Persia, Lucibel of France; his Sons-in-law, and gen∣tle Sestilian of Spain, servant to the fairest Agiliana, Princesse of Arbales, to carry succours to the Princes of Greece. This great Monarch desiring to manifest his zeale to the glory of the new God which he adored, and the esteem that he made of the Princes of Constantinoples allyance, being fortunately arrived in his own Empire, made forth Commissions, caused an hundred thousand Horse, and three∣score thousand Foot to be levyed, bestowed most part of the Infantrie in five or six Frontier Towns, and levying twenty thousand Horse, and thir∣tie thousand Foot, under the conduct of the King of Arbales his Cousin, to withstand all attempts of his neighbours, if they should chance to stir in his absence, he resolved in person to conduct an Army of fourscore thousand Horse into Aethiopia. Having then accodingly imbarqued them with his Sons-in-law, and himself, he was carryed with so prosperous a gale, that having run along by the coasts of Guinea, Cephala, and Calicut, in seven and thirty dayes he arrived within three leagues of Zeiden, where informing himself of
the state of the War, he understood that Artogant, the Soldan of Franca∣pa, being separated from the body of the Army, held Goraxa very straightly besieged with great likelihood of carrying it, in regard it could not be succoured without much prejudice to the Christian forces, where∣upon putting his men in battell array, he marched toward Goraxa with a resolution to charge the enemies, and accordingly, finding them prepa∣red to receive him, for that Artogant had been advertised of their discent, he caused Lucibel and Sestilian to advance with thirtie thousand Horse, who incountring six Gyants in the head of forty thousand men, they charged their Launces so luckily, as two of the Gyants were run thorow, and thorow. The incounter of these first troops was very furious, and so many Knights were overthrown, that within lesse than halfe an hour, the ground was all covered with them; Lucibel and Sestilian, having broken their staves in the bodies of the two Gyants, began to disorder the Pa∣gans, and overturning all that came in their way, they filled every part with such fear, as the souldiers flying from the tempests of their swords, declined them more than they would have done the pestilence; On the other side the four Gyants enraged at the death of their companions, made so great a slaughter, as was most lamentable to behold: In this sort the fight became most cruell and bloody; and every minute so many men fell, that in the field was nothing but heaps of dead bodyes. Two hours being spent in the heat of this first conflict, and the victorie as it were hanging in equall ballance, there arrived six Warriours from Zeidens side, who understanding by an hurt souldier of all that had past, they fell in amongst the Pagan troups, and began to make such a massacre of them, as they were no lesse dreaded, than all the Army besides; they cut off arms and heads, cleft men down to the waste, divided Knights in two, and the fury wherwithall they fought was so great, that they alone seemed able to destroy all the Pagan host. The Gyants perceiving this disorder, went and ran all foure together, with such confidence against those six incomparable Warriours, as if they would easily have layd them in the dust, but they were so rudely in∣countred, that two of them had their arms, swords and all, sent to the ground, and the other two were cleft down to the teeth. Then it was that the Pagans, beholding so sudden a defeat of those foure Colosses, in whom they had placed all their hope, betook them to flight, ready to be cut all in peeces, had not the Soldan of Francapa come in to their suc∣cour with ten Gyants, and threescore thousand Horse; The arrivall of these new forces having restored their courages, they turned head against the Christians, and began to lay about them with incredible valour, but the Emperour of Martaria approching with Persides, and Floridan, the fight began to be so hot and violent, that the face of the whole field was cove∣red over with slaughtered carkasses, and the ayr sounded nothing but cryes and lamentations of dying men; The Gyants did wonders, they cut and hewed down all before them, and keeping themselves still close together, they made such a miserable havock whersoever they went, as it was a spectacle of incredible horrour. The Martarian Emperour desiring to shew that he was a Christian, ran without fear into danger, being guarded by the thundring swords of Per∣sides,
Floridan, Lucibel, and Sestilian, who alwayes accompanied him, and the slaughter was so great wheresoever they past, that the Gyants being unable to arrest their ying people, advanted to incounter them, and charged them with such fury, as Sestilian and the Emperour were over∣thrown under the horses feet, where doubtlesse they had been stifled, had not Persides, Lucibel, and Floridan kept off the enemy, till such time as their followers had taken them up, and carried them out of the presse. This while the three Princes were in much danger amidst so many Gyants, and being oppressed on so many sides, they had little hope of escaping with life, when as those six Champions that came from Zeiden incountring upon that place, fell in with the Gyants, and discharged their swords all at one instant with such a tempest, that six of them sunk down dead at the feet of the three besieged Princes, who knowing those six incomparable Warriours to be Rozalmond, Alcidamant, and their companions, were so far incouraged, that clasping their swords fast in their hands, they delivered three such horrible blows, as three of those Colosses fell downdead on their fellows. The Pagans neverthelesse being nothing dismayed, stood very stoutly it, after the example of the Soldan of Francapa, who that day rendred marvellous proof of his force and courage, in so much that the Pagan Army being resolutely bent to fight it out, were within three hours cut al in peeces, six thousand only excepted, which with Artogant saved them∣selves in a wood, leaving the Christian Princes with the losse of thirty thousand men, whereof they were not much sensible, the rather for that the Emperour and Sestilian were well recovered of their hurts. Having continued then some time to bury their dead, during the which Rozalmond and his friends had recounted the deliverance of Amadis of Gaule, and of so many inchanted Princes, with all that had past in that adventure; The Emperour raysed his Camp, and marched on towards Saba, being some∣what perplexed with thinking how he should get to the Citie, by reason of the enemies lying round about it, but having learned of certain Courri∣ers, who had been sent to seek Alcidamant, and his fellows, for to be of the number of the Combattants, that there was a truce between the Pagans and them, he quietly advanced without any impeachment to the gates of the Citie, where all those great Princes did the Emperour of Martaria so much honour, and so caressed those excellent Knights, that came along with him, as cannot well be expressed in words; wherefore I will passe it over, and relate the combat betwixt the Christian Princes, and the Pa∣gan Kings, for the determination of their wars.
CHAP. LII. The dreadfull combat of an hundred Christians, against so many Pagan Princes; the end thereof, with the bloody slaughter of all the enemies troops. HAd not the hope of an horrible revenge in some sort mittigated the displeasure, which the pagans conceived upon the advertisement of the defeat of Artogants Army, by the Martarian forces, they would have been even mad with rage, but attending the day appoynted for the combat, with much impatience, they comforted them∣selves in the confidence they had to put all the Christians to the sword, when as they should be disfurnished of their Commanders, whereunto they were the more assuredly perswaded by the arrivall of the fairest Azamandra, who came unto the Pagans Camp, with a very stately equipage. First of all there marched in excellent order fifteen thousand Ama∣zons richly armed, and mounted on Vnicorns, whose furniture was all guilt over; a little after, but at some distance, rode nine other Amazons with golden Crowns on the top of their helmets; then followed a try∣umphant Chariot, carried upon twelve great wheels of Ivorie, and drawn by twelve Vnicorns, as white as snow, which being fastned together with golden chayns, were guided by twelve little Dwarfs, apparelled in cloth of gold; the Chariot was of a marvellous fashion, the length of it was fifty foot, the bredth fifteen; a sumptuous Pavilion enameled with red and greene, covered the top of it; the two sides were two Arches, whose roofs were inriched with a world of precious stones; against the back of it was a throne all set with diamonds, which sparkled round about in a wonderfull manner: Therein sate Azamandra, armed all over save her head and hands, with such a majesticall beautie, as amazed all that be∣held her; thirty Trumpets invironed this Chariot, continually sounding with an admirable consort, nine Amazon Queens followed close after, and a good way off marched fifteen thousand Amazons in the same or∣der as the first. This excellent Princesse was received with all the honour that possibly could be done her, especially by Falanzar, who being strucken in love at the sight of so rare a creature, kissed her hands, and said unto her. Madam, I must beleeve that the gods have inspired you to come hither, for to comfort us with your presence, after so many losses as we have received: Great Prince, answered she, it very much grieves me, that I have been so slack in bringing you this succour, which now proves altogether unpro∣fitable, in regard of the accord that you have made with your enemies; but if there remains a room yet in the number of the hundred, which you have chosen for the combat, let me intreat you to give it me, that I may
testifie the desire I have to serve our gods, and to make tryal of my self against the Princes of Greece, who are every where so cryed up with incredible applause. Madam, replyed Falanzar, it were a grievous sin me-thinks to expose so precious a Jewell, as your incomparable self, to the hazard of Arms; neverthelesse, since you desire it, we will by no means oppose your pleasure, whereon we will all of us absolutely de∣pend; You shall tomorrow then have the prime place, and so many Prin∣ces as you behold here, shall but second the greatnesse of your courage. Having said so, he with the most part of the Pagan Kings conducted her to her quarter, and leaving her there, to refresh her self, and pitch her Tents, he assembled all his Commanders to his Pavillion, where having briefly remonstrated unto them of what importance the next dayes fight would be, he desired them to permit him to dispose of the order that was to be observed in so dangerous an affair: wherfore having chosen fiftie of the strongest Gyants, that were stil remaining in the Army, he nominated fourteen of the best Knights Errant of all Paganisme, whose names shall be delivered hereafter, thirtie two Kings, and foure Amazonian Queens, with Azmandra, for the Combat. On the other side Amadis of Gaule, upon whose care the Christians altogether relyed, intreated the Empe∣rour of Martaria, seeing his age did exempt him from the exercise of Armes, that he would be pleased to be Judge of their Combat, where∣unto he having condiscended, he ordained that Gelodan, Atletta his Wife, Astibel and Timbres of Aegypt; Oriander, the King of Catay; the Queen Castora, and Parmenian of Cyprus, should be for the guard of the Camp; as also to see their men might still be in readiness for all kind of accidents, then finding that the rest of the Princes there assembled, amounted to the number of an hundred, he commanded them to be all prepared against the next morning, which at length appearing, to the equall contentment of both parts, our Christians heard Masse, and disposed of themselves, as men fitted for another world, whilst the Pagans to render their gods favourable, offered a thousand sacrifices unto them. That done, the Emperour of Martaria, and the King of Argosan, Judge for the Pagans, having begirt the Barriers with foure thousand men for the suretie of the field, and the Trumpets being placed, the Pagan Kings presenting themselves first with incredible confidence; The beauteous Empresse of the Amazons marched formost clad in such rich Arms, that the Diamonds upon them dazled the eyes of all the spectatours; then followed Falanzar, Brizardan the Soldan of Aralafia; Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara; Policastaleon, King of Zeilan; Mambriman, King of Fornacia; Furiander, son to the grand Salvage; Asturion, the stout Soldan of Brutacan; Alceus, the generous; Artogant, Soldan of Francapa; Bacar∣guant; the proud Knight Arastron; Brufaldor, King of Gedrosia; Morante∣on, King of Circassia; Bravorant, King of Morimont; Gorgophon; Roussar∣dan, the furious King of Grifalara; Antomedon, Caliph of Francapia; Ty∣phaeus the dreadfull; the gentle Knight Armorand; Fieraston, King of Bali∣an; Marisgolf the great; the horrible Gyant Bramanaldon; Pandaro the stout; Radamant, the inexorable, and fiftie Gyants; After whom went Gedereon King of Arginaria; Gronfalin, King of Facea; Meliander, King of Russia; Armorand, Palamedes, king of Cassandria; Asmorian, King of the superi∣our India; Salander, Giracond, Brandimart, Raiartes, Boraldo the strong; Bron∣caldion,
king of the Arcofibrats; Rindar, Artilian, Cariandr, Argilles, ∣dismond, and Alarban. These hundred Champions, selected out of the best of all Paganisme, being placed by the Judges, the invincible King of great Brittain arrived with the rest of his fellow Knights, in a most brave and gallant manner: Trasiclea, Claridiana, Alastraxerea, Hermiliana, and Pentasilea, entring first into the Lists, were by the Emperour of Martaria, opposed against Aza∣mandra, Tomiris, Zenobia, Anaxamena, and Neophona; and Amadis of Gaule set himself against Falanzar; Belianis of Greece, against Brizardan; the Knight of the Sun against the most valiant Bucarguant; Amadis of Greece, against Fuiander; Florisel of Niquea, against Mambriman; Don Rogel, against Asturion the strong Soldan of Brutacan; Spheramond, against Poli∣casteleon; Don Silves, against the generous Alceus; Claridian, against the proud Knight Arastron; Poliphebo, against Brufaldor; Rosicler, against Radae∣mant; Claramant, against Pandaro the stout: Rozalmond, against the redoub∣ted Bravorant; Alcidamant, against the great Gorgophon; Amadis of Trebi∣sond, against Roussardan the furious; Clarisel of Guindaya, against the grand Salvage; Persides of Greece against the dreadfull Typhaeus; Flo∣ridan of Persia, against Antomedon the proud Caliph of Francapia; Ama∣dis d' Astre, against Artogant; Russian of Media, against Barcandor; Fulgo∣ran, against the gentle Knight Armorand; Prigmaleon against Marmaran, Sophy of Bultara, and the rest just opposite to one or other of the Pa∣gan side. These two hundred Knights, the choyce of the whole world, being placed, as aforesaid, the Judges parted the Sun between them, and com∣manding the Trumpets to sound, they let them dislodge with such fury, that the earth trembling under the Horses feet, it made all the assistants looke pale with feare: The renowned Amadis of Gaule having incountred Falanzar, just in the visier of his Helmet, overturned him on the crupper of his Horse, himself passing along unmoved; Amadis of Greece, and Fariander, were both overthrown, and at one instant recovered their horses again; Florisel of Niquea ran Mambriman quite thorow the body, sending him dead to the earth; Policastaleon and Spheramond, met without any advantage; Bravorant, Gorgophon, Roussardan the furious, the grand Salvage; Antomedon, and the dreadfull Typhaus, having incountred Rozal∣mond, Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond; Clarisel of Guindaya; Grian, and Griolanis, in the midst of the course with strange fury, their staves flew about all in shivers, and passing along like lightning, and unmoved, they seemed to have run against rocks; Brizardan and Belianis, tumbled down wounded; Bucarguant lost his reynes in his incounter against the Knight of the Sun; Arastron and Claridian, were both of them much asto∣nished; Marmaran lost his Stirrop, Prigmaleon tottered in his faddle; Don Silves and his Adversary, the generous Alceus, were both overturned on the cruppers of their horses; Russian of Media, ran Barcandor into the shoulder, and was himself hurt in the arm; Fourteen Gyants were slain by Rosicler; the brave Polipheo, Claramant, Agesilan, Falanges, Astrapalo, Fortunian, Anaxartes, Dorigel, Silvan, Amanio, the two Cenophales, and Grandimor; and at this first incounter, Filin, Artaurus, Zair, Lindimart, Florarian, and Lucencio, were overthrown dead to the ground by those against whom they ran.
The fury of Launces being over, all these Knights drew their swords, and mingled themselves one amongst another, except Bravorant, Gorgo∣phon, Roussardan, the grand Salvage, Fieraston, and Marisgolfe, which would not quit Rozalmond, Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, Clarisel, Grian, and Griolanis, between whom there was one of the most horrible combats that ever was seen under the cope of heaven: The Christian Princes did wonders, the Pagans ran up and down like famished Lyons, the field groaned under the violence of so many Warriours blows, and the two Armies were equally terrified with the fury of their Combat∣tants. The Amazonian Queens, having had equall fortune with their Launces, charged one another very valiantly in a quarter, aside by themselves; but the fight between Bravorant and Alcidamant, Rozalmond and Gorgophon, and the other eight was so dreadfull, that men shut their eyes, not daring to be∣hold it; the strong Bravorant displayed his force, gave Rozalmond most terrible blows; but having the prime Knight of the earth to deale with, he was followed so close, as he had no leisure to think of any thing, save how to defend himselfe. Gorgophon thundered upon Alcidamant, Roussar∣dans stroaks fell like lightning on Amadis, his shield; the grand Salvage charged Clarisel with incredible force; Fierastron made Grian sweat drops of blood; Marisgolfe would not suffer Griolanis to take any rest; the dread∣full Typhorus hammered continually on Persides helmet; the great Caliph of Francapia, put Floridan very dangerously to it; neverthelesse the Christi∣an Champions demeaned themselves so well, as it was impossible to as∣cribe any advantage to their enemies. Bravorant enraged to meet a man able to arrest the fury of his Armes, discharged his sword with such violence on Rozalmond, that having divi∣ded his shield in twain, the poynt of it lighted so rudely on his helmet, as it made him knock his chin against his brest, with an opinion that all his teeth were broken to peeces, which so incensed out Warriour, as advan∣cing his sword he let it descend with such a tempest on Bravorants head, as he overturned him on the crupper of his horse, voyding blood out of his mouth, and ears, and so besides himselfe, that his horse carried him up and down the field for dead; but suddenly resetling himselfe in his saddle, he became so mad, as thinking to fly upon Rozalmond, who with another blow had cut a Gyant in two, he discharged his great curtelas so terribly on Lucendus, Prince of France, that he cleft him down to the shoulders, and finding Don Flores of Greece hard by him, he gave him so deadly a blow, that he sent halfe his body to the earth, wherewith yet not conten∣ted he lift up his arme to have stricken Don Rogel behind, when as Rozal∣mond observing the ruin of those two blows, set spurs to his horse, and discharged his sword with such fury on this audacious Pagans helmet, that it pared it away, to the very hayr, carrying a peece of his eare along with it, whereat he was so enraged, as taking his curtelas in both his hands, he let down at Rozalmond with such force, that if his armour had not been of the best in the world, his death had undoubtedly follow∣ed. On the other fide Alcidamant and Gorgophon intreated one another with no lesse violence, this proud Infidel cursing heaven, for making one able to oppose his Armes, took his mighty Fauchion in both hands, and there∣with
so struck Alcidamant on the head, as not being able to pierce that rich helmet, which he got in the inchanted Castle of Treasure, he made him to knock his chin against the pommell of his saddle; this horrible blow ra∣ther awaking his courage, than any way amazing him, he rose up, and gashing his teeth for very anger, he ran him with his sword into the thigh, and instantly redoubling on his helmet, he overturned him on his horses back with a great wound on his head: Thinking him then to be dead, he flew in amongst his enemies, where meeting the horrible Brama∣naldon, who had newly sheathed his curtelas in one of the Cenophales, he lent him so deadly a blow on the shoulder, that he cleft him down to the waste. In the mean time Gorgophon being come to himselfe again, and most strangely incensed with the bad usage he had received of his adversary, flew like a tempest amongst the Christians, cleft Florenio to the teeth, struck Filizel de Montespines brains out, and in his fury meeting with Luci∣damor of Boetia, he divided him in two peeces; then incountring with Amadis of Greece, who having newly killed a Gyant, came from astoni∣shing Furiander, he let drive at him with all his might, hoping to lay him in the dust with the rest; but this excellent Emperour, having scarce his match in the world, sustayned his blow, and striking him with that heroi∣call strength, which tryumphed over the Gyants of the Siclades Iland, he gave him a dangerous wound; in the mean time the invincible King of great Britain, having separated Falanzars head from his body, ran up and down with Agesilan, Falanges, Astropolo, and Fortunian, giving assistance to such as stood in need thereof; Prigmaleon on the other side behaved him∣selfe most bravely, against Marmoran, so did Russian of Media, against Barcandor; Fulgoran against the gentle Knight Armorand; Don Silves against the generous Alceus; the Knight of the Sun against Bucarguant; Belianis against Brizardan, and all the rest sought so well, that four hours were spent before it could be discerned, to whom the victory would incline; but Rozalmond and Alcidamant seeing it was time to display the uttermost of their forces by some remarkeable blows discharged with such force, the one upon Bucarguant, who had left the Knight of the Sun almost senslesse, and the other on Barcandor his brother, as they cleft them down both to the teeth, and continuing in this rage, Alcidamant cut the Soldan of Circassiaes head in peeces, and Rozalmond the King of Gedrosiaes. The death of these four mighty Pagans, being accompanied with the slaughter of sixteen Gyants, and of Alrban, Danizel, Argilles, and Rodis∣mond, the number of the Infidels began to diminish, which perceived by Bravorant, Gorgophon, Roussardan, Fierason, Marisgolfe, the grand Salvage, Antomedon, Typheus, Marmaran, and the proud Knight Arastron, they dis∣charged such horrible blows upon their enemies, that having hurt them all very dangerously, they fell in with such fury amongst the Christians, as the valiant Anaxartes was cut in peeces by Bravrant, Argantes; Empe∣rour of Germany, by Gorgophon; Lindt King of Rhodes, by Roussar∣dan; Olidor of Siramque by Fieraston, Anazander King of Dardania, by Marisgolfe; Floridan his brother, by the grand Salvage, the remayning C∣nophale by Antomedon, Liscd King of Siconia by Typhs, Grandimer by Marmoran, and the gentle Dorigel, Lord of the fortunate Hands by Ara∣stron, wherewith the Princes of Greece were so displeased, as Rozalmond,
Alcidamant, Amadi of Trebisond, Clasel, Grian, Grio, , eri∣des, Claridan, and Bel having incountred them, vowed never to leave them, till they had revenged their deaths; whereupon the combat re∣newed with more cruelty than before, wherein Arlanges of Spain, Arlan∣tes his sonne, Cassias, and the Duke of Laazo were likewise slain. But Amadis of Gaule, Amadis of Greece, Florisel of Niquea, the knight of the Sun, Rosicler, Poliphebo, Don Eleno of Dacia, and Lucibel of France joyning together, began to run over the field with such rage, that having layd nine Gyants dead at their feet; namely Radamant the cruell, the strong Pandaro, Razartes, Coriander, Artilin, Gedereon King of Arginaria, Rindar, Broncaldion, King of the Arcofibrats, and Meliander, the rest were cut in pieces, together with Artogant, who dyed by the hand of the Knight of the Sun; so that of the hundred Pagan Knights, there remained no more but the mighty Bravorant, Gorgophon, Roussardan, the grand Salvage, Furiander Typhaeus, Antomedon, Fierastron, Marisgolf, Marmaran, Arastron, Brizardan, Policastaleon, Astrurion, Soldan of Brutacan, with whom Don Rogel had fought all day without any advantage, the generous Alcaeus, and the gen∣tle knight Armorand, who by no means induring any speech of rendring themselves, combatted like desperate men, but having continued fighting almost two houres after the rest, they were fain at length to fall at the feet of their enemies, more voyd of bloud, than of courage. The Victory being thus gloriously obtained, the Judges went and par∣ted the ten Amazons, sent them out of the field with equall honour, and causing those sixteen famous Pagan knights to be conveyed into the Citie, that their wounds might with the more care be looked unto; the Christian Princes were marching out of the Lists in triumph with the Emperour of Martaria, who greatly rejoyced at their good fortune, when as they per∣ceived the Enemies troops ranged in battell array, under the conduct of the great King of Maritania; Zazifalt, and Monomatapan, to make to∣wards them for to refcue the Pagan knights out of their hands, whereat being marvellously incensed, they put themselves in the head of their Squadrons, and fell in upon them with such fury, as the Pagans wanting valiant and skilfull Leaders, began within lesse than an houre to betake themselves to flight; wherupon our Souldiours were so encouraged, that imitating their renowned Commanders, they made such a terrible masa∣ere, as the ground for foure leagues about, was covered all over with dead bodyes; and that which rendred the defeat yet greater, and more horrible, was the Sea, which hemmed them in almost on every side, so that since the Creation of the world so great a slaughter was never seen, for of foure hundred, and three score, and sixteen thousand men, the re∣mainder of so prodigious an Army, scarce fifteen hundred escaped, and that by the benefit of the night. The Christian Princes seeing themselves absolutely victorious retur∣ned into the Citie, where they found that they had lost of personages of marke; Lund, Anaxtes, Argantes, Emperour of Germanie; Melindus King of Cloton; the Cenophes, Floaria of Thrace; Luceneio, Lcidmor, Flornio, Emperour of Rome; Filizel of Montespin; Don Flores of Greece; Zair, Filin, Artaurus, , of Rhodes; Arlanges of Spain, Arlantes his son, Dorigel of the fortunate Ilands, Gol his Wife; young Leod, the valiant Tril, Grand, the Duke of , Floridan of So pradi∣za;
Perion of Turkie; Florestan, of Sardinia; Cassianus, Anaxander, King of Dardania; Floradin, Gelodan, Prince of Moldavia; Alettha, Oriander, King of Sardamira; Oroncius, Alvida, the Queen Castora; the King of Catay, Rozaphar, Parmenian of Cyprus; Garmantes, Don Smaldo, and Tymbres of Egypt, wherof some were slain in the Combat, the rest in the battell; much were they grieved for their deaths, and with many tears did they lament them, but they were comforted, for that they dyed in the bed of honour, and that also the principalls had been preserved from the fury of so bloudy a day, for which having rendred humble thankes unto heaven, they gave order for the curing of the wounded, and solemnizing the Funerals of the deceased, with all kind of pomp and magnificence. CHAP. LIII. The Pagan Knights are delivered; Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, and Rozalmond are crowned Emperours of Tramazond, Martaria, and Gardacia; The separation of all these Princes. THE Pagan Knights being mad with rage for the slaughter of so many Kings, and valiant Gyants, that had kept all the world in awe, but much more for that they were vanquished by their ene∣mies, would not suffer the Chirurgians to dresse their wounds, desiring rather that a speedy death might free them from the miserie of a long expe∣cted captivitie, which being declared unto the King of great Brittain, he went the next day to visit them, and knowing that whatsoever he should doe, would be autho∣rized by the Christian Princes, having found them all in a room together, he said unto them. Knights, I imagine that if fortune had favoured your designes, and that we had been in your power, as now you are in ours, you would have ta∣ken pleasure to have made us suffer unworthy things for the satisfaction of your revenge, but we will let you see, that the Princes of Greece are gentlier disposed, that they love not slaughter, nor bloud, neither doe at any time shed it, but when as they are obliged therunto, either for the maintenance of the order of Knighthood, or to defend themselves from such as doe assail them: your despaire hath made you decline the reme∣dyes, which we would have given you for the healing of your wounds, you shall goe and seek them where you please, to which end we set you freely at liberty, wherby also we desire you should know, that we never did, nor will fear the greatnesse of your armes; If you shall be sensible of our courtesies, and shall at your return contain your subjects in peace, we shall be very glad of it, if otherwise it shall not much trouble us. Where∣upon having formerly commanded a ship to be rigged and victualled, he caused them to be carried aboard without attending any answer, letting
them goe to Gorgophons Island wonderfully amazed to find such courtesie from enemies, that had been so exceedingly outraged, howbeit all this could not worke upon their hardned hearts, for they resolved to be re∣venged at any rate whatsoever, and once more to turn the world upside down. This affaire being then expedited, Amadis accompanied with seven or eight of the Grecian Princes, that kept not their beds, went to visit the beautifull Emperesse of the Amazons, and did her so much honour, as she repented the employing of her Armes against them. Soveraigne Prince, said she after a most gentle manner, I would not beleeve, that you and yours were every where invincible; nor could think that the applause, which the world gave you, were justly due to you, but having seen incre∣dible effects of your matchlesse valour, and found a generosity in you, not common to other men, I say the world doth you wrong, not to erect Altars unto you; wherefore I beseech you to passe by that which I have done against you, and to honour me so far, as to place me in the number of the truest friends you have. Great Lady, answered that magnanimous King, and bowing himselfe for to kisse her hands, I doe no longer lament the losse we have sustayned, seeing we have gotten so fair a thing, as your most excellent selfe; your desire doth very much oblige us, and the per∣formance of your commandements, shall alwayes be our uttermost am∣bition. Hereupon having intreated her to take a lodging with them in the citie, she and the Queens her followers were conducted by him and the Princes thither, and were brought to Trasicleas Chamber, where all the other Princes were assembled, by whom being infinitely caressed, both sides stood amazed at each others beauties. Shortly whereupon it grew to be a very great court; for Cassandra ar∣riving from Corolandaya, with all those excellent Ladies, of whom we have spoken heretofore, and all the brave Knights being recovered of their hurts made up such a royall presence, that it much astonished this fair Emperesse; but when as Rozalmond, Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, Clarisel, and Griolanis, presented themselves for to kisse her hands, she was so ravished with the sight of their goodly personages, and gallant demea∣nour, as she could not forbeare saying openly, that now she had seen all that the world had of most rare, a prayse that blushing made these Prin∣ces protest they would serve her eternally. Whilst all was thus in joy, and tryumph, and that the Princes were talking of their own departure, and dismissing of the Christian forces, two ancient Knights entred into the hall in mourning weeds, which looking round about, at length went and kneeled before Trasiclea, who presently knowing them, demanded what news they had brought from Trama∣zond. Very bad, Madam answered one of them, for being to acquaint you with the decease of our Emperour, we are assured that naturall affe∣ction will make you rather lament his death, than rejoyce to see your selfe Mistris of his Scepter, which now doth attend you, and your faithfull subjects wish for nothing so much, as your presence to appease certaine troubles, arising from the ambition of the great Lords, that strive for the government of the Empire; wherefore we most humbly beseech you, in tender compassion of your poor people to resolve upon as speedy a de∣parture thither, as convenience will permit.
At this speech Trasiclea dissolved into tears, and so bewayled the losse of her Father, that it pittyed every one to behold her; but after they had for a while given way to her sorrows, the Princes endeavored all they might to comfort her, especially Alcidamant, who desired her to consider, that the condition of all men was infallibly to dye, so that by degrees having asswaged her griefe, the King of great Britain propounded the co∣ronation of her and Alcidamant, which two days after was solemnized on a scaffold, erected for that purpose, where in their richest roabs, Alcidamant and she two dayes after presented themselves on their knees, before Ama∣dis, the Emperour of Martaria, Belianis of Greece, and the Knight of the Sunne, who with many ceremonies set two Imperiall Crowns on their heads, and caused them to be placed on two Thrones, where all the Prin∣ces that were present went and kissed their hands, except the Emperour, Amadis of Greece, Florisel of Niquea, Don Rogel, and Spheramond, which kissed them on the cheek. All these solemnities being finished, Alcidamant and his Lady descended from their Thrones, when as the Emperour of Martaria causing silence to be made, spake thus. My Lords, the age wherein I am, more proper for rest, than for the cares that wayt upon Kings, advises me to lay them all upon the Princes, which it hath pleased heaven to bestow on my daugh∣ters; wherefore said he, taking Amadis of Trebisond, and Palmirenna by the hands, let these be placed in those Thrones, as Emperours of Martaria; as for Floridan he shall be King of Orgalia, and Lucibel of Cleogena, two states that hold of my Empire, wherupon taking the Crown from off his own head, he delivered it unto Amadis of Greece, who with Florisel of of Niquea, Don Rogel, and Spheramond, crowned Amadis of Trebisond in the same manner, as they had done Alcidamant. This done, the two new Emperours marching formost with their Ladies were conducted to the Palace with more magnificence than can be well exprest, and the feast was far more sumptuous than at any time before, du∣ring the which, all the young Princes waited upon Alcidamant, Amadis of Trebisond, and their wives. The rest of that day, and eight dayes after, were spent amidst incredible contentments; at the end wherof every one preparing himself for his departure, Florimond of Canabea (that at the suit of Rozalmond had been sent Ambassadour to the Emperour of Gar∣dacia by Spheramond, for to advertise him of Armazia's deliverance, and to desire him, that he would be pleased to bestow her in mariage on his Son) returned with this report, that having been marvellously caressed by that great Emperour, he had noly approved of the match, but had re∣signed, and sent his Crown to Rozalmond; wherupon the former Cere∣monies were renewed, and that brave Knight was Crowned by the two new Emperours, Prigmaleon, and the renowned Amadis of Gaule; Fea∣stings, and tryumphs were likewise revived with as much, or more mag∣nificence than before, to the unspeakable joy of all these Princes, and especially of Fortiman of Greece, Belianis grand-child, who unable to be∣hold the excellent beautie of Penamonda, Rozalmonds Sister, without ado∣ring her, began to breath forth a thousand amorous passions, wherof we will speak more at large in our fourth part. These delights continued fifteen dayes together, during the which, the Christian Army had been dismist, and sent away, all these Princes sepa∣rated
themselves with many tears; Amadis of Gaule, Amadis of Greece, Don Silves, Clarisel of Guindaya, the valiant Esquilan of Poland, and the beautifull Empresse of the Amazons, who would needs accompany them, went with their Wives to Constantinople; Florisel of Niquea in∣to Trebisond with Falanges, Alastraxerea, Agesilan, and his fairest Diana; Don Rogel with Persides, and Fulgoran into Persia; Amadis d' Astre to the Empire of the Parthians, where the faire Infanta Rosiliana, was ready to expire with joy at his arrivall; Fortunian into France with Florisel; Ro∣zalmond, Russian, and Silverin of the Desart into Gardacia; Amadis of Tre∣bisond; Floridan and Lucibel with their Father-in-law into Martaria; Al∣cidamant with Trasiclea, Grian and Brandimanda to Tramizond; Griolanis and his beautious Adelazia to Corolandaya; Prigmaleon remained in Aethi∣opia, untill such time as his Subjects were somewhat better assured; The Knight of the Sun▪ and Belianis according to the great Alcanders directi∣ons, set forth with their kinsmen towards China, and the Empire of Mexi∣co; And all the other Christian Princes embarquing themselves, set saile for their own Countreys, where we will leave them to enjoy all the hap∣pinesse of peace for to finish this third Volumne, in the sequell whereof shall be seen the adventures of Don Belianis, and of the Knight of the Sun, together with a continuation of the marvellous acts of Alcidamant, Rozalmond, Clarisel, Persides, and other young Knights of Greece. FINIS.
