23299 S101822 99837625 1961
THE ARRAIGNEMENT OF COVETOUSNESSE, In three SERMONS. BY JOHN STOUGHTON, Doctor in Divinitie, sometimes Fellow of Immanuel Colledge in Cambridge, late of Aldermanbury, LONDON. PSALME 119. 36. Incline my heart to thy Testimonies, and not to Covetousnesse. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Bellamie, Henry Overton, Iohn Rothwell, Richard Serger, and Ralph Smith. 1640.
A methodicall Analysis of the chiefe things treated on in these Sermons on LUKE 12. 15. as they were perfected by the Author. A Sermon of Christ. 1 Begun, commending. 1 Sincerity. 1. 2 Magnanimity. 4. 2 Interrupted by a worldling, whose motion 1 Propounded. 13. 2 Answered. 1 Reproved. 14. 2 Improved. 15 in an exhorta∣tion against covetousnesse. 1 Backed, explicated with strong reasons. 2 Edged, illustrated with a Parable. 3 Continued. 1 Occasionally. 1 Revoking from worldly mindednesse. 22. 2 Provoking to heavenly mindednesse. 31. 2 Intentionally. Exhorting to 1 Watchfulnesse. 35. 1 Propounded, from the condition of 1 Their so doing. 1 Blessednesse of dutie. 2. Wofulnesse of neglect. 2 Masters sodaine comming. 40. 2 Reiterated and enlarged. 1 Occasion. 41. 2 Exhortation. 1. Nature. 1 Felicity in duty. 4. 2 Misery in defect, Abuse. 45 2 Measure to those that sinne of 1 Knowledge, greater. 47. 2 Ignorance, lesse. 48. 2 Meeknesse to 1 Beae butcherly opposition, which 1 Must be expected. 49. 2 May be presaged. 54. 2 Forbeare brotherly contention. 58.
Doct. Covetousnesse is a vice that is hardly discerned, it is a subtile one; it is a vice largely spread, it is a generall one; it is deeply rooted and rivetted in the soules of men, and will hardly be beaten out with many reasons and arguments, much working and chasing, it is a vice that is highly to be abhorred. of a very foule nature and consequence, and therefore a vice, that all that will be Christs Disciples should be vey curious to observe, and cautious to avoid, to ward and fence themselves against. 1 Explication▪ Nature of covetousnesse. 1 Premise. 1 Prodigall. 2 Fugall. 3 Liberall. 2 Propound something concerning the 1 Name. 1 Large. 2 Strict. 3 Indifferent 2 Nature. 1 Description, containing the nature 1 Generall. 1 Vice. 2 Morall. 1 Seat Soul 1 Formall, Affection. 2 Radicall, understanding. 3 Vertuall, Actions. 2 State. 1 Line of 1 Mediocritie. 2 Extremitie 2 Rule, Gods will written in 1 His owne breast. 2 Our hearts. 3 The word. 2 Particular. 1 Object Riches. 2 Manner▪ in 1 Generall opposite to 1 Liberalitie. 1 Frugalitie. 2 Liberality. 3 Magnificence. 2 Prodigality. 2 Speciall.
1 Infecting whole soule 1 Affections. 2 Apprehensions. 3 Actions 1 Thought 2 Word. 3 Deed. 2 Exceeding what love requires of 1 Getting. 2 Saving. 1 God. 2 Selfe. 3 Neighbour. 2. Distribution, according to, 1 Subject. in 1 Godly, concomian. 1 Opposed. 2 Neglected. 2 Wicked predominant. 1 Inraged. 2 Restrained. 2 State. 1 Criminall, subservient to 1 Pride. 2 Lust. 2 Capitall. 3 Degree. 1 Lesse, 2 More. 3 Designation of properties. 1 In it selfe. 1 Subtile, hardly discerned. 1 Hovv in respects 1 Generall. 2 Speciall. 2 Therefore take heed you do not lightly 1 Accuse others. 2 Excuse your selves. 2 Vniversall, largely dispersed in all. 1 Sorts. 1 Wicked. 2 Godly. 2 Rancks, 1 Rich. 2 Poore. 3 Vocarions. 1 Civill. 2 Ecclesiasticall. 4 Conditions, in regard of 1 Sex. 2 Age 3 Tenacious: deeptly rooted, not easily
1 Laid dovvne. 2 Alayed by any cure of 1 Religion. 2 Reason. 3 Time. 4 Dangerous. Proofe. 1 Scripture. 1 Testimonies 1. Colos. 3. 5. 2. 1 Tim. 6 9. 10. 3. Luke 16. 14. Psal. 119. 36. 4. Cor. 6. 10. compared with Ephes. 5. 5. 5. Exod. 28 21. 6. 1 Tim 3. 3. 7. 1 Cor. 5. 10. 11. and Psal. 10. 3 2 Examples. 1 Negative. 2 Positive. 1 Nabal. 2 Laban. 3 Ah 4 De. 2 Nature, it 1 Opposeth all good of 1 Grace. 2 Nature. 2 Exposeth to all evil of 1 Sinne. 2 Punishment. 2 In respect of us, it is to be avoided by all 1 Meanes. 1 Watching 2 Warding. 2 Men. 1 Common. 2 Christians. 2 Application. 1 Conviction. 2 Reprehension. 3 Exhortanon to bee 1 Iealous. 2 Iudicious. 3 Conscientious. 4 Ingenuous, 5 Generous. 1 Examination 2 Huiliation. 3. Reformation, remedies to 1 Recover. 2 Prevent.
1 Habituall. 1 Generall. Grace. 2 Speciall. 4. Paires 1 First. 1 Humility. 2 Temperance. 2 Second. Love of 1 God. 2 Neighbour. 3 Third. 1 Heavenly mindednes 2 Contentednesse. 4 Fourth. 1 Faith. 2 Wisdome. 2 Actuall. 1 Watch. 2 Pray. Strive. Meditate of 1 Former argu∣ments in the Do∣ctrine how it 1 Opposeth good of 1 Grace. 2 Nature. 2 Exposeth to ill of 1 Sin a∣gainst 1 God. 2 Neighbour. 3 Selves. 2 Punish∣ment. 1 Wrath. 2 Scorne. 3 Misery. 2 Our Saviours ar∣guments in the Chapter, in 2. degrees. 1 To the disturber in 1 Generall, felicity not in superfluity 2 Particular, assures not. 1 Secures not. 2 Delicacy. 3 Wisdome. 2 To the Disciples care. 3 Other arguments from Riches. 1 Riches in superfluitie are 1 Inconsiderable. 2 Vncertaine. 3 Vnprofitable 4 Hurtfull. 1 Worldly, is
1 Begetting in men, 2 Hindering. 1 2 3 4 2 Competency. 1 Needlesse. 24. 2 Fruitlesse. 25. 3 Brutish. 22, 4 Heathenish. 5 Hurtfull. 1 Fetters heart. 34 2 Hinders. 35. 2 Heavenly, more 1 Easie. 31. 2 Happy. 32. 3
LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of Covetousnesse. THis Chapter containes in it an excellent and a di∣vine Sermon of our Sa∣viour, to an innumera∣ble multitude of people, gathered together; so that they trod one up∣on another: In which Chapter, to give you the generall Summe of it, you may observe three things. 1. A Sermon begun, in the beginning whereof our Saviour exhorts to a double vertue: 1. Sin∣cerity or simplicity of heart, contrary to hypocrisie, and the leaven of the Pharisees, which in the first place he wisheth them to take heed of, Vers. 1.
2. Magnanimity, to despise and contemne all difficulties that may occurre, in the free, sincere, and ingenuous profession of a mans religion, not to be afraid of any difficulties, no, though they go as faire as death, Verse 4. 2. This heavenly dis∣course of our Saviour is interrupted, by the un∣mannerly admittance of them which came to this spirituall meeting with carnall hearts, they came to Church to heare Sermons, but their minde was upon their estate, and on outward things; and therefore one of the company, a worldly man, propounds a question to our Saviour, which he answers. 1. The question propounded is in the 13. Ver. And one of the company said unto him, master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me: his brother, it seemes, had the advantage of the possession, and he thought our Saviour was a good man, and it might be easie for him to do a good office▪ he, not regarding the imployment our Sa∣viour was about, troubles and interrupts him with this unsavoury motion. 2. Our Saviours answer is, partly by his repro∣ving, rejecting, condemning of the motion, in the 14. Verse: And he said unto him, man, who made me a judge or a divider over you? my office is of another nature, and the meanest Judge in the world can arbitrate this; It is not fit to leave the Word of God, and to serve tables, no not in a work of charity; there are things of a higher na∣ture; but then, 2. He contents not himselfe with this reproof,
but improves this unseasonable importunity, and takes the opportunity of conveighing a very sea∣sonable doctrine or exhortation upon this occasi∣on, that strikes at the very root of the disease which lurked in this man, and so more generally dehorts from covetousnesse, which he conceived was the spring of this mans disorder. Now that is, 1. Backed and replicated with a strong reason, in those words, for the life of man, or the happinesse and content of man, consists not in the abundance of that he possesseth: the world is mistaken in it, it is not that which makes a man happy, or that which will give a man true content, so I take the meaning of the word to be, although the world promise much. 2. As it is backed with a strong reason, so it is edged and illustrated with a sweet Parable; The great rich man he had a great crop, and be thought himselfe what to do, to pull downe his barnes, and build them greater, and sing a requiem to his soule, the issue whereof was, Thou foole; and such are all they which set up their rest here, and thinke that the life of man consists therein, and that happi∣nesse depends thereon. 3. As our Saviour condemnes, and reproves, so he improves the unmannerly proceedings of this man, and takes occasion to continue his hea∣venly Sermon, wherin I shall distinguish but these two things. I. Our Saviour goes on in the occasionall argu∣ment, which this mans request concerns. Secondly,
he intentionally adds somthing that was in his own minde to convey, and that is added to the former occasion. In the occasionall argument there be these two branches, and I shall but onely mention them, and desire you at leisure to peruse the place, because in this place, and that paralell to the 6. of Mat∣thew, is scarce the like argument handled in the whole book of God, nor all the wit of man can∣not have more excellent suggestions. 1. He revokes his disciples from worldly-min∣dednesse, by many excellent incomparable argu∣ments, Vers. 22. 2. He provokes them to heavenly-mindednesse, in the 31. Verse, wishing them not to seeke these things, but the kingdome of God. II. He proceeds to his former intentionall thoughts, wherein he commends especially two ex∣cellent vertues to all his disciples. 1. Watchfulnesse, in the 35. Verse, that they would always keep a watchfull posture, preparing for, and expecting the comming of the Lord, to be fitted for it, whenever it should be, sooner or later, sudden or otherwise, and this is, Propounded and pressed, and then iterated and inlarged. It is propounded and pressed, 1. From the con∣dition of a duty, which being discharged, makes a man blessed, in those words, And if he come in the second or third watch, and finde them so, blessed are those servants. 2. From the misery that will fol∣low upon the neglect hereof, in the following
words, If the good man of the house knew what houre the thiefe would come, he would watch, &c. 2. It is pressed from the condition of their masters comming, which is expressed to be sudden, no man knowes the houre; and thus farre our Saviour hath propoun∣ded and pressed this argument of watchfulnesse. 2. Upon a particular occasion he doth reiterate and inlarge the prosecution of this very argument: the occasion is expressed in the 41 Verse, Peter steps in, and puts the question, not so unmannerly as before, but proper enough for the Auditory: Master, speakest thou this parable unto us, or to all? This gives our Saviour occasion to re-inforce his former exhortation, wherein are the same argu∣ments I mentioned before, partly from the felcity in the discharge of this duty, how happy and blessed is that man, that when his Lord commeth▪ shall finde well doing, preparing and fitting himselfe for that meeting; and then the misery and the wofull condi∣tion of the evill servant, who instead of giving a portion to his Lords servants, shall presume his master will not yet come, but delay and prolong the time, and fall to beat and abuse his fellow-servants. I conceive in this place, and other places of Scri∣pture, where this evill servant is mentioned (be∣sides the generall notion of any that carrieth him∣selfe disorderly) I say, it hath a particular intenti∣on against that evill servant in particular, that An∣tichrist, whom the Lord shall destroy with the breath of his mouth, and abandon with t brightnesse of his comming, finding him drunke w the bloud of the Saints, This evill servant, I say, will be in a very
evill and sad condition. Our Saviour farther ex∣presseth this by adding one thing concerning the measure of this evill, that will befall the unfaithfull servant, and he propounds it as a rule of the mise∣ry, the misery wilbe great; as this is done more out of knowledge, he which knoweth his masters will, which sinneth hypocritically, against the light, a∣gainst conscience, those will have a double share in the misery, and it will be more fearefull to them: it will be something mitigated to them which knowlesse, yet bad enough, as is expressed in the 47 and 48 Verse. This was the first vertue that our Saviour exhorts unto, watchfulnesse and carefulnesse to prepare that they may not be sur∣prized with his sudden comming. 2. The second vertue our Saviour exhorts un∣to, is spirituall wisdome, although there be some ambiguity in some interpreters, either meeknesse or spirituall wisdome, it is agreed upon. There be two things wherein this is recom∣mended in generall. 1. In bearing unbrotherly oppositions; and our Saviour tels them, that this is that which must be expected, and may be presaged and fore-seen. 1. It must be expected, Vers. 49. for our Saviour tels them plainly, that he came to send fire on the earth; and not to make a carnall peace, but to conveigh the light of the Gospell, the events whereof would breed combustions, wicked men opposing the preaching of th Gospell, and of the godly; and this is made ev by those which are nearest to them, in the same house, Verse 52, 53. Our Savi∣our
prepares them with this before-hand, that they may meekely and wisely beare unbrotherly oppositions. 2. In which this meeknesse con∣sists more particularly, to forbeare brotherly con∣tention: Or, as some interpret it, it may rather be expressed thus, to take care to make peace with God so much the more, agree with thine adversa∣ry, it may commend brotherly conjunction: for those which are brethren, they shall meet with oppositions in the world, they had not need to devoure one another: Or, as many interpreters say, that adversary is God, which, while we are in this world, we should make our peace with, since we can have so little peace in the world; there∣fore our Saviour puts his servants in mind, that it is a great point of wisdome, at the least, to make their peace with God, that they may have sweet comfort from him in the middest of all bitternesse in the world. I omitted one thing that I should have spoken, in opposition to the two things that must be expected, which the condition of the Gospell will produce, and that may be presaged, in the 54. Vers. And he said unto all the people, &c. If men were but so wise to observe those prognosti∣cations of grace, and the way of the times of the Gospell, as they are to prognosticate the face of the heavens, when they see the evening faire and red, they presage faire weather, and on the ap∣pearance of a cloud, fowle weather: if men were so wise in the face of Scripture, they might fore-see when calmes and stormes are likely to fall, when they are like to fall into opposition
and affliction, and so wisely might prepare and arme for the same. Out of all give me leave to mention one thing needfull, from the unseasonable and rude motion of the worldly-minded man, interrupting our Sa∣viours Sermon with an earthly question, viz. It is no new thing nor strange, that men should bring carnall hearts to spirituall duties. You are not secure by being in the house of God, by hearing Sermons, but you may be full of carnall thoughts, if you be not carefull to purge them out, you may be thinking of your house, moneyes, or trade, talking, or bartering a∣bout worldly things, and so turning the Church into an Exchange, or you may be gazing after poorer things, this bodies fashion, or that bodies dresse, but every one should be carefull of that. To omit all other things, I shall onely fasten upon one observation, and propound that, so as it may be comprehensive to take the very substance of the truth, of the whole doctrine that our Saviour propounds, and I shall expresse it thus. Covetousnesse is a vice that is hardly discerned, it isa subtill one, it is a vice largely spread, it is a generall one, it is deeply rooted and riveted in the soules of men, and will hardly be beaten off with many reasons and arguments much working and chasing, it is a vice that is highly to be ab∣horred, of a very foule nature and consequence; and therefore a vice that all that will be Christs disciples should be very curious to observe, and cautious to avoid, toward and fence themselves against.
You see every one of these contained and inti∣mated in the very words of our Saviour, although I might have made so many severall observations, yet I chose rather to contract all into one; And I hold it very expedient so to do, that if a man can but remember the point, he may carie away all the maine things that are said concerning it, though he may forget other particulars, yet he may have the maine in the observation: But before I enter into the explication of the point, I shall 1. Pre∣mise one caution: there be three sorts of men which happily may be here, that may take some offence at this doctrine, taking things with a wrong hand, and hearing them with a wrong eare, which are delivered right. 1. The prodigall man may laugh in his sleeve, and be tickled, thinks he, I am shot-free, this Sermon concernes not me, I am not guilty of that sin, the world knowes it, and I proclaime it well enough, and this may please him, and so harden him, while he stands jeering at another man that walks con∣trary to him. 2. The frugall man, he is cleane contrary, he is a sober and a good husband, and he thinks it his wisdome to be so, as indeed it is, in a vertuall way, and with moderation, but he is offended, and thinkes this may touch him many wayes, taking that to himselfe which is aimed against covetous∣nesse, as though it were spoken to him. 3. The liberall man, he may take some offence, which is in the right path and line of vertue, he may receive some prejudice, because he is not
onely free from extremes, but is conscious of the contrary vertue, and so he may dance upon the rope of confidence, and be secure in that one ver∣tue, as though he need no more; whereas a man may have one vertue, and be liable to many re∣proofes, not being out of the gun-shot, therefore he should not be confident, of that one, but rather extend himselfe to every one. And I desire every one of these whom it may concerne, that they may by this caution be advised to take heed of of∣fence or scandall, which may hinder them in their way. 2. And so I come to the explication of the point, wherein I shall propound, 1. Something concerning the name, cove∣tousnesse. 2. Concerning the nature, and so shall indea∣vour to cleare the thing, First, by a discription of it, what it is. Secondly, by a distribution of it, according to the severall kinds and ranks of it. Thirdly, by a short designation of the proper∣ties of it: not such as might make signes and cha∣racters of it, but such onely as I expressed parti∣cularly in the point. 1. This onely I shall note concerning the name, covetousnesse, (for I cannot well go about to define any thing, what it is, except first the name be agreed upon; for names and words play fast and loose, and so the definition must varie, accor∣ding to the latitude of the words.) To omit all Metaphors, and such which are farther off,
there is a threefold latitude of this word. 1. It is taken in a large sense, and so it compre∣hends all inordinate desire, more than that which is properly called covetousnesse, or which our Saviour aims at in this place, covetousnesse or concupiscence af∣ter any thing, it may reach to all things inordinatly desired: As for example, to mention but three creatures, that there may be concupiscence after, honour, lust, and riches: Now we have nothing to do with it after this large sense. 2. It is taken in a strict sense, which I desire not to make use of, though it is used by some Divines, as indeed every one will have his owne apprehen∣sion, and yet there is no great difference: for my part, so long as things are agreed on, I shall never make contention about words, for that were but to hinder all knowledge. Know therefore, some take the word more strictly than is necessary, they would have cove∣tousnesse to be an inordinate appetite onely in re∣gard of keeping and saving riches, and not to reach to getting of them. 3. I take it here in a moderate indifferent sense, and so it is all inordinate desire toward riches in that excessive way, our affections and inclinations being set on them inordinately: I take covetous∣nesse in that middle sense, which comprehends both desiring inordinately, and getting inordi∣nately, and saving inordinately: either desiring, get∣ting, or saving inordinately, this is covetousnesse. And this being premised concerning the word, I shall in the second place indeavour to expresse
the nature of it, first, in a briefe description, which I promise not to be accurate in, because it is not easie to define it accurately, for an accurate definition should have nothing but the meere essentials, and all the essentials, which is wonderfull hard in all things, especially in morall things, but rather a rude draught or description, which may be suffi∣cient for ordinary understandings, and for the generall use of men: What I conceive suf∣ficient for the nature of the thing, I expresse it thus. Covetousnesse is a morall vice, or an inordinate affe∣ction toward riches, or worldly things, whereby the whole heart of man is inclined excessively thereto, and inordinately carried towards them, arising from a judgement perverted, and producing perverse fruits or actions. There bee two things to bee dilated and in∣larged in briefe, for it will be necessary to lay the foundation thoroughly, because the true un∣derstanding of this comprehends all that shall be built upon it: As there is in all descriptions, the generall nature and the particular nature wherein the formality of the thing consists. So it is in this description, for it containes, 1. The generall nature of this, it is a vice, and a morall vice. 1. It is a vice: for there be two kinds of dispo∣sitions which the soule of man is capable of; there is a crooked disposition and a straight; that disposition of the soule which is right in the right frame, toward any thing, that disposition is ver∣tuous,
and there is a crooked disposition, and that is, when the soule is not in its right temper, and that is vice, being not in the rank of vertue, which is a commendable ornament that beautifies the soule, but in the rank of vice, which is a staine and a spot that defiles and shames the soule. 2. It is a morall vice. There be two sorts of vertues and vices, intellectuall, and morall; wis∣dome is an intellectuall vertue, and so all the preg∣nancy of the intellectuall part of the understand∣ing, these excellencies of the understanding are intellectuall vertues, but this is none of those, but a morall vice, there be morall vices which corrupt mens hearts, the inclinations of their soule being corrupt, their understanding, and the will and affections are corrupt, and this is of that nature, it is a morall deformitie: Now in a morall vice there be these two things which are most princi∣pally confiderable, and I shall briefly touch them, because I would have this description, though rude, yet usefull, not onely for describing this particular thing, but for any man to frame a de∣scription of vertues or vices by. Two things are most considerable in a mo∣rall vice. First, the seat of it, and that is the soule of man, and the soule universall; and so it is, 1. Formally, in the will and affections, which are the proper seat of every morall vice or vertue. I conceive the will and the affections are in reality the same, and without all question, according to the generall opinion of all the learned, the proper
seat of every morall vice or vertue is in the affe∣ctions, in the right or wrong temper of the affe∣ctions or will; when the will is right set, it hath attained to vertue; when it is wrong set, it hath attained to vice: therefore I chose to describe it principally to be an inordinate affection; yet with∣all I added some other things (because there is a generall pollution of the soule by this vice) al∣though the proper seat be in the will, yet it hath an influence into, and defiles the rest of the facul∣ties: and so it is, 2. Radically, in the understanding, for there is no deformity in the will and affections, but there is a concurrent distemper in the understanding, it framing a wrong judgement and opinion, for that is the radix whence the affections are mis-led and mis-informed; and as all vertues, so all vices are formally and radically in the understanding, and all the rest of the faculties of the soule; so they are, 3. Vertually, in the actions; for the propensity of the soule towards vertues or vices, towards right or wrong, is manifest in ordinate or inordi∣nate acts; I say, in the actions, though vice be seated formally in the will, and radically in the understanding, yet it appeares vertually in the actions. Secondly, the second thing considerable in a morall vice or vertue, is the state, nature and qua∣lities of them, wherein you may observe two things. 1. The line, or horizon, that divides be∣twixt vertue and vice. 2. The rule, by which we
finde out this line. The line that divides betwixt vertue and vice, I expresse thus: when a man keepes the golden path of mediocrity, then a man is in the right line of vertue, when his wayes are equinoxiall, even, when he swerves from this, his affections, and so his actions, depending on them, swerve, either to the right hand, or to the left, ei∣ther to excesse, beyond the line; or defect, short of the line; then is an aberration from the line of vertue, and so a man is in hazard of vice. 2. The rule of this mediocrity: The Philoso∣phers, as the Naturalists observe, found no other compasse to finde out the right line, that when ver∣tue runs even, as wisdome shall direct; the truth is, it must be the voice of judgement and discretion that must judge of all morall vertues; to prescribe the path of the affections, a right and due temper must be kept; and that they may be in a due tem∣per, all must be described by wisdome: But to speake more Theologically; it is the will of the wise God that is the rule of mediocrity, which is written partly in his owne brest, in the holinesse of his owne nature, as the way that men must walke in; partly written in our hearts, so farre as they come into right reason, to be judged either as rea∣son is originally right, or rectified. In time of in∣nocency, reason was a competent judge, because it was not depraved; and full of light and beau∣ty, all darknesse being dispelled (by those heaven∣ly beames) which did serve for the guiding of a mans life, but now nature is corrupt, and it is as hard to have right reason, as it is to say what me∣diocrity
is, therefore I add in the third place, writ∣ten in the word, as the will of God is written in his owne brest, in the holinesse of his owne nature, and in our hearts; so all vertue is but an extract of something in the mount, according to that pat∣terne which is left written in the word, God re∣vealing to his people his will, and the way of ho∣linesse, which is pleasing and acceptable to him, that must be the judge and rule by which we must discerne the line of mediocrity, wherein vertue consists, swerving from which in the one, or de∣fect in the other, is vice. And so much concer∣ning the generall nature of it, that it is a vice, and a morall vice. 2. Now to add something concerning the par∣ticular, that which makes the formality of this vice of covetousnesse, that you may discerne it from other vices, I would propound but two things. 1. Something more generall; consider the Object, and the Act towards that Object. 1. The Object; for every kinde of vice or ver∣tue receives its species from the Object: now the Object is riches, the obliquity of it is by way of excesse, as the obliquity of the soule inmatters of pleasure is lust or wantonnesse, in matters of honour is pride or ambition: Covetousnesse is the obliquity which is in respect of riches and world∣ly goods, that is, when we are carried towards them inordinately, aiming at more than is compe∣tent: what is competent, may be judged by nature, what is necessary and sufficient for nature, may be
judged by reason, what is reasonable, may be judged by faith, now to be desirous, and covet, and lust after more than such a competency, to go be∣yond competency, besides necessity, reason or faith; this is a vicious disposition toward riches, this is all I shall say in generall concerning the ob∣ject, that it is a vice, the exercise whereof gives a vicious tincture and perverse inclination to the soule, when it hath to deale with riches; onely let me add by way of caution, most of all, both Phi∣losophers and others, make covetousnesse to be a vice in the defect, not in the excesse: I am hard to believe, but it is the excessive carriage of the soule towards riches, but this is easily reconciled; if men consider vices with relation to vertue, take the excesse and the defect as they stand in the ha∣bit to vertue, then covetousnesse is a defect to li∣berality; for liberality is the moderate seeking af∣ter riches and using of them, prodigality is the ex∣cesse, and covetousnesse prevaricates from the rule in the mount, in, or by way of defect, excesse, be∣ing something opposite: but if you take it accor∣ding to the object, as they stand in habit with the object: for my owne pait, with submission to o∣thers, I conceive that covetousnesse is rather in the excesse, than in the defect, in forcing the soule to worldly things, when a man is like the woman in the Gospell, that had a spirit of infirmity, bowes downe toward earthly things: prodigality is a de∣fective carriage, when a man regards them not with due moderation, but throwes all out at win∣dowes: upon the point they come both to the
same point and issue, and what I have said of this, may be said of all vertues and vices. 2. More particularly, the exorbitance of this covetousnesse may be apprehended, partly by the opposition in which it stands to other things, partly in its owne proper temper and disposition. 1. For the opposition, there be two things to which cove∣tousnesse is opposed in the same ranke, respecting the same object of riches, it is opposed to, 1. Liberality, in all the ranks and degrees; and, 2. To prodigality; I onely note this by the way, although we generally mention but one ver∣tue upon the line in matter of estate, and that is li∣berality; yet this liberality may have a threefold latitude, it may comprehend three distinct branches, the distinction of which may be taken diverse wayes. The lowest rank to which covetousnesse is op∣posed to liberality, is frugality; he which is fru∣gally liberall, which hath but a meane estate, and in a meane businesse, though he be sparing, yet he keepes the character and temper of vertue, accor∣ding to the proportion of the estate, nature, and condition of his businesse. The middle story to which covetousnesse is opposed to liberality, is that we call moderate libe∣rality, that is in those which have but ordinary e∣states, and in ordinary cases, to be simply liberall, and not to aime at great proportions in ordinary cases, men of ordinary places, ordinary liberality is the true character. The highest story is magnificence, to be more
than liberall, to exceed proportion, either taken from proportion of a mans estate, as a great man is not liberall, except he be magnificent, propor∣tionable to his estate, or to the thing, the businesse he is about to act; a man is not liberall to the publike good, which is barely liberall, if he be not magnificent according to his estate, and pro∣portionable to the publike good, it is not right; for magnificence is the true temper of liberality, which magnificence may be taken in respect of two severall things. 1. In regard of the person in whom it is: there be persons which are of meane condition, it is e∣nough for them, according to their estate and con∣dition, to be frugall; and so they shall carrie themselves vertually, though they goe no farther than frugall liberality, with respect to their meanes and condition. Others, which are of a middle sort, it is not enough for them to be frugally libe∣rall, but they must be liberally liberall, or els they come within the compasse of covetousnesse; though it be not sordid and base covetousnesse, yet they are not without the verge. The last rank are those which have fullest estates; it is not e∣nough for them to be frugally liberall, nor liberal∣ly liberall, they will not avoid covetousnesse, ex∣cept they be magnificently liberall, still to keep the proportion: if he which hath a great estate, doth no more than he which hath a meane one, or an indifferent one; he doth covet basely, because he doth not magnificently, as his estate affords. 2. In regard of the severall cases, and so there
be three severall cases, in which these severall ranks may be considered, and accordingly ex∣pressed. 1. Triviall and ordinary cases, and there frugall liberality is sufficient. 2. Great and necessary cases, and there liberall liberality is to be expressed. 3. Vrgent and extraordinary cases, and there, ac∣cording to a mans proportion, magnificent libera∣lity is required. I remember an observation that the Rabbins have, it may be it may please some of this audito∣ry, but in a perverse way; I desire there may be no misconstruction; they give this rule, to have every man carry himselfe according to his estate, the thing they specifie is in matter of cloathes, or apparell; they would have every man keep to his estate, and yet they allow of some excesse, and some defect, yet so, as liberality may rule: the thing is this, cloath thy wife above thy estate, cloath thy children according to thy estate, and cloath thy selfe beneath thy estate; they allow excesse on the one side, and defect on the other, and so upon the point they are made even; if there be excesse in one, moderation in another, and defect in another, that makes the supply; the thing I note it for, is not for the particular, but for the generall, according to the three ranks how we may regulate our selves, according to the three rules, and those according as the case requires, whether in a way of frugality, liberality, or mag∣nificence: I give but this rule proportion to that,
for matter of diet and apparell, an ingenuous fru∣gall liberality is commendable, rather keep within the compasse, it is the best rule of vertue that can be given in this case, because the excesse, or incli∣ning to excesse, doth but foment vice, as excesse in diet, sloathfulnesse, which hinders and impaires the intellectuall parts, excesse in apparell is but a flag of pride, and an inclination to it: therefore in those things the best rule is, to keep the temper of frugality, go in a liberall way, not sordidly, but in a way of frugality, rather under, than above a mans estate. There be some other things, wherein the cha∣racter of liberality lieth, to be observed, I will mention but two; towards the diligent labourer, and towards the necessitated begger, and there go a little beyond the compasse of frugality; be not penurious, pinching the labourers wages, and beat∣ing it downe, or the poore trades-mans ware: do as you would be done by; for it may be better almes, and baser covetousnesse, to grate upon the poore labourer, beat downe the hire upon the poore man that selleth his commodity, so as he cannot live; herein goe in an ingenuous libe∣rall way. There be other things that characterize magni∣ficence, in all publike services, which are for the publike good, for the good of the Church, or the advancement of the glory of God; for the good of the common-weale, or the service of the King, and the supporting his State and Honour, the best way is to baulk a frugall way, transcend a meere
liberall way, and Araunah-like, go in a magnifi∣cent way, rather beyond our selves; for it I a∣bate something below the rule in diet and appa∣rell, I shall have scope to exalt my selfe above my self in the publike good; this was the first thing to which covetousnesse is opposed to liberality; comming short thereof is, when a man forbeares to go according to the rule of vertue, and keeps aloof off. 2. On the other side, covetousnesse is opposed to prodigality, it is so farre from comming short of the rule of moderation, that it exceeds, the golden line is a free, ingenuous, liberall using and spending these things, as discretion shall prescribe: but when a man is beyond the bounds, carelesse for matter of estate, riches, throw all away in a night, upon dice or vaine courses, the extremity is in the excesse. 2. But now, besides the opposition, the pro∣per temper and disposition of covetousnesse doth best characterize it, it doth infect the whole soule, although formally it be, 1. In the affections; an inordinate affecting, and a love towards money, love of having much, im∣moderate desire, and immoderate griefe and ve∣xation, if he have them not; immoderate feare, if there be any danger of losing them; it may be circumscribed by any of these inordinate affe∣ctions, it is the desire, or love, either of them will expresse it fully, immoderate or inordinate love to riches, affecting of them, that is the defilement of the soule, in regard of the affections.
2. In the apprehension radically, it is in the un∣derstanding, which ariseth from some misconceit in the understanding; I will but mention one or two of the maine. In the understanding an over∣weening of worldly things; a man thinks there is a great deale more good and excellency, more de∣sireable, and more conducible towards his happi∣nesse and content, than indeed they do; he hath an erroneous opinion concerning the excellency of them, if he did not esteeme them so highly, he would never affect them so deeply; for a mans affections depend upon his opinion. There is another root of bitternesse, and that is atheisme, or infidelity, or diffidence, when men are poysoned with a low esteeme of Gods provi∣dence, thinking Gods Word is not to be taken heed of; they dare not trust Gods providence, but themselves, and their own solicitous care, for providing for themselves, dare not give any al∣lowance to Gods providence; these are the maine roots of covetousnesse in the understanding. 3. It manifesteth it selfe in perverse actions, the actions are depraved. 1. The thoughts are tainted with caring immo∣derately, alwayes plodding, running with thorny cares, vexing and tormenting the soule with de∣sires, that he is continually upon the rack with carking and caring thoughts. 3. His speeches are perverse, a thousand to one if his breath smell not of earth, all his talke is of his worldly businesse, how he may compasse such a possession; if he would shew but as much
love to God, as he doth to his mammon, it were well. 3. His deeds, they also are polluted. There be two maine actions which are inordi∣nate, getting, and having. 1. Getting, falling on inordinate courses, riches must be had, however they come by them, by faire or foule play; covetousnesse is a snare put on by the devill and our owne corrupt lust, which makes us venter (when we see a bait) upon any in∣ordinate action. 2. Saving and keeping will be inordinate, he will be pinching and penurious, scarce enjoying what he hath; it is a death to part with any thing, he parts with so much bloud out of his veines, as pence out of his purse; it goeth to his heart and soule: inordinate getting, keeping, and saving; this is the first thing, I add but a second. 2. As covetousnesse infecteth the whole soule, so the inordinatenesse of it appeares in the exceeding in what love requires, and is either Of God, Our selves, or Neighbour. The inordinatenesse of it shewes it selfe especi∣ally in the affections; and this I shall expresse in all these three things. First, that is apparent covetousnesse, and weares the livery and cognizance of covetous∣nesse, when it neglects what love requires, and is either against religion, or justice, or charity, those that stick not to trespasse on any duty of love,
I will mention all under that name, are deeply guilty, 1. When men feare not to trespasse on the love of God, and of holy duties, love worldly things so, as they will dispense with the love of God, trample on Gods backe, breake all rules of piety, rather than not come to his co∣vetousnesse. 2. When a man tramples most unnaturally upon the love of a mans selfe, that which hee oweth to himselfe; he will spend no time on his soule, to feed that, for feare hee should have too little for the world. Nay, hee will starve his soule, and body also, to save char∣ges, that he may grow rich, and scrape toge∣thr these outward things, he cares not though hee pinch himselfe, and those that belong unto him. 3. When the love of the world is predomi∣nant, above the love of his neighbour, that hee can breake the law of justice or charity, break the law of justice, so that he will wrong, de∣fraud, cozen, or cheat his neighbour any way, or dammage him, accounting all to be fish that comes to his net, so it may but feed his co∣vetousnesse: this is an inordinate affection to∣ward riches clearely, the very disease and le∣prosie sticking in his fore-head. And not one∣ly when men breake the law of justice, but when they break the law of charity, that can with-hold what they ought, or might do, or are called upon to do in that way, wither his
hand from giving almes, straiten him from his own flesh, it is death with him to part with any thing; in a word, when he can dispense with the love of God, himselfe, and his neighbour, breaking the duty of love, justice and charity; and all for the love of money; this is a cleare character of inordinatenesse after riches, and worldly things.
LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of Covetousnesse. THus of the description of the na∣ture of covetousnesse; I shall add a word concerning the second. 2. The distribution of it: and so it may receive a distribution, or distinction, three wayes. 1. In regard of the subject. 2. In regard of the state in which it may be. 3. In regard of the degree. I. In regard of the subject, there is a double kinde of covetousnesse. 1. It may be incident to the godly, as a concomi∣tant, being the relick of originall sinne, the seeds of all vices are in him, and so there is a naturall propensity still remaining towards covetousnesse, even in a godly man; but it is but a concomitant, it doth not beare sway at all in him; for in some measure it is subdued and mortified; although it may be somthing, more or lesse, towards predo∣minancy. It may be considered in a godly man
as diligenty opposed, a godly man is upon his watch, if there be any root of bitternesse in him, which inclines him towards covetousnesse, he will watch over it, and oppose and set himselfe against it, he will keep a narrow watch over his soule, because he is conscious of his inclination thereunto. 2. The other kind of covetousnesse is incident to a wicked man, and it is in him predominant, he is a servant, and a slave, he maks it his calling, he gives himselfe over, and subjects himselfe to it, it rules him, for he is wholly bent that way, but this admits of some differency; viz. even in a wicked man it may be sometimes inraged like a flame, with infinite fury, so that it beares downe all before it, sometimes also it may be restrained, there may be restraining grace in a wicked man, that keeps him from exorbitancie, though there is no saving grace, to mortifie it, and so it retaine the same nature of covetousnesse: herein he is like the Foxe; the disposition of Foxe is to devoure when he is in the chaine, yet he devoures not the Lambs, because he is chained; a wicked covetous man may have the same wild dispo∣sition in him, which is naturall, but God may bri∣dle & curb him from acting, and keep him in faire termes, that he is not so outragious as many are. II. Another distinction of covetousnesse is, in regard of the different state of covetousnesse in those persons where it is, godly or wicked men, there is no estate wherein it is, but it is a crime, be it in the lowest estate; 1. Somtimes covetous∣nesse may be criminall, as it may be subservient,
not the maine vice, but a servant to other vices; covetousnesse, as a sin, may serve some other lust, although I cannot denominate covetousnesse to be the ruling sinne, yet it is in a man, and serves his turne, as a side-wind, to serve some other lust. As for example: Sometimes a mans principall sin is pride; now because pride must have some∣thing to maintaine it, and therefore a man must use his covetousnesse as a servant to his pride, to furnish that, to bring him in trappings for his pride, which otherwise would be hungry; pride would starve it selfe without it: this is frequent, men will scrape, and rape, and keep a foule adoe, to oppresse, grate, and grinde the faces of men; yet it is not done principally out of covetousnesse, but rather as an act of pride; covetousnesse being a servant to pride: alas his sinne may not be cove∣tousnesse, he glorieth not in hoarding up money, but he must live at such a rate, in such a fashion, he must have gay cloathes, and he is necessitated to be covetous, not because his inclination is thereun∣to, but because he cannot else support his pride. Another corruption that covetousnesse waits upon, is lust: a man which is given to lust, he can∣not feed his lust without▪ meat and drink, to stuffe the pot, he cannot maintain his harlots, or nourish himself in that sin, nor furnish himself without co∣vetousnesse; and that makes him injurious, to steal from parents, or masters, use any trick of cove∣tousnesse, but it is not out of love thereunto; co∣vetousnesse is not his sin, but a servant to his lust, so that in both these respects covetousnesse may
be in a man, but yet in the estate of a servant. 2. Sometimes also covetousnesse is not onely the criminall, but the capitall vice, which doth ap∣parently denominate a man to be a covetous man, although he may have other vices, yet this is the chiefe, this is his grace, and in this case cove∣tousnesse is a friend to him, it is instead of pride, for he prides himselfe in his great estate, and herein covetousnesse is not a servant to pride, but the very throne of pride, which makes his pride sit higher, he is proud, but upon conceipt of his great heape of money, looking over the shoul∣der of his poore neighbour, and thus a man is proud, but it issues from his bags, his great e∣state, covetousnesse is the maine sinne; so in ma∣ny other kinds a man may instance, wherein co∣vetousnesse is the master-sinne, when a man makes it his glory, and his very trade, to gather a great estate together, not for any use of it, but that he can get such an estate. III. The last distinction of covetousnesse is in regard of the degrees, as all vertues and vices, they are capable of degrees: It may be, in some lesse, in some more, in some it may be hardly discerned, in others so palpable, that it may be felt; there is a sordid base covetousnesse, that all the world may see a man is covetous, he beares it in his fore-head, in every act that he doth, in all his car∣riage and course: Others slily dissemble cove∣tousnesse; are not so sordidly and so basely cove∣tous; but more slily carrie the businesse; men that are inwardly covetous, dissembling the bu∣sinesse,
or, at least, carrying it a great deale better. 2. Now to come briefly to the predicate, or the thing we affirme concerning covetousnesse: there be two things that I have propounded in the point concerning covetousnesse. First, something in regard of it selfe. Second∣ly, something in respect as it stands to us. 1. In regard of it selfe, there be these foure properties of covetousnesse that I shall note. 1. It is a subtill and a slie sinne, hardly discer∣ned, by every man, neither in himselfe, nor others; a man may be in before he is aware; and that ari∣seth partly from a generall ground of vice, because all vices are subtill and slie, they can borrow habits, and dresse themselves in the attyre of ver∣tues; covetousnesse may claime kindred with, and go under the habit of frugality, partly, upon a particular ground, there is something in covetous∣nesse which makes it more hard to be discerned; because there be more faire pleas for this, than for any other sinne in the world: as, to provide for children and posterity, for a mans estate and condition, to support his rank; a thousand things a man may plead for covetousnesse, there is more to be said for that a great deale, than for many o∣ther sinnes, as luxury and riot, uncleanenesse and filthinesse, although they be works of darknesse, and men are ashamed, if they once be discovered de facto to be guilty of them, their mouthes are stopped, but this is a more subtill sinne, and will admit of a great many colours, therefore it walks more close, and is hardly to be discerned:
In this respect it is a point of Christian prudence, to take notice of it, and, by the way, to make use of this: Now there may be these two things de∣duced, for it may be very usefull for practise. 1. Because it is a slie and subtill sinne, I would wish every man, not lightly or rashly to accuse an∣other man of it, and upbraid him with it; but look to his warrant and ground for it, if it be ambigu∣ous, and his actions may admit of a faire constru∣ction, I must not judge him, I know not a mans estate, and many other such like circumstances may fall in, and therefore I may not presently condemne another of covetousnesse. 2. Another point of wisdome, rather more ne∣cessary, is that we should not easily excuse our¦selves, presently blesse not thy selfe, as if thou couldst shun, decline, and avoid all reproof, think∣ing this sinne of covetousnesse concernes not me, it doth not hit me so home; in many things it is hard to prove that which is clearely true: a man cannot by the law prove a man is drunk, unlesse he be so grossely drunk, that he is not able to keepe out of a carts way, and many other signes of a le∣gall proofe, are hard, but yet a conscientious proofe betwixt God and a mans owne conscience, may be discerned: though thy sinne be such a slie sinne as covetousnesse, that another man is loath, hap∣pily, to charge it upon thee, remember it is a slie sinne, and may lie at the heart, suspect thy selfe therefore, and do not easily excuse it. 2. It is an universall and generall sinne, largely dispersed, our Saviours words implie so much,
therefore sith he, take heed, and beware; there is a double caution, as if he had said, you had need to watch, and to looke narrowly to it, it is a slie sin, a Jugler, that will cast a thousand mists before your eyes: and withall, it implies that it is a gene∣rall sinne, I speake to all of you, saith our Saviour to his Disciples, and others also, as if this were a ge∣nerall root of bitternesse all the world over; and in truth it is so, a man may see it universally: for, 1. There is no ranck or sort of men, which are altogether free. 1. Wicked men, some seeme to walke contra∣ry to it, in prodigalitie; yet either in predominan∣cie, or subserviencie, scarce a wicked man but he is covetous; he which is prodigall must scrape un∣justly to maintaine that. 2. Godly men are not altogether free, there are the relickes of this corruption in originall sin, and it sheweth it selfe even in them; godly men may doe it under pretence of religion, they (as he said) are then only godly, when godlinesse is spar∣ing, and frugall: many men are against drunken∣nesse in their families, because it spends their e∣states, under a vizor of godlinesse they keep men sober; so that a man may pretend religion, and yet within have a root of covetousnesse. II. It is in all sorts and ranckes of men. 1. Poore men think they are not capable of it, and yet notwithstanding, their desires may be as large as hell, there may be as much covetousnesse in a poore man, as in a rich man. 2. Rich men it is evident that they are excee∣ding
obnoxious to it, the having of much, increas∣eth the desire of having of more. 3. It is to be found among all callings, the Ci∣tizen, the Countrey-man, the Trades-man, the Gentleman, the Minister, the Lawyer, all callings, whether Civill or Ecclesiasticall, even Church∣men may be subject to covetousnesse, it is a dis∣ease that every ranck may be infected withall. 4. In regard of every mans condition, there is no sex nor age free, those to whom it belongs to take the care of families, women also as they are more impotent, their affections are more inordi∣nate, and so they are more unreasonably covetous: in all ages it is, although it be more rare in youn∣ger age, covetousnesse is not so proper thereto, youth is not free, but old age especially. III. It is also a tenacious sinne, deeply rooted, and therefore not easily laid downe, of our owne ac∣cord, a thousand to one, if a man lay it downe of his owne accord, to have so much goodnesse of himselfe as to strip himselfe of this vice, not one of a thousand doth it, no nor is it easily allayed or bea∣ten downe, not by those meanes by which vices may be cured. There are three things which may cure any vice. First, the authority of religion. Secondly, the waight of reason. Thirdly, the tract of time. 1. The best curing is, when the authoritie of re∣ligion will do it, if when a man heares the word of God, a man is readie to say, speake Lord for thy servant heares, that man is in a good temper, when he will be beaten from vice by the word of
God, God hath so much authority over his soule, that if hee heare this sinne is displeasing to him, he will owne none of it, but throw it out of his hands, as children many times at the very word of their parents, and this is the best: but covetous∣nesse is so tenacious, and rooted in many, as many words from God will not worke, to get it removed: our Saviour here is faine to use many words and arguments, besides his owne authority his bare word will not doe it. 2 The waight of reason may step in and second religion, shewing the deformitie and basenesse of it, and convincing the conscience, and yet this will not do it: surely that is not a good temper, when men will not be regulated by reason, when it is neither wit nor reason that will make the cure; our Saviour is faine to heape reason upon reason, I dare say, never any thing more larger discoursed of, and more fully convinced, then our Saviour doth here in this Chapter, and in Matthew, and yet all reason will not doe it, not beat it downe it was so tenacious, and stickt so closly. 3 Many things, neither authority of religion, nor weight of reason, yet time it self will cure them: love is overcome with time, but time doth not cure covetousnesse, but rather inflame it: the lon∣ger a man is acquainted, the lesse he growes wea∣ry, seeing no inconvenience in this sinne of cove∣tousnesse, although it pinch him a thousand times, and ride him basely, yet (thinks he) it is no such base thing, although indeed it makes a man so sordid and base, that it tramples upon his nature,
and his very excellencies, and makes him a base drudge, and the longer he is in it, the more beast∣like he is, the better he likes it: and whereas age cures many distempers, time when it comes to end, frees a man, being wearie, and having runne themselves out of breath, with their foolish waies; but covetousnes growes upon a man in his age, the nearer a man growes to the earth, the greedier he is after the earth, his mouth will be full of earth one day, and yet quo minor via, eo plus viaticum, the lesse way he hath to goe, the more tenacious he is. 4. Which is the principall thing, it is a most dangerous sinne, a sinne of a dangerous and a hidi∣ous consequence. I thought now to have demon∣strated it by some places of Scripture, wherein I should set downe the black stampe, and fearefull name that this sinne hath, so fearefull that it should make every man shie of it, and abhorre it, yea, the very thoughts of it; for there is not a blacker sinn in all the booke of God, in some respects, of an ordinary morall sinne, then this sinne of cove∣tousnesse. Some examples I should give, I shall briefly touch some of them, besides many negative exam∣ples which Divines doe observe: there is not any one man in Scripture which was noted for a god∣ly man, which hath ever beene tainted with this sinne of covetousnesse; not any one example, though you may meet with examples of many sins, yet with none of this: Noah was touched with drunkennesse, David with murder and adulterie, Peter denyed his master, we shall not meet with
any one instance, that the Scripture approves for a godly man, that was ever tainted with this sinne, it is so little kin to godlinesse: not that I will say, that there never was any; yet it shewes, it is very farre from pietie and Christianitie, from the way thereof: and those affirmative examples that we have of any that were covetous, we shall see they are set downe unto us, to shew, that they are most contemptible persons, as the most vile and odious persons to be abhorred. I had thought also to have shewed it by ground of reason: briefly in ge∣nerall, to touch it but in a word, referring the main of this, the application, to the next time. There be two things, by which a man may see the dan∣ger and follie of this sinne of covetousnesse. 1. It opposeth all the good of nature, and all the good of grace, it checks all graces, and the wayes there∣of, and the whole Spirit of grace, it casts a dampe and chokes a man from hearing the Word, from doing the worke of the Lord, and thriving by the meanes of grace, it stifles every grace in the soule, the groweth of it, it chokes all the good of nature, so that a man that is tainted with this sinne, hath not comm humanity, no bowels of compassion, as though he were made of flint, it doth so farre estrange him from the power of the excellency of grace, that it degrades him of all the sweetnesse of nature. 2. The second generall thing is, that it expos∣eth him to all kinds of wickednesse, there is no evill, whether of sin or punishment, but covetousnesse ex∣poseth a man to.
1. It leads a man into a thousand snares, hee which is once set on with a greedy desire after the world, will not sticke to commit any sinne in the world, to run upon the swords point, hee is drawn into the trap by the baite: suppose a man hold a peece of gold at the end of a sack; the Divell hee doth so, a covetous man he will creepe into the sack to be catched by the Divell, and cast into hell, while he goeth into the sack after the gold. It exposeth a man to all kind of punishments, both because it takes away all that watchfulnesse, that men observe not the season of danger: hence it is, that our Saviour wisheth them, to take heed of being overcome with surfeting, and drunkennes, and the cares of this life, lest that day come on them unawares: a man which is laden not only with drinke, but with lu∣xury, he grows wanton, and so minds not when evill approacheth to avoid the storme; this is the drie drunkennesse, the cares of this life, if a man be overburdened, busie, plodding after the world, it makes him forgetfull of himselfe. I remember a Story, of a City in Sicilia being beseiged by the Romanes, the maine experienced and most artifici∣all man in the City was one Archimedes, he used many devices, and did many wonders, but at last for all his stratagems the City was surprized, the Souldiers brake in, and great meanes was made to finde out Archimedes, at last, the Souldiers hearing where he was, brake into his house, and he was in his Studie, he never tooke any notice that the Ci∣tie was taken, when the Souldiers opened his Stu∣dy doore, they found him busie, drawing lines in the
dust, like some Mathematician, the Souldiers stood still looking on him, at last, in scorne and disdaine, one of the Souldiers, seeing him so barbarous, and inhumane, drew his sword and killed him, much against the Generals minde: Although God be∣seige us round about, though the Church be taken and surprized, though a mans owne house bee in danger, yet if a man be busie, drawing lines in the dust after worldly things, he will take no notice of any thing, nor use any meanes to prevent it, see no danger, and so not be able to avoid danger.
LUKE, Chap. 12. Ver. 15. SERM. III. And he said unto them, take heed and beware of Covetousnesse. THere was one point of Doctrine that we propounded out of these words, and it was this; that cove∣tousnesse was a sinne, subtile, uni∣versall, tenacious, and dangerous: cautiously to be avoided by all, and carefully to be watched and warded against. Two things wee propounded in the handling of it. First, to shew what was meant by covetousnes, which we have already done. Secondly, to speake something concerning the predicate, what we affirme concerning it: which we came to the last time: briefly to give you the heades. In respect of it self, covetousnesse, foure things we affirmed. First, that it was a subtile sinne, not easily dis∣cerned.
Second, a universall sinne, scarce any, more orSERM. III. lesse, but are covetous, all are tainted with it. Thirdly, that it was a tenacious sin, that sticks fast, and cleaves close unto us, &c. Covetousnesse is so revitted into men, that we can hardly get it out. Fourthly, it is a sin of dangerous consequence and great importance: I shall only a little inlarge upon that, it being the maine thing in the point; I will illustrate that, partly by Scripture, partly by reason. I mentioned then, (though I shall not name all) that there were many pregnant Texts of Scri∣pture, which represent unto us, the dangerous na∣ture and condition of this sinne: Colossians 3. 5. Mortifie therefore your members which are upon the earth, fornication, uncleannesse, inordinate affection, evill concupiscence, and covetousnesse which is idola∣try; marke there, how covetousnesse is yoked, and what is the consequence of it, although it be a farre more subtile sinne, hardly discerned, yet it is rancked with fornication, the sinnes that all the world cries shame of, the Spirit of God rancks it among those: nay more then so, it sets a speciall brand on that above all the rest, many doe pe∣nance for fornication, scarce did ever any for cove∣tousnesse, the world takes no notice of such per∣sons, the world hath set adulterie in a white sheet, but God himselfe hath stamped a black brand on it, covetousnesse which is idolatry; it is true, there is no sin that carrieth the heart inordinately towards any creature, but it may be termed idolatry: the harlot is the lustfull mans idoll, he makes an idoll
of her: preferment and honour is the ambitiousSERM. III. mans idoll, it leades him to it, but yet we doe not find that the Scripture doth expresly brand any o∣ther sinne, which is not directly idolatry, with that name, but only covetousnesse: I conceive, to omit other things, there is one thing, as the particular reason of it, which is very considerable (for there is a generall reason for other sinnes,) which is this; what a man preferres before God, that hee makes as his God, exalts it in the throne of God, and therefore for that generall reason, covetous∣nesse is called idolatry: But there is a speciall evill in covetousnesse which makes it idolatry in a deeper dye, a covetous man besides that in the ge∣nerall respect, his money is his idoll in the particu∣lar, he puts trust in it, he hath a confidence in it, and that is the greatest honour that God can have, when we can put trust, and secure our selves, and beare our selves out upon Gods protection, and in that respect, there is a great deale of propriety in those words to this sinne: for which things sake the wrath of God commeth upon the children of disobedi∣ence, vers. the 6. It is not only true of other sinnes, which may be taken notice of, but to provoke God in this secret sinne, which the world takes not so much notice of, for this thing the wrath of God commeth upon the children of disobedience. One remarkable place wee have in the first of Timothy 6. 9, 10. But they that will be rich fall into a temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtfull lusts, &c. For the love of money is the root of all evill, which while some coveted after, they have er∣red
from the faith, and peirced themselves throughSERM. III. with many sorrowes: this is as full a place as I can well conceive: those that will be rich, that are mad after the world, they are in a most dangerous condition: such men cast themselves upon a thou∣sand dangers, every expression, every word is full of weight, I will not take it now on me, to dilate at full unto you on them, I will leave it to your owne thoughts: It is the root of all evill, I will only speak of this, it is true, any sinne which is predominant, may be the universall root of all evill in that man, so that it may be applyed farther then the matter of covetousnesse, but yet there is something em∣phaticall in covetousnesse above other things, that precipitates a man into all evill, for that man which is set upon gaine, will not stick upon any e∣vill course that may advance him that way; it per∣verts the eyes of the wise, makes them blind, that they can see no danger: thus we see, that it is the root of all those evills, which do arise in that man which is bent upon covetousnesse; but there bee some other men which goe not upon the root of covetousnesse, but upon some other grounds, and so may breake into many evils. And therefore there is a caution to be observed in these words, all kinds of evill, which is a large word, for covetousnesse will not put a man into all kinds of evill, if you take it in the strict significati∣on, for it will not put him on prodigality, not in an ordinary course, I say, further then to advance covetousnesse, unicuique aliquis est sumptus qui vult facere lucrum, a man must bee at cost to
gaine oftentimes: but to adde another place.SERM. III. Another place to prove this, is in the 16 of Luke verse 14. And the Pharisees also who were covetous heard all these things, and derided him: A covetous heart is so farre out of frame towards any good, from any possibilitie of recovering him to a good estate, that the meanes of grace are but a scorne and derision to him: our Saviour him∣selfe, I dare bee bold to say, the proudest and most▪ captious man in the world could not ex∣cept against his Sermon: happily in any mans Sermon there may bee some infirmitie or weak∣nesse, so that a man may except against it, but our SAVIOURS Sermon was not obno∣xious to any such thing: And you see cove∣tousnesse made our SAVIOUR himselfe deri∣ded; when men deride wisdome it selfe, this is a high pitch, but covetousnesse doth this: Therefore the Psalmist makes a prayer to GOD, Psalme 119. verse 36. Incline my heart O Lord to thy Testimonies, and not to covetousnesse: im∣plying, there is an incompossibilitie betweene regarding GODS Word, and covetousnesse: if a man bee inclined to covetousnesse, hee is cleane out of the way from obedience to GODS commands, they are put in the ballance one a∣gainst an other, and David therefore here de∣sires GOD that hee would incline his heart to keepe his Testimonies, and therefore that hee would keepe him uprightly, free from cove∣tousnesse. 1 Corinthians Chap. 6. vers. 10. compared with
Ephesians Chap. 5 — verse 5. you shall finde that co∣vetousnesSERM. III. bars a man out of Heaven, there is the very same observation which I propounded in the first place, Know you not that the unrighte∣ous shall not inherit the Kingdome of God, nor Thieves, nor covetous: observe, that covetous persons are rancked with uncleane persons, and with Thieves, they goe altogether, for they are no better then Thieves on the High-way in GODS estimate, and shall as much bee barred out of Heaven, how smooth a sinne soever it seemes to bee, such cannot inherit the King∣dome of God, 1 Corinthians 5. 10. 11, Not alto∣gether with the fornicators of this world, or with the covetous, &c. It is such an odious sinne and so ab∣horred of God, that God would have all men to abandon it, but especially his owne peo∣ple, and therefore amongst other persons which are vicious and sinnfull, hee warnes the faith∣full not to eat with a covetous man: and there∣fore in the 11. verse, If any man that is called a brother, bee a fornicator, or covetous, &c. with such an one no not to eat: It is strange to see that they are so contagious, and loathsome, the Scripture saith no more of a Leprous person, but onely, that he should bee separated from the Congregation, there is as much said of a co∣vetous person, one which is in the Church, and professeth the Christian Religion, as for other men of the world, this is not meant of them here, but if any man which is a Saint of GOD bee covetous, with such a
man not to eat, they are excommunicated out ofSERM. III. the societie of Gods people, covetousnesse doth not only barre a man out of Heaven, but it barrs a man out of heaven upon earth, from the com∣munion of Saints, and also from all things ho∣nourable in a Common-wealth, or Church: co∣vetousnesse makes a man unfit to rule, Exo. 18. 21. Moreover thou shalt provide out of all the people, a∣ble men, such as feare God, men of truth, hating co∣vetousnesse, and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands: a man is not in Gods choise capable of the magistracy, if he be covetous: and there is ve∣ry great reason for it, for that man that is a slave to his lust, is not fit for that place, it is not to be ex∣pected there will bee justice done by him, if he sag too much upon the purse side: for that will keep down the, ballance of justice that it shall not goe right. A man is not capable of honour in the Church, if he be covetous, 1 Timoth. 3. 3. Not given to Wine, no striker, not greedy of filthie lucre, but patient, not a brawler, nor covetous: A Pastor or teacher of the Church of God, should feed the flock of Christ, and rule well, and therfore should be free from covetousnesse, nay, and hate covetousnesse; for they that are covetous, are like to looke more, and aime more at their owne advancement, how they may advance themselves, and at their owne gaine, then at Gods glory, and the good of soules: and therefore not fit to governe in a Church. 2. Besides these testimonies of Scripture, let me adde some examples, some I mentioned the
last day on the negative part, that whereas with o∣therSERM. III sins some of the Saints of God were tainted, as Noah was tainted with drunkennes, David with murder and adulterie: it is observable, that not one that beares the name of a reall godly man, is touched with covetousnesse. I will only mention those affirmative examples, two or three of them, whereby we shall see, that they are as bad as bad may be, which are stained with this vice of cove∣tousnesse, Laban was a covetous man, one that the Scripture brands for a base vile person, and sets an ignominious note upon him: Nabal, for that was the Anagram of his name: Nabal the churle is mentioned with infinite disgrace to be a covetous man. There is a command given for Kings that they should not bee covetous, and of all men in the world, they have most use of money, for the sup∣port of their state, and the defence of their King∣domes, and yet they are commanded not to be co∣vetous. Ahab his covetous humour after Naboths Vineyard, is mentioned in Scripture as the root of the ruine of him and his familie, and posterity, there were other sins which followed, but cove∣tousnesse was the root from which all sprung; we reade of one in the new Testament, Demas a for∣ward man once in religion, but when once hee came to imbrace the world, and cleave to that, it was in him a root of bitternesse, he apostatized and fell from Christianity, leaped through all that he had taken upon him before hand. 2. There bee two grounds or reasons of the
point, taken from the nature of it.SERM. III I. Because covetousnesse is a sin which oppos∣eth all good. 1. It chokes and checks the growth and very beginning of all that is good in a man. I might illu∣strate this by divers places of Scripture; it stoppeth the good of grace, and all the growth of any excel∣lencie in grace, it is those Thornes which stop and choke the growing to perfection, as I have some∣times expressed. The Hedge-hog in the Fable comes to the Connie-berrie in stormie weather and desires harbour, he promiseth faire to lie qui∣et and the like, but when once hee is entertained, hee never leaves pricking, till hee hath thrust his host out of doores: so it is with covetousnesse, it hath many faire pleas and pretences to get enter∣tainement in a godly heart, it tels him he will be but a frugall steward, but if once it be admit∣ted, it will never leave till it hath thrust out all pietie, and quenched all godlinesse, and heavenly mindednes, all will be eaten up with covetousnes. 2. The very good of nature is exceedingly chok∣ed by covetousnesse, all bowels of compassion are stopt towards our owne flesh and blood, there is no noble nor generous thoughts in such persons, they are not ingenuous, but so sordid, that as rust consumeth iron, so covetousnesse consumeth the substance of naturall perfection, it eates out all. Naturalists observe, that those places where there are Mines of silver or gold, they are all barren, af∣fording nothing for the refreshing of man or beast, bearing no graine nor crop; and besides
that which is worse, they are haunted with Di∣vels,SERM. III. I am sure it is true of a black spirit which is addicted to covetousnesse, it is not only barren of all good, but it exposeth them in whom it is, to the very possession of the Divell, to be led by a base and sordid spirit in all their actions. 2 As it opposeth all good, so it exposeth to all kinds of evill: there be two sorts of evils; the evill of sinn, and the evill of punishment, which attends sin, and covetousnesse layeth a man open to both. 1 There is no evill of sinne, but a covetous man will doe; the Divell hath hold of him in that vice, and he is at the Divels service for any kind of sin, to draw his purse: there is nothing in the world as I remember is more opposite to covetousnesse in nature then luxury and wantonnesse, a covetous man is temperate of his owne humour, yet cove∣tousnesse prostrates to the basest uncleannesse for hire or gaine that is: the whole spheare of the commands of God doth appeale covetousnesse as the breach of them all: it were no difficult thing (though I have no intention to inlarge so much) to shew that there is no evill but covetousnesse di∣sposeth unto; it takes a man from all good, and prostrates him to all evill. 2 And consequently there is no punishment but it layes a man open to: To mention but a word; the wrath of God is the fountaine of all punish∣ment which comes for other siunes, and cove∣tousnesse exposeth a man to the wrath of God, as I have shewed before: but more expresly see Psalme 10. 3. For the wicked bosteth of his hearts de∣sire,
and blesseth the covetous whom the Lord abhor∣reth: it brings Gods wrath, it brings the scorne and derision of men upon a man, there is scarce a∣ny one vice so contemptible to all men in generall, as covetousnesse is, it is the argument of a play to be jeered at on a Stage: which is an argument, that although it carrieth a generall applause with some, yet most men fall foule on covetousnesse, the world spits in his face, hee is jeered at by all men; it exposeth to all kind of judgements, which come either from the wrath of God, or from the hatred of man: I mentioned one thing the last time, and I will but only mention it now; to take up where we left, and make some addition where it is necessary: It makes a man unfit to observe Gods judgements, and so to avoid them, and take care to shun them. A covetous man in the most dangerous time, is so choaked with the cares of the world, that hee mindes not any danger, but plods on till he is taken in the very snare, And thus much concerning covetousnesse, the predicate that is affirmed of it, in regard of it selfe: the other thing I shall mention in a word, and so come to the application. 2. In respect of us, it is a sinne to be avoided by all men, and by all meanes. 1. By all men, common men, that have but any sparke of ingenuitie, must of necessity abstaine from this, and preserve themselves that they bee not foiled with this sinne. But Christian men, which pretend to be the Disciples of Christ, must shunne it, especially it being a thing furthest off
from pietie and Christianitie, there is nothing so unsuitable to, nor so incompatible with Religion: and therefore fugiat hoc opprobrium a nobis, it is a shame that a Christian man should be liable to bee upbraided with covetousnesse, and not to have a faire answer for it, because it is scandalous to Reli∣gion and dishonourable to God: nay it hinders the progresse of Religion, therefore it is to be avoid∣ed by all men. 2. By all meanes: our Saviour useth two words here , first , looke well to thy selfe, as if he had said, watch and take notice of thy self, lest thou doe slip, looke narrowly to your courses and wayes, lest you be overtaken with this sinne, and this is not enough , but , it is a place of danger, danger lyeth therein: as you would in times of danger redouble your watch in the Citie, so here should be a strong ward kept, to arme and fortifie, antidote and strengthen your selves with all the strength you can against the danger of this sinne, and this ariseth naturally from the former; for if covetousnesse be so dangerous in it self, then it concernes all men by all meanes to watch and ward themselves against it. But I shall passe to the application. If covetous∣nesse be so dangerous a sinne, it concernes all men then by all meanes to watch and ward themselves against it: many things might be spoken by way of application, but I passe briefe over many: as, For Conviction, many men may bee arraigned that stand convicted of this vice, if men would well waigh it, and draw out the description of it,
it would fall point blancke upon a great many men which thinke themselves free. 2. For reproofe of them, as being in a foule fault, it may be fouler then they are aware of, men are readie to please themselves in it, and plead not guiltie: if they be free from other sinnes, that they can say, I am not like such a man, they take no notice of this, this subtile sinne moves them not, if they come not within the verge of other sinnes, they slight spirituall sinnes, and as they take no no∣tice of them, so neither doe others, for this sinn (as some other sinnes) comes not within the lash of the Churches censure, the covetous man is not found fault withall, no neither is the proud man found faultie, there is no man censured for his pride, or his covetousnesse, the world takes no no∣tice of this sinne: yet if it be a thing so dangerous, here is a just reproofe for them. But I passe over these. 3. It serves for exhortation, partly that every one would, 1. Examine himselfe. I gave sufficient hints, by which a man may try himself, (in my apprehensi∣on) in the description, by which any man may re∣ceive comfort, by applying them to his own heart and wayes, and seeing, whether in some, more, or all of them, he comes not to be obnoxious to this sinne: I shall only give you two or three cautions, in which others may examine themselves. 1. Be jealous and suspicious of thy selfe, it is a sub∣tile sinne, very generall, and universally spread. I know it is reported of Luther, that though hee
found the roote almost of all sinnes in him, yet heSERM. III never found any inclination to covetousnesse, hee was free from that. But for our selves, and our better examination, let us not be secure; but be a little suspicious and jealous that there bee no such propension in us towards it; for there may be, al∣though we are not aware of it. And therefore for your better consideration, take this along with you, upon your examination be not confident, bee a little jealous and suspicious, that there may be a propension in thee towards it: upon tryals take not up foolish conceits upon frugalitie, but be jealous to scan thy heart in this kinde, whether it be inor∣dinate in its propension towards the world: I have given sufficient directions for this already. 2. What you do in this kinde, do it conscienci∣ously, not to cosen thy selfe, but as in the presence of God, and as you will answer him. I have told you that rule alreadie, I would have no man light∣ly to charge another, nor easily to justifie himself, and therefore examine your selvs conscienciously, not as you can stand with the judgement of men by outward appearance, but judge as conscience judges, and as you think you may stand and beare out at the day of judgement, at that strict account you must then give. 3. Labour to bring your mindes and heart to be ingenuous, not to studie shifts and devices, to beare up thy reputation and credit, and so to free thy selfe from it. O it is a rare thing to have an ingenuous spirit, such as that, if a man be not free from a fault, yet he will not be readie to defend it,
but sweetly and ingenuously to acknowledge it, it is impossible but he that stands upon his points, may be guiltie: I could give you divers touches thereof. Many men pretend it is not covetousnesse, but frugalitie, providing for posterity, this is no inge∣nuous spirit, nor plainnesse of heart? Why then dost thou neglect thy child, and bestowes not good breeding on her or him, but spare a penie and spoile the soule of thy child, and the bodie also? Why art thou so base, if all be for thy child, as to marrie her, and not to give a portion with her, when all comes to tryall, thou hast no ingenuous spirit, be ingenuous therefore, I say, doe not foo∣lishly cosen thy selfe, but bee willing to see what thou dost see, and baffle not thy selfe with foolish pretences. 4. Suppose the matter be a thing doubtfull, I beseech you stand not upon points with God, to avoide covetousnesse, be generous, be farre from covetousnesse, shun all apparances of covetousnes, be noble and generous minded, keep a broad dif∣ference and a vast latitude from covetousnesse, if you would bee cleare, make it appeare, be not ob∣noxious to suspicion, with hinching and pinching and such basenesse, which makes others, and up∣on probable reason and good ground, thinke that indeed you are so; but if you would not be tainted with this dangerous sinne, doe the contrary, be so farre from covetousnesse, that you will rather bee generously magnificent, according to the propor∣tion of your estate, and the nature of the thing: but
this is not that I intend, this is the first branch of the exhortation, that men would examine them∣selves, 2. I desire that men would humble themselves, and see their corruption, and bee affected truly with sorrow for it, even such sorrow as becom∣meth Christians, in that humility of spirit which should bee in us, upon every taking our selvs nap∣ping in every sinne? dost thou upon examination find thou art not free from covetousnesse? do not thou stand on thy pantables, as they say, but make amends, humble thy selfe before God, acknow∣ledge the basenesse and vilenesse of thy spirit, that thou art guiltie of that sinne which is abominable to God, hatefull to men, being a scorne and deri∣sion to them: and, 3. I desire that men would reform themselvs, stay not heere, but take out a new lesson, make progresse to reformation, recover thy self, or if thou be already free, labour to prevent it, in the whole latitude, in all the three species which I mentioned in the application, in our judgements, understanding, not thinking too high of riches, in our affections, not cleaving inordinately to them, in our actions, bee not too thoughtfull and carefull for worldly things to be talking and breathing of earth continually, having nothing at all to speak of but riches. There is a part of the mouth which the naturalists call the coelum, heaven, it is the up∣per roofe of the mouth, there be many men which have no heaven at all in their mouths, no upper part, but all lower, talking still of those base and
lower things, avoid it therefore in your talke, in your actions, and in your deeds, be not covetous in scraping in riches, having, nor saving, especi∣ally let it not carry thee inordinately either to impious courses, to trample upon God, or unjust or uncharitable towards thy neighbour, or thy self, thy bodie to pinch that, or thy soul to starve that, or to those about thee, to carry thy self injuriously towards them, in one word, set thy selfe upon re∣formation, against all the spices of covetousnesse. For the further prosecution of this, to cut off all other things, I shall only propound those things that may be antidotes against this sinne, and reme∣dies to cure this sinne: both to recover those which have been touched with this dangerous sinne, and to prevent it for the future: I take them both, and for them both there be two sorts of helpes. 1. Something habituall, to take care to furnish thy soule with, that may lock it up, and take up the roome, that there be no roome for covetous∣nesse in the heart. 2. Something that is actuall, to be done by a renewed act, and continually used, for the preven∣tion and the recovering a man from it. I shall but mention the former, for those things which are habituall. 1. In generall, labour to establish thy heart with grace, for vice and sinne is never cast out kindly nor cer∣tainly, but by the introduction of that which is contrary, and that is grace: therefore if you would emptie your hearts of sinne, we must clavum clavo pellere, as they say, drive out sinne, with driving in
of grace, as one wedge, if wee would get it out of a hard peece of wood, we must drive in another: so nothing can free us from sinne but the introdu∣ction of grace: what can take off darknesse from the face of the earth? nothing in the world but light; so, what can drive out sinne? it must bee grace brought into the soule, otherwise a man may do, as when a man reproves a fault to amend his brother, sometimes hee casts out one Divell with another, so the only true way of driving out sinne in generall, and so this sin of covetousnesse in particular, must be by grace brought into the soule, to have a heart established full of gracious thoughts, inclinations and affections, I shall menti∣on some more especially. There bee foure paire of graces in particular, which are wonderfull conducing, and effectuall for the dispossessing of this Divell of covetous∣nesse. The first paire (for I shall joyne two together) are Humilitie and Temperance, or sobrietie: it may bee some will thinke, those two bee farre off, but I tould you in the explication, that covetousnesse is sometimes in an estate of egencie, it is master: sometimes also it is in the estate of a servant, it waires upon some other sinne: there are two other sinnes that covetousnesse doth frequently wait up∣on (when a man is not overmastered with cove∣tousnesse, that is not his direct sinne) there may be other sinnes that will use the service of cove∣tousnesse, have it as a servant: to instance, cove∣tousnesse is a servant to pride, and lust, and to in∣temperancie,
now if a man be of an humble spirit, it will kill these lusts, a man would not aime at a high estate: for the most part men aime at great things rather for pride, because hee would beare a high port in the world, he would be , as it is said of him in the Acts, some great one in the world out of pride, that makes them scrape from this man and from the other, it makes them set upon any in∣jurious course to advance his pride: therfore if any one would keep prided own, let him learn humility and if a man would keep pride under, that would be a good means to suppresse his covetousnesse. 2. Temperance and sobrietie is another excellent meanes to keepe under covetousnesse: if I bee a temperate sober man, and doe not affect either ex∣cesse in diet or apparell, but am content with or∣dinary dyet and cloaths, and to go in a sober way, what need I tumble so much in the world? a little will serve for necessitie, all is for the back and the bellie, covetousnesse plunges a man into a thou∣sand inconveniences, it makes them lay about them infinitely in the world, because they must live at a luxurious rate, they must goe so fine in cloaths, and have such diet: whereas it might bee as advantagious every other way; a man might drive a trade within a lesser compasse, so contract it, it would turne to more advantage, and to his greater glory, if he made his pride exceed in no∣thing but in intemperancie or greedinesse after the best things, this would cleane turne the channell another way. 2. The second paire of graces, which, I would
have you to fix, increase and cherish in your hearts is the due love of God, and the love of thy neighbour, and this will be an excellent weapon to keepe un∣der covetousnesse, for if a man do love God, and love his neighbour as he ought, at least it will take him off from all basenesse of covetousnesse, hee will not be base to the service of God, pinching his soule, forbearing to allow any thing to the ad∣vancement of the kingdome of Christ, nor will he bee injurious to oppresse and defraud his neigh∣bour, if he be not altogether for himselfe, for cove∣tousnesse ariseth extremely from selfe-love, when a man regards not God, nor his neighbour, hee cares not whom he pinches from, so hee may ad∣vance himselfe, now the love of God and of his neighbour will be a great preservative, and there fore labour to ingraff those affections in thy heart. 3. The third payre of graces which I would have you to labour for, is heavenly mindednesse and contentednesse, if a man be heavenly minded, that his face is towards Ierusalem, towards heaven, if that be the great designe of his life; it will infinite¦ly keepe him off from covetousnesse, he will not stoop to those base things as rich men do, because he hath more high thoughts, and a more generou aime, his mind is not set on the world, but on hea¦ven. what needs he trouble himself with the cares of the world, which hath placed all his happinesse in heaven. And so for a contented spirit, as the Apostle speakes, godlinesse with contentednesse is great gaine: and for he which can frame himselfe to a contented spirit, a little will suffice, if he have
but food and raiment, meere necessities, a content∣edSERM. III spirit can rest quiet, and not restlesly reach af∣ter great things in the world. 4. Labour to get and to cherish both faith and spirituall wisdome: it would be an excellent preser∣vative in this case, if a man get faith, a true and lively faith, and adherence to Christ, bring Christ into thy heart, the love of Christ, and the prizing of him, and adherence to Christ, will infinitely make Dagon fall; as Dagon fell before the Arke, so this breakes the neck of all sinnes, all will fall to the ground, and particularly this base sinne, faith in the assurance of Gods promise, that I believe the promises of God in his word, that he will not leave, forsake, or faile them in their necessaries, which are carefull not to faile in dutie towards him: this faith will bee an admirable antidote a∣gainst covetousnesse. Spirituall wisdome also is a great helpe, for the root of all the poyson is not any defect in the acti∣ons or affections, but in the understanding; if men were wise to know the great good, and to desire what was most desirable and advantagious for them, they were then in the right way, to put themselves towards that great thing: but if men bee foolish and thinke all lieth in wealth, nothing else is worth talking of but wealth, nothing will make a man really good, which hath any feeling with it, but so much wealth, if a man be thus poy∣soned with these foolish conceits, he will despise and undervalue all the wisdome, and all the godli∣nesse, and the excellencie that is in any man, mea∣suring
all excellencie according to a mans estateSERM. III as indeed the world goes too farre this way, all Magistracie is chosen by estate, all reputation by estate, these things do secretly poyson, and as the wiseman saith, that estate will never excell in ver∣tue, in which there is a high price set on riches: if men would get spirituall wisdome to discerne the excellency of things, and to moderate a mans selfe according to the worth of things, it would bee a good meanes to keepe backe the overweaning af∣ter wealth, which hinders the growth of goodnes, and advances covetousnesse. There be these habituall graces, that must bee gotten into the heart. 2. I shall give you a briefe touch of the other branch. There be some other things actuall to be done, which are of great importance: I will men∣tion all in foure steps and degrees, and but meerely name them. 1. We must watch. 2. We must pray. 3. We must strive. 4. We must meditate upon those things which may give us victorie. 1. Wee must watch against, and take heed lest we be surprized and drawn unawares to it. 2. We must also pray against it, many sinnes we fall into, because we beg not Gods assistance, if we would pray ingenuously, and sincerely, as Da∣vid did, Lord incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousnesse: if men make their daily prayers unto God, especially those which finde themselves prone thereto, as every one should do against his master sinne, it would be an excellent
meanes to preserve the soule from this sinne. 3. We must strive against it, labour to mortifie these our members on earth, and this amongst the rest, we must strive continually and wrastle against this corruption, not cherish it, and make a darling of it, and cockering it, because the gaine is sweet, but because the sinne is odious, therefore we must strive against it. 4. Lastly, we must meditate upon these things which are conducible to establish the soule against covetousnesse, I will runne them over in generall because I cannot go through the particulars. 1. Consider the events of it, which I named formerly, if we did but consider how much it op∣poseth all good: it choakes all gracious thoughts and all the means of grace: the very word of God is choaked, when a man is brim full of this errour, then Gods word cannot enter: it opposeth and choakes all the good of nature, a man becomes like to a beast, or Tiger, he hath no bowels of compas∣sion, a man hath no noble ingenuous thoughts in him that is covetous, hee is all blurred with dirt, and the image of God is blotted out. 2. Consider how it exposeth to all kindes of e∣vill both of sinne and punishment: first, of sinne a∣gainst God, and against his neighbour; yea, against himselfe, he is injurious to all: and as it exposeth to all evill of sinne, so secondly, to all evill of pu∣nishment, to the wrath of God, to the scorne of men, to all punishments, in this life and the life to come, it barres a man out of heaven, and from any reputation on earth, not capable by Gods law of
any excellencie, neither (if all were well) should be by mans law. And for those arguments, I should have propounded which our Saviour men∣tions in this discourse immediately after the Text, I know not any in sacred or prophane writings, where it is so admirably pressed as it is here, and in those paralell places which I mentioned before. Now there bee two steps and degrees of those arguments. First, hee labours to beat it out of him that di∣sturbed him. Secondly, out of his Disciples. First, our Saviour deales more generally with those of his ranck, he which came to disturbe him in his heavenly course: and then hee proceeds to other arguments to take off his Disciples. In generall this he saith in this very verse, that men of great estates in the world, are mistaken, a mans life or happines consists not in riches, a man may be a happie man although hee bee not a rich man, but he cannot be a happie man by vertue of that he is a rich man, a mans happines and excellency lieth not in riches, that is the argument in generall. And something in particular is mentioned al∣so in the parable which is remarkable: as, First, riches will not free a man from cares, riches brings its cares with it: here is a rich man, his ground bore a great crop, yet hee was to stu∣die what he was to doe, he was full of cares and thoughts what to doe, how to dispense and im∣ploy his riches: they are so farre from emptying his heart of cares as that they fill a mans heart with
new cares, how to secure them, and to dispose of them, it settles a thousand other thoughts in the heart; so that they free not from cares. 2. Nay, it brings not so much as delight, soule thou hast much goods laid up for many yeares, it brings not a man to this, it doth not secure a man in a way of delicacie, that a man may injoy his pleasure and doe his will, which is the ground of a mans aimes, his end which he aimes at: if I had an e∣state I might eat, and drink, and sleep, and then do what I would, this is not the thing. 3. It doth not bring a man to wisdome, nor ar∣gue a wise man: for there is a counterbuffe to that (thou foole) that man that thought himselfe so jolly a wise man, because hee had so great an e∣state, our Saviour gives him here but the foole, it doth not put a man into the possession of wisdom, nor argueth any wisdome, to get a great estate: these are arguments in briefe of our Saviours dis∣course to him that interrupted him. 2. There are other arguments that he used to his Disciples, which are proper only to Christi∣ans. I shall give you but a briefe touch of the same. There is a double care, a worldly care, and a hea∣venly care, our Saviour gives a touch of both, speakes something of either, for both will serve for the beating downe of coveoussse. 1. And concerning woldly cares, I will tell you what our Saviour saith concerning them. 1. Worldly cares they are more then brutish, it is a senslesse thing to trouble a man with the cares
of the world our Saviour shewes that the beasts are provided for by God, those that neither sow nor reape, and therefore is more then brutish to be over carefull. 2. It is altogether fruitlesse and bootlesse, there is no boote nor benefit which comes thereby, not one man by his care can adde one cubit to his life, no mans care can make him rich, it is Gods blessing, and not immoderate caring. 3. It is a needlesse care, to trouble a mans self with cares: what need a child of two yeares old take care what he should eat to dinner or supper, or what cloaths he should have? his parents will looke to that: so it is here, God takes care for his children, what need his servants take immoderate and inordinate care? 4. Nay, it is a heathenish care, and a faithlesse care, the Gentiles do those things, they seeke af∣ter them, it is enough for Heathens which have no God, nor any promise made to them, to be so care∣full after these outward things, unlesse a man will shew himselfe worse than a heathen, he must not practise covetousnesse. 5. Lastly, it is very hurtfull. 1. It fetters the heart, and bindes that in chains, for where the treasure is the heart needs must be, it glews a mans heart to the world, and keeps him off from God: and, 2. It hinders the passage of preparation or meeting with God, or expecting the day of Christs comming, we cannot have a glympse of his com∣ming, or be ready to looke for him, if we be puz∣ling
here below, and thus much our Saviour speakes by way of argument against covetousnesse and inordinate cares of this life. 2. In stead of that worldly care, he expresseth the contrary, concerning the care of heavenly things. 1. It is a more easie care, and more easie gaine, in the 1. vers. first seeke the kingdome of God and his righteousnesse, and all these things shall be added un∣to you: all other things which are necessary, will come easily to us without caring: God will cast them into the bargaine as over waight. 2. A man shall have a richer bargaine, what e∣ver other things may bring, it may a great estate, but it cannot make a man a king, nor bring us to a kingdome, feare not little slock, it is your fathers plea∣sure to give you a kingdome. 3. It brings more continued and durable gain. If a man have great store of money in his chests and coffers, thieves may breake in, and a thousand o∣ther things may happen, but if we have treasure in heaven, that brings gaine that we cannot loose: these are the maine things by which our Saviour labours to beat downe covetousnesse in his Disci∣ples, and those that will follow him: there were some other things, I thought to have added. 1. From the consideration of riches it selfe. 1. That they are not so considerable, nor so de∣sireable things. 2. They are not so beneficiall, they will not pre∣serve a man from danger. 3. They are altogether uncertaine, riches will take their wings, when a man hath laboured all
his life long to get riches, he may loose them all at a clap: souldiers, or warre, or fire breakes in, and what hast thou of all thou hadst, all is uncertaine. 4. They are exceeding unprofitable, nay, more then unprofitable. 5. They are dangerous, they breed a thousand vices, as selfe-love, and selfe-confidence: the rich man puts his trust in his riches, in his wedge of gold: so is taken off from God, it breeds pride and puffs up the minde of a man : so that his head stands I know not how farre above his shoulders, it breeds a great deale of licencious∣nesse, men think they may do what they list if they be rich: they are farre off from God, it puts a man into a thousand evill courses, as riches are nothing considerable in them which are so greedy. 2. A competencie, or a moderate estate, (if men would be truly perswaded) is more desirable a thousand times. Agurs condition is the most de∣sireable in the world, Give me neither povertie, nor riches, but feed me with food convenient for me, the best condition and the most desireable, is neither to have great matters; it is a foolish thing to be gree∣dy: nor on the other side to be in extremity. But a moderate and competent estate, such an estate as I have somtimes expressed, is like unto glasse in the windows, that will be the best, which although it keepes out winde and weather, yet it keepes not out the light of the Sunne, the prospect of hea∣ven, such an estate that will keepe a man from the injurie of the world, that a man shall not bee in want, as will keepe out extremitie: that I bee not
anoied with extremitie, is desireable, and not so great an estate, as will keepe out the sunne of Gods countenance, whereas a great estate may do it, it may make us covetous, and such a man is un∣capable for godlines, untractable for the Ministe∣rie: A moderate estate is most desir∣able thing in the world. FINIS.
