24360 S103034 99838793 3182
A new Boke of the natures and pro∣perties of all Wines that are commonlye vsed here in England, with a confutation of an errour of some men, that holde, that Rhennish and other small white wines ought not to be drunken of them that either haue, or are in daunger of the stone, the reume, and diuers other diseases, made by Wil∣liam Turner, doc∣tor of Phi∣sicke. Whervnto is annexed the booke of the natures and vertues of Triacles, newly correc∣ted and set foorth againe by the sayde William Turner. Jmprinted at London, by William Seres. Anno. 1568.
TO THE RIGHT honorable Sir William Cecill Knight, chiefe Secre∣tarie vnto the Queenes Maiestye, and maister of hir Highnesse Courts of Wardes and Liueries. &c. and somtime his Constudent in the Vniuersitie of Cambridge, William Turner wisheth all prosperitie both of bodye and soule, through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. SIR, AFTER that I perceiued that my age ioi∣ned with conti∣nuall sickenesse, would suffer me no more to be profytable too Christes Church and common welth, by my voyce, wordes, and going a∣brode, thought it meete by such mē∣bers and meanes as GOD hath left in
me as yet vnhurt and vntouched, for that portion of liuing that I haue, to profit the Church of God as much as I coulde. And therefore within these xij. Monethes I haue translated one booke out of Latin into English, and haue writtē one homily against Glut∣tonye and Drunkennesse, and other vices annexed thervnto, and haue set them abrode, for the promoting and increasing of the kingdome of GOD. I thought also, seeing that God hath also endued mee with the knowledge of bodilye Phisicke, after that I had sought to promote the kingdome of GOD, to communicate some part of my knowledge that God hath gi∣uen vnto me in naturall knowledge, vnto my brethren that had nede ther∣of. But when as I perceiued that there was so much vse of Wine in all cou¦tries of Englande, and so many errors committed in the abusing of it, both of the most part of the Laitie, and al∣so of some of the learned that pro∣fesse
naturall knowledge, I thought I should doe no small benefite vnto the Church and Common welth of Eng∣land, if that I shoulde set out a booke of the natures of Wines, and confute the errors and ill opinions that all men haue concerning the natures and properties of them. And this booke haue I now ended, and dedicate vnto your Honor for a token of the good will that I beare vnto you, desiring you also to be a Patrone of it against all such babling and vnlearned So∣phisters, as wyll speake agaynst it, not being armed with learning, authori∣tie and reason, but onelye with their olde Sophistrie, which they learned in the time of ignoraunce and darke∣nesse. If these will be to busie in de∣fending of their errors, and will goe about to defende them, and con∣fute the truth that I haue taught in this booke, if that I can haue by the helpe of God, graunted vnto me any truce betweene me and my disease, I
entende to put you to small paine in the defending of my Booke, for I haue beene matched with as big men as these bee, I thanke GOD, and well haue escaped without dishonor. But if my sicknesse will not suffer me to doe it that I would otherwise doe, then I must desire you and other of my friendes to defende mee so farre forth as I defende the truth. Furthermore, whereas I set out of late a boke, declaring at large the ver∣tues and properties of the great Tri∣acle called Theriaca Andromachi, and of the Triacle of Mithridates called Mi∣thridatium, and also of the Triacle Salt, and the booke was negligentlye and falselye printed, and diuerse honest men think it necessarie to be printed againe, & I purpose to doe the same, & bicause it were necessary to haue a pa∣trone for it, which it hath wanted hi∣therto: I dedicate and giue this boke also vnto your learned Honor, desi∣ring you also by your learnyng and
wisedome to be patrone vnto it as I aue made you of my other booke. No more at this time, but the Lorde Iesus encrease you with the know∣ledge of his holy worde, and with grace to lyue al∣wayes according to the same, A∣men.
OF THE NATVRES, properties, profits, hurtes and helps that come of Wyne. ALTHOVGH the order of learning do require, that eue∣rye man that shall write of anye thing, should declare & open by definitiō it that he entendeth to entreate of: yet nede not I (as I iudge) going a∣bout to write of wine, to take any great paine to make a definition of it, bicause all men, women and childer, that are cummed to any perfite age, know well inough that Wine is the iuice of grapes pressed out, and put vp into vessels, to be drunken afterwards at cōuenient times of men, for diuerse endes and purposes that the Grape maker hath ordeyned it for. For manye great causes, it shall be more necessarye to diuide Wine into his kindes and sortes, that thereby the
reader may the better know what kinds of Wines are best for what endes and purposes.Wines may be diuided into sixe sorts at the least. Wines may be numbred and diuided either by the countrie and pla∣ces that they grow in, or by their colors, or by their youth, or age, and by their tastes, smelles, and by properties that they haue, and some of the maner of ma∣king, and euery one of these kindes, may bee diuided againe into certaine other speciall sortes or vnder kindes. Some Wine is called Creticum of Creta, which is named in English Can∣die, some is called Graecum of Graecia, some Rhennish, bicause it groweth be∣side the Rhene, some Gallicum, that is French Wine, bicause it groweth in France, and some is called Rheticum bicause it groweth in Rhetia, and so a greate sorte of other Wines haue their names of the countries, & places wheras they growe. But it is best as I thinke, first of all according to nature to intreat of new and olde Wines, and of it that is a middle Wine betwene them both.
Of new and olde Wine, and of it that is of a meane age that is neyther to be cal∣led new nor olde. THere are twoo sortes of newe Wine, one that is called Must,Two kindes of newe wine. and that is but latelye made or pressed out of the grapes, and is swete in tast, troubled in color, and thick in substaunce, and this sort is properlye called in Latin Mustum. And another sorte is called newe Wine, which hath left his swéetnes & gotten clearenesse,Galene. but yet it is not long since it was made.New wine after Ga∣len. Ga∣len in his booke of making of medicines, séemeth to call all Wine that is not fully fiue yeares olde, newe wine, and it that is past fiue yeares vntill it hee ten yeare olde, wine of middle age, and it that is aboue the age of ten yeares, olde wine, and Dioscorides writing of the nature of Wines in his fifte booke, calleth it Wine of middle age, that is more than seauen yeare olde, and Plinie writeth,
not without an error of the scribe (as I gesse) that Falerno media aetas incipit ab anno decimo quinto. But Valerio∣la a man otherwise wel learned,Valeriola leaueth the authoritie of Galen. leauing the authoritie of Galen, calleth it newe Wine that kéepeth still his Mustish and sweete taste, and as yet hath gotten no sharpenesse, and he calleth that Wine of middle age, that is no more swéete, but is cleare, and sayth that he and his coun∣trimen take the most notable Wines of Fraunce for olde Wines, before they bée fullye one yeare olde. And this doth he holde enarrationum medicinalium, lib. sexto, enarratione septima. In the same place he reproueth Aloisius Mun∣della for saying that wine sixe yeares olde was newe wine after Galen, who although fayled in excéeding one yeare beyond Galens numbring of the yeares of new wine, yet he went a great deale farther from Galens minde than Mun∣della did.Must only hote in the first degree Must when it is made euen of ripe grapes, is but hote in the first de∣grée. for Galen in his boke of the powers of simple medicines, hath these wordes
following. Vinum est ex fecundo or∣dine excalfacientrum. Sed quod ad∣modum vetus est ex tertio, sicut quod mustum vocant ex primo, caliditatis eius proportioni respondet siccitas, that is,Very olde wine hote in the third degree. wine (that is to say of midle age) is hote in the seconde degrée, but it that is verie olde is hote in the third degree, as it that is called Must is hote in the first degrée. By these words their errour is openly confuted,Non omne vinum esse calidum in secundo gradu. that holde that euery wine is hote in the second degrée. Galen writeth truly that the Grapes that grow in verie colde places, neuer come to ripe∣nesse, neither to swéetenesse, but when other wines are made, they are swéete & pleasant, but such Wines made of such grapes, are very soure and therfore colde, the words of Galen are these written in ye second booke de alimentorū facultati∣bus. In regionibus frigidis ne vuae qui∣dem ipsae exquisite maturari queunt, nedum passarū quaepiam, ob id quòd resinam vinis immittant, ne acescant celeriter. That is. In colde countries neither rasins come to anye perfite ripe∣nesse
neither the grapes,Rosin pre∣serueth small wine from souring. and therefore men put rosin into the wines, that they shoulde not shortly waxe soure. And in the booke of good and ill iuice he sayth thus. The Wines that are to olde or to newe, are to be eschued. For the olde doe heate to much, and the new Wines as long as they are greene,Verie grene and new wines heate nothing at all. or very new, heat nothing at all, so farre are they frō helping of men to digest their meates, that they are very hardly digested them∣selues, and oft times they hang and abide still in a mans stomacke, euen as water. Dioscorides also who wrote before Ga∣len, sayth lib. 5. The sinewes are hurte with olde wine, and other instruments of the senses: yet for all that it is swéeter in taste than the other wines are. Wher∣fore a man ought to beware of it, that feeleth the weakenesse of anye inwarde part. Yet when a man is in good helth a little being delayed with water, it maye be taken without harme. Newe Wine putteth a man vp,New wine. and filleth him with winde, and is hard of digestion and brée∣deth heauie dreames, and maketh a man
to make water. It that is of a meane age betwéene both, is free from the harmes that maye come of both, wherefore it is commonlye vsed both of hole and sicke men with their meate. Aristotel in his fourth booke Meteorologicorum the .x.Newe wine hath much earthlynesse in it, and therfore ill for them that are disposed to the stone. Chapter writeth. That new Wine hath more earth or earthlynesse in it than olde hath, wherevpon a man maye gather plainlye that new Wine is verye ill for them that are disposed to the stone, for it hauing so much thicke earthlinesse in it, giueth matter whereof the stone may be made to hote kidneys, that the heate of kidneis may so bake it into stones as the heate of the Bricke kill turneth the claye into Bricke or tile stones. Wherefore I must néedes dispraise the maner of our delicate Englishmen and women that drinke the Rhennish wine only for plea∣sure, whilst it is as yet as thicke as pud∣dle or horsepisse. For beside that it giueth matter to make the stone of, I haue kno∣wen thrée within the space of one yere in high Germany that toke the falling sick∣nesse by drinking much newe Rhenishe
wine, and they died all thrée, and coulde not be holpen with phisicke, one of them sodenly lost his spech and died within an houre after that he sickened, and the o∣ther two liued but a day or two after, and died miserably with great paine, and had grieuous fittes of the falling sicknesse at sundry times. I haue marked that with∣in these dosen yeares there haue bene more sicke in the falling sicknesse, than had wont to be before. The cause wher∣of I iudge to be, that mens wiues, nur∣ses,The causes of the rife∣nesse of the falling sick∣nesse nowe in England and children drinke more Rhennishe Must, and other swéete wines vnfined, brought out also of other coūtries as wel as out of Germany: thā they were wont to drinke before in times past. Aetius a diligent follower of Galen, and a faith∣full gatherer of the writinges of olde Greke writers of phisick, saith that wine (meaning thereby wine of middle age that is neither verie new, neither verye olde) is hote in the second degrée,The degrees of wines by their ages. and that verye olde is hote in the thirde degrée, as very new Must is hote in the first degrée. Ye maye sée here once againe, that they
are more bolde than learned and wise,Whether al kindes of newe wines ought to bee refused or no? that holde that all Wines are hote in the second degrée. Some peraduenture will aske whether there is any kinde of newe Wine that may serue for anye vses, and may be dronken at any time or no▪ To whom I make this aunswere by the au∣thoritie of Galen in his booke of good and euill iuice,Si vina te∣nuia, alba & aquosae tutò bibi possint, er∣rat Plinius qui vina tenuia & austera magis ca∣put tentare asseuerat. lib. 23. cap.  that ex recentibus vinis ge∣nus illud dūtaxat tutò bibitur, quod tenuis substantiae est, sicuti ex Italicis Cauchanum & Albanū. &c. quae sanc tenuia, candida & aquosa existunt. &c That is. Amongst new wines only that kinde maye be safelye drunken, that is of a thin substaunce, as amongst Italian wines are Cauchanum & Albanum. &c. which wines in dede are thin, white, and waterish, and therfore are called Oligo∣phora, that is, wines that can abide but small menging of water with them.Fulua vinae quia calida sunt, caput cito replent, non igitur vini tenui∣tas, sed ca∣liditas ca∣put tentat. And as redishe yelow Wines bicause they are hote in working, they fill the head by and by, so the other wines that are thin and waterish wines, and gently binding are not only not noysome vnto the head, but
oft times take awaye light head aches which come of humors gathered togi∣ther in the stomache,Hic Gale∣nus Pliniū & eius discipulos manifeste impugnat. thus farre Galen. Nowe some men that reade this booke, acknowledging thēselues to be my scho∣lers, peraduēture would learne of me bi∣cause I teach English men in this Eng∣lish booke, what kindes of wines that are brought into England,Smal wines helps the hedache, but make it not. are of this sort. I answere, that neither Sacke, Malmesey, Muscadell, neither Clared, French nor Gascone wine, though they be most vsed here in Englande at this time, are such Wines as Galen speaketh of here, but Rhennish wine that is racket and cleare, and Rochell, and Sebes and other small white Wines that are cleare from their groundes, therefore to them that are dis∣posed vnto the headache, amongst all new Wines these aboue named small Wines are least hurtfull, and maye be taken with lesse ieoperdie. If anye con∣tende that French, Clared and Gascone wine, and other wines as strong as Gas∣cone is, doe as little hurt to the head as these Wines doe: I aunswere that the
French, Clared and Gascone wines are not thin and subtill, but strong, thicke and hote, and not as Galen sayth aquosa that is, waterish. Wherfore if the autho∣ritie of Galen may take place, their opi∣nion is here openly confuted, which com∣mend so much French, Clared and Gas∣cone Wine, and despise and condemne Rhennish and such like White wines.Rhennish and white wines for∣bidden to be vsed of some newe phisitions. The same men haue forbidden all their patientes that are disposed to the stone, gout, and rewme, by name all Rhennish and white Wines, and saye that white and Rhennish Wines make and engen∣der the goute, holding that white and Rhennishe Wine driue so sore that they bring matter to the kidneis and bladder,That white wines bring the matter of the stone to the kid∣neyes, and that there∣fore breede the stone by the argu∣mēt of some sophisters. whereof the stone is engendred. First I must reason against this vnreasonable reason more largely than the argument of this booke, in some mens opinion, re∣quireth, bicause they haue holden this o∣pinion so long and without authoritie or good reason teach it so sliffelye still. For the better discussing of this matter, it is néedefull to tell what things bréede and
make the stone, and howe manye chiefe causes there be of it, and whether thin and waterish wines be ye materiall or ef∣ficient cause of the stone, or no cause of it at all, but a preseruatiue from the stone. Although the naturall disposition that a man hath of his father or mother to the stone be a great and vnauoydable cause of the stone, yet beside that, there are two common causes, of the which the one is the materiall cause, and the other is the cause efficient, or working or making cause, that maketh the stone, of ye matter that is disposed to be a stone. Galen in the third booke of norishmentes, writing of chéese in few wordes sheweth both the materiall and efficient cause of the stone. Olde chéese,Grosse hu∣mors are the materi∣all cause of the stone, & burning heate the cause effi∣cient. sayth he, is harder to digest and of worse iuice, and therefore readier to bréede the stone, Nam vbi succorum crassities cum ardēti calore iungitur, illic calculi generantur, that is, wher∣as there is grossenesse of iuices ioyned with a burning heate, there are stones engendred. Galen I graunt in his booke of good and ill iuices, writeth that the of∣ten
vse of such medicines that make thin and cut grosse humors in pieces,Medicines that are hoe and make thin, and cut grosse hu∣mors, to much vsed, make the blood whai¦ish, or cho∣lericke, or melancho∣like. maketh a mans bloud eyther whayish, or Chole∣ricke or Melancholike, for such kindes of Medicines doe not onely cut and make thin, but also heate out of measure. Be∣holde and marke here that he speaketh not of Rhennishe and white wine, but of vnmeasurablye hote medicines, and he sayth immediatlye after, ob id{que} solida membra exiccant, & crassum humo∣rem reddunt, quo in renibus assato, gignuntur calculi, that is. They drie vp the fast and sound members, and make the humor grosse, whereof when as it is burned or rosted in the kidneyes, stones are ingendred. Thus farre Galen. The same sentence and meaning hath Galen methodi medendi. 13.Meates of grosse iuice ingender the stone. libro in these wordes, qui crassi succi cibis vescun∣tur, calculi vitio vexantur. They that eate meates of grosse iuice, are grieued with the disease of the stone. Aetius wri∣teth that the causes of the stone are con∣tinuall crudities or rawnesse, or vndige∣sted humors wherof is gathered togither
great plenty of vndigested and raw mat∣ter, when a burning riseth about the kidneys and bladder, which burneth them and maketh them go togither in one, and maketh therof an hard stone. Alexander Trallianus intreating of the stone, saith: Est materialis calculorum causa hu∣mor crassus, efficiens autem ignea ca∣liditas, the materiall cause of the stone is a grosse humor, and the efficient cause is a fierie heate. Now by these authorities that I haue alleaged, it is cleare vnto all them that can and will sée that the matter or ma∣teriall cause of the stone is a grosse or thicke humor, and that the worker or ef∣ficient cause of the same is a great heate in or about the kidneyes or bladder. If that be graunted to be true, it followeth that those meates and drinkes that are of grosser substance and hoter than others be, cause and bréede the stone rather than other meates and drinkes that are thin∣ner, finer and of a colder complexion, but both French, Clared and Gascone Cla∣red wine are of grosser and thicker sub∣staunce,
and hoter of complexion than white Rhennish wine and white french wines be of.Clared wine whe∣ther it be of Fraunce or of Gasco∣nie, and red wine with such like, brede more the stone, than white and Rhen∣nish do, both concerning the materi∣all and ef∣ficient cause. Therfore they bréede ye stone more than white Rhennish and whyte French Wines doe. The Rhenish wine that is cōmonly drunken in Gentlemens houses and Citizens houses is commonly a yere old at ye least before it be drunken, & therfore it is older than ye common Cla∣red wine, which dureth not commonlye aboue one yeare, and if Rhennish wyne be drunken within the yeare, it is com∣monly racked before it be drunken, ther∣fore for two causes it hath fewer dregges and lesse terrestritie or grosse earthlynesse than the Clared wine hath, and therfore bréedeth the stone lesse than Clared wine that is commonly drunke in gentlemens houses doth. If I can proue this yt I haue sayde, and also that Clared wine is hoter than white Rhennish and white French wines be, there is nothing to let me but I may conclude without anye withstan∣ding, that Clared or red wines bréede the stone more than white wines do. Which I will assaye to bring to passe after thys maner following.
Of the difference of wynes by the colors. Plinie ma∣keth foure principall colors of Wine.PLinie in the .xiiij. booke of his naturall hystorie writeth thus of the colors of Wine. Colores vinis quatuor. Albus, fuluus, sanguineus, niger, that is, wines haue sower colors: white, redish yellowe, san∣guine and black. The white is well kno∣wen to all our countriemen, but the o∣ther are not fullye knowen euen vnto some of the learned here in Englande. Wherefore I thinke it néedefull for the better vnderstanding of it that I shall entreat of hereafter, to declare these co∣lors, so that they maye be knowen of all men that reade this booke. Aulus Gelli∣us in his second booke de noctibus atticis cap. 26.Fuluus. writeth, that Fuluus color vi∣detur de rufo at{que} viridi mistus esse.There are diuerse de∣grees vini fului. that is, the color that is called in Latine Fuluus, séemeth to be menged with red and gréene, and there séemeth in some to be more gréene, and in other more red. And he writeth that the color called Fla∣uusFlau{us} color.
in Latine séemeth to be made of the mengling togither of grene, red & white. And he writeth that the color of the lion,Leo fuluus, Aurum fuluum. golde, and sande is named Fuluus in Latine, thus farre Gellius. Whereas Dioscorides writeth of wines he hath these words folowing.  which wordes Ruellius trans∣lateth thus. Giluū, vtpote quod mediū est, medias inter vtrun{que} vires habet. But Cornarius in this place turneth  into fuluum. And in dede I lyke better the translation of Cornarius in this place, than the translation of Ruel∣lius, otherwise an eloquent and learned man, wherevnto moueth me the transla∣tion of Galen of our Linacre written in his xij. booke de methodo medendi. Ne{que} inuenies ex alborum vinorum genere calidum vllum, quando austera & me∣diocriter alba, cum inueterauerine fuluiora quodammodo reddantur. Quod si aliter nominare fuluum co∣lorem velis, licet voces igneum pal∣lens. Quotquot autem in ipsis cali∣dissima
sunt omnia certè flaua sunt. These wordes peraduenture some lear∣ned Gentleman or other learned men, had leuer reade in Greeke than in the Latine or Englishe alone, for whose sakes I will rehearse Galens owne wordes in his owne tongue, that men maye iudge the better of the nature of the woordes, and thereby of Galens meaning, . Out of all these places of the authours that I haue alleadged, I gather that Fuluus color is it that a man may call in English, redish yelow, for as Virgill calleth Golde Ful∣uum, bicause it is redishe yellow, our countrymen marking in golde both a roadnesse and also a yellownesse, some∣time saye, that a thing is as red as gold,
and other whiles, that a thing is as yel∣low as gold, as commonlye they say that his eyes & skin that hath ye disease that is called in Duch, Die guel sucht, and the Northē English tongue, yt Guelsought, and in Southerne English, the yellowe iaundise, are as yelow as gold. This dis∣ease is named in Latin Aurigo of Cor∣nelius Celsus, of the color of gold. Galen séeming to doubt whether al men vnder∣stoode what he ment by this word  which Hippocrates vseth in this signi∣fication, taketh the paine to open and shewe by two other Gréeke words what he meaneth by , saying that he thynketh that  maye bée called , that is, Wine of a fierye color, hauing mixed therewith the color of yellow Ochar, which Ochar is not of a bright yellowe color as  is, but more darker, whereby a man may plain∣ly know that Fuluum which is called in Gréeke  or  is a redish yellow color,Fierish yellow. as our Muscadine and Ba∣stards are, whē as they come to vs are of.Vinum sanguineū. Vinū sanguineum, that is sanguine, or
bloud coloured Wine, it is that we call commonly in English Clared wine, but not the pale, or pallet (as some call it) Clared wine. Vinum nigrum, so na∣med of Plinie, and called , in Greeke, is foolishly, but commonlye called in English red wine, when as it ought to be called blacke Wine, of the blacke color that it hath in comparison of other wines. And now after that I haue shewed what the foure colors that Plinie maketh mention of, betoken in our En∣glish tongue, I will go forwarde to de∣clare the natures of Wines by their na∣turall colors. Of the nature and properties of white Wines. DIoscorides sayth, vinum albū tenue stomacho vtile, ac fa∣cile in membra distribuitur. That is, white wine is thin, and good for the stomach, and is easily cō∣ueyed into the members,White wine both in sickenesse & in health is rather to be chosen than other wines by the autho∣ritie of Di∣oscoriaes. and white wine both in sicknesse and in health is rather
to be chosen thā others. And Galen wri∣ting of the nature of white Wine, sayth: . That is, ye can finde none of the white wines that is hote, meaning of the common white wines that were about where as he dwelt. Out of Galen in his fift booke de locis affectis. FVrthermore, when as a certain yong man being a Grāmarian, as often as he did to earnestlye teach, or deuise of any matter, or waxed hungry or angrye, was taken with the falling sicknesse, by reason of the to much quick feling of the mouth of his stomacke: I commaunded to giue vnto him bread well prepared in the thirde or fourth houre alone, if he did not thirst. But if he were troubled with thirst, to be moystened in wine,White wine mea∣surably binding hurteth not the head. and that in white wine which measurably bindeth, for such wine, as it strengthneth the stomach, so it hurteth not the head as hote wines are wont to do. Thus farre Galen. Out
of whose wordes we maye gather howe vnreasonable and vnlearned they be in Galens workes, that saye that all white Wines whether they be Rhennishe or French, or of like nature with eyther of both, are hurtfull for the rheume and o∣ther diseases of the head, and forbid their patientes to drinke them for a table or common drinke to be taken with meat, when as Galen alloweth it for them that haue the falling sicknesse, and sayth that it doth not hurt ye stomach, neyther trouble ye head as hote wines do, of which sortes they alow some for their patients for common table wine, as diuerse kinds of Clared wine, whereof euery one of them is hotter and more headie and fu∣mish than the common Rhennishe and French wines are, of the which matter we will talke hereafter more largelye, if God will. That the thin, small and wa∣terish wines do not hurt the head, so that they haue a littell astriction, Galen de∣clareth plainly in his booke de euchymia & cacochymia, in these words. And euē as firish red wines, seeing that they are
hote of nature, by and by fill the head,Fierish red wines fill the head by and by, bi∣cause they be hote. e∣uen so those wines that are thin and wa∣terish, and gently binding, are not onlye vnhurtfull vnto the head, but also some∣time they take away those small head a∣ches which come of humors gathered to∣gither in the stomach. Out of Aetius. OF all wines,Which wines hurte least the head and sinewes. white wines are least hurt, waterish wines ney∣ther bréedeth the head ache, ney∣ther hurt the sinewes. Wines that are white in color, nourish least of all other Wines, if they be thin in sub∣staunce, and after a maner like vnto wa∣ter.Aetius al∣loweth white wine for a pre∣seruatiue against the stone. Aetius also prescribing a diet for thē that are deliuered of the stone, how that they maye be preserued from falling into the disease of the stone againe, alloweth a small wine that prouoketh water, and is not verie olde. And the author of the booke of healing of the stone which is as∣cribed vnto Galen, and iudged of manye to be his, in expresse wordes fayth as followeth here. Vinum sit tenue admo∣dum
& album, non ita vetus, dulcia verò & nigra vina, calculosis sunt in∣epta. That is, let your wines be verye small and white,Red that is Clared wine is not good for the stone. and not so olde, but swéete wines and blackish red wines are verye vnméete for them that haue the stone. And the author sayeth in the same booke a littell after. Vinum tibi conue∣nit tenue & album, quod misturam non ita patitur , nam eius∣modi facile descendit, & succos qui sunt in nobis attenuat & secernit per vrinas, virtutem{que} roborat. That is, white and small wine is good and méete for you, which being small, cannot abide to be menged with much water, for such wine doth easilye go downe, and maketh subtill or fine the iuices or humors that are in vs, and sifteth them out by the wa∣ter, and strengthneth the power of man. Of the natures of white and diuers o∣ther wynes, taken out of Actuarius the last of the noble Greeke writers of phisicke.
GRosse and thicke wines nourysh much,Grosse or thick wines. Thin or subtill wines. and are cause of grosse bloud, and of the stopping of in∣ward partes, but thin or subtill wines which driue out water, are of a contrarye nature,Redish yel∣low wines are hotest of all. Wines in color red, are next in heat to rea∣dish yellow. Least hote of all are waterish and small wines, and they trouble the head least. A small white wine is best for a common ta∣ble wine. for they engender fine or thin bloud. Some wines that haue a little astriction, are better for the stomach but nourish lesse, but swéete wines are of the contrarie nature, but white wines are lesse hote thā other wines. Of wines are hotest of all redish yellow, and next vnto them are hotest, Wines of red co∣lor, they are least hote that are waterish, which are called in Greke , bi∣cause they wil not suffer to be delayed wc much water, such wines as these do trou∣ble the head least. But strong and wel co∣lored wine are more fit for them that la∣bor for to be of a good plite, and to looke well. But for thée that carest only for thy simple health, and for thy liuely spirite, it maye séeme that a weake wine which is white and thin should he sufficient for thee, and thou ought therewith to be con∣tent, except thou be compelled to flie for
néedes sake to vse hoter wines when as thou art to much cooled in thy body. Of the nature of red wine, which here in England is commonly called Cla∣red wyne, and of the nature of blacke wine which is called commonlye in England red wine, out of Galen in his thirde booke de ali∣mentis. Red wine and thicke wine.IF that whatsoeuer doth norish, be meat, thē is wine to be placed among the number of meates (that is of things that doe féede and encrease the bodie.No color of any wine is liker to bloud, than it that we call Clared wine, for the blacke wine that we call red wine, is blacker thā it may be compared vnto bloud. Rufa at{que} crassa vina. Deinceps nigra. Rufa aut nigra cras∣sa & ad∣stringentia.) Of all wines red and thicke wines are most méete to make bloud, as such as néede little chaunging to be turned into bloud, after these folow in order blacke wines, grosse and swéete, and also those which in color is red and blacke, and in substance or composition are thick, ioyned with a binding quality. The same sentence hath Aetius in these words following. Rufa ita{que} & crassa
ex omnibus ad sanguinem generan∣dum commodissima sunt, vt quae par∣ua egeant in sanguinem transmutati∣one. Deinceps nigra simul dulcia ac crassa. Deinde colore quidem rufa aut nigra, compage vero crassa, & haben∣tia simul adstringentem qualitatem. Out of the fourth booke of Galen de sauitate tuenda. REfuse and flie thicke and blacke wines, bicause they make an e∣uill iuice, and enter thorow and go very slowly down, and in the fift booke he sayth. Such wines as tarie long in the bellie, are none of them fit for an olde man, and that blacke wines that are grosse and thicke, and are binding, tarie and abide long in the bellie and stir vp flowinges in it. But they that are blacke and thick, and haue no astriction, in déede they tarie shorter while in the bellie. But yet they stirre not a man to make water, some take them before meat but they are not good for olde men, ney∣ther
any other which make a thick iuice, for these stop the liuer, milt and kidneys, whereby it commeth to passe that some olde men vsing these more largelye, fall into the dropsey, and other fall into the stone. Of the nature of wynes of diuers and sundry colors out of Galen de methodo medendi, sexto & .12. IN the sixt booke. Whatsoeuer Wines be swéete, and also of a readish yelow color, all such are sharpe or biting, and hote aboue measure.Wines good for them that swounde. In the .xij. booke. To them that swoune by the reason of yellow gall that vexeth the mouth of the stomache, a colde drinke is to be giuen vnto them, yet for all that wine that is hote of nature, and doth further the conneyance of iuices in∣to the bodie, ought to be offred to al them that are vexed with swounding, for it is plainly our will, that the nourishment that is taken in, should be delt and con∣ueyed
into the bodye, and that it shoulde not tarie in the stomach, but it is openly knowen that of wines they ought to be chosen that are yelow in color,Wines yel∣low in color and fine in substance are best for fainting or swouning. of a fine substance and olde, and such must néedes be of a good smell. To them that fall in a swounding by to much plentie of rawe humors, grosse thicke wines are noysome, and waterye wines as vnprofitable are to be eschued. Therefore we must choose out those that are midle wines, which, as is before sayd, are yellowe and white. But so manye wines as are the hotest of all, are bright yelow in color, as is the wine called Ce∣cubum in Italie. Of other kindes of wine they that are soure with astriction,Austera alba. and méetelye white and thicke, are not fit for the conueyance or leading of iuices into the bodie.Vina au∣stera alba antiqua. But if they be olde inough, if ye haue no other, ye maye vse them, for all such when they are old are good for the stomach.Redish yel∣low wine trouble the head. Further∣more all wines that smell well and are redish yellow, so much as is of their na∣ture altogither, they trouble the heade
when a man is vexed with both kindes of swounding, that is of it that commeth of yellow gall, and also it that commeth of great plentie of rawe humors falling into the mouth of the stomach, and there is no conuenient wine as is required, and thou art néedes compelled to vse some wine, thou must flie as I haue said before, all soure astringent wines, and new wines,Old thin or waterish wines are lightly ca∣ried into the body. and thicke wines, and chose waterish wines, and of them such as are olde, for such wines although they do not mightily heat, yet they are led or caried lightly into the body, wherefore these doe all alike conuey and deale the norishing iuices into the body,Both red yellowish and olde small wine conuey and deale the iuices into the bodie alike. as red yellow wines do, yet there is a difference betwéene thē, that is, that the redish yellow wines are more profitable for the digestion that is in the stomach, and in the veynes, bicause they doe heate more. Moreouer, they are easie to be tempered (or else as Linaker translateth it, to be mixed) & therfore are profitable to make good iuice. But there is none of all these things in waterishe wines, for verie little of the substance of
these is turned into ye kinde of bloud.Redish yel∣low wines smite the head. But when as redish yellowe wine smite the head, they that are waterishe doe neuer trouble it, and they beyonde all other driue out water. Next vnto the which are redish yellowe wines that are most thin and subtill,Small wa∣terish wines driue out pisse most of all other wines. which also ought to be chosen most chieflly against swounding. Yelow wines that are grossest in substance are conueyed into the bodie more slowlie thā these be, howbeit they are more piercing then all soure and binding wines, but these redish yellowe wines againe doe nourish more than thin wines, and cor∣rect fautie iuices, of all other wines most speedily engendring a good bloud. Thus farre Galen. Nowe after that it is often inough proued by the best authors that euer wrote of Phisick, that all red wines as are our Clared wines, and all blacke wines, which we call red wines, are ho∣ter and grosser in substaunce than small white wines be of: and both driue out water lesse than small white wines doe: It followeth that Clared and red wines are more, both the materiall and effici∣ent
causes of the stone, than small white wines are. Where as some argue that such wines as driue most, bring humors most of all other to the kidneys,The argu∣ment of them that holde that Rhennish and white wines breede the stone more than other wines doe. water vessels, and bladder, whereof the stone is ingendered there. But small Rhennish wine and o∣ther small white wines driue humors most to the places before named, there∣fore they breede the stone more than other wines that driue not so much as they do: I answere vnto the maior, that not eue∣ry wine that driueth most humors vnto the kidneys, water vessels & bladder is ye greatest bréeder & engendrer of the stone. For although small and waterish whyte wines driue more than Clared, yet it fol∣loweth not that they bréede ye stone more than red and Clared wines doe. For al∣though they driue some kinde of humors vnto the places aboue rehearsed: yet doe they not leaue them sticking fast in those places, but they driue them quite thorow all the water vesselles into the chamber pot or vrinall, for the which cause they are called in Gréeke , that is,
driuers forth of water and vrine, and such things as are in the vrine. Which name they haue not, bicause (as some men doe dreame) they bring many humors wher∣of the stone is made, to the kidneys and bladder, and let them lie there, as it were rotting in a dunghill, but as a faire and thin water casten into a canel of a stréete if it haue one to driue it forwarde, not onelye carieth it selfe awaye forth of the towne into the common sinke that is without the towne, but also the filthines that hath bene in the canell long before, euen so that small white wine that hath a nature to driue forth it selfe, and with it other things that are necessarie to be driuen out by the vrine, bréedeth not hu∣mors in the water vesselles, but driueth them quite away, and suffereth them not to tarie there, how then can white wine that after this manner scoureth the wa∣ter vessels be an ingendrer of the matter of the stone, when as it driueth the same matter away, and will not suffer it to ta∣rie in those places where as the stone v∣seth to be ingendred. When I was a
scholer in Cambridge, there was there a stinking butcherie, and very noysome to thē that went by it, or through it, what if a man should haue bene hired for .xl.s. in the yeare to keepe the butcherie, & the rest of the towne swéete, by carying out of the puddings, guts, and stinking bloud? if this fellow should carie out all the fil∣thinesse out of the butcherie once in the wéeke vnto the market hill, and let it lie there, should this man iustly be called a scourer or clenser of the towne, that cari∣eth the filth therof from one place onlye to another, & not quite out of the towne? I think no. Euen so if smal white wines should driue humors from diuerse places of the bodie, and shoulde not carrie them forth by the water vesselles, but let them lie stinking there, it ought not to be cal∣led a scourer but a defiler, & an hurter of the bodie. If the maister of the pudding cart before named, would let the filthines of the butcherie tarie so long there vntill it stanke so sore, by reason of long conti∣nuing in that place, and for lacke of ca∣rying out betime, that both they of the
butcherie, and all the neighbours about were grieuouslye vexed with the foule stinke of that filth that taried so long there, if an other carter offred for the same wages euery seconde day to carie out all the vncleannesse of the towne, which of these two mē were more worthy to haue the office and name of the townescourer? Smal white wines scoure and driue out the vncleannesse of the bodie as much as it is possible to be done by them, and red and Clared wine stoppe and hold backe, and fill the bodie full of ill humors, now which are most profitable to be taken most commonly of a man for the kéeping of his health? But although small white wine by nature hath such properties to driue out by vrine vnprofitable humors, that are commed within the compasse of their working, yet the vertue of it is hin∣dered, either if the man by eating and drinking to much continually fill the bo∣die with so many excrementes, that na∣ture euen being holpen with white wine cannot driue them out, by reason of the ouerflowing plentie of them, also if that
the meat lie to long in the stomach, and the excrements to long in the guttes, and goe not downe at conuenient times to the stoole.White wine some∣time cannot driue out humors sufficiently if it be hin∣dered by ill diet. Than the white wine for lacke of helpe, can not doe his office. And it is plaine, that banketting and much eating and drinking and keeping of the meat to long in the stomache, and the excrements vnscoured out of the bellie, giue the most part of the material cause vnto the stone, which thing may be easilye proued by the authority of Aetius writing of the stone, in these wordes.The mate∣riall cause of the stone. Ye must beware of such meats as are hard of substance, and are not esie to be broken with chowing, and also them that haue much substance,Holding of humors to long in the body, is the cause of the stone, and not the dri∣uing of them forth dayly in good season. and nourish verye much, and those that are conueyed in by heapes into the bodie, be∣fore they be fully digested, or made ripe, also meates of an heauy qualitie, and are hardly chaunged and swim aboue, and go to slowly downe to ye belly, & fill it ful of wind. Flie also such as stop the ways and veynes of the bodie, or otherwise a∣bide to long in the bellies, for the bellie being made wearie with such meates,
sendeth them forth either as yet raw, or halfe sodden to the liuer and kidneyes, and so it that was brought in by heapes rawe, is sifted or streyned vnfitlye and a∣gainst nature, and with an hastie rage is caried to the kidneyes, and by and by it groweth togither, and is thickned, and standeth there still. Thus farre Aetius. Of whome we may learne plainly howe the stone is made, and of what causes, and that neither small white wine, ney∣ther any other wine, will preserue a man from the stone, except he kéepe good diet withall, and emptie out the excrements of the bellie dailye. And the same sayth afterward, ventrem semper probè la∣xum habere oportet. Hic enim si bene subierit, puriora lotia prodibunt. That is, ye must haue your bellie alway well losed, for if the bellie worke well downeward, your water shall come forth the fairer and cleaner. If so often emptying of the bellye as nature requireth, maketh a mans water cleare and faire, then the to much stop∣ping of the bodie maketh a foule, drousie
or dreggye water. But such foule geare bréedeth the stone, therfore to much stop∣ping of the bellye is oft the cause of the stone. For when as such plentie of filthie matter cometh forth by the water, there must néedes be much aboue in the kid∣neyes and bladder, wherof the stone may be ingendred, if there be anye excessiue heate in the kidneyes and bladder. All men therefore may plainly sée that small white wine is falslye accused to be a brée∣der of the stone, when as ill diet and the stopping of ill humors within the bodye, is the cause thereof, and that wines that are hoter and stronger than white and Rhennish wines be, engender rewmes, and bréede the goute more than the white small wines do, as it is by places aboue alleaged, fully prooued. Of the natures of wynes after their tastes. THe wines that are commonlye brought into England, named by their tastes in Gréeke ,
that in Latine, vina dulcia, astringentia, austera & acerba, and such like as are acria and acida, for the most part wherof we haue neuer one proper name in En∣glish, though we can name dulce vinū well in English swéete wine: but what shall we call acre, austerum and acer∣bum in common vsed English? surely I cannot tell, for I cannot giue to euery one of these wordes one seuerall vsed English word, without circumlocution, wherfore séeing that the proper English wordes are so harde to be found: and the meaning of the words are as little kno∣wen of the most part of all men, I think it shall be necessarye to shewe by the au∣thoritie of some old learned writer, what these words adstringens, austerum and acerbum, acer and acidus doe signifie and betoken. If any man say that I nede not to take this paine, bicause the great and costlye booke, called Thesaurus linguae Romanae & Britannicae, that is, the treasure of the Latin and English tongue, hath done that thing alreadie: I
aunswere that I asked counsell of that great booke, and in dede as I found great plentie both of good Latin wordes, and fine maners of speaking, gathered wyth great paines, and ordered with no small learning and iudgement: but in ye Eng∣lish, as I found to much plentie of light, and new inckhorne termes: so in some places I founde such scarcenesse, lacke, and want of proper and true Englishe names, that the author is faine to giue one name to diuerse Latin wordes, for when I looked how he englished Acer, he englisheth it thus. Eger, sharpe, tart, soure or fell. Lo, here is great plentie of wordes, and yet we can not tell what a∣cer in taste doth properly signifie, and a litle after he writeth these wordes, acer, acidus succus, Vitruuius, eger. By this booke we may English lac acidum, eger milke. And afterwarde where as of pur∣pose he expoūdeth what Acidus betoke∣neth, he englisheth it, eger, soure, sharp, and he englisheth acidula pira, foure peares, he englisheth Acerbum, vnripe, soure, displeasant, and Acerbitas, soure∣nesse
of taste, sharpnesse or grieuousnesse of time. He englisheth Austerus, soure, sharpe, vnpleasant, and gustus austerus a rough or soure tast. Now how shall a man know by this booke what difference is betwéene, acer, acidus, austerus and acerbus, when as he calleth them all soure, and putteth so small difference betwéene one and ano∣ther. Surely we haue but small helpe of that booke in declaring of these words, & many such other, that are much occupied in phisicke and philosophy, and in other both liberall and mathematical sciences. Wherfore I wishe, to the ende that the booke may be in dede as it is called: that one learned phisition & philosopher like vnto Linaker, one olde and learned grā∣marian like vnto Clemond, and one perfite Englishman like vnto Sir Tho∣mas Moore, had the amendment and making persite of this booke commited vnto them. But now as Terence sayeth, quoniam hac nō successit, alia aggre∣diendum est via. Galen in the first of his bookes that he writeth of the powers
of simple medicines sayth. Cap. 39. If any man doe taste quinces or apples, or med∣lers, or mirtels, doubtlesse he shall know that there is an other féeling that is mo∣ued vnto vs of these things in ye tongue, and another of bodies astringentibus, that is, that are onely binding, for those things that are binding, appeare to driue inwarde that part of vs that they touche in al places equally or in like, as pulling, stopping, as drawing togither. But au∣stera séeme to goe downe euen vnto the bottome, and to moue a rough and vn∣equal féeling and drying vp and wasting all the moisture of féeling bodies. Fur∣thermore when as that bodie which is moued vnto our tongue doth mightilye drie and draw togither, and maketh it rough euen to the bottome, as choke peares that are not ripe, and cornelles, euerye such is called acerbum, differing from austero in the excesse of these qua∣lities. That is to say, austerum in many things is like vnto acerbo, but acerbum is in all those things wherein they are something like, much stronger and migh∣tier
than austerum is: and Galen in an∣other place writeth, that astringent is weaker than acerbum and austerum, in all those properties that they haue anye likenesse in. And Galen in ye .ix. booke de simplicium medicamentorum facul∣tatibus, sayeth that adstringentia draw togither, bind togither, and do make thick our substance, and therfore vpon what∣soeuer part of our bodie they be layde without, by and by they make it full of wrinkles, and draw togither. Further∣more after ye doctrine of Galen, we may perceiue in some kindes of peares, mar∣ked at diuerse times, gustum acerbum, austerum & astringentem. When the peares are newly growen, if ye taste of them at the first, ye shall perceyue that they are harde and drie, and are verye rough in taste, and then they are called acerba, but after that they are more than halfe ripe, when that hardnesse and dri∣nesse is gone, then become they moyster and softer, and are in taste austera. And when they are full ripe, they are astrin∣gentia, with a swéete taste ioyned ther∣with.
By this discription, I trust wise and learned men by taking of some paine in reading of olde English writers shall come by the knowledge of right and pro∣per English wordes for these .iij. Latin, or els at the least I iudge that men shall vnderstande what difference is betweene astringens, austerum and acerbum. In the meane time vntill that we may spede better, we may english astringens, bin∣ding, austerum, soure binding, and a∣cerbum, rough and binding like choke peares. And Galen lib. 1. simpl. medic. facultatibus. cap. 39. and in diuerse o∣ther places maketh an open and plaine difference betweene acre and acidum, contrarie to it that is alleaged of Vitru∣uius, who maketh them both one. For Galen sayeth, that acria are calida, and that acida are old. Acer may be Englished biting sharp, and acidum may be named soure as sor∣rell, and soure milke, and diuers other things. Actius writeth, that wine that is soure with an harrish binding, so that it be well smelling withall, hurteth the
head, but it which is waterishe,Waterish wines ney∣ther brede the headach neither hurt the si∣newes, then when as the gout is the hurting of the sinewes and ioyntes how engen∣der small waterish wines the gout? neither bréedeth the headach, neither hurteth the sinewes. Galen also sayth that soure bin∣ding wines stoppe flowings, and streng∣then the stomach, and hurt not the head, but that they helpe not them that are fallen into a swounde. Wines that are rough and binding in taste like vnto choke peares, stop vomi∣tings and flowings of the belly, and they coole and drie. Moreouer they goe hardlye downe, when as those things that are only of a soure taste, go easily downe. I haue learned by experience (sayeth Galen) that all those things that binde, and are also soure, are manifestly cold. Simeon Sethi sayeth, wines that are a little and gently binding, & are in color¦red, and in substance thin, are good for them that are of a good and a meane com∣plexion and temperature. But they are of a good complexion and of a mean tem∣perature that are neither to hote nor to colde, neither to moyst nor to drie, of the which sort I wéene we shall finde as few at this time almost, as we shalbe able to
finde citizens of Platoes common welth in euery parish of England. And Galen a man of more authoritie than Simeon Sethi is of, writeth in the booke of good and euill iuices, that as fierie red wines, for asmuch as they are hote in working, by and by fill the heade, euen so those wines that are thin and waterishe, and doe lightly bind, not only are not vnnoy∣some vnto the head, but also take awaye small headaches, and he saith afterward, all wines that are binding, are comfor∣table for the stomache, and that such as are soure and colde, be of subtill partes, but they that are binding, are of grosse parts de simplie. med. facultatib. lib. 4. cap. 2. Of sweete wines.Whatsoeuer things are swéete, cannot be colde, therfore swéete wines are of an hote complexion: and Dioscorides sayth, sweete wines hath grosse partes in it, and doth breath out of the bodie more hardlye, it filleth the stomache full of winde, it troubleth the bellye, and the guttes as Must doth, but it maketh not a man so sone drunken, but it is most fit
of all other for the kidneys & the bladder. To whom wine is ill, and vnmete and verie hurtfull. ARistotell sayeth that wine is nei∣ther fit for children, nor nurses, and Galen counsayleth that chil∣dren shall taste no wine at all: and woulde, that not euen springoldes that are full growen, shoulde take wine but in small quantitie, bicause that it maketh them fall headlongs into wrath and into lust of the bodie, and maketh the reasonable part of the minde dull and drousie. Wine is ill also for them that are of a hote burning complexion, and haue any inflammation within them in their bodies, or haue any burning agues. It is also generallye ill for them that haue a great reume and the goute, or ey∣ther an halfe or hole palsey. The wine that is menged with Gipso or with Ali∣baster, as Sacke is, hurteth the sinewes, and maketh ye head heauy, & setteth it on fier, and is very ill for the bladder. Wine
that is menged with cute, as our Malm∣sey is, fill a mans head and make hym drunken, breath out more hardlye, and trouble the stomache, which wordes I iudge, ought to be vnderstanded of such a wine, as hath very much cute put into it. To whome and for what purpo∣ses wine is good. THe holy scripture sayeth, yt wine maketh the hart of man merie, and that it is good to be taken of them that haue a weake and a féeble stomach, and the .xxxj. chapter of the Prouerbes hath this saying, O La∣muell, giue not vnto kings, I say, vnto kings, wine to drinke of it, or to princes strong drinke, least they, after they haue drunken, forget the law that is appoin∣ted, or ouerthrow the causes of all poore mens children. Giue strong drinke vnto them that are condemned to die, and Wine to them that haue a sorowfull hart, that after they haue drunken, they maye forget their pouertie, and remem∣ber
no more their misfortune. Galen in his first booke de sanitate tu∣enda, sayeth that wine molsteneth and nourisheth whatsoeuer is before made drie out of measure, and also swageth and ouercommeth the sharpenesse of bit∣ter gall, and furthermore, emptieth out by sweate, and driueth forth by water. Out of Dioscorides .xj. chapter of the fift booke. GEnerally euery wine not mixed, and is only simple of himselfe, and is of nature in taste soure and binding, maketh hote, is ea∣sily conueyed into the bodie, it is good for the stomache, it maketh a man haue an appetite, it norisheth and maketh a man sléepe, strengthneth and maketh a good color, and if it be plenteouslye drunken,Wines good against di∣uers poy∣sons. helpeth them that haue taken Hemlocke, or Coriander, or the poison called Phari∣cum, or yt poison called Iria or Opium, which is the iuice of Poppy, or Litharge, or Eugh, or Wolfes bayne, or choking mushromes, or todestooles. It is also
good against al the bitings and stingings of all créeping beastes, which after they haue stinged or bitten, kill a man with colde, or ouerthrowe the stomach. It is good for the long continuaunce of windi∣nesse of the midrife, and against the bi∣tings of the stomach, and hitchcocke or yesking, and against bending or stret∣ching out of the stomach, and against the flowing of the guttes and bellye. Wine is also good to them that sweate much,Wine good for them that sweate to much. and are made faint with to much swea∣ting, and especiallie such as is white, olde and well smelling. Hitherto Dioscoti∣des. Whose words when as he speaketh of the holesoninesse of wines against poi∣sons, and the bitings and stingings of venemous beastes, must be vnderstanded of Muscadine, Sack, Masey and Ba∣starde, and such hote  which by rea∣son of their heate, enter farther into the body, and more spéedily, and are better a∣gainst cold poisons thā colder wines be. Simeon Sethi of the nature of Wines.
SOme vse wine for profit, some to make them merie withall, and some for pleasure, and some for all these purposes. Wyne doth not only nourishe, but also maketh the meates to go wel downe, and stirreth vp the naturall heate and encreaseth it. And the most part of them that vse it so∣berlye, when as their bodie is withered before, they come into a good plight, and looke well. Wine hath this propertie, that it carieth and leadeth the meat vnto euerye small part, and through streyte wayes by the proper thinnesse or subtil∣nesse of his partes, & it heateth the mem∣bers and small parts, and maketh a good digestion, & driueth forth water. Wher∣fore it fifteth forth the most part of super∣fluities, but the greater power and wor∣king of wine may be spied more plainly in colde and withered bodies, and where∣in is lesse naturall heat, as in olde men, and in such as are amended of their sick∣nesse. But wine worketh not only these things which we haue spoken of before, in mens bodies, but also sheweth cer∣tain
chaungings wonderfully in a mans minde. For it maketh men merie, and to haue a good hope, to be manly and liberal, and many that we sée before, cowardes, after the drinking of wine, to be made bolde, chearefull, of a good courage, and a good hope, and some that were niggards and filthy pinchers to be made liberall, and frée giuers. But wine if it be vsed out of measure, ouerthroweth and drowneth the liuely soundnesse and strength, and the naturall color, and it bringeth the hole palsie, the halfe palsie, the falling sicknesse, and the trembling of the mem∣bers, it noyeth also the godlye and prin∣cipall part of the soule, bicause they that gull in wine so, haue mistie and darke senses, and their minde is not cleare. Hi∣therto Simeon Sethi. Whyte small wines that haue no great smell, are good for the sinewes that are wounded. Wine is good to washe the moyst fleshe that is in olde sores.Some wines to be giuen in some a∣gues at some times. Waterish wine is necessa∣rie for them that haue the ague, and haue thin iuices therwith, & it may be giuē in diuers agues, as Galen saith in his booke
de methodo medendi, when as the rage of the ague is not great.Wine good for the gout, occu∣pied with∣out. And althoughe wine when it is taken inwardly hurteth both the sinewes and ioyntes, bicause it fumeth vp into the heade, and bréedeth rheumes which fall downe vnto them, yet for all that, if it be layde outwardlye vpon the ioyntes, it strengthneth them, and maketh them fast when as they are loose by melting awaye or resoluing the moysture that is in them, and for that purpose serueth best of all other blacke wine, for the more that it is binding, the more it strengthneth. Out of the boke of Galen which tea∣cheth that the maners of the soule, and the complexion of the bo∣dy follow one another. WIne driueth away sadnesse, and pensiuenesse, but it is ill if it be to largely taken. But if a man wil vse it wisely, it will digest, and distribute or conuey the nourishmēt, increase bloud & norish, & it wil also make the minde both gentler and bolder. Plato
in the .ij.Plato de le∣gibus. booke de legibus, forbiddeth all children wine yt are vnder .xij. houres old, for that intēt yt they should not be driuen therwith into madnesse, he suffreth them that are full growen in age, to vse it, bi∣cause it is a remedie against ye grieuous∣nesse of age, and driueth away sorowes, & swageth the hardnesse of maners, the age of springoldes or of growing children, is hote and full of muche bloude, contrary∣wise the olde age is colde, and wanteth bloud, therefore the drinking of wine is profitable for olde men, but to them that are in growing, it is excéeding hurtfull, moreouer Plato did not suffer that the souldiers shoulde drinke any wine in the campe, neither bondmen in the citie, ney∣ther princes nor gouernors in the cōmon¦welth, neither iudges, neither any other that should enter in the counsell about a∣ny matter, bicause that wine as a certain tyrant doth rule & ouercome the powers of the soule. Hitherto Galen. But bicause it hath bene diuerse times sayd, that wine is good for olde men, and it is not as yet fullye shewed what maner of wine that
should be, it shalbe best to teache men by Galen what wines are best for old men. Galen lib. 5. de sanitate tuenda, sayth: All your counsell must goe to this ende in chosing of wine fit for old men, that it may be very thin or subtil, in color redish yellow, or yellow, or pale yellow, which is of a middle color betwéene bright yel∣low and white.The war∣ming of all the mem∣bers in olde mens bo∣dies. There are two profites that come to old men by the vse of wine, one is, that it warmeth all the members of their bodies, and the other is, that it scoureth out by the water all the whay∣ishnesse or thin waterishnes of the bloud, and bicause it doth so effectuallye,The scou∣ring awaye of the whai∣ish watery∣nesse of the bloud. it is best for olde men. But such wine is it that is thin in substance, & driueth forth water, and is yellow in color, for that is the proper color of hote wines, and so also which haue bene from the beginning ve∣rye white, and haue gotten a certaine yellownesse when they haue waxed old, wherevpon they begin first to be a little yellowishe pale, and afterwarde to be plainly yellow pale. But such wines as are eyther pale yellow, or bright yellow,
and a fat substaunce increase the bloud, & nourish the bodie by reason wherof they are now & then good for old men, to wete, at such times whē as they haue not much wheyish moisture, & would be more plen∣teously norished, but for all that, aged mē had more nede for ye most part, such wines as make a man pisse much, bicause they haue such plenty of waterish excrements. Now good reader séeing that almighty God our heauenly father hath giuen thée this noble creature of wine, so manye wayes profitable for our bodies and mindes, thanke him with all thy heart, not onely for it, but also for that he hath sent learned Phisitions to tell thée how, in what measure, and in what time thou should vse them, and not vse them, and for what complexions and ages they are good, and for what complexions and a∣ges they are euill. If thou take any harm by misusing this noble creature of God, blame not him, but thine owne selfe, that hast abused it, contrary to his will, and to the learning of his officers & ser∣uants that taught thee the right vse of it. Honor be giuen to God for euer. Amen. FINIS.
This Booke sheweth at large the powers, commodities, vertues, and properties of the three most renou∣ned and famous Preseruatiues or Triacles: to weete, of the great Tri∣acle called in Latine Theriaca Andro∣machi: of the Triacle Salt: and of it that is called by the name of the first finder out and maker, Mithridatium: Gathered out of Galen and Aëtius, by the labours and paines of William Tur∣ner, Doctor of Phi∣sicke. Newly corrected and a∣mended. Mellis si nimia est copia, bilis erit.
William Turner to the gentle Reader. FORASMVCH AS both Christian charity, and the common ciuil loue that euerye man oweth to his countrye, woulde and doth require that all Christians and men liuing ciuilly togither in one common countrye, shoulde one helpe another with such giftes, either of the minde, as learning, knowledge, wisedome, and cunning, or with bodily giftes, as riches, strength and all kinde of mans helpe, if they be more rich∣ly replenished therwith than their neighbors be: Methinke we that professe the science of Phisick, and can shewe great helpe and comfort vnto our brethren and countrymen, as wel as men of other countries, to wete, Italians, Germanes, and Spa∣niards haue done, might iustlye be accused of vnkindnesse, if none of vs (being so many) would take in hand to declare in the English tong, the manifolde and worthie vertues of the great Tri∣acle made by Andromachus: and of the Triacle Salt, which is called in Latine Sal¦theriacalis. Wherefore seeing that hitherto
I haue not perceiued any man to haue taken that labour in hand, for the loue that I owe vnto al∣mightie God and his people, my countrymen of England, I will aduenture as well as I can, to declare the nature, vertue, propertie and opera∣tions of the forenamed Triacle, and also of the Triacle Salt. And bicause I am not minded to bring out any new thing of mine owne inuen∣tion, I entend for to gather the summe of this whole matter out of an olde Graecian, named Galen, the most famous writer of Phisicke that wrote this .xiiij. hundred yeare in all Europa, Asia, or Africa, and out of another famous Graecian named Aëtius, a man of great lear∣ning: who gathered into a booke that is now a∣brode in Latin, all the most notable compositions that his predecessor (noble Galen) lest behind him, and a great number of compositions of me∣dicines, written before Galens time by noble Phisitions, wherof Galen made no mention: and also of no small number of excellent compo∣sitions of medicines inuented by learned Phisi∣tions after Galens time. If this my paine taken in this matter shall be perceiued to be thankefull vnto thee, and to be well taken, if God sende me longer life and health, I will set something more
forth to the profite of all my country men, both my friendes and foes also. The maner of ma∣king of the great Triacle, and Triacle Sale, and Mithridatium, maye be had both in Galen to Piso, and also in Aetius. Wherefore if there be any Apothecaries of Lōdon, that dare take in hande to make these noble compositions, they may know now where to haue thē: or if that for lacke of some simple medicines, not easilye to he had in England, they dare not aduenture vp∣pon the making thereof: they maye haue them made alreadye from Venice, as faithfully com∣pounded at this time, as euer any Triacles haue bene made there these .xl. yeres. But now let vs reherse the vertues and properties of these excellent medicines. And first of the great Tri∣acle.
¶ Galen writeth to Piso this. THE TRIACLE DE∣uised by Andromachus the elder, is verye good a∣gainst the biting of all wilde beastes and Ser∣pentes, against poysoned medicines, against diseases of ye stomach, shortnesse of winde, against the Colicke, against the iaundise, the dropsey, the con∣sumption of the lunges, all kinde of crampes or drawings togither, the pleu∣risie, sores of the bladder, stopping of wa∣ter, paines of the kidneyes, pestilent dis∣eases, and also the biting of a mad dog, if it be taken in the weight of the Beane of Egypt, with thrée ciathes of warme water: that is about the measure of foure ounces and a half. It is also good against the long during paines of the head, disi∣nesse of the head, and hardnesse of hea∣ring: it mendeth the dulnesse of the eye∣sight, it helpeth the falling sicknesse, and them that cast out bloud, if a man will
giue it with the broth of Comfrey. It draweth out the wormes in the guttes, it helpeth those that haue diseases of the liuer and milt, it helpeth thorowlye the bloudie flixe, and the common flixe that commeth of the slipperinesse of the guts and stomacke, and the turning torments of the guts, especially if the guttes haue no inflammation or great burning heate in them. Besides this, when as the body wasteth away with to much sweating, and his strength is brought to weake∣nesse, & the nature of the disease will not suffer ye vse of wine, this triacle drūken, stayeth or stoppeth the sweate, and re∣storeth the strength that was weakened before. It doth also prouoke downe to women their sickenesse that hath bene long stopped, and it doth now and then open the stopping of the issue of the mo∣ther and of the Emrodes: for séeing that it is endued with sundrye and mengled qualities or properties, therfore it sprea∣ding abrode something & making them thin, draweth them togither, that they maye be sifted out. It vseth for to staye o∣ther
things that flowe aboue measure, by reason of the weaknesse of ye strength of the body, or the power retentiue or hol∣ding power, and therefore restoreth the strength againe: and also it helpeth all diseases of the ioyntes, when as the time of increasing the disease is past, and it is come to the highest, for then thou shalte giue to drinke this triacle after thou hast made fometations vpō the aking place, the which in déede shall driue awaye the flowing humors that are stuffed in, and shall driue backe those that woulde fall in afterwarde. This Triacle is good also for them that are of perfite health, if they take it oft. With the vse of this Triacle, I haue oft times helped those that haue the disease called in Greeke Elephantia∣sis, and (now commonly called the lepre or leprosie, which is not in déede the le∣pre of the olde Grecians, neither it that the scripture maketh mention of.) It is not onely good for the bodie, but also for the minde, for if it be oft drunken, it hea∣leth melancholyke diseases, and wasteth away blacke choler, by reason whereof
it is also good for the Feuer Quartaine which commeth of blacke choler,But it may not be gi∣uen in the beginning of a Quar∣taine. other∣wise called melancholy. I haue deliuered many verie easily that haue bene sicke of the Quartaine, with this remedie. For I vse first to purge the sick person by vo∣miting, which is done after meate, and the next daye I giue hym to drinke the iuice of wormwood, and then two houres before his , I geue him this Triacle, and oft times the pacient is by and by de∣liuered from his fit. This medicine hath accustomably taken away ye feare of wa∣ter, which of all diseases is the worst, and vseth to come to a man after he is bitten of a mad dog. They that haue this dis∣ease, are afrayde of water, and for the great drynesse that they haue within thē, they are desirous of moysture, but they forbeare or hold themselues from drink, bicause that they are departed from their right minde and vnderstanding, and con∣sider not what woulde helpe them or doe them good. And therefore it commeth to passe that they flying & eschuing water, wither, and are drawen togither with a
deadly crampe, by the reason of a hote a∣gue that they are inwardly burnt with, and so at length die the wretchedst kinde of death yt can be. I haue vsed somtimes to put some portion of this triacle meng∣led with rose oyle, into the wounde that the madde dog hath made, that it might after the maner of a boxing glasse, sucke and draw out from the bottome the ven∣nome, in so much that the Triacle is not onely good to be taken in, but also to be layde outwardly vpon the wound, which as soone as the dog hath made with his téeth, must be launced and cut rounde a∣bout and kept open, for the space of foure dayes, that the venome may therby breth out, that the wounde be not stopped or growen vp againe. And for this purpose ye may make a cauterisation in ye wound to kepe it long open, but bicause the most part of men can better abide the akings than the burnings. If the wounde can be kept open with only cutting, it shall be better to let it abide so, in tender and weake persons, but if it wil néedes grow to, then must it be kept open with bur∣ning
or cauterisation. A man cannot finde a better remedie than this triacle a∣gainst the pestilence, which being also as it were a wild beast, bred of ye corrup∣tion of the ayre, leaping vpon men by the inbreathing of that ill breaths which destroyeth, wasteth, and maketh hauock not only of one man, but of whole tounes and Cities. And as Hipocrates draue away ye pe∣stilence out of Athens wt great fires made of spice woods, and swéete floures, chaun∣ging the temperature of the aire, that men by this meanes might draw in with their breath the purified or clensed aire, for a remedye against the common euill that reigned there then: Euē so this Tri∣acle like a scouring or purging fire, will not suffer them that take it in before they be infected, to be infected at al: and deliue∣reth them that are infected already, if they take it in afterward, chaunging the mali∣cious poyson of the aire which they haue receyued by breath. And suffereth not the disease to spread any further. Wherfore I counsel thée, euen whē as thou art in thy
best helth, to vse oft this Triacle. But es∣pecially when thou makest thy iorney in the winter. And this Triacle strength∣neth also the wittes or senses. It quicke∣neth the minde or vnderstanding, and so defendeth the body, by reason of the mix∣ture, that it suffereth not the bodye to be ouercome by anye poyson or venemous drink or potion. As it is reported of king Mithridates, who defended himselfe so, not with the great triacle, which at that time was not, but with a preseruatiue of his owne making, which after his owne name was called Mithridatium, that he could not be ouercommed with a∣ny poyson, a man must vse this Triacle after he hath perfitely digested. Somtime in the quantity of a beane of Egypt with thrée ounces & a halfe of water. And som∣time when he hath more time to digest the medicine, he may take the quantitie of a Hasel nut, with four ounces & a halfe of water. But I would counsell no body to take this triacle in the heate of Som∣mer. Neyther ought it to be taken oft and much, of them that are of flourishing
or lusty age, neither of thē that are of hote natures or complexions: I counsell also that they whose yeres turne towards age doe take it oft and much, not with water but with wine. Children in no case ought to receiue this medicine, bicause it will dissolue or lose in pieces their bodies. For I remember that I saw once a little boy, who by the vnseasonable vsing of thys Triacle, fell into a palsey. Of the Triacle Salt. THe Triacle Salt is a medicinall Salt, made of diuers excellent herbes, and of burnt Salt and burnt Vipers, or else of the tro∣chiskes of Vipers being burnt. And the composition of this Salt, is found both in Galen and also in Aëtius. Galen wri∣teth thus of the triacle Salt: not word for word but in sentence, as I am ready for to proue, if any man holde the contrarye. The triacle Salt (saith Galen) is good for the same diseases, poisons, bitings and o∣ther things that the great Triacle is good
for, but it worketh not so effectuously nor in so short a time. Some peraduenture will thinke that the vertue of Triacle Salt shall soone vanishe awaye, bicause the Vipers which are the principall grounde of the medicine are burned, and thereby léefe their strength: but that is not true, for manye things by reason of the fire are made better, or else declare their nature that lurketh. We melt or trie golde by the fire, and it that is coun∣terfeit golde, is bewrayed thereby, and it that is good golde, is declared to be good, by the triall of the fire. And iron also is made soft by the fire and bowable, and so is made fit for many things necessary for mans life. Are not also manye things that we receyue inwardly for the norish∣ment of our bodies made better by ye help of the fire? Galen rehearseth examples of diuerse other things which are made better by burning of them in the fire. And so hée sayth, that al Vipers burnt whole, do put away their poyson that they had before, & are made holsome by the fire. Although
the triacle Salt be good for manye other things, yet properly and especially it hel∣peth those diseases that rise in the vtter∣most part of the skin: as the scuruye e∣uill that goeth through the skin into the flesh, and maketh it of a white colour, the common lepre of the Grecians and scrip∣ture, and the Wild scabby or scuruy euil. And it driueth awaye lice that bréede of corruption, and besides these, it scoureth the téeth verye well, and suffereth them not to be eaten thorow, and it strength∣neth the gummes that are lose, and hol∣deth downe or stoppeth the flowing and the rotting of them. Of the Triacle Salt: out of Aëtius. THe Triacle Salt is good for all things that the great Triacle is after a moderate maner, and sheweth his profite by continu∣all vsing of it: howbeit there are some that denie vtterly that it hath any power to helpe or doe any good, alledging that
the propertie of the Vipers is destroyed by the burning, but I dare affirme that although the Triacle Salt hath not so great vertues as the great Triacle hath: Yet neuerthelesse that it léeseth not his strength by the comming into the fier. For there are manye things which are found and perceyued to be better for that they haue bene in the fier, as golde, lime, and such like. For Vipers burnt whole in the fier, put awaye by the reason of the fier, their more strong and hurfull propertie, and take of the fire their hole∣some temperature and right propertie. The Triacle Salt is chieflye commen∣ded in helping the diseases of the skin, as the white Morphew, yt Lepre of the Gre∣cians, and Scripture, the wilde scurfe, and the sickensse nowe commonlye cal∣led the Lepre, which in déede is not the Lepre, but Elephantiasis, the blacke morphew, wilde scabbes, thinnesse and falling of the heare, for it doth awaye by and by such euilles or griefes of the skin and driueth awaye verye well sharp ex∣crements, being in plenty vnder the skin.
The vse of this Salt driueth out sweate of many, and so by the sweating, the rot∣ten substance is emptied out: in so much that certaine drawe out lice in the begin∣ning, within .14. dayes after the vse of this medicine at the most, & afterwardes there appeared no more anye lice, but some in stede of lice, cast out flemmy spit∣ting, beginning first with the casting out of the Salt: and then within a little while after, when the spittell is purged out, it is stopped. Ye maye vse it as well at dinner, as at supper, with what soe∣uer kinde of meate ye list to take it, nei∣ther shall ye néede to prouoke anye man further, to the receiuing of it. For there is such pleasauntnesse in it, that a man might saye, it were rather made for plea∣sure, than for other intentes. A man may take the quantitie of three spoonefuls in one daye, especially if the meate be well digested in the stomach before. They that eate it haue a better digestion, and a grea∣ter appetite to their meate, and they haue a more florishing or lustie body, and all their wittes or senses lustier and fresher.
It dissolues suffusions that are yet be∣ginning, and not fully growen togither. Neyther shall any man be in daunger of suffusiō that vseth them dayly. The same prouoketh the monethlye disease of wo∣men, that are stopped by reason of a clu∣stering or stopping cōgeling of the bloud, the same stayeth and stoppeth the outra∣gious and large flowing of the same. Whosoeuer will take it afore hand, shall ouercome all the lying in waite of beasts that cast out poyson, neither when a man is hurt with the venome alreadye, & take the Salt by and by after, shall run into a∣ny daunger thereby, especially if he haue prepared, or as it were seasoned the com∣plexion of his body a long time before, by the vsing of this Salt. It is good to flie for succour vnto this helping medicine, which driueth away the euill in the be∣ginning of the Pestilence, especiallye if thou menge withall some part of Tama∣riske. Furthermore the triacle Salt is good phisicke for the most part of all dis∣eases, and especially for such as are in the kidneyes, for it breaketh the stones that
are in them,Suffusion is the running of a noisome humor in the eye which if it be not stop∣ped, engen∣dreth haw and pearle in the eye, and some name this disease Ca∣taracta. and when they are sore wea∣kened, restoreth and maketh them freshe againe. There can no like medicine be giuen, to helpe the disinesse of the head, & headaches, and to the falling sickenesse, vnto this if a man will take it plente∣ouslye, for the space of a yeare, I haue knowen olde iaundises, and those that haue hadde yll miltes, and men diseased with the Colike, which fell oft into that disease, to haue bene holpen by this Salt. And I haue dried vp the dropsey with it, especially it that goeth betwene the fell and the fleshe. And I haue driuen away the disease of vnsatiable hunger, which is called in greke Bulimos, wt this salt: & also if it be eaten, it helpeth those that go in colde ayre, that they take no harme therby. It stayeth continuall quiuerings or shaking, that come to one by courses, and drieth vp moyst horce and coughes. This Salt spinkled vppon the meate bringeth them that were consumed with a consumption, to their right state again, and maketh them that are losed by weak∣nesse, to amende agayne. For I knowe
manye that haue had all their members losed, that is to saye stricken with a pal∣sey, restored to their perfite helth againe. This etable Salt a man woulde thinke that it were onely made for them that be∣ginne to haue the goute, and for all them that haue anye disease of the ioyntes, it helpeth them so spedilye. A man can not well expresse howe much this Salt will staye and hinder olde quarteyns, and do∣tings or madnesse, that ryse of melancho∣lye, if it be taken before the fittes, or in the space betwene the fittes, it killeth al∣so all kinde of wormes, it is also verye good to rub the téeth, speciallye the great téeth, for it doth make the téeth not onely the whiter, but also strengthneth them, so that no tooth shal mooue or be losed after, nor eaten thorow, nor set on edge. It draweth also out of the head ye great plenty of humors, & purgeth it and ma∣keth the eies lighter. The phisition must occupie this triacle Salt after diuers ma∣ners and wayes: as for an example. If he will giue this Salt to one that spitteth bloud, let him put the sixt part of Com∣frey
brused and sifted, to one proporti∣on or quantitie of this Salt: as to fiue spoonefuls of the Salt, one of Comfrey. In the curing of them that are sick in the consumption of the lungs, called the pti∣sick, and them that haue matter running out of their breasts: ye phisition must put also to one part of the Salt, sixe parts of Oris pouder, or Dittamy of Candy. To thē that are diseased in the liuer, Ground pine, to them that are diseased in the milt, the roote of Swines bread, called Cyclamem, or the barkes of Capers, or put vnto the sixt part of pepper. If thou wilt dresse it for them that haue the gout, take awaye the halfe of the prescribed weight of Satirion, taking good héede that thou stirrest not vp furious plea∣sures, & such as lose the ioynts in them. But the Salt will breake the stone in the kidneys, most of all if it haue mixed with it ye fruit of Balsamum or Grūmell sede. If thou wilt make a stronger power a∣gainst poisons, thou shalt double ye quan∣tity of Scordiū, otherwise called Water Germaunder, and Horehound, in the
making of the Salt: and beside that, thou shalt adde dried Duckes bloud. It will be better for them that are bitten of a mad dog, if they put vnto it the rootes of Piony or burnt Crabbes. The Salt wil be good for them that haue their neckes growen backwarde, by reason of draw∣ing togither of the sinewes, if they can abide to haue a litle Castoreum, and O∣popanax, mixed with it. It cleareth and maketh sharp the eye sight, if thou put in thy Salt ye leaues of Malabathrum, in double quantitie. It helpeth ye digestions of meate, if there be put in it a sufficient quantitie of Cassia, and Costus, for the swelling that commeth of winde. Put Commin to it, it will prouoke brine or water in greater plentie, if thou put of ye séede of Dancus to it. It will deliuer a man sooner from the quartein if right vp growing Veruin and Agrimonie, and the iuice of Cireneik or Laser it selfe be mixed with it. But to tell the summe of the matter shortlye. Whatsoeuer thou knowest to be holesome and good for the diseased member, mixe that with the
Salt: either in the making of it, or in the quantitie that thou entendest to giue in. But we must not giue it to them that are with childe, nor to sucking children, neither to other little children, neyther to them that are of a hoter complexion, and especially not in Summer, neyther to them that haue a sharpe and a drie ague in any case. Hitherto haue I written of the great Triacle and the Triacle Salt: but bicause there are manye excellent vertues, helpes, and remedies that may be had also of the noble preseruatiue me∣dicine called Mithridatium, bearing the name of Mithridates the king, who in∣uented it, I thinke I shall doe well also to declare to such as vnderstande no La∣tine, the vertues, properties, remedies, and helpes, that maye be had of that pre∣seruatiue: which maye be taken with much lesse ieoperdie, then the great Tri∣acle can be taken. Yea maye take at the most, the quantitie of a hasell nut of this medicine. They that are come to full age may take the quātitie of a beane of Grae∣cia, which is called Lotos. This quan∣titie
may be encreased or diminished in ye middle ages, and they that haue no ague maye take it with wine, or with ho∣nied wine, or sugared wine, or with spi∣ced wine, if that they haue a stopped li∣uer. But they that are agewish, muste take it with water, or Mede. It is verie good for old reumes that flow downe in∣to the stomach and brest, and for all im∣postumes, and deepe old exulcerations or wearing of the skin that are far and depe in the bodye. It is good for them that are in a consumption, and them that haue great plentie of winde in their bellies, and it helpeth the common flix, it men∣deth the dull appetite, and bringeth a freshe appetite againe. And maketh a mans body haue a good color, it breaketh the stone, it helpeth them that cannot but with great paine make water, and suffereth not melancholy to be gathered togither. It sharpeneth their sight that receiue it, if it be taken afore hande, it hath a great power to hinder or let that a man be not hurt with any kinde of dead∣lye poyson, for the which cause it was
first ordeyned and inuented of King Mi∣thridates. AN ADMONITION OF William Turner to the Reader. ALthough both Galen and Aëtius hath giuen suffici∣ent warning vnto all mē & women, at what times, in what ages, complexi∣ons, and in what diseases these medicines maye be hurtfull or hole∣some to the receyuers of it: yet marking the great dull grossenesse of many Eng∣lish men that cannot vnderstand it, that is plainly spoken, and the foolish hardy∣nesse of other some that care not for suffi∣cient warning, but will boldlye become murtherers of themselues, by misusing of Gods creatures, not vsing them by the aduise of almightie Gods seruauntes and officers the learned Phisitions, but out of time, and out of measure take them in, without al discretion, folowing
onelye their owne aduise or els the coun∣sell of some doting olde Gooddame, or some craking Cremer, or prating runna∣gate Pedlar, I cānot think my self suffi∣ciētly discharged, except I giue warning to all men and women that wil vse these medicines, that they take thē not in rash∣ly and vnaduisedly, without the aduise and counsell of a learned phisition, who may tell them, whether they be agrée∣ing for their natures and complexions and diseases or no. The which thing if they will not doe, neither will learne in what quantitie they ought to be taken, neither what persons, of what ages, nei∣ther at what times they ought to be ta∣ken, doubtlesse, I thinke that it will chaunce sometime, that the most preci∣ous medicines shall turnē to their owne destructions. Let no man now say but he is sufficiently warned. The great Tria∣cle & the Mithridatium may be had wel, euen of the best making, of the most part of ye Apothecaries of the citie of London: and sometimes of other that trauaile to Venice, all these three sortes are nowe
lately made and dressed in the famous Citie of Venice. THE NAMES OF DIS∣eases and griefes that maye be healed by the great Triacle, called Theria∣ca Andromachi, as Galen wri∣teth in his booke vn∣to Piso. THE biting of all venemous beasts and serpents. All kinde of poysons and poyse∣ned drinkes. The diseases of the stomach. Shortnesse of winde. The Colicke. The Iaundise or Guclesought. The Dropsey. The consumption of yt Lungs or ptisick. All kinde of Cramps, or drawings togi∣ther, or shrinking of sinewes. The pleuresey or side ague with a stitch, and spitting of bloud, and vlcerations. Sores of the bladder. Stopping of water or vrine.
Paines of the Kidneyes. Pestilence, and pestilent diseases. The biting of a mad dog. Olde headakes. Disinesse of the head. Hardnesse of hearing. The dulnesse of the eye sight. The falling sicknesse. Vomiting of bloud. Wormes in the guttes. The diseases of the Liuer. The diseases of the Milt. The bloudie flix. The common flix. The turning tormentes of the guttes. Wasting away with to much sweating. The stopping of womens monthly sick∣nesse. The stopping of the mother. The stopping of the Emrodes. All superfluous flowings of the body. All diseases of the ioyntes. Poysoning, and falling to perillous dis∣eases. The common Lepre called Elephantia∣sis.
The disease of the minde that came of melancholye. All melancholicke diseases. Plentie of choler: called melancholy. The quartaine ague. The feare of water after the biting of a mad dog: The weakenesse of the wittes or senses. THE NAMES OF THE diseases and griefes that maye be hea∣led by the Triacle Salt: according vnto the learning of Ga∣len and Aëtius. All the diseases of the skin, but chiefly these that follow. THe white Morphew. The Lepre of the Grecians and scripture. The wilde scurfe. The common Lepre, called in Latin E∣lephantiasis. The blacke morphew. Wilde scabbes. The falling of the heare.
Thinnesse of the heares. Stopping of sweate. Ouermuch plentie of flegmaticke excre∣ments. Lacke of digestion. Lacke of appetite. Dulnesse of senses or wittes. Suffusions that bréede the hawe, and pearle in the eye, called of some Cata∣racta. Stopping of venemous diseases. The outragious flowing of venemous diseases. The bitting of venemous beasts and ser∣pentes. The pestilence and contagious aire. The disease of the kidneyes. The debilitie and weakenesse of the kid∣neys. Olde headaches. The falling sicknesse. Olde Iaundise. The diseases of the Milt. The Colicke. The dropsey. The vnsatiable hunger called Bulimos.
The cold yt a mā taketh in cold weather. Shakings and tremblings, that come before agues. Consumptions, Ptisicks, and wastings of the bodye. The Palsie and weaknesse of the ioints, and other members. The Goute. All diseases of the ioyntes. Olde quartaines. Dotings, and madnesse that come of me∣lancholie. All kinde of wormes that breede within a man. The rotting & other diseases of the téeth. Rheumaticke humors in the head. Certaine diseases of the eyes. THE NAMES OF THE diseases that may be healed by the no∣ble preseruatiue medicine called Mi∣thridatium, as Galen and Aëtius and all other learned Phisitions, that wrote after them of such matter, do beare witnesse in their writings.
THe stopping of the Liuer. Olde reumes flowing downe into the stomacke and brest. Impostumes. Déepe vlcerations, and of scraping of the skin that are farre in the body. Consumptions and Ptisicks. Windynesse in the body. The common flixe. The dull appetite. Euill fauored color of the face and other places of the body. The stone. Hardnesse and painefulnesse in making of water. Gathering togither of melancholy. Dulnesse of the eye sight. All deadly poyson. FINIS. ¶ Imprinted at London by William Seres, dwelling at the West ende of Paules, at the signe of the Hedge∣bogge.
