4890.3 22175246 25222
THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Briefe notes on Luke 17. vers. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. By MATHEVV CAYLIE Minister of Gods Word at Maidford in Northamptonsh. LONDON, Printed by I L. for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at his shop, at the entring in of Popes head Allie out of Lumbard-streete. 1623.
To the VVor∣shipfull, Master Richard Trist, of Maidford in Northamptonsh. WOrthy Sir, (Not to prefixe a tedi∣ous Epistle, be∣fore so small a Treatise) hauing a resolution for the publication hereof, (for reasons knowne to my selfe, and perhaps, not vn∣knowne to some that know mee) I make bold (I hope, not too bold) to present the same vnto you, to te∣stifie my respect of you.
Your Acceptance, Peru∣sall, Patronage, are the onely things I desire; though I cannot say, as the Iewes concerning the Cen∣turion in the Gospel, thatLuk. 7. 4. either it, or my selfe, is worthy for whom you should doe this. The God of heauen, the giuer of all good blessings, blesse you, & yours, prosper, and pre∣serue you blamelesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ. A Petitioner for you, vnto the throne of grace, MATH, CAYLIE.
THE CLEANSING OF THE TEN LEPERS: OR, Briefe notes on Luk. 17. vers. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And when he saw them, hee said vnto them, Goe, shew your selues vnto the Priests. And it came to passe, that as they went, they were cleansed. And one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned backe, &c. IN the three former verses, where this Hi∣storie of Christs clean∣sing
the ten Lepers be∣ginneth, the Euangelist setteth downe: First, the time, and that was, when he went to Hierusalem, which going is to be re∣ferred to his last iour∣ney thither; Hee went thither, though he knew (as hee foretelleth his Disciples in the next chapter Verse 32, 33.) that he should bee mocked, spitefully entreated, spitted on, scourged, and put to death: that by his going thither so freely, hee might shew that he suf∣fered there willingly. Secondly, the place;
hard by a certaine vil∣lage, the Lepers being prohibited to enter into any village. Thirdly, the persons themselues that were cleansed, and they are described: first, by their number; ten: se∣condly, by their disease, which was a leprosie: thirdly, by the place where they stood, and that was, a farre off: fourthly, the occasion: 1. their meeting our Sa∣uiour. 2. their petiti∣on, they lifted vp their voices, and said, Iesus, Master, Haue mercy on vs.
Now concerning these verses: In the 14. verse there may be obserued foure particulars. 1. Our Sauiours compassion, when he saw them: 2. his commandement, He said vnto them, Goe shew your selues vnto the Priests: 3. the Lepers obedience, they went: 4. their clean∣sing, It came to passe, that as they went, they were cleansed. And in the verses following, there is set downe what followed vpon their cleansing: 1. that one of them, who was a Sa∣maritane, returned, and
glorified God, and gaue thankes: 2. The ingrati∣tude of the other nine, which, how our Sauiour detested, hee shewed: 1. by his interrogation, Were there not ten clean∣sed? but where are the nine? 2. by his collau∣dation of the other, be∣ing a stranger: There are not found that returned to giue glory to God, saue this stranger; Whom therefore he dismisseth with this encomium; A∣rise, goe thy way, thy faith hath made thee whole: ver. 19. Now to such ob∣seruations as the words will afford.
And when he saw them. Wee may here behold our Sauiours easinesse to be entreated, his readi∣nesse to looke vpon and helpe distressed petitio∣ners; These poore men cryed & he heard them. He neither (like scorne∣full persons amongst vs, who will not vouchsafe to looke vpon a poore bodie) withdrew his eyes from their persons, for he saw them; neither (like our deafe world∣lings, who will not heare the cries of the needy) turned he his eares from their prayers: for hee
heard them. Neither like our churlish Nabals, (who refuse to releeue the distressed) denied he their requests, for he cleansed them. Thus the eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, his eares are open vnto their cry, and he deliuereth them out of their distressePsal. 34. 15.. The Lord who dwel∣leth on high, and hath respect vnto the lowly, heard Ionah, though he was in the sea, in a lowe place, euen in the fishes belly, when he cryedIon. 2. 1.. Hee heard the pensiue Publicane, (though
knowing his owne fil∣thinesse by reason of sin, the spirituall leprosie, as these lepers, by reason of their corporall le∣prosie,) he stoode afarre off, when hee prayedLuk. 18. 13▪. Surely, The Lord is nigh vnto all them that call vpon him, to all that call vpon him in truth: Hee will fulfill the desire of them that feare him, hee will heare their cry, and saue them, Psal. 145. 18, 19. When the Lord cal∣led Samuel, Samuel; Sa∣muel answered, Speake Lord, for thy seruant
heareth1. Sam. 3. 10.; When a god∣ly man in his minde cal∣leth, Lord, Lord, the Lord will graciously answer, Speake seruant, for thy Lord heareth. Salomon said to Bathshe∣ba, desiring (as shee said) one small petition of him; I will not say thee nay; but yet he de∣nyed her request1 King. 2. 20., but the Lord who hath said, Aske and it shall be giuen you, he will not refuse to giue to them that doe aske. Indeede the woman of Canaan cryed, but our Sauiour at first answered her
not a word; shee eryed againe, and said, Lord helpe me, yet he helped her notMat. 15. 23.; but hereby he sheweth not that he is vnwilling to heare and helpe, but how willing hee is to haue vs holde out in praying. Hee de∣nyeth vs present audi∣ence to make vs cry with the more instance; and they that with that wo∣man, cry instantly, and doe holde out perseue∣rantly, shall at length (as shee did) finde, that the Lord, though he be not alwayes presently entreated, yet is easie to
be entreated, and ready to heare, and grant such requests as are made ac∣cording to his will, as S. Iohn saith1. Ioh. 5. 14. 15.. Here then may they iustly be checked, who, as if the Lord was inex∣orable, will rather runne to any other then vnto him in the day of trou∣ble. This is the reason, why so many liue in want, because they will not betake themselues to the meanes for sup∣ply; they haue not, be∣cause they aske notIam. 4. 2.. In this it is true, Spare to speake, and spare to
speede. First, aske, and then (not before) it shall be giuen vnto you, Mat. 7. 7. 2. Heere is comfort for poore Christians: worldlings are vnmerci∣full, the times are hard, and the prices of victu∣als high; but yet the Lord is bountifull, and open-handed: As his plenty is not abated, so his goodnesse is not di∣minished, and he is now as heretofore, easie to be entreated. In the siege of Samaria, when the famine was so great, as mothers made their
children their meate, one of them cryed vnto the king of Israel, saying; Helpe my Lord, O King; And he said, If the Lord doe not helpe thee, whence shall I helpe thee2 Kin. 6. 26. 27.? But whosoeuer cryeth vnto the king of heauen, and saith, Helpe my Lord O King, he will say, If no man succoureth thee, yet will I helpe thee; He will not suffer the soules of the righteous (that cry vnto him) to famishPro. 10. 3 but will satisfie them in the daies of dearth, as the Psalmist speakethPsal. 37. 19; according to his pro∣mise,
(Heb. 13. 5.) hee will not forsake them, neuer faile them, nor withholde any good thing from themPsal. 34. 10.. 3. But lastly, although the eyes of the Lord are vpon the righteous, yet his face is against them that doe euillPsal. 34. 16. He ful∣filleth (indeede) the de∣sire of them that feare him, but as for vngraci∣ous and imprudent per∣sons, hee will not in fa∣uour be found of them, nor to their benefite heare them: When these spreade foorth their hands, he will hide his eyes from them;
when they make many praiers, hee will not heareEsa. 1. 15.. More particu∣larly, hee will neither heare the praiers of them that turne their eares from the poore, when they cry; nor of those that listen not to the word when it is preached: Who so stop∣peth his eares at the cry of the poore, hee also shall cry himselfe, but shall not be heardPro. 21. 13; And hee that turneth away his Eare from hearing the Lawe, euen his prayer shall bee abhominablePro. 28. 9; I wil close vp this point with the words of the man that
was blind, God heareth not sinners, but if any man bee a worshipper of God, and doth his will, him he heareth Ioh. 9. 31. Text.. Goe shew your selues vnto the Priests. This commandement our Sa∣uiour gaue vnto them, because (to omit other reasons) it was ordained, that the lepers in the day of their cleansing, should bee brought vnto the Priest, by whom they should bee discerned to be cleane, according to that which wee reade, Leuit. 14. 2. Now here∣by  he teacheth vs, That
none of the ordinances and rites which were prescribed by God, were to bee neglected, disregarded, or disused, vntill the Lord himselfe who ordained them, did disanull them. These are the commaundements, the ordinances, and the iudgements (said Moses) which the Lord your God commanded mee to teach you, that yee might do them Deut. 6. 1: where as by the word (Com∣mandements) is meant the morall Law, and by the word (Iudgements) the iudiciall Law; so the
Ceremoniall Lawe is meant by the word (or∣dinances) all which were to bee reuerenced, and obserued, vntill the time of reformation, (as the Apostle saith Heb. 9. 10) that is, of Christs reuealing came, who was the body of those shadows. Concer∣ning Circumcision, the Law was, Euery man∣child among you shall bee circumcised; of him that was vncircumcised, it is said, That soule shall be cut off from his people Gen. 17. 10. 14., Concerning the Passe∣ouer, all the congregati∣on of Israel was to keepe
it: and whosoeuer did eate leauened bread for the space of seuen daies, wherein leauen was for∣bidden, euen that soule should be cut off from the Congregation of Israel Exod. 12. 19. 47.. So Aaron was to make the belles which were vpon his garment, to sound, when he went into the holy place before the Lord, and when he came out, that he die not, saith the text Exod. 28. 35.. And the Priests, When they went into the Tabernacle of the Congregation, or to the Altar to minister, were to wash their hands, and
their feete in the brazen lauer, that they die not Exod. 30. 20.. Zachary and Elizabeth are commended for wal∣king, as in all the com∣mandements, so in all the ordinances of the Lord Luk. 1. 6.. Yea our Saui∣our himselfe, shewing his due regard vnto them, was circumcised the eight day, presented vnto the Lord, went to Ierusalem at times ap∣pointed; and (as hee did here) enioyned the le∣pers whom he cleansed, to goe shew themselues to the Priests. The multitude of ceremo∣nies
which were to be vsed before Christs comming, the Lord hath now (as it is obser∣ued) reduced to two Sacraments; And as those heretofore, so these now are to be re∣spected, not disregarded, not despised. Farre be it from any man to scorne them, because of the meane shew they make; or basely to esteeeme of them, because they seeme weake and sim∣ple: rather must we giue them their due valuati∣on, because they bee of diuine institution. Let vs
reuerence and honour them, feeing that the Lord hath ordeined them. Verily, I say vn∣to you, whosoeuer shall despise one of these (as to the carnall eye they seeme) vile Sacraments which Christ hath or∣dained in his Church, it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his necke, and that hee were drowned in the depth of the sea. As they went. The ex∣ample  of these men, tea∣cheth vs obedience to Gods cōmands. When Elisha said vnto Naa∣man
(who was also a le∣per,) Goe and wash in Iordan seuen times, and thou shalt be cleane; Naa∣man at first was wroth, saying, Behold, I thought, he will surely come out to mee, and stand and call on the name of the Lord his God, and strike his hand ouer the place, and recouer the leper; and he went away in a rage 2. King. 5. 10, 11.. But when our Sauiour said vnto these lepers, Goe shew your selues to the Priests, they were not angry, neither murmu∣red they and said, Be∣hold, We thought, he
will surely come vnto vs, and put forth his hand, and touch vs, (as he did another leper, Matthew 8. vers. 3:) but they without any adoe, cheerefully went their waies. I might tell you of the like obedience of Abraham, who when the Lord said vnto him, Get thee out of thy coun∣trey from thy kindred & fathers house, departed as the Lord had spoken vnto himGen. 12. 1. 4.: and of other holy men, all which haue said vnto God, as the people to Iosuah, All that thou commandest vs,
we will doe, and whither soeuer thou sendest vs, we will goeIosh. 1. 16 Vse 1.. Now for the vses of this point. First, these lepers beeing comman∣ded to goe, went. There are diuers in these daies, who being commanded to goe, goe not; like vnto him in the Gospel, to whom when his father said, Goe worke to day in my vineyard, went notMath. 21. 30.; And, as those idle loyterers, to whom it was spoken, Math. 20. 6. Why stand ye here all the day idle? they stand still, as though they had no
commandement to goe about the works of that vocation wherein God hath set them. But we are all enioy∣ned to goe; Magistrates must goe to the gate and iudge the peopleExod. 18. 22.. Mi∣nisters must goe and preach the GospelMark. 16. 15.: People must goe and worke with their owne hands, & do their owne businesse, that is, such as to their speciall places appertaineth1. Thess. 4. 11.. As the Lord therfore hath cal∣led euery one, So let him walke, as the Apostle saith. 1. Cor. 7. 17. Thus
much for the particular calling. Secondly, for our ge∣nerall calling. As these Lepers went, so they went (as it may be well thought) directly; and not as Ionah, who being commanded to Arise and goe vnto Nineueh, arose to flie to TarshishIonah 1. 2, 3.. And thus must Christi∣ans go directly also, and make straight pathes to their feete, as the He∣brewes are exhorted, Heb. 12. 13. They must beware of circuiting perambulations, & take neede of going about,
and fetching of com∣passe in religion: Their eyes must looke right on, and their eye-lids straight before themProu. 4. 25.. Let vngodly men gal∣lop for their pleasure, or profit, or preferment, in by-pathes and wry∣waies; wee must with Dauid runne (and that directly) in the way of Gods cōmandements, and turne aside neither to the right hand, nor to the leftDeut. 5. 32.. We must still be ayming at the marke of the high price of our calling, and haue it al∣waies in our eye (as it
were:) and (as Paul went with a straight course vnto CoosAct. 21. 1.,) so must wee striue to keepe an euen and direct course vnto it. Lastly, These Lepers went, and went on still, till they came to the Priests; So Christians hauing once entred the way that leadeth vnto life, must not then sit downe, but be still going onwards. Saint Paul reached forth and pres∣sed still toward the marke, Phil. 3. 13. And as he did thus himselfe, so exhorted hee others,
saying, So runne that yee may obtaine, 1. Cor. 9. 24. Now they that would obtaine, must not giue ouer running, till they come to the goale; Though now and then we slip and fall, and so are staied, yet we must not lye still, but vp a∣gaine, and make more hast in our way then be∣fore; And to be short, we must go from know∣ledge to knowledg, from strength to strength, from vertue to vertue, from grace to grace, till we become perfect men in Christ Iesus. Thus
much of the obedience of these Lepers; Now in the next place let vs goe on to what happe∣ned vnto them in the way, as they went: And it came to passe, that as they went, they were cleansed. As they went, they were cleansed: From hence we may obserue; that, As we walke ac∣cording to Gods com∣mandements, it shall goe well with vs. If Naaman the Syrian had not at last washed in Iordan, as Elisha badde him, hee might well haue beene a
leper vnto the day of his death; but going down, and dipping himselfe seuen times, according to the saying of the man of God, his flesh came again like vnto the flesh of a little childe, and he was cleane2. King. 5. 10, 11. 14.. And if these lepers had not went, as our Sauiour bad them, they might as well haue continued still as they were vncleane; but as they went, accor∣ding to his commande∣ment, they were clean∣sed: As also the blind man going and washing in the poole of Siloam,
whither Christ sent him, came backe againe seeing, and his eyes were openedIoh. 9. 7.. More generally: As Iosiah did iudgement and iustice, as he iudged the cause of the poore and nee∣die, it was well with himIerm. 22. 16.; and it was as well with Vzziah, as long as he reigned well: as long as he sought the Lord, God made him to pro∣sper2. Chron. 26. 5.. What the Pro∣phet Ieremy said vnto Zedekiah is worthy the remembring: Obey, I be∣seech thee, the voice of the Lord, so shall it be well
vnto thee, Ierem. 38. 20. And to the same pur∣pose is that exhortation of Moses to the Israe∣lites: You shall walke in all the waies which the Lord your God hath com∣manded you, that yee may liue, and that it may be well with you, Deut. 5. 33. It is not then in vaine to serue God, as the wicked imagine; It was not in vaine that these lepers went, according to Christs commande∣ment; neither will it be in vaine for vs to walke, according to Gods cō∣mandement. As they
went, they were cleansed; and as we walke, we shal be blessed. Blessed is eue∣ry one that feareth the Lord, that walketh in his waies: Happy shalt thou be (that doest thus) and it shall be well with thee, as the Psalmist saith, Psal. 128. 1, 2. Secondly, they take but an ill course to thriue and prosper, that wander in the by-waies of disobedience; and they are farre wide, that imagine that it shall bee well with them, as they liue ill. It will bee euill with such, and that,
first, in regard of their bodies. Our Sauiour cleansed these Lepers that were obedient; but the Lord will smite such as are disobedient, with the pestilence, with a consumption, and a fe∣uer, an inflammation, with the botch, and the itch Deut. 28. 21. &c.; As Gehazi was smitten with the Lepro∣sie for his falshood, 2. King. 5. 27. and Vzziah for his pride. 2. Chron. 26. 20. And 2. in regard of their estates, for, the treasures of wickednesse will profite nothing: Prou. 10. 2. They may
indeede prosper in the world, but alas, their ve∣ry prosperity shall de∣stroy them, Prou. 1. 32. Hence it is, that as the Lord would haue it pronounced to the righ∣teous, that it shall bee well with them, for they shall eate the fruite of their doings: So hee would haue it denoun∣ced against the vnrigh∣teous, Woe vnto the wic∣ked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his hands, shall be giuen him, Esa. 3. 10, 11. 3. Lastly, here is en∣couragement for the
godly to proceede in the wayes of godlines, and (as the Lord said to Iosuah Iosh. 1. 8.) if they would haue good successe, to obserue what hee com∣mandeth. Indeede, as the most godly faile in their obedience, so are they many times corre∣cted for the same; but yet so farre as they are religious, so farre they are sure to bee prospe∣rous, as farre as they are godly, they are sure to be happy. Surely I know (saith Solomon) that it shall be well with them that feare God,
but it shall not bee well with the wicked, be∣cause they feare not be∣fore God, Eccles. 8. 12, 13. And one of them, when he saw that hee was hea∣led, turned backe, and with, &c. From the pra∣ctise  of this Samaritane, we may learn our duty, which is this, To glori∣fie God, and giue him thanks for fauours and benefits receiued from him; This is the expresse Commaundement of God; Call vpon mee in the day of trouble, I will deliuer thee, and thou
shalt glorifie me, Psal. 50. 15. Where, as prayer, so praise for deliuerance is required, euen as the Apostle also would haue thanksgiuing ioyned with prayer and supplication, Phil. 4. 6. So that there is a necessary coherence betweene prayer and thanksgiuing: as prayer is the sending out for those things wee neede, so thanksgiuing is for the receiuing of them; ha∣uing receiued the things by prayer desired of God, we must giue him thankes for the same. The first thing which
wee aske in the Lords prayer, is, to haue grace to glorifie Gods name; and the last thing we are to performe in the same prayer, is to ascribe all glory to the said sacred Name. Moses composed a song for the Israelites deliue∣rance from the Egypti∣ans, Exod. 15. 1. and so did Hannah for her sonne 1. Sam. 2. 1., both in thank∣fulnesse vnto God. Da∣uid calling to minde Gods benefits, and be∣thinking with himselfe, what hee should returne for them, What shall I
render vnto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? resolues on this duty, I wil offer vnto him the sacrifice of thanksgi∣uing, Psal. 116. 12. 17. And thus this Samari∣tane perceiuing that hee was cleansed, renders this sacrifice for the same, he glorified God, and gaue thankes. The Apostle foretold that in these last dayes men should be vnthank∣full, 2. Tim. 3. 2. We see the truth therof: People haue tongues to aske, hands to receiue, but remember not to glorifie
God, when they haue receiued what they aske. In time of famine, sicknes, or any aduersity, they vsually pray vnto the Lord for helpe; but when he deliuereth them out of their distresse, doe they then (as the Psal∣mist exhorteth, Psalm. 107. 6. 8.) praise him for his goodnesse? or may it not rather bee saide of them, as it was of Heze∣kiah 2. Chro. 32. 35., that they render not againe according to the benefite done vnto them? I know there are certain words of course, as, God bee praised, I
thanke God, &c. in most mens mouthes. Many there are that giue thanks and glorifie God for∣mally, coldly, and super∣ficially; but few that doe it feruently, & zealously (as this Samaritane did) who with a loud voice (which was argumentū zeli, a token of his zeale) glorified God.) Few cal vpon their souls to performe this duty, as Dauid did, Blesse the Lord O my soule, and all that is within mee blesse his holy name, Psa. 103. 1. But let vs be exhorted, alwayes in all things to
giue thankes vnto God; As we pray for them, so let vs praise his Name for them, let vs glorifie him for what hee graci∣ously giueth vs; It is a good thing to giue thanks vnto the Lord, and to sing praises vnto thy Name, O most High, Psal 92. 1. Thankesgiuing (saith one) was an exercise in Paradise, and it shall be an exercise in heauen; It shall continue, when others shall cease. In the next life wee shall not neede the Word, nor Prayer, nor Sacraments, but the praising of God
shall not cease, beeing a peculiar exercise of the Angels and Saints in heauen. Now if wee would euer praise him in heauen, we must first praise him on earth; we must glorifie him here, if we desire to bee glori∣fied, and to glorifie him hereafter. I say then as the Apostle to the He∣brewes, Let vs offer the sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, theHeb. 13. 15 fruit of our lips, giuing thankes to his Name; and alwayes remember, that in thanksgiuing as wee glorifie God, so wee be∣nefite
our selues; The Lord will willingly giue vs what wee doe aske him, when hee seeth vs thankefull for that hee hath giuen vs; thankes for former blessings is the way to gaine and procure future blessings. When he saw, &c. hee turned, &c. Againe wee may obserue from  hence, That as thankes∣giuing is required, so it is speedily to bee rende∣red; as it is not to bee omitted, so it is not to be deferred. When Si∣sera was ouerthrowne, Deborah and Barak, euen
on that day, sang, saying: Praise ye the Lord for the auenging of Israel, Iudg. 5. 1. 2. And as soone as this Samaritane sawe that he was cleansed, he turned backe (viz. from the Priests) glorified God, and gaue thankes. Remember then to doe this presently after the receipt of any bles∣sing; As we must be swift to heare the word of God, Iam. 1. 19 so must we bee swift to returne thankes to God. Indeede we must (as S. Iames saith Ibid. bee slow to speake: to wit, against the truth that is deliue∣red,
but not Gods prai∣ses for blessings receiued: we must bee as quicke in thanksgiuing, as God is in giuing; as ready to glorifie him, as hee to gratifie vs; to giue him thanks, as hee to giue vs blessings. Secondly, as thanks∣giuing is not to bee put off, so neither is any o∣ther Christian and reli∣gious duty; This Sama∣ritane deferred not his glorifying of God, & so we must not deferre our seruing of God. Dauid made hast, and delayed not to keepe Gods comman∣dements
Psal. 119. 60.; No soo∣ner did Ionah cry in the streetes of Nineueh, Yet forty dayes and Nineueh shall be ouerthrowne, but they cryed mightily vntoIonah 3. God, repented, and turned from their euill way. Our Sauiour hauing called Simon and Andrew, they straightway followed him, Mark. 1. 18. And Zache∣us made haste to receiue him, Luke 19. 6. Alasse, people in these times, who make quicke dis∣patch of their worldly affaires, are exceeding slow in the most im∣portant busines of their
soules. Good courses for the present are onely allowed, not followed: Conuersion and amend∣ment the most purpose, but yet deferre them, young men till they bee old, old men till they be a dying. But as for young men they must remember their creator, feare him, serue him, now in the dayes of their youth Eccl. 12. 2, and not put off all this, till their vncertaine old old age: and Audite senes Ioel. 1. 2., Heare ye old men, it is suffici∣ent for you that yee haue spent the time past
of your life in the base seruice of the world, sin and Sathan; now while it is called to day, turne from your sins to serue the liuing God. And let all, both young men and maidens, olde men and children, take heede of this delay and procrasti∣nation; & set themselues about religious courses, & Christian duties with all speede and expediti∣on. That thou doest, doe quickly, said our Sauiour to Iudas, Ioh. 13. 27. As hee made haste to saue our soules, so must wee make hast to amend our
liues. As Rebeccas friends could by no requests hinder Abrahams ser∣uant from speedy re∣turne vnto his master, so let nothing hinder vs srom present conuersion to God our Master; Make no tarrying (saith the Sonne of Syrach) to turne to the Lord, and put not off from day to day; for suddenly shall the wrath of the Lord come forth, and in thy security thou shalt bee de∣stroyed, and perish in the day of vengeance, Eccles. 5. 7. Were there not tenne
cleansed?) Here we may note, that kindnesse is shewed by God vnto the wicked. These nine vnthankfull lepers were cleansed, aswell as the tenth, the thankfull one. Thus wee see that true which we reade, Luk. 6. 35. That God is kinde vnto the vnthankfull, and to the euill. And as our Sauiour cleansed the bodies of these vn∣gratefull lepers, so filled he the bellies of his car∣nall and fleshly follow∣ers, Iohn 6. according as the Psalmist speaking of men of the world,
which haue their porti∣on in this life, saith, that their bellies the Lord filleth with his hid trea∣sure, Psal. 17. 14. As he filleth their bellies, so he filleth their barnes also: Yea, and so loadeth them sometimes with this worlds good, that their barnes are not large enough to receiue their fruits, and to hold their goods, as appea∣reth by the parable of the rich man. Luk. 12. 16. Thus corporal and tem∣porall benefits, Impijs impertitur Dominus, the Lord imparteth to vn∣godly
men. And this he doth: First, that they might bee the more in∣excusable, and haue no∣thing to alleadge for themselues at the day of their account. Se∣condly, that if they haue, or seeme to haue any good things in thē, they might not bee al∣together vnrewarded. Thus Ahabs temporary humiliation was recom∣penced with the re∣moouall of a temporall iudgement: and these le∣pers temporary faith with the remoouall of their leprosie.
Farre be it then from  any man to imagine that, the enioyment of temporall things is an infallible testimony of Gods speciall loue; that the Lord beares entire affection vnto him, be∣cause he hath temporall blessings bestowed on him; No man (saith Salomon) knoweth ei∣ther loue or hatred by all that is before himEccl. 9. 1. 2., that is, no man can as∣sure himselfe of Gods loue by the fruition, or of his hatred by the want, of external things. All such things come a∣like
vnto all (saith he) and are common both to the righteous and to the wicked: As is the good, so is the sinner, and he that sweareth, as he that feareth an oath. The want of outward things, as of health, soundnes, wealth, beau∣ty, &c. is not a token of Gods displeasure; nei∣ther the possession of them, a sure signe of his gracious fauour. A man may be poore, diseased, full of sores, and yet be regarded by the most High here, and eternally beautified hereafter, as
we may see in Lazarus. And againe, a man may be healthfull, & wealth∣full, cloathed richly, and fare sumptuously, and yet be hated of God in this life, and euerlasting∣ly condemned in the life to come, as we may see in the rich glutton. Luk. 16. Againe, let not any be offended to see, profane and vnthankfull persons lusty and strong, their eyes stand out with fat∣nesse, and their strength firme; neither be enui∣ous, when he beholdeth the prosperity of the
wicked, Iudge them not to be happy, but goe into the Sanctuary of God, then shalt thou vn∣derstand their cursed e∣state. Surely, their health will end in vn∣happinesse; their sound∣nesse and strength of bo∣die, in destruction both of soule and body, and whatsoeuer they solace themselues withall, in desolation. Lastly; As Gods good∣nesse is extended vnto the wicked, who are his enemies, so must our kindnesse enlarge and stretch foorth it selfe
euen to our enemies. If they hunger, wee must not thinke too much to feede them; if they thirst, to giue them drinke Rom. 12. 20.. Wee must do good to them that hate vs: That so we may bee the children of our Father which is in heauen; for he maketh his Sunne to rise on the euill, aswell as on the good; and sendeth raine (as) on the iust (so) on the vniust. Matth. 5. 44, 45. Were are the nine? There are not found, &c. From hence obserue, that, The mostare com∣monly the worst: The
fewest the best. Before the flood all flesh had corrupted his way vpon the earth; onely Noah was vpright, and prea∣ched righteousnesse 2. Pet. 2. 5. The people of Sodome, were all vicious; onely Lot was righteous, and vexed with their vn∣cleannesse. Of those that were sent to search the land of Canaan, ten were vnfaithfull; onely two, Caleb and Ioshuah, were faithfull. And of these ten lepers, that were cleansed, nine were vngratefull; one onely a Samaritane, thankfull.
The flocke whereof Christ is sheepheard, is but a small flocke, Luke 12. 32. There were but a few names, that is, a few persons in Sardis, which had not defiled their garments; that is, which were faithful, and had not beene infected with those sinnes which reigned in that Church, Reuel. 3. 4. Many are cal∣led (saith our Sauiour) but few are chosen Math. 22. 14.. If but few, euen of those that haue an outward calling, how much more few, if you consider the rest of the world beside?
The way of righteousnes as it is a narrow way, so it hath but few followers; whereas the way of wick∣ednes, as it is of greater latitude, so it hath a grea∣ter multitude of passen∣gers; as it is of larger ex∣tent, so there are many that walke in it, Math. 7. 13. The Apostle saith to the Philippians, Walke  as yee haue vs for an example: but wee are neuer wished to walke, as we haue the most for an example. Looke vnto the most, and thou shalt finde them neglecters of
Gods worship, propha∣ners of his Sabbath, contemners of his word wallowing in wanton∣nes, delighting in drun∣kennes, liuing in coue∣tousnesse, &c. Iudge now if such persons are fit patternes to follow: the more a man goeth after them, the farther he wandreth from God; whosoeuer walketh with them in the broad way, it will at last leade both them and him to destru∣ction. Enter not therefore into the way of the wicked, & walke not in the way of euill men, be they neuer so
many Prou. 4. 14. The Lord hath commanded, Thou shalt not follow a multitude to do euill, Exod. 23. 2. We must not goe after the many. As the Lord said to Ieremy: Let them re∣turnevnto thee, but return not thou vnto them, Ier. 15. 19. So let the most follow vs, but let not vs goe after them: though they worke iniquity, yet that is no ground or warrant for vs; rather a warning to vs to flye iniquity; the more they pursue euill, the lesse must we, and the more praise shall wee haue, if
wee follow after that which is good. Secondly, let vs looke, not what the multitude doth, but what wee our selues ought to doe; it was worthily spoken of Iosuah vnto the people, If it seeme euill vnto you to serue the Lord, chuse you this day whom you will serue; but as for mee and my house, we wil serue the Lord, Iosh. 24. 15. Though many of our Sauiours disciples went backe, and walked no more with him, yet his true disciples cōtinue stil with him, and say, Lord
to whom shall wee goe? Thou hast the words of eternall life, Ioh. 6, 66. 68 Though these nine le∣pers turned their backs against Christ, yet this Samaritane alone by himselfe turned backe vnto him; and thus must wee doe our duties, though few beare vs company, wee must set our selues about what∣soeuer is required of vs, though none ioine with vs. And that wee may doe so, let vs remember that it is better, far bet∣ter, to be saued alone or with few, then to bee
damned with many. There are not found, &c. All these lepers be∣gan fairely, nine quickly made an end; one onely returned and perseuered: and as herein hee went beyond the others, so for this, he is preferred before the others, and commended by our Sa∣uiour. Now obserue heere  last of all, that to begin well is not sufficient, but perseuerance and con∣stancy is required; with∣out continuance faire beginnings and glorious proceedings are nothing
worth. What auailed it Iudas, that he was an A∣postle, that he preached, that he carryed himselfe in an outward honest, and reformed conuersa∣sation a long time, when hee continued not, but by transgression fellAct. 1. 25? What did it profit Saul, that he began to reigne well, when hee turned aside, and fell away? what, Demas, that hee was a professour: yea, that he went far in his profession, when after∣wards hee forsooke it, and fell in loue with the world? And what Iohns
hearers, That they reioy∣ced in his light, when it was onely forIoh. 5. 35. season a? It was nothing worth, that the Iewes hearing Christ speake of bread from heauen, earnestly desired it: saying, Lord euermore giue vs this bread; when they went backe, and walked no more with himIoh. 6. 34. 36.. And it was nothing worth, that these nine lepers began so well, that they met our Sauiour, lifted vp their voices, saying: Iesus, Master, haue mer∣cy on vs: That they went to the Priests, as
they were commanded, when at last they shame∣fully forsooke him, and vnthankfully departed from him. Righteousnesse forsa∣ken or departed from, is vaine and forgotten: When the righteous tur∣neth away from his righ∣teousnes, and committeth iniquity, all his righte∣ousnes that he hath done shall not bee mentioned, Ezek. 18. 24. Where per∣seuerance is not, repen∣tance, obedience, hearing, prayers, yea sufferings are in vaine, Gal. 3. 4. Yea without it, hope of happi∣nes
is lost; for they onely that are faithfull vnto death, shall receiue a crown of life, Reu. 2. 10. And he that shall endure to the end, the same shall bee sa∣ued, Mat. 24. 13. This then must teach vs, not to be weary of well doing. Multitudes there are amongst vs, who (like the Israelites, Psal. 78. 57.) turne aside like a deceitfull bow; whose goodnesse is as a morning cloud, and as the early dew which pas∣seth away Hos. 6. 4.. Diuers there are, who, as Iehu mar∣ched furiously, so theya Mal. 1. 13.
beginne feruently; but quickly say, as the Israe∣lites, Behold what a wea∣rinesse is it a. WhoseMal. 1. 13. present courses if wee compare with their first beginnings, wee shall finde that, with Ephesus they haue left their first loue, and are come to a Laodicean temper. And because they are neither hot nor cold, the Lord will spue them out of his mouth Reu. 3. 16, and cast them cleane from him. But as for vs, we must not leaue our former loue, obedience, zeale; but rather labour to in∣crease
them: Nor be weary of well-doing, till the day of our dying. Wee must not change our good courses for worser, till we exchange this life for a better. It was Iobs constant resolution: Till I dye, I will not remooue my In∣tegrity from mee. My righteousnesse I hold fast, and will not let it goe. My heart shall not reproach mee, so long as I liue, Iob 27. 5, 6. Dauid saith, I haue enclined mine heart to performe thy statutes alway, euen vnto the end. Psal. 119. 112. Asa his
heart was perfect with the Lord all his dayes. 1. King. 15. 14. And Paul finished his course, and kept the faith. 2. Tim. 4. 7. And as these haue held out, so let not vs leaue off. As we haue entred into profession, so let vs persist: It is a shamefull thing to giue it now ouer. Let vs say concerning our religi∣on, as that worthy The∣bane souldier did con∣cerning his target, I will either defend thee, or dye vpon thee; and as Ruth to Naomi: The Lord doe so to mee, and
more also, if ought but death part thee and mee, Ruth. 1. 17. I conclude all with the prayer of Saint Iude: Now vnto him that is able to keepe you from falling, and to present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with exceeding ioy: To the onely wise God our Sauiour, bee glory and maiestie, dominion and power, now and euer, Amen. FINIS.
