540 99854375 19792
AN ANSVVER And true discourse to a cer∣tain Letter lately sent by the Duke of Alba (in maner of a pardon) to those of Amster∣dam, to be by them conueyed and distributed vnto the other Townes in Hollande. Set forth by certayn true louers of their natiue Coun∣try, namely desirous to liue vnder the due obeysance of the King of Spayne, according to the old customes and priuileges of their said Countrie: Faithefully translated out of the Dutch into English, by T.W. Imprinted at London by Henry Middleton.
To the Reader. HAuing of late diuers & sundrie times bene vrged to write, declare, & put in light the iuste occasions, mouing vs to put on armes, & to stand in defence against certain our straūge and foraine enimies: of whose force, vniust, and cruell tyranny, we haue also giuen to vnderstand al Christiā Prin∣ces and Potentates, nations and coūtries. And hauing also sufficiently answered and put to silence such iniurious and slaunde∣rous Bookes, writings, and libels, as our said aduersaries had put in light, whereby they thought & sought to make vs odious vnto al kinds of people: our hope and con∣fidēce was that thei wold haue once abstai∣ned from their slaunderous writings, sée∣ing it so smally serued their purpose: which for a long time they séemed to doe. But at the last, perceyuing yt since their ti∣rānous regimēt began, ye longer, ye more it became lothsome vnto all people: and that there was small hope to obteyne to their
former aucthoritie, force, and regiment, by force of armes, do now returne to their ac∣customed prancks, and would faine vnder pretence of pardons, and letters of fauour (through false accusations) bring vs in ha∣tred with all men, and by vntrue persuasi∣ons séeme to purge their owne factes, ther∣by alluring the people vnto them, and so by littel and littell reduce the townes & coun∣tries reuolted from them, to their vile yoke of seruitude. And to that intent haue they of late put forth a certaine letter vnder the name of ye Duke of Alba, offering therby pardon and forgiuenes vnto the said townes of al their trāsgressions (as they term it) cōditionally, that they shoulde willingly submit them∣selues to their obeysance and subiection. Which letters were by meanes of them of Amsterdam dispersed into diuers townes in Holland. Notwithstanding, we are assured suffi∣ciently that no person of vnderstanding & discretion, much lesse townes & countries, wilbe moued by these their cautelous and most false and slaunderous Bookes, to re∣turne from the frée and loyall obedience &
ruice of our most natural Lord and King he kyng of Spaine, vnder whom ye Prince f Orange beareth the gouernement, to he shamefull and accursed seruitude of a traunge generation: yet to the intent to make the trueth manifest vnto all men, & o detect the false and subtile practises and euises of our enimies, we coulde not but aunswere vnto the sayde letter. Desi∣ring al such as regard the common wealth of their countrie, the preseruation of his wife and children, his life and goods, to read this with indifferencie, and not to suffer themselues to be seduced by the false propositions of our sworne enimies, but rather with all their power to aduaunce ye iustnesse of our cause & deliuery of our coū∣trie, from the vnsupportable yoke of this straunge nation.
Don Fernando Aluarez of Toledo, Duke of Alba, Lieute∣nant, Gouernour and Captain Generall. TRustie and welbeloued, it is well inough knowne that the kyng our soueraign Lord is one of the myldest and most graci∣ous Princes that may bee found, yet haue the Rebells endeuored themselues with lies and false persuasions, to persuade diuers townes to the contrary, putting a doubt in their heads, to the intent to seduce and al∣lure them from the obedience of his maie∣stie, as they haue done: wheras in dede (as commonly the trueth will not remaine vn∣knowen) it hath appeared what hath bene done with the townes of Gelderland, Fries∣land, Ouerissell and Vtrecht, which were re∣uolted, who of their free accords vncompel∣led haue put themselues vnder the obedi∣ence of his maiestie, who hath not touched any one Burges or inhabitant of the same, but hath suffered him to remayne in his former estat, enioying and possessing their owne goods, as they did before their re∣uolt. But hath vsed rigor onely against such townes as haue offered weapons and stoode at defence: And the like grace as afore∣sayde
wee intende to extende towardes all ch other Townes in Hollande as in lyke rder will submit them selues to the obey∣nce of his Maiestie without attending the ōming of his armie, which we in the name and behalfe of his Maiestie, do firmely pro∣ise and assure by these presentes: whereof e thought good to aduertise you, to the ntent ye giue knowledge to the Townes whom ye hope wilbe reduced: admonishing them further to haue a regarde to this occa∣ion offered, not slacking the benefit there∣f, & to return to the obeisance which they owe to the Kings Ma. their naturall Prince and Lord, whose grace and fauour they with ll the Burgesses & Inhabitants of the same, o presenting them selues within xv. dayes after the receipt of your notice and insinu∣ation, shall receyue, without thinking on or calling to remembrance any matters past: whereof ye may firmely assure them on our behalfe, and wee promise you by these our letters by vs subsigned, that such shalbe per∣formed and accomplished without default or contrauention. Shewing them further, how greatly they erre, if they think to with∣stand the Kings power, and what euill suc∣cesse it will haue if they obstinately persiste
and will trye his Maiesties power and force Trustie and welbeloued, the Lord bee wyth you. VVritten in Nymmeghen the x. day of Februarie 1572. after the style of th Court, Signed F. A. Duke de Alba: And lower was written Bevtij. The superscrip∣tion was as followeth. To our trustie and welbeloued the Borrowmaisters, Schepens and Rulers of the towne of Amsterdam. Collected and conferred with the true and originall copie. By me VV. Pieters, Secre∣tarie of Amsterdame. An answere to the letter late∣ly sent by the Duke of Alba, (written in ma¦ner of a pardon) to those of Amsterdam, and to be by thē conueyed to all the Townes there about. THE confidence and assu∣red persuasion that wée haue alwayes had and yet haue of the kings naturall disposition, hath besides many other weightie rea∣sons
and considerations moued vs, that we can not ascribe or impute this vnreaso∣nable and tyrannous regiment, the open subuersion of all good customes, rightes, v∣sances, priuileges and liberties of ye towns and whole Countrie, vsed by a straunge Nation, now of late, cōtrarie to the Kings promises, letters, and othe, by méere force brought into the same, vpon the Kings Ma∣iestie. For séeing we haue effectually found him a louer of his subiects, a mild hearer of the complaintes and cryes of the poore and suppressed, a tutor of the iust, and a defen∣dour of the liberties and rightes of the coū∣trie. How can wée then beléeue by any meanes, that he of his own frée will, should permit (much lesse commaund) that these his naturall base Countries should thus pi∣tifully be suppressed, and by violence of a straunge Nation, brought to euerlastinge subuersion and ruine? For at the first, not being conquered by the sword, but through friendly alliance and agréement first ioy∣ned with the famous house of Austria, and afterwards with the Kingdomes of Spayne, and so from time to time haue vsed their entire affection and faithfull seruice, aswell
towards his Maiestie, as also to his moste noble Auncesters, with singular industrie and diligēce. Namely in the last warres wt France, it hath manifestly appeared, wher∣in they neither spared charges nor paynes: but to the maintenāce of the same, in short space leuied iiij.C. millions of Golde, and likewise in all other matters, declared to∣wards his Maiestie all due obedience. Also his Maiestie hath againe at al times shew∣ed a Fatherly and benigne disposition to∣wards the said Countries. Howe could hée then haue stopped his eares from the cryes and lamentations of his poore and true sub∣iectes? Or how could he shut his eyes and not behold the lasciuious and wilfull dea∣lings of a straunge Nation? or his hart be shut vp from hauing compassion ouer such a miserable destructiō of his Townes and Countrie, so florishing and prospering at that time, as no land in Christēdome more. Where as the States of the whole lande, aswell in generall as particular, yea the chiefest of the Nobilitie and Lordes them∣selues with humble Supplications, Re∣monstrances, Ambassades and many other meanes, haue obediently requested to bée
hard indifferētly, and to be released of such a tyrannicall yoke. No certainly, we know and beléeue that our King of nature is the most gratious and mercyfullest Prince that may be found. But séeing we know this, we conclude resolutely, that this is not his doing nor will, which by the Albanish facti∣on hath of late ben done, but they giue the King to vnderstand slaunderous tales by them falsely deuised, kéeping him faste in Spaine, to the intent he should rule accor∣ding to their appetit, abusing his name, seale, and blankes at their pleasure, giuing out commaundements in his name such as best serue for their purpose: which thing is so plaine and notorious, as no man is of so simple vnderstanding and iudgement, which doth not sée, yea féele it. For they perceyuing about vi. yeares past, the No∣bilitie and Gentlemen of the countrie, to take to hart the state of the same, presen∣ting Requests to be dismissed from the In∣quisition and tyrannie of the new Bishops, then could they beginne to say, that to the Kinges naturall good inclination towards his subiects, and their good obedience, great wrong was offered: as who would say, it
was not the Kings mind nor pleasure that his owne Landes should bee charged with such a tirannicall seruitude as the Inqui∣sition is, & that he neuer thought it, which thei published vnder the Kings letters and seale, which they sent not onely vnto cer∣taine townes and congregations, but like∣wise to certaine of the chief Lordes and Nobles of the Lande. Then within a short whyle after (thinking the time fit to serue their turne) they published new Letters & Edictes in the Kings name, expressely to the contrarie: wherein his Maiestie willed and streightly commaunded that the new Bishoppes, the Counsell of Trent, and In∣quisition should be planted, vppon payne of his extréeme displeasure. Within a whyle after, they considering a great alteration like to happen, and some commotion to∣wards amongest the people, not findinge them selues sufficiently strong, they once ageyne called in the same and in the kings name made a new agréement, confirming it vnder his Seale. But within a whyle after (béeinge prouided of a power) the Kyngs letters vnder his great seale, was by them broken and violated, and the com∣mons
charged with new othes and taxes. Then began the Gallowes, scaffoldes, and poles, to be erected, the swoordes whetted, and the fiers kindled, and then they began to murther, burne, and hang, all the kyngs true subiects without end or measure: yea the most noblest Lordes of the countrie were forced to flée or to be murtherid. Now wel knowing that they kyng hath no plea∣sure in these doings, that his true subiects should thus vniustly and tirannously bée handled, as he himselfe hath often declared, and as we are fully certified, do therfore (not against our kyng, but against certain presumptious straungers, which haue ad∣uaunced themselues to inuade our country without right or reason,) take the sword in hand to defend and deliuer our bodies from their bloudie swoords, our goods from their gryping hands, & our wiues and daughters from their vnchast desires, knowing ther∣by for certaine, that we do our Kyng here∣in both good and faithfull seruice: the truth wherof being vprightly related vnto him, we hope he wil take in good part. Therfore we do not estéeme our selues for rebels, as this writing doth vniustly charge vs, but
the Kyngs true and faithfull seruants, and so wil remain to the death, séeking nothing more than to defend his heritage from the execrable tiranny of straungers, so as the same be not compelled to giue themselues to any reuolting or Rebellion. We also denie that which they further alleage. That we with lies and false persuasions seeke to rayse a slaunder vppon the Kyng, to the states and commons of the countrie, therby to allure his subiects from his obedience, & drawe them to vs. Undoubtedly any reaso∣nable person, may easely consider this to be a false accusation, as all the other are wherewith they burthen vs, and that they themselues are culpable of the same: being manifest, that they haue alwayes wrought with open lies and false persuasi∣ons to set these countries at debate with ye Kyng, by false accusations, therby séeking occasion to inuade the land, and so to bring it vnder their subiection. This is easely to be considered out of the request for ix. yeres which in anno 1552. the King himselfe did propone vnto the generall states of the lād within the towne of Valencia: namely that the meanes wherby to maintain ye warres
against Fraunce any longer were at an end, and that his maiestie knew not how to leuie any more money. Desiring therfore that they would appoynt some amongest them, which were expert in the state of the countrie, to find some meanes to succour ye matter. Wheruppon an assembly of their Deputies was kept at Bruxels, where after many deliberations it was finally conclu∣ded, & to the King was graunted ye sume of eight hunderd thousand Gilderns a yeare, for the space of nine yeares, whereof forth∣with should be leuied vppon the sale of rēts xxiiij. hunderd thousand Gilderns for the mayntaining and paying of xviij. thousand footemen, and eight thousand horsemen, whereof the one third parte to be straun∣gers, and the rest inhabitants of the coun∣trie, and that for the space of vj. monethes: ouer and besides twentie shippes of warre for seuen monethes. And further according to the particular instructions therof made, to bring ye same to effecte, there were cer∣taine necessarie specified, without which it had bene hard to persuade the common people. Namely, that the states of the land should haue the administration of the mo∣ney
in their hands, and pay the Souldiers according to the instructiōs which should be deliuered vnto them on the Kyngs behalfe: and further they to appoynt certaine per∣sons which should haue the mustering of the Souldiours. This deuise did please his maiestie meruaylous well, and hée hartely thancked them for the good assistance and inclination they shewed towardes him. Which afterward (as appeared) was the greatest and notablest seruice which might haue bene done to his maiestie and the coū∣trie, for therby his maiestie in the extre∣mitie of his necessitie was so holpen, yt the Kyng of Fraunce was greatly amazed at it. This was the onely occasion whereby not onely goodly victories against the eni∣mie were obteyned, but likewise that in ye end a peace was concluded to the great ad∣uauntage and honour of his Maiestie and countries. All this notwithstanding, there were not a few amongst the Spaniardes, (Whose example some of other countries followed) who sought by al meanes to per∣suade the Kyng, that this kind of order did greatly extend to the abasement and disho∣nour of his Maiestie, for that the states (as
they pretended) did hereby schoole the King, and wold limit and set him orders at their pleasures: which by no meanes was to be suffred, for that ye same did tend to an open rebelliō; with many other like persuasions which they by night and daye propound to the Kyng, to the intent to incense him a∣gainst the lowe countries. Whereas their pretence was none other than to satisfie their vnsatiable auarice, & gréeued them yt they were barred from the handling of the money. This notwithstanding they haue since attributed the miserie of this Coun∣trie, which through their vnreasonable ty∣ranny is now happened, vnto the request of nine yeares. So as it is easely to be per∣ceiued yt they are those which wt their fay∣ned tales and false persuasions haue gone about to set debate and strife betwéene the Kyng and his faithfull subiects: which also did long before sufficiently appéere, in the time of the most noble Emperous Charles, for to the intent they might come to their pretence, and bring into the Countrie such placards vnder pretence of Religion, wher¦by they might be Masters of our goods and substances, yea ouer our liues, wyues and
children, they with false illusions did per∣suade the good Emperour, that the doctrine of Martin Luther did condemne all iurisdi∣ctions both spirituall and temporall, and did giue free libertie to all men to robbe, murther, and burne, and euery one to liue at his frée libertie: as is expressed in the Emperours placard published at Wormes in Anno 22. and since in these lowe countries. Through occasion whereof, so much inno∣cent blood hath bene shed in these lowe coū∣tries, as it is to be verified, that since that time to this day, there hath bene executed for their conscience sake, some with the swoord, gallowes, fyre, and water, aboue one hunderd thousand persons, all vnder pretence that they were followers of such peruerse doctrine as in the sayd placard is inuented. Who séeth not than openly that they with manifest lies and open vntrueth do séeke to destroy and bring althings vn∣der their subiection? Haue we not also séene of late in the proponing of the tenth penie, how they haue helped thēselues with false practises? For when they perceyued that they could not persuade the states and the Deputies of the townes to condiscend, they
declared they sawe euidently that it was not to be done, and therfore was it not their intent effectually to leuie the tenth penie as they had proponed: but yet to the intent they should shew their dutiful affection and inclination towardes his Maiestie, they re∣quested that it might be graunted vppon condicion, notwithstanding that it shoulde neuer be leuied nor put in execution. And hereof haue they giuen to the states of He∣naulde and some others, further actes and letters. This notwithstanding, they haue since by a méere force vrged the execution of the tenth penie, bycause they had written to the King of Spaine (as they said) that the same was graunted. These are the false & double pranckes, which they vse and séeke, therby to bring this coūtrie into the kyngs displeasure, and so finally to vtter ruine. Yea we sée that they in this their letter can not forget their wicked trickes and false lies, saying that we seeke to bring the tow∣nes from the true obediēce of his Maiestie, and to allure them to vs as wee haue done. They them selues doe certainely knowe that neither our meaning nor intēt is such, nor neuer was, as appereth, by all our
writings, reasons, protestations, yea by al our actes, workes and proceedings. Yea, so farre it is from vs, that there is not one towne or village, no not one man to bée found, which is escaped from these strange tyrants, but he doth acknowledge the king for his Lord, and wilbe obedient vnto him in all respects, and likewise will spend his life & goods in his seruice, yea with a more feruentie than euer before: which they shalbe readie to shew effectually, so sone as it shall please the Kyngs Maiestie to dis∣charge them of this insupportable yoke and tirannie. So that it is moste euident that we haue not diuerted any townes frō the Kyngs obeysance, nor séeke to doe, but to the contrary, they are those that vnder the pretence and shadowe of the kyngs name, doth practise to get them from the kynges obeysance into theirs, to the intent to exer∣cise their force and tiranny ouer them. Do we not sée how they haue brought a great part of Sapine from the kyngs obe∣dience vnder the subiection of the inquisiti∣on? So that they alone do rule and go∣ouerne ouer Uillages, Lordships, townes, and Countries, without acknowledging
the Kyng: Yea they haue already so play∣ed their partes within the kyngdome of Spaine, that neither burgesse, commoner, nor noble man, no not the king himselfe, dare doo any thing against the authoritie & force of the Inquisition. They haue their Courtes, their Officers, Promoters, Ser∣ieants, Spies, Traitors, and Familiars, which will be subiect neither to the kings nor their countries iurisdiction, in so much that they are estéemed and feared more thā the king: like as hath appéered sufficiently by some great personages not necessary to be named, and yit daily doth among the no∣ble men and burgesses, whom they daily apprehend & put to death, without hauing regard to the kings superioritie or custome of the land. This is the gouernment which they would faine bring into this country, the which bicause we withstand, we are termed rebelles, as if we did withstand our king. Hereby they giue openly to vnder∣stand, that they seeke to ascribe the kingly name vnto themselues: knowing wel that we haue not stirred against the king, but against their outragious tiranny, which we will maintaine so long as one drop of
blood remaineth in vs. And yet further doe they procéede with their Spanishe prankes, rehearsing here some Townes which they (to get them the more credit) haue left vnspoiled, alleadging that they haue spared all those which haue offered no defence, concluding thereby that to all those which would willingly giue themselues vnder their subiection (which they terme the Kings obeysance) no harme should be offered. Nowe, it appéereth eui∣dently, that all the Townes (in this Letter comprehended) haue already sufficiently declared, what their meaning and intent is, namely to withstand the tirannie of these blood suckers, and that to the vtter∣most: and to that intent did willingly re∣ceyue garrisons of Souldious: but being forsaken of those garrisons, and being not able any longer to resist, the Burgeses did surrender themselues into the handes of those whom they tooke for their enemies. Haue now the Spanards of remorce and pi∣tie spared those Townes, as they would fayne make vs beléeue? What occasion had they thē before or since to set on fire so ma∣ny faire places and Uillages in the Coun∣trie?
who neuer hurt them: and althoughs thei would yit could not offer any resistēce. Why haue they chased so many a poore mā out of his possession, destroying his house & grounde? Yea, what occasion had they to shewe themselues so cruell and furious a∣gainst the Towne of Machlin? sparinge neither Churches nor Cloisters, but made hauoke of all to the vttermost. Did not they of Machlin surrender them selues so soone as the garrison was departed out of the Towne? it is manifest, yes. And that which is more, they neuer would suffer a∣ny alteration of Religion, nor yit permit any preaching of the Gospell. What hath all this profited them against the gryping handes of these mercifull giuers of pardō? The like hath happened to Dirmonde and Audenaerde, whom they first put to raun∣some, and yit afterwards vtterly spoyled and sacked. Ouer and besides this, the Towne of Mons in Henaulde was taken in by force: the Commons whereof would neyther assiste nor helpe the Souldiours to defende the Towne against the Albanistes, (which since they haue repented) nor yet would permit any alteration in Religion.
Which Towne was afterwards agayne surrendred by composition into the Duke of Alba his handes, vppon promise by othe & letters, that none of the Burgeses should be harmed: which promise notwithstan∣ding, whē they were entred, and al things as they would haue it, hanged vp a num∣ber of them, and God knoweth howe the rest shall spéede. And here in Hollande, how haue they v∣sed them of Rotterdam, who neuer were re∣uolted from them, nor yit had commenced any alteration either of religion or gouern¦ment? yea neuer thought of it: and yit at their ioyfull, haue they not murthered the Burgesses in great number, contrary to their promise? And afterwards at their de∣parture out of the towne, had not they con∣cluded to set it on fire, the most part of thē being departed? to which purpose they had prouided a great deale of straw and other stuffe, and would haue brought it to passe in déede, if the Bailife and other good Bur∣gesses had not letted them, who perceiuing themselues to be the stronger party, began to take some courage, & to withstand them. Note further I pray you what faith or
credite is to be giuē to their promise which they vowe so surely, as maye be séene by the horrible murther committed by these bloudie houndes at Naerden neare vnto Harlem: where vppon like promise made (as aforesayd) the Burgesses of the Citie suffered, them to enter, vppon hope of safety of life and goodes. The Spaniardes being entred, caused the Borowmaster and the commōs to resort to a certaine great house standing on the market place, vnder pre∣tence to sweare them to be true to the king. The poore simple people hauing dispossessed themselues of their armour and weapons, comming to ye place appoynted, were there like a sort of Lambes most cruelly murthe∣red, in such sort as few escaped. One Cor∣nelius Gissebert being then Borowmaster, was murdred by ye hāds of ye Duke of Al∣baes owne son, & many of their daughters they rauished in presence of the dead carca∣ses. Not contented with this, they ranne to the other Borowmasters house, where finding him sicke in his bead, murthered him. Besides this they spared not so much as the poore impotent persons that they foūd in the hospitall, with other most execrable
déedes, as hanging vp of men by the priuie members, and women by their brestes. &c. Which outragious crueltie there commit∣ted was (as they themselues confesse) ye oc∣casion of their euill successe at Harlem, al∣leaging the words of Iudas, Peccaui, tra∣dens sanguinem iustum. And a certaine Spaniard taken before Harlem, before his death confessed, they thought to haue done the like at Harlem. These things considered, is there any to be found so foolish and madde, that would giue credite to their wordes? and suppose with himselfe, that they haue spared the townes for pitie and holinesse? Wheras it is euident, that such Townes as at their first entrie they did not altogither spoyle & ransacke: haue afterwardes bene so bur∣thened and raunsomed▪ as men haue bene forced to pay thrée times the vallue of their houses and goods. And now they declare, that they do intend to shew the like grace as is aforesaid, vnto the other townes in Holland, which henceforth wil of their own accord yéeld themselues to their obeysance. Certainly the grace wilbe great that they will shew, they will for a time dissemble
the mater and looke through the fingers, vn¦till such time as they shalbe masters of the Townes, and then at their pleasure will apprehend and lay hold sometimes of one dosen here, somtimes of another dosen there, of the chiefest and substantialest, and as they sée oportunitie cause thē to be hang∣ed vp: which wilbe thought by them a singu¦lar grace in so eschaping from being bur∣ned aliue. And so hauing all the other Townes likewise vnder their subiection, their crueltie will then first begin: for then will they build Bulworkes and Castels in all firme townes, and begin to take and ap∣prehend the poore Burgesses by heapes, sending some with Galleyes into Spaine, some to be sold as slaues, other to be hanged on trées and Gallowes, and so vsed as a sort of shéepe brought to ye shambels. Then followeth the displacing of Magestrates & rulers, taking away of priuileges, deui∣ding the gouernment amongst Spaniards and Italians, bringing in the bloudie coun∣sell, and Inquisition, which is ten tymes worse than it hath bene vsed in Spaine, ex∣acting the twentie, and the tenth, yea the fifth and the third penie, and so fulfill their
appetites vppon our goods, yea, with our wyues and daughters: to conculde to bring the whole countrie vnder the miserablest slauerie that euer hath bene heard of. This sure is the grace that they of their meere mercy thinke to vse, for what grace or mer∣cy is there otherwise to be loked for at their hands, if they should become victorious o∣uer ye coūtrie as ouer their enimies, & reco¦uer those townes which haue reiected their yoke? séeing they haue vsed such cruel tirā∣ny, oultrage & insolentie in those townes, which at the first haue as friendes receiued them, and shewed them all friendshippe, helpe and assistaunce. Enquire of ye townes of Maestricht, Shertoghenbosch, Wtrecht, Tourney, Valencien, Lyle, and other more where they haue lyen in garrison, what grace they haue there extended towardes the commons of the same? And whither there be any kynd of oultrage, insolentie, spite or crueltie to be deuised, which there hath not bene vsed? So as many of their commons haue in great nombers bene pi∣teously murthered, as within the townes of Lyle, Valencien, and Tourney, hath notori∣ously
ben séene, and would haue set on fire and spoiled diuers of the notablest townes, as we haue rehearsed of Rotterdam, and as was aparant at Wtrecht, where they were determined to haue done ye like. Yea let vs sée how they haue done at Amsterdamme, (which Towne was well affectioned to∣wards them). Let vs consider what good fruites they of Amsterdam haue reaped by it. These haue first exacted of them a hun∣dreth thousand Gilderns, vppon condition to haue no Souldiours: afterwardes, they were the first that were condemned in the payment of the tenth penie, and cōsequent∣ly haue so charged and burdened them, that the Towne is in a manner vndone. But for what respect will they be so fa∣uourable and mercyfull to our Countrie, to graunt this fauour towards vs? It must procéede either in respect of our persons, or theirs. As touching their owne persones, they muste be moued to it of nature, or in respect of their gayne and profit. It is no∣torious that of nature they ar not enclined to mercy or kindnesse to vse such singular grace towardes vs. For if men consider what cruell and inhumain factes they haue
committed in the kingdom of Naples, with in the Dukedome of Milan, in the Indies, and in all partes of these lowe Countries where they are become vanquishers: yea in their own natiue Countrie, by robbing, murthering, burning, rauishing of womē, cutting of childrē out of their mothers bel∣lies and such like abhominable déedes, vn∣der the colour of rebellion & heresie (which they alwayes alledge for them selues) no occasion wilbe therby found why any man might accompt them pitiful and gratious. Then this their pitie and mercye muste procéed out of a respect for their own gayn. But that can not be, for they think that the Townes which are declined from them, haue so done, bicause they did not vse suffi∣cient crueltie against them, but spared ma∣ny which now are become their chéefe ene∣mies, according to the prouerbe which their Vargas doth vse, Nimis magna clementia, nos perdidit:This Var∣gas is the chief of the Inqui∣sitours in the lowe Countries. that is to saye, Too much mercy, hath spilled vs. Now therefore they make their rekoning thus, that if they may once againe obtaine to be Maisters, they will so tame and yoke the Countrie, that thei shal not néede to be at great trauell or charges
to kéepe the inhabitants therof vnder their subiection. Nowe, séeing wée can not expect any mercy or fauour at their hands for respect of their persones? Let vs then sée whither they might be thereunto moued for respect of ours: certainly much lesse. For, besides that the Spanish Nation are of nature lof∣ty and proud, and doe contemne all other Nations, séeking the superioritie ouer all, they do beare a singular and priuie hatred against this our Nation of the lowe coun∣tries: which hatred (as commonly it is séene) is bred of a ielousie. For they séeing that our naturall Princes and Lordes, the Dukes of Brabāt & Earles of Holland, &c. haue matched and allied them selues with Spanish women, heires of the kingdomes of Spaine, and by that meanes obtayninge the gouernement ouer them, sometimes haue ordeyned Netherlanders to rule in ye regiment of Spayne: as in the time of the Lord of Cheures, and the Cardinal Adrian borne in Hollande (who afterward was e∣lected Pope of Rome) hath ben séene. This hath not a little gréeued ye Spaniards, that they should be ruled by Flemings, (for so thei
terme all the Netherlanders) And hereout it happened, that within a whyle after that Charles the Emperour (of noble memorie) as lawfull heire did succede his Grandfa∣ther Ferdinandus king of Spayne, the whole countrie of Spaine, especially the kingdome of Arragon, began to rebell against Charles their naturall Lord, wrongfully pretēding that the succession of the kingdome belon∣ged not vnto him, and to that ende sent for a certaine Duke of Calabria, which was of the auncient house of Arragon, who then laye in prison, offering him the kingdome: which he denied to accept. Notwithstanding, shortly after, by the good fortune and pollicie of the Emperour Charles, all those matters were brought to a quiet ende: yit euer since that time haue the Spaniards borne an inward grudge & malice against our nation, as they haue al∣wayes well declared when soeuer they had any oportunitie, but especially against the Nobles of the Countrie, whom they per∣ceyued to be in speciall grace and fauour with the Emperour Charles (of most fa∣mous memorie) and the Kinges Maiestie that now is, inuēting al maner of meanes
to bring these Countries into the displea∣sure of their Maiesties: which (besides the examples aforesaid) doth euidently appéere by this last proposition of the Emperour Charles, who departing out of these Coun∣tries towards Spayne, leauing the same to his Sonne our soueraigne Lord, saide: hée did sufficiently perceyue, that the Spaniards sought by all meanes to incense him, and bring into his hatred his subiects of ye lowe Countries, according to their accustomed enuious nature which they bare towardes the countrie, but he should not credit them: but to the contrarie, hold these Countries for speciall recommended, as those who in his most necessitie (aboue all others) had de∣clared towards him most obedient faythe∣fulnesse, and had reserued the Crowne on his head: requesting they would shewe the like towards their yong King, and that hée should minister Iustice to all men, accor∣ding to reason, defending them against the rigour and violēce of their enemies, with∣out giuing credit to their euill willers and aduersaries, with many other holsome ad∣monitions, which some Lordes presently liuing, heard him speake.
Furthermore, if we consider in what e∣stimation we are with them, we shal soone perceiue whereof this hatred and malice is further sprong. It is manifest, that (by rea∣son of the neighbourhed which we haue wt the Germanes and other nations addicted to the Gospell) they haue alwayes estéemed vs for Lutherians and heretikes. I meane not onely of those that haue cast off the Popes religion, but in generall the whole Nation, perceyuing our people of nature not to be giuen to many ceremonies, and little estéeming the Apish toyes and trom∣peries which they haue learned of the Sar∣rasins, Moores, and other Heathen people. We sée what an Apes play they vse in the time of Lent, in scourging of them selues, with other mockeries, which they vse at our Lordes sepulchre (as they call it.) This they extéeme for ye greatest holynesse which may be. Nowe, they perceyuing that our countrie men, yea they that are most bent to the Roomish religion, do ieste and mocke at these their dooings, estéeming them as childrens toyes and méere hipocrisie. This also doth kindle in their harts an vnquench able hatred and enuie against vs, that they
which account themselues so wise and fine witted, should of our Children, Wyues and simple people be estéemed as Hipocrites & superstitious fooles. And so by reason ther∣of, they do estéeme vs all in generall (fewe or none excepted) as Heretikes and Lu∣therians. It is also manifest, that thei do hate∣and persecute the Lutherians more then the Iewes, Turkes or any other transgres∣sors that liue in this worlde: for with the Iewes, Turkes, Moores and Sarasins thei vse great familiaritie (for that ye most parte of them are spronge out of that race) but suche as they estéeme as Lutherians, they thinke them not worthie to enioye eyther Eyre, Water, Sunne, Moone, nor yit any other Element: yea thei doo persecute them by all the meanes they can deuise. And to looke for any grace or pardon at their handes for respect of our owne per∣sons, (séeing they hate vs aboue all other creatures in the world) it were meere mad∣nesse: yea they think they do God good ser∣uice when soeuer they may cruelly mur∣ther any of vs. Besides this, they accompt this whole Countrie as rebellious, saying
playnely, that in all the lowe Countries, there is not one Towne but hath forfeyted to the King their liberties, yea lyfe and goods, and haue purchased vnto them the displeasure and wrath of his Maiestie. The one for denying to receyue the Spanish garrisons: The other for neglecting the ex∣ecution of the Mandamentes & Placcards, in matters of Religion, and not punishing the Heretikes and offenders sufficiently. The third, for that they haue not sufficient∣ly ayded and assisted the Bishops, Inquisi∣tours and Spaniards. Others, for not graunting to the demaund of the x. pennie and other vnreasonable requestes: Some other because thei would not abyde the vn∣supportable violence of the Souldiours. In fine, there is not one Towne nor Uil∣lage in all the lowe Countries, which is not to be charged with losse of lyfe & goods: as is to be perceyued out of their owne al∣legations propound in the name of ye Duke of Alba, touching the x. pennie, saying, that such was demaunded to the intent that the Landes and countries which were fallen into the displeasure of the King, might thereby be reduced to his fauour. There∣fore
we néede not to looke for any grace or fauour at their handes, and all that which they do alledge and say is to bee extéemed for none other then subtile practises, to bring the simple and vnwyse vnder their yoke, and after being Maisters ouer them to vse them at their pleasures, where∣in they will haue no such precise regarde to those that haue offended, as to those which hereafter might offēd, or with whose goods and possessions they might bée made rich for euer. So that there is none, being of any power, authoritie, or coūtenance, or hauing any goods, that shall escape frée, for he that will stryke a dogge, may soone find a staffe. And vndoutedly, this is ye true na∣ture & cōmon vse of all Tyrants that haue subdued any Townes, specially being be∣fore reuolted from them, that they neuer thinke their rule nor lyfe to be in suertye, vntill such time as they haue made away such as they doe suspecte, might, or would withstande their power. Therfore all they which by seruitude (hel∣ping the Spaniards against their owne al∣lies, contrary to the dutie which they owe to their naturall countrie,) do in any wise
hope therby to get their grace and fauour, surely shalbe the first that shall find them∣selues disceyued: for it will not be so pre∣cisely asked what they haue offended, as wherin hereafter thei might or could offēd. Much lesse maye they loke for any grace or fauour which before haue reuolted and withstoode their tiranny, and nowe vppon hope of pardon shall turne and become eni∣mies to their natiue countrie, for such they wil estéeme as double Traytours, of whose trueth they neuer can be assured, thincking always, that spying their commoditie they will reuolt againe. And what soeuer elles they here proponed touching their grace & fauour, is nothing elles but meere deceipt and subtiltie: so that none (hauing his vn∣derstanding and right senses) will beleue these promises, but rather with life and goodes, and by all possible meanes, helpe to defende his Countrie and the liberties therof. And bycause it shall not be thought that this warning doth procede of affection ra∣ther then of a trueth, let vs first marke what kind of pardon they do propone, and then what assurance and certaintie they do
offer first they say. That vnto those which returne againe to their obeisance shalbe gi∣uen perpetuall grace and fauour as is gi∣uen to those which alreadie are turned vnto them, being left in their former state, vsing and enioying their goodes and other things as they did before their reuolte. Hereby they giue to vnderstand, that at this pre∣sent their goodes are deteined as forfet, and that the Duke of Alba and the Spaniards do esteeme themselues as Lordes and pro∣prietaries of the liues and goods of the in∣dwellers of the same townes, like as be∣fore the reuolting of the townes, they haue diuers times made their vaunt, yet wyll they now of a special grace & fauour graunt them so much, as that for a while they shal enioy the vse of their goods, vntil such time as they find better oportunity to put in ex∣ecution that which long hath lyen in their mindes: for by the wordes before recited, is not expressed the reseruation which they kéepe to themselues: Namely, that the Re∣belles and heritickes and other whome it shall please them, should be punished accor∣ding to the nature and disposition of their offences. Besides this, no mention is made
of the nobles & the whole cuntrie. So as all those that haue any goods, houses or lands, lying without the townes, can by no mea∣nes by the content of this letter be assured, only the inhabitants of the townes shoulde by this meanes be vsed as executors and accusers of the nobles and countrie. Then I pray you marke what kynd of assurance here is giuen. VVhich we in the name and behalfe of the kyng do certainely promise and assure you by these presents, & thought good hereof to aduertise you, to the intent you giue the same further to vnderstād. &c. Assuredly this is a proper assurance, vppon which one marchaunt wil scarce lend ano∣ther two pence: much lesse whole townes and countries aduenture their liues ther∣by, for what haue they not promised vs in the name and behalfe of the kings maiesty, and haue afterwards broken and infringed the same? as if they might make a iesting stake of the kynges maiestie at their plea∣sure, which vndoubtedly they doe. Howe often haue they promised these Countries, that they shold not be burthened with gar∣risons of Souldiours? That the Inquisitiō should not be brought into the coūtry? yea
how solemply, & with what a countenance, did they promise & vowe to the nobles & country ye agrement made in August & confirmed by the Duches of Parma. And in these last warres, when haue they at any time kept promise? nay rather whē haue they not opēly & wtout any re∣spect broken & violated ye same? They had faith∣fully promised ye towne of Rotterdam, thei wold but passe through ye same without hurting any of the Citizins, & as sone as they were within, they began to murther execrably, as if they had bene a sort of rauening Wolues and murthe∣rers. They had promised the towne of Mounts in Henault that they would not harme any one Burges, vpon which condition they entred the towne, where they apprehended a great nūber & hong them vp. But I pray you how haue thei delt with the Counties of Egmont & of Horne? what faire promises had they made vnto them, yea confirmed with the kinges letters & seale, making them beleue al things were forgotten & forgiuen, that the king did fauour & was boū∣tifull to them, & that nothing should be cōcluded in the counsel without their aduise, with many other like wordes, wherwith they persuaded these good noble men that all things were wel, & so got them into their hands, to the intent to dispatch them away moste miserably, setting
their heads vpon poles, as if they had bene mur¦therers or traytours? What faith or troth was kept with the Lords of Barow & Montigny, who were by the Duches of Parma & all the Lords & nobles of the country (for pacifying the state therof) so solēply sent in Ambassade to ye kings Maiestie? The Turkes and faithlesse heathens which know no God, do estéeme it an abhomi∣nable déed to endammage Emassadours or Cō∣missaries, being by all naturall reasons to bée estéemed as holy: Notwithstanding they kept those Lords as prisoners a great while, & in the end pitifully murthered them without law or Iustice. After this, what faith haue they kept with their owne souldiours, being vnder the re¦giment of the Countie Lodron, who serued him so long at Valencien? Did not the Duke of Alba promise & sweare to them, that the offences passed (to wit because they had demaunded to haue their payment) should be forgotten, and therupon gaue them his letters & seale, causing them to be written vp a new, & to take an oth to the king. And that which is more, caused thē to come from Valencien to Antwerpe vnder con∣duct there to receyue money, wheras he with his Spanish souldiours enuironed them, and in great nombers caused them to be hanged one after another: the rest which escaped hanging,
he caused to be chased and driuen away without payment? Who then would séeme to be so mad or bewitched, to attribute credite to any of their promises, except he were weary of his life and welfare? For if they haue in this sort disceyued the most notablest & chiefest Lords of the coun∣trie, if they haue so cruelly without reason mur¦thered the Ambassadours sent by the Gouernāt & nobles to the king: and if they haue not kept promise with those towns which neuer resisted nor altered religion, if they haue bene so vn∣faithful to their owne souldiours, through whō they were become Maisters of the Country. Should we then whom they vtterly hate, (& as they say,) haue rebelled against the king, main∣taining (as they alleage) the Lutheriā doctrine, bene their mortall enimies, and effectually de∣clared the same, be kept promise with, then surely the world had néede be altered and newe changed. But we perceiue euidently by their owne words, that they neuer meane to do it, for they themselues do not offer any assurance for ac∣complishmēt of their promise, but onely charge them of Amsterdam to giue notice therof to ye other townes, & in their behalf to promise this. Seing (saieth the Duke of Alba) that we do pro∣mise and assure you by this letter signed by vs
that so it shalbe doon &c. Now wold they haue the towne of Amsterdam wholy take vpon hir to do that, which so many townes should here∣after bewayl & lament if they kepe not promise with them. It might afterwards be said: wher∣fore were thei so foolish as to credite thē of Am∣sterdam (their enimies) seing the Duke him self made them no promise? In conclusion it is no∣torious, that these be but meere disceiptes to disceiue the simple people, for the proper words of the letter do declare euidently, that ye Duke doth not assure or promise the Townes any thing, so that they cannot charge him with any promise, though he obserue nothing, but onely them of Amsterdam, who haue promised it on ye Dukes behalfe. And thinke you that they of Amsterdam haue their excuse to séeke? No I warrant you: for they may say, we haue not broken our promise, seing we haue not on our owne behalfe, but in the Dukes name onely promised you. This disceipt was plainely séene by the aboue rehersed souldiours of Valencien, for the Duke of Alba did make the promise, & the Countie Lodron brake it, and yet neither of both thought they cōmitted any offence herein, seing the one was not bound to perfourme that which he had not promised, & the other woulde not by his promise bynd the Coūtie of Lodron.
All this nothwithstāding, though they should by any maner of othes or bonds, (possible to be deuised) confirme any promise, yit would they think thēselues in no point boūd to performe ye same, bicause of their cōmon rule: saying, there is no faith to be kept wt heretiks: as in the coū∣cel of Cōstance (wheras Iohannes Hus & Hierome of Prage, who vpō the kings oth & letters of safe conduct came thither & were there burnt aliue) it was cōcluded for an article of the faith, & all they condemned as heretickes, which kept any promise with heretiks. Besides yt, the Pope of Rome can at all times absolue thē of their othes & promise, as dayly it is vsed, so as they be no more bound to the same, than if they had neuer spoken it. Therfore, no wise people wilbe sedu∣ced with such deceitfull lies, but rather to ye last drop of their blood, duly & manfully helpe to de∣liuer their natiue coūtrie from these bloudthir∣sty Tyrants. Lastly, they produce a newe trick, séeking to make those afraid which are fearfull & of small courage saying, that they greatly erre which think to withstand the kings power, and that it will fall out euil with them, if they remayne ob∣stinat and wil trie his maiesties power and force. First we haue protested & by these presents doe proteste, that we neuer did nor will withstand
the kings power. Likewise are we well assu∣red that our king according to his accustomed clemētie, would not vse his power & force to de¦stroy & bring to ruine his own subiects, which always haue ben so faithfull to him & his aun∣cestors: But these straūge tirants which vnder the kings name goe about to bring our natiue countrie vnder their subiectiō, those wil we re∣siste to the vttermost and last man. And as for their power (wherof they so much hoast) we no∣thing feare, neither it néedeth not yt we tary lōg to trie their force, who haue alredy for ye space of v. or vi. yeres sufficiently shewed the same: so as they now scarce know whither to run or winde thēselues, and therfore come they nowe with this their pardon, perceyuing their force not to preuaile. But before, whē all things wēt as they wished, thei séemed as though thei wold haue deuoured the countrie in one minut. And perceyuing that the straunge souldiours (which serue only for money) ran from their garrisons they thought all had ben finished & done, and so wrote both into Spayne & Duytchland. But now being come to those that offer resistence, & are determined to defende their liberties with the sword: it quickly appeared through God his pro¦uidence, what their power was. For then they lost their best Captaynes and Souldiours, and
the Lord God hath defended our iust cause, and made a scorne of their great power and force. Their old Spanish souldiours (the like of whom they thought were not in the world) remayned there slain aswel as ye other. And now thei haue tryed that there be men left in the world yt will fight for their natiue countrie. So that we (con∣tinuing in the feare of God, & perfect vnitie a∣mongst our selues) shall haue no néede to feare the haultie words of those who haue so long beatē their braynes against the weakest town in Holland, wherin at the first was neither store of vittuals, munitiō, nor souldiours, (and wher¦of they had so great an aduantage by reason of the Yse, that they accounted it a Towne of no force) are yit driuen backward, & come to shame and confusion. But now, séeing the water is o∣pen, and the towne (through GOD his grace) greatly strengthened and furnished of good sol∣diours, and al maner of good prouision and mu∣nition, think they to make vs afeard with their boasts and threatnings? Nay, nay, good Bur∣gesis, let vs be of good courage, and nothing re∣garde their bragges, but trust in the Lord our God, who hitherto hath so wonderfully assisted vs, defending our natiue Countrie to the vtter∣most with our substance & bloud. Let vs man∣fully stand in defence of our Wyues & children
against these bloudthirstie enimies of our ho∣nors & cōmon weale: & to ye end direct our liues in all vnion & cōcord, to the intent that we may enioye our old liberties and priuileges, & leaue them behind vs, togither with a good name and fame to our childrens children, our neighbours and friends. Surely trusting in God, that hée will once turne his wrath from our sinnes, and behold vs with his mercifull countenance, and reduce our poore oppressed coūtrie to his former state and prosperitie. Also we trust that the Kings Ma. our soueraing Lord, piteously consi∣dering this insupportable tirāny & force, of those which so proudly abuse his name & title, to the destruction of the coūtrie dayly more and more: wil of his natural clemencie graunt vs, that we being deliuered frō these tyrants & suppressors, may once effectually shew, and apparantly de∣clare the iuste faith, hartie affection and seruiti∣able obedience, which we are readie (euen to the death) to shewe to his Maiestie, which wée in all humble maner require of his Maiestie. Also we hartely pray vnto almightie God, that he will graunt his Maiestie a long and healthful lyfe, & prosperous raigne. Written at Delft, the xii. of March. Anno 1573. FINIS.
