543 99842518 7181 <!-- the first half of the text from this VID was broken off as a separate text because it is actually a 'bound-with' copy of S544. S543 is supposed to contain only books three and four of Amadis de Gaul; S544 is supposed to contain only books one and two. The copies attached to the ProQuest records are confusing, since the record for S544 (99842516) is linked to two image sets, one of which (vid 7179) contains only books 1 and 2, but the other of which (vid 176813) apparently contains books 1-4. And the record for S543 (99842518), though it links to only one image set, links to a set that again contains all four books (vid 7181). -->
THE THIRD BOOKE Of Amadis de Gaule. CONTAINING THE DISCORDS and warres which befell in Great Brittaine, and there about, occasioned by the bad counsell, which King Lisuart receiued from Gandandell and Brocadan, against Amadis and his fol∣lowers: whereby many good Knights (afterward on either side) cruelly concluded their Liues. Written in French by the Lord of Essars, Nicho∣las de Herberay, Commissarie in Ordinarie for the Kings Artillerie, and his Lieutenant in the Countrie and Gouernement of Picardie, vnder Mon∣sicur de Brissac: Great Master and Captaine Generall of the said Artillerie. Translated into English by A. M. LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, dwelling in Foster-lane. 1618.
TO THE RIGHT HO∣NORABLE, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight, Earle of Montgomerie, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. RIght honourable, according to the saying of Cicero, writing in the commendation of Histories, he auou∣cheth M. T. Cice∣ro, in Epist. ad Plane. them to be the Treasure of things past; the patterne of those that are to come, the picture of mans life; the touch-stone of our actions, and the full perfecter of our honour. And Marcus Varro saith: They are the witnesse of Times, the light of Marcus Varro in Lib. de Hist. Cap. 16. Forsan & aeolim misse iuuabit. Truth; the life of Memorie; the Mistresse of life; and the Messenger of Antiquitie. And in very deede (Noble Lord) Histories cause vs to see those things without danger, which millions of men haue ex∣perimented with losse of their liues, honour and goods: making many wise by others perill, and exciting imitation of precedent mens ver∣tues, only to reach the like height of their vnconquerable happinesse. Wisdome wonne by experience, proues oftentimes very perillous, and (questionlesse) is so long in the comming, that a man may die be∣fore Reading of Histories are the en∣structers to true happi∣nesse. hee can come neere it: so that a second life were necessarily requi∣red, and all in imployment only about it. It is therefore to be hastened forward, by the search of passed examples, where of Historie affor∣deth the greatest plentie. Warranted then by so worthie presidents, but more especially, by an honourable Ladies earnest importunitie, for these two labours by mee vndertaken, and now (after longer delay then was intended) fully con∣cluded: I am bolde to present your honour with these two Bookes, or parts of Amadis de Gaue, the Third and the Fourth, neuer extant before in our English, and which long since had been with your Honor;
but that I had a purpose (according to my promise to that most Noble Ladie) to haue published the whole first five volumes together, where-of three haue formerly (though very corruptly) beene translated and printed, but these not till now. May it please your Honour to accept these two in the meane time, and, to make amends for so long iniuring your worthie expectation: in Michaelmas Terme next ensuing, the two former parts, the First and Second (somewhat better suted then before) will come to kisse your Noble hand: And then the Fift and Sixt shall immediately followe, with all the speed conueniently may be vsed, and so successiuely the other volumes of the Historie, if time will giue leaue to finish them all. So, humbly crauing pardon of your Honour, for this my present boldnesse, and, but such kinde acceptation of my good will, as may en∣courage mee to goe on with therest: Among them that are fairliest af∣fected to your continuall Noble and flourishing happinesse, and wish it to eternall perpetuity: Remaineth your Honors in all dutie. A. M.
THE THIRD BOOKE OF AMADIS DE GAVLE Contayning the discords and warres which befell in Great Brittaine and there about, occasioned by the bad councell, which King Lisuart receiued from Gandandell and Brocadan, against Amadis and his followers: whereby, many good Knights (afterward, on either side) cruelly concluded their liues. CHAP. I. THE sonnes of Gandandell and Brocadan, being (as you haue for∣merly heard) ouercome, the Knights of the Enclosed Island came to seeke Angriote and his Ne∣phew and (with great ioy) conducted them into their Pauillions. But King Lisuart (some small while be∣fore this victorie) had with-drawne himselfe into his Chamber; not for any good that he wished to the van∣quished, knowing alreadie the Trea∣son of their wicked Fathers: but be∣cause hee would behold nothing, that might redound to the glorie of Amadis, whom hee held in so great hatred, as to let him the more famil∣liarly vnderstand it: he would hardly admit leisure to the two Conquerors, to haue their wounds respected. But very hastily sent commaund vnto them, that they should depart out of his Country, neuer presuming af∣terward to enter it againe, least they would haue worse welcome then stood with their liking, whichnewes were so displeasing to them, that in∣stantly they complayned to Dn Gru∣medan, Brian de Moniaste, and other Gentlemen, who often vsed to visite them. And to them they said, that seeing the King (forgetting the for∣mer seruices done vnto him) held his fauours so far off, and in such strange manner from them: that himselfe likewise should not count it strange (hauing thus forsaken them) if they sought to displease him to their vt∣most power. Suddenly therefore ar∣ming themselues, and mounting on horse-backe, both they and their com∣panions rode toward the Enclosed Island, and the third day following, arriued at an Hermitage, where they found the Neece to Brocadan, the friend of Sarquiles, by whose meanes the treason had beene before discoue∣red: and because her Vncle had threatned her, shee secretly absen∣ted her selfe from the Court, when
beholding Sarquiles, shee came and embraced him, and preuailed so faire∣lie with her, as to leade her along with them. But you must vnderstand, that soone after Angriote and his associ∣ates were departed; Grumedan (who had beene their Conductor)  to King Lisuart, and acquainted him with all that he had heard of Angriote: whereon when hee had long conside∣red, he thus answered. I know right well, that patience is a vertue highly to bee commended, and beneficiall: Neuerthelesse, of∣ten times of a slender euill, it beget∣teth a most mightie ruine. For proofe where of, if I had (at the first) shewen such countenance to Agri∣ote & the rest, as I should haue done, and not entertained them so kindely as I haue done: it may bee they had neuer entred into such boldnesse, not onely to vse threatnings against me, but also to enter my Country so preuily. Notwithstanding, hauing done according as reason perswaded me, God (with his owne good liking) will allow it, and it will (no doubt) re∣dound wholly to my honour, and their confusion, which that it may bee the better knowne vnto them, it is my will (without any longer tempo∣rizing) to send defiance to them, and especially to Amadis, who is the onely Authour of all this euill; and so much the rather, that by the very same meanes their pride may be cha∣stised. At this very instant, Arban, King of North-wales, one of the wisest and most vertuous Princes in all the Land, was there present, who looking with discretion on this sodaine enter∣prise in the King, spake thus vnto him. Sir, I am of the minde, that (before you doe what you haue intended) you would vse the aduise of the chie∣fest men in your Kingdome, for you doe very well know, that Amadis and they of his line, are good and valiant Knights, admired for their power, and not neglected by their friends. Moreouer, there is no man ignorant, how falsely they haue beene accused to your Maiestie, as the victorie which Angriote and Sarquiles enioyed so lately against the ac, hath deliuered sufficient testimony for, had not right and truth supported their cause, although they are good and approued Knights indeed: yet could they not so easily haue gone cleere from the soones of Gandandell, nor of Damas, whereby sufficiently appeareth, that the hand of heauen was powerfull in maintayning their iustification. And therefore Sir, were you so pleased, as to forget your con∣cerned displeasure gone out against them, and make a repeale of them to your seruice: in my poore opinion it would be for the best, considering, it hath neuer past with any honoura∣ble allowance, that a King should warre with them, whom hee may easi∣ly, and with his no meane dignitie, commaund to yeeld him both loue and seruice: whereas in doing other∣wise, oft times it prooueth to the losse of his people, extreame expen∣ces, and weakening his authoritie, a matter so daungerous, as (vpon such aduantage) inciteth neighbouring Commanders, to thirst in desire o nouell attempts, to hurle off awe and subiection, and to winne more liber∣tie then they could formerly aime at. And therefore, a wise Prince, if pos∣sible it may be, should neuer giue oc∣casion to his subiects, to runne from that feare and reuerence which in du∣ty they owe vnto him: but rather ought to essay by all meanes, that his gouernment may rellish of tempe∣rate discretion, winning their hearts and willes rather by cordiall louc, then the least sauour of vigour and tyran∣nie, as a faithfull Shpheard re∣specteth
his flocke. Wherefore Sir, it is re∣quisite to quench the fire already ndled, before it get head to a full ne of deuouring: for often times, fter an errour is perfectly knowen, the remedy falls out to be too farre off. Amadis is so humble minded, and so much yours; as if you but send to recall him, you may quickly haue him, and all they that follow him, of whom you may dispose to be much better serued, then euer you haue beene. I know well (replled the King) that your aduise is verie good, but they vrged mee with such a demaunde, as lay not in my power to grant them, hauing made promise thereof before to my daughter Leonora. And I know withall, that their strength is no way equall to mine, wherefore, forbeare to proceed herein with me any further, but prepare you and the rest to keepe mee company: for to morrow, Cendill de Ganote, shall goe to defie them all in the Enclosed Island. You may doe as seemeth best to your Maiestie, answered King Ar∣ban, who perceiuing the Kings anger to be highly prouoked, would contest with him no longer: but without any shew of discontentment, retired into his owne lodging. But you must vn∣derstand, that Gandandell and Broca∣dan, perceiuing their Treason to be so apparrantly published by the death of their sonnes, and waxing weary of liuing any longer among people of vertue and honestie: caused the dead bodies to be had thence, and af∣terward, they and their adherents em∣barked themselues in a Shippe, and sayling away, arriued in a small Island, where they finished the remainder of their wretched lines, wherefore our History will make no more mention of them. Let vs now returne to King Lis∣uart, who, after hee had a long while considered on the message sent him by Angriote, and what speeches had beene vrged to him by King Arban: summoned a great companie of his Knights together, and began a hea∣uie complaint vnto them, concerning Amadis and his followers, declaring the bold speeches and insolent tearmes, which Angriote had sent him by Grumedan. Wherefore, my louing friends (quoth he) I pray yee to coun∣sell me, how I shall gouerne myselfe in this case. For if I endure this in∣iurie, it will redound no lesse to your dishonour, then mine owne disad∣uantage: considering, that a Prince cannot bee wronged, without great blame to the Subiects, if they suffer it, and vse no defence against it. Hereupon, warre was concluded against Amadis and his allies, and in∣stantly he called Condill de Ganote, say∣ing thus vnto him. Goe to the En∣closed Island, where you shall finde A∣madis, and tell him, that hence for∣ward neither he nor any of his friēds may attempt the boldnesse (vpon any occasion whatsoeuer) to enter my Countries: for if any of them may be taken there, I shall in such sort be∣stow them, as they will hardly escape agine with ease. Furthermore make this addition, that I doe defie them, and let them rest assuredly perswa∣ded, that I will be their vtter de∣struction both in body and goods, wheresoeuer I can meete with them. And because they make vaunt of ayding Galuanes against me: I am de∣termined to goe in person, and will take possession of the Isle Mongaza, whether if they dare persume to come, I will cause them to be surpri∣zed and hanged. In this manner departed Cendill de Ganote, and the same day the King dislodged, to soiourne in the Citie of Gracedonia, and there also to assemble his Army: whereof Oriana was most ioyfull, knowing the time of her de-
speake whatsoeuer them pleased. Sir, replyed Gandales, here is Sada∣mon, who hath charge from all the Knights now abiding in the Enclosed Island, to acquaint you with their ioynt deliberation. As concerning my selfe, I am sent particularly to you, as I shall make knowen to you from my Lord Amadis, if it may please you to let me haue a sight of your Queene, as one that desireth to doe her most humble seruice, and to your selfe, mine honor reserued. Be∣leeue me Gandales my good frend, answered the King, I am not offended that you should take part with Ama∣dis, for I am perswaded, that you ac∣count him as your owne sonne. And whereas you desire to see the Queen, I am well pleased therewith; onely for your loues sake, hauing so kindly entreated her daughter Oriana, du∣ring the time shee oourned in Scot∣land. In the meane while, seeing Sa∣damon is the principall Ambassador, in the businesse for which you are both sent hither, he hath permission to speake his pleasure. Then Sadamon aduanced himselfe, and with a manly countenance began his speech, declaring first to the King, the wrong that he had done to Gaa∣nes and Madasima, and generally to the kinred and friends of Amadis. From whom (quoth he) King Lisurt, I bring thee defiance, and here pro∣nounce, that they are and will be thy deadly enemies, so long as thou pre∣tendest any ght to the Isl Mon∣gaza, which (with shame) constrid∣ly you enoy. Afterward, particular∣ly he deliuered all the rest, not omit∣ting the ast particle of his charge. What (replyed the King) do they thinke to feare mee with ? No, no, they shall not enoy a te of their demaund, much  any peace with me. And the better to mani∣fest their folly, I am well contted, not to weare any Crowne during my life time, nor thinke my selfe worthy the name of King, except I can pre∣uaile against their ouer-much bold∣nesse. Sir, answered Sadamon, you know the greater part of them▪ and are ac∣quainted sufficiently with what they can doe: therefore, if you sider well thereon, you will finde them not to be so easily oercome▪ as (er∣haps) in rash coniecture you may imagine. And Sir (quoth ) my Lord Amadis  me charge, to deliuer from himselfe onely, as much as Sadamon hath said vnto yee: One∣ly he sends you word, that he will not be seene in the Isle of Mongaza, for seeing hee onely conquered it for you, hee will be no occasion of your losse thereof, neither will appeare in any other place, whereat the Queene may take the least dislike, all which he doth onely in honour of her, and for her sake. Let him doe as hee pleaseth (replyed the King) it shal not heate my bloud ouer-much, whether he bee there or no. Abei instantly (and before so many) hee appeared to make no account of  yet his minde and  were farre different, and there was not one man in the whole company, but made most high esteeme of Aais. So the King arose, commanding that Gandales and Sadamon should dine in the Hall, accompanied with Gints and his Nephew Gullan, with some other of the best esteemed Knights, to whom for their deeds of prowesse, the King dayly affoorded no meane honours, which incited many to imi their vertues, in hope to re the heigth of their fortunes. Dinner being ended, Gandales was conducted to the Queene, and hee entred into her Chamber, euen as Orana and M were conferring with her about him. Doing his humble reuerence and comming to the Queene, hee kied her hand, and
afterward shee caused him to sit downe by her, when shewing him Oriana, shee said, Friend Gandales, know you this Lady, to whom (some-time) you haue done so many serui∣ces? Madame (quoth he) if I haue don her any seruice at all, I hold my selfe very happy therein, and when I can compas ust occasion, am ready to do as much both to you and her. I thanke you (quoth shee) and what newes bring you vs from Amadi Madame, reped Gandals, he expres∣ly commaunded mee to see you, if possibly I might, and to present his most humble lutions to your graci∣ous acceptance, certifying you more-ouer, that it is no meane motiue to his high discontentment, to bee thus enforced to abandon your seruice. As much said my Lord Agrayes to me, who entreateth you, that in re∣gard both hee and Don Galuanes his Vnckle, are in such displeasure with the King: you would bee pleased to send him his Sister, for he is verily pswaded, that they standing so farre  of fauour, her presence can hard∣y bee well taken in this Court. When  heard these words, neuer was woman more heauily af∣flicted, because, ouer and beside the loue shee bare her, shee onely was the chiefe gardi of her most inti∣mate secrets; and withall, knowing her childing time to be so neere, it made a double addition to her sor∣row; for loosing her, she stood vttely  ure of confidence in any. But  be the tees in her es, closed ly with her in this ner. Bele me Madame, i the King should offr mee so much wrong, as to make a seperation be∣tweene you and mee, it would bee  my minde. Why (quoth Gandales) wherein should it be so offnsiue to you? cannot your entertainment be as gracious, in the Court of King Peron your Vnckle, with the Queene Elisenna, and Me∣licia your Cousin, all of them being so desirous to see you? Trust me Gandales, said the Queene, Agrayes doth mee no little displea∣sure, in making this demaund for his Sister, and before I meane to send her to him, I will speake with the King, who if he will follow mine aduise, she shall not depart hence with you, if her selfe take liking to continue with vs Mdame, answered Candales, let me then haue my dspatch so soone as may bee, because I must endure no long tarying here. As he delired these words, the King  the Chamber, when . Sir, ul well you know, the good entertainment and great honour, that the King and Queene of Scots affoorded mee, during the time you left mee in their guard, and such affiance they reposed in you, that to keepe me company▪ they sent thir daughter hiher with  and  if you  fm  All whic her Bro∣ther Ag  her cme  by  hence. , and Ma∣  the  him that  (as yet) to be  Oriana, but, with  of the dicords hap∣ her kinred, she might still remaine in his graci∣ous ▪ which mooued the King to such cmpassion, that he returned her this answere. Faire Cousine, doe you conceite, that for any difference betweene them and me, I can grow forgetfull of your
for better proofe of himselfe against king Lisuart, that makes such account of him. During the space of eight dayes, they awayted apt and conuenient time, to shippe themselues for passage to the Isle of Mongaza; and while they thus consulted together, the Mariners came and gaue them warning; that except they meant to lose oportunity in their enterprise▪ they must now a∣way, because the winde stood com∣modiously, which made euery man hasten to get him aboard, the Trum∣pets and Clarions chearefully soun∣ding. Now, as they were ready to weigh Anker, Amadis, who intended not to passe along with them, put him selfe into a Skiffe with Druno, & went from Ship to Ship to take farewell of his friends, perswading them to doe their deuoire. And let mee entreate yee (quoth hee) my deare esteemed companions, to be assistant one to a∣nother, and consider well with your selues, that you goe against a power∣full king; in which respect if you chance to fight, your fame and honor will be the greater. For I am not ig∣norant that there is no one man a∣mong yee, but hath beene tryed for a bold and worthy knight, which giues perswasion to my hopes, that the hand of Heauen assisting, and right in the cause you vndertake; you shal replant a poore Lady, in those goods and lands whereof shee hath bin too long disinherited. The entring into the Ship, where were Galuanes, Queragant, Florestan, Brian and Agrayes together; the teares trilled downe his cheekes, and embra∣cing them each after other, hee said; I was neuer in all my life so grieued, to forgoe such good company, as I am at this instant, but I know you will iustly hold me excused; and I would it had pleased God, that occasion had mini∣stred some other meanes, then thus to enforce our separation. But one re∣quest let me make vnto yee, that no discord may happen among yee; but liue together like louing friends and companions, for otherwise (assure your selues) the losse and ruine will be yours. And thus speaking, he com∣mitted them to Heauens protection, and went to take farewell of Mdsi∣ma, who sate in her Ship conferring with her Ladies, and thence returning to his Skiffe, the Mariners hoysed their Sayles, whereon the windes be∣stowed their breath so bountifully, as they soone lost sight of the Enclosed Island, and on the sixt day following, about day-breake in the morning, they arriued at the Burning Lake, where they secretly prepared Bridges and Boates, for their easier and spee∣die landing. For they well knew, that the Count Latin was there, with a great troupe of Knights for defence of the place, and notwithstanding all their diligence, they were discouered by the watch, and intelligence was quickly carried to the Counte, and Gldar de Rascuil, who instantly armed their men, & came to encounter their enemies on the Sea-shore. At their meeting, there fel an hard conflict on either side, the one for landing, the other for withstanding; and doe what they could, the knights of the Enclosed Isle were beaten back to their Shippes. Which being noted by Florestan, Galuanes, Agrayes, Or∣landin and some others of them: they leaped forth into the water, and in de∣spight of the Countes people, they got landing. For they were followed by their friends with such fury, as the other side retired, falling into a con∣fused rout. Which the Counte per∣ceiuing, he drew backe faire & softly, not doubting but to enter the Towne at his owne pleasure. But immedi∣atly newes were brought him that the inhabitants had reuoked, and that but one Port onely was kept for him. Beside, that Dandasida, Sonne to the
aged Gisse (which the day before had beene brought prisoner into the Castle) with about twenty other Gentlemen of the Towne, had bro∣ken open the prisons, as the guards laboured to supply the fight at the Sea-side, and they haue (quoth hee that brought the tidings) broken all in peeces, striking vp an Alarum in the Towne; where the inhabitants haue slaine all them that you left to defend it. This report was so dreadfull to the Count Latin and all his followers, that they intended to turne backe, and flie into the mountaines: but considering at length, that they might saue themselues by the Port, kept yet purposely for them, and so fall to some composition with their enemies; they resolued on that course, and made their retreate. Whereupon, Galuanes would not pur∣sue them any further, but caused his people to draw backe, attending till the rest of the army might bee safely landed. And as hee was taking or∣der for his campe, a Knight came to him, being sent from Dandaside, to aduertise him, that (without all fur∣ther question) he and his should bee Lords of the towne and Castle, if they pleased to come with their ime∣deat succour. For the Count and his troupes held no more but one sil∣lie Port, where they contended to re∣couer what they had lost, and might easily bee disposed of at his plea∣sure. Galuanes wanted no dilligence vp∣on this aduantage, but setting on with his Armie, marched directly to∣wards the Towne, conducts my Ma∣dasima all the way, to quicken loue and spirit in his Subiects, who came to welcome them with all honour and reuerence. Thus the Knights of the Enclosed Isand made their en∣trance, and while the Ladies were conuaied to the Castle; Galuanes cal∣ced a Councell, for btter direction of what was further to be done, and ver expelling all his enemies, be∣cause it appeared that they endeuou∣red to fortefie their Port which they held. Agrayes spake first, saying. If my aduise bee worthy allowance, I would not admit them the least lei∣sure to repaire their decaied fortune: but presently begin our assaut so liue∣ly, that not a man should possibly es∣cape. My Lord Agrayes (answered Florestan) wee shall doe much better, if it like all our company, without a∣ny further hazard of our men, to send them a summons of yeelding them-selues to vs: which (perhaps) they wil gladly accept, and it will redound more to our honour, then if we pro∣ceeded otherwise. This opinion was generally com∣mended, and Agri and Grte appointed as messengers to the Count, where giuing  to vnder∣stand what they had in charge, and assuring him withall, that if he did not sodainely yeeld, that was the very day of assault, and none would then bee admitted to mercie: the Count was soone perswaded to submission, espe∣cially all the rest that tooke part with him, beholding their present conditi∣on of daunger, no meane number of their fellowes being cruelly woun∣ded, and the whole Country already reuolted from them. Therefore, they rather chose to embrace the mer∣cie of such worthy Knights, then fondly to stand on the strength of our poore Por, or further to tempt their fortune; by seeking safety abroade among Country Boores and Pea∣zants. This also was well liked by the Knights of the Isle, for they were almost all wounded, or so shrewdly shaken in the fight, (which lasted all the day) that few were able to endure their Armes. Howbeit, this ioy was of no long continuance, because (well nre in the same instant (newes
that King Arban of Northwailes, and Gasquilan, King of Swetia, were en∣tred on the Isle, with more then a thousand Knights, on the behalfe of King Lisuart, which fell out to their no little amazement. Neuerthelesse, they concluded to stand vpon their best defence, maintayning the place with their vtmost power, and forbea∣ring to fight, vntill they had recoue∣red better ability. But because wee would not stray too far from Amadis, and what ensued to him, at his re∣turne to the Enclosed Island with Bruneo: wee will leaue these Gal∣lants in expectation of their ene∣mies, to tell you that which next suc∣ceeded. CHAP. II. How Amadis being in the Enclosed Island, enquired of Gandales tidings concerning the Court of King Lisuart, determining to passe into Gaule with Brunco, to shake off his melancholly. And of those aduentures which hap∣pened to him by a tempest, that threw him vpon the Sad Island. AFter that the Army by Sea had set saile, and Amadis quite lost the sight of them; hee and Bruneo returned into the Enclosed Island, and because hee had no leisure to enquire of Gandales, newes from the Court of King Lis∣uart, by reason of his friends so so∣daine departing: the very same day, walking alone in the garden, hee cal∣led Gandales vnto him, and entreated him to tell him, if he saw the Queene and his Cousine Mabila. Beleeue me Sir (answered Gandales) I spake with them both, & for ought I could perceiue, they beare you very kinde affection: especially the Queene, who desires you (by all possible meanes) to make your peace with the King. Then presenting him the Letter which Mabila had written, he further said. Madame Oriana, and your Cousine Mabila commend them-selues very louingly to you, and are much grieued, at the hard opinion the King holds of you, and Madame Oriana praies yee, to remember what kindnesse and respect you some times found in the Court of the King her father, and the Letter sent yee by your Cousine, will acquaint yee more at large with other tidings. Then Amadis turning his backe on Gandales, doubting the alteration of his countenance, opened the Letter, and saw that his linage encreased, Oriana being so neere the time of child-birth, then which, nothing could more content him. Notwith∣standing, his enforced absence from her, bred in him such extremity of af∣fliction, as his spirits forsooke their ordinary functions, and caused him to send foorth sighes in stead of words. Hereupon, hee purposed to goe visite his father King Perion, and passe into Gaule: commanding Gan∣dalin to prouide shipping for him, for on the morrow he would away in the company of Brunco. Gan∣dalin very diligently fulfilled his charge, so that the day following they set to sea, with a prosperous gale at the beginning: but at length it grew so tempestuous and turbulent, that they were throwen vpon an Island, which appeared very pleasing to them, by the plentie of goodly trees therein planted. And because they were much wearied with long being at sea, Bruneo said to Amadis: Behold Sir, here is a pleasant resting place, after our tedious trauaile, if
you like thereof so well as I do, and perhaps wee may meete with some aduentures. I am well content, answered A∣madis, and commanded the Patrone to make to the land. Marie God defend ye (quoth he) from so great an euill. And why? quoth Amadis. Because ye are but dead men, reply∣ed the Patrone, if you take landing heere, for this is the Sad Isle, where the cruell Gyant Madraque liueth, who is the bloodiest Tyrant in all the Isles about this Sea: and let me tellyce, that for the space of fifteene yeares, neither knight or damosell, hath entred heere, but either they suffered a piteous death, or else were detayned in shamefull impri∣sonment. When Amadis and Bru∣neo heard this, it was no meane mo∣tiue to enflame courage in them, their maine desire ayming at the de∣struction of such damnable cu∣stomes: and therefore they said to the Patrone, that he should take no care for landing them there, which if hee would not willingly yeeld to, they meant to enforce it. So ar∣ming themselues, and mounting on horseback, without any other com∣pany then their Squires Gandalin and Salinde, they rode on into the Isle, giuing them charge, that if they chanced to be assayled by any other then knights, they should assist them to their power. So long they iourneyed, til com∣ming vpon a plain, they discouered a Castell, which appeared to them very faire and goodly, and directing their course thither, they heard a horne so strongly winded, that the whole Isle made report thereof. I remember, quoth Bruneo, that the Patrone of the Ship told vs, when such a horne sounded, the Gyant went abroad from his fortresse, to fight with such as his people could not conquer, and his fury is often times so extreame, that euery man dieth he can meete with all, yea, and his owne followers may not escape him. Let vs on then, said Amadis, to finde out this deuill; and they had not gone any great way of ground, but they heard a great noise of men, and blowes betweene them, which caused their greater haste, to defend any that were iniuriously assayled. At last they espyed two knights ve∣ry violently pursued by a great number of horsemen, but on foote were they thus cruelly oppressed, very neere breathlesse: for their horses had beene slaine vnder them, and yet they defended themselues couragiously. Now, as they appro∣ched neerer to them, Ardan the dwarfe, knew Amadis by his Shield, whereupon he cryed out aloud: Ah my Lord, helpe your brother Galaor and the King Cildadan his intimate friend. Amadis and Bruneo astoni∣shed at these newes, without retur∣ning any answer to Ardan, put spurs to their horses in their rescue. But instantly they espied Madraque ma∣king towards them, mounted on a, great blacke horse, very thick coue∣red ouer with plates of yron. In his hand hee held a Speare of such weight, as hardly could any knight lift it vp from the ground. Threat∣ning his owne men, he said: Ye vile dogges, are ye so many, and can yee not foyle two poore tyred knights? Giue place ye Catiues, and let mee delight my selfe with sluicing the blood out of their bodies. Amadis seeing him make towards his brother and the King Cildadan, with more then an ordinary kind of furie, and doubting their ability of resistance, said to Bruneo. Louing companion, succour you my Bro∣ther, and let me alone to encounter
which vnfortunately tooke the thigh of Bruneo, and passing quite thorow, brake afterward in pieces against the Orelope. And so ve∣hemently did she labour in sending more Darts to them, that her feete slipping, shee fell downe from the Rocke into the sea, making such a dreadfull noise in her fall, as if some huge Tower had beene battered in pieces, they in the shippe verily supposing hee had beene drowned. But afterward, they beheld her to swim so nimbly, and to cut through the waues with such agility, that no fish could performe it more actiuely: but out of the shippe they let flie Arrowes at her, and woun∣ded her in three seuerall places. All which notwithstanding, so soone as she recouered landing; she fled so swiftly among the thickets, as if the diuell had borne her on his wings, or a whirle-winde hurried her away. Shee was couered with the skin of a blacke Beare, and appeared so hideous and dreadfull to behold that shee might easily haue beene reputed some maine monster, or diabolic phantasma, so affrigh∣ting them in looking on her, that they blessed thēselues with the signe of the Crosse. Now, because Bru∣neo lost much bloud by this vnhap∣pie hurt, they committed him to the Chirurgions care and atten∣dance, who opening the wound to see the daunger thereof: the Gy∣antesse shewed her selfe againe aloft on the Rocke, crying to them with a loude voyce, You damned dogges, doe yee thinke me to be a diuell, that yee make such crossing signes? No, no, I am Andadone, who will doe yee all the mischiefe I can, not sparing all possible paine & tra∣uaile to performe it. They shooting two or three Arrowes more at her, she ran ouer-thwart the Island, and so they all lost sight of her. But if Bruneo had not beene so ill, they would haue pursued her, and taken her, if they possibly could, to haue punished her as she well deserued: but fearing least wrse might befall him, the griefe of his wou would grow to more extremity, they laun∣ched foorth into the sea. And now had Amadis leisure, to acquaint his Brother with all that had happened in the Court of King Lisuart, since the time he had beene there, especially, how hee, and the great part of his kinred and , had left Great  re∣gard of the Kings refusall to Don Galuanes, concerning the  of Mongaza; as also the outrageous speeches hee sent them. And be∣leeue me Brother (quoth he) he will vndoubtedly repent it, for within these fifteene dayes, a great Armie hath past the burning Lake, con∣ducted by Galuanes, Agrayes, Flo∣restan and , all propo∣sing to bring the  vnder obedi∣ence to  as reason iustly reth. And had not I made conquest of it for King Lisuart, I would haue gone my selfe in person: but I much rather desire to visite Gaule, hauing no hope at all of seeing his Court any more. It greatly grieued Galaor to heare these newes, considering what harme might ensue thereby in time: And on the other side, hee had con∣tinually beene so affected to the seruice of King Lisuart, as hee could not forsake him, notwithstanding his loue to Amadis, or any other, and being vnable to conceiue, what should mooue him thus to estrange himselfe, from the place he sometime so highly esteemed; hee desired to vnderstand the cause.
Brother, answered Amadis, you may well think I doe it vpon vrgent occasion, and I would to God I could no more remember it, seeing the thought thereof is death to me, and therefore (I pray yee) spare any further speech in this case. Where-to Galaor gladly yeelded, and fin∣ding discourse on contrary matters, they arriued at Monstrel, where they went on shoare, because they vnder∣stood that King Perion soiourned there, for it was the neerest Towne that he had in Great Brittaine, and there he made expressely his aboad, to heare tidings of his Sonnes Ama∣dis and Galaor. No sooner did hee behold the Ship put into the Port, but hee sent to know who were in it, and the Messenger deliuering his errand to Amadis, was answered, that King Cildadan and Bruneo were come thi∣ther, onely to doe their duty to the King, who was not a little ioyfull of the newes, hoping that they would informe him, in what he further de∣sired. So mounting on horseback, they rode on to the Court: but A∣madis and Galaor went another way, for they desired first to see their mo∣ther, to trye if shee would acknow∣ledge them, or no. So, as the King came forth of the Towne, they en∣tred the Castell, where they met an Esquire, to whom they said. Friend, we would intreate (if you were so pleased) to acquaint the Queene, that two knights of her kinred, de∣sire to doe her reuerence, and to see her. The Squire was quick in deli∣uering the message, and brought them answere, that they might en∣ter. Heere you must obserue, that the had not seene Galaor, since such time as hee was carried away by the Gyant, being then but two yeares old. Neuerthelesse, so soone as they came before her, beholding Amadis; instantly she presumed the other to be Galaor, and was so rapt with extremity of ioy, that as shee was about to embrace them, she fell forward on them, as entraunced, being vnable (a long while) to speak vnto them, at last she said. Ah bles∣sed Virgin Mary, what do I behold? deare ioyes, hath Heauen so fauou∣red mee, as to let mee see you both together. So she swouned againe betweene their armes, but shee was quickly recouered by her Ladies, and then came to Melicia, who had no meane part in this nouell ioy. Thus the Queene had now her three children with her, and called to mind her passed misfortunes, not onely in respect of Amadis, but also of Galaor, the one escaping the dreadfull shipwrack on the Sea, the other from the hands of the Gyant Albadan: and now, what with sor∣row past, and ioy in presence, so strong a warre fought with her af∣fections, that her chearefull counte∣nance became quite changed. Not∣withstanding, after she had recoue∣red her spirits, and some ordinary discourse past betweene them; shee demaunded if they came alone in∣to Gaule. Madame, answered Amadis, King Cildadan came with vs in the Ship, and Bruneo also in company who (by great misfortune) chaunced to bee wounded some few dayes since. He is a good knight, valiant and hardy, and my desire is, he may find enter∣tainement fitting his desert. Trust me Sonne (quoth she) he shal haue heere all the honor and respect may best be deuised, as well for his owne sake, as for your faire affection to∣wards him. And I will command your Sister (who knowes right well how to cure all kinde of wounds) that shee shall bee carefull of his health. Sister, saide Galaor, I ioyne
with my Mother in this suit to you, for he is worthy of all helpe, and I know no Gentleman liuing, more forward then hee in the seruice of faire Ladies. Witnesse the Arke of loyall Louers, where he made proof of his loue to one, that well may e∣steeme her selfe most fortunate, to be honoured with the seruice of so loyall a man, as neuer could be tax∣ed with any disloyalty. When Melicia heard these words of her brother Galaor, in behalfe of him, whom she loued as dearely as her owne life; she could not auoid blushing: neuerthelesse, being dis∣creetly wise, she modestly excused this alteration, and said to her Bro∣ther Galaor. Sir, since it stands so well with the lyking of you and my Mother; heere I promise yee, that I will vse my very best endeauour in his seruice. At this pause entred the Kings Cildadan and Perion, who (as yet) had not heard of his Sonnes arriuall, that kneeled downe, and did him humble reuerence. Enfoul∣ding them louingly in his armes, he demāded, what fortune had broght them thus together, considering the generall report, that Galaor was lost on the day of battaile, which King Cildadan had against King Lisuart. You say very true Sir, re∣plyed Amadis, and so began to dis∣course, how he and Brunco arriued at the Sad Isle. Alas (quoth King Cildadan, can we talke here of Bru∣neo, and wrong him so much, as leaue him so long a while in the Ship, when it were much better for him to bee on land? In sadnesse (answered the Queene) there is no∣thing more contrary to a greene wound, then coldnes of the water. And therefore instantly commaun∣ded, that hee should be conueyed into one of the best Chambers in the Castell, which accordingly was done forth with. Then came the Ladies to visite him, and the Queene gaue him most gracious welcome, desiring him to be of good cheere: For heere is my Daughter (quoth she) right skilfull in the Art of Chirurgerie, that meanes to bee your often visitant. But Bruneo tooke these words other∣wise then the Queene meant them, because (as formerly hath beene re∣lated) he affected Melicia with his soules best integritie, and for her loue onely, and none other, had ap∣prooued and ended part of the ad∣uentures of the Enclosed Island. Nuerthelesse, at this time he knew how to gouerne his passions, thank∣ing the Queene most highly for this her kinde and gracious offer. So she withdrawing, left her Daughter, and some other of her Ladies, to pro∣uide such things as were needfull for him. By this aduantage of time and place, Melicia seated her selfe so apparantly in his eye; as he might perfectly apprehend the ray of her beauty, which fed his pes with such ease and happies, th he coueted no recouery of his new re∣ceiued wound, feeling the smart of the olde one, and guen him by loue so long agoe. And no little comfort did he receiue, by the sweete spee∣ches of the fae young Prncesse, who gaue him assurance, that in ve∣ry short time his wounds would be cured; prouided, that he perfomed wholly what she appointed him: For otherwise quoh she you may fall into farre greater danger. I trust Madame (quoth he) not to disobey any counsell that comes from you: because if I should doe otherwise, it will be the ending of my dayes. Well vnderstood Melicia, to what effect this answere tended: yet would hee not seeme to yeeld any apparant note thereof, but hauing
concluded his first dressing, sayd my Lord Brunco, for my sake (I pray yee) receiue a little sustenance, and afterward take some rest if you can. Then calling for such foode as shee knew meerest for him, and with a hand (more white then Alablaster) making it ready for his eating: she quickened such delicate apprehen∣sions in his soule, that his eye went farre beyond his appetite. So, commanding euery one to depart the Chamber, that the least noyse might nor offend him, she said. You haue promised mee, that you will essay some repose, let me see how o∣bedient you will be herein, till such time as I come to visite you againe: Then her selfe departing, she called Lasinde, Bruncos Esquire, and said vnto him. Friend, you know (better then any other) your Maisters con∣ditions, make demaund therefore of such things as you thinke fittest for him. The Squire was not now to learne, what entercourse of affecti∣on had passed betweene them, and therefore, presuming more boldly in his owne wit, then one lesse skil∣full, hee returned her this answere. Madame, I wish no worse to my worthy Maister, then that good fortune would conduct him to some such place, where he might make acknowledgement of the fa∣uours you affoord him. But it ap∣peares to me, that such as are desi∣rous to recouer a wounded body, first of all, they should apply helpe to the place principally offended. Which kinde of Physick instruct∣eth me, to entreate your pittie to my poore Maister, who endureth, not so much paine by the hurt so lately receiued; as by a disease of greater antiquity, and you that are the onely cause, can best minister the mittigation. Friend (quoth shee) I can tell how to helpe an in∣firmity wherewith I am acquain∣ted, but secret soares are quite out of my curing. Trust me Madame, replied the Squire, if the one seeme plaine to you, the other is no lesse apparrant, for you are not ignorant, that the extremitie of his affection to you, was the maine motiue, why he went to behold the Images of Apolidon and Grimanese in the En∣closed Island. Lasinde (quoth shee) they that become sicke by such a strange meanes, had neede haue much time to compasse their a∣mendment; without vrging any o∣ther remedy, then that which ex∣perience shall repute most neces∣sarie. And so she left the Squire, who went forthwith, and acquainted his Lord with all the conference, that had past betweene him and the In∣fanta Melicia: wherewith hee was not any way displeased, perswading himselfe, that she had thus discreet∣ly answered, reposing (as yet) but slender confidence in the Squire. And like as true louers often vse to doe, he conuerted all to his owne best aduantage; being much better contented then euer heretofore, and thanking God, that Andadones hurting him, had fauoured him with such an extraordinary felicity. For, vnder the happie fortune of this wound, he oftentimes enioyed her gracious companie, without whom, life was most tedious to him. Some few dayes after, Amadis, Galaor and King Cildadan walking together, Galaor perceiuing the nere approch of King Perion, hee went vnto him with these words. Sir, I most humbly entreate your Princely aduise, in a matter some∣thing questionable with mine owne iudgement. You know (my Lord)
quoth hee to his Brother Amadis, that you gaue me to King Lisuart, commanding me to serue him, and that I should be wholy his, whereof I made him faithfull promise, and you likewise. Now, beholding how great a differēce hath happened be∣tweene you two, during the time of my absence: I finde my selfe very strangely perplexed, considering, what errour I may commit, by ta∣king part with him against you, as also, how iustly I may be blamed by him, forsaking him in a time of such vrgent necessity. Wherefore most Royall father, I humbly craue your opinion in this case, to preuent my dishonour on either side, and that reason may bee preferred before mine owne will. Sonne, answered King Perion, you may not fayle to follow your Bro∣ther, against a King so head-strong and vngratefull, for if you gaue your selfe to his seruice against all men: yet your brothers cause ca∣ies an exception herein, in which respect, you may well forgoe your attendance on him, not onely be∣cause hee declares himselfe to A∣madis (in his owne person) a deadly enemy, but also to all his kinred and friends, amongst whom you ought to hold the prime place. Sir, re∣plied Galaor, it appeares to me (vn∣der correction) that I shall greatly forget my selfe, and runne into no meane blamefull imputation, by withdrawing my seruice from him, before his owne permission to that purpose: for, seeing (in the times of peace) hee gaue mee honour and good entertainment; what will be noysed abroade of mee, to forsake him when affaires of importance be fall him? Well knew Amadis, whereto the speeches of Galaor aimed, and that hee had no will to keepe him com∣pany: wherefore, formalizing him-selfe answerable to his Brothers fantasie, hee thus answered him. Brother, although we both stand highly obliged, to obey the coun∣cell and commaund of the King our father: yet I will humbly desire his pardon, in telling my minde con∣cerning your intention. Seeing you are so earnestly addicted to re∣turne into Great Brittan, and to continue in the seruice of King Lis∣uart; it likes mee well that you should doe so. For, in the case that concerneth our difference, I doubt not, but w many good Knights soeuer shall come to attend him; God, who is a iust Iudge, will (in the end) make him know, what wrong he hath done vs, and his ouer-great ingratitude, especially to mee, that haue honoured him with so many well deseruing seruices. There∣fore, may it so please our Kingly fa∣ther; hee may licence your depar∣ture, for I am contented with it. Why then (quoth the King) God be your guide, and I will rest in this hope, that you may (one day) be the meanes, of compounding peace in so vnhappy a warre. Thus Galaor obtayned his desire for departure, and because King Cildadan would shape some honest excuse to goe along with him; hee began in this manner. My Lords, it is sufficiently knowen to you all, to what issue the battaile came, which I had against King Lisuart, who on∣ly (by your meanes) got the glorie of the day, to my no little disaduan∣tange: for such honor as (in Iustice) appertained to mee, conuerted to my great confusion, in regard, that by the couenants on either side concluded before, I was constrai∣ned (for a limitted time) to acknow∣ledge him as my Commander, and to serue him  with all my
knights, which was no meane griefe in me to accomplish. But valuing mine honor much dearer then life, I yeelded to controule and checke mine owne will, and (according to my promise) to bring him a number of my subiects in his assistance, whereof already he hath giuen mee summons, and no later then this ve∣ry morning; for at the ending of Masse, I receiued Letters from him to that effect. Wherefore my good Lords, in doing no more then mine honor bindeth me to, let me goe a∣long to him with my friendly com∣pan Galaor. You may de as you please replyed King Perion, al∣beit I am perswaded, that in the end, he will be as little courteous to you, as to others casheered out of his fauour. At the ending of these speeches, they withdrew to their Chambers, where they continued till such time as they went to rest, and in the mor∣ning came to take their leaue of King Perion and Amadis, embar∣king themselues in a good Ship, that wayted there for them, and the windes sitting prosperously for their departing. So weighing Anker, they sayled into Great Brittaine to∣wards King Lisuart; who (the very same day) had tydings of the Count Latins ouerthrow and his men. Whereat he conceiued such dis∣pleasure, that without attending his leuied Army, he purposed to part thence, with so few knights as were then in his Court. Neuerthelesse, he concluded first to hunt the Hart, with all the Ladies in his company; wherefore mounting earely the next morning on horsebacke; he met the whole assembly to the Forrest, where his Tents were readily pre∣pared for him. Great delight had they in hunting, but hee himselfe could not forget the iniurie, recei∣ued by the knights of the Enclosed Island at the Burning Lake, minding nothing more, then how he might be reuenged on them, according as heereafter you shall heare declared. CHAP. III. How King Cildadan and Galaor, in trauayling towards the Court of King Lisuart, met with twelue Knights, and a Lady, who condu∣cted a young Gentleman, that entreated the King to make him Knight. DOn Galaor and King Cildadan arriuing in Great Brittaine, im∣mediately heard newes, that King Lisuart pre∣pared his Army for passage to the Isle of Mongaza, and that his depar∣ture would be speedily in regard whereof, they made all the haste they might to bee with him before he dislodged thence, and comming neere to the place of his abiding, they rested in the midst of a great Forrest. On the next morning as they were ready to mount on horse-backe, they heard (not farre off) the Bell of some hermitage, and making thitherward to heare Masseat their entrance into the Chappell, they be∣held twelue greene Shields, each hauing a golden Tower painted in the midst, all set in order about the Altar, and by them stood another Shield, wholly white, garnished with fine Gold, and enriched with many precious stones, whereat they
were somwhat amazed, because they saw no knights to whom they apper∣tained. Notwithstanding, as they kneeled at their prayers, a Squire entred, of whom Galaor demanded, who had placed those shields there? Sir (quoth the Squire) your request may not now bee answered: but if you goe to the Court of King Lis∣uart, there you will quickly know some uelties. Now as they were issuing foorth, there entred twelue knights; each of them guiding a Damosell by the hand, the fairest and best formed that possibly could be seene, all of them holding conference with a Gentle-woman more auncient in yeares, that seemed as a conductres to the rest. Well perceiued Galaor and King Cildadan (by her habit) that she was a stranger, and maruailed the more what she should be: but they deferred any further enquiry for that time, because they beheld the Hermite readily habited to say Masse. Which was no sooner en∣ded, but the elder Damosell addres∣sed her selfe towards King Cildadan and Galaor, demaunding of them, whether they were of King Lisuarts Court, or no. Why aske ye? answe∣red the King. Because (quoth the Damosell) we earnestly desire your conduct thither, so please it you to affoord vs such fauour. For wee are aduertised that he is in this Forrest, accompanied with his Queene, and a goodly troupe of Ladies, where he runneth the Hart. Beleeue mee Damosell, replyed Galaor, so please it you, we will keepe you company. Sir, quoth she, a thousand thankes, and seeing wee finde you so gently disposed, and are (as wee imagine) some of his followers: our suite to you is, that you would entreat him, to bestow knighthood on this yong Squire heere present with vs, assu∣ring yee, that he is deriued of so high birth, as he well deserueth to haue that honour, and much greater, if possible it might be. Truely Damosell, answered Gala∣or, I shall very gladly doe it, and am perswaded, that a King so good and gracious, will not deny me a request so reasonable. Let vs presently then, replyed the Damosell, set forward to him, while our Gentleman (ac∣cording to commendable custome) shall performe his deuotions heere in this Chappell. So mounting on horsebacke, she rode on alone in the company of Galaor and King Cilda∣dan, and as they descended downe an hill, they espied the King cros∣sing the Valley, who perceiuing two knights armed in that manner, imagined that they made their a∣bode there, to Iouste with any other that should first passe by. And albeit he had thirty knights in his compa∣ny as his guard, and each man ready for any such encounter: yet (at that time) he was not willing to haue a∣ny such tryall of the Launce; but sent Grumedan towards Galaor and his company, to request their in∣stant repaire to the King, which ac∣cordingly hee did: and so soone as Galaor perceiued his neerer ap∣proch, he presently knew him, and shewing him to King Cildadan, said. This is old Grumedan (quoth he) who bare King Lisuartes Ensigne in the battell against you. By my faith (answered King Cildadan) he is a ve∣ry worthy man; for on that day, I contended more against him, then any other in the whole band. And I well remember, that wee grew (at last) to hand-gripes, when I stroue to wrest his weapon from him: but it was a matter beyond my power, and yet I brake it in the handle, as himselfe fast held it. Their helmets were off, in regard
of the heates extremitie, by which meanes Grumedan quickly knew Galaor; and giuing his horse the spurre, he rode to embrace him, saying. My Noble Lord, you are welcome, behold the King, who hath sent me to yee, imagining you to bee otherwise then you are in∣deed, and therefore desireth you to come speake with him. Lord Gru∣medan, answered Galaor, king Cilda∣dan is here with me, and wee both will goe to salute his Maiesty. In good faith (quoth Grumedan) hee will be very ioyfull for your returne, and if you please, I will ride before to acquaint him therewith. Doe so, replied Galaor, and wee will fol∣low yee. Grumedan returning, and the king hauing obserued his long conference with the two knights, demanded (at his arriuall) who they were. Sir, answered Grume∣dan, the one is my Lord Galaor, who hath brought yee king Cilda∣dan in his company. How? quoth the king, is it possible? Yes verily, replied Grumedan. It is, said the king, the highest good happe that could now befall me, let vs therfore goe and kindely welcome them. As he made towards them, hee be∣held Galaor and king Cildadan, dis∣mounted from their horses to doe him reuerence, whereupon, he em∣braced them with so cheerefull a countenance, that it might ea∣sily be noted by the whole com∣pany, how pleasing their arriuall was to him. His next demaund, was concer∣the auncient Damosell that came thither with them. Sir, answered Galaor, we found her (a while since) in an Hermitage neere adioyning, accompanied with twelue Ks and a young Gentleman, the good∣liest person that hath beene seene, who (as is giuen me to vnderstand) hath trauailed from a far off Coun∣trie, expressely to receiue his Knight-hood, so it stood with your liking to bestow it on him, for hee will not haue it of any other as he saith himselfe. Wherefore King Cildadan and I doe entreate yee, most humbly, that you would grant it him: in regard, that his lookes and behauiour doe speake no lesse, but that he is well and worthily des∣cended. The King neuer vsed to affoord such an honour, but where he knew it to bee especially deser∣ued, wherefore, hearing this request made by Galaor (leaning vpon King Cildadans shoulder) he stood pen∣siuely a long while, without any an¦swere: because, that by denying them, he imagined they would take it offensiuely, and in yeelding to their motion, it appeared vncouth vnto him, and irregulare to his wonted custome. Neuerthelesse, hee demaunded of the Damosell, whose sonne hee was? Sir, quoth she, you may not know that as yet: but I dare sweare vpon my soule, that he is extracted of Royall seede by both sides. What thinke you then my deare friend, quoth the King to Galaor, may wee make him Knight? You may very well doe it Sir (answered he) without standing longer on any excuse, for I presume he wil prooue of no meane merit. On Gods name then be it so, replied the King: yet I would haue the Queene and her Ladies witnesses thereof, and therefore goe you before to them, and cause them to meete vs at the place where hee remaineth, for bee well assured, they all will be right ioyfull to see yee. So the King tooke he way towards the Hermi∣tage, and Galaor, with King Cilda∣dan, went to finde the Queene where you may well perswade your
selues, that neuer did men meete with more gracious welcome, espe∣cially by the Princesses Oriana and Mabila, for their hope was (by them) to heare some newes of A∣madis, and that they would worke his meanes, for recouering the Kings fauour againe. Hauing fi∣nished their best salutations on all sides, Galaor told them, that the King had sent for them, and vpon what occasion, to their no little ioy and contentment: for euery one was desirous to see the yong gallant, of whom Galaor had giuen such high commendations. The Queene and her Ladies be∣ing all mounted, made such speed to the Hermitage, that they aligh∣ted there, euen as the King was en∣tring into the Chappell, where be∣holding the twelue Shields, placed about that which was altogether white, and the young Gentleman very deuoutly at his prayers: he ap∣peared so pleasing in their eyes, that the former report came far short of their present opinion of him, for, in their best of iudgement, they had neuer beheld a more comely crea∣ture, nor of a more setled and assu∣red countenance. He seeing such a goodly company of Ladies and Knights, arose, and gaue them most humble reuerence. Then the King tooke him by the hand, and deman∣ded if he would bee a Knight. Sir, quoth he, for nothing else haue I iourneyed from so farre a Country, but to craue it at your hand, so plea∣sed it you so much to honour mee. Trust me said the King, you shall not be denied, and he falling on his knees, the King gaue him the Ac∣colade, according to the ceremonie then vsed in Knight-hood, saying vnto him; Be a Knight in the name of God, and so tooke him vp. Now, quoth he, for receiuing your Sword; you may make choise of any in this company, that stands fayrest in your owne liking. Sir, replied our new made knight, I desire then, that Madame Oriana may doe it, for if she performe it, I haue the thing that my soule most longeth after. Is it euen so? said the King, I will solicite her on your behalfe, and stepping to the Princes, thus proceeded. You heare how desi∣rous the knight is, that you would bestow such an honour on him; let mee entreate yee, not to denie him. Now, the faire young Princesse, to whom (neuer till then) any such request had beene made, neither knew what might be his reason that made the motion: had so little power ouer her present condition, that a most amiable blush mounted vp in to her cheekes. Yet taking the Sword presented to her, shee guided it to the knight, after the vsuall maner. Then spake the an∣cient Damosell to the King, so low as none but himselfe could heare her. Sir (quoth shee) seeing you haue done such honour to our knight, he shall remaine (if you be so pleased) in your seruice, with these twelue other knighs, that hi∣therto haue kept him company. And because dutie commandeth so much in me, as to returne againe to her that sent mee hither: I must en∣treate your fauour for my depar∣ture, first letting you know, that he is named Norandell, and is more yours then you imagine, as you shal further vnderstand by this Letter; which hauing verie closely conuei∣ed into his hand, she tooke her leaue, and rode on her iourney, leauing him pensiuely perplexed at her words And because he doubt∣ed, that the Letter might containe some more important matter: hee
feigned, as if hee would returne to his huntsmen, the better to reade the Letter where himselfe pleased: desiring Galaor and king Cildadan, to reconduct the Ladies backe to their Tents, awayting there the houre of dinner, while he (in meane time) would kill a Hart. But if I faile (quoth he) in comming to din∣ner, expect me not till supper time. So setting onward to the chase, and finding himselfe accompanied but with few: hee opened the Let∣ter, which contained as hereafter followeth. The Letter from the Infanta Ce∣linda, to King Lisuart. MOst mighty and excellent Prince, by reading this Letter, it may be, you will remember, that when you tra∣uersed strange Countries, and a Knight errant, giuing end to many great ad∣uentures: Fortune directed your course into the kingdome of my Father, who was lately before deceassed, and you found me retired to one of my Castels, called the Great Rosier; where Anti∣on le braue kept me besieged, be∣cause I disdained to ioyne with him in marriage, he being no way equall to me in nobility, and a much lesse friend to vertue. As he made good proofe thereof, r by force and tyrannie he vsurped o∣uer me (a poore young Ladie) the grea∣ter part of all my Countries, when at ur arriuall you offered him the Cem∣te, in defence of my right: which he accepting, as trusting more to the strength of his owne arme, then any iustice in his quarrell. And therein heauen declared iust iudgment; for, you being farre inferiour to him in compo∣sition of body, but much exceeding him in  of courage, preuailed against him. By meanes whereof, I was  after restored to my rights, all which I must and doe confesse, to hold of you for euer, as being wholly yours, and my selfe also. And you plea∣sed then to honour mee so much with your presence, that you came into my Great Rosier, where wee conferring together in the delightfull Arbours: you gathered the floure of my virgini∣ty, as wee were sporting in cropping sweet Roses, whereas the place was (and yet is) most plentifully abounding. Neither am I able to say, whether loue would haue it so, or my beauty prooued the maine occasion: but wel I wot, your command was so potent ouer me, and I so feeble in resistance; that before you departed hence, you left me conceiued of this young Gentleman, endued with such faire forme and feature, as it ap∣peared, that Nature was well pleased, to compleate him perfect in all excel∣lence, thereby to deface all remem∣brance of our sinne committed. Where∣fore Sir, receiue him as your owne, be∣ing of Royall seede both by you and my selfe, which verily perswadeth me, that he will prooue a valiant man, as retay∣ning in him part of your famous prow∣esse, and part of the exceeding loue wherein he was conceiued, at such time as you gaue me this Ring, which I send ye heere enclosed likewise, in the testi∣mony of the faithfull promise you then made to your humble seruant Celinda, Daughter to King Hegide, who kis∣seth the hand of your Royall Maie∣stie. When King Lisuart had read and re-read ouer this Letter, word by word, he perfectly called to minde, all that the Princesse had there set downe, albeit it was long time be∣fore his soiourning in the kingdome of Denmarke, where (as a wandring Knight) he performed such actions of Armes, as he wonne the loue of the Infanta Brisenna, whom after-ward he married, according as for¦merly hath beene declared. Not∣withstanding,
hee determined to make no account at all of Norandell (though he knew him to be his na∣turall Sonne) vntill hee perceiued how he would beare himselfe, and deserued by his deedes, to prooue such a one as he desired. As he con∣tinued in these priuate considerati∣ons, a goodly Hart, pursued by a ful cry of Hounds, passed hard by him, and the Huntsmen followed on so closely, that there the Deere lost his life. In regard whereof the King was willing to giue ouer further sporting, and commaunded the Huntsmen to beare the Hart to the Queenes Tent. Afterward, being set at the Table. Galaor and King Cildadan keeping him company; all dinner while hee had but little conference with them, for thinking still on Celinda, and her Letter sent him. Dinner being en∣ded, he tooke Galaor aside, and as they walked, thus discoursed with him. My worthy friend, so much doe I relye vpon your fidelitie and loue, as I hold you to bee the onely man in the world, to whom I dare make knowne my very intimate se∣crets. And setting aside those mat∣ters of no meane importance, which (during the time of your absence haue happened to me: I will onely acquaint yee with an especiall acci∣dent this day befalne me. So, deliue∣ring him the Letter which Celinda had sent, hee willed him to peruse what it contained. Galaor reading it ouer aduisedly, perceiued therby, that Norandell was Sonne to the King, whereat conceiuing no little ioy, he returned this answere. As∣suredly Sir, if you tooke such paines for your faire friend, in mine opini∣on, she is no way behinde ye in ho∣norable recompence, hauing broght ye such a goodly Son, as will proue a worthy man, and a valiant knight in Armes. Nor let the concealment heereof be irkesome to ye, because when you shall please to make it knowen, it will redound to your great ioy and honour. And if it a∣greed with your good liking, to let me enioy him as my companion, what seruices heereaster I shall doe for you, I will account to bee most worthily imployed. What? quoth the King, would you trouble your selfe with a Boy, affoording him (at the first) so great an honour, not knowing his temper, or how he will carry himselfe? It is well knowne, that there is not any knight in Great Brittaine, but he will repute himself much happy, to haue such grace as you offer him. Sir, (quoth Galaor) it is the first request that euer I made to yee, and I hum¦bly desire, that I may not be denied. On my faith (quoth the King) if you honor him so much, you shal high¦ly oblige him to you, and doe me al∣so an especiall fauour. And no mean glory to my selfe, replyed Galaor for he being Son to so famous a  cannot faile to bee one of the best knights in the world. Doe then (quoth the King) as shall  best. And as they held on this dis∣course, the Queene came in, w made them breake off, and shee be∣ing accompanied with King Cilda∣dan, Norandell, and many other knights, continued familiar confe∣rence together, till Galaor entred in∣to thes speeches. Sir, you know that by the cu¦stome heere vsed in this kingdome of Great Brittaine, no new made knight ought to refuse any knight Lady or Damosell, the first demand they shall make vnto him. You say very true Sir, answered the King ther wherefore doe you moue t¦stion? Because Sir, replyed  am a knight, and I would
Norandell, to graunt what I shall re∣quire of him, to wit, that (for one whole yeare) he and I may be fel∣lowes, and companions, not any way to be sundered or deuided, ex∣cept death or imprisonment shall enforce it. When Norandell heard this, hee was no lesse amazed then well pleased: for he very well knew, that Galaor was esteemed one of the best knights in that Court, and that the king affoorded much more honour to him, then any other that, kept him company, and thereupon he thus replied. My Lord Galaor it may easily bee discerned by your demaund, in how many obligati∣ons of dutie you would haue mee bound vnto you, in wishing that grace to mee, which I much rather ought to haue begged of you. And this I dare assure yee, that not onely doe I graunt what you haue desired, namely, my company: but also I giue my selfe wholly yours, and re∣quire, that in that nature you would receiue and accept me. Beleeue me, quoth king Cildadan, you haue both reason in these seuerall re∣quests: you Lord Galaor, in vrging such a fauour, and you likewise yong Norandell, in granting it: for if heauen bee pleased therewith, as we need not vse any doubt, it will redound to the honour and benefit of either. At this very instant, the King re∣ceiued intelligence, that his Army was to depart very speedily, where∣fore the next morning hee rode to the City, and riding alone by him-selfe he called Galaor to him, telling him. He was well contented, that his daughter Oriana should know Norandell to be his sonne, and her Brother,  shee should the better loue and respect him; but yet hee w haue it reuealed to her very secretly. Sir, answered Galaor, I am perswaded, that it will not a little please her, and therefore (if possibly I may) I will acquaint her therewith before wee come to Court. Doe so, quoth the king; Galaor riding backward, came to the Princesse, and to him (after some other conference had together) she spake in this manner. Sir Ga∣laor, I am perswaded, that the Gen∣tleman who was yesterday made knight, hath beene a long while knowne to you, in regarde you made choise of him as your asso∣ciate and companion: for I know not any knight in this Court, but would thinke himselfe highly ho∣nored, to be so graced by you, yea, though it were your brother A∣madis. Madame, replied Galaor, your comparison of mee with my Bro∣ther, is so vnequall, as the like spee∣ches may be spoken of heauen and earth: considering, that (in respect of me) he may bee tearmed heauen, and I (compared to him) farre in∣feriour to the lower element. And therefore, I repute it great presump∣tion in any knight whatsoeuer, to thinke himselfe his second: for it plainly appeareth, that fortune fa∣uoured his election, to hold the primarie place in valour, feature, and all other gracious gifts requi∣red in a Gentleman. Full gladly did Oriana listen to these praises of her Amadis, while inwardly shee thus spake to her selfe. Alas poore Lady, thy misfortune were vn∣matchable, if in being thus seuered from the presence of thy friend, thou shouldst bee as farre distant from his intire affection: in good sadnesse, death would be a thousand times more welcome to mee, then such a deepe discomfort. But Ga∣laor purposing a longer conti∣nuance of his discourse, thus pro∣ceeded.
Let it be no matter of mar∣uaile in you, faire Princesse, that I accepted Norandell into my com∣pany; for you may bee well assured, that I did it not but vpon great and good occasion, and perhaps, it will no more dislike you, then it doth me, when the cause is more famili∣ar to yee? I pray yee Sir, quoth she, if it bee a matter that your honour may dispence withall, not to con∣ceale it from me. Madame, said Galaor, the secret were very important, that I would not impart to you, and vpon faith∣full promise of your priuacie, I will discouer it. Rest boldly assured thereof, replied the Princesse. Vn∣derstand then Madame, quoth Ga∣laor, that Norandell is sonne to the King your father and your Bro∣ther. And so declared, how hee had read the Letter from the Infan∣ta Celinda, and the king likewise which she had sent to the king, with all the other speeches passed be∣tweene them. In good faith, an∣swered the Princesse, I am highly pleased, to know this new affinity betweene Norandell and me: and now I giue you thankes withall my heart, for the worthy honour you haue done him, in accepting him to be your companion. For, in being with you, hee cannot faile of proo∣uing to bee a good man, and a fa∣mous knight: whereas, should hee be otherwise addicted, yet such a bad nature would be quite altered, only by keeping your company, as hee hath faithfully promised. Ma∣dame, quoth Galaor, you haue power to say of me whatsoeuer you please, as of him, that is a most hum∣ble seruant both to the king and your self, when and how it shall like you to imploy me. So breaking off this enterpar∣lance, they rode to the Queenes lodging, where Galaor dismounting the Princesse, and hauing con∣ducted her to her Chamber: hee departed thence with his new com∣panion, vntill the next morning their going to the king, who told them, that hee purposed that night to sleepe aboord his Ships, and the day following to set saile away, gi∣uing order for euery mans being in readinesse. The Drummes and Trumpets summoning all souldi∣ours to their collours, they weigh∣ed Ankors on the morrow, and had the winde so auspicious for them, as quickly they loue the sight of Great Brittan: but soone after a∣rose a shrewde Tempest, which made them very doubtfull of perishing. Notwithstanding, it cal∣med so fauorably in the end, that (on the fift day following) they dis∣couered the Isle of Mongaza: where they landed, neere to the place where king Arban lay en∣camped and fort fled, awayting for their succour and supply.  long before, they of the  Lake had made a  foorth vpon them, and pursued them so violent∣ly: as if king Arban men had not wonne the toppe of the mountaine, they could not haue auoided dis∣comfiture. There did Florestan make good acknowledgement of his man-hood, for, meeting with Gasquilan, king of Swetia, hee wounded him so daungerously, as euery one reputed him for dead. Neuerthelesse, Bri∣ande Moniaste (aduenturing ouer forwardly into the throng, with full intent to charge King Arban) was taken prisoner, being no way able to helpe himselfe, so that on other side, many good knights were wounded, and layde along on the ground. All which king Lisuart heard at his arriuall, whereat hee
was so displeased, as no man could be more, concluding to bee reuen∣ged on them. Which the better to performe, hee gaue commande∣ment thorow his Campe, that no one should presume into the field, without licence thereto first obtay∣ned, hoping that the enemie would come againe to assaile King Arban, as formerly he was wont to doe be∣fore his comming thither. But the o∣ther side had intelligence of this fresh succour, in regard whereof they had retired themselues, atten∣ding further fortune. By this time, the houre drewe neere, when the Princesse Oriana should bee deliuered of her childe, and her Fathers departure fitted it very well: for, within a day or two after his shipping thence, the paines and throwes of child-birth grew so extreamely on her, that (about mid-night) shee expected death euery minute. Therefore she caused Ma∣bila to rise, as also the Damosell of Denmarke, who had (long before) prouided all things in readinesse, to bee required in such a necessitie. They being come to her, found her so ouercome with paine and an∣guish (not daring to crye or vse any complaint) that shee was vnable to hold out any longer. But Heauen pittying her oppressions, before the breake of day, requited her sorrowes with the birth of a goodly Boy, which the Damosel of Denmarke re∣ceiued, while Mabila gaue further attendance on the Mother. As shee was making it ready in the swadling clothes, she discerned seauen Cara∣cters vnder either little teate, some as red as blood, and the other as white as snow: whereat being not a little abashed, shee called Mabila, and shewed them to her. But neither of them had the skill to reade them; for they were all Greeke Letters, composed in Latin words, in which report, they forbare (as then) to acquaint the Mother therewith, wrapping it vp in the clothes, and laying it by the Mother, till shee gaue order for conueighing it thence, according as formerly hath beene determined, which being done, the Damosell of Denmarke departed to call her brother Du∣rin. In the meane while the Princesse holding the Infant in her armes, and bestowing many sweete kisses vpon it, spake in this manner. Alas little Creature, Heauen enlarge such blessings on thee, that thou mayst proue to be as good and vertuous a knight as thy Father, and make the beginning of thy fortunes more prosperous then his hath beene. A∣las, I am enforced to forgoe thee, and shewe my selfe towards thee more cruell, then any Tiger or Leo∣pard to their young ones. For I know not whether thou goest, nor when I shall see thee againe, which filleth my soule with such affliction, as Fortune cannot affoord thee the very least danger, but I shall finde it presented before mine owne eyes. Oh that I could but know the Nurse that shall giue thee sucke; I would entreate her to bee very carefull of thee. For it may so come to passe, that she will be so negligent of thee, that before thou canst be able to helpe thy selfe: she may many times leaue thee in the danger of wilde beasts, while she attendeth on sligh∣ter affairs, or else sit gossipping with her neighbours, telling vaine tales and fruitlesse fables. Neither can I therein much condemne her, be∣cause both she (and many more be∣side) may iudge thee to be the sonne of some silly woman; and perhaps the best fauour they will bestow on thee, shall be to make thee a Shep∣heard,
or some other flock-keeper on the field, who cannot alwayes be prouident in their paines, but (euen in despight of their vtmost dili∣gence) the Wolfe or Lyon passing by, may make spoyle and bloody ruine. These words were accompanied with inundations of teares, and yet she purposed their longer continu∣ance, till the Damosell of Denmarke entring the Chamber, said. Madam, it will soone be day, therefore expe∣dition is more fitting for vs, then vnthrifty delay Alas (quoth the Princesse) what intend yee to doe? What? said the Damosell, marie to saue your honour, and the life of your childe: doe not you remem∣ber, what we haue (long since) con∣cluded together? And let me tell ye, my Brother Durin waiteth be∣neath vnder the window, to receiue the Infant as we shall let it downe. I feare, (quoth the Princesse) that you will kill it in the descent. Let our care be your warrant, answered the Damosell. So taking it out of the Mothers Armes, shee was ready to swoune with griefe; and but that Mabila spake somewhat angerly to her, she would haue risen to follow it; but she said vnto her. Madame, if you grow so forgetfull of your selfe, we will forsake ye to: therefore suffer what must of necessity bee done, and (by the grace of God) all will goe well. So putting the child into a wicker Basket, and fastening a strong corde thereto, they let it downe at the window, to the place where Durin attended to receiue it. Afterward the Damosel descended, and finding the horses there, which Durin had brought thither: they mounted on them, taking their iour∣ney through the Forrest, because they would not meete with any body. So long they rode, till about day breake they arriued to a goodly Fountaine or Spring, which issued forth of an high Rocke, and vnder it was a Valley so obscure, as well in regard of the depth thereof, as also the plentie of huge great Bushes and Trees, that it was almost im∣possible to discerne bright day, as men passed along thorow it, and continually it was haunted with Wolues, Lyons and such like cruell beasts. From time of all antiquity, in a remote corner of this Valey, stood a small Hermitage, wherein liued a holy man, named Nascian, of whom it was euery where reported, that his life was so acceptable in Gods sight, as he was oftentimes fed with heauenly food, when earthly suste∣nance grew scant and fayled. All the company he had, was a young Lad his Nephew, who went abroad to get their daylie sustentation, and himselfe (in person) would diuerse times driue his Asse before him, and yet no sauage beasts offer once to touch him, albeit they met him vsualy on the way; but rather would humble themselues to the good old man, making him what mirthfull sport their rude natures affoor∣ded. This place was so solitary and vnfrequented, that a Lyonnesse did there yearely bring foorth her yong ones, and they would vsualy and priuily visite Nascian, euen as if they had beene his houshold little dogges, and as duely would hee walke to see them in their denne. Whereinto, so soone as the Lyon∣nesse saw him enter, shee would wander abroade to seeke her prey, as seeming to leaue her whelpes in his safe protection: because con∣tinually hee haunted thither twise or thrice each day, such was his de∣light in seeing them play with one
another. Now, by such time as the Damosell drew neere to the foun∣taine, the prime of the mornings clearnesse beganne to appeare, and she found her selfe so spent with trauaile, which all the night time she had endured, that shee said to Durin. I pray yee Brother, let vs refresh our selues a while in this place. Hereupon, they alighted from their horses, hee taking the In∣fant from his Sister, to lay it at the roote of a tree neere the fountaine, while he receiued her downe in his armes. The Lyonnesse then wal∣king in the depth of the valley be∣gan to send foorth such dreadfull roarings, that the horse whereon the Damosell roade (being fearefull at his noise) ranne swiftly away with her, before Durin had scarcely layde downe the child, and doe whatso∣euer shee could to the contrarie, carried her ouer-thwart the For∣rest, shee not hauing any power to descend. Durins horse also ranne away in the like manner, whereat he stood as confounded with amaze∣ment; for hee saw his Sister in dan∣ger, heard her crie and call to him for helpe, and yet hee could not lend her any, because hee was on foote, laying downe the childe that slept full sweetly. At length, per∣ceiuing no present signe of perill to the Infant, hee concluded to fol∣low the Damosell, and therefore ran that way which the horse had ta∣ken: finding him in a thicket of young trees, and she falne downe, almost depriued of her sences. Hauing holpen her vp, he prayed her to sit there a while, vntill he had recouered their horses, and casting his eye aside, espied hers so farre entred into a quickset, that he ea∣sily tooke him, and brought him to her. As he intended to pursue his owne, shee said vnto him; Good Brother, goe first to the childe, and bring it hither to mee, for if the bloudy beast finde it, farewell all hope of life. I will goe fetch it, quoth Durin, therefore stay you my returne in this place; And as hee offred to mount vp on her horse, she perswaded him to the contrary, least meeting with the Lyonnesse, or hearing her cry againe, worse might befall him. Durin followed her aduise, and departing thence without any longer delay, went directly towards the fountaine. But some small while before hee could get thither, the Lyonnesse had pas∣sed by, and taken vp the Infant with his teeth, not doing it any harme at all. By this time the morning was so farre growen on, that Nascian (hauing sung his Masse) walked a∣broade (according to his wonted custome) before the denne of the young Lyons, and beholding the Lyonnesse to bring them such an vnusuall kinde of prey: stepped iust in her way of passage, not a little wondring where and how shee had found it. Approching neerer to her, in threatning manner, hee thus spake to her. Cruell beast, who made thee so bold, to offer iniurie to a creature, sent by God into the world, to doe him seruice and ho∣nour? It is no food for thee, or thy whelpes. The Lyonnesse seemed to bee fearefull, and (euen as if she had vn∣derstood the commaund of Nas∣cian) couched downe presently on the ground, and moouing her eares and taile in louing manner, layde downe the infant, and beganne to lick it. Then the good olde man tooke it vp in his armes, and in bles∣sing it, said, Alas little Babe, thy mother that hath thus vnmercifully left thee, is well worthy to be curs∣sed
of God. The childe beganne to cry, and make much moane, which mooued the aged man to such compassion, that the teares streamed aboundantly downe his reuerend beard. And not knowing how to quiet it with any present sustenance, concluded in the end, to driue the Lyonnesse into her denne, and there to suckle it among her whelpes; which as hee did, hee said. I commande thee by the power of God, to whom all things liuing doe owe obedience; that thou giue nourishment to his creature, and to bee as carefull of it as to any of thine owne. The Ly∣onnesse made no refusall, but suf∣fred the child to suck so long as it listed: and then the Hermit taking it from her, carried it a long with him louingly to his Hermi∣tage. Presently hee sent for his Sister to come to him, to aduise what should be done with the child, and his young Nephew was dilligent in the businesse: but fortune was so contrarie, that hee found not his mother at home, because the day before, shee and her husband was gon to a village somewhat farre off, so as they could not be returned in the space of eight whole dayes. During which time, Nascian found himselfe much encombred, for hee was but badly acquainted with the office of a Nursse, and therefore, finding no other remedie: till they were returned, he made his best meanes by the Lyonnesse, as also a faire Ewe, that had newly eaned, and these holpe to foster our poore for∣saken infant. But returning now to Durin, thinking to finde the child at the fountaine, where he had left it: he was greatly astonished, when he perceiued his purpose defeated. Neuerthelesse, he so earnestly en∣deuoured, to know what was be∣come of it; that at last, he found the tracke of the Lyonnesse which had carried it thence, and presu∣ming that she had deuoured it, in mournfull teares he returned to his Sister. She vnderstanding this haplesse fortune, fell downe as one entranced, and breathing forth ma∣ny pittifull lamentations. ssed the houre of her owne birth, ha∣uing lost thus all her hope and com∣fort; wretch that I am, quoth she, what shall I doe? where shall I be∣stow my selfe? what answere shall I make to my Lady, when shee heares of this misfortune? O deare God, wouldst thou permit so yong a creature to perish, that neuer in it selfe offended thee? It is I that am iustly worthy of the seuearest pu∣nishment, and I would that this mishap had falne vpon my selfe, for life is now but loathsome to mee. Sweet Babe, thy Father (euen as yong as thou) beganne to proue the dangers of this world: and yet our Lord (in his great goodnesse) plea∣sed to preserue him. But thy mis-fortune is much more strange then his, because when he was left to the mercie of the waues, Gandales (in a happy houre) met with him, and af∣terward did foster him, as euery one well knoweth. But alas, little dar∣ling, thou didst fall into the mercy of a brute beast, that had no more pitty then his owne nature gouer∣ned, and so didst thou finish thy dayes, before they were (wel neere) begunne. These lamentations were sleeped in many floods of teares, Durin be∣ing no way able to comfort her, be∣cause (for a long while) death more appeared in her, then life. Notwith∣stāding, he knew so wel how to ma∣nage arguments of reason, that ha∣uing
somewhat preuailed ouer her passion, he thus spake to her. Sister, it may so fall out, that heauen hath beene gracious to him in pitty, for many other haue beene borne away by wilde beasts, and yet afterward attained to great perfection. There∣fore, the best way is, to comfort your selfe for you may doe yet many seruices to the Princesse, and to Lord Amadis, who, in loosing you, shall sustaine a double losse. What would you aduise me (quoth shee) to do? marie this, answered Durin, that we mounting both vpon your horses,  ce to Mirefleure, and soioue there two or three dayes, before wee doe returne to Court. And when your Lady enquireth concerning her childe, you may tell her (listening somwhat to the coun∣sell of Mabila) that he is in the go∣uernment of a very good Nurse. This aduice being allowed for good, they departed thence, taking the direct roade way to Mirefleure, where they remained for a time, be∣fore they would returne to the Court, and there let vs leaue them, we going backe againe to the good olde Hermite. About tenne dayes after hee had sent for his Sister, shee came vnto him, accompanied onely with her husband. Then he declared to her, how and in what manner he did find the childe, in the deuouring mouth of the Lyonesse, carying it as food for her young ones: but by Gods permission hee recouered it from her, and awayg for the time of her comming to him, the Lyonnesse and an Ewe had suckled and nouri∣shed it. Wherefore Sister (quoth he) questionlesse our Lord hath re∣serued it for his seruice, preseruing it from such dreadfull danger: in which respect, let me entreate you to prouide for it hereafter, and bring it vp, till it bee capable of such lear∣ning as I will teach him. And if it be the will of Heuen to blesse him with long life, I make no doubt but he will prooue a worthy man, and acknowledge the good which wee shall doe for him. Then the Her∣mite brought her where the Infant lay sleeping vpon a bedde of leaues and mosse, and shee no sooner saw him, but his very appearance plea∣sed her beyond measure, and she as∣ked of him, what was his name. In troth, quoth he, that is (as yet) vn∣knowne to me, but to cleare vs of all doubt, I will presently baptie him. And so hee willed her to vnswaddle him; and she espying the Caracters vnder his brests, shewed them to the Hermite. He bestowed such paines to vnderstand them, that hee found this word Esplandian in Latine let∣ters, but his skill reached not so far as the Greeke. Hereupon perswa∣ding himselfe, that he brought his name from his mothers wombe, hee would not rob him of it, but confir∣med it by Baptisme, naming him Esplandian, and so was he afterward knowne in many strange Countries, where he broght to end many great aduentures, as we shall reade heere-after. But for the present, wee spare to speake of them, let it therefore suffise ye, that the child being chri∣stened, and committed to the care of his Nurse and her husband: they returned home to their house, where they tended him with such louing respect, that time brought him to such comely shape and growth, that euery eye delighted to look on him. Thus as their owne Sonne they nursed and prouided for him, vntill such time as they returned him againe to the Hermite, accor∣ding to his former appoint∣ment.
CHAP. IIII. How King Lisuart fought a Battell against the Knights of the Enclosed Island, whom he vanquished. And of the great liberalitie he vsed af∣terward to Galuanes, in restoring him to all the lands and Seigneu∣ries belonging to Madasima. HEeretofore you haue heard, how King Lis∣uart and his Army lan∣ded in the Isle of Mon∣gaza, where they found King Arban fortified in the moun∣taines, doubtfull of Galuanes and his forces, who twise or thrise had giuen him shrewd repulses. Now you are to vnderstand, that after they were thus met together, the King gaue command to raise his Campe, and passe thence to the plaine Champi∣an ground: for hee had aduertise∣ment, that the knights of the Enclo∣sed Island were departed from the Burning Lake, as purposing to bid him battaile. So marched on these two Armies each against other, and had giuen charge the very same day, but that night preuented them; and therefore they were constrained to deferre it till the next morning. Then arming themselues, King Lis∣uart ordayned his forces into three bat tallions; the first led by Galaor and fiue hundred knights, among whom were Norandell, Guillan the Pensiue, Ladasin and Cendtle. The se∣cond was guided by King Cildadan, with seuen hundred other knights, hauing in their company Ganides, Brandoynas and Philippinell. The third, King Arban of Northwales had charge of, with Don Grumedan, and many other knights beside, both bold and valiant, appointed as guard for the person of King Lisuart: who before he meant to enterfight, be∣holding his enemies approach so neere him, gaue these speeches to al his followers. My worthie friends, you haue heere present before your eyes, the reason that mooued vs to crosse the Seas, to defend the honor of Great Brittaine, and this Country which is ours; as is most notoriously ma∣nifest, by our agreements made with Ardan Canile, auouched by Ma∣dasima, & the aged Giantes her Mo∣ther. And yet notwithstanding, vn∣der what couller or pretence I know not, they haue dared to make their entrance, and (by treason) haue sur∣prized both the Towne and Castell of the Burning Lake, where wee planted the Count Latin as our Vicegerent, whom they yet detaine as prisoner, and many more with him. This hath raised their courage to such a height of arrogancie, that they hold Fortune to be onely their Goddesse, and that she (with them) will beate vs hence, euen home to our owne houses, whereto it appea∣reth they will likewise lay claime, to order them and vs by their own dis∣position. But you shall see it fall out quite contrary; for, the reputa∣tion wherein wee haue so long time liued, and the hand of Heauen (I am assuredly perswaded) will not suffer vs to be disgraced by them. For I dare engadge mine honour, that there is no one man among ye, but will rather dye with credit and ver∣tuous repute, then liue in obloquie and detested shame. And such per∣fect acknowledgement I haue had
of you for many yeares together; that I must iustly confesse, I haue no meane occasion both to loue and highly esteeme ye. And if I had re∣ceiued no such knowledge of ye, yet it cannot be denied, but that from the very houre of my birth, Fortune strictly engadged me to yee all: as well in regard of the sidelitie, euer-more continued by ye to your for∣mer Princes, as also for the mani∣fold seruices done by yee to me in diuers places. Especially against barsinan, when he deliuered me into the hands of Arcalaus, to make him∣see King. And y, in the battell which I  King Cildadan,  to euery one. All which reasons haue grounded this beleefe in me, that, without re∣spect to some particulars, who haue entred into rebellion against vs, be∣ing heeretofore our friends, and now coueting the best and dearest blood in your bodies: you will de∣clare such zeale in dutie, (according to your auncient vertue and faith∣fulnesse) that we shall let them soon perceiue, how fondly they haue op∣posed themselues against vs. And that shall we very easily doe, being farre aboue them in number, and that which is beyond all things else, the right being on our side: So let vs boldly marche on to meet them; foryee see how forward they are to the field. While the King was thus busied in these remoustrances, Galuanes sate not idlely downe on the other side but being in the midst of his battalions, went from ranke to rank, persuading his knightsto fight man∣fully, & vsing these or the like spee∣ches to them. Vnderstand, my deare friends and companions in Armes, that the chiefe and most soueraigne happi∣nes, that can be in any Army what-soeuer, is, to haue one sole Head or Commaunder, whose wisedome in ordinances, and counsell in things requisite to bee done, may compasse obedience for the execution of his command. Now, it is apparent that yee haue not heere one Captaine onely, and such a man as I haue no∣ted to yee: but two or three, yea, more then twentie, who are all so sweetly linked together, as if it were but one will, one heart, and one ad∣uice. Seeing then, that this prime fe∣licity is not wanting to vs; let vs ap∣propriate our selues to the second, and helpe forward my fortune, in ayding vs against a King, the most ingratefull man of the world: who maketh full account to ruinate our goods and liues with a great and powerfull Army brought hither a∣gainst vs, onely to impouerish, and exterminate the right of a silly Gen∣tlewoman. But he may come short in his account; for we will aide and maintaine her cause, so long as life remaineth in our bodies; according to our oath and promise, whereto we obliged our selues when we re∣ceiued the order of knighthood. But if we dye with this attempt, it shall be to vs immortall glory, that wee had so iust occasion to fight a∣gainst him, who ought to desend the right of all Ladies. So that, that which (in many men) may be tear∣med rashnes or presumption, in vs will be truely  vertue and mag∣nanimitie of courage. Proceed we on then boly, and enter the field, not drding death or any danger whatsoeuer, honour being the onely obiect before our eyes. For in such martiall actions, Fortune admitteth neither feare or doubt. And if wee come off with victory, they so farre outgoing vs in number, our glory will bee the greater, and our fame the further enlarged, hauing enter∣prised,
with such height of spirit, a matter almost incredible to men. Such were the words of the gen∣tle knight Galuanes to his followers; which animated them so sprightful∣ly, as they imagined the time ouer∣tardied, till they were at fight. But Quedragant required a little longer respit; And in the mean while (quoth he) I hold it very expedient, that we should send to King Lisuart, and ad∣uise him, that if hee expect any ho∣nour in fighting with vs: that hee would withdraw his Archers, as we will doe ours, by which meanes, it will be the fairest forme of battell a∣mong knights, that euer was seene. This aduice was well liked by the whole company, and Elian the De∣liberate had the charge of this mes∣sage. Whereupon he went to the Campe of King Lisuart, giuing his signe afarre off, that he came to con∣ferre. Galaor, who ledde the auant∣guard, sent a Gentleman to meete him, and conduct him surely. Being brought to the King, he made kno∣wen what the knights of the Enclo∣sed Island had commaunded him. In good sooth, answered the King, I am very well pleased with their motion, and bidde them not faile in doing their vttermost. So Elian re∣turned, and informed Galuanes, who had likewise diuided his Army into two parts. But they were ouer few, in respect of the Kings power, which consisted of six times as many men more, and yet they were not daunted or dis∣mayed. Only they grieued for the want of Brian de Moniaste, who was taken prisoner on the day that they assayled King Arban; and for Agray∣es also, who was gone to leuie men, and make prouision of victuals from little Brittaine. These two bat∣tailes being ranged, and ready for fight, they marched each against o∣ther in this manner. For them of the Enclosed Island, the auantguard was led by Florestan, accompanied with two hundred and fifty knights, beside Quearagant, Angriote and Sarquiles; among whom also was Gasinan, bearing a goodly great En∣signe, wherein were figured twelue Ladies. Next marched Galuanes, Palomir, Dragonts, Listoran, and foure hundred other knights, all worthy men, and resolued to fight. Then Drummes, Trumpets and Clarions sounded on either side so chearefully, that the ayre returned backe as gallant an eccho: & as they were vpon ioyning, Galaor, who led the vauward for King Lisuart, shew∣ing to Norandell, Florestan, Quedra∣gant; Angriote, and Garnate, saide. My friendly companion, marke well these foure first that marche hither-ward so brauely, assure your selfe, that they are reputed among the best knights in the world. Hee that beares his Shielde Gules, with three Lyons Argent, is my Brother Florestan. The other that beares a∣zure, seamed with Floures and Ly∣ons Ore, is Quedragant. The third that beares Azure, with so many floures Argent, is Angriote. And the fourth who beareth all Sinople, is Garnate of the Dreadfull Dale: hee slew a mighty Serpent, and therfore was that name imposed on him. Let vs therefore charge them boldly, without any thought of difference. So placing their Launces in their rests, and giuing spur to their hor∣ses, they entred pell mell. The first that Norandell encountred, was Gar∣nate of the Dreadful Dale, to whom he gaue such a salutation with his Launce, that his Saddle girts break∣ing, he fell downe backward with the Saddle. This was the first bold aduenture that euer Norandel made which caused his estimation after-ward
to be the more glorious. Galaor was the next to him, against whom ran Quedragant, and met each other with such maine violence, that they lay both ouerthrown on the ground, and their horses vpon them. Then began the fight to be dread∣full & cruell, and such was the noise of strokes deliuered on either side, the sound of Trumpets, and the out∣crys of men; that it was a mater most strange & fearefull to heare. Knights lay ouerthrowen & wounded on the earth, in heapes together; and they that had beheld the fight betweene Galaor and Quedragant, after they ce recouered footing, might ea∣sily haue iudged, how little fauour they meant to each other. And as they declared themselues worthy renowne for deedes of Armes, euen so did Norandel, Guillan and the rest make good the like: But Angriote and Florestan resisted each other in such sort, as neither of them could gaine the least iote of aduantage, &, which was more; meanes was made to remount Quedragant, while the other withdrew Galaor out of the throng. Then came in king Cilda∣dan with his troups, who did set thē all to such serious imployment, as if Galuanes had not bin suddenly suc∣coured, there had bin no means for further resistance. And yet Florestan was in the midst of the croud, laying on all sides so valiantly about him; that he wel deserued, to be ranked a∣mong the best knights of the world; for heperformd such deeds of arms, as all were glad to giue him way. Now as he continued his trauer∣sing among the rankes, he chanced to meete with King Cildadan, who made much hauocke among his fol∣lowers: in regard wherof, he caught him fast about the body, purposing to lay him along on the ground, but the other held firme footing, and they stroue together so extreamely, that the fall hapned equall to them both. Notwithstanding, they were vp againe quickly, with their swords fastened in their hands, and as they hacked and hewed each other; An∣griote d'Estrauaux, and Enill came in to them, and gaue assistance to Flo∣restan, that in despight of Galaor and Norandel, (who seemed to come to the rescue of king Cildadan) they set him on his horse againe. In which time Cildadan retired, for he was sore wounded on the head, with a stroke that Dragonis gaue him with a sword. At this time King Lisuarts men beganne to haue the worst, so that the most part of them turned their backs, and took themselues to flight: but they met the king and his guard, that came to assist them, and he made meanes to stay them. Neuerthe∣lesse, beholding this disorder, he be∣came so amazed, that hee said to Grumedan; Shall all the honour of Great Brittaine, be now shaken and weakned, by a poor handful of spent & tired men? So clasping down the beuer of his Helmet, and couering himself with his Shield, he gaue the spur to his horse, crying aloud to his men. Is this a time for flight? follow me, follow me men of courage, & let vs ratheer dy together, then fly to our own shame. So entred he among the thickest of his enemies, & the first he met withall was Galuanes, to whom hee gaue such a shocke with a short Lance, that he made him bend in the back, & drawing forth his sword like an angry Lyon, he entred the prease, performing such deeds of armes, as no knight could do more. But Que∣dragant, Florestan, Angriote & Gar∣nate came, who ouerthrew him, and beat back his people couragiously. Now beganne King Lisuart to i∣magine, that Fortune turned her backe vpon him, and meeting with
Arban, Grumedan and Gasquilan, hee said vnto them. I feare that hea∣uen intendeth punishment vpon vs: but I had rather be tearmed a dead King with honour, then (being foy∣led) to liue with shame. And so he entred into the wood, where seeing what spoyle was made by Quedra∣gant and his men, hee charged him with all his might, and gaue him such a wound on the head, that the blood ran downe all about his face. And surely, hee had beene in very great danger of life, but for Angri∣ote and Florestan, who thrust in be∣tweene them; and as they laboured in his defence, king Lisuarts Sword entred the flanke of Florestans horse, so that hee fell downe dead vnder him. But Florestan quickly reuen∣ged this iniury, for in recouering himselfe, he so hought king Lisuarts horse, that he was glad to forgo his Stirrops, and in dismounting, gaue such a stroake to Florestan on the head, that both astouned, & shreud∣ly wounded him. Notwithstan∣ding, Florestan was not thus to bee discouraged, but beholding the king ready againe to charge him with his Sword, he vnder-ranne the blow; and catching him about the midle, seazed his Sword, by which meanes he might easily haue slaine him if he would: but he refused that aduantage so freely offered him, which afterward prooued to his owne harme. Galaor beholding the king in so great danger, rushed suddenly in, and without respect to brother, or any other kinsman, behaued him-selfe so boldly, that in despight of Florestan, he recouered the king out of his hands, and remounted him on horsebacke againe, by the helpe of Norandell, Grumedan, and some o∣thers, which gaue fresh encourage∣ment to the knights of Great Brit∣taine, so that they which before fled away with feare, stood to it now more resoluedly then euer. So tur∣ning head vpon their enemies, who (hauing lost Florestan and Quedra∣gant, that were among the dead bo∣dies) became so weakened in their strength, as they were constrayned to retire: for euen Galuanes himself was so grieuously wounded, as hee was no longer able to sit on horse-backe. Neuerthelesse, like a dis∣creete and hardie knight, vntill his people had gained the hill, he stood vpon his best guard, wi Palomir, Elian, Branfill, Enill, and Sarquiles, who were all (in the end) taken pri∣soners: And had it not beene for Dragonis, who forcibly recouered Galuanes, he had remained among the rest. Thus the king obtayned the vi∣ctory, by vertue of his courage, and the fauour of Florestan, who hauing him in his power, became enemy to his owne good fortune. For she is such an inconstant Mistresse, as will haue no man to let slip aduantage against his contrarie, lest shee turne her backe, and frowne at his folly, as she did to Florestan. For if hee had slaine king Lisuart, when in heate of blood (with tollerable excuse) hee might haue done it; the honor of the day had falne to him and his friends assuredly, which therefore thus hee lost, to their shame and confusion, as formerly hath beene related. Galuanes & his associats, being re∣tired among the mountaines, keep∣ing very circumspectly al the wayes & passages: king Lisuart comman∣ded the retreat to be sounded, and pitched his Tents in the same place where hee had wonne the victory. But as Galaor returned from pursuit of his enemy, hee espyed his Bro∣ther Florestan and Quedragant lying among the slaughtered bodies:
whereat he conceiued such inward griefe, that he was ready to fall be∣side his horse. Being alighted, and perceiuing in them no motion of life at all; his complaints were so pitifull and extreame, that euery eye did much compassionate him, and the King was made acquainted with his heauy case. Whereupon, immediatly hee mounted on horse-back, not for any good-will to Flo∣restan or Quedragant, but onely to comfort Galaor, whom hee loued most intirely. And yet notwith∣standing all his malice, he conside∣red, as he rode along, what daunger Florestan did thrust himselfe into, on the day of battaile against King Cil∣dadan, and that (but for him) he had beene wounded to death by Ganda∣curiel, as already hath beene at large declared. In remembrance whereof, he desired to saue his life, if possible it might be; and therefore, so soone as he came to them, he commanded their bodies to be carried into one of his Tents, and that his own Phisi∣tions and Chirurgions, should look diligently to their wounds. Vpon sight and search made, ac∣cording to their skill and experi∣ence, they found their hurts to bee very dangerous, but not deadly: for at their first dressing, they found such hopefull signes of recouery, that they vndertook (within certain dayes) to warrant their cure. Galaor on this comfortable pērswasion, left them to their rest and quiet, and went to the King, who was set in Councell, demaunding the opini∣on of his knights, what further was to be done against his enemies, de∣claring what daunger might ensue, by admitting them to gather fresh supply and strength, and that it would be both honour and profit, to old on still the pursuit of victo∣ry. For, quoth hee, I am very cer∣taine, that Agrayes is gone to leuie men in little Brittaine, and that hee will come quickly with new assi∣stance: wherefore I hold it most necessary, speedily to follow on them, not suffering them to take hart or breathing; and hauing now so good meanes to doe, let vs take the benefit of so apt an opor∣tunity. To this aduice all the knights condiscended without contradicti∣on in any one; and hereupon it was resolued, that each man should bee in readines the next morning, so soone as the Trumpet gaue forth summons, which was performed ac∣cordingly, But they met with stou∣ter resistance then they expected; for Dragonis, with so small a compa∣ny of men as he had with him, had so fortified the passage, and maintai∣ned it so manfully, that a great num∣ber of them were sore wounded, be∣fore they could get the least meanes of entrance. Notwithstanding, in the end, he was faine to leaue it, and seeke for safety in the Fortresse of the Burning Lake: but thither he was pursued, and there besieged both by Sea and land, to keep them off the Towne from issuing forth, and to cut off all hope of succour, which they continually awayted from little Brittaine. But because it would be a matter too prolixe and tedious, to report all the skirmishes and attempts which they had against each other during the siege, and it being a thing very litle appertaining to out history, which tendeth onely to the actions of Amadis, who remained now in Gaule with his Father King Perion: Let it suffise yee, that af∣ter the siege had continued 3, mo∣neths and more, two things were the cause of bringing them to ac∣corde. The one because they of the
Towne had receiued Letters from Agrayes, that hee lay sicke in little Brittaine, by which meanes he could not leuy competent forces to their expectation. The other, because King Lisuart reciued aduertisement from his Vncle Count Argamont, that seuen of his neighbour Kings, had made great prouision for the inuading of his kingdome, which required such care, as needfully ther∣to belonged. This aduice likewise gaue further intelligence, that Ar∣chalaus the Enchanter, was the one∣ly meanes heereof: because he had perswaded them to this attempt, v∣pon the aduantage of King Lisuarts absence at the Burning Lake, and the small store of knights remaining then in Great Brittaine. When King Lisuart heard these newes, hee consulted with his thoughts, what was best to be done; and after much discourse with his owne minde, he concluded, to take composition with Galuanes, if hee would but propound it. And it fell out so fortunatly, that the very same day, desire of conference was vrged by the other side, with offer of ren∣dring the place. Prouided, that the king would permit him and his peo∣ple freely to depart, and such priso∣ners as hee deteyned, with an agree∣ment of truce for two whole yeares, if he liked to allow thereof. Vpon many entercourses passing on either side; the offer was accepted, and truce concluded, so that the King (the very same day) entred the Towne. And as Madasima presented him the keyes, humblie casting her selfe at his feete, teares streaming abun∣dantly from her eyes, she said. Alas Sir, if euer pitty found place in your Princely brest, let it now appeare, and take compassion on a poore dis-inherited Lady. This humiliation of hers, wonne such power in all the knights there present, as there was no one of them but gladly made tender of his ser∣uice in her behalfe. Especially Gala∣or, who vndertook the mater for her speaking thus to the King. Vpon my faith Sir, respect in this case is very needfully required, and if euer in my life I did yee any acceptable seruice, let me now humbly entreate and to my vttermost possibility, that (for my sake) you would be gracious to her. Trust me Galaor, answered the King, if I should recompence your high deseruings, the Exchequer of all my vttermost, were not able to doe it. So calling Galuanes, hee thus proceeded. Galuanes, at the request of Galaor; and hoping, withall, that heereafter you wil acknowledge the fauour I afford ye: I giue this Coun∣try to you and Madasima, which (a∣gainst my liking) you haue vsurped, and now (against your will) is to me rendred. See therfore, that here∣after you declare your selues to bee better aduised, & both you & yours to vse homage & fidelity to me, ac∣cording as you ought to do in duty. Most humbly did Galuanes giue thankes to the King, swearing in∣stantly the oath of alleageance; and the, Army hauing taken refreshing for the space of seuen or eight daies, the King commanded preparation to depart thence. So on the Sunday following, earely in the morning af∣ter Masse, they went aboord their Shippes, accompanied with Galua∣nes, and many more to take their farewell. Ankers being weighed, & their sayles hoysed, they set forth to the maine Sea; the windes seruing them so prosperously, that in fewe dayes (without any disaster) they arriued in the Porte and hauen of Graedonia, where the Queene and Ladies wayted and
attended in expectation of their returne. And there (for this time) will we leaue them together, and declare what happened to Amadis, who abode in Gaule, to heare ty∣dings from them. CHAP. V. How Amadis, being with his Father King Perion, found himselfe sub∣iect to ouermuch melancholy, to be so farre sundered from his Oriana. And contrarywise, Bruneo was highly contented, hauing so apt occasi∣sion, to see and conferre with his Melicia, at what time himselfe plea∣sed: And of their seuerall enterprises, to satisfie their owne humours and fancies. AFter that King Cilda∣dan and Galaor had left Amadis in Gaule, he be∣came much more soli∣tary then euer hee had beene: for the company of Bruneo was now grown incōpatible to him, being so diuersly intreated in their affections. Because Bruneo enioyed (almost) whatsoeuer his soule desi∣red, beholding daylie the Princesse Melicia, whom he so dearely affe∣cted, that all things else slipt beside his remembrance. On the contra∣ry, Amadis being so far distant from his Oriana, all pleasures whatsoeuer were to him irkesome and tedious: which caused him to refraine all company, the better to conforme himselfe to solitude. It chanced on a day, being walking alone, (his Squire onely excepted) in the For∣rest, and neare to the Sea side: hee cast his eye towards Great Brittain, and espyed a Ship making in to the Port, which Ship hee supposed to come from London; whereupon hee presently commanded Gandalin, to goe know of whence it was, and hee seated himself (in the meane while) vnder a spreading Tree, to enter in∣to his wonted lamentations. Lea∣ning his head vpon his left arme, and sending a pittious looke to∣wards the Country, where formerly he had found such sweete entertain∣ment: breathing foorth a vehement sigh, thus he began. Poore vnfortunate Amadis, is it possible for thee to continue long in this torment? Alas, if Loue heere∣tofore was fauourable to thee, he now makes thee pay too deare vsu∣ry for it. What said I? Loue? O no, it is not Loue, not is Loue the cause thereof: but mine owne mis-fortune, that being enuious of thy sweete ease and felicity, forged and enforced the Kings discontentment, therby to be thy vtter ruine, by losse of her sight, on whom depended thy life and onely happines, which is a burden more vnsupportable for thee to beare, then if a thousand deathes were imposed on thee toge∣ther. But no beatitude is destinied to me, and I may well bee ashamed to wishe it, considering, Oriana would be too much offended there∣by. Why then shall I couet any such euill, she neuer affoording mee but grace and fauour? For the very least sadnesse that I can suffer, shee feeles it euen as sensibly as mine owne soule. These complaints were accompanied with such floods of teares, that maine riuolets ranne downe his cheekes, leauing him vn∣able (along while) to vtter foorth one word.
As hee continued in these passi∣ons, a dart flewe hard by his eare, whereof hee tooke no care, so much was his minde addicted elsewhere. But Gandalin returning then to∣wards him, espied (in a bushie thic∣ket) a Giantesse of immeasurable stature, preparing to let flye another dart at his Master: whereupon hee cryed out aloud to him; and Ama∣dis suddenly starting, demanded the reason of his clamour. Why Ma∣ster, quoth he, doe yee not see yon∣der deuil, that endeauors to wound yee. And so shewed him the Gi∣antesse, towards whom Amadis di∣rected his steppes; but she fled away thwart the Forrest, running as swift∣ly as a Hart, and (in her flight) reco∣uered Amadis his horse, where∣on mounting her selfe, she thus cry∣ed out. Know Amadis, that I am thine ancient enemy Andadone, the Giantesse of the Sad Isle: who tels thee plainely, that if I cannot com∣passe mine intent, yet time shall let thee know how much I loue thee. When Amadis perceiued, that it was a woman whom hee had pursu∣ed, he would follow her no further: but commaunded Gandalin to doe it, and to kill her if he could. Gan∣dalin obeyed his Lords command, and laboured earnestly till he ouer-tooke her. In which time, as Ama∣dis was sitting downe againe vnder the tree, with intent to recommence his former complaints: hee espyed Enill, otherwise called Durin, whom Gandalin had found abord the Ship, that his Master had sent before to enquire of. Whereupon Amadis ranne and embraced him, demaun∣ding what good newes hee had brought from Great Brittaine. My Lord, (quoth he,) Madame Oriana most kindly commends her selfe to ye, and sends ye this Letter; which instantly he deliuered to him. Ama∣dis perceiuing that she reposed trust in Enill, bade him discouer what she had further commaunded him. My Lord (answered Enill) she intirely entreateth you, that you would grieue so little as possible may be in this Country, and not to depart hence, vntill you shall heare further tydings from her. And she also cer∣tifies you by me, that your linage is encreased, by the birth of a gallant sweet Sonne, which my Sister and I haue conueyed to safe nursing: but he w̄as wary enough in discouering the maner of his losse. Great was the ioy and comfort of Amadis, to vnderstand such pleasing newes from Oriana, howbeit, her command that he should not part thence, was somewhat irksome to him: because it might bee presumed by sinister iudgments, that either neglect, or lack of courage, had driuen him to this retired kinde of life. Neuerthe∣lesse, happen whatsoeuer might to him, hee concluded, not to trans∣gresse a iote of her charge and com∣mand. As Enill had ended his discourse, Gandalin returned, who had slaine the Giantesse, and brought her head hanging at his saddle bow. Amadis was very glad to behold it, and desi∣red to know in what manner he had done it. My Lord, quoth Gandalin, I pursuing her very closely, and shee gallopping on the horse which she had stollen from you, as hoping to shippe her selfe before I should o∣uertake her: the poore horse was so weake in the backe, being ouerchar∣ged with the loade of so huge a de∣uill; as I imagined, hee had broken his neck with falling downe vnder her. At which apt opportunity, I instantly arriued, and before she had power to recouer her selfe, I was her deaths-man, as this testimony there-of may well witnesse to ye. By my
troth, said Amadis, this will bee a goodly present for Bruneo; therfore wee will returne to the Court, and there shalt thou haue the honour of deliuering it. As for thee, my deare friend Enill, without being seene a∣ny where else, I would haue thee re∣turne to my gracious Princesse, and giue her to know, that I most hum∣bly thanke her for her Letter, as also for thy further message from her. But yet I entreate, her to take some pitty and respect on mine honor, in com∣pelling me to leade an idle life here: Neuerthelesse, I will be obedient to her in any thing, and all my dayes are dedicated solely to her seruice. And yet I very well know, that no man can (by vertue) winne himselfe such renowne and reputation; but time and mens malice, will disgrace him on the very least occasion of∣fered. Goe then in Gods Name, to whose safe protection I commend thee, and doe my humble duty to my sacred Goddesse. So returned Enill to his Shippe, and Amadis to the Court to his friend Bruneo, who was much better healed of his late receiued hurt, then of his old loue-sicke languish∣ing, the fire whereof still more and more encreased the flame of his tor∣ment. Which he well perceiuing, and that he could not (as yet) reach the height of his intent, without much losse of time and hard endea∣uour, as a purgation to such slothful negligence, and the better to en∣large his knighthoods reputation, he resolued to visite strange Coun∣tries, in search of aduentures, and to accomplish such actions of Armes, that his fame might speake it selfe in all places. Hereupon, so soone as the Giantesse head had bin shewen him, Amadis and he walking aside together, he thus spake. Trust me my Lord, the youth of my yeares, and the slender esteem whereinto I haue hitherto liued, especially among knights of fame and merit, doth in∣stantly incite me, to forsake this loy∣tring life of ease and pleasure, and vndergoe another more painful, yet profitable, to ranke my selfe with men of so high estimatiō. And ther∣fore I humbly besech you, that if you haue any disposition to seeke after aduentures, you would be pleased to accept of my company, or else to licence my departure alone, for I must bee gone to morrow morning very earely. When Amadis heard these words, and remembred the iniuncti∣on, so strictly imposed on him by the Letter from Oriana, which Enill formerly had brought him; he grew extreamely offended: yet both dis∣sembling his distemper, and excu∣sing himselfe to Bruneo, he thus an∣swered. Beleeue me (deare Friend) I haue (all my life-time) beene de∣sirous of such company as yours; being well assured, that nothing but honour and happines could then happen to me. But the conference I haue had so lately with the King, and his strict imposition, for my not leauing his Country as yet, abridg∣eth me of your association, then which nothing can be more displea∣sing to me. Wherefore I desire you to hold me excused, not doub∣ting, but that the hand of Heauen will euery where defend ye. Bruneo seeing himselfe thus dis∣patched by Amadis, went to visite Melicia, whom he acquainted with the reason of his sudden departing: entreating her to continue graci∣ous vnto him, because hee preferred her fauour before all things else whatsoeuer. Melicia discreetly an∣swered him, that shee must whol∣ly encline her will, according as pleased the King and Queene, to
dispose of her: assuring him neuer∣thelesse, that he was the Gentleman, whom (before all other) shee could willingly accept as her husband, if so be it stood as well with their liking. As he and shee continued this con∣ference, taking gracious and amia∣ble farewells of each other: the king entred, to whom Bruneo addressing himselfe, he declared the occasion of his departure. Which the King allowed to bee both good and rea∣sonable; and because it grew some-what late, and a seasonable houre for rest and repose: all was referred till the next morning, for more ample parting discourse. Bright day no sooner beganne to appeare, but Bru∣neo armed himselfe at all points, af∣terward, going to heare Masse de∣uoutely. And as hee was ready to mounte on horsebacke, the King and Amadis came to him, condu∣cting him forth of the Citie, where they committed him to God and all good fortune: wherein it seemed he prooued so prosperous, that (in short time) hee finished so many rare aduentures, as would require larger scope then heere is limited; beside it is not materiall to the pur∣pose which wee labour to conti∣nue. Returne we therefore to Amadis, who hauing already soiourned in Gaule three moneths and an halfe, while King Lisuart made his warre in the Isle of Mongaza, and his repu∣tation being much diminished, by his discontinuance from Armes, so that euery tongue babled to his dis∣aduantage: especially Ladies and Damosels, who came from all parts in quest of him, and not finding him, returned so highly discontented, that they laide on him many blame∣full imputations, which came con∣tinually to his eare. Neuerthelesse, for any respect in the world whatso∣euer, he would not disobey the com∣mand of the Princesse Oriana: but rather chose to vndergo those taxa∣tions of disgrace, till King Lisuart returned into Great Brittaine again. Who receiued tydings at his arri∣uall, that his enemies were already passed into the Isle of Lionine, and euen vpon entrance into his Coun∣try. Now, albeit he appeared to make small reckoning thereof be∣fore his own people, as being feare∣full to distaste them; yet afterward, his minde was farre otherwise busi∣ed. But especially the Queene was much moued, greatly bemoaning the absence of Amadis, and those that went away with him, speaking it publikely; that if the King had them now in his seruice, and as rea∣dy at his command, as they were wont to be; he might assure himselfe of the victory. And if the Queene were so dis∣contented, what shall wee thinke of Oriana and Mabila? who as they sate deuising together, spake of the knights then absent from the Kings seruice, onely through his wrongs done to Amadis and his followers, so that Mabila said to the Princesse. Madame, although the King hath runne into an errour, it followes not, that you should doe the like, especially in matters so much im∣porting you. Me thinks you should rather send to my Cousin, and pre∣uent all occasions that may offend him, earnestly entreating him, that if he will not stand for the King; yet (at least) he will not be against him, in the hope you haue one day to be his heire and Ladie of his Coun∣tries, which then may succeede to him by your coniunction in marri∣age. Send therefore some message that may content him, and if hee be displeased at his so long abiding in Gaule, let him elsewhere recreate his
spirits, till time and fortune send a season more fit for your desires. Oriana liked well this friendly aduice, and wrote immediatly to A∣madis (by a Damosell)) that newly had brought her diuers presents from the Queene Elisena) all that she and Mabila had concluded to∣gether, and by her Letter fully ac∣quainted him therewith. Whereat he was not a little ioyfull, being now at liberty to go where himselfe listed. And yet he was in some per∣plexitie, not knowing readily what to determine. For it was the wil of Oriana, that hee should not serue a∣gainst King Lisuart, and to lend him any assistance, was as much against his own minde. To reconcile these two extreames, hee resolued to vse the aduice of King Perion, & finding him one day at conuenient leisure, walking along by the Sea side; as they were entring into the purposed discourse: they espyed (afarre off) a knight ryding towards them, mounted vpon a bay Courser, but so spent and wearie, that hee was scarce able to endure any trauaile. The knights Armour, Shield and Coate of Armes, were bruised and battered, that it was (almost) impos∣sible to take knowledge of him: and yet King Perion gathered by his out∣ward appearance, that he was some knight errant, wherefore he stepped forward to welcome him, and Ama∣dis looking aduisedly on him, knew him to bee his brother Florestan, whereupon he said to the King (who had neuer seene him.) Sir, know you not this knight? hee is one of the best in all the world, and your Son. My Son? answered the King. Yes truely (quoth Amadis) it is Flore∣stan, of whom I haue remembred you many times. Florestan beholding Amadis, be∣gan to coniecture, that the other was King Perion: wherefore dis∣mounting suddenly from his horse, the King came to embrace him, and he kneeled downe to kisse his feete, but King Perion would not permit it, taking him vp louingly in his armes, saying, he was most heartily welcome. Then taking him by the hand, they walked on towards the Castell to the Queene: who gaue him most gracious entertainment, as well for the Kings sake, as for his renowned fame thorow all Coun∣tries. And as they conferred to∣gether on the fortunes of King Lis∣uart, king Perion said vnto him, Son, haue ye heard of his enemies enter∣prise against him? I haue Sir (re∣plyed Florestan) and for ought I can collect to the contrary, their power is so strong, as, if heauen be not fa∣uourable, impossible is the vtter-most of his resistance, whereat wee haue little reason to be sorry, consi∣dering how matters haue been past. Sonne, quoth the king, I can easily beleeue, that king Lisuart hath fay∣led in some occasions; neuerthe∣lesse, I haue often heard him com∣mended for diuers good vertues: which perswadeth me, that this bu∣sines may fall out as successefull for him, as many others heeretofore haue done. Moreouer, it ill becom∣meth any king, to wish or desire the ruine of another, except he make warre against him, vpon some vniust occasion. It began now to waxe somewhat late, and the Tables were couered for Supper, wherefore the king said to Amadis: Sonne, conduct your Brother, and see him disarmed, then bring him to supp with vs. So A∣madis and Florestan withdrew them-selues, and being alone, Florestan thus spake. My Lord, the maine and principall occasion that drew me into Gaule, was to aduertise you
of the wrong which you doe not onely to your selfe, but likewise to all your race and kinred, continu∣ing so long a time full, and carelesse of Armes, whereby many tongues are liberall in your dis∣grace, and iudge (that being become faint-hearted) you are growen alto∣gether negligent. In good faith, answered Amadis, they may iudge as they please: but I hope heereafter, to cause them alter their bad opini∣on of me. As they held on this dis∣course, the King came, and had them with him into the Haule, where re∣freshing themselues with variety of viandes, the Tables were at length with-drawen, and a due houre came to goe to rest; Amadis and Florestan taking their leaue of the King for that night. But Amadis being vnable to sleep, his thoughts laboured continually, how he might recouer the credit he had lost: concluding with himselfe to runne a contrary bias, to the rash speeches rumorde out against him. And that he might the better attain thereto, one while hee determined to goe against king Lisuart: but sud∣denly (remembring the prohibiti∣on of his Lady Oriana) hee became quite changed, not knowing (on either side) how to make his ele∣ction. Till after a long combate with his priuate cogitations, hee thought it best to forget the iniuries done him in Great Brittaine, and to take part with the King, as well in regard that his side was the weaker, as also, if he should sustain the foile, Oriana might lose all hope of euer being his, or he hers. Heereupon, hee rose very earely the next mor∣ning, and being accompanied with Florestan, entred the Kings Cham∣ber, where finding him awake, they gaue him the good morrow, and A∣madis spake thus. Sir, all this night my minde hath endured much trauaile, about your conference with my Brother Flore∣stan, the last euening, and concer∣ning the daunger whereinto King Lisuart may fall, thorow the want of succour. In these meditations I re∣membred also that duty, which (as you then said euery vertuous Prince stands obliged vnto, to maintaine the rightfull liberties of another Prince, being wrongfully, and (vpon no iust occasion) inuaded. In re∣gard whereof, I am determined, if you thinke it conuenient, and will thereto licence me; goe into Great Brittaine, and without any regard of the wrongs I haue sustayned, not onely to assist King Lisuart, but his subiects also, who stand no way guilty in his offence. And trust me Sir, I vse not these speeches to yee, but vpon vrgent occasion; for heere is my brother, who knowes what re∣proches are spred abroad of me; for hauing a while absented my selfe from Armes: whereby it appeareth to many, that I am growne cold in the pursuite of aduentures, for the dangers elsewhere hapning, where-of I neuer dreamed. Therefore, that euery one may take true notice of me; if heauen be so pleased, I will in such affaires make such reall ap∣parance of my duty, that my renown (which seemeth to lye buried) shall reuiue it selfe againe, and with much more glory then euer it yet gained. Sonne (quoth the king) you well know, that I haue euer beene a lo∣uer of good men and goodnesse, and perceiuing king Lisuart to bee one of that number. I haue iust cause to affoord him any ayde and fauour, wheresoeuer I am able to compasse the meanes. And if I should deferre it this instant; the cause is easily knowen, onely the
difference betweene him and you. But seeing that your intention is changed, and that you will make one in so worthy a busines: I will goe along with yee for company: grieuing at nothing else, but that the time is too short for leuying our people. For if I had the leysure to prepare an Army; assure your selfe, I would leade along with me a Roy∣all assembly. But that defect shall not stay my present purpose. I will onely take such knights as are rea∣diest for me, and so away vpon my iourney. When Florestan heard this deli∣beration; hee stood silent a long while, as vnable to vtter a word, but at last; he said to the King. By my faith, Sir, when I consider the cruel∣ty of king Lisuart, which (but for the fauour shewen to vs by Lord Galaor, in the Isle of Mongaza) had cost the deare price of all our liues: I hold it impossible for me, to doe or wishe him any good. Your Highnesse is not ignorant, how long a time (be∣fore then) he deadly hated vs, ma∣ny times making his vaunt, to bee the vtter ruine and extirpation of vs all. Neuerthelesse, seeing mat∣ters stand on such tearmes as now they doe: I am wel contented, both in the honor of you, and for you are thereto so nobly affected, to forget all iniuries at this time, and will fol∣low you, as it is my duty to doe. Moreouer, by our agreement made at the Burning Lake, for the space of two yeares, I may beare no armes against him, whereby I stand partly bound, that if I will bee seene at all in the action, I must needes bee for him. Sir, said Amadis, the best course that we can take then, is closely to pursue our enterprise, without any other company, then we three one∣ly. For if our number should be greater, whatsoeuer we can doe, will but deserue the latest welcome: and therefore (if it, were possible) in mine opinion, wee would not wil∣lingly be knowne of any. Let it be so then, replied the king, I like the motion well, and I haue three Ar∣mours alike in all respects, very apt and proper to our intent, for our better knowledge and assisting of one another; let vs goe presently, and make proofe of them. So lea∣uing the Chamber, they descended downe into the Court, where pre∣sently entred before them, a Damo∣sell very richly attired, mounted on a beautifull Palfray, shee being ac∣companied with three Squires one∣ly, each bearing a goodly square. Chest before her, and the king thin∣king she demaunded for him, went towards her with Amadis and Flore∣stan, saluting her courteously, and demaunding if shee would speake with the Queene. No Sir, quoth she, my errand is onely to you, and these two knights, to whom I am sent by the Lady of the Vnknowne Isle, with these three presents which heere you behold. Then causing the chests to be set downe and opened, three Shieldes, three Helmets, and three Coat-Ar∣mours, were taken out of them. The Shields were Siluer, seamed all ouer with golden Serpents, so arti∣ficially wrought, that they appeared neere to life. The Coat-Armours were all alike, but the Helmets diffe∣red; for one was white, the other greene, and the third gold. The white was presented by the Damo∣sell to the king, and the Coate-Ar∣mour thereto belonging; the green to Florestan, and the gold to Ama∣dis, with these words. Sir, my Lady hath sent you these Armes, and de∣sires you by me, that you will heere-after imploy them better, and your
selfe also, then (for too long a time) you haue done heere. Amadis hea∣ring her so forward in speech, stood in feare, lest his loue affaires with Oriana should be discouered: there∣fore, to breake her off from any fur∣ther language in that kinde, hee an∣swered. Faire Damosell, I pray yee most humbly thanke your Lady on my behalfe, and tell her; I make much lesse account of her counsell sent me, then I doe of her present, which I will imploy according to my power. My Lords, replyed the Damosel, she hath sent armes to you all three, to the end, that you may know, and helpe one another (if need bee) in King Lisuarts warre. How? quoth the King, doth your Mistresse know that we meane to be there, and wee our selues (within lesse space then an houre) did not so much as dream thereon? I know not that, answered the Damosell, but she assured mee, that (at this very houre) I should finde yee all heere, and in this very place, further commanding me, that after I had deliuered ye these Arms, I should passe hence into Great Brittaine, whither she hath likewise sent mee; wherefore bethinke your selues, if you will command me any seruice. Now trust me Damosell, (replyed the King) you shall not de∣part hence, vntill you haue dined. And so conducted her further into the Castel, where the best entertain∣ment that could be deuised, was be∣stowed on her. Hauing sustayned Nature, and taken leaue of her three knights, she set onward on her way to the Sea-side, and instantly imbar∣ked her selfe. After her departure, Amadis con∣sidered with himselfe, that the day of battell was not farre off, and that (not without great cause) Vrganda had sent them those Armes: in re∣gard whereof, his desire grew much more earnest to be there, then for∣merly it had done: and therefore to hasten the enterprise, he caused Gan∣dalin (secretly) to prouide Ship∣pint, wherewith acquainting both the King and Florestan, they resolued to set away, the night ensuing. Being all aboord, the winde sate so conue∣niently for them, that, vnespied by any, they launched forth into the maine Sea, coasting about the Isle of Great Brittaine: where, very soon after, they landed so neere as possi∣bly they might, to the place where the seauen Kings lay encamped: ho∣ping, after they had once noted their disposition, to ioyne them-selues with King Lisuart. And to that intent, they entred a Forrest, where their Squires erected them a Pauillion, and where they attended more ample newes of the Army: sending daylie one of their follow∣ers to the enemies Campe, to en∣quire when the day of battel should be. Also they sent another, to Gala∣or, by whom they gaue him to vn∣derstand, that they were in Gaule. And the Squire had expresse charge to tell him, that he left them al three together, and earnestly desired, that (after the victory) hee would write to them, concerning his owne good health, and their other friends. Wisely did the Squires fulfill the charge committed to their trust, so that on the third day following, the first returned to them, and reported, that the Army of the seauen Kings was very great and strong, by reason of infinit numbers of strangers, who were lately there arriued, and that they layed sharpe siege to a Castell, which was said to belong to certain Ladies. And albeit it was very strong, and almost impregnable by power of Armes; yet they were in
great danger of yeelding it, because food and sustenance greatly fayled therein. And further (quoth the Squire) as I crossed thorow the Campe, I heard Archalaus the En∣chanter conferre with two of the Kings, saying, as hee walked along with them, that within sixe dayes they would bid thē battel, because no further order should bee taken, for bringing them in any victuals by Sea, and that their munition began to fayle them also. Yet all goes well (answered Amadis) in the meane while, we shall haue good leisure to refresh and recreate our selues. The very same day, the other Squire (sent to the Campe of King Lisuart) returned likewise, who de∣clared, that he met with Galaor, and what countenance hee shewed in reading the Letter. And trust mee (quoth he) very hardly could he re∣fraine from teares, when he vnder∣stood, that you were all three in Gaule: for he made a setled assurance of the victory, if the King could haue enioyed yee in his company. Moreouer, he sends ye word by me, that if hee escape with life from the field, he wil forthwith make haste to see ye. But what (quoth Amadis) is thine opinion of their Army. Trust me my Lord, (answered the Squire) so few fighting men as they be, yet are they al marshalled in exceeding good order, and diuers worthy knights are said to be among them: but they are all ouer few, in regard of the others mighty multitude. Notwithstanding, King Lisuart is not daunted a iote: but intendeth (as I heard it credibly reported) within two dayes to meete them, or else the Castell of Ladies will be constray∣ned to yeeld it selfe, hauing no sup∣ply of men nor meate. Well, said A∣madis, we shall see what will ensue on this busines. Thus they continued in the For∣rest, vntill such time as they had in∣telligence, that the two Armies pre∣pared to ioyne: whereupon they dislodged, and drew neerer to the Campe of King Lisuart, which was seated on the ridge of an hill, and so neere to the enemy, that but a little Riuer diuided them, running tho∣row the plaine, where King Ara∣nigne (earnestly desirous of fight) had passed his men. This King last mentioned to ye, was chosen the chïefe; and Coronall of the whole Army: belonging to the seauen Kings, and to him all the principall Captaines of the band, had made solemne oath and promise the day before, to obey him without any contradiction. For he desired no∣thing else (as he said) neither could haue any iote more; but onely the honour of the enterprise: referring all the spoyle and booty to his com∣panions, & the common Souldiers. And that he might the better accō∣plish his intent, he ordained nine battalions, in each of which hee ap∣pointed twelue thousand knights: reseruing to his owne charge, fifteen hundred, and more, commaunding on the morrow (by breake of day) the Trumpets & Clarions to giue summons, for all to set themselues in order, and bee in readinesse. Before he would dislodge, seeing his men forward to their deuoire: for their encouragement, he thus spake. What need it (Gentlemen) that I should vse any great perswasion for your bold fighting: considering you are the only authors of this war, and wherein you haue elected mee for your chiefe conducter? And that is the only reasō mouing me to speak, to the end, you may the more heed∣fully fixe before your eyes, the cause why you are assembled in so great a multitude. Resolue your selus
that it is not to defend your Coun∣try your liberty, your wiues, chil∣dren, nor your goods. But it is to conquer and subdue a nation, the most proud and arrogant people this day liuing; who make of vs (dwelling somewhat farre from them) so small esteeme, as of no∣thing lesse. Neuerthelesse, as neere as they are, I hardly thinke that they dare abide vs; for though they carry a kinde of fury in their marching: yet if you note well their lookes, there appeares an apparant testimo∣ny of doubt and difficulty in dealing with vs, which may moue & giue ye more heart to fight, then all the words of ng men can do; yea, al∣thoug ye were then ill ordered, & hle tired. We are heere, the very stoure & ful strength of most part of the Ocean Islands, & in such a gal∣lant number, that it were (almost) a sin to make any doubt of our cer∣tain victore. And for our further as∣surance, let vs remember, that wee are in a strange Country, a large & long distance from our own, not a∣mong our louers and friends, but e∣uen in the very midst of our ene∣mies, that euery houre expect our ruine & death. A matter which we cannot auoid, if we be once broken & disseuered. For they haue worthy horse-men, by whom we are certain to be pursued, without any meanes oreting to our ships; wherefore, we must resolue to conquer or dye, because the necessity wherein wee are, is much rather to be feared then their power. Let each man therfore do his duty; and I make no doubt, but before darke night do check our forwardnesse, we shall be Lords and Maisters of the whole Country, and thereby be held dreadfull in other parts of the world. King Aranigne hauing thus en∣couraged his Souldiers, hee caused them to march in good order to∣ward their enemies: who likewise marched in maine battell on the hill top, making such a glittering radi∣ance with their Armes, that it was a most goodly sight to behold. And they; were diuided into fiue squa∣drons; the first being guided by Bri∣an de Moniaste, with a thousand knights of Spaine. The second, by King Cildadan, with the like number of knights. The third by Galuanes. The fourth by Giontes: And the , by King Lisuart, accompanied with Galaor, and two thousand  knights: who seeing so great a ∣titude come marching against him, began to be very doubtful of the vi∣ctory. Neuerthelesse, like a pnt and magnanimious Prince, he went from battation to battalion, to per∣swade his Cheualiers, to fight braue∣ly. And for their better encitation thereto be gaue them to vnderstand that (with great shame) he was thus assayled by these enemies, with∣out any quarrell at all against them; but onely through the perswasion and procurement of Archalaus, the most disloyall traytour and villaine that euer liued, they were thus en∣tred his Country, with an absolute hope of conquest. And therfore my louing friends (quoth he) right be∣ing on our side, God (who is most iust, & in whose hand are all victo∣ries) wil vndoubtedly assist vs. If they say, that they war thus vpon vs, in re∣uenge of them that last inuaded this kingdō with K. Cildadan, assure your selues, they may well account to be therein deceiued. For in weening (vnder confidence of power) to re∣uenge their iniuries, their shame shall thereby be encreased, and a mi∣serable conclusion of their liues, vo∣luntarily enforced, and sought by themselues. Full well you know, that we are no new learners, how to
be seene in such conflicts as these: but old and well tryed Souldiers, so experimented and approoued by themselues; and so (I hope) at this time they shall finde vs. Their ima∣ginarie victory, is grounded onely on the huge multitude of men in their Campe, a base and rascal breed of people, collected from many in∣famous places, the most part of thē without order, obedience or disci∣pline. The very sight of our well-di∣rected approach, will strike amaze∣ment in their soules; yea, before we shall haue leysure to vaile our laun∣ces: and let vs but once enforce them to disorder, wee haue as much as we can desire. Marche we on then vndauntedly, and let vs make them know, that they are no meete com∣panions for our company: Onely, that our ground will be fastened in being their graues, and our hunger∣starued wolues satisfied with their carrion, as three or foure times al∣ready, such as they, haue beene ouer-thrown in seueral battailes, by the vertue and magnanimity of you and your auncestors. Such were the words of this gen∣tle King to his knights, who percei∣uing their enemies making towards them, marched in a well ordered part to meet them. King Perion, A∣madis & Florestan, lay hard by, close∣ly ambushed, with no intent to stir themselues, till they saw how the fight would speed on either side. Perceiuing Brian and his troupe to coutche their launces, they beheld them forthwith among their ene∣mies; mony good knights layed a∣long on the earth, and as many slain outright. But King Targadan, who led the first battallion of King Ara∣nigne, was suddenly succoured by Absadan, with 1200. knights, by which meanes Brian was constray∣ned to giue backe againe. King Peri∣on perceiuing it, said to Amadis and Florestan. Me thinkes, it is now high time to shewe our selues; for neuer can we looke for fitter occasion, see∣ing the enemy hath to much aduan∣tage ouer King Lisuarts people. On then Sir (quoth they) in Gods name let vs go helpe them. Thus speaking; they gaue the spur to their horses, & the first that King Perion met, was king Targadan, who before had not charged any knight, but downe hee went to the ground. But King Perion gaue him such a welcome with his Launce, that it pierced his Shield & armor, and so passed on quite thorow his body, that hee fell downe dead to the ground. If this encounter proued so hard to him, no lesse was that of Ab∣sadan the Braue: for Amadis met him with such might, that hee gaue his soule present passage out of his bo∣dy. The enemies became so daunted hereat, that their hearts failed them, and Brian and his followers pressed sore vpon them. Florestan made his aime at King Cardueil, in whom con∣sisted (well neere) all their hope, & met him at such apt aduantage, that he cast him quite out of his Saddle, and down he fell between his horses feete. Now began a most dreadfull conflict between the two armies, be∣cause they stroue with mainest vio∣lence, which should most offend the other: & they that had seen Amadis cut the way thorow the crouds, wold haue thought him no such maner of man, as layslothfully idle six months together; for he neuer stroke, but it either slew outright, or most cruel∣ly wounded, notwithstanding all their stout resistances. For they of Great Brittaine fought for their li∣berty & safety: whereas K. Aranigne & his men, labored only to conquer anothers country, thereby to enrich thēselues; thus each side contended
who should doe best, in bearing thence the honour of the day. A∣madis had his horse slain vnder him; but hee was speedily succoured, by such ayde as King Lisuart, King Pe∣rion and his followers sent him: who did all perfourme such incredible deedes of Armes in enery place as their enemies fell into confusion; & King Aranigne was so sore wounded, that, being past any hope of life; hee fled to his Shippes, and the greater part of his people after him like∣wise. As the other side pursued them very valiantly, Brutaxat, one of the best knights in the whole Army of the seauen Kings, beholding this faint-hearted flight, and foule dis∣order: thrust in with his followers, & made stay of them that chased King Aranigne, beginning as bloody a fight againe, as formerly had bin. In which space, they that most feared the fights successe, got into their Ships, & many were so saued: but Amadis entring among them, assay∣led Brutaxat with such a powerfull stroke, that down fel heon the earth. This, much augmented the terror of the enemy, so that, for their easie means of flight, they threw downe their weapons & armor in the field; some running to the Sea, others to the woods & rocks, euen as Fortune could best conduct them. And al∣though King Lisuart & his knights, found worke enough against their foes in the beginning: yet euery ey took particular obseruation of won∣ders done that day, by three knights, bearing Serpents in their armes, so that the King himself often spake a∣loud, saying: Either these are Ama∣disses, or three deuils in their likenes. Notwithstanding, when he conside∣red, what iniury he had done him, he then fell into a contrary perswasion. Thus King Lisuart remained vi∣ctorious, and encamped himself (for that day) in the same place where he conquered his enemies: and as he disarmed himselfe, he questioned, what was become of the knights of the Serpents? No other answere could then bee returned, but that they were seene gallopping towards the forrest, with all the swiftest speed their horses could make. On my faith (quoth the King) I am not a little displeased, that they would not remaine with me: for he that hath three such knights in his company, my boldly boaste of secure assi∣stance. Sir (answered a Squier, that met them ryding to the Forrest) all three of them spake to me, and gaue me charge to tell ye, that they were constrained to leaue your Army, & bestow their trauails in far countries where they may chance to fall into his power, that means to shew them but little mercy: humbly entrea∣ting you to hold them excused, that they gaue you not due reue∣rence before their departing. Vndoubtedly, these words proo∣ued truer, then Amadis expected when he spake them: but the Squi∣er, continuing on his meslage, fur∣ther said. Sir, moreouer they desire you, that if any part of bootie be fit for them: it may be giuen to those Ladies, that defended their Castell so worthily for you, that so they may receiue some recompence for the iniuries done to them. Before God I sweare, answered the King, their request shal be accomplished. But fair Sir (quoth he to Galaor) doe not you imagine your brother Ama∣dis to be one of the three? No surely Sir, said Galaor, because I receiued Letters (some few dayes since) from him, whereby he gaue me to vnder∣stand, that neither he, nor Florestan would stirre out of Gaule, vntill they heard some newes from me.
I cannot chuse then, replyed the King, but maruaile, of whence, and what they are. I know not, (quoth Galaor) but whatsoeuer they are, heauen shreld them from any il suc∣cesse; for (neuer in my life) did I looke on more braue and worthie Knights, or men that could doe more for you, then this day they haue done. So spent they out the rest of the day, in no other discourse (almost) but onely concerning the knights of the Serpents. And raising their Campe on the morrow, they went to Gandale, where the Queene and Ladies awayted the Kings com∣ming: there also hee brake vp his Atmy, discharging euery man to his owne home. CHAP. VI. How the three Knights of the Serpents, returning homeward into Gaule, were (by contrary fortune) cast on the place where Archalaus the En∣chanter dwelt, who resolued on their death, and what afterward befell them. THree whole dayes to∣gether; King Perion & his two Sonnes kept thēselues closely hid∣den in the Forrest: as well for ease and refreshing after so great toyle, as in expectation of a conuenient winde for shipping, which on the fourth day fortunatly happened; & so they set sayle, with a purposed intent for returning home into Gaule. But it fell out farre other∣wise with them; for hardly had they attained into the maine Sea, but it began to swel and rise in such dread∣full manner (being stirde and enra∣ged with contrary windes) as if Heauen and earth had conten∣ded together, and the Ship was so hurried by impetuositie of the waues, that, notwithstanding all the paines and endeauours of the Ma∣riners, they were constrained and driuen backe againe, towardes the coast of Great Brittaine, & to land farre enough from the place where they tooke shipping. There the three knights went on shore, and mounting on their horses; without any Squire to attend them; they would needs seek after some aduen∣ture, vntill the Sea should be better setled, hauing left expresse com∣mand with their men, not to depart thence, till their returne. They had not ridden any great length of ground, but descending downe a Rocke to a goodly plaine, they et with a Lady, attended by thre Squires, and two Damosels, each carrying a Falcon on their fist, as if they intended an hourely flight. The Lady beholding them, made way with her Palfray towards them, deliuering most gracious gesture for their happy meeting: and vsing ceremony of kinde salutation, gaue them to vnderstand by apparant signes, that she was bereft of speech, and dumbe. Most louely and faire she appeared to the knights, which moued them to compassionat great∣ly her hard fortune; and she going to him that had the golden Helmet; making signes of embraces, and of∣fers to kisse his hand, gaue outward notice both to him and the rest, of request to haue them accept alodg∣ing in her castel, which was at hand. And lest the knights should mistake her meaning: she made the like signs to her Squires, who fully acquainted
them with her desire, entreeting them (at their Ladies motion) to ac∣cept of one nights entertainment in her Castell. The knights being somewhat crazie, and wearied with the rough tempest endured on the Sea, ima∣gined that her will accorded with their words, and that no treason lay hid vnder this honest out-side; yeel∣ded to hers and their request, riding softly on with her, and entring into a pleasant seated Castel, where they were most graciously entertained, and conducted to a very goodly Chamber, and there they vnarmed themselues. When they were set downe at the Table for Supper, di∣uers Damosels came, each of them hauing an instrument, and be∣gan to play most melodiously: passing the time away in these plea∣sing recreations, vntill the houre for rest drew neere. Then withdrew the Musicians, and the thred knights, being left all alone, layed hrm downe in one bedde together; where (soone after) they fell a∣sleepe, as men that had some neede of repose. Heere yee are to obserue, that the Bed wherein the knights lay, was fix∣ed vpon a vice or screw, to bee let downe and mounted againe (with∣out any noyse at all) into a dunge∣on of twenty fathome deepe: and there the knights found themselues in the morning at their awaking, & whereat they were not a little ama∣zed, perceiuing themselues to bee betrayed, for they could not dis∣cerne any light at all; nor deuise how they should bee transported thither. At length, they arose to finde either some window for aire, or doore for passage to get forth, but all was in vaine, no likelyhood appeared anywhere of opening, or that might yeeld them the smallest comfort. But continuing on, in this doubtfull maze, they could heare the steppes and treadings of peo∣ple ouer their heads, and about sea∣uen or eight houres after, they saw a window opened vp aloft, and a knight (but meanely aged) putting thorow his head, demaunding (ve∣ry vnmanerly) what new-come guests came so willingly to looke for good entertainment there? By my faith, lustie Roisters (quoth hee) since I haue gotten hold of yee, I shall bee soundly reuenged of the wrongs ye haue done me; but that your liues is not any part of suffici∣ent payment. I am not now to arn, that you are they, which caused the ouerthrow of Aranigne and his Ar∣my, maintaining the quarrell of that wicked Lisuart: and let me now tell ye, that you are in the power of Ar∣chalaus, who will soone enough make knowne what loue hee beares yee. Looke well vpon mee, and if you neuer saw mee before this in∣stant: take good notice of me now, to know me againe, if you can scape from me. Oh how glad a man should I bee, if that villaine Amadis de Gaule were one among yee? By my soule, I would not sleepe, till I had cut off both his nose and hands, and put him to the most cruel death that euer was deuised. Presently came the Lady, who (the day before) counterfeited her selfe to be dumbe, and said. Vncle, yonder youngest man (pointing to Amadis) is the knight that wore the golden Helmet, who (you said) had so brauely behaued himselfe in Armes. This Lady we now speake of, was the daughter to Ardan Ca∣nile, naming her selfe Draa, the most malicious and subtile woman that those times affoorded; and had not come into these parts, but only to take Amadis, and procure his
death, which was the principall rea∣son why she dissembled her selfe to be dumbe. No sooner had she vt∣tered these words, but Archalaus went frem the window, and shutting it againe in most churlish manner, said to the knights. Be as merry as yee may; for before night, I wil haue your heads cut off; and then Ile send them to king Aranigne, in satisfacti∣on of the iniuries hee receiued by your meanes. Much more amazed now, then e∣uer, was King Perion and his sonnes, to see themselues thus in the power of Archalaus; and perceiuing so pal∣pably, that (vnder the counterfaited shew of dumbnes) the Lady hom they meant al good to) had thus de∣ceiued them. But that which re∣doubled the sorrowes of Amadis and Florestan, was, to behold their a∣ged Father in such danger, now vp∣on the very ending of his dayes; this mooued them to such compassion, as they could not refrain from wee∣ping. Neuerthelesse, hee being a wise and vertuous Prince, beganne not onely to be of courage, but also to comfort them, in this manner. How now my Sonnes? are yee so soone daunted at the dissemblings of Fortune? are yee now to learne her mutabilities (vpon my faith) I did euer hold ye to be more strong and constant. Let mee entreate one fauour from yee, to lay no more af∣fliction on me, then I am possessed of already. For, your extremity of sadnesse doth so ouer weigh my soule, as that is sufficient onely to be my death. Therefore, resume your wonted courage, and let vs put our trust in God: he is almigh∣ty, and able to free vs from this place, committing all care to him, and resting perswaded of his proui∣dence. But who could euer haue imagi∣ned, that, escaping the dangers in so bloody a Battaile: we should fall into such an accident, by the persua∣sions onely of a silly woman, and vn∣der the couller of such a dumbe de∣uice? Therefore, louing Sonnes, seeing we are not in case to dispose of our selues; setting apart all natu∣rall pitty and compassion, which ei∣ther you can haue of me, or I of you: let vs be patient, and not mislike our fortune, which we are not able any way to mend. Amadis and Florestan, hearing their Father speake with such a chearefull and constant reso∣lution; it appeared to them, that they were disburdened of the hea∣uiest load of their disaster; and ther∣fore concluded, to reioyce in all tri∣bulations whatsoeuer should hap∣pen vnto them. And so they spent all the rest of the day, without re∣ceiuing either meat or drinke, till somewhat late in the euening: at which time Archalaus came to them againe, and opened the window, ac∣companied with Danarda, and two auncient knights, bearing in their hands faire lighted Torches, and calling to his prisoners, he said: Knights, you that sleep so sound∣ly at ease, is not your appetite yet stirring, to eate some good meate, if you could come by it? Sir, answe∣red Florestan, if you were pleased to giue vs any. By my soule, replyed Archalaus, I haue no will to giue yee any, but rather to take meate from ye, if ye had it. Notwithstanding, because ye shall not bee altogether discomforted, to delight ye a little, I haue some good tidings to tell yee, whereof (perhaps) you will be ioy∣full. This euening, two Squires and a dwarfe came hither, making enquiry after certaine knights, bea∣ring Armes of Serpents: them haue I also taken into my custody, and al∣lowed them as faire a lodging as
yours is; but if they tell me not to morrow morning, of whence and what you are, you cannot imagine a death more cruell, then that I will put them to. Heerein, Archalaus did not dissemble with them; for they in the Shippe, perceiuing that not any of them returned againe, sent forth Gandalin, the Dwarfe, and Orpheus, the Arras-weauer, to vnder∣stand what was become of them, ar∣riuing (by chance) at the same Ca∣stell, where their Lords and Maisters were imprisoned. The three knights hearing these newes, were greatly discontented, and not without especiall cause: for they stood in doubt, lest torment, or some other meanes, should cause them disclose, whatthey would haue concealed. Yet Amadis, making no outward shew thereof, returned this answere to Archalaus. Trust me, Sir, when you shall know of whence, and what we are, I am well assured, that you will allow vs better wel-come, then hitherto you haue done: For your selfe being a knight, as wee are, and (perhaps) heretofore, falne into the trecheries of Fortune, as now we are; would finde the fauour of a friend, as we could affoord the like to you, stood you in the like ne∣cessity as we do. And if any mater of manhood be in vs, me thinks, that might well instruct yee (aboue all things else) to offer vs no wrong. How now Sir (answered Archalaus) haue yee learnde to prate so boldly? you shall finde, who it is that holdes dispute with ye, and whether I offer ye wrong or right. And let this bee your comfort, that like fauous as I would vse to Amadis de Gaule, were he in my power, the very same, and no other will I extend to you. Vncle said Dinarda, if you meane to send their heades to King Ara∣nigne, doe it not, vntill seuerity of famine haue caused their death: for, suffering them to liue somewhile in misery, death will then appeare the more welcome to them. Beleeue me Niece (quoth he) it is well adui∣sed, and I am content to allow there-of: whereupon, hee said vnto them, that they should haue some small mater of feding; prouided, they must resolue him, whether hunger or thirst most offend them; answere therefore (on your faith) which is the most irk esome to yee? Seeing, (said King Perion) you coniure vs so powerfully; I could like well to haue meate, but thirst doth afflict vs in much extreamer manner. So, (quoth Archalaus) I haue a piece of fat Lard, which hath lien in powder aboue these three moneths; that (I am sure) will quenche your thirst. Presently it was brought, and hee hurling it in at the grate, said. There, take it friends, make good cheare with it, and say not now, but you are kindly entertained. So they depar∣ted, leauing a Damosell at the win∣dow, to listen what speeches should passe betweene them. Much talke had she heard concerning the fea∣ture of person and manly prowesse, of him that wore the golden Hel∣met; especially, that in the late bat∣tell against King Aranigne, hee had declared such deeds of Armes, as no knight else could performe the like. This raised (in her) great pitty and compassion, and for his sake, she prouided a Flagon of wine and water, which letting down soft∣ly to them, she said. Gentlemen, be secret in this fauour I send ye, and (as I may) I will defend ye from pe∣rishing. The knights returned her most hartie thankes: so shutting fast the window, she bade them go to such rest, as that foule place would assoord them. Now, concerning the entertain∣ment
of Gandalin, and the two o∣ther, that sought after King Perion and his company, being falne into the hands of Archalaus, as hath bin said already: be it knowne to yee, that they were suddenly shut vp in a darke vault, ouer the Chamber where the supposed dumbe Lady had formerly lodged their Masters. There they found two knights and a Damosell, wife to the elder of the knights, who had long time beene kept there as prisoners: who decla∣red to the Squires, that by the win∣dow of their prison, they saw three knights (bearing Armes of Ser∣pents) brought in thither, and very worthy welcome giuen them at the first. Neuerthelesse (quoth one of them) at length they were let down into a deepe Dungeon, by the most horrid treason that euer was heard of: for the Bedde wherein they lay, was fixed on a screw or giuing vise; which easily, and without the least noyse, conueyed them aboue twen∣ty fathome in depth, they being in a sound sleepe, dreading no harme at all. Full well knew Gandalin and the other, that these knights were their Maisters, thus betrayed: notwith∣standing, they made no outward ap∣parance thereof; but (as if they had neuer seene or knowne them) Gan∣dalin thus answered. For ought I can perceiue, most vnhappily came we hither, where such worthy men are so cruelly handled, of whom we haue heard much fame and faire re∣port. But is there no way or means whereby to succourand helpe them? I am vndoubtedly perswaded, that if they were deliuered, our abiding heere would not be long. Let mee tel ye (answered the ancient knight) the maine butte or end of the vice, which supporteth the bed wherein they lye, is vnder the plancher of this Chamber, and heere you may behold it. If all our strength & labor will serue to turne it about, and re∣mount the bed vp againe to his for∣mer place: they may easily get forth, because the doore is neuer shut; and moreouer, the Guardes or Keepers of the Castell, are now all in their deadest sleepe. Let vs try (quoth Gandalin) what we can do; so euery one set to their hand. Such was their painfull labour & endeauour, that the screw of the vice turning by little and little, the bed beganne to rise: and King Peri∣on (being then not able to sleepe) felt how it mooued: wherefore, a∣waking Amadis and Florestan, hee said vnto them - Doe not you feele that we are remounting vp aloft? Assure your selues, the villaine Ar∣chalaus will keepe promise with vs, for (doubtlesse) wee are discouered to him. I know not (said Amadis) what may be his meaning: but hee that first layes hold on me to do me out-rage, shall pay the reckoning for all the rest. While thus they confer∣red; by little and little the bedde drew vp neere to the plancher, and attained to fixing in his first place. Then our knights, leaping lightly on their feete, drew forth their Swords, looking all about them, to see who had thus raised them again. But they could not see any body, to their no little maruaile, and they found their Armes in the same place where they had lefte them, be∣fore they went to rest, wherewith they armed themselues immediat∣ly. Afterward, they issued forth so secretly, that seazing the Guards, they hewed and sliced them in pie∣ces, before any ey could take notice thereof, vntill such time, as, by the great noise they made, in breaking the bolts and barres of the gates,
and sharpe assayling such as they met withall: Archalaus awaked, and heard Amadis cry with a loude voyce. For Gaule, for Gaule, this Castell is ours. In great affrightment he rose, and hauing no leysure to arme himselfe, he ran into a strong Tower, moun∣ting to the top thereof, and draw∣ing vp the Ladder after him; where seeing himselfe in safety, putting his head out ata window, he called to his people so loud as he could. In the meane while, our three knights had made way to Gandalin and the rest, freeing them from the slauery of Archalaus: whom they espied bawling aloft on the Tower, with some other, for their better safety. And because they could by no pos∣sible meanes come at them, they made a great fire, and smoakt them in such sort, as they were glad to des∣cend into-he lowest vaults, where they were likewise almost smothred with smoke. At length, the knights, seeing the Castell all engirt with fire; comman∣ded their horses to bee led forth; where mounting on them, they cō∣mended Archalaus to all his deuils; and the Dwarfe cryed out, Archala∣us, Archalaus, remember how kindly thou didst vse me, when thou tiedst me fast by the feete; in the Castel of Valderin, where I was as well per∣fum'd, as thou art now. The dwarfe deliuered these words so angerly, & with such a strange gesture, as made them all to laugh hartily. And when they were somewhat further off, they looked behind them, and be∣held the Castell flaming gallantly: perswading themselues, that they were sufficiently reuenged on Ar∣chalaus, and that he could no way es∣cape with life. By this time, bright day appea∣red, and they arriued at the place where they left their Ship; & there, the Gentlewoman that had bin de∣liuered with the rest, remembring the words of Amadis in the Castell, when he cryed, For Gaule, for Gaule: desired to know of Gandalin, which of them was the man. Gandalin pointing her to Amadis; shee went and fell at his feete, desiring pardon of him. For (quoth shee) I am Dari∣oletta, that committed your life to the mercy of the Sea, euen the very same day that you were borne. But beleeue me, my Lord, I did it to saue the honour of the Qaeen your Mother, who otherwise had bin put to death: for no one did know, but my selfe onely, that the King your Father (who is heere present with yee) was as then married to her. A∣madis; was much amazed heereat, for he had neuer heard the cause, wherefore he was left in such sorsa∣ken manner: so, taking Darioletta by the hand, he said vnto her. Faire Friend, I pardon ye, perceiuing it was done vpon so iust an occasion: and (heretofore) Galuanes hath of∣ten told me, that he found me floa∣ting on the Sea; but, till this in∣stant, I was vtterly ignorant, how it came to passe. Then she related all from point to point (without omit∣ting any thing) euen from the be∣ginning of King Perions loue, to his Queene Elisena, and the successe of euery accident: wherein the king tooke no little delight, and often entreated Darioletta to repeat the sweet pleasures of his youth. But while this company were thus in quiet and contentment, the case of Archaiaus carried no corres∣pondencie therewith: for hee and hir, remained inthe deep vault vnder his sower, where he was as well fa∣uouredly smoakt and perfumed, as euer Rainard the Foxe was in his vn∣derground kennel. And if his Niece
Dinarda, and some others had not succoured him; hee had there mise∣rably ended his dayes. But they came to him so soone as the knights were gone, finding him so suffoca∣ted and ouercome, as he was not a∣ble to stirre either hand or foote. Taking him forth of that smothe∣ring vault, they threw vineger and cold water in his face, so that (soon after) he began to breathe, and ope∣ning his eyes, beheld his Castell all on a sme. Then heauily sighing e∣uen as if his heart would haue split in sunder, he said. Vile traytour A∣ how many iniuries hast thou  since thy birth. Be well as∣ therefore, that if I can catch th, I wilbe reuenged to mine own hearts contentment. In the despight of thee, I will neuer keep any knight (falling into my power) aboue one night, but he shall dye the death; to make him sure for scaping from me, as ow (much against my minde) thouhst done. So calling for his Litter, he wold presently bee thence conuayed to Mount Aldan. For (quoth he) it vex∣etl my very soul, to behold the ruin of so beautifull a place, without any meanes in me to helpe it. As they rode on the way, at the entrance of a neere neighbouring Forrest; they espied two knights, refreshing themselues by the brim of a goodly Spring or Fountaine; who seeing the Litter attended by fiue knights, and two Damosels: they imagined, that some wounded body was ther∣in; where upon, they made toward it to be resolued: which, when Archa∣laus perceiued, he said. Go, bid yon∣der high-way spies come to me, and if they make any deniall, hew them in pieces: but be carefull, that you doe not tel them who I am, lest they flye away with feare. Heere you must note, that these two thus sent for by Archalaus, were Galaor, and his companion Noran∣del; to whō hen the other knights came, fiercely they commaunded them to lay downe their Armes, and come speake with him that was in the Litter. What saucie Sir is hee, said Galaor, that would haue vs dis∣arme our selues, and then come to him? You shall know no more then you doe, replyed one of the other knights: but if yee vse any longer contesting, we wil make ye come to him with cudgelling. I would laugh at tha (tsaid Norandel) I am sure you meane not as you say. That shal ap∣peare (quoth they) and so ranne a∣gainst them: but Galaor and Noran∣del vnhorsed the first two they met withall, albeit they all fiue gaue the encounter together, and yet could not stirre them in their saddles. The fight grew fell and fierce betweene them; but the knights belonging to Archalaus, were not able to endure the blowes of the other two, who tooke such order with them, that three of them were slaine out tight, and the other fled into the wood to saue themselues, whom they resused to follow, lest he in the Litter should get away from them in the meane while. To the Litter they came, & found Archalaus left all alone: because they that kept him company, had quite forsaken him, vpon the soile & flight of the siue knights; only there was a Boy remaining, who guided the horses of the Litter. Archalaus was not a little amazed, to see him-selfe in the power of strangers, who might well be reuenged on him, for the outrage done them: neuerthe∣lesse, be thinking himselfe on a sud∣den subtile shift, he saluted them in very humble manner. But they (be∣ing iustly moued with choller) com∣ming neere, and offering to strike
him, said. Treacherous thiefe, is this thy maner of behauiour to knights errant, seeking their death, that ne∣uer offended thee? I sweare by heauen. this is the last outrage thou shalt doe to any man liuing. Galaor hauing spoken these words, lifted vp his arme to smite him: but Ar∣chalaus (in great feare) cryed out. Alas my Lords, for Gods sake mer∣cy. Mercy (quoth Galaor) If Gru∣medan iudge thee worthy of mercy, thou mayest perhaps haue it, other∣wise not: for to him shalt thou goe, and by him shall thy vill any be sen∣tenced. Worthy Lords, answered Archalaus, you cannot doe me a greater pleasure, then bring mee to my Cousin Grumedan, who knowes me to bee another manner of man, then you imagine me. It is not vn∣knowne to him, that (at all times) I haue laboured, serued and honored Knights errant, such as I now per∣ceiue you are. When Galaor and Norandel heard him speake so honestly, and named Grumedan to be his kinseman, they were halfe offended with themselus, that they had giuen him such rough language, and answered him thus. What moued you then to send vs such an iniurious command by your men? In good faith my Lords quoth he, if you please but to heare me, I will acquaint you with the whole truth. Know then, that as I (not long since) crossing the For est of the Black Lake, I met with a Damosell, who made complaint vnto me of a great wrong done her by a knight, which my duty and order binding me to repaire I pursued him accor∣ding to her direction, and entring the Combate with him, before the Count of Ganceste, soyled him. But it chanced afterward, as I returned hometo my Castell, that villaine Traytour, which first of all you slew, accōpanied with two other knights, who lay closely ambushed to entrap me; watching their fittest oportuni∣ty, did all set vpon me, and would forcibly compell me, to make them Lords and Commanders of mine owne dwelling. What shall I more say to ye. They followed mee with such violence, as notwithstanding, all I could doe in my best defence: they tooke me, and sed me prisoner to a Fortresse not farre hence, where they long time detayned mee, in the most iniurious manner could be deuised, not permitting so much as the dressing of such wounds, as I had receiued in fight against them, and are heere apparant to your view. With these words, hee shewed them diuers skarres and hurts. And because (quoth he) they stood in feare, lest I should escape frō them, and go to the Court of good King Lisuart, there to require ayde and instice, of the gentle knight Ama∣dis de Gaule, or of his noble Brother Galaor, by the suitherance of my Cousin Don Grumedan: this very day, they had me along with them in this Litter (because I was not a∣ble to endure trauaile on horse-back) purposing to carry me, God knowes whether: doubting the friendship and helpe of my honou∣rable kinsmen, that laboured to re∣lease mee out of their thraldome some few dayes since. In which re∣spect, they no sooner espied you, but thinking you to lye in waite for the same occasion, they made no conscience in abusing you, as they had done mee in most rigorous maner. Worthy Sir (replied Galaor) on the faith of a knight, by this discours of yours, they were truely villaines. For, you being kinsman to one of
the best-deseruing men in the world, your wrongs haue bin too great and vnsufferable. But let me entreat you, to tell vs your name, and to pardon the iniurie wee haue likewise done ye, being ignorant of whence and what you were. I am named (quoth Archalaus) Branfi∣les, and know not whether you haue heard of me heere to fore or no. Yes that I haue, and vnderstand your merit among the very best (answe∣red Galaor) in doing all honorable courtesies to knights errant, at what time soeuer you can compasse the meanes, as Don Grumedan himselfe hath many times told me. I am glad of it (quoth Archalaus,) and seeing you haue receiued knowledge of me, let me in kindnesse obtaine so much fauour at your hands, as to take off your Helmets, and to tell me your names, that I may re∣turne thankes to my Cousin Grume∣dan, for your extraordinary curtesie. This knight (saide Galaor) my deare friend and companion, is cal∣led Norandel, and he is Sonne to King Lisuart. And I am Galaor, brother to Amadis de Gaule. Happy man that I am (answered Archala∣us (dissemblingly lifting vp his eyes to heauen) could any greater felici∣ty befall me, then to bee thus relie∣ued with two of the best knights in the world. This conference he con∣tinued the longer, taking good note and obseruation of them, that if e∣uer they should happen into his hands, he might be the better reuen∣ged on them. And my good Lords (quoth he) command me what ser∣uice shall like you best, for I con∣fesse my life to be onely yours: as∣suring ye on my faith, that if you at any time come where I may enter∣taine ye, you shall effectually finde what loue I beare ye. Friend Branfi∣les, answered Galaor, good successe attend ye: but if you please, we will ride along with ye, for your better security. I hartily thanke ye, replyed Archalaus, but this day I shall neede no further defence, I am so neere to a Castell, where I am assured of kind welcome. So he departed from them, not a little glad, that he was so well rid of them; for if they had knowen him, he had not easily escaped from them: wherefore, he commaunded him that guided the Litter, to make all the haste he possibly might, and to take the most vnfrequēted waies, lest they should pursue and recouer him again. By this time it waxed so late, that the Moon shone brightly: wherefore Galaor (seeing no other helpe) concluded on their byding that night by the Fountain, whereto Norandel was as willing as he. As they disarmed themselues, one of their Squires told them, that they should haue better cheare then they expected. How shall we haue it? quoth Galaor. It is ready enough for ye (answered the Squire: for, while you were fighting with the 5. knights they that remained with Branfiles, forsook him also, and left a horse lo∣den with victuals, whereof I took the charge, while the 2 damosels, which accōpanied the litter, entred among yonder old ruines of houses, from whence (as yet) they are not gone, because I haue obserued them wari∣ly. So much the better, answered No∣randel, conduct me where they are, that they may haue part in this booty Galaor went with him and the Squire, who shewed the place where they had hid themselues, which was an old Caue: in regard whereof, the Damosels had falne so deepely into it, as they could not by any meanes get out againe. Now, be∣cause the Squire knew not cer∣tainly, whether any knights were
in their company or no, the en∣trance of the Caue being so vnac∣customed, and neither Galaor or Norandel had their Armes about them: hee would proceede no fur∣ther, but with a loud voyce called vnto them, saying. Come foorth Ladies, come foorth, and giue mee not occasion to fetch ye foorth, lest perhaps you repent it. Twise or thrise he thus called to them, and they appeared not to heare him: when Norandel growing offended thereat, aduised Galaor, that fire should be made at the caues mouth, and so to smoake them forth, whe∣ther they would or no. Dinarda hearing these wordes, waxed very fearefull, and cryed out aloud, saying. Alas Gentlemen, take pitty vpon vs, and we will pre∣sently come forth vnto ye. Dispatch then said Galaor, and come away quickly, for we may not attend your leysure. Beleeue it Gentle-men (quoth shee) vnfaynedly, that wee are not able to come vnto yee, without your helpe, we are falne so deepe vnder the ground, and further (perhaps) then you will beleeue. Heereupon, Norandel went in him-selfe, and holpe them out each after other; when, perceiuing them to be such beautifull creatures: I know not which of them was the forwar∣dest, to entertaine a faire friend, so that Galaor pleaded possession of Di∣narda; and Norandel of the other. Then sending the Squire to prepare their Supper, meane while, they wandred somewhat further into the wood; where you may well con∣ceiue, that hauing a place so conue∣nient, and being furnished with such prouision, as such yong yeares and wanton desires could wish for: neither of the knights was so dull spirited, but knew well enough how to entertain his amorous Mistresse. Which dalliances being ended, the knights conducted them to the Fountaine, where they friendly supt together, with such food as the men of Archalaus had left behind them; vsing such conference all the time of Supper, as doubtlesse was not a∣ny way displeasing. By meanes whereof, the Damosels, who (at the first encountring) seemed strange, and halfe angry, were now become so gentle, milde, and tractable; that Supper was no sooner ended, but they went into the wood againe with the knights, as familiar in their kisses, and kinde embraces, as for∣merly they had beene to Galaor and Norandel. In which pleasures they continued til the break of day, when Norandels Lady thus spake vnto him. In good sadnesse Sir, I feare lest Madame Dinarda will be offen∣ded with me, because I haue absen∣ted my selfe so long time from her. Neuer thinke you so (quoth he) for she needes none of your presence, being so well accompanied as shee is: And I dare make it good, that she is as willing to be alone, as you are, or can be. But resolue me in one thing I pray ye; is not this Dinarda, the daughter to Ardan Canile, who (not long since) came into this Country, to aske the counsel of Ar∣chalaus, how she might be reuenged on Amadis de Gaule, and compasse his death? I am not acquainted (said she) with the cause of her comming hither; but well I wot, shee is the daughter to Ardan Canile, and in my poore opinion, he that hath beene pleased with her company this night past, may well boast of his happines & good fortune: for he hath wonne that, which many great persōs could neuer gaine so much as a sight of. Heere let me tell ye, as heereto-fore I haue done, that this Dinarda was both cunning and malicious,
expressing to Galaor such an out∣ward shew of loue and intire affe∣ction, as if her soule and behauiour truely consented together. And so farre was his beliefe abused by her, that, notwithstanding his aduerti∣sing by Norandel, what speech had past betweene him and his night∣commodity, yet hee made no ac∣count at all thereof, but declared as faire friendship to her, as before, not wanting in his very best curtesies to her. But at length, he demaunded of her, if she knew the knight that was carried in the Litter? Full well (quoth she,) and did not you know him to be Archalaus the Enchanter? Archalaus? (answered Galaor.) Had I but knowne so much before, hee should haue felt the keene edge of my Sword. Is he not dead? (reply∣ed Dinarda.) No (quoth Galaor,) my ignorance (for this once) hath priuiledged his life: but if euer here∣after we chaunce to meet againe, he shall well finde, that a debt de∣layed, is not payed, another day will serue the turne. Right glad was Dinarda, to heare that her Vncle had escaped with life: notwithstanding, wisely shee dissembled her contentment, and returned this answere. Trust me, Sir, it is no long while since I hazarded my life for the safety of his: but now finding my selfe so farre interrested in your faire affection, assure your selfe, it is one of my greatest grie∣uances, that you did not kill him; for there is not a heauier enemy in the world, to the life of you and your brother Amadis. I know it too well, (replied Galaor) and so long a for∣bearance, should now haue found a full discharge for all his treche∣ries, but that his subtilty outwent my honest simplicity, which will be quickly footed when time shal serue. Broad day breaking off these pri∣uate conferences, they mounted on horsebacke with the Damosels: who tooke no great pleasure in their company, though they bare it out with notable dissembling! But that which most offended Dinarda, was the report of Galaor, that he had left the Court of King Lisuart, onely to finde his Brother Amadis de Gaule, whom she hated more then any man liuing. So long they iourneyed to∣gether, that on the third day follow∣ing, they came to a Fortresse, the gates whereof stood wide open. In they rode, not meeting with any body whom they might speake to: but soone after came the Lord of the place, named Ambades, attended with some of his seruants, on whom (beholding this new come compa∣ny) he looked angerly, because they had not drawen the Bridge before their arriuall. Neuerthelesse, consi∣dering, that now it could not bee holpen, he made a shew of courte∣ous entertainment, & much against his minde. For he was neere kins-man to Archalaus, and euery way as wicked as he, quickly taking know∣ledge of his Niece Dinarda: by whō hee vnderstood the fortunes of his Cousin; and Dinarda also perswa∣ded him, that she and the other Da∣mosell had bin violently deflowred by Galaor and Norandel. Hereat he grew so incensed with fury, that instantly he would haue assayled them: but Dinarda willed him to be better aduised, because they two onely had foyled fiue knights, that had the conduct of her Vncle, and might prooue as power∣full ouer him and his. Therefore Sir, quoth she, as yet it is hest to con∣ceale your discontentment, till their departing hence to morrow mor∣ning, when I and this Damosell will guide thē forth: then letting down the Port-cullies of the gate, we shall
be sure to tarry with yee in the secu∣rer safety. Ambades did not mislike this counsell, but went to Supper with the Knights and Ladies, betaking themselues (afterward) to rest in their appointed lodgings; and the next morning, being risen, their hoste came to them, saying. Gentle-men, when it shall please you to de∣part, I will bee your guide, thus ar∣med as I am: for so am I vsed to doe, with any that accept of enter∣tertainment heere; and before my returne backe againe, I take delight in the search of aduentures, accor∣ding as other knights errant do. My kinde Hoste (answered Galaor) wee heartily thanke yee for your great curtesie. So, their horses being brought, first they holpe to mounte the Damosels, and themselues: but they gaue way to Galaor and Noran∣del to ride out foremost, the women comming slowly after with Amba∣des. No sooner were the knights beyond the gate, but downe fell the Port-cullies, and he (with the Damosels) were now out of their power. Forthwith, they mounted on the wall ouer the gate, and seeing the knights looke backe for the Damo∣sels comming after, he cryed out to them. Villaines, hell be your con∣fusion, before you get them againe in your possession. Goe dwell a∣mong all the deuils, and let them vse you, as ye haue done these poore Ladies; who dare venter no further with such base-minded men, but chuse rather willingly to abide here with me. Is it possible mine hoste (answered Galaor) that after such ho∣nour, and honest entertainment, af∣foorded by your selfe to vs in your Castell; you should expresse such lacke of manhood, as to robbe vs of our faire friends, so treacherously? If euer they were yours, (replied Ambades, or gaue themselues to ye without constraint: it likes mee the better thus to take them from yee, as thinking it may the more vexe and molest yee. But I am assured, that lustfully, and meerely against their mindes, you haue pursued and enioyed them; and therefore, at their earnest request made to me, I vse ye as I doe; shame then to quar∣rell any further in this maner, con∣sidering how much they detest ye. Let them but say so much themselus (quoth Galaor) to vs, and we shall quickly get vs gone. Dinarda, who (all this while) had hid her selfe, began to appeare vpon the wall, whereupon, Galaor spake thus vnto her. Faire Mistresse, this Knight wold gladly make vs beleeue, that willing∣ly you remaine with him, and that our company is offensiue to ye: We can hardly credit any trueth in his speeches, remembring some oc∣casions that haue past betweene vs. Then I perceiue (answered Di∣narda) that foolish credulity be∣trayed your best iudgement in me; for my affectiō was neuer so earnest towards ye, but I had rather behold your head parted from your shoul∣ders, then to enioy one minute of your company. Fond, and ydle-headed knight, didst not thou know that I am Daughter to Ardan Canile, and that thy Brother Amadis is the man, whom (aboue all other) I haue most cause to detest and hate? How then couldst thou dreame, that any good inclination remained in me towardes thee: considering, that thy greatest fauour to mee, since our late begun familiarity, hath aimed at no other end, but for
conueying me to Gaule, there to be∣hold him whom I least desire to see? You may therefore depart hence at your pleasure, and forget not to as∣sure your selfe, that in being perswa∣ded I most faithfully affected you, you doe, and shall find me the most deadliest enemy you haue. If I had giuen ye any such occasi∣on, (answered Galaor) yet I am well assured, the sweete satisfaction you receiued so latel / from me, and to you no meane contentment (as I i∣magined) did well deserue more louely language. But I can easily aime at your intention; you would gladly borrow as much friendship of another man, as fearing that I was not able to pleasure ye any further: wherein truely, now vpon better consideration with my selfe, you haue reason so to doe, and I none at all to mislike it. For, ouer and beside that generall disease, incident to all women of your witty disposition, to affect change and nouelty: I ought to haue remembred how difficult a thing it is, from so badde a stocke as is worth iust nothing, that any good fruit can bee expected. For thou art Niece to the onely vyle wretch in the world, and thou must needs resemble him in all kind of villainy. But Madame, said Norandel, I hope my amorous Mistresie, hath no such cause to complaine of me: for neuer woman was better entertayned by her friend, then (for so long time together) shee was by mee, and that I dare referre to her owne re∣port. As he spake these wordes, he espied her peeping ouer the o∣thers shoulder; whereupon hee called to her, saying. How say you sweet heart, is it not true? It is so true (quoth shee) that if I could compasse the like power o∣uer thee, as (when time was) thou hadst ouer me; I should easily make knowne, with what affection I endured whatsoeuer thou didst to me, which pleased me so well, that I referre thee to the deuils re∣compence. The deuill (said Norandel) cares not for my company, hee likes yours so well, and that villaine that is with ye. By Sainct Mary (an∣swered Ambades) you doe mee wrong, to thinke so badly of mee, holding you in such reputation, that if I could haue conquered two such as you are, I could vaunt thereof among the best knights in the world; for I hold ye to be but a couple of base Groomes. These words mooued Norandel to such choller, that he presently replyed, Base Gromes: Hast thou any such in thy pay or wages? If thou hol∣dest vs in no better esteeme, come downe from thy Castell wall, and thou shalt soone see, that a Groom of my breeding, can knocke a bigger knaue then thou art. But if thou conquerest mee, then boldly make thy vaunt, to haue foyled one of the greatest enemies, that eyther thou or Archalaus can haue. Gentle words (answered Am∣bades) haue not I tolde thee al∣ready, that I meane not to meddle with any such paltry companions? what honour then can be had by so base conquest? Tell not me of thy hatred to my Cousin Archalaus, thou art vnworthy to speake of a man of his merit; who, as he cares not for thy loue or kindnesse, so he dares thee to thy vttermost malice against him. So, bending a Turkishe Bowe, hee let slye three or four arowes at them, which
caused Galaor and Norandel to part thence, smyling heartily to them-selues, that they had bin so decei∣ued by two treacherous women. And yet (quoth Norandel) mee thinkes, they lik't their wine so well, as they will grieue for the misse thereof, when they remember vs. And howsoeuer they haue begui∣led our expectation, yet I can bee well content to be mockt so againe, paying no dearer charges then wee haue done. They rode on still thus merily ie∣sting, till about some three or foure dayes after, they came to the Port of Arsill, where they found a Barke ready bound for Gaule, whereinto they entred, and the winde sate so fitting for them, that (without hin∣derance or impeachment, they lan∣ded where King Perion then soiour∣ned. At that instant, Amadis was walking on the Sea-shore▪ accom∣panied with his Brother Florestan, & he remembring his Oriana, sent ma∣ny a longing looke towardes Lon∣don, But so soone as hee beheld the Barke to cast Anker in the Port, hee said to his Brother Florestan. Let vs goe learne of them, who are come hither to take landing, if they can tell vs any happy tidings. Goe we then (replyed Florestan, for perhaps we may meete with some of our ac∣quaintance. So walking downe to the Shoare, Amadis saw Galaor al∣ready come forth of the Ship, and Norandel following him; where∣pon he went and embraced his bro∣ther. As yet hee had no knowledge of Norandel, but Florestan had former∣ly seen him, telling him, that he was the bastard Sonne to King Lisuart, and companion to Galaor, as a so, one of the best knights of his age, & so he did worthily declare himselfe; in the battels at the Burning Lake, where many men of marke ended their liues. Neuerthelesse, he was then scarcely knowen to bee the Kings Sonne, neither would his Father make any auouchment of him, vntill the ouerthrow of King Aranigne: but there he performed such deeds of Armes, that the King himselfe greatly gloried, he had be∣gotten so famous a knight; & ther∣fore cared not (that day) who tooke knowledge of him. Not a little glad was Amadis of his arriuall, and for his Sister Oria∣naes sake, hee gaue him the more kind and gracious welcome, sen∣ding presently to King Perion, to ad∣uertise him of their landing, who came to meete them, and embraced Norandel in most louing manner, feasting them royally and magnifi∣cently three dayes together. On the fourth day following, Amadis (who formerly had resolued on his depar∣ture from Gaule, to pursue the search of strange aduentures) finding the King at fitte and conuenient ley∣sure, he thus spke vnto him. Sir, my long abiding heere with you, & discontinuance from the vse of Armes, hath bin the cause of much lauish language to my disgrace. Wherefore I humbly entreate your Maiesty, to licence my departure to morrow morning. Sonne, answered the King, I hold your honour in such precious esteem, that notwith∣standing pateall loue and affecti∣on, which well may make me loth to leaue your company. I am con∣tent, that you shall part hence at your owne pleasure. By my saith (quoth Galaor) were it not for one quest whereto I and my companion  haue reli∣giously bound our selues by oath; no occasion whatsoeuer could di∣uide vs from your company. But we
haue vowed the same before so ma∣ny worthy personages, and to con∣tinue our trauaile one whole yeare together; as nothing must hinder vs from that we seeke for. And what may bee the ground (said the King) of this serious inquisition? Sir, an∣swered Galaor, in King Lisuarts bat∣taile with the seauen Island Kings, three knights (vtterly vnknowen to vs)  and tooke our part, all ar∣med alike, except their Helmets▪ for one was white, another greene, and the third gold, and had no diffe∣rence, but their Shieldes emblazed  Sents. Thse three of whom I make re∣, performed such ad∣mirable deeds of prowesse, that the King , and all his knight, with confirmation of the whole ar∣my beside ascribed the cause of our victory onely to heauen and them: much did he in the white Helmet, also he in greene: but (aboue all) the golden Gallant might not bee med. And because none of vs could attaine to the knowledge of them by reason of their sudden par∣ting thence vpon our victory: my companion and I haue solemnely vowed and promised, according to the custome of Great Brittaine, to spend one whole yeare in the quest of them, before we giue ouer, or vn∣dertake any other enterprise. Sonne (said the King) when heauen plea∣seth, you may haue newes of those knights, and sooner then you look for. So spent they out the day, dis∣cosing on many things, till the due houre summoned them to rest. The next morning, Amadis being ar∣med, went to heare Masse; and ha∣uing taken leaue of the King, moun∣ted on horseback, accompanied on∣ly with Gandalin and the Dwarfe. Notwithstanding, the King would needes bring him somewhat on the way, out of the Citty; and as they rode together, Amadis thus spake. Sir, you know what trauaile my bro∣ther and Norandel haue bound thē∣selues to by vow, which will bee paines without any profit, except you please therein to ease them: for, by no meanes possible can they compasse their intent, but one of vs three must end their royle. Where∣fore, I thinke it expedient, if your Highnesse were so pleased, that when you haue forsaken my compa∣ny, you would tell them the whole discourse, and what we did in the seruice of King Lisuart. Since you will haue it so (replyed the King) it shall be done. Florestan was very desirous to haue ridden along with Amadis, but hee would not permit it: because in trauayling alone, hee had the more free passage for his considerations concerning Oriana; and beside, he aymed at aduentures of no meane perill, the honor wher∣of should be his owne onely. Anadis being gone, as Fortune best pleased to direct him, and the King with his company returned home to the Court: he called for Galaor and Norandel, with whom he discoursed in this maner. You haue betaken your selues to a strange kinde of quest, wherein (I am cer∣taine) you will haue but slender suc∣cesse, except it be in this kingdome. And therefore, account your com∣ming hither to be fortunate, in that I can shorten your long-intended trauaile. Know then, that the knights you seeke after, were none other then A∣madis, Florestan and my selfe. So he declared the whole manner of their enterprise, and how at the very in∣stant of their proceeding, Vrganda the Vnknowen, sent them the coate Armours, with the Serpents, the
golden Helmet for Amadis, the white for himselfe, and the greene for Florestan: shewing all instantly to them, and what harme had hap∣pened to them in the battel. Sir, said Galaor, heauen hath bin very fauourable to vs, considering our long-intended time of trauaile: onely to enter the Combate with them, and make knowne to the whole world beside (in extinguish∣ing their glory) that one of vs de∣serueth asmuch as the best of them. Yea (quoth the King) but it is much better to fall out thus, as now it doth. Then he reported to them, how in their returning from the battell, they chanced to bee imprisoned by Archalaus, and in what vngentle manner he vsed them. That villain, (answered Galaor) not long after es∣caped out of my hands, by a most queint and cunning treachery. Rela∣ting at large, how they met with him, their courtesie to the Damo∣sels, and their treason afterward at the Castell of Ambades. The King walked thence with them to his owne Chamber, where all the Armours were, whereof they had spoken: which they pre∣sently knew, as hauing well obser∣ued them in the battell, Norandel importuning the King so earnestly, that he frankly gaue him them. Af∣terward, hauing remained there a∣bout the space of fourteene dayes, they obtayned leaue to part thence; and passing into Great Brittaine, ar∣riued at the Court of King Lisuart: who, not a little glad of their com∣ming, instantly sent for them, to vn∣derstand what had befalne them in their quest. Sir, (said Norandel) wee haue brought ye happy newes, and an∣swerable to your owne desire. In te∣stimony whereof, behold heere the Armes of them, that perfourmed such worthy seruice for you, and in such a time of vrgent necessity. This white Helmet was then worne by King Perion, and your selfe saw him in the place, where it cost many the price of their liues. This greene Helmet belonged to the gentle knight Florestan, who well declared how hardily hee could handle his Sword. And this of gold appertai∣ned to Amadis, whom deeds of arms cannot be seconded by any: for by his assistance, the benefit of the bat∣taile redounded to you; but the honour thereof to his immortall glory. How could they (quoth the King) come so conueniently to helpe vs? Heereupon Norandel discoursed from point to point, how euery thing had happened, without the least omission, to the great content∣ment of all the hearers. Beleeue me, said the King, I perceiue that King Perion hath bin long time your fa∣uourer, and him I neuer saw out of his Armes, albeit I greatly desire to know him. You shall then know (answered Norandel) a wise vertu∣ous and most magnanimious Prince. And on my faith (quoth Grume∣dan) his Sonnes come not behind him in any of his best parts. These words were hardly pleasing to the King, though hee made no outward shew thereof: but falling from this maner of discourse, hee departed thence, leauing Galaor and Noran∣del, to whom Oriana and Mabila instantly comming, they deliuered most kinde commendations to them, both from Queene Elisena and the Princesse Mabila. Decla∣ring afterward, that Amadis was departed from Gaule into farre di∣stant Countreyes, to seeke after straunge aduentures, which ty∣dings
made them very sorrowfull, because they feared to heare no newes of him in a long while after. CHAP. VII. How Esplandian was neurished by the old Hermite Nascian. And what aduentures happened to Amadis in the meane while, changing his knowne name, and calling himselfe, the Knight with the greene Sword. ESplandian hauing attayned to the age of foure yeares, or thereabout; Nascian well knowing, that now it was fit time, to begin his instruction in vertuous exercises: sent to his Sister, that she should bring the childe to him, which shee accordingly did. The Hermit perceiuing his growth, to be beyond the ordinary stature of such young yeares, besides his beau∣ty and commendable forme: con∣ceiued in his minde, that heauen had thus preserued him to some es∣peciall end: so that, if formerly hee presumed of his future happines; he gaue more credit now thereto then euer he had done; endeauouring by all meanes possible, to haue him taught all commendable qualities, fit for the knowledge of a Gentle-man; embracing, kissing, and vsing him, as if he had bin his owne natu∣rall Sonne. And surely it was not without great reason, because the childe had alwayes declared, as apparant signes of loue to him, and rather more, then to his Nurse, whose brests hee suckt. In regard whereof, Nascian concluded to keep him still, sending his Sister home to her owne house: yet requiring the company of one of her Sonnes, that might bee as a play-fellow to Esplandian, who had suckt with him of the same milke, whereto shee willingly condiscen∣ded. From that time forward, the Her∣mit was their sole guide and gouer∣nour, they liuing there in the nature of brethren; and for their dayly de∣light and exercise, he would send them to hunt in the Forrest; so that at one time (among other) they ri∣sing earely in the morning to finde some game, Esplandian waxing faint and weary, sate downe by a Riuer side, and fell asleepe. The Ly∣onnesse (whereof we haue former∣ly spoken) comming thither, and finding this new kind of prey, smel∣ling at his face, began to fawne and moue his taile pleasingly, euen as if Nature had made an especiall inter∣diction, of touching, or doing any harme to the creature, which her selfe had before bin partly a Nurse vnto. And appeared to know him so perfectly, that had bin a while suckled with her milke: as instantly, without offering the least violence, she couched down at his feete, smel∣ling, and licking his hands and gar∣ments. Which, when his waking∣companion perceiued, being ouer-come with feare▪ he ranne home to the Hermit, crying to him, that he had left his brother with a great dogge, that would eate him, as hee lay sleeping on the banke of a Riuer, he not hauing any power to wake him. The holy Hermite, dearely affe∣cting
Esplandian, grew doubtfull of his safety; and commaunded his young Nephew, to bring him where he left him; which presently he did. Drawing neere to the place, he be∣held the Boy and the Lyonnesse playing together: when Esplandian beholding the Hermite, saide vnto him. Father, doth this goodly dog belong to vs. Sonne, answered Nascian, shee is sent of God, to whom onely all things appertai∣neth. Truely Father, replyed Esplandi∣an, I should well like his abyding with vs, and would make vse of him in our hunting. When the reue∣rent man heard him speake so con∣fidently, he grew as resolute in per∣swasion, and going neerer to Esplan∣dian, saw him kisse the Lyonnesse, e∣uen as familiarly, as shee had bin a Spaniell. Heereupon the Hermite said vn∣to him. Sonne, would you giue her somewhat to eate? Yea Father, an∣swered Esplandian, if I had any thing to giue her. With that, the Her∣mit tooke out of his Scrip the legge of a Deere, which a Hunter had be∣stowed on him, and giuing it to the Lad, he threw it to the Lyonnesse, saying. Heere Dogge, eate this. The Lyonnesse tooke it; and while shee was feeding on it, Esplandian played with her eares, pawes and taile, euen as familiarly as himselfe pleased, the beast offering him no other dislyking, then if hee had bin one of her whelpes. Such perfect knowledge did she take of him, and (euen by naturall instinct) loued him so dearely, as she followed him thence to the Hermitage, and (from that time forward) would neuer wil∣lingly leaue his company, except when she went to seeke some prey, which she would also bring home with her, euen as if she had beene a houshold seruant. And both the Laddes grew into such familiarity with her, that they would leade her oftentimes in a Leasse on hunting with them, as if she had bin a Greyhound for game. Which Nascian well noting, proui∣ded them Bowes fit fot their strēgth, wherewith they continually vsed to kill Harts, Hindes, Roe-bucks, and such like, sending still the Lyonnesse after such game as they had woun∣ded. But heere wee purpose now to leaue them for a while; returning to Amadis, who being departed from Gaule, entred the Country of Ale∣maigne, where he perfourmed such rare actions of Chiualry, that euery tongue talked onely of him, and there he was commonly called, the knight with the greene Sword, or, the knight of the Dwarfe, because Ardan still attended on him, and there he spent foure whole yeares, before he returned to the Enclosed Island, not hearing any tydings from his Oriana, which was his ve∣ry greatest affliction, because hee found no pains, labor or ill successe, any way comparable to the want of her presence. So long he trauailed from one part to another, that about the be∣ginning of the Spring-time, he ar∣riued in Bohemia, neere to King Tafinor, on whom Patin the Empe∣rour of Rome made sharpe warre: who hated Amadis more then any man else, for the reason formerly declared in the second Booke. Hee ryding purposely toward the camp, King Tafinor, who for a time, had ta∣ken truce with his enemy, was then flying his Gerfaulcon at a Heron, which fell at the horse feete of A∣madis. Now, because none of the horse-men could come at her, in regard
of the moist and marshie ground hindering them, the knight of the greene Sword alighted, and tooke her vp, demaunding the Falconers, if they were displeased thereat: And they answered no. Soon after came the King, who had coasted all along the Riuer for passage, and seeing the knight so compleatly armed, stood in some suspition of himself; till he further noted the greene scabberd of his Sword, being the same which he had in lone of the ancient knight, as hath bin formerly de∣clared. The King had many times heard much fame of his prowesse, and was so well pleased with his happy arri∣uall, that he entreated his company to the City, which Amadis denied him not; but ryding along with him, the King thus spake. Sir, I haue a long while desired, that I might be but worthy of such a companion as you seeme to be. My Lord (an∣swered Amadis,) the liberal renown of you and your bounty, which makes you famous in many king∣domes, drewe me hither, onely to offer you my seruice, if any way it may be acceptable to yee, because I haue heard, that you are warred on by a potent Prince, that giues ye no meane molestation. You say very true (replied the King;) but I trust in heauen, and by the meanes of your helpe, to see a short issue out of these troubles, Fortune hauing so conueniently guided you hi∣ther. By this time they were arriued at the Palace, where the King com∣manded he should be lodged, and Grasandor his Sonne to keepe him company. Now, in regard that the truce taken betweene the two Ar∣mies, was vpon the point of ending: each side stood on their best de∣fence, and the seuerall Campes pre∣pared for all attempts whatsoe∣uer. King Tafinor walking one day a∣broade, to vnderstand some tydings from the enemy, hee beheld afarre off twelue knights come riding to∣wards him; and as they drew nee∣rer, he knew the Shield of Garadan, borne by his Squire, himselfe being a neere kinsman to the Emperour; and they came not to fight, but to parlee. The King bare little affe∣ction to this Garadan, because hee procured and raised this warre, and well he knew, that his comming was but to occasion some fresh grie∣uance; which made stearne anger mount vp into his face, so that hee could not forbeare, but said. Ah trecherous villaine, thou hast alrea∣dy done me so many mischiefes, that I haue iust occasion to hate thee so long as I liue. Sir, (answered the Knight of the greene Sword,) it may be, he com∣meth to yee for some good end; therefore, it shall well become ye, now to dissemble all passion, enter∣tayning them with good lookes, not taking offence at any thing they say, in regard they come to yee as Ambassadours from the Emperour their Maister. Kinde friend (quoth the King) I allow of your good aduice, and wil be directed thereby; though it is no meane griefe to me, to haue so great an enemy neere me. Scarcely were these words ended, but Garadan and his troupe saluted the King, who gaue them kinde welcome desiring them, that before any speeches pas∣sed, they would goe along with him to him to his Palace. But Garadan made refusall, shewing himselfe as brauely proud and presumptuous, as formerly he was wont to do, spea∣king thus. King Tafinor, thou must vnder∣stand
the occasion of our comming to thee, and before thou partest from this place, thou must make vs an∣swere, such as shall seeme best to thy selfe, without aduice or consulting with any one but thy selfe. For in thee onely lyeth the conclusion of two things, wherewith I am to ac∣quaint thee from the Emperour: o∣therwise, assure thy self, before three dayes can be passed ouer, the battel will fall out to be so cruell and bloo∣dy, as it exceedeth all possibility, but thou and thy Country will bee vtterly lost. With these wordes he deliuered him a Missiue of credence, for fur∣ther confirmation of his speeches. Beleeue me Lord Garadan, (answe∣red the King,) I hope that the Em∣perour, and you, wil be more kinde to me, then appeareth by your mes∣sage: wherefore, deferre no further time, but deliuer the remainder of your Commission, that I may yeeld you satisfaction to my power. Garadan hearing the King to an∣swere so mildely, began somewhat to qualifie his owne choller, reply∣ed thus. King Tafinor, the Empe∣rour my Maister, hauing power suf∣ficiently to preuaile against, yea, & vtterly to ruinate a more potent Prince then you are, being desirous to make an end of this warre, to pro∣uide for other his more necessary occasions, makes tender to you of two conditions, whereby you may enioy peace if you please, or else not. First, if Combate may be perfor∣med of an hundred of your knights, against as many of his; or a thou∣sand to a thousand, the conquerors leauing the vanquished in such case, as to them shall seeme best. Or, if you finde this demaund to be ouer-great, hee is content to allow of twelue against twelue, of which number I meane my selfe to be one, who doe thinke my selfe able to fight with sixe of your knights, al∣though your selfe made one in per∣son. Therefore, of these two ele∣ctions, chuse which shall appeare the easiest to you: for otherwise, be well assured, that, setting aside all other affaires, his Army shall neuer part from this Country, till you be wholly vanquished, which will be very speedily, because you are not able long to withstand his po∣tent proceedings. Don Garadan (answered the knight of the greene Sword) were you to speake to a King of much lesse merit, yet deseruing more re∣spect and reuerence, mee thinkes you should bee more mindfull of your owne behauiour, in vsing such proud threatnings concerning your selfe, ill beseeming a Gentleman, appertayning to so great a Prince. Notwithstanding, he may make you what answere shall like him: albeit, in mine opinion, he should first vn∣derstand, what assurance you can make of your seuerall offers, if hee consent to your demaunds. When Garadan heard the knight of the greene Sword speake so resolutely in the Kings presence, hee maruay∣led greatly what he should be, and looking on him with a disdainfull eye, he said. Beleeue me knight, it appeareth well by your language, but much more by your boldnes, that you are not onely a stranger in these parts, but also to all honour and ciuility. And it amazeth me, that the King will suffer yee to speake so sottishly in his presence. Neuerthelesse, if his opinion of you be so good, as not to disallow what you haue said, let him first consent to my demaunds, and then I will answere him as I see oc∣casion.
Goe you on, quoth the King, with the rest of your message: for whatsoeuer, the knight of the greene Sword hath spoken on my behalfe, shall bee maintayned, if in our power it lye to perfourme it. Garadan became now more a∣mazed, then formerly he had beene; perceiuing, that the man whom he had inburied in wordes, was the knight with the greene Sword, whose renowne had already spred it selfe thorow all Countries, and made his stout heart somewhat to tremble: Neuerthelesse, he held it as his chiefest happinesse, that hee should haue now so apt an oc∣casion to combate with him; for, he was so ouer-weening and vaine-glorious, that he made no doubt of preuayling against him, and that very easily. Which ydle fond o∣pinion, caused him to lose all the honour and high reputation, wherein he had liued till that time, promising himselfe an assurance of victory, which afterward fell to his enemy. And waxing more chollericke then before, he retur∣ned this answere to the knight of the greene Sword. Seeing that the King giues you such power and authority, why are yee so slow in electing the fight? Because (answered the knight of the Dwarfe) it is a mat∣ter of such importance, as well deserueth to haue the aduice of the Princes and Ladies of this king∣dome. And it would highly content mee, if the King pleased so much to honour mee, as to entertaine me for one of the twelue hundred, or thousand, that are to bee ap∣pointed for this fight: for no man can bee more desirous then I am, to doe any seruice against you, on whom I would not one∣ly aduenture my best blood, but serue for him in any place, where he shall please to imploy mee. My deare friend, (replyed the King,) I most heartily thanke you, and will not refuse the offer you haue made me: but doe request with∣all, that you would make election of the fights in my behalfe, ac∣cording as you shall iudge it best, and for our most aduan∣tage. In good sooth Sir, (reply∣ed the knight of the green Sword) therein you shall pardon mee, (if you please;) for you haue about yee so many good knights, all louing and respectfull of your honour, that if you demaund their aduice in this case, their counsell will be both faithfull and honourable. Neuerthelesse, be∣fore you shall faile in this, or any other matter that Garadan can vrge; presume vpon my loyalty and ready seruice. One∣ly let me entreate your Maiesty, to demaund, what power he hath re∣ceiued from his Maister, to war∣rant the offers already proposed: and accordingly you may shape your answere, for the acceptance or refusall. Saucie companion, (answered Garadan,) I know thy meaning well enough, as seeking how to shrinke backe, and shunne all the offers made for fight. If you knewe mee well, (said the knight of the Dwarfe) it may be, you would hold better estimation of me, then rashly your rash opinion seemeth to deliuer. And doe not thinke it straunge, that I gaue such aduice to the King, as you haue heard: for if your seuerall offers should af∣terward bee disallowed or dis∣claymed;
they may bee the cause of stearner warre then yet▪ hath beene, in steed of a milder purcha∣sing peace. Garadan could no longer for∣beare, but drew a Letter forth of his sleeue, sealed with thirty faire Seales, in the middest of all which Seales, stood that, that belonged to the Emperour: And deliuering it to the King, he bade him to consi∣der on a speedie answere. By my faith, (quoth the King,) seeing you are in such great haste, you shall be answered before you part from this place. So, withdrawing thence, & calling some of the chiefest Lords of the company: he entreated them to aduise him particularly what were best to be done in this vrgent necessity. Then each man deliue∣red his opinion, which fell out to be different and contrary, because some approued the fight of an hun∣dred against an hundred, and others of twelue to twelue; but the grea∣ter number temporized, and gaue the like counsell, for continuance of warre, in manner and forme as it had beene begunne. For (quoth they) to hazard a kingdome vpon the strength of so few men, is a mat∣ter very dangerous. And moreo∣uer, it appeareth by Garadans owne words, that the Emperour himselfe first beginneth to grow weary of this warre, and (it may be) is so ouer∣pressed in other places, as he will be (thereby) enforced to withdraw his forces, and leaue vs in peace a∣gainst his owne will. Sir, said Count Galtines, it were very expedient (in my minde) to craue the counsell of the knight of the greene Sword. Now, was not he present at this assembly, and therefore hee was immediately sent for; and being come, the King thus spake vnto him. My worthy Friend, you haue heard at large the speeches of Don Garadan to mee, so comman∣ded (as he saith) by his Maister the Emperour: let me therefore entreate yee, faire Sir, to aduise vs what you thinke meetest for our an∣swere, because the seuerall opinions of our Lords heere present, are so different, as wee know not which to elect for our best course. Then he related to him (in order) all cir∣cumstances that had passed among them without omission of the least particle, and the knight of the greene Sword returned him this answere. Sir, I am sure you can suffici∣ently vnderstand, that the end and issue of such attempts, are onely in the hand of Heauen, and not guided or directed by the iudgment of man; but in regard you would haue mine opinion in this case, I will acquaint yee with my very vttermost power and abi∣lity. If then Sir, I had but one Castell onely, and an hundred knights at my commaund, and were besie∣ged by such an enemy, whose power twise exceeded mine. If heauen affoorded mee so much happinesse, to cause him condis∣cend to a peacefull conclusion, vn∣der haxard of mine owne strength, I should confesse my self beholding to him. Neuerthelesse, honourable Lords (speaking to the other Barons and knights there pre∣sent) whatsoeuer I preferre as best in this case: forbeare not you to counsell the King, accor∣ding to the fidelity wherein you stand bound and obliged to him. Onely my most humble request is, that hee would so much honor mee, as to ranke mee among their
number that shall be appointed for fight. Let me tell you Sir, (replyed the King,) that I now call to minde, what I heard once reported, concer∣ning King Perion of Gaule, hauing the like occasion in hand, as ours now is, against King Abies of Ireland, who forcibly had taken from him a great part of his king∣dome. Hee was deliuered by a single Combate, which a young knight (not aged fully eighteen yeares) vndertooke against the said King Abies, who was recko∣ned among the very best and bol∣dest knights in the whole world: yet was he slaine, and King Perion put in possession of all hee had for∣merly lost. But aboue all, as a matter most deseruing note, hee then knew him to be his owne Sonne, that had wonne for him that worthy victory: then tearmed the Gentleman of the Sea, and afterward called Amadis de Gaule. Thus our Lord (in one day) bestowed on him two migh∣ty blessings, by the recouery both of his kingdome and Son. Where∣fore then (in the like case) should not I imitate so worthy a man as King Perion, and essay to deliuer my people out of those great tribu∣lations, as haue afflicted them by a warre so long and tedious? Well may I graunt the Combat of twelue of my knights, against as many of the enemy: in regard that I am perswaded of them, as by the help of heauen, and the right of Iu∣stice being on our side, they will beare away the honour of victory. What is your opinion, Knight of the greene Sword? Sir, answered he, I neuer had knowledge of that Amadis; yet I long time frequented the Coun∣try of Gaule, where it hath beene my good happe to see two of his brethren, who are no way inferior to him in prowesse, and I haue heard likewise, that according as you haue▪ declared, so it fortuned to King Perion. Now, as concerning the fight of twelue to twelue, whereas your Maiesty hath resolued: be∣fore God I speake it, had I beene in your place, I should haue done the like. Nay, moreouer Sir, if Gara∣dan had demaunded a much lesse number, let him be now assured, he should not haue beene denyed, were it to the aduenturing mine owne person against his. And if it pleased you but to tell him as much, I would willingly hazard my life, to abate his pride, that prates so contemptibly of all men else, presuming vpon his owne vaine glory. I hold it better, (quoth the King,) that you should be twelue equally in number; and therefore I will bethinke my selfe, to finde out eleuen of the best knights in my kingdome, that may accom∣panie you in this attempt. For which, the knight of the greene Sword thanked him. This being done, the King re∣turned to Garadan, and spake thus. Lord Garadan, you haue de∣maunded the Combate of twelue to twelue, and I haue yeelded thereunto, vnder those conditions before offered, and to morrow is the day, if you are as ready as wee will be. By my soule Sir, answered Gara∣dan, you yeeld mee the greatest contentment that euer could hap∣pen to me, and I could wish (if it were possible) that your men were as ready, as those that aduen∣ture
for the Emperour. Gara∣dan, (replied the knight of the greene Sword) so the King were so pleased, and you possessed with the like desire of the Combate, as heere you appeare to make shew of: I would answere your heate this very instant houre. What? (quoth Garadan) doest thou doubt that I will flye from thee? were I sure to be Emperour of Rome; I would refuse that digni∣ty, rather then the offer thou hast made me. For, if I haue not man-hood sufficient, whereby to ouer-come thee, and take thy head from thy shoulders before it be night, I will willingly forfeite mine owne in the Field. The like hope of suc∣cesse (replyed the knight of the Dwarfe) haue I ouer thee: let vs then without longer trifling the time) see, whom Fortune will allow the best fauour vnto. So both withdrew thence to arme themselues, returning againe within a short while after; and to the knights that accompanied Gara∣dan, thus he spake. If euer you be∣held a braue encoūter at the launce, doe but obserue, with what skill and dexterious iudgment, I shall giue entertaine to this bold companion, that dare make tryall of his poore fortune against me; and repute me neuer to weare Helmet on my head, if I doe not deliuer his head to the Emperour, and leaue the Country quiet, not suffering any of you to lay hand to weapon. While Garadan held on these brauing speeches, the knight of the greene Sword, being at the other end of the Field, cryed out aloud to him to defend himselfe. Then couering themselues with their Shields, couching their Launces, and giuing spurre to their Cour∣sers: they ranne against each o∣ther with such violence, that the knight of the greene Sword was halfe amazed. But Garadan fell to the ground, so farre lost in himselfe, that hee lay a long while; vnable to moue either hand or foote, for the launce had pierced thorow his arme, which did put him to intollerable anguish. Then the knight of the greene Sword, perceiuing him in such a strange perplexitie, alighted from his horse, to see whether hee were dead or no; and as hee came neere him, Garadan being restored from his trance, started vp quickly, lay∣ing hand to his Sword, as if he had felt no harme at all. Now beganne a very fierce and cruell battaile betweene them, and it could not easily be iudged, which side had the better, because each stood so stiffely to the other, as it mooued no meane admiration in the beholders. And had it not beene for Garadans much enfee∣bling, by the great abundance of blood issuing from the wound re∣ceiued in his arme, hee had gi∣uen his enemie more occasion of trouble and daunger, then as now hee could doe in so weake an e∣state. At length he found himselfe so spent and weary, that to recouer breath, hee thus spake vnto him. Beleeue mee Knight of the greene Sword, in regard that I now know yee better then euer I did, I haue iuster reason of wishing worse to ye then before. Notwithstanding, because it ap∣peares to mee, that you beginne to waxe faint, I am well conten∣ted, to suffer yee (for a while) to rest and ease your selfe. How? (replyed Amadis) doest thou now talke of rest, and madest vaunt
not long since to haue my head so lightly? Assure thy selfe, thou shalt take no rest, nor I neither, till one of vs two rest in death on the ground; and therefore looke to thy selfe I would aduise thee. Thus speaking, hee charged him fierce, and fiercer, and at last let fall such a weightie blow on the toppe of his Helmet, as cleft quite thorow the steele, head and braine together, so that he fell downe dead in the field. Whereat the Knight of the greene Sword was not a little glad, not so much for the ill-will he bare him, as for the displeasure he imagi∣ned to haue done the Emperour, and especiall contentment of King Tafinor. So wiping his Sword, he put it vp into the sheathe, rendring thankes to GOD for the victory he had giuen him. Then came the King, and (em∣bracing him) demaunded how hee fared. So well my Lord, answered Amadis, as I haue no wound at all to hinder mee, from entring a fresh fight to morrow morning, with whomsoeuer you shall please to appoint mee. Nay, by my faith (quoth the King) you haue done enough for this businesse. Then was hee conducted into the Citty, with the greatest triumphe that possibly could bee. In the meane while, the Ro∣manes carried thence the body of Garadan, so daunted with his death, that all desire of farther fighting was vtterly lost: but con∣cluded together, to tell the Em∣perour, that their companion had engadged them (in meere de∣spight, adn his owne rashnes) to decide this difference by Armes: wherein he would needes (ouer de∣speratly) aduenture himselfe alone, and so lost the day. No one was against this determi∣nation, but a young knight, named Arquisil, a neere kinsman to the Emperour, who perceiuing the bad disposition of the rest, and the iniury they not onely should doe to the Emperour Patin, and to them-selues, but likewise to the whole Empire, spake thus vnto them. How now Lords? will you thus forget your selues, and lose the reputa∣tion of our Empire? Shall it bee bruited abroade, that eleuen Ro∣mane knights (thorow feare of death) were so cowardly-min∣ded, as not to combate with twelue Allemaignes, grosse-hea∣ded fellowes, and very slenderly experienced in Armes? So helpe me God, put me alone vpon the enterprise, and if you stand in doubt of him that hath foyled Ga∣radan, leaue him onely to me, and settle your selues to the other; for I dare assure yee, if our hearts bee good, wee cannot but speed suc∣cessefully, and recouer that ble∣mish, to our honour, which the misfortune of our friendes hath throwen vpon vs. Let vs fight then, and die eue∣ry man of vs, rather then deferre it any longer: considering, we ra∣ther ought to make choice of a death so honourable, then liue here∣after in perpetuall shame, or so wretched a condition of life, as ours must needs be. Assuredly, the valiant words of this young Prince, preuayled so farre vpon the others pusillanimity, and made them so confounded with shame, as they all resolued to tempt their fortunes, and euen pro∣stitute their liues to any perill, ra∣ther then to depart thence, with such dishonour. They were not so prompt and
ready for the Combate; but the knight of the greene Sword (hating all sloth and negligence) was as for∣ward to moue the King therein, de∣siring, that the next morning hee would appoint the other knights to be in readines, acording to promise, & they would accompany them to the field. But the King would faine haue deferred it longer, in regard of the woundes he receiued by Gara∣dan: and being vnable to preuaile with him, he thus spake. Knight of the greene Sword, you haue alrea∣dy done so much for me, as I dare not well deny you any thing you can demand of mee. And seeing you will needs haue an end of this controuersie, my Sonne Grasandor shall beare you company; for in a better occasion he can neuer aduen∣ture his life, nor with a man of grea∣ter merit. Sir, answered Amadis, you should reserue him for a more serious busi∣nesse; without hazarding him in so meane a matter, and where there is so slender need. Ah Sir knight, re∣plyed Grasandor, would you offer me a greater wrong then any man else can doe? By the faith I beare to my King and Father, if I had so much power ouer you, as I freely graunt you haue on me: I would then entreat you so farre to honour me, as that I might keepe you com∣pany all my life-time; and I could rather wish that I had neuer beene borne, then not to make one in this elected number, and in a case of such importance. Seeing it is your pleasure (quoth the knight of the greene Sword) and that you will needs be one in the fight, I make no doubt but God will assist vs; for being in your company, it cannot chuse but wee all shall speede the better. So euery one withdrew vntill the next morning when the King came to see his knight, whom hee found ready armed; and perceiuing his Armour to be greatly impaired, he said. My worthy Friend, I think it not fit, that you should enter into so dangerous a fight, so slenderly pro∣uided as you are. Wherefore, let me entreatye to take other Armes, which in my iudgement will bee more conuenient for ye, both in se∣curity, ease and aptnes. Heereupon, he sent for an Armour, which hee had kept (a long while) for one of the best in the world, and presen∣ting it to the knight of the greene Sword, said. Essay Sir, whether it will sit ye or no, and (for my sake) arme your selfe therewith, which I bestow on yee with as good a hart, as euer I kist Lady in my life. Most humbly did Amadis giue him thankes; and looking on the Sword, perceiuing it so well appointed, he drew it forth of the sheathe, when it appeared so fair and goodly to him, as he said to himselfe, that he neuer saw one of more perfection, then that belonging to King Lisuart, and his owne, which he dearely affected, aswell for the goodnes thereof, as because he wonne it by the power of loue, as we haue formerly decla∣red in the second Booke, in which respect, he would not leaue it for the best in the world. But seeing that this other weapon did well deserue, to come to the hand of some wor∣thy knight: he entreated the Prince Grasandor to accept it, whereof he made no refusall. As they were beholding the rest of the rmour, newes was brought them, that the eleuen Romaine knights were in the field, and there attended their comming In regard whereof, eachman quickly armed himselfe, and the twelue knights
rode forth, accompanied with the King, and many other: but when Arquisil beheld them approaching neere, he thus spake to his compa∣nions. Lords, friends and kinde compa∣nions, let me entreate ye to remem∣ber, that we go to fight; not onely to winne land for the Emperour, or to maintaine the promise made by Garadan, but for the honour of the whole Romane Empire. Moreo∣uer, I haue spoke it, and once again do vrge it, to permit me to combate him, who yesterday had the victory of our associat. I see him come foremost, and he shall be the first (I hope) ouerthrowen: prepare then to meete them, and make spare of no man. So taking their shields, they mar∣ched directly against their enemies; who perceiuing them to come nere, placed their launces, as they ought, charging manfully one another. Arquisil met the knight of the green Sword, so full forward, that he brake his Launce vpon him in many shi∣uers: but if himselfe had not quickly caught hold by the mayne of his horse, the knight had layde him a∣long on the ground; for he met him with such a direct opposition, as he lost his stirrops, and was quite out of his saddle. Afterward, perfecting his carriere, he met with one of the other, to whom he gaue so sound a salutation on the height of his Hel∣met, as he disarmed him thereof. At the same instant he was fresh char∣ged by two together, and wounded so grieuously in the thigh, as he was neere falling: whereat hee grew so offended, that clasping hand to his Sword, he gaue so great a stroke to him that was neerest him, as if hee had not receiued it at his best ad∣uantage, he had beene immediatly slaine thereby. But the blow slyding by, lighted on the horses neck, and on the legge of his rider, bearing them both together vnto the ground. When Arquisil saw that, he came behinde him, and gaue him such a stroke on the Helmet, as made his eyes to sparkle fire: notwithstan∣ding, hee knew so well how to re∣uenge himselfe, that he cut off his left arme iust at the shoulder. Then began the fight to bee more fierce then before, because they all came together pell mell; and although Arquisil felt great pain by his so late receiued wound, and lost his blood so extraordinarily; yet for all that, he gaue the by-standers apparant te∣stimony, that his heart was vncon∣querable, and he stil maintained the fight, continuing as fresh and cou∣ragious as any of the rest. Neuer∣thelesse, at length both he and his companions were so shreudly hand∣led, as the most part of them lay a∣long on the earth, and himselfe found no meanes, for enduring the sharpe assaults of the knight of the greene Sword, who followed on him still so incessantly, not permit∣ting him the least minutes space of breathing, as he was well neere vn∣able to hold out any longer. Then Grasandor buckled with him, and charged him so mainely with all his might, that he instantly fell downe in a swoune. Whereupon he aligh∣ted from his horse, making shewe as if he meant to smite off his head. But the knight of the greene Sword perswaded him to the contrary, and going to him, tooke off his Helmet, that he might receiue ayre: when comming to himselfe againe, he see∣med not a little terrified, when hee perceiued his death so nere; where-upon he craued mercy of him. On my faith (quoth the knight) thou dyest, except thou yeeld thy selfe.
Alas, (said hee) I submit to your mercy. Then he tooke him vp, and gaue him assurance of life. At which very instant came King Tafinor, who be∣ing ioyfull of so happy a victory, demaunded of the knight of the Dwarfe, how hee fared, & whether he were wounded or no. Sir, quoth he, I haue no wound so offensiue to me, but I count it worthily recei∣ued, in regard that you are so hono∣rably serued. So mounting all on horseback, they returned into the Citty, where the people stood in mighty crowds along the streetes, crying out aloud. Blessed bee this good knight, by whom (if God bee so pleased) we shall haue peace, and a finall conclusion of warre. In this manner, they followed him to the Kings lodgings, where Chirurgions came to visit him, assuring him (vp∣on their liues) that in very few daies they would enable him to sit on horsebacke, if he would be ordered by their aduice. Now, in regard that all the Ro∣maine knights lay slaine in the field, except Arquisil, who was brought in as a prisoner: he entreated the knight of the greene Sword, to suffer him to depart thence vpon his faith, that he might carry home his dead companions, vpon condition, that he would return to him at all times, and as often as hee pleased to com∣mand him. Arquisil (answered Amadis) you are a Gentleman, and I am perswa∣ded, that you will performe what you haue promised: goe, & returne hither againe so speedily as you can. So departed Arquisil, of whom our History now ceasseth to speake, to tell yee, that within some few dayes after, the knight of the green Sword, finding his hurts fully healed, and his body able to beare Armour, hee grew weary of longer tarrying with Tafinor, and finding him at conueni∣ent leisure, he spake vnto him in this manner. Sir, thankes be to our Lord, you are now in peace, and out of all troublesome annoyances; wherfore let my departure be with your good lyking: for I am determined to set forward to morrow morning, in pursuit of such good fortune, as my fairest starres shall assigne vnto me. But thus Sir assure your selfe, that wheresoeuer I shall abide, so long as I liue I am your humble seruant, as the fauour and honour you haue done me, doth iustly binde me. How Sir knight (answered the King) will you leaue me? Are you weary of this Country, whereof you onely may dispose, and of my selfe also. I beseech you Sir, to accept it as your owne by due desert, and let mee for euer bee happy by your compa∣nie. Sir, (said the knight) I humbly entreat you to pardon me, and to beleeue, that if it consisted in my power, (my earnest desire to doe you any seruice considered) I would yeeld to your request; but my heart by no meanes can permit it. The King knowing that it was small rea∣son to detayne him against his will, said. To morrow morning I will tell ye more; first, wee will heare Masse together, and then if it shall like you to graunt me one request, which I am to demaund of ye, you shall therein do me a singular plea∣sure. Sir (answered the knight) you haue such power in command ouer me, as (mine owne especiall in∣tention reserued) I will not gaine-say whatsoeuer you shall vrge vnto me. I thank ye Sir, (quoth the King.) So, falling into other discourse, and night drawing on, the knight of the
greene Sword, commaunded Gan∣dalin to make all things ready, for departing thence the next morning by breake of day. But as hee had a purpose to repose himself a while, the remembrance of his Princesse Oriana ouertook him in his priuate meditations, pressing him with extraordinary passions, as he had no power to refraine from teares, spea∣king thus to himselfe. Alas sweet friend, when shall I see the time, that I may once more be so happy, as to embrace you in mine armes? Loue, thou hast lifted mee to the highest felicity, that euer loyall hart could attaine vnto. But how? looke how much my glory is vn∣matchable in fauour, the like height it carrieth in tribulation and tor∣ment; for the more desirous I am to see ye, the further of still my cru∣ell starres doe send me. And that which is my greatest hell of all, is a grounded feare, that my absence shall either betray me to forgetful∣nesse, or bring you to the entertain∣ment of a new loue. Then suddenly he beganne to re∣prehend himselfe, saying. Whence should this idle opinion proceede in me? Deare sweete, I haue found you so firme and constant, that I doe commit a sinne in thinking amisse of you. And such is the assured proofe of your fidelitie, that the smallest sinister doubt, is but mine owne shame. For well I know, that as my whole life is dedicated to your obedience, so you can neuer haue iust occasion to wish me ill, or co∣uet any vnkinde reuenge on me, ex∣cept you take your selfe to be offen∣ded, in being more intirely and con∣stantly affected by me, then any man else in the world can doe. And yet I cannot tell, whether Loue be de∣sirous to punish me, because in dis∣daining all other, I made my selfe so wholly yours, as many haue been by me neglected, and discourteous∣ly refused. But well I wot, that my thoughts are so familiar in your heart, and your matchlesse beauty so diuinely caractred and engrauen in mysoule, as I may assuredly resolue, that time will set a period to all oppressions, either by my end, or your accusto∣med loyaltie. Spending thus the night in sighs and teares, euen vntill the morning appeared, he commaunded Ganda∣lin to rise, and being armed, hee went to Church, where he found the King at his deuotions. Hauing heard Masse, the King tooke him by the hand, and leading him somwhat aside, said. My dearest friend, seeing you stand resolued to part from me, let me first tell yee, that ye haue a King and a kingdome wholly at your command, and heereof take know∣ledge wheresoeuer you shall come. Me thinkes you should deferre no longer, to let me know of whence and what you are; promising you, vpon the faith and word of a King, that by me you shall not any way be discouered, except it may bee done with your consent. Sir (answered the knight;) let me entreate yee heerein not to wrong me, for I am minded neuer to dis∣close my selfe to any one, except by force I shall be thereto compelled. Then you doe me a great displea∣sure, quoth the King. God shield me replyed the knight, from offending so good and gracious a Prince: I will rather dispense with my vow, and tell ye. Sir, I am that Amadis of Gaule, Sonne to King Perion, whose name you remembred, when you agreed to the Combate of twelue knights to twelue. By the
faith I beare to God, (said the King) my heart did alwayes perswade me so, and rest your selfe assured, that this knowledge of you is more ac∣ceptable to me, then any thing else whatsoeuer in the world can bee. Blessed be the Father and Mother, that haue yeelded the world so wor∣thy a man, by whom so many peo∣ple haue receiued both profite and pleasure. Now was the King much more desirous of his longer stay: but that Amadis most instantly vrged the contrary, whereto he durst not make refusall. Wherefore, moun∣ting on horsebacke, by a goodly company he was conducted forth of the Citty, and there being commended to all good successe: hee tooke his way towards Roma∣nia, seeking after strange aduen∣tures, as Fortune pleased to direct him. CHAP. VIII. How King Lisuart hunting in the Forrest, where hee had left the La∣dies, accidentally met with a young Damosell, who shewed him the way to the Hermitage, where the good Hermite Nascian made his a∣byding: And how the infant (long time after) was knowne to bee the Sonne of Amadis and Oriana. IN the gay season of Mayes flourishing mo∣neth, King Lisuart ha∣uing long soiourned in one place, was entrea∣ted by the Ladies, that hee would guide them forth on hunting: wher∣to he very willingly condiscended, and presently commaunded his huntsmen, to prepare their toyles in the next adioyning Forrest, and to erect their Tents by the Fountaine of the seauen Beech trees, which was the most pleasing place in all the wood, and best agreeing with the time. Not farre off thence was the Hermitage, where Nascian the holy man nourished Esplandian, as already hath beene declared to yee. It happened on the same day, when the King had left the Ladies in their Pauilions, hee so long pur∣sued a Hart, sore hunted and esca∣ped from the toyles, that he was en∣forced to take vp into the highest of the Forrest, all along the side of a great hill, very well couered with brakes and bushes. So soone as he had attayned to the toppe there-of, on the other side he espied a young Gentleman descending ha∣stily, aged (as it might bee) about fiue or sixe yeeres, leading a Lyon∣nesse in a leashe; who seeing the Hart so hotly chased, hee let her loose after him, and shee pursued with such speed, that she tooke him downe before the King. The young youth, glad of so good successe, ran a pace to the fall of the Deere, and a∣nother childe that was his compa∣nion, where seazing on the veneson, hee tooke out a knife to cut his throate. Then winding a horne very loud, two little Bratches, which ordinari∣ly vsed to follow him, came pre∣sently to him, and both they and the Lyonnesse, had their fees of the game. This done, hee tooke and coupled them in a leashe; and ha∣uing
done the like to the Lyon∣nesse, crossed again ouerthwart the wood. The King, seeing them make haste away from him, was very de∣sirous to know what they were, and comming forth of the place, where he had hid himselfe, to note the be∣hauiour of these children, called to the young Gentleman, who in∣stantly stayed, vntill such time as the King came to him, vsing these words. Prettie childe, I pray thee tell me what thou art, and where is thy dwelling. Sir knight (answered the youth, Nascian the Hermite hath hitherto nursed me, and (as I thinke) is fa∣ther both to me, and this my com∣panion. This answere made the King very pensiue, for he could not comprehend in his thoughts, that Nascian (being aged and decrepit, as also reputed for a man of most sanctified life) should or could haue a childe so young and goodly: wherefore, as one couetous of fur∣ther information, hee demaunded where the Hermitage stood. It stands (quoth the youth) on the top of this Rocke, and shewing him a littly path, lest him, saying. If it shall please yee to follow this tract, it will guide yee thither: for I must needs after my fellow to the Foun∣taine, where wee must dresse the ve∣nison, which wee haue gotten this morning. Then the King left him, and as∣cending vp the Rocke, espied on the height thereof, the poore dwel∣ling of Nascian, so enuironed with great bushes, as well witnessed the wonderfull solitude of the good Hermite. Alighting from his horse, he entred into the first room, where hee found the holy man vpon his knees, clothed in a religious habit, and reading in a Booke of deuoti∣on, which hee gaue not ouer at his arriuall: but hauing finished his prayers, hee arose, demaunding of the King what he sought for. Fa∣ther, quoth he, not long since, as I crossed the Forrest, I met with a goodly childe, leading a Lyonnesse in a leashe, I pray ye (for courtesies sake) to tell me what he is: for, at the very first sight of him, my minde gaue me, that he is issued from some good place. While the King continued on this speech, the Hermite so heed∣fully obserued him, that hee knew him: as being the man to whom he had done many seruices, during the time that he followed Armes. In regard whereof, falling down hum∣bly vpon his knees, hee craued par∣don for his error, in not giuing him such entertainment, as beseemed so great a Maiestie. But the King raysing him vp, tooke him by the hand, saying. Good Father, will you not resolue me concerning the young childe which I mentioned to ye? Assure your selfe (vpon my faith) that the knowledge you may giue me of him, cannot but redound to his great benefit. Sir, answered the Hermite, our Lord hath hither∣to shewen great signes of loue to that childe; and seeing hee hath so carefully kept him, as I shall relate vnto ye, it stands with good reason, that you (as a King) should loue & defend him in such sort, as no harme or displeasure should bee offered him. You haue (as appeareth by your speeches) an carnest desire to know what he is. In trueth Sir, during the time that I haue nourished him, he may be tearmed mine: albeit, it is not yet fully sixe yeares, since I tooke him from the teeth of a Ly∣onnesse, that was carrying him to her whelpes. Wherein our Lord ap∣parantly
declared, that hee is the preseruer of all his creatures, be∣cause the beast neuer did him harme, but onely suckled it among her yong ones, so that by the milke of her, and of a little Ewe, which then I had, I compassed the meanes of fostring him for more then a mo∣neth: In expectation still of mine owne Sister, Mother to the other yong Lad that keepes him compa∣nie, who afterward comming to me, she became so good a Nurse and Gouernesse to him, that (thankes be giuen to our Lord for it) I am perswaded, he is one of the goodliest creatures this day li∣uing. And one thing (more strange then all the rest) I am to tell yee: vnderstand Sir, that as I was about to baptize him, my Sister hauing taken off very rich clothes, wherein he was swadled, shee shewed me a letter vnder his right pappe as white as snow, contayning the word Esplandian; and on the other side, (directly against his heart) were other carracters as redde as blood, which I could neuer vnder∣stand, because they are neither La∣tine, nor of our language. Now in regard of that name, which at his birth (it seemes) he brought with him into the world, I haue euer-more since, caused him to be called Esplandian, accordingly. In good faith Father, saide the King, you haue tolde me wonders: but seeing you found him in such fort as you say, it is to be presuppo∣sed verily, that he was borne not far off from this Countrie. That know not I, answered Nascian, neither co∣uet I to vnderstand more, then what our Lord hath permitted. Well then, quoth the King, to morrow good Father, I pray you meete me at the Fountaine of the seauen Beeches, where I shall be with my Queene, and a goodly company of Ladies. Bring Esplandian, the Ly∣onnesse, and your young Nephew with you, to whom I intend some good, for his Father Sergils sake, whom I somtime knew to be a good knight. Sir, replyed the holy man, I am bound to doe what you haue enioyned mee, and desire of God, that all may be to his honour and glory. The King giuing him the good morrow, rode thence, and arriued at his Tents about midday. Now, because none there knew what was become of him, each man was dili∣gent in enquiry after him: and (al∣though his most intimate familiars desired to know where hee had bin, yet would he reueale nothing, but commaunded to couer for dinner. As he was ready to sit downe at the Table, Grumedan came to tell him, that the Queene entreated him to see her Tent before dinner, about some nouell occurrences lately hap∣pening. Whereupon hee went thence to her, and being alone by themselues, shee told him, that as they came ryding from the Citty, a very beautifull Damosell, moun∣ted vpon a light ambling Hobbie, and conducted onely by a Dwarfe, presented her selfe before her. And she being very sumptuous in her apparell, rode by all my Ladies, and women, (quoth the Queene,) not vouchsafing one word to them, vntil such time as she came before mee: when she gaue me this Letter, tel∣ling me, that you and I must reade it this day before dinner, because thereby wee should bee acquainted with admirable matters. And no sooner had shee spoken that word, but she rode away from me so fast as her horse could gallop, without per∣mitting me the least leysure of any
answere. So she gaue the King the Letter, sealed with an Emerauld chased in golde, with these words engrauen about it; This is the Seale of Vrganda the vnknowne. Then opening the Letter, the King read the contents following. The Letter of Vrganda the vn∣knowne to the mightie King Lisuart. MOst high and powerfull Prince, Vrganda the vnknowne, who loues and desires to doe you any seruice, doth aduise and councell you to your great benefit: that at such time as a Gentleman (nourishea by three diuers Nurses) shall appeare before your Maiestie; you would embrace, enter∣taine, loue and dearely respect him; for he is the cause of your quiet, by de∣liuering you from the greatest danger wherein euer you were. He is deriued from blood royall on both sides, and partaketh (somewhat) in the natures of those creatures that gaue him sucke. By the first of them, he shall be so strong and magnanimous, as hee will darken all the valour of the very best Knights that haue gone before: being (neuer∣thelesse) so milde and gentle, that hee will be loued and esteemed of all men, occasioned by the nourishment receiued from his second Nurse. As for the third, beleeue it Sir, that neuer was Gentleman of better spirit, more Ca∣tholique, and compleate in all good con∣ditions: so that he shall addict himself to actions pleasing to God, auoyding all vaine affaires, wherein the most of other Knights doe commonly spend their time. And that which excee∣deth all the rest; he will prooue the one∣ly cause, of planting immortall peace betweene you, Amadis, and all his Linage. Therefore good King accept my counsell, and you wall finde it for the best. Yours in all seruices, Vrganda the vnknowne. These newes droue the King to no little admiration, and but for the high esteeme hee made of Vrganda the vnknowen, he should haue giuen slender credite thereto. But pre∣sently he called to minde, that this might be the childe which he found with the Lyonnesse: wherevpon he sayd to the Queene; I dare assure ye Madam, that this day I haue spoken with him, of whom Vrganda writes vnto vs: and to morrow he will be heere with the good Hermit Nas∣cian, who hath reuealed strange mat∣ters to me. Then he reported, in what man∣ner he met him, and all that he had heard of the Hermit: whereof the good Queene was not a little ioy∣full, as well because shee should see the childe; as to haue some confe∣rence with the holy man, in cases of Conscience, and to be confessed by him. Neuerthelesse Madame, (quoth the King) I desire that you would not disclose this to any one, vntill such time as hee bee in our presence. Afterward, they went and sate downe to dinner, talking of nothing all that while, but what goodly Harts and Hindes they had seene in the Forrest. Then came Galaor and Norandell with their venison, per∣swading the King to be earely stur∣ring the next morning: for they had fayled in the pursuit of a wilde Boare, the most huge and strangest that euer they had seene. But hee made them answere, that he had re∣ceiued certaine letters from Vrgan∣da, which he would impart to them the day following, and prayed them
therfore in the meane space to che∣rish well the Houndes, till all were perfourmed as he had determined. Then rising from the Table, the King went and conuersed with the Ladies, so spending all the rest of the day, vntill the houre of repose approached, when each one with-drew to their lodgings: and on the next morning, hauing heard Masse, each saluted other with the good morrow. The day beganne to grow on a∣pace, and the weather was so extra∣ordinary warme, that the Queene commaunded the sides of her tents to bee turned vp, for better recei∣uing the fresh coole ayre. Then could she discerne a goodly com∣pany of Ladies, flocking together beneath the toyles; in whose pre∣sence the King being arriued (the Ladies and knights conferring on what they best affected) he drewe Vrgandaes Letter forth of his sleeue, which hee had receiued the day be∣fore, thus speaking to Galaor and the rest. Now will I shew you an ad∣uertisement, that was sent vnto mee yesterday, whereat (I thinke) you will no lesse wonder, then I my selfe already haue done. Then he read it out so loud among them, that eue∣ry one might easily heare it. Neuer∣thelesse, they could not presume what this happy childe should bee, to whom destiny had promised such gracious blessings: onely the Prin∣cesse Oriana excepted, whom it tou∣ched neerer then any of the rest, not hauing (in so long time) heard of her lost Sonne. This was a no∣tice to raise suspition in her, that this might be her child; wherupon, such an biguous perswasions ouer-tooke her thoughts, that aboue ten times she changed colour: yet vn∣discerned of any there present; for they were all attentiue to the Let∣ters reading, as also to the Kings speeches, who demanded of Galaor, to know his opinion. Sir, (said he) seeing that Vrganda hath sent it to yee, we may well be∣leeue that it will fall out so, conside∣ring the trueth of those things, which so many times heeretofore she hath foretold, and no doubt but God will so permit it; for it wold be the greatest to mee, that euer can happen in all my life-time, to  faire a peace betweene you, my Lord Amadis, and all the rest of  friends and kindred. Welcome be it, (quoth the King,) and as the will of our Lord is, so let all bee done. As he ended these words, afarre off he espied the good Hermite com∣ming, the two young Laddes Es∣plandian and Sergil, with two vanas∣sours, kinsemen to olde Nascian, in such order as I shall describe vn∣to ye. Esplandian had a great Hare, and two Partridges hanging on his shoulder, which he had in with his Bowe by the way as hee came. Sergil led the Lyonnesse in a leashe, fastened with a little cord, and these followed Nascian, and the two other: the one of them carry∣ing the Hart, which the Lyonnesse had kilde the day before; as for∣merly hath bin related, and the other ledde the two Braches (be∣longing to Esplandian) coupled to∣gether. When the Ladies saw the Lyon∣nesse so slenderly guarded, they were so afraid, that they came all & sate about the king: who for their more assurance, said. Let none be dismayed; for he that is maister ouer this Lyonnes in power, will defend vs from a more daungerous beast then this is. I know not, said Gala∣or, who hath most commaund o∣uer the beast: but if shee once waxe displeased, the Huntsman
that leades her, will finde those reines ouer weake, to rule and con∣troule her at his pleasure. Why, (quoth the King,) she is in the con∣duct of the holy man Nascian, ther∣fore boldly let vs goe meete him. So each one arose, and the King went and embraced the Hermite, saying, hee was most heartily wel-come. Then taking the olde man by the one hand, and Esplandian by the other, hee presented them both to the Queene. Beholde Madame, the very goodliest Gentleman that euer you saw. Then Esplandian (e∣ as faire forwardnesse, as if all  life-time he had bin brought vp in the Court) made her a very gra∣cs reuerence, and presenting her his owne carriage, said. See heere Madame, what hunting sport wee haue had by the way, which you may dispose as best you please. Pretty youth, said the King, that power re∣maines in you onely. No Sir, an∣swered Esplandian, rather in you, or this Lady, to whom I haue already giuen it. Nay, quoth the King, she had much rather, that you wold diuide it among her Ladies, accor∣ding to your owne vnderstanding; then, if any remaine, we will expect our part. As the King spake these wordes, the Hermite cast his eye vpon the childe; who fearing that hee had committed some errour in his tal∣king, blushed so sweetly, that very pleasingly it became him to behold, and pointing to the Hart, cang pardon of the King for his offence, said. My Lord, I humbly beseech you, to accept this Hart as your owne, and my Lady shall haue this Hare: but these Partridges are for the tother Lady standing by her. This hee spake of Oriana his Mo∣ther, who darted such a louing look at him, as is easier for you to ima∣gine, then me to vtter. How pret∣ty Sir? said the King, will you giue nothing to these Gentlemen? I haue no more to giue, replyed the childe, but if I come hither againe tomorrow, I will bring them thus, such as I can get: in the mean while if you be so pleased, you may let them bee partakers of your veni∣son. All this young discourse was de∣liuered with so good a grace, and such pleasing life of gesture by Esp∣landian, that it procured much loue and admiration enterchanged with smiles and amiable regardes. In good sadnesse, said the King, his gentle nature is not to be wondered at: for, by that which hath bin de∣clared to me, by him who hitherto was his foster-father, faire destiny hath made large promises to him. Therefore good Father quoth he to Nascian, to the end that euery one heere present, may vnderstand the trueth of his rare fortune: I pray you once more to discourse, that wherewith you acquainted me yesterday. Sir, answered the Her∣mite, it is now more then fiue years, since I found the childe in the mouth of this Lyonnesse, carrying it to her young ones newly whelpt: and I am verily perswaded, that hee was not then fully a naturall day old. Then hee declared the man∣ner of his swadling clothes; what countenance the Lyonnesse ex∣pressed, when she first gaue him sucke, and the care hee had all the while of his thus nourishing, in ex∣pectation of his Sisters comming. All this discourse was diligently listened vnto by Oriana, Mabtla, and the Damosell of Denmarke, well knowing (by the Hermites rela∣tion) that Elplandian was (vn∣doubtedly) the Son to Amadis & the Princesse; which caused such
pleasing contentment in them all, that they knew not well how to dis∣semble it. Old Father, (quoth the King to the Hermite) you told me yesterday, that seeing our Lord had hitherto so graciously preserued the childe, I ought to haue care of him in his following-dayes: where∣fore, if it like you to leaue him with me, and his young companion like∣wise, I will cause them to bee so commendably educated, that (if God be so pleased) they shall both proue worthy men, & good knights; and I desire that I may preuaile with you in this request. Sir (answered the Hermite) they are yours, seeing you are so desirous to haue them: and I will heartily pray vnto our Lord God, to endue them with such grace, as they may hereafter do you some acceptable seruice. Then he gaue them his blessing, with these words. My Sonnes, see∣ing the King hath done ye so much honour, to allow yee entertainment in his Court, take paines to be o∣bedient and pleasing to him. The good olde man shed teares in great abundance, during the time of this short sweete counsell: when the King said vnto him: Graue Father, make no doubt but I wil so gouerne them, that they shall become such men as I haue promised ye. Then I beseech ye Sir, (said the Queene to the King) that you would referre them to my direction, till they bee more fitting for your seruice: and your Daughter shall haue Esplandi∣an, and my selfe will haue care of Sergil. Bee it as you please Ma∣dame (answered the King) I com∣mit them both to your disposition. Thus the childe was deliuered into his owne mothers gouerning, who accepted him more gladly, then any gift in the world that else could haue beene giuen her: and long time hee continued with her, vn∣knowen to any, but those Ladies that were best acquainted with her most priuate occasions. Now, be∣fore Nascian departed thence, she would needes be confessed by him: wherupon (vnder shrift) she gaue him to vnderstand, that Esplandian was sonne to her and Amadis, and in what manner hee was lost, by his carriage to nurse. Beleeue mee Daughter (answered the Hermite) our Lord must needes be offended with you, in offering such iniury to your owne soule, thorow an inordi∣nate and volupruous desire: especi∣ally you being borne of so great parents, and ought to be a mi and example to all the other peo∣ple, aboue whom it hath pleased him to aduance yee. Deare Father, (quoth she,) I know wel, that I haue most grieuously sinned: notwith∣standing, that which I haue done, was as a woman to her husband; for at the instant, we affianced our souls mutually together. Heereupon she reported how Archalaus had led her away, and how shee was after suc∣coured by Amadis, according as already hath beene related, in the precedent History. Then the Hermit was reasonably well satisfied, accounting the of∣fence so much the lesse, being vn∣dergone with so good a condition: for after this confession, the effect followed, because by this meanes, (though some long while before) Nascian made peace with the King and Amadis, being on the very point of entring into a sharpe and cruell battaile, as you shall vnder∣stand more at large in the fourth Book following. But Oriana hauing done pennance, according as Nas∣cian had appointed her: he tooke leaue of the King and the whole Court, to returne home to his
Hermitage, taking the Lyonnesse along with him, and the King went back to the Citty, to take order there for his further affaires. CHAP. IX. How the knight of the greene Sword, being departed from King Tafi∣nor of Bohemia, came into the marches of Romania, where hee met with Grasinda in the fieldes, accompanied with many Gentle-men, Ladies and Damosels: Especially with a Knight named Bran∣dasi dell, who would compell him (by force of Armes) to come speake with the Ladie Grasinda, and of the Combate they fought together. YOu haue heeretofore heard how the knight of the greene Sword, departing from King Tafinor, tooke his way towardes the parts of Romania, where hee made his abode no long time, but had perfourmed so many worthy deedes of Armes, that euery Prouince was filde with his praises. But it was not with∣out mighty sufferance of me∣lancholy, by continuall thin∣king on his Princesse Oriana. It happened vpon one day among others, that crossing the Coun∣try, hee ariued at a Port or Hauen of the Sea, whereupon was plan∣ted a Towne, in the most plea∣sing manner of situation that euer hee had seene, it being called Sar∣. And because the houres of the day were not sufficiently spent, he would not (as yet) make entrance: but turned his course on euery side, to make the better disco∣uery at his owne best aduantage; where obseruing the Sea coaste, hee beganne to remember Gaule, from whence it was now aboue two yeares, since he parted; which proued such an encreasing of his rrowes, that the res trickled downe his cheekes amaine. As hee continued in this pen∣siue humour, he espyed a troupe of knights, Ladies and Gentle-women comming towardes him: among whom there was one more beautifull and goodly, (as it see∣med to him) then any of the rest: for ouer her head was borne a Ca∣nopie of white taffata, fastened to foure roddes of yron, to keepe her from the heate of the Sun, which was then very piercing and vio∣lent. But because hee tooke no de∣light at that time, to bee seene in such companie, being so deuout∣ly addicted to solitude: he kept off so farre as hee could from all resort, that hee might (with better dispo∣sition) thinke on the former fa∣uours he had receiued in Great Bri∣taine. Beholding this troupe to draw neerer and neerer, hee wandred a∣loofe off: yet was he not strayed so re; but hee perceiued a comely Damosell comming after him, ac∣companied with a knight, that held a great Launce in his hand, which he shaked so rudely, as if hee intended to breake it. The Damo∣sell being hard at hand, made her palfray get before him, leauing
the other knight her guide, behind, vsing these words to the knight of the Dwarfe. Sir knight, yonder Lady, whom I imagine you haue taken little note of, hath sent me to yee, desiring that you would come speake with her, for your owne good. God defend her from al harmes, (replyed our sad knight,) albeit I haue no further knowledge of her. But tell me Lady I pray yee, what would this knight haue that came hither with you? Sir, (quoth she) let him no way procure your dis∣taste: onely doe what I haue desi∣red, and well will come of it. Assu∣redly, (said he) if you will not tell me, I shall faile in fulfilling what you would haue. Seeing you are so earnest Sir, (quoih shee) you shal be satisfied, although it is much a∣gainst my minde. Vnderstand then Sir, that when my Lady had espyed you, and this Dwarfe attending on you; because it hath beene told her, that there was a straunge knight in this Country, who performed such actions of Armes, as no man possi∣bly can doe more, and goes alwaies accompanied as now you are: shee is halfe perswaded that you are the man. In which respect, she would gladly doe you all honorable serui∣ces she can deuise, and discouer an especiall secret to ye, which (as yet) she hath not reuealed to any person liuing. Now Sir, as concerning this knight, when hee heard my Ladies motion, he made her answere, that he would cause you to come to her by force or faire meanes, which is very easie for him to doe, in regard of the high chiualry remaining in him; for his equal is not to be found in all these Countries: wherefore I would counsell you to credit me, & goe along with me. Friendly Damosell, answered Amadis, I would gladly doe more for your Mistresse then this: but I must first trye, whether this knight can accomplish his promise, or no. By my faith Sir, quoth she, I am the more sorry for ye; because, so farre as my weake iudgment can reache, you appeare to bee a most courte∣ous knight. So she turned her pal∣fray, and the knight of the dwarfe followed on his way, as before hee had done. When the other knight saw that, he cryed out so loud as hee could. Cowardly and faint-harted knight, alight from thy horse, and lead him backward, vsing his taile in stead of a bridle. Then come so, and pre∣sent thy selfe to my Lady, humbly crauing her mercy, because thou didst not follow her Damosell; o∣therwise, I shall smite off thy head from thy shoulders; therefore make choice of these two offers, which thou doest imagine most honoura∣ble for thee. Beleeue me Sir, answered the knight of the Dwarse, such seruice is better beseeming you, then mee; fall to it therefore, when you please. Is it euen so Sir? (said the other;) then Ile make yee doe it, whether you will or no. So placing his Launce in his rest, hee made no doubt of foyling him, as hee had done many before. Neuerthe∣lesse, our knight of the dwarfe, omit∣ting not the least moment of readi∣nesse to receiue him, gaue the spurs to his horse, and met the other (who was named Brandasidel) so full in the carriere, that he cast him quite out of his saddle, and hee lay in a trance vpon the ground; but him-selfe was hurt a little in the throate, and finishing his course, he turned bridle againe for a fresh encoun∣ter.
When hee saw Brandasidel lye so long vpon the earth, he said to Gan∣dalin. Alight, and looke if he bee dead or not, and take from him his Shield and Helmet. So Gandalin came to him; and as hee was disar∣ming him, Brandasidel recouered from his traunce; whereupon the knight of the Dwarfe called to him, saying. Villaine, thou art dead, except thou performe that which thou wouldst haue compelled mee to done, a man vtterly vnknowen to thee: for, seeing thy selfe wouldst make such a Law, it is conuenient that thou shouldst keepeit. As Bran∣dl opened his eyes, hee behelde the knight of the Dwarfe, holding his drawen weapon against his throate, looking stedfastly on him, and not vttering one word. How? quoth our knight, hast thou not the heart to speake? By the faith I beare to God, thy head then shall giue me a better reason. So dismoun∣ting from his horse, and lifting vp his Sword to strike; Brandasidel cry∣ed vnto him. Hold your hand Sir knight, for I will accomplish your command, rather then dye in this vile maner. Rise then, replyed the knight of the Dwarfe, and let mee haue it done immediatly. Then Brandasidel arose, and called his Squires to helpe him vp on horse-backe, according as the knight of the Dwarfe had appoin∣ted him, sitting with his face backward, and holding his horse taile in steed of a bridle, turning his Shield also the in side outward. In this maner rode he to Grasinda, who seeing him come so honourably, could not refraine from laughing, not any in her company, to see him thus worthily corrected with his owne rodde. In which regard he was so ashamed of himselfe, that he du not look vp; but holding down his head like a micher, rode thence away into the Towne. Now, the Damosell that was sent from this Lady to our knight of the Dwarfe, heard the wordes which passed betweene the two knights, and obserued the manner of their encounter, whereof as shee was ma∣king report to her Mistresse, the knight of the Dwarfe came thither, where humbly saluting Grasinda, he thus spake. Madame, by that which one of your women told mee, you haue a desire to speake with mee. Indeed Sir knight, (quoth shee) shee told you nothing but trueth; and seeing it hath pleased you to doe mee so much honour, you are most respe∣ctiuely welcome. For, ouer and beside those miracles of manhood, which I haue heard (for trueth) per∣formed by you in these our mar∣ches: I was made acquainted (not long since) with the extraordinarie fauour, which King Tafinor of Bohe∣mia (my Cousin) receiued by your meanes. In which respect, I must confesse my selfe to stand obliged to you, and doe therefore entreate you (so farre as my poore power may preuaile with you) to accept a lodging in my Palace, where your hurt may bee diligently attended: thus assuring your selfe, that to no place you can be better welcome, nor receiue speedier cure. Madame, (said he) perceiuing in what kinde manner you haue entreated me, let me perswade you to rest resolued, that I will make no spare of my selfe in all perils of the world, to doe you any seruice: and therefore, reason strictly bindeth me, not to refuse your most gracious offer, mine owne necessity so much requiring it. Thus rode they on towardes the Towne, conferring very kindly to∣gether:
and Grasinda seeing him to be so goodly and compleate a per∣son, instantly fell into amorous af∣fection. And let me tell ye, shee was a Lady of most exquisite beau∣ty, young, delicate, well-spoken, affable, in the gayetic of her time, worthy of the chiefest liking, as any Lady else could be, hauing liued in marriage not fully a yeare, being now a widow, and without any childe. But the knight of the Dwarfe had his thoughts else-where busied, the Idea of his Oria∣na being continually before his eyes, by whose absence he endured extreame passions: and yet not∣withstanding, he knew so well how to conceale them, as the cunningst eye could hardly make any disco∣uery. As they entred into the Towne, the inhabitants (who had already heard of the successe betweene him and Brandasidel, who before had bin reputed the toughest knight in all that Countrie,) thronged thorow the streetes to see him, saying to one another as hee passed along: This were a happy fortune to our Lady, if shee might haue this man to bee her husband; for a more good∣ly person is no where to bee found, nor of greater valour. Being come to the Palace, and conducted into a very sumptuous Chamber, he was there vnarmed. Then came Maister Elisabet, a ve∣ry excellent Chirurgion, who ha∣uing seene the wound which he had receiued in his throate, saide vnto him. Sir, you are wounded in a very dangerous place, and haue need of long rest: otherwise, your person will be in great hazard. Very sorry was our knight to heare these words, and said to Maister Elisabet. I will doe whatsoeuer you will haue me, prouided, that you promise me, (vpon your faith to God, and your Mistresse,) that so soone as you shal see me in disposition, to endure tra∣uaile, you will not faile to tell mee, because whatsoeuer I doe, it is im∣possible for me to rest in any quiet∣nes, vntill it please our Lord to per∣mit, that I may bee where my heart desireth to soiourne. Thus spea∣king, he fell into such a melancholy fitte, as teares issued abundantly out of his eyes, whereof he was much a∣shamed: neuerthelesse, restrayning them so couertly as he could, hee shewed a more chearefull counte∣nance then before. And Maister Elisabet said vnto him: I pray you Sir, vse as little sadnesse as possibly you may, and I trust in God, in ve∣ry short while to see you safely cu∣red. Then were the Tables comman∣ded to be couered, and Grasinda her selfe serued in person, perswading him very earnestly to be merry: and supper being ended, they betooke themselues seuerally to rest; but in steed of sleeping, he (according to his wonted manner) beganne to re∣member his Oriana, in whom was his sole delight and pleasure, enter∣mixing (notwithstanding) those co∣gitations with extreame torments and passions, which combatted continually one against another, so that in the midst of this trauaile, at length he fell asleepe. But if loue preuayled so powerfully in him, hee was of no lesse might in our new Loue Grasinda, who being with-drawen into her Chamber, soone after, betooke her selfe to bed: when (suddenly) the comely graces and feature of our knight of the greene Sword, in liuely conceit presented themselues before her, which helde so strict a commaund ouer her affe∣ctions, as she had no ability to con∣tradict those impressions, so that
she fell to this conference with her selfe. Alas, whence should proceede this ydle fancie? The death of my late husband, did so farre estraunge mee from this behauiour, as I haue many times solemnely purposed, neuer more to come in subiection to any man liuing. Neuerthelesse, this newe come stranger who per∣haps, makes no account of me hath made such stealth of my former freedome that I seele my selfe to be more his, then mine owne. And yet notwithstanding, if so faire a felici∣ty might befall me, that hee would  himselfe Lord of mee and my  neuer was woman more  to Fortune; the are chi∣ and rich vertues remaining in him, considered. But what know I, whether his affections haue ano∣ther obiect, or no? Let come whatsoeuer may happen, I will tell him my loues intention, and then (it may be) he will take pitty on mee. But whence might ensue that extra∣ordinary sadnesse, which enforced teares from his eyes so abundantly, whn Maister Elisabet told him, that his hurt would cause his long aby∣ding heere? If I could so compasse it, his Squire would therein resolue me: and (perhaps) proue the means, that the more discreetly I may reach the hth of my purpose. To  I will attempt it, if I can de him at conuenient ly∣re. Thus spent she the nigh with∣out any other resting. But when day came, shee sent one of her wo∣men, to know how her new Guest fared, and whether he had taken good rest, or no: word being retur∣ned her, that hee  awake. Whereupon, she went to his cham∣ber, and hauing giuen him the bon∣, demaunded, how & in what e∣state he found himselfe? Well Madame, I thanke God and you, (quoth he.) In troth Sir, (said she) this night haue I taken the worst rest, that euer I did. How Lady, (replyed our knight,) haue you bin so ill? Now, as she purposed to disclose her hearts oppressions, feare and shame, inter-mixed with that mo∣dest bashfulnesse, which euermore held soueraigne dominion ouer her, had so closely lockt vp her lips, that she sate vnable to make him a∣ny answere. But she sent him such a heart-speaking looke, as made her re complexion to alter; which our knight of the Dwarfe wel obserued, but imagining this weakenesse to proceed from some other occasion, he thus spake. Madame, seeing your disposition hath bin so displea∣sing to yee, me thinkes I should not miscounsell yee, to goe and lye downe againe, and sleep may come vpon ye better, then before. Let me tell ye Sir (answered Grasinda,) this disease is too frequent with me, and will passe away (by Gods leaue) as suddly, as he sent it. She spake this, to preuent all oc∣casion of leauing his company, wherein shee spent the whole day, taking such delight in looking on him, as shee had almost forgot her selfe, that it was now a due houre to command her absence. Wherefore, giuing him the good night, she re∣turned to her bed, where, if the pre∣cedent night shee tooke little rest, this that ensued, was much more in∣iurious to her, because incessantly she turned from one side to ano∣ther, by reason of this fiery loue tor∣ment in her. So that, setting aside all other cares, she concluded (with∣out any further delaying) the very next morning, to let the knight vn∣derstand her martyrdome. And
questionlesse, had he not bin woun∣ded, so violent was her extreamity; that instantly shee would haue gone to his bed. For, those delights and solaces, which (for lesse then a yeares space) shee had with her late husband, added fresh fuell to her flame, and was as tinder to her op∣pressing passions: which at length so ouer wearied her, as shee fell a∣sleepe, and so continued till it was broad day. Being vp and ready; according to her vsuall custome, shee went to see how her knight did, more feare∣full then euer before shee had bin; and whereas in her night fittes, shee had resolued to acquaint him with her disquiet, Day had put her on such a Robe of shame, as quite alte∣red her determination. Thus for more then a moneths space shee continued in these agonies, till one day among other, meeting with Gandalin at apt leysure, she thus be∣spake him. Friendly Squire, in the loue that you beare to God & your Maister, let me entreate to mooue one que∣stion to ye, concerning him, which cannot but returne to his great ho∣nour and profit, and by mee shall not bee discouered to any liuing. Madame (quoth Gandalin) if your motion be within the compasse of my capacity, assure your selfe that I will resolue ye. Tell me then, sweet Friend, (said Grasinda,) doe you know of his affection to any wo∣man, that may contradict his loue to another, if it should grow to such a purpose? Madame (quoth he) it is but a little while as yet, since the Dwaife and I became his seruants; whereto nothing more incited vs, then his admired vertues and re∣nowne: And he hath expressely for∣bid vs, to enquire either of his name, or any of his affaires: but to declare the fidelitie of our duty, in knowing no more then he thinkes fit for vs. But thus much I dare tell yee, that wee haue already seene such valour in him, as you may well credit with∣out all question, that he is the best knight in the world. Now, as Gandalin made a more ample relation of his Maisters for∣tunes, she held her eyes fixed on the ground, and (in sighing) shewed her selfe so pensiue, that hee easily perceiued the loue shee bare to his Lord. But tell me then Sir, I pray ye, (quoth she,) why did hee fall a∣weeping the other day in our pre∣sence. Truely Madame, said he, it is a matter continually happening to him, and so often doth hee sighe both by day and night, that I mar∣uaile much how he can liue. Yet I know him to be such a man, and of so great spirit, that this proceedeth not from any dread of peril, or from any hazardous enterprise he can vn∣dertake: whereby it may bee easily presumed, that it is entire loue and affection, which he beareth to some Lady that I know not. So God help me, (replyed Grasinda) I do beleeue as much, and highly thanke yee for this courtesie. Now, you may go to him, when you please, and heauen send him as speedie a remedie for his hurts, as I could willingly wish to mine. Hauing thus spoken, shee with-drew thence into her Chamber, per∣swading her selfe assuredly, that she was preuented in her hopes: where-upon, she promised by all discreete meanes, to quenche the fire already too much kindled. Neuerthelesse, Loue still gaue a maine opposition, and fed her imaginations with idle conceit, that (in time) shee should hit the marke she aymed at. But it fell out otherwise; for so soone as our knight felt himselfe able for
Armes, he commaunded Gandalin to make all things ready, because he meant to ride away the next mor∣ning. At that very instant Grasinda came into his Chamber, where talking together as they were wont to doe, and falling from one discourse to a∣nother, the knight of the Dwarse at last spake thus. Madame, I feele my selfe so exceedingly well reco∣uered (thankes be to God and you) as I am purposed, so you bee not therewith displeased, to part from hence very earely to morrow mor∣ning: coueting nothing more in my defies, then to study how I may (during my life-time) best acknow∣ledge the good and honor you haue done me. Therefore Madame, I most humbly entreate you, to con∣sider with your selfe, if there be any seruice that you shal please to com∣mand me, my imployment therein shall stretch so farre as my lifes ex∣treamity. When Grasinda heard these wordes, she fell into such a heaui∣nesse, as she could not returne him any answere: neuerthelesse, at length she thus replyed. Knight of the greene Sword, I make no doubt, but that your heart and tongue are relatiues, the one agreeing with the others intention, as well for the good which you say, you haue re∣ceiued in my house, as for a matter of farre higher moment, which nei∣ther the time, nor your forward in∣tent, will now permit to be discoue∣red. Therfore, when the happy houre shall come best fitting mee to vrge my recompence, assure your selfe, I will demaund it so secretly of you, (without either blushing, feare or shame) as you shall well perceiue it to be a matter, which I haue hither∣to kept concealed in my heart, and neuer reuealed to any one liuing. In the meane while, let me entreate you to tell me, which way you pur∣pose to direct your trauaile? Be∣leeue me Madame, answered our knight, I hope in short time to bee in Greece, as well to see the country, as the Emperour, of whom I haue heard many good reports. Truely Sir, (replyed Grasinda,) I wishe all happy successe to attend yee; and I meane to prouide a Ship for ye, and to furnish ye in such sort, as your voyage shall be the easier perfourmed. Moreouer, I will giue ye Maister Elisabet for your health and welfare, when any disa∣ster or inconuenience shall befall ye: with this promise, that if you finde your body apt and able, you shall come againe hither to mee within a yeares compasse. Our knight had small reason to refuse so great kindnes; but in returning Grasinda most harty thankes, said. Madame, I were the most abiect wretch in the world, and no way worthy the name of knight, if I should not endeauour to acknow∣ledge so many gracious fauours, as you haue bestowed vpon me; and I should think the wearing of Armes farre vnfit for me, if either by dread of death, or any other accident whatsoeuer, I should deferre the fulfilling of what you haue inioy∣ned me. What I desire (quoth she) to haue you doe for me, shalbe respitted till your backe returne, and it is no other thing, but what shalbe for your honor and aduantage. Ma∣dame (said he) such is my confidence in your true appearing vertues, that you will not vse me in any other ser∣uice. No, vpon my faith, (quoth she.) Then she sent for Maister Elisa∣bet, to whom she gaue charge for prouiding a good Ship in readines,
and all necessaries else fit for tra∣uaile, during the knights voyage to Constantinople. Which he accom∣plished with such care and dili∣gence, as (the fift day following) our knight taking leaue of Grasinda, went aboord with Maister Elisabet. Hoysing their sayles, they passed many Islands of Romania, in the more part whereof he performed such rare deedes of prowesse; that his fame flew (in short while) through the whole Country. But by reason he had no more then a yeares limitation, for his returne to Grasinda, the Mariners importuned him to more speedines: giuing him to vnderstand, that it was impossi∣ble for him (making so many de∣layes by the way) to finish the voy∣age so soone: Whereupon he con∣cluded, to land no more till he came into Greece; and therefore launched forth into the maine: where (for this time) wee will leaue him to speake of matters happening in Great Brittaine, during the long voyage of Amadis. It hath bin tolde yee in the se∣cond Booke, that Patin, being then no more then a meane knight, with∣out any great estate or possession, liued onely in hope; to bee heereaf∣ter Emperour of Rome, when the death of his brother happened, who had no procreated heire of his bo∣dy. This perswasion, in respect of his loue to the Queene Sardami∣ra, whom he most intirely affected, made him vndertake the voyage of Great Brittaine, where he was most honourably entertained by King Lisuart, especially after he knew him to be the Emperors brother. There he grew forgetfull of his first loue, beholding the beauty and comely graces of the Princesse Oriana, whom he requested in mariage of the King her Father. Vpon the an∣swere made him, he determined to shewe himselfe among the most va∣liant spirits, in searche of straunge aduentures, and combatting all er∣rant knights he should meet with∣all. Crossing through the Forrest, whereas then Amadis was, despai∣ring of euer seeing his Oriana any more (in regard of his banishment, signified to him by Durin, brother to the Damosell of Denmarke) he be∣ganne to sing the praises of the Princesse, and to glorifie himselfe in the loue she bare him in his opi∣nion. At which time, Amadis and he fought together, where Patin was conquered, and sore wounded in the head: in regard whereof, he returned to Rome, without going backe to King Lisuarts Court, lea∣uing his marriage in suspence till some other time. But it fell out so well for him, that so soone as he was there arri∣ued, the Emperour his brother left his life, leauing him sole heire to the Empire. Whereupon, he had far greater desire then before, to fi∣nish the affection he had begunne: hoping, by reason of the great dig∣nity whereto he was now aduan∣ced, he should the more easily com∣passe his long-desired marriage. Which, the sooner to effect, he sent Ambassadours to King Lisuart, with a new request of his daughter in marriage: heereto were appointed Saluste Quide, Prince of Calabria, Brondariel de Roce, the great Maister, the Archbishop of Tarente, and the Queene Sardamira, accompani∣ed with a gallant troupe of knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen, to bring home the Princesse Oriana, as they hoped. But matters happened to another end, as heereafter more at large shall be related to you.
CHAP. X. How within some while after the Knight of the greene Sword had hoy∣sed saile into the maine Sea, and had quite left the Islands of Ro∣mania: By hard fortune, he was cast vpon the Deuils Island, where he fought with a Monster, named Endriagus. THe Mariners hauing set their sayles, with full intent for Constan∣tinople; so soone as they had lost sight of the Isles of Romania, the Sea exal∣ted it selfe in such sort, and grew to such a dreadfull tempest, that, not∣withstanding all paines the Mari∣ners could take, for best guiding and gouerning the Ship, it was so tost with contrary windes and waues, as very many times they were in manifest peril of shipwrack. And being out of all further hope, safety not appearing so much as in a glimpse of assurance: they atten∣ded onely the mercy of God, and continued in this extreamity the space of 8, dayes, without knowing where, or in what part they were. For the tempest of winde, haile and raine, was so thick and continuall, as it seemed that heauen and earth and the Sea would meete together. But at length, the Ship was throwen on Shoare about two houres before day, and with such violence, as they feared it would be split; for it was driuen out of the Sea on drye land. Notwithstanding, they sustayned no harme at all, which gaue them better hope then formerly they had, so that when bright day appea∣red, they knew themselues to bee in the deuils Island, which by reason of a straunge Monster there aby∣ding, was so dispeopled, as no li∣uing creature repayred thither. Then a new feare seazed on them, and now they despaired of their liues more then before, so that they were euen ready to throw them-selues into the deepe: when the knight of the greene Sword deman∣ded of them, what might be the rea∣son of this terror? Alas Sir, (quoth they,) where doe you imagine wee are landed? what gulfe, what shipwrack could haue beene worse to vs then this? Now wee are in compasse of the Deuils power, who in the forme of a cruell Monster, ruinates all this Country. How? said the knight, I see nothing yet that should thus a∣maze ye: therefore tell me I pray ye, what deuill or Monster is it, that workes this great despaire in ye? Then Maister Elisabet (lesse dis∣mayed then any of the rest) spake for them al, saying. Vnderstand Sir, that this Island, wheron our disaster hath brought vs, was not long since in the possession of a Giant, the most bloo∣dy Tyrant that liued in all the Isles. he had to wife an honourable Lady, as wise, milde and vertuous, as hee was wicked and cruell: of whom he begot a daughter, named Bran∣daginda, that was (in her time) one of the goodliest Ladies in the world: And although many great Lords, and men of high merite, would gladly haue enioyed her in marriage: yet notwithstanding, the rigour of the Giant was so extreme, as he still kept them off, because by no meanes hee would haue her to marry. In regard where-of, this Mayden encreasing in yeares, and those desires that would faine experiment, what hap∣pinesse it was to liue with a man,
knowing withall, that her father had set downe his resolution, neuer to bestow her as a wife on any man: preuailed so much by insinuating blandishments, and incestuous de∣monstrances, that she drew him to affect her, and had his company car∣nally. But that which was much worse, shee machinated the death of her owne mother, that the more boldly, and without feare, she might liue still in this horrid incest, wherto the Giant gaue quick consent. This Mayde that was, perceiuing her selfe to grow great with childe: one day, as her mother and shee walked together in an Orchard, passing by a deepe Well, she thrust her there∣in so rudely, as she brake her neck in the fall. Now, because the people began to murmure, the Giant told them, that he vnderstood by three of his gods (one in the likenesse of a Grif∣fon, the other as a Lyon, and the third in the shape of a man) that of him and his daughter, should bee borne a creature, so much to be re∣spected and feared through all the Countrie, that none of his neigh∣bours should dare to attempt any harme against him. And vnder this colour, he openly married his wic∣ked daughter, who within no long time after, was deliuered of a Monster, in such manner as I shall shew vnto ye. It was so full of haire on the face, feete and hands, as it ap∣peared to be a Beare, all the rest of the body was couered ouer with scailes, so hard and strong, as no ar∣root from a Bow could pierce them▪ beside, they were so broad & great, that they extended quite o∣uer the backe, defending it like so many Shields, so that no instrument of yron could enter thorow them. From vnder them came forth arms, hands, legs & feete, with nailes and clawes so piercing, like to them of a mighty strong Lyon. His eyes see∣med properly like two burning coales, or brands, so red and spark∣ling, that in the night season they seemed like two shining starres. And, that which was much more, his teeth were so huge & sharp, that they would bite through & breake the best made Armour of steele. By all these meanes, he did so many harmes and mischiefes, that he brought this Isle to be disinhabi∣table; especially because he could mount, leape and run so speedily, as the very nimblest Hart in the world. And if at any time he grew angry or offended (as it happened very often) in fighting with Beares, Lyons and wilde Boares, he would send foorth such a dreadfull smoake from his nostrils, as plainly appeared to be a duskie flame of fire, so loathsomly stinking, as no liuing creature could escape infection therby, which cau∣sed euery one to flye & shunne him. When he yelled or howled, hemade such a fearefull cry or noyse, grating his teeth in so strange manner, and clapping his wings so hideously; as, to the very boldest courage, nothing could be more dauntable. The peo∣ple of this Sea, commonly called him Endriagus; as being held and re∣puted by them, to be rather a de∣uill, then any beast produced by nature. Much amazed was our knight of the greene Sword, to heare Maister Elisabet make this strange descripti∣on; nor being able to comprehend any possibility, that so horrid a thing could be engendred betweene man & woman. Except the ponderous weight of a sinne so monstrous, had in such sort alienated naturall disposition: that the soule fiend tooke the place of a reasonable soule, and so caused this hellish
procreation. Whereupon hee de∣maunded, why he was suffred to liue so long, and whether (as yet) he breathed there or no? I will tell yee Sir, answered Master Elisabet, all such as haue attempted his destru∣ction, haue fayled and finished theirliues most cruelly, Further-more, you must know, that the Em∣perour of Constantinople, vnder whose subiection this Island alwaies hath bin, hath sent hither the grea∣ter part of his power, but all hath proued to no purpose. I maruaile, (said our knight) why they did not kill him so soone as he was borne? Vnderstand Sir, (replyed Maister Elisabet, that Brandaginda percei∣uing her self to be great with child, the Giant her Father was not a litle proud thereof, as hoping to haue such issue as his gods had promised him. And heereupon, he caused three or foure Nurses to be dili∣gently sought for; conceiuing with himselfe, that seeing the infant should be so strong; reason requi∣red, that his nourishing should be answerable thereto. But the mo∣thers time of deliuering growing neere, shee began to feele the most bitter anguishes in the world. Not∣withstanding, the Giant and shee tooke all in good part, perswading themselues that those paines pro∣ceeded onely from vigour of the childe: who at the time appointed) came so dreadfully forth of the mo∣thers wombe, as all the women then present were amazed thereat. Neuerthelesse, standing in feare of the Giant, they swadled it vp in rich clothes, and gaue it to one of the Nurses to sucke: at whose brest it drew so strongly, and without a∣ny intermission, as, notwitstanding all her loud cryes, he sucked the very heart blood out of her body, so that shee fell downe dead on the floore. The like did the second, & the third, all of the Nurses instantly dying, not only by the poyson issuing frō him, but also by the violence he did vnto them. These tydings being sent to the Giant, in no little amazement, he went to his gods, and hauing of∣fered sacrifice according to his cu∣stome, he demaunded of them, why they had giuen him such a mon∣strous linage? He that carried the resemblance of a man, answered. It is necessary he should be such a one, that as my workes are straunge and admirable, so should his be, & con∣formable to mine, especially to de∣stroy all Christians: therefore hee hath some semblance of a man, to whom all things owe obedience. And I, (quoth the other) in fauour of thee, haue giuen him the strēgth of a Lyon to resemble mee therein. That which mooued me, said the third, to arme him with wings, and sharpe-piercing tallents or clawes, was in imitation of my selfe, that as I partake in a Griffons nature, so he should bee Master & controuler of all creatures hee can meet withall. And let this suffice thee, without further sorow for the three womens death, that gaue him suck but hence forward let him bee nourished with the milke of thy slocks and heardes, vntill it be the space of a yeare; at which time, hee will be so well for∣med, as he shal resemble vs al three. In the meane while, take heed (vpon perill of thy life) that thou, thy wife, or any other then she that must tend him, doe see him; for else great harme will happen to thee. For this cause, the Giant (willing to obey the command of his gods) prouided diligently for al that they had appointed him; and so this de∣uilish Monster (for a whole yeares limitation) was nourished and kept in a very close Chamber. Which
time being accomplished, and the mother vnderstanding by her who had him in gouerning, that hee was growne great and strong, beyond all naturall capacity, had such an ear∣nest desire to see him, as shee caused the Giant to yeeld consent. Entring both into the Chamber where hee was nourished, and he seeing his mother; suddenly leapt about her shoulders, and caught such hold a∣bout her neck, that before his father could lend any help, he cruelly kilde her. Whereat the Giant grew so en∣raged, that he ran on him to kil him, & in casting a blow at him with all his might, the Sword rebounded backe vpon his owne leg, wounding it so deep, as in the extreme anguish he felt thereby, he fell downe to the ground, and there breathed his last. At the very same instant, the Mon∣ster, being named Endriagus, fin∣ding the doore of the Chamber to stand open, flew thence into the mountaines, leauing all them in the Castell infected to death with his poyson. Afterward, he did so many harmes in euery place, that al the in∣habitants were glad to forsake the Country, or else to dye the death. Thus you haue heard, how this Isle hath remained desart for the space of forty yeres, and so long is it since this hellish Monster hath heere li∣ued in this manner. By my faith, answered our knight, you haue told me wonders, wherein our Lord hath plainely declared, what long patience he hath vsed, in expecting amendment for the sinnes of men; but finding them ob∣stinate & too hard-hearted, he hath continued this seuerity of venge∣ance. Neuerthelesse, I am not to part away from this place, vntill I haue fought with this Endriagus: hoping assuredly, to reuenge the wrongs he hath done to so many, & to replant this Isle again with people, that may religiously serue God. And because the day was well neere spent, he put off his purpose till the morning, his company being minded not to leaue the Ship, because their feare stil con∣tinued, beholding the sea & tempest nothing appeased, but rather en∣crease more and more, by the Mon∣sters houering ouer the Island, and especially by the place where the Ship ancred. Night being ouerpast, & the bright morning appearing, he called for his Armes, and afterward heard Masse deuoutly: then summo∣ning them of the Ship about him, he thus spake. Louing friends, I will go directly to the Castel to seek the Monster: where (if it so please God) I may haue the victory ouer him. And because it appeares to me, that in two or three dayes we shal hardly put to Sea againe. I intend, if I finde the Castel as yet habitable, to come again hither for ye, that you may re∣main in safe security, vntill the wea∣ther be more calme. So mounting on horseback, and taking none but Gandalin in his company, they ascē∣ded vp the Rock, where presently they espied the Fortresse, and ry∣ding thither to it, found neither man or beast liuing in it. Heereupon af∣ter they had thorowly visited it, and found it to bee strong & wel-defen∣ced, they returned to them in the ship, and causing them to bring vi∣ctuals thither for three dayes, commending them all to God, he said. Stand vpon your guard so well as you can, for I must goe to effect mine enterprise: thus aduising you, that if I haue good successe, Gan∣dalin shal winde his Horne to ye, & giue you assurance thereby, that Endriagus is dead, and I liuing. But if the contrary happen to me, there shall be no need of any signall
to ye, because you will know it soon enough. In the meane while, pray to GOD both for mee and your selues. So setting on his way, hee left them sad and mourning, for the small hope they had of his returning. But their griefe could not be com∣pared to that of Ardan the Dwarfe, who being compelled to leaue his knight, by a seueare command im∣posed on him, made such ruefull moane, as euery man tooke com∣passion on him. Alas, (quoth Ar∣dan,) am not I the most miserable wretch in the world, that when I haue most occasion to follow my Master, neuer hauing forsaken him before in all my life, he should now forbid and prohibite mee, as if I were a meere stranger to him? Then Maister Elisabet called them all to prayer, while our knight and Gan∣dalin were thwarting the Isle among brakes and bushes, and finding no∣thing. But Gandalin was so pen∣siue, as his Maister, perceiuing him to weepe, said vnto him. Ah Ganda∣lin, it appeareth by thy counte∣nance, that being with me, thou art afraid to dye: I pray thee, kinde Squire, returne backe to the rest, & there expect what shall become of me. If these teares proceede from any doubt in thee, that I cannot pre∣uaile against the Monster, assure thy selfe, that the hope I haue in the mercy of God, & the remembrance of my Lady, who now (euen at this very instant) presents her selfe be∣fore mine eyes, doth arme me with such strength, as I am able to fight with the deuill himselfe, if I could finde him. For my minde perswades me, that I see her in the daunger of Endriagus, and that I am come hi∣ther to defend her: Ah Gandalin, canst thou imagine, that I would suffer her to bee offended or outra∣ged, considering, that on her, my life & best happines doth only depend? So pausing awhile, he then began againe thus. Doest not thou know (my louing Squire) that shee hath caused all the teares which haue bin shed by mee, and greater perils al∣ready past, then this can be? Be∣leeue me, Gandalin, I feele my for∣ces newly redoubled, and my hopes a thousand times more encreased, in but thinking of her, as I haue told thee. Then set aside all feare, and cry and call as loude as thou canst, that Endriagus may heare thee, and come hither to vs quickly, if hee be in those parts. And one thing I doe most earnestly entreate thee, to wit, that if I dye in this attempt, thou wouldst compasse some meanes, to carry my heart to my Lady, which is intirely hers, and tell her I sent it, that we appearing before God, hee may iudge, that I present her no∣thing, but what is her owne as well as mine. When Gandalin heard these words, his heart was shut vp in sor∣row, as hee was ready to fall in a swoue: desirous rather of his own death, then (with paine) to accom∣plish what his Master had comman∣ded him. And as they insisted vpon these tearmes, they saw Endriagus come forth of a hollow Rocke, ca∣sting from his eyes & throte flames & smoke so noysome, as all the ayre thereabout was infected therewith. So soon as he had espied them, hee came towardes them, hissing & sno∣ring in most admirable maner: not∣withstanding, it could not daunt our knight a iote, but he boldly marched to meete him, while Gandalin ran to hide himselfe, fully perswaded, that his Maister could neuer scape from such a furious beast. Our knight perceiuing that hee could by no means cause his horse to come nere
him; quickly dismounted on foot, and taking his Launce in both his hands, aymed therewith so coura∣giously at Endriagus, that (by great good fortune) he gaue him a thrust in the left eye, and put it quite out. Then Endriagus gaue a horrible dreadfull crye, and arising vp on his hindmost pawes, caught hold on the Launce so strongly, as, inten∣ding to breake it between his teeth, he tooke it so farre into his mouth, that our knight espying so apt an aduantage, by aduancing it forward as occasion serued, hee wounded him both in the tongue and throat, and left a part or tronchion thereof sticking fast betweene his teeth. Ne∣uerthelesse, hee gaue a great leape, purposing thereby to surprize the knight: but hee auoyded it by step∣ping aside, and drawing forth his Sword, gaue him a manfull stroke therewith on the right shoulder, which proued to no purpose; for he might as well strike on a rocke or a∣nuile. Endriagus got hold of the Sword with his teeth; but by reason of the sharpe steele, and part of the Launce troubling his throate, hee could not keepe it as hee intended. And that which hindred him most of all, was his great effusion of blood, which ranne in such aboun∣ding measure downe his throate, as he was scarcely able to draw any breath. At length, he rent our knights Shield from about his neck so rude∣ly, as his hands were his best helpes, to keepe him from the ground; and as he stroue to breake it in pieces, our Knight hauing recouered him-selfe, taking his Sword fast in both his hands, smote on the top of his head but it entred no more then in∣to a mount of Adamant. Then he perswaded himself, that except Heauen gaue him assistance, he meerely laboured in vaine: for he saw no place else where to hurt him, but in the other eye, which with great care) he kept and defen∣ded. Heereupon our knight made all his aime at that side, and proued so happy in his blow, that lighting on his snout, it entred into one of his nostrils, (which were great and wide staring) so farre, that it pierced the braine extreamely. This made Endriagus so mad, that hee got our knight fast about the body, and with his sharpe-pointed clawes, tore his coate of maile, yea, and entred through the flesh to the bone: when questionlesse he had quite kild him, but that his owne blood so ouer∣stifled his stomacke, that, letting loose his hold, he fell downe back-ward. And as he rendred his spirit, the deuill came out of his body, causing such a clap of thunder, as all the whole Island shooke with the sound thereof. This noyse being heard by them in the Castell, they perswaded themselues thereby, that their knight was then at the Combate: and albeit they were in a safe and well-defenced Fort, yet the best and boldest man of them all, was ouercome with extraordinary feare. Endriagus being thus vanquish∣ed, our knight rose very faintly; and purposing to goe finde Gandalin, (who was then comming towards him) hee fell downe againe in a swoune, by a little perling brooke, that descended from the moun∣taine. Then Gandalin (imagining his Maister to bee dead) fell into most dolefull lamentations: but com∣ming neere him, he beheld him to breath: wherupon he vnarmed him. Then recouering his spirits, called to Gandalin, saying. My deare Friend
Gandalin, now thou shalt see the ending of my dayes; let me entreate thee, by the kinde nourishing which I receiued from thy father and mo∣ther, that as thou hast been loyall to me in my life, thou wilt continue so in death, and so soone as my vitall spirits haue forsaken me, to take out my heart, and beare it to my dearest Mistresse. Tell her Gandalin, that as it veelded it selfe hers the same day I first saw her, and euer since hath continued better and better in her seruice, while it was lockt vp in this brest, or sad habitation, neuer wea∣ried in any obedience to her: that shee would be pleased so to receiue it now, in remembrance of him that kept it for her; and in so doing, I be∣leeue that my soule shall haue the happier rest in another world. As hee meant to speake more, words fayled him, and againe hee swonded. Then Gandalin (without staying to answere him) mounted on the top of the Rocke, and win∣ded the horne which he caryed (to giue signall of the death of Endria∣gus) so loude, that Ardan the dwraff, who was then on the highest of one of the Castle Towers, easily heard it. Wherevpon hee ranne downe presently, to acquaint Maister Eli∣sabet therwith; desiring him to make haste to his Maister, who (perhaps) stood in great neede of his helpe. Maister Elisabet, hauing all things in a readinesse, mounted on horse-backe, directing his course as fast as hee could ride, towards the place where hee still heard the sound of the Horne. Not long had he iour∣neyed, but he espyed Gandalin, who comming to meete him, cryed out afarre off: Alas Maister Elisabet, En∣driagus is dead: but if you prouide not the sooner for my Lord, hee is gon likewise. How man quoth he? Alas, said Gandalin, he hath already lost so much blood, as hee is not a ble to speake a word. Very sadde and sorrowfull was Maister Elisabet at these newes, and ran quickly to the place where the Knight lay, so weake and ouer spent as hee had no motion of his pulse: yet his eyes were wide open, where∣fore to comfort him, Maister Elisa∣bet sayd. How Sir Kinght? will you declare such debilitie of courage, hauing brought to end so great and glorious an interprise? doe yee not know, that I am heare to make you sound and well againe, so soone as pleaseth God. When the Knight heard him, hee stroue to make an∣swere, but could not. Then they layd him softly vpon a cloake, and hauing wholly vnarmed him, Mai∣ster Elisabet viewed his wounds; which he found to be so many, and dangerous, as hee stood in great doubt of his recouery? Neuerthe∣lesse, hee resolued to performe so much as possibly he could, and in∣stantly applyed so soueraigne vn∣guents: as both stanched his blee∣ding; and so assawaged all vigour of paine, that his speech came to him againe, when with a very feeble and low voyce, he thus spake. Oh, my Lord God, who to re∣deeme mee tooke humaine flesh, in the blessed Virgins wombe, and afterward didst suffer a most do∣lorous and painefull Passion: take pitie on my soule, for I well knowe, that my bodie is no better then earth. Truely Sir, answered Mai∣ster Elisabet, you haue good reason to recōmend yourself to him, con∣sidering that (by his assistance) you shall receiue the speedier helpe. As he ended these words, there arriued diuers of the Marriners, who taking him vp gently in their armes: con∣uayed him thence to the Castle; where laying him in his bed, he was
so voyd of allhis sences, as hee felt not any thing was done to him. Thus he continued all night, com∣playning continually, as one that endured much, yet without vttering any one worde, till about breake of day he fell asleepe. Hereupon, Maister Elisabet com∣manded all to auoyd the chamber, to preuent any noise for offending him, and sate downe close by him, till hee heard him wake, and cry: Gandalin, Gandalin, shield thy selfe from this deuill, so cruell and daun∣gerous. In good faith, Sir, replyed Maister Elisabet; if you had been as safely shielded as hee, your health were the surer, and your recouerie the lesser. At these words, our Knight ope∣ned his eyes, and knowing Maister Elisabet, said vnto him; Oh, Maister, where are we? Where? quoth hee, in such a place, where you shall doe well enough, by the grace of God. And perceiuing his Feauer to haue left him, hee brought him food to eate, & was so diligent in care ouer him, that (before night) hee reco∣uered his memorie perfectly, and beganne to know and speake to e∣uery one. Maister Elisabet seeing all dan∣ger to be well quallified; both hee, and all the rest gaue thanks to God for it, and continued still so respe∣ctiue of him, as hee grewe hourely better and better: notwithstanding for twentie dayes hee kept his bed, without any habilitie of rising. At length, Maister Elisabet perceiuing that (without any great perill to the his person) hee might endure the Sea, especially his Feauers begin∣ning to forsake him: one day as they sate deuising together, he sayd, My Lord, thankes be to God, you are soundly recouered, and (in mine o∣pinion) when best shall please you, you may goe aboard your shippe: whereto (I so much the rather coun∣sell you) because our victuals growe so short, that if wee dislodge not hence the sooner, we shall be quite emptied. My louing friend, answe∣red our Knight, I may iustly say, that next vnto God, you are the man to whom I am most beholding, deliue∣ring mee from the great daunger wherein I was. And let mee assure yee, that so long as my soule liueth as a guest in this bodie, you haue a Knight ready to bee employed for you, without reseruation of hazard or perill whatsoeuer: for you haue done so much for me, (I being none other then a silly knight, destitute of all meanes, my best meanes consi∣sting in a poore, broken and batte∣red armour:) that while I shall en∣ioy a day of life, you may worthily acknowledge it to be yours. My Lord, answered Maister Eli∣sabet, you say what pleaseth you of your selfe, but howsoeuer, I ac∣count my selfe the happiest of all other professing my Art; that vnder Gods assistaunce, I haue saued the life of the best Knight that euer backt a Courser: which I dare pub∣liquely auouch; you hauing attemp∣ted and finished matters incredible to common iudgements. So that I am well assured, from this time fore∣ward, many that haue endured shames and iniuries, must expect helpe by our means, whereas other∣wise, they shall remaine miserably without any hope. Therefore Ibe∣ing borne to be the poore occasion of so great a blessing; doe accompt my trauell more liberally recom∣penced, then if I had all the weal∣thy treasures of the world together. Worthy Friend, quoth our Knight, leaue these commendati∣ons to some other, on whom (hap∣pily) they may be more deseruedly
bestowed; and councell me I desire ye, in the busines I haue vndertaken, as I shall make it further knowen to ye: you are not ignorant, that in no meane griefe and heauinesse, we parted from the Isle of Romania, and by importunity of the Mariners on∣ly: wee set sayle for further passage, as purposely bound for Constantino∣ple, but that windes and tempests haue quite altered our course. All which notwithstanding, for any pe∣rill I finde in my selfe, my minde va∣ries not a iote from my first deter∣mination: so that if you can alleage no contradiction, I am more ready then euer, to aduenture the Sea for Greece, where I would gladly see the Emperour, and some singulari∣ties of the Countrie, which are no common matters to our knights of Gaule. Therefore, if you be as well con∣tented, let vs away for that part: our returne to Grasinda alwayes re∣membred, at all times, when you please, and according to promise at our parting. CHAP. XI. How the Knight of the greene Sword made knowen to the Emperour of Constantinople, (to whom the Island appertained, where he slew the Andriagus) the great fortune and victory he there obtained: And of matters happening to him afterward. WHen Maister Elosabet heard the minde of our knight of the greene Sword, which euermore was bent towardes Constantinople, he said. Trust me my Lord, I thinke it expe∣dient then, that you should first write a Letter, to giue aduertise∣ment, that by your meanes; but more especially, the grace of our Lord assisting, you haue deliuered this Country from the deuils slaue∣ry and subiection. Deare Friend (quoth the knight) I vnderstand, that you haue beene knowen to him a long time, but me he hath neuer seene: therefore doe you write such a Letter, and ac∣cording as your selfe shall best de∣uise it. Whereto Maister Elisabet willingly consented, and instantly wrote at large to the Emperour, all the aduentures happening to our knight, since they departed from Grasinda: especially (how miracu∣lously) he had fought with, and con∣quered Endriagus, a Monster more diabolicall then humane. Desiring him, in the knights name, to send people to replant, so desart a place, and to let it be called thence-for∣ward, Saint Mary Island. So giuing the Letter to a Squire his kinseman, hee commaunded him to goe to the Emperour, and to returne againe so soone as possi∣bly hee could with prouision to re∣victuall their Ship. Being imbarked, the winde sate so prosperously for him, that on the third day following, he arriued at Constantinople, where the Emperour then being: after such reuerence done as best be∣seemed, hee presented him the Letter from Maister Elisabet, say∣ing. Sir, Master Elisabet your most hū∣ble and affectionate seruant, hath
sent you this Letter, whereby (I hope) you will receiue no meane contentment. Then the Emperour tooke and read it, being mightily a∣mazed, to vnderstand that Endria∣gus was vanquished, which caused him to speake thus out aloud Before GOD, here are very strange tydings. In the presence then (among many others) were two Princes his most familiars, the one named Gastilles, sonne to the Dutchesse of Garastra, his sister; a Knight esteemed among the best, and Count Salender, Brother to the faire Grasinda: taking them a∣side, hee shewed them the Letter from Maister Elisabet. After much admiration among them all, the Emperour sayd. The Knight of the Greene Sword, of whom so many high prayses are re∣ported, hath slaine the monster En∣driagus in single fight: and because this messengers owne eyes are wit∣nesses thereof, I pray you let him make relation of what he knoweth. Vpon my faith, answered Gastilles, verily, it is a matter hardly to be cre∣dited, that a mortall man should combate a Deuill with a Sworde: I thinke it was neuer read nor heard of before. Wherefore if it be so, as Maister Elisabet hath written to ye, & that such a man hath so much honoured yee, by comming into your Countrey, you ought to giue him the best entertainment can bee deuised. Let me tell ye, quoth the Emperour, what I haue determined. I thinke it not much amisse, that you, and Count Salender should first goe to him, euen to the Island where (as yet) hee remaineth sickly, and conduct him in the best maner you can imagine: taking along with you such victuals and other necessaries, as is conuenient for such a purpose. But aboue all the rest, forget not to take some excellent Painter with you, to draw in naturall figure that horrible beast: because there is no possibilitie of bringing him hither, yet we would haue his proportion so neere to the life as may be. For it is my purpose, where he hath been conquered, to erect a high Pillar of brasse; on the top whereof shall be aduanced the Knights Figure that fought with him, and the Monsters also, in liuely shape: with so ample a discription in golden Charracters engrauen thereon: that all succee∣ding times may know this famous Action. In which respect, I pray ye to vse your speediest diligence, for I shall neuer rest in quiet, vntill herein I am fully satisfied. The two Princes, knowing the Emperours will, tooke so good or∣der for their shipping, as very ear∣ly the next morning they were em∣barked: when hoysing Saile, with apt and prosperous windes, in few dayes they landed in the Isle, Saint Marie: so newly called, at the re∣quest of the Knight of the Greene Sword. Hee being aduertised of their arriuall, went to meete them; doing them all the honour that the time and place could permit: espe∣cially to Count Salender, knowing him to be brother to the beautifull Grasinda. And although he looked somewhat wanne and meagre, by reason of his long sicknes: yet our Grecians reputed him to be one of the most compleat Cheualiers, that euer they had seene. Wherevpon, after ceremonious welcoms ended on all sides, Gastilles taking him by the hand sayd: Sir Knight, Mine Vncle, the Emperour, hath sent vs expresly to you, to thanke you (in his behalfe) for the great good you haue done to this whole Countrey, which hath so long time layen wast and ruined. Moreouer, for the ear∣nest desire hee hath to see you; hee
entreateth you by vs, to passe (with what conuenient speede you may) towards Constantinople, where hee will welcome you according to your due merit. Lord Gastilles, answered our Knight, I haue so often heard of the Emperours goodnesse and magnifi∣cēce, that although I neuer saw him: yet am I earnestly desirous to doe him any seruice: and to be employ∣ed as hee shall please to command me. I must further entreate you, said Gastilles, to let vs see the Monster Endriagus, that his liuely portrai∣ture may be taken by an expert pain∣ter; which for the same purpose, is sent hither with vs. Here is Maister Elisabet, said our Knight, and Ganda∣lin my trusty Squire also, who was present whē I fought with the beast; they can easily conduct ye where he lieth. But I feare his body is so in∣fectious, as you will hardly bee able to come neere it. Let vs make triall of that, replyed Count Salender, to giue the better report to others, how, and in what manner we found him. Our Knight perceiuing their vnalterable desire, praied Maister E∣lisabet to guide them to the place where hee was assailed, and to let them know the truth of all. So they mounted on horse-backe, for it was somewhat farre from the Gyants Castle, and (by the way) Gandalin reported to them, the man∣ner of the sights beginning, the doubt hee had of it, and little hope or expectation of his Maisters re∣turne. And in this time of confe∣rence they were come to the place, where Endriagus lay so stinking; as if Maister Elisabet had not formerly giuen them excellent preseruatiues, they had beene in great danger of their health. But by this meanes they might come the neerer to him; while the Painter drewe his Figure so artificially, as nothing was wan∣ting but life it selfe. But the more they obserued him, the more they found the aduenture to be: so that no iust comprehension could haue been made of the substance, except their eyes were reall witnesse. Afterward, they returned back to the castle again, and soiourned there with our knight three dayes, visiting the Isle in euery part: and the day following, they tooke shipping thence, with so good a gale of wind, that they took landing in the porte of Constantinople not long after. The Emperour hauing intelli∣gence thereof, sent Chariots and horses, for the Knights more hono∣rable conuoye to his Court: and himselfe, accompanied with a good∣ly Traine of Princes, and great Lords, rode in person to meete him. Our Knight offred to kisse his hand; but the Emperour embraced him, telling him, that hee was heartily welcome, as he that iustly deserued by his valour, to hold ranke among the greatest Lords of the world. For if I (quoth he) and such as resemble me, are constituted in the preemi∣nence and authoritie of Emperours of Kings: it comes to vs by the meanes of our Predecessors, whe got and conserued such fortune for vs: but you hauing performed such rare deeds of Chiualrie, are not on∣ly worthy of an Empire, but euen of the Monarchie of the whole world, and that meerly by merit. You haue power, mighty Prince, answered our Knight, to paint me in what coulours you please: not with∣ding, all that I am or can bee, is no more then your humble vassaile and seruant; & would it pleased God to afford such means, as might expresse my earnest loue to you, in any seri∣ous or importāt seruice. So ceasing, the Emperour walked along with
him to a chamber which he had cau∣sed to be prepared for his lodging: being so faire & sumptuously furni∣shed, as neuer had the like bin seen: except that belonging to Apolidon, in the Firme Island. The Emperour with-drawing, left him accompa∣nied with Gastilles, and Count Salen∣der, & went to the Empresse giuing her to vnderstand; that the Knight of the Greene sword (so much re∣nowned through the world) was come to Court: To whom he pur∣posed all the kinde entertainment could be deuised. And therefore Madame (quoth he) be not sparing towardes him in the very best graces may be affoor∣ded: commanding your Ladyes so to decke and adorne themselues, that it may mooue his desire to continue in our Court. For beside his repute and estimation, of being the very best Knight in the world, and bringing vnder awe and obedi∣ence, that goodly Island, so long time dispeopled: I am vndoubted∣ly perswaded, that hee can bee none other, then some great Lord disgui∣sed, for his better veiwe of strange Princes estates; therefore let mee commend him to your very choy∣cest respect. My Lord (quoth she) seeing it is your pleasure; I will not fayle in effectuall performing what you haue commanded me. By this time it waxed and grew somewhat late, and our Knight fin∣ding himselfe not halfe currant, after his sayling on the Sea: departed not out of his chamber till the next morning, when hauing bin with the Emperour at Masse, he brought him afterward to see the Ladyes, all of them giuing him most gracious welcome, Especially the Empresse. But hee fell on his knee before her, to kisse her hand, and as shee tooke him vp, hee said: Madame, among all the blessings of heauen bestowed vpon mee, I esteeme this one of the chiefest, to haue the meanes of see∣ing the magnificence of the Empe∣rours Court (famous in all places of the world) and that with such af∣fable lookes and entertainment, as I take no little care, how, or which way my power can euer stretch it selfe, to acknowledge this fauour by any dutious seruice. And I would I could tell you in good Greeke Lan∣guage, how much I am, and desire to be, wholly yours, but the slencer power I haue in this countrey, may excuse my ill speaking, and referre to full effect any thing wherein you please to command mee, and that shall best witnesse my good will. Knight of the Greene Sword, said she, the Emperour hath long time desi∣red to haue your company, & wish∣eth with al his heart, that your mind were answerable to his, for your cō∣tinuance still heere with him. So falling out of one discourse into another, the Empresse beeing wise, and curious in vnderstanding all Nouelties, especially the quali∣ties and fashions of strange remote Countries, enquired many matters of him; whereunto he knew how to answere, with so good a grace and discretion: that she sayd within her selfe, it is impossible, but hee must be of as great prowesse as prudence. All this while the Emperour enter∣tained the Queene Menorssa, and other of the principall Ladyes, to whom hee said: Can you giue such welcome to our newe Knight, as may make him ours alwayes heer after? It may be sweete Ladies, that therein you should performe so fa∣mous a conquest, as neuer any beau∣ties did the like: for I haue credibly heard, that infinite dangers of death can neuer daunt him, to maintaine all their rights that request it of him.
In good faith, answered the Dut∣chesse, mother to Gastilles, we are all then highly beholding to him, see∣ing he is so ready to vse his Sword, and stand as defence for all such as are in need: no doubt, but Heauen will be his helpe, in defending him from all harme, and encreasing his great renowne. Then came Leonorina, the onely daughter to the Emperor, with the two daughters to Barandel, King of Hungarie  who was so rich in beauty, and all choyce perfections, that she seemed a rare pearle among the very fairest Princesses of the world. And that which most of all did illustrate her rarities, was her extraordinary wisedome, and deli∣cate carriage: in regard whereof, e∣uery one tooke delight to behold her, but much more to keepe her company. Hauing done a gracious reuerence to the Emperour, and af∣terward to her Mother, shee sate down at her feet. Then our Knight looking on her, remembred when Oriana was left by King Lisuart in SCOTLAND, being then about her age, at which time, Loue depri∣ued him of his liberty, and gaue him wholly as her seruant. Immediatly, all the fauours of amitie, & gracious entertainments, since their first ac∣quaintance, presented themselues to the eyes of his soule, and his affecti∣on being no way weakened or im∣paired, (either by length of time, or distance of place) but rather much more encreased, threw such a sud∣den amorous affliction vpon him, that he was wonderfully pensiue, & in this melancholy fit, he thus spake to himselfe silently. Oh happy prison, which (by good reason) tooke my spirit captiue, for more admittance into greater liber∣tie! Oh sweet death, occasion of a double life! Oh quick remēbrance, that canst keepe such an affectionat oue so couert! Poore Amadis, farre off from thy louely felicity, what canst thou hope for heereafter? wouldst thou hinder the issue of thy life, whereby thou mayst be rid of so many miseries? Ah Oriana, the true exemplary of all vertue, thy absence is so grieuous to me, as I can neuer hope to recouer ioy. With the conclusion of this pri∣uate imparlance, he breathed forth a loud-speaking sigh; which the Em∣perour perceiuing, became full of maruaile, thinking some strange ac∣cident had befalne him. But instant∣ly, they noted a chearefull reuiuing of his spirits, and his lookes to bee as fresh and faire as before: yet as a∣shamed of his soules sudden rap∣ture in this kinde, to lay his passions so open to euery eye, the new tin∣cture in his countenance gaue eui∣dent testimony. This raised a more earnest desire in the Emperor, then before, to know whence such a sud∣den vnexspected mutation should proceed, vrging the opinion of Ga∣stilles therein. Trust me Sir (quoth he) I am not able to iudge in this case, but ratherstand as one con∣founded, to see, that such a man as he is, should declare so little discre∣tion in such an assembly. Assure your selfe (replyed the Emperour,) this passion proceeded from some intimat affectiō, to her that hath the highest command ouer him. It may be so, answered Gastilles, but to clear all doubt, let M. Elisabet be questio∣ned in this case. Then was he called, & the Emperor said to him. Elisabet my long-loued friend, I am desirous to know one thing of you, which I charge ye (by the faith you beare to God) to resolue mee in if you can. And I sweare to you vpon my soule, that by mee it shall neuer bee discouered. Sir, answered
Maister Elisabet, you may well per∣swade your selfe, that I will not lye to a personage of your greatnesse, but will tell you freely any thing I know. Can you (quoth the Empe∣rour) yeeld a reason, why our new-come knight both sighed and wept so lately: I desire you not to con∣ceale it from me; for if hee stand in need of any thing whatsoeuer, assure your selfe, hee shall be supplied in such good sort, as he shall haue iust cause to shake off all melancholy. Sir (replyed Elisabet) heerein I can say nothing to you; for he is such a man, the very closest in such maters, as he will not haue manifested, as I neuer saw the like. No man can better dissemble his priuate fanta∣sies, & yet I haue often seene him in such extremities, that if a man might gather iudgment by sighing, I haue imagined, that his heart must needs split in sunder, yet neuer was it possible for me to know the cause. But thus much I verily conceiue, that it must needs be the controul∣ling power of loue, which torments him in such tyrannicall maner, be∣ing (perhaps) far off from her whō he affecteth. I iumpe with you in o∣pinion (said the Emperour) and I could well wish, that his loue were to some Lady of this country; for I would be so liberall in bountie to him, as there is neither King, Prince or Lord so potent, but might repute himselfe happy, to match his daugh∣ter in marriage with him, that there∣by we might be the more certaine of his company. And if you Maister E∣lisabet, (my hearts true friend) can worke this mater out of him by your wit, rest thus resolued, that you shall well vnderstand my acceptation of the seruice, which you may doe in this kinde; and therefore, let me per∣swade you to pursue it. Sir (quoth he) you shall perceiue that I wil do my vttermost heerein. So the Em∣peror rising, went to the Empresse, & taking her aside, said. Madame, you haue lately seen (as wel as my selfe) what sadnes our knight of the greene Sword suddenly fell into, & we cannot gatherwhat should moue him thereto: therfore I entreat you, to deuise some meanes, wherby we may know it: & likewise, if hee will consent to stay here still with me, I wil not be sparing to him in any de∣maund whatsoeuer. My Lord, said she, it were best (in my iudgement) that to morrow we should attempt this enterprise: for I will take him at such apt oportunitie, as he shal haue work enough to deny me. In the meane while, I will allow such gra∣cious fauours towards him, as both you and I will preuaile in that wee would haue. So they spent out the whole day, entertaining the knight, beyond all compas: and on the morrow, after Dinner, the Emperour caused the Ladies to meet there againe, where, at the first encounter, hee was char∣ged by the Empresse, who, the bet∣ter to gaine her intent, smyling, & as it were by way of deuising, said. Sir Knight, since you came into this Court, I wel remember, that a migh∣tie melancholy fitte seazed on you suddenly, and it is no longer since then yesterday: let me entreate ye (fair Sir) to tel me whence it should proceede; for if it were occasioned by any iniurie, either done heere, or any-where else within the Emperors commaund, bee well assured, that you shall bee righted. And if it might stand with your good liking, to abide heere with my Lord the Emperor, no knight in all his house can find better welcome. & I would perswade you thereto, if I might. Madam, (quoth he) if I had so much power as to commaund my selfe, I
should thinke it a happines for me, to haue so gracious an offer: but be∣ing compelde to obey mine owne hearts affections, (which no way may permit it) I humbly entreate your Maiesty to hold me excused. By this the Empresse well vnder∣stood, that she could neuer compas her intention; wherfore she gaue a signe to the Emperor, that he should come to them: which being done, she began again thus. My Lord, I hope you will make good what I haue promised to this Knight: my request to him, is, that he would re∣maine here in your Court, vnder this assurance, that hee shall be re∣spected aboue any knight you haue, and yet no more then his owne due merite. Beleeue me Madame answe∣red the Emperor, if hee graunt me this one fauour, I am as ready to af∣ford him another: for, hee cannot aske me any thing that I will deny him. Sir, (replyed our knight,) you haue already done me so much ho∣nor, that I thinke my whole time cannot extend it selfe, to performe any such seruice, as the very least of your liberall fauours doe deseruedly challenge. Neuerthelesse, I haue bin so long a while out of mine owne li∣berty, by being subiected to the cō∣mand of one only: as I neither can, nor willingly would offend there, to please any-where else. For I am cer∣tainly assured, that in doing other∣wise, death wold not lōg suffer me to be your seruant, nor to cōtinue that duty, where I stand bound to pay it. This answere was deliuered with such vehemencie of passion, as testi∣fied sufficiently to the Emperour, that Loue was soueraigne Lord o∣uer his affections: therfore he wold no further iwportune him, but en∣tred into some other discourse. While thus they held on confe∣rence, the faire Princesse Leonorina came in, carying two most rich Crowns, the one vpon her head, and the other between her hands; & go∣ing to the Knight of the Greene Sword, spake thus. Sir knight, I ne∣uer yet begd any gift, but of the Em∣peror my Father: notwithstanding, I now presume vpon such boldnes, as to request one of you, if you plea∣sed to grant it me. How Madame? (quoth he) can any Gentleman bee found so hard-hearted, that dare re∣fuse so faire a Lady, in any motion she shall make vnto him? As for my selfe, I promise to obey you, in any matter you please to command me. The yong Princesse thanked him most affectionatly, and taking the Crown frō off her head, said to him: I pray you Sir, seeing you promise to doe so much for me, to present this Crown to the very fairest Gen∣tlewoman you know, & saluting her on my behalfe, to entreate her to af∣ford me so kind fauor, as to acquaint me with some tydings from her, ey∣ther by writing, or word of mouth. The Knight took the Crowne, & as he was about to answer, she preuen∣ted him, continuing on her speech in this manner. And this other Crowne, (not a iote lesse richer then the first) shalbe for the most ex∣cellent Lady that you know, to whō, if you be so pleased, do from me the like message. Yet my lōging is such, as I pray you tell me presently, what they are, to whom you mean to giue them. Madame (quoth he) by the faith I beare to God, your own selfe must haue the first, and none other; for you are the very fairest Gentle∣womā that I know. As he thus spake, he placed the Crown again vpō her head, & (looking about him, said: If there be any knight that dare main∣taine the contrary, I am ready to combate him. Great pleasure tooke the Empe∣rour,
and the whole company, to be∣hold Leonorina vse so gallant a grace to the Knight: neuerthelesse, be∣cause shee was the maine obiect of euery eye, she began to blush, which made her appeare much more beau∣tifull. Then the Empresse tooke oc∣casion to speake, saying: You speake your pleasure Sir, of this Gentlewo∣man: but I had rather haue those Knights to doe me seruice, whom you haue conquered in Armes, then those that she hath won by her beau∣ty. But he returned her no answere, because Leonorina presented her self again, saying: I confesse Sir, that you haue done much more for me, then I know how to deserue: and yet this cannot with-hold me, from coniu∣ring you (by the thing you most dearely affect, aboue all other in the world) to tell me, why you wept ye∣sterday, and what the Ladie is, to whom your heart is most engadged in obedience. When our Knight saw so seuere an iniunction imposed vpon him, to disclose that which he most coueted to conceale, he stood in doubt, that the Infanta was enforced to do this by the Emperor, or else some other, that would know more then he was willing they should. Whereupon, his colour changed in such sort, as euery one did plainly perceiue it: & taking a long pause before he spake, at last he thus proceeded. Madame, I most humbly beseech you, to ac∣cept some other seruice of me, & to quit me of this request. You know Sir (quoth she) what you haue pro∣mised, & I as wel know likewise, that if you breake not your word, you must tell me what I desire to know. Why then Madame (said he) I will doe it, seeing you enforce me to it. When I beheld you first, faire Prin∣cesse, I called to mind, that about the time & age wherin you are; Fortune presented mee with gracious enter∣tainment, by louing a Lady wholly like to you. So that my heart then being far distant from his true felici∣ty, gaue testimony (by mine eyes) of his piercing passions, somewhat to allay the extremity of his torments, whereof it appeares you tooke too much notice. Now, in regard of the aduantage you tooke of my word, being desi∣rous to know what she is, to whom (at this instant) I stand most obli∣ged: if you would please to forbeare such an vnnecessary motion, I should esteem your prudence more intire then I doe, inplaying thus on the poore discretion of a silly errant Knight, to disclose more then hee would, and what he most desires to keepe concealed. Neuertheles, since I must needs passe on further in this affliction, I sweare to you Madame, by my faith, that it is shee to whom you haue sent this other Crowne, who is (as I thinke) the very fairest Lady that euer was, or euer shall be among the most perfect. Now con∣tent your selfe, faire Princesse, with∣out forcing me any further. Vpon my word, replyed the Emperor, she shall not, and so far our knowledge is enlarged by your relation, that we are euen as wise now, as when we be∣gan. And yet (answered our Knight) I haue said more now, then euer I did before: whereto I was more wil∣ling, because Madame Leonorina should well perceiue, how ready I am to doe any seruice for her. You may wel Sir, quoth the Emperor, be allowed to keepe secrets, when your greatst reuealings are mere ridls to vs: & therfore seeing shee hath offen∣ded you, reason requires that shee make amends. Pardon me my Lord, said our knight, in your better opini∣on, for if she haue offended, let her be rankt among thē, that can induce
and perswade such demaunds to a poore knight errant, who (as yet) is so slenderly acquainted with the Greeke tongue, that, when he offers to speake, he may well be laught at, for his foolish babbling. Indeed Sir, (quoth the Emperour) I onely am the cause of all this contending; and therefore we must needs make an end together. The amends, said our knight, is too much made alrea∣dy my Lord: prouided, that I may remaine in your good conceit, and that you will remember me hereaf∣ter. Let me tell ye Sir, answered the Emperor, that heereof you can∣not fail, nor in any satisfaction that I can make ye, although you should stand obstinat against the permissiō. Now, albeit the Emperour spake these words in iest, yet followed a time, that they fell out to good ear∣nest, as you will finde more at large in the fourth Booke following. Sir knight, said Leonorina, I know that I haue done you wrong; and seeing it is not in my power, at this present, to make you a sufficient amends: I beseech you to accept this Ring, e∣uen with as good a heart, as I was desirous to know of you all that I demaunded. Taking it from off her finger, he stepped forward to giue it him▪ but in steed of the Iewell, he tooke her by the hand, saying. Ma∣dame, this white and delicate hand, is more worthy to be kissed, then a∣ny other that I haue seene within this yeares compasse: and the Ring may well repute it selfe happy, to be circled with so high an honor; ther∣fore pardon me, I pray ye, and suf∣fer me to kisse it. All this Sir, (quoth she) cannot hinder the Ring to bee yours, & so she presented it to him again whereof he durst make no re∣fusall, but in setting one knee to the ground, took it, & sweetly kissed her hand. Assure your selfe Sir, said she, that you haue so excellent a stone, as I esteeme it to bee the onely one of that kinde: albeit I haue the very like in the Crowne which you gaue me backe againe, which two stones (indeed) should be but one. So help me God, replied our knight, it is not to be admired, that a thing so rare, should bee in the power of the worlds choycest Lady: for, like as such a precious Iewell is not easily come by; as hardly (I think) can all the East yeeld another to go beyond you, either in wisdome, knowledge, and all good graces else; therefore this Iewell is only fit for you, before any other. With that the Emperor stept in, saying. Let me tell ye Sir, when you know from whence it came, you wil make much greater e∣stimation of it: & if you obserue the excellency of the Ring, you will find it worthy of right good kee∣ping: For it is (of an Emerauld) as faire as possible can be: and the rest is a Rubie of two colours by nature, the one red as blood, the other white as snow. Then know Sir, that Apolidon my Grand-father, (whose renown hath long time circled the whole earth, though I know not whether as yet it came to your ears) holding the place that now I doe, a∣mong many other singular things giuen him by Filipane, King of In∣dia: he sent him twelue Crownes, the very richest that could be seene: And although they were of inesti∣mable value, yet there was one to be prized aboue all the rest; and that is it which my daughter presented you first, wherin the stone (being whole was then enchased. But Apolidon finding it to be so strange, caused it to be cut in twain, leauing one of the parts in the Crowne, which he gaue to his Queen & wife Grimenesa, whō he loued so dearely, as more loyall louers were neuer heard of: & kept
the other moitie for himselfe, which hee wore so long as he liued in this Ring, and which, I pray you keepe for her sake, that gaue it you with so good a heart. And if at any time you haue occasion to part with it, let it be to some one of your kinred, to the end, that if Fortune conduct him into these parts, hee may know and serue the Lady that gaue it you, if she stand in need thereof. And so it came to passe after-ward; for it fell into the power of Esplandian, who for the loue of her, (some short while after) performed many deedes of Chiualry, as you shall vnderstand in the fift Booke. Sir, answered our knight, I haue of∣ten heard speech of that Apoliaon, who builded the Arche of loyall Louers in the Firme Iand, where I my self haue bin, trauailing through the country of Great Brittaine: there also I saw the figures of him and his faire Grimenesa, with many other singularities, which are there at this present. Perhaps then (quoth the Empe∣rour,) you know the knight that conquered the Enchanted Palace, whereof I heard so much report. Sir, said he, I haue diuers times spo∣ken with him, and hee cals himselfe Amadis, Sonne to King Perion of Gaule, who is talked of in many pla∣ces. It is he that was found floting on the water, whereupon hee was tearmed the Gentleman of the Sea. In a plaine field of battell, he van∣quished Abies, the most potent King of Ireland, and there the King, his father and his mother knew him to be their Sonne. On my soule, (said the Emperour,) but that I am perswaded, that so great a Lord would not vndertake so long a iour∣ney, I should thinke it were your selfe that you speake of, and I should hardly bee altered other∣wise. Our knight made him no aun∣swere at all, but changing into o∣ther conference, at length they brake off, and sixe whole dayes he remay∣ned in Constantinople, during which time, neuer had man more honou∣rable entertainment. And because the time drew neere of his promised returne to Grasinda againe, he pur∣posed to take his leaue, causing his Ship to be in a readinesse, and fin∣ding the Emperour at conuenient leysure, hee thus closed with him. Sir, you haue bestowed so much ho∣nour and respect vpon me, as I can come in no place wheresoeuer, but you may boldly say, that I am your seruant, ready to obey all your commaunds, as often as you shall please to imploy me. And because I intend shortly to bee in the mar∣ches of Romania, according to a so∣lemne promise made, I most hum∣bly beseech you to licence my de∣parture. Worthy Friend (answe∣ced the Emperour,) if it were possi∣ble, that you could afford longer a∣biding heere, you might doe me an infinite pleasure: but seeing your promise hath so strictly engadged you, God forbid, that I should cause you, or any other, to falsifie your word. Sir, (said our knight) I dare as∣sure you, that my honour will bee highly wrongd in doing otherwise, as it is well knowne to Master Eli∣sabet; therefore I entreat you to de∣taine mee no longer. Well then, (quoth the Emperour) I am con∣tented: prouided, that without a∣ny contradiction, you graunt mee three dayes longer stay. Your will bee done Sir, saide our knight, seeing it is your pleasure to haue it so. The saire Princesse Leonorina nor being present at this parlie, shee
sent for him into her chamber, and being in the midst of her Ladies, she said vnto him. Sir, you haue graunted the Emperour (as I am enformed) three dayes more to keepe him company: Faire Knight, let me entreate ye to afford me two dayes beside his, during which time, you shall be dayly (if you please) with me and my Gentlewomen, be∣cause without any impeachement, wee may the better gouerne you. Therefore aduise your selfe, with a good heart, we hauing you heere a∣mong vs, will compell you thereto perce. As shee thus spake, shee made a signe to her Gentlewomen, to lay hold on him. Seeing himselfe thus engirt by them all, what amiable graces, and milde forces they sea∣zed him with, by a voluntary impor∣tunity, he promised to obey them, in this, or what else they would com∣mand him; and smyling, hee thus speke vnto the Princesse Leonorina. Why Madame, being vnable to e∣scape so sharpe an imprisonment, as is heere presented to my face, doe you imagine that I dare any way contradict you or yours? In good faith Sir, answered one of the Gen∣tlewomen, you doe the wiser; for if you did the contrary, you would be in greater daunger, then when you fought with the Monster Endria∣gus. Truely Ladies, (quoth he) I be∣leeue ye assuredly, considering it is certaine, that a man shall haue more labour in offending such Angels, then if he contended against twenty worse Deuils then he was. Where∣fore, I had much rather attempt a∣gaine such another like warre as that, then fall into the perill of your displeasure. Remember then Sir, answered Leonorina, what you haue promised, and looke that you bee carefull in keeping it. Thus our knight continued in Constantinople fiue dayes longer then he purposed, during all which time, he was a good companion a∣mong the Ladies and Gentlewo∣men: who neuer ceased to enquire of him, concerning the singularities of the Firme Island, the Defended Chamber, the Arche of lorall Louers, and also the Portraitures of Apolido and Grimenesa. Likewise concer∣ning the Ladies of King Lisuarts Court, the fashion of their gar∣ments, their manner of behauiour; and a thousand other things, such as ouer curious women most com∣monly couet to know. And as hee made answere stil to his best power, in cases of this nature; he conside∣red with himselfe, that if his Oriana could haue made one in this faire company, he should haue thought, that all the bright beauties in the world were there congregated to∣gether. At last, he grew so distra∣cted in his soule, that words began to faile him, and he stood as falne in∣to a traunce. Which the Queene Menoressa (Lady of the Isle Gaba∣sta) perceiuing, shee held him so strongly by the arme, that imme∣diatly hee came to himselfe againe. Then he well perceiued, that hee had fayled in some one kinde or o∣ther; wherefore, in excuse of him-selfe, he said vnto them. I beseech ye Ladies, thinke it not strange, that hauing before mine eyes so many admirable beauties, wherewith both God and Nature hath bounteously enriched you all: I should finde my sences quite transported from their vsuall course, by remembring one, of whom I did sometimes receiue so many gracious fauours, that fin∣ding my selfe now to bee farre off from her; I endure a torment worse then death, my spirit being rapt out
of my body, and liuing in her, to serue and obey her as I ought to do. Wherefore, Loue being to blame, for the fault wherein I haue offen∣ded before you; should deseruedly receiue the punishment, and not I, whom hee▪ tormenteth with too much rigour. Great compassion tooke all the Ladies and Gentlewomen on the affliction, which they beheld our Knight continually to suffer, and e∣uery one stroue to comfort him so well as she could. But the day be∣ing come, when he must needes take leaue for imbarquing himselfe: the Queene Menoressa, (who bare him an intire secret affection) said vnto him. Sir Knight, by something that I know, your long absence hence will scarcely be well taken: but see∣ing wee must needes endure your losse, I pray yee to accept a gift of me, which I am very desirous to be∣stow vpon you. Then shee called for sixe Swords, the very fairest and best tempered that euer were seene: desiring him to furnish his friends with them, and not to be vnmindfull of her. Madame, (quoth the Knight,) your gift is such, that (for your sake (they shall come to the hands of sixe knights, the best (in mine opinion) this day liuing, and of whom you may and shall dispose at all times, and in all affaires you will please to command them. That is the mat∣ter, (said the Princesse Leonorina,) which wee all together moue vnto you. By my faith, Madame, quoth he, all my life-time, I shall be yours, ready in obeisance, when you please to imploy me. I thanke you Sir, re∣plyed the Princesse, and doe more-ouer entreate you, that you would please so much to honour vs, as to send hither someone of your linage, to remaine particularly ours, and to serue vs all, as need shall require Madame (quoth hee,) I make no doubt, but, before any long time, to send you a neere kinfeman of mine: who being in your seruice, you may well vaunt, that you haue one of the best knights in the world. This he spake, as thinking of his Brother Galaor, whom he intended to cause to come and serue the ∣perour, both for the augmentation of his renowne, and the bigher ho∣nour of the Princesse. But it fel out otherwise; for in steed of Galaor, Esplandian arriued there some while after; who for the loue of the I'rin cesse Leonorina, fought many a braue fight, as you shall vnderstand when we come to speake thereof. Let it suffise vs now, that the knight of the greene Sword was shipt as that day, and setting sayle with Master Elisabet, launched forth into the maine, bound with prosperous gales for his returne to Remania. Wherefore we will be a while silent of him to tel ye, that much about this season, the Prince Saluste Quide, & the Queene Sardamira, with their traine, arriued in Great Brittaine, to conclude with King Lisuart, the marriage of the Emperour and O∣riana. And perswading themselues, that the voyage should answere their owne intention, they publi∣shed in all places as they passed a∣long, that they should shortly re∣turne backe with the Empresse. But GOD, (in whose hand all things are) declared heerein, that hee doth oftentimes dispose mat∣ters, quite contrary to the opinion of men, who neither loue or repose any confidence in him: but thinke to command both times and the starres, according as it commeth into their owne braine. Where∣in they finde themselues both
mockt and deceiued, euen as these Ambassadours did, who were entertained with the grea∣test triumphes and honour, that the King could possibly make them. CHAP. XII. How the Knight of the greene Sword departed from Constanti∣nople, to satisfie the promise which hee formerly had made to the faire Grasinda: And of that which afterward happened to him. OVr knight of the green Sword being on Ship∣boord, and set foorth from the Port of Con∣stantinople; as alrea∣dy hath beene related to yee: the windes were so fauourable to him, that in lesse then twenty dayes hee arriued at the place, where the faire Grasinda liued in exspectation of him. And albeit hee was yet farre off from Great Brittaine, yet notwith∣standing, finding himselfe approa∣ching towards the place, that gaue his heart best life and encourage∣ment, his hopes did so heighten themselues, and his spirits were so graciously cheared, as not anything seemed now impossible to his ap∣prehension, though (in fiue yeares absence) he had endured a world of afflictions. And now euen as if he felt the heauenly ayre of Great Bri∣taine, his foule laboured with an in∣finity of discourse, concerning what things he was to performe, & what meanes he should compasse, to wnne but a sight of his O∣riana. Now, long before his landing, Grasinda had heard by many, what worthy deeds of Chiualrie he had done in all the Islands of Romania: wherefore, being certified of his arriuall, accompanied with many knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen of the Country, shee went to wel-come him as honourably as might be. Then conducting him to her Pa∣lace, there wanted no entertain∣ment that best could expresse her affection towards him, and thus she spake. Beleeue me Sir Knight, if formerly I held a good opinion of you, at this present it is much more encreased, considering how faith∣fully you haue kept promise with me, in being returned from your long voyage, before a yeare is fully compleated. Which armeth mee with a perfect perswasion, that ha∣uing not fayled in the first, you will doe the like in the next, which (ac∣cording to some conference passed betweene vs, a little before your embarquing for Greece) I purposed to acquaint you with all at your re∣turne. Madame (quoth he) God forbid, that during al my life-time, I should any way shew my selfe vnthankfull to you: for you haue so farre obli∣ged me to you, that I must in dutie confesse, that (next vnder God and Master Elisabet) who by your com∣mand hath kept mee company) I meerely hold my life by your meanes: and therefore you may dis∣pose of me, as shee that wholly hath power ouer me. Surely Sir,
said shee, if hee haue done you any acceptable seruice, I repute it as mine, and take it in as kind part, as if it were performed to mine owne selfe. Now, because Supper-time drew neere, and the whole day had beene somewhat contagiously hot, shee commanded the Tables to be coue∣red in a most delightfull Arbour, where all varieties of possible plea∣sures were plenteously to be seene, and all delicate viands so sumptu∣ously serued in, as it exceeded the compasse of any expression. Supper being ended, they went discoursing together so long about the faire walkes, that night ouer-took them: which caused Grasinda to conduct him to his Chamber, where in ho∣norable manner she tooke leaue of him. Our Knight being in bed, in steed of sleeping, he fell into his accusto∣med melancholy; and, as if Oriana had bin there present, hee thus dis∣coursed with himselfe: Alas, faire Friend, my long absence from your person, hath loaded my soule with so many dolorous passions, that, but for feare of displeasing you, Death had long since wrapt mee vp in my graue, and depriued me of my onely happines, which consisteth in the sight of you. Oh mine eyes, are you not ashamed to exhauste (by throw∣ing forth teares) the scarcitie of hu∣mour, wherein my ad heart nouri∣sheth it selfe, in exspectation of my returne towards her; for whose ser∣uice onely, my spirit contents it self to breathe in this toyling body? A∣las, the more hope you haue of see∣ing her againe, the higher do you at∣taine to happines, by such fauours as she hath extended to you, farre be∣yond your merit. Moreouer, you may well remaine assured, that her loyaltie is so constant, as, (by any accident that can happen) she will neuer varie, vnderstanding my fide∣lity in her owne soule to be such, as I had rather dye an hundred thou∣sand times, then to lose the least glimpse of her kind fauour. These words were so loudly deli∣uered by our Knight, that Gandalin (who slept soundly) awaking at the noyse, started vp, and asked if hee would commaund him any seruice. Alas Gandalin, quoth he, I pray thee take no heed of mine vnruly passi∣ons, but rest contented, that I must suffer them, seeing Loue hath brought mee into this extremity. You are a strange man, replyed Gan∣dalin, thus to afflict your selfe, when you should be most comforted and cheared in heart, considering, that we are well on-ward in the way, of returning to your Lady Oriana, for whose sake you suffer all these tor∣ments. And me thinks you should doe well to throw off these distur∣bing passions, which present ineui∣table perill of life, and draw on dan∣ger of sicknes, when you should haue most need of health: for, grief begets ouer-hasty infirmities, which will hardly be auoided at the largest leysure; therefore good Sir, take rest if you can. How? quoth hee, canst thou talke of rest, or returning to Oriana: considering what a promise I haue made to Grasinda, which may commaund me further off from her, then hitherto I haue beene: I cannot thinke so Sir, answered Gandalin, but am rather perswaded, that her motiō may draw you nerer to her, then you can imagine. What sayst thou Gandalin? replyed our Knight, doest thou thinke that For∣tune can be so fauourable to mee? Assure thy selfe, if so great a good might befall me, I could bee well content, to forgiue all her former
cruelties; which, since I was cast vpon the Sea, she hath infinit wayes imposed on me. And if euer I hap∣pen to such a place, where I may compasse any meanes for sending thee to Oriana, wilt thou doe so much for me, to carry her immedi∣ate tydings of me, and make mee once more as happy, as when thou wentst first to her, at my returne from Gaule? How sayst thou? doest thou remember it? That doe I Sir, said Gandalin, and can as well speake to her, and make discourse of all your life, as euer I did, if you dare repose so much trust in mee; for I know both the Saint and shrine she is deuoted to; and therefore, in the meane while Sir, let me entreat you to be of good courage. Thus spent they out the most part of the night, deuising together on such attempts, as might happen by the way in their returne to Great Brittaine. Earely the next mor∣ning our Knight arose, and went to finde the Ladies, who were hearing Masse; which being ended, Grasinda tooke him by the hand, and leading him somewhat aside, began in this manner. Vnderstand Sir knight, that a∣bout a yeare before you came in∣to this Country, I happened into an assembly, procured by the Duke of Basile, whereto al the faire Ladies and Gentle-women of these parts were summoned. As we were in the chiefest of our good cheare, I know not by what occasion, but my Brother the Marquesse Salender (a man whom you well know, and in whose custodie I then was) spake out aloude before all there present, that my beauty was so highly excel∣ling, as no one in all the company might be compared with me; and if any Knight durst maintain the con∣trary, hee was there ready to enter Combate with him. Notwith∣standing, either because he was va∣liant, and therefore much feared; or whether the whole assembly ioy∣ned with him in opinion, there was no one would contradict him. By which meanes, I bare away the su∣preme honour, from all the fayrest Ladies in Romania, to my no small pleasure and contentment, as is very easie for you to imagine. And now Sir, if (by your meanes) I might at∣taine to a further passage, and reach to that heighth, which my heart hath euer since aymed at, and desi∣red, I should account my selfe the happiest Lady in the world. Ma∣dame (quoth he) commaund mee what you please, and if it be in my power to performe, bee well assu∣red, you shall finde mee ready in o∣bedience. Heereupon she thus proceeded. My Lord, I haue heard, that in the Court of King Lisuart, are the one∣ly bright beauties, not to be match∣ed: if you please to conduct me thi∣ther, and there to au ouch as much for me, either by Armes, or other∣wise, that I may haue the honour a∣boue them, as already I enioy ouer those of this Country, I shall con∣fesse my selfe more beholding to you, then to all the other Knights in the world: for I haue no other mo∣tion then this to make vnto you, and which most earnestly I beseech you to graunt. Whereto if you condiscend, I haue resolued on a speedie parting hence, and to be at∣tended with such a company, as shall highly honor so good a knight as you are. And this may the more encourage you, because in the pre∣sence of the King of Great Brittain, and all the Lords and Ladies of his Court, you must maintaine, that the Lady you haue brought thither, (which shall bee my selfe) is fairer
then any Maiden there to be found, which, if any one dare gainsay, by force of Armes you will compell him to deny it. And for further enlarging the glory of the Conquerour, you shall weare a Crown vpon your Helmet, which I will cary along with me, and he against whom you contend, shall haue another, that the conque∣rour (in signe of triumph) may also weare that of the conquered. Wherein if Fortune stand fauoura∣ble to vs, and that you finish this en∣terprise according to my minde, then I must further entreate you, to conduct mee into the Firme Island, where (as I haue heard) is an en∣chanted Chamber, that no Lady or Gentle-woman can enter into, ex∣cept shee excell Grimenesa in beau∣ty, who neuer could be equalled by any. Then will my chiefest desires be accomplished, and you dischar∣ged of your promise made mee: therefore, aduise well with your selfe, whether you intend to deny me, or no. When our Knight had heard this discourse, he suddenly changed co∣lour, and thus replyed. Alas Ma∣dame, you haue vndone me, in vr∣ging a mater so far out of my power, and haue euen strooke me dead with your words. This he spake, considering what wrong he should offer Oriana, in attempting a labour so highly to her dishonour. And on the other side, he was well assured to finde an infinite number of good Knights in King Lisuarts Court, who, by any perill that might hap∣pen, would not endure so deepe an indignitie: beside, this was the rea∣diest way, whereby he might fall in∣to his Ladies dis-fauour, and (per∣haps) procure his owne death by this meanes. In consideration of all these in∣conueniences, he called to minde also, his kinde entertainments re∣ceiued by Grasinda, what a helpe she had beene to him in so vrgent a ne∣cessity, and how he had bound him-selfe to her by voluntary promise: these contended so mainly with his other cogitations, that when his seruice to Oriana, checkt him from pursuing this enterprise, reason re∣required, and enforced him to the contrary. Heereupon, he fell into such a perplexitie, that he wi∣shed hee had neuer beene borne, and cursed Fortune, who was so contrary to him in all occasi∣ons. Then suddenly he called to mind, that Oriana was no Maide, but a troth-plighted wife, hauing had a child, as Mabila had sent him word: and therefore, he that should main∣taine a fairer Maide, then Grasinda was a faire wife, should receiue shame, and so by good reason, he might enter the Combate with him. Which either before, or afterward, (as he found time, place and oportu∣nitie to fauour him) he would make knowen to the Princesse: And ther∣fore, as one awaked out of a serious studie, or escaped from some me∣lancholy dungeon, he began to ele∣uate his spirits, and with a smyling countenance, thus he spake to Gra∣sinda. Madame, most humbly I beseech you to pardon the fault wherein I haue offended, which proceeded not from any feare, to vndertake the very greatest matter that you can command me, or the most difficult danger wherein you please to im∣ploy me: but my heart hauing sole soueraignty ouer mee, sought to make vse of me elsewhere, had not the obligation, wherein I standmost strictly bound to you (for so many high and gracefull fauors done me)
preuailed against him, in crauing leaue to obey your disposition, which I am ready o performe con∣ditionally, that, without any regard of my indiscreete answere, you will vouchsafe to remit this errour. In good faith Sir knight, answered Grasinda, I was much amazed, to see your sudden alteration, and heare your refusall of such a matter, as cannot but redound to your honor, and my glory. But perceiuing you are now in so good a deliberation, I pray you to continue it: being as∣sured, that (by your meanes) I shall gaine the like honour ouer the maydes of Great Brittaine, as I haue already wonne from the Ladies of Romania, and that I may (afterward) iustly weare the two Crownes, as hauing gotten the prime place of beauty by conquest. Beleeue me Madame, answered our Knight, the way you pur∣pose to passe, is greatly to be doub∣ted, and you must needes goe through so many straunge Coun∣tries, as trauaile may be very offen∣siue to you, and diminish much of that goodly feature, and liuely co∣lour, wherewith Nature hath most liberally enriched you. So that by gaining in the one, you may (perhaps) lose in the other; where∣fore, consideration is very requi∣site, before repentance ensue too late. Sir, said shee, counsell is alrea∣dy taken, and my resolution cer∣tainely set downe: for, notwith∣standing whatsoeuer may happen, I am not able to be altered, without spare of gold, siluer, paine or perill any way ensuing. And whereas you say, that we must passe through many strange Lands; the Sea (in this case) can best releeue vs, as I haue learned by Maister Elisa∣bet. Well then Madame (quoth he) take order for your other affaires, and let vs part hence when you please. That shall be (said she) so soone as wee may; in the meane while, bee no way iniurious to your selfe, but passe the time as pleasant∣ly as you can: for I haue Hawkes, Hounds and Huntsmen to yeeld you pleasure; and therefore I would aduise you, this day to chase the Hart, Hinde, or nimble Roe, or any other game that may best delight you. Whereto hee willingly gaue consent, so that after dinner, our Knight, accompanied with many Lords and Gentlmen, rode into the Forrest. There they met with great store of wilde beasts, who being well nere spent with running, made backe a∣gaine vpon the pursuing Houndes. But as our Knight earnestly follow∣ed a Hart, which had escaped from the toyles, both hee and Gandalin were strayed so far into the woods, as they were enforced to spend the whole night there, by not knowing how to recouer againe their way of entrance. And as they traced from one side to another, at length they came neere to a very beauti∣full Fountaine, enuironed round a∣bout with trees of such heighth, as it was impossible (almost) to meet with taller. There they resolued to a∣bide till the next morning; where∣fore, alighting from their horses, they first watered them, and after tooke off their bridles to let them graze. And because our Knight could not so soone betake himselfe to rest, hee walked along vnder the faire-spreading trees, and discer∣ned somewhat neere him a white horse lye dead, all couered with fresh-bleeding woundes, which hee had ltely receiued. Moreouer,
he heard the voyce of a man com∣playning very lamentably, as one that felt intollerable paine and an∣guish: but being vnable to discerne from whence it proceeded, by rea∣son that the night was so darke and cloudie, he drew as neere to the cla∣mour as he could, to listen the cause why he thus complayned. Then the voyce seemed louder to his atten∣tion then before, and he could easi∣ly vnderstand the deliuery of these speeches. Ab miserable man, vnfortunate Bruneo de bonne Me: now thou dost too plainly perceiue, that thou art enforced to finish thy dayes, and all thy affectionate desires, wherewith thy loyall heart hath beene so long time afflicted. Ah Amadis de Gaule, my worthy Lord, neuer more shalt thou see thy faithfull companion Bruneo: for in the quest of thee, ac∣cording as thy well-beloued Sister Melicia commanded me; I fell into the hands of Traytours, who haue wrought my death, without the ayd or succour of any friend to helpe me. O vnkinde Fortune, vtter e∣nemy to my felicity, thou hast throwen me so farre off from all re∣medy, as I haue not so much as the meanes, whereby I might make knowen my disaster to any one, that should reuenge my wrongs, which were no meane comfort to mee, in this wofull case, and the more con∣tentedly would my poore soule part out of this wretched world. Ah Melicia, floure and mirrour of all vertuous perfections, this night thou losest the most loyall seruant that euer Lady or Gentle-man had, for my whole life-time was deuoutly dedicated, onely to o∣bey and please you in all faithfull seruices. And vpon my soule, if you well consider it, perhaps you will finde this lesse extreame for you, being assured, that you shall neuer meete with any other, so constant to you, as your Bruneo: Now doth the lampe of my life beginne to burne dimbe, and my afflicted heart lo∣seth all his forces, wherewith (by your remembrance onely) I haue heeretofore performed many man∣ly deedes of Armes and Chiual∣rie. Now therefore, I must needes recommend it to you, entreating you so to fauour and respect it, as neuer sinning against you in loyal∣tie. Death, that hath seazed on me, thou shewest thy selfe too sharp and rigorous to me, in robbing me of all my happines, all my ioy and pleasure in one instant. Nor doe I expressely blame thee, for depri∣uing me of my life: but because thou couldst not permit mee before my death, to accomplish the charge im∣posed by Melicia on me, which was, to find out her brother Amadis. Heere he paused awhile but pre∣sently proceeded on againe thus. Alas, this commaund was the very first that euer she did put me in trust withall; and now (as I too plainly perceiue) must bee the last also. Whereby I feele a double torment: for, if I could haue had the meanes to satisfie her heerein, my trauaile, (though ending in death) I should haue esteemed happy. And that, (deare Mistresse) is my chiefest af∣fliction, that my dayes are cut off, before I had the power to acknow∣ledge the infinitie of gracious fa∣uours by you bestowed on me: but rest you well assured, and on my soul I protest it, that I neuer stood in feare of death, in whose face I haue oftentimes hazarded my fortunes; but grieue to finishe my life thus, in louing you too affectionately. Then a heart-breaking sigh in∣terrupted
his speech, which yet a∣gaine he quickly recouered, saying: Ah my deare friend Angriote Estra∣uaux, where art thou now? how hast thou forsaken me? Thou hast main∣tained this quest with mee a long time together, and now (in need) hast left me, not affording mee any comfort or succour. And yet I haue little reason to blame thee; be∣cause my selfe was the meanes of our separation this day, to both our great misfortunes, that sundered vs from euer meeting any more. Then began he to sigh extreme∣ly, and the coldnesse of his stomack breaking foorth many hicko a∣mong innumerable sighes, made a strange confusion of his words ol∣lowly vttered. In regard whereof our Knight, who had well vnder∣stood all these wofull complaints, could not refrain from teares: ne∣uerthelesse▪ going (at last) to the place where he lay, he thus spake to him. My kind friend Bruneo, what dismall mishap hath thus befalne thee? I pray thee be of good cheare, and put thy trust in our Lord God, who hath done so much both for thee and me, as to conduct mee to this place, where I will compasse some meanes to helpe thee. Bru∣neo conceipted in himselfe, that these wordes came from his Squire Lasinde, whom he had sent to seeke some Religious man, by whom hee might be confest before his death; wherefore he thus answered. Alas my deare Lasinde, thou hast tard too long, for I feele my fainting in such forwardnesse, that I cannot ac∣complish now what I purposed. Therefore, let me entreate thee, that so soone as my soule hath for∣saken this her sad habitation, thou wouldst returne into Gaule, to faire Melicia: whom when thou hast ac∣quainted with my mischance, pre∣sent her the rightsleeue of my shirt, thus tincturde in my true heart∣blood, and seauen letters foulded vp therein, which I haue alwayes hi∣therto kept as carefully, as mine own life. And because strength fayleth me, doe thou supply out the rest that should be said, assuring her, that the griefe she will conceiue for my misfortune, by thinking her selfe to be the cause thereof, sending me in search of her Brother Amadis, did more torment me, then any torture else could doe. Why, how now deare friend? answered our knight, doest thou thinke me to be Lasinde thy Squire? why man, I am thy companion A∣madis, for whose sake thou art falne into this great danger. Therefore, take heart man, be of good com∣fort, and I will bring thee to so wor∣thy a man, as shall restore thee to health againe very speedily. Now, albeit Bruneo was so weake, by the great aboundance of blood which he had lost, as hee was no longer a∣ble to speake▪ yet knowing Amadis by his voyce, and seeing him so neere him, hee weetly embraced him, as he accordingly did the like to him, enteringling the teares together that fell from their eyes; which was performed in such sort, as they that had beheld them, would haue thought, they had seene one soule diuided, betweene two most louing and intimate friends. And as they were thus compassionating each other, Gandalin (who had all this le heard their resounding of their words) came thither, to whom our Knight of the Greene Sword, said.  come neere, and helpe me to vnarme my kinde compa∣nion Bruneo: which Gandalin did, both peroming it so gently as they could, and his Armour being , they  him  the
sweet hearbs at more ease. By this time the breake of day beganne to appeare, and our knight commaunded Gandalin, to go finde Maister Elisabet with all possible speed: beside, to entreate Madame Grasinda, to send thither (with him) a soft horse-litter, for conueying Bruneo to her Palace. Gandalin heerein was so diligent, that hee made a very speedie returne, bring∣ing Master Elisabet thither with him: who seeing the two friendes thus disconsolate, and making much moane each to other, he said: Good my Lords, feare not any thing; for, by the grace and helpe of God, I wil prouide whatsoeuer is needfull. Then visiting the wounds of Bruneo, he found them shut and closed, by reason of the nights ex∣treame coldnes: notwithstanding, hee applied such excellent oint∣ments to them, as before they par∣ted thence, his paine was well ap∣peased, and he fell fast asleep, which gaue vndoubted hope to Maister Elisabet, that the worst of daunger was past; whereof when he had ad∣uertised our knight, no newes could be more comfortable to him. As thus they sate expecting their sicke friends awaking, they espied a man comming towards them, cary∣ing the heades of two Knights at his saddle bow, and holding an Axe in his hand all bloody. He seeing so many sit there together, grew feare∣full: but our Knight of the Greene Sword knowing him to be Lasinde, the loyall Squire to Don Bruneo, a∣rose, (accompanied onely with Gandalin) to meete him. This made the Squire much more timorous, and perceiuing them thus comming towards him, he turned bridle to fly away. After him followed our Knight, running into a very deepe bottome or vallie, where the thick∣nes of the brakes & bushes, hindred him from sight of the Squire, wher∣fore he cryed so loud as hee could. Whither fliest thou Lasinde? stay many, for I am one of thy friends. When Lasinde heard himselfe na∣med, he turned his face, and present∣ly knew Amadis: wherefore, aligh∣ting from his horse, most humbly he saluted him, saying. Alas my Lord, doe not you know the heauy newes of my good Master, who lies slaine in this Forrest? At speaking these words, he made most pittifull lamentation, and then began again thus. Surely Sir, you wil not thinke what trauaile he hath en∣dured, onely in the search of you, so earnest was his desire to find you: which would to God he had done, before this great misfortune befell him, by the villainous treachery of two traytors, whose heades you may heere behold, not long since deliue∣red mee by Angriote Estrauaux. He gaue me expresse command, to pre∣sent them to my Lord if hee were li∣uing: if not, to lay them so neere to his dead body as I could, that the world might witnesse iust reuenge taken on them. Lasinde, answered our Knight, he is liuing, thankes bee giuen to God for it, and I left him vnder yonder trees, in better dispo∣sition then thou imaginest. Not∣withstanding, hee is yet so feeble, by his great expence of blood, as he could not declare how, or by whom hee was thus wronged: and if thou wilt follow me, thou shalt finde him in no worse estate then I tell thee. But beware (vpon thy life) that before any whosoeuer, thou call me none other, then the Knight of the Greene Sword. It shall bee done Sir, quoth the Squire, seeing it is your pleasure so to com∣mand me.
Come thou then with Gandalin, re∣plyed our Knight, and I will haste thither before, because I would haue no man to know, that I haue spoken with thee, therefore re∣member what thou hast in charge. Away goes our Knight, leauing Gandalin and Lasinde together, re∣turning towardes Bruneo, where (soone after) both the Squires arri∣ued also. Lasinde made a low reue∣rence to the Knight of the Greene Sword; and, as if he had neuer seene him, said: Blessed be the houre (my Lord) that conducted you hither so happily, to meere with my good Master Bruneo, who in the quest of you, hath beene so abused, as now your owne eyes are testimonies of his extremitie. Friend Lasinde, an∣swered our Knight, thou art wel-come, and I pray thee tell me, what fortune drew him and thee hither, and by whom came hee thus woun∣ded? My Lord, that you shall know presently: giue me but leaue first to speake to him. Now was Bruneo awaked from his sound sleepe, and felt himselfe in indifferent disposition: where∣fore they admitted Lasinde to come neere him, speaking thus. Sir, your kinde companion Angriote Estra∣uaux, hath sent you the two Tray∣tours heads, whom he fought with∣all, and slew, knowing what iniury they had done to you. And he is gone to a Monastery of Ladies in this Forrest, to stenche the blee∣ding of a wound, which hee recei∣ued in his right legge, and there hee will make no long abyding, but intendeth to see you aliue, or dead. I pray GOD (quoth Bruneo) that hee will defend him from all e∣uill: but how couldst thou finde me out in this Desart place, so farre estranged from all resort? Sir, said the Squire, Angriote commanded me, to goe directly to that part of the wood, where I should discerne the taulest trees: because hee vn∣derstood by the Traytours them-selues, that there they had woun∣ded you to death, which vrged him to such extreme sorrow, as no mans could be more. Before God, replyed the Knight of the Greene Sword, it were great pitty, that Angriote should suffer a∣ny wrong: for he is a man of espe∣ciall merit, and one that I would very gladly see. Therefore Lasinde, conduct mee (if thou canst) where hee is, while Gandalin, and these other, conuey thy Mai∣ster to such a place, where I know he shall be most kindly welcome. So they layed him gently in the Litter, and our Knight put on the Armes of Bruneo, bruised and batte∣red as they were, and he rode with the Squire into the Forrest, where they had not trauailed long toge∣ther, but they espied Angriote come ryding towardes them, with his lookes deiected to the ground, like to a man very sad and melancholly. Behind him they saw foure knights also, making haste after him, all well armed and mounted, pursuing a∣maine vpon the spurre, and crying out so loud as they could: Turne, turne thee Traytour, for thou must leaue thy head behinde thee, in re∣uenge of both theirs, whom thou hast treacherously slaine, being men of much more desert then thy selfe. At this crye, Angriote turned backe, and prepared for his owne defence; which our Knight of the Greene Sword perceiuing, he gaue his horse the spurre, and, be∣fore any blow was smitten, came among them, saying to Angriote, who had not till then seene him▪
To them, my noble companion, to them, and feare not, but heauen will defend thee in all extreami∣ties. Much amazed, but yet greatly comforted was Angriote, seeing the Knight of the Green Sword, whom (by notice of his Armes) he imagi∣ned to be Bruneo; and as he purpo∣sed to make him answer; our knight ranne against his enemies, meeting first with Brandasidel, (hee that for∣merly would haue forced him, to ride with his face backward, to the horse tayle, & compell him to come to Grasinda, who thought him to be the most absolute Knight in al the Islands of Romania, as already you haue heard;) but his Launce gaue him such a sound salutation be∣tweene his Helmet and the Cuirats, as caried him quite out of his sadle, and there hee lay entranced on the ground. The other three charged Angriote all together, against whom he maintained his cause so stoutly, as his courage gaue perfect apparance of it selfe. And now be∣ganne the fight betweene two to three, manfully performed on either side: but in the end, our knight of the greene Sword, and Angriote had such aduantage, as they were glad to turne their backes, because the best man among them all, fell down to the ground. Which the other two beholding, they were quite out of heart; and flying thwart the For∣rest, as Fortune best guided them, the one chaunced into a maise, where hee was drowned, while Angriote hewed the other in pie∣ces. This being done, hee purposed to follow his companion, whom still hee conceiued to be Bruneo: al∣beit his stroakes and rare Chiualry vrged a contrary suspition, and hee knew not what to imagine, till hee beheld Amadis returning towards him, who had then put off his Hel∣met to take the aire, by which means Angriote knew him. Then, as one much amazed, he rode to him, and stretching forth his armes, louingly embraced him, saying. My worthy Lord, what high good happe befell me to meet you so luckily: conside∣ring, that but by your assistance, I had doubtlesse bin dead. By my faith Sir (quoth our Knight) you owe many thankes to Lasinde, who was the cause of our happy mee∣ting for he perswaded me, that you were gone to a neere adioyning Monasterie, for cure of a wound re∣ceiued in your legge. Indeed Sir, (said Angriote) such was my deter∣mination, and thitherward I went, till these Traytours came to assaile me: But know you what is become of Brunco? I am perswaded, hee is either dead, or in very great daun∣ger. Be of good cheare man (re∣plyed our Knight) I hope his grea∣test perill is past: for I lately left him, in the cae of one of the best Chirurgions in the world. Then he reported, in what maner he found him, and what complaints he made, exspecting nothing else but death; whereby I perfectly vn∣derstand (quoth hee) what tedious trauailes you both haue endured, onely in the search of me, for which (while I liue) I stand highly obliged to you. I would it were in my po∣wer (quoth Angriote) to let you know how much more I could find in my heart to doe for you: then should you well perceiue, that this which you please to terme trauaile, is nothing else but pleasure and de∣light to me. And let me tell you, that I liue not, but onely by your meanes: for you holpe me to the wife, which I haue now married, without whose
comfort I had no longer breathed. Leaue we this talke, said our knight, till some fitter time, and let vs goe see, whether yonder dismounted varlets bee dead or no, or else to put them out of their paine. So they returned to the place of encounter, and found one of them offering to rise: but the Knight of the Green Sword going neere him, made a proffer to smite him, saying. Trayterous villaine, how dust thou (vpon no occasion) assault any Knight errant, that neuer did thee the least displeasure? Confesse the truth, or else thou diest. Before God Sir, (swered Angriote) this is one of them, that so cruelly wounded our friend Brunco, and to prooue it true, I left him with him, and two other Knights beside, that came to seeke succour for their Si∣ster (as they said) that should bee burned most shamefully. But them-selues (afterward) confessed the treason to me, in returning from a place, where (at the same instant) I was desired, to deliuer the Son of an ancient Knight, who was kept pri∣soner by diuers villaines. Which I did, setting him at libertie, and im∣prisoning the other in his steed; by which occasion, I and Bruneo were sundered, whom since I neuer saw. Is not this true? speake wretch: but hee answered not a word, lying still, with his eyes fast fixed on the ground. Heereupon, the Knight of the Greene Sword called to Lasinde, saying; Alight from thy horse, and smite off his head. Lasinde pre∣sently dismounted, and as he lifted vp his arme to strike, the other cried out. Alas Sir, for Gods sake take pitty on me, and I will tell you the trueth instantly. Make haste then, (said Angriote) or another shall bee hastier with thee, then thou wouldst haue him to be. Then (by litle and litle) hee began to relate what had happened, saying. Vnderstand my Lords, I and my companions being aduertised, that two Knights errant, were newly ar∣riued in this Country, to enquire af∣ter the knight of the Greene Sword, we resolued to kill them, as thinking by that meanes, to doe displeasure to him whom they desired to finde, because we hate him deadly. And in regard wee feared to set on them both together, we deuised to sunder them, by misinforming them, as al∣ready you haue heard. But when we came to the Fountaine of the high Beeches, he whom we condu∣cted, in pretence of deliuering the condemned Lady, suffered his horse to water there: and as hee let loose the reynes of his bridle, we ran vpon him, giuing him so many hurts with our Swords and Axes, before hee had the least meanes of defending himselfe) that he fell down dead, as we supposed, for he appeared not to moue any limbe. Villaine, (answered Amadis) durst thou commit such detestable treason, vnder colour of thy hatred to me? How Sir, quoth the other, are you the Knight of the Greene Sword? Looke villaine, said Ama∣dis, and see it heere hanging by my side. Then Sir, quoth the other, you may partly hold me excused, be∣cause what I haue done, was by the perswasion of a kinseman of mine, whom you haue slaine, and heere you may behold him lying at my feete. A yeare is not yet fully ex∣pired, since he receiued by you, the greatest shame that any man could haue, and his name was Brandasidel, whom I know not whether you re∣member as yet, or no. You made him mount vpon his horse, with his face backward and to hold the taile
in steed of a bridle, with his Shield renuersed, and so presented him to Grasinda. Heereat hee conceiued such dis∣pleasure, that in meere malice to you, he enuied all other knights er∣rant, as wee did the like in loue to him. Thus haue I declared the whole truth to you, and humbly en∣treate you, (without any respect to mine offence) to graunt mee mercy, beyond all merit. Our Knight beganne to be com∣passionate, answering. The mercy thou shalt haue, is not to abridge the punishment thou hast iustly de∣serued: but in hope that thou wilt become an honester man hereafter, then hitherto thou hast bin, in this regard thy life is spared. But if thou fall to thine old byas, assure thy selfe, time will fitte me with a sharper reuenge, r then now I can or will take on thee, So leauing him, they rode directly towardes the Towne: and falling from one dis∣course to another, our knight de∣manded of Angriote, what newes he had brought out of Great Brittaine? He resolued him all things that hee could, and told him (among other matters) that a reuerend Hermite, named Nascian, had giuen King Lisuart one of the very goodliest young Gentlemen, that euer was seene: whom he recouered (in his swadling clothes) out of the teeth of a Lionnesse, carying him for food to her young ones: Also how the Queene had giuen him to the Prin∣cesse Oraina, to serue her (quoth he) with my Sonne Ambor: but there is very great difference betweene them, because Ambor is mightily deformed, and the other an incom∣parable creature. You may (quoth Amadis) report of your Sonne as you please, but if hee carry resem∣blance with his Father, he wil proue a man of extraordinary merit. To women let vs leaue beauty and faire feature, who are curious and inqui∣sitiue after such nicities: & would to God your Sonne were of age to follow me, then should I require him of you, and that very earnestly, to keepe company with Gandalin, on whom I purpose to bestow knighthood, so soone as I shall re∣turne into Gaule. Trust mee Sir, said Angriote, Gandalin doth well deserue much at your hands, and if my Sonne were so happy as you wish him, my hopes would mount farre higher, then as yet they can doe. Falling from this, into other talke, Amadis demaunded, how long since he and Bruneo had iourneyed toge∣ther? Since our departure from Great Brittaine, answered Angriote, we neuer abandoned one anothers company, for any fight or Combat whatsoeuer could happen, till ye∣sterday: and yet notwithstanding, we haue ended many straunge and dangerous aduentures, albeit (all of them) inferiour to your high for∣tune, against that deuilish Monster Endriagus, according as wee haue thereof bin aduertised. Wherfore I beseech you to let me vnderstand, how, and in what maner you fought together. We must referre that, replyed A∣madis, till some more apt and con∣uenient leysure, because we now are neere to the Towne, and that will require a much larger discourse, then the shortnesse of the way will permit vs. By this time they were arriued at Gransidaes Palace, who hauing heard tydings of their comming, came very kindly to welcome them, con∣ducting them to the Chamber where Bruneo lay, who beganne to finde himselfe better and better, by
such good meanes as Master Elisa∣bet had vsed to him. But when hee saw them all three so well met toge∣ther, he was not a little ioyfull, prai∣sing God for such a fortunate suc∣cesse. And as they parled on their pas∣sed aduentures, our Knight of the Greene Sword, declared to them, the promise which he had made to Grasinda, and what shipping shee prepared for passage into Great Brittaine: whereof they were all ex∣ceeding ioyfull, in regard of their long-desired returne thither. In the meane while, Bruneo grew to a∣ble strength, and being in disposi∣tion to endure the Seas: all things weare readily fitted for the voyage; Grasinda and they going aborde, with such a conuenient company as was thought meet. So hoysing sayle, they laun∣ched foorth▪ into the Deepe, where they were so assisted by successefull windes, as (in very few dayes) they lost all sight of the Islands of Romania. CHAP. XIII. How the Queene Sardamira, with the other Embassadours from the Emperour Patin, arriued at the Court of King Lisuart, ho∣ping (at their returne) to beare thence the Princesse Oriana with them: And of that which happened to certaine Romane Knights, offering iniury to a Knight errant. THe Embassadors from the Emperour Patin, being come to King Lisuarts Court: they were entertayned by him most honourably, hauing vn∣derstood the occasion, that drew them from Italie into Great Brit∣taine. After audience graunted to their Embassie, he told them, that he would call a Councell of all his Lords together, and then they should haue an answere: yet hee gaue them this comfort, that hee made no doubt, but they should re∣turne to the Emperour their Ma∣sters contentment. At this time was not Oriana in the Court; for, hauing vnderstood the cause of their comming, she feigned her selfe sick, to auoyde all meanes of speaking with them, and therfore was retired to Mirefleur. The Queene Sardamira, vpon this hopefull procrastination, determi∣ned to go see the Princesse, making her intention knowen to the King: who liked well of, and for her better conuoy, gaue the good olde Knight Grumedan charge of her. On the morrow following, shee set forth from the Court, to let the Princesse vnderstand, how the Em∣perour affected her dearely, how honourably hee would receiue her, and what rare singularities shee should see in Rome. But herein she was much deceiued, because her ve∣ry meere remembrance of Amadis, gaue her more sweete content in soule, then any thing else in the world could doe. Now was the season of the yeare exceedingly hot, in which regard, the Queene (for her better refresh∣ing on the way) sent diuers of her seruants before, to pitch her Tents neere a little Riuer, that ran along within three miles of Mirefleure. There she alighted, accompanied
with Grumedan, and many Lords, Ladies and Gentlewomen of her owne country; among whom were fiue Romaine Knights, who ima∣gined so well of themselues, as none in Great Brittaine could come neere them. Being within their Tents, their fiue Shields were han∣ged without at the entrance, and their Launces likewise leaning a∣gainst them: which was a signall (according to the custome obser∣ued among Knights errant or tra∣uayling) that no one might passe by before them, without triall of the Combate, and these enstructi∣ons they receiued from Grumedan. To whom they made answere, that they would essay themselues a∣gainst those of Great Brittaine, to let them well know: that they had better skill then they, both in brea∣king a Launce, and handling a Sword. We shall see (replied Gru∣medan) how it will goe with you: and yet I dare assure yee, there may some such passe , as will finde yee worke enough to doe. As thus they held on their dis∣course, they espied (a farre off) a Knight comming, which was the gentle Prince Florestan, who (in vaine) had trauayled through ma∣ny countries, to finde his Brother Amadis. And now (very pensiuely) hee was riding to King Lisuarts Court, hoping to heare some bet∣ter news, by the Romaines that so lately came thether, as had beene told him by the way: and seeing the Tents there erected, he rod toward them, to vnderstand who was with∣in them. He happened to a Pauil∣lion, the linnen walls whereof were high exalted, that the coole∣nesse of the fresh ayre, might the better be conuayed to the Ladies within, who sate deuising together on pretty and pleasing purposes. Florestan sat leaning vppon his Launce, regarding the Ladies very earnestly, yet not deliuering so much as one word because his thoughts were otherwise busied: which caused one of the Ladies to speake somewhat roughly to him, in this manner. Beleeue mee, Sir Knight, me thinkes you shew your selfe very vnmannerly, to appeare thus boldly before so many great Ladies as are heere present, not vsing any reuerence at all to them. But perhaps there Shieldes heere hung vp, called you hether, to de∣clare more duty towards their Mai∣sters, then you would seeme to owe to vs. In good faith, Gentlewo∣man (answered Florestan) you haue great reason thus to check me: and yet let me tell yee, mine eyes were so seriously busied in behoulding such bright beauties, as quite be∣rest my bodies faculties, and made them fall into this offence. There∣fore, most humbly I entre at you all together, to pardon this great neg∣lect in mee, for which I will make amends as you shall please to ap∣point me. The Ladie would not so giue him ouer, but said, pardon is to be desired, after the mends is made, and not before, with all my heart Lady (aunswered he) prouided, that you interdict not my iousting against your Knights, or else com∣mand them, to hang vp their Shields within your Tent. How Sir (quoth she) doe you imagine, that they hang heere vpon no stron∣ger condition, but to be taken downe so lightly? Perswade your selfe, before their Maisters can be thereto vrged, they are absolutely determined; to conquer other, from such errant Knights as shall passe this way, to triumph ouer them afterward in Rome, whether
they intend to beare them, with their names vpon them, to whom they appeained. (Wherefore, if you shunne falling into such ine∣uitable daunger: let me perswade you to depart hence, with so much hast as possibly you can make. In good sadnesse Madame, aunswered Florestan, although I finde little friendship, and haue farre lesse knowledge of you: yet will I not follow your councell, nor stand in feare of the shame you speake of. But in steed of my Shield, which they may hope to beare with them to Rome: I will haue all theirs, and send them to the Firme or Enclo∣sed Isle, to beautifie the place, among many other that are there already. As thus he spake, hee made an humble reuerence to the Ladies, and so rod towards the other Pa∣uillions. Grumedan had heard all this discourse betweene the Knight and the Ladies, which made him suddenly presume, that he was some kinsman to noble Amadis: and it mounted his spirits very io∣condly, with a hopefull perswasion, that he would qualifie the ouer da∣ring pride of the Romaines, who (vpon opinion of their owne wor∣thinesse) contemned all other na∣tions in the world. Comming forth of his Tent, he beheld him to handle the Shildes each after the other, and that in such manner, as daring their Maisters to come to the loust: afterward he with drew thence, crossing ouer the little ri∣uer, in expectation of them that had any quarell against him. The fiue Romaine Knights mounted on horsebacke, intending all together to set vpon him: but Grumedan stay∣ed them in this manner, saying. How Lords? would you offer to breake honorable custome, and combate fiue against one Knight onely? you ought to goe one after another, according as your Shields haue beene touched: and remember your selues well, for by the Knights outward appea∣rance, hee will not easilie be put to disgrace. Lord Gramedan, answe∣red Gradamor, wee Romaines differ very farre from you, because you commend, before the deed be done, and we, after it is effected: and let me tell yee, you will hardly finde any Knight equall to vs. I know not (replied Grumedan) what they are whom you talke of, and hold in such high estimation: but if I were to deale with any of you, that offered me the very least iniury: I should hope to loose no honour thereby. Grumedan, Grume∣dan, answered Gradamor, you haue a good conceite of yourselfe, and I could wish (though it did cost me my fayrest fortune) that we two were now as ready one for another: as I shall quickely be for him, that is so boldly come hether to seeke his owne shame. And yet I feare it will neuer fall to my turne; because hee whose Shield he first handled, will handle him with such seuere chastisement, as I shall not need to display mine arme against him. Here at Grumedan smiled, saying. Well Sir. take heed you hap not in∣to the hazard, for many times it comes to passe; that they who thinke to vanquish others, are disfauoured and foyled themselues by fortune, who neuer was friend to the pre∣sumptuous. I vnderstand you well (said Gradamor) and that thus we may contest heere till it be night. So, going to him whose Shield was first toucht, he said. Goe my deare companion, and make it apparant∣ly knowne, what difference there is betweene well speaking, and bad
doing. Be confident in me, replied the other, I am not made for prating enterparlaunce, and neuer let any account be had of me: if (at our ve∣ry first shock) I make him not mea∣sure his length on the ground; ex∣cept he deliuer me his Shield, and his horse to you Lord Grumedan, which I perceiue is very faire and goodly. So crossing the riuer, and placing his Launce in his rest, hee ran against Florestan, and Florestan against him, but fayled of breaking their Launces: neuerthelesse, they met with their Shields and bodies together so mainely, as the Ro∣maine (being lesse expert then the other) was cast downe from his horse, and breaking his arme in the fall, lay all along so am azedly con∣founded, as hee was able to moue neither hand or foote. Herevpon, Florestan cryed out to his owne Squires, to stay the horse, which ran about the field, and and to take the Shield from about the Knights neck and hang it vp vp∣on a tree, where hee poynted him. Then returning to the place where he began his course, he attended for a second man, to succour his com∣panion, who very soone after pre∣sented himselfe. But if the first found a curst entertainement; this other met with one much worse, for Florestan gaue him such a wel-come with his Launce: that it en∣tred quite through his Shield, coate of Maile; and pierced farre into the flesh, so that his girts braking, by strength of the encounter, he tum∣bled ouer and ouer, with the horses saddle betweene his legges, and ha∣uing perfected his race, Florestan turned back againe, saying. By my faith, Knight, the Saddle shall be yours, but the horse mine, vpon condition: that (hereafter) you publish your prowesse in the Capi∣toll of Rome, in what manner you attempted, and how you sped. These words were so audibly de∣liuered, as the Ladies might easily vnderstand them: which pleased Grumedan so highly, that hee said to the other Knights. If you speed no better then your companions haue done: I am of the mind, that at your returne to Rome, they need not breake downe any part of the walls, to let in the glory of your triumph. Beleeue it Sir, answered Gradamor, before the sport is ended, you shall see a contrary turne of chaunce, to his disaduantage that you make so much account of, who (accidentally hath ouer-throwne two of our friendes. I know not (said Grumedan) what may happen, but (for ought I yet see) he meanes to defend his Shield manfully, and conquer yours: for cariage of them to the Enclosed Isle, as he said, not to be placed in ranke of those belong∣ing to loyall loouers, but among such Knights, as left their armes more vpon compalsion, then with their owne good wills. Therefore, it stands you now vpon, and that very needfully, to display the strength of your arme, that I be not troubled to day to arme my selfe, to defend the honor of our knights, on whom you haue throwne such foule aspertions, and scandalous imputations. At these words Gradamor laugh∣ed hartely, and nodding his head (as in derision) replied Lord Gru∣medan, it likes you to be pleasant, and to imagine mee of no more might or courage, then to combate against your brauing speeches: be∣well assured, that (before day light shut in) I shall make you to repent them. I heare you say so, answered Grumedan: but hee that hath begun to feast your fellowes will dresse a
better dish for you before it bee night, very much offended was the Queene Sardamira, to heare Gra∣damor contest thus vpon no occasi∣on. In this time, Florestan had re∣couered the downe-cast Knights horse, and hung his Shield vp by the other. Then returning to his first place, and taking a new Lance, hee stayed the comming of ano∣ther. Then came forth the third knight, who, with a stearne countenance, shooke his staffe so strongly, as if he would haue doubled it together, and giuing the spurres to his horse, ranue against Florestan. But Flo∣restan (who was one of the most a∣ctiue Knights in the world) met him with such direct encounter on the Helmet, that it fell off from his head; and the shocke was so vio∣lent, as, if he had not quickly caught hold about his horse necke, hee had falne to the ground. Then turning bridle, he tooke his Launce by the steele head, intending to smite him with the great end thereof: but hee turned aside from the blow, coue∣ring himselfe with his Shield, wher∣on Florestan caught such fast hold, that he core it from his neck, beating him so often about the pace, as hee was enforced to fall downe. Where Florestan left him, crying out, that euery one might heare him. By my faith Knight, it was ill done of you, to beginne so badly, with triumph∣ing ouer our Shields at Rome, when yours must keepe company with theirs, that I must send to the Enclo∣sed Isle. The like successe befell to the fourth man, who, in fal∣ling from his horse, brake his legge. Now, there remained none but Gradamor, who continuing still his presumptuous speeches, said to Gru∣medan: See you bee ready to an∣swere me, so soone as I haue disci∣plinde vonder saucie companion, in whose behalfe you haue spoken somewhat too liberally this day: and I if I doe not make you to vnsay those words, let me neuer here after backe a horse that may bee worthy any thing. That will appeare by and by, replyed Gramedan; but I dare beleeue nothing till I see it: and if you come fairly off from the strange Knights entertainement, you and I shall haue leysure to talke together the better. Gradamor would then returne no answere, but in a great rage passed ouer the Riuer, and cryed to the Knight, to guard himselfe. Then Florestan ranne against him; and the shocke was so violent betweene them both, that Gradamor bended his Shield together: but Florestan tooke him at such apt aduantage, that hee threw him quite out of his Saddle, into a quagmine, full of stinking soyle and dirt. Now I dare sweare, said Gramedan (spea∣king then to the Queene) for ought I yet know, I shall haue leysure e∣nough to breathe my selfe, wh Gradamor haue made cleane his Armour, and recovered another bone to deale with me. Beleeue me Sir (quoth she) he hath but badly maintained those great words which he spake to you: but hee did like them, to whom de¦serued chastisement is due, and therefore you may well hold him excused. All this while, Gradamor labou∣red very painfully, to get himselfe out of the filthy bogge, wherein he feared lest he should bee drowned, but at last, hee came very fowlly forth, so ashamed of his misfortune, as death could haue bin more wel-come to him. Then ooke he off his Helmet, for he was almost poisoned with the smell of the puddle, as
being no way able to endure it. And as he stood to recouer breath Florestan (in a mocking manner) said to him. Knight, thou that canst skill so well, of threatning men that thou knowest not: if thou canst handle thy Sword no better then thy Launce, thou art not the man that must carry my Shield to Rome, as of late thou madst thy brag to doe, Before God, answered Gradamor, mine arme is yet strong, and my Sword keeue enough, to take re∣uenge on thee, and the very boldest Knight in all Great Brittaine if hee offer mee any iniury: as thou shalt presently perceiue, if thou darste maintaine the custome of this coun∣try against mee. Now, albeit Florestan was there with much better acquainted, then Gradamor could be, yet he demaun∣ded of him what it was? It is con∣uenient (quoth hee) and agreeing with the order of Armes, that thou shouldst either restore me my horse, or else alight on foote, that our manner of fight may be equall: then, he that shall gaine the better, let him deal with his enemy as likes him best without any admission of mercy. Trust me, replied Florestan, I will fulfill thine owne desire: although I am well assured, that thou wouldst not shew such courtesie to mee, if thou hadst mee at the like aduan∣tage, as now I haue thee. But be∣cause it were very vnreasonable, that so goodly a Romaine Knight, beeing oylde with such filth and dirt, should make his horsein as bad a case as hee is himselfe: I will dis∣mounte from mine, at thine entrea∣tie. So he alighted on foote, and couerieg himselfe with his Shield, marched boldly against Gradamor, who made no doubt now, but to reuenge his iniury very sufficiently. The fight began, and continued (for some while betweene them) ve∣ry sharply and cruell: notwithstan∣ding, it lasted not long; for Florestan (who was one of the most skilfull Knights then liuing) brought his e∣nemie to such extremity, that hee drew him so farre as to the Queenes Pauilion, where he fell downe, by reason of a mighty stroke deliuered on the toppe of his Helmet; and lay so bere ft of al his sences, as he could stirre neither hand nor foote. Then Florestan set his foote vpon him, and taking him by the legge, dragde him a long to the miry puddle, wherein∣to he fell at the first: but the Laces of his Helmet chaunced to breake, so that it fell off from his head, and the fresh ayre driuing away his trance, gaue him sight of his immi∣nent danger, which made him craue pardon of Florestan, and cry out to the Queene for helpe. By my faith (quoth shee to Grumedan) this shame and perill is iustly falne vpon him: for by the same Law which he made him-selfe, he must now receiue his ena∣cted punishment. Florestan looking angerly on Gradamor, saide vnto him. Canst thou craue mercie, considering what couenant hath past betweene vs, and on an edict willingly set downe by thy selfe? Looke for none other fauor, then what I am bound to, by thy owne conditi∣ons. Wretch that I am then, an∣swered Gradamor, there now re∣maines no hope or comfort. No, (quoth Florestan) and so assure thy selfe, except thou doest two things that I shall command thee. Alas Sir, saide Gradamor, I am ready to obey you, and to doe whatsoeuer you shal enioyne mee. Write then presently, replyed Florestan,
thy name, and those of thy compa∣nions, with thine owne blood, vpon these Shieldes, and afterward, thou shalt know the rest of my will. Gra∣damor was in such feare, as hee see∣med rather dead then aliue: for Florestan stood with his Sword still ouer him, ready (at a word) to smite off his head. Whereupon, he called for one of his seruants, to bring him a Penner speedily, and taking foorth a penne, filled it with his owne blood, and so perfourmed the commaund of Flo∣restan. On horse-backe mounted hee presently, and taking a strong Launce from one of his Squires, re∣turned againe to Gradamor, saying: Base Knight, this Launce was neuer made, but for their reuenge, whom thou hast hitherto cowardly and in∣iuriously abused: thou diest there∣on instantly, except Grumedan en∣treate mee to saue thy life. Alas Sir, quoth Gradamor, hee will neuer doe it. Scarcely had hee finished these words, but Florestan made a proffer to thrust it in his throate: which made him fearefully crye out: Ah gentle Knight Grumedan, entreate some fauour for mee. At this crye Grumedan came neere, and returned him this answere. Beleeue mee knight, your great presumption hath brought you into this daunge∣rous estate: and if he whom you so audaciously threatned, should smite your head off from your shoulders, hee did no more then you haue iustly deserued. Neuer∣thelesse, for this time, I will de∣sire him to pardon and forgiue you. Then Florestan, turning to Gru∣medan, said. Lord Grumedan, you haue power to commaund me: and seeing it is your will that hee shall liue, I am contented to remit him. And therefore, thou Romaine Knight, thanke him for thy life, and remember withall, that so soone as thou art come to Rome, thou report in the open Senate, what honour all of you haue wonne, against the Knights of Great Brittaine, whom (in your common talke) you con∣temne and despise. And if your Emperour take delight to heare you speake, bee not neglect, in telling him it often. Because (for my part) I will make knowen to the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, the great liberalitie of you Romaines in this Countrey, by parting so lightly with your Armes, Hor∣ses and Shieldes, to men that you know not, and when you are no longer able to defend them. All these wordes vttered by Florestan, could not procure the least answere from Gradamor: but he held downe his head in no meane rage, to see himselfe so flouted and scornde. Which Florestan well perceiuing, to torment him the more, thus againe hee procee∣ded. For ought I see (gentle Cheua∣lier, you may carrie home to your huge Cittie, the huger ouer-wee∣ning you brought with you hither: because wee sillie Knights errant, haue no other care, but of ou honest and courteous behauiour, which you abhorre by birth and cu∣stome. Yet if thereby you would compasse the affection of your faire friends, let me perswade you, to trauayle to the Arch of loyall Lo∣uers, to make it apparantly know∣en, whether you haue as much looue as valour. Perhappes you may thereby winne such honour and glory, as will make you the more esteemed of your Countrie
men, and encrease fauour for yee a∣mong your gracious Mistresses; who knowing your former appro∣bation, if they bee women of sound iudgement, they will not (all their life time) chaunge you for worse. Grumedan hauing heard all this conference, nothing could better content him, then to see these proud Romanes thus disgraced by one Knight onely. On the other side, Gradamor was in such tormen∣ting affliction: as (without retur∣ning any answere to Florestan) hee said to Grumedan. I pray you Sir, let mee be carried into one of the Tents: for I feele my selfe so ill, as it is not possible for mee to liue any long while. Selfe doe, selfe haue, replyed Grumedan; commaunding the Squires to beare him in, retur∣ning afterward to Florestan, say∣ing. Sir Knight, if it agreed with your good liking, I would gladly know of whence, and what you are, con∣fessing my selfe therein the more beholding to you: and so much the rather, because a man of your esteem and merit, ought not to conceale his name among his friends. Lord Gru∣medan (quoth he) you must needes pardon me, because I haue so high∣ly offended the Queene, and these Ladies heere present this day, as I would not by any means be known, although their excelling beauties were the onely cause thereof. For, seeing them all so faire, my sences were so transported, as I sate gazing on them, not vsing any salutation to them. Therefore, I entreate you to pray them to pardon me, or else to take such satisfaction of me, as shall be liking to themselues: then send me answere to the round Hermi∣tage, where I intend to repose my selfe all this day. Assure your selfe Sir, answered Grumedan, for your sake, I will pre∣uaile with them so fare as I may, and I dobt not, but they will bee easily conteuted, when they heare how honest an offer you make them. I pray you Sir, till me, re∣plied Florestan, doe you heare any tidings of Lord Amadis? Heere you must obserue, that Grumedan loued Amadis as dearely, as any man could doe, and the meere remem∣brance of him, caused the teares to trickle downe his reuerend beard, and thus he replyed to Florestan: So God mee helpe (gentle Knight) since the time that he parted from Gaule, with the King his Father, wee neuer heard what became of him: and be you sure, that if I could haue knowen anything of him, I should take no small pleasure in telling it to you, or any that is a friend to him. In good faith, answered Flore∣stan) I make no doubt of it; for I know you to be so loyall, as if all men were of your minde, treason or villanie could finde no enter∣tainment among men, as now a∣dayes they doe, and that too com∣monly. Thus speaking, hee commended him to Gods protection, and Gru∣medan returned backe to the La∣dies: ut very soone after, hee espied one of Florestans Squires comming towards him, who saluted him from his Master, in this man∣ner. Lord Grumedan, my Lord Flo∣restan (with whom you conferred so lately) hath sent you this Horse, belonging ye while to Gradamor, which he thinkes fit for your ser∣uice. And these foure other horses beside, hee prayes you to present them (as his gift) to the Lady,
with whom he had some parlance, at his arriuall first at these Tents. Very ioyfull was Grumedan of this present, because it was wonne from the menacing Romaine, but much more iound in soul, when he knew him, that sent it: to whom hee bare most intimat affection, as well in re∣gard of his loue to Amadis, as for the manly valour remaining in him. So, he conducted the Squire, where the Lady was, to whom he thus spake. Faire Lady, the Knight that was this day contemned by you, in too many seuerall disgracefull kindes, onely for carrying ouer∣good opinion of your vanquished Romaines, haue sent you their foure horses, and desires you to bestow the on whom you please. The Lady shaping her answere to the Squire, replyed thus. Honest Friend, thanke your Master, and tell him, he had better pleasde mee in sending his owne horse, then all these, conquered against my minde. Madame, I beleeue you, answered the Squire: but they that couet to winne any thing from him, must be more bolde and hardy Knights then these, of whom, their successe makes too pittifull mention. Squire (quoth she) thinke not much, that I wishe their honour and profite more, then I doe your Masters, whom I know not, neither euer saw before this day: Neuerthelesse, now I haue behelde his manly dis∣position, I grieue that I haue spo∣ken any thing to his dislyking, and will make amends for my rash∣nesse, whensoeuer hee shall pleae. The Squire tooke his leaue of her and Grumedan, returning to∣wards his Maister, that awayted his comming, to whom hee recounted all the discourse betweene him and the Lady: whereat Florestan laugh∣ed heartily. And causing them to take thence the conquered Ro∣maines Shields, hee tooke his way to the Hermitage, determining to stay in no place more then one night, vntill he arriued at the Enclo∣sied Isle; where hee hoped to finde Galuanes, who kept it during the absence of Amadis, and there hee would leaue the Romanes Armes, according as he had formerly pro∣mised them. Heere you are to vnderstand, that so soone as the Squire parted from the Lady, Grumedan went to con∣uerse with the Queene Sardamira, to whom he made knowen, that he who had vanquished her Knights, was Florestan, brother to Ama∣dis, and tolde her (beside) what tokens hee had sent. How Sir? (quoth shee) was this Florestan, Sonne to King Perion of Gaule, and the bright Countesse of Saladria? Yes truely Madame, answered Grumedan, and one of the very worthiest Knights that I know. I know not (said she) how hee hath carried himselfe in this Countrie; but heretofore the sons of the Mar∣quesse of Ancona (among whom he frequented in Romania, for the space of three yeares together) haue assu∣red mee, that they neuer saw a more actiue Knight. Neuerthelesse, they durst not (for their liues) speake one word of him before the Emperour, who neuer loued him, neither would endure to heare any thing in his commendation. Ma∣dame, said Grumedan, do you know the reason of his spleene? That I doe (quoth shee) it is onely out of his hatred to Ama∣ds, who is his Brother, and conquered the Enclosed Isle, con∣cluding all the straunge aduen∣tures there. Which the Em∣perour had reserued for him-selfe: but Amadis preuented him;
whereat he conceiued such displea∣sure, as hee would very gladly any way contriue his death. Grumedan smyling at these words vttered by the Queene, replyed: By my faith Madame, if the Emperor were so well aduised as hee▪ might be, hee hath more reason to loue and respect him, in sauing him from the dishonour that he might there haue falne into, as many more did, that essayed those aduentures, yet none but the good Knight Amadis, could haue the glory of finishing them. Bt credite me Madame, this is not the cause of his malice to Ama∣dis; but another matter, which I knew long since. If you be a kinde Knight, (quoth she) conceale it not from me. Then he declared, what had happened to the Emperour, sing∣ing his supposed Loues praises, when he found Amadis layed vnder the Tree in the Forrest, and what words they had together, till it drew on the Combate, as hath beene re∣hearsed in the second Booke. Why then (said the Queene) I well perceiue, that the occasion of their hatred is not small, but of much greater nature then I tooke it to be. CHAP. XIIII. How the Queene Sardamira sent to entreate Florestan, to be her con∣duct to Mirefleure, to Oriana: Because hee had so curstly handled the Knights that kept her company, as they were able to follow her no further. AS thus the Queene and Grumedan were conferring together, of that which happe∣ned to the Emperour Patin, who vnder pretence of loue to her then in those dayes, passed from Italie into great Brittaine, to approue his manhood against all Knights errant, and to maintaine withall, that her beauty farre excee∣ded Orianaes, and all other Princes∣ses in the world: At last he fell in∣to the discourse, (whereof all this while he had beene silent) how A∣madis handled him in the Forrest, which the Queene had no little de∣light in, to heare it thus discouered by Grumedan. Among other varie∣tie of talke; at last, hee said vnto her: Madame, what message will you send to Florestan? The Queene heereat was very pensiue, but hauing a while well considered with her selfe, she thus answered. Sir, you see in what estate my Knights are, as they are neither able to guard themselues, nor mee: therefore I doe earnestly desire, that you and Florestan would bee my guides, till such time as I might ar∣riue at Mirefleure. Madame, re∣plyed Grumedan, Florestan is so ab∣solute a man, and discreetly adui∣sed, as hee did neuer deny Lady or Gentlewoman, any thing that they could demaund of him. By much greater reason (then) will hee not forget himselfe to you, conside∣ring, it will bee pleasure to him to doe you any seruice: and so much the rather now, because hee craues pardon of you, for the fault where∣in (he thinkes) hee hath offended you. Let me entreat you then good Sir, answered the Queene, to lend
mee one of your Squires, for con∣duct of this Gentlewoman to him, by whom I will giue him to vnder∣stand my will. Heereto Grumedan condiscen∣ded, and presently they departed thence with Letters of credence, importing the pleasure of her Mi∣stresse. So long rode shee and the Squire together, that they came to the Hermitage, where they found Florestan, who instantly took know∣ledge of the Gentlewoman: for it was she that so checkt him at the Queenes Pauillion; neuerthelesse, he welcomde her very graciously, and she (in saluting him) vsed these words. Sir Knight, at a cer∣taine houre of this day, I little thought of any command, to come and finde you in this place, as ima∣gining then, that matters would haue falne out farre otherwise then they did, betweene our Knights and you. Gentlewoman (quoth he) your selfe doth sufficiently know, that the fault proceeded from themselues, in demaunding such a matter of me, as I could no way yeeld to, but with mine owne deepe dishonour. But tell mee I pray you, did the Queene (your Mistresse) abide there all this day, in the same place where I left her? Behold Sir (quoth the Gentlewo∣man) a Letter which shee hath sent you: And kissing it  shee humbly presented it to his hand. Now, because (as I he for∣merly told you) credee was abso∣lutely committed to her charge: Florestan desied her, to declare r mssage. My Lord, quoth shee, see∣ing you haue disabled the Knights, that had the charge of her conduct, and the way (which she must pase by) is not safe, as shee is gen to vnderstand: the Queene my Mi∣stresse doth earnestly desire you, that you would be her guide to Mire∣fleure, where she hopes to finde the Princesse Oriana, with whom shee hath especiall occasion of confe∣rence. Truely Gentlewoman (answe∣red Florestan, I should be very sorry, to deny so goodly a Lady as your Queene is, in any thing she pleaseth to command of me, and most hum∣bly I thanke her, for the high ho∣nour she doth me, in chusing me to her conduct: but now the day is so farre spent, and the Sunne declining to his rest, that I thinke it necessary to tarry till the breake of day, and to morrow morning wee will be so earely with her, as if we had rested there all night. Doe (said the Gentlewoman,) as seemes best to your selfe. Then food was brought them to eate, and they supt together, deui∣sing on diuers things, vntill it was a fit houre for rest. Now, because, beside the place where the old Her∣mite slept himselfe, there was but another very small Cell. Florestan left it to the Gentle-woman, and went to repose himselfe vnder the Trees, vntill the houre of dislodging thence. Being armed, he called for the Gentle-woman, and so they took their way towards the Queen, who continually exspected when they would come. Being arriued at the Tents, Florestan entred that, belonging to Grumedan: who met him, with kind embraces, not a little  of his presence. And after rs speeches passed betweene them, Grumedan saide vnto him: My Lord Florestan, me thinkes the Queene hath sustayned no losse, fin∣ding so good a change of you for her owne Knights: and thus much let me assure you, that shee is one of the very wisest Princesses I haue e∣uer seene, highly deseruing to bee
honoured and serued. Vpon my faith Lord Grumedan, answered Flo∣restan, I account my selfe happy, if I may accomplish any thing liking to her. So walking vp and downe within the Tent; with a louing embrace, Grumedan said. Tell me Sir, I pray you, what haue you done with the Shields you caried hence yesterday? Why Sir (quoth hee) I haue sent them all to your deare friend Gal∣uanes, who now is at the Enclosed Isle, because he may there rank them according to their merite. And if any other Knights of Rome desire to re-obtaine them, as in reuenge of their fellowes shame, they may there also compasse the meanes, by triall, how well they deserue at the Arch of loyall Louers. In the speaking of these wordes, the Queene Sardamira entred into Grumedans Tent: which caused Flo∣restan to be silent; and meeting her with humble reuerence, fell on his knee to kisse her hand. But the Queene stayed him by the arme, and raising him vp gently from the ground, said, that he was most hear∣tily welcome. Madame (quoth he, I haue all my life time bin a ser∣uant to Ladies: by a much stronger obligation (then euer) doe I now stand engadged, to imploy my very vttermost paines for you, whose merit reacheth beyond them all. In good faith Sir, replied the Queene, I must needes thanke you, for the great paines you haue taken; and seeing you are so ready to make a∣mends, for the fault wherein my Knights haue offended: reason re∣quires that I should likewise pardon you, for any error against me or my women. Me thinkes Madame (answered Florestan) that I can feele no paine or trauaile by obeying you: in re∣gard that your admired beautie doth well deserue the conduct of a farre better Knight then I am. But in affording me this honour, you bind me to ye, in more then I shalbe able to satisfie. Let vs breake off this talke, said the Queene, and tell me; shall wee now set forward on our iourney? When you please Madame, answe∣red Florestan. First, quoth Grume∣dan, I hold it meere, to conuey these wounded Knights, to a Towne not farre hence, where they may be well attended, vntill they bee able to mount on horsebacke. Let it bee so, said she. Then was a goodly white palfray brought her, whereon being safely seated shee set onward with her Ladies and Gentlewomen, being guided by Florestan and Gru∣medan, who entertained the time with such good discourse, as the way seemed neither long or tedi∣ous. Heere I must tell yee, that the Princesse Oriana had (long before) heard of the Queenes comming to Mirefleure, onely to see her, which grieued her very greatly, knowing she would talke with her concer∣ning the Emperour, whose very name was hatefull to her. But when she vnderstood withall, that Gru∣medan and Florestan came in her company, her sorrow was indiffe∣rently asswaged, hoping to heare (by them) some tidings of Amadis. And as shee was busied in these thoughts, newes came, that they were alighted at the gate; where∣vpon shepresently went to welcome them. The Queen Sardamira going for-most, made a low reuerence to the Princesse, with a proffer of kissing her hand: but she tooke her by the arme, and ledde her into a goodly Haule, expressely prepared for her
entertainment. There they sate downe each by other, and the two Knights neere vnto them; and as they were in talke together, Oriana (perceiuing the Queene Sardamira lend an attentiue eare, to a priuate discourse betweene her and Grume∣dan) softly spake thus to Florestan aside. In good sadnesse Lord Florestan, it is a very long time since wee saw you in this Countrie, to my no litle discontentment: as well in regard of the good-will I euer bare you, as for the great losse many a poore soule hath sustayned, who were wont to finde helpe by you, your brother Amadis, and many other of your followers. But cursed be they that caused this so long separation, and I beleeue that I speake it not, but vpon vrgent occasion: for I know a poore Damosell, in daunger of disinheriting, because shee hath no man to right the wrong offered her. But if Amadis were heere once againe, and so many more as are too farre off absent: shee might well as∣sure her selfe, that that which is hers in iustice, should not so easily be ta∣ken from her; whereas by reason of their absence, she hath now no bet∣ter hope or comfort, then onely in death. Oriana continuing on these speeches, teares issued abundantly from her faire eyes, as fore-seeing her vnfortunate end, if the King should so much forget himselfe, to deliuer her to the Romanes. And she had solemnely vowed betweene God and her soule, that she should be no sooner on Ship-bord, but she would throwe her selfe into the Sea, and this was her finall conclu∣sion. Very well vnderstood Florestan, that this close-couched Enigma concerned her selfe; whereupon he thus replied. Madame, God being all made of mercy, will neuer bee vnmindefull of them that put their trust in him: for (as yet) hee neuer did, and doubtlesse, he will not now beginne with so desolate a Damo∣sell. As for my Lord Amadis, as∣sure your selfe, that he is in perfect health, continually in quest of strange aduentures: so that his fa∣mous deeds in farre distant Coun∣tries, renownes his name in all parts of the world, All these words were ouer-heard by the Queene Sardamira, and per∣ceiuing that they spake of Amadis, she said to Oriana. God keepe him from the Emperours fingers: for hee is the onely man in the world that he hateth most, next to ano∣ther Knight, who soiourned some while in the Court of King Taffinor of Bohemia. This Knight I now speake of, not much aboue a yeare since, ouer-came (in open field) the most gentle Knight Garadan, the onely man in all the Romaine Ar∣mie: except the noble Prince Saluste Quide, who is now come into this Countrie to the King your Father, to conclude a marriage betweene his Lord and you. And hee beares him this hatred, for causing the o∣uer throw of eleuen other Knights beside: whose hope was to reuenge the iniurie done to their friend on the day following the Combate with the first knight, being appoin∣ted so many to so many. This mis∣aduenture so dismayed the whole Romaine Armie, that the Emperor was compelled (according to a for∣mer-made couenant) to raise his Campe, and to render back to King Taffinor, whatsoeuer he had conque∣red from him. Afterward, so briefly as she could, the Queene reported, the whole manner of the seuerall fights, and to
what issue they sorted, as you haue heard already at large. So helpe me God, Madame, answered Flo∣restan, although your Emperour should neuer looue him, yet there are many other worthy men, that wishe him all true happinesse and honour: and (in my poore opinion) Lord Amadis needes not care for his malice. Notwithstanding, make knowen to vs (faire Queene) if you can, the name of the man so much commen∣ded by your selfe. Vnderstand Sir, (quoth she) one while he cals him-selfe, the Knight with the Greene Sword, and another while, the Knight of the Dwarfe: albeit I am verily perswaded, that neither the one or the other is his true name indeed. But because hee weares a Sword, that hath a scabberd of greene colour, and a Dwarfe doth ordinarily attend on him: these names haue therefore beene impo∣sed on him, and vsually he makes an∣swere to them. When Florestan heard these wordes, he was very ioyfull, know∣ing for a certaintie, that it was A∣madis: the like did Oriana, who had noted the same reportes before by many. And because shee was now some hinderance to her, that she could not haue any longer pri∣uate conference; shee arose, thus speaking to the Queene Sardamira. Madame, in regard of your tedious iourney this day, you cannot chuse but be weary; wherefore a place of repose is more conuenient for you. Then shee conducted her into a goodly Chamber, and there leauing her to her owne desseignes, went downe into the Garden, accompa∣nied with Mabila and the Damo∣sell of Denmarke, to whom shee de∣clared all her former intelligence, concerning the knight of the Green Sword, whom they knew assuredly to be Amadis. On my faith Madame, said Mabi∣la, if it be so, let mee tell you the Dreame which I had this last night past. Me thought that wee were in a Chamber close shut vp, and that we heard a great tumultuous noise without, which made vs feare∣full beyond measure: but your A∣madis suddenly comming thither, brake the doore, calling for you out aloud. Then I shewing you to him, me thought hee tooke you by the hand, and so brought vs forth, placing vs in a very strong Tower, saying to vs: Abide heere, without any dread or terror, and therewith∣all I happened to wake. This makes mee verily beleeue, that hee will set you at libertie, and free you from their power, that hope to haue you hence. Deare Friend and Cousin, an∣swered Oriana, you giue mee great hope and comfort; and if I were worthy of such a happinesse, I could desire our Lord to heare your good wishes: otherwise, that wee might both dye in one instant. Forbeare such words, replyed Mabila; for he that is aboue all fortunes whatsoe∣uer, will send you (at his good plea∣sure) a better issue out of all trou∣bles, then you can wish or imagine. But conferre with Florestan, and earnestly desire him and his friends, to doe their best endeauour, to breake the Kings intention, that no such conclusion may passe for cur∣rant. Now, let me tell you, that Galaor had already done so much as was possible for him, not by any aduer∣tisement or entreaty vrged to him on the Princesses behalfe: but be∣cause he plainely perceiued, what shame would ensue by disinheriting Oriana, for the aduancement of her
Sister Leonora. For, some day or two before Florestans arriuall at Mirefleure, King Lisuart being retur∣ned from hunting, tooke Galaor a∣side, as they rode on the way, thus speaking to him. My louing friend, I haue euermore found such fideli∣tie in you, and reposed such trust in your counsell, as I neuer intend to conclude any mater of importance, without imparting it first to you. You vnderstand what honour the Emperour hath done me, and his embassage so lately sent me, reque∣sting to haue my daughter Oriana as his wife: wherein (as I conceiue) our Lord hath wrought most graci∣ously both for her and me, because he is the onely potent and redoub∣ted Prince, at this day liuing in all Christendome. In which respect, hee being thus allied with me, I shall neuer haue a∣ny neighbour or enemy, that dare presume any way to offend me, and I shalbe more respected and drea∣ded, then euer any King of Great Brittaine heeretofore hath beene. Moreouer, it is a matter almost im∣possible, to seeke any better prouisi∣on for her; for shee being wife to so mightie an Emperour, Leonora shall afterward remaine sole Lady of my Dominions, which otherwise may happen to be diuided, to our no lit∣tle detriment and danger. And yet let me tell you, I purpose not to doe any thing in this case, without the aduice of the Lords and Knights of my Court: but more especially of you, whom I coniure (by the loue and affection you haue alwayes borne me) to tell me freely your o∣pinion, and without any dissimu∣lation. Much amazed was Galaor, to heare the King vse such language, perceiuing apparantly heereby, that he meant wholly to disinherite his eldest Daughter and right heire, to aduantage the second. For this cause, he stood a long while very pensiue, without answering so much as a word, till the King began again thus to rouse him. Come Sir, a∣wake your silent cogitation, and tell me truely what you think. Sir (quoth he) I beseech you to hold me excu∣sed, for I finde my capacitie ouer feeble, to yeeld you any faithfull counsell in a case so important. Moreouer, you are minded to con∣gregate the chiefest Lords of your Land, to commune with them in so serious a businesse: and they (no doubt) like loyall subjects, will di∣rect you as becomes a King. But yet (quoth the King) I would glad∣ly first haue your aduice, else you will giue mee cause to misconceite you. God shield me Sir, said Ga∣laor, from so doing: rather I will li∣berally lay my heart open to you, according to mine owne poore iudgment, and the true integrity of my minde. Sir, said he, whereas you say, that in marrying your Daughter Oriana with the Emperour, there remaines no possibility of a fairer fortune: surely, I am of a quite contrary opi∣nion; for, she being your principall Heire, and sent into so remote a Country, to lose a kingdome alrea∣dy prouided for her, you shall leaue her poore without meanes, and sub∣iect to a people, but slenderly a∣greeing with the manners and con∣ditions of this Nation. And where∣as you conceite, that in being wife to an Emperour, and dignified with the name of an Empresse, her au∣thoritie and renowne is the surer af∣terward: before God Sir, let mee plainely tell you, that you wrong both your iudgement and reason therein. Fore-thinke what may en∣sue, and say shee haue heires male
by her husband, which is the sole comfort of any kingdome: she be∣comming a widdow, the first fauour her owne childe shall doe for her, is, to vrge her retreate, to hold pos∣session of the Empire by himselfe. If he take a wife, then it falles out far worse for her, because the new Em∣presse will be second to none, and then it is most certaine, that your Princely Daughter lyes open to a thousand inconueniences, and vna∣uoydable grieuous extreamities. For first, shee hath lost this Coun∣try, which was certaine to her, as being her naturall place of birth and breeding, to liue in a strange land, farre from parents, subiects and ser∣uants, which is no common kind of affliction. And whereas you alleage, that by his alliance and fauour, you are sure to be succoured, and much fea∣red. Surely Sir, I must tell you, that (thankes be giuen to our Lord for it) you haue so many true friends, and trusty Knights at your command, as (without any helpe of the Romaines) you may easily extend your limites when you please. And I am perswaded, that in ex∣spectation of support from them, they will rather seeke to ruinate and destroy you, then furnish you with any such assistance as you may ima∣gine, scorning all equality, or any to bee greater then themselues. Moreouer, it is most certaine, that they can couet no better meanes, then by compassing some apt occa∣sion, to register you downe in their Chronicles, to your shame and their glory, vnder the shadow of some sleight fauour, irregularly affoor∣ded; then which, no greater mis∣chiefe can happen to you and yours. And alas Sir, what reason haue you to send the Princesse Oriana so farre from you, being your Daugh∣ter and chiefest Heire, onely to ad∣uance the Princesse Leonora, who is her yonger Sister? By my soule, of a most vpright and vnpartiall King, renowned through the wide world for the Authour of Iustice: you will procure the greatest scan∣dall to your reputation, and wound your vntainted honour so deepely, as neuer powerfull Prince or King did the like. But I hope that Heauen will bet∣ter direct your iudgement, and set∣tle more surer cogitations in your soule, which I (as the very meanest Knight in your Court) doe hartily desire. And beleeue it Sir, that I durst neuer haue beene so bold, to tell you the free censure of my soul, but that you pleased so expressely to command me, and I (as a loyall ser∣uant) could doe no lesse. And let this be your perswasion of me, that during my life time, I will keepe my promise, faith and fidelity to you, as one that stands much ob∣liged to you, for infinite good turnes and fauors done me. Well declared King Lisuart by his countenance, that he was scarse∣ly pleased with Galaors remon∣strance: and he likewise as quickely apprehended it: wherefore, con∣tinuing on his speech, he said. Sir, King Perion my Father, hath com∣maunded mine attendance on him in Gaule, so soone as possibly I can: and because I meane to set hence to morow morning, to the end you may not conceiue, but that I haue coun∣selled you faithfully; if you bee so pleased, whatsoeuer I haue spoken, I will set downe in writing, that you may acquaint them with it, whom you intend to assemble together. I pray you doe so, answered the King. And at these wordes, they were
come neere vnto the City, which made them alter their discourse. Being alighted, the King betook himselfe to his Chamber, where he sate downe very sad and pensiue, and would not all that day be seene in any company. The next mor∣ning, Galaor tooke shipping, accor∣ding to his former determination: for hould not bee present at the resolution of this mariage, as know∣ing certainly, that the King would not bee altered from his purpose, notwithstanding all aduice and councell to the contrary. More-ouer, he knew some part of the pri∣uacies betweene Amadis and Oria∣na, who all this while remooued not from Mirefleure, whither the Queen Sardamira came to see her, as you haue heard already, finding her to be the onely fairest Princesse in the world. What would shee then haue thought, if she had seene her in her former condition, before this continuall melancholy seized her, for the absence of her Amadis, and this new purpose for marriage, which grieuously oppressed her? Being now somewhat meagre, pale and pensiue: yet she appeared, as if Nature had studied all her life-time, to make her the mirrour of choicest perfection. The Queene finding the day no way fauourable, to acquaint Oriana with the cause of her comming, de∣ferred it till the next morning; when resorting againe to see her; and ha∣uing first heard Masse together, they walked along the allies of the Gar∣den, and proceeded so farre into the businesse, that she told her, how dearely the Emperour affected her, what pursuite he made to enioy her as his wife, and what supreme feli∣city attended her, onely by this ma∣riage. But the answere of Oriana was so vntuneable, as the Queene durst proceede no further with her: but in the interim, Florestan came to them, who purposing to take his leaue, that he might returne to the Enclo∣sed Isle, she tooke him aside, decla∣ring, what infinite afflictions houre∣ly encompassed her, & how shame∣fully the King her father dealt with her, by compelling her to marry in∣to a straunge Country, and to the onely man of the world, whom she least respected. But beleeue it Sir, (quoth she) if he continue in this humour, the first newes he shall heare of me, af∣ter my departure hence, will be my death. For come what may, if he sunder me from this Country, Death, and the Sea shall diuide me also. For it is my full intent, to drowne all my disasters in the waues: who (for euer) shall remaine witnesses of my sorrowes, and in them I ex∣spect to find more compassion, then in mine owne kinred, countrie, friendes and seruants. And there∣fore, honourable Lord Florestan, I humbly beseech you, (for Gods sake) to imploy some paines for disswading him from his intenti∣on: otherwise (vpon my faith) it will be a great clogge of con∣science to him, and the very straungest mis-fortune, wherein a poore disinherited Lady can fall, being forsaken of God and men. Thus speaking, she wept so ex∣tremely, that Florestan (although he was one of the greatest spirited men in the world) could not re∣fraine from teares, hauing his heart so confounded with compassion towards her, as hee was not able to vtter a word. Notwithstanding, at last he got the maistrie of this op∣pressing passion, and said. Madame,
you shall doe me great wrong, if you hold not this conceit of me, that I am wholly yours, ready to o∣bey you in any seruice till death. But to speake to the King your fa∣ther, as you would haue me, it is a matter beyond all possibility: for you your selfe do know, what ha∣tred he beares to me, onely in the despight of my Lord Amadis, for∣getfull of so many high and worthy seruices, as both he and all his linage haue euermore done to him. And if he haue receiued any from me, hee neuer needs to thank me for it con∣sidering, I neuer did any for his sake, but onely by the commaund of him, who hath soueraigne power o∣uer me, and whom I will not contra∣dict at any time. And that was the reason, for my being in the last warre of the seuen Kings, not as any helpe to them of Great Brittaine: but onely for preseruation of your iust title and right thereto, as shee that shall one day, (by Gods leaue) bee Lady and Queene thereof. Presume also Madame, that you haue this interest in me, that this which you haue told to mee, I will thinke on and make knowen to King Perion, and other good friends, to procure some remedy for you in this distresse. And I make no doubt, but he will prouide for you in such sort, as you shall haue occasion to rest contented. Nor purpose I to soiourne in any place, vntill I come to the Enclosed Isle, where I shall finde the Prince Agraies, who is very desirous to doe you any seruice, as your selfe doth well know, especially for the loue of his Sister Mabila. There shall wee consult together, what course is best to be taken in this case, without spare of any thing remaining in our power. But know you certainely, (quoth Oriana) that Agraies is, or will be there? Yes Madame, said he, as Lord Grumedan hath assured me, as hee receiued instruction by one of his Squires, that came thence within these few dayes. I beseech you then, replied Oriana, to relate vnto him amply, what confidence I do repose in him: And if you heare any newes of your Brother Amadis, faile not to acquaint me therewith so soon as possibly you may. There-of assure your selfe Madame, answe∣red Florestan. With these wordes, he tooke his leaue of her, kissing her lillie-white hand, and returning to the Queene Sardamira, spake thus. Madame, I am constrained by force to leaue you, and else where to seeke after my further fortunes: but wheresoe∣uer I shall bestow my selfe, be bold, that I am alwayes your knight and seruant, and so I pray you to ac∣count of me. In good faith Sir, said she, they that refuse so faire an offer, may wel be reputed but poore in iudgment: because I am perswa∣ded, that you are held to be one of the best and most courteous knights this day liuing. And God shield me from such monstrous ingratitude, to deny a seruant of such honor and worth: rather most louingly I ac∣cept your kindnes, and returne you thankes with all my heart. Florestan, looking on her with an affectionate eye, and beholding her to be so amiably faire, said: Ma∣dame, I beseech our Lord, (who hath enriched you with such rare beautie) to grant your own hearts best desires: and thankefully I take your most gracious answere, be∣cause now I can doe nothing else for you, but remaine in ready willingnesse of seruice, wheresoe∣uer you shall please to commaund me. So taking leaue of her, Mabila,
and the other Ladies, he mounted on horsebacke: desiring Lord Gru∣medan, that if he receiued any ty∣dings of Amadis, he would let him vnderstand thereof so soone as he could, at the Enclosed Isle, whether he now went, to see Agraies and his other associates. CHAP. XV. How the Knight of the greene Sword, (who afterward stiled himselfe the Greeke Knight) Bruneo de bonne Mer, and Angriote d'Estra∣uaux, embarked themselues in the company of the faire Grasinda, and of that which happened to them afterward: MAster Elisabet hauing taken good order for Shipping, with all such necessaries, answerable to the enterprise of Grasinda, the windes also sitting faire and auspicious: she went aboord, attended by the Knight of the Greene Sword, Bruneo, Angriote, and many other Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen, as partly hath beene reported already. Hauing weighed their Ankers, and put forth into the large and spacious Seas, sometimes be calmed, and other∣whiles tempestuously afflicted: at length, by fauour of Heauen, and the great diligence of Master Elisa∣bet (an extraordinary skilfull Pilot) they passed by so many straites and Islandes, that they disco∣uered the coaste of Great Brit∣taine. Then the Knight with the Greene Sword, beholding the Country, where he hoped to finde his best happinesse and comfort, became exceeding ioyfull. And because he would by no meanes be discouered, he desired Grasinda, and all the rest in his company, to enti∣tle him no other thence-forward, but the Greeke Knight. Then hee commanded Gandalin, to bring the sixe Swords, which the Queene Me∣noressa had giuen him, at his de∣parture from Coustantinople two of them he gaue to Bruneo and Angri∣ote, and himself guirded on one, be∣cause he intended not to be knowen by that which hee vsually woare, hauing a greene scabbard, as of∣tentimes hath beene before remem∣bred. Comming neere to the place, where King Lisuart then made his aboade, Grasinda and hee being with-drawen aside, he began to her in this manner. Madame, by gra∣cious fauour of the Heauens, wee are now very neere the Countrie, whereto your heart hath alwayes pretended a most earnest desire: and I dare assure ye, that without spare of life or any trauaile, I will endeauour to make knowen, what bountifull graces you haue from time to time affoorded me. Worthy Greeke knight (quoth she) such is my trust in God, that he will not take his mercies from me, and as he hath prouided mee of so good a knight to be my guide, so hee will blesse me with the hope I aime at. But I pray you Sir, seeing wee are so neere to land, let vs goe on shoare, you, Angriote, Bruneo, and my selfe, without any more; and there wee may priuately conferre together, what is first to bee done, before I present my selfe to the Ladies of this Country.
Then Master Elisabet called for a Skiffe, which instantly was broght, whereinto they entred: and as they made towards the Shoare, they es∣spied a Ship lying at Anker. Here∣vpon our Greeke Knight, being de∣sirous to know who was in it, com∣maunded the Mariners to get neere it, which being done, Angriote cal∣led to them in the Shippe, demaun∣ding whence they were, whether they were bound, and who was a∣boord. Surely Sir, replyed our Patrone, our Shippe is come from the Enclosed Isle, and heere are two Knights aboord, who will gladly tell ye, what you desire to know. When our Greeke Knight heard speech of the place, whereto he was so much affected, and that two of his compa∣nions were there, his heart leapt with ioy; and Angriote continuing his questions, desired the Patrone, to cause the two Knights to come vp on the Deck, and (in the meane while) to tell him, how they were named. That may not I doe, an∣swered the Patrone, lest they should grow discontented with me; but I will call them vp to you; and per∣formed his word accordingly. Then they came vp on the Ore∣lop; and Angriote saluting them, de∣manded, if they knew where King Lisuart lay? Trust me Sir, answe∣red one of them, wee will gladly in∣struct you in any thing we can; but first we would entreate you, to re∣solue vs in one matter (if it consist in your power) for which wee haue vndertaken this voyage, and pur∣pose not to soiourne in any place, vntill wee can be therein satisfied. If wee know it, said Angriote, you may be well assured, that we will not conceale it from you. Sir Knights, (quoth the other) haue you heard any newes of a Knight, named Amadis de Gaule, in search of whom, many of his friends haue endured much paines and tra∣uaile, and haue left few places with∣out enquirie? These wordes did so touch our Greeke Knight with ioy and com∣passion, that hee could not refraine from teares: considering, what affe∣ction so many worthy men did beare him, and what sorrowes they suffered for his sake. First tell me, said Angriote, what, and who you are, and afterward, you shall vnder∣stand so much as I know. Then the other, who (all this while) had bin silent, stepping forward, said: Such as know me, call me Dragonis, and this my companion is named Enill, both resolued to ore-run the whole Ocean, and question Port by Port, vntill we finde the men wee speake of. Gentlemen (quoth Angriote,) God be your speed, and for your sakes, I will gladly enquire of our Shippes, wherein are straungers of many Nations, what they can say to this demand of yours. Our Greeke knight vrged him to this answer, be∣cause hee would not be knowen so soone, Angriote then began again, saying: I pray you Sir, where may we finde King Lisuart, and what newes is in his Court? Sir, answered Dragonis, he is now in a certain Ci∣ty of his, called Tagades, an excel∣lent Port of the Sea, confronting Normandie. And there is a great as∣sembly of his knights, sitting in coū∣sell, about a motion made by the Emperour of Rome, to enioy his Daughter Oriana in mariage, wher∣to no one will giue consent. Alrea∣dy there are arriued many Romanes to conuey her thence with them, a∣mong whom is the Prince Salusta Quide, Duke of Calabria, & other the greatest Lords of the Empire, beside a worthy traine of Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen; and shee is (already)
called Empresse of Rome. But she mournes incessantly; for it is much against her mind, that this marriage should be so much as talked of. We may well imagine, that this was more then Greek to our Greek Knight: for neuer was man strooken into such an astonishment; especi∣ally, vnderstanding the great re∣grates and grieuances of the Prin∣cesse. Notwithstanding, his spi∣rits recouering chearefull vigour, and being resolued withall, that it was quite against her consent, and contrary to the liking of the Lords of Great Brittaine: hee might the more easily helpe her by Sea or Land, wherein hee would not faile the very meanest Gentle-woman in the world. Much greater duty then he owed to her, without whose grace and fauour hee could not liue one houre, as he was verily perswa∣ded in his soule. And highly than∣ked God, for vouchsafing his arri∣uall in a time so opportune, that hee might doe her any seruice. As not doubting but to compasse the height of his attempt, (getting her into his power, and without any blame by her) and to ouercome all his misfortunes together. And here (in his soule) he read a lecture to his Ladie, discoursing his bitter suffe∣rings and languishments, the paines and perils by him endured, since the time he saw her last, and now, the catastrophe of all contentment, after a more then Herculean labour. Now, said Angriote to Dragonts, you are sure that the Romaines are already come about this businesse? On my faith (quoth he) it is yet but foure dayes, since wee parted from the Enclosed Isle, & on the very same day, there arriued Quedragant, Lan∣din his Nephew, Garnate of the Dreadfull Dale, Mandacian of the Siluer Bridge, and Helye the Delibe∣rate, who came to know of Florestan & Agraies, when they should begin the quest of Amadis de Gaule. And because Quedragant purposed to send to the Court of King Lisuart, to vnderstand there some tidings by strangers: Florestan made him an∣swere, that it wold be but lost labor, in regard, that himselfe had made the like question, & could know no∣thing. But wee heard by one of his Squires, that there happened some difference between them, which he corrected in such sort, as he is much commended in all places for it. I pray you Sir (quoth Angriote) tel vs, what is that Florestan? He is (answe∣red Dragonis) one of the sons of king Perion of Gaule, who sufficiently re∣sembleth the goodnes and worth of his two other brethren. Hereupon, at large he recited the contention between him & the Ro∣manes, in presence of the Queene Sardamira, & how his Squire (after-ward) came to the Enclosed Isle with their Shields, wheron (in bloody ca∣racters) was written each mans name. And because they were so shreudly handled by Florestan, the Queene sent after to entreate him to be her conduct to Mirefleure, whe∣ther shee went to see the Princesse Oriana. These newes were highly pleasing to the Greeke Knight & his associates, neuerthelesse, when he heard him name Mirefleure: his hart began to tremble, remēbring what delight and pleasure hee had there somtime receiued. Wherfore, with-drawing himself aside, he called Gan∣dalin to him, saying. My friend Gan∣dalin, thou hearest (as wel as I) these tidings concerning Oriana, & doest know withal, that if they should take effect I could not liue one houre af∣ter: therefore let me preuaile with thee, to doe one thing which I will aduise thee, and this it is.
Goe thou with Ardan, to Grasin∣da, and tell her, that you two, (with these other Knights heere present) will trauaile to finde out Amadis de Gaule. Being come to the Knights, secretly tell them, that I am heere, and desire them (with thee) to re∣turne to the Enclosed Isle. Finding there Quadragant, and Agrayes, en∣treate them from me, to keep them-selues there together, vntil the time of my arriuall, which shall be (by Gods helpe) within eight dayes, little more or lesse. Say also to my Brother Florestan, and to thy father Gandales, that I would haue them to take order, for prouiding so many Shippes, and other Vessels in a rea∣dinesse, as they can procure. For I purpose to be seene (shortly) in a place, where (if they be so pleased) I would gladly request their compa∣ny: and thou knowest sufficiently Gandalin: what diligence is required in a case so important as this is; wherefore, once more I desire thee, not to bee slow or tardie heerein. Then he called the Dwarfe to him, and said: Ardan, goe with Ganda∣lin, and follow those instructi∣ons, which he shall giue thee from mee. So Gandalin, according to his Masters commaund, went to Grasin∣da, in this maner. Madame, quoth he, we two are determined to leaue the Greeke Knight, and goe abord this Shippe, because wee would tra∣uaile along with these two Knights, in the searche for Amadis de Gaule. Therefore, good Madame, consider with your selfe, if you haue any ser∣uice to comand vs: returning you most humble thankes, for your ma∣nifold fauours done vs, without any merite at all on our behalfe. The like they said to the Greeke Knight, Angriote and Brunco; and so went aboorde the Shippe to Dragonis. Heere I must tell ye, that Angri∣ote was made acquainted with this intention: wherefore, to palliate and conceale it the more cleanely, he called to Dragonis, saying: Sir Knight, this Squire and Dwarfe are desirous to keepe you company, in your quest of Amadis de Gaule: be∣cause (as themselues say) they som∣time serued him. Dragonis and E∣nili knew them immediatly, which made them the more willing to accept their company, entertaining them with very kinde and louing re∣spect: but much more welcome were they, when they vnderstood what Gandalin tolde them, which made them weigh Anker presently, and set on towards the Enclosed Isle. The like did our Greeke Knight and his company, hoping that day to take harbour, in the neerest Hauen to Tagades, where (as then) King Lisuart kept his Court. Heere were assembled with him, most of the worthiest Lords in his kingdome, whom purposely he had called together, to conclude the marriage of his Daughter Oriana with the Emperour. But they, re∣specting the good and welfare of the Realme, as it became loyall and true Counsellers to doe, were all of a quite contrary opinion, shewing him by many sound and probable reasons, that hee went against all right and equitie, committing his chiefe Heire, into the subiection of a presumptuous and giddie-headed stranger, who (as they approued by precedent examples) might as quickly grow in hatred to her, as he was haire-brained in his ouer-sud∣den affection. All which notwith∣wanding, the King would not listen to, but alleage still such perempto∣rie reasons, meete and conuenient for such a Prince, as will allow nor like any aduice but his owne.
In which regard, Count Arga∣mont absented himselfe from this meeting, to a Castell of his owne, which was some two dayes iourney from the Court: notwithstanding, he was sent for againe and againe, and so much importuned, as he was brought thither in a Litter, hee be∣ing so weake and impotent by age, as hee was not able to sit on horse-backe. The King being aduertised of his comming neere the Court, moun∣ted on horsebacke to meet him, and the next day hee sate in councell a∣mong his Lords, deliuering diuers considerations, for maintenance of his former opinion, till at length (speaking to Argamont) thus hee said. Honorable Vncle, you are sufficiently acquainted with the occasion, why I haue called toge∣ther this great assembly, which plainly is, for mariage of my daugh∣ter with the Emperour of Rome, a matter by him most earnestly labo∣red and desired. Wherefore, let mee entreate you first, to tell mee what you conceite thereof: to the end, that these Lords may the more freely afterward, acquaint mee with their seuerall opinions. A long while the old Earle excused him-selfe, till being vrged thereto by the Kings expresse commaund, after some alligations for his owne de∣fence, he spake as followeth. My Lord, seeing it is your plea∣sure, that I should speak my minde in this noble assembly, concerning the Emperours marriage with the Princesse Oriana: I most humbly beseech you, to receiue in good part what I shall say. I know it to be treason in as high a degree, to dissemble with a Prince in matter of good counsell, as otherwise to offend against his royall person: and therefore, without any clouding or dissembling, credit what I speake in my poore aduice, albeit I haue of∣ten enough told it you before. Sir, you know, that Madame Oriana (your eldest Daughter) ought to succeede you, and by iust reason, is heire to the Countries, which God and Fortune hath giuen to your charge; whereto, by the right of Na∣ture, she hath more true title, then euer you had, or could pretend. For it fell to you, onely by the death of King Falaugris, who was but your Brother, and shee is your owne Daughter, and the eldest. There∣fore, consider with your selfe, that if the like had beene done to you, which now you purpose to the Princesse Oriana, you could not haue bin (at this day) so great a Lord as you are. Why should you exile her (as it were) hence, to plant my Niece Leonora in her place, considering, shee neuer offended you, to our knowledge? And if you thinke, that by marrying her to the Empe∣rour Patin, you shall thereby make her a greater Princesse, and most happily prouided for in your imagi∣nation: Beleeue me my Lord, you come very farre short of your ac∣count. For you are not ignorant, that if they haue children together, she suruiuing the Emperour, shall but simply remaine Dowager of Rome, in steed of being (after you) Lady and Queene of this king∣dome. Nay, which is much more, doe you thinke that your Subiects will euer agree thereto? I am perswa∣ded in my soule, if they should say, yea, it were against the Religion of their soules. And therefore, Hea∣uen fore-fend, that I should tell you otherwise, then my conscience as∣sures me to be true: albeit I know (to my no litle griefe) that, let vs alleage
whatsoeuer we can, you will be go∣uernde by your own fancie. Wher∣fore, most humbly I desire you, to pardon what I haue said, being compeld thereto by your seuere in∣iunction, against which may bee no gain-saying. Then he sate silent, and the King gaue order, that euery man should deliuer his minde: but they all a∣greed with the opinion of Count Argamont, which the King percei∣uing, he thus replyed: My Lords, I haue fully vnderstood your seueral iudgements: all which notwithstan∣ding, how can I (with mine honour) reuocate what I haue already pro∣mised to the Emperours Ambassa∣dours? Therein (quoth the Count and the rest) you may doe as you please, for wee haue discharged our dutie. By this time, the day being faire, and the Sea calme, our Greeke Knight and his company coasting along: the Mariners had descryed the mountaine, whereof the Towne Tagades tooke his name; and where King Lisuart as then resided, as for∣merly hath bin related. Some of them also went to Grasinda, and as∣sured her, that if the winde chaun∣ged not, they would land her in the Hauen within an houre, or lesse: and our Knights walking aloft on the Deck of the Shippe, declared them-selues thankfull to our Lord, for es∣caping such infinite perils and ship-wrackes, as euery minute was inci∣dent to them. But whosoeuer had the greatest cause of contentment, was farre in∣feriour in ioy to our Greek Knight, who since hee set eye on the Coun∣try, wherein liued all his hope, hap∣pinesse, and support of life, was so delighted in his soule, as no mans felicity could be answerable to his: neither had he power to looke off that long-wished land. Notwith∣stāding, fearing left his folly should be too plainly perceiued, he went downe into the Ship, and going to Grasinda, said. Madame, wee are now (as your selfe may see) at the place which you so much desired, and where I hope (by the perfection of beautie abyding in you) to attaine the full issue of mine enterprise: so that you shall safely returne home into your Country, with such honour as is iustly due to you. For right and reason being both on my side. God (who is a most vpright Iudge) will wholly maintaine the cause for you and me. Now, albeit Grasinda stood in some doubt of her successe; yet per∣ceiuing shee was come so neere to the point, where shee must either winne or lose what she much coue∣ted, shee made a manifest shew of a resolued assurance, answering the Knight in this manner. Beleeue me Sir, my hope and perswasion is greater in your manhood and good fortune, then all the beautie remay∣ning in me. But one thing let mee most hum∣bly entreate you, that when you are in the chiefest heate of your busines, you would fixe before your eyes, that you neuer attempted any con∣quest, but you brought it to a full and finall effect. In so doing, your renowne will highly enlarge it selfe, and my ioy likewise, whereby I may the more iustly stile my selfe, the on∣ly happy Lady now liuing. It is very expedient (replied our Greeke Knight) that we now con∣sider what is to be done. You haue a Gentle-woman attending on you, who hath a quicke and apprehen∣siue spirit, being named Gonisesa, and she speakes French very perfectly: we will deliuer her a Letter, which
shee shall present to King Lisuart, and his Queene Brisena, who doe (both of them) well vnderstand, and speake that language. Expresse charge must bee giuen to the Gen∣tlewoman, that she make no answer to any question demaunded of her, but in French onely. After she hath concluded with them, hee shall re∣turne hither againe to vs, because we purpose to stay in this place for her comming backe. Grasinda liked this motion excee∣ding well; wherefore, without any longer delay, the Gentlewoman was called, and the Letter giuen her: then shee entred into a small Barke, with her father, and two o∣ther Knights, that were her bre∣thren. Not much differing from the same instant, the Greeke knight gaue order to Lasinde, Bru∣neoes Squire, to follow after her, (without her knowledge thereof) for a more certaine obseruation of her entertainment in the Court, and what speeches should bee vsed to her, after her leaue taken of the King. And the better to colour his pre∣sence there, hee had expresse com∣mand, to pretend a diligent inquisi∣tion for his Master, saying to such as demaunded any newes concerning him, that he saw him not, since hee left him sicke in Gaule, when he vn∣der-tooke the quest of Amadis, meaning to returne to him againe, so soone as he could. So departed Lasinde, hoping right well to accomplish his enter∣prise. Soone after, the Gentle-woman arriued at the Town, where she was heedfully obserued by eue∣ry one, as well in regard of her beautie, as for her commendable manner of attendance. Passing from streete to streete, enquiring where shee might finde the King: shee chanced to meete Esplandian, with two Merlinson his fist, which he was going to flye in the field. He per∣ceiuing the Gentle-woman making towards him, went and met her, de∣maunding if shee would command him any seruice. Faire youth (quoth she) I seeke for the Kings lodging, whither I pray you to be my guide. That will I Lady (quoth he) and gladly shall I shew it you, if you do not know it. A thousand thankes sweete youth, answered the Gentle-woman. Then Esplandian tooke hold on the reines of her Palfray, and serued her as a Squire, leading her Palfray to the Palace, where after she was dismounted, hee conducted her to the King, whom they found walk∣ing in a Gallerie, with the chiefest Ambassadours of Rome, according for the marriage of his Daughter to the Emperour. The Gentle-woman falling on her knees before him, humbly salu∣ted him with these words. Sir, if it might so please you, that the Queen and all her Ladies were here in pre∣sence, I should then deliuer a mes∣sage to you, from her that hath sent me hither to you. And if it so fall out, that any of them doe finde her selfe interessed, by such matter as I am to let them all vnderstand: she must essay (if she thinke good) to finde out one to defend her, against a good knight, who purposeth to be heere very speedily: prouided, that your Maiesty do graunt him safe conduct. Truely Damosell, answered the King, wee will not hinder you in your charge. Whereupon, imme∣diatly he sent Count Argamont, his Vnkle, and Arban, king of North-wales, for the Queene, who stayed not long but came thither with her Ladies. Then the strange Gentle-woman,
kissing her hand, and ma∣king a low obeysance; spake thus. Madame, if that which I haue in charge to deliuer, from her who hath sent me hither, shall seeme any way straunge to you, you haue the lesse reason for it, considering, that this Court is renowned all the world ouer, for the very greatest ma is, and rarietie of aduentures heere happening, which my selfe al∣so haue knowen for truth, and that neuer any knight, Lady or Damosel, returned hence discontented. And thereby I am resolutely perswaded, that I shall finde no lesse fauour heere, then others formerly haue done: wherefore, receiue this Let∣ter, and if you please to allow of the contents therein set downe, you shall soone see the most gentle Greeke knight, and the fairest Prin∣cesse in the world, of whom hee hath charge. Then the King com∣manded the Letter to be publikely read, that euery one might heare what it contained. The Letter sent from Grasinda, to the Potent King Lis∣uart. MOST high and magnanimous Prince, I Grasinda, fairest of all the choycest beauties in Romania, doe giue you to vnderstand, that I am newly arriued in your land, vnder the guard and conduct of a Greek Knight, onely vpon this occasion: that as I haue already bin precisely iudged, and con∣fessed, for the fairest woman of al them in Romania: so, for the maintenance of this glory, which hath affoorded my soule no meane contentment, I would be heere in like case reputed, aboue all the Maides in your Court; for other∣wise my minde can neuer be satisfied, because it is the thing, that (beyond all other) I most desire. And if there be any Knight, that in his loue to any par∣ticular beautie, or in the behalfe of all together, will contradict mee, hee must resolue himselfe on two things. First, for Combate against the Greeke Knight: And next, that hee bring a Crowne with him from his Lady, ac∣cording as I my selfe will weare ano∣ther, to the end, that the Conquerour (in signe of triumph and victory) may make a present thereof to his Mistresse, for whom hee vndertooke this triall. And if you bee pleased Sir, to graunt this my humble request, then I likewise desire you to send a safe conduct by my Gentlewoman, for me, and all my com∣pany; but especially for the Greeke Knight, that hee may receiue no other discourtesie or out-rage, except such as may happen to him from them with whom he shall combate. And if hee chance to vanquish the first, then let a second, yea, third, sourth, and fift, or so many (one after another) as shall haue the courage to contend against me and my Knight. Your Maiesties in all serui∣ces else to bee comman∣ded. GRASINDA. Before God (quoth the King) the Lady must needes be extraordi∣nary faire, and the knight bold and valiant, that vndertakes so great an enterprise: the end whereof will not be easie in the attayning, because such fortunes are full of danger, and opinions (in this case) as diuers. Notwithstanding, Damosell and faire friend, you may returne when you please; and while we attend for your Ladies arriuall heere: safe con∣duct shall bee published according to her owne desire; and if shee finde none to gain-say her challenge for beauty, sheeshall (in my minde) haue the accomplishment of her
owne desires. Sir, replyed the Gentlewoman, you speake like a good and gracious King, as euer-more you haue bin esteemed. The Greeke Knight hath two Knights more in his company, who are de∣termined likewise to combate for the loue of their Ladies, against all such as dare encounter with them, and they desire also security from your Highnes, for their safe com∣ming and returning. Faire friend, answered the King, you shall haue all that you can request, and I am well pleased that it should bee so. Sir then (quoth she) rest your selfe assured, that you shall see them all here to morrow morning, in the company of her, who thinkes her selfe to be the onely beauty in the world. Wherefore Madame (said she to the Queene,) cause your choycest Ladies, to put on their ri∣chest accoutrements, and not to forget any thing that may illu∣strate their perfections, if they hope to gaine any glory from her. So, taking her leaue, she mounted on her Palfray, and returned direct∣ly the same way she came; where finding the Barke awayting for her, she went aboord, and had the winde so fitting for her, that she was quick∣ly with Grasinda, to whom at large shee reported, all that had passed betweene King Lisuart and her, who had graunted all that she requested. Hereupon, the Greeke knight was minded to haue their Tents and Pauilions forth-with erected so neere to the Towne as might be; and therefore concluded, that both he and all his company would goe on land the day following. But heere I must tell ye, that so soone as the Damosell messenger was de∣parted from the Court, the Prince Saluste Quide, who had bin present at the whole conference, and heard what answere was made her, step∣ped forth with other Romaine Knights, and falling on his knee before the King, saide as follow∣eth. Sir, we that are Romaines, and strangers here in your Country, do most humbly beg one boone, which we must needs craue of your Maie∣sty, redounding highly to your ho∣nour and benefit. Truely Sir, an∣swered the King, there is no reason then, that it should be denyed you. All of them gaue him most hearty thankes, and then the Prince pro∣ceeded on thus. Let it then bee pleasing to your Highnes, that we strangers may maintaine the cause for so many faire Maides, as are here present in your Court. And if Hea∣uen be as fauourable to vs, as equity and reason shall shew themselues gracious in our attempt: we make no doubt, but to effect this busines much better, then any of your Knights can doe, because our long acquaintance with the Greeks man-hood, hath sufficiently instructed vs, how to deale with them, being men commonly ouercome by vs, as our manifold encounters can well witnesse, and their very name shall more renowne our chiualry, then a∣ny effect whatsoeuer can ensue by them, to the men of this Country, although they were all to grapple with them. Don Grumedan hearing the pre∣sumption of the Romane, and with what audaciousnes he spake, could not endure it, but rising vp, thus hee said to the King. Albeit Sir, it is very high honour to Princes, when such strange aduentures happen in their Courts, whereby their renown and magnificence may be the more augmented: yet notwithstanding, many times they returne to their
scandall and disgrace, if they be not embraced with such discretion and reuerence, as is euer more re∣quired in all potent Kings. I speake these words Sir, for the Greeke Knight, who is so lately come into your land, vnder hope of perfor∣ming such matters as hee hath ac∣quainted you withall: wherein if he shall preuaile, and conquer them that would contend against him, though the danger will be theirs, yet the shame and dishonour must be yours. Wherefore, if you were so pleased, all should be deferred till the comming of Galaor and Noran∣dell, who will be heere within foure or fiue daies, as I am credibly en∣formed by some Knights that haue seene them. And by that time al∣so, Guillan the Pensiue will be reco∣uered, and able to beare Armes: which (in mine opinion) would fall out better for you, because they are meetest men to confront any challenger, and to defend the ho∣nor and reputation of your Court, with all the beauties therein aby∣ding. The King suddenly starting vp, replied. This may not be graunted, because my promise is already past to the Prince Saluste Quide, and these other Gentlemen his compa∣nions, who must be the protectours of our best beauties, and are able to answere a more high and daunge∣rous enterprise, then this is or can be. It may be so, said Grumedan: but I am well assured, that none of our Ladies or Damosells will consent thereto. Let it suffice then (quoth the King) that I will graunt to no∣thing else for them, then as alrea∣die I haue determined, and my word past for it. Hereupon, Saluste Quide thanking the king most hum∣bly, addressed himself to Grumedan, saying. Lord Grumedan, you may say what please you: neuerthelesse, I hope to winne the honor for these Ladies, and to ouercome the Greek Knight in Combate, of whom you make so great account. And be∣cause there are two other Knights in his company, of no lesse valour and prowesse then hee, as I am gi∣uen to vnderstand: I am well plea∣sed to Combat against them, and you if you haue any wil to take their part: prouided, that two of my com∣panions may ioyne with mee. By this meanes it will be apparantly discerned, to whom the honour of victory shall fall: the fight being equall, of three Romaines, against two Greekes and a Knight of great Brittaine. Grumedan smiling at the Princes pride, returned this answer. It were shame for me to make refusall, ther∣fore I accept your offer I, and those two that shall take my part. Thus speaking, he drew a Ring from off his finger, and making a low reue∣rence to the King, said. Behould Sir, here is my gage, which most humbly I beseech you to receiue, on the behalfe of mee and my com∣panions; as in iustice you can doe little lesse, the Prince Sa∣luste hauing challenged the com∣bat, as you your selfe haue heard; otherwise, hee must either vnsay his words, or yeeld him selfe van∣quished. By God, said Saluste, sooner shall the Seas be dryed vp, then the word of a Romaine be re∣tracted, or the least iniury done to his honour. And I doe much mer∣uaile Grumedan, that you dare speak words so voyd of reason: but if age haue made your sences faile you, your body must iustly pay the pe∣nance in combate, for speeches so indiscreetly deliuered. Surely Sir, answered Grumedan, I am yet yong enough, to bring mine enterprise
to a good issue, and to gaine that from you, which you imagine to get ouer-easily from me. And let me plainly tell you, that mine age hath taught me more experience, then euer, young pride or presump∣tion could learne, as I hope is suffi∣ciently seene in you, by the proud perswasion you haue of your selfe, who rather appeares to be a Cap∣taine of Braggards, then a man to performe any matter indeed. With these words arose vp King Arban, & more then thirty Knights beside, to take the cause in hand, & to maintaine what Grumedan had spoken: but the King imposed si∣lence on them, commanding them (on perill of their liues) not to vse a∣nymore such words in his presence. Whereupon, euery man departed to his lodging, leauing Count Arga∣mont alone with the king, to whom he spake in this manner. Sir, haue you not obserued the audacious in∣solence of these Romanes, and how vnreuerently they dare abuse the knights of your Court? In your own iudgement, they that are so malle∣pert here, what will they not doe in other places? In good faith Sir, see∣ing they declare so litle discretion, I greatly feare their behauiour to the Princosse Oriana, euen so soone as you shall haue lost sight of her. And yet notwithstanding (as I hear) you haue already giuen them your grant for her, which makes mee to meruaile not a little, whence this strange fancie in you should pro∣ceed, considering, that neuer did a∣ny Prince (so wise and & iudicious as you haue alwayes bin esteemed) so far forget himself, wherby plainly appeareth, that you are desirous to tempt your own good fortune, & to let loose the reines of diuers disa∣sters, very ominous to this whole kingdome. Haue you forgottē, what especiall graces our Lord hath (in a maner) heaped vpon you? And doe you not stand in feare of his anger? Fortune, is not she mutable? Are you now to learne, that when shee growes weary of good turns to him whom she hath exalted, she wil cha∣stise him afterward with many stripes, yee, with such cruel tortures, as are a thousand times worse then death? Pardon me Sir, I beseech you, if the faith I beare you, haue made me thus bold; to speake such words, as (perhaps) you like not: you are not ignorant, how transito∣ry the matters of this world are, and that all the renowne & glory, which by long and tedious trauell can bee gotten in this life, is oftentimes quenched and quite buried, vpon a very small occasion, if Fortune doe but once distaste the person. So that if any remembrance remaine of a mans former felicity, this blame will only liue vpon him, that hee did not make vse of his precedent happines, but rather entertayned it with an idle and negligent respect. Pausing here a while, and hearing the King to returne no answere, hee began againe thus. Sir, doe but thinke on the fault you sometime fell into, by banishing so many good Knights farre hence, as Amadis, his brethren, kinred and friendes, by whom you were feared, honoured and respected euery-where. And be∣ing scarcely freed from this mishap, will you voluntarily fall into a worse? Vndoubtedly I must needes imagine, that God and all good suc∣cesse hath forsaken you, because you haue first forsaken him. For, if it were otherwise, you would accept the counsell of them, that desire to liue no longer, then in loue & faith∣full seruice to you. But seeing what I doe, I am content to discharge the homage and duty I owe you,
and with-draw my selfe into mine owne territories: because I will auoyde (so much as possibly I may) the iust complaints and teares of your Daughter Oriana, at such time as you deliuer her, according to your promise, and the manifold miseries that will ensue thereon, to your dishonour, and woefull ouer-throw of this famous Re∣alme. Vncle, replied the King, that which is done, is done, were I to dye, I will not falsifie my word. But I pray you to abide heere two or three dayes longer, to see what issue these new-attempted Combats will sort vnto: because I elect you as Iudge of these exploytes, with such beside as your self shal make choyse of. Heerein you shall yeeld mee great contentment, and such ser∣uice as cannot be more acceptable, because we haue no one heere, that vnderstandeth the Greeke language better then you doe. Sir (quoth Count Argamont) seeing such is your pleasure, farre be it from me to contradict it: yet vnder this con∣dition, that afterward, you will dis∣pense with my departure; for it will be impossible for me to abide a∣mong such grieuous mournings, as must needs succeed this heay for∣tune. So breaking off their discourse, by reason of the Prince Saluste Qui∣des comming: Count Argamont with-drew himselfe, leauing the King and Prince in priuate confe∣rence. Now, we may not bee vn∣mindfull of Lasinde, the Squire to Don Bruneo, who compassed so good meanes, that he attained to true in∣telligence, of all matters and confe∣rence, since the Damosell-Messen∣gers departure. Wherefore, see∣ing the night fast hastening on, se∣cretly he left the Court, and made his speedy passage by Boate to the Greeke knight, whom he acquain∣ted with the Prince Salustes request to the King, the answere of Don Grumedan, and all things else in their due proceeding. This fell out to his no little comfort; and so much the rather, because now hee knew he should meddle with none but Romanes: whereas he feared be∣fore, that either his brother Galaor, or some other as worthy a Knight of Great Brittaine, would steppe in∣to his place on the Ladies behalfe. And then hee knew too well, that neuer could the fight be ended, ei∣ther without his death, or some o∣ther of his dearest friends, or (it might be) of both together. But these doubts being somewhat as∣swaged, he thought the time ouer long, till hee was at the combate; whereupon hee said to Grasinda. Madame, if you bee so pleased, to morrow morning wee will earely heare Masse in our Pauilions, and then take our way towardes King Lisuart, with such attendants as you shall appoint: and I make no question, but (by the helpe of hea∣uen) you shall obtaine your long-wished desire. Whereto she readily condiscended.
CHAP. XVI. How the Greeke Knight and his confederates, conducted the faire Gra∣sinda to the place where the Combates were to be perfourmed; And of that which ensued thereon. LIttle rest tooke Grasin∣da all this night, and much lesse the Greeke Knight, in regard of eithers earnest long∣ing, to haue this enterprise succes∣siuely accomplished. Wherefore by breake of day the next morning, they were conueyed ashoare, with the company appointed to attend vpon them: and after they had de∣uoutly heard Masse, they all moun∣ted on horsebacke, shaping their course to the Towne of Tagades, where King Lisuart with his Lords, exspected their arriuall. Now, you need not make any doubt, but that Grasinda was most rich and sumptu∣ous in her attire and habit, as hoping (by the helpe of her Knight) to winne the like honour from the Maydes and Virgins of Great Brit∣taine, as shee had done from the fairest women of Romania. And perswade your selues beside, that if she were so respectiue of her owne adornements, she failed not in the like care for her followers: especi∣ally her Ladies and Gentlewomen, which gaue good testimony to all such as saw them, that their Mstis was a most rich and worthy Lady. And yet the more to embellish her beautie, she woare a coastly rich Crowne on her head, which had bi long before conquered for her, in the manifestation of her beauty. Close by her side rode the Greeke Knight, in very honourable equi∣page, hauing on a rich Armour co∣uered with a coate of Armes of his owne colours. Next to him fol∣lowed Brunco, bearing a Shield of Sinople, in the midst whereof was figured a faire Damosell, with a Knight on his knees before her, as seeming to require mercy and fauor of her, his Armour being all ouer∣wauie with gold. By him rode An∣griose, mounted on a gallant Cour∣ser, armed likewise with a costly Ar∣mour, all thicke seamed ouer with flowres of gold: and he guided the Damosell, that had bin Messenger to king Lisuart the day before. In this manner came Grasinda, to the place appointed by the King for this busines, in the midst wherof was raised a square base of black marble, containing the height of a man; wherupon, he that intended to enter the Combat, was to fixe either his Helmet, Shield, Gauntlet, or else some greene branch. The Greeke knight looking on all sides about him, beheld the King, and many knights of Great Brittaine, but most he obserued the Prince Salust Quide, in an Armor thick seamed with Ser∣pents, which made him seeme so great of stature, and being mounted also on a Horse of huge aduantage, that he appeared to be a Giant. Thē listing vp his eies, he saw the Queen, & a faire troup of Ladies about her, each one wearing a rich Crowne on her head. But he could not see there his Oriana, which beganne to touch him somewhat in soule: wherefore he turned head to Grasinda, who ha∣uing her eye fixed on the Prince Sa∣luste Quide, he could easily gather thereby, that she was in great doubt of her successe, when smiling to him selfe, he thus spake to her. It appea∣reth to me Madame, that the huge
forme of this Knight makes you fearefull of my fortune: notwith∣standing, before he and I part hence, I shall let you plainly perceiue, that although hee is higher mounted then I am, I haue a heart as intire and able as his, and right consisting on our side, the victory must needs be ours. Heauen stand so fauourable for you, answered Grasinda. Then the Knight took the Crown which she woare on her head, and ryding gently toward the square base, placed it thereon: afterward, returning to his Squire, who had three mighty strong Launces (each hauing a little Penon at the point, enriched with faire flottes of fine gold,) and taking which of them he best liked, rode afterward to the King, speaking thus to him in the Greeke tongue. Most excellent King, I salute you as the onely ab∣solute Prince on the earth. Know that I am a knight of a strange Na∣tion, as my outward appearance makes manifest to you, and I by commaund of the Lady (who one∣ly hath power ouer me) am come into this Country, to approue my fortune against the knights of your Court, so great is their fame and re∣nowne in all places. But for ought I can perceiue, my intent is wholly frustrated, and you haue graunted that to Romanes, which I desired of your owne. But seeing it is so, and that it may bee none otherwise: may it stand with your Highnes liking (without any further waste of time) to com∣maund him that first intends the combat, to take the Ladies Crown, whose cause hee meaneth to main∣taine, and to place it on the Prrou, according as alreadie I haue done mine. Hauing spoken these words, hee gaue the spurre to his Courser, and made him bound, curuet and car∣riere so dexteriously before them, and with such a commendable plea∣sing performance, as euery eye took delight to behold him, with no meane praises ad commendati∣ons. Afterward, hauing attained the length of the field, hee turned with an extraordinary gallant grace, exspecting who durst first present himselfe. Now, the King knew not what all this while had beene spoken to him, because he vnderstood not the Greeke language: wherfore Count Argamont, who stood neerst to him, interpreted all that had beene said, with this addition of his owne. In good faith Sir, quoth he, it would highly please me, to see the ouer-daring pride of the Romanes, a lit∣tle qualified by this Grecian knight. Before God, answered the king, wee shall annon behold one of the stear∣nest encounters, that euer was seene in this land: for I perceiue the Prince Saluste Quide, already is en∣tred into the Lists. And to speake truely, he aduanced himselfe very proudly, enuious and much displea∣sed, to heare what praises were ge∣nerally giuen of the Greeke knight, which made him rate and reuile the people, crying out against them, saying: Fye on ye foolish sottes, I di∣ots, and beetle headed Brittaines, what mooues you to this sencelesse admiration, of a blockish paltrie companion, that shewes all the wit and courage he hath, in tormenting a poore horse vpon no occasion? Before God, if he were a man of any wisdom, he would make more spare of him, for the better defending him selfe against me, or else for his spee∣dier flight, before he be therto com∣pelled. Alas poore ignorant peo∣ple, you expresse your great want of knowledge, concerning the name of
a Romaine, who is so dreaded throughout all the East, as there is no Greeke Knight so hardie and ad∣uenturous, that dare contend with a Knight of Rome. Alas, I see the death of this miserable vnfortunate fellow, whom I shal so boysterously ouer-throw at the first blow, that the very reines of his backe will flye in sunder: and not onely the Crowne must be my boory, but the glorious Lady also, who hath taken so much paine and trauaile, to come hither into this Country, heere to receiue perpetuall shame and infamie. Speaking thus, he rode toward the Ladies; and addressing himselfe to Olinda, demaunded of her, if she pleased to deliuer him her Crowne, that thereby hee might defend her beautie. For, in mine opinion (quoth he) any man of good iudge∣ment will confesse, that iustly you ought to haue that other Crowne, which the fond Greeke hath placed on the Perrou. Moreouer, I haue made choyce of you, among all the rest, to be my best beloued; where∣fore I beseech you grant me leaue, that I may begin the Combate for you, as she to whom I am vowed and dedicated. For, no sooner shall the Empresse haue made her en∣trance into the great City of Rome: but there I meane to make you my wife, as sole Lady and gouernesse of me, and all my greatest fortunes. Olinda, tired and much troubled with this idle talke of Saluste Quide, made him no answere; but turning her face another way, feigned a conference with one of her owne company: which the Prince percei∣uing, as halfe in anger, thus he spake to her. It seemeth Madame, by your manner of behauiour, that I am a man vnable to execute what I haue spoken: but let mee neuer haue loue, or any esteeme of you, if I doe not perfourme much more. Only this being granted, that my first encounter with the Launce, may haue but your gracious looke, and that you turne not your face till it be done. This earnest importu∣nity did so embellish the beautie of Olinda, by a most sweet and amiable blush: that she knew not how to bee rid of this vexation, making no ac∣count at all of his words. Which the Queene obseruing, she took the Crowne from her head, and sent it to the Prince Saluste▪ who receiuing it very thankfully, went to the base or Perron, and set it by that belong∣ing to Grasinda. Afterward, taking a strong Lance, he beganne to shake it in such sort, as if he meant to snap it in sunder: then ryding proudly to the King, with his Helmet on his head, and Shield about his necke, thus hee spake. King Lisuart, I shall soone let you see the difference, betweene vs that are Romanes, & the Knights of your Court: for this braue pre∣suming Greeke, that thinkes to com∣bate with so many one after ano∣ther, shal presently receiue the grea∣test shame that euer Knight did. And then, let his other two compa∣nions come if they please, to re∣uenge his cause if they can: for this I dare promise you, that before I de∣part from hence, I will present you with their heads, insteed of Crowns. So much offended was Grumedan, at these arrogant proud wordes of Sauste; as he could hardly forbeare to smite him. Neuerthelesse, in regard of the Kings strict counter∣maundes before, he dissembled his anger, and went to him only with this answere. Lord Saluste, you haue not yet forgot the Combate, that must bee betweene you and me, if (as you say) you escape from the Greek, & come fairely off
My memorie is more perfect then so, replyed Prince Saluste, and your selfe shall haue good cause to re∣member it. So closing his beauer, clasping close his Shield, and placing his Launce in the rest, he ranne mainly against the Greeke Knight, who met him with such force (neither of them failing in the attaint) that Sa∣luste was vnhorsed: and our Greeke Knight finishing his race, found a truncheon of the Launces shaft sticking in his Shield, whereby eue∣ry man thought that hee had beene wounded. But hee quickly decla∣red, that there was no such matter, and snatching it out, threw it on the ground, turning againe to meete with his enemie, who moued nei∣ther hand nor foot, he was so daun∣ted with the fall. And not without great cause, considering what a height he fell, and the heauy charge of his armour, so that his right arme was broken in twaine. And yet it happened farre worse to him; for in falling downe, his left foot hung fast in the stirrop, and being vnable to get it forth, his horse offended at his vnfashionable burden, gaue him such a blow with his foote on the Helmet, that it fell off from his head, and he lay still as one entran∣ced. The Greeke Knight beholding him in this pittifull condition, spake out so loud, as euery one might heare him. Beleeue me gentle Ro∣maine, the Lady for whom you haue performed this rare chiualry, is wonderfully beholding to you: notwithstanding, if you doe not quit her Crown from my Mistresse, (who deserues it better then she, as excelling all in beautie) you lye fairely for the losse of your head presently. But Saluste made him not any answere; whereupon the Knight rode to the King, thus spea∣king in Greeke to him: Sir, he that so lately gaue perswasions to your people, to relye confidently in his manhood, will not now render his Ladies Crowne to my Mistresse, to whom (by the testimony of all pre∣sent) it iustly appertaineth. Where∣fore, may it please you (as an vpright Iudge) to doe me right: otherwise, I will smite off his head before this faire assembly. Then suddenly tur∣ning bridle, and alighting from his horse, he went to Prince Saluste, ma∣king shewe, as if he meant to kill him. Which Count Argamont seeing, said to the King. Sir, you ought (in my minde to graunt the Greeke Knight what he demaundeth, and saue the life of the other, else you may heereafter bee blamed for it. And why? answerd Grumedan. I pray you Lord Argamont, let Fortune deale as pleaseth her. Haue you not yet seene enough of these Ro∣maines saucinesse? I protest to you vpon my faith, that with their per∣emptorie audaciousnesse, they are become as malicious as olde Mon∣kies, and you shall perceiue it by ex∣perience, if the Greeke Knight bee hindred from pursuing his victory. For although Saluste be so neere his ending, yet I dare giue you all my lands and goods, if the King doe saue him: that he will iustly say here∣after, he saued him from death, that will bee the greatest enemie to his life. Therefore, I beseech you Sir, delay your sentence for a while, till it may be certainely kno∣wen, what will bee the issue of the fight. During this discourse, the Greek Knight made shew of disarming Sa∣luste, for more easie smiting off his head from his shoulders: which the King fearing, prayed his Vnckle to
vrge the stay, and to graunt him the Crowne which hee desired. Then the olde Earle arose, and tolde him in the Greek tongue, what the King had commanded him. Heereupon, the Knight stept backe, and putting his Sword vp into the sheath, spake to the Count in this manner. In honour of so good a King, and you, for once I will saue the life of this presumptuous Romane. Neuer∣thelesse, if any of his companions fall into the like danger, let them be well assured, that they must make a∣mends for him. For I neuer heard of any vaine-glory like to theirs, wherein they haue gotten an habite and custome, to condemne any Knight errant, in respect of their owne worthinesse. Moreouer Sir, I pray you tell the King, that for the much good I haue heard of him, I shall neuer bee willing to yeeld him any discon∣tent, or enter into any seruice hurt∣full to him. But withall, I humbly entreate him, to fauour me in the prosecution of my victory, if others shall present themselues for the Combat: to the end, that hereafter they may not bee forward in despi∣sing other men, after the manner of the Emperor Patin; who hath great delight in threatning others, and yet beares away the blowes shame∣fully himselfe, like to these Bragado∣chiaes of his band. So mounting on horsebacke, he rode to the square Perrou, whence he tooke the two Crownes, and carried them to Grasinda, who (you must needes presume) was extraor∣dinarily pleased; and thanking the Knight heartily, prayed him to pro∣ceede on, since he had begunne so well. Then calling for a new Launce, which speedily was brought him, he returned to the end of the Lists, at∣tending when another should come offer himselfe. And seeing no man stirre, being wearie of so long way∣ting, he called for the Damosell Messenger, that brought the Letter to Court, saying thus to her. Faire friend, I pray you goe to the King, and tell him, that I most humbly de∣sire him, if the Romanes will com∣bate no more, that he suffer not any of his Court to supply their defect: for, ouer and beside the smal honour they shall gaine, by vanqui∣shing so silly a Knight as I am, yet at this time, I am not willing to meddle with them. But, if any of the other will reuenge their compa∣nions disgrace, I am heere ready to receiue them all, one after ano∣ther; yea, or two of the very best of them both together. The Damosell rode presently to the King, and deli∣uered all that the Greeke Knight had committed to her trust, where-to he answered: That hee was well pleased with his motion, conside∣ring the great imposition layde vp∣pon him by his Lady. And if hee liked to loue him, and be one of his followers, he would honour him as highly as any Knight of his Court. Moreouer (quoth the King) assure him from me, that he shall suf∣fer iniury by Combate, against none other then the Romaines, who ear∣nestly craued it at my hands. And he had great reason for this answer, because he had then no Knight able to contend with the Grecian: For all were absent from the Court, in regard of the tempestuous trou∣bles, except Guillan le Pensif, who was then sicke, and Cendile de Ga∣note, who the day before (by an vn∣luckie accident) was shot through both his legges with an arrow, as the King came to the fall of a Hart. This answere being vnderstood
by the Damosel like a wise & discreet Gentlewoman, humbly thanked the King, saying further, thus. Sir, if the Greeke knight could so ea∣sily haue beene entreated, the Em∣perour of Constantinople had not so soone lost him: but hee will neuer subiect himselfe to any, as hauing more affected liberty, then all the goods and treasures of the world. And thus assure yourselfe, that his onely desire and felicity, is, to de∣fend the right of Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen, in preseruing them from wrong or abuse offered to them: in which honourable imployment, he hath wonne such immortall fame and renowne, in manifold difficult and dangerous attempts, as the se∣uerall reports would seeme incredi∣ble. So, with your answere I will returne to him, or any seruice else you please to commaund me: gi∣uing you further to vnderstand, that, till it be midday, he will attend them that dare aduenture the Combate, but afterward he shall hardly stay, or admit any such ley∣sure. Then she returned to the Greeke knight, who hauing heard the Kings answere, went to Grasinda, saying. For ought I can perceiue, Madame, the Crowne is your owne franke and free, and I clear'd from all further danger of the Romanes: neuerthelesse, in expression of my dutie to you, I will tarry yet a litle longer, to see if any of them haue the heart to aduenture his fortune. Hauing thus spoken, he called one of his Squires, and said to him. Car∣ry my Shield, and set it on the Per∣rou; then proclaime aloude, that if there be any other Romaine, who is willing to enter the Combate, let him come and aduance his Shield by mine. The Squire did as hee was com∣manded, yet (for all this) not a man of them would stirre, but stood loo∣king one vpon another: especially Maganill, who (among the Ro∣manes) was reputed for one of the best Knights in the world, yet being very fearefull of the Greeke, and willing to excuse himselfe, he thus spake to his other companions. You know, my friends, that ye∣sterday the Prince Saluste Quide vn∣dertooke the Combate against Gru∣medan, and I made him promise, that if he were vanquished by him, that I and my two brethren would reuenge his cause: therefore (of ne∣cessitie) I may not now aduenture. But I am much amazed at you all, to see you so voide of heart and cou∣rage, as to stand like men confoun∣ded in soule, at one onely encoun∣ter of the Launce perfourmed by the Greeke. Then he called to Gradamor and Lazanor, two young Romaine Knights, of spirit enough, and said to them. Me thinkes you are too slow in aduenturing your fortunes. You see, the Greeke make proffer of combatting with any two among vs, and I am very certaine, that if you two will accept his challenge, hee shall finde it no easie matter to deale with you; let mee therefore perswade you to vndertake him. These words did so puffe them vp with a vaine conceit of themselues, as they called immediatly for their Armes, and entring into the Lists very boldly, depending more vpon presumption, then any mannerly education, passed by before the king, without any offer of salutation, or seeming so much as to see him. Then ryding to the Perrou, Grada∣mor (in very despightfull manner) hauing his Sword drawen in his hand, smote with all his force at the Greeke knights Shield aduaunced
thereon, and brake it in pieces, cry∣ing so loud as he could. Ill may be thriue, that suffers any longer this saucie mates Armes to stand heere so proudly. When the Greeke Knight both heard and saw this iniurie, he grew so highly offended, that, without staying to call for another Shield, he tooke a new Launce, and giuing the spuries to his horse, met the two Romaine Knights so couragiously, that one of them was throwne to the ground so amazedly, as he knew not whether it was day or night, and euery man thought that his necke was broken, hee lay so qui∣etly. Now, because our Greekes Launce was shiuered in many pie∣ces, he drew his Sword, and turning his face to Lazanor, loaded him with such mighty strokes, as, if hee had not caught fast hold on the maine of his horse, hee had falne to the earth. But as he lay thus bow∣ing, the Greeke seized on his body, and by meere strength of arme (tea∣ring the Shield from about his necke) hee threw him against the ground. Neuerthelesse, quickly he receiued footing, and went to helpe vp his brother: In this time the Greeke was dismounted from his horse, which he feared to loose, because he ran about the fielde: but minding more his present busines, hee ranne pell mell vpon his ene∣mies, laying so stearnely about him on euery side, as they were no way able to endure him. Now gaue he good testimony of his valour, and that hee was no learner in such extremities: but as one of the Ro∣manes was running about the Per∣rou, and the other following speedi∣ly after him, onely to auoide the Greekes keene edged Sword, hee gaue Lazanor such a stroake on the right leg, as it was well neere cut in twaine, so that meere paine and an∣guish made him fall downe, and pi∣teously he craued mercy. But the Greeke Knight preten∣ding, that either he heard or vnder∣stood him not, he set his foot on his brest, and so left him stretcht out a∣long on the ground, returning to Gradamor, who fled to the king for warrantie of his life. All which would not serue his turne; for with his Sword, he did beat him backe a∣gaine to the Perrou, where being quite out of breath, he fell downe all along: where the Greeke setting foote on him, smote so many blowes on his Helmet, that it fell off from his head, which hauing now at so apt aduantage, he purposed to smite from his shoulders, but that the o∣ther cryed out to him. Ah gentle knight, for Gods sake mercy, I am ready to doe whatsoeuer you shall command me. Remoouing his foote from off him, he suddenly looked back, and espied Lazanor creeping on his knees to steale away: but he quickly caught hold on his arme, and dragd him along to the Perrou, laying him close by his brother Gradamor, which made euery one imagine, that there he would smite off their heads together. Whereupon Don Grumedan, who hated them to the death, spake out so loud, as euery man might easily heare him. Mee thinkes the Greeke hath so well re∣uenged the wrong done to his Shield, as Gradamor hath good cause to remember it while he liues. As he spake these words, Esplan∣dian came to him, and the Greeke demaunded what hee would haue. Sir, answered Esplandian, I beseech you (for my sake) spare the liues of these two Knights, seeing they
yeeld themselues as vanquished. But he feigned as if hee vnderstood him not: wherfore Esplandian pray∣ed Count Argamont, to interprete for him, which he did. Truely Sir, (quoth the Greeke) I will gladly be∣stow their liues on this sweet youth, prouided, that you will tell mee of whence, and what he is. Beleeue me Sir, replyed the Count, I know not any man in this Court, that heerein can resolue you, for he was brought hither almost by miracle. Then briefly he reported, how, and in what manner the aged Hermite found him. I haue often heard of him, said the Greeke, in Romania, and that he is named Esplandian, by reason of certaine naturall letters or carra∣cters vnder his brests. You say true, answered the Count, and you shall see them presently, if you please. So he commanded Esplan∣dian to shew his brests, as accor∣dingly he did: whereat the Knight not a little meruayling, said. Faire youth, I pray God to blesse thee, and send thee good fortune in the highest degree. So mounting on horse-backe a∣gaine, he left the Romaines with young Esplandian, and returned to Grasinda, saying. Beleeue me Ma∣dame, I haue beene ouer-trouble∣some to you, but I was compelled thereto (as your selfe hath seene) and could make no speedier dis∣patch. Vpon my faith, answered she, you can neuer doe any thing, but I shall very thankfully accept it, let vs now then goe on-ward, if you please. So getting forth of the crowd, they tooke the way to their Shippes, in so high content on all sides, as possibly could be. Being come aboord, they commanded the Mariners, to set saile for the Enclo∣sed Isle. But because the Greeke Knight had some suspition, that Don Grumedan would stand in need of Knights helpe, to maintaine the Combat, which he had vndertaken, if so be it should go forward, he de∣sired Angriote and Bruneo, to stay be∣hind, & succor him, & in the meane while to vnderstand some tydings of Oriana, if any way they could at∣taine thereto. CHAP. XVII. How King Lisuart sent for his Daughter Oriana to the Court, that he might deliuer her to the Romanes. And of that which happened to a Knight of the Enclosed Isle: But more especially, of the Combat which Don Grumedan had against them that defied him. ALready hath beene de∣clared to you, that the Princesse Oriana be∣ing at Mirefleure, the Queene Sardamira (by the consent of King Lisuart) went thither to see her, and to acquaint her with the Emperours affection towards her, as also with what mag∣nificence she should be wel-comed to Rome. Now, in the prosecution of our History, you must vnder∣stand, that after full conclusion was past with the Romanes, concerning her: the King would haue her come to the Court, commanding his Ne∣phew Giontes, to take two Knights more with him, & bring her thence away with all conuenient speed. But he gaue him charge (vpon pe∣rill
of his life) that none, but they of her owne company, should haue any conference with her. For execution of the Kings com∣mand, Giontes tooke Sadoce and La∣zanor with him; who being come to Mirefleure, after they had acquain∣ted her with her fathers purpose, they made ready a Litter for her, be∣cause otherwise shee was vnable to trauaile, she was so weake and sick∣ly, by reason of her continual mour∣ning; yet on she needes must, ac∣companied with the Queene Sarda∣mira, and other Ladies. Betweene Mirefleure and Tagades, where the King soiourned, approaching nere to a goodly Fountaine, enuironed with diuers young spreading trees, they espyed in a little groue, a Knight, ready prepared for Com∣bate, bearing a Shield of Sinople, and a Launce, with a Banderole or Pennon of the same colour: who calling to one of his Squires, said. Goe, and tell them that guard Ma∣dame Oriana, that (in courtesie) I entreate them, to let me speake a word with her; else, I will striue to doe it, whether they will or no. The Squire going to Giontes, told him as his Master had commanded him: whereat he beganne to laugh harti∣ly, that he (being alone) should send them such a threatning braue; wherefore hee gaue them this an∣swere: Friend, returne to the Knight, and tell him, that he cannot (at this time) speake with Madame Oriana: moreouer, that if hee con∣tend violently to doe it, he will not find it easie for him. When Oriana heard these words, she tooke them very vnkindly, and said to Giontes: Fair Sir, why should you be offended at any mans spea∣king with me? Perhaps he brings me such good newes, as may be ve∣ry pleasing to me. Madame, (quoth he) the King hath commaunded vs on our liues, that no one may come neere your person, much lesse speak with you, vntill you come to him. The Squire returned his answere to his Master; in the meane while Giontes, misdoubting that hee must needes try the Combate, made him ready for it. As readily came the Knight (who stiled himselfe the Greene Knight) into the fielde, and both giuing the spurre to their hor∣ses, met together so furiously, that their Launces flew in pieces, and Giontes his horse being shouldered, fell to the ground with his Maister vnder him, so that he could not rea∣dily recouer himselfe. Whereupon the Greene Knight trotting to him, desired him once more, that hee would permit him to speake with Oriana. By my faith Sir, answered Giontes, if you do, it is much against my will, and by this mis-fortune of my horse. Hardly had he concluded these words, but the Greene knight heard Sadoce crying, that hee should stand vpon his guard. Wherefore, lea∣uing Giontes, he ranne against the o∣ther, and failed in the attaint: which Sadoce did not, but met him so man∣fully, that his Launce flew in infinit pieces. The Greene knight, an∣gry at his misse, took another Lance, and giuing his horse the spurre, met Sadoce so powerfully, that hee cast him quite out of his saddle. Which Lazanor seeing, and hoping to bee reuenged for his two companions, couched his Launce against the Greene Knight, with full perswasion to vnhorse him: but they encoun∣tred so furiously with their bodies, that Lazanors arme was broken, and hee sate so amazedly on his horse, as hee had not the power to stay him, till hee had runne out his
whole race, because the Greene Knight (in his passage by him) had pluckt the bridle off his head, and seeing him runne in that con∣fused manner, he fell a laughing at him. Then came he to Oriana, and humbly saluting her, shee imagined him to be Amadis: wherefore, ray∣sing her selfe in the Litter, she wel∣comde him very graciously. Then the Knight gaue her a Letter, spea∣king thus to her. Madame, Agrais and Florestan, doe duteously com∣mend themselues to your accep∣tance; and haue expresly sent me to you, to bring you their mindes, con∣tained in that writ. Wherefore, consider with your selfe, if you will command me any seruice to them: for I must returne to them with all possible speed, being well assured, that although I am a man of slender valour, yet they may stand in neede of my helpe, before their enterprise will be ended. Now trust me Sir, quoth she, they may well faile of meeting with a better Knight then you are, witnes the paines you haue taken to speake with me. But good Sir, seeing you haue done so much for mee, vouchsafe to let me know who you are, to the end, that I the more thankefully remember you heere-after, when better I may performe it. Madame, they that know mee, said he, doe tearme me Garnate of the Dreadfull Dale, whose griefe is not a little, for your fathers vnkind∣nes and cruelty to you. Notwith∣standing, hardly will he bring his purpose to passe, it will first cost the liues of many good Knights, who (for your sake) will defend you to their vttermost power. Ah my deare friend Garnate, quoth she, I pray GOD giue mee the meanes, whereby I may acknowledge this wonderfull loyaltie. Madame, said he, I haue all my life-time desired to doe you some seruice, as one that is your most humble seruant, and now I must needes take my leaue of you. For he saw the Queene Sardamira comming neere, who beholding Oriana aduisedly, imagined her lookes to be more chearefull, and her present disposition much alte∣red from the former, whereupon she said. Madame, I doe not know the Knight that spake with you, but he hath handled your guards as rough∣ly, as Florestan did them that had the charge of me, so that now they need not mocke one another. I know not, whether it be the misfor∣tune of the way, or through their owne want of courage: but well I wot, that I neuer saw two worthi∣er knights, then this and Flore∣stan. Oriana faintly smyling, answered. I saw not how yours were dealt withall: but as for these heere, it seemes that they met with one, who knew well enough how to chastise their harshnesse. As they held on this merry mocking, Giontes, and the two other came towards them, so much ashamed of themselues, as they durst not hold vp their heads, to looke them in the faces. But setting on toward Tagades, Oriana called Mabila into the Litter to her, as desirous to haue her company. So being together, they closely read the Letter, whereby Florestan ad∣uertised the Princesse, that Ganda∣lin, and Ardan, the Dwarfe to Ama∣dis, were both arriued at the Enclo∣sed Isle, where they exspected their Master within eight dayes follow∣ing, according as hee had sent word thither; and Galuanes, Agraies, be∣side many more good Knights,
were all purposely there met toge∣ther; onely to lend her succour, so soone as they should haue intelli∣gence of her shipping away, to bee sent for Rome; wherefore, in the meane time, she should comfort her selfe, and be of good courage, as now she had no other cause. These newes were so welcome to both the Ladies, as nothing else pos∣sibly could be more; and they ima∣gined, that either they were newly reuiued from death to life, or deli∣uered out of a darke dungeon, into an incompatable glorious light. And all the way as they rode along, they could finde no other argument of talke, neither so much as thinke on any thing else, but only to reade and re-reade the Letter ouer and o∣uer, which questionlesse they did an hundred times. But being come to the Court, new sorrow ouer ma∣stered this iocund solace; fearing, lest the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, should not be able to execute their enterprise. Now, so soone as Ori∣ana was alighted; she went to her own lodgings, neuer going to the Queenes her Mother, according as she was wont to doe, making an ex∣cuse, that she was not wel. Whereof the King receiuing knowledge, hee went to see her, accompanied one∣ly with Arban, King of North wales. No sooner was he entred the cham∣ber: but shee thrw her selfe at is feet, and (euen as it were) wning her selfe in teares, with a trembling voyce, thus she spake. Alas my King and Father, for Gods sake remember your defolate daughter in compassion, and bee not lesse fauourable to her, then (al your life-time) you haue beene to meane Ladies & Gentlewomen, in requiring your ayde and assistance: Ah my worthy Lord and Father, when Archalaus led you away priso∣ner, it was for the fame of your great goodnes, in helping her, that there∣to vrged you. And can it be possi∣ble, that now you should forget so rare a vertue, that euermore was most familiar with you? will you deale worse with me, then euer you did with any liuing body? I haue heard that you will send me to the Emperor of Rome, with intent that I should be his wife: But if you com∣pell me thereto, you shall commit a most haynous sinne; for it must bee done in despight of my selfe; and I am certaine, that I shall sooner con∣sent to mine owne death. Deare Daughter, answered the King, think you that I respect not your good & honor, as I ought to doe? Father, quoth she, I know not how you vn∣derstand my good & honor, but this I can assure you, that if you separate me from you, you will be an homi∣cide to your owne blood. Then she fell into such sighes and teares, as the King was enforced to forsake the Chamber, and leaue her, shee moned so much pity in him. Then Arban King of Northwales stept to her, and hoping to comfort her, said. Madame, you haue alwayes hitherto bin esteemed wise, & it ap∣peares, that now you will wander from that good reputation. Do not you know that there is due remedie for all things? It may be the King wll better aduise himselfe, if you knew which way he might be won thereto. Ah my royall Cousin, an∣swered she, seeing Fortune is so ad∣uerse to me, & determines to worke her vttermost malice on me, depri∣uing you & many more of al means of succouring me by force of arms, wherein you haue past through infi∣nit dangers, to deliuer afflicted La∣dies & Damosels from tribulations: let me then (at least) entreate you, to helpe me with your good word,
in counselling the King from do∣ing me such shame, except he in∣tends to tempt God, and constraine that happinesse, (which alwayes to this instant hath attended on him) vtterly to forsake and abandon him, leauing (in steed thereof) all mis∣chiefe and misery. For Gods sake therefore, returne againe to him, and find some meanes to bring him hither once more, with mine olde noble Vncle Count Argamont, and Don Grumedan, to the end, that you three together may the better pre∣uaile with him. In vttering these words, the wo∣full Princesse was so grieuously af∣flicted, that she seemed rather dead then aliue, for she fell downe on the ground in a swoune: which King Arban seeing, he departed out of the Chamber, while Mabila and other Ladies (who were then about her) might minister some helpe to her in this extremity. He went to the King, and told him all that O∣riana had said to him: which moued him to such compassion, as his in∣ward distraction might be very easi∣ly discerned. Notwithstanding, for all the perswasions he could vrge vnto him, he would not goe to her: vntill Count Argamont and olde Grumedan were so earnest with him, that at last he yeelded. And as they entred into her Chamber, they be held her former traunce as yet to continue: wherefore he went nee∣rer to her, and taking her in his armes, said: Deare Daughter speake to me; but she moued neither hand nor foote, but lay as if she had bin dead. At length, by the helpe of Vine∣ger and cold water, her spirits came to her again, & she, breathing forth a vehement sigh, able to breake a strong heart in sunder, seeing her Father so nere, said vnto him. An my deare father, take pity on me. Sweet child (quoth he) what wouldst thou haue me do? Sir, said she, before you send me away from you, I beseech you consider what harmes will en∣sue. For neuer will I see Rome, rather shall the Sea deliuer me from that hell, and so shall you be the cause of two euils together. First, of my diso∣bedience to you, onely by your selfe enforced Next, of the dismall ho∣micide, which your daughter must and will acte vpon her selfe. By which meanes, in thinking to com∣bine alliance and loue with the Em∣perour, (he knowing my destructi∣on wrought in the meere despight of him: she shall receiue iust occasi∣on of eternal hatred to you, and not he alone, but all such as shall heare of so lamentable a disaster. So that, looke how much you haue been re∣nowned through the world, for a benigne, mercifull, and vpright Prince: so much the more will you then bee condemned, for the most cruell▪ plesse and yron hear∣ted man that euer ed. Pardon me, deare Sir, the extremity of my a∣ction, makes me speake what I doe, which if you conceite to be vttered too vnreuerently, take such due ven∣geance on my indiscretion, as best shall like your selfe: for you can inflict no paine or torment on mee so grieuous, as that which already you haue prepared for me, in depriuing me of your father∣ly presence. Daughter (quoth he) I vnder∣stand you very well, your mother shall tell you what I am determined to do▪ therfore, do not thus discom∣fort your self, but be of good cheare, and (perhaps) you shall haue your own desire. The King made her this promise, because his heart was oppressd with sorrow, as he could not speak any longer. And indeed,
the Queene then came in; who be∣holding her Daughter in such wo∣full condition, was much amazed thereat: for Oriana no sooner saw her Mother, but she fell into a swoun againe. In which time, the King left the Chamber, committing her to the care of women, who were not a little busie about her. After the was somewhat recouered, as the Queene demaunded how she fared: the wofull Oriana opening her eies, which (in a manner) were quite drown'd in teares, beganne to looke vpon her very ruefully, and with a voyce meerely forced, said. Alas deare Mother, my present estate is much better then it should be, or I (in heart) could wish it: for Death now is my onely desire, and thereto my spirit soly inclineth, seeing my selfe vtterly forsaken of the King & you. Your intent is, to send me to Rome, but the voyage I shall make, will not be halfe so far: because I will leaue you my body (whereof you haue disposed against all reason) & render my spirit to God, who whol∣ly hath souerainge power ouer it. The Queene being moued with much compassion, replyed thus. Sweet Daughter, the King loues you so dearely, as he thinkes on no∣thing else, but what may be for your good and best aduantage: where∣fore should you then thus torment your selfe? Why Madame Mother, answered Oriana, doe you think this banishment of mine, so aduantage∣ous for me? Why doe you say, that the King my Father loues me, shew∣ing himselfe more mercil to me, then euerany father did to his child? Here you must vnderstand, that during this woefull conference, be∣tweene the Queene and her Daugh∣ter▪ the King was walking in his Gar∣den, accompanied with very few. Count Argomnt seeing him very pensiue and melancholy, conside∣ring on what the Princesse had said vnto him: conceited with himselfe, that now he was become better ad∣uised; whereupon he went to him, saying. My Lord, I think my selfe a most happy man, that I can com∣passe any occasion▪ to tell you that, which duty bindeth me to doe: knowing you a wise and vertuous Prince, easie to vnderstand what good is got by euill meanes. Neuer∣thelesse, my late commiseration of your Princely Daughters present e∣state, constrayneth me now to re∣member you, of that which I heere∣tofore haue said concerning her. And I humbly beseech you, so much as a man may doe, that before you send her so farre hence; you would maturely consider it, and iudge thereof without any partiall affecti∣on. For, as we commonly see, that a wise man seldome fals into any errour, when he is guided and led by reason: euen so we discerne the contrary, when he pesumeth so much vpon himselfe, that he will al∣low of no counsell, but out of his owne braine, then he falles into greater dangers, then all his after∣wit can recouer, as (by wofull expe∣rience) hath bin obserued in many Princes. You see my Lord, what extremi∣tie your Daughter Oriana is in, and if you well consider thereon, you may easilie iudge, what inconueni∣ence may happen to her person, by an inward violent-conceiued des∣paire, which afterward (all your life-time) you may at leysure re∣pent. Beyond all this, you will runne into an vnauoydable blame, not on∣ly of strangers; but euen of your owne subiects, and thereby grow hatefull to them, whereon must needes ensue many mis-fortunes.
Therefore beleeue the counsell of them, that solie desire the good, be∣nefit and honour of you and your kingdome, whereby no perill what-soeuer can happen to you in so do∣ing: but if it should fall out other∣wise, yet you stand clearely excused, and they bound to prepare all possi∣ble remedies. These considerati∣ons (my royall Maister) do impor∣tune my soule, with endlesse impre∣cations, that you would vse a father∣ly pitty, and please these Ambassa∣dors by some other means, then the precious price of your daughters blood. Vncle (quoth the King,) these words haue moued too much; therefore, if you meane to please me, vse no more of them. So, turning from him, he espied the Prince Sa∣luste Quide, and Brandaiell enter the Garden; who being come neerer, called them to him, saying. Lords, my daughter is now come to court, and she is somewhat sickly, but I trust she will be better amended to morrow. Sir, answered Brandatell, we gladly would haue her deliuered to vs, so soone as may stand with your liking, because the Emperour our Master, exspects her day by day, according as he hath written to you. You know, replyed the King, that I haue conseted to his request, against the whole opini∣on of the knights of my Court, yea, and contrary to her will too. Not∣withstanding, I haue done it, in re∣gard of the Emperors vertues; and the hope I haue, of her honorable respect and entertainment. In the meane while, forbeare a little, that she may forget what shee must for∣sake, and prouide your shipping in a readines; for this next weeke ensu∣ing, I will deliuer her to you fully furnished. My Lord, answered the Prince Saluste Quide, it is not to bee wondred at, if at the first she moune for parting from you: but I am well assured, that so soone as she shall be arriued at Rome (beholding so many great Lords to giue her obeysance, the triumphes prepared to welcome her, and (aboue all) the choyce loue and respect of the Emperour to her) her ancient breeding will easily bee forgotten. Moreouer, if you please, to grace Olinda with her company, I meane to make her my wife so soone as she comes there, because I finde her to be a wise and vertuous Lady. Beleeue me (quoth the King) I wishe it might bee so: And then he entred into a large discourse, of such especiall vertues remaining in her, as more could not be found in any Lady. By this time the Tables were co∣uered for dinner, in the midst wher∣of, they that intended to combate with Grumedan, came and presented themselues, speaking thus to King Lisuart. Sir, you know what words were vsed some few dayes past, by Lord Grumedan, to the great dis∣grace of the Romanes, so that Prince Saluste, and we with him, do come to challenge him the com∣bate. Because hee shall well know, that it ill becomes such an old do∣tard as he is, to make comparison with knights of Rome: therefore, if you be so pleased, it shall be perfor∣med tomorrow, for it grieues vs, that he should remaine so long vn∣punished. Don Grumedan hearing himselfe thus abused, beganne to change co∣lour, and as hee was about to make answere, the king seeing him in cho∣ler, arose, and said to him. Grumedan, you haue euermore hitherto beene wise and temperate, especially in speech: let mee then request you, to conceale your displeasure, and onely answere to the combat, which these Knights doe vrge you to.
Sir, said Grumedan, seeing it is your will, it shall be so, and to morrow I will not faile to meete them in the field, according to my promise, where I hope to reuenge the wrong they haue done mee in your pre∣sence. So the King rose from the Table, and went into his Chamber with Grumedan, demaunding there of him, where were they whom he had chosen to take his part? Sir, said he, first I know the right on my side, and if Galaor come to morrow (as I think he will) I am well assured, that hee will beare me companie: but if hee come not, then will I fight with them all three, one after another. That may not be, answered the king, for you haue consented to three a∣gainst three, and so the oath re∣maines before me recorded, which makes me stand in great doubt of you, because they are young and strong, you aged and weake, and without any to helpe you. Sir, said Grumedan, God who hateth pride and presumption (wherewith they are too much enflated) can prouide helpe, when it is least looked for. But if the worst should happen, I know two of mine owne kinsemen, that wil not deny to ayde me against them, were they fare better knights then they are. The King pausing a while, sud∣denly said. I haue considered o∣therwise for you, I will disguise my selfe, and second you in the cause: for, assure your selfe, you and I shall well hold out against them all three. God forbid Sir, answered Grume∣dan, that you should so endanger your royall person for me. Why? said the King, in better place I can neuer doe it, and neuer else can I iustly acknowledge the manifold seruices you haue done for me, ha∣zarding your life in so many seue∣rall dangers, onely for the defence of me, and my Realme. Sir (quoth he) the present demonstration of your gracious goodnes towardes me, hath so farre enlarged the obli∣gation of my duty to you: that if I could dye a thousand deathes in your seruice, I should yet confesse my selfe more indebted to you. ut, neuer feare man, replyed the king, my heart hath yet courage enough, and this arme is endued with suffi∣cient strength, to maintaine a quar∣rell of greater moment. Pardon me Sir, said Grumedan, neuer will I giue consent thereto, considering what wrong you shall doe to your selfe, you being a king of vpright iu∣stice, should deale as truely with a stranger, as him that is your famili∣ar friend. Well (quoth the King) seeing you are so earnest, I will vrge it no further, although it goes much against my minde: goe then, and prouide for your busines; for you haue no time now of trifing de∣laying. Grumedan gaue him the good night, and went to his owne lodg∣ing, whether he sent for two knights his kinsmen, speaking thus to them. You know the Combate, which I haue vndertaken to morrow against three Romanes, and because you are they in whom I haue most con∣fidence: I would make choise of no other Knights then you, to second me in so good an action. They ac∣cepted this offer very ioyfully, and reputed themselues highly honou∣red thereby: so they departed to make ready their Armes; and Gru∣medan entred into a Chappel, where hee remained in prayer till the next morning, and then went to make all things fit for him. As he began to arme himself, the Damosell belonging to Grasinda, (of whom you haue formerly heard)
suddenly came thither, bearing one of the goodliest Swords that euer was seene; and saluting Grumedan, spake thus. Sir, the Greek knight, who dearely loues and respects you, for the manly spirit alwayes knowen to be in you, hath sent you this Sword, which he frankely giues you, as being one of the best knights in the world: and it is the very same, wherewith (not long since) he chastised the Romaines in your presence. By me he tels you further, that he hath heard of your vrgent necessity, for two Knights to assist you in this fight: wherefore, he hath left two of his own associats, whom he reputes no way inferiour to himselfe, and prayes you (for his sake) to make vse of them, and not to imploy any other in this busines. Faire Da∣mosell, (quoth he) I humbly thanke both the Knight, and you, for the great pains you haue taken to bring me these tydings, which are not a little welcome to me. So receiuing the Sword, it see∣med to him one of the best that e∣uer he had seene; and guirding it on his thigh, he said to the Damosell. Truely, the Greek knight hath done much for me, considering the small knowledge we haue together; and God giue mee grace, that I may make amends for this fauor one way or other. His two friendly com∣panions (quoth she) do attend you, and are ready to enter Combate so soone as you shall please: therefore slacke you no time, for I saw the three Romaines as I came hether, in good forwardnes to their owne dis∣honor. Then the horse was brought, which Florestan had giuen him, the very same which hee conquered be∣fore the Queene Sardamira: and be∣ing mounted thereon, he rode soft∣ly to the place where the Combate should be performed. There hee found the two knights, that were come to helpe him; and they salu∣ting one another, Grumedan said vn∣to them. Gentlemen, I know not who you are, but that which you come to doe for me, giueth appa∣rant testimony, that all my life-time I must acknowledge you for my dea∣rest friends. As he ended these wordes, they saw the three Romaines enter the field, with Trumpets and Clarions sounding before them, and making such a noyse in the ayre, as it eccho∣ed round about in euery place. In∣stantly was the King mounted on his Scaffold, who casting his eye euery-where, as exspecting Grume∣dan, hee saw him betweene the two knights and the Damosell, whom he knew so soone as he beheld her. But he could not deuise, who they were that tooke part with Grume∣dan: wherefore he called to the Da∣mosell, and demaunded of her, if she had brought them. Sir, said shee, the good are euermore supported by such as themselues are, and that is the reason, why the Greek knight, vnderstanding the loyaltie of Lord Grumedan, and the Combate he had vndertaken against the Romaines; also, what slender meanes he had of helpe at this present, all the best knights being now absent from your Court: Hee hath therefore sent two of his owne companions, whom you may esteeme little infe∣riour to himselfe, in all those good parts belonging to manhood. And thus Sir, you may also assure your selfe, that Grumedan neuer exspe∣cted any supply: for he neuer knew thereof, till such time as he was rea∣dy to mount on horseback, and that I my selfe presented them to him. Trust mee Damosell, answered the King, the Greeke knight hath done
much for him, especially, in such a necessity. Scarcely were these wordes en∣ded, but the three Romaines came before the Kings Scaffold, speaking to him (so loude as all might heare them) in this manner. Sir, in re¦gard that we haue resolued with our selues, to carry the heades of three Knights to Rome, that dare presume to combate with vs. We humbly desire, that you will not bee displea∣sed therewith, although Don Gru∣medans head be one of them, which yet you may helpe, by sending word to him, that if hee will deny his for∣mer words heere before your Maie∣sty, and freely confesse, that we Ro∣maines are the best knights in the world, we are contented to forgiue all. Doe (quoth the King) that which you come to doe, and hee that remaineth conquerour, let him deale with his enemie as best plea∣seth himselfe. By this time, the Queene and her Ladies had taken their seates, ac∣companied with Guillan le Pensif, and Cendill de Ganote, both yet so weake, by reason of their sicknesse, as they could hardly support them-selues: For Guillan was newlie deli∣uered from a continuall Feuer, and Ganote had both his legges shotte through with an arrow, as the King was hunting in the Forrest. Now, the Queen much mis-doubted, that Fortune would deale frowardly with the good old Grumedan, and therefore calling Guillan to her, de∣maunded his opinion in this case. Madame (quoth he) the hazards of fights, are euermore in the will of heauen, and the good right of the Combatants: but not in the armes strength, nor in the presumption of men. Wherfore Madame, we all know∣ing Grumedan to be wise, a vertuous Knight, and as honest a man as the world can yeeld (far differing from the ouer-weining pride, of those men that he hath to deale withall:) it makes me verily think, that (weak as I am) if I were in his place, I should easily winne the honour of the day. This answere did highly content the Queene, yea, and in such sort, that she conceiued better hope of Grumedans victory, then formerly she had done. Now, the Knights on eyther side, encountred together so furi∣ously, as their Launces flew vp in many shiuers: but there befell such an accident, as neuer happened in King Lisuarts Court before, for the three Romanes were all vnhorsed, and none of the other lost so much as a stirrop, wherefore, turning their faces readily, they saw them lye on a heape together. Hereupon Bruneo de bonne Mer, one of them which the Damosell brought to helpe Grumedan, said to him. Seeing wee haue let the Ro∣manes perceiue, that we know how to breake our Launces, it were very vnreasonable, that we should assaile them any longer on horsebacke; for they being downe, let vs descend al∣so. Be it as you please, answered Grumedan, and dismounting from their horses, being couered with their Shields, manly they marched against the Romanes, to whom An∣griote spake so loud as hee could, thus. Beleeue me, Gentlemen of Rome, I thinke you make little, or no ac∣count at all of vs, or else, being wil∣ling to bestow your horses on vs, you are content to dismount so rea∣dily, as (for your kes) we will doe the like. The Romanes, whose hearts (be¦fore) were so highly aduanced, as none could reache a loftier pitch.
finding their proud hopes to bee thus frustrated, were so confounded with shame, as they would not an∣swere so much as a word, but hol∣ding downe their heads, ranne vpon their enemies with such swiftnes, as easily might their inward malice be discerned. But if they shewed themselues rough and sharpe assayling, the o∣ther were not negligent in defen∣ding, especially Grumedan, who in his earnest desire to be reuenged, entred among them, laying blowes hardly to be endured, wounding o∣thers, and receiuing some himselfe. Notwithstanding, in the end, he and his two companions (laying aside all care of perill) layde such heauy loade vpon the other, that they were compelled to recoyle, and Maganil fell downe backward. Then Brunco de bonne Mer, who sharply pursued him, stept vpon him, and violently plucking the helmet from his head, threw him against the Scaffold, whereon the Queene and Ladies sate. Where Maganil, seeing him selfe in danger of death, cryed out for pitty and compassion: but Bru∣neo, pretending not to heare him, bade him yeeld himselfe, or else hee would smite off his head. Sir (quoth he) I will doe whatsoeuer you com∣maund me, and heere I am ready to confesse, that I haue lied falsely: for the Romane Knights are not such as I haue boasted them to be nor a∣ny way comparable to them of Great Brittaine. This acknowledgement was heard by the Queene, and Guillan, who pittying him that so earnestly sued for pardon, saide to Brunco. Worthy Grecian Knight, mee thinkes you should haue little de∣sire to that head, which is full of no∣thing else but pride and vain-glory: wherefore, leaue it to himselfe, as a matter of no value, to the end, that when he is returned to Rome, hee may there make report, what bene∣fit he got heere by his insolence and presumption; the Queene and her Ladies ioyne with me in this suite to you. Since so vertuous a Princesse, an∣swered he, doth command me, and you (whom as yet I know not) doe also desire it, farre be it from mee to deny it. So taking his foote off from Maganil, he returned to Gru∣medan, who had beaten downe the second, and he likewise fearing the losse of his head, made the like a∣mends as his fellow did. Now there remained none but the third, who had lost so much blood, that he fell downe dead at the feete of Angriote: wherefore he tooke him by one legge, and dragde him out of the field. In which while, Grumedan remounted on horsebacke, and imaging that his two new friends would follow him, with-drew thence to his owne lodg∣ing, that his wounds might be loo∣ked vnto. But so soone as he was gone, Bru∣neo and Angriote, without putting off their Helmets, as fearing to bee knowen, presented themselues be∣fore the King, and said vnto him. Sir, we must now take our leaue of you, and returne to our worthy friend the Greeke Knight, with whom we are so much honored and esteemed, as in no place else we can deuise to finde the like. Wherefore, if you please to commaund vs any seruice to him, we are ready to doe it with most willing mindes. God be your guide, answered the King; for certainly, both he and you haue made it sufficiently knowen, that you are no new learners to deale in such combates. Then the Damosell, who had bin
their conduct thither, saide to the king, that shee desired to speake in priuate with him, concerning a mat∣ter much importing him. That shall you faire Damosell, said he. So, all being commanded thence, she as∣cended the Scaffold, to afford Bru∣neo and Angriote the better meanes of departure, turning the same way, as they came; and she being come to the King, beganne thus. Sir, quoth she, you haue hitherto bin held for the most esteemed King of Christen ome, a louer of all honour and vertue: but (aboue all the rest) the onely protector of Ladies and Damosels, bestowing on them infinite fauours and gra∣ces, whereby they haue receiued iust occasion, o loue you more then any liuing an beside. But now, by losing all the hope they had in you, they finde themselues vtterly defeated of your wonted great and gracious goodnes, by too euident a testimony, of cruell vnkindnesse to your owne Daughter, the fair Prin∣cesse Oriana, dieriting her, of that happinesse, which (in right) be∣longeth to her, after you. Whereat, how impossible a thing it is in their opinion, that your wonted, royall, affable, and benie nature, should be so suddenly nuered into cru∣elty, almost the like neuer heard of. Neuer more  they exspect a∣ny kindnesse towardes them from you, vsing such strange behauiour to her, whom loe and fatherly pity bindes you neere vnto, beside your royall title of King, whereby you ought to be an right Iusticer, and see that all are truely dealt withall. Thinke not, Sir, ut much euill will ensue heereon, b the wretched ex∣ample you giue to your people, and the ceaselesse teaes, and bitter la∣mentations of Madame Oriana: all which are before God, calling for due vengeance; so that if you take not good heed, the end of your reigne will ensue but the beginning of these miseries, wherein you will be more pittied, then any other Prince that I know. More I may not say to you, because I am to fol∣low the two knights, who (I feare) haue long ere this exspected mee. Damosel, said the King, heauen bee your conducter, you haue spoke ve∣ry wisely, and like a woman of good spirit. So the Damosell descended, and departed, and arriuing where the two knights were, they rode on to the Sea, finding a Brigandine there attending, which Grasinda had ap∣pointed for them. And because they knew for certainty, that king Lisuart had set downe his determi∣nation, to deliuer his Daughter the first day of the weeke ensuing, they made what haste possibly they could to be with the Greek knight, that he might also bee acquainted there-with. And they stayed not aboue two dayes and two nights. but they took hauen in the Enclosed Isle, where the other were landed but a little before. Whereof Agraies, Plore∣stan, and others, being aduertised, they went to meete them with no meane ioy. There might you haue seene mutuall loue and am on all sides, congratulations, embraces, and all the ceremonious offices of courtesie, all done in honour of Lord Amadis: whereat Grasinda being amazed, knew not what to say, vntill hee came vnto her, say∣ing, Madame, I pray you bee no way discontented, that thus long I haue concealed my name from you, which is Amadis de Gaule, of whom your selfe haue often spoken. These
other are my kinred and compani∣ons, friends and followers, all re∣solued to doe you any seruice what-soeuer. Lord Amadis, answered she, you need not desire any pardon of me, considering, you haue neuer offen∣ded me: but rather I am highly to be condemned, that haue had you so long time in my house, not like a great Prince and Lord, as you are, but rather in the nature of a meane Knight errant. And you had reason to conceale your selfe from me; for if I had so well knowen you then, as now I do: I should haue strouen with my best endeauour, to doe such honour, as you iustly deserue. Sweete Ma∣dame, said he, neuer vse such words, in regard you haue done so much for me, as I remaine obliged vnto you while I liue. Walking on in this conference, they entred into the Palace of Apo∣lidon, where they found the Tables couered for dinner, and the meate already serued in: Scarcely were they set downe, but Angriote, Bruneo and the Damosell came in before them, where we need make no doubt of their hearty welcome. And as Amadis had questioned them, what issue Grumedans Combate had against the Romanes: they related to him, that the King was fully minded, to deliuer his Daughter to the Emper ours Ambassadours, and that within three or foure dayes at the vttermost. Heereat Amadis was so moued, that his colour presently chaunged, as being doubtfull, that either they should not haue time enough for her rescue, or that they of the En∣closed Isle, would not partake with him in such an enterprise against King Lisuart. Therefore to feele how they stood affected to his pur∣pose, so soone as the dinner was en∣ded, falling into much variety of discourse, and growing into some reportarie of his long voy∣age, at last thus he beganne with them. My worthy and honourable friendes, for ought I can perceiue, matters are much altred in Great Brittaine, since we haue bin out of it, and the King hath got him ano∣ther kinde of humour, then he was wont to haue in precedent times. For I haue seene and knowen, that he would readily more regard the affaires of poore distressed Ladies, then matters of most moment con∣cerning himselfe. Notwithstan∣ding, to my no little amazement, he is bent to the destruction of his own naturall daughter, that peerelesse Princesse, Madame Oriana, then whom, neuer was childe more dili∣gent and respectiue of her parents, then from time to time she hath al∣wayes declared her selfe. And yet, as Angriote and Bruneo doe plainly tell me, without regard of all this duty and obedience, euen in the meere despight of her, and contra∣ry to the iudgement of all the Lords of Great Brittaine, he hath relegated and confined her, to the onely man in the world, whom she most hateth; which moueth me so much to com∣miserate her case, as, if you would both beleeue me, and lend me your assistance, we would free her from this thraldome, and set her at li∣bertie. Sighing and pausing a while, hee began againe in this maner. What-soeuer I haue said (my deare-estee∣med kinsmen and friends,) assure your selues, that I will not vndertake any thing, without your counsell and furtherance. And yet wee should all remember the solemne oath we made to the Queene Bri∣sena,
at the very last Court held in the City of London: where wee then sware, neuer to suffer wrong to be done to any Lady or Damosell, if she required helpe of vs. Shall we now then endure, that she shall be captined, and vyllie entreated, of whom (heeretofore) we haue recei∣ued so many honorable fauours? Shall the Ladies and Virgins of her company, be carried away perforce, and (for euer) banished from their owne country? Before God, I speake it, if we doe suffer this hay∣nous indignity, we are well worthy of eternall blame, without any ex∣cuse or pretence to shield vs: nay, we shall fall into the base reputati∣on, of recreant and vnworthy knights, regardlesse both of honour and Armes. Let vs then aduise here together, what you think meetest to be done. For, as concerning my selfe, I deter∣mine to deferre a voyage, long since by me intended: as, not many dayes since, I made knowen to my Cousin Agraies, Florestan, and others, by Gandalin, and now with such Ships as I should finde heere, labour so much as lies in me, to breake the purpose of King Lisuart, and rescue so many wronged Ladies. Among whom, next to the most wofull Princesse Oriana, is vertuous Olinda, whom the King (in this new-deui∣sed tyranny) will compell to mar∣ry Saluste Quide, albeit vtterly a∣gainst his owne liking. And now Lords, let me mooue one matter to you: I would gladly know, by what autority he can war∣rant this crueltie, to them that are none of his subiects, neither borne within any of his Dominions? There is my Cousin Mabila, sent by the King her father into Great Brit∣taine, not to be confined for Rome, but to remaine with the Queene, and keep the Princesse Oriana com∣pany, to whom her loue hath al∣wayes bin such, as neuer could bed greater betweene two Princesses. And I much maruall, that his whole kingdome doth not reuolt against him, or (at least) some bold and har∣dy Knight vnder-take the cause, to counter check his folly honorably by Armes. We see (deare friends) that no one (as yet) steppes forth in the a∣ction; and therefore I would en∣treate you, that, according to the ancient commendable custome, di∣ligently obserued among alknights errant: you would be carefull, that such a shamefull and dishonourable deed may not be done. In so doing, we shall winne more fame and true renowne, then euer hitherto we haue done, without any euill impu∣tation, or sinister misconstruction. Tell me then, what you thinke here-of, to the end, that according to some resolued conclusion, we may take order for the most expedient execution. Then Agraies, whom it neerest concerned, as well for his Sister, as for the honorable affection he bare to Olinda, as hath bin declared to you in the first booke: answered be∣fore them all, in this manner. I know not where the man is, that would be dull or slow in so accep∣table an enterprise; considering, that before you (my Lord and Cou∣sin) arriued here: we were all assem∣bled in this place, to make prouision for this in conuenience. And now, that you finde vs so conformable to your will, I am certaine, that no man among vs, is of any other minde; but that Fortune meerely calles vs, to vndertake the businesse, and promises vs an vndoubted vi∣ctory. For she seemeth weary, that she hath fauoured King Lisuart so
long a time, and he makes no ac∣knowledgment thereof any manner of way. Why should hee send my Sister (against her wil) into a strange countrie? Did my Father giue her him, to dispose of at his pleasure? You all know, that soone after our departure from Great Brittaine, I demanded her of the Queene: but she denyed me, sending me word by Gandales, that she would keepe and respect her as her owne person. Is this then kindship, or courtesie, to keepe her in such sort, as to ouer-throw all her fortunes in the end? Mabila, hath she no other place of retirement, but to the Court of the Emperour? Is not the kingdome of SCOTLAND of sufficient opu∣lencie, for her breeding and edu∣cation? Striking his hand on his brest, with a very small pause, he brake forth againe thus. I protest before God, this dealing of King Lisuart, is both vile and dishonourable; yea, and so farre off from common rea∣son, that I had rather die a thousand deathes (if it were possible for me) then not to be reuenged; and alrea∣dy I haue acquainted the King my Father herewith, that he may pro∣uide some remedie for it. In the meane while, let me entreate you al, my honorable Lords and friends, to lend me your assistance, especially you, whom this iniurie toucheth as neerely as my selfe, it being offered, not only to the person of my Sister, your Cousin and neere kinred: but also to Olinda & others, for whom, according to our solemne oath and promise (as my Lord Amadis hath well remembred) wee ought in duty to steppe forth, and stand as their protectors and defenders. Lords, said Quedragant, as for my selfe, I am ready to depart, when it shall please the company, and if I make any spare of my paines, let me be excluded from all good opini∣on: and I beleeue there is no man heere among vs, but he will say as much as I haue done. For, if wee hazard our liues often, and vpon little or sleight occasion: we haue great reason now to aduenture fur∣ther, and not to be sparing of our very vttermost endeauour. How say ye, my friends, haue I not spoken the trueth? Then euery one answered, that no danger, or death should cause a∣ny deferring, but it required quicke and speedy diligence, to keepe the Romanes, from passing through the straites of the Mediterranean Sea, before any fight were made vpon them. Easily, quoth Amadis, shal we make this prouision, for to mor∣row morning wee will be all well shipt, and winne the way before them; which was set downe for a full resolue. Now Grasinda was present at all this conference; and she to giue them the more encouragement, said. Before God, Gentlemen, your enterprise is high, and worthy of the greatest commendation, con∣sidering, that beside the good you shall doe to her, whose helpe and rescue you intend, you shal giue ex∣ample to many other worthy Knights (either of this, or any o∣ther strange Country) that heereaf∣ter by your imitation) they suffer no shame or wrong to be done, to any Lady or Gentlewoman whatso∣euer. Wherein you will make your selues so memoratiue to them, that she, or they that now liue, or shal many hundreds of yeares here∣after, will sing rare Peans of your praises. Madame, answered Amadis, God enable vs to effect our enterprise, according as (I know) you heartily
wish it. In the meane while, if you be so pleased, you shal remain here, in the company of Ysanie, the good old Gouernour of this Island, who shall be as obedient to you, as to my selfe. Maister Elisabet must go with me, because I repose great trust in him. My Lord (quoth she) you may dispose of me and mine, accor∣ding as to you seemeth best. Amadis humbly thanked her, and gaue com∣mand, that euery man should bee prepared, to go aboord those Ships, by breake of day, which Agraies and Florestan had there readily fur∣nished, according as they had or∣der sent them by Gandalin. Then, the next day, being all embar∣qued, they set saile directly for Great Brittaine, hoping to meet with the Romans, as afterward they did. CHAP. XVIII. How King Lisuart deliuered his Daughter Oriana, to the Ambassadors of the Emperour, and other Ladies with her, to be conueyed to Rome: And how they were (soone after) rescued by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle. THe day being come, according to King Lis∣uarts promise, that he would deliuer his Daughter to the Ro∣manes, to be conducted to the Em∣perour, hee continuing constant in his wilful opinion, without any pos∣sibility of alteration, either of pitty to her, importunity vsed by the Queene, and all the graue aduice of his Lords to the contrary. To effect the full issue of his owne humour, he went to her Chamber, where sit∣ting downe by her, and taking her by the hand, thus he spake. Daugh∣ter, you haue euermore shewen your selfe obedient to my will, ne∣uer vsing any contradiction: will you now hold on in the same mind, according as Reason doth require? You haue put on a sad and melan∣choly disposition, at the marriage which I haue determin'd for you, whereat I am not a little amazed. Do you imagine, that I would doe any thing, but for your benefite and honor? or can you conceipt any e∣uill in clination in me towards you? I sweare to you vpon my faith, that the loue I beare you is so certaine, as I do no lesse grieue for your farre absence from me, then you can doe your selfe. But you doe well know, that it is impossible, to prouide such an happines for you neerer home. Wherefore I pray you, that in vsing your wonted wisdome and discretion, you would shew a more chearefull countenance, & reioyce in the great fortune ordained for you, being wife to the greatest Prince in the world. If you doe, (besides the high estimation gene∣rally to be made of you) you shall glad your fathers soule, who grieues at your strange alteration, as no man possibly can doe more. During all these speeches, Oriana had her spirits so contracted, that she was not able to shed a teare; and therefore, as a woman, out of sense of her own sorrow, seeing there was now no further remedy for her, with a bolde and stedfast resolution, thus shee replied. My Lord, you haue then (for ought I can otherwise perceiue) resolued on my mariage
to the Emperor: but therein (hap∣pily) you haue committed one of the greatest errors, that any Prince aliue can doe. For first, so long as my life lasteth, I shall neuer loue the husband you haue chosen for mee; and next, I am very certaine, (as of∣tentimes I haue told you already) that I shall neuer see Rome: rather shall the fishes vse their mercy to me, then I will goe to a home that is my hell, or dwel where I can haue no affection or desire. And I am of the minde, that you could not be heereto induced or perswaded, but onely in the loue you beare to my Sister, being desirous to leaue your inheritance to her, and make mee heire to all the miseries in the world. Neuerthelesse, God, who is iust, will neuer suffer this your vnreasonable purpose to take ef∣fect; sooner he will marry mee to my death. When the King heard Oriana answere in this manner, pitty and anger mixing themselues together, made him likewise change his for∣mer language, and thinking to win her by menaces, said. You play the foole with me, and you will not yeeld, for all the entreaties I can make: but if you dallie thus with me any longer, insteed of wiuing you to the Emperour, I will wed you to the Tower, and where you shall see neither Sunne nor Moone. My Lord, quoth she, you can not commit me to a more hatefull pri∣son, then Rome, and you shall doe me a great grace, to make me an e∣uerlasting dweller in your Tower. Then arose the King, very highly displeased, and leauing her, went to the Queene, saying to her. I pray you go to your daughter; for, not∣withstanding all the meanes I can vse to her, she will not be sent to the Emperour, and I cannot reuoke my promise to the Ambassadours. Now, you must obserue, that the Queene had practised all possible wayes, to breake off this intended mariage, till such time, as at her last mouing the matter, the King grew so offended, that he charged her to motion it no more, except shee meant to endure his heauy displea∣sure. Wherefore, as not daring to in∣cense him any further, without re∣turning him any answer, she went to Oriana, whom she found so full of sorrow, as none could be more. Ori∣ana, leaned on her left arme, beating her other hand against her brest; when the Queen said to her. Daugh∣ter, the king is wonderfully offended with you: I pray you be obedient to him, seeing all that he doth, is for your good and honor. Ah Mother, (quoth she) I see now that I am lost for euer; for I feel death so nere ap∣proching, as it is impossible for me to liue any longer. Speaking these words, she fell down in a swoun, and the Queene likewise hard by her, which made the Ladies cry out so loud, that the King heard it, & came thither, imagining that Oriana was dead indeed. But finding it no o∣therwise then a traunce, he would needs haue her caried so aboard the Ship, notwithstanding all the La∣dies teares, & mourneful entreaties. Being thus brought into the Ca∣bine appointed for her, the Ladies were likewise ledde thither, that should go with her, among whom was Olinda, strugling and striuing with all her might, & crying to the King, that she might not be so vio∣lently forced and abused. Notwith∣standing, he would not lend her any attention, but suffered her so to be hurried thence, so great was his dis∣traction of spirit. Before they weighed ankers, he called to the Prince Saluste Quide, and other the
choisest of the Ambassadours, to whom he recommended his daugh∣ter: praying them to entreate her in all honourable manner. Which they promised to doe; and taking a solemne farewell each of other, the King returned to his Court, and the Romanes launching forth into the Maine, soone lost the Coaste of Tagades, Oriana not knowing or perceiuing any thing, such was her rapture quite from her selfe. The Ambassadours to the Em∣peror, had bequeathed Mabila one∣ly, to keepe company with her in her Cabine; and the Queene Sarda∣mira, with the rest of the women, were bestowed in another Shippe, and so (in no litle ioy) sayle on the Romanes, till at length they descry∣ed on the Sea, a great Fleete of Shippes, making directly towards them. But, at the first sight, taking them to be either Merchants, or some such other peaceable people, they made no further reckoning of them. By and by they beheld them to di∣uide into three seuerall bands, and make fast on them, by the helpe of oares: which gaue them good cause to prepare for defence, if they should assaile them. But I am sure you perceiue, that this was the suc∣cour for Oriana, led by noble A∣madis, and a great number of wor∣thy Knights, as well of the Enclosed Isle, as diuers other of his friends thus met together, all determining to dye, rather then to permit the Ladies to be thus forcibly carried away. When they perceiued so many sailes together, and in such martiall manner prepared, especially for so great a conuoy, there grew a iea∣lous doubt among some of them; which Amadis perceiuing, and fea∣ring, lest their suspition might dis∣harten the rest, he spake to them in this manner. My honorable friends and companions, were I not fully assured of the vertue and magnani∣mity remaining in you, I should (doubtlesse) be slow enough, in ha∣zarding the fight against the ene∣mie, that comes so strongly prepa∣red for vs. Neuertheles, knowing you to be such as you are, and al∣wayes haue beene; especially, the iust occasion that hath called vs all hether: it appeareth to me, that we should not insist on the least delay, but, setting aside all seruile feare, goe couragiously to the busines. The captiuity of so many desolate Ladies, stand as inciting obiects to our eyes, and honour calles vs to their rescue, by our solemne oathes taken for their freedome. Where∣fore, I earnestly entreate you, that we may brauely boord their Ships, and make such expression of our duty, that setting the Ladies at libertie, the conductors of them may carry no tydings to the Empe∣rour. No sooner were these wordes thus spoken, but Drummes and Trumpets sounded chearefully: for the two Fleetes were so neere each to other, as there could be no shrin∣king backe from fight. Now, Darts, Slings, Arrowes, wilde fire balles, and other offensiue engines, flew li∣berally oad; and the fight (in the beginn) was so fierce, as no iudg∣ment could be giuen, which side had the better or worse. Notwith∣standing, they of the Enclosed Isle, (by the meanes of that exquisite Pi∣lot, Master Elisabet) got before the winde, and sunke two or three of the Shippes of the enemie. At the very same instant, the Ship where∣in Agrates and Quedragant were, by the meanes of grapling y∣rons, caught hold on that of the
Prince Saluste Quide, and the men entred into her. But if Agraies and Quedragant made ample proofe of their manhood: Florestan, and Gar∣nate of the Dreadfull Dale did no lesse, hauing boarded another Ship hard by. For they assailed the Mar∣quesse of Ancona, and the Archbi∣shop of Tarente, while Amadis fought with the Ship wherein Bran∣daiell was; whereto hee had most minde, because it seemed the best disposed, and had a goodly Lan∣terne, with great store of Flags and Streamers, bearing the armes of the Emperour, euen as Admirall of the whole Fleet, which made him imagine, that the Princesse was there. Great and stout resistance was a long while made, but Amadis and his followers plyed them so hotly, that they cut so many in pieces, as they met withall, crying out aloud, Amadis, Amadis, Gaule, Gaule. As he pursued on in this good successe, he met with Brandaiell, to whom hee gaue such a stroke on the helmet, as he ouerthrew him; and tearing it from his head, made shew, as if he would smite it off. Alas Sir (cry∣ed out Brandaiel) take such ransome of me as you please, and saue my life. Tell me then, said Amadis, what hast thou done with Oriana? You shall finde her (quoth  in this Cabine, accompanied ly with Mabila. As he was going thither, Angriote stept in, to whom he gaue the charge of his prisoner, and go∣ing neere the doore, he found it strongly barde with an iron chaine: but running with his foot against it, he made it violently flye open. Mabila being in the Cabine with the Princesse, had formerly heard the voyce of Amadis, and Gaule, and said to Oriana, being laide (much trobled in mind) vpon a rich Couch, and had heard nothing al this while of the fight: Madame, beleeue, that heauen hath sent vs helpe; for me thinkes I heare your Amadis, en∣quiring for you, therefore raise vp your spirits, and reioyce. At the very word Amadis, the Princesse seemed to rise (as with a sudden start) demaunding, where is A∣madis? Madame, quoth she, I heard him (I am certaine) euen now both speake and fight in the same Shippe where we now are. Doe not you yet heare the noyse among the o∣ther Shippes? Vndoubtedly, the fight is hot and fierce. Come, come, deare Mabila, answered Oriana, questionlesse you are in a dreame. No, vpon my soule, replyed Mabila, I heard the slashes of Swordes, and the noyse of a very potent Fleete. At this very word, Amadis entred, and seeing Oriana, he fell on his knee before her. But she (ouer-come with extremitie of ioy) held him by the arme, and glewed her lippes so fast to his, as if she meant they should neuer be parted, and thus she stood a long while, robde of all power for speech, till at length she said. Ah my dearest Loue, see∣ing I am now in your custody, I feare not them that would take me from you, or going any further with them, for Death it selfe shall now neuer more diuide vs. Ma∣dame, said he, one of the greatest fauours that euer heauen affoor∣ded me, is this, in giuing me so good an occasion of returne into this country, onely to doe such needfull seruice. As they meant to continue lon∣ger this kinde of discourse, Mabila said vnto them. Why stand you musing in this manner? Doe you
not see Sir, what need there is of your helpe in yonder other Ships, where the fight is fiercer and fier∣cer? Good Cousin, goe and suc∣cour your deare friendes, you may afterward conuerse at more leysure with the Princesse. Goe then, deare hart, said Oriana, and returne againe so soone as you can to me. Then he departed out of the Cabin, leauing Oriana and Mabila to the charge of Angriote, and entring his owne Ship, beheld Landin de Faiarque, and his associats, assayled by a Romane Vessell, that pressed very furiously vpon them. But hee made in with such a strength, as they were soone sunke: And now remained no more to bee fought withall, but that Ship wherein the Prince Saluste Quide was, which re∣sisted stoutly against Agraies and Quedragant. Neuerthelesse, at the arriuall of Amadis the Prince by no meanes could auoyde, but that he was smitten downe vpon the Orelope. Agraies, who hated him to the death, because he caried away his beloued Olinda forcibly; caught the Helmet from off his head, and (at one blow) parted it from his bo∣dy. Now, the Knights of the En∣closed Isle, seeing Fortune had bin so fauourable to them, placed guardes vpon the conquered Ships, while Amadis, went to enquire for the Queene Sardamira, and the o∣ther Ladies (whom he found in the Ship, where the Prince Salust Quide lay slaine) quaking like leaues vpon a tree. When Olinda espied Agraies, she (more ioyfull then euer) ranne and embraced him, before he had a sight of her: but afterward, ouercome with the same extremity of delight, making a low reuerence to her, he said. Madame, I pray you pardon what I haue done to the Prince Sa∣luste Quide, who in seeking to make you his wife and mistresse, hath re∣ceiued the reward of his presumpti∣on by my Sword. Sir, quoth she, I know not what might mooue him to affect me so much, considering, I neuer shewed lesse loue to any man liuing: there∣fore, what he sought to compasse by extremity, hath returned vpon him condigne punishment, and now I neede mourne the lesse for a whole yeare. But I pray you tell me, how you happened to succour vs in such a need? Madame, said he, that must be related at more leysure, when all this tumult is blowen ouer. While Agraies and Olinda were thus in talke together, Amadis con∣ferred with the Queene Sardamira, (who knew not him) and comfor∣ted her, desiring her, not to be grie∣ued, for the disaster happening to her company: but shee wept so ex∣treamely, as that it would haue mo∣ued any heart to pitty, which made him leaue her, and goe to the Da∣mosell of Denmarke. Then the Queene demaunded of Florestan, what he was that had spo∣ken to her? Madame, quoth he, it is Lord Amadis, that worthy Knight. Nay then, said she, I am of better comfort then euer, and cannot faile of good entertainment in his company: for all my life time I haue heard, that all Ladies and Da∣mosels receiued from him nothing but honor. Amadis ouer-hearing her, left the Damosell of Denmarke, and retur∣ning to her againe, said. Madame, you may thinke your selfe as safe, and welcome into this company, as when you were with the Prince Sa∣luste Quide; and therefore bee no longer disconsolate. Lord Amadis,
answered shee, I haue heard euery where reported, what honorable fa∣uours you haue extended to wo∣men, which giueth mee some per∣swasion, that you will deale with me no worsse, but better if you can. And reason good, Madame, said he, for you being a Queene, deserue to haue the very best entertainement. And as for my selfe, I promise you on my faith, that I will endeuour what I can for you: and to begin my word with you, if you be so pleased, I will conduct you to Ma∣dame Oriana, to the end, that you being both together, may enioy consolation one with another, e∣quall to your owne contentments and liking. Then Amadis commanding the two Ships to be vnited together, and entring into that where the Princesse was, leading the Queene Sardamira by the hand, he presented her to Oriana, saying. Madam, here is the Queene Sardamira, and all the Ladies and Gentlewomen that should attend you, who desire, that you would accept of their compa∣ny. Amadis (quoth she) I am your prisoner, and therefore you may and must command me, well knew Amadis, that she spake these words, onely to palliate their close affecti∣ons, wherefore hee would not an∣swere her one word: but Oriana shaping her course to the Queene, spake thus. For ought I can per∣ceiue Madam, we must take another way now, then going to Rome, and endure our fortunes patiently, be∣cause there is no other remedy. Further on shee would haue thus proceeded, but that Agraies entred the Cabine, leading Olinda by the hand, which Oriana perceiuing, she left the Queene Sardamira, and came and imbraced them, as one that had not in a longtime seene them. The like she did to Florestan, Quedragant, and many more, than∣king them perticularly, for their se∣uerall fauours done vnto her: espe∣cially Garnate, to whom shee said. My worthy friend Garnate, but for you, I had beene dead: but the let∣ter you brought me from Florestan, did presently reuiue me. Madame, said he, I did but my duty as very glady I would doe, in all occasions else, you please to command me. After these courtesies, to all that came and presented themselues be∣fore her; she called Amadis aside, and said vnto him. Beleeue mee (sweet friend) if I had gone on but a little further, all your right had beene lost with mee: but our Lord hath prouided better for vs both, and now I am where willingly I would be. Madam (quoth hee) I haue not done any thing for you, equall to the infinite of your graci∣ous fauours towards mee: and I de∣sire pardon for your greeuous feare, which this rude encounter could not but put vpon you. I heard none at all, said shee, I was so ouercome with extreame melancholy & if Ma∣bila had not told me of it, I had bin as vtterly ignorant of any fight, as they that dwell in Great Brittaine. But tell me I pray you, whether are you minded to cary mee? Let mee coniure you (deare sweet) by all the loue you haue euer borne mee, that seeing wee are now met together, and in so good company: you would speake nothing to me in any place, that may returne to our pre∣iudice, but when you are willing to command any thing, your Cousine Mabila may easilie enterpret be∣tweene vs. My further intent is, to be conuayed to the Enclosed Isle, where I would gladly be: till hea∣uen afford more fauour for mee, and my Father may vnderstand
what wrong he hath done me. Let me liue no longer Madame (answe∣red Amadis, then to doe you my vt∣termost seruice; wherefore you may well perswade your selfe, that your will shall any way be accomplished. And I hold it very expedient, that you should make your mind known to Agraies, Quedragant and Flore∣stan, who couet nothing more, then to please you with their vttermost paines. Well (quoth Oriana) when you meete in counsell toge∣ther, I will send your Cousin to them, to know how they wil dispose of me. So Amadis departed from her, and called all the Knights of the Enclosed Isle in counsell, to vnder∣stand which way they would take. Many contrary opinions passed a∣mong them, some thought it meet, that Oriana should be conueyed to the Enclosed Isle; others would haue her into Gaule, to king Perion: but the most part agreed for SCOT∣LAND; till Mabila comming to them, said. My Lords, Madame Oriana entreates you, that she may bee conducted to the Enclosed Isle, vntill her reconciliation with her father King Lisuart. And seeing you haue already so well begunne this busines, that, proceeding on from good to better, you would still stand fast for her, as alwayes you haue done for distressed Ladies and Damosels requiring your help, with due consideration had to the quali∣ty of her person. Madame, answe∣red Quedragant, I am sure, that my Lord Amadis, and al we of his com∣pany, are determinately resolued, to serue her till death, without spare of coyne, friendes, or any thing else re∣mayning in our power, yea, were it against the King her father, the Em∣perour, or any other that dare of∣fend her, not doubting, but by the helpe of God, and the iustice of our cause in doing her seruice, we may lawfully make resistance against them. Considering also, that there is not a man among vs, but hath solemnely sworne, neuer to de∣part from this association, vntill she be at perfect liberty. And so you may safely assure her from vs, con∣cerning all which hath bin said, as not to be denyed by any one in this company. Mabila thanking them most affe∣ctionatly, departed from them, and comming to Oriana, declared what the Knight had said vnto her, wherof she was not a litle ioyful, & instant∣ly, all betook themselues to their se∣ueral Ships. And according to their former conclusion, they set saile for the Enclosed Isle; where in their voy∣age we wil leaue them, to make an end of this Third Booke. The end of the Third Booke.
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this Third Booke of Amadis de Gaule. Chapter 1. OF the discords and warres which befell in Great Brittaine, and thereabout, occasio∣ned by the bad counsell which King Lisuart, receiued from Gandandell & Brocadan, against Amadis and his followers, whereby many good Knights (afterward on either side) cruelly conclu∣ded their liues. Fol. 2. Chapter 2 How Amadis being in the Enclo∣sed Island, enquired of Gandales, tydings con∣cerning the Court of King Lisuart, determining to passe into Gaule with Bruneo, to shake off his melancholy. And of those aduentures which happened to him by a tempest, that threw him vp∣pon the Sad Island. Fol. 12. Chapter 3. How King Cildadan and Galaor, in trauailing towards the Court of King Lisuart, met with twelue Knights and a Lady, wh con∣ducted a young Gentleman, that entreated the King to make him Knight. Fol. 21. Chapter 4. How King Lisuart fought a Battaile against the Knights of the Enclosed Island, whom he vanquished. And of the great liberalitie bee vsed towards Galuanes, in restoring him to all the lands and Seigneuries belonging to Madasi∣ma. Fol. 34. Chapter 5. How Amadis being with his Father King Perion, found himselfe subiect to ouer-much melancholy, to be so farre sundred from his Oriana. And contrarywise, Bruneo  high∣ly contented, hauing so apt occasion, to see and conferre with his Melicia, at what time him-selfe pleased: And of their seuerall enterprises, to satisfie their owne humors. Fol. 41. Chapter 6. How the three Knights of the Ser∣pents, returning  ward into Gaule, were (by contray fortune) cast on the place where Ar∣chalaus the Enchanter dwelt, who resolued on their death, and what afterward befell them. Fol. 53. Chapter 7. How Esplandian was nourished by the olde Heie Nan. And what aduenture happened to Am  the ne ile, chan∣ging his knowne e, and cg himselfe the Knight with the Greene Sword. Fol. 69. Chapter 8. How King Lisuart hunting in the Forrest, where he had left the Ladies, accidentally met with a young Damosell, who shewed him the way to the Hermitage, where the good Hermite Nacian made his abiding: And how the Infant (long time after) was knowe to be the Some of Amadis and Oriana. Fol. 83. Chapter 9. How the Knight of the Greene Sword, being departed from King Tafinor of Bohemia, came into the marches of Romania, where hee met with Grasinda  the fieldes, accompanied with many Gentlemen, Ladies and Damosels: Es∣pecially with a Knight named Brandasidell, who would compell him (by force of Armes) to come speake with he Lady Grasinda, and of the Com∣bate they fought together. Fol. 87. Chapter 10. How within short while after, the Knight of the Greene Sword had hoysed saile into the maine Sea, and had quite left the Islands of Romania: By hard fortune hee was cast vpon the Deuils Island, where he fought with a Mon∣ster named Endriagus Fol. 97. Chapter 11. How the Knight of the Greene Sword, made knowen to the Emperour of Con∣stantinople (to whom the Island appertained, where he slew the Endriagus) the great fortune and victory he there obtained: And of matters happening to him afterward. Fol. 105. Chapter 12. How the Knight of the Green Sword departed from Constantinople, to satisfie the promise which he had made to the faire Grasin∣da: And of that which afterward happened to him. Fol. 117. Chapter 13. How the Queene Sardamira, with the other Ambassadors from the Emperour Patin, arriued at the Court of King Lisuart, hoping (at their returne) to beare thence the Princesse Oria∣na with them: And of that which happened to certaine Romaine Knights, offering iniurie to a Knight errant. Fol. 129. Chapter 14. How the Queene Sardamira sent to entreate Florestan to be her conduct to Mire∣fleure to Oriana: Because he had so curstly hand∣led the Knights that kept her company, as they were able to follow her no further. Fol. 138. Chapter 15. How the Knight of the Greene Sword (who afterward stiled himselfe the Grecke Knight) Bruneo de bonne Mer, and Angriote Estrauaux, embarqued themselues in the company of the faire Grafinda, and of that which happe∣ned to them afterward. Fol. 147. Chapter 16. How the Greeke Knight and his confederates, conducted the faire Grasinda to the place where the Combates were to bee perfor∣med. And of that which ensued there. Fol. 159. Chapter 17. How King Lisuart sent for his Daughter Oriana to Court, that he might deliuer her to the Romanes. And of that which happe∣ned to a Knight of the Enclosed Isle: But more especially, of the Combate which Don Grume∣dan had with them that defied him. Fol. 166. Chapter 18. How King Lisuart deliuered his Daughter Oriana, to the Ambassadours of the Emperour, and other Ladies with her, to be con∣uayed to Rome: And how they were (soone af∣ter) resiued by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle. Fol. 181. FINIS.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE Of Amadis de Gaule. WHEREIN IS AMPLY DECLA∣red, what end and successe the Warre had, begun betweene King Lisuart, and the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: With the Marriages and aliances, there-upon ensuing, to the high contentment of many Louers and their faire Friends. Written in French by the Lord of Essars, Nicho∣las de Herberay, Commissarie in Ordinarie for the Kings Artillerie, and his Lieutenant in the Countrie and Gouernement of Picardie, vnder Mon∣sieur de Brissac: Great Master and Captaine Generall of the said Artillerie. Translated into English by A. M. LONDON, Printed by NICHOLAS OKES, dwelling in Foster-lane. 1618.
TO THE TR VLY NO∣BLE AND VERTVOVS GEN∣TLEMAN, SIR PHILLIP HERBERT, Knight, Earle of Montgomerie, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, &c. WIth the same deuotion, and integrity of vnspotted affection (most Noble Lord) I present to your gracious accep∣tance this fourth Booke of Amadis de Gaule, encouraged thereto by that truly vertuous Lady, who hath promi∣sed, to stand betweene me and your dis-fauour, in presu∣ming so boldly as herein I haue done. The fift and sixt Bookes are shortly to succeed, vpon your Honorable ac∣ceptation of these: and whatsoeuer else remaineth in my poore power, either in these or the like imployments, are dedicated soly to your Noble seruice. Your Honors in all duty, A. M.
The Printer to the Reader. HAuing finished these two Bookes of Amadis de Gaule (the third and fourth, somewhat longer delayed, then was at the first intended) I am to intreate thy gentle fauour (courteous Rea∣der) for such slips and errors, as haue escaped mee in the Printing, and where Sence shall seeme lame or defectiue in any place, to helpe it with thy bet∣ter vnderstanding; as considering, that not wilfully: but ra∣ther vnwillingly, those faults haue escaped the Presse. By Mi∣chaelmasse Tearme next ensuing, I haue made promise, of the first and second Bookes of Amadis and so consequently the follow∣ing parts, as God and thy kinde fauour shall therein further me. Till when, accept these; a speedie spurre to hasten on the o∣ther. Thine to be commanded, N. O.
THE FOVRTH BOOKE OF AMADIS DE GAVLE. Wherein is amply discoursed, what end the warre had, begun betweene King Lisuart, and the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: with the alliances and mariages therevpon ensuing, to the no little contentment of many Louers, and their faire friends. Of the great sorrow made by the Queene Sardamira, after she vnderstood the death of the Prince Saluste Quide: And of the arriuall of Oriana in the Enclosed Isle. CHAP. 1. BY the discourse of our Third Booke, it hath beene declared to you, how King Lisuart deliuered his daughter Oria∣ana to the Emperours Ambassa∣dours, contrary to the opinion of all the Princes and Lords of his Kingdome; and that she (with the other Ladies and Damosels that kept her companie) were rescued by Amadis and his friends; the nauie of the Romains vanquished, Bran∣daiell de Rocque taken prisoner, the Marques of Ancona, the Archbishop of Tarente, and many more beside. Great was this ouerthrow, wherein none of them escaped, but was ei∣then slaine, or taken prisoner. After the conflict was fully ended, and all the Ladies brought together; Ama∣dis (euermore to conceale discreet∣ly his loue and Orianaes) went into hir Ship, leauing Angriot and some other Knights to keepe company with the women. I Passing from Ship to Ship, to make such prouisi∣on as was thought necessary: hee came neere to that wherein Agraies was, and there hee heard the most woefull noyse that could be: de∣maunding what might be the rea∣son thereof, answere was made him, that the Romaines bewayled the death of the Prince Saluste Quide, without any meanes of pacification. Herevpon, Amadis gaue com∣mand, that the body (lying still vp∣on the Orelope) should be put in∣to a Coffin, till they might giue it buriall when they came to land. Then they that before made such ruefull lamentation, being now
bereaued of the body: encreased their cries and clamours so loude, that they were heard by the Queene Sardamira, who sat close by the Princesse Oriana. When shee vn∣derstood the cause of their complai∣ning, she was suddenly surprised with such extreame sorrow: as shee fell downe on the ground, and wee∣ping bitterly, said. Alasse! For∣tune hath now apparantly declared, that her mallice extendeth, not onely to the ruine of vs miserable captiues; but also to destroy the Emperour and his whole Empire. Ah poore Prince, mishap hath had too much domination ouer thee! Alasse, what losse, and what sorrow (for euer) will they endure, that deerely loued thee, when they shall heare of thine vnfortunate end? I know not how thy maister himselfe is able to support this greefe, I ra∣ther beleeue, that he shall no sooner heare of these sad newes, but he will immediatly die with extremity of impatience: & surely, not without great reason, hauing lost so many goodly Ships, such a power of wor∣thy men, and a Prince of such admi∣rable expectation. Then turning to the Princesse Oriana, shee thus proceeded. Nay Madame, his losse of you, is the the greatest matter of all other, whom he more desireth, then any thing else in the world, and for whom, he will raise such rough and strange warres, as will cost the deare liues of infinite famous and renowned Knights, which cannot be long delayed, except thou (O Emperour) doe shew thy selfe the most childish and cowardly min∣ded Prince, that euer any mother brought into the world. During these lamentations, she lay still vpon the ground, her armes foulded one within another, and meerely drowning her selfe in teares▪ which mooued Oriana to such com∣passion, as, being ouercome with weeping, shee was feigne to with-draw thence. Whereupon, Mabila, being more strong & constant then any of the rest, came to the Queene, and said. In good faith Madame, in mine opinion, it ill becomes a Princesse, so wise and well quallifi∣ed, as you haue alwaies beene re∣puted, to fall into these ∣ties: for the vertue of a discreet soule, doth neuer so well expresse it selfe, as in the tempestuous times of preturbations.  that beare the title of a Queene, ∣reason, ought to be much more set∣led and constant, then a weake Gen∣tlewoman, or any other person, vn∣worthy to hold the place and ranke that you doe. Doe not you know, that fortune is mutable, affording her fauours to whom she pleaseth, and reuoaking them againe vpon her least distemper? Consider then, that the Emperors Nauie being thus vanquished, and you in the power of the Knights of the Enclo∣sed Isle: it ensueth vpon meere ne∣cessity, that you should haue pati∣ence, and suport this accident with womanly discretion, when you can haue no helpe to the contrary. Es∣pecially being assured, that you are in the power of them, who will doe you all honor, seruice, and the very best entertainement that can be de∣uised. And though Prince  be dead, what remedy? you cannot recall him againe with your  such chances are but  guerra, and common to all that fol∣low such affaires. Wherefore Ma∣dame, neuer make your  then needs: but, in vsing your ∣ted vertue and fortitude, take ▪ according as they happen,  is ineuitable.
The Queene returned her this answere. Lady, it is easie for him that is in ioy, to comfort (as you doe) one downe cast with griefe. Neuerthelesse, if you felt the woe that ouer-maistereth me: you would complaine (pehaps) much more then I doe. And yet I well know, that you tell me truth, although it is impossible for mee, so much to command ouer mine own passions, as (instantly) to follow your coun∣cell. Wherefore (for Gods sake) let me entreat you, that in excusing my imperfections, you, and all the Ladies here would rather helpe me, in the due complaint of mine vnre∣couerable vnhappinesse. Madame, answered Mabila, if this greefe, which you entreat of vs, would doe you any good, I dare sweare to you vpon my faith, that in this com∣pany there is no one Lady (as I thinke) but willingly would doe it withall her heart. But then you know withall that when it is so don; there must be (of necessitie) an end of your mourning, either by the compulsion of time, or as wisdome commandeth. Continuing in these remon∣strances, Oriana returned to them againe, and found the Queene in more moderation of her sorrow. During this time, Amadis had gi∣uen order, to hoise sailes, and make for the Enclosed-Isle, which they dis∣couered the third day following: in regarde whereof Gandalin was sent before in a Skiffe, to aduertise Grasinda of their comming, which being vnderstood by her, she was so highly pleased, as none could be more: especially when she heard of their victorie, and conquest made of so many Ladies and Da∣mosells, but chiefly of Oriana, whom she desired to see more then any other. For which cause, she pre∣pared her selfe (in the best manner she could deuise) to entertaine her, presuming so much on her selfe, that (without all doubt) she should accomplish the aduenture of Apo∣lidons Pallace, and attaine to (in her presence) the verie highest degree of honour, that euer Lady or Da∣mosell might doe. Seeing them approach some-what neere, she entred into a Barge to meete them: when Oriana de∣maunded of Bruneo, of whence, and what shee was. Madame, quoth he, I beleeue it is Grasinda, she that so lately obtained (by the meanes of Lord Amadis) the prize for beau∣tie, against all the fairest maides and Virgins in the King your fathers Court, and surely, I take her to be one of the wisest Ladies, that euer I haue seene. Then hee related at large, the honour, gracious enter∣tainement, and fauours she had af∣foorded them, during their soiour∣ning in her Countrie. Beleeue me Sir, said the Princesse, you shall shew your selfe very ingratefull to her, if you doe not make due ac∣knowledgement of such courtesie, when she hath occasion to imploy you. As thus she concluded, Gransinda came aboord their Ship, Angriote stepping foorth to helpe her vp, and presenting her to Oriana, said. Behold Madame, this is the Ladie, to whom my Lord Amadis, Bruneo and I are beholding for our liues. At these words, the Princesse and Grasinda made reuerence to each other, and so passing on into the port, they went a shoare, many goodly palfrayes (very richly trapt and harnessed) there wayting to receiue them, whereon they all mounted. Then, being conducted by the Knights, they rode on to∣ward the Pallace of Apolidon, and (by
the way) discoursing, what honour Amadis had wonne in King Lis∣uarts Court, vnder the name of the Greeke Knight: Oriana said to Gra∣sinda, I promise you Madame, if I had knowne it, you should not haue had such contentment with∣out me: but I neuer heard of any thing, vntill it was ended. That was my onely ioy, answered Grasin∣da, and the highest fauour Fortune could doe me, for if you had beene present (considering your rare and admirable beautie) I hardly thinke, that my Lord Amadis (how good a Knight soeuer hee is) would haue finished his enterprise, to his ho∣nour and mine: for the Crowne had beene due to you, beyond all other in reason, but you being ab∣sent, the Conquest only was made for me. As she ended these words, she perceiued Amadis to be very nere, and fearing least her liberality of speech had offended him; in ex∣cusing her selfe, she prayed him to pardon her. For neuer (quoth shee) did mine eyes hope to be∣hold, so absolute a beauty as this of Madame Oriana, therefore I cannot but confesse her right aboue all other. Amadis being not a little pleased, to heare her so highly commended, whom (beyond all things else) he most esteemed, smi∣ling, thus replied. By my faith, I should confesse my selfe voide of all good iudgement, if I should thinke ill of the honour you doe to Madame Oriana, she deseruing the title of the most vertuous Prin∣cesse that I know. Oriana, some∣thing abashed at such great prai∣ses: could not so well containe her selfe, but that a vermil∣lion blush lept vp into her face, which made her appeare tenne times more perfect. Neuerthe∣lesse, thinking more on her instant happie Fortune, then the due merit of her beautie, she said to Grasinda. I will not now contradict the good opinion, which it hath pleased you to conceiue of mee, for then I should contest with a person of most pregnant iudgement: it suf∣fiseth mee, I dare assure you, that (such as I am) all my life time, I shall wish your welfare and ad∣uancement, so much as lies in the power of a poore disinherited La∣dy to doe, for now you see me in no better condition. So long lasted this kinde of dis∣coursing, that they arriued at the Pallace of Apolidon, where they all alighted with the Princesse Oriana. Now, because it was one of the most sumptuous buildings in all the world: I thought it not a misse, to describe it by writing. CHAP. II. A description of the Lignographi, and foundation of the Pallace, which Apohdon had caused to be builded in the Enclosed Isle. THE foundation of this most magnificent Pallace, with the Parke and Garden to∣gether, was quadran∣gle, and contained in length, sixe hundred, twentie fiue fadomes, and in breadth, three hundred, three score and fifteene: allowing sixe foote to the , the foote to consist of twelue inches, and euery inch sixe Barlie comes in length, walled about with a high wall of black-marble, with Dorick Co∣lomnes
of white-marble. At the front of this foundation, was plan∣ted the Pallace, which had in his square, an hundred, fortie and one fadomes, and at the foure corners, was exalted foure huge Towers, one of Azure stone; the second of Iris or Opall-stone; the third of Chrisolite; and the fourth of Ias∣per; which had in the Diameter of their circumference, eight fa∣domes, two foote, and three inches. In each of them was two Cham∣bers, foure warderobes, and as ma∣ny Cabinets: comprehending in these, the Defended Chamber, which was in the Tower of Azure∣stone. Now, in regard it was the most excellent of the rest, I will describe the singularities thereof seuerally to you. It was wainscotted about with vnicornes horne, fashioned like to the feete of Lampes, fret∣tized with Lignum, Aloes, Balme and Cedar, all wrought in antique engrauerie with fine gold, thickly embellished with enamelled flou∣rets. The pauement was of Chri∣solite, carued in loue knots, enrich∣ed with Corall and Cipres, cut in little scales, and fastened with threds of gold. The doore and window worke was of Ebonie, en∣chased with siluer mouldes, and the glasse all Christall. All the chinks and crannies of the Warderobes and Cabinets, were stuffed with Agats, cut in Lozenges, wherein (euen as it were naturally) infinit figures of all kinde of creatures were plainely to be seene. In the roofe of this Chamber hung two Lampes of gold, at the bottomes whereof were enchased two Car∣buncles, which gaue so bright a solendour round about the roome, that there was no neede of any o∣ther light. But all this riches was of slender value, in regard of a Mirrour or Looking-glasse of white Saphire, the onely orientall that euer was seene, which had three feete in square, standing vpon a plate of gold, so bordered and garnished with great Diamonds, Emeralds, Rubies and Pearles, as neuer was seene a thing more to be admired. Betweene those foure Towers, whereof I haue told you, were sea∣ted foure faire great Halls, all of equall largenesse, the worke being throughout of Porphirie-stone, with Dorick pillers, contayning thirtie foote in height, fixed vpon bases of brasse, couered with Cha∣peans of gold, vnder Architranes of Porseline, vpon which were Fri∣zes of Iuorie, with diuers deuises in all languages: and aboue those Frizes, were Cornishes of Topaze, enriched with Turkesses. Directly facing the portall of this Pallace, had Apolidon formerly placed those Perrons, whereof we haue spoken in the first and second Bookes, and next to them, the Arke of loyall Louers, as already you had heard. Passing on further, you should enter into a very goodly Court, contayning three and fiftie fa∣domes in square, Orthogonally cornered by iust leuell of line, be∣ing paued with Iasper-stone, wrought in workes after the Mosa∣call manner: vnder which was a dungeon in the middle square, be∣ing one & fiftie fadoms & an halfe in depth, and in the midst thereof was a double vice, for letting down and mounting againe, contayning nine fadomes. In the Diameter round about were foure other sumptuous Halls, of twentie fa∣domes in height, deuided by o∣ther Towers, of no lesse beautie then the former. The winding
staires conducting to them, were of guilded copper, made in the forme of a lanterne, retained by bowing pillers, and sustained with Atticque Collomnes of Craterite∣stone (very hard to cut) after the an∣cient manner, and the mounting of these staires met not together, nei∣ther by line Orthogonall, or Am∣bligonall in angle. This dungeon had foure stages or roomes vpon one platforme, wherein were sixteene great lodg∣ings, and in the midst rose vp the gyring staire, and foure Pauillions, beside the foure Towers wee spake of before, which with the said Pa∣uillions, surmounted the platforme of two stages vnder couerture. Now, to tell you whereof this dun∣geon was made, you must vnder∣stand, that the first stage was of Chalcidonie-stone, enriched with Dorick collomnes of very white Alablaster, with mouldes and ap∣purtenances answereable to the others height. The second stage or roome, was of greene Marble, brought from Alexandria, enrich∣ed with Ionick collomnes of fiue Topas, mouldings, heads, bases and seatings like to the other. The third stage was of red Marble, with speckled Corinthian collomnes of Iuorie. And the fourth was of Ia∣cinthe, with Proesme Tuscane col∣lomnes of Emerald. Easily might these repeated plat∣formes beseene, vnder which were the foure stages, paued with Poise∣line, as also those of the foure Pa∣uillions, and all the rest surmoun∣ting the chiefe plat formes, made of wood of Cypres, Codar and Cethin, which cannot be toucht by any corruption, couered with mo∣ther of Pearle, and the rest of them with glasse of fine transparant steele, knit together with fillets of gold. All the portalls of the Pal∣lace were of pure Alablaster, wrought in the forme of damaske worke, with mouldings, tympaines and frontissons of Amber, and Ver∣million Agath: whereon were cu∣riously engrauen in antique shapes (euidently to bee knowne) many battailes and redoubted seruices, as well of the Greekes and Romans, as of the Gaules: and vnderneath them, the Images of Prapus Mars and Apollo, with those other of Venus, Ceres and Miaerua of the best pollished white marble that euer was seene. And Apolidon caused the moulding workes and portalls, to be expressely made of Diamonds, to the end, that as they were opened, they might shut a∣gaine of themselues, euen by the meere vertue of that stone. The Pauillions and Towers were seue∣rally garnished, with sixe and fifty Chambers, foure-score Warde∣robes, and as many double Cabi∣nets, the best guilded and adorned that possibly might be. Passing through this second Court, entrance was into a Gar∣den, where, according to the de∣scribed measure of the buildings quarter, it was naturally planted withall kindes of sluores and good hearbes that could be desired. In the midst thereof stood a goodly fountaine, the water issuing from the two dugges of a Venus, mode of Agath (mounted on a great piller of Emerald proesme) and falling into an huge Basen of Azure stone. This Image was so ingeniously cut and shaped, as nothing but speech wanted: because the Agath did so truely agree and come neere to nature, as Venus (in her ) was not more beautifull. Shee held in her right hand (somewhat higher aduanced then the other)
the selfe same golden Apple, which Paris adiudged to her, when he was made the arbi rator for the three gaddesses in Ida Forrest, whereon followed that vnfortunate warre, betweene the Greekes and the Troy∣ans. This Apple was afterward stolne from Venus by Iuno through the meanes of iealous Vulcane, and then in following time (going from hand to hand) happened to Apolidon, who found it among the vnualuable treasures of the King his father: with the Pearle (other∣wise tearmed the Vnton) which Cle∣opatra long time had in her posses∣sion, after the had quaft off the o∣ther in the company of Marke An∣thonie. And this Peasle also hung at the left care of the same God∣desse, and was so ordered by Arte; as it could by no meanes be taken away, till the faire creature that en∣tred the Defended Chamber, had drunke of the water of that cleere Fountaine. And then the Image would present the Pearle and Ap∣ple to her, as worthie to haue the chiefest honour for perfect beauty. In her other eare hung the Ring of Pyrrhus, wherein was an Agate enchased, whereon (by most woun∣derfull admiration, and varietie of nature) the nine Muses were figu∣red according to life, with Apollo holding his Harpe: whereof Pes∣pasian made so high account, that he esteemed  I well  whereof we haue formerly  was enclosed with double Gae∣ries, of tenne sad and an halfe in breadth supported with Arches and great D and ∣cae collomnes, or Ca and Amust, thirty foote in height. At two corners, which directly con∣fronted the Patke, they had winne in building, a Chamber, a Warde∣robe and a Cabinet double staged. The nether part or floore of these Galleries, was painted (by most exquisite Painters) with all the se∣uerall kindes of hunting and fow∣ling: for there might be discerned (to the life) what delight Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen take, being so assembled together, sitting or lying on the fresh greene hearbes, to heare the Huntsmans pleasing report, who soone after might be seene, seeking all about with his hound in a line, questyning after the stricken Hart. And by the countenance of the man, he seem∣ed to winde his horne a long while, to giue notice, that he had found the fall of the deare. Beside, in embossing or moulded workes, were the other hounds to be seene, that gaue report of his defeature, or death, with the horse-men galloping after them, mainly on the bridle, with their Bugles at their mouthes (and swolne bigge cheekes) appearing so pleasing to the eye, as it almost gaue euident perswasion, that the ayre made re∣uerberation of the noise, euen as if it had beene performed indeed. But aboue all, what is he, that would not be extraordinarily delighted, beholding the Stagge in the full honour of his head, running strong∣ly, breaking through the brakes and bushes, crossing one the lands, hol∣ding his head aloft, and his tongue their , laboriously to winne the neerest water: while the hounds are at defcult, by the Deares diuer∣sitie of leapes, shifts and other escapes? All which yet is nothing, to see him forced from the soile, and compelled to the bay when the hounds swiftly running, hang vp∣on his haunches, loudly proclay∣ming his death, and then haue their
reward for their labour. A little further off, was the hun∣ting of the wilde Boare or Swine, whom the Lime-hound had for∣ced to forsake the bushes, and dri∣uen to passe along by Grey-hoūds; whereupon, the beast being fierce and furious, at the winding of the hornes, ran among the hounds and hunters, grunting, snoring and ouerthrowing whatsoeuer he met withall. And that which was worst of all, with his long and sharpe Tushes, he bit and kilde the boldest Grey hounds that durst encounter him, notwithstanding the best contriued Iacks, made for defence of their bodies. But the Huntsmen, being quick and ready, making at him with their Boare∣speares, and wounding him deepe∣ly, layde him all along. Then, be∣ing able to contend no longer with the hounds, flocking round about him, some tugging him by the coddes, others by the eares and thighes, would neuer cease vntill he was dead. Assuredly, it would require much length of time, to describe (in due order) the seuerall kindes of hunting, and the like sportes, painted all along this plea∣sant Gallerie. And the Painter deserued no meane commendati∣on, for the extraordinarie excellen∣cie of his worke: especially, his ad∣mirable perspectiue, in the descrip∣tion of Hawking, which was figu∣red meerely to the life. Among others, the flight at the Heron, fol∣lowed by three Sacres toward the mountaines, where she soared so high, as shee might be discerned within the clouds. Then sudden∣ly she began to discend, and being fiercely pursued, fell downe to the ground, where the hounds were ready to receiue her. If these paintings affoorded such pleasing contentment, much more then did they in the higher Galle∣rie, where was figured the most part of the battailes betweene Semira∣mis and Ninus; the ouerthrow of Astiages by the Persians; the death of Marchesia, Queene of the Ama∣zones, in the Country of Asia; the discomfiture of Cyrus by Queene Thomiris; the assaults of Hercules against Androgeus and Otreus; the flight of Vexores, King of Egypt, assailed by the Scythians, and infi∣nite other fights, well descruing e∣ternall memorie. The pauements of these Galleries were thus singu∣larly beautified, being of Iarecote, blacker then any Moore, and the seeling formed in Oualls, made of Zedrosus, the bone of a fish, which the Kings of Arabia hold in high esteeme. The walls were of pure siluer, wrought with curious An∣tiques, and enammelled beasts: the gutters and water passages of Ala∣blaster, extending long out frō the walls, betweene arteficiall Crosse∣lets, enriched with golden leaues, and other workes cut after damas∣king manner. The doores and windowes (in their wood worke) were of Ebonie, and the glasse wholly of bastard Diamond. Going from hence, they entred into the Parke, contayning three hundred Acres of woods, enuiro∣ned and planted with Pines, Ci∣pres trees, Laurells, Holmes, Palmes and Terebinthine trees. Therein were diuers delectable and pleasant Arbours, appearing, as if Nature had contended with her owne skill, not onely to make them singular, but admirable also: for there were an infinite number of Orenge trees, Date trees, Citron trees, and Myrtle trees, all iustly planted by the line, with other the very sweetest fruitages, that pos∣sibly
in the world could be wished for. On the other side was a mea∣dow, watered by a great many little Riuers, by meanes whereof, the ground brought forth store of de∣lectable hearbes, with Violets, Dai∣sies, Paunsies, and other most odo∣rifferous floures. Yearely, in the month of May, came the Phoenix (as a Gardiner) thither, and for the amenitie of the place, tooke such pleasure to be there: that there she cast her fea∣thers, so soone as Apolidon had per∣fected the enchantments of his Pallace, which was most ssumptu∣ous and magnificent. Where∣fore, causing her feathers to be dil∣ligently gathered, he made them vp in a nne, with a rich diamond in the dst and of such largenesse, that it easilie serued for a looking-glasse, annexed with the very goodliest Emerauld, and the grea∣test Rubie, that euer had beene seene. And Apolidon appointed (when he departed thence for Con∣stantinople) that this precious Fanne, should be kept among the other singularities of the Isle, as the most excellent thing of all other: wherefore Amadis presented it to Oriana, on the same day when she landed there. And to the end, that this pleasant place might continue embellished, with all things that possibly could bee had: Apolidon lest there two Vnicornes, which the Prince of Quinsay had sent him, and there they liued so long, that King Lis∣uart found them there, after the mariage was sollemnized, between the Princesse Oriana and Amadis. Moreouer, there were many Ci∣uet and Maske-cattes, which made the ayre so extraordinarily sweete, as nothing could bee therewith compared: and sometimes the Pellicane also made her sent there. Great store of other worthy crea∣tures liued there also, as Harts, Hindes, Roes, Goates, Hares, Connies &c. withall diuersitie of Birdes and Fowles, as it was won∣derfull to heare the varietie of their noates, especially the Nightingale, and the solitarie Owsell, affecting alwaies to be alone. From forth of a nere neighbou∣ring high Rocke, descended a great water, which filled the Lake, whereof you haue heard i the second Booke, where the Hart lost his life, narrowly pursued by the hounds, as hath beene already rela∣ted. And thither vsually resorted the Beuer to bathe himselfe, with an infinite number of Swannes, Cignets, Cranes, Storkes, Cormo∣rants, Heronnes, with a plentifull store of all other Birdes. But all these made not this Lake so singu∣lar, as the frequent resort of a Mare∣maide, which was heard there (were neere) continually singing, as neuer was heard more delecta∣ble hermony. From this Lake is∣sued many Riuers and Currents, which made diuers little Islands in this Meadow. In one of them was a Dedalus or Labyrinth, contay∣ning onely foure Acres in square, planted with the most precious Balme, that euer grew in Engadia. And it was continually kept by two Serpents, bred of his kinde, that watcht the golden Apples in the Garden of Hesperides day and night. Directly in the midst of this De∣dalus, was a Colossus of guilded Brasse, contayning the height of sixe score Cubites, holding in his left hand (raised vp on his head) a Lanterne of Christall, and in it, the rod yet burning, wherewith Pro∣metheus kept the fire which he stole
from heauen: yeelding such a bright splendour day and night (without diminishing) that for the space of an hundred miles, round in compasse, the Mariners made their resort thither, as they did to Pharos neere Alexandria. This flaming Rod, Apolidon had gotten (by great industrie) from the Priests and Magitians of Chal∣dea: And whosoeuer could looke on this vnextinguishable fire, in his true nature, and without couering in this manner, hee should attaine to most mighty prouidence. But the Serpents kept the place very strongly, without doing any harm, to them that tooke delight in the Parke: prouided, that they presu∣med not to enter the Dedalus, for then they would belch forth such fire and flames, as was able to daunt the boldest spirit. And all this was thus ordained by Apolidon who was (as you haue formerly heard) one of the very greatest Enchan∣ters in all the world: yet, when the matchlesse beautie, entring into the Defended Chamber, should come neere to this Colossus, the Enchantments must cease, and easi∣lie might this admired fire bee looked on. Now, gentle Readers, consider seriously with your selues, if the like Pallace can now a dayes bee easily found, accompanied with such plentie of singularities, as Oriana saw there? To proceed on now in our Historie, the Ladies and Gentlewomen being brought to their seueral lodgings: the Knights of the Enclosed Isle departed from them, committing them to their good rest, because (in deed) it was somewhat late. Neuerthelesse, the Princesse Oriana (all that night) could not sleepe, partly through wearinesse on the Sea, and partly by her fearefull conceite, of harme that might ensue to Amadis, vpon this bold and hardie aduenture, which gaue her some reason to fore-thinke, of an intestine warre betweene him and King Lisuart. And now she beganne to consider with her selfe, that to palliate the earnest affection betweene them, there was necessarily required: that she should gouerne her selfe much more discreetly, then formerly she had done to kill all occasion of ill conceiuing of her. Hereupon, the next morning, shee sent to Amadis and the other Knights, requesting to haue a little conference with them, and they, who desired nothing more, then to serue and honour her: came im∣mediatly vpon her commande, and after courtesies past on either side, Quedragant, who had charge from the whole companie, to vnderstand her will, said. Madame, as we are enfourmed, you haue sent to speake with vs, let vs know what you will please to command vs? In good faith Sir, answered the Princesse, commaunds are no matters for mee, especially to them, in whose power I am as a prisoner, you may speake your pleasure. Madame, quoth hee, but there is not a man among vs, who is not willing to do you any seruice. Oriana returned him many thankes, and then repli∣ed thus. Let mee entreate you then to bee so pleased, that during the time of my residing in this place, my women and I may be se∣uered from all other company, and also to promise vs, that none of you (whosoeuer it bee) may come to see vs, without our leaue and permission: for you well know, that the surprizall you haue made of vs, and of the Emperours people, be∣ing once divulged abroade, it will
be hard, to comprehend the end of your intention, and our innocence, but speeches may passe to disad∣uantage. But when they shall heare the religion, wherein we de∣sire to liue, till such time as the King my father recall mee into his good opinion: I am perswaded, that easilie they will conuert their harsh language, into honest excu∣ses for vs all, who (together) make this request so reasonable to you wherein (we hope) you will yeeld vs no dell, being the first that e∣uer we made to you. M, answered Quedragant, we are h to o other end, but to obey you, and beleeue, that in this, and all things else you shall please to commande vs, no one of vs dare or will gainesay you. Euery man among them affirmed as much, allowing highly of her wis∣dome and prouidence. And al∣beit Amadis imagined this their se∣peration a little too rigorous (ha∣uing no other felicity in the world, then to be in her presence) yet he was feigne to dissemble it: being a matter so reasonable, and for the conseruation of her honour, whom he affected as his life. Ho∣ping notwithandsting, that though the day time denied him such an happinesse, yet the night would blesse him somewhat better, al∣beit not so often as hee could wish it. CHAP III. Of the Councell held among the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, touching the businesse for the Princesse Oriana, and what they further de∣termined to doe. YOV haue formerly heard the victory, which Amadis had a∣gainst the Romans, by meanes whereof, he got Oriana into his possession, and the other Ladies that bare her companie, which he accounted the happiest of all his other fortunes: albeit he fore-saw in his soule, that very hardly hee should appease the iniury, which he had done not onely to King Lisuart, but also to the Emperour. In regard where-of, questioning with his owne thoughts, that it would require no meane might, to withstand such potent Armies, as from either side would be made against him: yet notwithstanding, hope, conducted by the power of loue, gaue him this resolution, rather to die a thousand deaths, then redeliuer her to Patin, without whom hee could not liue an houre. He made no doubt of compassing some meanes, to re∣gaine her the former grace of the King her father, and to breake the alliance else-where intended; which that he might the better at∣taine vnto, hee gaue the Prince Agrates and Quedragant to vnder∣stand, that the Princesse had sent to pray this fauour. For otherwise (quoth he) she intendeth rather to make a Sacrifice of her selfe, then to fall into his power, whom she more hateth then any man liuing: Beside, it shall no way redound to our honour, to suffer such a mon∣strous shame, hauing made so great and good a beginning for her de∣liuerance. Quedragant returned him this
answere. I sweare vnto you Sir, at our first and giddie-headed eye∣sight, we see so great a fire already kindled, as (we may easily presume) is impossible to be quenched with∣out a hard and daungerous warre, which we may not well maintaine and endure for any long time, without the ayde and succour of our deare friends and companions, wherefore, I thinke it expedient, that all the rest which are here, should be made acquainted there-with, to know their opinions; to the end, that they may be the bet∣ter enclined to sustaine the busi∣nesse, if they shall conclude on warre. I pray you then, said Ama∣dis, that we may all meete together tomorrow, and take the charge (if you please) to summon them, wher∣to Quedragant gladly condiscen∣ded. Hereupon, the day following, they met together, and Amadis, sit∣ting in the midst of them, beganne in this maner. Honourable Lords, yesterday, Madame Oriana sent to pray me, that we all would consider one some good meanes, to winne againe the lost grace and fauour for her, with the offended King her father, qualifying in him (if it bee possible) that strange conceit of his, to marry her with the onely Prince in the world, to whom she beareth the least affection; otherwise, death will be much more welcome to her. And therefore I thought it good (after I had spoken with some of this company particularly) to vn∣derstand from you all in generall, what you thinke thereof: For, see∣ing wee haue beene friends and companions, in the procuring of her libertie; it is much more rea∣sonable, that we should all agree to maintaine it. But before I enter into further speech, I humbly desire you, to fixe before your eyes, that (already) your fame & renowne is so knowne through the world, by reason of the rare actions of Chiualry by you performed: that (at this day) there is neither King, Prince nor State, but stand in feare of your high va∣lour. For they all well know, that to winne immortall honour, you haue contemned, not onely the sumptuous treasures and kinde en∣tertainments, inherent to you in your owne houses: but the deare blood of your owne bodies, where-of you haue made no spare, in gi∣uing the boldest spirits to know, the sharpe and keene edges of your swords, to the mightie perill of your owne persons. And, as markes and testemonies of your prowesse, the wounds receiued in many parts of your bodies, may render such apparant faith, as For∣tune thinkes her selfe much obliged to you: being willing to shew you, how much her owne selfe is in deb∣ted to you. And being desirous to recompence your former high deseruings, she made plaine proofe thereof by deliuering this glorious victorie into your hands, which you haue had against the two chiefest Princes of Christendome, King Lisuart and the Roman Emperor. Nor doe I speake, concerning the ouerthrow of their men onely, being farre inferiour to you in me∣rit: but of the worthie succour you haue giuen, to the most wise, de∣bonnaire, and vertuous Lady this day liuing. Wherein you haue done a very acceptable seruice to God, by executing that dutie, whereunto you are expressely cal∣led: namely to succour the at∣ed, whē they are to endure wrongs beyond all reason. Now, if the King and Emperour thinke it good
to be angrie, yet, seeing right is on our side, and God (who is iust) will stand for vs also: let vs giue them to vnderstand, that if their owne experience cannot teach them iu∣stice, but by might and power they meane to assaile vs; we are able to meete them with such resistance, as shall remaine in memory while the world endureth. Therefore, let euery man speake his minde in this case, what he conceiueth meetest to be done, either to finish the war begun: or else to motion peace, by restoring Madame Oriana to the King her father, according to her owne desire. For, as concer∣ning my selfe, know, that I will ne∣uer yeeld thereto, except you be so pleased, nor shall fond opinion o∣uersway me in this matter, beyond the compasse so your liking. I know you to be men indeed, and your vertues of apparant: as no∣thing can withdraw you from true valour and magnanimitie, nei∣ther to aduenture on any action, whereby your honour (in how small a degree soeuer) may receiue any base imputation. So he ceased, leauing the mindes of all the companie highly con∣tented and satisfied, by such an humble and gracefull remon∣strance, as he had made vnto them. Then Quedragant (commaunded thereto by all the assistants) stood vp, and answered Amadis in this manner. Lord Amadis, it is most certaine, that our attempt made vpon the Emperour, was not for any hatred wee bare to him: but onely to keepe the faith, whereto euery good Knight standeth oblig∣ed, in maintayning and defending afflicted persons from wrong, especially all vertuous Ladies, of whom it is our dutie to be protect∣ours. And therefore I would ad∣uise, that before we vndertake any further warre; wee should send to King Lisuart, to let him fully vn∣derstand, vpon what occasion we dealt with the Romans. And if he be found discontented; then, in the verie mildest manner can bee de∣uised, to shew him withall graci∣ous demeanour) what shamefull iniurie he offered to Madame Ori∣ana, vnder collour of marrying her to a forraigne Prince, vtterly to disinherit her at home, a matter euery way offensiue to God, and not to bee suffred by his owne Subiects. Pausing a very little while, and clapping his fist vpon the boorde, thus he proceeded▪ If therefore it may stand with his good pleasure, to forget his conceiued anger a∣gainst her (if there be any entred in∣to his royall brest) then we to offer deliuerie of her againe, on this con∣dition, and not else. If he refuse or disdaine the dutie, wherein we send vnto him: then to tell him re∣solutely, wee feare him not a iote, but if he will make warre vpon vs, we are as ready to defend our selues. In the meane while, I hold it very necessarie, that wee strengthen our selues with all such things, as an action of such importance doth require, as this is. At least, that he may not come vpon vs vnprouided, whensoeuer hee determines to as∣saile vs (if he be so minded) albeit, in mine opinion, peace were much better then warre. But this con∣clusion is not to be tardied by any meanes, rather we must put our selues in due preparation, dispatch∣ing hence messengers to our kin∣red and friends, to supply vs with their best succour, when we shall require it. Such was the answere of Que∣dragant, and approued by all the
Knights there present: whereupon it was concluded, that Amadis should send a messenger to his fa∣ther King Perion of Gaule, also A∣graies into Scotland, Brunco to the Marquesse his father, and Quedra∣gant to the Queene of Ireland, of whom he should haue many able men, if her husband King Cildadan brought no worse, then he did to the ayde of King Lisuart. This was made knowne to the Princesse Oriana, and their finall delibera∣tion for procurement of peace. As thus they continued in these conferences, some of them stan∣ding in the gazing windowes, which had full view vpon the fields: they espied comming from the coast, that gaue entrance into the Isle, a Knight all armed, with fiue Squires attending on him, who when hee drew neerer, they knew him to be Briande Moniaste, sonne to Lazadan, King of Spaine, of whose arriuall they were all right ioyfull for hee was an amiable, bold and hardie Knight, and as courteous as any whatsoeuer. Hee espying so great a company there together, vpon their comming foorth to meete him: began to grow doubt∣full, that they had heard some euill tyding of Amadis, for whose sake and search hee had expressely left the King his fathers Court. But perceiuing, that their intention was to salute him, and seeing Ama∣dis there among them: he instant∣ly alighted, and running to em∣brace him, said. Trust me, my Lord, the quest I vndertooke to heare newes of you, is sooner ended then I expected: for I was giuen to vnderstand, that you were so closely hid, as it was a matter im∣possible to finde you, but God be praised for it, me thinkes I see you in very sound health. Cousine, quoth Amadis, you are most kinde∣ly welcome hether, assuring you, that as Fortune hath released you from one toyle and trauaile: so now she hath as readily fitted you with an other, answerable both to to the time and place, where your presence and imployment may much auaile vs, as you hereafter shall heare more at large. In the meane while, I thinke it conueni∣ent, that you should be disarmed, and then wee will tell you our mindes afterward. So taking him by the hand, hee conducted him to his lodging, where, as they were taking off his Armes, seeing such store of Knights flocke more and more about him, he sayd to Amadis. My Lord, I am verily perswaded, that so faire an assembly of worthy and valiant men, could neuer be thus met to∣gether, but vpon some extreame vrgent cause: therefore, I pray you tell me what it is. Hereupon, Ama∣dis amply related to him, how, and in what manner all things had past, especially the churllish ingrati∣tude, which King Lisuart vsed, not onely to the Knights that had done him infinite seruices: but also to his owne children, enforcing one of them (through ouergreedie and great auarice) to bee disinherited from her right, and (meerely a∣gainst her will) sent to Rome, to be wife to the Emperour, and that is Madame Oriana. And this is the cause, that so many of vs are here assembled together? quoth Brian, is the Princesse Oriana at Rome? No, replied Amadis, we haue for∣cibly taken her from the Romans, that had the charge of her conuoy: And now at this present, shee is here in this Pallace, with all the Ladies, and Gentlewomen that were in her companie. Now shall
we easily redeliuer thē, except King Lisuart determine more respect of them, then hitherto he hath done. Afterward, he told him what was resolued on by them all, which Bri∣an liked as well as they: albeit hee conceiued, that the iniuries of two such potent Princes (by this de∣feature) would not bee suddenly appeased. Notwithstanding, see∣ing that which was done, could not be recalled: he dissembled his co∣gitations, and onely answered thus. I know King Lisuart, to be one of the most reuengefullest Princes this day liuing, and very hard to endure an iniurie, therefore, you must quickly consider on some re∣sistance, if he shall offer to assaile you: and I hold it more requisite, to take order for all inconuenien∣ces which may ensue by his means, then to consume time in friuolous words. Of one thing I am high∣ly glad, that Madame Oriana and her women haue so happie a re∣tirement, and I would gladly see her, if you please. Let me tell you Sir, answered Amadis, my Cousine Agraies, and my Brother Florestan are appointed, to make her ac∣quainted with our deliberation, and you may goe along with them: being well assured, that it will be no meane ease to her, to conferre with you on her misfortunes in pri∣uate. No time was delayed in going to her, but before they would pre∣sume to enter her lodgings; they sent her word, that they came to her from the whole company. Hereup∣on, their entrance was admitted, and she went to meete them: es∣pecially Brian, whom she had not seene in a long time, and therefore as he did her reuerence, she said vnto him. Cousine, you are come hither in a very good time, to de∣fend the libertie of a Lady, who stands in great neede of such helpe as yours. Madame, said he, I had not so long delayed my comming hither, but that presently, after the seuen Kings ouerthrow in Great Brittaine: the King my father com∣manded my home returne, to with-stand the warre, which the people of Affrica made vpon him. And scarsely was it ended, but I vnder∣stood, my Cousine Amadis was so farre distant from his friends, through some conceiued griefe or displeasure; as no tidings could be heard of him. Wherefore, fea∣ring least he was lost for euer, I re∣solued to enter vpon his quest, both in the loue and reuerence I beare vnto him. This was the occasion that drew mee from Spaine, being fully perswaded, that I should soo∣ner haue notice of him here, then in any other place else whatsooner. And Fortune (I thanke her) hath guided mee hither, where I haue met with apt occasion, not onely to doe him seruice, but also for you, royall Princesse; for which great kindnesse, Oriana returned him in∣finite thankes. But now, before I passe on any further, I thinke it very necessarie to tell you, what was the principall motiue and reason, why so many good Knights and worthy men, should beare such honour and good will to this Princesse. Asiure your selues, it was not for any guifts or presents she had bestowed on them, she being (as yet) voide of all meanes to that effect. Much lesse, for any fauour by Amadis borne to her, the loue betweene them both being kept so secret, as you haue heard at large in the prece∣dent Bookes. But indeed, she was so humble, wise and debon∣naire, that by her meere humility
and courtesie, shee knew how to steale the heartie affections of eue∣ry one. A matter so apt and pro∣per to heroyick persons, and them deriued from great place: as they haue no other powers or faculties, but such as make them to bee more honoured, praised and estee∣med. Consider then, in what reputa∣tion they ought to be held, who (by ouer-strange persumpsion) haue delight in all immodest be∣hauiour, when all is duely weigh∣ed, they beget the peoples disfa∣uour, a secret contempt among all good mindes; yea, and distaste of many of their owne appearing wel-willers, that particularly desire their ruine, to abate the ouer-wee∣ning pride, they take in such wick∣ednesse. Gracious language, ap∣prehensiue grauitie, and humble modestie, are so proper and pecu∣liar to Princes and great persons, that whensoeuer they but speake: it begetteth their subiects cordiall loue, absolute obedience, with a generall foare of offending; And the contrary is so deadly daunge∣rous, as nothing can be more harm∣full to them. Let vs conceiue then, how well it agrees with a knot of such base minded companions, to put on a boasting spirit of brauerie: as thinking by their outward glo∣rious appearance, to make them-selues respected and feared. Before God, mee thinkes they should consider, both what they are, and what they shall bee: then they may easily know of them-selues, that they are full of shame and all disgrace, and for such, I am content to leaue them, returning againe to our former purpose. Vnderstand now, that after Ori∣ana had a long while conuersed with Brian: shee called for the Queene Sardamira, and said vnto her. See Madame, here is the sonne to the King of Spaine, I am sure you know him yet. Then the Queene going neerer to him, after she had very graciously saluted Bri∣an; entred into so serious a dis∣course with him, that Oriana found the meanes of leauing them toge∣ther. So, with drawing her selfe aside, she called Agrates and Flo∣restan to her: entreating them ear∣nestly, to acquaint her with the cause of their comming. Agraies wholly related to her, whatsoeuer had passed among them in coun∣cell, what true and honorable af∣fection all the Knights did beare her: and lastly, what resolution they had agreed on, concerning her cause, desiring her withall, to send backe her minde, whether she liked their intention, or no. Alas Sir, quoth she, they are all so wise and vertuous, as no bad thought can preuaile among them. One thing I would most humbly request of them, that (euen for Gods sake) to seeke some meanes, if pos∣sibly they may, and agreeing with their honour; to worke my peace with the displeased King my fa∣ther. Then, pretending to whisper some thing in the eare of Agraies, Florestan (as one not to learne ci∣uility) retired thence, leauing them both together. When Oriana per∣ceiued she might speake at liber∣tie: she began her womed o∣nings to him, in this manner. Deare Cousine, although I haue great hope in the prouidence of your kinsman Amadis, and in the loyall affection which all these Knights doe beare me: yet (mee thinkes, reason requireth, that I should most of all relie on your fidelity, in re∣gard of my bounden dutie to the
King your father, and the Queene your mother, affording me such princely entertainment in Scot∣land; as also for gracing me with the companie of your sister Mabila, of whom onely (next vnto God) I hold my life. For, without the comforts, which she hath many times giuen me  the very strong∣est  tunes: a long time since, I had beene buried, and de∣priued of any ioy in this world, And albeit I haue now no meanes or power, to acknowledge, either towards them or you, so many ob∣ligations of due debt: yet my hope is, that time hereafter will better In the  thinke it not amise, that familiarlie I let you vn∣derstand, what heauie burdens of griefe I beare. And for my first be∣ginning (sparing to speake, what wrongs the King my father hath done me) let mee entreate you, to procure (euen to your vttermost power) an honorable peace, be∣tweene him and your Cousine Amadis. For I make no doubt, considering the ancient comitie be∣tweene them, and the iust occasion you all haue, of scarse wishing him well: that hardly will these matters (begun) grow to any other end, then most heauie misfortune, nay,  ruine on both sides; except such  as you shall make, be well qualified with good coun∣ prouidence, which I know is  abounding in you. Wher∣fore, once more I desire you, as well to anoyde such a maine incon∣uenience, as also to protect mee from suspition of forraine nations, who may hereafter make doubt of my innocence, and maculate my good reputation, which is more precious to me then life: that you would all consider what I haue said to you. Madame, answered Agraies, as concerning the good entertaine∣ment you receiued in Scotland, the King my father and the Queene, did no more therein then they ought to doe: and such (I am sure) was their affection towards you: that in all things, which their vn∣derstanding could reach vnto, there wanted no loue or kindnesse in them to you, as their best respected allie and kfewomen. Now, as concerning my sister and my selfe, our actions shall daylie make knowne to you, in what vnfeigned respect we hold you: desyring you to beleeue, thet you may command vs, as they that couet nothing more, then your good and honour, preferring them before our owne liues. And whereas you wish me, to forget the iniurie, which the King your father hath done, not only to mee, but to all my kinred and friends: assure your selfe Ma∣dame, the wound was made so wide and deepe, as it will neuer be hea∣led while I liue. It was no little ingratitude to vs, denying my Lord Amadis, my selfe, and many other good Knights, the humble request we made vnto him, to giue the Isle of Mongaza to mine vnckle Galua∣nes, who dearely deserued it, and much more: considering, that it was conquered by his aour and vertue, that became an humble su∣ter for it. Neuerthelesse, for your loue and honou, I am content to dissemble my distaste, and deferre (for some time) my iust occasion of wishing him ill especially, for ba∣nishing vs from his Court so strangely, euen as if we had beene his deadly enemies, and neuer minding or respecting, how ma∣ny great seruices we had done for him.
And to let you know, that I will wholly imploy my selfe to please you: I promise you Madame, I will essay (to my vttermost) to doe as you haue desired me. But it would hardly agree with reason, that it should be ouer-rashly vndertaken, because, if I should bee coole in speech now, matters being altoge∣ther disposed for warre: in stead of edging the courages of so many worthy Knights, as are now met together in this Isle, I should intimidate the greater part of them, by hearing mee preach of peace, and raise in them an ap∣prehension, that I vse such lang∣uage, as being the man first affrigh∣ted. Wherein I must fall into two euills together, which hereaf∣ter will redound to the great dam∣mage of vs all, but especially mine vnrecouerable shame. But some being sent to the King your father, and hauing heard his answere: I will entreate my worthy friends, to doe according as you haue adui∣sed. In the meane while, mee thinkes you should greeue so lit∣tle as possibly you may, supporting both Time and Fortune, with a wo∣manly, constant and inuincible pa∣cience. Cousin (quoth shee) I acknowledge it very requisite, not to daunt their manly spirits, that are assembled here about my busi∣nesse; but rather, to maintaine their height of minde, committing all things to their care and discretion. During all this conference, A∣grates continually obserued Olinda, whom he affected with all his heart, as he had made good proofe of, in passing (for her loue) vnder the Arch of loyall Louers: notwith∣standing, preferring vertue before his passions, hee knew so wisely to cōceale them, that leauing her there shut vp with Ortana, hee departed without speaking to her, and ne∣uer frequented the place, albeit it was an insupportable paine to him. So, at parting from the Prin∣cesse, hee said: Madame, I will ef∣fectually performe what you haue enioyned me. Returne then, said she, and commend mee most kind∣ly to the whole companie. The like shee did to Florestan and Bri∣an, who taking leaue of her, went to seeke Amadis and the rest, who awaited their comming, and de∣clared to them all her answere. Whereupon was concluded, that some should bee sent to King Lis∣uart, so soone as possibly might bee; wherefore Brian and Que∣dragant were entreated by all the company, to take that charge vpon them, which they could not well refuse, because the other were so importunate. CHAP. IIII. Of the discourse which Amadis had with Grasinda, and the answer sh made him: Also, what Letters were directed by Amadis, to diuers great Princes. NOW did not Amadis know, what order hee should take concer∣ning Grasinda; either for sending her home into her owne Countrie, or to de∣termine on her abyding there, vn∣till this contention were better ap∣peased. Wherefore, being desi∣rous to sound her owne ∣on, hee went to visite her in her lodging: and after some few other
speeches passed betweene them, Amadis thus spake vnto her. Ma∣dame, I am much discontented with my selfe, that I haue no better opportunity, of doing you honour, in this place, and giuing you wel-come equall to your deserts: but time being contrarie to my desires, robs me of all due occasion. There∣fore I humbly entreate you, that (in excusing me) you will conceiue no offence, or impute it to any want of good will: for you haue so much bound me to you by your passed fauours, as I cannot enioy one day of my life, that I may not graunt but to be onely yours, in any seruice whatsoeuer I can doe for you. And because it is now a long while, since you departed from your Countrie, and (perhaps) this long abode of yours here, may be more displeasing to you, then I could wish: I am desirous, to vn∣derstand your owne deliberati∣on, to the end, that I may endeauour all possible meanes, to obey you in whatsoeuer you shall please to command me. Lord Amadis, answered Grasinda, I might well be reputed poore in iudgement, if I knew not certaine∣ly; that both the companie, and fauours you haue done for me hath sorted to the very highest honour, that euer could befall me. As for the good entertainment, which you alleadge to haue receiued in my Country, if it could deserue the name of goodnesse: hath it not al∣readie beene more then fiue fold recompenced, to your great same, and partly my reproach? Neuer∣thelesse, to put you out of doubt of my determination; I will boldly disclose my minde vnto you. I see so many good Knights heere met together, for assistance of that peerelesse Princesse Oriana, and they wholly relying vpon your ver∣tues, both in hope and perswasion of good successe, for the loue and high esteeme they hold you in; it is impossible for you to forsake them, but to your eternall blame and in∣famie. And therefore, seeing such a weightie charge is put vpon you, it must be your care and labour, to send to all coasts, for recouerie of men to giue you succour: that the honour of so great an enterprise may remaine to you, by meanes of your good friends, among whom, I account my selfe not to bee the least. And that you may haue ef∣fectuall proofe, of deeds to make good words: I am resolued, to dis∣patch hence Maister Elizabet to¦morrow morning, sending him for Romania, there to muster vp (both of my subiects, and others) so many as conueniently he may, and ship∣ping them with all speed, to con∣uay them hither. In the meane  bee no distaste to you, I me, of what consequ with the other Laat conclusion is reso so much to hono Knights: to imploys, ne∣uer to forkinred for some power see this warre ithstand the forces of other end.  aduenture to set Before God, Madame (, I Amadis) for ought I can perceiue, you haue such an excellent incli∣nation, to make me acknowledge, how deepely I shall runne into your de, beyond all ability of sa∣tisfaction; that I stand meerely as a man confounded, at such extraor∣dinarie loue and kindnesse. And seeing you are so free in bounty to∣wards me, I were vnwise to refuse it; but (with all humility) most thankefully accept it. And if you please to require Master Elizabet, to passe from thence to Constanti∣nople with Letters of credence from me to the Emperour: I make
no doubt, but (according to his promise heretofore made mee, and hatred he beares to the Emperour of Rome) that he will louingly send vs ayde. I am perswaded, replied Grasinda, that Maister Elisabet will hold himselfe right happie, in do∣ing you any acceptable seruice: for his desires only ayme thereat, as often times he hath assured me. Now Sir, there remaineth nothing else, but your entreatie to Oriana, that I may make one in her graci∣ous company. Madame, said A∣madis, seeing it is so well lyking to you, I will presently send to know her minde; and doe verily beleeue, that it will be as pleasing to her, as to your selfe, that you will vouch∣safe to keepe her company. Then he called for Gandales, to whom he gaue that charge, and he tarried not long, but returned a∣gaine to them, saying: That Oriana thanked Grasinda most affectionat∣ly, and gaue attendance  Constantinople, where hauing done what Amadis appointed: hee should returne to Romania with all possible speed, and shipping such forces as hee found prepared, to bring them away to the Enclosed Isle. This done, Amadis conducted her to the Princesse, where leauing her: he went to dispatch away Ma∣ster Elisabet, to whom he gaue a Letter, directed to the Emperour, the contents whereof follow. The letter of Amadis, sent to the Em∣perour of Constantinople. MOst High and excellent Prince, the Knight of the Greene Sworde (whose right name indeed is Amadis de Gaule) sends you most humble salutations. And whereas (after the foile of the Endriagus) comming to your Court, you pleased to giue mee most royall entertainement, and (beside your manifold fauours) out of your owne benigne bountie, of∣fred mee ade and assistance when need should require, in fauour of my seruices done you, by the reduction of that Country, which you pleased to name the  of Saint Mary: I am bold to acquaint you, that occasion now doth minister such matter, as you haue apt meanes (if you please) to accomplish your promise, and vpon so iust a quar∣rell, as possibly can bee offred. Ac∣cording as Maister Elisabet shall fur∣ther impart vnto you: whom I hum∣bly entreate you to credit, on the be∣halfe of him, that (in all dutie) kis∣seth the hand of your Imperiall Ma∣iestie. Your Highnesse loyall Knight and seruant, Amadis de Gaule. Such was the dispatch of Mai∣ster Elisabet, who going aboord his Ship, setting saile, very soone after, arriued in Greece. The very same day, Amadis gaue order to Tantiles, Maister of the houshold to Queene Briolania, to depart for the Realme of Sobradisa towards his Misresse, saying thus to him. My dee friend Tantiles, thou knowest (as well as wee our selues) how we stand bound for the main∣tenance of warre, and how highly mine honour will be endamaged, if the end of this beginning fall not out to our intention: goe there∣fore to thy royall Queene, to whom (after thou hast done my humble dutie) say, I desire her to send mee
such a supply of soldiours, as pos∣sibly shee may. Thou maist at large acquaint her, with all matters past, the condition wherein we now are, and into what daunger we may fall. Moreouer, tell her, and bid her well remember it, that this matter touching me, concerneth her selfe as neerely, being hers, as she doth very well know. My Lord, answered Tantiles, the Queene my Mistresse will conceiue more delight then you can imagin, that she may compasse any meanes to let you know, how desirous she is to doe any thing worthy your acceptance. And beleeue it assu∣redly, that so soone as shee shall heare these tydings: she will take such order in the matter you send for, as you shall quickly see me re∣turned with a sufficient power of men. Deliuer her then (quoth A∣madis) this Letter, and make what dilligent speed thou canst. So he gaue him the Letter, contayning these liues. The Letter sent from Amadis, to Briolania, Queene of So∣bradisa. I Am perswaded Madame, after you haue heard by Tantiles, Maister of your Houshold, the cause that mooues me to send to you in such haste: that you will allow much fauour, to what he shall tell you on my behalfe. Assure your selfe, that in making vse of your gentle breeding, you will not now saile mee: no more then you thinke I should doe, being alwaies readie to set foote in stirrop for you, where any ne∣cessitie can offer it selfe. And be∣cause he hath beene euermore present, at all such occurrences as haue happe∣ned to me, since my returne into this Country, and I haue giuen him charge, to let you know them at large; I will not be troublesome to you, in reading ouer a tedious long Letter. But ear∣nestly entreat you, that (crediting him) you will alwaies containe mee in your gracious fauour, whereof I desire to pertake so long as I liue. That Amadis, who is yours. So Tantiles departed, and with∣out soiourning in any place, tra∣uailed so deuoutly, that he soone arriued in the Kingdome of Sobra∣disa. On the otherside, Gandalin was appointed to goe for Gaule; for which cause, Amadis, taking him aside, thus spake to him. Ganda∣lin, thou art he, who alwaies hath beene the guardian of my most in∣timate occasions, by the loue which our youngest yeares bred in vs, euen as if nature had inuited vs to a perfect brother-hood. Thou knowest, that my honour is thine, and that thine concerneth mee as much as mine owne. Thou seest what a businesse is begunne vpon me, of what consequence it is, and what conclusion is resolued on, by all the Knights: to imploy our friends and kinred for some power∣full ayde, to withstand the forces of King Lisuart, if he aduenture to set vpon vs. And for this cause, I haue sent Messengers to diuers Princes, from whom I hope to re∣ceiue such bands of men, as shall make vp an able Armie. Now, albeit thine absence will be somewhat grieuous to me, yet notwithstanding, relying more vp∣on thy diligence, then any other seruice now to be done mee: I am determined, to send thee to King Perion my father, who of long time hath knowne thee, and to whom (better then any other) thou canst disclose, of what importance this warre will prooue to mee, if King Lisuart doe begin it. For, as thou
maist truely tell him, in part it con∣cerneth him, the ingratefull King hauing done so many high disfa∣uours, to all them that are of our li∣nage, excluding them from his Court, after such an infinity of great good seruices, by them done to him: what thou knowest, spare not fully to acquaint him withall, both what thou hast seene, and in what necessitie thou didst leaue vs. And yet neuerthelesse, boldly say vnto him, and assure him thereof, in the loyall dutie of a sonne, that I feare not any power whatsoeuer; hauing right and iustice on my side, and so many worthy Knights to assist me in my cause. Tell him moreouer, Gandalin, that I had neuer attempted so great an enterprise, had it not beene, that seeing God had called mee to the order of Knight-hood, I neuer min∣ded any thing more: but to per∣forme the dutie of a Knight, defen∣ding (to my power) the wrongfull disgraces offred by many, especial∣ly to Ladies and Gentlewomen, who ought to bee preferred before all other persons, and for whom I haue often put my life in perill, without hope of any other recom∣pence from them, then pleasing God by so well a done deed, and augmenting mine owne renowne through the world. And this was the onely cause that mooued mee to forsake mine owne Countrie to seeke (among strange nations) for such as stood in need of my helpe: where I haue met with many pe∣rillous aduentures, as thou thy selfe hast seene, and can at large re∣count. Namely, that arriuing in this Isle, I was aduertised, how King Lisuart (forgetting the glory of God, right towards men, coun∣cell of his Lords, and the verie na∣turall instinct, which euery good father commonly beareth to his child) would needs, euen in a man∣ner of extreame cruelty, banish from his Kingdome, Madame Ori∣ana, his owne daughter and prin∣cipall heire, to giue her (against her will) as wife to the Emperour Pa∣tin of Rome, whom she hateth to the death. Hereof shee made complaint, not only to them of the Realme of Great Brittaine, but require yde and uccour of all Knights bearing Armes, as well by letters and mes∣sages as otherwise: desiring them, with heaued vp , and foun∣taines of teares flowing  her eyes, to take pittie and compassion vpon her miserie. And so much her prayers and oppressions pre∣uailed, that the Lord and ruler of all things, locked on her with a mercifull eye, inspiring the hearts of many good Knights, to meete here in this place, euen by miracle as it were: where I found them, as thou knowest, resolued to aduen∣ture their liues, for setting her at libertie by force, and other Ladies keeping her company. Conside∣ring, that in doing otherwise, they should iustly deserue blame in fol∣lowing times, giuing (many) occa∣sion to presume: that cowardise only kept them from this com∣mendable ayde, being persons of so great quality as they all are, and the case so important. In which respect the conflict happened be∣tweene vs and the Romans, accor∣ding as thou sawest it: wherein we tooke many prisoners, and reued he Ladies from their hands. But to mediate the matter with King Lisuart, and my Cousin , shall speedily part hence, with expresse order from vs all, to worke by humble intercession, that he would
take in good part what wee haue done, and receiue Madame Oriana, with all her attendants, into his fa∣uour againe. And yet wee stand resolued, that if he will not accept our honest offer, but proudely des∣pise it: to stand vpon our guarde against him, our good friends and kinred backing vs; among whom, Gandalin, thou maist assure him, that we reckon him as the chiefest, and therefore doe humbly entreate him, to helpe vs in so reasonable a necessitie. See also the Queene my mother, and kisse her hand on my behalfe. Pray her, to send hi∣ther my sister Melicia, to keepe companie with these other Ladies, among whom she may learne ma∣ny singular qualities. But before thou goest hence, know of my Cou∣sine Mabila, if shee will command thee any seruice thither: and make some means, to speak with the Prin∣cesse Oriana, who will not shew her selfe so strange to thee; but that thou maist perceiue the estate of her good health, and how her af∣fection continueth towards me. If Amadis was thus seriously bu∣sied, about the procuration of good ayde, Agraies slept not on the otherside: for he instantly sent Gandales into Scotland, with ex∣presse charge to the King his fa∣ther, in what need they stood of his assistance. Already Landin was gon for Ireland, by whom Quadra∣gant entreated the Queene his Niece, to send such a sufficient power, as possibly she might. And yet not to let King Cildadan, her husband, know thereof: for it was against all reason, that hee should meddle in the matter, considering the couenants and alliances, be∣tweene him and King Lisuart. Moreouer hee had command, to prouide so many shippes for warre, as he could, and to bring them a∣long with him. Brunco de bonne Mer (who dearely affected Melicia, sister to Amadis) wrote to the Mar∣quesse his father, and to Branfill his brother, about the same busmesse, and deliuering his Letters to his Squire Lasinde, spake in this man∣ner. My honest friend Lasinde, thou seest what a number of Knights are here assembled, notwithstanding, thou must conceiue, that the grea∣ter part of this businesse, cōcerneth Amadis principally, whom (be∣side the vnfeigned loue I beare him) I would gladly ayde to my vt∣termost power, for his sister Meli∣ciaes sake, to whom I stand obliged in seruice, and to none other. For should I doe any otherwise, I am well assured, I should procure his great discontentment, which were worse to me then any death. And therefore thou must wisely per∣swade my father, to giue vs his best succour: shewing him discreetly, that this matter is as important to me, as to any other, and yet not vse one word of Melicia. Onely tell him, my obligation and dutie to Amadis, who hath honoured me with his company in so many pla∣ces, is the onely motiue that com∣mands me: And my brother Bran∣fill shall hereby winne more honor, then so to sleepe in the cinders of negligence, as he doth. My Lord (answered Lasinde) I hope so well to accomplish your command, that my voyage shall haue effect equall to your desire. And so taking leaue, he went away. Nor was Amadis vnmindfull, concerning the offers made him by King Taffinor of Bohemia, at such time as he vndertooke his cause in Combate, against Garadan, whom he slue, and afterward foyled eleuen
other Knights, belonging to the Emperour Patin. Hereupon, consulting with his owne cogita∣tiōs, he determined to send thither Ysanis, the ancient Gouernour of the Enclosed Isle: a worthy wise Knight, to request ayde of him. And pursuing this purpose, he cal∣led for the good old man, to whom he said Ysanio, knowing the fidelity remayning in you, and your euer∣readie good will to doe mee any seruice: I would entreate you, to vndertake a iourney for mee, about a matter of great consequence, not knowing any Gentleman (be∣side your selfe) more apt and an∣swerable for the businesse. I would haue you goe to King Taffinor of Bohemia, to whom you shall beare Letters of credence from mee: gi∣uing him (beside) to vndestand our occasions, and what trust wee re∣pose in his assistance. Hee is a Prince magnanimous and boun∣tifull, and (I trust) will not faile me, hauing formerly made mee such li∣berall offers. My Lord, answe∣red Ysanio, I promise you I will doe my duetie. Well then, sayd Amadis, to morrow morning you shall set on-ward: but aboue all things (Ysanio, my deare friend) I pray you vse dilligence. Then hee gaue him the Letter, which spake thus, The Letter from Amadis, to Taffinor, King of Bo∣hemia. SIR, if euer I did any seruice, wor∣thie your liking and acceptance, the honourable and kinde entertaine∣ment, which I receiued of you and yours, all the while I remained in your Court, hath made me much more rea∣die (so long as I liue) to make no spare of my person, but alwaies to be in due preparation, for your continuall obedi∣ence and seruice. Wherefore I hum∣bly entreat you, not to imagine, that the sending of this present messenger to you, is in expectation of any re∣compence: but rather, remembring the honest offers you made mee at my departure from Bohemia, it drew me on to so much boldnesse, as, by this meanes of sending to you, earnestly to desire you, to giue mee aide in abusi∣nesse, which nerely concerneth mee, and wherewith this bearer will fur∣ther acquaint you. I beseech you Sir to credit him, euen as my selfe, and to command his dispatch with all pos∣sible speed: to rid him out of all dread, that is readie to sacrifice his life for you. And that is Amadis de Gaule, sirnamed in many places, The Knight of the greene Sworde, euermore by you and yours to be commanded. CHAP. V. Of the priuate talke, which Oriana and Mabila had with Gandalin, and what he gaue Amadis to vnderstand, concerning them. AMbassadours being dispatched to all parts, as you haue formerly heard, Gandalin, being readie to depart for Gaule: came to the lodgings of the Princesse Oriana, according as his Maister before had appointed him. And because no man might enter, without command and permission from the Princesse, the gate being alwaies kept by one of the aun∣cientest
women: he sent word to Mabila, to know from her, if she pleased to write to the Queene her Aunte, or to her Cousine Melicia. Mabila being acquainted by the Gentlewoman, concerning the motion made by Gandalin, went and told Oriana thereof, so loude as eue∣ry one might heare her, saying. Ma∣dame, Gandalin is going for Gaule towards King Perion: may it please you commaund him any thing to the Queene, or to my Cousin? Yes mary will I, answered Oriana, cause him come in, that I may speake with him. Then Gandalin was ad∣dmitted into the Princesse Cham∣ber, when seeing him, she presently arose, and taking him aside (as pre∣tending to giue him some priuate enstructions; she beganne to sigh, and spake in this manner. Gandalin, my deare friend, what thinkest thou that Fortune is so contrarrie to me, bereauing me of the onely man in the world, whose company I most affect, he being so nere me, and I altogether in his power? Neuerthelesse, we cannot haue the meanes for the least pri∣uate conference, without great tax∣ation to mine honour, whereby my heart endureth such affliction: as, if thou knewest it, I am certainely perswaded, that thou wouldst take more pittie on me then thou doest. And so I pray thee tell him, to the end, that though I haue iust cause to complaine: yet he may reioyce, by the augmentation (dayly more and more) of mine vnfeigned loue and loyaltie to him. And I would haue him deuise the meanes, by some pretie stratagem among his associates; that yet we may see one an other, vnder collour of thy voy∣age, and to comfort me. Madame, answered Gandalin, you haue great reason to beare him such loyal affection, and to remem∣ber also some remedie, whereto (aboue all things else) hee would gladly aspire: for if you knew the extremitie, wherein I haue seene him an hundred times, you might very well beleeue, that loue is a Lordly tyrant ouer him. I haue seene him halfe dead (as it were) a thousand times, thinking on the passed fauours you haue affoorded him, and as manie times to recouer life againe, onely by the meere re∣membrance of them. I haue like∣wise seene him (among the deadli∣est dangers in the world) performe such incomparable actions of Armes, calling onely vpon you to be his comfort: that it can hardly bee credited, any Knight should haue so much valour in him. There∣fore sweete Madame, I pray you take pittie on him, and vse him an∣swerable to his high deserts. For this I dare assure you, neuer was any Knight more loyall, or more yours, then he is: neither euer had any Lady such power ouer a man, as you haue ouer him; in your hands only lies his life and death, and you may dispose of him as you please. Gandalin, replied Oriana, I be∣leeue thee vndoubtedly, feeling in mine owne selfe, that which thou relatest in him, and his life is mine, for I haue no other breathing, but by him, and in the companie of o∣thers, he onely makes me liue. But I pray thee, make mee not die, as sometimes thou didst, when thou broughtest me tydings, of his re∣turne from Gaule into Great Brit∣taine: for, in being depriued now of all meanes, to doe what willingly I would for him, I may doe wrong to him, and to myselfe also, by de∣claring my desires ouer-earnest and affectionate. Therefore, I pray
thee speake no more, but returne to him, and will him to worke some way, that I may see him so soone as possible he can. So Gandalin tooke his leaue, and as he was parting out of the Chamber, shee spake some-what audibly: faile not to come for my letters, before you goe hence. Amadis attended his returne in sound deuotion, and no sooner saw him, but sayd vnto him. Well, Gandalin, hast thou seene my Lady? I pray thee tell mee, what hath she said to thee? Then hee declared (word by word) what had passed be∣tweene them, how desirous she was to see him: and (for a finall resolu∣tion) wished him, to come with some other of the Knights, vnder collour of comforting her. But when hee came to those words of kindnesse, which (in the zeale of af∣fection) she had spoken: hee stood as one entranced, till recouering spirit againe, he thus spake. Alas, Gandalin, how shall I do what thou saist? Hauing apprehended a con∣ceit suddenly, thus hee proceeded. Thou must needs goe to Agraies, and tell him, that because I send thee into Gaule, thou was desirous to know of my Cousin Mabila, whe∣ther shee would write to my sister Melicia, or no. And after some few speeches past betweene you, she told thee, she held it very con∣uenient, that we should oftener vi∣sit Madame Oriana, then wee vse to doe, and make meanes, to cause her forget the extreame melancholie, whereto (ouer-much) shee addict∣eth her selfe, least, being so continu∣ally sad, shee fall into some dange∣rous disease. And be very circum∣spect, hee discouer not, that thou hast spoken with me, or that I know any thing of this matter. And once more I pray thee tell mee, didst thou not finde her very sad? You know well enough Sir, an∣swered Gandalin, and for no little length of time, that shee is one of the most wise and vertuous Ladies, as euer was borne, and knowes so discreetly to dissemble her passi∣ons: as the cunningst censure can¦not reach them, or gather by her lookes, whether she be inwardly af∣flicted or no. And yet I am verily perswaded, that she is too much gi∣uen to melancholie. Heauen af∣foord mee so much fauour (quoth Amadis) for her, that her desires may sort to some good effect: ne∣uer then shall I feare either life or death, or any thing else that For∣tune can impose vpon me. Doubt nothing Sir, replied Gandalin, I hope, that as our Lord hath euer-more preserued you, and preferred you before any other Knight: hee will not now forget you, and in a time of such vrgent necessity. Goe thy way then, said Amadis, to my Cousine, and bring mee newes a∣gaine so soone as thou canst. So Gandalin departed, and find∣ing Agraies at leisure, discharged his message so effectually: that the Prince (imagining all to be true he had sayd) thus answered. Trust me, my sister shewes her selfe to be very well aduised, and what she re∣quires, shall bee done. And al∣though her visitation hath hitherto beene deferred; it was for no other reason, but in feare of disconten∣ting Madame Oriana. Where∣fore, I will confer hereon with the companie, whom I shall finde (I make no doubt) as readie as my selfe to obey her. So, without any further tarrying, he went to Lord Amadis, to whom hee declared all that Gandalin had told him, as from his sister. Amadis appea∣ring, as if hee had neuer heard
thereof, replied, that he referred to him and the rest, whatsoeuer they thought fit to be done in this case. Whereupon, Agraies imparted it to them all, yet without any notice, that it proceeded from the opinion of Mabila: but rather from an ap∣prehension in himselfe, as accoun∣ting it very conuenient, to goe comfort the Princesse Oriana, whom Gandalin found to bee mightily ouer-come with melan∣choly. And beleeue it (quoth hee) if in such extremities, the strongest and most magnanimous spirits stand in neede of consolation: by much more reason then, doth the weake constitution of young La∣dies command it, who beeing fee∣ble of themselues, should there∣fore the oftner be visited and com∣forted. Hereunto all the Knights of the Enclosed Isle condiscended, and (for a beginning) the very same day they sent to the Princesse, to knowe if she would allow thereof, or no: And she returned them an∣swere, that they should be most re∣spectiuely welcome. Whereupon they presently went thither, and as they fell from one discourse to a∣nother, Quedragant and Brian said. Madame, if you please to cōmand any thing to the King your father, or to your mother the Queen, wee are appointed from this companie, to depart for Great Brittaine about your businesse. Now was Amadis withdrawn aside with Mabila, while Agraies cōferred with Olinda, and Florestan, and An∣griote with Grasinda. And well we may conceiue, that Amadis was in a strange perplexity, seeing her so neare him, whom hee loued aboue all creatures in the world, and yet hee durst not so much as speake to her: but regarded her with a sted∣fast eye, whereto her eye also see∣med to make answere, euen as if an imparlance had passed be∣tween them, which made his words to Mabila, to sauour of idle and fond imperfection. But shee, well knowing the Saint of his deuoti∣on; to cure him of his ouer-awing fit: bethought herselfe of the most honest meanes that could be, both to quicken him, and recouer some spirit likewise in Oriana, saying soddenly, Madame, you promised Gandalin yester day, that you would write to Queene Elisena, and to Melicia, and (for ought I heare to the contrary) he is presently to de∣part, and you haue forgot your let∣ters. Oriana, who vnderstood well e∣nough at what marke shee aymed, answered: Let him come hither, and by word of mouth, I will as well satisfie him, as if I had trou∣bled him with my Letters. Then one of the Damosels arose, and go∣ing foorth of the Chamber, called for Gandalin, who presently entred with her. Well had hee beene in∣structed by Amadis, concerning what hee was to doe, if the Prin∣cesse would speake with him before this company: wherefore beeing come where she was, hee made her an humble reuerence, and then to his Master, who talked all this while (as I formerly told you) with Mabila. It was not long, before Oriana (who sate between Quedra∣gant and Brian) arose, and taking Brian by the hand, said to him. I pray you Cosen, to witnesse with mee, what message I shall send by Gandalin, to the Queene of Gaule and her daughter Melicia: to the end, that you may report it to the King my father, if hee inquire any such matter of you. In the meane while, Lord Quedragant (if so hee
be pleased) shall abide with the Queene Sardimira, who knowes well enough how to entertaine him. But Brian, who was one of the most gentle and courteous Knights liuing: would not follow her, but, with an amiable smile, thus answe∣red. Madame, you must pardon me, for, beeing appointed (as I haue told you) to goe to the King a∣bout your businesse: my friends heere may grow suspitious of me, and stand in doubt, that I may be so subborned by your gracious speech, as I shall shew my selfe more milde and tractable to him, then consists in my commission, and the charge I haue receiued from them. Nay Sir, replied Ori∣ana, heare but the reason, why I would haue you acquainted with this message. It is to no other end, but by hearing mine owne tongue to relate my hearts tribulations (wich I desire should bee knowen, not onely in Great Brittaine, but likewise in all countries of the world:) you would bee the more indulgent, to mediate my peace, and to deliuer al these Ladies from imprisonment. And if you were af∣fected to any one amongst them; her vertue might preuaile against any sterne deliberation. Oriana deliuered these wordes with such a gracious demeanour, as they all tooke delight to heare & and behold her. Especially Brian, who although he was young, faire, and of goodly forme: yet was hee more addicted to follow Armes, then loue; and fewe Knights were more actiue then hee, to handle his launce and sword, for the defence of iniured Ladies, whensoeuer they stood in need of his help. Where∣by hee became a friend to all in generall, and did them infinite par∣ticular seruices, which being desi∣rous that Oriana should take know∣ledge of, (thus hee answered. By my faith Madame, you may esteeme of mee as you please, but if I should long tarrie in so good company: I greatly feare, I should soone lose that, which I haue alwaies held as mine owne, since first I had knowledge of my selfe. Therefore, I had need to get me further off, and leaue my roome to Lord Amadis, & your Cosen: they may serue you for wit∣nesses, if they be so plsed. At these wordes euery one ∣led for he retired with such a grace as declared some bashfulnesse of what hee had spoken: leauing Ori∣ana close by Amadis, who ne∣uer had any priuate conference with her, since his departure from King Lisuarts seruice. But now, seeing opportunity so graciously fauour him, as he might freely speake what hee vvould hee was so vtterly lost in ioy, that e stood trembling, as one vnable to vtter a vvord. But Oriana, laying her right hand vpon his arme, caught holde vvith her other vpon his hand, & locking it fast in hers (to testifie the vigour of her affection) said: Deer friend, though no greater happinesse in this vvorld can befall mee, then continually to enioy your ed presence: yet it hath been no mean discomfort to mee, that beeing so neare one to another, e houe bin barred from such a blessing. Ne∣uerthelesse, I accoumpt my selfe highly beholding to fortune, for deliuering me into your power, as all my life time I haue desired, and wherewith I hope also neuer to part, so long as my soule shall liue in this body: for it had as I thinke) neuer beene created, but
only to be dedicated in seruice and obedience vnto you: yet I knowe very well, that we frequenting one with another, as sometimes we did in Great Brittaine, mine honour may receiue endamagement: for the newes of my surprizall is al∣readie so diulged, that if wee dis∣semble not our priuate passions,  thereby may ensue vn∣to vs. Therefore I hold it better, to gouerne our selues rather by dis∣cretion, then the lauish power of fond affection: which if wee doe, we may may alwaies presume, that the charitable deed you haue done, is no more, than the commendable custome among all good Knights, that make no spare of their liues, to succour afflicted persons, especi∣ally women, so badly vsed as I haue beene. And beleeue mee (sweete friend) if herein you will not follow my counsell, by weening to bor∣row some stolne delight and con∣tentment: we shall but formalize an image happinesse, & lose that vtterly, which the wise atten∣ding for time will vndoubtedly bring vs. Madame, answered Amadis, I neuer had any other thought, but how I might best bee obedient to y, neither shall haue any other so  as I liue, because I haue no other maintainance for this poore life of . But let mee be regar∣ded in your pittie, for if you thus  p your slfe, and suffer me to see you no oftner then I doe: it is impossible, but that the melancho∣lie which ouer-masters mee, will hasten my death very suddenly. I doe not vrge those priu, which your gracious fauours afford me in Great Brittaine, or that euery eye suld discern then: but  ght may sometime befrend vs th, es∣pecially by the means of my Cosen. Now trust me Sir, said Oriana, I am not a little amazed, that you, hauing such assurance of the vnfai∣ned loue I beare you, should now seeme doubtfull thereof: doe you imagine, that I desire not your ease as much as mine owne? Before God I speake it, I haue no pleasure but by you, neither any ease but to see you satisfied. But, consider the tumultuous estate wherein we are, and that if we were (neuer so little) discouered, it would bee to the vt∣ter ruine of vs both. So many eyes obserue our behauiour here, as ne∣uer did the like, when wee were in company with the Queen my mo∣ther. And here our actions are so narrowly pursued, as (without ex∣terme danger) no such aduenture may be made as you speake of. Ex∣cuse me therefore I entreat you, & let this remain for your settled con∣tentment, that I am so faithfully yours, as both my oath and promise haue strictly bound me. Madame, answered Amadis I will practise how I may best please you, and to bring my thoughts to your obedi∣ence: albeit I much misdoubt, that this compulsion will hardly holde out, if it be not the better backt by your fauour, from which it appea∣reth you seek to exclude me, with∣out offending either in worde or thought, and that I dare maintaine on the perill of my soule With these wordes, the teares gushed out of his eyes, where at O∣riana grieuing, said. Exclude my best comfort! Sooner let me die ten thousand deaths. I know the truth of your loyaltie, and can desire no better testimony thereof, then the iust apprehension of mine owne conscience. And take not in ill part what I haue said to you, for the feare of your so long absence from me, as in these lauer yeares you
haue beene, was the onely motiue of this language. What more ad∣vantage then can you require of me? Let the King my father make peace or warre with you, he can make me neither lesse nor more yours, then resolvedly I am. As shee would haue continued on these speeches, Mabila, who ser∣ved to thē but as a shadow, percei∣ving many eyes fixed vpon them, spake thus closely. Enough for this time, every eye notes you. Sweet friend (quoth Oriana) dry vp your teares, and sit by your Cousin, who will tell you some things, that yet you never heard of, and wherein I thinke) you will take a little delight. So she left them together, returning againe to the Queene Sardamira and Brian. In which time, Mabila told him at large, how Esplandian was borne, and by what mishap he was lost in the Forrest, as Durin and the Damsoll of Denmarke carried him to Nurse. And last, ll adven∣tures happening to him, till hee came into his mothers protection againe, as you haue heard more at large declared in the third Book. Amadis heere at was to ioyfull, as no man could be more, and answe∣red Mibila thus. Beleeue me Cosin, I was continually full of doubt, for at my returne from Constantinople, by chance, I met with Angriote d'Estreaus, who repor∣ted all that to me which you haue told me concerning : but he knew not whose sonne he was, neverthelesse, my heart was sudden∣ly inspired with a perswasion, that Madame Oriana and I together had some right in him. And so much the father,  bring the letter I received from you by , being as then in the  whereby you gaue me to vnder∣stand, that my lynage was encrea∣sed, yet durst I not presume in what manner. But now (heaven be prai∣sed) we are both well assured, and better satisfied then ever before, es∣pecially my selfe more contented, then if I had conquered the grea∣ter part of the world: not only for being father to Esplandian, but because I begot him on her, whom fortune hath preferred before all o∣ther, both in vertue, beauty, and all other good graces. Yet haue I suffered so much for her sake, as if I were able, to express but only a half part of those cares, that kept mee company during her absenc, your selfe would complaine much more then I haue done. Here, fetching a deepe sigh, hee breathed a while, and afterward thus went on. But fortune made me a most honorable recompence, sen∣ding mee in such a convenient sea∣son, to deliver her from her enemies hand: for, if it had falne out other∣wise questionlesse it had beene the death of vs both. But that which now doth most offend me, onely is feare of her sicknesse, by her conti∣all griefe and melancholy: shee being not in the company of the Queene her mother, and in the King her fathers disgrace. Where∣fore I beseech you good Cosin, comfort her so much as possibly you can, by cherishing her hopes, that heaven will giue furtherance to these affaires: beside, so  good Knights are heere assembled together, who will all be  in the smallest peeces, rather then she shall suffer any shame or . And for this cause we haue ∣ded (before any warre shall bee attd) to send to King , and  to ap∣pe his , and to  againe his gratious fa∣vour for her: provided▪ that all alli∣ance
with the Emperour be quite broken off, otherwise, we are resol∣ved, never to deliver her: Meane while, we haue dispatched Ambas∣sadours to all parts, to procure aid and succour among our friends, to the end: that if he refuse our honest offer, and will needs enter the field against vs, wee may bee able (like good men) to make him answer. Cosin, answered Mabila, I will do all that I can for you, and never credite me, but Madame Oriana doth highly applaud this her good fortune: assuring you, that we all endured such greivance by her in your absence, but especially, when she heard of her intended marri∣age to the Emperour, as you would haue stood amazed, to behold the sorrowes which I haue seene her suffer. But because you vnderstand sufficiently, both the reason of the cause, and what iust right you haue in her, I will loose no more time, to remember you of that which needs not. Let it suffice you, that you haue brought her so farre into loues extremitie, as possibly more cannot be. Now, in regard that the houre was come for Quedragant and the rest to depart thence, and had-al∣ready taken leaue of Oriana▪ Ama∣dis and Mabila gaue over talking. So the Knights went forth of the chamber, & giuing the goodnight to the Ladies, returned to their owne lodgings. Where now (for a while) we meane to leaue them, to the end that wee may tell you, how King Lisuart came acquain∣ted with the death of the Prince Saluste Quide, and ouerhrowe of the Emperours men. CHAP. VI. How newes was brought to King Lisuart, of the Romans foyle and ouer-throwe, and how his daughter Oriana was taken from them; where at he grieued greatly. THE end of the third Booke related to you, how King Lisuart de∣liuered his daughter to the Romans, against the opinion of all his Councel. And she being on Shipboard, well ap∣pointed with Ships for the conuoy; set on to Sea. Afterward, beeing returned to his Chamber, more sad in soule, than appeared by his out∣ward behauiour: his melancholie encreased more & more vpon him, to see himselfe so meanely accom∣pained, & in worse manner then he was wre especi∣ally, when  came & told him, that the  was very ill, through griefe and sorrow mighti∣ly seazing on her. Hereupon, hee went to see her, where not finding his daughter, nor the other Ladies and Gentlewomen, that vsually kept her company: his secret con∣ceit of griefe began more plainely to expresse it selfe, so that the tears trickled downe his reuerend beard. No sooner was hee entred the Chamber, but the Queene behol∣ding him, fell downe in a swoone: yet hauing good helpe about her, quickly she came to her selfe again. Then the King embraced her in his armes, and to comfort her, spake in this manner. Madame, I was perswaded, that your vertue and
wisedome would preuaile against this womanish weakenesse: especi∣ally, those matters (about which you thus afflict your selfe) being brought to so good an end, that our daughter may iustly stile her selfe, one of the greatest Princesse in all Europe. Wherefore I pray you be better comforted, and if you will not doe it for your owne sake: yet let it be done for mine, otherwise, you will giue mee occasion to mis∣conster worse than I doe. The Queen, well vnderstanding all that hee saide, would expresse no out∣ward appearance thereof, but sigh∣ed without any intermission: which mooued the King to such compas∣sion, as he could not refraine from weeping. But because hee would not be noted hee went downe into the garden, where he walked sadly alone by himselfe: till such time as King Arban came vnto him, who not seeming to perceiue the Kings sorrow, said. Sir, your huntsmen willed mee to tell you, that they haue found (in this neare neigh∣bouring Forrest) the greatest Hart that euer was seene: may it please you (to morrowe) to goe see the pastime? yes, with all my heart an∣swered the King. As thus they continued talking, diuerse Knights came thither, who to alter him from his melancholie disposition: fell into diuersitie of discourse, some of hunting, others of hawking, so that all the rest of the day, they talked of nothing else. But the next morning, as they were readie to mount on horseback, for∣tune, who is seldome satisfied with any passed misfortunes, brought a new occasion of much greater sor∣rowe. For, some of the Romanes which had escaped from the pri∣sons in the Enclosed Isle: presented themselues before the King, in very sory and base garments, declaring at large all their disaster, his daugh∣ters surprisal, & death of the Prince Saluste Quide. You may now imagine, whether these bad tidings amazed him, or no, notwithstanding, declaring constancie, & vnconquerable wis∣dome: hee made shew of little or no distaste at all, but answered, as if the matter concerned him a great way off. Friends (quoth hee) I am sorrie for the death of the Prince Saluste Quide, and the mishap be∣fallen to you: but for the wrong done mee by them of the Enclosed Isle, I haue been vsed to receiue (& oftentimes to returne also) the like Alarums, knowing well enough how to reuenge greater iniuries. Be of good cheere, and at my returne from hunting, I will further consi∣der on your businesse. Then calling for one of the masters of the house-holde, hee commanded them to giue them good entertainement. Away rode King Lisuart and his traine, declaring a iocond spirit all the way, euen till hee was well en∣tred into the Forrest: where he con∣tinued three whole daies, pulling downe many a goodly Deare. On the fourth day, he returned to the citie, and comming to the Queens lodgings, shewed himselfe much more cheerefull, then euer hee was since his daughters departure. So soone as hee was entred his Cham∣ber, hee commanded euery one to auoide: and sitting downe in a chaire by her, thus he began. Ma∣dame, in matters of slender conse∣quence, which ensue by accident, men may haue some cause, to ex∣presse passion and melancholy: but as they proceede from iall grounds, so ought they to bee for∣gotte with as  remedie. But when a man shall bee offended by
some one, not only in his person and goods, but in his honour and reputation: then it agrees with good reason, not only to declare passion and melancholie, but also to practice all meanes of prouisi∣on, to take vengeance on him that committed the offence, and to let the world vnderstand be∣side, how highly the greatnesse of the case hath mooued him to impa∣tience. I speake not this to you without cause: you haue declared a sorrow too apparant, for the absence of your daughter, according to the naturall inclination of mothers: and yet notwithstanding, I should account my selfe happy, by a con∣ceiued hope, of soone forgetting such griefe. But in the tayle (as we vse to say) is the venomous sting hidden, and the end of actions doe approue their good, or euill: and therefore I must tell you, that such an iniury hath lately been done me, and toucheth me so neare, as I shall neuer take rest, till I haue satisfactiō answerable to my desire. The Romans that had the conducting of your daughter, are discomfited, the Prince Saluste Quide slaine, Oriana, and all the other Ladies in her com∣pany, taken prisoners, by the knights of the Enclosed Isle: who imagine themselues not meanely happy by such a victorie, hauing done (as they thinke) more than euer any men did in great Brittaine. And because the same thereof will soone spread it self thorow the world, it is very requisite, that you should dis∣semble sorrow, and vse more pru∣dence than passion. In so doing, you shall remaine highly commen∣ded, our enemies daunted, and I extraordinarily contented, hoping to prouide so well in this case, as your honour and mine shall be suf∣ficiently defended. When the Queene had heard these newes, she sate very pensiue, not speaking a word. And as shee was one of the wisest, and best ad∣uised Ladies in the world, & dear∣ly louing to her husband: so could she suddenly consider, that it was more necessarie, to procure peace betweene the King, and the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, then to sharpen his fierce spleen against them, theirs being also as hotte towards him, whereupon she returned him this answer. My Lord, you haue conceited (as best pleased your selfe) of my inward affliction, for the separati∣on of me and my daughter. But as concerning the fauour done her by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, if you doe but well consider the time, when you were a Knight errant, like vnto them, and what you your selfe haue done in the like cases: you would gently excuse them, in the greater part of their enterprise. Doe you thinke, that hauing heard the lamentable moanes she made, euen commonly noised in euery countrie, how (in meere despight of her) you would marry her to the Emperour: that this would not mooue them to lend her ayde? No man better than your selfe doth know, that nothing is more com∣mended by God and man, then helpe and succour giuen to wron∣ged Ladies, especially when it is so vrgently required: by very strong reason then, ought they to afforde it your daughter, whom they haue knowne and well thought on so long a time. Beleeue it my Lord, they can receiue no shame by the deed, and your selfe will confesse in the end, that their attempt shold not bee displeasing to you: they presuming (it may be) that you haue
beene greatly importuned to this marriage, and yeelded thereto a∣gainst your liking. I well perceiue (quoth the King) that you are not much offended with the matter, but rather you can both like and allow thereof: but I sweare by God, I will make them dearely repent it. So, rising in a great rage, hee flung out of the chamber, & entring into his owne, sound there King Arban, Grume∣dan, and Guillan le Pensif, who went not from him, till hee had tolde them all the conference betweene him and the Queene, and what an answere she made him. Now, be∣cause they saw him much incensed, they thought good, to conceale what the meant to say, and milde∣ly (by little & little) brake off these speeches. But it chanced on the morrowe following, that as the Queene came from hearing Masse, Durin, brother to the damosell of Denmarke, fell on his knee before her, and presented her a Letter, which Oriana had written to her, as followeth. CHAP. VII. A Letter sent by the Princes Oriana, beeing in the Enclosed Isle, to the Queene her Mother. MAdame, although you cannot but be (alreadie) aduertised of my misfor∣tune, such as it is: yet I thought it ient to let you knowe part of my mournings. And as a beginning to this Leter, I beseech you most humbly to consider, how mishap hath continually followed mee, since my banishment from your Countrie, from the King my father, and you also, than which nothing could be more some to me. Neuer∣thelesse, not so satisfied, I was burri∣ed by such a tempest, that the Ro∣mans (which conducted mee) beeing ouercome: wee were brought to the Enclosed Isle, by them, who (know∣ing the wrong done vnto vs) hazar∣ded their liues, to stay our passage any further. And because I stand in doubt, that such a matter will not be pacifi∣ed betweene my father and them, without great effusion of blood, except you Madame, haue some respect there∣to: I thought fit to send this bearer to you, entreating you (for the honor of God) to take compassion on your poore desolate daughter, and worke so much with the King, that I may re∣turne againe to him, and reobtaine his ed fauour, hauing no way of∣fended him, except hee be displeased, that I haue beene too obedient to him, for therein onely I confesse my selfe culpable, and not otherwise. For the rest, to tell you, how they (in whose power I am and the Ladies with me) are minded: they haue sent Ambassa∣dours to my father, as well to knowe, how hee likes their succour giuen mee, as also, to mediate his pittie towards mee. Herein Madame, according as I haue giuen charge to Durin, hee will further instruct you at his ar∣riuall, and lend a helping hand, to plant peace (if you can) to such a dangerous warre begun by misfortune; for her sake, who remaineth: Your most humble and obedient Daughter, Oriana.
After the Queene had aduisedly read, and re-read ouer this Letter, but not without teares: shee said to Durin, that shee would speake with the King, and afterwards giue him an answere. And as shee was enquiring of him, what entertaine∣ment Oriana and her company had in the Enclosed Isle: the King came, whom shee withdrawing into her Cabinet, & casting her selfe downe at his feet, weeping bitterly, shee thus spake to him. Alas Sir, for the honour of God take compassion on your daughter, and read (if you please) this Letter which she hath sent me. The King seeing the Queen so drowned in teares, tooke her vp from the ground, and receiuing the Letter from her, read the con∣tents thereof: then to appease the extreamitie of her passions, hee thus answered, Madame, the Am∣bassadours will soone be here, that are sent from thence, haue patience till I haue heard them speake. They may (perhaps) giue me such satis∣faction, as the iniurie which I haue receiued will bee forgotten: And they may bring such a message, as I will rather consent to mine owne ruine, and desolation of all mine e∣states, than to peace. Much better doe I affect to die with honour, poore and disinherited; than to liue amighty King, miserably wretched & faint-hearted, clowded with the teares of you and your daughter. Wherefore, speake no more hereof to me, except you purpose to of∣fend me; And so leauing her, hee departed out of the chamber. Afterward, she called for Durin, and said vnto him. Friend Durin, returne to my daughter Oriana, and tell her, that I can send her no an∣swere, vntill the Ambassadors shal be arriued here, for the King (till then) knowes not how to determine on his businesse. But assure her, I will essay all possible meanes, to do what she hath desired me. And say, I entreate her, alwaies to fixe her owne honour before her eyes, with∣out which, I shall desire her death. Bid her remember, that a wise and discreet soule, is best discerned in aduersitie, and not in the flattering times of prosperity. And seeing our Lord hath suffered her, to bee borne a Princesse, and the daughter of so great a King; reason doth re∣quire, that vertue should bee more familier with her, than with a body of baser condition, in all aduersi∣ties (whatsoeuer) that can happen to her. Alwaies committing the managing of her chiefest affaires to God: whom I hartily pray to blesse her, & preserue her in his ase pro∣tection, vntill such time as we shall meet againe together. Durin being thus dispatched by the Queene, tooke his way towards the Enclosed Isle, and some few daies after his departure, as the King was sitting downe to dinner in the great Hall: an Esquire suddenly entred, who gaue him a Letter of credence, which when hee had read, hee de∣manded of the Squire, of whence, and what hee was. Sir, answered the Squire, I am seruant to Quedra∣gant of Ireland, who hath sent me to you about such a businesse, as I will relate, if you please to heare mee. Honest friend, said the King, speak your pleasure. S (quoth the Squire) my Master, & Brian de Mo∣niaste, being sent from the Enclosed Isle, are landed in your countrie, to acquaint you with some especiall matters, from Lord Amadis de Gaul, and other Knights that are in his company, But before they passe a∣ny further, or come neare your Court, they send you word by mee (vnder your gracious fauor) that
they require safe conduct for their comming. Otherwise, they are de∣termined, to publish their message in all parts of your Land, and in o∣ther kingdomes beside, before they make returne to them that sent thē. Wherefore Sir, aduise your selfe, and send them your intention. Well knewe the King whereat the message aymed, and therefore he thought it not conuenient, that they should proclaime their cause thorough his kingdome, a matter not to be done, but to his high dis∣honour. Considering, all Ambas∣sadours ought to haue security, as being a case sacred and inuiolable, and the Prince that should offer them iniurie, were farre vnworthy the name and office hee beares: wherefore very graciously, thus he answered the Squire. My friend, say to them that sent you hither, they may safely come to my Court, and I will gladly heare their mes∣sage to me. The Squire hauing this answere, returned presently to his Master, who (with Brian de Monia∣ste, being aduertised of the Kings minde) forthwith went a shoare, & iourneyed so expeditiously, that on the third day following, they ar∣riued at King Lisuarts Court, be∣fore whom they presented them-selues, as hee was newly risen from dinner. He knew them so soone as he be∣held them, being men whom he had often seen, wherefore he welcomed them graciously: and all pressed a∣bout the King, to heare their em∣bassie, when Quedragant, setting his knee to the ground, beganne thus. Sir it is a very laudable ver∣tue, & worthie the highest commen∣dations among Kings and Princes, patiently to heare and vnderstand, such matters as strange Ambassa∣dours haue in charge to deliuer them, being wholly dispossessed of passion: because, if the Embassie fall out to their contentment, they will receiue the more ioy thereby, and the Ambassadours shall be the better fauoured and entertained. Contrariwise, if they speake mat∣ters displeasing to them, yet so to palliate and conceale their anger: that their answere may come graci∣ously from them, in regard of the condition and office they beare. At these words he arose, and sit∣ting downe by his fellow before the King, proceeded thus. Sir, I pray you pardon mee, that I haue vsed this induction to you, which I sweare vpon my faith was not done, in any doubt of the assurance you pleased to grant vs: but in due and iust commendation, of the vertue of so good a Prince, that so freely gaue vs entrance into his king∣dome. Now Sir, the occasion of our comming to your Maiestic, is, by command of the best Knight that e∣uer yet was knowne, Amadis de Gaule, and generally, on the behalfe of all them, that are with him in the Enclosed Isle, who thus (by vs) ac∣quaint you with their minds. Trauer¦sing starnge & far remote coūtries, in search of aduentures, according as all other Knights errant vse to doe, especially to succour the weak & distressed, whan outrage (against all reason) is offered them: they were aduertised by many, that you Sir, being guided by a light and in∣ordinate will, rather then vpright iustice and equity, was desirous (contrary to the counsell of all your best friends) to disinherit (with the greatest shame in the world) Ma∣dame Oriana, your eldest daughter, & giue her as wife (against her will) to the Emperour Patin. So that, neither taking compassion on her,
nor her incessant teares & moanes, much lesse regarding the end of such an enterprise, and manifest dis∣like of all your subiects: you vio∣lently deliuered her to them, that had no reason to request her of you. And because such matters of fact and iniustice, are not only dis∣pleasing to God, but to all such as heare thereof: it pleased the hand of heauen, to make vs instruments of redresse in such a deepe necesity, and that the Romanes, who had the conduct of her and the other La∣dies, should fall into our hands, and standing on their defence a∣gainst vs, bee vanquished, some aine, and others taken prisoners. Now Sir, for her and the Ladies, I must tell you, that (at this instant) they are in the Enclosed Isle, with a good and sufficient company of Knights, determined to honour them so much as they possible may. For their intent neuer was to of∣fend you, or them: but to main∣taine equitie, and keep them from force or violence, according as your selfe (sometime) made them sweare at Vindolisore. Let mee therefore entreate you, that preferring vertue and reason, before choller and passion, you would be pleased, to receiue home againe your daughter Oriana, and hereafter to entreate her, not as a stranger, but as a father should his childe, without sending her farre from you, or your countrie: where-of, if God be so pleased, shee is to be Lady and Queene after you. If you thinke your selfe iniured, and will not grant to their request: that yet you would not deny her your gracious fauour, but accepting her into your Court, as she was wont to bee; to take such reuenge on them afterwards (if you thinke it meet) as you can. For thus much Sir, I must assure you, that if you purpose to assayle them; they will defend themselues as best they may. Be therefore well aduised on your answere, for in your hands you haue both warre and peace. The King, being mightily insen∣sed, thus replyed. Gentlemen, be∣cause vertue doth seldome keepe company, with temerarious Orati∣ons, nor audacious answers, both the one and the other beeing farre insufficient, to whet on or animate cowardly mindes: I will not holde you with any long delay, or vse many words, when few may suffice. But my patience being greater to∣wards you, than it needs to be, let mee tell you, that this attempt done by them of the Enclosed Isle: I know to bee executed more vpon presumption, than any magnani∣mitie of courage, standing  the braue wordes by you deliuered. So that what height of honour you imagine to be wonne thereby: any man of good iudgement and dis∣cretion, will rather check and fouly condemne it. For, it is a matter of no great difficultie, to put in disor∣der, or to ouercome such persons, as trauaile by Land or Sea without all dread or suspition, especially, when men repute themselues to be among their friends. As for your proposed remonstrance, for recal∣ling home my daughter Oriana, and neuer more to send her farre from mee: this is no matter, whereof I am not to yeelde any account to you, but to God only, who (next to himselfe) hath constituted me So∣ueraigne in this kingdome, to go∣uerne both it and the people. Ther∣fore I doe not meane, to allowe o any peace with them, vntill they haue made due reparation, of the iniurie I haue receiued by them:
then I will consider on their moti∣on, and not before. Sir, said Brian, wee haue no fur∣ther commission to you, or to en∣quire after any other businesse; what else is to bee done, let each side consider thereon as they think good. But God only knoweth the occasion, that made vs enterprise what wee haue done, for the fre∣dome of your vertuous daughter: and vpon that point wee rest, and craue leaue for our departure. Go in Gods name, said the King. Thus were the Ambassadours dispacht, Grumedan bringing them aboue a mile out of the Citie, sayde vnto them. Before God Gentlemen, I am much grieued at this new dis∣aster, I alwaies did hope, to see you (one day) as welcome againe to this Court, as euer you haue been: but now I am verily perswaded, that our long expected peace will come too late (except our Lord helpe it) considering the minde of Amadis. Nor did I imagine him to bee in the Enclosed Isle, because we heard newes, that hee was vtter∣ly lost foure yeares agoe: and now it amazeth mee not a little, that he should be so suddenly found again, and giue such succour to Madame Oriana. Lord Grumedan, answered Bri∣an, the King (it may be) will know in time, both what we are, and what seruices we haue done him: And if he attempt any thing against vs, hee will finde the issue to be more sharp and sower, than the entrance was pleasing or delightsome. As for Lord Amadis, you sawe him not long since in this Court, when hee conquered the Crowne from the Romans, that maintained the beauty of the maides of Great Brit∣taine, to bee more excellent than the Ladies that came with him. Saint Mary! said Grumedan, what doe you tell me? Is it possible, that Amadis was the Greek Knight? Be∣leeue it, answered Brian, it was he, and none other. By my soule, said Grumedan, I now well perceiue, that I am a man of very poore iudg∣ment, seeing I might then haue wel assured my selfe, that it was hard for any man to doe what he did; I may doubt whether I haue eyes & vnderstanding. But faire Sir, seeing you haue already done so much for me, let mee further entreate you to tell mee: who they were that lent assistance on my day of Combat? Who? answered Brian, smiling, why two of your very dearest friends: Angriote d' Estrauaus, and Brunco de bonne Mer. In good sad∣nesse (quoth Grumedan) if I had knowne them, I should haue war∣ranted my victorie more certaine than I did: and am well content to confesse now, that the honour of the day is more iustly due to them, than to me, and all my life time, I am a friend and seruant to Amadis, and to you likewise, mine honour reserued. As thus they rode on deuising to∣gether, they met with Esplandian, newly returned from hawking, with Ambor, sonne to Angriote d' Estra: uaus, carrying a Spar-hawke on his fist: and comming somewhat neare them, Brian de Moniaste, demanded what he was. This is (answered Gru∣medan) the young Gentleman Es∣plandian, of whom the wise Vrgan∣da hath spoken so many maruailes. I haue heard of him, sayd Brian, heretofore. I pray you cause him to stay a while, that wee may the better beholde him. Which Grume∣dan did, for, as hee was passing by them, hee called to him, saying. Come hither Sir, see heere the friends of the Greeke Knight, who
(at your request) pardoned the Em∣perours Knights: at least wise, send him some commendations, from your selfe. My Lord, answered Es∣plandian, I humbly entreate them to pardon me, I knew them not: but for my loue to that good Knight, I would gladly haue the meanes to doe him any seruice, and if they please to kisse his hand on my behalfe, they shall binde me to them all my life time. Faire Sir, saide Brian, that office shall be mine, and I will doe it with a glad soule: albeit hee hath chan∣ged his name since you last saw him, for now hee is called Amadis de Gaule: Amadis de Gaule answe∣red Esplandian, surely I cannot think it, because I heard that he was dead: whereat I conceiued no little grief, for the renowned prowesse re∣ported to be in him. It is he doubt∣lesse, said Quedragant. Then Sir I dare assure you. replied Esplandian, I am not so forie for the losse of my hawke this day (though I loued her dearely) as I am ioyfull to heare what you haue tolde me: because, if I may liue to grow great, I will begge so earnestly of the Queene, that she shall not deny mee to goe see him, and to receiue my Knight-hood from his hand, if hee shall please so much to honor me. Sweet youth, said Brian, God blesse and prosper you. And so they tooke leaue each of other: Brian and Que∣dragant following their way to the Enclosed Isle, and Grumedan and Es∣plandian returning to the Court. CHAP. VIII. How King Lisuart called a Councell, concerning what hee intended to do against the Knights of the Enclosed Isle. And what resolution was agreed vpon. After that Quedragant & Brian were departed from the Court, King Lisuart found himselfe wonderfully discōten∣ted, seeing such weightie occasi∣ons to grow more and more vpon him: he intended on the morrow to call a Councell, only of Arban, King of Norwales, Grum den, and Guillan le Pensit; who being mette together, the King beganne in this manner. Honourable friends, you know what iniurie I haue receiued by the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and what shame I should do to my selfe, in suffering them to passe vn∣punished. Neuerthelesse, not to shunne the way which all Princes should take, doing nothing with∣out counsell and deliberation: I would first bee aduised by you, in what manner I should shape my reuenge, that hereafter they may remain an example to such as dare enter into the like attempts against mee. Full well you knowe, how dangerous it is to vse delay in such actions, and of what consequence my occasion is: therefore I pray you, let vs consider together on some redresse, and euery man free∣ly speake his minde. Arban King of Norwales, was the first that answered, speaking thus. Sir, seeing you are resolued to make warre against Amadis and those of his league, accounting it vnmeete, to accept the offer made you by them: it is expedient to consider,
that the managing of the matter may bee so ordered, as the glory must remaine to you. For although we holde it vndoubtedly, that vic∣torie consisteth in the hand of hea∣uen onely, God giuing it when, where, and how hee pleaseth, and commonly, agreeing with the iu∣stice of the cause: yet diligent pro∣uidence is not to bee neglected, in all such cases, as are required, be∣fore any enterprise be attempted, or any contempt made of the enemie. It is good to imagine, that he may prooue able enough to finde you play sufficient, if fortune looke fa∣uourably on his cause: considering, that when men are too confident, either of their owne right, or trust∣ing to their owne strength: it pro∣cureth their ruine and totall destru∣ction, through ouer-bolde pre∣sumption, albeit the victorie were their due. Fauour me Sir to tell you, that if you well consider, with whom you haue to deale: mee thinkes, an ad∣uantageable peace were more ho∣nourable for you, than a hazardous and doubtfull warre, falling out more strangely then can bee imagi∣ned. You know Amadis, and the rest (by whom hee is backt and sup∣ported) to bee all good Knights, men of great spirit, and all of them nearely alyed to Kings and potent Princes, who will not faile them for any disaster, or death it selfe. You know also, on the other side, that the most part of your subjects, neuer liked or thought well of the deliberation (meerly made by your selfe) for marrying your daughter to the Emperour, the onely motiue and occasion of this warre. And therefore, you may be well assured, that how soeuer they beare it with a smooth brow, and rankerous spleen inwardly: they can be easily con∣tented, that all should goe but bad∣ly on your side, by not following their liking; howbeit, I make no doubt, but that they will serue you in all loyalty. You haue said well, answered the King, but wee are not now to stand vpon these tearmes. I doe not craue your counsell, whether I should de∣termine peace or warre: but only would know of you, by what means I may be best reuenged. Sir (quoth hee) by my former speeches, you may easily knowe that. Assemble your forces & send to your friends for assistance: especially to the Em∣perour of Rome, because this case concerneth him, as nearely as you. Afterward, your Army beeing rea∣dy, march on (without any dally∣ing) towardes them whom you meane to assault. But before you doe this, it were good (in mine op∣pinion) to practice some meanes, whereby you may call home some that are farre off from your seruice, partly through discontentment, & partly by wrongs offered. I vrge this motion, because if they be not willing to ayde you; they should not resolue to offend you. For, be∣ing forth of your Land, it would fal out dangerous, if they should con∣spire and bend themselues against you, if Fortune doe lowre that day vpon you. For, many times it comes to passe, that distastes and dissents led by length of time, doe soonest make their outward appea∣rance, when his power (against whom the conspiracy is meant) growes weake & decayed. Where∣fore Sir, this is one of the chiefest points, whereof you are maturely to consider. Truly, said the King, I know that you haue spoken to the purpose, & will do therein what I can. Sir, said Grumedan, Amadis hath bin (here-tofore)
so well accepted in your Court, as no man posibly could be more: and I could heartily wish, that those villaines which caused this so long separation, had neuer been borne into the world. And although I am his friend in∣tirely, so shall I bee no enemy to you, if you desist from beeing his. Wherefore, according to the ad∣uice giuen you by King Arban: it were good, that (aboue all other things) you reconcile them to you that pertake with him, winning their hearts and willes by little and little: as easily you may doe, gi∣uing them good lookes and graci∣ous language. Then hauing the help of Rome, and other your allies, as the Kings of Ireland Suetia, I make no question, but you may (with little ease) attaine to your in∣tention, euen according to your owne minde. But my good Lord, said Guillan, before any matter at all be attemp∣ted, it were good to know, if those men may bee resolued on, whom you haue named. Are you sure that the Emperour will meddle in the cause? He is a man of very slen∣der faith, and as ill affected of his owne people, as can be. Are you certaine also, that the King of Suc∣tia will doe as you say? If his Ma∣iestie were so pleased. Ambassa∣dours should be sent to them spee∣dily, to entreate their fauour in this case, shewing them apparantly: that if reuenge for such a wrong were iustly inflicted, it would with-draw any from attempting the like. In good sadnesse, saide the King, you haue very well aduised, and be∣cause you (Lord Guillan) doe suf∣ficiently vnderstand the businesse: I pray you take the charge vpon you to the Emperor, for I know no Knight more able to preuaile with him, then you are. Sir, saide Guil∣lan, I was not borne but for your seruice, when, and where you shall please to commande mee. Make ready then (quoth the King) to morrow you shall haue Letters of credence only, and the rest remaine to your owne report. So they arose from Councell, and each man returned to his lod∣ging, till the next morning: when the King sending for Guillan, saide vnto him. Lord Guillan, according to our conclusion yester-day, you must depart towards the Emperor, and with as much expedition as may be. To him make knowne, how matters haue come to passe, that hauing deliuered my daughter to his Ambassadours: shee was af∣terwards surprised from them, and forcibly carried to the Enclosed Isle, his men all slaine, or taken priso∣ners, whereof hee ought to haue re∣spect, this iniury redounding as much to him as me. If he offer aid, and will leuy an Army to be reuen∣ged: say, that on my part shall be no defailance, in any thing my power can stretch vnto. If you find him willing to proceed effectually, returne againe with all possible dili∣gence: that our enemies may haue no leasure to fortifie themselues, as I am certaine they intend to doe. Sir, answered Guillan, God giue me grace to accomplish your will in this, and any thing else you shall please to employ mee in. Worthy friend said the King, there are your Letters of credence, and if it bee possible, set away to morrow mor∣ning early, for one of my best Ships is made ready for you, and waites your comming in the hauen. Sir, replied Guillan, there shall bee no want of duty in me. And so ta∣king his leaue, and giuing order for his further affaires, he went aboard,
and set away. The very same day Brandoynas also was dispatched for Galuanes, in the Isle of Mongaza, and from thence into Ireland, to King Cildadan, to make ready so many men as he could. Philipinell was sent to Gasquilan,, King of Sue∣tia, who sometime came into Great Brittaine, to approue his manhood against Amadis. King Lasuart sent him word, that if his spleene as yet continued: hee should now haue better meanes then euer, because the warre was intended against him. So farre did these newes fly a∣broad, that they came to the vnder∣standing of Archalaus the Enchan∣ter, to his no little ioy and comfort; intending (by this occasion) the vt∣ter ruine of King Lisuart, and like∣wise, of Amadis. And for his spee∣dier attaining thereto, he went pre∣sently to King Aramyne: who hea∣ring of his ariuall, gaue him most royall entertainement, presuming peremptorily, that hee would not come into his countrie, but vpon some very vrgent occasion. Beeing priuately seated together, Archalaus thus began. Sir, some few dayes since, I re∣ceiued credible information, that King Lisuart and Amadis de Gaule (two of the deadliest enemies you haue) are fallen vpon such a quar∣rell: as, without any hope of peace euer to come betweene them, they muster men for a maine battell, out of which they cannot escape, but with the finall destruction of the one, or other, & (perhaps) of them both together. And because occa∣sion doth expressely call you, as wel to reuenge your former losses in times past, as also to extend your limits, by peaceable making your selfe King of Great Brittaine: me thinkes you should not delay the mustering of your men, and sum∣moning all your friends together, that while they cauill, & maintaine their quarrell so farre off, you may take so apt an aduantage, and make an easie entrance into Brittaine. If they chance to meet, and fight the field; then, without giuing the least leasure to the conqueror, to breath or refresh his followers: you may set vpon him so opportunately, and bid him so hot an vnexpected bat∣taile, as none of them can escape with life. Now Sir, to acquaint you with the cause of their enmity, you must vnderstand, that King Lisuart sen∣ding his eldest daughter for Rome, hauing giuen her as wife to the Em∣perour: Amadis de Gaule (one of them, who in your last lost battaile, termed himselfe Knight of the Ser∣pent, and then wore (as you well remember) a golden helmet) with a great many more, met the Romans on the Sea, set vpon them, and o∣uercomming them, slew the Prince Saluste Quide, a near kinsman to the Emperour. The rest were taken prisoners, with the Ladies & Gen∣tlewomen, whom they conueyed to the Enclosed Isle, where as yet they keepe them. Now indeede I cannot certainely resolue you, what matter mooued them to begin this warre, but I am well assured, that King Lisuart in reuenge of this in∣iury, gathers as great an Army to∣gether as hee can. And Amadis hath sent into all parts for succour, purposing to stand vpon his owne defence, if he shall be assailed. During these busie troubles, Sir, you haue an excellent occasion (if you please) to shew them as subtill a sleight as euer was done, setting vpon them as I haue directed you. And because (at the very first sight) you may discerne your victory to
be certaine: I will worke so much, that Barsinan, Lord of Sansuegna, sonne to him whom the King bur∣ned at London, and likewise all they of the linage of Dardan the Proude, whom Amadis foyled at Vindolisore, shall come to your aide, with the King of the Profound Isle. Wher∣fore, perswade your selfe, that being assisted with so great a number of good Knights: there is no doubt to be made, but you shall reach the height of your desire. My worthy good friend Archa∣laus, answered the King Aranigne, you tell mee great matters, and al∣though I was fully determined, ne∣uer more to tempt fortune, she ha∣uing shewen me such slender fauor in times past, yet me thinks it were a great folly, to foreslowe such oc∣casions, as freely come to offer themselues, for the augmentation of my honour and profit. For, if in such cases, attempts managed by reason, haue as happy issue as men can wish: the fruit of such a labour is well gathered, when desert holds vp the lappe to receiue it. But if it should fall out otherwise, yet (at least) that must be performed, wher∣to all men stand bound by vertue, for maintenance of their authority, which is not to be valued by passed misfortunes, as (when a happy houre presents it selfe) they should refuse to embrace it, as declaring themselues to be dastardly minded, and voide of all courage and mag∣nanimitie. Seeing then wee are so forward in tearms, let it suffice, that I faithfully credit you, and desire you (while I am prouiding mine Army) to take order for the rest, sending to Barsinan and our other friends, for their effectuall ioyning with vs. Archalans hauing heard this re∣solution, made no long stay with King Aranigne: but taking leaue of him, iournied so diligently, that hee ariued in the countrie of San∣suegna, where hee found Barsinan. To him he tolde all the passed con∣ference, setting before his iudge∣ment, what an execrable iniurie King Lisuart had done to his fa∣ther, suffering to bee burned aliue by a tower, from the toppe where-of (afterward) hee caused his bro∣ther Gandandell to bee throwne downe, whom Guillan le Pensif had taken prisoner. And doe you think (quoth he) that had it not been for this Amadis de Gaule, but Barsinan your father, had peaceably beene King of Great Brittaine? But that villaine came, and after hee had re∣scued Oriana from mee, caused all the rest of my enterprise to bee vt∣terly voide. But now you haue time conuenient to bee reuenged, therfore, except you will shew your selfe dull & base minded; delay no longer, considering, that King Ara∣nigne is ready to assist you. Easily did Barsinan beleeue all that hee had said, and promised to appeare in field, so soone as any need required. So Archalaus de∣parted thence, to the King of the Profound Isle, and gaue to him the very same instructions. Hauing ob∣tained what he desired, he returned homeward, and crossing the coun∣trie, aduised all the kindred of Dar∣dan the Proude, to be in a readiness, to depart away when they should be commanded. But at this instant; our History speakes no more there-of: but returnes to the fortunes of Quedragant and Brian, being vnder saile for the Enclosed Isle.
CHAP. XI. How Quedragant and Brian, sayling on the Sea, by a sudden and vnex∣pected tempest, were cast so farre out of their course, that hauing lost all knowledge of land; they met (accidentally) with Queen Briola∣nia: And what happened to them. QVedragant and Brian beeing on the maine Seas, shaped their cō∣passe for the Enclosed Isle: but vpon a sud∣den, the windes began to blow so stearnely, and such a violent tem∣pest arose, as the best man of cou∣rage among them, made little ac∣count of escaping, seeing their saile yardes and tacklings broken in pee∣ces, and with such impetuous gusts of contrarie windes, as trusting nei∣ther to stearne, or any hope else, but the mercy of God only, and the waues, they expected sinking eue∣ry minute. So long they ran this disasterous fortune, that the dead darke night ouer-tooke them, with extreame thunders, and flashes of lightning, which was their best meanes for seeing one another: till day-breake appeared, the windes grew appeased, and the Sea (by lit∣tle and little) indifferently calmed. Now they could plainely per∣ceiue, that they were cast farre e∣nough out of their course, for they discouered the coast of Sobradisa: and as they were preparing thither, they espied a goodly great Shippe sayling towardes them, which they determined to call to, to knowe who was aboard her. Comming more neare, they beheld vpon the decke, diuerse Ladies and Gentle-women, and some Knights among them, discoursing together: where-upon, before they would presume any further, they put forth a Fri∣gate, commanding one of their Squires, to goe know of whence, & what they were. The Squire perfor∣med his charge, and going aboard the Ship, humbly saluted such as he saw there, saying. Lords and La∣dies, there are Gentlemen in yon∣der ship, who (in curtesie) desire to vnderstand, what you are, and whi∣ther you are bound. Honest friend answered one of them, say, that the Queene of Sobradisa is here, and longs to be at the Enclosed Isle. These newes Sir, answered the Squire, will be very welcome to two Knights, that sent mee to you, who are also bound for the selfe same place. Honest Squire, sayde the Queene, tell vs then their names, if you may do it. Indeed Madame (quoth hee) I stand charged to the contrary. But thus much I dare tell you, that they tooke shipping in Great Brittaine, to returne to the Pallace of Apolidon; where they had been before now, if fortune had not hindred their voyage. But I am very certaine, that their ioy (for meeting with you) will make them forget all their passed dan∣ger: wherefore I will returne a∣gaine to them, and tell them what I haue heard of you. So saying, he went back to the Ship from whence hee came, and declared to Que∣dragant & Brian his answere, where-of they were not a little ioyfull. And drawing nearer, ioyned their vessell with the Queenes, and going aboard, humbly saluted her.
Here I must tell you, that shee many times (formerly) had seene them at London, and in diuerse o∣ther places, which made her the sooner take knowledge of them: and entertayning them with all ho∣nourable respect, shee spake thus vnto them. Before God, Gentle-men, next to Amadis de Gaule, to whom I stand very much obliged, it were hard for mee to meet with more welcome men, and I pray you tell mee, what fortune hath conducted you hither: because Tantiles Master of my housholde, assured mee that hee sawe you sette saile for Great Brittaine, about bu∣sinesse for the Princesse Oriana. Ma∣dame, answered Quedragant, Tan∣tiles tolde you true, and wee haue beene with King Lisuart, and vsed our best endeauour to make peace betweene him, and our friends in the Enclosed Isle: but hee misliking so faire a conclusion, wee are the more onward for tearmes of warre. Then hee reported at large, what speeches had past betweene King Lisuart and him, and in what man∣ner they parted. But (quoth hee) we were no sooner put to Sea, but so violent a tempest ouertooke vs, as we expected nothing but drow∣ning: and by these meanes, haue wee runne so farre from our right course. In good faith, saide she, wee haue had our part of the tem∣pest too, and greatly feared the sin∣king of our Shippe, considering what dangers shee hath endured. And let mee tell you, two whole daies are already past, since we set forth from Sobradisa: expressely to goe see Amadis and Madame Oria∣na, and all the good company there with them. Our hope was to make more haste thither, than wee haue done, as fearing, least King Lisuart had already se, his forces, in refusing the honest offers you made him. But for ought I can perceiue, hee greatly forgets him-selfe, whereat I much maruaile, and it seemes, that hee is wearied with his long continued good fortune: beginning warre so rashly, with them that haue done him so many great seruices, whereof hee may repent him at leasure. For Lord Amadis will finde so many sure friends, and all ready at his com∣mand: that King Lisuart (it may be) will see himselfe deceiued in his expectation. As for my selfe (quoth shee) vp∣on this onely, and no other cause, haue I left Tantiles behinde, with expresse charge, to leuy in my ter∣ritories, twelue hundred able men for warre, and to bring them away with all possible speed. But if it might so please you wee would be very glad of your company, seeing we are thus so well mette together. Madame, saide Brian, seeing your Ship is much crazed, may it please you to goe aboard ours, and yours shall follow, whereto all agreed. And so they set on, deuising to∣gether, on many matters: till at length, they espied two men of warre vnder sayle, which Tiron had purposely sent forth, to disappoint and surprize the Queen. Now, concerning this Tiron, whereof I now make mention to you, hee was the sonne to Abiseos, whom Amadis and Agraies conten∣ded withall, in the citie of Sobra∣disa: according as you haue alrea∣die heard, in the first booke of this History. By whose death, and likewise of his two eldest sonnes, Briolania remained peaceably Queene of the whole countrie: ex∣cept of one Castle only, wherein, this Tiron (third sonne to the saide Abiseos) was saued by an ancient
Knight, who had the charge of him, and therefore there nourished him, till he came to able age of bearing Armes, and to receiue knighthood. Then hee began to worke wonders, so that hee was reputed, for one of the best and boldest Knights then li∣uing. Which the aged Knight per∣ceiuing, hee put him in minde to compasse the recouery of his lost country againe, pressing him so im∣portunatly, to reuenge the death of his father, and brethren: that he re∣soluedly determined, to aduenture the taking of Queen Briolania, and afterward, to make him self an abso∣lute King, if he could. Hereupon, hee being informed, that shee embarked her selfe for the Enclosed Isle, and but with a small company: made ready two Ships, & with an hundred hardy Knights, lay hulling on the Sea before, to execute the full of his intent. The sunne grew to declining, and night not farre off, wherefore Brian and Quedragant, doubting to be assaul∣ted: stood on their guard, because they saw the other make a pace to∣wards them, by help of their Oares. Being come neare vnto them, they heard the voyce of a man, calling out aloud to them, in this manner. Knights, you that accōpany Queen Briolania, tell her, that her Cosen Tiron is here, and would speake with her: commanding you her people, not to stand vpon any de∣fence against vs, least wee hew you in peeces, and bestow no better fortune on her. When the Queene heard these wordes, shee was surprised with a wonderfull feare, and trembled ex∣ceedingly, saying to Brian. Alas Sir, wee are all vndone, this is the greatest enemy that I haue in the world: and beleeue, that he would neuer come in this manner, but to deale with vs as cruelly as hee can. Madame, answered Quedragant, feare not any thing, if he assault vs, hee will (perhaps be better welco∣med, then hee lookes for. For my companion & ten of your Knights, shall take charge for resisting one of their Ships: and I and the rest will deale with Tiron, vnto whom he spake thus. Knight, thou that desirest to see the Queene: come hither aboard her Shippe, and she will gladly heare thee, otherwise, not. Come aboard? quoth Tiron, why, that is my meaning; in the de∣spight of her and thee, or any else whatsoeuer. So turning instanstly the prow of his Ship, & siding the Queenes, the grappling irons were cast forth, to fasten them together: and ma∣king a signe to his other Shippe, to fight couragiously, the assault be∣ganne very sharpe and dangerous. Wherein hee vsed but silly proui∣dence, making small account of the Queenes strength, which he found greater than hee was aware of. And Tiron, scuffling ouer negligently in his owne quarrell, would needes step into the Queenes shippe: but his tarrying there was longer then he looked for, for Quedragant mee∣ting there with him, found him such tough play, as Tiron was beaten downe, and committed to safe cu∣stodie, albeit his Knights did their vttermost endeauour to rescue him. Neuerthelesse, in the conclusion, not one of them all escaped in their ressistance, but was either slaine, or taken prisoner. This so daunted their courages, that (by little and little) getting vp alost on the deck, they began to cut the cords of the grappling irons, which fastened the two Ships together. But Que∣dragant perceiued it, and seeing fortune was onely for him, in the
despight of Tirons Knights: he en∣tred their Shippe, where hee made such a massacre, as hee quickly be∣came master thereof. In the meane while, Brian kept heade with them in the other Ship, and although hee was grieuously wounded, yet could they gaine no∣thing against him: but, seeing their companions lost, gaue ouer fight, and laboured to gette away by all meanes they could vse, and so the Knights of the Enclosed Isle were Lords of the victory. Hereupon, Quedragant appointed guards for the Ship which hee had conquered, then hee entred into that where Queene Briolania was, who (during all the fight) sate closely in her ca∣bin, more dead than aliue, onely through her extreame feare. But when shee saw Quedragant, her heart was cheered, & then she que∣stioned the successe of her enemies. Madame, quoth hee, the most part of them are slaine, drowned and fled, and the rest (I hope) will giue you no ill language: especial∣ly Tiron, whom hee commanded (by his guardes) to be brought thi∣ther, as accordingly they did, and hee fearing some cruell death to be inflicted on him, fell downe at the Queenes feete, saying. Alas Ma∣dame, for the honour of God take pittie on mee, and without obser∣uing my foolish enterprise, excuse my youth. I am of your blood, and may hereafter do you some seruice, if it will please you to saue my life. Tiron said she, not for any loue wee beare you, but for some other rea∣son mouing vs thereto: you shall not die now, nor till I shall be bet∣ter aduised, how to deale with you. So he was sent backe to his prison, and Brian came sore wounded with an arrow, which pierced quite tho∣rough his shield, and sunne a great way into his arme. The Queen was so grieued therat, as nothing could more displease her, fearing the harme to be farre worse then it was indeed. Neuerthelesse, concealing her owne thoughts, she (being very skilfull in Chirurgery) said, it was a matter of nothing, and doubted not, but within few dates, he should be safe and sound againe. With her owne hands shee in∣stantly vnarmed him, and applied such medicines to the hurts, as were most expedient. Afterwards, set∣ting sayle, they held on their course to the Enclosed Isle, where they ari∣ued, euen as Amadis and some o∣ther Knights were walking on the sands. Seeing these Ships making in thither, they went on, to be fur∣ther resolued of thē: when present∣ly they knew the Squires of Que∣dragant & Brian, as the were com∣ming first to Land. Being minded, to question some newes of their Masters, they sawe them entring in∣to the port: wherefore, euery one stroue, who should bee formost to welcome them; but they were much amazed, to see the other Shippes which they brought with them. Brian perceiuing their doubt in this kinde, said vnto them pleasant∣ly smiling. You know Gentlemen, when wee parted from this place, we went away with one Ship onely, and now you see how our store is encreased, meerly by conquest, and with a greater booty than you ima∣gine, wherein you are to haue no part or aduantage. For, seeing for∣tune hath been so fauourable to vs, her blessings must remaine to vs: and not to you, that loyter here in idlenesse, while we labour and tra∣uaile. Well Sir, answered Amadis, it shall suffice vs, to partake in the pleasure you haue had: prouided,
you must tell vs, if the booty be so great as you would make vs belieue. Nay, much greater said Brian, & to approue my words, is it not a faire conquest, to win a Queen, & such a one, as she of Sobradisa, with many beautifull Ladies, and Gentlewo∣men beside, as you shall see imme∣diately? By my faith, said Amadis, your booty cannot bee tearmed small. As thus they passed on their plea∣sant talke, the Queene and her wo∣men were landed, and euery man was ready and dutifull, to welcome them with all possible honour, and goodly Palfrayes, were presently brought, wherupon they all moun∣ted, and so rode on to the Pallace of Apolidon. On the way, Amadis giuing gracious entertainement to Briolania, spake thus. Madme, it is to mee no little ioy, to see you in these parts safe & well, accounting my self more beholden to you then euer, that you would take so much paines, as come and see vs: espe∣cially, in such a time of no meane tribulation, and when you may best comfort Madame Oriana, whom you shall see so ouer-gone with griefe, as no one possible can suffer more. But I hope your presence will be so pleasing to her, as she will learne to forget a great part of her melancholy. My Lord (quoth shee) for this cause only haue I left my countrie, and God doth best knowe, what griefe I haue endured in your ab∣sence, neuer hearing any tydings of you. Yet I receiued some comfort by the ariuall of Tantiles, whom I haue left at home in my countrey, to leauy men for warre, according as you haue sent me worde by him: and I my selfe had taken the mat∣ter in hand, but for my earnest de∣sire to see you and Madame Oriana. Neuerthelesse, without the help of Quedragant and Brian, mine enter∣prise was in danger to bee disa∣pointed, as at more leasure I shall let you fully vnderstand. Here I must tell you, that Amadis (so soone as hee saw Queen Briola∣nia there ariued) sent to aduertise the Princesse Oriana thereof, to en∣treate the acceptation of her com∣pany, which accordingly shee did, because shee loued and esteemed her extraordinarily, in so much, as shee said to the Queene Sardamira. Madame, you shall see annon, one the most faire & gracious Princesse that euer you beheld, and one that deserues our very best entertaine∣ment. Wherefore let me so much preuaile with you, that you Mabi∣la and Olinda, will goe welcome her at the Parke gate, where shee is to allight, and giue her all kinde & gracious welcome. Hereupon they three (without any tarying) went a∣long, and as they opened the gate, Briolania came thither, accompani∣ed as you haue formerly heard: where Amadis tooke her from her horse, and beholding them that stayed for her, he said. I perceiue Madame, that wee must leaue you, for I see my Cosen Mabila, is come to depriue vs of your company. Shee had vnderstood before, that Oriana was retyred by her selfe, on∣ly accompanied with her women, and none else: wherefore (smiling) she thus answered Amadis. Be you Sir then hence forth religiou ho∣nest: And yet I feare you would faine bee my confessor.  Ma∣dame, quoth hee) I would I were able to appoint you sufficient e∣nance, for the harme you haue done with that piercing eye, you should be sure of punishment enough. As hee spake these wordes, hee would haue stept into the Parke: but Ma∣bila
arested him, saying. Cosen, our order forbids you, to passe a∣ny further: therefore goe back, or else wee haue power to excommu∣nicate you. Marry God forbid said hee, I had rather bid you and your company good night, than run in∣to such an heynous danger. So, taking leaue of them, the gate was made fast againe, and Briolania con∣ducted to Orianaes chamber, where shee attended her comming, with all her other Ladies and Gentle-women, and gaue her very worthy welcome: and being much affec∣ted to her, shee was the more wil∣ling to let her know how glad shee was of her ariuall there, saying. Ma∣dame, you haue taken extraordina∣rie paines, to come and see me in so remote a countrie, and at a time of such affliction: whereby I well perceiue, that good will and affec∣tion so long time borne me, meer∣ly brought you hither, and caused your kinde voyage. Madame, answered Briolania, so soone as I was aduertised of your estate, I could not forbeare, but come my selfe in person to see you, with whatsoeuer remaineth in my power to doe for you. For, ouer & besides the good I heartily wish you, it is generally knowne, by how many seuerall duties Lord Amadis hath bound me to him: and there∣fore such matters as concerne him, I account as much or more mine owne. And for this reason I haue lest Tantis (whom you wel know) behinde mee, to leauie Knights and bold souldiers in my countries, and very speedily hee will bee here with them, according to the trust I haue alwaies reposed in him. In the meane while, so it may be no of∣fence to you, I will keep you com∣pany, till your affaires haue a hap∣py and successefull ending. Very graciously did Oriana thank her declaring, how shee expected the returne of Quedragant and Bri∣an, who were gone to her father King Lisuart, to procure peace, if possibly it might be. Now although Briolania knew what answere they had receiued, yet would shee not speake thereof: because Grasinda came to them, whom Briolania ha∣uing neuer seen before, demanded of Oriana, what she was. I promise you Madame (quoth shee) this is the only woman in the world, of a stranger, to whom Lord Amadis stands most beholding: for, but by her meanes, you had neuer seene him here. then shee related, what succour shee had giuen him, by the care and paines of Master Elisabet, his honourable entertainements in her dominions, and finally, all that hath beene alreadie declared. And to the ende, said Oriana, that you may come the better acquainted with her, and heare her report her owne curtesies: if you please, wee will sup together, without any o∣ther company, but only wee three, and my Cosen Mabila. Oriana did this, not only to plea∣sure and delight Queene Briolania, but her selfe also: who neuer could be satisfied, with hearing those pas∣sed fortunes repeated, almost num∣berlesse times in a day, whereupon she called to Mabila, saying. Co∣sen, Queene Briolania findes her selfe not halfe well, beeing wearied with long trauelling on the Sea: giue order therefore, to couer for supper here in my chamber, where wee will admit none else with vs, but Madame Grafinda. Mabila gaue present enstructions hereof to the rest, so that all left the lodging, but onely the foure Ladies toge∣ther, who (very soone after) sate downe at the table, and as they were
in the midst of their seruice: Oriana (minding nothing more, than to heare Grasinda talke of Amadis) said vnto her as followeth. Madame, no longer agoe then yer-while, I reported to Queene Briolania, the battaile between A∣madis, and the Monster Endriagus: but shee will not beleeue me, ex∣cept you giue her further assurance thereof. Therefore I humbly en∣treate you, that you would make discourse thereof to her, according as Master Elisabet affirmed it to you, and likewise, how it was your fortune (at first) to meet him in the fields. Then Grasinda, to please them all, declared, how comming from Sadina (the principall Citie of her Land) accompanied with diuerse Knights, especially Brandasidel espi∣ed Amadis ryding along the Sea shore, shewing a countenance of much griefe and sadnesse. For, so soone as hee beheld vs, hee turned out of he way, euen as hee would haue auoided the combate from his professed enemy. Which Branda∣sidell obseruing, and bearing mee then some inward affection: See (quoth hee) I pray you, the man-hood of these knights, that tearme themselues Knights errant, so soon as he saw one, fearing the sight hee was glad to turne bridle. By God, let me neuer more put Armour on my backe, if I bring him not back againe to you, with more haste then hee makes away, and then I will make him to serue as your slaue. Then, though I laboured to my very vttermost, to turne him from this friuolous intention: yet would hee needs ride on till he ouertooke him, and then he would haue con∣strained him to come backe. But Amadis, neither caring for him, nor his greatest threatnings, entred the sight with him: wherein Brandasi∣dell found such harsh entertaine∣ment, as at length hee was punish∣ed with his owne appointed penal∣tie, which was this, that the van∣quished should ride backwarde mounted on his horse, and holde the tayle insteed of a bridle. It did not a little please mee, to see him come riding in such hansome or∣der, & so confounded with shame, that it was worse than death to him, as well appeared by his coun∣tenance. Then I demaunded of him, what hee had done with the Knight, whom hee sware and pro∣mised to bring to me. But he not answering me one word, I sent one of my women to Amadis, and en∣treated him (in curtesie) to come speake with mee, which hee refused not to doe. In our conference together, hee breathed foorth many a vehement sigh, which caused me instantly to imagine, that the power of loue o∣uer-awed him, and affecting some Lady, by whom (perhaps) hee sawe himselfe so slenderly regarded; as hee was inforced to be absent, with∣out letting her know his purposed trauailes, and I iudged withall, that hee was a man of more note, than outwardly hee seemed to be. Here-upon, I so earnestly importuned him, as hee vouchsafed to accept a lodging in my Castle, and there hee soiourned some few daies: during which time, keeping him compa∣ny, and obseruing his youth and faire disposition, it seemed to mee, that shee might well repute her selfe most happy, that could enioy him as a friend or husband. Now, although before his ariual, I found my selfe no way enclined to any such humor, beeing neuer∣thelesse newly widdowed: yet af∣fection then preuailed so farre with me, as I was neuer more amorous
of a man, then of him. So that, without taking any rest, either day or night, my thoughts continually trauailed to him, vrging me so farre: that I must needs discouer my dis∣ease to Gandalin, who seemed an honest and discreet Squire, as after-ward I well perceiued by his an∣sweres. For, without telling me a∣ny of his Masters affaires, hee gaue mee plainely to vnderstand, that he had so little cōmand ouer himselfe, as all hope (on my behalfe) might well bee spared. And I beleeuing him, resolued with my selfe, that it were better to quench the sparks but newely kindling, then suffer them breake forth into a flame. Wherefore I practised to finde the meanes (but not without paine enough) to set a stay vpon my rash affection, and bring it againe to the former byas: and so much the ra∣ther, because hee was to depart for Constantinople, accordingly as for∣merly hee had determined. And be∣cause I had an aspiring intention, to compase that (which afterwards I did) by his meanes: I made him promise me, to be with mee againe in the space of a yeare, which ac∣cordingly hee performed, but not without most mighty danger. Then shee declared his conquest of the monster Endriagus, and lastly, all the other aduentures in their due order. By my faith Madame (said Bri∣olania to Oriana, vpon this discourse of Grasinda) I now call to minde, how when I came first to see you at Mirefleure, Lord Amadis passed by the Tents and Pauillions, there rai∣sed on the way, while I tooke the fresh ayre. Diuerse Knights were then in my company, who fell into the like fortune, as her Brandasidell did: for they thinking to cause him come speake with mee vpon com∣pulsion, were all disgraced, & sore wounded. You haue tolde me that oftentimes, answered Oriana: who receiued all these reportes to her owne aduantage, as being well assu∣red, that this melancholy humor of Amadis had no other ground, but only by his ardent affection to her. So, instantly they went all to rest, because it grew to be very late. CHAP. X. Of the report deliuered by Quedragant and Brian, to the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, concerning their Embassie to King Lisuart; And of that which thereupon was resoluedly determined. QVearagant and Brian, Ambassadours sent to King Lisuart, being re∣turned back againe to the Enclosed Isle, as hath already been amply declared: beeing desirous to render a reason of that they had done, mette on the morrow at Councell, purposely so appointed by Amadis and the other Knights. Whereupon, Quedra∣gant, beeing to speake for himselfe and his companion; began at large to rehearse his speeches to the King, and the answer thereon made him. Which (quoth Quedragant) was so short, as wee can conceiue no otherwise, but that he will deale with vs as hardly as hee can: con∣sidering, his prouiding of men for all partes, making full account to shew vs no mercy. And we haue no
great cause to be agreeued thereat, because our honour and chiualrie will thereby bee more renowned, more then at any other time we can attaine vnto: for if we beare away the victory, it will bee spoken of through the world, to our fame, & his reproach. Now, as oftentimes (in the like attempts) men declare themselues to bee of diuerse opinions: so here it fell out, for some allowed of war, and others were more leaning to peace. But Agraies, who bare but little loue to King Lisuart, for those reasons before alleadged, vnderta∣king to speak for them all, beganne thus. Honourable Lords, I know not how (with any honesty) we can giue ouer our intention of warre, considering what iust occasion wee haue, and beside, our enemy is in some forwardnesse to come against vs. Notwithstanding, it is no wis∣dome in vs so to suffer him; but ra∣ther to muster our forces speedily, and march directly into his coun∣trie, to let him wel vnderstand what wee are. For, if wee permit him to come seeke vs heere, beleeue it vn∣doubtedly, it will so puffe him vp with pride: that hee (who of his owne nature is presumptuous e∣nough) will thinke he hath wonne the day at the very first landing. Be∣sides, we shall runne into our owne dis-reputation many waies, in gi∣uing occasion to the ill-iudging world, not only to msconster the iustice of our cause; but also, to throwe some sinister opinions on Madame Orianaes iniuries, for which wee are thus entred into Armes. For my selfe, I sweare to you vp∣on mine honour, had not her ear∣nest and incessant entreaties to me, not to speake against peace been so vehement: I had neuer consented that any Embassie should haue bin sent to Great Brittaine, beeing so much abused as wee are. But, see∣ing our enemy makes such manifest shew of his mallice towards vs: I am now discharged of my promise, and absolutely resolued, neuer to enter league of loue or friendship with him; vntill hee haue felt, how well wee can stand vpon our owne defence, beeing enabled by as war∣like powers, as any hee can bring a∣gainst vs. Therefore my Lords, I am on the minde, that wee should conclude on warre, and without a∣ny further deferring, so soon as our supplies are come: to set away di∣rectly for London, and there bid him battaile, if hee dare come forth to resist vs. This resolution was wonderful∣ly pleasing to Amadis, who (til then) was in a continuall perplexity, as fearing, that warre would be defer∣red, and hee enforced to render backe his Oriana, than which, no greater misery could befall him. Wherefore, seeing the greater part ioyned with Agraies; to aduantage farther this opinion, thus he spake. Noble Cosen, as yet I neuer noted any man in this company but hee was alwaies as forward to these af∣faires, as any one could be. If any man haue questioned those incon∣ueniencies, which commonly doe happen in warre: hee is not there∣fore to be taxed, as one that would exempt himself from the businesse, but vseth rather such prouident speeches, as in these cases are fit and iust. And whereas you think it con∣uenient, that wee should enter into King Lisuarts countrie, rather then giue him the least leasure to seek vs here: that deliberation hath al∣waies dwelt on my thoughts, if the rest of you my Lords and worthy friends, will haue it so. For by these
meanes (perceiuing vs to come so neare him) hee may suddenly alter his former opinion, and yeeld to that which wee haue requested. There was not a man in the whole assembly, but freely gaue his voice to this conclusion: And warre be∣ing fully agreed on, men were sent forth, and scouts appointed to all places, as well to heare newes from Great Brittaine, as also for muste∣ring men together. CHAP. XI. How Master Elisabet ariued in the countrie belonging to Grasinda, and passed from thence (for Constantinople) to the Emperour, accor∣ding to the charge giuen him by Amadis. AFter that Master Elisa∣bet was embarqued, he had so good a gale of wind, as (in few daies) he landed in Romania: where sending for the chiefest lords of the countrie, hee gaue them to vnderstand his charge, expressely commanding them to make ready a sufficient number of horse and foot, for passing thence to the En∣closed Isle, so soone as he should be returned from the Emperour, to whom hee was going for the same cause. Which they promised effec∣tually to performe, and hee leaft a Nephew of his named Libeo, a young Knight and of good spirit, still to solicet them in the businesse: and hee set sayle for Constantinople, where hee ariued without any im∣peachment. Being landed, he went to the Emperour, whom he found accompanied with many Princes & great Lords, and doing him hum∣ble reuerence, hee presented him a Letter from Amadis de Gaule. The Emperour, who had known him a long time, welcomde him ve∣ry graciously, & demanded of him, where hee had mette with Amadis de Gaule, of whom hee had heard so many great speeches? Sir answered Master Elisabet, I deale plainly with you, I neuer knew his name to be Amadis, vntill we were ariued in the Enclosed Isle, and then he declared it himselfe vnto vs. For, before that time, hee called himselfe the Greek Knight, as fearing to be knowne by his other borowed name of the greene Sword, after his departure from you. And that was in regarde of his promise to my Lady Grasinda, for conducting her to the Court of King Lisuart, & there to maintaine against all commers, that she was a fairer woman, than the choicest Vir∣gin in all that countrie. Then hee related (at large) how all things had past, especially, his Combate (about that cause) against the Romanes, who meerely in pre∣sumption vndertooke the fight, but spedde according to their deserts. And indeede Sir (quoth hee) they thought that they cōtended against a Greeke Knight, so that, before they entered the Combate, they made little account of him, spea∣king it publikely, that neuer Greek durst be so bolde as to deale with a Roman, man to man, but easily should vanquish him, as they had done many other before. But the successe fell out contrary to their expectation: for they were foyled one after another, and (indeede) with no more then resistance of cō∣mon course. Beleeue me saide the
Emperour, I reioyce in all his hap∣pie fortunes, and credit it assuredly, that if I had meanes, whereby to doe him any pleasure, hee should well knowe that I am his friend to my vttermost power. Sir, answered Master Elisabet, your gracious offer can neuer shewe it selfe in a more needfull season, and now hee doth most humbly require it. Say you so? said the Emperour, let me know how? Then Master Elisabet proceeded thus. Sir after hee had abated the Ramanes daring pride, he withdrew himselfe to the Enclosed Isle, which is his owne by iust title: and there he found a great number of Knights ready bound for the Sea, in succour of Madame Oriana, eldest daughter to King Lisuart, whom (against her will) he would haue married to the Emperour of Rome, and quite dis-inherited her, to aduance his youn∣gest daughter Leonara, contrary to all aduice and opinion, not only of the Princes and Lords of his land, but also of his subiects in generall. Whereof Lord Amadis beeing ad∣uertised, hee highly commended their enterprise, so that on the day ensuing, they put forth to Sea, and hulled about the straites, for them that had the Princesse in charge. Manfully were they assayled, & (af∣ter a long and fierce conflict) van∣quished, taken prisoners, and the Ladies thus rescued, conuayed to the Enclosed Isle, where now they a∣bide at this present. Neuerthelesse, they sent Ambas∣dours to King Lisuart, as well to let him vnderstand, vpon what occasi∣on they had thus rescued his daugh∣ter: as also to entreate her home acceptation againe, without sen∣ding her any more so farre from him, considering the great wrong hee did therein to him selfe. But, as they doubted, so it came to passe, for without any regard to their ho∣nest offer: hee stood mainely on his owne strength, and would haue that by force, which they tendered him freely. For this cause Sir, my Lord Amadis, and all his worthy band of Knights with him, do hum∣bly entreate you, holding the prime place among Christian Princes, & being Gods deputie and minister, to maintaine right and iustice (espe∣cially, when such a vertuous Prin∣cesse is so highly wronged) that you would be pleased, to send them some succour; wherein you shall binde them all to you while they liue, or can bee imployed any way in your seruice, with their vttermost paines. All this while, the Emperor len∣ding an attentiue care to Master E∣lisabets wordes, sate very pensiue: as considering, that hardly would this enterprise be ended, without a long and doubtfull warre. For hee well knew, that King Lisuart was a Prince of vndauntable spirit, and the Emperour of Rome was a man immeasurably proude, & too much opinionate of his owne fortune. On the other side, knowing what iust occasion the Knights of the Enclo∣sed Isle had, to rescue Oriana in so deep distresse, and how highly him selfe stood obliged to Amadis, not onely for the monster Endriagus death, but also for taking such pains as to come see him in Constantino∣ple, and what bountifull offers hee had made him beside; he resolued to send him succour with all speed, speaking thus to Master Elisabet. My worthy good friend, Lord A∣madis shall haue of mee his owne desire, and such an Army will I send him, as both Patin and King Lisuart shall well know, how dearly I re∣spect and esteeme him.
These royall words were so plea∣sing to all the Knights there pre∣sent, especially to Gastilles: as pre∣sently hee fell vpon his knees, say∣ing. Sir, if euer I did you any ac∣ceptable seruice, I most humbly en∣treate you, that (in recompence of all) you would please to permit me, that I may be one in the number of them, apointed for this honourable succour, for I neuer vndertooke a∣ny voyage, that could bee more welcome to me than this. Nephew, answered the Emperour, you & the Marquesse Saluder shall goe toge∣ther in my steede, and therefore giue order, that such shipping bee made ready, as is needfull, for pas∣sage to the Enclosed Isle, with ten∣thousand approoued warriours, which shall goe with you. Sir, said Maister Elisabet, I must needs re∣turne speedily into Romania, where Grasinda (my Mistresse) hath alrea∣dy taken order, for an Army of men leauied in this cause, and them to passe along with mee thither. Wherefore, may it please you to licence my departure, to the end, that in due time I may crosse the Seas, and embarke our forces to ioyne with theirs. Friend, repli∣ed the Emperour, rest your selfe here some two or three dayes, and afterwarde depart at your owne pleasure. CHAP. XII. How Gandalin ariued in Gaule; And of the speeches betweene him and King Perion. GGandalin, being parted from the Enclosed Isle, preuailed so well by his diligence, that in few dayes he ariued in Gaule, euen at the place where King Perion (as then) soiourned: who was not a little ioyfull to see him, as being assured, that hee brought some tydings of his sonne, whom hee had not seene in six yeares and more. Hereupon, hee sent imme∣diately for him, and he hauing done such dutie as became him, deliue∣red his Letters from Amadis, de∣claring, that he had left him in the Enclosed Island. Now, in regarde other matters of moment were re∣ferred to his report: the King de∣manded of him, what newes hee had to impart to him. Sir, said Gan∣dalin, my Lord and all his honora∣ble companions, stand in great need of succour from you. What is the matter? replied the King. Then Gandalin (without omit∣ting any thing) reuealed the whole businesse, as you haue heard before discoursed. Hereat the King was much amazed, howbeit, hee made no outward shew thereof, and gaue command beside, not to vse any speech of these newes, especially to Galaor; because (as yet) hee was very weake, by reason of a disease hanging long vpon him. But (quoth hee) if he demand wherefore thou art come hither; tell him it was to vnderstand of my health: and to morrowe I will take order, accor∣ding as thy Master hath required. Galaor had immediate intelli∣gence, that Gandalin was come to Court: wherefore hee sent to re∣quest the King, that Gandalin might come to him, to tell him some ty∣dings of his brother Amadis. And although hee was in such weake
estate, that hee could hardly sup∣port himselfe: yet hee arose and embraced him, demanding how his Master fared. My Lord (quoth hee) I left him at the Enclosed Isle in very sound health, God be than∣ked for it, and in good hope to see you shortly: assuring you, it will be no little griefe to him, when hee shall heare of your long sicknesse. As thus they discoursed, Norandell entred the Chamber, who knowing Gādalin, asked if Amadis were come thither. No my good Lord, said he, I left him at the pallace of Apolidon, where hee refresheth him selfe after his many trauailes, in Almaigne, Romania, and Constantinople. My deare friend Gandalin (quoth Gala∣or) I pray thee tell mee what thou maist. Gandalin declared all his Masters trauailes at large, to the no little maruaile of the hearers: especially, when hee told all the manner of the fight with the monster Endriagus. Alas, said Galaor, when shall I see him? Soon enough (answered No∣randell) if you would take some paines to recouer your health. Be∣leeue it (quoth Galaor) I will do my vtmost endeauour, not only for my health, but to ease my longing de∣sire to see him. My Lord, said Gan∣dalin, the King gaue me charge not to holde you with any long dis∣course, in regarde of your feeble condition: wherefore, I pray you to spare my absence now, and to morrowe I will keepe you longer company. So Gandalin left them, and retur∣ned to the King, whom hee found studying on the businesse for his sonne Amadis, and because hee would keep his purpose secret: he determined to send Norandell into Great Brittaine, although hee was but newly come to his friend, hea∣ring what a long sicknesse hee had. Hereupon, the next morning hee sent for him, and euen as if instant∣ly he had heard some nouell aduer∣tisement, hee said vnto him. Wor∣thy friend, this day I haue receiued newes, whereby (for ought I can perceiue) the King your father hath an enterprise in hand, wherein your seruice may much auaile him, and therefore I would aduise you to go to him. But let me entreate you, not to talke hereof to Galaor, con∣sidering in what weake estate he is, and it may bee greatly offensiue to him. Sir, answered Norandell, I would bee loath to doe any thing hurtfull to him, and humbly thanke your Highness for your good coū∣sell: to morrow (with your leaue) I meane to part hence, and this day I meane to keep him company. Changing this kind of discourse, they fell to talke of other matters: till Norandel withdrew to his friend Galaor, speaking to him in this ma∣ner. My honourable companion, I promised King Lisuart when I parted from him, to see him againe within a moneth after: wherefore, let not my departure so soone bee displeasing to you, because I am thereto enforced; and so much the rather, in regarde I see that the worst is already past with you, and you are much better amended then before. Moreouer, the small time of my Knighthoods employment, many others may highly misinter∣pret, by my so long remayning idle, and hurle diuerse blamefull asper∣tions on me: which I am sure will be but little pleasing to you, know∣ing, that you loue mine honour as deare as your owne. Neuerthelesse, if your sicknesse should holde on in any long continuance (which hea∣uen forefend) I promise to see you againe so soon as possibly I can.
Galaor was much disconted at No∣randels wordes, because hee tooke great delight in his company: not∣withstanding, thus hee answered. vpon my faith, albeit you haue great occasion to doe as you say: yet your absence from mee will cause no meane griefe. Neuer∣thelesse, preferring your honor be∣fore my pleasure, I am content to let you goe when you will, desiring you most earnestly to doe my hum∣ble duty to the King, assuring him, that so long as life remaines in this body, hee shall finde me his loyall and faithfull seruant. So, embra∣cing each other very affectionately, they parted, but not without wette eyes. Norandels Ship lying ready for him, and hauing taken leaue of King Perion and his Queene: the windes and Seas were so fauoura∣ble to him, as in few dayes he lan∣ded in the port of Vindilisore, where King Lisuart was preparing his Ar∣mie, for the Enclosed Isle. No soo∣ner had Norandell set saile, but King Perion mustered men from all parts, and made shipping likewise ready, for their passage to the Enclosed Isle, so speedily as might be. In the meane while, Lasinde, the Squire to Bruneo, beeing come to the Marquesse, diligently executed his commission, and by pleasing perswasions, compassed his inten∣tion also with Branfill: who seeing his father somewhat slowe and tar∣die in the businesse cast himselfe at his feet, saying. My Lord, I would I had beene with my brother, to haue fought with the Romanes: surely, I should haue reputed it for one of the fairest fortunes, that e∣uer (in this life) can befall me. But seeing my best starres haue fayled mee therein, most humbly I entreat you, in recompence of that losse: to giue mee leaue to goe thither, with such succor as you shall please to send. I dare assure you father, that it will be both for your honor and your sonnes: who (as you well know) haue long time been much bounden to Amadis and his friends. Sonne (quoth he) I am well con∣tented, and seeing you haue such desire to warre; you shall haue Knights good store to beare you company. As indeed hee had, for while Branfill was fitting all things in due order for him selfe, his fa∣ther gaue charge for the other ex∣pedition of Souldiers. Here you must likewise obserue, that the good olde Gouernour Ysa∣nio, who was sent to King Taffinor of Bohemia: found here very gra∣cious entertainement, knowing that hee came from the Knight of the greene Sword. For, after hee had deliuered his Letters, and his fur∣ther message fully vnderstood; the King said vnto him. I promise you Sir vpon my faith, I will not fayle him in so serious a businesse, but he shall haue all that hee can require. Then he called his sonne Grasandor, to whom hee declared all that Ysa∣nio had tolde him, and the cause of his comming, demanding of him, if hee would vndertake the voyage for the aide of Amadis, who had cal∣led him selfe Knight of the greene Sword. My Lord (quoth he) the greatest desire I haue in this world, is, to en∣ioy the company of so good a Knight, and I desire it of you most entirely. But because I cannot lea∣uy your army so soon, may it please you to let mee goe on before, ac∣companied onely with Twentie Knights: then Count Galtines may follow mee, and bring the rest with him. Beleeue mee, answered the King, I am well contented, and do allow of your aduice, for beeing in
so worthie a company, your vertues will bee greatly encreased. And I confesse my selfe so highly behol∣ding to him, that hee may well rest assured, hee shall wholly dispose of mee and mine. For which kindnesse sanio humbly thankt him, and con∣cluded to attend on Galtines, to cause him make the more haste. In the meane while, Grasander embar∣ked himselfe, accompanied onely with twenty Knights, and parting from the port, put on to Sea. On the other side, Landin, who was secretly sent by Quedragant in∣to Ireland, found meanes to speake with the Queen, who hauing vnder∣stood the cause of his comming to her: called some of her trustiest ser∣uants, and commanded them, that (in the closest manner they could deuise) they should gather a power of men, to goe to her Vncle in the Enclosed Isle. And although shee bare but little loue to Amadis, ha∣uing alwaies in memory, the death of King Abies her father: yet much more did shee hate King Lisuart, for the yearely tribute he compel∣led her husband King Cildadan to pay. Wherefore shee resolued helpe the one, in hope to confound the other. But now our History speaketh no more concerning her, but leads you to another matter touching King Lisuart, who had sent Guillan le Fensif to the ∣rour, and other messengers to o∣ther friends, to bee supplied in his purposed warre. CHAP. XIII. How Guillan le Pensif, ariued at the Emperours Court of Rome: Phi∣lipinell in Sutia, and Brandoynas in Ireland. GVillan le Pensif, being dispatched from King Lisuart, had such spee∣die sayling & taruaile; as (in lesse than three weekes) hee landed in the nearest port to Rome. Then taking horse, according to the custome of the Knights of Great Brittaine, he rode on to the Emperour, who was then accompanied with a great number of Princes and Lords, purposely sommoned to Court, for the en∣tertainement of Madame Oriana, whose ariuall hee expected euery day. For the Prince Saluste Quide, and Brandaiell de Reque had written to him, that King Lisuart had deli∣uered her to them, and that they were continually vpon their par∣ting towards him. When the Em∣perour beheld Guillan, he knew him immediately, because he had seene him many times before, and thin∣king hee brought him some newes of his long expected wish: de∣manded where hee had left the Prince Saluste Quide, and the rest of the traine. Sir, quoth hee, King Lisuart (my Master) hath sent this Letter to you; command that it may be read to you, and then you shall be further satisfied in your de∣mand. then the Emperour tooke the Let∣ter, and although it contained some particular priuate credence: yet he would needes haue it publiquely read, and that hee (in like manner) should deliuer what hee had to say. Sir, said Guillan, my Master King Lisuart greets you thus, that in re∣garde of your perpetuall loue and alliance, hee was well content (ac∣cording
to the request made to him by your Ambassadours) to giue you as wife, Madame Oriana, his eldest daughter & principall heare. And thereupon, after many difficul∣ties debated among the Princes, Lords and Subiects of his Realme: hee deliuered her to their hands, who had power to receiue her on your behalfe. but it came to passe, that Lord Amadis de Gaule, and diuerse others his complices, well prouided with shipping: lay as scouts in the way, assayled them in their passage, and after a long fight the Prince Saluste Quide was slame, and most of the rest of your people, led as prisoners to the Enclosed Isle, where (as yet) they detaine Ma∣dame Oriana, the Queen Sardamira, and same others that were in their company. Notwithstanding, after-ward, to make amends for the of∣fence committed, they sent Am∣bassadours to his Maiesty, offring him diuerse good conditions: which he would not accept before he vnderstood your minde, because the iniury concerneth you as much or rather more than him. Where∣fore he commanded me to tell you, that if you meane to reuenge this wrong, hee will bring a good and sufficient Army into the field: pro∣uided, that you (for your part) will doe the like. And so your powers being ioyned together, he and you shall easily drawe them to such rea∣son, as shall bee best liking to your selues. When the Emperour had heard this, neuer was man in greater chol∣ler, and very apparantly he did de∣clare it: for, like one improuident, and vnfurnished of all foresight, he began to sweare, and (euen) enter into a meere lunacy, saying to Guil∣lan, You know what is done, re∣turne to your Master, and tell him: I shall neuer enioy any rest, vntill I be ioyned with him, and with such a power, as those Rake-hells of the Enclosed Isle shall well know, how highly they haue offended me. Sir, answered Guillan you cannot come so soone as you shall finde the King my Master and his Army readie. Haste home then (answered the Emperour) and make no longer ta∣rying here. Thus was Guillan constrained to get him gone, without (almost) the leasure of receiuing any sustenance: whereat hee was not a little offen∣ded, especially for his slender en∣tertainement, and he made no long tarrying from Great Brittaine, to make his complaint thereof to King Lisuart. Beeing embarqued on the Sea, he sayled directly to Vindiliso∣re, where hee landed not long af∣ter, finding the King there, expec∣ting his ariuall, to whom hee decla∣red all that the Emperour had said, and what small discretion hee be∣wrayed, before so many Princes & Lords. And beleeue it Sir (quoth he) vndoubtedly, that if they which come in his company, haue as slen∣der braines as hee: neuer were seene men more vnmeet for warre, nor worse gouerned then they will bee. If they will be aduised by mee, said the King, I hope wee shall not be beaten for want of good gui∣ding: for they beeing mingled a∣mong vs, we shall both help them, and they vs. It shall suffice me, that they be speedy in their comming; because I haue this day receiued ad∣uertisement, that the Emperour of Constantinople, and the Kings of Gaule, Scotland, Bohemia and Spaine, doe enter Armes for the ayde of Amadis. I heare also, that King Aranigne, with Archalaus and Bar∣sinan, do muster men from all parts:
but what their intent is I know not, and therefore I holde it conuent∣ent, that wee should first bid our e∣nemy battaile, before hee win time to come vpon vs. Which wee may easily doe, if they proceede not a∣gainst the Romanes: for Brandoynas is newly ariued from Ireland who assureth me, that hee left King Cil∣dadan mustring his forces, and in forwardnesse to ioyne with vs. Phi∣lipinell likewise, is comming home from Suetia, and hath certified mee by his Letters, that King Gasquilan will not faile to bee here within fif∣teene dayes, with such a band of worthy Knights, as are soundly set∣led in resolution. As for the rest, leauied heere at home in mine owne countries, you may see (all-ready) more than fiue thousand, trouping together in the next meddowe: so that before a moneth be expired, we shall be ful∣ly ready for marching hence. But what of Galuanes? said Guillan, is he for you, or no? No, answered the King, hee hath entreated mee by Brandonynas, that hee may (at this time) stand exempted: Desiring rather, to redeliuer vp the Isle of Mongoza into my hands, then to go against Amadis and his Nephew. And knowing that in other occasi∣ons hee may doe mee good seruice, I am content to holde him excu∣sed. So, three weekes and more were passed ouer, yet no newes heard, ei∣ther of the Emperour, or of his Ar∣mie. Whereat the King was not a little mooued, and fearing that hee would not keep promise with him: a Brigandine was presently prepa∣red, and his Nephew Giontes sent in all haste to Rome, to know the cause of this delay, and so he parted from Vindilisore. CHAP. XIII. How Grasandor, Sonne to the King of Bohemia, sayling vpon the Sea met with Giontes: and of that which happened to them. YOu haue already heard that Grasandor hauing taken leaue of the King his father, was shipt to Sea, accompanied onely with twenty Knights, sayling towards the Enclosed Isle. Earely in a morning, about sunne rising, hee discouered the Brigandine wherein Giontes was; which foorthwith hee boarded, hauing the winde more at will than the other had. Then Gra∣sandor, being desirous to know whe∣ther hee went, commanded  should come before him: for hee had no power of contradiction, be∣cause hee had none but Manners a∣board with him. Wherefore hee gaue him to vnderstand, that his voyage was to Rome, thereto enioy∣ned by King Lisuart: entreating that hee might be no longer staied, because his businesse required ex∣pedition. Grasandor replied thus. Before God (quoth he) hee that hath sent you, is no well-wisher to Lord A∣madis, to whom I am an eternall vowed friend: therefore you must reli mee your name, and what com∣mission you haue to Rome, other∣wise you cannot easily passe from me. If by concealing what you de∣mand, answered Giontes, the least iot of the King my masters honour might be deminished; death could
not compell me to disclose it. But redounding to his fame, with no meane aduantage, & being a matter of no great secrecy: know Sir, that my name is Giontes, a Knight of Great Brittaine, and Nephew to the King of whom I spake, who hath sent me to the Emperour, to hasten those forces formerly pro∣mised him, for his intended warre, against them that haue wrongfully surprised his daughter Oriana, and diuerse other in her company, vn∣der conduct of the Prince Saluste Quide, and other Romanes, whereof som were slain, & others takē priso∣ners. Now Sir. hauing thus satisfied you, I pray you let me be stayed no longer. Goe a Gods name, answe∣red Grasandor, and remember, that your King and his Emperour, shall sinde with whom they haue to deale, if they aduenture to assaile Amadis, and them that will be in his company. So they parted, Grasandor haste∣ning towardes the Enclosed Isle  beeing ariued, hee was most ioy fulle welcomed, Amadis (and the rest) entertayning him in most  manner. Then hee re∣forted to them, how hee met with Gtes at Sea, who went to hasten the Emperour of Romes Army, and what other speeches had passed be∣tween them. Also, how the King his father was leuying men in his King∣dome, to follow after him with all possible speed, and very shortly they were to bee expected, with Count Galtines and Ysario, who stayed behinde only for their con∣duct. In the meane while (quoth hee) I, as one entirely affected to you, am come before, to offer you both my loue and seruice. You are most heartily welcome, answered Amadis, the King your father binds mee more and more, both to him and you, in all I can. Now obserue how (from that very instant) the Army for the Enclosed Isle gathered strength, and grew compleate within fifteen daies af∣ter. For, King Perion ariued there with three thousand Gaules, all well experienced and hardy warriours: Galtines with fifteen hundred: Tan∣tiles for Queene Briolanis, with 12 hundred: Branfill, brother to Bru∣nes, with six hundred. Two thou∣sand were sent by Ladasin, King of Spaine, to his sonne; and other fif∣teene hundred came from Scotland, sent to Agraies: besides two thou∣sand which Libeo, Nephew to Ma∣ster Elisabet, brought from Grasin∣daes Prouinces, all carrying Turkie Bowes. Eight thousand likewise came vnder the conduct of Gastiles, sent from the Emperour of Con∣stantinople; all these being encam∣ped on a goodly plaine, hard by the maine Rock of the Enclosed Isle, couragiously expected the enemies comming. And you must thinke, that it was a goodly sight to behold so faire an assembly, for there was not a man among them, but his ve∣ry lookes expressed the resolution of his soule, and that hee was a war∣riour indeed which pleased Ama∣dis so highly, as nothing could more content him. But the Princesse Oriana, thin∣king continually on such mischan∣ces as might ensue in such cases, had euermore her eyes filled with tears, refusing all comfort that came from the women: wherewith Mabila ac∣quainted Amadis, who was not a little grieued thereat. And seeing he had no better meanes to delight her, then to present before her eyes, how many valiant men had vnder-taken Armes in her defence: hee sent to entreate her, that she would bee pleased to behold them on the
morrowe, all ordered in the forme of a maine battell, and therefore secretly gaue the alarum, which she and the other Ladies accepted ve∣rie pleasingly. For, from their win∣dowes, they could discerne all the field, & Amadis (in the night time) had closely ambushed an hundred men, and three hundred Harque∣buziers to confront them, sayling all along the Sea shoar, and about ten of the clock the next morning, they entred into skirmish, the Alla∣rum being giuen on either side. The morning (after sunne-rising) prooued very foggie and mistie, so that the Ladies could not discerne any of the sport: but after that the sunne had scattered the mists, then the warriours ranged their battali∣ons, and the Harquebuziers plaied hotly with their shotte, so that the Scouts and Centinells (fearing to bee surprised on either side) made their escapes queint and cunning. Then was the whole campe so mo∣ued, euen as if the heauens had thū∣dered, by the noise of Drummes, Trumpets, and Clarions, cheerful∣ly sounding on euery side. And as they laboured for winning of En∣sines, the men appeared like Ants, very properly stealing abroad forth of their earth, where all summer they made their prouision for win∣ter▪ In the meane while, the Ladies were (on all sides) at their gazing windowes, beholding this militarie controuersie; which serued as a pleasing passe-time to them, by rea∣son of the intelligence Amadis had giuen them thereof the day before. As thus they were pell mell to∣gether, Mabila with a very gracious respect, came to Oriana, speaking thus. By my faith Madame, there are many great Princes and Poten∣tates, who haue not such plenty of men at command, as you haue: I referre my selfe to this instant spec∣tacle before your eyes. What say you yourselfe? Is it not true? How happy then were you, in making due consideration hereof, and how much you can command in him, to whom this whole Army affordeth obedience? I am perswaded that if King Lisuart, and the Emperour (which neuer shal be your husband) did but beholde what you now doe: they would consider twice on their enterprise, before they ventured a∣ny further forth of their countries. Wherefore it is no more then ne∣cessarie, that hence-forward you should refraine your sighes & tears, and shew a much more cheerefull disposition, then hitherto you haue done. Deare Cosen, answered Orania, it is impossible for mee to be plea∣santly humoured, when I consider mine owne instant miserie. For well you know, that if the King my fathers power, and this belonging to your kinsman, doe but once ioyne or meete together: it will prooue to the ruine of the one or o∣ther, or (perhaps) of both together. Which were an vnrecouerable mis∣chiefe to me, as well for the dutie which nature commandeth in mee to my father, as also the affection I beare to Amadis. How then can I any way haue cōtentment? would God I were deade, rather than I should liue to see such mighty in∣conueniences. With these words, the teares streamed aboundantly from her faire eyes. Why how now Madame? saide Mabila, doe you thinke that our Lord hath forgotten you? I dare promise you, hee will no more leaue you now, then hi∣therto hee hath done, if you repose your trust in him. For your inno∣cence is generally knowne, and that (against your will) this great a doe
hath beene begun: therefore, ne∣uer grieue your selfe so much, be∣cause it may fall out the worse for you, and be offensiue likewise to my noble Cosen, and all the other wor∣thie Knights, who desire nothing more than to doe you seruice. All this while, King Perion (since his ariuall) had not seene the Prin∣cesse Oriana; wherefore, after this pleasant battaile was ended, he de∣manded of Agraies, if hee could compasse the meanes to speak with her, because hee would gladly doe her reuerence. Agraies made him answere, that hee would worke the way for him: and presently went to the Princesse, acquainting her with King Perions desire. Hee shall be most graciously welcome (quoth she) whensoeuer it pleaseth him to come. But deare Cosen, what is your opinion of my misfortunes. Am not I the most vnhappy crea∣ture in the world, to see so many great Princes and good Knights troubled, and all about my business? Madame, said hee, we are all yours, and there is not a man among vs, that will not gladly (& with a good heart) be employed in your seruice, and all account their paines suffici∣ently rewarded, if you but vouch∣safe to accept it. Alas Sir, answered she, I know not how I shal any way be thankfull to you all, for this great grace: but I will entreate our Lord to requite it. Madame, replied A∣graies, if you dislike not what wee doe, & would be a little more cheer∣fully humorous then hitherto you haue been; you should binde vs all in much more dutie to you. Be∣leeue it Cosen (quoth shee) I will  with my pa much as possibly I can. And because I vn∣derstand, that the  to the King of  is also  riued: I pray you to let him come along with King Perion. So Agraies tooke leaue of her, and went to seeke the King of Gaule and Grassandor, to whom hee decla∣red; that Oriana attended their cō∣ming, and that they should be most kindly welcome. Wherefore, with∣out any further delaying, they went vnto her, accompanied with Ama∣dis, Florestan, and diuerse others. Entring into the Princesse cham∣ber, shee attended on by the other Ladies and Gontlewomen, went to entertaine them: And then King Perion, who had not seene or spo∣ken to her, since shee aboad with the Queene of Scots, demanded of her, whether shee knew him, or no. My Lord (quoth she) although I neuer saw you more then once, yet I do well remember the request you granted mee, when you made your sonne Amadis Knight. It is true, answered the King, and seeing you were the cause of the first ho∣nour that euer he receiued: I hold it reasonable that hee should bee thankfull therefore to you, so long as he enioyeth life. While thus they talked toge∣ther, Grassandor conferred with Ma∣bila, whom hee found so discreetly wise, and endued with such singu∣lar graces: as (thence forward) he grew enamoured of her, so that he married her, as you shall read here∣after. In the meane space, Queen Briolania discoursing with Quedra∣gant, shee said vnto him. Sir, but for our former intelligence of your mornings battaile, neuer had wo∣men beene in the like terrour and amazement. How Madame? an∣swered Quedragant, was it more dreadfull, then the late attempt of your Cosen Tiron? No by my faith, said shee, for then I expected no∣thing else but death, and but for you, I had been in the greatest dan∣ger,
that euer could happen to any Lady or Gentlewoman: but thanks be to God, and your good succor. I now haue time to be fully reuen∣ged. Madame, saide Brian, your beauty and vertue doe plainely de∣liuer, that you haue no power to take any such reuenge as you speak of: but rather speakes pardon in the fairest language, and presumes of more loyalty in him hereafter, then precedent times haue warran∣ted from him. Truely Sir (quoth she) I could well like of so good an inclination in him, and if you think it meet, wee will send for him im∣mediately, to vnderstand how his minde is affected: assuring you, that it would be no little ioy to me, if I could kindly reconcile him; in regarde he is young, my very neare kinsman, and of better spirit (as I thinke) then euer was in his father, or other brethren. Madame, repli∣ed Brian, you could neuer speake more vertuously, then now you do: I pray you send for him, to the end (if hee stand so addicted) hee may promise fidelity to you, in the pre∣sence of so many good Knights as now are here. It liketh me well, an∣swered she, for hee is prisoner to you two, and none of mine, and therefore dispose of him as you please. Instantly was Tiron sent for, who being come before so great a com∣pany, expected no other arrest then death: and therefore was not a little amazed, when hee heard Bri∣olania thus speake to him. Tiron these two Gentlemen (whom you know well enough) haue entreated mee to shew you mercy, and I am well enclined thereto, neuer min∣ding the treason of your deceased father against me: prouided, that you deliberate, and promise mee, hence-forward to follow vertue as zealously, as your life hither to hath beene lewde and wicked. Also to make amends for the wrong you haue done mee, and endeauour to become a loyall & faithfull seruant: and doing so, I will not vse you as a prisoner, but as my Cosen and nea∣rest kinsman. Therefore tell mee presently (without any dissimulati∣on) how you stand resolued: for, being issued from the royall blood of a King, you should highly shame your selfe, to deliuer now such wordes, as hereafter should not be effectually performed. Alas Madame, quoth hee, if you please to take pitty on me, while I liue I will neuer more offend you: and therfore I most humbly entreat you, euen (for Gods sake) to for∣giue mee. As for my fathers trans∣gressions, I cannot yeeld you any reason for them: considering I was then so young, as all remembrance of him is quite bereft me. But for mine owne particular, I protest and promis to you Madam that I wil be iust & faithfull to you, if you please to forget my former errour towards you, which rather was the guilt of my youth, then any other willing sinne. If you doe as you say, an∣swered she, it will proue the better for you. What I promise Madame, replied Tiron, I solemnely sweare vnto. Nor did he euer faile therein, and therfore it fell out to both their great honours. Briolania extending such mercy to her enemy, and hee no lesse man-hood to her, may serue for an ex∣ample to many; in beeing lesse prompt and forwarde to reuenge, then their cruell nature doth pro∣uoke them. And now returning to our former purpose, Tiron beeing thus reconciled to the Queene, and and shee desirous to declare, what trust she would repose in him, vpon
this new agreement, said vnto him. Cosen it is my minde, that you take charge and conduct of those forces which Tantiles hath caused to come hither from my countries: you shal be their chiefe commander, and they as obedient to you, as to my selfe. Tiron refused not this hono∣rable , but accepted it in most humble manner. As thus they resolued, King Pe∣rion and the rest tooke leaue of the Ladies, returning back to the camp, where they met with Balays de Car∣santa, who was newly there ariued, accompanied with twenty Knights all his kinsemen, whom hee had brought to doe seruice to Amadis, as hauing heard before of his vr∣gent necessity. Here you must ob∣serue, that this Balays was hee who parted him and his brother Galaor, when first they fought together, by the meanes of the Damosell, who needs would haue the head of Ar∣da the Dwarfe, and formerly had deliuered him out of prison from Archalaus, as hath been declared in the first booke of this History. He also passed by Vindilisore, to note King Lisuarts Army, giuing assu∣rance, that the Romanes were there arriued, and Gasquilan King of Sue∣tia, with a great number of Knights. Report likewise was credibly enfor∣med, that the camp would dislodge thence within fifteene dayes at the vttermost, and then march directly towards the Enclosed Isle: wherfore king Perion determined, to preuent him by the way, and bid him bat∣taile first. CHAP. XV. How Patin, Emperour of Rome, landed with his Army at Vindilisore, where King Lisuart lay in expectation of his comming, and of that which happened vnto them. SOme few dayes after Giontes had parted with Grasandor at Sea, hee ariued at Rome, where he found the Emperor embarking his Army, for passage into Great Brittaine: and he gaue him to vnderstand, what he had re∣ceiued in charge from King Lisuart. Hereupon without any  de∣lay, hee commanded set sayles, and weigh ∣to the maine , for ariuall in the hauen of , where King  then  his , in  of this  all the  ready come to him. Great honour  at his ariuall, and his ∣ged in the most commodious pla∣ces, for their refreshing and health: for they were so wearie with long being on the Seas, as eight daies were fully expired, before they could march any further. In which time, King Lisuart feasted the Em∣perour , not without much conference together, concerning the bolde attempt of Amadis, in rescue of the princes Orania: but they intended to take such sharpe reuenge, a should for euer after be daily talked of, and the Emperour  to the King. Brother, let me  you to grieue no more for your daughter, because I will as∣sure you, that if I liue but the space of sixe whole moneths; your Pirats and Prowlers on the Seas, shall
feele what iniury they haue done to mee, for I will haue them all han∣ged and strangled on the very masts of their shippes: but they did cast vppe their account without their Hoast, as you shall well perceiue hereafter. Now it came to passe, that a day or two before their setting forward, as the two Princes were visiting their Campe: they espied Enll, Nephew to G, accompani∣ed onely with one Squire, who car∣ried his shield. Comming nere to the Sentells, hee demaunded, if a Knight named A was there with the Emp Pat, or no: And answere was , that he was there, whereupon he desired to speake with him. en two soul∣diers were apointed to conduct him to the Emperour, who asked of him what hee would haue with his Nephew. Sir (quoth Ell) I come from the Enclosed , to doe a mes▪ sage to him, from my Lord Amadis de Gaule, who hath sent me to him. At these , Arqsill stept foorth, and saide vnto him. See Knight, I am the man thou comest to, boldly deliuer thy message. Lord Arqusill, answered Eill, my Lord Amadis de Gaule, remem∣bers you by me, that at such time as hee ariued in the Court of the King of Boemia, calling himselfe (then) the Knight of the  Sword: hee combated  named G,  eleuen other  pata∣kers, and of whichu were on▪  full wll you  on the  a∣greement y  to  ri r, to whom y prisoner. Neuerthelesse, that you might well knowe, his gentle and vetuous inclination: vpon your owne requests, hee granted you li∣berty, vnder condition that you should returne to him (at all times) when he gaue you , & now by me he cha. Beleeue Span, answered Ar,  de G  ed by some of  (w was  fale therein, n enforce ee: the bly I entreate you, that  ture heere may not bee o to you, for if I s I must not be taken for the  I am. Then the  very  regard of the  his estate) beg, saying to E. K that ent t eth neare, to punish  for his many  the D is, shall not  c from me. A you A, hi pr  o. When Ell heard t rours a dread  you haue expe knw h  d if now  deale with him as  hee will appeare before y
Prince and potent Lord, as hee is, and from him (perhaps) you will part againe with as little honor as you did before. Well knew King Lisuart, that the Emperour could not command his passions, but would offer outrage to Enill, except hee preuented it, whereat hee was not a little offen∣ded: and therefore to breake off their further difference, he said to the Emperour. My Lord, let vs sit downe to dinner, and leaue this messenger to enioy his priuiledge. So departed both the Princes, , who brought him to his Tent, where he made him the best cheare could be : and the next morning mounting on horseback, they made such haste by their iourneys, as they quickly ariued at the Enclosed Isle. Where Arquisil found himselfe not a little amazed, to see such an hoast of men assembled together: neuer∣thelesse, hee concealed his cogita∣tions, and alighted at the Pauilli∣on of Amadis, who, after hee had demanded tydings of the Empe∣rours Campe, and his intentions, spake vnto him. Lord Arquisill, your Master is a great Prince and powerfull: yet hee may finde (if he come to assayle vs) that hee will be more manly answered, than hee perswades King Lisuart hee shall be. And because you may the bet∣ter beleeue my wordes: before we , I will cause you to take a full view of our Armie. Hereupon, two Knights were commanded to conduct him tho∣row the Army  named so many friends: that Arquisil began to  doubtfull of the Romanes vic∣torie, accounting his owne fortune none of the best, that he could doe his Master no seruice in so great a necessitie. But then hee began to consider in the instant, that (per∣haps) if hee desired Amadis to set him at liberty, vntill the businesse was passed ouer: he would not de∣ him, knowing him to be one of the  and gentle Knight in the world. Whereupon, , beeing in the lodging of King Perion who had then the very chiesest of his Campe in his companie, setting his knees to the ground thus he spake. Sir, I most humbly beseech you to permit me, that I may eake one word to you, in  Lord Amadis, and these oter Knights here. Speake (quoth the King) whatsoeuer pleaseth you. Then Ar∣quisil rising, began to relate at large, the manner of the Combate be∣tweene Garadan and Amadis, and afterward of the eleuen Romanes, a∣gainst as many other Knights be∣longing to King Tassinor, and all that, which you haue formerly heard. Moreouer, that himselfe be∣ing in the greatest danger of death, that euer hee had been before that time: Amadis saued his life, by ta∣king him prisoner, sending him safe∣ly away, vpon condition, he should appeare againe before him at all times, and as often as he should re∣ceive summons from him in which respect, and to  it pleased my Lord Amadis (vsing but his wonted gentlenesse and )  he may  whereby he shall binde me all my life time to be wholly his, because there can no greater crosse befall me, then the
losse of such an honour. And to the end he may iudge. that I speake for no other reason; I sweare to come and yeeld my selfe againe vnto him on the morrow after, if I be left a∣mong them that lue. Amadis beeing very desirous to let all men perceiue, how little hee stood in doubt of the Emperour, or any helpe that Arquisill could giue him, returned him this answer. Arquisill, although the Emperour your Master is too lauish of his tongue, and ouer▪ glorious and pre∣sumptuous without any occasion: yet notwithstanding, being not wil∣ling (at this time) to reuenge my selfe on him by any means of yours, I am content to giue you libertie, and that you shall be with him on the day of battaile. Vpon condi∣tion, if you scape with life: you shall come againe to mee on the tenth day following, in any place wheresoeuer I am, to doe such ser∣uice as I shall command you. For which fauour Arquisill most hum∣bly thanked him, swearing on the Kings hand, that hee would keepe his promise faithfully: and beeing very earnest in desire for his return, taking leaue of all the company, hee mounted on horse-back, and without any stay in any place, came to the Emperours Camp, who was not a little ioyfull of his returne, demanding by what meanes he thus escaped. Then Arquisill reported to him all that which you haue all-ready heard, what powerfull strength A∣madis had for sight, and lastly, the gracious curtesie and l ee had vsed towards him. But beleeue mee Sir (quoth he) he will be ready to meet you, as soone as  shall set sooting in his countrie. Where∣at the Emperor was much amazed, for hee imagined till then (accor∣ding to the trust he reposed in King Lisuarts perswasions) that Amadis was voyde of all meanes for reco∣uering of men, whereby to resist so great a power, and made full ac∣count to besge him in the Enclo∣sed Isle, and to regaine it by force or famine. But vnderstanding now the coutrary, ee concluded on o∣ther prouisions, and  King L, dge thence  breake of day:  muster made of  orse as foote, where ded. Vpon view of the Army, they found of the  three thou∣sand horse, and seauen thousand foot, whereof two thousand were Harquebuziers. Of King Lisuarts countrie, two thousand horse, and foure thousand foot, fiue hundred whereof were good Archers. The rest, amounting to the number of a thousand (cōprehending two hun∣dred from King Cildd) were brought by Gasquilan King of Sc∣ti, and the whole were ordered in this manner. To the Emperour was apointed the auantgard, which hee accepted: and because his troupes were ouer-gr, in regard of the rest; hee let fiue hundred horse, and as many foot, referring them to the rereguard. King Lisrt led the maine battell, accompanied with the men of his owne country:  Noran,  goodly shew in marching, ir par∣ting th Co∣roall of the foot in th) had ordered his  square, the first hereof
were very richly armed,, and all of them excellent Souldiers. In the midst of the Army, the Ensignes waued pleasingly with the wind, wel guarded with Halbardiers, and on the flankes were two thousand Har∣quebuziers, couducted by Arquisill, wel fitted with Casks and Gorgets. On the sides were the wings of the Emperours forces, and himselfe in person, and in them were so many Ensignes, Guydos & Banderoles, as it was impossible to beholde a brauer troupe: because the most part of them had their horses bar∣bed, and the Archers (who neuer seperated from the rest) all so well mounted, as there appeared but lit∣tle difference. Betweene the men on horseback and foot, marched a band of Artil∣lerie, with a great number of Pio∣ners, and the Carriage, bearing powder and bullets only. The rest, wherein were the Cordages, Ca∣bles, Lanternes, Cressets, Iauelins, Pkes, Shouels, Spades, Bils, Axes, Hammers, Axeltrees, Tents, and all other things needfull for carri∣age: came in the end of all the Ar∣mie, sided by the bagadge. The battaile proceeded on in very good order, and the rereguard follow∣ing, comming to encampe three miles from thence. CHAP. XVI. How King Perion was aduertised of the dis-lodging of his enemies: And what order ee tooke to march before, and fight with them. AFter that the Armie for the Knights of the Enclosed Isle had mette together, and were wel refreshed: by generall consent, the good King Peron was apointed chiefe head and conduc∣ter of this enterprise, and each man swore obedience to him. Hee was a gentle Prince, wise and well fore∣iudging, whereupon he considered in his owne thoughts: with whom hee had to deale, and of what im∣portance such a battels losse would bee, if fortune should not speake faely to him. Hereupon, some few daies after, he dispatched scouts and spies to all parts, to vnderstand the day of setting forward, and o∣ther tydings of his enemies: recei∣uing certaine intelligence, that (without all doubt) they bent their course for the Isle. Whereupon he resolued, to meet them before, and to fight with them by the way, if he should finde occasion conuenient: which that hee might the better doe, hee ordered his Army in such manner as shall be related to you. First of all, the charge of the a∣uantgard was committed to Ama∣dis, accompanied with Agraies, Bruneo, & two thousand three hun∣dred hardy bold warriours on horse backe, the most of them beeing Gaules. Qedragant had the charge of foure thousand foot, of the like nation, but mingled with some Scots among them, and six hundred light horse, to sallie forth and skirmish, vnder the Ensigne of Banll. For the battaile, Gastles was Coronall of fiue hundred foote, almost all Greekes, making a battalion sepa∣rately of seauenteene hundred Ar∣chers, who were so industrious in vse of the Turkie bow, that at each loose they could deliuer fiue Ar∣rowes
together: ouer whom, Libe, phew to Mater Elisabet, was Captaine and Commander. King rion with Gaudales, followed thē, attended with eighteene hundred horse, accoasted by Brian, with the reeguard of 15 hundred Knights, for the more part, of Spaine: sustai∣ned by three thousand foot, of whom Sadamon had the conduct. Then, as apointed to supply and uccour, as also to re-enforce and help (at all needfull occasions) such as were most oppressed: Tiron, with seuen hundred horse, and Madaran, for guarding the bagage, followed with fiue hundred foot. This being thus ordayned, euery man was cō∣manded to attend his Colours, & make ready for departure earely the next morning. But now, not to swere far from our purpose, and from that which Archla (all this while) laboured to compasse, you must vnderstand, that so soon as he receiued credi∣ble information, that the Kings, P∣rion & Lisurt, marched one against the other: hee suddenly sent away Garin, sonne to Grumell (who wa lame by Amadis when hee holpe Ori, as you haue heard in the first Booke of this History) giuing him expresse charge, to stay in no place by day or night, vntill ee had aduertised King Aranigne, and others of his league and com∣bination, of this their proceeding, and that (with all possible speede) they should set forward their Ar∣mie, and enter into the kingdome of Great rittaine, where he would attend them with his troupes. Garin obeying the command of Archalaus, trauailed so expeditious∣ly, that hee ariued in the great Ci∣tie of Araige, of which place, all the Kings ruling that countrie took their names, and there hee found the man hee was directed vnto. He acquainted him with the cause of his comming thither, and did the like to others, to whom hee had the same employment: and they ha∣uing their Armies in readinesse, concluded, to make their generall meeting before the towne of Cali∣fan, in the countrie of Sansuega, & there they encamped together, to take shipping from thence: as accor∣dingly they did, so that vpō the day apointed, they found their power to consist of twelue thousand and more. Setting sayle away they pre∣pared directly for Great Brittaine, where they landed neare vnto a Ca∣stle, which appertained to Archa∣lans: who there waited their com∣ming with six hundred Knights, all deadly enemies to King Lisuart and Amadis. After they had refreshed them-selues some two or thre dayes, ha∣uing receiued aduertisement, what haste King Lisuart made against them of the Enclosed Isle: they dis∣lodged away, marching on for∣ward, by easie daies iourneyes. The aantguard was conducted by the King of the Profound Isle, with sixe hundred horse, and three thousand fiue hundred foot: the charge wher∣of was giuen to Barsiuan, a young Knight as yet, and very aduente∣rous. King Aranigne, led the main battaile, accompanied with fifteen hundred horse, and three thousand fiue hundred bold voluntaries: v∣der conduct of six Knights, near kins∣men to Brnayer whō Amadis van∣quished in the battaile of the seuen Kings, and came now expresly from the Isle Sagarie, as hoping to re∣uenge the death of their kisman. To Archalas was giuen charge, of the rereguard, with 5 hūdred horse, and fifteen hundred foot. And be∣cause the young Duke of Bstroe
arived there with the latest, with some number of light horse: hee was apointed for discouery, & pre∣uention gf way-layings. In this order they entred vpon King Lisuts Land, by the clos and most hidden waies they could chuse: as fearing to be seen, vntill they had brought their enterprise to conclusion. CHAP. XVII. How Gandalin, Squire to Amadis, and Lafinde, Squire to Bruneo de bone Mer, were made Knights: And of the battaile betweene the two Kings, Lisuart and Perion. WE haue declared here-tofore, that Gandalin had order giuen him by Amadis (passing in∣to Gaule) to entreate the Queene his mother, to send Melitia, to keep company with O∣riana, which King Perion wel allow∣ed of: but beholding Galaor still so sickly, she was loath shee should depart▪ vntill he were a little stron∣ger. Wherefore Gandalin remai∣ned there for her conduct, so soon as Galaors danger were past, which happened within a short while af∣ter. Hereupon, the Queene cau∣sed her to bee embarked, well ac∣companied with Ladies and Gen∣tlewomen, hoping shee should (as yet) finde King Perion in the Enclo∣sed Isle. But he was departed thence before her ariuall, to the no little griefe of Gandalin, because he ho∣ped to receiue his Knighthood be∣fore the battell should be fought: & therfore, because he might the soo∣ner attain therto, he departed thēce, and (without staying in any place) ceased not til he came to the camp. When Amadis saw him he deman∣ded what was become of his Sster? My Lord, quoth hee, shee is at this instan in the Enclosed Isle, with the faire Princesse Oriana, and humbly commends her selfe to your graci∣ous fauour. And my brother Gala∣or, said Amadis, is he yet recouered? Hee findes himselfe (answered Gan∣dalin) in much better estate, then formerly hee did: but yet continu∣eth so weake, as hee is not able to leaue his Chamber, and come in∣to the open ayre. Afterward, hee reported all that to him, which you haue heard alrea∣die, and said. Beleeue me Gandalin, thy rydings doe not please mee a little, and I am glad thou art retur∣ned in so apt a season, in regard (I hope) wee shall haue the battaile, before three dayes be fully expired. That made me make such haste, re∣plyed Gandalin; for you knowe my earnest desire to bee knighted, and I can neuer receiue it at a more conuenient time, nor euer shew my selfe worthie of so great an honor as now. And credit me my Lord, that but for the knowledge I now haue, of your easre sparing mee, hauing Madame Oriana in your owne pow∣er: I would not haue vsed these speeches. Wherefore, most hum∣bly I desire you to grant mee, that this battaile may not bee fought, vntill I may bee comprehended therein, and that I may reach my longing expectation. Amadis sitting silent a while, at length thus answered. Gandalin, the fulfilling of thy request is so irksome to mee, that it piceth my very
; and therefore (if it were possible) I would acquit my selfe thereof. Notwithstanding, finding it to bee very reasonable, I will so aside all passion to please thee: on∣ly being sorry, that wee are in such a place, where I can get no Armes to giue thee, and to doe (beside) what else is requisite, and answera∣ble to thy deseruing. My Lord, said Gandalin, your brother (hath out of his especiall grace) herein furni∣shed mee, for at my parting from him, (he knowing my determina∣tion) gaue mee his owne Armour, and the very best horse hee had: moreouer, he would haue bestowed his Sword on mee, but I tolde him, that you had promised to giue me one of those, which you receiued in Greece from Queene Menoressa. well then, said Amadis, seeing it is so, it shall be fittest for you, that the night before you goe to the battel: you performe the watch in the King my fathers Chappell, & in the mor∣ning, I will present you Armed to him, according as to order apper∣tayneth, because I holde it impos∣sible, to receiue your knighthoode from a wortheir man. Vpon my faith my Lord (quoth Gandalin) I neuer had any other desire, but to receiue it from your selfe. Be it, said Amadis as you please. Lasiu∣da, Squire to Brun, replied Gan∣dalin, not long since tolde me, that his Master had likewise yeelded to his knighthod, and that hee and I should performe our watch toge∣ther, and so be companions in the battaile. Aadis answered him not a word, but went into the Kings Tent, who had giuen order, that the Campe should march on earely the next morning: because his scoues and spies had assured him, that the ene∣mie approached neare. So mar∣ched the two Armies each against other, and on the third day follow∣ing, they came in sight halfe a mile off: and there encamped, perfor∣ming many aduenterous skirmi∣shes, as well on horsebacke, as on foot: especially the Romanes, who still pressed them of the Enclosed Isle to fight, because they found the place aduantageable for them. But King Perion vnderstood their meaning well enough, fortefying his Campe with great trenches, & defending all passages with his ar∣tilery Thus they maintained them-selues three daies together, skirmi∣shing (well-neare) from morning to night: and longer time they had thus temporised, but that they re∣ceiued information, how Archalaus had induced King Aranigne, to the leuying of a powerfull Army, and marched on speedily to encounter with them. Hereupon, the two Camps grew iealous of one another, not know∣ing to whether side they inclined: for King Lisuart imagined they came in ayde of Amadis, and Ama∣dis presumed the like for King Lis∣uart, and this was their onely mo∣tiue of their falling to fight, accor∣ding as you shall heare hereafter. But before it came so to passe, Gas∣quilan, King of Swetia, who had ex∣pressely left his courtrie to fight with Amadis: sent a Trompet to him, who being come into his pre∣sence, spake in this manner. Lord Amadis, the King of Swetia my Master, sends you worde by mee, that at such time as King Lisuart vndertook the warre, against Galua∣ues in the Isle of Mongoza: he then departed from his kingdome, with intention onely, to approue his manhood against you; not for any hatred or malice hee beares you, but onely in regarde of your great
fame and renowne. And being no way able to meet with you, he was enforced (being then wounded) to returne home againe, frustrated of his expectation. And hee had not now left his owne lande againe, but that hee was aduertised by King Lisuart, of your vndertaking this hardy enterprise. And continuing still in his former deliberation, hee entreates you (in meere curtesie) that to morrowe you would breake three Lances with him: for if you delay it till the day of battaile, hard∣ly shall you approue your selues each against other, according to his honourable desire. Trompet answered Amadis, I haue long since heard of this which thou tellest me, and of thy Masters earnest desire, and doe also verily beleeue, that it proceeds from true magnanimity of spirit in him. Now although there is great difference betweene my actions, and the fame noysed abroad of mee: yet I am well contented, that hee should holde such reputation of me, as he doth, and knowing him to bee no lesse then he is, I could rather wish, that his proofe of mee might be in some such place, where hee might receiue more seruice by me. My Lord, said the Trompet, he well re∣members, how matters past be∣tween you and Madraque, the Giant of the Sadde Island, and albeit they concerned him somewhat neare as a sonne to a father: yet being ad∣uertised of the curtesie you exten∣ded towards him, hee reputeth you rather worthie of commendation, then any manner of reuenge. So this desire in him, of triall with you, is not for any enui he beares to your iust reputation: but only thus, that if hee happen to preuaile, hee shall winne that which by no meanes else he could attaine vnto. If hee sstaine the oyl, ye h will holde his e the lesse; the worlde beeing so ∣ently informed of your maniod victories, not only against the ery toutest and strongest Giants, but likewise, against most cruell and su∣pernaturall beasts. Depart then, re∣plied Amadis, and to morrow mor∣ning, thy Master shall fide me here ready on this plaine, to accomplish his pleasure, and so the Tromper re∣turned thence. before we passe any further, I wil reporte the principall cause, which mooued this great Prince Gasqui∣lan, to trauaile through so many countries, onely to approoue him selfe against Amadis. In the third Booke of our History hath been re∣lated to you, that he was the sone of Madraque, and of the sister to Laucine, King of Swetia, which Laucine dying without heires: Cos∣quilan beeing knowne in many pla∣ces, to bee one of the most gentle Knights that the worlde yeelded: was called by them of Swetia, and elected to bee their King. Af∣terward, he fell in loue with a yong and beautifull Princesse, named Pinela, who was both an heire and orphane, by death of her father and mother, and many lands & Seig∣neuries, bordering and adioyning to them of Gasquilin, belonged to her as her right and inheritance. His extreamity in affection to her, prouoked him to vndertake many bolde aduentures, which hee worthily effected, not without great perill to his person: neuerthlsse, kindnesse in her was but coole to him, in regarde hee was deriued from a Giant so proude and cruell, as by no meanes thee would accept him for her husband, notwithstan∣ding his most earnest and honest pursue. Whereat Gasqil grow∣ing
discontented, threatned intire ine and detestation, both of her and hers: which one of her faithfull subiects fearing, aduised her to vse a little dissimulation, and to temporise hereon so well as shee could. She lent such liking to this perswasion, that at one time (a∣mong many other) Gasquilan vsing his wonted opportunities, with goodly discourse & protestations, as louers in like afflictions can ea∣sily performe: she as a Lady dis∣creet and quicke of apprehension, answered him in this manner. My Lord, seeing Heauen hath endowed mee with such riches as I now enioy; no dread of danger, or of death it selfe, can make mee falsifie the promise I made to my deceased father: which was, neuer to marrie, but vpon one especiall condition. What was that? sayde Gasquilan. I solemnely swore (quoth she) to him before hee died, neuer to ioyne in marriage, but with the best Knight in the world, if it lay in my power to winne him; and although he were neuer so poore, yet I would haue no other hus∣band. Hereupon I made diligent inquisition, who might be this on∣ly man of men, and haue receiued credible intelligence, that Amadis de Gaule cannot be seconded: wher∣fore, if you dare make hazard of your manhoode, and vanquish him, you shall enioy your earnest desire. This only occasion incited Gasqui∣lan, to vndertake those two voya∣ges, which hee made into Great Brittaine, presuming so much vpon his valour, that hee should haue the vpper hand of Amadis. The Trompet beeing come backe to Gasquilan, declared vnto him the whole answer of his message: wher∣at Gasquilan was so ioyfull, that he deliuered these wordes so lowde, as all by might easily heare him. Be∣fore God, Trompet, I would not now wish to be master of the fairest Citie in Gaule, in exchange of this long looked for happinesse: for I hope to make it apparantly known, that I am a little more worthie then hee. So, imagining the time too ouer-long, the next morning, by breake of day, hee put on a gray Armour, couered with golden Griffons, holding a bleeding hart in their tallons, as testimony of the torments he endured in loue. Then comming before the Emperor and King Lisuart, hee earnestly entrea∣ted them to come see how he could abate the glory of Amadis. And if (quoth hee) I vn-horse him not at the first encounter, I am content to beare no Armes for a whole year together. But the Emperour who had sufficient experience of Ama∣dis, was of another minde, and therfore ordered the greater part of his power in forme of battaile, as well for his owne security: as doub∣ting some sudden surprisall, vnder the colour of this particuler Com∣bate; and the like did Agraies on the other side. The two auantguards being thus each before other, Amadis hauing put on a green Armour, thickely powdred with Lions of gold (euen such another as he wore when hee came to his Oriana at Mirefleure, at his returne from the poore Rocke, when hee slew the two Giants, Fa∣mongomad and Basigant his sonne) called for Gandalin, and saide vnto him. Gandalin, seeing thou wilt not haue thy knighthood from a Kings hand: goe Arme thy selfe, and be∣fore I enter into this Combate, I will perform what I haue promised thee. So Gandalin departed, and soon after returned againe to Ama∣dis, who attended there for him,
and taking him by the hand, con∣ducted him to King Perion, spea∣king thus. Sir, heere is Gandalin, who desires to haue his order of knighthood. wherefore most hum∣bly I desire you, in regarde hee will needs receiue it of me; you would be pleased to gird on his sword, that hee may remember (so long as hee liues) the honour you gaue him. With these wordes, hee presented him one of those Swordes, which Queen Menoressa had giuen him at Constintinople, and had remained in the custody of Durin, brother to the Damosell of Denmarke. Then gi∣uing him the accolade, and putting on his right spurre: the King next came, and girded on his Sword, & so he receiued this high honour, by the hands of the two best Knights in the world. At which time like∣wise, Bruneo did as much for Lasin∣de, whose Sword was girded on by Agraies. This being thus done, Amadis went forth of his troupes, because Gasquilan was attending for him vp∣on the plaine, and each of them ha∣uing a mighty strong launce placed in his rest: gaue the spurre to their horses, and met together with such violence, that their staues flew in shiers, and their heads and bodies encountred so mainely, as Gasqui∣lan was throwen forth of his saddle, lying along on the ground entraun∣ced, with the paine hee felt of his left arme, which was quite broken by his fall. And albeit Amadis was shrewdly shaken, in the shock, & his horse shouldred: yet hee made meanes to allight before his fall, & drawing forth his Sword, marched therewith against Gasquilan, who continued (as yet) so amazed, as he appeared not to moue a ioynt. Hereupon, the Emperour mis∣doubting that hee would haue smit∣ten off his head; caused  Harquebuziers to be dischaged at him, and two bold horsemen issued forth, with intent to surprise him: which Agraies well obseruing, sud∣denly rushed forth of his troupe, followed by diuerse of his friends, and while a little skirmish lasted, found meanes to remount Amadis againe. Then it fell to them that could doe best on both sides, for the vaunguards marched against each other, & the great Ordenance played without any intermission. In the meane space, Amadis hastened on the maine battaile, and the rere∣guarde, and caused Bruneo, to issue forth with three hundred horse, to charge a troupe of the Romaines, who defended six great Culuerins, which King Lisuart had placed neer at hand, and did much harme to the foot-men. But hee carried himselfe with such vndaunted courage, that hauing put the enemy in route, he became Master of that Artillery. By this time the two Armies had paced very neere, and beeing vpon the point of sight, Drummes and Trumpets sounded cheerfully, and the foot-men performing their of∣fice of seruice, marched on with their Pikes crossed, to resist the horse-mens entrance: while the Harquebuziers and Archers made two sharpe charges, wherein Que∣dragant was wounded in the left arme. But comming all to ioyne, the noyse exceeded admiration, to heare the breaking of Launces, Pikes and Halbardes, sounding like a great tempest of haile, falling on a house couered with tile or smooth slate. There might you haue seene many braue men ouerthrowen on the ground, some deadly wounded, others wallowing in their blood, dismembred of legges and armes: the fight continued long in this
dreadfull manner, before it could any way be discerned, whether side had the better or worse: for Floran rushing in vpon the Gaules, made such a slaughter among them, as he let not a stroake fall, but valued a life. While this bloody fury endured, Amadis and his troupes, charged the Emperours vauntguard, and when it came to the Launces brea∣king, Gandalin, who was one of the formost, met the brother to Arqui∣sill, and brake their Launces each on other, but the Romane was dis∣mounted. Now they entred pell mell, and they that had seen Agraies follow his businesse, would haue thought him to bee one of the best Knights in the worlde: for, before hee lost his Launce, hee vnhorsed foure of the Emperors best knights. And here was the fierce heat of the conflict, because the Emperours Harquebuziers, who were conduc∣ted by Arquisill thwarted the horse-men of Amadis: and but for Bran∣ful and Tiron, who came and acco∣sted them with their light horse, they had done them much more harme than they did. But they brake so violently vppon them, as they could no way charge them, but fell into disorder; albeeit Arquisill foūd meanes to rallie them againe in good manner. Agraies Landin, & Angriote d'E∣streueus being ioyned together, re∣sisted the Romanes with wonderfull boldnes, each man pretending vic∣tory to his side: and Amadis with some other Gaules, entred the midst of the presse, making such hauocke among them, as no man durst a∣bide before them. There they met with an, bastard brother to the Queene Saramira, and Constant de Rqu, who hauing yet their Lances whoe and ound, encountred A∣madis and Landin: but Landin was vn-horsed by Constant, and Flamyan by Amadis, for he gaue him such a powerfull stroake, which piercing quite through him, made him tum∣ble from his horse dead on the ground. Then mette together the Romanes and Gaules, to succour and helpe such as were ouerthrowne, and beleeue it for a certaintie, that many lost their liues in this hotte charge, by reason the Emperour came in vpon them, accompanied with many noble Knights. But hee found his purpose soone disapoin∣ted, and before his face, the Gouer∣nour of Calabria was slaine by Ama∣dis, who perceiuing Agraies and Angriote to bee on foote in the throng, and in very great danger: laboured so manfully, as he quick∣ly gaue them succour, by the helpe of Gandalin, Lasinde, Granate of the Dreadfull Dale, and Bruneo. Hereupon, the Gaules, who were halfe spent and tired, tooke heart a∣gaine, and then began the Romanes to dismay, falling into disorder, and flying directly toward King Lisuart, who followed the maine battalion: and but for Floyan, and some other of the nobler spirits, who maintai∣ned the assault (holding out coura∣giously euery way, while the foot-men returned againe to battaile) not a man had escaped aliue. For Quedragant and his squadron char∣ged them so violently, as they had not so much leasure as to bethinke themselues what to doe. But when they saw the power of King Lisuart so neare, they held out the battaile: against the forces of King Perion, the troupes of Gastiles, and the Ar∣chers of Libeo, playing hottly still on them. Now began night to draw neare, and King Lisuart well peceiued, that retrait was more commodious
for him, then enduring the fight any further, especially that day, where∣fore, without attending the other powers, he withdrew the head of his Armie into his fort, and King Peri∣on continued impalled in his camp, euen where the conflict had beene maintained, the watch and guardes on either side well apointed, inten∣ding the next day to fight for victo∣ry. But about two houres within night, a Trompet belonging to the Emperour and King Lisuart, was taken by the scoutes, as he came to craue truce for foure and twenty houres onely, which was yeelded vnto. CHAP. XVIII. What order was taken by both the Armies, for further proceeding in the fight, the time of truce being ended. AFter that the truce was expired, the two Campes, beganne to march each against the other; and because both the vantguardes had endured much trouble on the day of battell, they were appointed to the ree∣guard, and the maine battaile went in their place. Thus both the Kings, Perion and Lisuart, were before, and after that the Artillery had long time played, and done great harme on either side, the band of foote, conducted by Norandell, came to encounter them ledde by Gastiles. Here now began a wonderfull con∣flict, & so many worthie men were slaine, as it was most lamentable to beholde. For, as King Lisuart mar∣ched on the one side, with intent to enclose the battaile of Gastiles: hee met with the Archers ledde by Libeo, who making no spare of their cunning, their arrowes flew so thicke in the aire, that they seemed like a swarme of Bees, fledde from their hie, to seeke their abyding some where else. By meanes where-of, many of their enemies were sore wounded, and their horses shrewd∣ly endangered, King Perion follow∣ing after them with his troupes. Now began the Drummes and Trumpets to sound chearefully on each side, and the noyse was so ter∣rible, as if they had heard the hea∣uens thunder: for some cryed Gaul, Gaule, others Spaine, Scotland, Ire∣land, Bohemia, and so euery man ex∣tolling his owne countrie, as the vsually doe in such warlike actions. But when they came to fight with their Swords, neuer was seeene so many horses wounded as then, be∣cause euery one stroue who should most flanke and hough them, and the dust rose so aboundantly, as the ayre became to be darkened there∣by. Then Amadis, who led the bat∣taile, set onward, because hee was aduertised, that the Emperour pro∣ceeded on mainely with his troups: whereupon hee sent to tell Quedra∣gant, that he should diuide his foot, and to Brian and Sadomon, to march neare with their supplies, if the o∣ther should be distressed, and that Branfill, with his light horse, should charge on the baggage belonging to King Lisuart. On the other side, the Emperor, who had receiued intelligence, what mighty harme the Archers did in the vantguarde, to King Lis∣uarts men, and fearing least they
could not long hold out, against the sharpe charges of King Perion: sent to Arquisill, that he should accoste them, & that Constant with his Har∣quebuziers, should come vpon the rere of their enemies. Notwithstan∣ding, they were much deceiued in their hope, because instantly they saw the maine battaile, conducted now by Amadis, so neare vpon them: that they were constrained to flock together, only to maintain the present fight, and ioyned soon after with the two rereguardes. For Madacan, who had executed his en∣terprise so farre as hee could, gaue out publiquely, that the Romanes were in flight: and this he spake, be∣cause hee saw a troupe, of horse is∣sue forth of the rereguarde, which Cildadan had sent out, for the res∣cue of their baggage. Madacan obseruing this, and that his troupe was not strong enough: they all re∣tired with a maine gallop, so that the very terrour thereof, brake the foot which was led by Brandoynas. And now both the Armies entred fight pell mell, performing such admirable deedes of armes, as no men possible could doe more, and furie on both sides so mightily en∣creased, that thereon ensued an in∣incredible slaughter. During this conflict, Brian, who was followed by his Spaniards, met with Arban, King of Norwales, and they charged one another so vio∣lently, as they little failed from be∣ing vnhorsed. Then came King Lis∣uart with Grumedan, who carried his Ensigne, and other Knights of Great Brittaine seconded them, who brought Brian into such a straite: as if hee had not speedily been supplied by Agraies & Flore∣stan, hee had been taken, but their succour came so conueniently, as their enemies were glad to recoile. Neuerthelesse K. Lisuart had ouer-thrown Dragonis, & wold haue slain him: but that Agraies steping be∣tween thē, cried out aloud. Disho∣norable King, turne thy face to me, for thou shalt die by the hand of A∣graies, who hates thee more, then any man liuing. Thus speaking, he gaue him such a powerfull stroke on the helmet, as made fire to spar∣kle in his eyes, and leauing his sword hanging at a chaine fastened about his arme; caught him fast by the middle, and so strictly, as hee had almost borne him downe to the ground. But King Lisuart likewise got as fast holde on him, and each stroue manfully against the other, who should haue the best aduantage of his enemy, by cleane strength. As thus they contended toge∣ther, King Perion chanced to spy them, and beeing followed by Lan∣din, Florestan, and a great troupe of his people: drew neare to helpe Agraies, and to take King Lisuart, if hee could. Pursuing his enter∣prise, hee met with Giontes, Grume∣dan, and a great many more, who charged him very fiercely. And here you may be well assured, that there was not only sharpe assailing, but likewise as manfull defending: some beeing grieuously wounded, others slaine outright, and many troden to death among the horses feet. For King Cildadan came fresh∣ly in vpon them, with a great num∣ber of his Irishmen, and Gastiles al∣so so well accompanied, as heere now was the maine violence of the battaile, because both the horse and foot were mingled together. Ne∣uerthelesse, King Lisuarts side foūd themselues sorely oppressed, by rea∣son that Amadis, Lasinde, Ganda∣lin, Balays, Landin, and diuerse o∣thers their followers, charged them
in the rere, and had driuen them to flight; but for Floyan, who shoul∣dred vppe the re-enforce of the Ro∣manes, by him freshly rallied toge∣ther againe. Notwithstanding, this hotte resi∣stance lasted not long, for Amadis meeting with Floyan, slew him in the Emperours presence: who hoping to reuenge his death, ranne in vp∣on Amadis, who knowing him well enough, & redoubling his strength, only in the hatefull spleene he bore him, as the Emperour lifted vp his arme, with intent to smite him on the head: Amadis aymed at him so directly, that hitting iust in the shoulder ioynt, hee parted it quite from his body, and the griefe therof was so violent to him, that instantly hee fell downe dead to the ground. By meanes whereof, the Romanes growing into great terrour and dis∣may, began to turne their backes, flying away so confusedly, as nei∣ther King Arban, or any other, be∣side, had power to stay them, what-soeuer good wordes they spake vn∣to them. Now did King Lisuart apparant∣ly perceiue, that Fortune stood not fauourable for him and his that day, and the losse of the battaile could not bee auoided: yet notwithstan∣ding, desiring rather to die with his sword in his fist, than to saue life by a shamefull flight, hee would needes enter in among the prease, but King Arban staying him, spake thus. Alas Sir, lose not your life desperately, and with your owne consent: Will you fight alone a∣gainst a whole Armie? doe you not see the Romanes in a confused dis∣order, and the most parte of our owne men discomfited? Oh let it please you to retire, and saue the rest, with whom wee may (at some other time) better deale with the enemy, then now we can doe. Wel knew King Lisuart that he spake no otherwise then true, wherefore, while his people retired, he & such as hee could best assure: remained still vpon the rere, defending them-selues against all pursute. Slender warrant of safety had this beene to him, or them, but for A∣madis, who foreseeing what dis∣content it would bee to Oria∣na, if the King her father should be vnterly foyled: said to King Pe∣rion. My Lord, our enemies flie, I pray you (without arther hazar∣ding our owne fortune) let vs con∣tent our selues with the honour wee haue already this day receiued: for if wee pursue on after him, darke night will ouertake vs, and it may bee, like desperate men in reuen∣ging their great losse, wee may fall into no meane danger. Leaue them then to their owne shame, and let vs retreat our owne men, that are ouer spent and wearie. Be it so an∣swered King Perion. How? said A∣grates, now that victory sweetely presents herselfe vnto vs, shall wee willfully refuse her? By God, deare Cosen, you are well worthie to be no better accounted of, then as fil∣ly Knight errant. Would you (re∣plied Amadis) haue your men mur∣der one another, for lack of others to fight withall? Is not the Sunne set, and night so neare, as if wee should holde on any further in fight, wee shall not knowe our ene∣mies from our friends: I pray you Sir, let vs rest thus satisfied. Well knew Agraies, to what end Amadis made this excuse: where∣fore, without vrging any further re∣ply, in great choller hee turned bri∣dle, and gallopt on the other side, because Amadis had caused retreate to be sounded. Then euery man fell backe and King Perions Armie en∣camped
in the same place where they had fought, as a signall of vic∣tory, hoping the next day to finish finally what they had begunne. But soon after, an Heralde came to de∣manded the the Emperours bodie, and another truce for foure daies, during which time they might bu∣ry their dead. It was consented vn∣to, contrary to the opinion of ma∣ny, but onely by the meanes of A∣madis. CHAP. XIX. Of the conference which King Lisuart had with the Romanes, after the fought battaile. And how the holy man Nascian, who had nourished Esplandian in his younger yeares, hearing of this warre, departed from his Hermitage, to come to the two Kings to make peace betweene them. THe truce confirmed, as formerly hath been said, King Lisuart gaue commande, that the Emperors body shold be brought, with the greatest mag∣nificence that could be deuised, and so to be placed in his owne Tent. Now because hee stood in some feare, that the Romanes would fight no more, because their chiefe com∣mander was dead: hee resolued to speake vnto them, as well to encou∣rage them, as to vnderstand how they were affected. Hereupon, the day following, hee sent to entreat Arquisill, that hee would conduct them in order of battaile, for their better apprehending what hee had to say vnto them. Whereunto Ar∣quisill gladly condiscended, and ha∣uing assembled them in a goodly meadow, King Lisuart came vnto them, and placing himselfe in the middle squadron, spake as follow∣eth. Honorable and worthie friends, you haue seene and experimented in these two encounters, how For∣tune hath showen herselfe our hea∣uie enemy: so that in bestowing her frownes on vs, shee triumphes in the death of my kinde brother, and your royall Master, besides many other valiant Knights, who by effects (in seeking reuenge on his enemies) were willing to finde what they sought for, because it was the very fairest experience they could make of their vertue, for gai∣ning the glory they haue aspired vnto. And for their better attai∣ning thereto, the hazard of their liues seemed as a matter of no mo∣ment vnto them: but that it was much more honourable, to die in defending themselues valiantly, thē to escape by a shamefull recoile. So that, to auoide falling into such a high dishonour, they rather gladly desired, by expressing the very greatest magnanimity of cou∣rage, to endure Fortune, then yeeld to feare. Nor doe I hereby vrge a∣ny taxation against them that haue escaped with life, knowing well, how worthily they haue all carried themselues: but rather to entreate them, that in preferring honour, before sorrow, for the losse of your friends & companions; you would essay (the truce being ended) to re∣uenge their misfortune, fighting couragiously against them, who swell in heart too proudly of their victory.
I am verily perswaded, that wee ought no lesse expose our selues to hazards and dangers, then if wee had preuailed against them, as they haue done against vs; nor to de∣clare any abatement of courage, ei∣ther in assayling them, or defending our selues, if fortune should con∣tinue her disfauour to vs. Conside∣ring, that if wee all die here, it is an immortall glory to vs, and a more honourable buriall then any man can wish for. For the whole earth in generall is the rightfull graue, wherein to interre the bo∣dies of men illustrious and famous, whose memories are not so well preserued by priuate inscriptions & epitaphes: as by their owne legit∣timate renowne, which extendeth and publisheth it selfe in the remo∣test nations, who doe more dis∣creetly consider in their soules, the height and aduancement of their courage, then the disaster which hath befallen them. For it hath bin vniuersally obserued, that negli∣gence, the fittest attendant for shame, is much more irkesome and distastefull to a man, that hath a found and entire minde: then any death whatsoeuer, happening to him by valour, with vnconquera∣ble hope of publike glory. All this confirmeth my beleefe (deare and worthie friends) that scorning to degenerate from your famous predecessors, you will per∣forme so much: that the world shall witnesse your great vertue and constancy, and that the death of your Prince, is not the stroke that strikes you all dead. Wherefore I desire you, to let mee vnderstand how you are addicted, to the end, that according to your resolution: I may set in order such affaires, as are needfull for my selfe. Assuring you in the worde of a King, that were I sure to dy a thousand deaths: yet will I not depart from hence, till I see the end of mine enemies, or they of me. These words so exalted the harts of the hearers, that they answered as with a common consent; they were now more willing to fight then euer, for which King Lisuart thanked them most hartily. All this beeing done, hee gaue order, that the Emperours body should be car∣ried to the Monastarie of Lubania, vntill better opportunity should serue, to performe such sollemne obsequies & funerall pompe, as in like cases is required. Then he sent his Chirurgions, to haue dilligent care of the wounded, to whom he gaue great gifts, and promises; as also to many Captaines of the Ar∣mie. And this hee did not without great cause, for euery mans hope (next to the fauour of his Prince) of honest eempence for his pains, makes hin Noft-times) fight and aduenture ▪ life the more boldly, as now all these men were resolued to doe, at their next encounter. But God in whose hands all things doe consist, ordered matters farre otherwise, as forthwith shall be de∣clared amply to you. The fame of the marriage of O∣riana, with the Emperour of Rome, had spread it selfe in so many pla∣ces: that the good olde Hermit, who nourished Esplandian in his infant daies, had intelligence ther∣of, especially of the Kings subiects dislike, in compelling his daugh∣ter against her will, to vndergoe a businesse so displeasing to her, and lastly, what succour was sent to Amadis in the Enclosed Isle, wher∣upon, two great Armies were met in field together. Here I must al∣so tell you, that hee well knew the successe of their loue, the estate and
conscience of Oriana, how she and Amadis had promised marriage ech to other, vnder which contracted couenant, Esplandian was begot∣ten, and therefore she could not be giuen in marriage to any other but our Lord would be highly displea∣sed therewith. For this cause, hee concluded to trauaile to the Enclo∣sed Isle, to obtaine leaue & licence of her, to acquaint King Lisuart with so much as hee knew. Here-upon, so ouer-spent with yeares, as hee was, hee mounted on his Asle, and accompanied onely with ano∣ther good man, bequeathed him-selfe to trauaile, and ariued at the Pallace of Apolidon, immediately after King Perions departure: wher∣with he was not a little disconten∣ted, fearing hee should not execute his enterprise so speedily, but that the two Armies would preuent him. Oriana was quickelod▪ quainted with his comming, aee enter∣tained most humanely: but she was much amazed, why he should vn∣detake so long a iourney, and at a time so vnbefitting, hee being aged aboue three score yeares: wherein shee being desirous to be resolued, and taking him alone with her into her Cabinet, falling into teares, thus she spake. Ah my good fa∣ther, it is much worse with menow, then when I first saw you, yet hea∣uen (I hope) will send mee com∣fort. Madame, answered Nascian, for this cause onely did I leaue my small Hermitage, hauing heard, that the Emperor of Rome, and the King your father, marched towards these limits, to bid battaile to A∣madis and others with him. Now, foing what inconueniences will ensue, if their intent growe to execution, as well by the slaughter of many, who must needes perish in such a purpose, as also by the haous offence to heauen, be∣cause, as I am enformed, this cru∣ell warre began about your mar∣riage to Patin: I trauailed hither to you, to vnderstand the truth of all, and to esay f it bee possible) to pacifie these troubles, to the glo∣ry of God, and to the honour and profit of his people. For you know Madame, that I a not ignorant in some secrets of your conscience, and what sinne you shall commit, in beeing giuen as wife to any o∣ther, then to him who already is your owne, as heretofore you haue disclosed to me. Pawsing a while, and giuing a great sigh, thus hee proceeded a∣gaine. But deare Madame, because I receiued this secret in confession: it is not lawfull for me to reueale it, without your owne good will and consent. Wherefore matters standing on such tearmes as they doe: mee thinkes you ought to be well aduised, and to compasse some meanes, whereby the King your fa∣ther may be acquainted, with the promise past between you and A∣madis, to the end that hee may no further sinne thorough ignorance. And so much the rather, because you are now in such a place, where he is not able to do you any harme. But if you should happen into his power, as heretofore you haue bin: yet you ought to preferre the feare of God, before any other respect whatsoeuer, although it extend to his displeasure, which I hope well to moderate, if you will permit me to speake with him. Alas father, said Oriana, in you only lieth my remedy and comfort: doe therefore what shall please you, and entiate our Lord to respect mee in pittie. Madame, replyed Nascian, I am as∣sured hee will helpe you, for hee
listeneth to any sinner, that turnes to him with a contrite heart, and is sorrowfull for offending him. And by his fauour also, grace will be granted me, to finish the taske I haue vndertaken, both to his ser∣uice, and your contentment. And because the two Armies are neare to one another, and I feare their meeting, before I shall bee come to them: may it please you to let mee part hence this day, least some inconuenience may happen by my negligence, and the fruite I expect by my labour, perish not through slothfulnesse. Father said Oriana, no doubt but God will be your guide, and I earnestly entreat you, that if you see young Esplan∣dian: to preuaile so much by your endeauour, as to bring him hither at your returne. Then shee com∣manded dinner for him, and after hee had refreshed himselfe: hee mounted on his Asse, ryding di∣rectly towards King Lisuart. His a∣ged trauaile was not so speedy, but that the two Armies had fought twice together, according as you haue already heard, and hee came thither on the day, before the se∣cond truce was finished. As hee passed by the Campe, he saw (on euery side) the interment of many slaughtered bodies, whereat hee was so grieued, that falling into teares, and lifting vp his eyes and hands to heauen, hee said. O my Lord God, for the honour of thine owne great name, I humbly be∣seech thee, to take pittie on this people, and grant mee grace, that I may pacifie this great disorder. Passing on further, hee came neare to the Tent of King Lisuart, who quickly espied him, and immedi∣ately knew him: whereupon hee went to welcome him, for he held this man of holy life in high esteem, and well considered, that (but vp∣on some great occasion) he would not haue left his Hermitage; & take so great iourney to him, whereup∣on as hee embraced him, hee said. Good father, you are welcome, then taking him by the hand, he led him into his pauillion, and seating him by himselfe in a chaire of vel∣uet, hee commanded all to depart, and leaue them two alone together, and afterwardes fell into this dis∣course. Holy father, I know you haue not vndertaken so tedious a tra∣uaile, and ill agreeing with your age, but vpon some vrgent neces∣sity, wherein I humbly desire you to resolue me. You haue great rea∣son Sir, answered Nascian, to con∣ceiue so of me, for vndoubtedly ex∣treamity of yeares, and the condi∣tion whereunto it hath pleased our Lord to call mee, may well excuse me from beeing seene among men of blood. Neuerthelesse, conside∣ring the harme that may ensue, I haue not feared the danger of my person, as hoping to performe a seruice acceptable to God, and wholesome to your soule. Let me then tell you Sir, that being (some few daies since) in the Hermitage, whereunto happy chance was your guide, when you and I conferred together, concerning the most strange nourishing of Esplan∣dian: I vnderstood the occasion of this warre, attempted by you a∣gainst Amadis and his friends. Yet am I well assured, that you cannot accomplish what you would doe, namely, marrie my Ladie your daughter to the Emperour of Rome: by which enterprise, many grie∣uous mischances haue already hap∣pened, not onely because it is not agreeable, to the greatest and mea∣nest of your kingdome, as many
times already hath beene told you: but for some other reason Sir be∣side, concealed from you, yet ma∣nifest to mee, and against which (by Gods lawe) you cannot con∣trarie. Knowe then Sir, that Ma∣dame Oriana your daughter, is al∣ready vnited in marriage to ano∣ther, as heauen hath appointed, and stands well pleased to haue it so. The King beeing much amazed, to heare the olde man speake in this manner: coniectured immedi∣ately, that weakenesse of braine be∣got this kinde of language, & that hee was troubled in his vnderstan∣ding, or else had beene misinfor∣med of that which he spake, where-upon hee said vnto him. How fa∣ther? my daughter was neuer mar∣ried to my knowledge, neither did I euer purpose to giue her to any other, then to the Romane Empe∣rour, to whome I promised her, accounting it for her honour and benefit. And God is my witnesse, that I neuer intended to dis-inherit her, as many haue inconsiderately immagined: but only to combine alliance with so great a Lord, by meanes whereof, he and I so vni∣ted together, Christian faith might be the more augmented. And ther∣fore my intention beeing iust, mee thinkes I should not be therin bla∣med. Sir, answered the Hermite, that which I haue tolde you, concer∣ning some matters hidden from you, yet to mee apparant: I will presently declare vnto you, for from none other then my selfe can you know them. Vnderstand then, my Lord, that the selfe same day, when (by your command) I came to the Forrest, where, for more delight of the Ladies then present with you, your Tents were erected for view of the sporte (I knowe not whe∣ther you remember it, or no:) I brought you young Esplandian, who presented you the Lionesse, that gaue him suck at the first: The same day, the Princsse Oriana your daughter was confessed by me, & tolde mee in her confession, that she had promised mariage to Ama∣dis de Gaule, at such time as he de∣liuered her from the Enchanter Archalaus, to whom you had giuen her, a little before that the Damo∣sell (by whom you were enchanted) had brought your state and person into the greatest danger that could bee possible, from which Galaor freed you. And beleeue it to be ve∣ry likely, that our Lord himselfe, gaue consent to the mariage, for Esplandian is the issue thereof, and of him, Vrganda the Vnknowen, foretolde many maruailes, as you your selfe doe very well know. Now, in my poore iudgement, you should not be displeased there-with, considering, that Amadis is the sonne of a King, and accoun∣ted (in all places) to be one of the best and most gracious Knights in all the world. I would aduise you Sir, that in shewing your selfe to be such as you euer haue beene: you should defend the honour and con∣science of your daughter, and ma∣king an end of this warre, call her home again to you, & vse her here∣after as reason requireth. In so do∣ing, our Lord will be well pleased with you, who else will (doubtlesse) bee offended with you, for the ef∣fusion of so much blood, which you haue caused to be shedde vpon no occasion. When the King had all this while listned to this discourse, he shewed himselfe to be very pensiue, and at last saide. Good father, is it pos∣sible that my daughter should bee
married to Amadis? Yes truely re∣plied Nascian, hee is her husband, and Esplandian is your grandchilde. O God (quoth the King) how ill hath it been for mee, that I could not know this matter till now? vp∣on my faith, many good Knights had yet beene liuing, which now (to my no little griefe) are dead. Alas father, why could not you sooner haue reuealed this? I might not doe it, answered the Hermite, for it was tolde mee in confession, and if now I haue made it knowne to you, thinke it is done by such permission, as I receiued from the Princesse your daughter, for other∣wise, you had neuer heard it from mee. But she is therewith well con∣tented, as well for the clearing of her soule: as also to take away all occasion from you, of further sin∣ning herein through ignorance. At that very instant, meere con∣ceit in the King, presented before the eyes of his soule, the seuerall seruices hee had receiued by Ama∣dis and his ked, and such they were, as hee had not then beene li∣uing, but only by them, hauing so many times olpen him in very se∣rious affaires. Desert in Amadis pleaded iustly for his daughter, and a greater gift, if hee could bestow it on him; and so much the rather, because the Emperor (to whom he had promised her) was dead, and beside, Vrganda had tolde him ma∣ny wonders, concerning Esplandi∣: but aboue all the rest, that hee should be the cause, of perpetuall peace between him and Amadis, as euen already (in a manner) hee saw performed, and hauing discoursed all this in his minde, thus hee an∣swered Nascian. Father, albeit I had set downe my rest for death, & all mine with me, or to haue the vp∣per hand in this warre: yet seeing how matters haue happened, I will follow your counsell, and I entreat you most affectionately, to worke so well with Amadis: that hee may listen to peace, which (for my part) I put into your hands, to the end, that you may hereafter testifie before God, with what dutie I sub∣mit my selfe in this case. These wordes were so pleasing to the good old Hermite, as, wee∣ping for meere ioy, hee fell before the Kings feet, saying. O most hap∣py Prince, the Lord almighty quite you for this kindnesse, and blesse you with long and prosperous life. The King taking him by the hand, & raising him vp, said. Father, I wil perform what I haue promised you, without any manner of reuocation. Neuerthelesse, I would haue al men to know, that neither feare, or de∣fect of courage, hath hereunto con∣strained mee: but reason only, and in such nature as you haue reuea∣led to mee. Wherefore, it shall be fitting for you, to go into King Pe∣rons Campe, before the truce bee fully ended, to the ende, that ac∣cording to what you shall certifie me, I may stand vpon my guard. Sir, said Nascian, if God so please, I will neither eate nor drinke, till I haue spoken with Amadis, and let me entreate leaue for my depar∣ture, because occasion now frankly offers herselfe to me. Hauing thus spoken, the King & hee returned to the Knights, where they found Esplandian, newly there ariued from Queene Brisena, who had sent him from Vindilisore to King Lisuart only to vnderstand of his health, whom when Nascian be∣held, hee knew him presently: yet wondred to see him of so taule sta∣ture, & very neare ready to vndergo Armes, which made him (with meer ioy) runne and embrace him. But
the young gentleman was much a∣mazed, to see the olde man so won∣derfull kinde to him, hauing whol∣ly forgotten him, and therefore blushed strangely: notwithstan∣ding, soone after, he both remem∣bred the Hermite and his hermi∣tage, and falling on his knees be∣fore him, kissed his hand, when the olde man folding him in his armes, said. Beloued childe of God, bles∣sed be the houre of thy birth, and praised bee the name of our Lord, for prospering thee to such estate wherein I now see thee. During this discourse, the stan∣ders by were much amazed, to see this holy man vse Esplandian so lo∣uingly, and the King himselfe, be∣but newly aduertised, that hee was grandfather to him: mooued with a fatherly affection, felt such ioy in his soule, as neuer at any time hee receiued more. So that the hatred which he formerly bare to Amadis and his friends: became suddenly changed into amity extraordinary, and hee demanded of the youth, from whence he came. Esplandian, well enstructed by nature, kissing a packet of Letters in his hand, hum∣bly presented them to the King, an∣swering thus. Sir, the Queene my Mistresse sent mee to you, as there more at large you may be certified. Then the King opened the letters, wherein (among other matters) shee earnestly entreated him: that by all meanes hee would listen to peace, if hee might doe it with his honour. After hee had ouer-read the Letters, hee shewed them to Nascian, saying, Beholde good fa∣ther, it seems that my Queen knows already, what is intended betweene you and me. Sir, said the Hermite, shee counselleth you wisely, and if God be so pleased, that which shee so earnestly desireth, shall bee put in execution, before this yong gen∣tleman returnes to her againe. Wherefore, let mee craue of your Maiesty, to let him goe along with mee in companie, to the end, that during my trauaile, I may conuerse with him the more easily. Let it be so then, answered the King, for it is my will, that hee shall not leaue you, so long as you would haue him with you. The Hermite most hum∣bly thanked the King, and present∣ly mounted on his Asse, as Esplan∣dian did on his horse, attended on∣ly by Sergill his companion, who had come along thither with him. So they departed thence, taking the way towards King Perion, and all that while, the good olde man conferred with Esplandian, euen till they were ariued at the watch. There they were stayed, to knowe where∣fore they came, and what they de∣manded: but when they vnder∣stood, that Nascian came to speake with Lord Amadis, they conducted them both to his Tent, and there presented them vnto him. Here you must consider, that he had ne∣uer before seene the reuerend olde man, and therefore knew not what he should thinke, or what businesse hee might haue with such a person. Looking likewise on Esplandian, he had as little knowledge of him: al∣beit hee had formerly spoken to him, on the same day, when he com∣bated the Romanes, on the behalfe of faire Grasinda, & when he (being then very young) begged the liues of the two Knights, that else had been slaine by Amadis. But Que∣dragant, who had taken better no∣tice of him, when hee met him at his last returne from Great Brit∣taine, went and embraced him, say∣ing. Faire Sir, you desired me (and Brian also) not long since, to doe your commendations to the Greek
Knight; which wee accordingly performed, and here he is himselfe, to iustifie that wee failed not there∣in. These wordes gaue assured testi∣mony to Amadis, that hee to whom Quedragant spake, was his sonne, which made him feele inwardly in∣estimable ioy. And then the young Gentleman came and did him reuerence, not as a sonne to his fa∣ther, beeing yet ignorant of him: but as to the onely Knight of the world, & by whom he had hope to haue his knighthood, so conceu ed in him, on the very same day hee combated the Emperours Knights. Notwithstanding, the differences happening between the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and them of Great Brittain, raised a wounderfull doubt in him, that he should not attaine to his intention. Then Amadis em∣bracing him, demanded if King Lis∣uart had granted leaue for his com∣ming to him. My Lord, quoth he, this good olde father Nascian, will acquaint you with the reason of his comming to you. Obserue here, that Amadis had often heard of this Hermite, who was reputed generally, for a most holy man of life: wherefore, going to him, hee said. Father, I pray you pardon mee, for I knew you not at your entrance: but now I vnder∣stand more of you, and the honour that is due to you by desert. Ho∣nour (replied the Hermit) be giuen to God only, I am his poore hum∣ble seruant, who (in his feare) de∣sires to speake alone with you in se∣cret, if it shall please you but to heare me. Yes on my faith, answe∣red Amadis. And so, taking him by the hand, they went aside by themselues, and Nascian began in this manner with him. Sonne, before you vnderstand the cause, which hath mooued mee to come see you, I would set be∣fore your eyes, the great obligati∣ons wherein you are indebted to our Lord: to the ende, that you may henceforth encline your selfe, to do such things, as are best plea∣sing to him. I make no doubt, but am well assured, you haue often heard, how in the very first daies of your life, you were forsaken of all friends, and giuen ouer to the mer∣cie of the Sea, in a matter of small defence, and without any other guarde but God: by whose good∣nesse, you fell into their hands, who afterwardes gaue you nourishment, euen vntil you came to be a Knight, and the most compleate knowne at this day. For our Lord hath indu∣d you with strength, to gaine the maistery of many Giants, Monsters, Tyrants, and most cruell beasts, whereby your renowne hath ex∣tended it selfe, into all partes of the worlde. Now, seeing he hath enriched you with so many great graces, mee thinkes it is no more then reason: that you should ac∣knowledge him for your soueraign Lord, and labour in thankefulness to him, by humbling your selfe be∣fore his face, for otherwise, all the fauours hee hath bestowen vpon you, will turne but to your shame and disgrace. Sonne, you see how olde and de∣crepit I am, nature (almost) decai∣ed in mee: Notwithstanding, I haue not feared, to vndertake so long a iourney to you, because I heard (euen in mine owne poore Hermitage) the discord betweene you and King Lisuart, with whom I haue lately spoken, and found him to be such a man, as a good Prince, and minister of God ought to bee, and ready (if nothing keep you to the contrary) to listen to peace,
which (me thinkes) you ought not to refuse, as well for the quiet of your conscience, as for the safety of your person. And to the end, that you may make no disguising of your affections: let me assure you, that I know more of your most intimate affaires, then you imagine I doe, for Madame Oriana (vnder the seal of confession) hath tolde mee a chiefe secret, concerning you both. When Amadis heard him speake so plainely, hee knew well enough, that he spake nothing but the truth, wherefore hee thus answered. Fa∣ther, if I could serue my God, ac∣cording to his graces and mercies bestowed on mee; I might well e∣steeme my selfe the most happie Knight in the worlde. But, beeing a grieuous sinner, as I am, prefer∣ring (too often) mine owne plea∣sure before his glory: I must needs faile, as other men doe, to my no little griefe. Yet I hope (knowing mine owne defects) to behaue my selfe better then heretofore I haue done. Humbly beseeching you, good father, not to feare, or defer in telling me, what you best thinke I ought to doe, that may bee most acceptable to him, for I will there∣in obey you, to my vttermost pow∣er. Ah my good sonne (quoth he) you do enough in taking this whol∣some way: whereby I hope to bee your guide, not only for the tran∣quility of your countrie, but also for the good of many soules. Then he recounted to him, how hee had trauelled to the Enclosed Isle, where hee had conuersed with Oriana, and by her consent, was sent to King Lisuart, and acquain∣ted him with all hee had in charge: especially, the troth-plight marri∣age of them both, the issue where-of, was Esplandian. And beleeue me childe, quoth the Hermite, the King hath heerein carried himselfe so vertuously, and takes all in such good part; that if you fall not off, I hope to vnite a perpetuall alliance betweene you. Now you may diuine, whether Amadis heard these tydings gladly, or no: but I dare assure you, they were so welcome to him, as hee had no power to dissemble his inward ioy, but presently returned this an∣swere to the Hermite. If it shall please the King to accept me as his sonne, I promise you (good father) that hee shall finde me so tractable to him, as I will be diligent in do∣ing him any seruice. There remai∣neth no more then, replied the Her∣mite, but that you both may speake together: therefore aduise with your selfe, both how and when it may most conueniently bee done. Let me tell you, answered Amadis, I would haue you first, go to King Perion my father, and tell him the cause of your comming to me: like∣wise your owne opinion, that king Lisuart will now accept those of∣fers, which lastly were made to him in Great Brittaine (on our be∣halfe) by Quedragant and Brian de Moniaste, concerning the Princesse Oriana, if they might be once more tendered to him. Say moreouer, you are well assured, that hee shall finde him reasonable, and a Prince of peace, euen as any other what-soeuer in the world: And you may tell him, that you haue spoken with me, but I haue referred all to his disposition. For the honour of God, said the good olde man, I pray you (without any longer de∣laying) to let me be brought where hee is. Father, replied Amadis, my selfe therein will serue as a guide to you, and for so good an occa∣sion. Vpon these tearmes, they went
instantly to King Perion, who being aduertised of Nascians comming, came to welcome him: but behol∣ding Esplandian with him, he could not guesse who hee should be, on∣ly hee appeared to be a very good∣lie creature, as any he had euer loo∣ked on in his life, wherefore he de∣maunded of the Hermite, whether he were his son, or no? Sir (quoth hee) hee is partly mine, as beeing a foster father to him in his younger yeares, and our Lord bestowed him on me (almost) miraculously. It is very true, answered the King, if this be hee, to whom the Lionesse gaue sucke at his beginning, as I haue often heard, and of whom, Vrganda the Vnknowen hath foretolde many wounders: and among the rest, that he shal be the cause of planting peace and amity between King Lis∣uart and my sonne Amadis, which I pray God indu him with grace to doe. And beleeue mee, seeing such faire fruit is to fal from his for∣tune, hee well deserues to be both beloued and esteemed. In truth answered the Hermite, this is hee of whom you speake, and when you haue further knowledge of him, you will affect him more then you ima∣gine, as at better leasure, I shal here∣after tell you. Then hee called Esplandian, and commanded him to doe reuerence to the King: when the young Gen∣tle man, setting his knee to the ground, would haue kissed the Kings hand, but hee tooke him in his armes, saying. Gentle Sir, you are so faire and vertuously quallifi∣ed: that such as see you, or haue e∣uer heard of you, doth both loue and highly esteeme you. And I am perswaded, you will proue so wor∣thie a man, that Knighthood were very desertfully bestowed vpō you. Esplandian hearing himselfe so cō∣mended, began to grow somewhat bashfull thereat: and perceiuing the King to blush likewise, desired to know of the Hermite, if he could tell whose sonne hee was. Sir, said Nascian to the King, this young man (as yet) knoweth not any thing concerning his owne demand, and as for my selfe, I am very certaine, that hee hath neither father or mo∣ther, from whom (as yet) hee hath receiued any great fauours. Neuer∣thelesse, our Lord hath hitherto pre∣serued him, and gaue him me (at the first) to loue and instruct him, as mine owne childe. At these wordes, the King began to conceiue, that hee would not conferre any further with him be∣fore so many by-standers, & there∣fore tooke him aside: but the Her∣mite changed his discourse, saying. I beseech you Sir to beleeue, that considering the condition whereto I haue been long time called, and so many aged yeares already ouer-gone me: I would not haue forsa∣ken my Cell, to bee seene among warres and contentions, had it not been, that my slacknes in so impor∣tant a businesse, might haue pro∣cured much euill, wherewith our Lord would haue been highly of∣fended. And his displeasure would not only haue extended it selfe to you, & the people assembled in both these Campes: but also to many o∣ther, vnskilfull in the discords be∣tweene you and King Lisuart, with whom I haue already conferred, & so well perswaded him to peace, as hee is ready both to listen there∣to, and to entertaine it, according as I haue imparted to Lord Amadis your sonne, who wholly referreth all to you. Therefore I desire you Sir, that preferring the good and tranquile estate of so many people, before priuate spleens and passions:
not to disdaine what is freely offe∣red you, and which you ought ra∣ther striue to purchase. Father, replied King Perion, God is my witnesse, what griefe I haue endured, for matters that are alrea∣die past, with the losse of so many worthie men, and how gladly I would haue gone another way, if King Lisuart would haue listened thereto. But hee alwaies carried so high a hand, as, notwithstanding all remonstrances made to him by our Ambassadours, especially in re∣guarde of Madame Oriana, whom hee sought to disinherite: he made no account of vs at all, presuming so much vpon himselfe, that by the ayde of the Romane Emperour, hee would ouer-run the whole worlde. By this meanes hee made refusall, not only to admit this difference to iustice; but likewise contemned all hearing thereof. Neuerthelesse, if hee will yet submit to rea∣son: I dare repose such trust in my followers, as they will bee ordered by mine aduice. I haue euermore descanted on this discourse, pro∣ceeding from no other occasion, but whereto hee stands bound by right of nature, and to his owne blood. So that, if hee will yet re∣peale the princesse his daughter, in∣to his former gracious fauour, and not marrie her to any other person, not onely to her, and his owne people, but to all them that know or heare thereof: wee will deliuer her to him, and continue his kinde friends, if hee bee as desirous as wee. Sir, answered the good old man, if God bee so pleased, all this will come to passe. Therefore, if you thinke it conuenient, elect two Knights on your behalfe, to deter∣mine the differences, where-about so many harmes haue alreadie hap∣pened: King Lisuart shall likewise nominate two other for him, and I standing in the midst between them will labour to ende all strife and contention. Bee it so, quoth the King. Sir, said Nascian, I will not sleep, before (I hope) to speed, with such successe, as the effects shall be answerable to your owne desire. Instantly hee tooke leaue of him and the rest, returning whence he came, to finish what he had begun. And presently King Perion sommo∣ned all the chiefe of his Armie to∣gether, speaking to them in this maner. Lords, & endeared friends, as we are bound to put our goods and persons in danger, not onely for the defence of our honour, but also to maintaine equity & iustice: so are wee likewise obliged, to set aside all hatred and passion, to re∣concile our selues with our ene∣mie: when (of himselfe) hee pro∣fers vs peace. For, although it can∣not be gaine-saied, but that the be∣ginning of warre may goe on, with∣out offence to God: yetnotwith∣standing, in the end, if through rash opinion, fantisie and want of know∣ledge, we estrange our selues from reason; that which (at the first) ap∣peared honest, conuerts it selfe into iniustice. And doe not thinke, that I vse these speaches to you without cause. Nascian, a holy Hermite (well knowen to the most part of you) came lately to mee, as you sawe, to practise peace be∣tweene vs and our enemie: where-to King Lisuart is willing to yeeld, if you mislike not. Neuerthelesse, I would not giue him any resoluti∣on, till first I heard your delibera∣tions. For, to mee it seemeth very rea∣sonable, that as you haue been made partakers of toyle and trauaile, so
should you also be of ease and tran∣quility. And therefore I pray you, that without any dissimulation, you would all aduise for the best, and God will therin further your coun∣sell. For my selfe according to the opinion of olde Nascian, I holde it very meet, that wee should make choyce of two Knights amongst vs, and giue them ample power, to de∣termine with two other (appointed by King Lisuart) of all differences, whereby this warre receiued origi∣nall. Albeit, I desire not to be cre∣dited in this case; but rather will allowe of such aduise, as you con∣ceiue fittest for the good of all to∣gether. Hereupon, Angriote d' Estreuaus first presented himselfe, of whom the King required his opini∣on. Sir, said hee, you haue beene chosen chiefe of this enterprise, as well for the dignity of a king shi∣ning in you; as for the fauour and esteeme generally helde of you, whereby you may resolue on the businesse of this warre, as it shall seeme best vnto your selfe. Not∣withstanding, seeing it is your plea∣sure, that I shall first speake my minde: I like it well (vnder cor∣rection) that if peace be presented vs by our enemy, wee ought to ac∣cept it. For, as it falles out, it is to our no meane aduantage, hauing not onely the better of him alrea∣dy: but Madame Oriana also in our owne power, for whose cause wee first entred into the field. Now, for the naming two choyce men a∣mong vs, to accord (as you say) all differences: I know none more meet for such a businesse, then the Lords Quedragant, & Brian de Mo∣niaste. They (at the first) vnder∣went this charge, when they were sent into Great Brittaine, to excuse vs to King Lisuart, for that which we had done, in rescuing his daugh∣ter from the Romanes: and I am peswaded, they will vndertake the same charge againe, if they were thereto entreated. Now because this aduise found generall allow∣ance, Brian and Quedragant yeel∣ded presently thereto: whereat king Perion was highly pleased, hoping the warre so hotly begun, would by these meanes be calmely ended. CHAP. XX. How Nascian returned towards King Lisuart, with the answere here∣ceiued from King Perion. THe Hermite being re∣turned backe to King Lisuart, gaue him to vnderstand, all that he had agreed on with king Perion: assuring him withall, that hee would make them good friends, before hee parted from them. For I left him (quoth hee) with a purpose, to conferre with the chiefe of his Army, to winne them thereto, if hee can. Father, saide the King, hee dealeth most wisely therein, to the ende that none of them should receiue discontent∣ment: And for my part, I meane to doe the like, as you shall presently see performed. Then hee went to see Gasquilan, who (as yet) kept his bed, with the extreame paine of his broken arme, receiued when he en∣countred with Amadis. There hee
sent for king Cildadan, and some o∣ther chiefe Commanders in his Campe, to whom hee declared, what speeches had past betweene the Hermite Nascian and him, ten∣ding wholly to peace and concord; concealing (neuerthelesse) matters concerning Amadis and his daugh∣ter. Finally, hee acquainted them with the answere of king Perion, re∣quiring their further counsell in the businesse. But first of all (quoth hee to Ar∣quisill) seeing you now holde the place of the deceased Emperour, my brother, for whom (in part) this warre was begun; we are to vnder∣stand your minde. My Lord, an∣swered Arquisill, if the Emperour were now liuing, wee that are his vassailes, ought to serue him as well in warre as peace: but hee beeing dead; with the finishing of his daies, all command hee had ouer vs, is likewise concluded. Neuer∣thelesse, wee will yet doe for you, as for him, so that your seruice (what lieth in vs) shall no way bee tardied, while you thinke good to make vse of vs. Notwithstanding, if king Perion be inclined to peace, I beleeue, they that affect your ho∣nour, as they ought to doe, will counsell you alwaies to accept ther∣of: prouided, that it bee no way hurtfull for you. For you may easily consider (at the very first view) that fortune stands not for you & yours, and if wee linger on further, it may prooue worse then hitherto it hath done for vs. My Lord, said the King of Swe∣tia, if peace may bee treated with your enemie, I would aduise you not to refuse it: considering the most of your people are wounded, others sicke and crazed, and a long turce is now very needfull, if a re-enforcement bee thought expedi∣ent, after a sufficient time of rest. By all means possible, said the King, let vs bee deliuered out of this paine, for king Perion (on his side) hath chosen two Knights, to accord all our differences: And I will no∣minate two other, which shall bee you Arban king of Norwales, and Guillan le Pensif, who haue well vn∣derstood how al matters happened, from the beginning to this day. In the meane while, I will send backe Nascian to king Perion, to entreate him, to withdrawe his Campe a daies iourney backwarde: and wee will meet in the Citie of Lubania, for conference during the time of peace. Such was their resolution, wher∣upon, king Lisuart, quickely re∣turned to Nascian, to whom hee declared all that was agreed vpon; praying him most affectionately, to finish the businesse hee had be∣gun. Sir, quoth hee, I will obey whatsoeuer you shall command me, and hauing spoken with king Perion: you shall know the houre for your departure hence, & when the Armie must dislodgh. So de∣parting from him, hee went to A∣madis, who no sooner sawe him, but hee demanded of him, what newes he brought backe: and whe∣ther king Lisuart continued in his former determination, or no? The Hermit let him vnderstand all, and for the better proceeding in this case, thought it fit; that both the Campes should be further diuided from each other, then now they were: whereunto king Perion easily condescended, and it was confir∣med likewise by generall consent. Hereupon, carely the next mor∣ning, euery man trussed vp his bag and baggage, and the Campes fell
back seuen miles and more. Where wee will now leaue them planting their Tents, to tell you, what end the enterprise of king Arauigne sor∣ted to, who but awaited a conue∣nient time, to surprise one or both the Armies. CHAP. XXI. How King Arauigne, being aduertised of the losse, which King Lisuart had sustained, and the dislodging of his Campe; determined to giue him battaile. YOu haue already heard the enterprise of King Arauigne, who, after his powers were vni∣ted together, ceased not trauailing ouer the mountains: but yet so couertly, as neither king Perion or Lisuart could attaine to any certaine knowledge there-of. For he kept himselfe very close, watching but opportunity, to set on the first of the Campes that should be broken. For this cause immediately after king Lisuart was dislodged, and gone directly to the Citie of Lubania: the Scoutes of Archalaus his Campe, who were on the toppe of all the mountaine, dis∣couered the Armies retyring, wher∣of he gaue intelligence to king A∣rauigne. Who imagining them to bee the whole strength, intended to set forward, and rather to assaile them, then the forces of Amadis, as beeing perswaded, that if hee brought his attempt to effect, king Perion would not afterwarde care for contending with him, about the kingdome of Great Brittaine, but that easily hee might enioy it in peace. These beeing his endes, and to compasse them, hee concluded still to lie close, vntill the night ensuing: when he would then giue both the Alarme and battaile together, as being the readiest way to surprise them. Then hee commanded his Nephew Esclanor, a man skilfull in feates of warre, as any other possi∣bly could be; to take twenty knights with him, and following the traine of the enemy in the closest manner, truely to discouer, where they would campe the night ensuing. Now, you must heere obserue with me, that King Lisuart was con∣tinually suspitious, what king Ara∣uigne intended to doe, hauing re∣ceiued sundry aduertisements, that hee marched in the countrie with a great power, and yet could not heare which was hee went. Some of the countrie gaue him notice, that hee kept himselfe ambushed in the mountaines, and because hee would prouide against any incon∣uenience,: he called king Cildadan, and all the Captaines, and acquain∣ted them with his minde, desiring them to take order, that their peo∣ple should keepe close together, without any forraging, or scatte∣ring one from another, but followe still the Artillery in frame of battail, as formerly had beene appointed them. And although some were of the minde, to send aduertisement to K. Perion, what they had heard cō∣cerning K. Arauigne, that he might the better stand vpon his own gard, and succour them if they should be distressed: yet King Lisuart had a heart so high and magnanimous,
as he would by no meanes consent thereto, affecting rather to hazard his life, then lose the least iot of his reputation. Only he sent Philipinel, accompanied with twenty bolde Knights, to discouer and runne tho∣rough the countrie, commanding them expresly, to coast along the mountaines, and let him hourely vnderstand, what they could heare of the enemy. So pacing on about foure miles, he encamped, and gaue it out by man to man, that a little rest must now serue, because they would march all night to Lubania. Not farre had Philipinell trauai∣led, but he discouered Esclanor and his twenty Knights: wherewith im∣mediately hee acquainted king Lis∣uart, and that (without all doubt) the strength of Arauignes Armie was hid among the Rocks. At that very instant king Lisuart dislodged, to gaine entrance into the Citie: for there hee purposed to expect succour, if hee should be pressed thereto, stealing on by little and little from the mountaine, and mar∣ching on vpon the plaine. Which when Esclanor noted, he sent to bid king Aranigne, that hee should put on (with all haste) by the the most secret passages: but the way was so straite and narrow, as they could not march but two together at the the most. By which meanes, before they could attaine to king Lisuart, hee and his were very neare to the Citie: whereat Arauigne began to despaire, fearing to faile vtterly in his enterprise. By this time also, Esplandian and Sergill (whom the Hermite had sent to king Lisuart) finding his Campe dislodged: made such speed, that they sawe the men (both horse and foot) descending downe the moun∣taine. Then they presently coniec∣tured, that this was the Armie of king Arauigne, whereof they heard the Queene Brisania speake, before they parted from her. Wherefore, fearing this power to be ouer great, for that of king Lisuart (who had beene almost vtterly ouerthrone in the precedent battailes) they grew to great dismay, so that Es∣plandian said to Sergill. Brother, I pray you that wee may returne to Lord Amadis, and let him vnder∣stand what wee haue seene. Sergill was very willing, and returning the same way they came, they rode so dilligently: that by the breake of day, they alighted in king Perions Campe; where hee had newly re∣ceiued intelligence, that king Ara∣uigne and his people marched tho∣rough the countrie, and therefore kept his Armie (for the most part) all that night in order of battaile. Esplandian and Sergill, going to the Tent of Amadis, found there the Hermite Nascian: who was not a little amazed, to see thē so quick∣ly returned, & demanded of them, whither they went. Father, answe∣red Esplandian, it is very needeful, that I should speake with Lord A∣madis, to let him know some mat∣ters, that do greatly concerne king Lisuart and his troupes. Now A∣madis had but withdrawne himselfe a while, only for a little refreshing, because all the night hee had been in Armes: notwithstanding, when hee heard what the young Gentle-man had saide, hee called him to him, demanding of him the estate of the matter. My Lord (quoth he) king Arauigne hath besieged the King my Master, neare vnto the city of Lubania, & with such a power: as if you send him not succour, & that speedily, I thinke you shall neuer see him while you liue, but either taken or slaine, and all that are with him. Wherefore I pray you doe
so much for him, as you are wont to do for many others, who (it may bee) are not in such deepe distresse as hee. When Amadis heard these news; remembrance of displeasing his La∣dic Oriana, if her father should be discomfited, and by his most dead∣ly enemy in the world, through de∣fect of assistance from him: enfla∣med so his soule, that, without an∣swering so much as a worde, hee went to king Perton, speaking thus. My Lord, for ought I heare, king Arauigne hath turned his backe on vs, to fight with king Lisuart, and is already so neare him, that it is a great aduenture, but hee will bidde him battaile. Whereat I shall not be a little displeased, knowing well that they of Great Brittaine, haue lost so many of their men against vs, as they are not able now to out∣stand a fresh force. Moreouer, if they should bee ouerthrowne (be∣ing come forth of their Campe, in hope of future peace betweene them and vs:) it will appeare to many, that this ambuscado was laid for them by our inuention, and that (by our meanes) king Arauigne was thus treacherously set vpon them, to our most high disparagement, among all them that shall so ima∣gine of vs. Wherefore, I entreate you Sir, that with a part of this Ar∣mie, I may go before and giue them succour. Sonne answered King Perion, doe what you think best, and if you goe before, I will follow and backe you: if by mischance you should be preuented. Amadis most humbly thanked him, and parting thence, met with Florestan, Quedragant, Garuate, and Gastilles, whom he ac∣quainted with his enterprise, where-to they gaue good allowance. Here-upon, they forthwith set their men in order, marching directly for Lu∣bania: fully resolued, to fight with king Arauigne and his men, if they might meet them in the field. CHAP. XXII. How King Lisuart, was assaulted by King Arauigne, brought into great danger: And of the succour giuen him by Amadis in his necessity. WE haue heretofore ve∣ry amply declared, how King Lisuart had intelligence by his vant courers, that the Armie of King Arauigne pursued him: by meanes whereof hee dis∣lodged, hoping to gaine the Citie of Lubania before the fight. For he knew well enough, that he had not strength sufficient to stand against so great an hoste of men, and fresh∣ly come into the field: but he was suddenly set vpon, and followed so hotly, as hee had small meanes of helping himselfe. The two Camps began to skirmish together, conti∣nuing fierce assaults eace against o∣ther, vntill darke night ouer-tooke them: wherefore, they were con∣strained to remaine encamped near one to another, in expectation of the morning, to beginne againe in better manner, then before they had done. King Lisuart (by no meanes) would retire, as fearing to affright his followers, and wholy disharten them: and therefore making a ver∣tue of necessity, so soone as the
night was spent, he ordered his bat∣taile so well as hee could, determi∣ning to die among his men, rather then blemish his honor in the least degree. Barsinan, who led the vant∣guarde for king Arauigne, first gaue the onset with his troupes: but be∣fore they came to handy blowes, many were laide on the earth with the great Ordenance, which plaied vpon then without ceasing. Neuer∣thelesse, at length they entred fight pell mell, and Grisall, who was En∣signe bearer to Archalaus, was ouer-throwne in this first encounter by Norandell, albeit Archalaus labou∣red his vtmost to releeue him. But king Cildadan, accompanied with many of his chiefest men, began to breake through the prease, where∣by Barsinan had beene instantly foy∣led: but for the re-enforce, which king Arauigne sent by the Duke of Bristoy. Now might you haue seen many Launces shiuering in the ayre, and both horse & foot weltring in their blood on the ground, a sight most pitifull to beholde. For king Lis∣uart (playing at double, or quit) at∣tended by the rest of his Armie, came vpon the flankes of his ene∣mies, and the first hee met withall, was the brother to Aluinas (whom Florestan slew at the Fountaine of Oliues, where the three Damosels were guarded by the Dwarsse) whō hee vnhorsed so lubberly, that hee brake his necke, by his horses fal∣ling vpon him. Pursuing on his pur∣pose, Archalaus espied him, who knew him very perfectly, and fol∣lowed on so fast, that hee shewed him to Barsinan, saying. You haue no other worke to doe, but instant∣ly to reuenge your fathers shame∣full death, for that is hee, which made him so suffer. Then Barsinan called to him ten of his Knights, with whom hee came, and set vpon King Lisuart, and ouerthrewe him to the ground, where hee was en∣closed (on all sides) by Archalaus and a great many more, who labou∣red their very vttermost, as hoping to take him. But Philipinell, with them that had (the day before) dis∣couered the Armie of Arauigne, came and succoured him: notwith∣standing their lot had fallen soule, but for king Cildadan, Arquisill, No∣randell, and Brandoryas. Now grew the fight fiercer and fiercer, for these foure rushed tho∣rough the croudes so boisterously, that they bare downe horse & man before them: and notwithstanding al resistance the enemy could make, they remounted the King vpon No∣randells horse, for he had alighted, that the King might haue him. Then taking a Sworde in both his hands, (which he found by good fortune) hee performed therewith such ex∣traordinarie deeds of Armes: as in meere despite of Barsinan and his followers, hee horsed himselfe a∣gaine, wherein Brandoyuas was no meane help to him. Archalaus then wel perceiued, that they must needs haue the worst, except king Ara∣uigne came vppe with his troupes: wherefore hee sent a young Squire of his, and bad him goe tell him, that hee was much amazed, why he should leaue him thus in so serious a businesse. The Squire ranne pre∣sently, and performed his charge: but Archalaus answered him, that he thus delayed, hoping to draw King Lisuart and his men, further off from the Cittie, that hee might be the more easily encompassed at pleasure. But now hee marched on with his squadron, which furiously brake in vpon King Lisuarts forces, who were then so wearied, and few in
number: as they were repelled to retire, euen within the gate of the City, where they saued themselues, by the meanes of king Cildadan, Arban, Grumedan, Norandell, Guil∣lan, Arquisill and others, who fol∣lowed in the traine. Now, if these worthie men declared (thus rescu∣ing) their greatnesse of spirit, you must conceiue, that king Lisuart as plainely witnessed, that hee forgot not his honour in such a necessity: for neuer was any Knight seene, that more forwardely aduentured his person to perill, then he did, nor with more allacrity of courage, in∣tending to reuenge his owne death, if such should be his fatall disaster. And as hee was in this extreami∣tie, Grumedan, who carried the stan∣dard, and King Arban, were beaten downe before his face, and taken prisoners, whereat he became most impatient: and with all his force, would needs enter into the throng, to succour them. But some of his (beeing more discreetly aduised) kept him backe, and finding meanes to get him into the Citie, and then shut vp the gates. So king Ara∣uigne remained master of the field, not without great losse of his men, which yet were but few, in regarde of them belonging to king Lisuart: who found then by experience, what dismall harme hee had endu∣red, by giuing ouer-much credit to the persawsions of Brocadan & Gan∣dandell, by whose treacherous meanes, hee had banished Amadis from his Court, and many other worthie Knights, for which he now intirely grieued: And not without good cause, considering what slen∣der hope he had, to free himselfe from the danger which round had engirt him. By this time, king Arauigne, was withdrawne into the middest of his troupes, to take counsell; whether they should (now instantly) assault the Citie, or deferre it till the mor∣ning. Now, as in such affaires, o∣pinions are diuerse, so some gaue aduice to refresh their people, al∣ready much wearied. Others spake to the contrarie, alleadging, that they should not permit their ene∣mies thus to rampire in themselues, or let them take heart: but liuely, and without any delay, to followe vpon them, to encrease their feare, and weaken their courage. Wher∣upon king Arauigne commanded Barsinan, and the Duke of Bristoy, to leade their troupes vp one side of the Citie, while he and his gaue the assault on the other, and that either side should striue for soonest en∣trance. Then Drums and Trum∣pets sounded the assault, and men (on all sides) ran to the wals, where they found king Lisuart & his men, with the inhabitants of the Citie, that gaue them two or three stout repulses, with Harquebuze soe, Darts, and Crosbowes. All which discouraged not King Arauigne a iot, but rather did whette him on more and more, and had not darke night preuented them; king Lis∣uart had beene shrewdly enforced, and the Cittie surprised. But the obscurity was so great, as they could not discerne one another: in regard whereof king Arauigne caused re∣treate to be sounded, hoping to be∣gin againe at the breake of day, or else, that they within the Citie, should yeeld to his mercy.
CHAP. XXIII. How Amadis came to the succour of King Lisuart: And of the valiant ouerthnow of King Arauigne. BY the precedent chap∣ter you haue heard, how the young Gen∣tleman Esplandian, & Sergill, hauing disco∣uered the Armie of Arauigne, and doubting that king Lisuart was not strong enough to fight with him: made a short returne to Amadis, entreating his succour, whereto he willingly yeelded. Notwithstan∣ding, hee could not proceed on so speedily (albeit hee trauelled night and day) but King Lisuart was fal∣len into great perill of his person, as euer before had happened to him: which danger thus befell him, on∣ly by meanes of vnhappy guides, that conducted Amadis and his troupes, wandring (about mid-night) farre out of the way, without knowing where they were, which much displeased Amadis. Hereupon he demanded of them, if they were farre from the moun∣taine, or no. The guides answered, that in their opinion (considering how farre they had alreade gone) they could not bee neare: where∣fore hee commanded Gandalin, to ride so farre on either side, as hee might reach some matter of disco∣uery. Then he got vp on the highest part of all, to try, if hee could see the fire in king Arauignes Campe, beeing led all the way by one of the guides: and far they had not gone, but Gandalin descried the enemies fires in their Camp, which he shew∣ed to the guide, demanding of him, if now hee could giue them better direction, without any more stray∣ing, wherein he warranted him, & therefore bad him boldly followe him. Returning backe to Amadis, they declared what they had seene: to his no little contentment, as ho∣ping to take king Arauigne nap∣ping. Moreouer, he was partly de∣sirous, to let King Lisuart perceiue, how willing hee was (yet) to doe him seruice, notwithstanding all his former hatred to him, and therefore rode on hard all the night. Yet could hee not ariue there so soone, but King Arauigne had begunne the assault againe, so sharpe and hotly, as gaue great danger to them with∣in the Citie, because the enemies were become masters of the princi∣pall part: by meanes whereof they entred in by such numbers, as king Lisuart was compelled to betake himselfe to a very little street or pas∣sage, being followed by some of his chiefest Knights, and there he resol∣ued to liue or die, rather then hee would yeeld himselfe a prisoner to his proud foe. Here began extreamitie to shew it selfe apparantly, for, like men despairing of any helpe or remidy, they declared such manly deeds of Armes; as the Duke of Bristoye & Barsinan, were much impeached in their hopes. On the other side, King Cildadan, Arquisill, Flamian, and Norandell, who seemed to keep sure the nearest Cantons, founde Arauigne (that held them besieged) such hotte worke: as, but for sixe Knights of the Isle Sagittarie, hee had neuer gone any further. For,
the women and children of the Ci∣tie, were alost in the windowes, hurling downe boyling Lead, Oyle and water, as much perplexed him and them in their passage. Now did Norandell, and such as were with him, fully perswade them-selues, there to end their liues: yet not as cowards and recreants, but like true borne, bolde and couragi∣ous Knights. And hereupon, king Cildadan, stepping to one of them of the Sagittarte Isle, ran his Sword vp to the hilts in his bodie, that downe he fell dead to the ground. The sight heereof was so dread∣full to the other fiue, that they be∣ganne to retire, and king Cildadan, with them of his troupe, pursued them very stoutly: till king Ara∣uignes forces came vppe to releeue them, and there the day had beene vtterly lost, but for the fresh supply of Amadis, who was not a little dis∣mayed at his ariuall, to see the ene∣mie haue such aduantage of King Lisuart, whom hee greatly feared to be either slaine, or taken. Wher∣fore vowing a mercilesse reuenge, he commanded all his horsemen to alight, and entring in vpon them pell mell, to cry aloud, Gaule, Gaule. When the other heard such a sud∣den tumultuous noyse, and found themselues so sharpely charged in the rere: they plainely perceiued, that their attempt had failed, and all their hues to be in very great dan∣ger. So that King Arauigne, whol∣ly discouraged, fied with Archalaus into a house, hoping there to strengthen themselues, and rather to die there, then yeeld to mercy. But they had not long staied there, before King Lisuart came thither, and set vpon them so sternely: that after some slender resistance, they yeelded themselues to be prisoners. At the very same instant, Amadis met with the other fiue Knights of the Isle Sagittarie, who fought a∣gainst his people very boldly: but hee making against them, accom∣panied with Florestan and Angriote, at length surprised them, and com∣manded them to safe custodie. Pas∣sing on further, they met with Bar∣sinan and the Duke of Bristoye, figh∣ting manfully: yet they no sooner saw Amadis, but they threw them-selues at his feete, defiring mercie, which hee would not denie them, and so committed them to Flore∣stan. Now because a great parte of King Arauignes Armie, had saued themselues by flight into the neigh∣bouring mountaines, and he found no further resistance in the Citie: hee returned forth of the same gate whereat hee entred, and meeting with Gandalin, said. Go I pray thee, and will Quedragant to retreate our people: for I would not be known to King Lisuart, and I meane to stay for him halfe a mile hence. Gandalin rode away presently, & finding Quedragant, did his mes∣sage to him; who without any lon∣ger delay, caused retreat to bee sounded, rallying all his troupes together. As thus they retired, king Lisuart could not presume, how, or whence hee had receiued this high fauour, and therefore demanded of Guillan le Pensif, if hee knewe any thing in the case. Before God Sir (quoth he) he must needs be a deafe man that could not hear Gaul, Gaul, cried so many times this day; which may well assure you, that Amaedis, and no other, hath done you this vnexpected kindnesse. I pray thee, said the King, doe so much for me, as to finde and stay him, if it bee possible, that I may haue some con∣ference with him. So departed Guillan, who knew before, that Amadis was already
gone, wherfore, galloping the same way which he had takē: at last he o∣uertook him, & deliuered the Kings message to him, aduising him to re∣turne backe againe with him. A∣madis perceiuing, that hee could not honestly gaine-say him, rode backe with him to King Lisuart, and alighting from his horse, did him most humble reuerence: but the King imbracing him, declared ma∣nifest signes of great loue to him. At which instant, King Cildadan came to them, and many other Knights, with Florestan and Angrio∣te, who were so louingly welcom∣med by king Lisuart, as it was im∣possible to be bettered. And as he was speaking vnto them, Brandoy∣uas came to tell him, that the inha∣bitants of the Citie, made such slaughter of king Arauignes people, as they would not admit any one man to mercie. But beleeue it Sir (quoth hee) it wery good to cease this cruelty: for if their leaders haue not deserued death, their fol∣lowers in seruice should not bee worse entreated. Sir said Amadis, giue order quickly to stay this pro∣ceeding, and content your selfe with the victory gotten against thē. Then the King called Norandell, and gaue him charge to command a retreate, that shedding of blood might be spared, and the rest to be taken prisoners. At that very time, an Esquire ari∣ued there from king Perion, to ad∣uertise Amadis, that he was hard at hand, with the rest of the Armie, to giue him succour, if neede re∣required. Not now, answered A∣madis, thankes be to heauen. And therefore Sir (quoth hee, to King Lisuart) you may well giue vs leaue to depart: to the end, that without any further trauaile, king Perion may send vs home againe. Before God, replied the King, although you haue been hitherto alwaies in∣uincible, yet shall you now bee so farre constrained by me, as to abide here for his comming hither: be∣cause hee must needs partake in the ioy, which wee haue receiued by your meanes and succour. Then, looking vpon king Cildadan, hee said. Helpe mee (I pray you) with your entreatie, and trie whether your request can more preuaile with him, then mine. Beleeue me, Lord Amadis, answered king Cilda∣dan, you may not deny the King: considering he mooues the matter to you so earnestly. Nor will I, said hee, if my companions thinke it conuenient. What say you to it Lord Quedragant? you ought to o∣bey the King, quoth hee, and seeing you haue done so much for him, doe more for him yet, if it bee in your power. So was Amadis stayed there, and in this time of conference, king Ar∣ban and Grumedan, returned from their imprisonement, hauing esca∣ped thence, with their hands bound hehinde them with strong cordes: for their guardes, seeing what sup∣plie Amadis had brought with him, betooke themselues to flight, and so left them at their owne liberty. When king Lisuart saw them, ne∣uer was man in greater ioy: because hee was formerly perswaded, that either they were slaine, or eise worse wounded then they were, where∣fore, with open armes he went and embraced them. And while he was busied in these kindnesses, they espied (a farre off) the Armie of king Perion come marching to∣wards them, which Grumedan shew∣ed to king Lisuart, saying. Sir, as I imagine, here is some new suc∣cour comming to you: but if the first of Lord Amadis had tarried so
long, wee might haue shut the sta∣ble doore after the Steed was gone, according to the ancient Adage. Grumedan (answered king Lisuart, smiling) I know very wel, that who∣soeuer contests with you, in mat∣ters concerning the honour of A∣madis, shall finde worke enough to doe: but much more, to defende himselfe, if extreamity should que∣stion the case by weapons. Sir, said Amadis, Lord Grumedan hath reason to wish mee well, for he hath neither friend or kinsman, that ow∣eth him more dutie and obedient seruice, then I doe, and for such a one (I am certaine) he will acknow∣ledge and esteeme me. By this time, king Perion drew nearer and nearer, and thereupon, king Lisuart made forth to meete him, whereof Amadis aduertised him by Durin: wherefore he com∣manded his men to march a slowe pace, and taking Gastiles, Grassan∣dor, Brian de Moniaste, and Tiron, with him, left Agraies to conduct the troupes, because king Perion wel knew the ill-will he bare to king Lisuart, and feared least discourte∣ous language might passe between them at their meeting, whereby the purposed peace should bee quite made frustrate. So the two Kings went to meete each other, giuing the spurre to their horses, and em∣braced together very louingly, king Perion speaking thus to king Lisuart. My Lord and brother, me thinkes your Armour is much impaired, since you departed from the camp: albeit, I am well assured, it lay not rusting in your Armourie, while the fight lasted betweene your men and mine. And for ought I haue heard, they that brought it thus out of fa∣shion, haue receiued a payment beyond their expectation, and lit∣tle to their liking. So they haue, answered king Lis∣uart, thankes be giuen therefore to God, and the good helpe that you Amadis, and these other Knights brought mee, in so vrgent a necessi∣tie, as I am sure you haue heard al∣ready. In good faith, said king Pe∣rion, I haue all my lifetime desired, that my children might bee yours in peace and true amity. I hope, replied king Lisuart, that so they shall be before wee parte, and our kindnesse neuer to faile, especially on my behalfe. But seeing Prince Agraies not to be one among them: hee enquired expresly for him, ha∣uing vnderstood his hatred towards him, and desirous to reconcile him, and make him his friend, if possi∣ble it might be. Whereupon, king Perion made answere, that hee stay∣ed behinde, as a conduct to the rest of the Armie which followed. I pray you Sir, said king Lisuart, that hee may bee sent for, because I pur∣pose, not to parte from this place, before I haue both seene and em∣braced him. My Lord answered A∣madis, then I my selfe will goe for him. It is well aduised (quoth king Lisuart) because hee will doe more for you, then any other whatsoe∣uer. So Amadis rode directly to A∣graies, whom hee met not farre off, and tolde him what you haue heard already: earnestly entreating him, that, forgetting all discontentment, hee would goe with him, and giue king Lisuart so good lookes as could be. My Lord and Cosen, said Agraies, you know, that my li∣king or disliking lasteth vpon your pleasure, and I heartily desire, that the succour which you haue giuen him, of whom you speake, may be better acknowledged, then all the better acknowledged, then all the former haue been. And further I assure you, I am content to requit
all the wrongs done to you, mee, and many more, meerely offered in despite of you, and without any occasion at all. Then they rode on together to King Lisuart, who, so soone as he saw Agraies, left all the rest, going to embrace him, saying. Cosen, doe you thinke, this embracing as dangerous to me, as that was which you gaue mee, on the day of our last being together? Before God Sir, replied Agraies, I hope to find this much better then the other, for I was neuer (to my knowledge) in the like danger. We will talke ther∣of said the King, at better leasure. But now you see the king my bro∣ther tarries for vs, let vs goe con∣duct him to Lubania, where I will make you all the best entertaine∣ment I can. So they returnd to king Perion, and tooke the way towards the Citie. King Lisuart had receiued diuers wounds in his bodie, but the Chi∣rurgions hauing seene them, gaue him hope of speedy recouery: yet hee kept his bed ten daies together, beeing often visited by the Prin∣ces and Lords of his owne country, as also the other: who, to delight him, had almost no other talke, but of the tricks and stratagems of Ar∣chalau, by meanes whereof, hee compassed his purposes; especial∣ly, when hee carried the Princesse Oriana away prisoner, and (after-warde) King Perion, Amadis., and Florestan, by the subtiltie of Dinar∣da; also, in what sorte hee escaped from Galaor and Norandell, faining himselfe to bee Branfiles, Cosen∣germaine to Grumedan. But most of all, his proiect plotted (by the helpe of Arauigne) against them all: which surely had preuailed, but that Amadis was the onely hinde∣rance. Such accidents, answered king Lisuart, doe often come to passe, by such wicked wretches as hee is, who dare endanger themselues in doing euill, and therein make their most delight: finding the entrance sweete and easie, onely by the insti∣gation of the Diuell, who depriues them of all apprehension, con∣cerning what dishonour may hap∣pen to them, beside misery of life, which makes death much more welcome to them, then life can be. As Arauigue himselfe hath now some cause to confesse, being in the power of his chiefest enemies: and may well serue as an example to all other, that are to be taxed with the like vice. As hee ended these wordes, the good olde Hermite Nascian, came to them, who had softly followed after king Perion, and finding the Princes in such peaceable quiet∣nesse: praised God for it, and the good aduice of young Esplandian, causing Amadis to depart so spee∣dily, when hee came to the rescue of king Lisuart, as king Perion made knowen before them all. In troth, saide king Lisuart, I would gladly know, who gaue the youth so good counsell. Sir, replied Esplandian, my father Nascian sent mee to you, to tell you, what hee had conclu∣ded with king Perion: but I could not finde you in the Campe, wher∣fore, Sergill & I, passing on further, discouered the Armie of king Ara∣uigne, as they descended downe the mountaine. Then I called to mind, what I heard the Queene my Mi∣stresse say, at my parting from her, that hee was your enemy, and fea∣ring what afterwards happened to you, I made haste to aduertise Lord Amadis, to the end hee might giue you succour, as he did. Before God sweet youth (saide king Lisuart) I
shall not (while I liue) forgette so great a blessing happening to mee: And folding Esplandian in his arms, sweetly kissed him on the cheeke. At that time, king Gasquilan was brought thither, in a Litter, ha∣uing softly followed, as beeing vn∣able to sit on horsebacke, by reason of the shrewd fall hee had, when he would needes trie his manhood a∣gainst Amadis, on the first day when the two battailes met. Into a reser∣ued chamber hee was conducted, by some of the chiefe in the compa∣nie, especially Amadis, who came & saluted him, saying. Sir, I would gladly see you in farre better dispo∣sition, than now you are: but by the grace of heauen, your health may bee as soone restored, as your harme happened. Gasquilan than∣ked him with all his heart, yet did not know him, because hee had ne∣uer seen him vnarmed: which king Arban obseruing, said. Sir, I think you knowe not the Knight that tal∣keth with you, yet you haue often heretofore heard of him: this is A∣madis de Gaule, against whom (some few dayes since) you made your proofe. Much amazed was Gasquilan, see∣ing his countenance (as hee ima∣gined) more meete to court faire Ladies, then to endure the harde toyles of knighthood: and if hee had not made the triall which hee did, hee should hardly haue giuen credit to the renowne euery where noysed of him, whereupon he thus replied. I sweare to you, Lord A∣madis, vpon my faith, that you are the Knight I haue most desired to see, since I began to beare Armes, not for any good will I bare you: but to fight with you, euen to the death, if this mishap had not be∣fallen mee, as now it is too well knowne. For, if fortune had so much fauoured me, as to haue gi∣uen mee, what you haue gotten o∣uer me: beside the glory, of con∣quering the only most happy knight in the world, I should haue wonne the loue of one, whō I affect much better then my selfe, and by whose command, I came twice to see you in this countrie, with such misad∣aduenture, as I haue cause to la∣ment all the dayes of my life, be∣cause I haue lost (by you) all hope of euer enioying her. Sir, said A∣madis, your honour had beene but slenderly augmented, by ouercom∣ming mee, after such plenty of wor∣thie actions, by you performed. And as for her, whom you hold as lost through mine occasion, if she be a woman of good iudgement, as doubtlesse shee is: it is impos∣sible, but she must needs loue you answerable to your merit, and as one of the best Knights this day b thing. For, assure your selfe Sir, it would much displease mee, to be the least meanes of with-hol∣ding her fauour from you: yet if it should prooue so, I craue your pardon, with this condition, that in all places wheresoeuer I shall come, I am ready to doe you any seruice. These gracious wordes, so high∣ly satisfied King Gasquilan, as hee extended foorth his armes to em∣brace him: and instantly they were made friends, Amadis keeping him daily company, so long as hee so∣iourned in the Citie of Lubania, where Arquisill also yeelded him-selfe prisoner, to fulfill the promise hee had formerly made. But Ama∣dis, who held the gentle Knight in high esteme, freed him from all further submission, and promised him his hand for chusing him Em∣perour, before they parted thence together: by meanes of the Arch∣bishop
of Tarente, the Marquesse of Acona, Brandaiell de Rocque, and others, that were prisoners in the Enclosed Isle. Of whom (quoth he) I will earnestly solicite this matter, that (for my sake) they will affoord you this fauour: & which (I hope) they cannot deny mee, knowing none more neare in blood, and fit∣ter for the Empire, they you are. When Arquisill heard these wordes, hee was most ioyfull: well knowing the conspiracies of them of Rome, to make election of ano∣ther, wherein they would very hard∣ly proceed, without the fauour of Lord Amadis, and therefore, hee said. My Lord, you haue hereto∣fore done me so many honourable fauours, as I must needes confesse my selfe wholly yours. And so much the rather, in seeking thus my further aduancement, which comming so to passe: you shall dis∣pose both of it and me, as holding all of you onely, and none other. Referre all care thereof (quoth A∣madis) to me alone. Proceeding on to further spee∣ches, they entred into a lodging, where Gandalin had the charge of Archalaus and King Arauigne, in∣them laid vpon a bedde, wondrous melancholie: wherefore Amadis demanded of them, whereon they thought? What art thou (quoth Archalaus) that wouldest know our thoughts? How? said Amadis, dost thou not knowe Amadis de Gaule, whom thou hast threatned so many times? I am hee that speakes to thee. When Archalaus heard him, hee be∣ganne to note him better than be∣fore, and remembring that he had formerly seene him, thus answered. Beleeue mee, I thinke thou speakest truth, and although length of time hath partly taken thee out of my knowledge: yet I am perswaded, thou art the same man that I had in my prison at Valderin, where thy youth & cōplexion could so much commande mee, that the pittie I then tooke on thee, hath brought me now into such distresse, as con∣straines me to craue mercy of thee. Mercy? said Amadis, I knowe not how thou canst expect that from mee, considering thou couldst ne∣bestowe it on thy selfe: for, if such had beene thy power, long agoe thou wouldst haue ended a world of cruelties, that haue beene thy continuall exercise. Neuerthelesse, if thou couldest repent, and (with an honest soule) promise me neuer to vse the like againe; I could find in mine heart to pardon thee. Trust mee, answered Archalaus, it is a worke very hard for me to do, almost imposible, for there I knew continually how to conquer, and euermore tooke such delight in do∣ing ill; as now I cannot easily ad∣dict my selfe to goodnesse. But ne∣cessity, which is a bridle sharp and rigorous, to metamorphose all bad customes into vertue: happily will constraine my older yeares (seeing the estate wherein I am) to follow those courses, which my youth & liberty then disdned to do. What other ransom then, replied Amadis, shall I haue of thee, to let thee goe? All my Castles (quoth hee) and other goods, by meanes wher∣of I pursued a great part of those vices, for which thou iustly doest reprooue me. Leaue me only what shall like thy selfe to doe, for the re∣mainder of my life; & if thou grant mee so much grace: it may be, this onely bounty will beget in me, that which reason heretofore could ne∣uer compasse. Beleeue me, said A∣madis, thine owne confession of so lewde a life, and hope I haue of thine amendment: shall be the key
to free thy soule from thy bodies thraldome, hauing so long a time engaged them both to the Diuell. So hee turned his face, to goe from him: but Archalaus called him againe, and pointing to Arauigne, said. I pray thee Amadis, looke vp∣vpon this wretched King, who (not long since) was neere hand to bee one of the greatest Princes in the world: but in a moment, the same fortune which (befoore) shewed a∣miable lookes, hath beaten him downe, and wholly wrought his ruine. An obseruation not vnmeet for thee, for thou, and all other, that aspire vnto the highest degree of happinesse, art subiect to the like disfauours. And because to van∣quish and pardon, are most fami∣liar to noble and magnanimous mindes: bestowe on vs now such entertainement, as thou wouldest wish to receiue from vs, wee hol∣ding the place, as now thou doest, and from which thou canst not al∣waies warrant thy selfe. More account did Amadis make of these good words, than of him that spake them, and well vnder∣stood the end whereat hee aimed, although hee would make no out∣warde shew thereof: but, without any further contestation, left him, departing thence to his owne lod∣ging, to dispatch Ardan the dwarffe to Oriana, that shee might knowe the warres finishing, as also what-soeuer had passed between the Prin∣ces and Lords in the two Camps. Moreouer, hee gaue him a Letter, directed to Ysanio, whereby he gaue order: that Brandaiell de Rocque, the Marquesse of Ancona, the Arch∣bishoppe of Tarente, and the other Romaine prisoners, should bee sent to him. So departed the Dwarffe, who trauailed day and night, vntill he ariued at the Pallace of Apolidon. Hee presently sent worde to the Princesse, byone of her womē, that hee would speake with her from A∣madis. Shee no sooner heard of his ariuall, but fearing some vnhappy fortune; became so afflicted in mind, that she trembled exceeding∣ly: knowing, that victory could not fauour either of the Campes, but it would procure sorrow and griefe to her all her lifetime. Then Ar∣dan entred her chamber, who de∣declared by his looks, that she had no cause of sadnesse, or melancho∣lie. Neuerthelesse, so soone as she saw him (not hauing so much pa∣tience, as to let him deliuer his message) with teares in her eyes, she said vnto him. Alasse my deare friend Ardan, tell mee I pray thee quickly, in what estate hast thou left the King my father, and is thy Ma∣ster aliue or dead: dead? Madame, answered the Dwarffe, they neuer (in their liues) were so merrie together. Then he reported to her, all that which you haue heard already, es∣pecially, in what great danger King Lisuart was, when Amadis came with his happy succour. Also, his royall entertainement to King Pe∣rion, and lastly, what loue he expres∣sed to Esplandian, by whose means, Amadis, came to the rescue of them of Great Brittaine: which gaue such comfort to Oriana, that lifting vp her eyes and hands to heauen, shee spake so loude as all present might heare her. O most mercifull God, blessed for euer be thy diuine bounty, shouring downe thus thy pitie vpon thy poore seruant, and that happy childe, who hath beene the occasion of this great goodnes. Oh, let thy mercy yet further per∣mit, that all those especiall predic∣tions, which the wise Vrganda deli∣uered of him, may not faile in him. All the Ladies there present, per∣swaded
themselues, that shee vsed these wordes of Esplandian, for the helpe which hee had procured to King Lisuart: yet were ignorant of her further interest in him, which wisely she concealed to her selfe. Afterward, shee demaunded of Ardan, if he came thither about a∣ny other businesse. Madame (quoth hee) I haue Letters from my Lord, directed to the Gouernour Ysanio, commanding him by mee, forth-with to send him the Romaine priso∣ners. What way then, saide shee, will he take, and the King also? Ma∣dame, quoth hee, for ought I can vnderstand, they will not part each from other, till all differences are fully concluded. Honest Dwarffe, said the Queene Sardamira, tell me I pray thee, how haue the Romaines behaued themselues: are many of them slaine in the battaile? Ma∣dame, answered Ardan, a great number of them haue ended their daies valiantly, and (well neere) all the rest are sore wounded: but since the death of the Emperour, Floyan and Constant, no man of name (that I knowe) hath perished among thē, but was liuing, when I parted from the Campe, where I left Arquisill in serious conference with my Ma∣ster. As for your brother Flamyan, he beginneth to growe strong, and woundes are (in a manner) cured. Ardan hauing receiued expresse charge from Amadis, to make so little tarrying there as could be: de∣manded of Oriana, if shee pleased to command any thing to his Ma∣stes? Doe my most humble com∣dations (quoth she) to king Perion of Gaule, Agraies, Bruneo, and A∣madis, to whom I purpose not to write, because thou broughtest me no Letter from him. So the dwarffe took leaue of her, and went to find Ysanio, giuing him the Letters from his Master, and deliuering his fur∣ther message beside. Whereupon, Ysanio tooke such order, that before the week was expired: the Romanes were all ariued at Lubania, in pre∣sence of King Lisuart, and the o∣ther Princesse and Lords. But A∣madis calling them into his cham∣ber, & being there alone with them, spake thus. Lords, I am sure you are not ig∣norant, what issure this warre hath sorted to, by meanes whereof, al∣most all the Princes of the East, & they likewise of the West, haue en∣tred into Armes. And because we are now vpon tearmes, for a per∣petuall peace, I hold it reasonable, that albeit you are my prisoners: yet nothing shall be concluded till first it be imparted to you. Now, as this is the reason of your calling hither; so am I like wise to entreat you, that (for my sake) you would accept and elect Lord Arquisill as your Emperour. For ouer and be∣side, that there is not to bee found (as I heare) any man more neare in birth to the Empire, then hee: so am I well acquainted with his high deserts, which mooues me the more (in his behalfe) to bee thus earnest with you. In the dooing whereof you shall be get your selues two especiall graces. The first, by calling to the gouernement of so excellent a Monarchie, a Prince wise, valiant, & vertuous, for your better conseruation, and entertai∣ning you in all loue and kindnesse. The other, that in my endeared af∣fection to him, I freely giue you (with him) liberty, and all such ran∣somes, as are due to me from you, continuing moreouer (while I liue) your affectionate friend. aduise therefore with your selues, what answere you will make me: to the end, I may also consider, how I
shall carrie my selfe to you, in mat∣ter of so important occasion. Brandall de Roque, beeing the ancientest of them all, stood forth, and made this answere to Amadis. My Lord, most true it is, that wee are your prisoners, and know very well, what honour you haue done vs, and the extraordinary entertain∣ment wee haue receiued, since our ariuall in the Enclsed Isle. Where∣fore I speake, not only for my selfe, but all heere present: that there is not a man among vs, but will glad∣ly employ himselfe in your seruice. But wee cannot resolue in the mat∣ter concerning Lord Arquisill, till wee haue first spoken with Flamyan, and other ine Captaines in the Armie: wherefore we pray you per∣mit, that wee may conferre toge∣ther swearing (for our part) that we will hold our hands for him, where∣by your desire may bee satisfied. Well then said Amadis, consult to∣gether, and to morrow let me haue your answere. So they withdrew thence, to go finde Flamyan in his lodging: for (as yet) hee kept his chamber, not healed of the hurts, which hee had receiued in the last encounter. Then they declared to him, what spee∣ches had past betweene them and Amadis, what offers and promi∣ses hee had made, in fauour of Ar∣quisill, and lastly, the answere they returned him. Beleeue mee, saide Elamyan, Lord Amadis speaketh like a good Knights, and no more, then all wee ought to take in good part, and allowe of very worthily. Neuerthelesse, the election of an Emperour is of such importance, as it is good reason to acquaint the other Romaine Captaines therewith: to morrow we will send to them all, and haue the matter in deliberati∣on, th will wee answere Amadis, what wee thinke best. Flamyan did according to his speeches, and af∣ter they were all assembled, hee re∣uealed the occasion of their mee∣ting, and the request of Amadis, for Prince Aquis. By right of linage (quoth he) the Empire s his. More-ouer, hee is wise, hardy and vertu∣ous, what is to bee resolued vpon, that either we may excuse, or yeeld to Amadis in his request. Euery man answered according to his minde: but in the ende, Ar∣quisill was named Emperour, wher∣of Amadis was soone aduertised, and all the other Prince, and Lords were well pleased there with, espe∣cially the Kings Lisuart, Peron, and Cildadan, who with goodly troupes (on the day following) went and conducted him to the Church, where, before all the people, hee was proclaimed Emperour of the Romaines, and at dinner, Amadis serued as his Cup-taster, Gastilles as Pantler, and Agraies as Cauer. Af∣ter the tables were withdrawne, King surt beeing seated some-what beneath him, reporting what aduentures had happened to him, since he was crowned King of great Brittaine: fell into discourse, what good turnes and seruices hee had receiued by Amadis, and proceeded on so farre therein, that he said to him, before them all. Lord Amadis, albeit very few can be ignorant, in what you haue done for me, since your first ariuall in my Court, when you vquised Ardan the Poude: so will I not now spare to speake somewat else, for reasons which hereafter will be better vnderstood. Then particularly he reported all the ma, which would be tedi∣ous to trouble you with againe. But (quoth hee) for many high & worthie seruices, Lord Amadis, I giue you my daughter Oriana as
your wife, leauing her as mine heire (after my decease) to my kingdome of Great Brittaine. Then Amadis more glad and highly pleased, then euer before, falling on his knee, most humbly thanked him. Well Sonne, said the King, let it not of∣fend you, if I entreat olde Nascian to tell the Emperour, how Esplan∣dian was begotten, and whose Son hee is: that euery one may know, how the marriage of you and Ori∣ana was long since contracted. The Hermite beeing present to satisfie the Kings request, declared all the precedent fortunes, and the pro∣mise past betweene Amadis and the Princesse, whereby Esplandian be∣came his sonne. We neede make no doubt, con∣cerning the inwarde ioy of the no∣ble youth, beeing ignorant (till then) whose sonne he was. Wher∣upon, King Lisuart called him, and auouched him for his Grand-child before them all, to the no little con∣tentment of Amadis: who know∣ing the Emperours minde, & how desirous hee was, to enioy Orianaes sister in mariage, spake thus to king Lisuart. Sir, seeing you haue giuen mee that, which aboue all things else in this world, I most desired: let mee likewise most humbly en∣treate you, to giue the Princesse Leonora to the Emperour, and then his ioy will be equall to mine. By my troth, answered the King, this good motion shall neuer be deni∣ed, if hee will haue it so. Then I take your highnesse at your word, replied Arquisill. And I giue her you, quoth the King, with all mine heart. Moreouer, I will bring her with me to the Enclosed Isle, that both these mariages may bee there accomplished together. To mor∣row I purpose to parte hence for Vindilisore, where she keepeth com∣pany with my Queen. In the meane while, you may expect mee at the Pallace of Apolidon, whither my kingly brother may send for Galaor: and because nothing else may be o∣mitted, to compleate our ioy and contentment, I will send for my Cosen Galuanes, & Madasima. The Marshalls of the lodgings, apper∣taining to the Kings Lisuart and Pe∣rion: gaue present order for their departure, the one side to the En∣closed Isle, and the other to Vindi∣lisore. CHAP. XXIIII. How King Lisuart ariued at Vindilisore, where his Queen Brisenia at∣tended his comming; whom (soone after) he caused to remoue thence, and with her daughter Leonora, accompany him to the Enclosed Isle. AFter that King Lisuart was dislodged from the Citie of Lubania, accompanied with the rest of his Armie, hee iournied so expeditiously, that hee ariued at Vindilisore; where his Queene Brisenia expected his com∣ming, according to former intelli∣gence sent her. And although hee was greatly perplexed in minde, seeing his reputation much impai∣red, by those disfouours receiued from fortune, notwithstanding the agreement hee had made with Amadis: yet neuerthelesse (like a wise and iudicious Prince) hee dis∣sembled his griefe, shewing much
better outwarde carriage, then o∣therwise willingly hee would haue done. And his owne knowledge was no meane incitation thereto, by hourely pressing his conscience, with a sensible apprehension, that hee had beene the onely cause, of shedding (ouer-prodigally) so much Christian blood: vnder an vniust colour of reuenge, which he preferred before all counsell and aduice, giuen him by the Princes and Lords of his Land, wherewith our Lord being iustly offended, had scourg'd him with there rods, not to make him murmur or gruge against him, but rather to thank him, for in∣flicting no heauier vengeāce on him In meditation of these matters, hee went to the Queenes lodgings, and she being before aduertised by Brandoynas, of all that had happe∣ned in his voyage; welcommed him most graciously, and looking vpon young Esplandian, who fol∣lowed next to the King: folding him in her armes, & sweetly kissing him, thus she spake. My worthie sonne, blessed bee the houre of thy birth, hauing (in thy young dayes) done such seruice to the King: as, but by thy good aduise (as I haue vnderstood) he had neuer seene his owne kingdome any more. Ma∣dame, answered the King, I hope, seeing hee hath begun so well: not any one houre shall passe him, but will encrease in him both will and power, of proceeding on better & better. For I assure you, that beside the right of nature, which iustly incites mee to wish him well: no day can passe ouer my head, but I must needs confesse a perticuliar af∣fection to him, for the great happi∣nesse I enioy by him. While thus the King and Queen conferred together, concerning Es∣plandian, the other Princes and Lords were kindely entertained by the Ladies & Gentlewomen: who beeing curious in inquiry, how the fights had beene performed, be∣tweene the Kings people, and them belonging to Amadis, were a long while without any other language. But when they heard of the pur∣posed marriages, & that they must likewise goe to the Enclosed Isle: this raised much more pleasure in them, then the recitall of colde feares and Alarums, whereon they wholly conferred before. For now, one made full account, to try the Arch of loyall louers; others the Defended chamber, and the other singularities in the Isle, and in these delightes they spent the whole day. But the houre of rest beeing come, the King withdrew into the Queenes chamber, where being a∣lone by themselues, hee began in this maner. Madame, if you found your selfe much amazed, when you heard the matters concerning your daughter and Amadis: beleeue no lesse of me, when I heard the first newes thereof. And by that which I knew afterwarde, both you and I were farre off from our reckonning. For, perswade your selfe, it is no little disturbance to my minde, that I could not know these things, before the scandall was discouered, and nothing euer touched mee so nearely, especially, the losse of so many worthie Knights, who had now beene liuing, and perished in these vnhappy wars, which breeds in me such remorse of conscience, as you, or any other, will hardly credit: but matters already past, are ouer-late to bee remedied. Wherefore, I purpose now, that what yet remaineth to be done, shall bee performed with our very vttermost honour. Forgetting the offence of our daughter, who made choyce
of a husband at her owne pleasure: yet one that well deserues her, & a better. For I neuer saw any Knight errant, that could winne himselfe so many friends, or haue such a multi∣tude of Kings, Princes, and potent Lords at his comande: whereby it plainely appeareth, that Fortune is diposed to preferre him, before any other. And because at my parting from Lubania, I promised, to bring you with mee to the Enclosed Isle, there to consummate the mariage be∣tweene her and him: I pray you giue order for all things, which you thinke requisite in such cases. Also, for the conduct thither of your daughter Leonora, whom (vpon his owne request) I haue giuen as wife to the new Emperour. Very ioyfull was the Queene, to see the King so well disposed: especially towardes her daughter Oriana, which was the thing shee most desired. In regard whereof, and to maintaine him in this good minde, she saide. Sir, it seemeth to mee, that heauen hath beene very gracious to you and me, bestowing such alliance on vs, in fauour of whom, their friends shall for euer hereafter be ours. What else remaineth to bee done, referre all to mee, for all shall bee ordered to your contentment. Hereupon, earely the next morning, shee sent for Arban, King of Norwales, Great maister of the Kings housholde, to whom she gaue the charge of all. CHAP. XXV. How King Perion (and his companie) tooke their way towardes the En∣closed Isle: And of that which they did, before King Lisuart came thither to them. AFter that they of Great Brittaine were gone from Lubania: King Perion and his Armie marched backe to the Enclosed Isle, where Oriana expected their comming, newly aduertised by Gandalin, what conclusion was made with king Lisuart. So soone as they were there ariued, they went to see her, and Amadis presented the Emperour Arquisill to her (whom she had neuer seene before) saying. Madame, as yet you know not this Knight: but he is in good hope, to be nearer in kinred to you, then you imagine. By these words she plainely vnderstood, that he was the Emperour, wherefore (raising her selfe) shee went and did him re∣uerence, as hee did the like to her, & with a very Princely grace, said. Madame, I am so much beholding to Lord Amadis, that both you and hee may dispose of me, and whatso∣euer is in my power, at your plea∣sure. My Lord, answered the Prin∣cesse, I know what & who you are: wherefore, I most humbly beseech you, that (hence forward) you would reckon mee, as one of your best si∣sters, and kinde friends. During this time, Agraies, Flore∣stan, Quedragant, & Brian gaue cur∣teous salutaions to Queene Sarda∣mira, Grasinda and Olinda, and Bru∣neo de bone Mer, to his most deare∣ly affected Melicia. But Amadis obseruing Grasandor, sonne to the King of Bohemia, standing by the Infanta Mabila, so rauished in soule with loue to her, that accustomed
feare in such affaires, closed vp his mouth, not daring to deliuer so much as on ewod: caused him to call his Cosen, and thus he rounded her in the eare. Madame, you know that Grasandor loues you more thē himself, yet you appear ouermuch to neglect him, I pray you speake to him: for well I knowe that you beeing sicke of the same disease, and many times in the like ex∣treamity, would (euen gladly as hee) finde ease in the like tormen∣ting affliction, therefore, to your mercy I recommend him. Shee knowing, that Amadis was shot in the same place, where this loue-sicke paine oppressed her, euen as violently to another, as shee to Grasandor: began to blush in such strange manner, as all present did apparantly perceiue it, and ghest at the cause of her alteration. Yet to couer it so well as shee could; she made answere to Amadis, that shee would obey his commande: And he taking her by the hand, wēt with her to Grasandor presently, saying. See Sir, heere is a Lady, that findes fault with seeing you so melanchollie. Let me intreate you my Lord, to yeeld her some reason, how and from whence your afflicti∣on ensueth: and so hee left them together. Grasandor finding oppor∣tunity to fauour him, and that now he might freely vtter his minde to her: between hope and feare, kind∣nesse and constraint, thus hee be∣gan. Madame, it seemes to mee, that Lord Amadis findes the same passi∣ons in mee, as him selfe suffered, when loue allured him (at the first) to like Madame Oriana. And to speake no more then truth, when I thinke to impart my oppressions to you, the three principall organes of my life, are in most strange and vnusuall distemper: namely, mine eyes, my heart, and my tongue. For so soone as mine eyes can but gae a sight of you: they incite speech, onely to tell you the cause of my griefe; but all in vaine. Then my tongue, hoping to supply that de∣fect: openeth my mouth, but feare preuailing, quickly closeth it vp a∣gaine. If then my heart be in hea∣uy martyrdome, I leaue to your owne iudgement, speaking (as it doth) by continuall fighing. And finding it selfe vn-furnished of all helping meanes: checks mine eyes, for bringing home the first tydings of your bright beauty. Then they, in excusing their errour: promise to performe the tongues office, be∣cause it is dumbe in your presence, and by outward appearance (shew∣ing it selfe pitifull) would begge of you mercy and remedy. While Grasandor continued these complaints, Amadis (not knowing how he should raise the siege, the Emperor still talking with Oriana:) saw Queene Briolania enter the chamber, whom hee going to kisse, called the Emperour, saying. My Lord, you haue not yet seen all the beauties in this goodly beauty, as here Queene Briolania may testifie to you. Before God (quoth hee) you say very true. So leauing Ori∣ana to salute the Queene: she see∣med so faire in his eye, and her be∣hauiour so gracious, that hee vsed these wordes to her. I am perswa∣ded Madame, that Apolidon, in crea∣ting the singularities of this place, left them in such rich perfection, only for the honour of excelling Ladies. For I can repute them no other then immortall, and make men tractable, to abide (heere all their life time) among such rauish∣ing beauties. Now did Amadis steppe into the
Emperours place, so soone as hee was gone from Oriana, feigning to doe him a great fauour, in helping him to conferre with Queene Bri∣olania. But he had a quite contrary meaning, and did it to no other end, but that the rest of his friends should talke with their Ladies, while hee might be alone with her whom hee most desired. For hee had not conuersed familiarly with the Princesse, since her ariuall in the Enclosed Isle: wherefore, finding time and place sufficiently commo∣dious, he beganne with her in this manner. Madame, I haue thought all my life time hitherto, that no possibi∣lity remained in mee for acknow∣ledgement of those great and gra∣cious fauours, which (so long a while) I haue receiued by your meanes only. And last of all, in being the cause that aged Nascian reuealed to the King your father, what right wee had each in other: whereby your sonne and mine be∣came knowen to him, and peace confirmed, between them of Great Brittaine and vs. As for my selfe, I shall stand much more obliged to you now, then euer heretofore: And therefore, aduisedly consider what else remaineth for me to doe, for I assure you, I shall take no lit∣tle delight, in doing whatsoeuer you commande me. When Oriana heard him deliuer such speeches, hauing before her eyes, what dutie euery woman of honour and discretion, oweth to her husband; shee thus answered. My Lord, in my poore opinion, you doe both your selfe and me wrong, and therefore I pray you, speake to me henceforward, as to your hūble wife & seruant: and not after those kind of phrases, whē I was no other then your friend. Furthermore, let mee humbly entreat you to tell me, in what condition you left the King my father, and how I am now estee∣med of him? Madame, said Ama∣dis, if outward lookes may be true euidences, I neuer saw man declare more contentment, then he deliue∣red when we were together. Albe∣it I coniecture (considering his in∣euitable danger in our last encoun∣ter, when he hoped to recouer you from vs by meer force) his thoughts are otherwise quite different. Yet hee dissembles it so wisely as possi∣bly can bee, euen to hurle shame vpon himselfe, and excusing what hath past betweene you and mee: fully resolued (as hee saith) to bee more cheerefully disposed, then e∣uer hitherto he hath been. Where-upon hee is returned backe to Vin∣dilisore, to fetch the Queene and your sister Leonora, whom he hath promised in marriage to the Em∣perour. Oriana was not a little glad of these newes, saying. My Lord, these are matters of no meane com∣fort, especially, that I haue reco∣uered my fathers grace againe: for, next to you, I loue him aboue any man liuing, notwithstanding, all the hard sufferings (as well you know) hee hath put me to. But fur∣ther I pray you tell mee, what is your opinion of Esplandian? By my faath Madame, quoth hee, by his carriage and behauiour, he plaine∣ly declares himselfe to bee yours: And if good Nascian could haue preuailed, hee had brought him hither to you. But the King would needs haue him goe with him, to please the Queene, because shee knowes him not yet to bee her Grand-childe. So, breaking off this discourse, King Perion, who had all this while entertained Grasinda with talke:
tooke leaue of her and the compa∣ny, because it drew neare supper time. Wherefore, withdrawing thence into his owne lodging, A∣madis followed him: & there, loo∣king forth at a windowe, till the tables were furnished, hee thus spake. Seeing sonne it hath plea∣sed God, that you haue ended all troubles, with so great honour: let the whole glory be ascribed to him, and while you liue, acknowledge thankfulnesse to your friends, who to help you in so serious a business, haue made no spare of their liues and goods, which bindes you the more to loue and honour them, re∣cōpencing their kindnesse so much as in you lieth. Considering, that without their assistance, it is most certaine, you had beene in great danger, not only of your liues losse, but also of your honour, which I account a thousand times dearer. And because it is no more then rea∣son, that, like as they haue beene pertakers of all paines and perils, so they ought to be of pleasure and contentment, which you haue re∣ceiued by their meanes: let it ther∣fore be no meane part of your care, to respect them in especial manner, by distributing such booty among them, as is in your hands, the Kings Aranigne, Barsinan, & others being your prisoners. Moreouer, such as you knowe affected to those Ladies, which keepe companie with the Princesse Oriana: let them haue equal cōten∣tment with your selfe, by espousing them, to whom their fancies are enclined. For which cause, I deli∣uer into your power, your sister Melitia, to giue her to him whom you thinke worthiest of her. You haue likewise your Cosen Mabila, and the Queen Brilania, to whom you stand highly obliged. Grasin∣da also, and the Queen Sardamira, who haue suffered a great parte of Orianaes sorrowes: me thinks they should participate in her fairest for∣tune, and be aduanced as you think meetest. Assuring you, that the greatest comfort I can haue in mine aged yeares, is, to see your brethren Galaor and Florestan married, that before I depart this life, I may re∣ioyce in issue from you all. Con∣sider hereof I pray you aduisedly; & further what I haue said, to your vttermost power. My Lord answe∣red Amadis, I will doe all that lies in me, to please both you & them. It is enough, quoth the King. And so all things beeing aptly ordered, they sate downe to supper. In the morning, a sudden sum∣mons was sent to all the chiefe Knights, for an immediate meeting: and when they were assembled, A∣madis entred into these speeches. Honourable Gentlemen & friends, the great and labourious trauaile, which you haue endured in these late warres: doth very well deserue, that now you should giue ease and respite to your spirits, and in re∣garde of the deare debt, wherein I stand engaged to you, to essay my vttermost meanes, to let you enioy those beatitudes, which (I know) are pleasing to euery man among you. For, as by your most gracious as∣sistance, afforded in my very nee∣rest extreamity, I haue attained to that, which I esteemed aboue all things else in the world, namely, the peaceable enioying of my long loued Oriana: Euen so, I beseech you (with all my heart) that each man would instantly declare, if hee stand affected to any Ladie or Gen∣tlewoman heere, for I assure you, on the faith of a Knight, to preuaile so farre as I can with them, that they shall not easily deny, what I
entreat on their friends behalfe. Moreouer, you know that king Aranigne, Barsidan, and many other beside, are our prisoners, defying those gracefull vertues, whereto the order of knighthood truely tyed them, and exercising (so much as in them lay) all cruelties and ty∣ranny. In regarde whereof, they are not worthie of any ransome, but iustly punishable, for the grie∣uousnesse of their treasons: and therefore I thinke it fit, that con∣sideration should be vsed, for diui∣ding their estates & goods among∣you. As for my selfe, I deny any part or portion belonging to mee, holding my selfe sufficiently satis∣fied, if I can compasse any means, of doing you any perticular plea∣sure or seruice. When they that were not mean∣ly affected to their Ladies, heard him vse these wordes, and knewe what power he had to forward them that way: you may well imagine, that they did not lende any deaffe are to such a pleasing motion, es∣pecially, Agraies, who earnestly en∣treated him, to giue his honou∣rable furtherance, for his marriage with the faire Olinda, Bruneo with Melicia, Grasandor with Mabila, and Quedragant, who neuer loued till then, declared his affection to Grasinda, saying. I now sufficient∣ly vnderstand, that youth and time haue (heretofore) been contrary to my quiet, hauing then no other care, but for the managing of my Horse and Armes: but at this in∣stant, yeares and reason constraines mee to another kinde of condition, so that if it like Madame Grasinda, to accept me as her husband, I shal account my happinesse equall to a∣ny mans, of what condition soe∣uer he be. Before God, said Florestan, I was once determined, to returne into Aliemaine, so soon as the businesse concerning my Lord Amadis was ended, as well to see my mother, as many other mine endeared friends. Neuerthelesse, I know not with what eie I obserued the Queen Sardamira, but this I am well assu∣red, that if I could compasse the meanes to marrie her; I should ea∣sily forget mine intended voyage, and all things else whatsoeuer. But others, more free from loues impe∣rious subiection, hauing their mindes wholly addicted to follow Armes: spake in a quite contrary language, desiring Amadis, to im∣ploy them in the conquest of Ara∣uignes kingdome, the countries be∣longing to Barsinan, or any where else. And we request (quoth they) no other part of booty, but the means of winning renowne, honour and Chiualrie. Hereupon, Amadis returned thē answere. Seeing you are of this disposition: with the good liking of the company, I will make a pre∣sent diuision. On Quedragant, I bestowe the countrie of Sansuega, for his larger portion in marrying with Grasinda. To you Bruneo, I giue the kingdom of Arauigne, with my sister Melicia. And as for my brother Florestan, I will worke so with the Emperour: that hee shall giue him the countrie of Calabria, with the Queen Sardamira, whom hee so dearely affecteth. As for my Lord Agraies, and Grasandor, they are (thankes bee to God) rich and mighty enough, by means of their fathers, & will content themselues (as I thinke) to enioy those beau∣ties that affect them. What else re∣maineth, shall be distributed parti∣cularly, according to the merit of euery man, so soon as King Lisuart shall be heere ariued. Which they
all liked well, and so we leaue them returning to their lodgings: atten∣ding the time, when they should goe and conuerse with their La∣dies, according to their wonted custome. CHAP. XXVI. How Bruneo de bonno Mer and Branfill, were appointed to iourney into Gaule, to fetch the Queene Elysena and Galaor, and of those aduen∣tures that happened to them in their returning back againe. SOme fewe dayes after that K. Perion, and the other Knights were come to the enclosed Isle; Agraies, Brunco, and they that had hope of speedie marriage, fearing least the absence of the Queene Elysena and Galaor, might cause a further deferring of that long desired day: Came and humbly requested King Perion, that he would send for them, whereto he presently yeelded. Whereupon Bruneo made first tender of his ser∣uice, saying. Sir, I humbly intreate you, that none other then my bro∣ther and I may haue this charge, for otherwise you shall doe vs wrong. Well then answered the King, smyling to himselfe, if I should graunt your owne request: I am perswaded, you would more gladly keepe company with Melicia, then vndertake so long a iourney from her. In good faith Sir, replied Bruneo. to be alwayes neere her, is the only happinesse I can desire: notwithstanding, I am willing to goe for the Queene, and Galaor on∣ly in my earnest affection to doe them seruice. By my faith, said An∣griote, you must not performe this voyage, without my companie. Why then (quoth the King) goe you all three, and heauen grant, that you may finde my sonne in better estate, then when I left him. Sir, answered Ysanio, some few daies since, certaine Merchants comming from Gaule, gaue mee credible assurance that hee was well recouered, because they had seene him; complayning only that his countenance was (as yet) pale and Wan, by reason of his long sick∣nesse. These newes were highly pleasing to the King, and all the companie, in regard whereof, Bruneo, and his two other friends, tooke shipping the next morning, and sayled with such prosperous Windes: that in few dayes after, they landed where the Queene then lay, of whom they were most gratiously entertayned, especially by Galaor, because hee longed to heare tidings from his brother and other friends. And as hee embraced them, with the tears trickling downe his cheekes, hee said. By my faith, my good Lords, misfortune hath so long kept mee companie, that, considering what iniurie she hath done mee (in with-holding me all this while from you and the exercise of Armes) it hath beene (well neere) a Thousand deaths to me. My Lord quoth Bru∣neo, wee haue brought you such newes, as will make a sufficient sa∣tisfaction, for all the anguish you haue endured. So, hee declared before the Queene, the encounter, and bat∣tailes betweene the Kings, Perion, and Lisuart, what great dangers
and perils they were in, by the sud∣den onset of King Arauigne and Ar∣chalaus: And last of all, the league of loue and amity, combined on both sides, and the seuerall marri∣ages consulted and agreed vpon. hereat Galaor was somewhat ama∣zed, hauing neuer heard any thing of such attempts, and answered Bru∣neo thus. Is it possible, that my no∣ble Lord king Lisuart should be in such extreamity, and I not neare him? Vpon my soule, I must now confesse, that Fortune loued mee much better then euer she did: For had I not beene sicke, whatsoeuer dutie I owe to the King my father, I should haue made no spare of my life, to succor the other. Yet it had fallen out worse for mee, if in the time of my sicknesse, I had recei∣ued any certaine tydings of this matter: vndoubtedly it had beene my death, to faile him in a necessity so vrgent. It is much better saide Bruneo, that all things are past in so good order. Then taking him by the hand, thus he proceeded. I receiued charge from my Lord Amadis, to doe his re-commendations to you, and to desire you, that you would cheere vp and recreate your spirits, in the best manner you can deuise: for he is minded (if you thinke it so con∣uenient) to haue you ioyned in marriage with Queen Briolania, so soone as you shall be ariued there. And wee were expressely sent from king Perion, to conduct the Queen to the Enclosed Isle, where he atten∣deth her comming, with a good∣ly traine of Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen. Son (quoth she to Galaor) we will part hence this next ensuing weeke, in the meane while, take order for shipping, and all things needefull for our voyage. And therefore presently sent for sai∣lers, who hauing vnderstood his pleasure, made immediate proui∣sion, of the very best Ship the King had, and went aboarde the sixt day following. Not farre had they sailed from the coast of Gaule, but they descri∣ed a vessell on the Sea, well fitted with the winde, and making nimble speed, the Pilot or Master striking saile, so soone as hee espyed the Queenes shippe. Whereupon, the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, thinking them to be Coursaires, or Pirates▪ forthwith armed themselues, and to vnderstand the truth, sent one of their Squires in a Squiffe towardes them, to demand of whence they were, and whither they intended. The Squire drawing neare vnto them, called out aloude vnto them, saying. Hoe, aboard there, they in the Shippe here not farre off from you, in kindnesse sent to knowe what you are, and whither you are bound? My friend, quoth a knight standing on the Decke, there is a Ladie of honour in this vessell, whose voyage tendeth to the En∣closed Isle. Beleeue mee Sir, replied the Squire, then shee hath met with company, if she be so pleased: for they that sent mee to you, are say∣ling thither, and you may safely come aboard them. Which words being ended, he returned to them he came from. In the meane space, that knight that was aboue, went downe to the Ladie, and acquainted her with the Squires message: by meanes wher∣of, shee sent one in a Frigate pre∣sently away, to vnderstand the truth, and whether (vpon the Squires words) shee might safely come to them, or no: and so went nearer to the Queenes Ship, where Angri∣ote being first of all seene, the other Knight spake thus vnto him. Sir,
a Squire of yours, (not long since) came to vs, to know what wee were and whither our trauaile intended. Wee gaue him answere, that wee were bound directly for the Enclo∣sed Isle, and thither (hee said) was likewise your intention, now Sir, because wee haue in charge, a Prin∣ceste of great esteeme; we pray you giue vs some assurance of your companie. Knight, answered Angriote, if you please to come a∣boord of vs, the Ladie you talke of shall finde a Queene heere, who wil gladly welcome her into her com∣pany, and giue her as gracious en∣tertainment, as shee can desire to haue. Sir, said the knight, I hear∣tily thanke you for her, and this I dare assure you, that hauing heard her cause, and the reason of her tra∣uailing thus on the Sea, you will so much compassionate her case, as not to deny her your helpe if shee require it of you. So taking leaue, hee returned to the other vessell, which presently came and ioyned with the Queens. Then came vp a Ladie in a garment of black cloath, shewing (both she and all her companie) very sad and disconsolate lookes, whereat An∣griote (who well obserued them) was much abashed, reputing her by her countenance, to bee a Lady of good discent and reputation. And courteously saluting her, deman∣ded, if shee pleased to ascend, and visit the Queene. Sir Knight, quoth shee, I will doe what shall please you▪ neuerthelesse, I pray you name her to me, and them that are in her companie, Madam, said Angriote, she is the Queene of Gaule, my Lord Galaor her sonne, is with her, and three other knights of the Enclosed Isle, whither we are sayling. Then will I attend vpon her and you thi∣ther, replied the Lady. So Angriote, supporting her by the hand, brought her into the Queenes Cabin, and shee hauing vnderstood all that you haue heard already, welcommed her most gra∣tiously▪ but the Lady ing much oppressed with griefe, fell downe at her feete, intending to kisse them, which the Queene would not per∣mit, put raysed her gently, desiting to know the cause of her sorrow. Madam, quoth shee, though now I am left quite naked, of all fortunes blessings and fauours, hauing no o∣ther comfort or repose, but only the recytall of my misfortunes: yet you may beleeue mee, that I was (not long time since) a dy of great qualitie, and married to the disceaed King of Dacia, by whom I had two Sonnes, and one only in∣fortunate daughter, and so much the more infortunate in hir Birth, by being the death of the King hi Father, and the totall ruine of mee and her brethren, for you must vn∣derstand, Madam, that after shee was married to the Duke of tia, one of the greatest neighbouring Princes to my Countrie: by how much the day of her Bridall was pleasing, by so much the more, was this mariage wretched and misera∣ble. For, very soone after the so∣lemnitie, the Duke, my new sonne in Law, beeing yong, and ambiti∣ous of rule: conspired the death of my husband, and of my two other children, the eldest of them hauing not (as then) attained to the age of fourteene yeares. According to his proiect, so did he performe it vpon my Lord, & appointing a day, pre∣tending an honest visitation of vs, accompanied with a great number of his people, which (as hee said) were brought with him for our greater honour: the King my hus∣band no way misdoubting the pre∣meditated
treason, rode foorth to meete him, and as hee embraced him, t villaine drewe a pocket∣dagger, and cruely murdered him. Both my sonnes (in a faire & for∣tunate hoe for them) came riding a good distance behinde their fa∣ther, and heairng of this bloody tumult: returned in a maine gal∣lop backe to the Citie, where the traytor holds them (as yet) sharply besieged. Then was I absent, in a pil∣grimage to our Ladie, at a very ancient Church, builded on the top of a high Promooe, and there I was aduertised of my mis-hap. If then I was in woefull ex∣treamy, or no: be you my iudge good Madame, considering I (in a moment) found my selfe vtterly de∣stitute of all reme, and forsaken of any hope: so that, but for the comfort and aduise giuen mee, by these two Knights which keepe me company, I had not liued one on∣ly houre. They called to remēbrance, one nan ed Amadis de Gaule, who is said, to be the refuge and support of all afflicted Ladies, neuer denying them his assistance. Whereupon, I haue attempted this long voyage, to finde him at the Enclosed Isle, where hee is affirmed certainely to be, with a great number of other good Knights, his companions in Armes. When the wrong done me by this wicked sonne in lawe, shall be knowne to that noble Lord and his other friends, & how extream∣ly hee maintaines the siege against mine owne naturall sonnes: I hope hee and they will take compassion on me, and giue mee such succour, as by meanes thereof, I shall expell the enemy out of my countrie, for my subiects attend nothing else, but to vndertake Armes against him, they want but only a comamn∣der to leade them. Greatly was the Queen mooued to pittie, hearing the misfortunes which besell the Queene of Dacia: and the three Knights were so near∣ly touched, that they instantly re∣solued to giue her helpe, and the Queene thus replied. Sister, and faire friend, your sorrow doth or a little grieue me; neuerthelesse, I consider Fortune as she is, seldom sparing either strong or feeble, king or subiect. So that they which taste of her best fauours, ought most to eare  suspect her mutability: in regarde, that when they thinke themselues to be aest and secure, they fall the sooner into your dis∣aster. But, seeing good happe hath sent you thus to me; I take some comfort, that we shall saile in com∣pany together into the Enclosed Isle, where I hope you shall finde such succour as you seeke for. Madame, answered the Queen of Dacia, I remember, that certaine Knights (not long since) trauayling through our countrie, tolde the late king my husband, that Amadis had succoured Oriana, daughter to King Lisuart, who was constrained∣ly sent to the Emperour of Rome. But Amadis rescued her from the Romaines, and conuayed her to the Enclosed Isle (euen in despight of their vttermost mallice) where yet shee abideth well accompanied: which giues me hope, that seeing shee hath tried the rigour of mis∣fortune, she will like wise take pitty on my iniuries, so that (by her meanes) I may finde mercy accor∣ding to my expectation. By my faith Madame, said Angriote, if the Queene bee so pleased, you shall passe hence no further: for I am readie to goe with you, and will make no spare of my perion, in your seruice. The like answered Bruneo
and Branfill, most humbly entrea∣ting the Queene, to graunt them leaue: considering, shee was now come so neare to the Enclosed Isle, as shee might soone be there, with∣out any hindrance, and so much they importuned her, that at length shee condiscended. Hereupon, they entred into the Queene of Daciaes Ship, and taking farewell of the rest, commanded the Mariners to ho sailes, and away. The Queene of Gaule and Galaor, they pursued their porpose to the Enclosed Isle, where (soone after) they landed, and the Knights bee∣ing aduertised thereof, went forth to entertaine them. When King Pe∣rion sawe Galaor in so good dispo∣sition, the graue olde man was so wonderfully ioyfull, that (smiling) hee said to him. In good sadnesse sonne, seeing now we are in amity with King Lisuart. I will stand in lesse doubt of you hence forwarde, then heretofore I haue done. My Lord (quoth he) I was neuer so ioy∣full in all my life, as when newes were brought me, of your leauging with him, and long I wish that this peace may continue. There shall bee no fault in mee answered the King. Looking then aside, he saw Oria∣na and her traine, comming foorth of the Parke, to meete the Queene, to whom the King saide. You see Madame, wee haue no want of good cōpany here. No beleeue me, my Lord said she, & now I need not maruaile any more, that I heard no newes from you in so long a time, hauing worke enough to do, to gouerne these Ladies. Amadis and the Emperour led her by either arme, when Oriana came and did her humble reuerence, as the Queen also did the like to her. But Galaor, who was none of the hindemost, beholding the Queene Briolania: left all the rest, and went to her, & kissing her, she blushed so sweetly, that Amadis perceiuing it, said. Ma∣dame, I hope here after (hauing so good a Knight to be your seruant) you will diuide a little of that dain∣tie colour, betweene your selfe and him, for hee hath great neede of it, as you may perceiue, and therefore to your gracious mercy I com∣mend him. Galaor, who had not seene her, since his parting from Sobradisa, when hee brought Florestan thither, but only one other time, being as then very young, when shee came into Great Brittaine to seeke Ama∣dis: found her now so faire, and growen great with infinite rare per∣fections, that his former loue to her renewed so strongly, that hee, who neuer sought after a woman, to ma∣rie her, resolued now to haue none other then shee, and shee with the selfe same purpose to hm. And so it came to passe, for soon after, they were married, and of them descen∣ded sonnes bolde and hardie, which conquered by (their valour) many strange countries: as you shall vn∣derstand more at large in the fist booke, reading the actions of Es∣plandian, and there, all their high enterprises, are amply discoursed. But returning to our former bu∣sinesse, so soone as the Queene E∣lisena, was entered the Parke: the Knights (according to the custome ordayned by Oriana, on the day when Amadis brought her thither) departed: and this lawe lasted, vn∣till the marriages agreed vpon, were celebrated in the presence of King Lisuart, as also of the Queene Bri∣sena, whose comming thither was hourely expected. In the meane while, their vsual exercise was, some to hunting, others to hawking, ac∣cording
as the time and season ser∣ued. For the place was accomoda∣ted with all kind of Beasts, Foules of the Riuer, and other such like pleasures, as it were most admira∣ble to be hold. And in these varie∣ties of delights we will leaue them, to tell you, what happened to Bru∣neo, Angriote, and Branfill, after their parting from the queene Eli∣send. CHAP. XXVII. How Bruneo de bonne Mer, Branfill and Angriote, went on with the Queene of Dacia: and what aduentures happened to them. AFter that the three knights were entred into the Shippe, be∣longing to the queen of Dacia, shee not knowing their names, began in this manner with them. Lords, seeing it hath pleased you to vndertake this trauaile for me, let me intreate you, to tell me what, and who you are, to the end, I may doe you such honour as becomes mee. For you know, that I haue no more vnder∣standing of you, then as one that neuer saw you, vntill I came aboard the shippe, where I found you in companie of the queene. Madam, answered Angriote, our same is (as yet) so slenderly noysed through the World, that to tell you our names, will giue you no greater knowledge of vs, then before: ne∣uerthelesse, because your desire is such, I will presently therein resolue you. These two my friendly com∣panions, are brethren, the one na∣med Branfill, the other Bruneo de bonne Mer, not long since affianced to the Princesse Melicia, sister to Lord Amadis de Gaule, to whom you were trauailing. As for my selfe, I am called Angriote d'Estra∣uaus, who desires to doe you any seruice. Oh my faire starres, quoth shee, what friendly conducts haue you beene to mee? Neuer could I wish for better tidings, because I haue heard you much esteemed, by such as haue spoken of you to my late king and husband, and how helpe∣full you haue beene to Amadis, in behalfe of the Princesse Oriana: which encreaseth my hope now better then euer, that I shall bee ful∣ly reuenged on the traytor, who hath so highly wronged mee. Madam, said Angriote, wee will doe for you what wee can, without spare of any thing in our power. Humbly did the queene returne thankes both to him and the rest, and from that time forwarde, shew∣ed her selfe more sprightly dispo∣sed, then before she had done. And within some short while after, they discouered the coast of Dacia, where as they purposed, so they tooke landing. Now did Angriote thinke it most conuenient, that the queene should keepe still aboord the ship, vntill they perceiued how the af∣fayres proceeded, and that they (being guided by the two knights which attended on the queene) should ride directly to the besieged Citie, where gayning meanes of entrance, the two Princes might bee acquainted with their tidings. Hereupon, they committed her to heauens protection, and rode a∣way
keeping the most couert passa∣ges they could, till darke night ouer-tooke them, & hoping to escape the watch, fell into the ambush of ten knights, fiue of which being slaine the other fiue fled to the Campe, to raise the Allarme. In the interim time, Angriote and his consorts still rode on, euen vntill they came close to the walles of the Citie: where the guides cal∣led to the Sentinell, and being well knowne to the Watch, a Posterne was suddenly opened for them, whereat they entred, and quicklie were conducted to the two Princes lodgings, Sonnes to the murdered king. They vnderstanding the oc∣casion of their ariuall, and that the queene their mother, was returned in health and prosperous successe: first gaue thankes to heauen, and then welcommed them in such good manner, as their present e∣state and distresse could affoord. Yet let me tell you, they came but to a very sorry supper, for there was a great dearth of victualls in the Cittie, through the seuere besie∣ging of the enemie, & our knights were so hungrie (not hauing eaten any thing all that Day, that they needed no sauce to whet on their apetite. Wherefore seeing no o∣ther redresse, and making a virtue of necessitie; they went to rest. All this while, the Duke and his Armie kept themselues in forme of battaile, remaining quiet till the breake of Day: but then the other fiue knights of the watche, which had escaped from the rest, brought such dreadfull tidings, as they veri∣ly perswaded themselues, that some fresh succour was comming to the Cittie. When it was faire day, each went to his charge, and the kings Sonnes, with the knights of the Enclosed Isle, called a counsell of the principall Captaines and commanders: Wherein was concluded, that one part of their people, should bee ready to issue foorth the night following, at the changing of the Watch, as well to make an essay of sudden surprising the enemie: as also, to get foorth (during the Allarm) the yonger of the two Princes, with Bruneo and a guide only, for conducting them to the neerest neighbouring towns, and villages, to rge their reuolt from the faithlesse Duke. Where-to they easily condescended, in re∣gard of their vniust oppressions: as also, because the queene was re∣turned, and the knights which she had brought with her. Hereupon, about the dead of night, Angriote and Branfill the chiefe vndertakers of this enter∣prise) came to the place where they found their men ready to march. The night was extraordinary darke, with a mightie winde and extreame rayne, so colde; as seldome had beene felt the like: which gaue them great hope, to finde but small resi∣stance at the Watch, as indeede it fell out to their expectation. For, so soone as each man had put a white crosse vpon his brest, to know one another in the horrid darke∣nesse: they went out secretly at a false Port, marching on faire and softly, without the least noyse, and seazing on the Scouts, slew them, before the watch could vnderstand any thing. For, the time did so  them, as some slept, others lay to shelter themselues in the Trenches: so that they made a shrewd slaughter of them, before the Allarm could come to the campe. By which happy meanes, they of the Cittie, (following their good fortune) ran in vpon the rest, whom they found in their Tents
and Cabanes, and of them also they made such a massacre; as the clamour came to the Dukes eares, and he presently mounted on horse-backe, with such few followers as he could get to him. Now was the Allarme, re-enfor∣ced, and the noyse of Drums and Trumpets so great, beside the out∣cry of the Souldiers, the impetuous murmur of the windes and raine: as the very boldest spirit became much daunted, because there was neither Tent nor Pauillion, but they were all ouerthrowne, & rampled in the mire. Notwithstanding, the Duke compassed the meanes to ral∣lire the more part of his horsemen, and with some small number of his foot, marched directly against his enemies: who perceiuing their ap∣proach, and contenting themselues with what they had done; made a softe retire towardes the Citie, be∣cause their strength did no way e∣quall their enemies, who followed vppon them with a fierce charge. But Angriote and Branfill (beeing in the restood them so cou∣rageously, as very many were dis∣mounted, and more ore wounded. Which the Duke well obseruing, began to despaire of his successe, & as it many times comes to passe, that men thinking to reuenge their iniuries, runne thereby into grea∣ter perils: euen so this wicked Prince (guided more by furie, then reason) rushed in so farre among his enemies, as by a powerfull stroke with a Mace or Battell. Ae, hee was beaten downe, taken and carried away. At the sight hereof, the terrour of his Souldiers, grew so great that beeing quite out of hrt, they retyred to their Campe, and Angriote and his followers, re∣turned backe into the Citie, with their booty. During the time of this hotte skimish, Bruneo de bonne Mer, see∣ing a fitte and commodious houre for his dislodging: set on away with the yong Prince, & his guide, and without any impeachment, tra∣uailed so successefully, that they a∣riued (by point of day)  to a goodly Towne or Citie  A∣lumenta, where they met  two Knights, armed at all points, who had beene sent by the duke the day before, about some especiall af∣faires. The first that discouered these Knights, was the guide, who shewing them to Bruneo, said. Sir Knight, for Gods sake let vs turne backe againe: see you not two of our most especiall enemies making towardes vs. Art thou affraid? an∣swered Bruneo, bee carefull only of thy Master, and for the st, leaue that to me. So charging his ln, and giuing the spurre to his noise, hee cryed out aloude to the two Knights. Traytours, theeues, sup∣porters to the bad cause of the  Duke in the worlde: you are but dead, except you defend your selues the better. By this cry, the other well knew, that (perforce) they must prepare for fight: wherefore, without re∣turning any answere, they ran both at Bruneo. The one crossed and broke his Lance, and the other fai∣led in the attainte: but so did not Bruneo, for his Lance entring be∣tweene his thighes and the Saddle, threwe the Knight to the ground with so violent a fall, that there hee lay more then halfe entranced. His other companion, hoping to re∣uenge his cause, drawing forth his sword, returned vpon Bruneo, and gaue him such a blow, as clet his Shield in the midst. But hee caried not this comfort farre, for Bruneo ioyned with him suddenly, and rea∣ched
him such a mighty stroake on the Helmet, as made him sit stag∣gerring on his horse: by which ad∣uantage, catching fast holde on his Gorget, hee drew him so strongly to him, that downe hee fell to the ground amazedly. There lay the Knight shaking & quaking, while Bruneo (diuerse times) couruetted his horse ouer him, euen as if hee meant to tread him in peeces: as indeede hee had done, but that he cryed out to him for mercy. Arise then, said Bruneo, and see if thy companion be dead, or no. The Knight beeing full of paine, rose quakingly vp, and com∣ming to the other, tooke off his Hel∣met, when receiuing ayre, hee be∣gan to breath. Lift him vp, saide Bruneo, into thine owne saddle, and sit behinde to supporte him vppe: which the Knight accordingly did. Then looking about, hee sawe that the young Prince & his guide were fled: but they returned againe vp∣on fight of the victory, and being come to him, hee said to the Kings sonne. My Lord, heere I present you two prisoners, aduise with your selfe, whether I shall pardon them, or put them to death before your face, for more terrour to the rest, that followe the treacherous Duke their Master. Sir Knight, replyed the Prince, they should not pay pe∣nance for this offence, I pray you send them backe to the Campe, where, if they will become ours, I will cause them to be as well respe∣cted, as lies in my power to doe. This aduise was wel liked by Bru∣neo, and much did hee commend the wisedome and good minde of the young Prince, wherfore, vpon receipt of their fidelity, they rode together to the Citie Aumenta, where they were no sooner ariued, but the inhabitants knew both the guide, & their young Lord. Wher∣upon, in a very small time, all the people assembled about him, to kisse his hand, and offred him the very vttermost of their power: whereof Bruneo being very ioyfull, spake vnto them in this manner. worthy Citizens, the loue which you haue shewen to this young Prince, your true and lawfull Lord, bindeth him to you in endeared af∣fection, so long as hee shall liue: and the trust which he reposeth in you, should binde you to loue and honour him. You see hee is but young, and hath small meanes to expell the enemy out of your li∣mits, and that enemie (as you all well knowe) murdered by treason, your late good and royall King. Since when, vsurping on the king∣dome, hee hath besieged the chie∣fest Cittie, and keepeth his strength (as yet) so near about it: that with∣out your ayde, it is in danger of vt∣ter spoyle and ruine, with all the noble Citizens and good Knights abyding therein. Wherefore, wor∣thie Lords and Citizens, now that occasion so louingly offers herselfe, by returne of the Queene your roy∣ali Mistresse, who hath brought with her three Knights of the En∣closed Isle, whereof I am one: con∣clude among your selues to reuenge such iniuries as you haue receiued by the traytor, and doe so much, that your legittimate Lords may be re-seated in their rights. And this I dare assure you, if you will follow me: that I shall haue the meanes, to surprise both him and his Army, yea, vtterly to ouerthrowe them; only by the helpe of my compani∣ons, who are alreadie within the Cittie, and they will not faile to is∣sue foorth, so soone as I shall giue them the signall. As thus hee continued on his O∣ration,
there ariued two peasants, who came in great hast from the camp to aduertise thē of this citie, for certaine: That the besieged knights and Cittizens, had made a fallie forth (in the night) vpon the Watch, whom they had slaine, as also a great number more, before they could bee any way succoured. Moreouer, that the Duke himselfe was beaten downe from his horse, taken, & led away prisoner into the Cittie, by two strange knights, as the report went. Hereof, said these fellows, there neede no doubt to be made, because we were in the camp when the Allarm was giuen, where we were constrayned to abide, by reason of the turbulent night, which hindered vs from selling our victualls. But wee were neuer in such a feare, and not without great reason: considering that the Soul∣diers were (and yet are) so mighti∣ly terrified, as they ranne away con∣fusedly, striuing who shall get him-selfe first farthest off. So helpe mee God, said Bruneo, these are happy newes. Now bestirre your selues, my friends, let vs forth-with part hence, and pursue them in the rere, that wee may the sooner send them packing. At these words euery man cryed, to Armes: but Bruneo (vpon better aduice) deferred this hast vntill the euening, to the end they might come vpon them vnprouided: in the meane while they went to re∣ceiue some sustentation, that they might the better march away in the night. His aduice was geeerally allowed, and they all resolued, to liue and die with him. Hereupon, the houre for their departing being come, they were all marshalled in order, and each battalion, appoin∣ted, marching on in good order to∣wards the Campe: and about break of day, they came neere it within a quarter of a league. Then Bruneo by fiering of a Beacon, gaue a sig∣nall to them of the Cittie, aduerti∣sing them thereby what hee inten∣ded. But the Dukes watch percei∣uing it, presently sent intelligence to their Captaines, who doubting some immediat danger, and not for∣getting the precedent night and great losse: caused their bagge, and baggage closely to bee trussed vp, and raysed their siedge so speedily, as they were gone three leagues off, before any knowledg could be had of them, or where they were. But, so soone as these newes came to Angriote and Bruneo, they and their people mounted on horse-backe to follow them: finding them very conueniently, driuing all their luggage before them: then they beganne to skirmish each a∣gainst other, and although the har∣quebuziers kept themselues behind with the greater part of the Horse: yet were they so sharpely charged by them of the Cittie, that they fell from their ranckes, and ranne into great disorder. By meanes wherof very many lost their liues, a great number were taken prisoners, and more had receiued much greater damage, but that they rallied them-selues together againe, and kept in a fast combination. Angriote well obseruing this, and calling to minde, that the pursuite of a desperat enemie, causeth (often times) the losse of a battaile already wonne: commanded retreate to bee sounded, and the rather, bee∣cause darke night approached. So, returning backe to the Cittie, each man betooke himselfe to rest till the next morning, concluding then, to goe visit the Queene, who (as you haue already heard) remained still aboard her Shippe, in expectation
of tydings from the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, and of her sonnes. Ac∣cordingly, they came thither to her, finding her so oppressed with melancholy, as no woman possibly could be more. But when she saw them in so good disposition, vn∣derstanding also the surprisall of her enemie, and dissipation (most rui∣nous) of his Campe: her soule be∣came extraordinarily ioyfull, as tri∣umphing in the very highest hap∣pinesse the world could yeeld her. And the Princes, her sonnes, with the three Knights, came neare vnto her, to kisse her hand: which shee would not suffer, but embra∣ced them very graciously, decla∣ring no meane thankfulnesse for her happy fortune. Afterwarde, they conuayed her into a rich Litter, purposely brought for her iourney, and so cō∣ducted her to the Pallace in most royall manner: where shee was no sooner alighted, but she comman∣ded the Duke to be brought before her, as (accordingly it was perfor∣med. And albeit shee had resolued with her thoughts, not to execute any reuenge vpon him, but (euen in meere pittie) to forget and for∣giue all: yet considering what shamefull wrongs she had suffered, and the murder of the King her hus∣band so fresh in her soule; shee commanded him presently to the ibbet. But the Knights of the En∣closed Isle were not therewith con∣tented, and therefore, in most gra∣cious and modest manner, tolde her: that they neuer tooke any pri∣soner to mercy, to whom (after-warde) they vsed any molestation. Wherefore, they desired her, to containe her purpose till their departure: and then, to doe what shee thought fitte, and as her Councell should best aduise her, requiring also fauour for their de∣parture. Shee fearefull to offend such ho∣norable & high deseruing friends, returned this answere. Nay my Lords, thinke not, but I will doe whatsoeuer you commande mee: yet notwithstanding, you must needes grant me, to stay heere with mee eight or tenne daies more. In which time, I hope to compasse the Coronation of my sonne, and then to send him along with you to Lord Amadis, if you will but honour me so much, as to bee his conuoy thither. Madame, quoth they, wee are all herewith heartily contented. Hereupon she sent pre∣sently to one of the Masters of the houshold, giuing him charge, to see all things fitting in readinesse, as were belonging to such a solemni∣tie, and in him there wanted not a∣ny dilligence. The day of triumph being come, the young King, accompanied with the Princes of his blood, the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, & mul∣titudes of noble Personages more: rode maiestically to the Cathedrall Church, where they heard solemne and diuine seruice. Afterward, he was conducted to a goodly Thea∣ter most magnificently adorned, and there by sound of Trumpets, and voyce of the Heralds, he was openly proclaimed King: he throw∣ing much golde and siluer among the people, crying three seuerall times, Largesse, Largesse, Largesse, giuen by the most mighty and mag∣nanimous Prince, Garinter, king of Dacia. As foure of the chiefest Dukes in the kingdome, conducted him to the place where the royall feast was prepared, the Trumpets and Cla∣rions sounded on all sides: so that, for the space of three whole daies
and nights together, the people ceased not, from making Bonfires, and other signes of ioyfull trium∣phing. As also the Nobility of the Court, had Maskes, Tourneies, Dances, and such like pastimes: which had continued much longer, if Angriote and his companions would haue stayed there. But they earnestly importuned the Queene, to licence their departure, which (much against her minde) she was enforced to grant, and before their embarquing, thus she spake to thē. Noble Gentlemen, although it is impossible for me, in any dutie to requite what you haue done for mee, without any merite at all on mine owne behalfe: yet is so falles out at this season, that (running in∣to a farther debt) I am to solicite you with a second request, and wherein, I desire you, not to deny mee. You know very well, that I neuer sawe Lord Amadis de Gaule, for whose sake you did partly (as I imagine) vndertake this long voy∣age, which hath fallen out most for∣tunate to mee, and to your endlesse honour for euer. Now, I haue not any thing more deare in esteeme, then the new created King my son, who (as I haue already tolde you) I desire to send to the Enclosed Isle, to liue among so many good knights as are there: vntill he come to yeares fit for knighthood, ho∣ping that a nouell kind of breeding there, will highly aduantage him, and that then, Lord Amadis will deale so honourably with him, as to bestow knighthood on him with his owne hand. Wherefore, once more I entreate you, to take him with you, and deliuer him to Lord Amadis, as a present from me. Madame, answered Bruneo, I faithfully promise you, that (with all my heart) I will performe it; and further I dare assure, that hee will be very welcome thither. Take or∣der then for his equipage, because wee would aboard to morrow, the winde now sitting so prosperously for vs. Heereupon, the Queene ha∣uing fitted all things necessary for her sonne: with a very honoura∣ble traine, conducted him to the Shippe, and there committing him to God, and the Knights louing care, away they sayled, discoue∣ring (in fewe dayes) the coaste of the Enclosed Isle. But before they landed, they sent to Amadis, to let him vnderstand, that the king of Dacia was in their companie, beeing purposely sent thither to him, and to remaine vnder his go∣uernement. Which caused Ama∣dis immediately to take horse, and accompanied with many of the knights, conducted him to the lodging of king Perion.
CHAP. XXVIII. How King Lisuart, his Queene Brisena, and their Daughter Leonora, de∣parted from Vindilisore, to goe for the Enclosed Isle according as it was concluded on, at their setting from Lubania. NOt long since, it was told you, that the same day as King Lisuart came to his Queene, hee acquainted her, with his promise made to Amadis, and some others beside: entreating her likewise most earnestly, to take order for all things fitting her owne preparation, and her daughter Leo∣nora whom hee had affianced, by his worde, to the Emperour, and that they might set away the next weeke following. In the meane while, he sent to Galuanes and Ma∣dsima, to come to beare him com∣pany in this vaoyage, as according∣ly they did. Soone after, they set on forward, and at the end of eight dayes, came within lesse then foure leagues of the Pallace of Apolidon. Whereof when king Perion and the rest were aduertised, they mounted on horse backe, with the Ladies and Gentlewomen, ryding not farre be∣fore they mette them. Many em∣bracings past on either side, but A∣madis and Galaor alighted, so soone as they came to King Lisuart, only to kisse his hand; which hee would not suffer, but embracing them in his armes, desired themto mount themselues againe. King Perion, who came one of hindemost, gaue the spurre to his horse, and gallopped to meete king Lasuart: who came in the like man∣ner towards him, and they both embraced very louingly together. In the meane space, Oriana went to the Queene her mother, and do∣ing her very humble reuerence: she entertayned her so graciously, as no woman liuing could doe more. As the Queene Elisena, Briolanta, Sardamira, and all the other Ladies saluted each other: the Emperour Arquesill came, and alighted from his horse, to kisse, and welcome them. Then the knights of great Brittaine went among the Ladies, who held them in pleasing and fa∣miliar discourse, vntill they came to the Pallace of Apolidon, where King Lisuart, and Queene Brisena, were lodged. Quedragant condu∣cted King Cildadan to his lodging; Amadis, King Arban and Grmedan, Guillan Galaor and Nrandell, and Agraies his vnckle Galuanes, all these were thus honourably atten∣ded. Now was Esplandian iust equall in age with the yong king of Dacia, and this very day grew in such friendly acquaintance with him: as they made themselues vowed com∣panions together: neuer (thence forward) to sunder companie. But more especially, after they receiued the order of knight-hood, and du∣ring their voyage to Constantinople, where Esplandian became amorous of the faire Leonerina, whose graci∣ous companie hee enioyed, by the meanes of his companion Talan∣que, Sonne to Galaor, and Manely le Sage, Sonne to King Cildadan, whom they begot on the two Nie∣ces to Vrganda the Vnknowen, in the time of their imprisonment: As our historie more amplie relateth
in the fift Booke, wherefore at this time we will speake no more there-of, but returne to our first pur∣pose. After the ariuall of king Lisuart in this manner, the Lords, Ladies, and Gentlewomen, being walking together in the garden of Apolidon, viewing the rare and most artificiall pictures: they heard (without the pallace) a wonderfull noyse and cla∣mour of people, and therefore sent immediatly to know the reason thereof. Newes came to them for certaine, that on the Sea there was a fire so dreadfull, as neuer had the like beene seene before, and it made directly towards the Port: where-upon, the knights sent for their hor∣ses, mounting on them presently, and the Ladies vp into the highest Turrets, the better to behold this meruaile. All of them did visiblie discerne on the Sea, a flaming Rock so impetiously driuen by the winds and waues, as if it were continually in danger of drowning. And that which most augmented their feare, was, a sudden alteration of this fire, into the shape of a most horrible and hiddeous serpent, which in more then supernaturall manner, extended forth his wings so farre, as a very good Archer was not able to shoote. If this gaue them iust cause of a∣mazement, that which followed did no lesse, for it came directly to∣wards them, with his head so highly exalted, as the head or scuttle of a Shippe-mast, deliuering such thick black smoake out at his nosthrills, as made the sight of it to be lost many times together: then suddenly a∣gaine was it heard to hisse and make a noyse, as neuer could the like di∣uelish terror be talked of: the com∣mon people taking it to bee some diuine iudgement, and a punish∣ment sent from heauen, for a noto∣rious affliction vpon them all, fled vp into the highest part of the Isle: and the like did most part of the knights, though much against their mindes, because their Horses, af∣frighted at the horrid sight of this monster, beganne to snoare, and fling about, and foaming vpon the bits in their mouthes, ranne vp in∣to the mountaines, their Masters being vnable to stay them. Yet in the end, such as preferred honour before losse of life, got themselues dismounted, returning back to the Sea shoare, to make resistance a∣gainst this monster, if it should pre∣sume to come on land. No sooner were they returned thither but they saw the Serpent ad∣uance his wings, as if hee meant to flie away: and instantly from vnder∣neath them launched foorth a small Frigot, couered with cloath of Gold, hauing two dwarfes in it ro∣wing with Oares, conducting a very beautifull Damosell, and two E∣squires attending on her. Sudden∣ly King Lisuart called to mind how terribly Vrganda affrighted him, when first shee came to him in the Cittie of Fenusa, assuring them all that doubtlesse this was shee and none other. Sir, answered Amadis I beganne to imagine as much, so soone as I discouered the Friggot: although (before) I knew not what to thinke, but was verily perswaded, some Diuell was come to worke vs mischiefe. Scarsely had hee concluded these words, but Vrganda shewed her selfe to them all: whereupon, their former great feare, was conuerted into as exceeding ioy, and so much the rather, because in her owne fa∣miliar shape shee came on Land, which seldome before shee vsed to doe. For at all other times, when
she would bee seene in any such as∣semblies: shee came in the likenes of an aged woman or Beldame, or as a childe, a beast, a bird, or any si∣militude best pleasing to hir selfe. Then King Lisuart & Amadis went on to welcome her, and so did the Emperour, whom shee had neuer seene before: Neuerthelesse, shee shaped her course to him, before a∣ny of the other, and spoke to him in this manner. Sir, neuer in all my life time haue I beene in any place, that was honoured with your royall pre∣sence, till now: yet notwithstan∣ding, I know you so well, as I de∣sire to doe any gratefull seruice to you and your Empresse, as alwaies hath been my studious inclination, and as your selues hereafter shall perceiue. For by my meanes, the first fruite proceeding from your generation, shall be preserued from diuerse dangers; wherefore I wish you to remember my words. And although my abyding is farre from the limittes of your Empire: yet can I (when pleaseth mee) be with you in Rome, in lesse space then the compasse of a naturall day. Lady, said the Emperour, farre be it from me, to refuse your gracious kinde∣nesse, much lesse, to misprise your happy remembrance: Assuring you, I holde this for the greatest good that can happen vnto mee, and I hope that you will keepe pro∣mise with me. I will not faile answe∣red Vrganda. Then looking about, and seeing Amadis neare her, kissing him, she said. Although (my Lord) you haue beene so highly fauoured by For∣tune, as to teach the height of your affectionate desires: yet giue not too much credite to her wanton smyles. For, although you seeme to bee now aboue all stormie tem∣pests, beeing in the peacefull pos∣session of your long loued Oriana, whom you preferre before al things else whatsoeuer: yet let me tell yee, you will finde more serious busi∣nesse hereafter to bee performed, then (as yet) you haue gone tho∣rough. Because blame will more nearely choake you, by losse of the reputation wherein you now are; then if you had neuer attained ther∣to. But as I haue beene alwayes yours in your passed fortunes, so credit me. I will continue in them that are to come. Madame, quoth hee, considering the manifolde fa∣uours I haue receiued from you, and what true signes of loue you haue alwaies shewen me: you may well perswade your self, that while any breath remaineth in this body, you haue intire power of comman∣ding me, and that my desires are ap∣ted to your obedience. Concer∣ning such trauailes, as are destined and ordained to me: you know my wonted patience to endure them, and my vndoubted hope in you, will enable mee with sufficient strength to withstand all encom∣brances, beeing guided by your fa∣uour and good counsell. King Lisuart then came to her, saying. Madame, if you be so plea∣sed, let vs goe on to the Pallace of Apolidon, where the Ladies doe at∣tend your comming: for they are already aduertised of your ariuall, and there we may much better con∣ferre together. With all my heart, quoth shee, and calling the two young Squires forth of the Frigate, placing the one on her right hand, and the other on her left, she went on with the King and troupe: then calling Esplandian to her, thus shee spake. I promise you (faire youth) I haue had better remembrance of you, then you can imagine: And
beholde I haue brought hither these two Gentlemen, to keepe compa∣ny with you, because you will stand in much need of their helpe, when you shall bee in the greatest heate of all your businesse. Wherefore, hence forwarde, I pray you to af∣fect them, euen as deare as your sefe. Then, perceiuing the Ladies cō∣ming to meet them, shee gaue o∣uer talking, to doe them reuerence: and as shee kissed each after other, comming to Oriana, shee spake out so loude as all might heare her. Be∣leeue me Madame, neuer was I bet∣ter pleased, then being in such cō∣panie: for hardly can (elsewhere) be found such store of bright beau∣ties, enriched with all rarietie of choyce perfections. Madame, an∣swered Queene Brisena, no doubt but your words would be very true, if all here were such as you speake of. So taking her by the hand, she conducted her into her chamber, where the Knights left them, that they might conuerse more priuate∣ly together. CHAP. XXIX. Of the conference which Amadis had with his Cosen Dragonis, in gi∣uing him the kingdome of the Profound Isle, and the Princesse E∣stoilleta to wife, whom he had loued a long time. DRagonis was not with Amadis, when he made partition of king Ara∣uignes countries, and them belonging to the other prisoners: but followed a Damosell, that guided him from the Monastarie of Lubania, to fight with Angriffort, Lord of the Deep Gulffe, who kept her father in pri∣son, to compell him surrender vp a Castle, belonging to him. And the Combate was wonderfull between them, for Angriffort was the most hardy and valiant Knight, then li∣uing in all that countrie. Notwith∣standing, Dragonis had the victory, and made him promise, to meete him at the Enclosed Isle, within twentie daies next ensuing, & there to craue mercy of the Princesse O∣riana. This Dragonis that we speake of, was young, actiuely disposed, and an excellent warriour: as hee well declared in the Isle of Mongoza, when King Lisuart, came thither to assault Galuanes. For the more part of his confederates beeing defeated and fled: he kept a narrow passage, with very few men, and performed there such deedes of Chiualrie, as hee became famous thereby all his life time after. Now, he could not come to Amadis so soone, but at his returne from the Deepe Gulffe, he went to Galuanes, and being both together: they receiued Letters from king Lisuart, whereby Galua∣nes was requested, to come & beare him company, according as for∣merly hee had made promise. By this meanes, Dragonis and he iour∣neyed thither together, and so soon as they were come to the Enclosed Isle; Amadis remembring what good seruices his Colen Drogonis had done for him, in the late fough∣ten battailes, & what wrong should be offered him, if hee did not per∣take in the like pleasures and con∣tentments, equall with his other
companions: being alone by them-selues together, thus hee spake to him. Cosen, since such time as you left vs, diuerse marriages haue been cōcluded on, of the chiefest knights here present, and those gracious Ladies, whom they haue so long time intirely affected. Moreouer, by generall aduice and consent, the countries belonging to king Ara∣uigne, Barsinan, and our other pri∣soners, haue beene diuided, and you therein forgotten, by reason of your absence: Yet there is further consideration had of you, as you shall presently vnderstand. I haue beene lately aduertised by a Squire, that since our parting for Lubania, the King of the Profounde Island (be∣ing grieuously wounded before) di∣ed on the Sea, some fewe dayes af∣ter, sayling homeward from reco∣uerie of his health. In which respect his kingdome shall become yours, and likewise you shall enioy in mar∣riage the beautifull Estoilletta, by you long time beloued: meerely as due desert, she being a faire, wise, and vertuous Princesse, descended from Kings by eyther side, and as deerely esteemed by Oriana, as any that I know, mee thinkes that (for your own contētment) no better sa∣tisfaction can be made you: Then to enioy her whom you loue, and esteeme as choysely as your selfe. Dragonis being not a little plea∣sed, to heare Amadis speake in this manner: knew not (at the first) what answere to make. For he was once purposed, to goe along with Brunco and Quedragant, in conquest of those lands, which Amadis had di∣uided to them, and from thence, to seeke after strange aduentures in Sardaignia: then to ioyne with king Florestan, and assistt him in his seri∣ous affaires. Notwithstanding, con∣sidering how Amadis affected him, and what zealous care hee shewed on his behalfe; he promised to obey him. Whereupon, the next day following, hee and Estoilletta were affianced together, in presence of all the Knights, Ladies, and Gen∣tlewomen, to generall ioy on euery side, expecting the long lookt for day, when these marriages should bee celebrated and accomplished. The same night, Amadis desired of King Lisuart, the Dukedome of Bristoy, for Guillan le Pensif: who gladly granted it, and the widdow to the deceased Duke also, for whose sake he had so much suffered, as thereby he got the name of Pen∣siue.
CHAP. XXX. How the marriages of Amadis with Oriana, and the other Princes, and Ladies, Were solemnly Celebrated in the Enclosed Isle: Where, the selfe same day, Oriana made proofe of the Arch of loyall Louers, and like∣wise of the Defended Chamber. THe day being appoyn∣ted, when the amorous knights should receiue from their Ladies, the fruite of their longing expectation, and that the mariages so long time delayed, were come to the pointe of celebration: the holy man Nascian prepared himselfe for that office, and after the solemnity in such cases vsed, a comming from Masse, Amadis spake thus to King Lisuart. My Lord, most humbly I begge one boone of you, which rea∣sonably you cannot deny me. Son and my best friend (quoth hee) I grant it with all my heart, what so∣euer it bee. Then I entreate you sir said Amadis, command Madam O∣riana your daughter, before wee sit downe to dinner, to make proofe of the Arch of loyall Louers, as also of the Defended Chamber: Whereto she would not (as yet) by any means listen, by all entreaties made vnto her. Howbeit, I haue such confi∣dence in her loyaltie, and likewise in her excelling beautie: that shee will obtaine the honor of the place, whereinto (for more then a hun∣dred yeares) neyther Lady, or Gentlewoman could bee so happy as to enter. And hereof I doe so much the rather assure my selfe, ha∣uing often times seene the statue of Grimanesa, which is portrayed in hir chiefe and most eminent perfection neuerthelesse, I am verily perswa∣ded, shee neuer was equall to your daughter. And therefore by her meanes, wee may all enter this day into Apolidons Chamber, and there finish the solemnitie of this festi∣uall. Sonne answered King Lisuart, these are matters not appertaining to me, and it is to bee doubted, that such an enterprise as this is, may in∣duce some trouble or molestation, in so worthy an assembly as heere are met together. For we see many times, desire to compasse a case of importance, may dimme both the eyes and vnderstanding of the at∣tempter, and that in such sort, as he may mistake one thing for another, and so runne riot from all course of reason, whereby he seemed (at first) to make his entrance. My Lord, said Amadis, I still containe my for∣mer opinion, and that the successe, will be answerable to my desire: free from all harme or offence, but ra∣ther to the content of all this com∣panie. Well, quoth the King, your will shall be fulfilled. So hee called Oriana, whom the kings Perion, and Cildadan (Bride-like) guyded by eyther hand, and thus hee spake to her. Daughter your husband hath requested a boone of mee, which I haue granted, although I greatly doubt, that very hardly (in my opi∣nion) it will bee accomplished ac∣cording to his hope; neuerthelesse, you know that I haue alwayes kept my word, and therefore aduise your selfe, in doing that you shall bee enioyned. Oriana being not a little ioyfull to heare the King her father speake so familliarly; performing very
great reuerence to him, thus reply∣ed. My gracious Lord and father, commande what you please, I am∣ready to obey you. Then daugh∣ter (quoth the King) before you sit downe as a Bride at the table, you must essay the aduenture, of the Arch of loyall louers, and likewise that of the Defended Chamber; this is the boone I haue granted to A∣madis. When these wordes wher heard by the other Ladies, a secret murmur ran suddenly among them; some for the loue they bare to O∣riana, fearing least shee should not finish so high an enterprise, and to her honour: others more addicted to selfe conceit, made promise to them of going beyond her. Not∣withstanding, this striuing had but a small continuance, because the King had a hand in the businesse, and he well knowing, that Olinda and Melicia, were desirous to ac∣companie his daughter in her for∣tune; entreated them thereto very earnestly. But theire choyce friends, and new married husbands, were of a quite contrarie minde, and labou∣red to alter them from this humor, fearing their falling into danger, of loosing that, which they were not able to winne themselues: and therefore, they desired no such tri∣all, but were satisfied with enioy∣ing their long expectation. By the faith I beare to God, said the King, you can no way mislike their for∣wardnesse, but rather should high∣ly allowe thereof: because, for ought I can perceiue, they couet to make testimonie of their loyalty, by better meanes then you your selues are able to iudge of, and it is my minde, that they shall make their proofe, before my daughter Oriana do attempt it. This pleased Amadis extraordi∣narily, knowing wel that they could not enter into the Defended Cham∣ber, before her: and this disfauour to them, would be the higher aug∣mentation of her honour. So Me∣licia and Olinda, went on towardes the Arch of loyall louers, vnder which they passed without any im∣peachment. Then the Brazen Sta∣tue began to sound so melodiously, as euery one tooke great delight to heare it; but especially Agraies and Bruneo aboue all the rest. Go∣ing on further, the two ladies en∣tred into the Garden, where they beheld the Statues of Apolidon and Grimanesa. As they were busily loo∣king on them, they espied Orania almost vnder the Arch, looking behinde her, if Amadis followed her: and instantly, such an amiable blush mounted vppe into her face, that with her owne naturall pale complexion, made her appeare most sweetly beautifull. No sooner was she iust vnder the vault of the Arch, but the Image soūded, much more harmonious & pleasing, then euer before had been heard by any: casting forth of his Trumpet, Gilliflowers, Pinkes, Dai∣sies, Colonbines, Pauuces, and a thousand other kinde of flowers, the most oderiferous that euer were smelt. Then entring into the Gar∣den, Melicia and Olinda called her, to shew her the figures of Apolidon and Grimanesa: but she was alrea∣die come to the Iasper piller, where shee found all their names newly engrauen, but could not ghesse how, or by what meanes. Herupon she called them to see what shee had done, and thence they returned to the Images, which they found to be so ingeniously framed, as no∣thing wanted, but life it selfe, and speech: especially that of Grima∣nesa, which seemed so exceeding
faire, as Oriana grew distrustfull, of her entrance into the Defended Chamber. But this doubt had no long la∣sting, for shee going neare to the Venus made of Agate (only to take water of the fountaine) the Statua put forth her right hand, presen∣ting her the Apple, while, snatch∣ing away the most excellent pearle, hanging in her eare, she made the like tender of it with the other hand. Now, albeit her two com∣panions loued her very singularly, yet could they not preuaile ouer their owne passions: but (behol∣ding this extraordinary fauour) some secret sparks of enuy took fire against her: yet she beeing willing to leaue nothing vnperfected, went to the Dedalus, in the midst where-of (as I haue alreadie tolde you) was the Colossus of Brasse, holding the Lanterne, where the diuine fire was kept by the Serpents, who looking on Oriana, beganne faw∣ningly to moue their tailes, and bow downe their heads, in signe of humiliation. By this meanes, without any o∣ther hinderance, shee passed on to the midst of the Labirinth, & there beheld (at her owne pleasure) the theft of Prometheas, which in the presence of the three Ladies, vani∣shed away, and neuer was after-warde seene by any one, nor the Serpents neither. Wherefore the Ladies returned backe againe, to the place where the Knights, and other of the company attended for them. If now their amorous friends were in the maine height of con∣tentment; iudge you faire Ladies, that haue made proofe of loues sweetest fauours. For mine owne parte. I would gladly make you be∣leeue, that they all felt such a hea∣uen of happinesse, as I could herti∣ly wish to my selfe. Now listen what followeth, and (perhaps) you shall heare matters, no lesse pleasing and delightfull. The Ladies hauing ended these aduentures, ás you haue lately heard, Grasinda, beeing much of∣fended, that shee had not followed on with them: concluded in her selfe, to approue that of the Defen∣ded Chamber, before any of the o∣ther, and thereupon, comming to Amadis, spake thus. My Lord, al∣though my beauty cannot satisfie mine owne desire: yet it is not so distrustfull of it selfe, but it dare es∣say the aduenture of the staires, or ascending to the Defended Chamber. For if that be likewise ended, with∣out some of my paines imploiment; all my life time (afterward) will be but irkesome and tedious to mee. Therefore, let come what can or may, if I obtaine entrance, my minde will bee satisfied: but if I meete with repulse, others haue had the like fortune before mee. Ma∣dame, answered Amadis, it ap∣peares to me, that defect of beauty should no way be your hinderance, much lesse any want of good will: so that, if you like to beleeue mee, you may passe them before any o∣ther, who (by this meanes) may well be releeued by you, and spare their labor in attempting entrance. Grasinda imagining that Amadis spake as hee thought, deferred no further, but blessing herselfe with the signe of the crosse: went on di∣rectly to the first degree, which ea∣sily shee ascended. But when she came to that of Marble, she was re∣pulsed backe so rudely, that shee lay along vpon the ground, vnable to mooue either hand or foote. Which Quedragant beholding, ran to her, and lifted her vp gently in his armes: not without much pit∣tying
her estate, albeit hee was well assured that his infirmitie would turne to nothing. Neuerthelesse, such was his deare affection to her, as hee most misdoubted her owne danger by conceit. Agraies, who all this while stood talking with Olinda, spake thus vnto her. Faire beautie, though madam Grasinda hath had such ill successe: yet you may reuenge her wrong, & therefore neuer feare, but proceede on boldly. So, kissing her, he tooke her by the hand, and conducting her very neere to the steppe of cop∣per: she passed it as easily as Grasin∣da had done before her. But as the one was beaten backe, weening to get ouer the marble staire, so the o∣ther found no better fortune, but was suddenly surprised by the tres∣ses of her hayre, and throwne to the ground very disgracefully. By meanes whereof, Melicia aduanced her selfe, and, euen as if her heart and feete had flown together, shee passed ouer the two formost staires: whereby they which obserued it, were verily perswaded, that this ad∣uenture was only dedicated to her, and to none other. Now beganne Oriana to grow very suspitious, which lasted but a little while: for very soone after, she was worse repulsed then any of the former, and so shaken, that Bruneo, thinking her verely to be dead, be∣gan to greeue very extremely. Not∣withstanding, they that were well acquainted with the sight of such accidents, did nothing else but laugh: knowing for a certaine, that these feares were but signes of bet∣ter assurance. There remayned now no more of the foure Ladies, to gaine (by proofe) the supremacy of beautie, for entrance into the En∣chanted Chamber, but only Oriana: And shee standing somewhat neere to Amadis, smiling, thus hee spoke to her. Madam, I know well enough that this honor is only due to you, and many times I haue assured your of it: therfore, pursue you for∣tunate promise, and stand in dread of no danger whatsoeuer. At these words, he left the Prin∣cesse, and she, proceeding unto the stayres, passed them all without a∣ny difficultie, but when shee drew neere to the doores entrance, shee seemed to feele an infinite number of armes and handes, which very strongly and mainely resisted her. Neuerthelesse, shee was not a iote discouraged, but defended her selfe vertuously turning euery way to a∣ny resistance; and in meere despight of any impeachment, made free her passage, yet much out of breath. But when shee coulde no longer sustaine her selfe, the hand which first fauoured Amadis (as you haue already heard in the beginning of the second Booke) drew her plea∣santly in. Then an infinite of hu∣maine voyces were heard, singing so loud as they were easilie vnder∣stood. Blessed bee the ariuall of that only and excellent Lady, none the like since Grimanesa, and yet goeing be∣yond her in all beauties, in regard whereof, she is worthie of the most va∣liant Knight, that euer bare armes this hundred yeares, and more; with whom she may here henceforward, lie at her owne pleasure, according as best shall seeme to her selfe. Instantly the chamber doore flew open, and Oriana entred there∣into so highlie satisfied, as the com∣maund of the whole world could not more content her. Which when Ysanio, the Gouernour of the Isle perceiued, hee plainely published before them all. This day is the consummation of the Enchantments, which Apolidon left heere to perpe∣tuate
his memorie: But seeing this Lady hath entered the Chambers all o∣thers may follow without any hin∣drance. Hereupon all the rest, as well Knights, s Ladies and Gentle-women followed in after her, and there beheld all the singularities, which haue beene already related to you, in the beginning of this fourth Booke; about which they spent so long pleasing time, as they quite forgot when they should goe to dinner. But the master of the houshould came to king Perion, and told him, that their meate was neere spoyling: Wherefore, he tooke O∣riana by the hand, and led her into the great dining Hale, where a roy∣all Feast was ready for them: there they sate downe at each Table, ac∣cording as the master of the Cere∣monies called them by name, and were serued with the most exquisite cheare, that could bee possibly de∣uised. No sooner were the tables with-drawne, but they fell to dauncing, and so spent out the day, till they couered for supper, which being en∣ded, masques, and mummeries came in, continuing so long among the Ladies: till the Queenes of great Brittaine and Gaule withdrew the new married couples. Amadis had prepared his lodging in the De∣fended Chamber, where he meant to rest with his long loued Ortana: the like preparation was made for the Empresse, and the other brides. In the meane while, Amadis disroabed himselfe, to meete with her in loue∣ly embracings, whom hee had so long time desired, and by infinite trauailes dearely deserued. And be∣ing now alone by themselues, no doubt but they made proofe, of the greatest delights loue could affoord which feare had kept thē from long before. And if they were well plea∣sed wee must needes thinke no lesse of Brunco and Melicia, and also of the other amorous combatants, dis∣playing now their colours in the face of Venus. CHAP. XXXI. How Vrganda the vnknowne reuealed before them all, such matters as shee long time had foretold before they happened. And how shee tooke her leaue of Amadis, as also of all the other companie, to returne whence she came. AFter that the triumphs and feastings were o∣uerpast, which conti∣nued for the space of eight dayes together: Vrganda the Vnknowne (desirous to returne home to her own dwelling) desired the Knights, Ladies and Gentlewomen, to meet on the mor∣row following, in the great hall of the Pallace, to the end, that before hir departure) shee might imparte some matters to them, which as yet they neuer vnderstood. And for the apter way, the next day following, after dinner was ended, and the ta∣bles taken away: in the middest of the whole assembly, shee called the two young Gentlemen or Squires which came with her in her Frigot and taking them by the hand dire∣cting her selfe to the company in generall, thus she began. Lords and faire Ladies, I know long time agoe, and without the aduise or helpe of any mortall man
that this meeting should bee here in this place; after the passed con∣flicts, wherein so many famous and worthie men haue perished on ei∣ther side. And, God is my wit∣nesse, if it, had lien in my power to helpe it, how gladly I would haue imployed my very vttermost paines. But things beeing so ordained, by the prescience of him, to whom all creatures owe honour and obey∣sance: it commeth to passe, that these occurrences haue happened according to his apointment. And to let you vnderstand, that I was not ignorant of those things thus come to passe: I think you remember yet (very well) Ma∣dame Oriana, that being in the Ci∣tie of Fenusa (you and I being bed∣fellowes together) you entreated mee, to reueale what fortunes were towardes you. And albeit I did ear∣nestly disswade you, to cease from such curious questioning: yet not∣withstanding, in the end (ouercome with oportunitie) I tolde you, that the Lyon of the Doubtfull Isle, should issue forth of his denne, and by his loude cries and roarings, af∣fright his guardes, so that in (meere despite of them) hee should seaze on your person, and thereby ap∣pease his owne extreame hunger. Now Madame let mee tell you, how this Prophecie hath taken his full effect, for if you heedfully ob∣serue it, Amadis your Lord & hus∣band (more strong and inuincible then any Lyon) came forth of that Isle, which by great reason might be tearmed doubtfull: and furiously assailed the Romaines that had you in guarde. Them hee foyled, took you into his owne power, and if (by you) he hath giuen any ease to his owne affections, you both doe best know it. As for you Lord A∣madis, I tolde you also at the same time, how constrained you should oppose your life, euen to the vtter-most danger that could be, and that the recompence you should re∣ceiue, for all the lill expence of your blood, would be but a long & large seperation, from her whom you so dearely affected. And euen so it came to passe, for after you had combated, and vanquished the valiant Ardan Canile, where you fell into such perill, as euery one doth well remember: the benefit came to King Lisuart, begetting you his hatred, and a tedious ab∣sence from Madame Oriana. And you Sir (quoth she to King Lisuart) haue not forgot the Let∣ter which I wrote vnto you, the same day as you found young Es∣plandian, in the Enchanted Forrest, hunting with his Lionesse, wherby I gaue you to vnderstand (if yet you remember it) the strange ma∣ner of his nourishing, hauing suckt three Nurses, quite contrarie one to another: a Lionesse, an Ewe, and a Woman. Moreouer, that hee should bee the cause of planting loue and peace betweene you and Amadis, after that (by his meanes) you escaped the very greatest dan∣ger, that euer befell you, since you receiued the order of knighthood. Whereof remayneth (as a suffici∣ent testimonie) the sharpe assault giuen you by the King Arauigne, only through the procurement of Archalaus, and the succour you re∣ceiued from Amadis, by the hastie dilligence of the young gentleman, as also your instant alliance one with another. Now may you easi∣ly perceiue, if heretofore I reuea∣led true matters to you, or no: wherefore, I will now proceed on further, and foretell other fortunes, yet remayning in the destynies of power.
First, I will begin with you two, quoth shee to King Cildadan and Galaor. See you these two young Squires, Talanque and Manely? As∣sure your selues, that in them I haue recompensed the seruices, which you haue receiued from mee, if I haue done you any heretofore: causing you to begette them on two such Ladies, whom I doe affect uery singularly. And this I dare warrant, that if heauen blesse them with life: they will prooue to be Knights of great pro∣wesse, very bolde and actiue in Armes, and as fortunate as any that haue fore-gone them. There∣fore you gentle Gentleman, receiue them as your kinde companions, louing them at they shall deserue: for I dare assure you, that they will bee faithfull, making no spare of their persons, to assist you in your greatest perills, which Fortune pre∣pared for you, before the day of your natiuitie: which partly to ob∣uiat and preuent, I caused the great Serpent (which you sawe) to bring mee hither, within whose wombe you shall receiue the order of knighthood, and there you shall be armed, and there is a gallant horse carefuly kept for you. Moreouer, if hereafter you will remember it, it will guide you to the first place, where the courage of your gentle heart, shall yeelde the first testimony of your magna∣nimity, trauersing (without perill or danger) the deepes of the Sea, accompanied with many Knights of your blood. By it you shall be∣get a new name, and bee called in many places, the Knight of the Ser∣pent, and vnder that title, you shall faile into diuerse strange countries, with much labour both of minde and bodie, for the loue of her, that can reade the seuen red letters on your left shoulder, which will wit∣nesse (by the liuely colour remay∣ning in them) that your hart is then enflamed with extreame loue, Vn∣till such time, as a flight of Rauens, breed on the Sea Marches, shall passe from the East partes, ouer the proude waters of the Sea, where the great Eagle will be brought in∣to such extreamitie, as he shall find no safety in his owne ayre. When the proude peregrine Faulcon (more faire and sound of wing and feathers, then any other bird of prey) shall assemble many, as well of his owne kinde, as of others, to come and souccour the Eagle, and they fighting with the Rs, in hot furie, shall well neere kill them all, by the power of their beakes and tallons, constrayning them (for their latest refuge) to enter the mer∣cie of the waues, where a great number of them will be drowned. Then the great Eagle, acknow∣ledging the benefit receiued by the gentle peregrine; shall draw forth of his owne bodie, a great many of his entrailes; & liberally giue them to his tallons, that bestowed such fauor on him, that he may (at ease) asswage the extreme hunger, which had tormented him long time be∣fore, and beside, he shall giue him the free enioying, of all the great Forests and mountains in his owne countrie. At the same time, the great Serpent shall drowne himself before the eyes of all present, in the very deepest of the Sea, giuing thereby to vndestand, that then it will bee more conuenient for you (quoth she to Esplandian) to dwell more safely on the land, then on the moouing waters. Now necessitie enforceth, that I must goe hence into other places, where partely I cannot excuse my selfe: neuerthe∣lesse, I will not faile to be heere a∣gaine,
at such time as you, and your companions shall bee able to vnder∣goe Knight-hood. For I am well assured, that at that time, for some occasion which is now concealed from you: you will all meete heere a∣gaine, and many more with you, be∣fore whom I will discouer wonder∣full things. In the meane while, I charge you all vpon your liues, that none of you be so bold, as to come neere the Serpent: for I dare assure you, whosoeuer aduenters it, shall perish without any remedy, And for as much said shee to A∣madis, as you detaine in prison that wicked wretch Archalaus, surnamed the enchaunter, who at all times hath practised to worke you mischiefe, and will hereafter attempt the like behold, here are two Rings the one for you, and the other for Madam O∣riana, the vertue of them is such, as they that haue them, or weare them, none of his enchantments can hurt them, or any in their company, so being as he continueth in captiuity. And therfore let me aduise you, to haue him straightly kept, and in a strong Cage of Iron, where he may bee seene of all: to the end, that li∣uing in such miserie, hee may die a thousand times a day. For death is much more cruell, in so prolonging a mans life, then when he quickly makes an end of him in a mo∣ment. Madam, answered Amadis, I well perceiue, that you depriue mee of all hope, of euer satisfying the fa∣uours that I haue receiued from you and which day by day you still heape vpon me. Lord Amadis (quoth she) you did so much for me, when, by your meanes, I receiued my friend from the Castle at the Causey where you gaue knight-hood to your bro∣ther Galaor, as I hold my selfe suffi∣ciently recompenced, for all that I haue done, or can do hereafter in your behalfe. Hauing thus spoken shee tooke her leaue of the whole companie, and mounting vpon a Palfray, brought thither ready for her: shee rode to the port where the two Dwarfes awaited her comming. Thither did all the Knights conduct her, vntill shee entred into her Fri∣got, which suddenly was wrapt in so black a cloude: as they lost the fight of her, and of the serpent also, which lay houering halfe a league off, and shewed not it selfe till three dayes after. But the darkenesse being va∣nished away, they beheld it in the same place, where Vrganda left it at the first. So the Knights urning to the Pallace of Apolidon, continu∣ed out their feasting, which lasted yet eight dayes longer. In the meane while, the Emperour Arquisil sent to prepare the shipping, which his predecessour Patin, brought with his Armie to Vindilasore, and they being come thither, his people were imparked and the next day follow∣ing, for the earnest desire he had to be at Rome, there to bee lawfully crowned) hee went aboard, with his Empresse Florestan and the Queene Sardamira. The winde sitting fairely for them the weighed Anchors, and hoysed sayles, so that (in short while) they were a great way off from the coast of Brittaine, & crossing the straites of Gibraltare, entred into the Leuant Sea: where wee will leaue them say∣ling, returning to King Lisuart and the rest, in the Enclosed Isle, the more part whereof prepared them-selues, for the kingdome of Arauigne. But others, more affecting their ease, made account of repayring home to their owne houses, especially King Lisuart. Neuerthelesse, before hee dislodged thence, knowing well, how
faithfull King Cildadan had been to him, so long as all his serious af∣faires endured: hee did the parte of a most magnanimous and boun∣tifull Prince towardes him, and be∣fore all them of the Enclosed Isle, re∣mitted the tribute hee paide him, to the losse of many worthy knights hearts, that had formerly serued him, more by constraint, then any inclination of good will. So taking leaue of them all, hee returned home to his country. And the same day, they remayned there with Amadis, as well for the pur∣posed warre in Sansuega, as else-where, held a Councell: wherein was decreed, that Don Quedragant, Bruneo de bonne Mer, Agraies, An∣griote, d' Estrauaus, and Brian de Moniaste, should go together, with them that were left of the Scots, I∣rish, and Spanish, by whose helpe, the countries of Arauigne and San∣suega, (beeing neighbours, and but∣ting one vpon another) might be the sooner conquered. And bee∣cause the countrie of the Profound Isle, confined on the kingdome of Sobradisa: Galaor should grant sup∣ply of vittailes and passage, to his Cosen Dragonis and his Armie, which consisted of Gaules and Bo∣hemians, with the people that Gal∣uanes could bring from the Isle of Mongoza. Hereupon, such as were named, and set downe for the warre, took shipping on the sixt day following, and the rest returned home to their countries: King Perion to Gaule, King Cildadan to his Queene, and Gastilles to Constantinople. But A∣madis and Grasandor, kept them-selues at, the Enclosed Isle, with Ori∣ana, Melicia, Grasinda, Mabila, Es∣plandian, and the King of Dacia, in expectation of newes from them, that were gone thence with so great a power. CHAP. XXXII. How Amadis went away alone, to reuenge the knights losse, whom a La∣die had brought dead in a small Barke; And of that which happe∣ned to him. AMadis and Grasandor, voide (as it appeared to them) of all trou∣ble or offence, hauing them in their compa∣ny, whom they most esteemed: tooke no other care, but how to spend their time in all pleasure and delight. But Fortune, vtter enemy to any mans ease and quiet, when shee likes to play her changing prankes: had prepared a new oc∣casion for them of sorrow and sad∣nesse, as presently you shall vnder∣stand. One day among other, when these two Knights were gone to hunt the Hart, as Amadis held his hound in a leash, for his best ad∣uantage of the game: hee espied a farre off from the coaste, a small Barke on the Sea, yet making to∣wardes land, & imagining it should haue some strange occasion therin, hee descended downe the Rocke, to see what might ensue. But be∣fore he could goe low enough, the Barke was close at the shoare, and a Ladie came foorth thereof, and one Mariner, who (with much la∣bour) drew forth a dead Knight, yet wholly armed. Amadis made
a stay somewhat short of them, to trie what would ensue of this sad beginning, hiding himselfe behind a ush for his better shelter, and long he had not tarried there, but he saw the Mariner and the Ladie, lay the Knight along vpon the Sands, placing his shield vnder his head. This caused Amadis to conceale lse no longer, but going to∣wards them, the Lady presentlie knew him: Whereupon, suddenly throwing her selfe at his feete, and fountaines of teares flowing from hi eyes, she spake thus. Alas Lord Amadis, take pittie on a poore wo∣man, and for the honor of Knight-hood, giue her succour: for I am shee, that first laid hand on you (be∣cause the Queene your mother had no other helpe then my poore selfe) when you were borne into the World: moreouer, I can well tell you, that all the harmes I suffer at this present, hath happened to mee by the loue I haue alwaies carried to you. Amadis seeing her so woe, be∣gon, and euen meerely drowned in teares, as it were, could not know her at the first sight: but looking on her more aduisedly, he remembred her to be Darioletta, of whome wee haue spoken in the beginning of the first Booke, and tooke so great compassion on her, as raysing her vp very graciously, he promised to assist her to his vttermost power. Alas Sir, answered Darioletta, you haue but one only meanes, whereby to relieue mee in this vrgent ex∣tremitie, and that is instantly to goe with mee whether I shall con∣duct you. Amadis pausing hereon a while, suddenly replied, how Lady, I haue no armes to fight withall, but my Sword only, and this bugle about my neck, & this hound in my leash, I hope you will allow me some bet∣ter fournishing then they are. As for Armes, replied Darioletta, de∣ferre no further dallying but vnase this dead Knight, and put them on: for if you stand on any trifling, it redounds not only to my death, but also such another as you loue, as well (if not more deerely) then you doe me. Speaking these words, she drowned her faire cheekes in teares, and held Amadis fast about the legs not suffering him to stirre from her, whereby hee became so moued to pitty, that he yeelded to her request. Foreseeing very well, that if hee re∣turned back to Oriana; hardly hee should gaine leaue to goe along with the Lady, and as their necessi∣ty vrgently required. Whereupon, arming himselfe with the Armes of the dead knight, and taking vp his Shield, he entred into the barke. As they were put∣ing off from the shoare, one of the huntsemen came, to whom Amadis called, saying friend, goe seeke Lord Grasandor, and tell him, that I am constrained (in meere pittie) to goe with this Lady, whom I met on the Sea-sands but ere while, euen in such mournefull manner as thou beholdest her. Pray him to pardon me, and to intreate as much for me of Oriana, not to be offended with my suddaine departure, but rather to allow thereof: because I could no way excuse it, but to my great reproach and dishonour. For thy selfe, I pray thee giue buriall to that dead knights body, in recompence of his Armes which I haue taken from him. Scarcely had he ended these words, but a lustie gale of winde filled the Sailes, and (in a moment) they were so farre off from Land, as Amadis could not heare the huntsmans answere. As they sayled on, Amadis seeing the
Ladie to take no truce with her teares: earnestly entreated her, to relate, whither she intended to con∣duct him, and also the occasion of her mourning: whereto gladly she yeelded, beginning in this manner. Vnderstand Lord Amadis, that at such time as the Queen your mother departed from Gaule, trauailing to∣wardes the Enclosed Isle, according as the King your father had sent for her: she sent a Lackey to my hus∣band in little Brittaine, where hee was gouernour of your lands, wil∣ling him, that both he and I should meete her at the Pallace of Apoli∣don, where the marriages of you & my Lords your brethren were to be solemnised. My husband ioy∣ing not a little hereat, and my selfe much more: suddenly proui∣ded a good Ship, wherein wee im∣barqued our selues, with my sonne, whom you sawe dead on the sands, and also my daughter, hoping to bestowe her on Madame Melicia your sister. But night comming on vs, the waues and windes were sud∣denly tempestuously mooued: so that by their extreame violence, the sailes, rudder, and tacklings of our Shippe, were all split in sunder. Our Pilot also was so distracted in minde, as all knowledge of his Compasse or Quadrant vtterly for∣sook him, wherby it came to passe, that our Ship remayning at mer∣cie of the waues and weather: we were driuen vpon the Red Island (vt∣terly vnknowne to any of vs) where the Giant Balan abydeth, of whom you haue heretofore heard, & there we landed. At that very instant, we were en∣closed, & seazed on by the Guards of the Port, and forcibly brought before the Giant: who presently demanded of vs, if wee had euer a Knight in our companie. My hus∣band made answere, that both hee and his sonne had (long since) vn∣dergone that order. It behooueth then, saide the Giant, that accor∣ding to the custome of this coun∣trie, you fight with mee one after an other, and if you can holde out but an houre only, you and yours shall goe free: but otherwise, you must remaine my prisoners, and therfore make choyce of which you thinke fittest for you. And one thing I will acquaint you withall before hand, that performing your manhoode (as true Knights ought to doe) you shall finde so much the more loue & courtesie in me: but if (through faintnesse of courage) you faile in any the least point, whereto the ho∣nour of Chiualrie bindeth you; I will vse yee like villaines and co∣wards, and lay you where neither Sunne or Moone can be seene, and so you shall remaine ten yeares to∣gether. My husband hearing these threat∣nings, and obseruing the high sta∣ture of the Giant; could warrant no assurance of himselfe. Neuer∣thelesse, knowing what it was to faile any way: forgetting all feare, hee replied. Basely are they bred (quoth he) and ill is Armes bestow∣ed on them, that through dread of danger, shall refuse to fight for their owne liberty. Nowitstanding, what assurance shall we haue of your pro∣mise, if wee maintaine an houres fight against you, according as you haue proposed. Nothing else, said the Giant, but my worde onely, which neuer was, or euer shall bee broken, for any good or ill that can befall mee. For rather will I con∣sent, not onely to mine owne death, but likewise, to my sonnes, and kinred, and seruants beside, as alreadie I haue made them to swear and promise. Before God, answe∣red
my husband, cause our horses to bee restored vs, and the Armes belonging to my sonne and mee; and then begin the combate when thou pleasest. The Giant commanded them to be deliuered. But my sonne, too rash and ill aduised, desired of his father, that he might begin the first fight: which being granted him, he was so ill intreated by the Giant, that euen in the first encounter, he ouerthrew him so mainely, and his horse vpon him, that both their neckes were broken in the fall. Whereat my husband beeing of∣fended, & thinking to reuenge the losse of his sonne: ran against Ba∣lan, and brake his Lance manfully on his Shield, yet the Giant stirred no more at the shock, then if his bodie had beene a huge and strong Tower. But as my husband perfec∣ted his carrire, hee tooke him by the arme, and (in despight of all hee could doe to the contrarie) lif∣ted him out of his saddle, and car∣ried him into his Castle, without any more harme done to him, but shutting him vp in a chamber, and I and my daughter with him. Pondering there on our great misfortune, hauing lost the life of my sonne; my husband, daughter, and my selfe imprisoned, and our seruants no way able now to sted vs: I fell into sad complaints, and spake so loude (as it seemed) that the Giant heard me. All good king Perion, said I, if thou or any of thy sonnes were heere, I am sure our wrongs would bee quickly reuen∣ged: but I knowe you are all too farre hence. When the Giant had heard my wordes, and the Kings name: hee demanded of me, what knowledge I had of him, and whe∣ther he was the father to one named Amadis de Gaule, or no? I answered him, hee was, and that you & your brethren knew mee for such a one, as had dedicated her whole life to your seruice. Musing a while to himselfe, at last hee tolde mee, hee was so desi∣rous to see you, that if I could cō∣passe the meanes, of bringing you to him, and that you would fight with him for our libertie: he would allow this small Barke, and this Ma∣riner, because hee would reuenge the death of his father Mandafabul, whom you slew cowardely (as hee said) in the battaile betweene the Kings Cildadan and Lisuart, at such time as you cald your self, the Bright Obscure. Moreouer, that you tooke him vnprouided, as he carried away the King of Great Brittaine prisoner in his Ship. And that you might haue the more occasion of going with me, and by an vrgent motiue to commiseration: hee permitted me, to beare the dead bodie of my sonne along with me, according as you sawe at our meeting. But first of all I demaunded of him, that if it were my good hap to finde you: what security you should haue, of wrong or iniurie from any, but him-selfe only? My faith and worde a∣lone (quoth he) which I will main∣taine so long as breath is in my bo∣die, not only against him, but any other Knight whatsoeuer, that would come hither with me in this seruice. Thus (Lord Amadis) perceiuing the offers he made me, and the ex∣treamity I was in: I was so bolde to vndertake what you haue heard, trusting in the mercy of heauen, and your goodnesse, which neuer was denied to any, that desired your helpe. For I am verily perswaded, that you will easily ouercome this Diuell, that maintaines so wicked a custome in his countrie. Deare
friend answered, Amadis, I am very sorry for the death of your son: what else remaineth to be done, I will die but you shall haue reason. So they sayled on three dayes & three nights, together, and on the fourth,, discouering a small Island, in the midst whereof stood a Castle somewhat farre off: which made him demand of the Mariner, if hee knew the name of it, and to whom it appertayned. To king Cildadan, quoth the Mariner, and it is com∣monly called, the Isle of the Infants. Let vs goe a shoare there, said A∣madis, to refresh our selus with wa∣ter and victuals: for wee know not what necessitie wee may fall into hereafter. Hereupon, the Mariner strooke in close to the foote of a Rocke, from whence they beheld a Gentleman, descending, who com∣ing neere to them, faluted Amadis demāding, of whence and what he was. I am (quoth he) a knight of the Enclosed Isle, & from thence I came not long since, thereto expressely moued by this Lady, to haue some reason done her, if I can, for an iniu∣rious wrong offered her by one aby∣ding in an Island not farre from this as I am giuen to vnderstand. The Gentleman requested to know his name. Balan answered Amadis. Well Sir, quoth the other, and what course doe you meane to take therein? Fight with him, re∣plied Amadis, and pluck downe his ouer-daring Pride, whereby he in∣iurieth many that neuer offended him. The Gentleman beganne to smile, and in a mocking manner nodding his head, said. Sir Knight of the Enclosed Isle, there is a great difference betweene saying and do∣ing. I can easilie beleeue, that you came hither with such animation, but I am wonderfully affraide, that before you returne backe (if you purpose to goe on any further) a great part of the heate, which I now see in you, will bee more calmely qualified. Therefore sir, I woulde aduise yee, to turne some other way for, if the Lord of the Isle, from whence you now came, who is (as I vnderstand, and haue many times heard) Amadis de Gaule, and his two brethren, Don Galaor and Florestan, (accounted amongst the very best Knights in the World this day li∣uing) had met together, and gone about such a fond enterprise, as you haue now vndertaken: they were sure to be much rather reprehended then allowed for wise and discreete men. And because you are (in mine opinion) one of King Lisuarts knights, to whom my Master King Cildadan, is an intimate friend: I would perswade you to beleeue me, otherwise, worse will befall you, and you must needs prooue a mur∣therer of your selfe, being aduised, and will not auoid it. I know not what may happen, answered Amadis, but I haue heard all my life hitherto, that it is an Ar∣ticle, proper and peculiar to them, that couet the supream place of honour and renowne, to attempt occasions of most danger, and diffi∣cultie. Not that they intend to bee, so highly esteemed: But to shunne discouraging in so braue an enter∣prise. And seeing I am now so for∣ward on my iourney; death it selfe cannot alter mine intention: wher∣fore Sir, I entreate you in courtesie, to helpe vs with fresh water and vi∣ctuals, for which we will be thanke∣full to you. With all my heart, re∣plied the Gentleman, and more; I will beare you companie thither, to see the successe of your fortune, and whether you shall speede well or ill with the Giant.
CHAP. XXXIII. How Amadis sayled away from the Port of the Island of the Infanta, to pur∣sue the purpose he had formerly intended. THE Barque / belong∣ing to Amadis, being furnished with fresh water and victuals: the Gentleman of the Isle, snipt himselfe with them, and set sayle away. And as they were con∣uersing together, the Gentleman (who indeed was a Knight of good fame) demanded of Amadis, if hee did euer know King Cildadan? Yes truely, quoth he, I haue oftentimes eene him, among many good Knights, and no long time since, in the contentions which King Lisuart and Amadis had together: Where he carried himselfe so valiantly, as I neuer saw any Knight of more me∣rit. By my faith sir, replied the o∣ther, it is great pittie, that Fortune fauors no better his high deseruing, but euermore turnes her back vpon him, yea, and ouer-rigorously: in making him (who is borne to great occasions) tributorie to king Lis∣uart. Of that tribute, answered Amadis, he stands now discharged, for the King you talke of, hath freely forgi∣uen it him, for the noble deedes of Armes hee hath discerned in him, and for his many seruices done to him, during the time of his hotte employments. Wherefore, the taxation, which was such a blemish to his renowne (not by any fault in himselfe, but only vpon accident) is now cleerely acquitted. But know you this for truth? said the Knight. Yes verily, quoth Amadis: And so related the whole businesse to him, according as you haue heard it al∣ready. Then the knight lifting vp his eyes and hands to heauen, said. Blessed be the name of God, who hath permitted my good King and Master, to enioy the right which is due vnto him. Sir Knight, said A∣madis, haue you at any time seene Balan. Yes, that I haue, answered he. I pray you replied Amadis, to certifie mee what you know con∣cerning him. That will I very glad∣ly, said the knight, and (perhaps) in better manner then any man else you could light vpon. Vnderstand then sir, that hee is Sonne to the fierce Giant Mandaffa∣bull, the same man, that Amadis (when hee tearmed himselfe the Bright Obscure) slew, and on the ve∣ry day, when the king my Master, and he of Great Brittaine, fought a hundred, against a hundred, where∣in perished many other Giants, all neighbours to this countrie, and kinsemen to Balan, whom you now enquire for. By the death of his fa∣ther, he became and yet remayneth Lord of the Red Island, where hee maketh his aboade at this instant, it being one of the most fertill Islands in all the Easterne Sea, and of the greatest reuenues, by meanes of the frequent resort of strange Mar∣chants, that land there at all times, of whom hee exacts an infinite tri∣bute. Now sir, you are to obserue beside, that if his father was valiant, and not meanely experienced in Armes: His sonne exceedeth him in all things, only crueltie excep∣ted. For, looke how much the one was a Tyrant, and most inhumane: the other is so much the more mild, peaceable and gracious, so that it
appeareth (almost) a miracle in na∣ture, to see men issued of one & the same linage, to be so different in their qualities. In this point, I must tell you a generall opinion, that this faire de∣meanour became hereditarie to him, only by vertue of his mother, who was one of the most modest, benigne and affable Ladies, then to be seene, farre differing herein from the other Giantesse, wife to Famongomad, and her owne sister, shee beeing the most foule, defor∣med, sluttish and vnhansome crea∣ture, that euer was seen of her kind. Whereby may bee collected, that two such contrarie complexions, seldome haue power to agree toge∣ther, being deriued from such dis∣cordant nature. Notwithstanding, the reason hereof (in my poore o∣pinion) may be thus rendred: that vertue most commonly is a compa∣nion with beauty and comely fea∣ture; but is a meer stranger to vg∣ly deformity, and base disposition. Now Sir, I am further to tell you, that it is more then twenty yeares since I was appointed Go∣uernour of the Isle where you found me: therefore I can speake to you the more vnderstandingly, as a man most frequent, in know∣ledge of any thing you can demand of me. For since the yongest years of the King my maister, I neuer went out of this Climate, by reason of the faithfull trust reposed in me, especially in those daies, when the rich golden Sunne shone not so a∣boundantly on him, as in later times it hath done. For by his prowesse and other high deseruings, he mar∣ried the daughter to King Abies of Ireland, who was slaine by Amadis, when hee entitled himselfe, by the name of the gentleman of the Sea, or the like kinde of appellation. Beleeue mee Sir, saide Amadis, you haue done me a great pleasure, so well to acquaint mee with the conditions of Balan, whom I could wish (for mine owne benefit) to be of another kinde of Character, then you haue now described him to me. For if hee had beene indued with such plenty of vices, as you haue giuen him to mee in vertues: hee cannot expect (when time shall serue for our meeting) any hope in his owne ability of strength. And let mee tell you, till this instant, I neuer stood in feare of his vtter-most power: albeit I cannot now well resolue what to thinke of my selfe, in a case of such strange con∣trariety. Neuerthelesse, come what can, more precious to mee is mine honour, then my life. And let mee further entreate you to tell mee, if hee be married, and whence he had his wife? In good faith (quoth the Knight) neuer man had better for∣tune in marriage, then he, enioying one of the most virtuous Ladies that can be: she being daughter to Gan∣dalack, Lord of the Rocke of Galta∣res, by whom he hath a sonne, aged (as I imagine) about fifteen yeares. Very sorrie was Amadis when he vnderstoode for a certaintie, what alliance was between Balan & Gan∣dalack, whom he loued dearely, for the nourishing which his brother Galaor had of him, in the time of his infancie: and he could wel haue wished, that this combate might haue been against some other per∣son, although it should fall out more doubtfull and dangerous to him. But if it were against his owne brother, hee could not now denie it, in regarde of his promise passed to Darioletta. And so long they held on discourse, that darke night ouer-tooke them, yet they sayled on mer∣rily still, till somewhat arely the
next morning; they discouered the Island with the red Tower, where∣by the whole countrey had her name: because in the midst thereof was a goodly Castle builded, enui∣roned with great Towers, and such walles as were of no meane maruell to be seen. Then the Knight seeing Amadis take some delight in beholding thē, said. Sir, this Castle which you see yonder, was not built as this day, no more then an hundred since: but as you now see it, so doe an∣cient Histories speake of it, that he who first founded it was named Io∣seph, sonne to that Ioseph of Arama∣thia, who brought the Sangreal into Great Brittaine, at such time as the whole land consisted of Paganes. But by his meanes, the most part of the people conuerted to the faith of Iesus Christ: not without suffering many incursions of hostile enemies, that dayly came in vpon them, & grieuously molested them from time to time. To preuent this annoyance, this Tower was thus erected, in manner as you now beholde it, but after-wards (as all things haue their chan∣ges, with the alteration of times:) if fell into the hands of Giants, who tooke great paines to re-people the Isle with worshippers of Idols, & excluded all them that honou∣red the true God. Neuerthelesse, our Lord prouided so wel for them, that (in despite of their enemies) they still continued heere, though not in so great a number, or en∣ioying such libertie as formerly they had: yet partly by paying great taxations and tributes, and other of lesse ability, by continuall serui∣tudes to the Giants, vntill such time as Balan came to bee Lord thereof, who (as I haue alreadie tolde you) is debonnaire, vertuous and of Catholique religion, where∣by hee is very naturally beloued of all his subiects. Now, although the Knight de∣clared all these good qualities, and many more in the Giant, to Ama∣dis: yet all were but as fuell to fire, enflaming him so forwardly, that hee entreated him to goe before, and to let the Giant vnderstand, that a Knight of the Enclosed Isle was come thither with a Ladie, whose sonne he had slaine and kept her husband, daughter & seruants prisoners. And if by combating with him, and vanquishing him, they might be deliuered, hee reque, sted security against all men, but himselfe; otherwise let him not ad∣uenture to come neare the Port, because the challenger held it as his refuge. The Knight forthwith entred in∣to a small Skiffe, leauing Amadis and his company at the hauen, in expectation of his returne. So soon as he came near the Giant, he knew him, as one whō he had many times seene, and demanded of him, whi∣ther hee went. Lord Balan, quoth hee, I came hither with a Knight, whom I left at the Porte, who tels mee, that he came embarqued from the Enclosed Isle, and his comming is purposely to fight with you. At these wordes the Giant started, & began to imagine, that this was one of those men, whom Darioletta had before spoken of, & suddenly said to the Knight. Is there not a La∣die with him of some indifferent yeares. There is, answered the Knight. On my life, quoth hee, it is Amadis de Gaule, or one of his brethren, whose fame is so great throughout the world. I know not that replied the Knight, but I ne∣uer beheld a Gentleman of more goodly forme, nor lesse fearfull,
by his words, for if you send for him hither by me, and giue him warrant against all men, but your selfe, hee will quickly be heere, to end his en∣terprise. He shall be welcome, said Balan, and you know my vse and custome to all men, assure him vp∣on mine honor, that hee shall haue no wrong or iniurie done him by a∣ny of mine: but if hee gaine the vp∣per hand of me, he shall enioy what he can demand of me any way. At these words the Knight tooke his leaue of Balan, and entred into his boate againe, to goe find Ama∣dis, to whom hee declared all that the Giant had said. Whereupon, setting thence from the port, and comming to ascend the Rock, they went on towards Balans Castle, where he sate before the gate vnar∣med, saluting Amadis and Dario∣letta, he demanded of her, if this Knight was one of them, whom she had promised to bring with hir. But Amadis, taking the answer from her (as fearing to bee discouered) told him. That hee was not come thither to tell his name, but to let him feele the keen edge of his sword if he did not make a liberal amends, for the wrongs which the Lady had receiued, and the rest of her compa∣ny. Knight, replyed the Giant (in a kinde of scornefull manner) I feele such a feare instantly possesse mee, as constraines me to offer you such a courtesie, which as yet I neuer did to any other: knowing, that you are deceiud by hir which brought you hither, ignorant who I am, and what I can doe. Therfore I am con∣tented to suffer you seeke after ad∣uentures in other strange countries and not (for this time) make you liable to the custome of this Coun∣trie. Amadis being much displeased, to heare in what slender esteeme the Giant held him; chollerickly retur∣ned this answere. Grant pitty or pardon to such as thou hast power ouer, and not to me, that haue thus farre aduentured by Sea, only to deale with thee: and that I will soundly let thee know, before the sonne can circle this Rocke, if thou doest not consent to abolish, and giue ouer the damnable custome, which heere thou maintainest both against God and man, and which (in reason) thou oughtest not to gaine-say. Moreouer, I would intreate thee (in kindnesse) to doe it, for the good I wish to thy selfe, and in fauor of some of thy neerest friends whose welfare, I as dearely account of, as mine owne. Let me therefore aduise thee, to yeelde this Lady re∣dresse of her wrongs, before con∣straint compells it, and we proceed on in further trouble. This request, (quoth the Giant) exceedeth reason, and neuer shall it be granted by me: Beside: let me tell thee, but that I am somewhat desirous to approue, how your knights of the Enclosed Isle, can maitaine the Armes they beare; I would not vouchsafe to put on any myselfe. And because thou art on foote, and lackest a Horse to doe thee seruice: I will send thee one of the very best in my Stable, with Launce and Armour, if thou standst in neede. For I haue great store of such as I haue conquered, as well from some of thy companions, as o∣thers, who thought their manhood as good as thine. So help me God said Amadis, thou dealest like a good and worthie Knight, the horse I will not refuse, neither the launce but as for any Armour or Shield. I will haue none other then those (at this time) which belonged to the knight slain by thee on no occasion, whose innocence giues mee both
strength and courage, to reuenge the Wrongs done to him and the rest. He is dead and gone, answered the Giant. So leauing him, Dario∣letta and the knight, hee went into his Castle from whence soone after, came forth a squire, who presented a uery goodly courser, and a strong Launce to Amadis: and instantly, vpon the toppe of the Redde Tower, a noyse of Trumpets sounded most cheerefully, which caused Amadis to demand the reason thereof, Sir Knight, said the Squire, Balan my master is now ready to come forth, therfore stand vpon your guard, if you will be well aduised. Scarcely had hee ended these words, but all they within the Ca∣stle, as well men as women, came vpon the walles, and battlements, to behold the issue of this combat: and presently came forth Balan, mounted on the like courser as hee had sent to Amadis, armed with a most bright Armour, and bearing an huge shield beyond measure. As he approached neere to his ene∣mie, who sate readily prepared to encounter him, hee spake so loude as euery one might heare him. Be∣fore God, Knight of the Enclosed Isle, thine ouer-weening hath too farre blinded thine vnderstanding, and I am so much mooued thereat, that I cannot chuse but pittie thee, for refusing my kinde offer when I tendred it to thee. Pittie me? an∣swered Amadis, I well may doe it on thee and thy soule, except thou speedily repent: Otherwise, le employ the time in manly execu∣tion, and not in idle menacing words, as thou doest. Clasping downe their Beauers, and couching their Launces, they ranne each against other with such swiftnesse, as if lightning had carri∣ed them. Amadis met Balan so strongly, that hee pierced both his shield and coate of Male, directly vpon the stomacke bone, which was so painefull to him, that he fell downe on the ground, when as hee had charged Amadis, and ran his Launce so farre into the horses head (the paine he felt much qualifying the vigour of the blow) that the horse fell downe dead, and his Ma∣ster vnder him. But he quickly re∣couered himselfe, and drawing forth his Sword, marched towards Balan, who yet was so terrified with his fall as hee could hardly stand on his feete. Notwithstanding feare of death, and shame to bee vanqui∣shed, made him cheere vp his spi∣rits, and stand vpon the mainest manly defence of himselfe. Then they beganne to hack and hew one another, that whosoeuer had heard and not seene them: would rather haue thought the noyse to bee ham∣mers one an anuile, then swords on Armour. As the Giant lifted vp his sword with all his force, thinking to beate downe Amadis with the blow: his Shielde glaunced aside, whereof Amadis taking aduantage, and see∣ing Balan so openly discouered wounded him in the right arme, just on the elbow ioynt, the griefe wher∣of made him almost sencelesse, and retyring back two or three paces, reeled like a drunken man, When the knight of the Isle of the Inanta perceiued plainly, that Amadis had the better of the fight, chiefely, that at the first encounter with the Launce, he had ouerthrowne him, whom he (before) reputed inuinci∣ble, and beheld so much blood issu∣ing forth of his Arme, as set a crim∣son die on the ground: hee could not presume who or what he might be, but as diuers coniectures met
his thoughts, blessing himselfe, with the signe of the Crosse, he said to the Lady. Where could you meet with such a diuell as performeth things impossible for any mortall man to doe. Ah Sir Knight, quoth she, if the world hade a few more such men as he, the pride of wicked wretches would not be so insolent, as it is in many places. In this meane while, Amadis fol∣lowed the Giant hot & fiercely, and hee so weakened more and more, by losing the benefit of his right arme: that hee was compelled to take his sword into his left hand, but his enemy gaue him such a stroake (in the meane space) on the toppe of his Helmet, as made the sight or fore part turne directly be∣hinde. Which fell out very ill for Balan, for being thus bereft of sight, hee stroue extreamely to recouer it againe: but not without much paine and difficulty, thorough his right armes disabling, from whence the blood still streamed aboundant∣ly. Then Amadis hoping for a fi∣nall conclusion of his busie trouble, lifted vppe his sworde for another stroake: but the Giant had first re-seated his Helmet, and seeing the blowe comming, defended it with his Shield so well as hee could, and the sword of Amadis entred so far into it, that it was impossible for him to get it out againe. Now beganne they to hale and tugge one another so violently, that the thongs or leathers of their Ar∣mour brake in sunder, and both the sword and shield was wholly in the power of Amadis, which prooued farre more troublesome to him then before; for it was so exceeding hea∣uie, as hee could scarsely stirre it from the ground. By meanes wher∣of, the Giant had more ease to be∣stirre himselfe, charging Amadis at his owne pleasure: but it was with his left hand onely, and much the better for Amadis, for if Balan could haue commanded his other arme, Amadis had died without all doubt hauing neither sword nor shield, wherewith to defend himselfe. But necessitie (the quicke conceiuing mother of inuention) enstructed him suddenly with a new kinde of remedie, in manner following. Hee had his owne Shield still hanging behinde him in a Bauld∣rick, which did mightily hinder his strength, in recouering his Sword out of Balans Shield: wherefore, hee rent it violently from his owne neck, and threwe mainly astainst the shinnes of Balan, who felt the throw very painefully. Afterward, taking his Sworde (newly recouered by both his hands, from out of the Gi∣ants Shield, and by setting his right foot manfully on it) it plainely ap∣peared to euery eye, that he won it not easily, because (in the interim) Balan charged him seuerely, & grie∣uously wounded him in many pla∣ces on his bodie. But hauing reco∣uered the best part of his defence, his heart and courage became ther∣by the more chearfull and forward, in following his enemie at all ad∣uantages, to play still vpon him, as occasion serued, and therein he ex∣pressed all care and diligence. And indeed, the paine of the Giants stomacke, by the push of the Lance, with the ouer liberal expence of his blood, so extreamely encreased his paine and torment: that breath fai∣led him, and in a swone he fell on the ground. When they in the Castle beheld this, and verily supposing him to be dead; crying out with one voyce to Amadis: Ah traytour, in an ill houre hast thou slaine the best Knight in the world. But notwith∣standing,
all their lamentations A∣madis would not bee stayed, but stepping vpon the Giant; rent the Helmet from his Head, and perceiuing him to bee yet liuing, spake out loude enough to him, saying. Yeeld thy selfe Balan, if thou wilt not lose thy head: ne∣uerthelesse, hee stirred neither hand nor foot for all these wordes. Then the Knight, who was Gouernour of the Infanta Island, fearing least A∣madis would vse Balan as he threat∣ned him: came neare vnto him, & demanded, whether the Giant were dead, or no. No, answered Ama∣dis, neither doe I see any wound on him, whereby hee should bee thus farre out of heart Let mee entreat you then Sir, said the Knight, to deale no worse with him then you haue done, vntill hee come to him-selfe againe, and then I dare pro∣mise you, that he will satisfie what-soeuer you can demand of him. O∣therwise, beleeue it vndoubtedly, more harme will happen to you, then you can easily imagine: for the people within the Castle are al∣ready in Armes, and will be reuen∣ged on you to their vttermost pow∣er. For them (answered Amadis) I make no reckoning at all: but for your sake, and his neare alliance to Gandalack, I am the more willing to be perswaded. At these words, they saw Brauor, sonne to Balan, come forth of the Castle, accompanied with thir∣ty men well armed, whereupon, Amadis perceiuing in what danger he was: drew backe to the Rocke, wherein was a rift, after the forme of a caue o denne, and there, one, or two men could well withstand twenty and more, and the Grants Shield there serued as a rampier of defence. They of the Castle came meanely against him, hurling darts and huge stones at him, beeing no way able to offend him but before: but hee was so well sheltered with the Giants Shield, as all their ma∣lice could not a iot touch or hurt him. Hereat, they grew so incensed and enraged, that two of the boldest in all the troupe, stept forward to pluck him out of the cane perforce: but Amadis gaue the first of them so sound a welcome, as hee neuer spaka worde after. This so terrifi∣ed the other, and the rest, that none durst aduenture to come near him, or step within his reach. During this time of so sharpe as∣sayling, some of them belonging to the Castle, had carried Balan home into his bed, while the rest oppressed Amadis very desperately. Which was no little affliction to the Knight of the Infanta Island, vn∣der whose worde and warrant, hee had come thither: whereupon hee called Brauor, and thus hee spake to him. Before God Brauor, thou hast vndertaken a busines, little to thine honour. Doest thou not know, that thy father was alwaies a man honest and vertuous of his worde? And wilt thou degenerate, in breaking both his faith & promise. By me he gaue assurance to the Knight, and by solemne protestations, that hee should not be offended by any, but himselfe only. Neuerthelesse, thou sufferest him to bee wronged most vilely, although thy father bee yet liuing, and will hardly allowe this thy discurteous dealing. Beleeue me as thou list, for it thou stand in doubt of Balans death, take order, that the Knight may bee securely kept this night, without any iniury or disgrace done vnto him: And to morrow, thou shalt better see the disposition of thy father, and go∣uerne thy selfe thereto accordingly, for I dare assure thee, that hee is in
no perill of life. True it is, that with∣out my request first propounded for him, and the Knights affection to Gandalacke thy grandfather (as him-selfe assured me) he had smitten off his head: therfore follow my coun∣sell, and better will befall thee, then thou art aware of. I will doe so an∣swered Brauor, if my mother shall allow of your aduise. Goe then said the Knight, to know her minde, and in the meane while, let euery man withdraw himselfe. Brauor commanded his people to depart, and keepe themselues farre enough off from the Caue, least they should any way offend Amadis in the time of his going to the castle Where comming to his mother, he declared all that the knight had said to him: and how for the loue of Gandalack hee that had vanquished his father, refused to kill him. When she heard what her sonne had saide, she presently imagined that he was Galaor, whom shee affected as her own brother, because they had been nursed together at the Rock of Gal∣tares. Whereupon she wished her Sonne to follow the Knights aduise for his father began much to mend. By this meanes Amadis remained in peace, yet standing still vpon his guard, least hee should againe bee aslaulted by them of the Castle, who stood still as his besiedgers, but a great distance off from him. CHAP. XXXIIII. How Darioletta, perceiuing Amadis to bee in such danger, made great oae and lamentation: And how Balan and hee were made friends. WHen Darioletta percei∣ued Amadis to be be∣sieged on all sids, with∣out any meanes of ayd or succour: she began to grieue and lament very earnest∣ly, and in her weeping vsed these words. Wretched and vnfortunate woman that I am, must the only best knight in the world lose his life, and by mine occasion. How dare I (hereafter) appeare in the presence of the King his Father, the Queene, or any other of his friends, knowing what harm I haue procured to him? Miserable woman, and much more miserable then I am able to tearme my selfe. If I was once the meanes of sauing his life, by inuenting that strange kind of cradle, wherein hee was committed to the rude Seas mercy: how farre vnkinde and con∣trarie am I now to him, in causing the end of his dayes, when I most expected and hoped for helpe by him? Alas! how misguided were my sences from reason and vnder∣standing, at the time when I met him on the Sea shoare, and would not suffer him so much as turne back to the Castle of Apoliaon, to take his leaue of madam Oriana, and from whence hee might haue brought some other Knights with him, by whom (in this extreamity) he should haue beene well suppor∣ted? Who therfore deserues iustly to be punished, but only my selfe, hated and despised of all good luck, and performing the part of a light headed and indescreete Woman, trusting ouer much to mine owne rash opinion. All this while did Amadis be∣holde Dariolettaes sadde complay∣nings, and how often times shee
heaued vp her hands to heauen, as requiring comfort onely from thence, yet could he not vnderstand any one word she spake, but enioy∣ed this benefit of seeing her, by light of fire, made by them that watched him, and for their better wearing away the cloudie night, which also gaue him some feeling of her wofull condition, and so af∣flicted him in soule, as hee resolued to die, or get out of the rocky caue, because the nights obscuritie woulde therein more auaile him, then day light could doe, or delay∣ing time till the morning. Beside, cōsidering the doubtfull issue of his present estate, it appeared plainlie to him, that hee could not escape thence, without eyther death, or taking: being ouer wearied with weight of his Armes, want of natu∣rall rest, and extreamitie of hunger, all of these beeing no meane ene∣mies to any hopefull expectation. Only his best helpe in this necessity was, that he saw his guardes begin to nodde and sleepe, and therefore so softly as he could, and by little and little) hee offered to steale out of the Caue, hoping so to compasse his peace. Well was this obserued by the Knight of the Infanta Island, who considering what danger he might fall into, what speeches had past be∣tweene Brauor and the Gyants wife, all tending to his good and safetie: ranne presently to him, and stayed him, euen against his will, as it were, saying Sir Knight, I pray you to be∣frend me so much, as but to heare me, before you aduenture any far∣ther, whereat Amadis stood still, to listen what he would say, and the o∣ther declared to him, how hee had conditioned a truce with Brauor vp∣on hope of the Giants recouerie; who already appeared to be out of perill, and told him (beside) what you haue formerly heard. Amadis hereat was very ioyfull, beleeuing him to be an honest and kinde man, that would bring him so good news and that no dread of death could cause him to inuent them, where-upon he thus answered. Courteous Knight, for this time, I both credit, and will follow your counsell, swea∣ring to you by mine order of knight-hood, wherein already I haue spent ten yeares seruice: that I had much rather be hewn in peeces, then the Lady (for whom I haue contended with Balan) should not be fully satisfied in her demaunde. Both you and shee, replied the Knight, shall haue all that you can desire. For I know Balan to be such a man, as makes more account of his worde, then hee doth of his life. During this time, the Gyant lay on his bedde, not able to vtter a worde, but panted extraordinarily as one that endured a strange kinde of perplexitie in his stomack; wher∣by his breath began greatly to faile him, and still (one while after ano∣ther) he shewed with his left hand, and poynted to the place where hee was most payned. Which his Chi∣rurgeons perceiuing, (who durst not as yet take off his garments, as fearing much to stirre him) they aduentured to obserue the place whereto he signed, and found (by present apparance) that hee had great reason so to doe, for more then the palme of a hands breadth, round vpon the stomacke, the flesh and bones were quashed, and meer∣ly broken, as it were whereupon, they applyed immediatly so many oyles, vnguents, and other helpe∣full remedies: that, before breake of day, speech came to him againe, and hee demanded, what was be∣come
of the Knight and the La∣die. Then the truth of all was tolde him, for none of them durst tell a lie in his hearing: which made him to call for his sonne Brauor, and all the rest, that kept Amadis so sharpely besieged, and beeing come before him, he began in this manner to his sonne. Infamous villaine, durst thou presume to falsifie my worde, in any thing that I had promised. Slaue, as thou art, what honour, or what aduantage could redound to thee, by so base a deed as thou hast done? was it in thy power to recall my life, if death had pleaded possi∣on of it? Or how canst thou excuse this treason, in pursuing that villa∣nie which thou hast so impudently begunne, against a worthy Knight, who had not entred vpon my land, but vnder the assurance of my worde? Didst thou euer know hi∣therto, that for any thing hapning to me, I was any way false or iniuri∣ous in my promise? Haue I not e∣uermore iustly kept my word, to my power, as valuing it farre aboue thee, or the deare esteeme of mine owne life? By the faith I beare to God, but that nature somewhat speakes for thee: thou shouldest in∣stantly bee hanged ouer my Castle wall, as an example to all such vil∣laines as thou art, enemies to truth and vertue. Take him, take the wretch, binde him hand and foote, and so bear him to the Knight: then tell him from mee, thus I haue sent the traytour, that not only abused him, but mee much more, and say, I entreate him, to take such ven∣geance on him, for vs both, as hee hath worthily deserued. Not any man among them, durst euer contradict what hee had cammanded: wherfore Brauor, was presently seased on, strictly bound, and so carried thence to Amadis. But his mother, fearing least such seuerity might be fall him, as Balan had vrged, and knowing also, what wrong▪ the Knight had receiued: departed secretly out of the cham∣ber, and ranne after her sonne. Ne∣uerthelesse, she was not so swift of foot, but Brauor was presented to Amadis before shee came, and in such manner as the Giant had ap∣pointed. Whereof (notwithstan∣ding) Amadis made small account, but pardoned him honoura∣bly, and vntied his bonds himselfe, euen as the good Ladie came to him, whom she presently knew: for hee had taken off his Helmet be∣cause it was ouer burdenous to him, but shee could not imagine, how he would deale with her sonne Brauor, wherefore shee threw her selfe at his feet, and weeping, said. Alas, Lord Amadis, doe you not know me? Now, albeit he very wel remembred her, and that shee was the sister to Gandalack: yet (for a while) he would not let her perciue so much, but somewhat fiercely, answered. Ladie, I know not who, or what you are, and desire neuer to come among such bad and wic∣ked people, as I haue mette withall in this place. Alas Sir, said shee, if you thinke it meet that I shall con∣ceale your name, I am well conten∣ted to doe it: neuerthelesse, I know you to bee Lord Amadis de Gaule, brother to Galaor, whom I so dear∣ly affect, as in honour of him, and for his sake, I humbly entreate you to pittie and pardon my sonne. These wordes moued his noble heart to such cōpassion, as he could no longer dissemble his displeasure: but taking the Lady gently from the ground, he thus spake to her. Ma∣dame, my brother & my selfe haue receiued such benefits & curtesies
from Gandalack your Father, as I would hazard my person to any pe∣rill, yea euen to my very latest gaspe to doe him the best seruice consi∣sting in my power, or any of his friends, for his sake. But as concer∣ning your Sonne, these men here present know right well, that I par∣doned him before you could come to begge it of me: nay more, I vn∣bound him with mine owne hands, before your arriuall, without desi∣ring any other reuenge on him, but only on such as maintaine wicked and vnlawfull customes. Among whom I name your usband as the chiefest man, whose knowledge of my name I care not for: because he may hold himselfe well assured, that I will neuer depart frō this Isle, vntil he haue satisfied the lady that came hither with me. And therfore, if he be so iust and true of his word, as he would haue it appeare by open publication: let him meete mee in place conuenient for vs both, and then he shall know, whether he was carried away from mee by right or wrong, after I had obtained the mastery ouer him. Againe she fell vpon her knees, saying, beleeue me sir, hee will doe you reason, in any thing you can demand of him, as you may well perceiue, that hee was vtterly igno∣rant, in that which his people haue done contrary to his worde. For then hee had neither sence nor vn∣derstanding, which may well serue in his excuse. Wherefore I sweare to you vpon my faith, that if you please to goe along with me to him (because he cannot by any meanes come to you) before you part one from another, I doubt not but you will bee reconciled louing friends. Madam, answered Amadis, I haue not any susption of you: But I greatly doubt the condition of Gy∣ants, who are cōmonly little gouer∣ned by reasō, but carried away only by furie and crueltie. It is true Sir, (quoth shee) and yet notwithstan∣ding, I know his goodnesse to bee such, as you may well cred it him on mine assurance. Your word hen (answered Amadis) shall be my war∣rant, And so I will goe along with you. So lacing on his helmet, faste∣ning his shield about his neck, and grasping his Sword fast in his fist: he entred the Castle, with the wife to Balan, who quickly had aduer∣tisement of their arriuall, and ther∣fore requested the knights presence in his chamber. No sooner were they entred, but the Giant raysed himselfe on his bed so well as hee could, saying, that he was most hear∣tily welcome. Balan, answered A∣madis, I know not how thou mea∣nest, but I haue iust occasion to complaine of the villanie offered me by thy men: being come (vpon thy words warrant) to combat with thee, and vrge reason for thy wrong to the Lady that conducted me hi∣ther. And albeit I had the better of thee, yet cowardly they assaulted me: although I thinke it was not done by thy command, being then in disposition not to doe it. But be it howsoeuer, seeing thy Iustice vp∣on thine owne Sonne, I acquit both thee and them also: but not in the case of right appertayning to the Lady, for, death it selfe cannot hin∣der me from my duty in her behalfe which makes mee the more louing∣ly dersie thee to giue her content∣ment. Otherwise, I must bee con∣strayned, to finish vpon thy Bodie, that which I haue already begunne: a matter much displeasing to mee, for Gandalacks sake, whom I dearely affect & esteem, & to whom (as I am enformed) thou art nearely allied
in some nature of affinity. Knight replyed Balan, although my extreamity of griefe is such, to see my selfe vanquished by one Knight only, as death would be a thousand times more welcome to me: yet both these are of no value at all with me, in regard of that dis∣honour acted by my sonne and ser∣uants. And did my strength so much fauour me, as but to execute mine owne determinations, thou shouldest sufficiently perceiue, how farre the power of my word exten∣deth. For the instant, I could doe no lesse, or yeeld thee any better te∣stimony of my truth: then deliuer him into thy power, that began so foule and iniurious an offence, al∣beit he is of no meane esteem both to me and his mother. But seeing this submission cannot cōtent thee; command what else thou wouldest haue, and it shall be granted. For matters past betweene thee and me (answered Amadis) I am sufficient∣ly satisfied: but not in the wrongs that concerne the Lady. I am rea∣dy (replied the Giant) to suffer any such condemnation as thou thin∣kest best, whereby to please both her and thee: with this considera∣tion, that the vnrecouerable life of her sonne stands out of my reach, and therefore must needes bee an∣swered by some thing, remayning in my power First of all then, said Amadis, my will is, that thou deliuer her hus∣band, her daughter, and all their at∣tendants out of thy prisons. Next, in steed of her sonne, flaine by thee, condemne thy sonne to make her a∣mends, by present marriage of her daughter. For lt mee tell thee ∣lan, her husband is as good a n∣tleman as thy selfe, and as suffici∣ently enriched with meanes: euen so faire, as hee is gouernour of all those countries, which the King my father commands in the lesser Brittaine. When Balan heard him speake in that manner, he began to obserue him more i then before, and thus replyed. I pray thee (in curtesie) withou on∣ger delay, to tell mee  e, and thy fathers  fa∣ther answered A is the King of Gaule, and I am his  A∣madis. At these wordes, the Giant lif∣ted vp his head, saying. Is it possi∣ble that thou should be s, who slew my father? It is very true, quoth he, for I beeing in ayde of King L, and perceiuing him to bee in vnauydable dager of death: I slew a , who was re∣ported to bee thy father. Before God, answered Balan, it can nuer enter into my vnderstanding, how thou durst bee so bolde, as to pre∣sume so sarre into my diction: but only by my euer kn ho∣rable renowne, of keeping my faith and worde inuiolate, in any cause whatsoeuer. Or else, the meer mag∣nanimity of thy soule, which neuer made reckoning of the very grea∣test perill, but futhered thee in the haughtiest enterprises, is thy conti∣nuall good guiding Angell. And therefore, seeing fortune is so fa∣uourable to thee; it were against reason, that I should contradict her in thy happinesse, hauing made so deare a proofe thereof my selfe already. As concerning my sonne I giue him freely t thee, to be dis∣posed of at thy pleasure: not in any fauourable respect of mee, but as beseemeth a villaine, that durst pre∣sume to breake his fathers faith. For no goodsse else can now remaine in him, but what his conce may well learn f thee: as ing a true teacher  do∣doning
him so great an offence. Then reaching forth his hand, & Amadis meeting it gently with his, hee thus proceeded. The husband to this Lady, her daughter, and all the prisoers else in my custodie, shall forth with bee released: ac∣cou the very fayrest fortune,  did or can befall mee, to be ed as thy friend, and so I bh thee to accept me. That will I with all my heart, answered Amadis: And embracing him as he lay, said. I am so farre engaged in seruice, to thy Father in Law Gandalack, as, for his sake onely, I hold it an Article of my dutie to loue thee truely. And as a begin∣ning of our ae, let mee entreate and perswade thee, to cease and giue ouer this wicked custome, which (both against God and reason) thou hast heere so long time maintained. Also, forgiue thy Sonne Brauor, whose error rather ensued by folly of youth, then otherwise: com∣manding him withall, that (to mor∣row) hee marrie this Ladies daugh∣ter, that so wee both may stand dis∣charged of our promises. Where-to Balan gladly condescended, and Darioletta, with her husband were also well pleased and satisfied. And not without great reason, and much to our purpose, doth our Historie speake of this mariage. For from them two issued a Sonne, na∣med Galeote, that married one of the daughters to Galuanes, and the faire Giantesse Madasima; whence descended the second Balan, succe∣ding euermore (from father to Son) in this Island of the Red Tower. Vn∣till it came to the gentle knight Se∣gurades, brother to the knight that came to the court of ing Arthur, being aged aboue sixscore yeares: he hauing (in regard of his age) for borne the vse of Armes, the space of twentie yeares did yet (without the helpe of any Launce) vnhorse all the famous knights that came to Cmelt. This Segurades, whereof I now speake, was in the time of king V∣tr Pendragon, Father to king Ar∣thur, and left one only Sonne Lord of this Island, who was named Bra∣uor le Bran: who was slaine by Sir Tristram de Lyons, as he conducted fayre seult, wife to King Marke, in∣to Cornewall. Of this Brauor le Brun: issued the valiant Galehaut le Brun, Lord of the farre remote Isles, a great friend to Sir Lancelot du Lake, as you may well remember, if you haue read the histories of the Round Table, where mention is made of the Bruns, who descended all from the stock of Balan. With whom we wil leaue Amadis, attending the curing of his Wounds: to tell you, what happened to Grasandor, after the hunts-man had done his message to him, and knew assuredly, that he was embarqued thence with the Lady his conducter.
CHAP. XXXV. How Grasandor followed in the quest of Amadis, and what aduentures happened to him in his trauatie. NOt long since you read, that Amadis being en∣tred the Barque of the Ladie, who purposely came thither to seeke him: one of the Huntsmen came along the shoare, to whom he cal∣led, commanding him to bury the dead Knight, and acquaint Grasan∣dor with the reason of his so sudden departure. Which being imparted to Grasandor, hee was a long time pensiue, maruailing what aduenture had befallen him, to drawe him so farre off from him and Madame O∣riana. Hereupon, giuing ouer further pursuing the game, he desired him, to conduct him where the dead Knight lay, and being there ariued: hee sawe him lie along, quite disar∣med, but neither Shippe or sayle could hee disne on the Sea. So carrying the dead body into an Ab∣bey neare adioyning, which Amadis had founded, Grasandor returned to Oriana, whom hee found with the Infanta Mabila, and the other Ladies, who seeing him enter with∣out Amadis, demanded whence hee came thus all alone? From point to point, hee related the whole aduenture, according as hee had receiued it from the hunts-man; yet with some regarde, as fearing to afflict her ouer much, whom it most concerned, I meane Madame Oriana: whose heart was so seuerely shut vp with griefe, as shee could not (for a long while) vtter one word. But when her soule had wonne more liberty, then shee thus answered. Surely I am perswa∣ded, that seeing hee hath le you and taken no farewell o me: hee departed not, but vpon some very great occasion. By my faith Ma∣dame, replied Grasandor, I  of your minde: for hee sent me word by the Huntsman, that I should ex∣cuse his absence to you. Alas quoh the Princesse) I know not what ex∣cuse to allow of, neither what wee are best to doe. Madame, answe∣red Grasandor, I haue resolued with my selfe, to trauaile in quest of him, and if (by good fortune) wee may meete together, wee shall  more easily passe all good or harme that can betide vs. And one thing I dae promise yee, that no place shall containe me aboue one night, vn∣till I can heare tydings of him. Oriana, and all the other Ladies, liked this motion very well: only Mabila excepted, who all that night could not refraine from teares. Notwithstanding, her sorrowes could not stay Grasandor, but carely in the morning he armed himselfe, and after hee had heard Masse, ta∣king leaue of the Princesse, and the whole company: hee went aboard a Barque, with two Squires and his horse only, and none else, but the Mariners to conduct him. So et∣ting saile, not knowing which way to direct their course, they sayd all that day and night, not meeting with any shippe or vessell, to  them tydings of what they sought for. The second night ensuing, they passed close by the Isle of the ∣ta: but such was the  they could not discouer it,  uens were then so darke and
die. So parting from that Coast, and by the Island of the Red Tower also: about the breake of day, they descried a broad strand o hauen, where Grasandor would needes goe on shoare, to vnderstand what countrie it was, for it appeared very pleasing to him, and plentifully planted with all kindes of Trees. Taking his Armes, and accom∣panied with his two squires on foot he went vp into the Countrie, gi∣uing charge first to the Marers, to part away from thence, if they heard no other dings from him. So they ourneyed on a large part of the day, not meeting any one whom they might speake vnto: where andor did not a little mrail considering the ertilitie of the soyle, and how well it stood planted in many places. Being en∣tred into a very thicke wood, and following a guyding track therein: he came to a goodly cleare foun∣taine, where hee alighted from his Horse, and feede on such viands as  Squires had there for him, and they being wearie with trauailing on foote, aduised him to returne backe to his que. So helpe me God, quoth he) I will neuer endure the rep, that being so farre en∣tred into a Countrie, I returned without some satisfaction of my de∣sire. Whereupon, the Squires left him, and ee went on still by the track of the wood, till he came in∣to a narrowe vailey, so  set with trees, as hardly could the beames of the Sunne ga any pas∣sage through them. In the  of this vale, there stood a small Mo∣nasterie, where beeing desirous to enter, hee dismounted from his horse, and astening him to the ring of the dore, went into the Church to say his orisons: beseeching God deuourely, to guide him in such sort, that this enterprise which hee had vndertaken, might chiefly re∣dound to his honor and glorie, and lastly to some happy issue of his paines. Continuing thus on his knees before the Alter, there came in a white Monke, to whom hee called, saying. Good father tell me what land is this, and to whom it appertaineth. S Knight answered the Monke, this is the dome of Ireland. but searcely (at this time) in obeysance to the King: because, not fare off from this place, there hues a Knight, named en, with two other of his brethren, mightie , and powerfull in Armes, who by fauour of a Fortresse, whereto they make their common retreate, haue vtterly ruinated all these parts, and forcibly excluded all the inha∣bitants, which vsually made their a∣biding about this mountain. Grow∣ing on thus still from bad to worse, thy commit an infinite number of euills, thefts and spoyles, without making spare of my passenger: no,  Knights eant, if they can  of any. But will you vnderstand how they execute their villanie? They  continualiy all three together, and when they heare of any one comming their way: two present∣ly goe and closely hide themselues, while the third stands ready for the sight. But if hee chance to prooue too weake: then comes forth the o∣ther two brethren to succour him, and kill the partie that is assaulted. And euen but yesterday, it chanced that two of my holie brethren, re∣turning homeward, with such almes as is in charite giuen vs to liue vp∣on: they saw these three villaines al∣together, and so cruelly dealing with one gentle Knight, that after they had wounded him in many
places of his body, they would like∣wise haue smitten off his head; but for the earnest entreatie of those two Religious men, by whose im∣portunity, they left him, and sffe∣red them to bring him hither, where hee is yet liuing. His friendly com∣panion (afterwarde) happened hi∣ther likewise, who grieuing for the others ill fortune: departed hence, euen but a very little before your ariuall. Gone is hee to finde these wretched traytours, & to combate them, with dangerous hazard of his life. I pray you father, said Grasan∣dor, to shewe mee the wounded Knight. Very willingly, replyed the Monke. So hee conducted him to a le Cell where he lay, and so soone as they saw eithers face, they present∣ly knewe one another. For the wounded man was , Cosen to Landn, and Nephew to Don Que∣dragant, who had beene present in many worthie actions, during the waires betweene King Lasuart and Amadts, but especially in the com∣panie of Grasandor. He finding him in this woefull estate, grew very sor∣rowfull, and after some few spee∣ches together,  spake in this manner. I beseech you noble Lord, goe helpe my Cosen andn, who is ridden after those traytours, that dealt with mee thus vpon bae ad∣uantage. Because I am perswaded, that your speedy ayd (perhaps may saue his life: for they are three, and will all set vpon him together, if hee chance to meete with them. But where may I soonest (said Gra∣sandor) finde him? You shall re∣plied E) come to a little turning track in this valley, which will guide you  vpon the plaine: in the  whereof standeth a strong  and thither the  vse to withdraw themselues, after any such treachery committed. By these wordes, Grasander well perceiued, that the Religious man had truly informed him: wherfore, commending Eliseo into  pro∣tection, and the  care of his health, foorthwith ee tooke hore, and gallopped so speedily as he could) directly as the Monke had formerly enstructed him. No sooner was hee past the valley, but hee espied the Casle, and Landin before the gate, crying out aloude to them within: but he could not vnderstand what he  was not (as then) me neare  nough, and therefore  among the trees and , to  the success of his . With in a while after,  bridge to be let downe  awe come forth, of goodly stature, and well appointed. He hauing spoken some few wordes to Landin, they sundred themselues farre from each other, giuing the carriere to the  and  then launces: that all the valy gaue an ecchoing novse thereof, and both of them  to the ground albert the Knight of the Caes fall, was much more dreadfull then that of Landins. Quickly they both recouered footing, and hauing their Swords aptly prepared, ra mainely each at other. Then beganne the fight to be hotte and , yea, and in such cruell violence, as the large expence of their blood gaue plaine apparance thereof. Neuerthelesse, Landin carried him  couragi∣ly, as he brought  other soone to his command, bee being able to de nothing else, but only ward off his blowes. When  he could hold out no  made a signe to them of the , that the other should quickly come to
his rescue. Forth came the two o∣ther Knights, riding very hastily, & being prouided of huge strong lan∣ces, made towards Landin, crying out aloud Traytor, if thou killest him, thou art but dead. When Lan∣din saw them comming, hee prepa∣red for his owne best defence, and, without any shew of dismay, said. , you are the men that I  for, serting treacherously vp∣on Knights errant: But I vew here before God, I will leaue my Life in this place, or reuenge our wrongs with the loss of your heads. Grasandor well noted all these , mounting sud∣denly on hi horse, and riding mainly vpon the bridle: came a∣mong the  so loud as possi∣bly he could. Theeues, Villaines, leaue this Knight. Thus speaking, he charged one of the bretheren so strongly, that downe hee fell, and brake his right arme in the fall, mea∣suring all his length on the ground hauing no power at all to help him-selfe. The other ran against Landin hoping  beare him,  else to kill the  vnder him: But he auoyded it so dexteriously, as recei∣uing no  at all, hee wounded the horse of his enemie in the flanck more then a hands breadth. Now if Landin was glad of such vnlooked for helpe, let me (in like necessity) yeelde their opinion, for hee neuer was in the like dager before, and especially, when he eard his  call to him, saying. Finish  him thou  withall, and leaue the other to my mercy. Landin was ruled by his direction and ranne to the first whom he had ouerthrowne, bringing him quick∣ly to such confor, that he made his face to  the bare Earth. In the  while, Gsandor slept not in dealing with the other, but followed one of them so freely; that at the third stroake, hee cut off the hand wherewith he held his Sword. Wherefore, despayring now of a∣ny redresse, and seeing his two o∣ther companions in such pittifull condition: Hee turned bridle to∣wards the Castle, for there was his latest refuge. But the Horse being stubborne, and vnrulie mouthed, in despight of all that his Master could doe: Leapt beside the bridg, on the banke of the diteh, and so tumbled downe to the bottome, giuing a desrned ending to his ri∣ders dayes. By this time was Landin com∣ming towardes him (who had left both the other lying along on the ground) searing, least some in the Castle would make a sallie forth, vp∣on him to whom he stood so much obliged: But perceiuing none to make any such offer, comming neer to Grasandor. Landin spake thus. Sir Knight, I pray you tell me who you are, that I may know the man, to whom I am indebted for my lifes safetie. My deare friend Landin,  the other, I am Grasandor, thankefull to Heauen for our happy meeting and suceesse. Much ama∣zed was Landin, to see him there, who he had left in the Enclosed , with Atadis, being able to ima∣gine no reason, why they two should be thus sundred, wherefore he said. Belecue mee Lord Gra∣sandor, I durst haue sworne you to be in a quite contrarie place: ther∣fore let me entreate you to tell mee what aduenture drew you into these so farre distant parts. Grasandor related all the whole matter to him, as formerly you haue heard, and how hee trauailed in the quest of Amadis: desyring, if he knew any tidings of him, not to conceale them from him. First
my Lord, answered Landin, you are not ignorant, that my Cosen Eliseo and my selfe, were not long since discharged thence, with mine vnckle Don Quedragant, and Bruneo de bonne Mer, to goe to King Cil∣dadan for ayde of men: because the Nephew to King Arauigne, vn∣derstanding the ouerthrowe of his Vncle, had taken possession of his kingdome, and gaue vs (at our en∣trance) a very sharpe battaile. Now although the victory fell to vs, and the enemies losse prooued to bee great: yet many men of worth pe∣rished on our side, and wee were sent for the leuie of fresh forces. And because good water grew scant with vs in our trauaile, the first place wee came to, was the Isle of the In∣fanta; where it was tolde vs, that but lately before, a Knight passed thence with a Lady, and went pur∣posely to fight with Balan the Gy∣ant. Yet could we not know, what was the cause of this his attempt: only we were informed, that the go∣uernour of the Isle was gone along with him, to see the issue of the cō∣bate. By further intelligence we gathe∣red, that this Balan was of huge sta∣ture and strength, whereby I am perswaded, that none (other then Amadis) durst vndertake the aduen∣ture: and comparing the manner of his so sudden leauing you, with the other circumstances of your discourse thinke therfore (vndoub∣tedly) it is hee. Before God, saide Grasandor, I am halfe offended, in that hee refused my companie in this action. How? answered Lin∣din, are you to learne now, that the Fates and Fortune, haue reserued all haughty enterprises for him on∣ly, and to him they are due, and to none other? I perceiue it (quoth Grasandor) too apparantly: but how happened you to be seperated from your Cosen? By the greatest mis-hap, answered Landin, that could bee, as you shall instantly vnder∣stand. No sooner tooke wee landing in this countrey, but he began to feele himselfe not halfe fit for trauaile, by some sudden apprehension of sicknesse seazing on him. Yet his vndantable minde was such, as hee would not soiurne in any place, or determine on any ease or rest, vntill wee might come to King Cildadan. In which purpose, crossing ouer the countrie, we came at  to a little Monasters, where  him. There wee m, who (with liberall expence or eaes, re∣quired succour of vs, against a Knight that kept her husband pri∣soner: because (against his will) he would dispossesse him of his law∣full inheritance, and by his disabili∣ty of resistance, hath shut him vp in a strong Tower, where neither the Sunne, or any light else can yeeld him comfort. Then she entreated my Cosen, who was so sickly dis∣posed, as I haue tolde yee, to suf∣fer mee goe along with her: not doubting, but (by Gods assistance) I should quickly returne againe to him; because the Knight with whō I was to deale, stayed not aboue two miles from thence, as the Da∣mosell solemnly assured vs both. All the requests and entreaties I vsed to him, could not disswade him, but needes hee would ride a∣long with mee, and when wee came to the ende of the clowdie valley, which you haue likewise past: wee saw a Knight well armed & moun∣ted, slning by vs as if hee desired not to bee seene. Whereupon my Cosen aduised me, to followe the Damosell, and hee would ride to know what that other was. Thus
were wee seuered, and (soone af∣ter) I met with him I sought for, and calling to him, hee came to me presently vnarmed. After some small conference betweene vs, hee seemed to know mee well, and de∣manded of me, what I would haue. I acquainted wim hith all that the  had tolde mee, desiring him to deliuer her husband, with∣out any further molestation; wher to for my sake (as he said)  with gaue consent. Appeaing to this  kindnesse to , euen as much as any  could doe: I tolde him  that  ou with a good minde and wo but winne him blame a∣mong all Knights of merit. For which gentle reprehension, hee thanke mee most louingly, & pro∣mised (neuer after) to be so forget∣full of himselfe. So parting from him, I returned to the Monasterie, where I found my Cosen very sore wounded. Demanding of him, how this perill had happened to him, hee made mee answere, that going after the Knight we met: so soone as hee had left me: he cried to him, to stay and turne his face, which hee did. After the Launces encounter, a sterne and dreadfull combate passed betweene them: neuerthelesse, the issue of the acti∣on prouing to my kinsmans honor, and holding his enemy for fully vanquished. two other came forth of a secret ambushment, and an together so  vpon him that they brought him nto such a case as you haue lately seene him. And it God had  directed two Religious men that way, acciden∣tally  their wonted way home,  he had vtterly  there. But then prayer, and , were so ear∣nest and instant: that they preuai∣led for his life, and so carried him thence with them. One of those reuerend Monkes (answered Grasandor) acquainted mee with all that which you haue reported of your Cosen: yet not a∣ny thing of you, but that you were gone thence, to pursue the com∣mitters of so horrid a villanie, for which (thankes bee giuen to God, both you and I are sufficiently re∣uenged, because I thinke they are all dead. I know not that, replied Landin. let vs goe see for more as∣surance. So going to Galifon, ly, vnable to rise and his brother ard by him, not dead, but : Landin  his two Squires to alight, who mounted them into the faddles of their hor∣ses, and sate behinde on the crup∣pers themselues, onely to support them. So rode they on towards the Monasterie, fully resolued that if Elisco were dead, they both should be hanged: but if he were in good disposition, then they would take some other deliberation. Beeing come to the Monasterie they found  in much better e∣state of health, then they expected: for one of the religious Monkes (a man most expert and skilfull in the art of Chirurgerie) had tended him so carefully that hee was quite out of any danger. Causing Galifon & his brother to be dismounted, and they looking on Landin disarmed: they presently knw him, hauing often seen him with King Cildadan, before they forsooke his seruice, only thorough the small account they made of him, when he became tributarie to King Lisuart; after which time, they fell to robbing & theeuing spoyling any that fell into their power. Highly pleased was Galifon (his
misfortune considered) to see him-selfe and his brother at the com∣mand of such a man, from whom he assured himselfe of mercie: and therefore with teares in his eyes, thus hee began. For the honor of God, and true Nobilitie, I beseech you Lord Landin, not to deale with vs as we haue iustly deserued: but by declaring your goodnesse and gentle breeding, referre the base liues of me and my brother, vnto your wonted mercy and pitty. Gali∣fon (answered Landin) I neuer thought you to be such men, ha∣uing beene brought vp vnder so good a Prince, as is the King your Master, and among so many worthy Knights, as ordinarilie doe attend on him: among which number (God is my Iudge) I alwayes estee∣med you, and not to bee any such men as I haue found yee. Alas sir (quoth Galifon) desire of rule and commanding, hath won mee this due desert, as it hath done many more, as idle headed and improui∣dent as my selfe. But be it howsoe∣uer, in your hands now lies all my remedie. What would you said Landin, that I should doe for you? Begge pardon replied Galifon, for me of the King, to whose mercy, and your good pleasure, I willingly sub∣mitte my selfe. I am contented so to doe: said Landin, prouided, that herafter you change your vile con∣dition, and become as vertuous, as you haue beene lewd and vicious. That I solemnly vow and sweare to you, answered Galifon. Vpon that faithfull promise (quoth Landin) I dismisse you: conditionally that you and your brother, within the space of three weekes hence ensu∣ing, wheresoeuer King Cildadan shall then bee, you doe render your selues vnto him, intirely obey him, and then I will compasse the means, that he may forget what hath past, and pardon you, if my power can stretch so far. Most humbly did Galifon and his brother shew themselues thankeful; and because it grew to be late, they supped together with such meane cheere, as both the time and place could afforde them. Earlie the next morning Grasandor, hauing heard Masse tooke leaue of the companie: and returned to the place where the Barque waited his comming, and the men not a little ioyfull, that hee had heard newes of Amadis. For, by the plaine appearing words of Landin, he made no doubt of mee∣ting with him in short time, or else to heare report of him, in the Isle of the Infanta, for which cause hee in∣tended the greater hast. Being in the Barque, he enquired of the Pa∣tron, if hee could conueniently bring him to the Isle of the Infanta? who made him answere, that know∣ing now the countrie wherein they were, hee could easilie set sayle for that Island: and Grasandor earnestly entreated him so to do. So, without any farther delay, they weighed Anchors, and hauing the winde prosperous for them, say∣led all that night, till (about breake of day) they descried the Island. Then drawing to starbord, and making vp into the Seas hight, a∣bout euening they came to coast it. Grasandor went a shoare, and moun∣ted vp the Rock, vntill hee came to the great Towne, where meeting with the Gouernour (already retur∣ned backe) hee vnderstood, that Amadis had conquered Balan, and friendshippe was vnited betweene them, according as you heretofore heard. By my Knight hood, said Grasandor, these are the best newes that euer I could aske for, not so much for knowing whether Amadis
had finished (to his high honour) a combate so perillous, beeing e∣uermore inured to such happy for∣tunes as this: but for my more cer∣taine knowledge, where I may find him, for otherwise, I am not capa∣ble of any rest, either by day or night, so strictly am I bound by my vow. I am verily perswaded, answered the Gouernour, that many other haue seene extraordinarie actions of Armes, and (doubtlesse) perfor∣med with no meane honour: but if they knew as well as I, his admi∣rable valor in this haughty attempt, and resolution in the execution, I thinke in (my poore opinion) they would confesse it to exceed all for∣mer presidents whatsoeuer. Honor be attributed to heauen, said Gra∣sanaor, for this blessed fauour. And now there remaines no more to compleate my contentment, but onely to stay no where till I haue found him: may it therefore please you, to lend mee some one skilfull Mariner of yours, to be my helpe in this negotiation. With all my hart said the Gouernour, and victualls also for your vessell, if you are in such necessity. Then the Gouernour of the Isle called for one of his chiefest Pilots, and presenting him to Grasandor, said. This man came from thence but yesterday, and very well knowes how to conduct you thither. I thanke you Sir, replyed Grasandor. So after some little time of rest, his desire stil prouoking, him to see the man he sought for the went aboard, and (without any sinister fortune) landed the next morning in the I∣sland of the Red Tower; enquiring there of Balans people, if Amadis were there as yet, or no. You shall find him aboue at the Castle, quoth they, and (if you please) wee will conduct you thither. So they ascended vp the Rocke, & as they set foot within the Castle gate: Grasandor espied Amadis, to whom he ran. and caught him fast in his armes. My dearest friend (quoth Amadis) what fortune hath conducted you hither? How fares Madame Oriana, and all the other Ladies in her companie? Trust me Sir, answered Grasandor, all are in good health, considering their griefe for your so sudden parting from them: And by their aduice, I put my selfe vppon your quest, with solemne vow, not to giue o∣uer till I found you; otherwise Ma∣dame Oriana could not haue liued three dayes, such was her extreame sorrow for your absence. Yet she considered very wel, that you would not haue parted so peremptorily, if some earnest occasion had not enforced it. My returne, saide A∣madis, shall bee sooner (perhaps) then shee expects. That will be no discontent to mee answered Grasan∣dor: onely let vs stay heere sixe or eight dayes, because the Seas haue beene somewhat offensiue to mee. With right good will, replyed A∣madis, for I would also haue my wounds thoroughly cured, before I did aduenture on any trauaile.
CHAP. XXXVI. How Amadis being in the Island of the Red Tower, conferring with Gra∣sandor; espied a small Foist on the Sea, which put into the Port, hauing people in her, that told them tidings of the Armie, which was gone for Sansuegua, and to the Isles of Landes, or the Profound Isle. VPon a day, as Amadis and Grasandor walked together in priuat con∣ferrence, concerning the Princesse Oriana, being on the verie highest hill, or Rock of the Red Island: they descri∣ed a farre off on the Sea, a Foist of no great bignesse, making towards the Land. Hereupon, they began to descend, to know what persons were in her, and no sooner were they downe the Rocke; but one of their Squires (whom they had sent before for news) returning backe, told them: that the vessell was in the hauen, and it was a Master of the housholde to Madasima, for by that name hee had stiled him-selfe. Scarcely had he finished this re∣port, but Nalfon, who was the man we now speake off; came to meete them, and Amadis knew him imme∣diatly: demanding of him, whether he went, and what newes hee could tell them. Nalfon, who likewise knew him perfectly, humbly saluted him, wondring not a little to see him in those parts, where Balan commanded, and knowing also his hatred to him, because hee was the man that slew his Father. Wherfore after some few courtesies passing betweene them, Nalfon said. Trust me my Lord, I would neuer haue enquired for you in this countrie, neither can I well imagine, what aduenture should draw you hither. My honest friend, answered Amadis it was the will of Heauen to haue it so, and for what reason, I shall haue better leisure to tell you: but first acquaint me, in what estate you left my brother Galaor and Galuanes, as also if you met with Dragonis? My Lord, quoth Nalfon, they neuer were in better condition, and I shall tell you some things, that will content you. Know then Sir, that after Galaor, and Dragonis were dislodged from Sobradisa, with their Armie: My Lord and Master Galuanes, well ac∣companied with Souldiers, which he had leuied in the Isle of Monga∣za, came to ioyne with them, at a place commonly called, the Rocke of the Damosell Enchantresse, which is on a Promentary farre in the Sea, I know not if euer you heard anie speech thereof, or no. Yes that I haue replied Amadis, Garnate of the Dreadfull Dale heretofore told mee of it, how he being sicke sayled by this coast: but in regard of his great infirmitie then, hee could not make any proofe, of that which gladly he would haue done. Wherfore, I pray you discourse (at large) what you know thereof, because I haue beene credibly enformed, that ma∣ny Knights of name, haue bin lost in that passage. On my Faith sir, an∣swered Nalfon, not anything I know shall be concealed from you, and then he thus began. The common ame is, that this Rock was so called by reason of a Damosell there dwelling, who was (in her time) very curious in vnder∣standing all magicall Sciences, and
grew so expert in them, that shee wrought wonderfull things, and farre beyond the power of nature. Among the rest, shee erected there the most sumptuous building that euer was seene, and afterward, she preuailed so powerfully by her skil: that she drew thither (were they ne∣uer so farre off) all Ships passing to Ireland, Norway, Sobradisa, the Isle of Lands, or the Profound Isle; they not hauing any power or meanes (what windes soeuer blew) to helpe themselues, but (by meere con∣straint) were brought to take lan∣ding not farre from her abyding, whence they could not be dischar∣ged, except shee pleased. There she stayed them, and compulsiuely kept them, taking of their marchan∣dises or goods, whatsoeuer liked her best: especially errant Knights, if they had any aboard, and them she would make (afterward) to com∣bate one with another, euen to death many times, and therein she tooke very great delight. But as it often happeneth, that suc as deceiue others, come (in the end) to bee deceiued themselues: so shee of whom I speake, hauing heaped together infinite treasures, and by such meanes as I haue rela∣ted, thinking still to liue by her Artes, and contrarie to the course of nature, as if she had power and command ouer the Starres; was taken tardy in her owne strength. For the awefull arme of Heauen, no longer suffering the mischiefe, which (vndeseruedly) shee had ex∣ercised vpon many; did darken her vnderstanding in such sort, that she who was wont to abuse the very best aduised, found her selfe ouer∣reached, by one merely ignorant in such skill, not thorow any ingenu∣ity or subtiltie of spirit remayning in him, but plainely, as I shall dis∣course vnto you. It came to passe, that among the number of Knights there by her de∣tained, the man whom my instant report concerneth, borne in the Ile of Creete, a comely person, well disposed, actiue in Armes, and a∣ged about fiue and twenty yeares: was made choyce of by her, to bee her amorous friend, albeit the had (at all times) fully resolued, neuer to come vnder any mans subiecti∣on, either by marriage, or other∣wise. Yet now, in one poore mo∣me, she became so conquered by loue, and so farre strayed from her former liberty, only by the outward behauiour of this Knight, a to con∣clude, hee had the full conquest of her, and could commande more o∣uer her, then she her selfe had pow∣er to doe. Herein shee conceiued such extraordinarie liking, as  minute (almost) was omitted from their new familiar exercise. But he beeing discreete and well aduised, considered with himselfe; that time would betray him in his amorous warfare, and the edge of her discon∣tentment might cut off all those sweet embraces. Obseruing well this sudden lear∣ned lesson, hee contended with his owne humours, to shew her bet∣ter satisfaction then euer bee had done: to the end, that she concei∣uing his loue addicted more to her, then any other respect hee had of himselfe, might so increase her cre∣dulity, as to hit the marke hee most aimed at. Perceiuing her flame to wexe fiercer and fiercer, and all in a settled perswasion of his fidelity; he earnestly importuned her, that as his loue was no way alterable to he: he might receiue the selfe same rea∣son from her, of no deceit on̄ her side, but that they both ballanced an equall and true affection, as by
many solemne vowes and protesta∣tions she had often swore vnto him. And as a testimony of of her loyall meaning in this case, he desired no more of her, but his entire freedom, and to enioy the like libertie of e∣state, as when he was (constrained∣ly) brought into that Isle: whereto (at length) she yeelded, and hence ensued her vtter ouerthrow. For heere Sir I must tell you, that this proiect in the Knight, was to no other end, but only to be vtterly quitted of her, as well foreseeing the mutabilitie and inconstancy of wo∣men. Being (on a day) deuising with her, on the highest peece of all the Rock, embracing and kissing hir as he was wont to doe, perceiuing place and oportunitie fit for his in∣tention: hee thrust her suddainlie backward from off the Rock, so that in falling downeward vpon the se∣uerall crags and clifts, her body was quite torne in peeces, before it could get buriall in the Waues, which (at the length) swallowed them vp all. This being done, and the Knight nothing sorie for it: he compassed the meanes to conuaie into his Shippe, whatsoeuer hee could carrie away from the Isle, and with so many people as were there∣in, set away from thence home to hi owne countrie. Here I may not omit to tell you, that he was constrayned to leaue an enchanted treasure behinde him, re∣maining yet (as is affirmed fathful∣ly) in one of the chambers of the great Pallace: no way able to bee ceazd on, by such as since then haue landed there, not only to winne it by conquest, but also are debarred from entring the place where it is enclosed. And as yet, Serpents re∣paire thither in winter, which con∣tinue there likewise all summer, and hide themselus there in very strange manner. Moreouer, as I haue cre∣dibly heard, the doores belonging to this Chamber, are continually fast closed, and a sharpe Sword (to forbid entrance) thwarting the way hauing on the one side certaine let∣ters as red as blood, and those on the other side as white as Snowe. These strange charracters are saide to signifie and declare the name of him, by whom (vndoubtedly) this aduenture is to be ended. And hee must draw out the Sword, there thrust in vp to the hilts, and barring the passage between both the doors For then they will open of them-selues, as by common rumor it is reported in many places. Very pensiue was Amadis, all the time as Nolfon had declared these newes, one while concluding with his thoughtes (whatsoeuer might ensue thereon) to trauaile thither, and essay the finishing of the enchantment, wherein so many worthy Knights had fayled. Sud∣denly againe his opinion altered, being pressed with an earnest desire of returning backe to the Enclosed Isle. Notwithstanding, he resolued in the end, seeing hee was now so forward on the way, to passe on somewhat farther, yet hee made no noted or instant appearance thereof but seeming carelesse and negligent of that which had been said, falling into another kinde of conferrence, demanded of Nolfon, what way Ga∣laor and his Army tooke afterward? My Lord (quoth hee) after hee had stayed some few dayes in the har∣bour, very neere vnto the Rock: he set sayle directly for the Profound Isle, as hoping to enter it by way of suprizall. But they of the country hauing some suspition; before wee could come thither, had betaken themselues to Armes, and awayted for vs vpon the shoare, where they
found vs worke enough to doe, be∣fore we could compasse any means of landing. For one of the osens to the late King, conducted the people, and had so animated them against vs; as you neuer sawe men fight more courageously, nor with better iudgement. But the valour of the Lords, Ga∣laor, Galuanes, and Dragonis (they hauing leapt into the water vp to the chinne, and fighting with vn∣dantable resolution) did so hear∣ten and embolden on our men in following them: that our enemies were enforced to retire, and in de∣spight of all they could doe, wee entred in vpon them; but not with∣out great slaughter of our men, & a wonderfull butchery of the con∣trarie side, wee pursuing them still into the Citie, where their chiefe and principall Captaine, was soon numbred among the dead. Then did we beleauger them on all sides, which droue them to such astonish∣ment, as (seeing themselues desti∣tute of a guide and leader) soone after they required a parlee, which accordingly was granted them. For the effecting of this busines, foure were delegated among them, who came to Prince Galaor and our other Captaines; with whom they so capitulated, that they yeelded themselues. Prouided that their li∣bertie and goods might remaine intire vnto them: which was affor∣ded them willingly. And the very same day we entred into the Citie, where (before the weeke was fully expired) Dragonis was crowned King. Afterwarde, hauing recei∣ued their homage, and oath of loy∣all alleageance, as wel of the Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, as of the Commons in generall: Prince Ga∣laor, and Galuanes my Masteer, per∣ceiuing that their departure thence would not be so soone as they had intended; dispatched me towardes the Queen Briolania, as also to Ma∣dasima, to acquaint them with all the good newes which I haue told you. But heard you nothing (quoth Amadas) of Quedragant and Brunco? My Lord replied Nolfon, before I dislodged from the Campe, some escaping from the Isles of Landes, and from the Citie of Araigne, ho∣ping for safety in the kingdome of the Profound Isle: came thither, and by them we vnderstood, that one of the kinred to Arauigne, backt by the people of the countrie, had gi∣uen a great battaile to our friends, that purposely came to assaile thē. But ours had the better, and droue them to flight, since when we heard no further how matters haue hap∣pened. Wee shall heare that no doubt (saide Grasander) at better leasure, and in more ample man∣ner. So continuing on their confe∣rence, they entred into Balans Ca∣stle, and Amadis went to visit him lying still on his bedde, being (as yet) not able to walke about. And they two beeing alone, Amadis tolde him, that he had receiued cer∣taine intelligences, whereby he was constrained to departe thence the next morning, earnestly desiring him: that (according as hee had promised) he would restore to Da∣rioletta her husband, daughter, ser∣uants, and the Barque which they had brought thither with them, & whatsoeuer else he had taken from them. To the end, that they might fayle away to the Enclosed Isle at their pleasure. Moreouer, that r∣uor and his wife should beare them company, to see Ortana, and the o∣ther Ladies there, that came thi∣ther with her. There may ee re∣maine (quoth Amadis) till  bee
of yeares fit for Knight hood, and I am well assured, that the best en∣tertainment can be made to a man, will there be done vnto him, and only for your sake. Lord Amadis, answered the Gy∣ant, though (heretofore) my full in∣tent and purpose was, to doe you what harme I could possibly deuise, yet now I am turned quite contra∣ry, and loue you as dearely as I can doe my selfe, accounting it as my only felicitie, to be your seruant, as (indeede) I am, wherefore, present∣ly I will take order, to fullfill those things which you haue enioyned me, and assure you also, vpon my Faith, that so soone as I haue reco∣uered my health: I will visit the Pa∣lace of Apolidon, only to see you, and will keepe you companie, when and whether you shall please to command me. I pray you doe so, said Amadis, and if you would haue any thing else with me, commaund it, and therein (trust me) you shall be obeyed. Most kindly did the Giant return him thankes, and louingly embra∣cing one another, tooke their finall farewell for the next morning. But Batan came not so soone to the En∣closed Isle, as he intended, and Ama∣dis expected, because after his de∣parture, he receiued aduertisement: that Quedragant and Bruneo, (tho∣row want of men) were held in the Cittie of Arauigne, still besiged. Whereupon, he beate his dromms througout all his marches, and as∣sembled together a worthy band of Souldiers, which hee led thither in person: whence ensued quickly, not only the reduction of the place be∣siged, but likewise the whole coun∣tries both of Arauigne, and Sansue∣g, as elsewhere you shall heare more at large. Let it suffice then, that after the two knights of the Enclosed Isle were aboard their Shippe, and ready to weigh Anchors: Amadis desired Nolson to furnish him with a guide, that could conduct him to the Island of the Damosell Enchantresse, because he had a minde to see it. With all my heart answered Nolfon and I my selfe will beare you com∣panie thither, if so you please to permit me. And one thing I can assure yee, that now is the best sea∣son of all the yeare, for seeing the singularities of the place: the stearn frosts and colds being already with-drawne, whereby horrible and ve∣nemous creatures retire themselues into their hoales, dennes, and ca∣uerns in the Earth. It shall suffice me replied Amadis, to haue but one of your skillfull Mariners, and not to hinder you, in an employ∣ment so serious. Nolson herein fulfilled his mind, deliuering him a Pilate of expert iudgement, and so, commending him to God: sayled on to the Island of Mongaza, and Amadis with Gra∣sandor, directly to the Rock of the Damosell Enchauntresse. So aptlie did the winds fit their purpose, that (within six dayes) they did discerne it, and saw it so high, that it seemed to them to be aboue the Cloudes. comming into the Port, there they found a Barque lying at Anchor, all alone, and no one to haue care of it: whereby they immagined, that they to whom it belonged, were as∣scended vp the Rock, and feared no disaster of the vessell. Then Ama∣dis, being desirous to attemp the aduenture by himselfe; spake thus to Grasandor. My deare friend and companion, let me in treate you to attend mee heere till to morrow morning, by which time I may bee returned, or perhaps sooner: And if my fortune stand faire, from aloft
I will giue you some signe, where∣by to finde me. But if within three daies you heare no tydings of me: then assure your selfe, that mine enterprise hath succeded ill, & then proceede in the rest as you shall see occasion. Grasandor seeming somewhat of∣fended, thus answered. How? my Lord, do you think I haue not cou∣rage enough, to endure what tra∣uaile soeuer can bee in this place, especially, being in your company? where it would much more en∣crease, if I had but as little as the value of amity. I promise you dear friend, saide Amadis, neuer any such opinion of you, did once en∣ter into my minde, hauing knowen you in so many worthie actions; as deseruedly bestowes the esteeme on you, to bee one of the best Knights in the worlde. And seeing you thinke good to beare me compa∣nie; I haue a great desire that it should be so. So hee commanded a planke to be laide for landing, and they two only went ashore (rmed at al parts, with their Swords and Shields rea∣dily prepared, whensoeuer or how∣soeuer they should be assailed. This done, they beganne to mount the Rocke, by a little tracke somewhat rough and vneasie, scrambling vp by little and little: till they came to an Hermitage, wherein stoode a Statue of Brasse crowned, holding in both hands (iust before the brest) a Table of Copper guilded, wher∣on were engrauen certaine Greeke Letters and Characters, easie e∣nough for them to reade that vn∣derstood the language. And yet it was aboue two hundred yeares, since they had beene engrauen by the Damosell Enchantresse: who was in her time, the most expert in Ma∣gicke Artes, that euer had beene since, and daughter to one named Finctor, of the Cittie of Arges, in the countrie of Greece. Now were our Knights so weary, and out of breath, as they were a∣ble to goe no further: wherefore they sate downe on a seate of stone, to obserue the Statue more adui∣sedly. It appeared to them an ad∣mirable peece of Arte, especially the Table and Characters: which Amadis began to reade, as well hee could, although his stay in Greece was not long, when he conquered the Monster Endriagus; and the writing on the Table, was as fol∣loweth. The inscription on the Table. At such time as the Great Island shal flourish, and therein shall be assem∣bled the flower of Chiualrie and of beauty, and the land gouerned by a most potent and magnanimious Prince: Then shall hee come from thence, to whom the Sword and en∣chanted Treasures are destined, and not (tell then) shall they come to any mans power. Full well did Amadis perceiue, that this aduenture was not appoin∣ted for him, but perswaded him-selfe, that it was reserued for his sonne Esplandian onely, who was borne the fairest and goodliest per∣son liuing: neuerthelesse, hee con∣cealed it to himselfe, and asked Gra∣sandor whether hee vnderstood the inscription, or no? No truely, quoth hee, for I neuer was in place where the language was spoken. Vpon my faith answered Amadis, this is some very ancient Prophe∣cy: And then he tolde him all that it contained. I know not, replied Grasandor, wherefore it should bee thus predicted, except it aymed only at your selfe: you being son to the most worthy Prince, that e∣uer girded sword by his side, and
the very choysest Lady for beautie of her time, as euidently may be dis∣cerned, by the other especiall beau∣ties remayning in her. Therefore, let vs boldly ascend vp higher, be∣cause it shall bee as much blame to you in forbearing to trie it, as pre∣sumption in any other that shall dare to attempt it. Nor speake I this without iust occasion; because my hope is, to see that by your meanes, which no man else in these dayes is worthie to see, Amadis be∣ganne to smile, perceiuing with what zeale Grasandor spake, and said Seeing it must be so, let vs goe on then and vp to the Pallace, before darke night preuent vs in our deter∣mination. From the hermitage thus they parted, and followed still the track that guided them: but with such difficultie and daunger, as they had many downe slidings, and very pe∣rillous falles. Yet worse then all this befell them, for day light fay∣led, and they were enforced (by the nights extreame darkenesse) to stay vpon a little plaine till morning: where they lay downe so vneasilie, as they could not take a iote of rest. And therfore they fell into discours of the painefull vsurie Fortune now paid them, for the former pleasures (borrowed of their friends) in the Enclosed Isle. All which notwith∣standing, said Amadis, were it not for feare of Orianaes distaste, and suspition of the griefe wherein now she may bee: happen to mee what may, I would goe see the Campe of Bruneo & Agraies, before I returned to her. Hereat Grasandor began to star∣tle, and said. By my faith Sir, you will make her die with meere doubt fearing whether you be aliue or no. And so much the rather, because I promised and swore to her, to bring you back againe with mee, so soone as I could finde you. Wher∣fore, let me aduise you, and herein somewhat ouer-rule you, to obey her, rather then your owne rash de∣sires. Afterward, according as we shall learne by others informations, we may either goe to them, or send some supplie, if neede require. I think (quoth Amadis) we may doe much better, at our parting hence, to shape our course for the Island of the Infanta, from whence I will send a Gentleman to Balan, reque∣sting his assistance for them: which I am sure hee will performe in the best manner, and so we may (in the meane while) set on to the Enclosed Isle, to prepare entertainment for him, against he comes tither. Thus our two Knights spent out the most part of the night, some∣times napping and nodding, and other whiles waking, till day appea∣red: when vp they rose, and moun∣ted vp the Rocke againe, till they came to the entrance of a greater plaine, where they beheld huge ru∣ines of very antient buildings. Pro∣ceeding still on, they came to an Arch of Marble, whereon stood a Statue of Alablaster, being made for a Woman, and so ingeniously wrought, that nothing wanted but life it selfe. In her right hand, shee held a Pen, as if shee were readilie wrighting, and in her left hand, a role of Parchment, with Greeke let∣ters thereon, contayning these words. The Inscription on the Role. That Science is most certaine, whereby we profit more before the Gods, then wee doe among Men: because the one is holie, and the other vaine and vnprofitable. Behold, quoth Amadis, excellent knowledge deliuered in very fewe words, for if euery man vnderstood
rightly, what graces heauen hath bestowed vpon him: many would more addict themselues to vertu∣ous actions, then they doe, and shunne those vices which leade to perdition. So passing on farther they entred into a base Court, full of fragments of Collumnes, as well Ionick and Tuscane, as Dorick. Like∣wise, of many ancient Medalls, and personages so artificially carued, as it was impossible to looke on better. Nor had the iniurie of time much offended them, but gaue them leaue still to containe, a very especiall, apparance of their singularitie: which cited Amadis to note them with se more heedefull ob∣seruation, and thought he could ne∣uer sufficiently satisfie his eye. As he turned from one side to a∣nother, he came into a very goodly hall, so richly painted, as it was most wonderfull to behold, and looking about it: they perceiued an entrance into a fast lookt vp chamber, hauing two doores of bright shining stone, in the midst of which doores was a Sword so transfixed, as it passed quite thorow vp to the Crosse. Hereby they ga∣thered apparantly, that the treasurs and enchanments (so much spoken of) were there enclosed. In regard whereof, Amadis (purposing to ap∣proue the Chambers opening) went neer to essay the getting forth of the Sword. But looking vpon the poell and the crosse hilt, which were of bone, yet more clr and aie , then any Ruby of the East: hee beheld seauen letters in Greeke (redder then any fire) to bee vpon the one side, and some few other (whiter then Snow) vpon the other side, all concording after this manner. The Prophecie engrauen on the Sword. In vaine doth the Knight bestow his paines, that shall essay (what force soeuer or strength remaineth in him) to draw forth this Sword: ex∣cept it be he (only destined hereto) by the same Letters, as the Statue of Brasse hath written in the Table it beares, and carries vpon him the same Charracters as are engrauen on eyther side of this pommell. For this prediction was set downe by her, who was not to be seconded by any (of her time) for most admira∣ble intelligence in all Magicall Sciences. Hereby Amadis tooke occasion to marke these red letters more ad∣uisedly, then formerly he had done, and called to minde, that Esplandian had the verie like vpon his bodie: wherfore he resolued assuredly that only he must end this meruaile, ne∣uerthelesse, he demanded of Grasan∣dor, what was his opinion in this case? So helpe me God, quoth he, I vnderstand well enough the con∣tents of the white Letters: but for the redde, I am able to say iust no∣thing. Nor I (answered Amadis) albeit I imagine, that both you and I haue seene the verie like, vpon somebody that wee know. You say verie true, replied Grasandor for your sonne as I haue heard, brought the like into the World with him from his mothers wombe, and sure∣ly in mine opinion, they are the ve∣ry same. Notwithstanding, if you had not quickned my memorie, I should neuer haue thought on it. And therefore make no complaint of your Fortune, if you faile in this enterprise: because, for ought I can perceiue, you haue begot him, that must carrie this honor from you. Amadis musing to himselfe while suddenly starting said. I am of your minde, for so haue I gathered, by the Table on the Image of Brasse.
Return we then back againe, quoth Grasandor, and leaue the rest to bee ended by him, to whom the deste∣nies haue made their promise. So we must bee inforced to doe, saide Amadis, albeit I am somewhat of∣fended, that I may not carrie away his sword with mee. By my faith, replied Grasandor, if you should of∣fer to get it, your hinderance may be more then you imagine; and yet it may fal out, not to proue so good a sword as your owne. Moreouer, when I consider how you obtained it: neuer could any Knight attaine to a fairer fortune, nor more be∣seeming a man, than yours was then. This hee spake, in regard that Amadis wonne it, by approouing himselfe to bee the most loyall and perfect louer, that euer loued: ac∣cording as in the Second booke of this Historie, hath been oftentimes declared vnto yee. Hereupon, they returned backe by the same way they came, and passing againe among the Antiqui∣ties: Amadis stayed there a while, better to beholde them. The more hee looked on them, the more hee commended their rare perfections, both in moldings, friezes, & chap∣ters, lying among the ruines of those famous buildings. And no way could hee turne his eye, but he beheld many fractures of singular carued parsonages, the very muscles obserued to the life, and such per∣spectiue where occasion required it: that (in his opinion) it relished more of some diuinitie, then to be performed by the skill of man in workemanship. As hee continued in these medi∣tations, a knight armed with a white Armour, and holding his sworde ready drawen, came to them, cour∣teously saluting them, as they did the like to him. Then he demanded of thē, whether they were of the En∣closed Isle, or no? We are, answered Grasandor: but why doe you moue that question? Because (quoth the other) I found a Batque beneath, and men therein, who tolde mee, that two Knights belonging to the Pallace of Apolidon, were ascended vp this Rocke: but they concealed their names from mee, as I did mine from them. Nor desire I any thing else, but peace and friend-shippe with them, beeing casually come hither in pursuite of a knight, who (by trompery) is escaped from mee, with a Damosell forcibly car∣ried away by him. Friend, said Gra∣sandor, in courtesie let me entreate you to take off your Helmet, or to tell vs your name. If you will swear to me, replied the Knight, whether you know my Lord Amadis or no, and that you will doe the like to mee: I am well contented, other∣wise you speake but in vaine. By my faith, quoth Grasandor, we are two of the best friends hee hath, and therefore you may well be knowen to vs. So the Knight disarmed his head, saying: You may now knowe mee well enough, if you be such as you haue sworne your selues to mee. Hardly had hee concluded his wordes, but Amadis ran and caught him in his armes, saying. Brother Gandalin, is it possible that fortune should cause vs to meet in this ma∣ner? Much amazed was Gandalin, to see himselfe thus embraced, and by a man vnknowne to him, and vn∣able to coniecture who he should be: wherefore Grasandor suddenly said. Why how now Gandalin? Haue you forgotten your Lord A∣madis? Amadis? answered Ganda∣lin, may it bee possible? Then fal∣ling on his knee; whether he would or no, hee kissed his hand, before
Amadis could any way preuent him: but then demanded of him, how and by what meanes he came thither? Beleeue me my Lords, re∣plied Gandalin, your equalls in loy∣alty of affection, would gladly know as much concerning you, as you now demand of me, you being as farre from them, as this place is from their abyding. Neuerthelesse, to giue you content, I will declare the whole truth vnto you. Know then, that being with Bru∣neo and others, who are yet in con∣quering the countries of Arauigne & Sansuegua, returning from a cru∣ell battayle, which the Kings Ne∣phew gaue vs at our entrance, and wherein many worthy men lost their liues: one day (among other) a Damosell belonging to the king∣dom of Norway, attired all in black, came into the Tent of Agraies, de∣siring him on her knees (in no mean plenty of teares) to giue her rescue in a wrong done vnto her. Agraies causing her to rise, and sit downe by him, demanded the cause of her sad complaint, and hee would re∣dresse it so much as lay in him to doe. Alas Sir (quoth she) you haue good reason to helpe mee, because I am both a subiect and seruant to the King, who is father to Ma∣dame Olinda your wife: for whose sake and honour, I desire you to as∣sist mee with one of your Knights, for recouery backe of my daugh∣ter, whom the Lorde of the great Tower on the Sea shoare, hath for∣cibly taken from mee, being there∣to onely emboldened, because I would not giue him her in mariage. And my reason is, in regarde hee is neither so noble, nor descended of so good a house, as my husband was: but rather is of base and ser∣uile condition, vsurping the place he possesseth, vpon his neighbours, whom he hath since expelled. The father to my daughter was brother to Don  honour, &  of Great Brittaine.  I at a∣ny meanes for the reco of her, without you: because notwithstan∣ding all the earnest entreaties I haue ved to him, the wicked man is so cruelly minded, as hee doth dayly deny mee, so that my dayes can haue no long continuance, ex∣cept (by Armes) he be compelled to restore her. Damosell, answered Agraies, why doth not your King do you iustice, as (in right) to him belongeth? My Lord, quoth she, he is so ouerspent in yeares, and decayed in bodie, as hee is not able to gouerne himself, or any other: neither doth hee e∣uer come forth of his bedde, only through his extreamitie of age and sicknesse. The man then you speaks of, replyed Agraies, is his abyding farre from hence? No Sir (quoth shee) in lesse space then a day and a halfe, the winde sitting conueni∣ently, wee may by Sea easily sayle thither. Then I made tender of my seruice, as willing to goe along with the Lady. But my Lord A∣graies would not consent thereto: except I made him faithfull pro∣mise, of returning backe againe to him, after I should haue combated the Knight, without attempting any further, if (with honour) I might safely doe it. My promise made to that effect, and I sufficiently furnished, I went aboard with the Damosell, in a Barque which shee had purposely brought with her: and the Sea was so calme and fauourable to vs, that on the morrow (about mid-day) we tooke landing, and the Lady con∣ducted mee thither where her daughter was detayned. At my en∣trance
into the Port, I called out a∣loude  any to answere mee: and a  (g forth at a window) deded of mee, what I would haue, whereto, thus I replied. Tell thy master that hee must quickly de∣liuer a Damosell, which hee forci∣bly hath taken from her which is in my companie, or yeelde mee a rea∣son why he will not: otherwise, not a man shall issue forth, but he dies the death. By my Soule (quoth he I spake to) your threatning assures vs sufficiently what you are: neuer∣thelesse, doe but stay a little, and (I thinke) you shall heare other ti∣dings. I withdrew somewhat off, and tarried not long, but they of the Tower opened the gates, and forth came a Knight well mounted, ha∣uing on a yellow colourd Armour, and at the length of a carriere, hee called to me, saying. Knight, thou that (without any discretion) thret∣nest mee that knowes thee not, say, what doest thou demand of mee? I answered, that I neither did or would threaten nor defie him, vn∣till I vnderstood the cause, why hee kept the daughter of the Lady here present with me) from her. Well, said he, admit it were so, what is that to thee? I hope (quoth I) to re∣uenge her wrong, and to make thee restore her againe, whether thou wilt or no. We shall soone try that, said the other: And so giuing his horse the spurre, hee came running mainly against me, as I did the like to him, couching our Launces so conueniently, that the shiuers of them flew vp into the ayre very gal∣lantly. Setting hand to our swordes, a tough battaile began betweene vs, which continued (almost) to the euening: but in the end, the right being on my side, the victory fell to mee, hauing him downe vnder my foot, and my sword ready to smite off his head. But he calling for mer∣cy, prayed me to saue his life, & he would do whatsoeuer I would haue him. Why then said I, deliuer this Lady her daughter againe, and sweare neuer to take maide or wife contary to their owne liking: which faithfully he vowed to doe. Here-upon pretending to goe fetch the Damosell forth, hee went into the Tower, and here he stayed not long but I saw him embarqued on the Sea, armed as I left him, and the Damosell with him, hee calling out thus aloude to mee Knight, wonder not that I haue broken my word with thee, for the power of Loue hath thereto compelled mee, being not able to liue one houre, without her whom I thus carrie away with me. And seeing it is out of mine owne abilitie, either to conquer or gouerne my selfe: I pray thee, finde no fault with this that I haue done. And because neither thou, nor her Mother, shall hope hereafter to see her any more: behold, I will now conuey her to such a place, where thou shalt neuer heare any tidings of her. Speaking these words, he rowed away, and the Damosel wrung, and wrested her hands, whereat I con∣ceiued such griefe, that death was much more pleasing to mee then Life. For the mother beganne to make such strange Lamentations, tearing both her hayre and Gar∣ments; casting in my teeth, that she had receiued more wrong by mee then from the Knight himselfe. For (quoth she) while my daughter was in the Tower, there alwayes was hope of recouering her againe: but now, all expectation is vtterly fru∣strated, being carried to a place vn∣knowne, and whereof you are the
only occasion, by not executing the victory, when it remained in your power to doe it. Now am I our of hope of any remedy, and not only is the paines you haue ta∣ken for mee thanklesse: but also I haue iust cause, to complaine of you before all men I shall euer meet withall. In my answere to hr, and to ap∣pease hr , I confessed, that I held my selfe guilty of he newe dter, because I might wl haue considered that the Knight beeing disloyall to her, in so  her daughter, small vertue el would be expected in him.   it d . I  swore to er, , ei∣ther by  re∣coered her daughter, and deliue∣red her  hands. Prouided, that she would lend e her Barque, and some of her Mariners, as my guides, whereto she condiscended. Moreouer, she promised to attend my returne in a Castle, there neare adioyning:  also the  of mee, and to see that I should pme my promise. So wee pted from he, stting sayle the same wy, as  te Knight had taken beore vs, and long time wee syled, without hea∣ring any newes at all: vntll this ve∣ry day ( is the fift wee met with , who told mee  a , with ∣dig to  in the  te ∣chantr. Wh I ariuin, I  a empty Sq, and your people no  whom I enqui∣red, if  any belon∣ging . They could , but that the Sq was th beore the ariuall, and in such manner as I found it. Whereupon, I ascended vp this Rocke, thinking they might be hidden here about: and also to try an aduenture, which the fisher∣men tolde mee was here aloft in an olde ruined Pallace, wherein if I fled, yet I might make some re∣port thereof, to such as aterward I met withall. Friend Gandalin, answered Gra∣sandor, concerning the Knight and the Damosell, the may remaine e hope of meeting with them: bt fr the Aduentur, your laour  is vtterly lost. So, ee reported all that had formerly happened, whereat Gandalin (some-what amazed) demanded, whether they had seene the Knight, or no? No truely, answered Amadis, and yet wee haue visited all these ruines two seuerall times: notwithstan∣ding, wee will once more goe ouer them againe, and make a more ad∣uised obseruation. Walking about from place to place, they espied the Knight close hd in a corner, who  himfe to be discoue∣ ame frth to them, dman∣dn or whom they sought▪ For the  answered Gandalin. The Knight presently knowing him by his white Armour, replied. Trust mee Sir, I wonder not a little, what pleasure you take in thus pursuing me, hauing already assured you, the arme of loue ath so ouer-awed mee, that I haue no power to go∣ne my  I am verely perswaded, that  either you, or any other  this company, had (in like manner) felt the force of loue, as I haue do: I should not ap∣peare to be o faultie, as (perhaps) I seeme to be n your imaginations. Therefore de with mee what you will, for nothing else but death can diuide mee from this Damosell,
such, and so vnfayned is my affecti∣on to her. Amadis, who had many thousand times felt himselfe in the same ex∣tremitie, began to take compassion on him: Neuerthelesse, thus hee answered. Although what you haue said, is in some measure excusable: yet the Knight that hath pursued in search of you, may not faile in his promise made to the Ladie, for o∣therwise hee deserues to bee repre∣hended before all worthie persons: I know it well sir, replied the knight and am likewise contented to put my selfe into his power, prouided that he will bee so kinde vnto me as carry me back againe to the Ladie, and there pleade my cause for mee, that she will be pleased to suffer me enioy her daughters as my wife, be∣cause now she hath made choise of me before any other. Is that true? quoth Amadis to the Damosell. Yes sir, said shee, albeit heretofore hee detayned me against my will neuer∣thelesse obseruing the truth, and in∣tegritie of his affection, I am now fully minded to forget all former vi∣olences, both pardoning, and pro∣mising to accept him in marriage. Beleeue me said Amadis, I am very glad of it, and Gandalin, if you will follow mine aduice, worke with the Mother so much as you can, that this happy wedding may bee effe∣cted. I shall Sir (quoth hee) with all my heart, and reioyce to see so good a conclusion. So they went on, to returne to the Sea shoare: but the night pre∣uenting them, they were enforced to stay in the Hermitage, discen∣ding the next morning downe to their men, who awaited their com∣ming in the Barque. As Gandalin tooke his leaue, Amadis and Grasan∣dor intreated him, to recommend them to Agraies, and their other friends there: aduising him and them also, to returne speedily to the Enclosed Isle, where they should heare other tidings. Thus Ganda∣lin, sayled thence to the Lady mo∣ther, where, hauing deliuered both her daughter and the Knight: hee laboured the matter so effectually, that (notwithstanding all former spleene) the mother quickly con∣sented to her Daughters minde. Gandalin was not a little amazed hereat, but remembring, that wo∣mens constancie was as certaine, as the continuall turning tides of the Ocean: hee could not chuse but smile, and leauing them to their further affaires, went aboarde the Barque, returning to Agrates, who was highly pleased with Gan∣dalins good successe, as also his for∣tunate meeting with Amadis and Grasandor in so strange a manner. But now wee must change our purpose, to them that were bound for the Enclosed Isle. with an earnest desire to see their wiues, whom they had left in no meane melancholie, only for their absence. Amadis and Grasandor, departing from the Island of the Damosell Enchantresse, found the Seas and Windes so fauourable that (without any impeachment whatsoeuer) they entred the port of the Enclosed Isle. As they mounted vp the Rock, and came to the Mo∣nasterie, which Amadis had caused to bee builded: they saw before the Gate, a Damosell attired all in mourning, and two Squires with her, holding their Palraies by the bridles. They saluted her very cour∣teously, as she did the like to them, and then they entred into the Church to performe their Orisons: in the meane while, the Damosell enquired of one of the Monks there standing, what they were. The re∣ligious man answered her, that the
one was the Lord of the Isle, and the other was his noble friend and companion. When the Dosell knew that Amadis was there, shee stayed in the porch of the Church, and see∣ing him comming towardes her: shee fell at his feet, and weeping a∣boundantly, said. Alas, Lord A∣madis are not you he, who knowes how to giue remedie to re af∣flicted soule, such as mine is at this instant? Assuredly, if it were not so, your fame and renowne would ne∣uer haue circled the worlde, so of∣tentimes as already they haue don. For this cause, I the most vnfor∣tunate of all other, am come to to craue mercy and pittie of you. Thus speaking, she caught fast hld about his legges, embracing them so strictly, as Amadis could by no meanes gette from her: for, the more hee stroue to get loose, the more violently still she pressed vp∣on him, wherefore he said vnto her. Faire Damosell, I pray you tell me your cause of griefe, as also what and whence you are, and although I should refuse al other Ladies: yet will I doe for you whatsoeuer I am able; to release you out of the sorrow wherein I see you. Pausing a while, shee said. My name you shall not know, till I be certaine, that you will performe what you are to promse: but the cause of my griee and tribulation grew in this manner. I am wie to a Knight, whom I loue with all my hart: but such is both my misfort and his, that hee is become a priso∣ner to the very greatest enemy hee hath in the world, and it is impossi∣ble for him to be thence deliuered, without such help as I hope for in your goodnesse, and no man else whatsoeuer. Beleeue it Sir, quoth shee, my knees shall neuer part from this earth, nor mine armes from a∣bout your legges (except thereto you forcibly constraine me) till you grant what I am to demand of you. Amadis perceiuing both her impor∣tunitie and obstinacie, knew not wel what to say, fearing to stand obli∣ged by his promise, for the vnder∣taking of some such matter, which well he might repent at leasure: as indeed hee did. Neuerthelesse, he was so moued to compassion, see∣ing her teares flowe forth so inces∣santly: that hee granted what shee desired, requiring that hee might know her name. Then she caught him by both the hands, and (whe∣ther hee would or no) kissed them sweetly; and addressing her spee∣chs to Grasandor, beganne in this manner. Sir Knight, I pray you remem∣ber, that Lord Amadis hath made this promise to me, who am the wife to Archalaus the Enchanter, and him hee keepeth in prison, beeing the greatest enemy hee hath in the world. But if Heauen were so plea∣sed, this hatred may conuert it selfe into the greater amity, by such hap∣py meanes as may bee wrought. Much offended was Amadis, to see himselfe deceiued by the subtilty of this woman, and gladly hee would haue reuoked his promise sworne vnto her: notwithstanding, hee could not blame the woman, who had iust reason to imploy her vt∣most paines, for the benefit of her husband, as euery good wife else ought to doe, and thus hee answe∣red her. By the faith I beare to God (Ladie) you haue made too large a request to me, for in despite of any perill that can come to me, I would not consent to such a mat∣ter: but only in regarde of the pro∣mise I haue made yee, and it is the first that euer I granted to Ladie or
Damosell, whereof I repented my selfe afterward. With these words, hee and Gra∣sandor mounted on / horsebacke, commanding the wife of Archalaus, to follow him to the Pallace of A∣pollidon: but before they could get thither, Oriana and Mabila had in∣telligence of their arriuall. What pleasure they conceiued, by this their so long expected comming, it is impossible for me to expresse: yet such it was, that not only they, but all the Ladies and Gentlewomen went to attend their entrance into the Parke. At their meeting, there needes no other question to bee made, but the like kisses and em∣braces passed betweene them, euen as yong married couples vse to doe, vpon the very day of their choisest delighting, to yeelde the truer te∣stimonie of their Faiths firmnesse. And these sweete ceremonies vshe∣red them to their Chambers, where (no doubt) but they paid sound ar∣rearges, for their so long absence from their sweete Mistresses. On the morrow morning, being at Masse, the wife of Archalaus came againe, and fell before the feete of Amadis, intreating him to performe his promise, which hee had sworne to on her husbands behalfe, and which (accordingly) hee yeelded vnto. Afterwarde, before he would sit downe at the Table, accompani∣ed with all the traine of Ladies, hee went to see him in his Cage, where he found his head and beard to bee as white as Snow, extending down so farre as his girdle. Vnfashiona∣ble hee appeard to be in euery part, great, crooked, and somewhat de∣formed, but his lookes fiery and much to bee feared. Wherfore, so soone as the Ladies beheld him, they were greatly affraid of him: e∣specially the Princesse Oriana, who formerly had made proofe of his mallice, when hee carried her away, and when Amadis came to her hap∣py rescue, as hath beene declared in the first Booke of this our famous Historie. Now although Archalaus saw his wife among the rest: yet he see∣med to make no account thereof, which caused Amadis to aske him, whether he knew her: or no? Yes, (quoth he) I know her. Art thou pleased (said Amadis) at her coming hither? Sufficiently said he, if it be about my businesse, otherwise, I take no care at all. For considering the condition wherein I haue liued, euer since I fell into thy handes (be∣ing resolued to suffer patiently, any harme whatsoeuer can happen to me) my heart is setled, and my per∣swasion confirmed (in meere de∣spight of thee) to liue thus, and no otherwise, till I die. But listen mee said Amadis, if for her sake, I should set thee at libertie: wouldst thou accept it so thankfully, as to extend the like to me, if my case were an∣swerable to thine now? Yes, quoth he, if thou didst send for her on thine owne instigation, but if by her wit and cunning she hath presumed on this enterprise, and wone some promise from thee against thy liking I neither can or ought render any thankes to thee therefore, because good workes done perforce, deser∣uedly (of themselues) doe lose their merit, and therefore I pray thee to tell me the truth of all. Amadis did then declare vnto him, how hee mette with her at the Monasterie, in what manner shee had deceiued him, and gotten his deliuerance. Howsoeuer things haue past, said Archalaus; I will plainely tell thee my minde. If thou hadst taken pittie on me in Lu∣bania, when I my selfe desired mer∣cie
of thee: assure thy soule, that all the remainder of my life, I had con∣tinued thy bounden and perfect friend. But at this instant, thou being constrained to release me, without any desire of mine, or sute made on mine owne behalfe for it, but in meer performance of thy promise: so will I receiue this freedome (if thou wilt let me enioy it) and with as much content as thou deseruest. Otherwise, thou mightest imagine mee dull, and of very silly courage, if, in steed of so good occasion, as I haue to hate thee, I shoulde shewe my selfe thankefull for so many iniuries as thou hast done mee. Thou hast highly pleased me, an∣swered Amadis, in not disguising thy venemous malice towards mee, and I deserue no blame for thy deli∣uerance: for I was resolued, a long while, to kept thee thus mued vp, as thinking it very reasonable, to make theee suffer the paine iustly due to thee, rather then by releasing thee, thou shouldest torment good peo∣ple, as heretofore thou hast done. Neuerthelesse, since I promised thy freedome to thy wife, I will send thee hence, and cause thee to bee conuayed to some place of safety: desiring thee (so much as is possi∣ble for mee to doe) that although, neither in will nor word, thou canst finde in thy heart to pardon me; yet thou wouldest not treacherously beguile me. At leastwise, doe not hereafter vse thy wonted cruelties, to such as neuer did offer thee any displeasure: which the rather thou oughtest to doe, for his sake, that hath bestowed this instant fauour on thee, & gaue thee release, when thou didst least looke for it. I know well enough replied Archalaus, that in any thing concerning thee, I shal exercisethe ery best of my wil and skill, by all meanes possible I may, continually to work thee mischiefe: but for harming others, perhappes (therein) I will followe thy coun∣sell. Wonderfully were all the Ladies amazed, to heare the olde villaine speake so sawcily to Amadis, and much they did reproue him for it, but tolde them: It was naturally his humour to be obstinate, & they must endure it so wel as they could; but for the rest hee would be sure to keep promise with them. So they departed out of the Chamber, leauing the wife of Ar∣chalaus there to keepe him compa∣nie till the next morning, and then Amadis sent for Ysanio, comman∣ding him, to release Archalaus out of his iron Cage, to giue him horse and Armour, and guide both him and his, farre from the limittes of the Enclosed Isle, and with such safe∣ty, as his wife might receiue no dis∣contentment. Ysanio performed his charge, bringing him and his com∣pany so farre as his Castle of Valde∣rine: where, taking leaue of him, Archalaus returned him many thankes, saying. Sir, tell Amadis from me, it belongs only to cruell and sauage beasts, to be mewed vp in Cages of iron, as I all this while haue beene, and not to Knights, such as hee knowes I am. But bid him beware of mee, I hope very speedily to be reuenged on him, e∣uen in despight of that olde whore Vrganda the Vnknowne, in whom he reposeth too much trust. I rather thinke answered Ysanio, that I must take paines againe to keep you fast, so long as already I haue done in your Cage. With these words they parted, Ysanio and his traine returning the same way they came, euen till they ariued at the Enclosed Isle: and thi∣ther
(sooner after) came Darioletta, with her companie, being all most kindly entertayned. But now wee must alter our present discourse, to tell you what Balan did, after that Amadis and Grasandor had left him, in the Island of the Red Tower. About fifteene dayes, or three weekes, after the two Knights of the Enclosed Isle, were dislodged frō the Red Tower; the Giant Balan, finding his wounds almost cured, and he a∣ble to walke about his Chamber, forthwith gaue order, that Dariolet∣taes Shippe should be made readie, because shee and all her companie might safely sayle to the Enclosed Isle, with Brauor his Sonne. Manie goodly Iewells and gifts he bestow∣ed on them, and being earlie embar∣qued on a Munday morning, they set sayle and away, and landed as you haue already heard. The Giant being returned to his Castle, gaue presently charge, to leuy and mu∣ster men in all parts of his domini∣ons, for the succour of Agraies, who still held the Citty of Arauigne be∣siged, and long he delayed not, but all things were prepared, his ships well munited, and put forth to Sea. So furtherous was both the wind and weather, that on the tenth day following, they landed where the Armie of the Enclosed Isles Knights were encamped. No sooner were Galaor and Galuanes Agrates, and the rest aduertised thereof, and that Ba∣lan himselfe was come on shoare: but they mounted on horse-backe, to goe meete and welcome him, with a worthie troupe attending on them, for they knew before, all that had passed between Amadis & him. As they came neere they embraced each other, and the first that stept to Balan, was Galuanes, of whom the Giant (not knowing him) deman∣ded, if hee were Galaor, the brother to Amadis, whom he was very desi∣rous to see? No sir (quoth hee) I am Galuanes your friend and kins-man, if so you please to accept mee. Ha, my Lord and Cousin said Ba∣lan, I had not beene so tardy from your company, and my deare Cosin Madasima also, but for your friend-shippe with him, who then was my most deadly enemie: yet now wee are become so good friends, that I loue you so much the more, and for his sake. Close by him was Galaor, who presenting himselfe to Balan, bad him most louingly welcome. The Giant vnderstanding what and who he was, did him very humble reue∣rence, saying. My Lord, I stand so engaged to your Noble brother, as no Gentleman in the world can bee more his, then I am, and yours like∣wise. And surely wonder must now cease in mee, concerning the fame and renowne published of you both because I neuer saw any man more truely resemble him then (in all re∣spects) you effectually doe. But to speake truely, there is no other dif∣ference betweene yee: but that you are somewhat taller, and Lord Ama∣dis a little more corpulent. By this time they were come to the Campe and his lodging appointed in the Tent of Galuanes: which was singu∣lerly beautifull, and farre more rich then any of the rest.
CHAP. XXXVII. How Balan being in the Tent of Galuanes, the principall Commanders of the Armie came to see him: And what conference they had together. YOu haue heard, how the Gyant Balan, beeing come to the siege be∣fore the City of Ara∣uigne, hee was visited by Agraies, Quedragant,  d bonne Mer, Angriote d'Estrauaus, Granate of the Dreadfull ale, Palo∣mir, Brian de Moste, and all the chiefest Lords of the Armie: after some kinde salutations and speeches passed betweene them, Bal began in this manner. My Lords, i you wonder at my so sudden coming hither, and in a season so little ex∣pected: my selfe may well mar∣uell as much, at something (not long since) happening to me: be∣cause, from the time of my first ap∣prehension of knowledge, I had a continuall purpose and deliberati∣on, by all meanes possible to pro∣cure his death, whom now I affect more dearely then my selfe. And therefore it is most certaine, that the execution o mens willes, are more in the power of Heauens strong hand, then in any abilitie of such as intend them, as I haue well experienced by my selfe. So, turning about to them all, hee preeded thus. I thinke there is not  among yo,  mee to be the  liant and dradfull  bull,  of the Island of the  Tower, who was slaine by Amadis in the battaile of King Cildadan, where med himselfe the bright Obs. Nturl reason  then, to  reuenge on him r my fathe death: but the contrary hath () happened vnto me, my selfe beeing vanquished and ouer-come by his hand. So he discour∣sed the whole manner of the com∣bate betweene them, & vpon what occan Am came to seeke him in hi : lstly, the peace and  concluded btween thē, with  him in the  (quoth c)  aduertisemnt, , as well at the ges being, as since: I resoled to bring  sh ucour as I could, and as already you haue eene, purposing  leaue you, till  countrie were reduced to perfect obedience, and in such ma∣ner as you would haue it. Lord Balan, aniwered Agraies, your fathers death deserues iust ex∣cuse, especially on the behalfe of  C Amadis, performing no , then as one enemie uld doe to another, meeting him in the  of fight, though  of persons, your father so farre out going and exceeding him, both  strength and stature: wher∣by may bee ged, that it is no mr of marai, when Heauen main a full cause, and by imagid wakenesse, astes  the  might. Con∣ now be∣ from his  I am very well , tha thereby) you haue ra∣ther wo then lost, because there is not a Knight in this Campe, but is w yours, in all kindes of imployment, as our further willing seruce, (at all times) shall aproe. Bln returned him many thankes,
and, because it waxed somewhat late, being also a priuate night of supper, all bad him good rest except Galaor and Galuanes, who stayed still to keepe him company. On the morrow morning, Balan being desirous to round the Cittie, to obserue the best strength thereof, and which place was fittest for breach, or entrance: Galaor and hee walked very early together, so couertly as they could. But when Balan had well considered the Bulwarkes all about, the platformes and Rampires, within the depth of the ditches, and (aboue all else) what number of men were to de∣fend it, with their store of victuals, and necessary munition; it appeared a Citty to him, very hardly to be en∣forced. But then Galaor told him, that the most part of the Souldiers were bandied against the inhabi∣tants, and the inhabitants against them: Whereby (quoth hee) this discord is sufficient for their ruine vtterly. Considering withall, that (as wee haue receiued aduertise∣ment) their hearts are so deiected, as they dare make no more sallies forth vpon vs, in regard of the great losses they haue had already. More-ouer, our men are resolued to die in the assault, or they will enter: not∣withstanding, wee will not permit them to haue so much head, fearing their losse, and respecting our hope (day by day) of their surrender, the reasons before alleaged considered, and our detayning their King here prisoner with vs also. Beleeue mee Sir, said Balan, you stand vpon very great apparances, neuerthelesse, if my aduise were worthy to be allow∣ed, I would giue them no longer time of respite: But attempt our fortune to morrow morning, and see what lookes they will set vpon vs, in a bolde sudden and sprightlie assault. So long lasted this discourse, as it brought them to the Campe of A∣graies, where meeting with Enill he saluted Balan, saying. My Lord, the Prince Agraies, entreates you, (being n this forwardnesse) that you would see the King Arauigne, here prisoner in my Tent: because hee is desirous to speake with you, as hee hath made knowne to the Prince. I am well contented an∣swered Balan, for (perhaps) this comming of mine, may promise some good agreement with him. So they went all three to the King Arauigne, whom they found atten∣ded with his guard: But so soone as Balan, saw him, he set his knee to the ground, and kissed his hand. The King tooke him vp, saying: he was most heartily welcome. And because they would conferre pri∣uately on their affaires, the others left them alone, and departed thence. Then King Arauigne demanded of him, what hee conceiued of his hard Fortune? And breathing forth a sigh, sufficient to haue broken a bigger heart: hee stood along while silent, as being vnable to deliuer a word, till at last, thus he spake. Ah my deare friend Balan, if your Fa∣ther Mandafabull were now liuing, how Irkesome would my mishap be to him? And to speake truely, mat∣ters are mightilie altered since his death. For, it is not fully a yeare, since I stood vpon no meane tearms of being the very greatest King in all the West: but now, I am bee∣come the poorest and most misera∣ble man in all the World. How Sir? replied Balan, it seemes you distrust the mercy of the almighty in whose power it is, to dispose of you as best liketh him. If Fortune haue once frowned on you, is her wheele so
fast nayled or printed, as shee can∣not lift you to the place from whence you are fallen? Let me per∣swade you Sir, not to bee thus dis∣comforted, but in kingly patience to thanke God for all, and hee will not forget you. Walking on along with him, hee beganne thus againe. I knowe very well Sir, that hardly can you expresse constancie or courage, in such cases of so sharpe affliction, and vneasie to bee endured, as your imprisonement is. Yet I can desire no better experience therein, then the like misfortune hath ministred to mee, in permitting mee to bee vanquished by the same man, that was the worker of your downefall. Notwithstanding, let mee take it ill or well, bee pleased or offended at my foyle: I see no other reme∣dy, but only to arme my selfe with patience, and sooner to forget the iiurie I haue receiued, then my selfe. For the rest, I am of opinion that it is possible, to treate on some good agreement betweene you and these Princes: who (I am perswaded) will therein listen to you, if such a motion proceede from your selfe. How can that be done (quoth the King) except in forgoing all, which they pretend to haue conquered from me: and I had rather die, bea∣ring the name of an imprisoned King, then to liue a begger at li∣bertie. If after death, saide Balan, life were easie to bee recalled backe a∣gaine, I should ioyne with you in this opinion: but hauing nothing dearer to vs in this worlde, wee should preserue it so long as is pos∣sible for vs. My worthy friend Ba∣lan replied the the King, doe with mee what you please, into your hands I commit my selfe, my life, my goods, & honour: beseeching you intirely, to remember my busi∣nesse in such nature, as I make no doubt but you will. Now because they saw Enill comming in to them: they altred their discourse, and Ba∣lan taking leaue of him, went to finde Galuanes and Galaor, who staied his returne in the Tent of A∣graies. There hee declared, what spee∣ches had past between him and the King Arauigne. And in my minde, quoth he, considering the humor wherein I left him, I thinke it were good to make him some offer, gi∣uing him some countrie of his own for a place of retirement, where hee may weare out the remainder of his dayes: and be contented to resigne vp all the rest. The whole company was well pleased heere-with, and highly allowed the aduise of Balan: for to speake vnpartially, hee was one of the wisest men, and as sound in iudgement, as any where else was to be found. Wher∣upon they entreated him, to me∣diate this matter with Arauigne, committing all to his discretion: because indeede, they themselues were halfe tyred, and grew wearie of the warre. On the next morning, hee went to the King Arauigne, and (among diuerse others remonstrances) told him, how at his request, and only by his meanes, hee had so well pre∣uailed with the Princes of the Ar∣my: that they were all contented, to leaue him parte of the Isles of Landes, in full and intire soueraign∣ty. Which liked him well, consi∣dering it was much better for him, to continue King of a little, then to be Lord of nothing. Hereupon the City was surrendred, and certaine Shippes and victuals were giuen him, for his retreate into the Isle of Liconia: And the very same day,
Bruno was crowned king with great magnificence. So, hauing recei∣ued their homages, and faithfull a∣leagance for the whole Countrie, their Army being (in this time) well refreshed: they set away to the Cit∣ty of Calaffan, in the Realm of Sansu∣gua. Whereof the people being aduertised, assembled themselues in great numbers, and, electing Cap∣taines and Commaunders among them: resolued to attend their com∣ming, and bid them battaile, before they would suffer any besieging. But they tarried so long for their muste∣red forces; that I am loath to dly you in so idle an expectation. Let it suffice then, that the Countrie of Sansuegua was conquered, and be∣cause it is not any thing , or incident to our Historie; to tell you in what manner it was perfor∣med: we will bee silent therein at this time, leauing the e to them of the Enclosed Isle; and now wee will tell you, what happened to King Lisuart, after his re into Great Brittaine. CHAP. XXXVIII▪ How King Lisuart being hunting, was taken prisoner by Enchantment and very strangely. ALthough our History hath long discontinu∣ed, from speaking of King isut, and of a∣ny thing happening to him, since hee went imbarqued from the Enclosed Isle, returning home to his Countrie of Great Brit∣taine: yet I now finde apt occasion to bee no longer forgetfull of him, but to declare, how afterward hee caied himsese, as being a matter fit for our purpose in this place. sten then to mee, Lords and faire Ladies, and you shall vnder∣stand a new kinde of subtiltie, which fortune made him taste of, to let him the better know, what slender assurance he had of her fauours: for at such time as hee thought to bee most at quiet, after so many warres & discords passed wherwith already you are fully acquainted, this acce∣dent ensuing hapned to him. First, he resolued with him selfe, to make some indifferent long soiourning in the Citty of Fnusa, because it was seated in a very sweete ayre, and highly comodious for Forests and faire Riuers, well stored with all kindes of beasts fit for game, wherein he te no meane delight and pleasure. And albt his aged yeares required ease and rest, as most meetest for him: yet such was his forward will, and noble magna∣nimitie of spirit, as he would (by no meanes) yeelde thereto, but rather daylie sighed and sorrowed, that he could not performe what formerly he had done, and bee seene in such aduentures and combats, as conti∣nually befell him in the beginning of his raigne. This disputable questioning, be∣tweene his desire, and ability of bo∣dy, drew his soule into an vnacu∣stomed sadnesse, making him be∣come so pensiue and melanlie: as hee would nder himselfe from all company and delighted in no o∣ther pastime, but to walke abroad sometimes with his Cross-ow, to strike a heart, inde or idde in
the Forrest. Hereupon it fortuned, that walking (one day) without any other Armes, but only his Sworde and Crosse-bow: hee disrned (somewhat farre off) a Dell making towardes him, mounted on a seemely Plrey, ryding mainly on the brdle, as if the had beee nearly pressed and purd, & com∣ming neare to him, hee demanded of her, the . Ah my Lord  s such man, as wll succ si of m and .   him whee  the  came, th so  together, till  a very thick wood, the King  man v∣med, holding a Damosell by the tresses of her haire, strng to cast her downe vpon the ground. But she resisted him so strongly as shee      forth his Sword, he said  leaue the Dmoell free from vio∣lence, or . The ma be feareful, an o the wood, and with such , as all the paines the King tooke, admitted  meanes of ouer the  being  hindred  tees and bushes, so that (indeed) hee could vse no diligence. Wher∣up lighting from his horse, hee  after him,  hee came  a great meadowe, in the midst whereof was a Pon r∣d, and thereinto he  the  enter. Wherefore he went directly thither, and comming neare, a Da∣mosel presented her selfe vnto him, desiring to know, why he ran so ex∣peditiously? Damosell, answered the King, ne is entred into this Tent, who not (long since) would haue ed a Gentlewo∣man in the wood, & I come hither to giue him chastisent for his lewdnesse. ter Sir (quoth thee) and if any such be there as you  after, I will deliuer him to you:  hardly can I endure, that wrong  should be offered to any woman whatsoeuer, hauing (all my life time, loed honou and . Vpon thse words the King went onward, but at his first step within the Tent: hee fell downe in such strange manner as he was quite be∣ret of all knowledge & vnderstan∣ding. Soone after, the other two Dmosels which he had left behind him, came thither also, and taking vp the ent immediately, carried the King  a Shippe, awayting there  for him at the S  and  they ho  sayle▪ without any discouery f . The Kings Bow  being  behinde, and making what haste hee could after him,  found the horse, and not his Master: neuer was man in such wofull extreamity, fearing the mishappe that  befallen him. He sought about for him in euery place, bt neither  nor way yeelded  any  wherupon, dis∣consolate▪ & out of all hope, seeing the night stealing fast vpon him, he returned backe to the Citie, and without speaking to any person, en∣tred into the Queenes chamber, reporting to her, in what manner King Lisuart had left him, and af¦terward, could heare no tyding of
him. Not a little amazed was the Queene, when shee heard of this strange and vnexpected accident, which made her fall downe into a trance: but her Ladies and Gentle-women being at hande, cut her la∣ces, and quickly recouered life in hir againe. Then sending for King Arban, and Cendill de Ganote, shee told them all that the Kings Bow∣bearer had imparted to hir. But they fearing further to offend her seemed to make smal account of it, perswading her, that the Forrest be∣ing long and large, and very thickly set with huge Woodes: hee might there loose himselfe for a while, yet afterwardes returne well enough home. No, neuer, said the Queen. His horse to be found, and no news of him? what answere you to that? Madam, quoth King Aban, it appeares very likely, that the trees and bushes standing so thick, as no meane hinderance to his sport, hee therefore left his horse. These words did somewhat com∣fort the Queene, but yet her opiniō went quite contrary to his saying, and therefore, making a shew of some other businesse, they returned to their lodgings, to Arme them-selues, and aduising other Knights (there present) to follow them, they entred into quest of the King. But all was in vaine, for they could heare no tidings of him: so remayned the Queene in sadnes till the next mor∣ning, when Grumedan and Giontes (being returned from their voyage) came to see her. She demanded of them, if they had met with the king? No truely Madam, quoth they, nei∣ther did wee know of his losse, till some of the Citty acquainted them therewith, but we intend to follow in the search of him. On my faith, said she, I finde my selfe in such af∣fliction of minde, as I must needes goe with you: for abiding heere a∣lone, I shall die with extreamity of sorrow. But if eyther wee can finde him, or heare any news of him, it will shorten my griefe: otherwise, it will be some ease to mee, to endure any toyle or trauell whatsoeuer, rather then desolately continue here. So she sent for two Palfrayes her selfe mounting vpon the one, and the wife to Brandoynas on the other riding on in quest of the King, with the two knights. From place to place they trauailed, but they could heare no news at all, and on the third day following, they met with King Arban very pensiue, and his Horse so wearie, as hardly was hee able to goe. Then the Queene as∣ked him, if hee had heard any thing of the King? Madam, quoth hee, e∣uen as much as when I left you, on∣ly I stand in doubt, that he is surpri∣zed by some treason, and carried out of this countrie. Long agoe it is since I foresaw and suspected this accident, and if he would haue been ruled by mee, this had neuer happe∣ned to him. I euermore disswaded him, yea, with teares, and entire in∣treaties, neuer to wander so alone in doubtfull and deceiuing Forrests where infinite vnlooked for daun∣gers lie hid; but hee would neuer like my aduise. As hee would haue proceeded on further, the Queene fell downe in a swound from her Horse: But Gru∣medan suddenly alighting, tooke her vp in his Armes, and speech soone after came to hir againe, when de∣liuering a very vehement sigh, shee said. False and deceitfull Fortune, hope of the miserable, and cruell e∣nemy to the prosperous, haue I now any occasion to speake well of thee? If in times past, thou madest mee Lady of many Kingdomes, ho∣noured
and obeyed by worldes of people, but (aboue all the rest) ma∣r mee to a mighty and vertuous Kings in one meere moment, thou hly vndone mee, thou hast robde mee of all my ioyes in him, because on him only, depended all my comfort, life and honor. And therfore I know right wel, that thou makest a triumph of my tormen, and enforcest too deare an intrest, for all the former  thou didst lend me. But why de I com∣plaine on thee, hauing so long time seene and obserued that this is on∣ly thy true behauiour? death is farr more powerfull then thou art, and hee can ende thy vtmost malli in∣flcted on mee: which beeing my chiefest hope and Anker-holde, I will comfort my selfe therein, and victoriously vaunt ouer thee. Thus the wofull Queen sate wee∣ping and lamenting, with such vio∣lent passions and anguishes, as they that were about her, durst nor open their mothes to comfort her. On∣ly they pitied her distresse, and she often looking on Grumedan, with an eye that truely spake sorrow frō her heart, saide. An Grmedan, if euer thou didst mee any seruice, now, when I finde my selfe forsaken of all hope, and neuermore to re∣ceiue any the least pleasue: I pray thee giue ende to my griefes, by some sudden way to death, which will hee highly welcome to mee, es∣pecially by thy hand, rather then li∣uing longer i such languisg as I doe. But Grmedan▪ to alter  desperate disposition in her, com∣forted her in the best manner hee could: but all would not passe for currant payment, it proued rather to encrease her anguish more and more. In which regarde, both hee and the rest compassed the meanes, for conuaying her to the nearest vil∣lage, sending immediately to the Cittie for skilfull Phisitions: who found her so feeble, and such a de∣bility in her vnderstanding, as they stood greatly in doubt of her reco∣uerie. Neuerthelesse, they expressed their paines so diligently, applying such cordialls and other soueraigne comforts, as within two daies, she began to  knowledge againe. And calling for Grumedan, after some few des passing between them, hee saide vnto her. Beleeue , you doe not well, to take  n such sort as you doe, considering, I haue heard you say an hundred times: that the vertue of prudence  not to be discerned in any person, but in such as are most solicited with sorrowes and af∣flictions. Whereby plainely appea∣reth, that the counsell you were wonte to giue to others, is now most necessarie for your selfe. Are you now to learne, that Fortune hath two daughters, the one called (by many) F, the other Infe∣licity? If  hath kept com∣panie with you, all your life time till now, and Infelicitie comes to vi∣site you in her steed: arme your self (as becomes a vertuous Queene) with the deencible weapons of courage, wisedome and constancy, euen to enter the lists with the mo∣ther herselfe, which will so daunt her vnhappy daughter, as shee will e  to follow you any longer, but giue you ouer euen in the open . Consider (good Madame) what I say vnto you, because other∣wise, I oreee two necare approa∣ching and irreparable accidents, threatning danger to you: the one is ver perdition of your selfe, and the other, of my Lord the King, if at his returne hee findes you dead.
Say he should be lost, why, these are but wordes, for hee cannot bee so closely hidden, but he will be seen. And if wee can heare no speedy ti∣dings of him, either in this country or else where: yet his captiuity in a∣ny prison cannot be so strong, but by the helpe of your Subiects, and fauour of your friends and kinse∣men, he will be quickly thence deli∣uered. And therfore I beseech you Madam, setting aside these sorrows, which threaten danger to you: you would round engirt your selfe with good Councell and comfort, to reach the height of that, which is much more needfull for you in this case. The Queen liking this discourse, yeelded to Grumedans aduise, and thereupon, purposed to send Bran∣doynas to Amadis, to let him vnder∣stand the Kings losse, and in what extreamity she her selfe was, by him she sent this Letter following. The Letter from Queene Brise∣na, to Lord Amadis. My Lord and Sonne, if heretofore the estate of King Lisuart your Father, hath beene defended and augmented by your meanes: a season (better now then euer) presents it selfe for your employment (considering the perill pre∣pared for him) to keepe and preserue all still in perfect condition. For, some small while since, by his enemies (as it appeareth most likely) he is carried a∣way and imprisoned none of vs know∣ing where, or why: which makes mee beleeue, that but vpon occasion of a farre greater enterprise, this Treason would neuer haue beene vndertaken. Now, because it is a matter concerning you (next to my selfe) more then a o∣ther I haue sent to aduertise you there-of by Brandoynas this bearer, who hath seene and vnderstands all, and who can acquaint you with my instant aistresse, better then I am able to set it downe in wrighting. Wherefore I pray you to credit him as my selfe, and con∣sider on the rest. Your wofull Mother Queene Brisena. This Letter written and deliue∣red to Brandoynas, he set on towards Amadis: and the Queene with her company, went directly to London to call a councell, and set all things in order. Here you are to vnder∣stand, that soone after the romor of the Kings losse, spred it selfe so liberally in all places: that Quedra∣gant, Bruneo and the rest, being then in Sansuegua, had intelligence there-of, and they honorably considering what preiudice might redound ther∣by to Amadis, if any neede should happen in Great Brittaine: conclu∣ded on the speedy goeing to the En∣closed Isle, to vndertake whatsoeuer hee should command them. Here-upon, hauing planted Garisons in all needefull places, they sayled thence with so faire a winde: that they landed at the Pallace of Apoli∣don, the very same day as Brandoy∣nas arriued there. As Amadis was comforting Oria∣na, by reason of the news formerly receiued; the comming of these Knightes was made known to him: but hee being loath to leaue the Princesse alone, intreated Grasandor to goe meete them, and acquaint them with the occasion of his stay∣ing behinde, which accordingly he performed, finding them in good forwardnesse on the way. Then he declared to them, what hee had re∣ceiued in charge from Amadis, de∣siring them to excuse him, if this day did not alow them to see him: but early the next morning hee in∣tended
to visite them. Now, be∣cause the affaires they came about, required some speed & dilligence, they entred into Councell, and Brandoynas was called before them all: where amply he declared, what he could say concerning the Kings losse, and in what dangerous con∣dition hee had left the Quene. Ma∣ny opinions passed among them, but at length it was resolued: that they all should pursue the quest of him, both by Sea and Land, hoping Fortune would be no lesse fauoura∣ble to them herein, then heereto-fore shee had beene in the like at∣tempts. Scarcely had they concluded on this deliberation, but one of their Squires came and tolde them, that a Ladie was come forth of the great Serpent, and (in their opinion) it was Vrgania the Vnknowen. If it be shee said Amadis, then the case will goe well with vs. So they all set forwarde, and met her (almost) at the Parkes entrance, mounted on a goodly Palfrey, which her two Dwarffes led by the bridle reines. The first she addressed her selfe vn∣to, was Galaor, whom shee kindly saluted, and all the rest, and being in the midst among them, she thus began. How now Lords? did not I lately tell you, that I should finde you heere againe assembled in this place, about some businesse then vnknowne to you? You did Ma∣dame, answered Galaor, I remem∣ber it very well, so doth Madame O∣riana likewise, who wil not be a little ioyfull for your ariuall. And part∣ly to comfort her (quoth shee) is the cause of my now comming. So they entred into the Pallace, and being dismounted from horse-backe, they conducted her to the chamber of the Princesse; who so soone as shee sawe her, cae and fell at her feet, and weeping inces∣santly, said. Alas madame, you that knowe future accidents, as well as them present, why did you not take order, for the King my fathers mis-fortune, hee beeing your so deare∣ly esteemed friend? I may well as∣sure my selfe, that when you fayle him, his case is vtterly voide of any remedie. Madame, answered Vrganda, I pray you doe not thus discomfort your selfe. Know you not, that the more men are mounted to high de∣grees, the more subject they are to as great tribulations? Although wee are all made of one and the same substance, all obliged to vices and passions, yea equall alike to death: yet the omnipotent Lord of all, hath made vs diuerse, in en∣ioying the goods of this world. To some hee giues authority; others are subiect to seruility and vassa∣lage. Some are made poore and very miserable, others enioy aboun∣dance and prosperity, and all ac∣cording to his owne good pleasure. So worthy Madame, comparing the great blessing, you now enioy, with such sorrowes and vexations as you haue sustained, put all your present afictions into one seale, and your passed fortunes into another, and they will no way be answerable in weight. As for the King your father, I knewe (long agoe) this which hath happened to him, and yet notwithstanding, I could not help it. For so it was appointed by diuine pre-science, who (in time) will also permit: that he shall re∣turne home againe into his owne countrey, with as much content∣ment, as euer heretofore hee en∣ioyed. Then conuerting her speeches to Amadis, & others there present, thus shee proceeded. When I de∣parted
last from his companie, I did then assure yee, that at such time as Esplandian should receiue his order of Knight-hood, I would meete you againe in this place, for this cause, to keepe promise both with you, and him, and to discharge you of a labour you are entring into: I am come hither as you see. And this I tell you, that if all the men this day liuing, and so many more as shall come hereafter, doe attempt the quest of king Lisuart, and to deliuer him out of the place where hee is: they loose all their paines. There∣fore let mee aduise you to desist from the promise you haue made each to other. Requesting you be∣side, that you will all be my guests in the great Serpent, with Esplandi∣an, Telanque, Manelie, the King of Dacia, and Ambor, Sonne to An∣griote, presently giuing order for your Horses, for the houre now in∣uites vs. They not daring to denie her, did as shee commanded, and giuing good rest to Oriana, accompanied her to the Sea side: where they found a Barque ready, which con∣ueied them to the place where the great Serpent lay. Entring therein∣to they left their horses in the great Hall, where taking Esplandian and his companions with her, shee led them into a Chappell, to performe their watch and prayer, according to the ancient custome, before any man might be made a Knight. Af∣terward she returned againe to the rest, and bad them sit downe to sup∣per, which they found ready pre∣pared for them, and in most royall manner. The tables being with-drawne, she sent them to keep com∣pany with them that watched in the Chappell. Then shee and her two kinsewomen, Solisa and her Si∣ster, followed them, Vrganda carry∣ing a Habbit or Coate of Male, very black, Salisa an Helmet, of the same colour, and the third a shield answerable thereto. Now, albeit (at the beginning) all other Knightes were armed with white Armour: yet would shee needs haue him to differ from them in this manner. So soone as shee was entred the Chappell, shee cal∣led Esplandian to her, saying. Most happy yong Gentleman, see what accoutraments I haue brought for you, as testimonies of the power, wherewith your heart will hereaf∣ter bee enueloped, partaking (in some measure) with the naturall disposition of the king your grand-father. Moreouer, it is to put you in minde, that as other (when they are made Knights) receiue this ho∣nor with white Armour, and bright∣ly polished, in signe of ioy and cheerefulnesse: so these thus black and vnsightly, are bestowed on you by destinie, to remember you (ma∣ny times) of those sorrows and tri∣bulations, wherein all your friends are at this present. So they three armed him from head to foote, on∣ly his Sword excepted, and deman∣ded of Amadis his opinion therein. By my faith Madam, quoth he, if he had a Sword, hee were in case (me thinkes) both to defend himselfe, and to assayle any other. You know answered Vrganda, as well, or better then any other in this troup, where one hath been kept for him aboue two hundred years past and you haue seene it in the Rock of the Damosell Enchauntresse who left it there (by apointment of the fates) only for him. And therefore hee must needes goe thither to con∣quer it, for I dare assure you, hee will performe such actions of arms, as shall eclipse the bright fames of many that haue shined most cleere∣ly
in all partes of the worlde. As shee spake these wordes, foure o∣ther Damosells came in, each one bringing furniture for a horse, and an Armour as white as snow, ha∣uing a blacke crosse in the midst thereof, and these foure other Da∣mosells armed him therewith. All this while, was Esplandian on his knees, before the Altar deuoutly imploring the assistance of heauen, to giue him grace and meanes, wherby to accomplish those things destined to him: as well for the deliuerance of King Lisuart, as a∣ny other enterprise whatsoeuer, wherein hee coueted not his owne priuate glory. Thus remained the Knights all night in prayer, euen vntill the next morning, when a mishapen ill fa∣uoured Dwarffe, beeing mounted on the very height of the serpent, winding a Cornet with such loud∣nes, as the whole Island returned the Eccho therof from all parts: & the Ladies ranne vp to the Towers in the Pallace of Apolidon, to see and obserue whence this noyse came. Then went Vrganda from the Cha∣pell, with them that had watched all night whom she conducted vp near to the Dwarffe: And inwardly came sixe other Damosels, attired all in blacke, each bearing a Trumpet of golde in her hand: and Vrganda calling Balan to her, saide. Friend Balan euen as nature hath prefer∣red you before all other of your li∣nage, making you an enemy to vice, to follow reason and vertue, so will I aduaunce you (for the loue I know Amadis beares you, and e∣uery other Knight in this company) and doe you such an honour this day, as all that haue beene before you, or are liuing at this present, could not, nor can attaine to the like. And this it is, that Esplandi∣an (who shall be esteemed the best Knight in the worlde) must haue his order of Knighthood from your hand. Balan fearing to displease Ama∣dis and the rest, excused himselfe very honourably: but they all pre∣uailing with him, hee tooke Esplan∣dian by the hand, and asked him if hee would bee a Knight? Yes Sir, quoth ee, if you please to bestow such honour on mee. Then Balan gaue him the accolade, and after-warde, buckled on his right spurre, saying: I pray God (faire Gentle-man) to make thee such a man, as generall hope is conceiued of thee. This done, Vrganda tooke Amadis aside, saying. Bethinke your selfe, if you will haue any thing with your sonne, because hee is to de∣parte hence suddenly. Hereupon, Amadis rounding him in the eare, saying. My sonne, at such time as I ariued in Greece, I was receiued, and highly honoured by the Em∣perour, who afterwardes lent mee so good assistance, as I must con∣fesse my selfe for euer beholding to him. And because hee tyed mee to some promises, made then (vnder mine oath) to his faire daughter Leonoryna, one of the most wise and gracious Princesses in the worlde, as also to the Queene Me∣noressa, & other Ladies in her com∣panie: that if I could nor returne againe to them my selfe, I should send them a Knight of my linage, to serue them. I finde my selfe in no disposition leaning that way, but command you, that so soone as you haue released King Lisuart, you goe and discharge my dutie to her. And that you may be the bet∣ter knowne, receiue this Ring, which was giuen me there for a kind token.
Esplandian humbly vpon his knee promised, not to faile a iote herein: but it was not fulfilled so soone as they both hoped for, because be∣fore hee came thither, hee passed through many perills for the loue of that faire Lady, whose renowne only (hauing neuer seene her, tied him so subiect to hir, as hee made no valuation of his Life, as when it comes more aptly to our pur∣pose, you shall further vnderstand. Then Vrganda called him, saying. Sonne you must needes bestowe Knight-hood of these your foure companions, who, before many dayes are past, may render you the honour of your gift. Esplandi∣an obeying the will of Vrganda, gaue them the embrace, and spurre on their heeles, and then the sixe Damosells sounded their Trum∣pets so sweetely: As all the Lords and the fiue new made Knights likewise became so sleepilie en∣aunced, as they were voide of ll vnderstanding. At which very instant, the Serpent voided out er mouth and nosthrills such a horrible smoake, as the Sea could not bee discerned for a long while. But very soone after (no body could el how) the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, found themselues to bee in the Parke of Apoidon, not a little wondring how they came her, but much more beside, what was become of the Serpent, and the fiue new created Knightes. But that which most of all amazed Amadis, was, when hee awaked,  finde a wrighting in his hand  inscription. The wrighting which Amadis found in his hand, at his waking. Kings and Lordes, that are in the Enclosed Isle, returne home to your Countries, and there contented∣ly rest your Spirits, leauing the glorie and prize of Armes, to those that be∣ginne to mount aloft, vpon the mu∣table wheele of Fortune, let the Fa∣uours shee hath hitherto affoorded you, remaine as a full satisfacti∣on. And thou Amadis de Gaule, who (since the day that King Perion made thee Knight, at the request of thy Oriana) hast vanquished many braue Knightes and cruell Giants, escaping strange and vnparraleld perills: Let the happinesse thou hast had, suffice thee, beeing more then any could attaine vnto before thee. Learne now to tast those sweets and sowres, which Kinges and Ru∣lers are Subiect vnto, for they are now prouided for thee. And like as in thy younger yeares, thou wentst in the condition of a simple Knight errant succouring manie in their necessities: So at this time, as thou entrest into farre higher felicities, thou shalt finde more neede then e∣uer heretofore, to lend thine assi∣stance in much greater matters, be∣moaning many times thy former con∣dition of Life, and thy Dwarsse onelie, ouer whom thou hast had com∣mand. Hauing all of them read this Letter, they entred into a con∣testation, whether they should follow the Counsell of Vrganda, or no: But at length Amadis tolde them, that it was behouefull to credit her, in regard of the con∣tinuall truth of her predictions. And therefore (quoth hee to Ga∣laor) I take it for the best, that you and Galuanes should goe to Great Brittaine, to visit the queene, and let her know what Vrganda hath proposed vs, for the Kinges
deliuerance, which will be no little ioy to her, and so soone as you returne mee answere, my Cosen Agraies, Balan and I will followe after you. And you my Lords (quoth hee to the rest) that / haue accomplished so many famous conquests: returne to take more ample possession, and fully enioy the fruits of your labours. Where-to they all willingly condiscended, and leading their wiues along with them, on the morrowe they tooke leaue of Amadis, Oriana, and the rest, that made their stay in the En∣closed Isle. And heere wee intend to leaue them, making an ende of this our Fourth Booke, attending till the Fift shall come to our hands. The end of the Fourth Booke▪
A Table of all the Chapters contained in this Fourth Booke of Amadis de Gaule. CHPTER 1. OF the great sorrowe made by the Queen Sardamira, after shee vnderstood the death of the Prince Saluste Quide: and of the ariuall of Oriana in the Enclosed Isle. Fol. 1. Chap. 2. A discription of the Li∣nographie and foundation of the Pal∣lace, which Apolidon had caused to be builded in the Enclosed Isle. Fol. 4. Chap. 3. Of the Councell held a∣mong the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, touching the businesse for the Princesse Oriana; And what they fur∣ther determined to doe. Fol. 11. Chap. 4. Of the discourse which Amadis had with Grasinda, and the answere she made him,: Also what Letters were directed by Amadis to diuerse great Princes. Fol. 18. Chap. 5. Of the priuate talke which Oriana and Mabila, had with Gandalin; And what he gaue Ama∣dis to vnderstand, concerning them. Fol. 24. Chap. 6. How newes was brought to King Lisuart, of the Romaines foyle and ouerthrowe, and how his daughter Oriana was taken from the; whereath grieued greately. Fol. 31. Chap. 7. Of a Letter sent by the Pricesse Oriana (beeing in the En∣closed Isle) to the Queene her mother. Fol. 34. Chap. 8. How King Lisuart called a Councell, concerning what hee in∣tended to doe against the Knights of the Enclosed Isle: And what resolu∣tion was agreed vpon. Fol. 39. Chap. 9. How Quedragant and Brian sayling on the Sea, by a sudden and vnexpected tempest, were cast so farre out of their course, that hauing lost all knowledge of Land; they met (accidentally) with Queen Brilania: And what happened to them. Fol. 46. Chap. 10. Of the reporte deliue∣red by Quedragant and Brian, to the Knights of the Enclosed Isle, concer∣ning their Embassie to King Liuart; And of that which thereup was re∣soluedly determined. Fol. 51. Chap. 11. How Master Elisabet ariued in the countrie belonging to Grasinda, and passed from thence to Constantinople to the Emperour, ac∣cording to the charge giuen him by A∣madis. Fol. 53. Chap. 12. How Gandalin ariued in Gaule; And of the speeches be∣tweene him and King Perion. Fol. 55 Chap. 13. How Guillan le Pen∣sif ariued at the Empereurs Court of Rome; Philipinell in Swetia, and Brandoynas in Ireland. Fol. 58. Chap. 14. How Grasandor, sonne to the King of Bohemia, sayling vp∣pon the Sea, met with Giontes; And of that which happened vnto them. Fol. 60. Chap. 15. How Patin Emperour of Rome landed with his arie at Vindilisore, where King Liuart lay in expectation of his comming; And of that which happened to the. Fol. 65 Chap. 16. How King Perion was aduertised of the dislodging of his e∣nemies: And what order hee looke to
march before, and to fight with them. Fol. 69. Chap. 17. How Gandalin, squire to Amadis, & Lasinde, squire to Bru∣neo de bōne Mer, were made knights And of the Battaile betweene the two Kings, Liuart and Perion. Fol. 71. Chp. 18. What order was taken by both the Armies, for further pro∣ceeding in the fight, the time of truce being ended. Fol. 7. Chap. 19. Of the conference which King Lisuart had with the Romans, after the fought battatle. And how the holie mn Nascian, who had nou∣rished Esplandian in his younger yeares, earing of this warre: departed from his He tage, to come to the two Kings, to make peace betweene them. Fol. 80. Chap. 20. How Nascian retur∣ned towards King Lisuart, with the answere hee receiued from King Peri∣on. Fol. 91. Chap. 21. How King Arauigne being aduertised of the losse which King Lisuart had sustainea, and the dislodging of his Campe, determined to giue him attaile. Fol. 93 Chap. 22. How King Lisuart was assaulted by King Arauigne, brought into great danger: And of the suc∣cour giuen him by Amadis in his ne∣cessity. Fol. 95. Chap. 23. How Amadis came to the succour of King Lisuart: And of the valiant ouerthrow of King Ara∣uigne. Fol. 98. Chap. 24. How King Lisuart a∣riued at Vindiore, where his queene Brisena attended his comming whom (soone after) hee caused to re∣moue thence, and with her daughter Leonora, accompanie him to the En∣closed Isle. Fol. 108. Chap. 25. How King Perion, and his  their way towards the Enclosed Isle▪ and of that which they did, before King Lisuart came thither to them. Fol. 110. Chap. 26. How Bruneo de bonne Mer and Branfill, were appointed to iourney into Gaule, to fetch the queen Elysena and Galaor: and of those ad∣uentures which happened to them in their returning back againe. Fol. 115. Chap. 27. How Bruneo de bon∣ne Mer, Branfill and Angriote, went on with the Queene of Dacia, and what Aduentures happened to them. Fol. 120. Chap. 28. How King Lisuart, his queene Brisena, and their daugh∣ter Leonora, departed from Vindili∣sore, to goe for the Enclosed Isle, according as it was concluded on, a their setting from Lubania. Fol. 126. Chap. 29. Of the conference which Amadis had with his Cosin Dra∣gonis; in giuing him the Kingdome of the Profounde Island, and the Princesse Estoiletta to Wife, whom hee had loued a long time Fol. 130 Chap. 30. How the marriages of Amadis with Oriana, and the other Princes and Ladies, were solemnlie celebrated in the Enclosed Isle where (the selfe same day) Oriana made proofe of the Arch of Loyall Louers, and likewise of the Defen∣ded Chamber Fol. 132. Chap. 31. How Vrganda the Vn∣knowne reuealed before them all, such matters as shee long time had foretold before they happened. And how shee tooke her leaue of Amadis, as also of a the other company to remou whence she came. Fol. 137 Chap. 32. How Amadis went a∣way alone, to reuenge the Knightes losse, whom a Lady had brought dead in a small Barque: and of that which happened to him. Fol. 140 Chap. 33. How Amadis sayled
away from the port of the Island of the Infanta, to  the purpose hee had formerly intended. Fol. 145 Chap. 34. How Darioletta per∣ceiuing Amadis to bee in such daun∣ger, made great moane and lamen∣tation. And how Balan and hee were made friends. Fol. 152. Chap. 35. How Grasandor fol∣lowed in the quest of Amadis, and what aduentures happened to him in his trauailes. Fol. 158. Chap. 36. How Amadis being in the Island of the Red Tower, con∣ferring with Grasandor, espied a small Foist in the Sea, which put into the Port, hauing people in her, that told him the tidings of the Armie, which was gone for Sansuegua, and to the Isle of Landes, or the Profound Isle. Fol. 161 Chap. 37. How Balan being in the Tent of Galuanes, the principall Commander of the Armie came to see him: And what conferrence they had together. Fol. 184 Chap. 38. How King Lisuart be∣ing a hunting, was taken prisoner by Enchantment and very strangely. Fol. 186.
