9342.8 23684445 26808
The order for Swannes. FIRST yee shall inquire if there be any person that doth possesse any Swan, and hath not compounded with the Quéenes Maiestie for his marke. That is to saie, six shillings eight pence for his marke during his life. If you know any such you shall present them, that all such Swannes and Cignets may be seased for the Quéene. 2 Also you shall inquire if any person doo possesse any Swan or Cignet, that may not dispend the cleare yerely value of fiue Markes of frèehold (except heire apparant to the crowne) then you shall present him. 22. Ed. 4. 3 Also if any person or persons doo driue awaie any Swan or Swannes bréeding or prouiding to bréede, be it vpon his owne ground or any other mans ground, hée or they so offending shall suffer one yeares imprison∣ment, and fine at the Quéenes pleasure, thirtéene shillings foure pence. 11. Hen. 7. 4 Item, if there be found any Weres vpon the riuers not hauing any grates before them, it is lawful for euery owner, Swanmaister or Swanheard, to pull vp or cut downe the birth, net or gin of the said Were or Weres. 5 Item, if any person or persons be found carrieng any Swanhooke, & the same person being no Swanheard, nor accompanied with twoo Swanheards: euery such person shall pay to the Quéene thirtéene shillings foure pence, that is to saie, thrée shillings foure pence to him that will informe, and the rest to the Quéene. 6 Item, the ancient custome of this Realme hath and doth allow to euerie owner of such ground, where any such Swan shall heirie, to take one rd, and for the same the Quéenes Maiestie must haue of him that hath the land bird twelue pence. Item, it is ordeined that if any person or persons doo conuaie away or steale away the Egge or Egges of any Swan, & the same duelie prooued twoo sufficient witnesses, that then euery such offender shall pay to the Quéene thirtéene shillinges foure pence for euery Egge so taken out of aest of any Swan. 8 Item, it is ordeined euery owner that hath any Swannes shall pay foure pence yéerely to the maister of the game for his fée, and his dinner and per frée on the vpping day. And if the said maister of the game faile of the foure pence, then he shall distraine the game of euerie such owner that so  faile of paiment. 9 Item, if there be any person or persons that hath Swannes that both heirie vpon their seuerall waters, and after commeth to the common ri∣er they shall pay a land bird to the Quéene, & be obedient to all Swan lawes; for diuerse such persons doo vse it for collusion to defraud the Quéene  right. 10 Item, it is ordeined that euery person hauing any Swannes, shall begin yearlie to marke vpon the first of August, and no person before, but , as the companie may, so that the maister of the Quéenes game or his deputie be present. And if any take vpon him or them to marke any nnes or Cignets, to forfeit to the Quéenes Maiestie for euerie Swanne fortie shillings. 11 Item, it is ordeined that no person or persons being owners or Swanheards, or other, shall go on marking without the maister of the game be sent, with other Swanheards next adioining, vpon paine to forfeit to the Quéenes Maiestie fortie shillings. 12 Item, it is ordeined that no person shall hunt any duckes or any other chase in the water or néere the haunt of Swannes in fence time, with a∣ogs or spaniels from the feast of Easter to Lammas, vpon paine to euery time so found in hunting to forfeit six shillings eight pence. 13 Item, it is ordeined that if any person doo set any snares or any maner of nets, lime or engins to take Bittorns or Swannes from the feast of Easter to the sunday after Lammas day, he or they to forfeit to the Quéenes Maiestie for euery time so setting six shillings right pence. 14 Item, it is ordeined that no person take vp any Cignet vnmarked, or make any sale of them, but that the Quéenes Swanheard or his depu∣tie be present with other Swanheards next adioining, or haue knowledge of the same, vpon paine to forfeit to the Quéene fortie shillings. 15 Item, it is ordeined that the Swanheard of the Duchie of Lancaster shall vp no Swanne, or make any sale of them, without the maister of the wannes or his deputie be present, vpon paine to forfeit to the Quéenes Maiestie fortie shillings. 16 And in like maner the Quéenes Swanheard shall not enter into the liberties of the Duchie without the Quéenes Swanheard be there pre∣ent, vpon the like paine to forfeit fortie shillings. 17 Item, it is ordeined that if any Swans or Cignets be found double marked, they shall be seased to the Quéenes vse, till it be prooued to whom the same Swans or Cignets doo belong. And if it cannot be prooued to whom they doo belong, that then they be seased for the Quéene, and hir Grace  be answered the value of them. 18 Item, it is ordeined that no person make sale of any white Swans, nor make deliuerie of them without them the maister of the game be present or his deputie with other Swanheards next adioining, vpon paine to forfeit fortie shillings, wherof six shillings eight pence to him that will informe,  the rest to the Quéenes Maiestie. 19 Item, it is ordeined that no person shall lay leapes, set anie nets or drag within the common streames or riuers vpn the daie time, from the  of the Inuention of the Crosse, vnto the feast of Lammas, vpon paine so oft as they be found so offending to forfeit twentie shillings. 20 Item, it is ordeined that if the maister of the Swans or his deputy doo sease or take vp any Swannes as straies for the Quéenes Maiestie, that he shall kéepe them in a pit within twentie foote of the Quéenes streame, or within twentie foote of the common high waie, that the Quéenes sub∣s may haue a sight of the said Swannes so seased, vpon paine of fortie shillings. 21 Item, it is ordeined that if any person doo rase out, counterfeit or alter the marke of any Swan, to the hindering or losse of any mans game,  any such offender duelie prooued before the Quéenes Maiesties Commissioners of Swannes, shall suffer one whole yeares imprisonment, and  thrée pound six shillings and eight pence to the Quéene. 22 Item, it is ordeined that the commons, that is to saie, dinner and supper, shall not excéed aboue six pence or eight pence at the most, and if any game be found on that riuer where such dinner or supper is had, and the owner of the same game absent nor any for him, the maister of the game or his deputie to laie six pence or eight pence for euerie such owner, and to be allowed againe of euerie game, whose owner is absent. 23 Item, it is ordeined that there shall be no forfeiture of any white Swanne or Cignet but onely to the Quéenes Grace, aswell within the fran∣ses and liberties as without, and if any doo deliuer the Swan or Cignet to any person so seased, but onely to the maister of the Quéenes game,  his deputie to the Quéenes vse, he to forfeit six shillings eight pence, and the Swannes to be restored to the maister of the game. 24 Item, it is ordeined that no person shall take any graie Swannes or Cignets or white Swannes flieng, but that he shall within foure daies next after deliuer it or them to the maister of the Quéenes game, and the taker have for his paines in taking the said Swan eight pence. 25 Item, it is ordeined that euerie person hauing any game of his owne, shall not be Swanheard for himselfe, nor kéeper of any other mans annes, vpon paine to forfeit to the Quéenes Maiestie fortie shillings. 26 Item, it is ordeined that no Swanheard, fisher or fouler, shall er any other swanheard, fisher or fouler by way of action, but onely before the Quéenes Maiesties Iustices of Sessions of Swannes, vpon paine of forfeiting to the Quéenes Grace fortie shillings. 27 Item, the maister of the Quéenes game shall not take away any vnmarked Swan coupled with an other mans Swanne for breaking of the , and when they doo heirie the one part of the Cignets to the Quéene, and the other to the owner of the marked Swan. 28 Item, it is ordeined that if any heirie be led withone Swan, the Swan and the Cignets shall be seased for the Quéene, till due proofe be had ose they are, and whose was the Swan that is away, be it Cob or Pen. God save the Queene. Printed by Henrie Denham. 1584.
