A111 11966699 51745
ABSALOM'S REBELLION. As it is Recorded in the 2. SAM. Chap. 15, 16, 17, 18, & 19. WITH SOME OBSERVATIONS UPON THE SEVERALL Passages thereof. Too fit a Patterne for the present Times, whereinto we are FALLEN. OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Vniversity. 1645.
ABSALOM'S REBELLION. As it is Recorded in the second of SAM. Chap. 15, 16, 17, 18, & 19. IN the two precedent Chapters, 13, and 14. you shall find, that Absalom fully discovered his many Vices of Revengefulnesse, Malice, Insolency, Dissimulation, Pride, Impatience, Vnthankfullnesse, Iustifying himself in his faults, even in the Murther of his Brother Amon; and being thus seasoned, he turnes Traytor; For Treason never goes alone, it is alwaies Ʋshered in with other notorious vices. And when he is resolved to enter into the Rebellion, he first amuses the Common people with an opinion of his Gallantry. [Chap. 15. v. 1. He prepareth Horses and Cha∣riots,
and fifty men to run before him.] Such Shewes he knew would prevaile much with the multitude. Then he possesseth them wirh an opinion of his industry, and wins upon their affections, with his Affability. [v. 2. He rose up early, and stood beside the way of the Gate, and it was so, that when any man that had a controversie came to the King for judgement, then Absalom call'd unto him and com∣muned with him.] But yet this was not enough, unlesse he slandered the pre∣sent Governement, for he saith to him, [v. 3. See thy mat∣ter is good and right, but there is no man deputed of the King to heare thee.] The Common sort love to be flattered, and are naturally inclined to beleive ill of their Rulers. Then he is liberall in his Protestations, what won∣ders he would doe for a sudden Reformation if he were in Authority; and said moreover [v. 4. O that I were made Judge in the Land, that every man which hath any Suite or Cause might come to me, and I would doe them Justice.] He must raise an expectation of the new, who goes about to alter the frame of the old Governement. And to winne upon them whom he intended to abuse, he aboundeth in courteous and civill behaviour toward those who make their application to him. [v. 5. When any came nigh to him, to do him obeysance, he put forth his hand and took him and kissed him] And herein he dealt subtilly to gaine a generall applause, he did not speake some faire, and neg∣lect others, [but v. 6. In this manner did Absalom to all Isra∣ell that came to the King for judgement, and so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israell.] Yet all this while he is not come to the height of his wickednesse, untill he make Religion the Stale for his im∣piety. [v. 7. Absalom said to the King, I pray thee let me go and pay my Vow which I have vowed to the Lord in Hebron.] And the King gave him leave, and he went. But he having thus infatuated the hearts of the Men of Is∣raell, instad of performing an Act of Devotion, as he pre∣tended. [v. 10. Absalom sent spies (as Committees)
throughout all the Tribes of Israell, saying, as soone as yee shall heare the sound of the Trumpet, then yee shall say Absa∣lom raigneth in Hebron.] A cheife City in Israell yee see, was the place where the Covenant was made, and the vow to be performed, and thus the Scene of Rebellion being laid in the sanctified City, it spred quickly throughout the rest of the Kingdome like Wilde-fire. Some (no doubt) went with Absalom, who were of the Plot, but [v. 11. others went in their simplicity and knew not any thing.] Alas! its no hard matter to mislead many igno∣rant soules by example. But yet when they are gathered, they must be kept toge∣ther, by the opinion that wisemen are in the Plot. There∣fore, [v. 12. Absalom sent for Ahitophell the Gilonite, Davids Councellour, from his City, even from Gilok, while he offered Sacrifice.] There is never so much danger of sedu∣cing the Subjects, as when the Kings Councellours, when his great Councell turne head against him, specially under the counterfeit maske of Religion. Now, and not till now,Vers. 13. is the Treason discovered to Da∣vid, and David acquaints his Servants therewith, who were with him at Hierusalem, and he said to them, [v. 14. Arise and let us fly, for we shall not else escape; make speed to de∣part least he overtake us suddainly, and bring evill upon us.] There is no dallying in time of eminent danger. And, [v. 15. The Kings servants said to the King behold thy servants are ready to doe whatsoever my Lord the King shall ap∣point. And, [v. 16. The King went forth and all his houshold after him, and, [v. 17. They tarried in a place that was far off.] I doe not finde that then, or at any time after, it was ob∣jected against David as a fault, that he then left the City, or His great Councell, who had first left him, and their Loyalty. Yet this is observable, That although the Kings depar∣ture were suddaine, it was not in disorder, [v. 18. All his servants passed on besides him, and all the Cherethites, and all
the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, even 600 men, which were come from Gath, went before the King.] These were his Life-Guard, and his servants, and his Guard in those daies for∣sooke not their Master the King in his distresse. And all this while, or after this, I doe not finde what the Kings fault was, which might provoke Absalom and the people to this Rebellion. David was a good King, and a wise, and a va∣liant man, a man after Gods owne heart, and yet he was not free from this misfortune. Amongst others who attended the King, Ittai (who as is conceived was the Sonne of the King of Gath) was one who went over to Hierusalem with David from Gath. It was not objected against David, or Ittai, as a fault, that he was a stranger, and yet did offer to assist the King against his Re∣bels; nor in truth is it a fault now, unlesse in this, that strangers should thus condemne the Naturall borne Sub∣jects. But the King would have dissuaded Ittai from going with him, and said, [v. 19. Wherefore goest thou with us? re∣turne to thy place, and abide with the King, for thou art a stranger, depart thou therefore to thy place.] Strangers may not be compell'd to serve in such a case; but they may be en∣tertaind, if they be willing. Yet Ittai would not be dissuaded, but answered the King thus, [v. 21. As the Lord liveth, and as my Lord the King liveth, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whe∣ther in life or death, even there surely will thy servant be.] True fidelity is then best tryed, when the event is doubtfull, and good Princes shall do well to observe such followers and such Servants. Vers. 24, 27, 28.Amongst others, Zadook the high-Priest, and Abiathar and the Levites, would have gone with the King. They did well to offer their Services, for in such times no Subject is ex∣empted. But David sent them back of purpose to gaine in∣telligence by their meanes. Ahimaaz and Jonathan, their two Sonnes, being trusty Persons fit for that imployment. Good intelligence is an important piece of Service in time of
Warre especially, and it is a principall point of wisedome to imploy fit Instruments. Hushai,Vers. 32, 33, 34. also a Councellour to the King would have gone with him. Indeed I wonder how any Councellour can absent himselfe at such a time; but by the Kings owne directions, as Hushai did: But he was sent back of purpose, that he being a sad wise man and a faithfull, might undermine the crafty Councell of Ahithophel. Both in times of Warre, and of Peace, such expedients must be used, and then are not only lawfull but necessary, and amongst other policies, divertion is many times of great use. As good Men upon such Accidents follow the King in his lowest Fortune, out of Duty and Conscience, so doe some wicked and false men, for by-respects. Ziba, the Servant of Mephibosheth,Chap. 16. v. 1. comes to meet the King, and brings a Present with him, the outside was faire, to shew his duty to the King, but the true Errand was, to insinuate with the King, and by a false Lye to betray his Master. This kind of Court craft is practiced too often; but a wise King, sooner or latter, will find those out who use it, and severely punish it. About this time also,Vers. 5. the King met with another mis∣creant of another disposition. Shemei the Sonne of Gera; he finding the King in these streights railed at him, and cursed him to his face. After-ages have also found many Shimei's, who stick not to raile at God's Annointed; but doubtlesse such will meet with their reward, as Shimei did, in the end. Abishai being then present,Vers. 9. his fingers itched to take off the head of this foule-mouth'd man; but David made other use of this Affliction, and would not give way thereto at that time. There are seasonable times for patience, as well as for Justice, and good Princes will discerne the seasons thereof. We left Hushai a while since,Vers. 16. when he left the King to follow Absalom. But you observe it was by the King's spe∣ciall direction, and for his better Service. Else it had been a
Crime unpardonable in him, had he done it of his owne head, and a good intent would not have excused it. Vers. 21, 22, 23.This Plot of sending Hushai to Absalom prospered well, for Ahithophel gave shrew Counsells indeed, for one was, That Absalom should goe into his Fathers Concubines, and that publickly, that so the breach between him and his Fa∣ther might be so wide, that it should be irreconcileable. A desperate Counsell it was, that he and his Co-adjutors being put past hope of pardon, they should be put past feare of retracting; And thus when the wicked Counsells of a Coun∣sellour prosper, he is cryed up for an Oracle, as Ahitho∣phel was. Chap. 17. v. 1.The other was, that Absalom should send him with a present strength to surprize the King and his few follow∣ers, before they were provided. Maturity in resolutions, and celerity in execution of enterprizes of Warre, are of excel∣lent use. Vers. 7, 8.Absalom put the first in practice presently, his owne un∣gratiousnesse prompted him to that; but about the other Hushai was consulted with, and he by his wisedome did happily divert it.Vers. 14. [But this was appointed by the Lord, that the Counsell of Ahithophel might be defeated, that the Lord might bring evill upon Absalom] And when Ahi∣thophel found that his Counsell was not followed,Vers. 23. impa∣tient of the affront (as he esteem'd it) and fearfull of the Successe, he went home to his house, put his things in Or∣der and hang'd himselfe.] Such, and such let the end be of all those Counsellours or others, who conspire against their So∣veraigne. Vers. 5.Hushai forthwith sent intelligence to the King of these Consultations and of the result thereof, whereby the danger was for the present diverted, but it was not held safe to rely thereon, for new Counsell might alter the case againe. No greater danger then to be over secure. Vers. 17.Whil'st David and the People with him were pursued by Absalom in the Wildernesse, and the defection was very generall, yet some there were who came in to assist the
King with their Persons, others with their Purses, and some brought Provisions of all sorts to relieve the King's Army; amongst whom good old Barzillai was one. Thus should all Loyall Subjects doe, none must stand Neutralls at such a time. By this time was the Kings Army well increased,Chap. 18. v. 1, 2, and now the King divides it into three Tertia's, under the Command of severall Colonells or chiefe Captaines. That was the course then, and that's the course still, where there are formed Armies, for Order must be kept in all great Actions, both in times of Peace and Warre. To encourage the Souldiery,Vers. 3, 4, the King would have gone into the Battell in Person; But the People dissuaded him, saying [Thou art worth ten thousand of us] and the King hearkned unto them. For the Person of the King ought not to be hazarded, but in Cases of inevitable necessity. At last the Battell was set,Vers. 9, wherein God from Heaven fought for the King, for [Absalom, the Arch-Traitor, in passing through the Wood was hang'd by the head in a Tree.] A fearfull Example, and fit for all Traytors to look back upon. When this was related to Joab the Captaine of the Kings Host, and he understood, that Absalom was not yet dead,Vers. 10, 14, &c. he was not satisfied till he had taken three darts, and strook him thorough the heart. It is not safe to deale remissely with notorious and dangerous offenders. But when this stroake was given and the Rebels disper∣sed themselves, Joab sounded a Retreat,Vers. 16, and the Souldiers return'd from pursuing of Israel. He had pitty upon the se∣duced multitude, when they had pitty on themselves, and re∣pented them of what was amisse, and were willing to returne to their obedience. When the Battell was thus ended,Vers. 20, Joab sent Messengers to the King with the Tidings. Observe this, that without the Mission of the Generall, it was not lawfull in the time of Warre to run with Newes from the Campe, although it be true which is told.
Vers. 33.Assoone as the King was inform'd of the Successe, and withall of the death of Absalom, he was passionately mov∣ed therewith. Herein he discovered more the affection of an indulgent Father, thou the Judgement of a prudent King, the time and place rightly considered. Chap. 19. v. 1,But when Joab (an old Commander) observed what impression this took with the Souldiery, he told the King very home of this unseasonable Error. Some body must deale plainly and truly with the King in such Cases of impor∣tance, so it be done with discretion. He told plainly to the King,Vers. 6, That it would hazard the losse of the hearts of his People, if they should apprehend, that he loved his Ene∣mies, and hated or neglected his Friends. Vers 8,He therefore advised the King to rise up (for he was dejected) and to speake comfortably to the People, and the King followed Joabs Counsell, and he did so. Good words, and a gentle Carriage cost little, and yet prevaile much with the Common People. Vers. 9,For upon this [the People strove who should be first] in shewing their duty to the King. Vers. 13,The King also thought it no ill piece of Policie, to win over Amasa unto him by promises of preferment. Such Po∣licies must sometimes be used, but it is not safe to trust over∣much to a reconciled Enemy. Vers. 16, 17,Amongst others Shimei, and Ziba, of whom ye heard even now, the Tide being turn'd, came to congratulate with the King. But he (as a wise King should doe upon time-servers) did set a marke upon them, and Shimei had his just reward. Vers. 24,Mephibosheth also, as soone as he (being a lame man) could come to the Kings Presence, attended him to expresse his joy for the Kings Victory, and in the Kings absence, had neither wash'd his Feet, nor drest his Beard, nor wash'd his Clothes, till the King return'd in Peace. They who cannot fight, must at such a time Pray, in one way or an¦other, every one as he is able, ought to expresse his Duty and Affection.
And old Barzillai, who before in the Kings distresse,Vers. 31, did attend him, and help to releeve his Army, came down now to help to Conduct the King over Jordane. None is so old or so weake, but (if he be willing) will finde some way or other to expresse his love and Loyalty. The King gratiously accepted Barzillai's fidelity,Vers. 33, and moved that he should goe along and live in Court with him, (Barzillai was for his quality, a Person might have befitted it,) but he was very aged, unfit for a Court life, and he was also wise and understood his owne imperfecti∣on, and unfitnesse to turne Courtier at that Age, and there∣fore modestly and thankfully he refused that gratious offer. It were to be wish'd, that none were imploy'd in places for which they are not fit, and that men were so modest and so wise, as not to accept of such imployments when they are offered. Yet Barzillai tooke the opportunity to move the King,Vers. 37, to confer that favour upon Chimham his Sonne, who was a young man, and fit to serve in Court. And the King grant∣ed his suite, and [he tooke Chimham with him.Vers. 40.] A gratious requitall of the King, to a faithfull and well-deserving Ser∣vant. This is the true Story of this Rebellion, faithfully extracted out of the Holy Writ, where it is Recorded; scarce to be paral∣lel'd untill these unhappy Times, whence it seemes they have taken their President. It needs no other Application. FINIS.
