B3501 15261063 103303
February the 10th. 16 79 / 80. I Do appoint Thomas Simmons and Jacob Samp∣son, to Print this my Narrative, and that no other Presume to Print the same, or any part thereof. Robert Bolron.
THE NARRATIVE OF Robert Bolron, Of Shippon-Hall, Gent. Concerning the late Horrid Popish Plot and Conspiracy for the Destruction of His Majesty and the PROTESTANT RELIGION. Wherein is Contained, I. His Informations upon Oath before His Majesty in Council, and before se∣veral Justices of the Peace, of the said Design, and the means by which he arrived at the knowledge thereof. II. Some particular Applications made to himself to assist those design'd in the Murdering of his Majesty, the Persons by whom such applications were made, and the Reward promised. III. The Project of the Popish Party to erect a Nunnery at Dolebanck near Rip∣ley in Yorkshire, together with the Names of some Nuns actually designed for that Employment, and taking the Profession upon them, as also an Ac∣count of a certain Estate of 90 l. per annum given by Sir Thomas Gascoigne to the Nunnery for ever. IV. The Names of the Persons Contributors to the design of Killing the King, and the Establishing of the said Nunnery, as also the particular Sums of Money by each of them respectively subscribed and given. V. The cunning contrivances of that Party by fraudulent Conveyances to secure their Estates from forfeiture to the King, if they were discovered to be en∣gaged in the Plot, himself being witness to one of them. VI. The names of the Popish Priests known by him to have said Mass, or to be engaged in the Plot. With other Material Passages relating to the Horrid Plot. Together with an Account of the Endeavours that were used by the Popish Party to Stifle his Evidence. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson, next door to the Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate-Street. MDCLXXX.
TO THE KINGS MOST Excellent Majesty. THE Protestant Party in this Land, though they admit of many subdivisions amongst themselves, by reason of differences in Opi∣nion and Judgment about Modes and Forms of Worship (such Disagreements having likewise been, even in the Purer dayes of the Apostles them∣selves) yet do all Unite in their joint Prayers and Supplications to God Almighty, for your Ma∣jesties Life, and Safety; your Majesties Interest in them all being very Considerable (if you please to im∣prove it,) and I pray God to direct your Majesties heart to Protect, Value, and Esteem them, that your Majesties Interest may be only aimed at, by all your Loyal Protestant Subjects. I know this is an ex∣traordinary time, and things verge towards a Crisis, wherefore if my zeal for your Majesties Service, as well as Gratitude for my Pardoned Life, doth some∣what transport me to some indecencies in my Address to your Majestie, I hope, as formerly, I shall obtain your Majesties Gracious Favour.
This Nation is very sensible, how often your Majesties Life hath been threatned by the Romish Faction. I have heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne say, That though some were discovered and Executed for the Plot, yet they would never give over, until you were taken off; I confess I have been often present in Popish Cabals, where it hath been repre∣sented as a chief part of their Policy to alienate Your Majesties Affection from Your Parliament; for then (as I have heard them alledge) Exasperations and Discontents would grow high on each side, and Your. Majestie would be weakned in the greatest part of Your Defence; so that the Love of Your People would be alienated and estranged from your Ma∣jesties Interest. For no Home-bred Disturbance can ever rationally do Your Majestie any hurt, as Long as you have Parliamentary Assemblies to second and stand by you. For then they did conclude that your Majesties Sword would cut on both sides, and they thought themselves happy if it did cut but on one side, as they were pleased to Term it, when Your Parliament was Dissolved, which procured much rejoycing among the Romish Party. Being but an Inferiour Person, 'tis above my Sphear to advise, but my Prayers shall not be want∣ing, That God would mightily Protect Your Ma∣jesty against all Machinations, and Attempts of Wicked Men, made against either Your Life or Go∣vernment. And that he would continue You an Eminent Example of Piety, Vertue, and Good∣ness to Your People, (who walk as much by Pat∣tern as Precept) according to the example of Jeho∣saphat, whose heart was lifted up in the wayes of
the Lord, to Your Establishment and Comfort here, and Eternal Bliss hereafter. For, God be∣ing an Your side, all the Projects of Your Adversa∣ries, though seemingly not disappointable by human art, are but weak and impotent things, and subject to a demolition by the least breath of his Mouth, who hath suffered them to proceed so far towards the Destruction of Prince and People. Your Majesties most Dutiful Subject, and most Obsequious Votary and Servant, Robert Bolron.
Advertisement. THE Narrative of Lawrence Mowbray of Leeds, in the County of York, Gent. concerning the Bloody Popish Conspiracy, against the Life of his Sa∣cred Majesty, the Government, and the Protestant Religion. Wherein is Contained I. His Knowledg of the said Design, from the very first in the Year 1676. with the opportunity he had to be acquainted therewith; and the Reasons why he con∣cealed it so long; with the manner of his discovering the said wicked Project to His Majesty, and His most Honourable Privy Council. II. How far Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Sir Miles Stapleton, &c. are engaged in the Design of Killing the King, and Firing the Cities of London and York, for the more speeding setting uppermost the Popish Religion in England. III. An Account of the Assemblings of many Popish Priests and Jesuits at Fa∣ther Riston's Chamber, at Sir Thomas Gascoigne's House at Barmbow, with their Consultations and Determinations. IV. A Discovery of the Erecting a Nunnery at Dolebank in York-shire, by the Popish Party, especially by Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with an Account of an Estate of Ninety Pounds per Annum, settled thereupon by him. V. A Manifestation of the Papists Fraudulent conveying of their Estates, himself being privy to some of them. VI. A probable opinion concerning the Jesuits, the grand Instruments in these Affairs. With other Considerable Matters relating to the Plot. Together with an Account of the Endeavours that were used to stifle his Evi∣dence, by making an Attempt upon his Life in Leicester-Fields. Printed for Tho∣mas Simmons at the Princes Arms, and Jacob Sampson next door to the Wonder-Tavern in Ludgate-street.
The Preface to the Reader. TWO things render a Discourse grateful and ac∣ceptable to the Peruser thereof. First, The Dignity of the Author. Secondly, The Usefulness of the matter therein contained. The second of these will be accompted for in the whole Series of the following Discourse; but by naming the first, I know I have laid in a great prejudice against my self, who does acknowledge the Mediocrity of my State and Condi∣tion, insomuch that Silence might have suited my station, rather than Speech, especially in Print, if the sight of the Danger of the King and Kingdom were in, had not made a violent impression upon me, as the Peril of Croesus did upon his Dumb Son; for when such Capital Miseries are threat∣ned, who can be silent? They that impute Meanness and Inferiority to my charge, are like to have Confitentem reum; but the consideration I reserve my self upon, is this, That God oft-times makes use of weak Instruments, having Truth on their side, to bring about great Designs, that so all the glory may be ascribed to himself. Notable Mutations in the Government of this World have evened upon seemingly light and inconsiderable occa∣sions. I shall instance in that which was the talk of all Europe in its season; And that was the action of Charles the Fifth, Emperour of Germany, and King of Spain, in resigning up his Empire and all his other Dominions, and living af∣terwards a private and retired life. He had been a Prince of great Wars, and (generally) of prosperous Successes, ha∣ving had the Pope himself, and the King of France both Prisoners, and extending his Victorious Banners to the ve∣ry Indies. It must needs be some Signal and Remarkable thing you'l say, which occasion'd so eminent a Change in such a
Mighty Monarch; I'le tell you one great Reason thereof which the Historian relates: An Old Soldier of his came to him, desiring a Discharge from his Military Employ∣ment: The Emperour demanding his reason, received this answer, That there ought to be some respite between the work of a mans Life, and the business of his Death. Which Speech, tho seemingly light and obvious, yet wrought so great an im∣pression upon his Mind, that he soon after followed the Old Soldiers example. Far be it from me to equalize Cases; 'Tis sufficient, if I can but adumbrate the rude Lineaments of a Similitude; for alas, what am I? And if it be lawful for me to use the names of others, what is Mr. Oates, Mr. Dugdale, or Mr. Mowbray, but comparitively mean, and by some persons slighted, affronted and discourag'd Instru∣ments, that the hinge of so great Discoveries should turn upon us. It is sufficiently known, That the Design of the Papists hath been the issue of the Council of many years, managed by the skilfullest and deepest Heads of that Facti∣on. Now that all these productions so long a hatching, should be crushed on a sudden by, as it were, obscure and unthought of Persons, I will not say it honours the Instru∣ments, beeause I my self am concerned amongst them, but of this I am sure it mightily exalts the name of God, who by men, otherwise despised, is pleased to do his own work. I will not dispute whether Dr. Oates went over to the Pa∣pists upon any conviction of Judgment (that being a point proper for his own Determination) but for my desertion of Protestancy, it is in part accounted for in my following In∣formations. I confess, to my shame, that worldly interests did concur too much thereof, as the conveniency of an out∣ward livelyhood and beneficial employment; and my re∣turn to the reformed Religion was partly upon the guilty cognizance I had of this Black design, and the Roman Priests vowed approbation thereof; Being so reduced to the Protestant Church, I hope God will so assist me with his Grace, that I shall be no scandal thereunto, but that I shall improve the strict and holy principle thereof, even to the exemplifying of them in my own heart and life, so that I shall no more be deceived by the lying suggestions of de∣ceitful Priests. For it is no small encouragement to the dissoluteness which is amongst the Papists, The easiness of
those confessions which they undergo. And Sands in his Europae Speculum page the 11th. will afford ample satisfacti∣on, who hath these remarkable words; I have known (saith he) very devout persons, who by their own report excuse their ac∣quaintance in matters criminal, having wittingly perjured them∣selves in Judgment, only presuming upon this present and easie re∣medy of Confession, and others of more then ordinary note amongst them, who when the time of their Confession was at hand, would then venture on those actions, which before they trembled at, as presu∣ming to surfeit by reason of the Neigbourhood of a Physitian. And as for penances I have known (sayes the same Author) page the 12th. That penance for horrible and often Blasphemy, besides much other Lewdness, hath been no other then the bare saying their Beads thrice over, a matter of some hours muttering and which in Italy they dispatch as they are going in the streets, or dispatch business at home, making no other of it then two Lips, and one Fingers work. And if Sandys be excepted against as a partial Author because of his Reli∣gion, let us hear what their own Casuists say, Layman af∣firmes, That a Confessor is obliged to absolve his penitent, tho he refuse to perform the pennance enjoyned him; the reason he gives is, because no man is bound to satisfie for his Sins in this life. Insomuch that it is grown a question a∣mongst them mentioned by Escobar; Whether it be not lawful for a Confessor to leave it wholly to the will of the Penitent. Add hereunto the doctrines of Pardons and In∣dulgencies, and then judge whether a large door for licen∣tiousness and prophanity be not opened to the Professors of the Roman Church. These Doctrines of the Papists are so corrupt, that some of their own do condemn them; and to this purpose read what the Sorbon Doctors say against the Jesuits. Moral Pra∣ctice of the Jesuits, page 143, 144. When Bishops and Priests were not without difficulty induced to proceed to the Reconciliation of Penitents to God, for fear of binding themselves in those Sins whereof they pretended to loose others, whom, it may be, the Sove∣raign Judge had not absolved; Sinners, tho reconciled, continued in fear and humiliation, having their sins ever before them; and after the practising of all sorts of good Works, and submission to the rigour of Ecclesiastical Discipline, they were still afraid they had not satisfied the Justice of God. But now as if the most hainous
Crimes were as inconsiderable as the highest faults, and as easily par∣doned as the smallest miscarriages; as if the maladies of the Soul were not difficult to cure, and as if God had for the future for ever remitted the severity of his Judgments against Sinners, from the time they followed the Advice of the Jesuits; The most dissolute Wretches are no sooner absolved by these Complacent Directors, but their Con∣sciences are in peace for all their sins past, tho they are resolved to commit them again. With much more to the same purpose. Judge then, whether the Flood-gate of Impiety be not opened by these Licentious Tenents. But to return. The manner how I came to be instrumental in these Matters, deserves a Serious Consideration, and adds much to the Wonder; for being born of Honest Parentage at New-Castle upon Tine, I was by them bound an Apprentice in the City of London, where if I had served out my full Time with my Master, I had not had the opportunity of knowing and consequently of discovering what I now do; but after some Years Service, upon some private discontents, I left my Master, and listed my self a Soldier in His Majesties Army, in which Military Employment if I had also persisted, I had been abridged of these matters: I must therefore look upon it as the Providence of God, who made both the Lives of an Apprentice and of a Soldier uneasie to me, that so I might be carried into that Family, where the things men∣tioned in my subsequent Informations, were managed and transacted; and without my residence therein, as one of their Religion and Family, I could never expect to know; for the Papists are very Sly to communicate any thing but to their own Confidents, and that too, under the strictest Bonds and Oaths of Secresie. And indeed they keep their Proselytes in great awe and subjection by those Sacramental Obligations; I my self am a great proof thereof, who had many such Tyes imposed upon me not to discover the Treason in which I was enga∣ged: And if it were discovered by others, still to deny it. And I must confess, (if I had persevered in the Popish Reli∣gion, I should hardly have got over the Obligations I had layn under thereby: But by the Protestant Doctrine I am better informed, viz. That Oaths binding either to do or conceal unlawful things, the sin lyes in taking, not in break∣ing them.
Being then by Gods Providence redeemed from those insnaring bonds, I am free to discover what I know. 'Tis true, my Condition did confine me to my Employ∣ment in the Countrey, and therefore I was not privy to the Consults of the Jesuits in London, until the Heads of those Consultations were communicated to us in the Countrey; which I must needs acknowledg was very speedily done. For the Emissaries of Rome have an incredible celerity in conveying their Intelligence, not only to the several Parts of this Land, but even to Rome it self, and all the World over; which is an old Complaint commenced against the Jesuits by them of the Order of Seculars. I have heard it affirmed by some understanding men, That the Jesuits and the Jews, are the greatest Intelligencers in the World; for being both of them Close and Compact Societies, united by the Oppositions generally made against them, their Communications are much Circumscribed with∣in their own Bodies, there being a constant Intercourse, of Intelligence maintained betwixt all the parts (even as in the natural Body the spirits are diffused through the whole Com∣positum) that so speedy Remedies may be applyed to any appearing evil, in the very bud; and opportunities of ad∣vantage may be taken by them at the first hop. And therein certainly their care and pains (if they were employed about lawful designs) do not deserve reproof. Rather the too much Supineness and unactivity amongst Protestants is to be taxed, as giving great advantage to the Adversary to grow upon them: 'Twere well if this incon∣venience were remedied, and that our Zeal and Labour for the propagation of the Truth did exceed theirs, (as it ought to do) for the Disseminating of their Errors, Eas est et ab hoste doceri. The Jesuits amongst the Romanists are the most Zealous for the propagation of their Religion in their old Mumpsimus way, and have the greatest abilities and opportunities to intermix themselves in Temporal affairs, to the Distur∣bance of States and Kingdoms, and therefore they are look∣ed upon by this Nation as destructive to its Interest, their true religious intent being to murther all Heretical Kings (as they term them) which will not submit to the Pope's obedience.
Though I do know they do value themselves much upon a Speech of King Henry the Fourth of France, spoke in his latter dayes, That to know the Iesuits, is the only way to lve th; though indeed that Monarch, being af dered by their Instigations, was but ill rewarded for his favourable opinion of them: Mr. Gavan, lately executed, in his dying Speech did extol his Society upon the accompt of that great King's Opinion; But if authority and not rea∣son should take place, we can oppose the Opinion; for our own King James, who in open Parliament 1605. speaking of Roman Priests and Jesuits, hath these words, Thi  of those who know and observe the whole grounds and scale conclu∣sion of their Doctrines, can either prove good Christians or good Subjects. And indeed this Imposture is imposed upon the Jesuits, That like Weather-Cocks, they change their Opinions, when their Interest requires it; besides, these excellent Casuists have this rare Pollicy, to alter their Sentiments and Conscience upon any occasion when it may be for their profit to change. I know the Jesuited Ecclesiasticks do value themselves much upon the account of the Spirituality, innocency, and Regular Conversation of their Order; Good Eptes, if they did properly belong to them. This puts me in mind of a Pleasant Story I have heard of a Jesiut, who was Preach∣ing in one of their Colledges, and in his Sermon he compa∣red their Order to a Clock, which by the Regulanity of its Motion did direct all other things; but just as he was ∣ering his Similitude, (see the mischief) the Clock of their Col∣ledge being out of Order, struck above 100 times, which being heard by the Auditors, administred inward ling and laughter, and was a just reproof to the Preacher, for his superlative, but ill-timed praises of the Society. And indeed, such an accidental reflection may operate more on a Jesuit, than a solid and well formed Argument, in Mood and Figure; For that Sect are great Fencers in Di∣tation, and can ward a strong blow by Evasion or Quik; But against such an Occasional and Providential check, there is no Fence. I will not assume to my self to be able to trace them, in all the Maeanders of their Projects, but I believe sufficient is
herein discovered to convince the uninterested: As for persons engaged, The more is discovered, the less they will believe. The Lord grant, That all True Protestants throughout the Land may impute This Discovery to his Glory, not out of Animosity against any mans Person, (which I utterly detest) much less out of a desire of any ones ruine and destruction, but out of a just Zeal, That Truth may be advanced, and the great Mischiefs, impending over this Land, may be prevented. So prayes A Servant to all his Country in Truth and Righteousness, Robert Bolron. The Informations of Robert Bolron of Shippon∣hall in the Parish of Berwick in Elmet in the County of York, Gent. taken upon Oath, at seve∣ral times, before the Lords of his Majesties most Honourable Privy Council. THis Informant saith, That he was born in New-Castle upon Tine, and bred up in the Protestant Religion, that he came to live with Sir Thomas Gascoigne (who is now about Fourscore years of age) at Barmbowhall in Yorkshire, in the Year 1674. as Steward of his Cole-Works, where he had not long been, but he was dealt with to turn Papist by Sir Thomas Gascoigne him∣self, and one William Rushton a Priest in that Family, and that one Anthony Fulshurst was present in Parlington-Hall, when Sir Thomas and the said Rushton did use Arguments to persuade him this Informant, to change his Religion, and to that end Sir Thomas bade him, this Informant, go to one Alice Carpmell, a Servant in his House, and to desire her to shew him, this Informent, his Chappel, which accordingly was performed; and he gave him, this Informant, two Books, a Catechism, and a Book of Saints, wherein it's shewed, that
Protestants hold Papists were saved, but Papists declare Pro∣testants are Damned, and therefore they told him, he ought to turn Roman Catholick. They also declared unto him this Informant, that great ▪Miracles were wrought by their Church, which the Protestants could not perform, especially One Miracle said to be done at Fra. Johnsons house, in the said Parish of Berwick, which was told by the said Anthony Fulshurst, to the Informant, to per∣suade him to be a Romanist, and is as followeth. Mary Smith then a Protestant, living in Garforth, near to Barwick being (as it was reported) possessed with the Devil, Mr. Lawson a Romish Exorcist, was sent for, to Francis John∣sons house to dispossess the said Mary Smith; to which house several Protestants did come to see it done, amongst which the said Anthony Fulshurst was one, being a Protestant at that time, and having an English Common-Prayer Book, said, he would not part with it for all Sir Thomas Gaseoignes Estate. The Party possessed was very unruly, and told the Exorcist, that he could never do no good of her, unless all the Prote∣stants and Hereticks were put out of the Room, which was accordingly done, except the said Anthony Fulshurst, who be∣ing Sir Thomas Gascoignes Steward, out of Civility they would not exclude. Yet after all the rest were excluded, the said Mary Smith told the Exorcist, that she had yet one Friend left in the Room, meaning Anthony Fulshurst, who blushing, askt her, Where, or in what, he was her Friend? To which she answer∣ed, In being of the Protestant Religion, and told him several Circumstances of his life, as also of his being that day in a Field, and about to come over a Style, that he sat down and considered with himself, which she related to him again to his great astonishment and amazement; as also his good opinion of that Book in his pocket, which would e're long bring him to be one of them; and she thankt him kindly for his kindness in propagating their Interest, and of the good esteem he had for them. To which the said Anth. Fulshurst replyed, That since he had been so long her Friend, he would be no longer of the Protestant Religion, and so went home, and burnt his Common-Prayer-Book, which before he so highly prized, and immediately turned Roman Catholick; which Argument they used, as a Motive to persuade him the Informant, to be a Roman Catholick.
And the said Anthony Fulshurst added, That the Exorcist told him, that the said Mary Smith was possessed with four Devils, three of them, he quite expulst out of her; the fourth he brought into her great Toe, which did lie there, and do the said Mary Smith no harm, which af∣terwards was confirmed by the said Mary Smith unto him this Infor∣mant. That besides the Chapel in Sir Thomas's house, he the said Sir Thomas had another private Chapel in the house of William Butcher in Barm∣bow, which said William doth not go to Church as a Protestant, and the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne does keep another private Chapel at La∣singcroft, and Thomas Gascoigne Esquire his Son keeps also a private Cha∣pel at Parlington-Hall, in which said Chapel this Informant was recon∣ciled, by the said William Rushton, to the Romish Church, and Laurence Mowbrey came to him, this Informant, who was then at Garforth Cole-Pits, and did tell him, this Informant, that Sir Thomas had sent him unto him, and that he must go with him to William Rushton, to be ta∣ken into the Church; which was accordingly done. That after this Informant had changed his Religion (which was about the beginning of June 1675.) he married with one Mary Baker, Niece to Mris. Errington, then living in Sir Thomas's house, whom the said William Rushton did pervet to the Roman Catholick Religion, as he told him this Informant, and that upon this Informants Marriage his Wifes Aunt Mris. Errington aforesaid did give this Informant a house in Ship∣pon in Yorshire, which was held by Lease of the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne. That upon some of the Proclamations for Roman Catholicks to leave London, and about Christmas last, to this Informants best remembrance, one Mary Pressicks (Wife of Tho. Pressicks) who was Sempstress to the Jesuits, and did use to buy several things for them; as also for divers Romish Persons of Quality, told this Informant, that upon a mans follow∣ing the said Mary Pressicks in the Street, to apprehend her, she looking back, and espying him, being conscious of her being concerned in the Plot, she made haste into an Alley, bolting the Door after her, which the Man perceiving, presently cryed out, Stop the Papist, stop the Plot∣ter; but She got quite away from him, and durst not appear publickly, but soon after with her Child hasted out of London, where she had dwelt several years, and came to Mr. Fulshurt in Parlington, in Yorkshire, and there abode about a week, and then Thomas Pressicks her Husband took two Rooms in this Informants house at Shippon for her and her Child, where about Candlemas last, as also about Easter, and Whitsuntide fol∣lowing, this Informant discoursing with her about Coleman's death, and the Priests then in hold; she did inform that His Majesty, being beyond Seas, did promise the Monks and Jesuits, that he would bring in their Religion, if ever he enjoyed his own again, and that it was upon hopes thereof, whilst the troubles were here in England, that so many of that Religion did venture their Lives and Estates for His Majesty, and that thereupon the Monks and Jesuits did so plentifully supply His Majesty's wants, whilst beyond the Seas; but His Majesty coming home again, and not performing his promises, thereupon Father Harcourt (who lived in Wilde-street, or Duke-street, London, but the Informant thinks the latter)
and other Jesuits, at Father Harcourt's Chamber (which was the usual place of their meeting) and elsewhere contrived this Plot, as Mary Pres∣sicks told him, this Informant. WHICH WAS TO DESTROY HIS MAJESTY, AND SƲCH OF HIS SƲBJECTS AS WOƲLD NOT BE OF THE ROMAN CATHOLICK RELIGION, and to have ALTERED THE GOVERNMENT AND RELIGION esta∣blished, by bringing in THEIR RELIGION. And that Father Har∣court, being Confessor to the said Mary Pressicks, did tell him, this Infor∣mant; that after the Discovery of the Plot, she the said Mary Pressicks, with several others did privately keep, and secretly at several times help to convey the said Father Harcourt, for fear he should be taken especially one time being at a Feast with the said Father Harcourt, where was none then present but Roman Catholicks, but as the House had ordered; some Protestants coming afterwards to the said Feast, Father Harcourt goes into another Room, but a Child of the said Mary Pressicks, and another little Boy belonging to the House where the Feast was, said one to another, Father Harcourt is gone; whereupon one of the Prote∣testants immediately stept out to fetch a Constable to apprehend the said Father Harcourt, but the said Mary Pressicks, with others, did forthwith help to convey the said Father Harcourt out of the house, so that, at that time he was not taken; and she likewise told him, this Informant, that she was very sorry that the said Plot did not take effect, and that Picke∣ring did not accomplish his design in PISTOLLING THE KING, and if that had taken effect, all would have been well; this she said about Ea∣ster last, when this Informant's Grandmother and Wife were present, both whose names are called Mary Bolron, and she added, That Oates and Bedlow▪ were Rogues for discovering it. This Informant also says, That the said Mary Pressicks did affirm unto him, that the Gun was found wherewith Pickering did intend to kill the King, and that Gun being found, she feared, was the cause that he lost his Life. This Informant further saith, that Mary Pressicks said, That though this Plot did not succeed, yet still would they be contriving new ones; for as long as this King ruled, and until the Plot took effect, and that the Roman Catholick Religion were established in England, this Nation need not expect any quietness. And further she affirmed, That most of the Gen∣try of the Roman Catholick Religion were concerned, and did know of the Plot, particularly Sir Tho. Gascoigne of Barmbow Hall, Baronet, Thomas Gascoigne Esq; his Son, the Lady Tempest his Daughter, and Tho. Pres∣sicks, Husband of the said Mary Pressicks. This Informant further saith, That the said Mary Pressicks did say in this Informants hearing, That the King was but an Ass, and was not fit to Rule, That he was guide by the Parliament, and what mony the Parlia∣ment gave him, he spent it upon his Concubines. This Deponent saith, that upon the 30th. of May last past, being the day after Holy Thursday, he being at Barmbow-Hall aforesaid, the said Sir Tho. Gascoigne desired him, this Deponent, to go into the Gallery, where, after a little time, the aforesaid Will. Rushton, who was their Deponents Confessor, came unto him, & asked him, whether he were at Pontefract-Sessions? to whom he answered, That he was, and had taken the Oath of Allegiance; as also several others with
him; that thereupon the said Rushton told him, That he, and all others, that had taken that Oath, were damned, if they kept the same; and there∣fore bid him be sure to come to Confession to him, the next Sunday, to have the benefit of Absolution, for that it was a damnable sin to take that Oath. Also telling him, this Deponent, That he had power from the Pope to ab∣solve him, upon his Confession, adding, that few Priests had that power from the Pope, as he had. And this Informant saith, That he discoursed with the said Rushton, about the Lawfulness of his taking the said Oath, but the Priest was in great wrath with him, this Deponent, as if he would have struck him, and told him, he was a fool, and knew not how to judge of that Oath, for it was a denying of his Religion; to which the said In∣formant said, That he thought it was only to be true to his King and Country, which was no sin; for Mr. Ellis, Priest to Sir Walter Vavesour hath written Commentaries on the Oath, justifying the lawfulness of tak∣ing it; Rushton replyed. That Ellis was a Fool, and that his Superiors would call him to an account for the same; and that he, this Deponent by taking that Oath, had denied the Popes's Power to absolve him from it; but, said he, The Pope has power to depose the King, and cause him to be killed, because he was a Heretick; and further affirmed, that it was a me∣ritorious Act to kill the King, and that he might merit Heaven, if he would do it; and that he said Rushton would assist him in it, and that the Pope would absolve him, if he did that Act and Deed. This Informant further saies, that the said William Rushton did quote a certain Text of Scripture unto him, which as he this Informant re∣members, was the 149 Psal. The words were, Thou shalt bind their King in Fetters, and their Princes in Chaines; Upon which words the said William Rushton did make this Exposition as follows. That the Pope had bound the King, Prince and People in their Sins, because they had denied the power of the Pope, and deserted his obe∣dience, who was Successour to St. Peter, therefore it was lawful and no sin to depose and kill the King, or any of his Subjects, and that the Pope may give away, His Majesties Kingdoms to any Person whom he plea∣seth, unless the King and his Subjects would return into the bosome of the Mother Church. To all which this Deponent replyed, that he would not be employed in doing so wicked a deed, and therefore desired him not to trouble him this Deponent about the same; well said the Priest, you may hang me if you please for speaking these words, to whom the De∣ponent answered, that if he did do himself no injury, he this Deponent would not do him any; and so the Priest bad him consider what he had said, and come to him again. The same 30th. of May, about Six of the Clock in the Evening, Sr Tho∣mas Gascoigne having left order with his Servents, that the Deponent should not go away till he came in, he the said Sr Thomas at his return called the Deponent into his Chamber at his house at Barmbow, and ask∣ed, what discourse past between him and Mr. Rushton? the Deponent said, their discourse was about the Oath of Allegiance, then the said Sr. Thomas told him in these, or the like words. Well man, if thou wilt undertake a designe (which I and others have in agitation) to HELP TO KILL THE KING, I will send thee to my SON TOM if in TOWN, who with the rest that are concerned shall in∣struct
thee how thou shall assist in it, and thou shall have a 1000 l. for thy reward. This Informant further saies, that the said Sr. Thomas Gas∣coigne did tell him this Informant that perhaps his Son Tom Gascoigne would not be at London, yet he would give him such Instructions, that if his Son were gone beyond Seas, that he should find out the rest con∣cerned in the business, and he bid him, this Informant, not to fear any danger, for what he did was for the good of the Church, who would re∣ward him well for his paines, besides what he gave him. The Informant desires him to forbear to perswade him thereunto, for he would not have any hand in Blood, neither would he do so wicked a deed. Then the said Sr. Thomas desired him of all loves to keep secret what he had said which the Deponent promised, and so they parted, but though he promised secrecy both to the said Sir Thomas, and the said Rushton, he thought it a sin to conceal so wicked a thing; That soon after the said 30th of May, he went to Mr. Normanton Minister of Water-Fryston, who sent him to Mr. Tyndall a Justice of Peace, and he sent him to Willian Lowther Esq; another Justice, (who acquainted Justice White with the Informants business) and upon discourse thereof with the said Justices, he this Informant did desire he might come up to the Council to inform them of it; which the said Justices thought was the best way; and Justice Tyndall wrote a Letter, and sent it by him, to his Brother Tyndall, in London to carry him this Deponent, to some of the Privy Council, but this Informant saies, he had the misfortune to lose his Letter at Ware, which being found and opened, was sent after him to Mr. Tyndal at London. That at his Arrival in London, he went to the Green Dragon in Bi∣shop gate-street, and was there directed to Sir Robert Clayton, who took his Examination. And the Deponent further saith, that about 14 Months since he was discharged from being Sir Thomas's Steward at his own desire, for that he the said Sir Tho. would have had him, this Informant, for one month to have got in his debts, and in the mean time to let Hen. Addinson, and Bennet Johnson manage the Colliery in this Informants room, but the said Informant refused, for he told him, that they that look to the Pitts should gather in the debts (for that he would not be concerned with Hen. Ad∣dinson, or B. Johnson) who are the Informants Enemies which was the oc∣casion of their parting. Neither did this Informant give the said Sr. Tho. any other occasion then before mentioned to fall out with him, save only that he was about a year since arrested about his accounts, for that the said Sir Tho. was then indebted unto this Informant 19 l. which the said Sir Th. refused to pay him this Informant, until he had delivered in his accounts, but this diffe∣rence was all pacified in a weeks time, that he hath no malice against Sir Tho. or any others, and would do no wrong in such a matter for all Eng∣land, that he hath 7l. a year Land of his own, a Cole-Farme of 30l. a year, a Lime Kilne of 10l. a year. This Informant further says, that about three years ago, viz. in the year 76. that he, the said Sir Tho. Gascoigne did send 3000 l. to the Jesuits then in London, besides 50 l. beyond Seas, which 3000 l. was paid for a design then in agitation for the good of the Roman Catholick Re∣ligion;
and the said Sir Tho. Gascoigne did tell Christopher Midcalf, who then lived in Sir Tho. Gascoigne's house, that he intended Rich. Phishwick, should return it to London by 300 l. at a time for avoiding suspicion; And this Informant supposes that it was so returned, because the said Rich. Phishwick did tell him, that in a little time they had returned 3000 l. to Lond. and this Informant further says, that he hath in that year at se∣veral times seen the said Rich. Phishwick, carry to Leeds several sums of mony, to be returned to London, and the said Rich. Phishwick, when examined, is able to give an account, if he did return it all himself, or else, who it was, that did return it, and this Informant further says, that he do's well remember that 300 l. of the said 3000 l. was for Mr. Corker, who was and is a Roman Priest, whom the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did say, was a Prisoner in Newgate, and other 300 l. for Mr. Harcourt who was executed, as also 300 l. for John Cornwallis, who is a Roman Priest, and is Prisoner in York Castle, where this Informant did see him; And this Informant further sayes, that he did hear the said Sir Thomas say, that if it were 10000 times as much, he would be glad to spend it inso good a cause. This Informant further says, that a little before Easter, in the year 1675. Charles Ingleby a Lawyer, being with Sir Thomas Gascoigne in his Bed-chamber, the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne told the said Charles Ingle∣by, in the hearing of this Informant, he being in the next Room, That he was resolved to make a Colourable Conveyance of his Estate unto Sir William Ingleby, Baronet, accordingly as they had formerly discourst about it, for that he was fearful his Estate should be forfeited to the King; and the said Charles Ingleby answered, it was best so to do; and that he would have the defeasance ready against Easter to be seal∣ed, which he would draw with his own hands; withall he advised the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne, that he must be sure to bring none but Pro∣testant-witnesses to testifie the sealing of the said Deed, in regard they that were witnesses to the said Deed, must not be witnesses to the De∣feasance, for fear the Conveyance should be discovered to be but meer∣ly Collusive, to whose advice Sir Thomas did assent. And at the time appointed Matthias Hickeringhill, with this Informant, did attend Sir Thomas Gascoigne, to the house of the said Sir William Ingleby afore∣mentioned, where, at the sealing of the said Conveyance, which was the eight day of April, Anno 1675. he did see the summe of one thou∣sand pounds collusively borrowed, which this Informant did with the Assistance of the aforesaid Matthias Hickeringill help to count. And the said Charles Ingleby his Brother holding the Deed with him in his hand, did read the said Collusive Conveyance, the Contents of which Conveyance was as followeth: That the Said Sir T. Gascoigne in consideration of the sum of one thou∣sand pounds in hand paid by the said Sr. William Ingleby did convey a∣way all his estate lying in Barmbow, Barwick Scoles, with many other pla∣ces therein particularly named unto the said Sr. William Ingleby, for sea∣ven years, he paying besides the aforementioned sum of one 1000l. year∣ly, and every year during the said term of seven years unto the said Sr. Thomas Gascoigne the sum of one hundred pounds toward his yearly
maintenance, to which Deed of Conveyance the said Matthias Hickerin∣gill a Servant of Sr. William Inglebyes with this Informant (being then a Protestant were witnesses. And after the sealing of the said Conveyance, The said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did go with Sir William Ingleby into a back Room of the said House to seal the Defeasance which he heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne and Sir William Ingleby declare in discourse to Sir William Inglebyes Lady immediately after their coming forth, that it was accordingly sealed, but who were witnesses to the said Defeasence, he cannot inform, but believes Charles Ingleby and his Brother who were present can give an account. This Informant saith, that when the afore∣said one thousand pound was borrowed, and the Conveyance sealed, that he did at that time know that it was but collusively and pretendedly bor∣rowed of Sir William Ingleby for fear Sr. Thomas Gascoignes estate should be forfeited to the King, but he this Informant did not then know there was a design in Agitation against the life of the King, he then being a Protestant, and therefore he wondred with himself how Sir Thomas Gas∣coigne should apprehend himself to be in so much danger (none of the pe∣nall Laws being then put in execution) but saies, that after he had turned Roman Catholick, then the misery was unfolded; for William Rushton at Confession did discover to him, this Informant, the whole Design of the Plot, and about the discovery of the Plot, or presently after, he, this Informant, did hear the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne declare unto Sir Miles Stapilton, that according unto his, and the Advice of other of his friends, he had done very well in settling his Estate upon Sir William Ingleby, as aforesaid, because if they should be discovered to be engaged in the Design of Killing the King, that then his Estate would have been forfeited, which forfeiture, by this means, he had avoided, if he were discovered.
The Particular Romish Priests known by this Infor∣mant, whose names are as follows. 1 WIlliam Rushton, this Informants Confessor or Ghostly Father, who at confession did first acquaint this Informant with the Plot of killing the King, whom this Informant hath several times heard say Mass, and hath administred unto this Informant above one hundred times the Eucharist, having on the usuall Robes when they exercise that Function, he further saies, that the said William Rushton Christened this Informants two Children. 2. Thomas Thwing of Heworth near York, whom this Informant hath several times heard say Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and give the Sacra∣ment to several Roman Catholicks there present, as also with his wife hath received the Sacrament from his hands. 3. William Hardwick, born at Bransby beyond York, whom this In∣formant hath several time heard say Mass at both the Chapels in Barm∣bow, and to give the Sacrament to several there present, his usual custom is to ride from New-Hall neer Pontefract to Barmbow, and usually comes once in three weeks, and then rides in the night time, which is common∣ly on the Friday night, and staies till Munday, and then returns back a∣gain to New Hall, his sallary is allowed him by Thomas Gascoigne Esq and his office is to help the poor Catholicks near adjacent unto Barm∣bow; for as soon as the said William Hardwick was come, he sent alwaies an old woman, whose name is Ellin Bellas, to give notice to the rest of the Catholicks, that they must come to scowre their Kettles, that is come to Confession at such an hour, according as the time was appointed; for the poorer sort of Catholicks were not admitted to come to Sir Tho∣mas Gascoigne's house; therefore the Chapel William Butchers house in Barmbow, was the place appointed for the help of the poorer sort. 4. Thomas Thwing of Quosque, who commonly keeps a Boarding-School, for training up Children in the Romish Principles, who goes commonly more like a Butcher than a Priest. 5. Dr. Stapilton, Brother to Sir Miles Stapilton, who hath said Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and hath delivered the Sacrament to several there present. 6. Francis Blaxton, a Romish Priest, whom this Informant hath heard say Mass, and administer the Sacrament in Walton Chapel, his mans name is Emanuel Gascoigne, and they do abide now in or about York, as was told this Informant. 7. John Andrews, a Romish Priest, whom this Informant heard say Mass, at Mris. Margaret Mitcalfe's house in Rmonby, near Northaller∣ton, to whom he administred the Sacrament, as also to Mris. Sadler her Sister to Adrian Mitcalfe, the said Mris. Mitcalfe's Son to Elizabeth Mitcalfe, servant to the said Mris. Mitcalfe, besides to three others who were strangers to this Informant.
8. John Pand, alias Cornwallis, whom this Informant hath heard say Mass at Barmbow, having on the usual Robes when Mass is said, and hath seen him administer the Sacrament unto Sir Thomas Gascoigne, and several others. 9. Thomas Addingson, whom this Informant see Christen a Child at Lasingcroft, to whom he confessed, that he was a Romish Priest, and that he had received his Orders from beyond Seas, and used several Arguments to perswade him, this Informant, to be a Papist. 10. Richard Gascoigne, Priest to Mr. Apleby of Lynton upon Owse, who confest to him, this Informant, that he was a Priest, and that he had received his Orders from beyond the Seas. This Rich. Gascoigne being at this Informants house (when Mr. George Gascoigne lived in it) taking opportunity early one morning, did go into this Informants Layth or Barn, with a dirty Drab, and had there carnal knowledge of her; and another time also had dealing with her in this Informants Stable, which then belong'd unto the said George Gascoigne, who both times was taken in the Act, yet both Mornings said Mass, and admi∣nistred the Sacrament to the company then present, having not Abso∣lution for his faults. The true Relation of this horrible Deed he had from the Papists, and the woman her self, who told him, this Informant, that the said Priest never gave her above twice pence a time, that she alwaies knew what she was to have. 11. Farneby is Priest to John Middleton of Stockhall-hill, Gentleman, who told this Informant that he was a Priest, and that he had received his Orders from beyond Seas. 12. Lodge, Priest to Sir Miles Stapilton, whom this Informant hath heard say Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and administer the Sacrament to several there present. 13. Robert Killingbeck, born at Moor-Town, near Leeds, whom this Informant hath heard say Mass in Barmbow Chapel, and administer the Eucharist to several of the company there present. 14. Fincham, Priest to Sir John Savill of Red-hall, near Barmbow, where this Informant hath heard him say Mass, and give the Sacrament to Sir John Savill, his Lady, and his Daughter; as also to Mr. Abbot, the said Sir John Savil's Gentleman; this Fincham used to come to Barm∣bow, to William Rushton, to be confessed of his sins; and likewise Will. Rushton would go to the said Sir John Savil's house to be confessed by the said Fincham. 15. Mr. Ellis is Priest to Sir Walter Vavesour. 16. Robert Dolman, a Romish Priest, who is now Priest to Sir Mar∣maduke Constable of Everingham, and as it is told, this Informant that Sir Marmaduke Constable hath petitioned His Majesties Councel for the bringing over of the said Robert Dolman, whom he pretends to be his Servant. 1. Francis Gascoigne, Brother to Sir Thomas Gascoigne, who used Arguments to perswade this Informant to change his Religion.
This Informant further saith, That about March last, to this Informant's best remembrance, Sir Thomas Gascoinge, and Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; his Son, being Discoursing about their present concerns, the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; did tell his Father that he and Mr. John Midleton, of Stockhil-Hall, had been be∣fore the Justices of the Peace, and had gotten Licence from the said Justices of the Peace, which said Licence Sir Thomas read, and it conteined as is below expressed. The one Li∣cence or Certificate was to permit Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; and his man to Travail peaceably to London: for that the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; his only occasion to go to London was to decide or make an end of a Controversie, then depending in Chancery, between Sir Thomas Gascoigne of Barmbow, his Father, and James Nelthorpe, Esq; living in London; and that Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, had likewise gotten the Justices con∣sent to Travel into the South, who pretended that his only occasion was to Receive some Rents due to him in the South parts: and that the Justices upon their Oaths had given them liberty to the last day of April, or last day of May, but whe∣ther of the two it was, this Informant does not well remem∣ber, but saith, he thinks they had their Licence or Certificate to Travel but until the last day of April: And he saith, That he did hear the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; say unto his Father, that as soon as he had done with James Nelthorpe, Esq; and set in Order that design they had in hand, he and Mr. John Middleton would then fly into France, for that they were resolved not to return again, but both would (if it were possible) Cheat the Justices; and that he did hope God would help and further their design, which did tend so much to the Glory of God; for they both were resolved to commit the design into such hands as would not fail to do it, but they would not stay to see the Execution; for they were both resolved to fly with the first convenience: And the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne did mightily commend Mr. John Middleton and his Sons Resoluti∣ons: And the said Informant says, he does not know what is become of the said Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; or Mr. John Middle∣ton of Stockhil-Hall, but he saith that both Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; and Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, did before their going to London sell, or cause to be sold their Stocks from off their Grounds: And that the said Mr. John Middleton did sell his very House-Hold-Goods, which was only done with an intent to defraud His Majesty of them, for they were in fear some
Discovery should be made against them, and that their Estates should be forfeited to the King. This Informant further says, That being with William Rushton at Confession, who taking occasion to Discourse with him a∣bout this Horrid Plot (as he had done several times before) he the said William Rushton told him, this Informant, that when he heard at any time the word Design mentioned, that he must understand (by that word) the Design they had in hand of Killing the King, for Establishing the Roman Catholick Religion again in England, and that except at some of their private Consults, he this Informant should seldom hear mention made of Killing the King, but that only they were resolved when they spoke of it, to call it by the name of the word Design. This Informant also saith, That Sir Thomas Gascoigne, with others hereafter mentioned, did in the year 1677. between April and Lammas, to the best of his remembrance, assemble themselves together at Barmbow-Hall, where was held a Con∣ference to Establish a Nunnery, which Nunnery they then agreed immediately to Establish at Dolbanck, in hopes that their Plot or Design should take effect, which was to have Killed the King, and to alter the Government Established in England, and to bring in the Roman Catholick Religion, upon which account they all mutually resolved to venture their Lives and Estates. 1. Whereupon Sir Thomas Gascoigne did promise to give to the Nunnery 90 l. per ann. for ever, upon which account the rest did agree that Sir Thomas Gascoigne should be Cano∣nized a Saint, to which they would procure the Popes con∣sent. 2. Sir Miles Stapleton promised to give 200 l. who made this Excuse, that he was building his House, which should be made fit for the Reception of Noble Persons, according to their De∣gree and Quality; but that in the mean time nothing should be wanting to his power for their assistance, whereupon it was unanimously resolved that he should be made a Privy-Councellour, to which they would procure the Dukes con∣sent. 3. Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; promised to give 500 l. and it was also there agreed, that he should be made a Privy-Coun∣cellour, to which the Duke should be intreated to give con∣sent.
4. Sir Walter Vavaser promised to give 200 l. but is since dead. 5. The Lady Tempest said she would give 150 l. but pro∣mised a larger Contribution at her death. 6. Sir Francis Hungate promised 50 l. who made an Excuse that he had a great many Debts to pay, but that afterwards they should have more. 7. Richard Sherbourne, Eldest Son of Richard Sherbourne, of Stonyhurst promised to give 300 l. 8. Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, yielded to give 200 l. to the said Nunnery and Plot of Killing the King. 9. Mr. Charles Ingleby, Lawyer, concluded to give 30 l. 10. Robert Killingbeck, a Romish Priest, was also present at the said meeting, and did promise in the name of his Master, Thomas Riddal, of Fenham, Esq; that he should Contribute Li∣berally for the carrying on the said Design, and that his Ma∣ster had given him such Instructions before he came from home, but does not remember how much it was he promised for the carrying on of the said Design. There was also a Letter read in the said Assembly, wherein Stephen Tempest, Mr. John York; and Richard, his Son, did excuse themselves that they were not at the Meeting according to their promises; and that the said Stephen Tempest was willing to give 50 l. Mr. York and his Son would give betwixt them 50 l. for the effecting of so Pious a Design: and besides, their well Wishes and Prayers should not be wanting for the Prosperous pro∣ceeding of so Meritorious and Pious a Design. There was also present William Rushton, and Thomas Thwing, besides several others whose names this Informant does not know. This Informant heard also, that the Lord▪ Mollyneux had given his Consent thereto, but he does not know where he lives. And according to the former agreement Sir Thomas Gas∣coigne did by Deed conveigh unto the said Nunnery a certain Estate for ever, which was Purchased of Mr. Timothy Macele∣verer of Arncliffe, and lyes at Mauston in the Parish of Whit∣church near Leedes, and is Rented of Sir Thomas Gascoigne by Alvery Lofthouse, who enjoys▪ by Lease the said 90 l. per ann. And he did also in the said year, between Lammas and Michael∣mas, Establish the said Nunnery at Dolbancke near to Ripley; Broughton-Hall, Hewoyth-Hall, and Mistress Lashals House in York, were made their places of Refuge, that they might not
be too great a Company together, for avoiding suspition, till the Plot or Design took effect. Mistress Lashals was made Lady-Abbess, Mrs. Beckwith her Sister, and Mistress Benningfield were made her Assistants. Ellin Thwing, a Nun, was sent for from beyond Seas, to instruct all such as should be made Nuns, Mistress Beane was made a Nun, Mistress Cornwallis also belonged to the Nunnery: Sir Thomas Gascoigne did per∣suade Mary Roote and Elizabeth Butcher both of them to be Nuns, who accordingly did go to the said Dolbancke, and were made Nuns, and Sir Thomas Gascoigne did say jestingly unto the said Mary Roote, when she was taking horse, there goes an old Maid and a young Nun: Thomas Thwing was made then Confessor to the Nuns, but having sent to obtain the Popes consent, he in the year 1678. returns them an Order for Establishing the said Nunnery, as also his Benediction by John Cornwallis, a Romish Priest, and also declares the said John Cornwallis sole Father-Confessor to the Nuns, in the room of Thomas Thwing, who was ordered by the Pope to be Chief Su∣perior or Arch-Bishop, and he to succeed in the place of him that first dyed, who was a Chief Superior or Arch-Bishop in England. In the mean time a sufficient maintenance was al∣lowed, besides 20 l. per ann. the said Thomas Thwing hath of his own. This Informant saith he cannot affirm that he did hear Sir Miles Stapleton mention the Killing of the King; but Sir Fran∣cis Hungate, Mr. John Middleton of Stockhil-Hall, Esquire Gas∣coigne, and Sir Walter Vavaser, did mention several times the Killing of the King; and Sir Miles Stapleton was in the Room with them, and this Informant did not hear him speak against it, but said he would give 200 l. for the carrying of it on: and Sir Miles Stapleton added, That if the Duke of York did not please them, they would serve him as they did intend to serve his Brother; Richard Sherbourne answered it was fit it should be so, if he would not Pardon the Murderers of his Brother, to which the rest assented. And Sir Miles Stapleton did in the year 1675. make a Collusive Conveyance of his Estate to Sir John Dawney, which this Informant did read in Sir Thomas Gascoignes Chamber, which was made for fear their Design of Establishing the Roman Catholick Religion in England, should not take effect: and this Informant did hear Sir John Dawney confess, that he did know of the said Conveyance, and that it was done with his consent, but that he was not present at the Sealing of it; and the said Sir John Dawneys confession this In∣formant
can make appear to be true if your Lordships do re∣quire it. This Informant did also read in the Chamber of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, a Catalogue of all the names of the Contributors to the Nunnery, which Paper was Intituled the names of the Actors and Contributors ingaged in the Design of pro∣moting the Roman Catholick Religion, as also the Establi∣shing a Nunnery, &c. Which List he hath heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas Gascoigne, Esq; his Son, the Lady Tempest his Daughter, William Rushton the Priest, said it was the List of those that had ingaged themselves in the Design of Killing the King. And this Informant does very well remember, that in the said List, there was the particular names of Thomas Rid∣dal, of Fenham, Esq; Sir Marmaduke Constable of Everingham, and his Son, whose Priests name was Bankes, and is the Supe∣riour Priest for Yorkshire, Mr. Richard Iles of Ferry Friston, Robert Stanfield of New-Hall, near Pontefract, who was said to be designed to have fired Pontefract: There was also named in the List Mr. Richard Townley of Townley, who keeps a Priest, whose name is reported to be John Sturdy, and as he is informed is now with him, Christopher Medcalf, and Thomas Medcalf of Ottrington, Gentlemen, John Peircy of Stubbs, Gent. whom this Informant hath heard to be very much ingaged in the Plot, Doctor Peter Vavaser, Esquire Dole∣man, with several others whose names this Informant doth not at present remember: There was also their several Contribu∣tions mentioned in the said List, which was given by them for the carrying on of the said Design, but because this Infor∣mant did not take a Coppy of it, he cannot give a further account of the sums particularly mentioned in the said List, further than he hath before declared. But this Informant says, That a little after the Discovery of the Plot, the above mentioned Robert Stanfield, being with this Informant at a place called Wheldale, or Healdwood, he told him, this Informant, that there was a great Watch kept at Pontefract, and particularly towards his House, and that the Mayor of Pontefract had a suspition of him (as he was in∣formed)
that he was to Fire Pontefract; and he also added that he was mistaken, for he was not to have Fired Pontefract, unless the King had been Killed, and then he was to have had five hundred men in readiness to have murdered all the Pro∣testants that they could meet with. This Informant also says, That at the same time he deli∣vered a Letter to him, this Informant, which was directed to one William Hardwick, a Romish Priest, then at Sir Thomas Gascoignes House, and he desired him, this Informant, to bring him to his House that night, but to be careful of him for fear he should be Discovered; and that they had a great many E∣nemies, but he hoped ere long it would be otherwise: and he further added, that he very much relyed upon him, this Infor∣mant, because that William Hardwick had told him that he was a very Honest and a Good Catholick, one fit to be trusted. But this Informant did not convey the said William Hardwick to the said Robert Stanfields House, but sent his brother Thomas Baker, who conveyed him to Newhall in the night time, where he left him. This Informant further saith, That the abovesaid Richard Iles, did tell him (having before shewed him, this Informant, his Altar with a Tabernacle upon it, and other Furniture belonging to a Roman Priest when he celebrates Mass) That there would never be no good in the Nation until the Roman Catholick Religion were the chief in England. And this Informant further saith, That after the Discovery of the said Plot, he did hear the before mentioned Richard York say, that he was very sorry that the King was not killed, for then they needed not to have feared going from home, or have been tied within the bounds of five miles. He, this Informant, further saith, That he heard several Papists say, That Doctor Peter Vavaser was gone to London with an intent to get an Order from His Majesty and Privy Council to go beyond Sea, for fear he should be discovered to be concerned in the Plot. He further saith, That Sir Tho∣mas
Gascoigne, with others in his company, did several times mention the name of Esquire Doleman, living in Peaseholme Green in York, as a partner with them in their Designs, his Christian name he doth not remember, but hath in his Let∣ters by the particular order of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, Thomas Gascoigne Esq; and Lady Tempest, been desired to recommend them kindly unto Mr. Doleman and Esquire Doleman, which Letters were directed to William Hornecastle, servant to old Mr. Doleman, and hath likewise received several recommen∣dations back again to Sir Thomas Gascoigne and Esq Gascoigne and Lady Tempest before mentioned. This Informant doth also remember, that in the year 1678. there hath been held at the House of Sir Thomas Gascoigne, several Consultations by the afore-mentioned persons, for the carrying on the Plot, especially a little before the Dis∣covery of it, they had a great Consultation by those whose names are mentioned before. For after this Informant was out of Sir Thomas his service, he did use the House as much as when he was his servant, and thereby had opportunity to know it. This Informant does also remember, that he did hear Sir Thomas Gascoigne say unto the Lady Tempest in the year 1678. about the beginning of September, that he had ordered one hundred and fifty pounds to be sent unto Dole∣banke, to put the poor Catholiques in Arms, he hoping that shortly the Blow would be given; which money was to be ordered by Father Cornwallis and Mrs. Lashalls, which money this Informant did hear Sir Thomas Gascoigne say afterwards that he had sent it. And he did hear a Letter read, sent by Cornwallis, wherein he did desire Sir Thomas Gascoigne's speedy supply for the carrying on so great a Design, for that that sum of one hundred and fifty pounds was too little; where∣upon the said Sir Thomas Gascoigne sent immediately thirty pound more. This Informant further saith, That Francis Calvert and his Wife told him that there was a Design in hand, for the pro∣pagating of the Roman Catholick Religion, and then he hoped the Priests (meaning the Roman Catholick Priests) might go publickly, and then he said he hoped to be Lord Mayor of York, and she said she hoped to be Lady Mayoress
of York, and they both made a scoffing at the Parson of the Town, who was then going in that part of the street over against their House, for then both of them said that he was but a pitiful Preacher, and no more fit to preach a Sermon than they were fit to say Mass, and that the Town did not love him because he was a little inclined to favour the Presbyterian Faction. They further said that they hoped ere long that he would be glad to hide his head in a corner, and Mrs. Calvert took up a knife lying upon the shop-board, and said she wished it in the heart of all those that would not be of her persuasion. And she further said, she could freely kill the Parson to do God good service. The said Francis Calvert told this Informant that he did of purpose procure himself to be made Sheriff of York, that he might the better understand how to rule if he were made Mayor. All which words were spoken to this Informant by them, another also being present, whom this Informant thinks was Mr. Calverts Daughter, and it is about a year ago, as this Informant remembers, since he heard the words spoken. This Informant says also, that there are several Roman Ca∣tholicks who do keep Ale-Houses, and under that pretence do Lodge Priests in their Houses, and therefore this Informant leaves it to your Lordships Judgment, whether it be not fitting to put forth a Proclamation for all Popish Ale-Houses to be put down. This Informant says, He knows by information where there does two or three Popish Priests at certain times come, whose names are Mr. Winter, Mr. Gerald or Gerard, and Mr. Jennings, who this Informant does know very well to be Priests. This Informant does also further declare, That what he speaks here is nothing but the real Truth, neither hath he Malice against any man, nor does he expect, think, or hope for any reward; but shall reckon himself very well rewarded if he can but serve his King and Country, and satisfie the World that the snares of Death were prepared for them. This Informant doth further confess, That he hath used his utmost endeavour to stifle the Plot, and to persuade the world there was no Plot at all, which was contrary to his knowledg, and does humbly beg His Majesties Gratious Pardon.
This Informant says that William Banckes a School-master, living in High-Holborn, came to the Lodging of this Informant upon the sixth of January; and being in a Room with him privately, he the said William Banckes did ask him, this Informant, if Mary Pre∣sicks and Thomas Thwing, now Prisoners in Newgate, were to be try∣ed this Sessions; to whom this Informant replyed, that he did not believe that they would be tryed untill the next Sessions after this. Then the said William Banckes said, he was very glad to hear that good news, that he had been inquiring for him two or three times; and taking him, this Informant, by his Right Hand, and looking about him with an intent (as he himself confessed) that no body was near to over-hear our discourse, then told this Informant that he had a very great secret to communicate unto him, but that he, this Informant, should solemnly promise him that he would not discover it; to which this Informant replyed (not suspecting any thing) that he would keep secret what ever he told him, this Informant think∣ing he would discover some Priest, or other person that could con∣firm this Informants Evidence: whereupon the said William Banckes, told him, this Informant, that if he would not appear and give evi∣dence against Mary Pressickes, and the others in Custody, that he would help him, this Informant, to a Friend that would give him a considerable sum of money, and that it were better for him, this Informant, to take a sum of Money, than to take lives, and that he was desired by his Friend to speak to this Informant about it▪ And that he would ingage that it should not be discovered, that he this Informant did take Money. But if this Informant would not ab∣scond himself, but appear against the Prisoners, that then he would lessen his Evidence against them; but not to speak his full know∣ledge of them, and to do them all the favour that this Informant possibly could; but he could wish he, this Informant, would not ap∣pear; and that he would ingage him that he should be well reward∣ed for his pains; and that he was sure, that if he, this Informant, would not appear and give in his Evidence against the Prisoners, no other Persons would. These words were spoken by the said Willi∣am Banckes several times to him this Informant; to all which this Informant replyed, that he did intreat him to meet him, this Informant, next Thursday again; and that then he would discourse with him about it, but that he would not divulge to any the dis∣course between them. This Informant further says: That the said William Banckes did promise him this Informant to meet him again on next Thursday, to discourse with him about it. This Informant further says, that he told the said William Banckes, that he could hartily Wish to have had William Rushton (a Romish Priest) in Custody; which said William Banckes answered again, that he believed and durst ingage this Informant, that I might have the said Rushton, if this Informant would be but favourable to the rest: and that he would inquire of his Friend, and bring him an answer on Thursday next.
This Informant further says; That William Banckes he discourse∣ing about his Majesties former Proclamation concerning the 20 l. due for every Priest taken, the said William Banckes added. That it were better for him, this Informant, to take 20 l. and not to appear a∣gainst the said Thomas Thwing, than to have a hand in his blood. To which this Informant answered, that he would return him an answer next Thursday, and that he would not appear against the said Thomas Thwing, if he could but discover Rushton, so that he might be taken; this Informant knowing very well that there are several o∣thers which have already given Information against the said Thomas Thwing; there being three besides this Informant to prove him a Priest, and two of them to prove him a Traytor. The CONCLUSION. THus have I in Honesty and Sincerity of heart, Communicated to my Country-men, the deep Designs of the Roman parties, and the danger England is in, of Subverting it's Government by their at∣tempts. I confess my Informations are but plain in their Language, not couched in a Rhetorical Style, but Calculated for the under∣standing of all the Commonality of this Land, how illiterate soever. I acknowledge my self to be much inferiour to many of my fellow Wit∣nesses, in acquired parts and abilities; yet nevertheless the Spirit of Man, according to the expression in the Proverbs; is as the Candle of the Lord, searching all the inward parts of the Belly: That Ordina∣ry reason and understanding which it hath pleased God to bestow upon me, being heightned and advantaged by Conversation, and Trading in the World; and especially having the opportunity of being inform∣ed in these subtle Intrigues, by my residence in that Family where many of those matters were Contrived and Acted, could easily make a Judgment, without much Logick or Philosophy, to what Conclusion such Premises did tend; whilst I was One with them in the Design, I did often please my self, with some pretty Evasions and quirkes, which I was taught by my Leaders, in case of discovery, to evade or at least alleviate the sense of my Punishment. They were such as these. That it was lawful for a Roman Catholick to deny the truth, have some Mental Reservations to himself. That owning another Power and Ecclesiastical Supremacy, than what is established in the Land, I was not bound to declare what really I knew, fancying my Examiners to have no Authority to ask me, and that I was otherwise obliged by my Religion. That if I were Guilty of such Crimes that deserved death; yet I might assert my Innocency, having before received the Benefit of Abso∣lution. Upon these false Maximes, I was encouraged to proceed, till the Horridness of the Crimes to which I was tempted, as to be an Agent in the Kings Death, and the Nations ruine, and that for Money, did
stare me in the Face, and God affording his gracious Conviction, on which I stood, and so enabled me to Consider how I might find out a way to extricate my self from these great evils. Hence arose my return to Protestantisme, and my resolution to discover, which discovery I have undertaken and  aged, not out of particular grudge, animosity, or revenge against any of that Family to which I was related, or any other person whatsoever (God is my Wilness, and my own Conscience also his Vicegerent) much less out of any hopes of gain, priviledge or preferment, which are Motives too for did for Ʋpright and Faithful minds, but only out of love to Religion, King, and Country, who would be all highly concerned, if such flagitions and execrable undertakings should attain their designed end. But as I in my poor Sphere have Contributed to the prevention of those Evils, so I hope others of that Religion will follow my Exam∣ple, and be reclaimed from those Wickednesses (which whatever their Priests talk of Indulgences and Pardons) would certainly involve them both in Temporal and Eternal destruction. 'Tis not in my power to Convert, that is Gods work, and requires an Immediate concurrence of his Grace, but methinks the present Informations should at least Con∣vince and stop the Mouths of the most obstinate Gain sayers. I know many Clammours are, and further will be raised against me, by those whom I have deserted, as of my being an Heretick, Apostate &c. But I leave it to the Judgment of all uninterested persons, whether it be not much more just and equal for me (though of an inferiour Class) to speak the Truth, for preventing such high inconveniences, as are impending upon us, than for persons of Nobility, eminency, and worth, to be instrumental in bringing such mischiefs on us. And as it is a comfort to me that I have aimed at Gods Glory and the good of this Land in what I have done, so being encouraged and warranted by my superiours, I shall not shun the Ʋtmost hazard in case I may be further instrumental for the detection of evil and promot∣ing of good; but still with this Provisoe, that I would not accuse any man wrongfully, or be a false witness against my Neighbour, for any worldly encouragement whatsoever. I grant that many deep heads were engaged in these designes, but they with whom I conversed had as much Zeal as any, and besides were advantaged by fair possessions and estates, which they were free enough of, to encourage others in these black enterprizes, that so those who had no Principle of zeal for the work, but were meerly Mercenary, might be engaged therein by Pecuniary considerations. I pray God for the future all such Mischievous designs may be pre∣vented, that the Protestant Religion may flourish amongst us, and that the Kings Majesty may have a long and prosperous Reign over us in Truth and Righteousness, to the Glory of God, and the Comfort of Pro∣testant Professours, who though divided and subdivided amongst them∣selves, yet have ALL reason to say Amen.
The Particular Names of the Persons accused by Robert , Gent. to be engaged, or Abet the Plot. 1. SIr. Thomas  Barronet, in the Homer. 2. Sir M Stapylton Barronet, in the Messengers Custody. 3. Charles Ingleby Esq in the Kings Bench. 4. Thomas Riddall Esq; in Morpeth prison. 5. Sir Thomas Haggerstod Barronet. all out upon, security. 6. Richard Townley Esq 7. Robert Doleman Esq 8. Dr. Peter Vavesour Gent. 9. Richard Iles Gent. 10. Robert Stanfield Gent. 11. Lady Tempest, 12. Thomas Pressicks▪ Gent. 13. Richard Sherbourne Esq; in Lancaster Prison. both in Newgate. 14. Mary Pressicks. 15. Tho. Thwing, Priest, 16. John Pracid alias Cornwallis, Priest, Prisoner in York Castie▪ both Prisoners in Owse Bridge in York. 17. Mrs. Lashalls, 18. John Andrews, Priest, Corker, Harcourt, and Pinckering are mentioned in the Informations. Mrs. Lashalls, before mentioned, Mrs. Beckwith, Mrs. Benning∣field, Mrs. Cornwallis, Ellin Thwing, Mary Root, Elizabeth But∣cher, all belonging to the Nunnery. These following persons, are not as yet apprehended. Thomas Gascoigne, Esq Richard Sherburne the younger. Sir Francis Hungate, Barronet. Lord Mollyneux, Frances Calvert▪ and his Wife. Stephen Tempest, Gent. Richard York. These three are deceased. Sir Walter Vavesore, John York, Christ opher Mitcalfe, Priests untaken. Winter. Gerald or Gerard Jennings. John Sturey. Francis Brown, Nicholas Brown, alias Gascoigne, Benedictine Monks. Robert Killingbeck. Fincham. Francis Gascoigne. Robert Dolman. Mr. Ellis. Thomas Thwing. Thomas Thwing. Dr. Stapylton, William Rushton. Farneby. Lodge. John Pracid, alias Cornwallis. William Hardwick. Francis Blaxton. John Andrews. Thomas Addinson. Richard Gascoigne. Metham. FINIS.
