c1500 7952952 40707
A Catholicks Resolution, Or, a Serious ENQUIRY Whether it be Better To turn Independent, Presbyterian, Romane? Or continue What I am, Catholick? In Matter of RELIGION? London, Printed Anno Dom. MDCLXVIII.
I. Whether Independent OF all Religions I think I could make some∣what among Them; for what Learning I have, will help maintain their Ignorance, and my being a Proselyte, will promote their Confidence. It's probable I could frame as plausible a Discourse of the Reasons inducing me to be of that Persuasion, as some they have admitted: But before I joyn with them, I shall wait a resolution of the following Queries. And, 1. Whether I can easily joyn with such, as would Pa∣ganize and make Antichristian all the Churches of Christ in the whole world, except themselves? 2. Whether that be a false Church that converts their Members, before they come to be of their Party? 3. Or that which would propound a better way for Ministers maintenance, than God, who hath ordained, That they that serve at the Altar should live by the Altar? 4. And that set up such to be Preachers, as have no art nor knowledg in the Tongues? 5. That make the whole essence of the Ministerial Call to consist in Election of the people, without Ordination? 6. That cry down Bishops, because they cannot preach to all their Flock at once, and yet themselves gather Chur∣ches from York to London, so that many do not see the face of their Pastor once in a year? 7. Whether under that Notion all Heresies have not crept into the Church? 8. Whether I shall joyn to that Party, who never yet could set bounds to themselves; but do still expect some new Discoveries for Modification? and whether my con∣sent
go that not be more dangerous than the Oath of &c? 9. Whether I shall submit to that Party, that hitherto neither the most Religious, the most Learned, nor the major part of any Nation ever yet submitted to? 10. Whether the first and best of our Reformers ever thought of or practised such a way? 11. Whether, were I now to die, I could take com∣fort in their Absolution, seeing not one of them is autho∣rized thereunto? And, 12. That would persuade us that all our Martyrs for the Protestant Cause, did worship God in a wrong way, and therein condemn the Generation of the Just? Could Answer be brought in to this Jury of Questi∣ons, That they are Not guilty, I could then better believe them, and relieve my self: For the present, my Consci∣ence not being satisfied, I shall with them Catholick Cha∣rity, and pray, That as they would shun the Fock of Su∣perstition on the one hand: they would likewise avoid the Shelve of Separation on the other: And O thou that a∣lone art an Independent Being, teach all thine to depend upon thee, for counsel and direction, and not to despise the Churches Communion! II. Whether Presbyterian? IT is a Thriving way, and I am poor; the tentation there∣fore is strong: but better enjoy peace of Conscience, than the spoils of violence; I shall yet propose some cases of conscience, and upon their true Resolves, I shall either shake hands with him, or continue what I am. 1. Whether I do not believe, That Christ taught his Apostles to pray, and say, Our Father which art in heaven?
2. Whether I do not believe, That the Apostles did pray, and say, as Christ taught them, Our Father which art in heaven? 3. Whether I have done well, to expunge and oblite∣rate that Prayer, Our Father which art in heaven? 4. Whether I do not believe; That Christ sent his Apo∣stles, as his Father sent him? Joh. 20.21. 5. Whether I do not believe, That the Father sent Christ to be the chief Bishop of our Souls? 1 Pet. 2.25. 6. Whether I do not believe both these missions to be jure divino? 7. Whether I do not therefore believe, Episcopacy to be jure Divino? 8. Whether I do not believe , to be a diffe∣rent word from ? 9. Whether I do not believe Bishop to be the name of office and dignity, Presbyter to be a name of order and duty? 10. Whether I do not believe Bishops are sometimes called Presbyters, because they were Presbyters before they were Bishops? 11. Whether I do not believe Presbyters qua Presbyters are never called Bishops? 12. Whether I do not believe that St. Paul spake and did divinely, when he constituted Timothy Bishop of Ephe∣sus, and Titus Bishop of Creet, to oversee, and if need were to rebuke the Presbyters there? 13. Whether I do not believe St. Jerome spake piously, when he said, Nisi exors quaedam & ab omnibus eminens po∣testas Episcopo ducetur, tot essent Schismata, quot Sacerdotes; That unless an extraordinary and peerless preheminence were given to the Bishop, there would be as many Schisms as Priests. 14. Whether I do not believe King James spake poli∣tickly
and prudently, when be said, No Bishop, no King? 15. Whether I do not believe the Primitive Church, and so the Church successively untill of very late years, one century and less than an half, was governed by Epis∣copacy? 16. Whether therefore I do not believe I have done very ill to shoulder out Episcopacy, that I might get into his Chair? 17. Whether I do not believe that Thebulis and Aë∣rius were therefore called Hereticks, because they would have had an ecclesiastical parity, Bishop and Presbyter all one? 18. Whether I do not believe, The Canon; of the A∣postles distinguished the three degrees of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, and gave the superiority to Bishops▪ Can. 4, 6, 7 19. Whether I do not believe Thebulis and Aërius did therefore phansie an ecclesiastical parity, because they could not be made Bishops, which they earnestly affected? Epi∣phan. Haeres. 75. 20. Whether I do not believe the Church of Jerusalem was called a Virgin Church, and never corrupted, until by Thebulis, because he was not made a Bishop? Eus. l. 4 c. 22. 21. Whether I do not believe Ignatius lived in the A∣postles days, and saw Christ in the flesh, and being yet a Bresbyter, writ to the Antiochians, to remember Evodius their Bishop, who first from the Apostles received the supe∣riority above the Presbyters; and after being Bishop him∣self, and going to suffer under Trajan, writ to the Clergy and Presbyters there, That they would be diligent in feed∣ing their flok, untill God did show unto them, Him that should rule over them after his death? And in another Epistle ad Sard. thus, Presbyters be obedient to your Bi∣shops; Deacons be obedient to your Presbyters; Laymen
be obedient to all: And after all concludes thus: My soul for theirs that observe this order, The Lord be with them. 22. Whether I do not believe Aërius was the first that voted down all Fasts. Vigilantius the first that voted down all Feasts appointed by the Church both Hereticks; and therefore whether I may not fear, I am something Heretical in following their steps? 23. Whether I do not believe, that S. James set out a Lyturgie or book of Common Prayer, for the Church in his time; St. Basil the like in his time; St. Chrysostome the like in his time; and so downwards untill Mr. John Cal∣vins time? 24. Whether I do not beleve, that Mr. John Calvin himself thought well of Common Prayers, and particularly of our Common Prayer Book, when he said, Quod ad formam precum & rituum Ecclesiae, valdè probo, ut certa illa extet, à qua pastoribus in sua functione dscedere non licet; Concer∣ning a Form of Prayer, and Ecclesiastical Rites, I very well like, that there be a certain and constant one, from which the Pastors of the Church may in no wise depart or vary? 25. Whether I do not believe, That every word in the Common Prayer Book is in the Bible, either literally or ratio∣nally deduced thence. v. g. for the Confession. Almighty God, Gen. 17.1. And most merciful Father, Exod. 34.6. We have erred and strayed from thy ways like lost sheep, Psal. 119.176. We have followed too much the devises and desires of our own hearts, Jer. 18.12. We have offended against thy holy laws, Mat. 7.8. We have left undone those things which we ought to have done, 1 Sam. 15.24. And we have done those things which we ought not to have done, 1 Sam. 24.5. 2 Sam. 12.13. And there is no health in us, Psa. 38.3. But thou O Lord have mercy upon us miserable offenders, Luke 18.13. Spare thou them O God which confess their faults, Prov. 28.13. Restore
thou them that be penitent, Ez. 18.31. According to thy pro∣mise declared unto mankind in Christ Jesus our Lord, Mat. 11 18. And grant O most merciful Father for his sake, Joh. 16.23. That we may hereafter live a godly, righteous, and sober life, Titus 2.12. To the glory of thy holy name, 1 Tim. 6.16. 26. Whether I do not believe the Absolution, Almighty God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, be grounded upon, John 20.23. 27. Whether I do not believe the Lords Prayer, with the Doxology, Thine is the Kingdom, Power and Clory, is ver∣batim in Mat. 6 and without that Doxology in Luke 11. 28. Whether I do not believe, those Versicles, O God make speed to save us, be not in Psal. 102.13. Open thou my lips O Lord. And my mouth shall shew forth thy praise, Psal. 51.15. I might be endless: to answer therefore some of your Grand Objections; I ask, 29. Whether I do not believe, Remember not Lord our offenses, nor the offenses of our forefathers, is a sincere prayer for the living, and no sinful prayer for the dead, viz. That God would not visit the offenses of our forefathers upon in their children, and grounded upon Exo 20. and Ezek. 18. 30. Whether I do not believe, From sudden death good Lord deliver us, is a fervent ejaculation, no idle desire, that God would not take us away unpreparedly, until we have made ready our Accounts? 31. Whether I do not believe, For all them that travel by land or by water, all women labouring of child &c. is a charitable prayer, and answerable to the Apostles com∣mand, Do good to all, Gal. 6.10. Pray for all men 1 Tim 2.3. 32. Whether I do not believe, By thy holy Nativity & Circumcision, by thy Agony and bloudy sweat &c. is obtesta∣tive, and the sign of our Faith, not affirmative and the
sign of an Oath; desiring God by these effectual means of the Actions and Passions of Jesus Christ, to deliver us from those punishments which are due unto us for our sins. 33. Whether I do not believe, the first prayer in the Office of Matrimony, That God would blesse this couple, as I∣saac and Rebecca, proceeded rather from the holy Ghosts inspiration, than from humane invention; because if from man onely, he would have gone upon reason, and made the prayer thus, blesse them as Abraham and Sarah, or blesse them as Jacob and Rachel; for Abraham was Gods first friend, jacob was Gods great friend; yet neither so, nor so, but as Isaac and Rebecca; because Abraham had his Hagar, one Concubine; Jacob had his Zilkah and his Bilkah two at least, Isaac never any but his Rebecca? 34. Whether I do not believe, That that prayer, Pre∣vent us O Lord in all our doings, &c. be not absolutely a∣gainst those great points of Popery, concerning works of preoperation and cooperation, grounded upon that of St. Paul, Eph. 2.8. and so no kin to the Mass Book? 34. VVhether I do not believe the Creed of the Apostles is every word in the Scripture, viz. I believe, Mark 9 24. in God John 14 1. the Father, 1 Cor. 1.3. Almighty, Gen. 17.1. maker of heaven and earth, Gen. 1.1. and in Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord, Rom. 1.3. which was conceived by the holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary, Luke 1.35. suffered under Pontius Pilate, John 19.1. was Crucified John 19.18. Dead John 19.30. and Buried, John 19.42. He descended into Hell, Act 2.27. the third day he rose again from the dead, 1 Cor. 15.4. He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth at the right-hand of God, Mar. 10.19. From thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Act 10.42. And in the holy Ghost, Mat. 28.19. The holy Catholick Church the communion of Saints, Ephes. 5.27. the forgiveness of sins,
Col. 1.14. The Resurrection of the Body, 1 Cor. 15.35. and life everlasting, John 10.28. 36. VVhether I do believe the Feasts of Christmass, Ea∣ster and whitsuntide have been observed by the purest and Primitive Churches, and commanded upon as to observe the same? Clem. ep. decret, Telesph. p. 117. Cyprian de Na∣tiv. Christi, Nazian. Orat. 38. Chrysost. hom in Nativ▪ Chri∣sti. The Church of Helvetias confess, c. 24. The Church of Bo∣hemia, c. 15. The Church of Bremen, Regist. 2. fine, the Church of Auspurge confess. act. 4. 37. Whether I do not believe, The Lord b with thee; and with thy Spirit, equivalent to uth. 2.4. 38. Whether I do not believe St. Paul spake Scripture, when he said, and bid us pray with the spirt ad with the understanding, and whether I do not sometimes pray without the understanding, when I think I pray by the spirit. 39. VVhether I do not believe, That therefore I have done very ill to excommunicate the English Common Prayer Book, which by most Divines hath been cal ed op∣timum Breviarium, and so instead of it, have set up a Dire∣ctory, which speaks nothing so much, as the sixth sence, and hath no better Derivation than from the Directarii? But I am in earnest, and earnestly desire of Almighty God, that if the Presbyterian be determined to go on in his opini∣on; yet that we may joyn together in all Christian affecti∣on, and so meet in heaven, in everlasting Union; for till I am convinced upon the former Queries, I am resolved ne∣ver to be of their communion upon earth; though I wish them increase of sanctity, while they live; and eternity of happinesse when they dye, through Iesus Chrit, Amen.
III. Whether Romane? I Am as far from Rome, as I am from Geneva; yet finding the Romane possest with more of the water, & the Pres∣byterian with more of the fire, I hope some moderation may in time cement England and Rome into the Catholick, so strongly, as never hereafter to be dissolved, or melted by the fury of zeal: You and you only I confesse have the face of a Church, and I hope you will not deny us the Form, and Being of a Church; since I believe there is so much ingenuity and wisdom in you, as to distinguish be∣twixt a Church extinguished and eclipsed or persecuted: The Church of England I acknowledge is under a cloud and eclipsed, but the Candle is not quite out and extinguished: Wheresoever two or three (of the Catholick Church) are gathered together, there is Chist in the midst of them, so was his promise Matt. 18.20. And wheresoever a lawful Priest or Pastour of the English Church is with two or three of his Congregation, I will not, I dare not doubt of the performance. If you have lesse charity, either in the taking or mistaking of it, I shall propose some few Queries in my own name, as one of you, though I thank God I am none of you, not ever intend to be in opinion, howsoever in affection, because you are my next neighbour; I therefore love you s my self. 1. VVhether I do believe Romane and Catholick are Termini covertiblies? 2. Whether I do believe, I may be saved, if I pray as the Catholick Church doth, and was taught by Christ, Our fa∣the which art in heaven; though I do not pray, as the Ron Church doth, and teacheth, O thou mother of God, St. er, St. Paul pray for me?
3. Whether if I do believe as the Primitive and Ca∣tholick Church did and doth, and hath taught the Apo∣stles Creed, though I do not believe as the Roman Church doth, the Creed of the Councel of Trent, I may be sav'd? 4. VVhether if I endeavour to live after Gods Com∣mandments, and obey him, though I do not endeavour to live after my superiors command, I may be saved? 5. Whether if I receive the Sacrament of the Eucharist as Christ Instituted and Commanded me to receive it, in both kinds, Bread and Wine, Flesh and Blood, though I do not receive it as the Church of Rome hath abrogated it, and Commanded to receive, in one kind only, I may be saved? 6. Whether my conscience can be satisfied by the de∣vice of concomitants that the Blood is given in the Body, since in the Eucharist the Blood is to be given as shed, not kept, as poured out, not contained in the Body? 7. Whether if I be born again, and made a Christian by true Baptism, and afterward confirmed by a true Bishop, though I am not annointed with oyl, I may be saved? 8. Whether if I believe the Scripture, and frame my life according, though I do not equally believe Tradition I may be saved? 9. VVhether if I serve and worship God in Spirit and in Truth, though I worship no images, nor God by ima∣ges, I may be saved? 10. VVhether I may not be saved, if I believe in Gods mercies through Christs merits, though I put no confi∣dence in merits of my own works? These Queries with a very few more by moderate and, unbyassed men, might be brought to a reconciliation, and that they may be, I pray you let us joyn in one Prayer, till we joyn in all points.
O Most merciful God, who hast made all Mankind of one; O most merciful God, who hast contracted all the Elect of Mankind into one Body, thy Church; and hast given the whole Church but one Soul, thy Spi∣rit; and that Soul but one Life, thy Faith; and that Faith but one prop, one Gospel, one Baptism, one Lords Supper; and this one Body and one Soul, but one Head, thy self, who art but one Lord, and hast again dispersed this Body into several Assemblies and Societies, and hast made each Society and Assembly but one; thereby in∣timating to us, that we should all have but one Heart and one Mind; In mercy we beseech thee look upon thy Church, and make her as thy Son did leave her, One; one in Opinion and one in affection, that she may be no long∣er crucified betwixt Hereticks and Schismaticks, Thieves of thy Truth; betwixt profligates and hypocrites, thieves of thy Grace; betwixt Zelots and Superstitious, thieves of thy Honor: but by virtue of thy Sons Golgotha, dry up Akeldama, and for the merit of Calvary, Deliver, O deliver her from all her present misery; Relieve her from Force without, and Fury within, both against her; Rescue her from civil Enemies, and crafty Children, both which fall upon her; Suffer not Reeds any longer to be thy Scepters, nor Chairs thy Throne, nor Tricks thy Order, nor Rudeness in one part, nor Superstition in another part, thy Service; nor Miscreants thy Wshippers, nor Confusion thy Religion, nor Wild-  Zeal, nor Lunacies thy Resolutions, nor De  Spirit; but appear by her once more in  ¦rit of Peace and Purity, of Sanctity  Wisdome and Sobriety, that all  Church by thy Livery, which tho  Love, Peace and Patience; and
may be guided by thy One Church, in the right way of Truth into Heaven, through Jesus Christ Amen. In whose blessed Name and words we further call upon thee, as he hath taught us in his Holy Gospel, saying Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name; Thy Kingdome come, Thy will be done in Earth, as &c. Give us this day our daily bread, And forgive us our tres∣passes, as &c. And lead us not into Tentation, but &c. For thine is the Kingdom, Power and Glory▪ &c. Or IV. continue what I am, Catholick? I Desire so to continue, though I starve for it; For I have not took up this Religion upon Tradition or E∣ducation, but upon Judgment and Deliberation; And instead of Queries and Cases of Conscience, I offer to my self these Irrefragable Propositions. 1. If I pray aright according to the Patter of Devo∣tion sum'd up in the Lords Prayer, I shall be heard. 2. If I repent aright according to the Prophets and A∣postles Direction, with the Contrition of my Heart, with the Confession of my Lips, and the Endeavour of my Life; I shall be forgiven. Joel. 2. 2 Cor. 7. 3. If I do right according to Gods will in his Word, sum'd up in his Decalogue, or Ten Commandments, though not absolutely and enactly, yet uprightly and Evangelically: I shall be accepted. 4. If I believe aright according to Gods Gospel, sum'd up in the Apostles Creed, without doubting, without dis∣usng, without desparing, I shall be saved. 5. If I receive Christs holy Sacraments, as he did insti∣tute,
and appoint them, not onely as Signs, but means of Grace, not onely as Assurances of Salvation, but Convey∣ances of Sanctification, I shall be glorified. And my Religion being so good, I desire not to change but to continue as I am; and for that I praise Gods mercy, and pray for Gods blessing. My Religion is good, for it is Gods; my Calling is Law∣ful, for it is of God; my Service is honorable, for it is for God and my Savior, my message in which I am employed is honourable, for it is of Peace, and to be an Instrument of Reconciliation betwixt God and his People, and my pro∣ceeding in it, if it be as it ought to be, in Love, shall be acceptable; Joyfully I may do it, for God will reward it; Freely I may do it, for God will make it good; Boldly I may do it, for God will defend it; and incessantly I should do it, for first or last God will give a blessing to it. But who, who is worthy to do this weighty business? not the best of men, how much more unworthy am I the worst of men and chief of Sinners? Truly of my self I am as unworthy as unable, and unworthy to be enabled, if thou enter in Judgment with me, That thou mayest not, I thus address my self to thy Throne of Grace. Look upon me O my God in the face of Jesus Christ I beseech thee, and for his sake assist me with thy Spirit, That I may speak thy word, lest I be guilty of carelesnes; That I may not speak before I Learn, lest I be guilty of Rashness. That I may Learn and Speak, lest I be guilty of idleness; That I may not speak to the Ear, lest I be guil∣ty of Flattery; That I may speak to the Heart, and so be a means of other mens salvation; and when I have prea∣ched
to others, That I may not be a Castaway my self: Sanctifie me with thy Spirit I beseech Thee; That I may aswell live as speak Divinity; Let thy Glory be my chief, Thy peoples and my own safety my next Aim; That I may not bring a wo to thy Flock, Give me Learning; that I may not bring wo to my self, Give me Diligence; that I may not bring Dishonor to thee, Give me Discre∣tion; Deliver me from the misery of Starving thy Flock, for want of skill; Deliver me from the Cruelty of star∣ving thy Flock, for want of will; Deliver me from a fruit∣less industry in feeding thy Flock, for want of Prudence; make me painful in my Study, powerful in my Pulpit; Fervent in my Piety, Holy in my Conversation, Succes∣ful in all; That I may be discharged of the Bloud of all those Souls Committed to my Charge: it is a precious People, for thou hast purchased them at a dear Rate, even with Bloud, with thy Bloud, with thy precious Bloud: Let them be precious too in my Esteem, That I may preach to them in Season and out of Season, not onely by Speaking well, but Living better: help their understand∣ings in my knowledg of Divinity, better their Wills in my Practse of Divinity; Supply them and my self for ths Life and the next out of thine own Fulness; and Crown my Labours with the Conversion of such Souls, as thou hast Ordained to Life Eternal, Through Jesus Christ: In whose most Blessed Name and Words, I further call upon Thee, as He hath Taught. FINIS.
