c7234 11191591 46631
A CATALOGUE OF SUCH BOOKS That ate printed for, and sold by WILLIAM CROOKE, at the Green Dragon without Temple-Bar, next to Deve∣reux Court. Where is to be Sold Bibles, Common Pray∣ers, and all other sorts of Books. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1683.
Books Printed for William Crooke, Bookseller, at the Sign of the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, nigh the Passage into the Temple, by Devereux Court, 1683. DIVINITY. 1. SIxty one Sermons, preached mostly upon pub∣lick occasions, by Adam Littleton, D. D. Folio, Price 16 s. 2. Brevis Demonstratio, being the truth of the Christian Religion, proved by Reason, 120. price bound 10 d 3. The Primitive Institution, shewing the antiquity and usefulness of Catechizing, together with its sui∣tableness to heal the distempers of the Church, by L. Addison, D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 4. A Sermon preached at the Funeral of a sober reli∣ous man, found drown'd in a Pit, in 80. price bound 1 s. 5. Mr. Howel's Visitation Sermon before the Bi∣shop of Chichester, 40. price 6 d.
6. Dr. Hascard's 2 Sermons on the 5th. of Novem∣ber, and before the L. Mayor of London, in 40. 7. Mr. Manningham's 2 Sermons before the L. May∣or at St, Maries in Oxford. in 40. 8. A Sermon preached at the Savoy in French, and since printed in French and Engl. 120. price bound 8 d. 9. A Modest Plea for the Clergy, wherein is consi∣dered the reasons why why the Clergy are so contemned and neglected, by L. A. D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 10. Hugo Grotius, his Catechism, Greek, Latin, and English, with a Praxis of all the Greek words therein contained, in 80, price bound 2 s. 11. The Spirit of Prophecy, proving, that Christ and his Apostles were Prophets: written by the di∣rections of, and recommended to the Press, by the right reverend Father in God, Peter, Lord Bishop of Ely, in 80. price 3 s. 12. The King-killing Doctrine of the Jesuites, in a sincere discourse to the French King: written by a Roman Catholick, in 40. price 1 s. 13. Justifying Faith; or the Faith by which the Just do live, together with the excellency of the Com∣mon Prayer Book, in 80. price bound 1 s. 14. Mercy Triumphant, or the Kingdom of Christ enlarged beyond the narrow bounds which have been wont to be set to it, by Ed. Lane. 15. Du Moulin's Reflections reverberated, being a full Answer to the damning Doctrine of Dr. Lewis Du Mowlin: also, a Confutation of Edmond Hicker∣ingill's railing against the Ecclesiastical Courts, by E. Lane, in 40. 1 s. 6 d.
16. Responsio Valedictoria ad secundam Sandii Epi∣stolam, &c. per Sam. Gardiner, S. T. D. in 80. pri. 1 s. 6 d. 17. The Book of Psalms paraphrased, with Argu∣ments to each Psalm, in 2 Vol. by S. Patrick, D. D. and Dean of Peterburgh, in 80. price 10 s. 18. The Book of the Proverbs of Solomon Para∣phrased with Arguments, by S. Patrick, D. D. &c. 19. The Christian Sacrifice, a Treatise, shewing the necessity, end and manner of receiving the Holy Com∣munion, together with Prayers and Meditations, &c. by S. Patrick, &c. 20. The Devout Christian, instructing how to pray and give thanks to God; or a Book of Devotions for Families, and for particular persons, &c. by S. Patrick. 21. The penitent Christian, fitted with Meditations and Prayers for the devout receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by Lewis Southcomb, 120. pr. 1 s. 22. The Truth of the Christian Religon; written in Latin, in 6 Books, by the Learned Hu. Grotius, now translated into English, with a Seventh Book added to it, by S. Patrick, D. D. in 80. 23. The Works of the pious, and profoundly lear∣ned Joseph Mede, B. D. some time Fellow of Christs Church, Cambridge, corrected and enlarged according to the Authors own Manuscripts, in Folio. 24. A Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Law of Nature, and of the Christian Religion, in two parts, by Sam. Parker, D. D. in 40. 25. The Rules and Exercises of Holy living and Holy dying, by Jer. Taylor D. D. the 13th. Edition in 80.
26. The Penitent pardoned, or a Discourse of the Na∣ture of Sin, and the Efficacy of Repentance, under the Parable of the Prodigal Son, by J. Goodman, D. D. 40. 27. The Practise of Christianity, in two Parts, by Dr. Sherlock, in 80. price 5 s. 28. A Collection of private Devotions in the pra∣ctice of the ancient Church, called the hours of Pray∣er; taken out of the Scriptures, Fathers, &c. by Dr. Cozens late Bishop of Durham, 120. price 2 s. 29. The Holy Court compleat, by Nic. Causin. in folio. 30. Bishop Sanderson's Sermons compleat. fol. 31. Perkin's Works in 3 Volumes, folio. 32. Robinson's Annalium Mundi Ʋniversalium, in folio. With most sorts of other Divinity Books. LAW. 1. THE Jurisdiction of the Authority of Court-Leets, Court Barons, Court Marshalsea, &c. together with the most necessary learning of Tenures, and all their Incidents of Essoyns, &c. with the Re∣turn and Forms of several Original and Judicial Writs, now in use, relating to Writs of Error, Writs of false Judgment, and other Proceedings of frequent use in the Courts of Westminster, by J. Kitchin of Grays InnEsq To which is added Brevia selecta, be∣ing a Choice Collection of special Writs; the Fifth Edition, in octa. price 6 s.
2. Praxis Curiae Admiralitatis Angliae, Author Francis Clarke, in 120. price 1 s. 3. Sir Simon Deig's Parson's Councellour, the last Edition in octa. 4. The Reports of Sir Henry Hobart, Chief Ju∣stice of the Common Pleas, folio. price 10 s. 5. Formulae bene placitandi, a Book of Entries containing Variety of Choice Precedents, by W. Brown, in two parts, folio. 6. The second Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, containing the Exposition of the Statutes, by Sir Ed Coke. folio. price 15 s. 7. The third part of the Institute of the Lawe of England, concerning the Pleas of the Crown, by Sir Edw. Coke. folio. price 6 s. 8. The fourth Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England, concerning the Jurisdiction of Courts, by Sir Edward Coke, in folio. price 10 s. 9. The Law of charitable Ʋses revised, and much enlarged, with many Cases in Law, both ancient and modern; with the Readings of Sir Francis Moor upon the Statute of the 43. of Eliz. digested by G. DutyEsqfolio. 10. Officina Brevium, select and approved Forms of Judicial Writs, and other Process, with their Returns and Entries in the Court of Common Pleas: as also special pleadings to Writs, fol. 11. Fitz Herbert's Natura Brevium, the last Edi∣tion, in 80. 12. Wingate's Abridgment, the last Edition in 80. 13. Young Clerk's Guide, in four Parts, or an
exact Collection of choice English Presidents, octavo. 14. Reports of divers Cases in Law, taken by R. Brownlow and J. Goldsbrough Esquires, both Protho∣notarys; with directions how to proceed in any intri∣cate Actions, both real and personal, with an exact Table, the 3d. Edition, in 40. 15. The Touchstone of Presidents, relating to Judi∣cial Proceedings at Common Law, in oct. 16. Actions on the Case for Deeds, viz. Contracts, Assumpsits, Deceipts, Nusances, Trover, and Con∣version, &c. with 2 Tables, by W. SheppardEsq octavo. 17. The Practick part of the Law, shewing office of an Attorney, and guide for Sollicitors, in oct. 18. Reports, or new Cases, taken in the 15, 16, 17, and 18th years of King Charles 1st. by J. MarchEsq in 40. 19. A Dialogue betwixt a Student and a Philoso∣pher about the Common Law of England, by Thomas Hobbs of Malmsberry, in oct. 20. The Compleat Sollicitor, entring Clerk and Attorney, &c. in oct. printing. 21. Several Statutes of Bankrupt, with the Judges Resolution thereon, in oct. price 1 s. 6 d. With all sorts of other Law Books.
HISTORY. 1. AN Institution of general History, or the Histo∣ry of the World; being a compleat body thereof, in 2 Volumes, by W. Howel, now Chan∣cellor of Lincoln, in folio. 2. Historical Collections, being an account of the Proceedings of the 4 last Parliaments of Qu. Elizab. by H. TownsendEsq in folio. 3. A Chronicle of the late Intestine Wars, of the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland, from the year 1639. to the year 1660, by Mr. Heath, since continued to the year 1674, in folio. 4. Some years Travels into divers parts of Asia, and Africa the Great, by Sir Tho. Herbert lately deceased, the 4th Edition, in folio. 5. The History of Parthemissa, composed in 6 books by the Earl of Orrerg, in folio. 6. Clelia, the whole Work, in five parts; writ∣ten in French, now put into English, in folio. 7. Scarron's Comical Romance, being an Historical account of a company of Stage-players, full of varie∣ty of Novels, rare Adventures, amorous Intreagues, &c. being both witty and pleasant, in folio. 8. Popish Cruelties, being an account of the Trea∣sons of Dr. Parry against Qu. Eliz. with his Confes∣sion of it at his Tryal, and his denyal at his Executi∣on, folio price 1 s.
9. The Life of Thomas Hobbs of Malmsbury, writ∣ten by himself in Latin, since translated into English, to folio, price 6 d. 10. An Historical Narration of Heresy, with an ac∣count of the Punishments thereof, by Tho. Hobbs of Malmsbury, in folio, priced 6 d. 11. Megalopsichy, being a particular and exact ac∣count of the last 17 years of Qu. Elizabeths Reign, both Military and Civil, the first written by Sir W. Monson one of the said Queens Admirals; the se∣cond written by H. TownsendEsq a Member of her last Parliament. Wherein is a true and faithful Relati∣on of all the expeditious attempts, designes, successes, and errors, both of the English and Spanish, in the Wars from the year 1585, to the said Queens Death. With a full account of the eminent Speeches and De∣bates, &c. in the said time. To which is added, Dr. Par∣ry's Tryal in the year 1584, all written at the time of the Actions by persons that were eminently acting there∣in, folio, price bound 10 s. 12. A Voyage into the Levant, being a Relation of a Journey lately performed from England to Grand Cairo, by Sir Hen. Blunt, 120. price 1 s. 13. A Description of Candia, with an exact account of the last Siege and Surrender of it to the Turks, of oct. price bound 1 s. 14. Calliope's Cabinet opened, wherein Gentlemen may be informed how to order themselves for Feasts, Funerals, &c. price bound 8 d. 15. A Discourse of the Dukedom of Modena, con∣taining the original Antiquity &c. of that Dukdome, in 40, price 6 d.
16. The Travels of Ulysses, how he went to Hell and came back again, &c, by Tho. Hobbs, price 1 s. 17. The present state of London, containing the Antiquity, Fame, Walls, Rivers Gates, Churches, Bridge, with the Customs and Infranchizements, by J. BridalEsq price 1 s. 18. The Wonders of the Peak in Darbyshire, com∣monly called the Devils Arse of Peak, by Tho. Hobbs, 80, price 1 s. 19. The Life and Death of Mahomet, being the first estate of Mahometism, shewing all the designs that that Impostor Mahomet had to carry on and settle the Turkish Religion, written by L. Addison D. D. price 1 s. 6 d. 20. The Historians Guide, or Brittain's Remem∣brancer, being a summary account of all the Actions, Exploits, Sieges, Battels, Designs, Attempts, &c. taking notice of the Year, Month, and day of the Month, all eminent Passages have been for 80 years last past, price 1 s. A portable Book. 21. The Connexion, being Collections of some principal Matters in the Reign of King James, being the time that nothing of this nature is printed, being betwixt the end of Megalapsichy, or the last 17 years of Qu. Eliz. And the beginnings of Mr. Rushworth, Heath, Nalson, Whitlock, and others, price 1 s. 6 d. 22. The Moors bafled, being a discourse of the Government of Tangier, under the Earl of Tiviot, shewing the subtilty and pollicies of both Parties, written by Dr. Addison, who lived there many years, price 6 d. 40.
23. All the Works of Homer, both Illiads and Oddyses, translated out of Greek into English, by Tho. Hobhs of Malmsbury, price 5 s. 6 d. 24. Considerations on the Loyalty, Religion, Man∣ners, and Reputation of Tho. Hobbs 80, price bound 1 s. 25. The Memoires, and rare Adventures of Henri∣etta Sylvia Moliere, a great Lady in France, now living, written by her self, in six parts in French, and now translated into English, price 4 s. 26. Tho. Hobb's Angli Malmsb. Vita, being an account of Mr. Hobbs, of the Books he wrote of the times, when and the occasion thereof, of the Books and Authors against him, of his Conversation, Ac∣quaintance, &c. part wrote by himself, the rest by Dr. B. in 80, printed 1681. 27. Behemoth, being the History of the Civil Wars of England, and the Councels and Artifices, by which they were carried on, from 1640 to 1660, printed now from his own perfect Copy, in which is many pages more then was in the former Counterfeit Editi∣ons, none of which Editions before this, had less then a thousand faults in them, whole Lines left out in a hundred places, which did extreamly pervert the sence of the Author. Tho. Hobbs. 28. The Tracts of Mr. Tho. Hobbs of Malmsb. in 2 Vol. in oct. gathering Nine of his Treatises toge∣ther, which are also to be had single, viz. 1. His Life, in Latin. 2. His Considerations on his Loyalty, Religion, &c. 3. His Art of Rhetorick in English. 4. His Dialogue about the Common Law of England.
5. His ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy. 6. His Civil Wars of England, the perfect Edition. 7. His Historical Narration of Heresy. 8. His Answer to Bishop Bramhal in defence of his Leviathan. 9. His seven Problems, with an Apology for his writings to the King, price bound 9 s. 29. A New Survey of the Present State of the World, newly written in French, and now transla∣ted, and printing in English, in oct. With most sorts of other Curious History. PLAYS and POETRY. 1. HOmer's Works in English, by Tho. Hobbs, in 120. 2. A Poem on the Life of Mr. Hobbs, written by himself. 3. Melpomene, or the Muses delight, being a Col∣lection of new Songs and Poems, by several of the present Wits, in oct. 4. A Poem Latin and English, on the Devils Arse of Peak, by Tho. Hobbs. 5. Hug. Grotius Catechism in Greek, Latin, and En∣glish, in a Poem. 6. The Confinement, a Poem, with Annotions on it, in oct. 7. Vittoria Corombona, or the White Devil, a Tra∣gedy 40.
8. Catalines Conspiracy, a Tragedy 40. 9. Rival Kings, or the Loves of Oroondates, a Tragedy, in 40. 10. The Old Troop, or Monsieur Raggou, a Co∣medy. 40. 11. The Amarous Gallant, or Love in Fashion, a Comedy. 40. 12. The Mock-Duellist, a Comedy, 40. 13. Wrangling Lovers, a Comedy, 40. 14. Tom Essence, a Comedy, 40. 15. The Wits led by the Nose, a Comedy, 40. 16. The French Conjurer, a Comedy, 40. 17. Counterfeit Bridegroom, a Comedy, 40. 18. Tunbridge Wells, a Comedy, 40. 19. The Man of New market, a Comedy, 40. 20. The Constant Nymph, a Pastoral, 40. With other Plays and Poetry. MISCELLANIES. 1. THE deaf and dumb mans discourse; being a dis∣course to shew how the deaf and dumb do understand one another, with a Tract of inanimate Creatures, 80. price bound 1 s. 2. The Compleat Measurer; or a new and exact way of Mensuration, by Tho. Hammand, 80. price. 1 s.
3. The American Physician, treating of all the Roots, Trees, Herbs, Shrubs, Fruits, &c. in His Ma∣jesties Plantations in the West Indies, by William Hughes. in 120. price bound 1 s. 4. Lord Bacon's Apothegms, or witty Sayings, in 120. bound, price 6 d. 5. A Letter about Liberty and Necessity, written by Tho. Hobbs to the Duke of Newcastle, with Bishop Lany's Answer to it. in 120. price bound 10 d. 6. Reflections on the Philosophy and Philosophers of the ancient and the modern Times, by M. Rapine, in 80. price bound 2 s. 7. Ten Dialogues of Natural Philosophy, by Tho. Hobbs, in 80. price bound 2 s. 8. Quinquina; a discourse of curing Agues and Fevers by the Quinquina Bark, commonly called the Jesuites Powder, in 120. price bound 1 s. 9. A Sermon preached at S. P. T. by the late Usur∣per Oliver Cromwell, 40. price 3 d. 10. A Treatise of Ʋsury, by Sir Rob. Filmer. 11. Saunders his Astrological Physick. in 80. 12. The Court of Curiosity, being the most curi∣ous Eortune-Book that ever was extant, answering double the Questions, and with more exactness than any Fortune-Book extant, with the learnedst, and best Interpretation of Dreams that was ever out: This third Edition made exact to what it was before, price 1 s. 6 d. 13. Tho. Hobbs his Defence of his Leviathan, against Bishop Bramhall, in 80. price 2 s.
14. Hobbs his 7 Problems, in 80. 15. The True English-man, being a Vindication of those many Loyal Addresses to the King, by Dr. J. Harrison in 40. By the said William Crooke is sold all sorts of English Books, School Books, and most sorts of other Books. FINIS.
