D2632 R15557 12036898 52888
The House of Weeping engraved panel of people mourning around coffin engraved panel of funeral procession engraved panel of mourners, graveside an goeth to his long home and the Mourners about the streets Eccl: 12.5 inted for Iohn Dunton at ye Black Raven the Poultry London.
THE Pilgrims Guide From the Cradle to his Death-bed: WITH His Glorious Passage from thence to the New-Ierusalem. Represented to the Life In a Delightful new Allegory, Wherein the Christian Traveller Is more fully and plainly Directed than yet he hath been by any in the Right and Nearest way to the Celestial Paradice. To which is added the SICK-MANS Passing-Bell, With no less than Fifty Several Pleasant Treatises besides (rarely if ever handled before) all of them being distinctly useful, and will afford the READER extraordinary pleasure and delight in the perusal if either profit or novelty will do it. To these are annext, The SIGHS and GROANS of a Dying Man. By John Dunton late Rector of Aston Clinton. Illustrated with Eight curious Copper Plates. They were Strangers and Pilgrims on earth, but they de∣sire a better Country that is an heavenly, Heb. 11.13. ondon, Printed for John Dunton at the sign of the Black Raven at the Corner of Princes-street, near the Royal-Exchange, MDCLXXXIV.
To his most Affectionate Sisters and Brother Sarah, Mary, Elizabeth, and Lake Dunton of Chiswick near the famous City of London; and to his much Honoured and respected Un∣cle and Aunt Mr. William Reding Senior of Dungrove, and Mrs. Mary Chace, late Wife of Mr. Jeremiah Carter, both of Chesham in Bucking∣hamshire; and to his very loving Cousins William, Nathaniel, Thomas, Anne Reding of Little Missen∣den; and Mary, Margaret, Eliza∣beth, John, Anne, Richard and Sa∣rah Woolhouse of Stone near Prince∣resbrow in Oxfordshire; and to the four truly Vertuous and deserving Gentlewomen Mrs. Palmer of Graff∣ham (my Native Town) in Hunt∣ingdon-shire, Mrs. Mead of St. Ma∣rys Parish in the City of Bedford, Mrs. Field of Aston Clinton, Mrs. Ma∣ry Gossam of Bellingdon; and to his old and dear School-fellows Mr. Matthew Biscow, Mr. Elias Cox, Mr. John Chace and Mr. John Ayres.
My most endeared Relations and Acquaintance, THose Two well known and useful Books bearing my Father Dunton's Name, (Entituled, The House of Weeping, &c. and Dying Pastors last Legacy, &c.) sel∣ling wonderfully beyond all expectation, have encouraged me now a Third time to reoblige the World (but in a more especial manner my beloved Country-men, and you my Relati∣ons and intimate Friends,) by publishing another Treatise of his which you here see is entituled, The Sighs and Groans of a Dying man, &c. which said Treatise was fairly writ∣ten out for the Press (as many of you very well know) with my Fathers own hands just before his Death; and if this pleases as well as the two former pieces (as doubtless it will, for it doth together with some of the other Fifty Treatises accompanying of it, compre∣hend the Whole Duty of a Sincere Christian) I intend out of hand to expose some more of his Works to publick View: But many of them being written in Short-hand (and no body being able to read his Characters but my self) they'l take me up some little time to Transcribe them fair for the Press. Now if any wonder that this present Treatise comes into this wide World with∣out some Great or Noble Man for its Pa∣tron,
let such know that such Dedications begin now adaies to grow out of Fashion, his Policy was commended by many (and proved profitable to himself) who instead of Select Grandees for his Godfathers made all the Congregation Witnesses to his Child: so would I, if I could, invite you all together that are my Friends (and the whole English Nation besides) to this useful Book request∣ing you, and all therein to Patronize such parts and passages thereof as please you best, so hoping that by several Persons of all Ranks and Degrees the whole will be protected. But the Truth of it is to all you mentioned on the first Page chiefly, and of right belongs the Dedication of this Book; for surely those many and great Favours and daily continued Courtesies, which I have received from you may well challenge and command a double Expression of thanks and acknowledgement from me. And I knew not wherein I might more publickly, and better testifie my grati∣tude to you than by presenting you with some∣thing that might abide by you (and be your daily Companion both abroad and at home) as a Specimen of that solemn respect and service which I owe to you all. I have read of Pylades and Orestes, and many others, but the Past, Present or Fu∣ture
Age have not, nor never will produce such a Stupendious Example of Friendship and entire respect as yours hath been to me, which tho I cannot fully requite (should I live to the years of Methusalem) yet I will ne∣ver cease (whilst I have breath to fetch) kindly to acknowledge. Moreover, I very well knew any thing that had my Dear deceased Fathers name stampt upon it, would be very gratefully re∣ceied (and kindly entertained) by you all. And therefore now it being very seasona∣ble, I shall crave ave to put you in mind of your Deceased Fiend and Father; he is a true Friend (sath the Smyrnean Poet of old) who continueth the memory of his de∣ceased Friend: When a Friend of St. Au∣stins dyed, he professed he was put into a great strait whether he himself should be willing to live or willing to dye; he was unwilling to live because one-half of himself was dead, yet he was not willing to dye because his Friend did partly live in him tho he was dead: Let us all now make the Application as we see cause. And further consider, that tho for the present our loss may seem great, yet if any Memory on earth goes with us to Heaven, he now being nearer the Fountain of Love, loves us more than ever, and now is better able to express it in higher and dearer ser∣vices;
but if all remembrance of Friends and Kindred dye with us, yet still he loves us more then he could ever possibly upon Earth, tho in another relation the thoughts of which should stop the current of those Tears wherewith our hearts and eyes are so big and full. But to avoid Prolixity, I must proceed and further acquaint you that to this Treatise of my Fathers entituled, Sighs and Groans, &c. is added for your great pleasure and Satisfaction. First, The Pilgrims Guide from the Cra∣dle to his Death-bed, with his gloriou and triumphant passage from thence to the New-Jerusalem, &c. Which said Treatise was written on pur∣pose to encourage those Holy and Devout Pilgrims who have set forth, and are Jour∣neying towards a Heavenly Country that so they may make a resolved and chearful pro∣gress therein, notwithstanding all the dif∣ficulties, oppositions and conflicts that they may meet withal in the way thither. Herein is given brief hints of the usual Tryals, Troubles and Temptations that are like to sally out upon those that travel this narrow way that leads to Paradice, with an exact account in what places (whilst they are upon their Journey) they must look for
and expect comfort, succour and support, with a representation also of the happy success of those Christian Pilgrims that hold on in their heavenly race, and hold out therein, even a participation of future glory, and that all the Temptations they overcome in the Road to happiness, shallbe as so many shining Jewels in their Crown of Victory which will abun∣dantly make amends for all their pains, suf∣ferings and difficult travels. Here further you may see (throughout the whole Allegory) how that this present transitory Life is called a Pilgrimage, a Travel and a way, because it continually plieth to an end; For as they which are car∣ryed in Coaches, or sail in Ships, do finish their Voyage, tho they sit still and sleep, even so every one of us, albeit we be still busied about other matters, and perceive not how the course of our Life passeth away, being some∣times at Rest, sometimes at work, sometimes Idle, and sometimes in sports and recreati∣ons, yet our life alwaies wasteth, and we in posting speed with winged hast towards our last end. And loe! as our way-faring Pilgrim (describ'd in this Book) travelleth apace and leaveth many things behind him; even so it fares with us: For the poor re∣solved Pilgrim in his way sometimes seeth
stately Towers and sumptuous Buildings, he beholdeth them a while, he admires them, and so passeth from them; afterwards he seeth Green Fields, fine Meadows, flou∣rishing Pastures, and goodly Vine-yards, upon these also (with pleasing delight) he looketh a while, he wondreth at the sight, and so passeth by, then he meeteth with fruitful Orchards, green Forests, long Chaces, delightful Plains, lovely Com∣mons, pleasant Fields, huge Thickets and spreading Trees full of all manner of flying Fowls and singing Birds, sweet Rivers with silver Streams, and beha∣veth himself as before. At the length, be∣fore he cometh at his Journeys end, he meeteth with lonesome Desarts, hard Waies, rough, and unpleasant, foul, and over-grown with Bryars and Thornes, here also he is enforced for a time to stay: He laboureth, sweateth, and is grieved; but when he hath gone awhile, he over∣cometh these difficulties and getting at last a clear and distinct Prospect of the end of his Journey he remembreth no more his former Griefs and Danger. Just thus it is with us who like Pilgrims and Strangers are travelling and posting apace towards our long homes, one while we meet with pleasant and delightful things,
another while we meet with affrighting, sor∣rowful, and grievous crosses, but they all in a moment pass away and are gone and va∣nish even like Mist before the early Sun. And look as a pleasant Landskip which at a di∣stance seemeth to the eye rough, and uneven, (by reason that here is shadow'd a Hill, or Dale, there a Plain, and green row of Trees, yonder a Church, a Town, a City, a Village with Rivers (full of Swans) running by it; Then here again a poor Cottage, a shady Grove, a delightful Meadow, Birds flying, a sturdy Castle, and behind that some demo∣lisht Fabrick) yet if you come close to it all appears both smooth and even. Just thus it is with every Christian Pilgrim, who when he first sets out for Heaven, or whilst he is on his Travels thither, all things seem to appear to him rough, harsh and unpleasant, but when he comes close and near to his Journeys end, and just within prospect of Happiness, all things appear to him smooth, plain and delightful. This weary Pilgrim oft did ask to know How bad the way, how far he had to go To the new Je∣rusalem.. His way was tedious, and withal opprest, Yet his chief Travels were unto his rest. Our Life's a Journe To the Grave.; yet fond man delays To enquire out the number of his daies. He cares not [He] how slow his hours spend; His Journey's better than his Journeys end.
But this true Dal Called the Pil∣grims Guide. most friendly doth display To each sad Pilgrim the hour of the day. And tells him of the shady Oak Divine Provi∣dence., and Her That doth refresh; (the Sun-burnt Traveller) And cover him from Mrs. Charity. Storms and Showres too, And Called World, Flesh and Devil. Highway Thieves that would his soul undo. Yet if the Guide spoke of be not his Friend Hee'l miss that Road which doth in glory end. But then again this Heavenly Guide shews plainly to every Christian Pilgrim what strange discouragements he must expect to meet with on the road to the Celesti∣al Paradice, and how that his way thither is not all along strew'd with fragrant Flowers, with pleasant Fountains, and green and shady Walks (as many weak Pilgrims foolishly imagine when they first set out on their Journey for Heaven) for turmoiling fears and perplexities will attend every resolved Pilgrim, almost in every state and place he passes through. Further in this Allegory is shown how no Pilgrim whatso∣ever must expect whilst on his Travels to Heaven to meet with that glorious Jewel called CONTENTMENT  which many Pilgrims heretofore have eagerly sought for but could never find it) till they arrive at the de∣sired Country: which said disappointment often made our Pilgrim in this Book wofully to cry out—Con∣tentment, Oh! Contentment, where art thou, where art thou, what art thou gone such a long Journey that thou canst never return? —Oh! Contentment, Contentment*, Spark of pure Celestial fire, Port of all the Worlds desire;
Paradice of Earthly bliss, Heaven of the other World and this; * TELL me where thy Court abides, Where thy glorious Chariot rides. Eden knew thee for a day, But thou wouldst no longer stay; Outed for poor Adams sin, In a flaming Cherubim. Yet thou lov'st that happy shade, Where thy beauteous form was made; And thy kindness yet remains, To the Woods and flowry Plains. Happy David found thee there, Sporting in the open Air, As he led his Flocks along, Feeding on his rural Song; But when Courts and Honours had Snatcht away the lovely Lad, Thou that there no room couldst find, Let him go, and staid behind. His wise Son with care and pain, Searcht all Natures frame in vain; For a while content to be, Searcht it round, but found not thee; Beauty own'd she knew thee not, Plenty had thy Name forgot; Musick only did aver, Once you came and Danc'd with her. All the World still Hunt about, Happy he that finds thee out. Some have dreamt thou stll dost sit Circled round with Mirth and Wit,
In a Cloyster, or a Pew, Others alwaies seek for you: But there search, alike is vain, These Morose, and these Prophane. Mothers with indulgent care, Hug their Child, and find thee there; Kiss it while a Sleep it lies, And upon it feast their Eyes; When the little Bantling came Just to Lisp its Mothers Name, All her airy hopes are fled, There it dies and leaves her Dead. —Oh then Contentment, Contentment! Since thy Throne thou dost not place In a Palace, or a Face, Since thou coyly passest by Pleasures, Riches, Harmony. Since we cannot find thee out With the Witty, or Devout. Since I here of thee Despair, I'le walk to Heaven and find thee there. And therefore now I heartily wish that those rouzing and awakening Truths, that are contained under this pleasant Allegory, entituled, The Pilgrims Guide, &c. may be of dayly and universal use to all those Chri∣stian Travellers that are upon the srious enquiry after the right and nearest way to the New-Jerusalem: (where true Contentment only Dwells) And who knows but they may! for sometimes Truth apparel'd in a delightful Allegory, hath a freer access to some Tempers than in another Mode or Dress: But this I am sure Pro captu Lectoris habent sua libelii.
According to the candour or humour of the Reader, it will be accepted or censured: And therefore I shall not be concern'd if it please not every Liquorish Palate. That there may be faults in its Conduct I am not alto∣gether Ignorant, but these lapses lookt on with a sorrow∣ful Remembrance that the Author's Dead; or with an amicable view, will but appear as Moles in a fair Face however. Dear Hearts, Do you but give it your blessing and chearing Pro∣tection, and it shall venture the idle and impertinent censures of others. But Secondly, for your further pleasant Entertain∣ment, you have in this Book a distinct Treatise, Enti∣tuled, The Sick-Mans Passing-Bell, &c Wherein you have in most winning and affectionate Language; First, The whole Art of Living and Dy∣ing well, impartially represented to your view. Secondly, The Reasons wherefore Death is a serious thing; and how can this be rationally doubted? (tho it is by the A∣theistical Spirits of this Age) for when a man dies, he takes his solemn leave of one World and goes into ano∣ther (where he never was yet) to receive his last and final Doom, either to be Saved or Damned to all Eter∣nity. Thirdly, It is shown in this Passing-Bell how a dying hour is the last opportunity we have for com∣mending the Goodness of God, and His holy and righte∣ous waies to others, and how we ought therefore whilst the flourishing Plumes of Age are upon us, and we con∣tinue in perfect Health and Strength, daily to beg of God that our last Breath, in a more especial manner, may be drawn Heaven-wards, that so we may enter praying into the House of Blessing and Praise. Fourth∣ly, Herein is shown how we ought to live in a continual
preparation for Death all our life long, with an account of the infinite hazard of a Death-bed Repentance, or ventring Eternity upon our last breath. Fifthly, It is plainly shown in this Passing-Bell what Death is, where∣in you have his Character drawn to the Life. Sixthly, Here you have a most excellent Prayer that ought to be said in case of a sudden surprize by Death, as by a mor∣tal Wound, or any other evil Accident, when the me∣thods and Solemnities of preparations cannot be used. To which is added, The Sick-mans last and loving Exhortations to his Wife, Children and Servants an hour, or thereabouts, before his doleful Passing-Bell had Rung. Seventhly, You have an Act of Resignation to be said by a dying Person in all the bad accidents of his Sickness. Eighthly, You have an Act of holy Re∣solution of amendment of life in case of Recovery. Ninthly, You have in this Passing-Bell, the Reasons why the English People shut the eyes and mouth of their dead Friends as soon as ever they are departed. Tenth∣ly, You have the reasons why dead bodies are often kissed. Eleventhly, The reason why dead Bodies are often wash∣ed. Twelfthly, You have the reasons why the dead are often perfumed and Embalmed, &c. Thirteenthly, The Reasons why the dead are usually cloathed with white Linnen (or other sutable dresses) before they are put into their Coffins. Fourteenthly, You have the Reasons of the pomp and Ceremony wherewith the English carry thier Dead to the Grave. In the Fifteenth place, you have in this Treatise called, The Passing-Bell, a preparation con∣cerning the Contingencies and treatings of our deceased Friends in order to their Burial. Sixteenthly, The manner how the English Bury their Dead. Seven∣teenthly, The exact Method that ought to be observed in Funeral Processions for most Ranks and Degrees of men. In the Eighteenth place, in this Passing-Bell, you will see how Death is borne with us, goes along with us hand in hand through all the Stages of our Life;
how Infancy dyes into Child-hood, Childhood into Youth, Youth into Manhood, and so on till Old Age comes where we part fairly at our Journeys end, unless some acci∣dent, a Sword, a Bullet, or a Disease meet us and makes us break company at Half way, as it very often doth, for Death throws at all with an Impartial hand, and even scorns to spare any; he doth not crouch to Em∣perours, and humbly beg their leave to kill them; he Kills not Kings upon his bended knee, nor doth his darts use any more Ceremony to a Prince upon the Throne, than to the poorest Beggar on the Dunghill, or lowest Vassal that crawls on the ground, both die and turn to dust alike. Further is shown how the Noble∣mans costly and embroidered Sear-cloth stinks, as well as the rags and half sheet of the Beggar. Nay how, even Kings themselves corrupt under their grandy Tombs and glorious Arches as well as poor Laza∣rus, who goes to bed in silence, naked, and without a covering. Then in the Nineteenth place, you have an account how that 'tis neither Riches, Stately Friends, worldly Pomp, nor Honours too can Shield us from the stroke of Death: For take Man, extend him as big as you please, let your fancy stretch him till she crack her self; Cloath him with purple, then beset that pur∣ple with Jewels as thick and large until he look not like a Man but a Firmament: Let Crowns and Miters shoot down like Stars that fall; set him in the midst of perpetual Victories; let vanquish'd Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Empires, Lordships and Mannors be his Footstool, and let Conquer'd Princes and Governours be the Cushions to it. And let one stand and proclaim before him all what ever proud Titles or Honours (which are but a blaze blown by the breath of a mortal Man) or Ambition hath aspir'd to, or Fancy can dictate, call him King of Kings, the Husband to Fortune and Cousin to the Gods, yet afer all this Noise and Pomp, when we have done all, it is but a Man, Death
with his Pale-horse will trample upon him and kick out his breath, and so draw a black Curtain over him, and then this mighty Pageant is at an end. Methinks, I hear the whistling Plow-man all day long, Sweetning his labour with a chearful song: His Bed's a pad of Straw: his diet, coarse; In both, he fares not better than his Horse: He seldom slacks his thirst, but from the Pump; And yet his heart is blithe, his visage, plump; His thoughts are ne're acquainted with such things, As Griefs or Fears: he only sweats and sings: When as the landed Lord, that cannot dine Without a qualm, if not refresht with Wine; That cannot judge that controverted case, 'Twixt meat and mouth, without the Bribe of Sauce; That claims the service of the purest linnen, To pamper and to shrowd his dainty skin in; Groans out his daies, in lab'ring to appease The rage of either Business or Disease: Alas, his silken Robes, his costly Diet, Can lend a little pleasure, but no Quiet: The untold sums of his descended wealth Can give his body plenty, but no Health: The one, in pains, and want, possesses all; T'other, in great splendour, finds no peace at all. How often have I seen (saith a late learned Au∣thor) a Valiant General when he is to reap the har∣vest of his Crowns and Triumphs, fight unprospe∣rously, or fall into a Feavour with Joy and Wine, and so change his Lawrel into Cypress, his Trium∣phal Chariot to an Hearse, dying the night before he as appointed to perish in the Drunkenness of his Festi∣val Joyes. And therefore here under this Head, may ery properly be inserted the following Verses, Viz.
Go to the dull Church-yard and see Those Hillocks of Mortality, Where proudest Man is only found By a small swelling of the Ground, Where crouds of Rich Bodies are made Slaves to the Pick-ax and the Spade. Dig but a Foot or two to make A cold Bed for thy dead Friends sake; 'Tis odds but in that scantling room, Thou rob'st some Great Man of his Tomb; And in thy delving smit'st upon His Shin-bone, or his Cranion. Yet further (in the Twentieth place) it is shown in this Passing-Bell, that tho Death (like a terrible Sergeant) will most certainly one time or other overtae and Arrest all (with his cold and clamy hands) and lay them prostrate in the Dust; yet how notwithstand∣ing all that we ought not continually to amaze our selves with the thoughts of it, or too much to aggravate to our fancies the pains of Dying, the loss of Earthly So∣ciety, and dearest Friends; the solitude, darkness, and sluttishness of Graves, the dismal Knells, the Blacks, &c. the Hearses, and the whole pomp of sorrow and dolefulness, that attends Funerals, because too many of these sad and Melancholy thoughts are ready to soften and betray our minds and Christian courage, and will make Death the more tremendous and terrible to us when ever with its grim eyes it stares us in the Face; But some there are 'tis certain, tho their number is but few that care not tho Drums and Trumpets should Ring their Knell, or tho they saw a Grave every step they fetcht. And the truth of it is, I am ready to think, that could we from one of the highest Battlements of Hea∣ven stand and take an unlimitted Prospect of all things
in this world & by this advantgeous view espy how many men and women lye fainting and dying at this very time for want of Bread, how many Young men and valiant Heroes, in foreign Countries, are hewen down by the Sword of War? How many poor Orphans are weeping over the Graves of their deceased Fathers, by whose life they were enabled to eat? How many Marriners and Ps∣sengers are at this present time in a storm, and shreik out becase their Keel dashes against a Rock or bulges un∣der them? How many people there are that at this time weep by reason of Soul and Bodily troubles both, and are ecome even desperate by too quick a sense of infelicity? In all reasonable conjectures we should be almost glad to be out of the noise and participations of so many evils, and even long to be in a better world, though we were to pass through a thousand deaths unto it. But to proceed (in the 21st place) here is further shown that the road of Death is as common as 'tis in∣grateful, Infants as well as men daily can direct us in it, witness every Church-yard, where are to be seen Graves of all sizes: but the business is not so much to dye, as to dye well, which this Passing-bell shews you is only obtained by living well. It is indeed often uncomfortable to nature (especially when a man stands upon the brink of an endless Eter∣nity) to behold the sad stages of Corruption and Oblivi∣on of Dust and Darkness, and of a lasting silence. But the only way to overcome death is to be resolved to meet it, and to be ready with a kind and a hearty welcome to entertain it, or rather to bid it as it were defiance in the open field by a truly vertuous and godly life. And fur∣ther under this Head is shown, that when we come to dye we shall see (whatever we may now think) that Mines of Gold, Rocks of Diamonds, Lordships and Man∣nors, Crowns and Scepters, Kingdoms and Empires are not worth one Drachm of Grace, one Smile from Heaven, one Embrace of a Saviour, and how they are
not able to purchase it; nay if they cold, cursed said no∣ble Galeatius be that man who counteth all the world worth one hours communion with Jesus Christ, and if one hour of Communion be so sweet, Oh! what will a Life of Communion be, saith a late Learned and Re∣verend Divine: Therefore now Whilst on this Passing-Bell You cast your Eye, Learn these two Lessons, How to Live, to Dye. But further (in the 22d place) in this Treatise is shewn, that there is no state, no accident, no circum∣stance of our life but it hath been sowred by some sad instance of a dying Friend, or some other astonishing Pro∣vidence, a friendly meeting often ends in some sad mis∣chance, and makes an eternal parting: and further how Death is able to meet us every where, and how procured by every instrument and in all chances; and how it enters in at many doors, as by violence and se∣cret influence, by the aspect of a Star and the stink of a Mist, by the Emissions of a Cloud and the meeting of a Vapour, by the fall of a Chariot and the stumbling at a Stone, by a full Meal or an Empty Stomach, by watch∣ing at the Mill or by watching at Prayers, by the Sun or the Moon, by a Heat or a Cold, by Sleepless Nights or Sleeping Days, by Water frozen into the hardness and sharpness of a Dagger, or Water thawed into the Floods of a River, by a Hair or a Raisin, by violent Motion or Sitting Still, by Severity or Indulgence, by Gods Mercy, or Gods Anger, by every thing in Providence, and every thing in Manners, by every thing in Nature, and every thing in Chance — Mans body's like a House: His greater bones, Are the main Timber; and the lesser Ones,
Are smaller Splints: His Ribs are Laths, dawb'd ov'r Plaster'd with flesh and blood: his mouth's the Door: His throat's the narrow Entry: and his heart Is the Great Chamber, full of curious Art; His Midriff is a large partition Wall, 'Twixt the Great Chamber, and the spacious Hall: His Stomach is the Kitchin, where the Meat Is often but half sod, for want of Heat: His Spleen's a Vessel, Nature doth allot, To take the skum that rises from the Pot. His Lungs are like the Bellows that respire In ev'ry office, quickning ev'ry fire. His Nose, the Chimney is, where by are vented Such Fumes as with the Bellows are augmented: His Bowels are the Sink, whose part's to drain All noisom filth, and keep the Kitchin clean: His Eyes like Chrystal Windows, clear and bright Lets in the Object, and lets out the Sight: And as the Timber is, or great or small, Or strong or weak, 'tis apt to stand or fall, Yet is the likeliest building sometimes known, To fall by obvious chances; overthrown Oft times by Tempests, by the full mouth'd Blasts Of Heav'n; Sometimes by fire; Sometimes it wafts Through unadvis'd neglect: Put case, the stuff Were ruin-proof, by nature strong enough, To conquer Time and Age: Put case, it should Ne'r know an end: Yet, yet our Leases would. And alas! alas! Eripiter Persona manet Res. We take pains to heap up things useful to our Life, and get our Death in the purchase, which those rash, foolish and over-reaching muckworms do not consider, who make haste to be rich by galloping full speed into an
Estate, (before they are well in the Saddle, or have prayed for a blessing) by which means, before they run far towards hoarding up wealth, they unavoidably break their Wind if Death in the midst of their Bustle and Stir doth not save their patcht credit by preventing the odious repute of their breaking.Psal. 39.6. Psal. 146.4. But now in this Treatise you will find, that these men that drive thus at getting all the world into their hands are men that walk in a vain shew, and disquiet themselves in vain, heaping up Riches when they know not who shall gather them) and how in a day unexpected (when they think their Earthly designs and projects succeed most bravely) their very thoughts shall perish. And therefore here Dear Cozens by the way I ad∣vise you that have Trades, never to engage in too many businesses at one time, lest some Irons burn, nor in very great affairs (before you have traded in the world nine or ten years) lest your loss prove irreparable, re∣membring that in a great River Fish are to be found, but then take heed you be not drowned: for great Ʋn∣dertakers are like Forlorn Hopes, Aut Caesar, aut nul∣lus. And in desperate Casts 'tis very great odds if you throw not Ams Ace; and on the other hand many busi∣nesses are like the King of Spains Dominions that lye so far asunder, that the charge of keeping them eats out the profit, so that there is very few who eagerly involve themselves in multiplicity of business but rue it at last; I once my self (said a Dear Friend of mine) had con∣cerns with a Person involved in much business, of whom it may seem that speech was not meant, In the sweat of thy brows shalt thou eat bread, for he sweat in toil∣ing for wealth till he was ready to starve, working him∣self by a World of business, in about half a years time out of many Hundreds, till at last he was necessita∣ted to take Harbour in Ludgate. But I shall add no more here under this head but these Verses following,
(which if seriously considered, are enough to put a damp or stain upon all our too eager pursuits after worldly Riches.) Viz. Naked we came, 'fore we began to be Traders among the Sons of Misery; Tender, unarm'd, helpless and quite forlorn, E're since 'twas our hard fortune to be born. And when the space of a few trading days Shall be expir'd, then must we go our ways. Naked we shall return, and nothing have, Nothing wherewith to bribe the hungry Grave: Then what's the Proudest Dealers glittering Oare; Oh! what's he more than I, with all his store, Since we must both without distinction dye, And slumber both stark naked, he and I. But then (in the 23d place) is shewn how that suppose we could by rising early, and sitting up late, and by much hard tugging, and labour, and by often and early combing the Head of occasion, get the Golden Lock of success and prosperity (and so by this mens arrive to the splendid Titles of Rich and Great) yet that all this would not be able to keep off death or old age from our backs, or give us a Lease of Lon∣ger Life f r every meal we eat, is as it were a ransom from one Death, and layes up for another. And while we think a thought we dye, for the Clock strikes, and reckons on our portion of Eternity, nay we even form our words with the breath of our Nostrils, and we have the less time to live for every word we speak; therefore well might holy David say, He that lives to fourscore years we count him wondrous old: And now adays if any, through much grief and pain climb up to their hundredth year, they are accounted the chief wonder of the age wherein they live; but thse that arrive to this age their very lives do become the perfect model of a winters day, and they huge burdensom both to themselves and
others. Besides in Old Age as is shewed in the Passing-Bell gray hairs, and hoary Heads, dim Eyes, rotten Teeth, trembling Joynts, short Breath, stiff Limbs, wrinkled Skins, short Memories, decayed Appetites, Bald Pates, are esteemed but as Dressings to Funeral Solemnities, and the proper badges of persons entred very far into the re∣gions of Darkness. And now — Dear Relations, &c. We all are going to the self same Place, We only differ in our Way, our Pace: One treads the Common Road of Age: Another Travels, directly by the hand of's Brother: Some cross the Waves, perchance the nearer way: Some by the winged Shaft that flies by Day: Some ride on Fevers: Others beat the hoof, With Horses in their hands, and make a proof, Of their own strength: Others more fairly pace On Beds of Down: Some ride a speedy Race On hot-mouth'd Surfeits, emulous for the Cup: Some hotly-mounted fiercely gallop up On spurgall'd Broyls, whose frantick motion send Their hasty Spirits to their Journeys end: Some ride upon the racking Steeds of Treasure; Others false-gallop on the backs of Pleasure: All journey forwards to the self same place; Some the next way; and some the faster pace: All post an end, till beaten out of Breath, They all arrive at the great Gates of Death. As to the several Emblems belonging to this Book, I shall here in this Epistle take little notice of them, they being fully explained in their respective places through∣out the whole Book, but only speak something of those that relate to the sick-mans Passing-Bell: wherein you have described to the Eye in Figures (after a most lively manner) 1. How the Minister (being sent for)
comes to visit the Dying-man, with the manner of the Sick-mans carriage when he came there. 2ly. (means proving ineffectual) how the Sick-man gives up the Ghost, and how forthwith upon this the Passing-Bell is Rung out by the diligent Clark, to tell the whole Fami∣ly, Neighbourhood, Town, and Parish, That the Poor-man is dead that lately lay sick (being gone the way of all flesh) and that they should prepare speedi∣ly to follow after, none of them all knowing whose turn may be next. Then what is Life! But the flourishing array Of the Green Summers Meadow, which to day, Wears her Green Plush, and is to morrow Hay. And then again 3ly This Passing Bell doth as it were ell them that the very same Bir, and it may be, that he very same persons that are to carry this Dead-man o his Grave, stands ready to do as much for any of them. And 4ly it tells them all that their own mortality may easily be read in the death of this their deceased Neigh∣bour and Friend. — But now execution being served pon the Sick-man, (he being departed this mortal life) Methinks I see Grim Death, that aged Sire, Fly to next Town, with Wings that ne're will tire. Upon his bare Head an Hour-Glass he wears, And in his wrinkled hand a Sythe he bears, (Both Instruments to take the lives from men, Th' one shews with what, the other sheweth when.) Methinks I hear the doleful Passing-Bell, Setting an onset to the Dead mans Knell. (This moody Musick of Impartial Death, Who dances after dances out of breath.) Methinks I see his dearest Friends lament, With Sighs, and Tears, and woful dryriment:
His tender Wife and Sisters standing by, Dewing the Death-bed whereon he doth ly; Methinks I hear a voice in secret say, Their Glass is run too, they must dye next day. But then in the next place is represented (to the Life) how the man as soon as he is dead, is stript and laid out all along on the Bed, and how from thence, in about three days time (his Face being pale and wan, his Cheeks fallen, and his Eyes being sunk into his Head, and he becoming a frightful Spectacle to his very Friends) he is haled in his Winding Sheet to his Coffin with the manner how the weeping Mother, sorrowful Children and sighing Friends spend over him many, many a bitter tear, whilst pro∣bably all this while the greedy Nurses are fighting and scufling for his very Shirt and Cloathes, and the wretch∣ed Sons too Boxing and Duelling of it valiantly for the Mony and Goods that he hath left behind. In the fifth place is shown how the Dead-mans nearest and dearest Friends are invited to his Funeral with the manner how upon his Relations shoulders (after the usual Complement of a sprig of Rosemary, a Glass of Burnt Claret, paper of Biskets, Gold Ring, or Ser∣vice of Plumb-Cake is over) he is carryed to the Church, where often for the sake and instruction of the living, a Funeral Sermon or Oration is made, (and very likely if he was rich, or left a good Fee to the Par∣son of the Parish) at the latter end of it he is extold to the Skies, as the Nonesuch of the Age, Town and Country wherein he lived, where as large Enco∣miastical Praises of the Dead, unless their lives were eminent in Goodness, and free from any notable Blot, are much condemned by the most judicious and godly Divines, as a thing of very evil consequence, because they often prove Confections of Poyson to the Living; for many, whose lives speak nothing for them, will draw the example into consequence, and be thereby, led int
hopes that they may press a Hackney Funeral Sermon to carry them to Heaven when they dye; on the other hand it may be said, that though common Graves de∣serve no Inscription, yet Marble Tombs are not without some Epitaph: Heroical and vertuous Examples should not go with a Common Pass but with a Trumpet. In the sixth place is represented after what mournful manner the Dead-mans Corps or Herse is carryed (when the Doleful Bell begins to Toll) to its slemn Inter∣ment, where the Drooping Pomp ends, and where the Mourners and Supporters of his Pall, (and likewise his weeping Friends,) (after committing Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust in sure and certain hope (if the man dyed a sincere Christian of his resurrection at the last day to Eternal Life) leave his pale Carcass to make a splendid Feast for the Worms to feed on. In the seventh place (in these Emblems) is shown how poor frail man, from all Fortunes store in the con∣clusion of his days can reap no more than a narrow Cof∣fin and a scanty Grave, with the manner how our en∣trance into the world, and exit out of it, seem to meet, and what affinity there is between our Winding Sheet and Swadling Bands. In the eighth place, by these Emblems belonging to the Sick-mans Passing-Bell is shown, 1st how fading man doth but as it were, just arise from mother Earth to take one single turn upon the Stage of the World, with a necessity (by reason of sin) to return again and dye (2.) How poorly and meanly clad we must enter into our Coffins, a Winding Sheet, and one poor Shrowd being all we can carry with us, or our Friends will be∣stow upon us when they take of us their last Farewell. (3.) After what dismal and distracted manner some Relations carry it at their Friends Graves with the dole∣full Ahone; Ahone; ringing of Hands, tearing of Hair and sheding of Tears they make there, with a dis∣cription of one that did thus passionately follow her Hus∣band
to the Grave (nay desired to be buried alive with him) that as soon as ever the black attire of his fu∣neral was over, marries another, with whom she lived extream merrily all her days. By which you may see when once we are dead and gone, our Friends will think no more of us than we are wont to do of them we now survive. And we know not how soon that very earth which we now so negligently tread upon, may receive us into her cold Embraces, Veiw then these Emblems, and Revolve this Book, For Deaths mementoes, stand where e're you look. But I should quite tire your patience, should I run over all those delightful Heads which this Passing-Bell treats of, I shall therefore here make a stop — And in the next place proceed to tell you, that there is in this Book, besides what I have already told you of, a third Course prepared for you, of no less than fifty several pleasant Trea∣sant Treatises (rarely if ever handled before) all of them being greatly useful, and will afford extra∣ordinary pleasure and delight in the perusal (as was said in the Title page) if either profit or no∣velty will do it; nay further I must tell you, if depth of Fancy, variety and greatness of Subjects are capable of affording satisfaction to a Reader, you will have throughout this whole Work, I now pre∣sent you with, abundantly to satisfie your curiosity. But here again I should be too tedious should I ei∣ther write all the particulars wherein this Book doth excel, or give you the names of the fifty several Treatises just now spoken of: I shall therefore at present add no more, but my sincere and hearty wishes, that when your worldly Enjoyments, Incomparable Good Humours, and Earthly Splendor, shall be shri∣velled to nothing, or at least into a cold remem∣brance,
that even then the sweet perfume of your truly vertuous Deeds and most generous Actions may remain afterwards more fragrant, fresh and green than the Flourishing Grass that in Chesham Church-yard shall cover your mournful Graves when your souls are past into Immortality; and that your very names may be as living Examples of Ver∣tue and Piety to after Ages, or rather that they may bury monuments, behold the worlds Funeral, see Time laid in the Dust, and stand up with Eternity: I am, (most affectionate Friends) Yours, Yours, Yours, in ten thousand Obligations of Love and Service: JOHN DUNTON.
Verses relating to the Frontispiece or first Emblem in this Book, Entituled The Pilgrims Guide, &c. I. The Pilgrims Guide helps him to a sight of Jerusalem. Walk on Dear Pilgrim, soon sweet rest thou'lt find; This Pisgah Mount! Thy Canan lies behind: Look back and see the Worlds thin Gaudy Toys; Look on and see the Crown of all thy Joyes. II. The Pilgrim in great distress goes to Prayer. When all that's gay, when all that's great invite T the deceitful Bower of soft delight: Te Christian Traveller doubles Guards and Pains, For now no Countercharm but Prayer remains. III. Here we have no continuing City, Heb. 13.14, From this Vain World do pious Pilgrims run, reach Heaens Glory, by the settingOf their Lives. Sun. On this false Earth our Pilgrim would not stay, Tough Thorns did pave, and Devils line his way.
The Pilgrim guide helps him to a sight of Ierusalem. ye guide ye old gents engraved panel of gentlemen departing on a journey The Pilgrim in great distresse goes to prayer &c. The Pilgrim Dreameth upon a hill The Pilgrims enemies engraved panel of pilgrims on a hillside here we haue noe continueing City Heb: 13.14. all pilgrims engraved panel of pilgrims passing a town
THE PILGRIMS GUIDE From the CRADLE To his Death-Bed, &c. CHAP. I hewing the Occasion of the Pilgrims first setting out for Jerusalem. BEing weary of England, the Country where I dwelt, and finding no satisfaction in any thing I enjoyed, I took a Resolution to shift my seat, and to seek for that of which felt as great a desire as I did a want in some her Land. Many strange Countrys there were which I visited  pursuance of this purpose, many steep Hills I mbed, and many dangerous Precipices I narrow∣ escaped, I committed my self not once or twice the danger of the Seas, expecting to be brought  the Port which I so much wished for. But still I s as far from the accomplishment of my desires
as when I first launched out, and found all my pains rewarded with nothing but weariedness and tired Spirits. If it were my work in this paper to recount all my Adventures, and the several issues of them (which are enough to fill a large Folio) the story I believe would not be altogether useless, nor without that charming pleasure which such relations are wont to yield to those that read them: But having re∣solved for divers causes to begin the main History of my Life, there where I began to enjoy a taste of Happiness, I shall reflect no further upon my Infancy, Youth, Riper Years, and Old Age then only to tell you in what case that blessed hour found me: you must know then after so many tedious Journeys, and as many disappointments, my legs beginning quite to fail me, and to deny me so much as their support, I sat down upon the green grass, in a deep Melancholy and such a great heaviness of mind, that I feared I should sink still lower and lower, and go no further to seek a Grave, my countenance was so al∣tered, that there were very few marks remaining of the same man I was before, my looks were strange∣ly dejected, my eyes grew hollow, my complexion turned as white as a Clout; and in short, my whole blood was so impoverished of Spirits, that my flesh fell to the very bone, and my Cheeks in a despair of any other comfort seemed to desire to meet, and so bid the World farewel. In this dismal estate I continued but too many days, and according to the nature of that thought∣ful humour which now had gained the supreme power over me, I mused on divers things, and con∣trived several new Journeys in my fancy, which yet I saw at the same moment, would only contribute more to my affliction, and nothing at all to the amendment of my condition. But at last, as if I
had been admonished by some courteous Angel, which I fancied then flew by me, and gave me a small touch with his wing, I felt a thought stir in my Soul, remembring me of a place ca led Jerusalem, which I had totally forgot in all my Travels, and never so much as dreamed of directing my course unto. My Heart, you may easily think, leapt at this sudden stroke, and my Pulse beat at no ordina∣ry rate; for hearing by some means or other in times past, very much discourse of the beauty and the pleasant Scituation of that City; of the sweet tem∣per of the Inhabitants, and the many goodly things that were to be seen and enjoyed there above all other places, I was instantly possessed with a strong desire to remove my seat thither, and to seek my fortune (as we commonly speak) in another World. And Pondering seriously with my self the little or no contentment which I had taken in my best con∣dition here, together with the hopes which flutter∣ed in my soul of bettering my self there; my pre∣sent weakness could not hinder me from being in∣spired with a conceit that I should be able to Travel thither, nor depress my desires from going into a kind of passion to be at that place, whither my thoughts did run before me without my leave, and could not be perswaded to stand still for one moment. In shrt, my mind was so impressed with the hap∣piness which I heard dwelt at Jerusalem, that I was not able to discharge my Soul at any time of those thoughts and desires which lifted me up from the ground, and told me they would carry me thither. When I did eat or drink Jerusalem would still be in my thoughts; when I was in company, Jerusalem stole away my heart from them; nay, in my very seep it would not stay away, but I was wont t dream fine things of Jerusalem; but that whic makes the story of me the more remarable, is,
that it was toward the latter end of the year, and in the decay of all things, when these good thoughts began to spring up in my soul, when the Earth had removed it self a great way from the Sun, when all the Gallantry of the Fields had resigned its place to Ice, and Snow, when Charity grew cold, and Chri∣stian Virtue seemed to be gone back to its root, when the ways were untrod, and few or no Christi∣an Travellers upon the Road, then zealous desires began to bud in the heart of me, and I felt such a vehement heat, urging and stimulating my breast, that I could remain in no quiet for thinking of my Journey to that fair place, which had been so much commended to my Love, as the most flourishing and glorious that ever eye beheld. CHAP. II. Showing the earnest desire of the Pilgrim to be at Jeru∣salem. MUch time I spent in consultation with my self about the course which would be best to hold in my Travels thither, I spared no cost, omitted no study to get acquaintance with the nearest way to it, nor did I cease to enquire of those who were re∣puted the most skilful Guides, that I might obtain a true information of every passage in that Journey, which I seriously resolved to undertake; for though the weather was cold, the waies dirty and dangerous, and the Journey I was told would be long, and com∣pany little or none could be expected to deceive th the tediousness of the Pilgrimage, yet so great wr the ardors which I felt withn my self, that I regard¦ed none of thse discouragements, but only wishe
that I might be so happy as to find the right way though I went alone thither. And that which made the fulfilling of my desires more difficult, and my hopes to arrive more gloomy, was the many Con∣troversies which were in those daies fiercely agitated, and the huge Quarrels that men raised about the right way to Jerusalem. There were no less than Twenty (and some say many more) very different Parties that contended sharply with each other, and every one of them confidently affirming, that they only were the People of Sion. I need not here relate how sorely it grieved my very Soul! to see so many different waies every one of them laying so high a claim to Truth, and bitter∣ly reproaching the rest as damnable Heresies, I could not bend my course to no quarter but I was in danger to be assaulted with some Question or other, and was put upon my defence against some man of Brass, who thought himself worthy to be one of the Cham∣pions of Truth; nay, they all taking distant paths, and not going in strait and parallel lines, but in ob∣lique and crooked waies which crossed each other very frequently; they never met together but there was such justling and quarrelling about the Road to Jerusalem, that no man could be near them, but they would engage him to take the one or the other part in their angry conflict. But I received this benefit by these unhappy feuds, that they made me some∣times think it was no mean thing in the esteem of o∣thers as well as my self, for which there were so ma∣ny and so fiery Contenders; the prize I hoped would prove glorious which had drawn into the Field so many Combatants. The affliction also which I felt in my Spirit when I beheld them so sharply engaged, had this good effect upon me, that it made me more sensibly admire the goodness of God, which had preserved me from lsting my self in any of those
angry Parties, and entring into those never enough to be lamented Broils. This put me likewise in some hopes that he would not suffer me to remain long without the knowledge of the Truth, who had so graciously prevented me from diverting into the paths of Falshood. This degree of understanding I had already acquired that sweetness and love, meekness, moderation and peace were the Harbin∣gers to divine Knowledge, and since they were be∣come my Guests, I believed by some providential means or other in a very little time I should be di∣rected in the right way to Jerusalem, the place I so earnestly long'd to be at. CHAP. III. Shewing how the Pilgrim heard of a safe Guide; with his Character drawn to the Life. ANd he truly who is not wont to frustrate the expectations of those who breath after a bet∣ter Country that is an Heavenly, did not use much de∣lay before he gave me a sensible demonstration of that which I already believed, for being one night by meer Accident at a Neighbours House, where there were hot Contests about the right way to Jerusalem, where some were of one Opinion, and some of another; at last there stands up an Old Grave Gentleman that was a perfect stranger to me, who said, That in his judgment (if he might be suffered to speak it bold∣ly) thy were hugely mistaken who marched under the annors of any of those who were meerly for sense nd contetion, if they thought they were in the right ay to Jeualem: for Jeruslem (he  lding to them which was
a City at better Unity within it self than it was sup∣posed by these angry men, and he believed the way to that place would be found to be more peaceable than to be disturbed with the hideous sounds of Drums and Trumpets; upon hearing of what he said, I called him aside and told him, I desired to take two or three turns with him in the Garden ad∣joyning to that House we then were in (and it being a Moonshiny Night the walk afforded us both great de∣light) when we came into the Garden, I earnest∣ly begged him to tell me (for I told him I per∣ceived he was the man that knew) the right way to Jerusalem. To which he answered, he could not deny but he partly knew the way, but was not throughly acquainted with all the turnings; but he said he was intimately acquainted with a Guide that could conduct me safe thither. I askt him where he liv'd? he answered, Not far from this place, but for the present he said he would conceal his name, and only let me know him by his Character; He is a person then that is altogether disinteressed, and a partaker in none of those Hot Controversies and Contentions that are among us, one tht hath Sion and Jerusalem more in his heart than in his mouth, and loves to do more than to talk. But when he speaks, his words are more than sounds, and have a sting in them which pierces the very heart: If you did but hear him, you would feel that he leaves a true compunction in the Spirit, and not a false alarm in the ear. His head is Grey tho not his hairs; his wisdom makes him more venerable than his years, he knows better how to live than others do; how to dspute, and he can Argue more for peace than they for their Opinions. He hath Faith enough to save himself, and Charity enough to believe that others may be saved that are not in all points just of his Belif: His compas∣sion is equal to his understaning, his meeness, equal to his zeal, his Faith is mtcht with Charity, his love to
his Neighbour is proportionable to his love to God, and his Humility and modesty is equal to them all; he seems to be a piece of the Wracks of Antient Christianity, a Re∣lique of the Golden Age, one of the Children and not one of the Apes of Antiquity, he hath escaped the contagion of this evil Age, without flying from it; and he is Master of more strength than custom is of force and violence. In a word, If those Worthys ln whose veins the blood of Christ did run, could return to visit this lower Werld again, I make no doubt but they would discern in him such marks of their vertue, that they would confess him for one of their race, and kindly embrace him as an Inheritor, not only of their name but of their noble Qualities. If you would know any more of him, you had better learn it from himself than from me only; this I can assure you, that by his safe guidance there are many pious Pilgrims have made a very happy progress towards Jerusalem, to which you are so reso∣lutely travelling. And if you fear that when you go unto him, you may loose your labour and not find him at home, or that you may find him little at leisure. I can give you this further assurance, that he being a man of peace, he stirs but little from his own House, which stands at the further end of yonder Village, and if you climb up that Hill just before us early to morrow morning, you may with a Perspective Glass discern his Habitation from all the rest in the Town. And when you come there, you'l find there is but very little company that frequents his House (the passage to it being very difficult) and there∣fore you need not fear of finding him at home. But if you please to call m up early to morrow morning, Il'e wait upon you thither for fear you should mistake your way.
CHAP. IV. Shewing how the Pilgrim found out this Guide, and his Discourses with him. YOu cannot imagine how it pleased me to hear this news, and how much I thought my self beholding to God for bringing me so fortunately into this old Gentlemans Company. Well, in the morn∣ing I arose very early, and went to his House and call'd him up, and he very readily goes along with me. When we came there, we found that the Guide was at home, and that he had not one crea∣ture in his company: so after a very few Civilities passed between us, and some excuses that we made for our boldness in interrupting his meditations, I plainly told him what the real cause of my present address to him was, and of the trouble I was come to give him. I am, said I, a true lover of Jerusa∣lem, and have made a vow (by God's assistance) to take a Journey to that blessed place, but about the way thither I am so perplexed, that I account it a great blessing that I have not lost my wits, and am not become unable to travel to your House: One cries to me, Lo here! another, lo there! and ano∣ther, lo yonder lies the path of Life. But hearing Sir, that you were of great abilities to direct me, and that you are a man of Peace; and more than that, a man of Good Will, who hath a strong Pro∣pension to do good, I am come to make it my hum∣ble request unto you, that if it be true which is re∣ported of you, you will do me the favour to afford me some charitable Instructions about the most pas∣sable way to Jerusalem. As soon as I had made an end of speaking thus to the Gide, the good Old Gentleman that out of kindness brought me to the
Guides House, took his solemn leave of us both and departed; and I never saw his face more. CHAP. V. Shewing how plainly the Guide dealt with the Pilgrim, about the difficulty of the way to Jerusalem. NOw I appearing in habit like a Pilgrim, having a very innocent Countenance, an humble behavi∣our and using such language as signified that it was not curiosity, or a mind to try the skill which he had in forreign Parts, but a real desire to travel which brought me thither; he therefore returned me this answear, that he was heartily glad to meet with any man that would ask the way to Jerusalem, and that he thought he read in my face so much of the serenity of my mind, and the sincerity of my heart, that he might be confident I came with a real desire to receive satisfaction about it. But said he, tho' I must needs confess I can safely guide you in the right way to Jerusalem, and am willing to do it; yet I believe I may spare my pains in giving you directions, because there is some reason to think you will not be at the pains to follow them: For if you will give any credit to my words, I must let you know that the way to Jerusalem is both long and also full of many and great difficulties; and that there are many waies which will seem to you to lead strait to it, and which many men will point you unto, as the next Road, which if you should take, will lead you into great danger, and not only carry you a great deal about, but perchance conduct you to the quite contrary place, and end in your utter undoing, I would wish you therefore to consider a while,
whether it be an advisable thing to undertake such a Journey, wherein there are so many hardships and so many cross paths; a Journey which is so tedious also, and wherein I cannot promise you security from Frights, Thieves, Beatings, and such ill usages as have made many men possessed with such inten∣tions as you seem now to have, quite to lay aside all thoughts of it, and to sit down contented at their own homes; and after all this, I know not whether you will yield your belief to all that I shall tell you you must encounter with if ever you get to Jerusa∣lem: For, First, you must expect to be mightily hindred in your way thither by evil Companions of all Ranks and Degrees. Secondly, you will certain∣ly be fiercely set upon (and that almost to the pe∣ril of your Life) by three powerful Enemies (World, Flesh, and Devil) which will haunt you constant∣ly, both in company and in secret, besides seven other Enemies, whose names are Pride, Coveteousness, Letchery, Envy, Gluttony, Wrath, and Sloth, under a colour of bearing you Company for your Recreation and Delight, will earnestly seek your undoing. Moreover, by the treacherous assault of these Ene∣mies, your Cinque Ports, Sight, Hearing, Smell, Tast, and Touch will become endangered; and besides all these an hundred Enemies more you must expect to meet with, but time at present will not permit me to tell you who they are. After I had, with a great deal of patience, heard what he said, I was so far from shewing any tokens of disgust at his discourse, that I rather discovered an inward pleasure that I had received in his Free∣dom with me; and after I had rendred him hearty thanks for dealing so impartially with me, I be∣seeched him that he would not think it fit to spare his pains, which he had already, with no small suc∣cess, begun to bestow, but that he would make a
poor Soul so happy as to let it know from that mouth which he perceived would not deceive or misguide it, that difficult, long and dangerous way which leads to Jerusalem. And now I am not able to re∣late how much this devout person (who now ap∣proved himself to be both my Friend and Guide) was over-joyed to hear this welcom language: And he now begins to direct me in the following man∣ner: Before you begin your Journey (saies he) or set one step in the way you resolve to go, have these few words in your mind, and sometimes upon your Tongue, I am nought, I have nought, I desire nought, but only to be with Jesus at Jerusalem, further (said my Guide) I advise you before you enter up∣on so long a Journey, to see that your body be in good health, lest you should fall into any such sick∣ness by the way as might prove dangerous and fatal to you, and for that end I would also wish you to take some Physick, the better to prepare your self for Travel, and to disburthen nature of all those ill humours wherewith you may abound, which will at least indispose you and make you lazy, and soon weary if they be not timely discharged and carried away; now the best Counsels I can give you of this kind are these: First, I would have you purge your thoughts of all unworthy thoughts of God, and perswade your self that he is very good and earnestly desires to see you at Jerusalem. Secondly, Then it must be your care, when your mind hath recovered right thoughts of God to pu∣rifie your intentions throughly, and to see that they be unspotted in his sight, protest to him a thousand times that you desire above all things to know what that good, that perfect and acceptable will of his is. Let him know that you are so passionately bent to please him, that you would not stick, to purchase
the understanding of his pleasure at the rate of ten housand Worlds, if it was in your disposal. This will prepare you In the Third place to throw out that sluggish hu∣mour which is in all our Natures, and to dispose your will with true fervour to attend this business of searching out the will of God. And next to this, I beseech you use the greatest diligence you can to provide that your Faith that is to do all things in your Journey, be not it self infected with the com∣mon disease of Sloth and Idleness; be sure to purge your Soul from all the drowsie and Phlegmatique Opinions you may have about it, which stifle and choake the very Spirit and Life of it; suffer it not to rest till it animate you to a free and chearful obedi∣ence of all God's holy Commands; let it give your Soul a sense that the whole of Religion is compre∣hended in this one powerful word, let it seem as a point from whence all the lines of your duty are drawn like a fire in the middle of a Room, sending out its heat on every side in an ardent love of God, and of your Brethren. And having thus effected this, then Fourthly, search your Conscience very narrowly to find out all the sins whereof you stand guilty, some of which may lurk so securely, or look so demurely, that a Faith which is not very busie, may either not espy them, or let them pass for no offences; these must all be purged out and left behind you, as things that can by no means be permitted to go along with you in your Journey, and for that end let me advise you to unload your soul of them all by humble Confession, and if any of them lie as an heavy burden upon you, to repair to the Spiritual Physitian, that he may help you by his counsel and prescriptions to ease you of them. But then take care that all these be attended with a strong resolution, that so tho your sins should follow
and call after you, when you are upon your Journey, and beg to have but one word with you, They shall be so far from receiving any entertainment, that you will not so much as enter into Speech with them, nor listen to the voice of any of their Temptations. For this you know undid no less than six hundred thousand Travellers to Jerusalem in antient times, and left all their Carkasses buried in the Desarts, who left Egypt, as you are now going to forsake the World; but it was in their bodies only, and not in their hearts and affections, their mouths watered still at the remem∣brance of the Flesh and Coleworts, the Garlick and Onions, and they had a secret inclination to return to those enjoyments which they had abandoned; therefore you must resolve to oppose every sin to wade through all difficulties, refuse no labours, and re∣solve to beg your bread, if without you cannot come safely there, this you must avow to be your mind, and you must confirm and ratifie it again and again, without any reservations, clauses or exceptions; and to this you must add, So help me, O my God. But 5ly be mindful of your home, and evermore have yonder glorious City in your eye to which you are travelling, Travellers use not to stand gazing or loitering on the way, or to be drawn aside to behold Novelties; they rise up early and come to their Inn late, and travel hard to get home-wards; nor are they satisfied till they reach it. And shall not we that are Christians, that are travelling to an Heavenly Country, be as mindful of our home; it being such a home, that as far transcends the state∣liest habitation here, as the highest heavens doth the lowest earth; such a home as the quickest and sharpest eye would be dazled with beholding but a Glimpse of its glory, and the eloquentest tongue or pen (that ever was) comes infinitely short to des∣cribe it. The great Apostle (who had once a view
of that glory) comes something near in describing t, (but 'tis in the negative, what 'tis not, not what tis:) for (saith he) Eye hath not seen, nor Ear heard, or the capacity of man apprehended the splendor of it. 'Tis such a home as all the Patri∣archs, Prophets and Saints of God in all ages have left all to enquire after. This was the City to come, which they had ever in their Eye, and wandred a∣bout in Sheepskins and Goatskins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented to find out. 'Tis such a home where you shall never be troubled with any loathsome so∣ciety, and your beloved company shall never be taken from you. No strugling of enemies there; no David and Ishbosheth to contend for one Crown; for none but Conquerors are there; all Heads shall be adorn'd with Crowns of Glory, such as never incircled the Temples of any earthly Monach. 'Tis such a home, where Satan, nor any of his instruments shall be ever able to molest; no siding or taking of parts there; no Schisms or Divisions; no room for Make-bates there: What should such Salamanders do in Heaven? there's a fitter place prepared for such hot Spirits, (& 'twere well for them if one heat would extinguish another) for fire and brimstone must be the porti∣on of their Cup. This place is only for Friends to dwell together in unity, and none admitted here, but those that live in peace; here must be no spi∣rit of Contradiction, no dissentions or fallings out. 'Tis such a home, where you shall forthwith behold and enjoy the glorious beatifical Vision, and be eternally unridling that Mysterie which Mortality could never reach to, nor reason apprehend, the Tri-une God, the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity. There you shall see the Lamb with his train of Attendants, Cherubims, Seraphims, Princi∣palities, Powers, Thrones, Dominions, Archangels, and Angels, Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Mar∣tyrs
and Confessors, crying, Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath: And there shall those good Angels which were your Guardians upon earth, be your everlasting Companions in Heaven. (In a word) 'tis such a home where you shall be made perfectly happy; Time shall not rust or diminish your glo∣ry, nor adversity with her frowns, ever approach near those Mansions; for you shall be ever in the Sunshine of Gods favour, and your happiness as everlasting as his that made it. Oh! did but all transitory Pilgrims consider the shortness of the sweetest pleasure here, in compa∣rison of those endless and eternal joys that the Saints shall there partake of, and the shortness and small∣ness of the longest and greatest misery or torture that can be endured here in our passage to Glory, to the Worm that never dyes, to the fire that is never quencht, to those everlasting torments that shall in full viols be poured upon the wicked in Hell for ever; they would think less of this world, and more eagerly long to be travelling to a better. 6. Choose the best Guides you can get, when I have left you, to direct you in the way, for I must speedily depart from you. Choose such Guides which will lead you in the way to that home, to which many Saints are already gone in Soul, and many more shall in Gods due time arrive, and be fully glorified both in soul and body. These Seers and Overseers are those that open the Scriptures, or make plain the way of the Lord, and cause his paths to be known to the Sons of men; they are also (for their Dignity) termed Ambassadors of Christ, Christs Stewards, Publishers of glad Tidings, Proclaimers of Salvation, fellow-workers together with Christ, and Ministers of the Gospel. These God hath set up as lights, that by their soundness of Doctrine and integrity of Life, many souls may be
recalled from darkness unto his marvelous light: they are Cities set upon a Hill for men to see, and Candles lighted upon Candlesticks to light the Tra∣veller the way; and these (by their Eminency) are (or at least ought to be) Men of excellent Qualifications, and rare Endowments; (Angelical Persons, Men made up of Heaven) and if we take such for our Guides: we need not fear crooked paths, but may be confident of our way. But be∣cause all is not Gold that glisters, nor all such as they seem, it behoves us to be very cautious in the choice of our Guides; for if the blind lead the blind, whither will they go? The way to Hell is braod and easily found, 'tis a pleasant way beset with Roses, able to entice the foolish Traveller, who is Ignorant that it leads to death. And on the con∣trary, the way to Heaven seems to flesh and blood very uncomfortable; a narrow, sharp, steep, and unpleasant way, very intricate, long tedious, trou∣blesome and hard to find; in which many a passen∣ger hath stumbled, and many a blind Guide lost his way. But that we may be warned by others harms, and reach that which they fell short of; let's bear with the sharpness of the way, and be encouraged by the happiness of the end. The advice of a late ingenious Author, to this purpose, is worthy your observation. Regard not (saith he) how difficult the passage is, but whither it tends; nor how deli∣cate the journey is, but where it ends; if it be easie, suspect it; if hard, endure it. He that cannot ex∣cuse a bad way, accuseth his own sloth; and he that sticks in a bad passage, can never attain a good jour∣neys end. It cannot be denied, but that many a passenger hath suffered by bad Guides, such as have let them go out of their way, and made them be∣lieve the pleasantest way was the best and the poor Traveller not sensible of the mistake, till it hath
been too late to talk of returning. But of such we are cautioned to beware; and tho they speak never so smoothly, This is the way, walk in it, we are to turn our deaf ear to the erring Charms of such blind Guides and witless Counsellors. 7. Set out betimes (when throughly instructed in the way you should go) and hold out to the end. And here I shall in the first place give Dire∣ctions to young Pilgrims who are just setting out in your Journey towards Heaven. And in the next, humbly address my self to aged Pilgrims, who are (or at least ought to be) near their Journeys end. And first to you young Pilgrims ah! let me request you to make God and Heaven the constant objects of your thoughts; the one of your fear, the other of your love; so walk that ye displease not the one, and ye need not fear the attaining of the other. Are you setting out for Heaven? Oh! lose no time, remem∣ber that many have squandered away the morning, and have not reach'd their Journeys end er'e night; and with those foolish Virgins for their tardiness, have been excommunicated that place of repose, where the early Traveller safely and in good time arrived. An hour in the morning (you know) is worth two at night; and God is better pleased with young Zeal than decrepid Holiness. Josiah's for∣wardness makes him renown'd to posterity, and young Timothy's Piety eternizes his name to future Generations. Are you on your way, persevere in your Christian Course, and think upon the end whilst ye are at the beginning, (and even now up∣on the race, have an eye to the recompence) so shall the splendid glory of the one facilitate the the irksome tediousness of the other. Every true Christian (saith a learned Writer) is a Traveller: His Life, his walk; Christ his way, and Heaven his
home; his walk painful, his way perfect, his home pleasing. Let's not therefore loiter, lest we come short of home; nor wander, lest we come wide of home; but be content to travel hard, and to be sure to walk aright, so shall our safe way find its end at home, and our painful walk, make our home wel∣come. We are all concerned to make the best use of time, lest (too late) we lament the abuse of it; yesterdy cannot be recalled, to morrow cannot be assured, to day therefore is only ours, which if we slight, we lose; which if lost, is lost for ever. Young Pilgrims remember this, I mean you whose bodys are strong and healthful, not beset with any sickness, or besieged with any diseases, nor loaded with those common infirmities incident to old age, consider that you know not how short your time is, your Sun (for any thing you know) may go down in the morning, and your night may fall e're noon. There∣fore be early up, and earnest on your way towards home; that if death should snatch you away in a moment, it may be, only to waft you to happiness, whilst ye are inquiring after it. David rose up ear∣ly in the morning, and was earnest in his enquiries after this Jerusalem which you are travelling to, he longed after it, panted for it, and perpetually did he (during his tedious Pilgrimage in Mesech) lift up his hands, with his soul, towards it. The Father of the faithful rose up early too, and did chearfully set out, and held out to the end, as all those must do that hope to reach his bosom. But young Pilgrims i'le now leave you a while on your march, and after your good be∣ginning expect your perseverance in well doing, and  happy conclusion: And now come and direct my peech to aged Pilgrims, even to you whose decrepid odies signifie your night at hand, when you shall ie down in the dust, and rest in oblivion, till the ast Trumpet shall summon you before that dread∣ful
Tribunal. Let me humbly request you now to be inquisitive after the other world; have you tri∣fled away the morning of your day, and all thi while not put one foot forward on your Journey fo Heaven. Let me acquaint you, that it may not no be too late, if you defer no longer; remember there were some called at the third hour, as we as at the first; and labourers entertained in th evening, that were rewarded with those that cam in the morning. Are you on your way, go chear¦fully along, and you may yet finish the work of th day e're the approaches of the night; wherefor be not weary of well doing, but remember that th end crowns the work; and he only the gainer wh endures to the end. How many have set out b times, and made a promising beginning, that hav fainted on their journey, and fallen short of Heaven that which hath a Diadem in the end, may well ad¦mit some bitterness in the beginning. Let ther¦fore the worth of the Reward prompt you in yo greatest difficulties to undergo all with patienc who would not do much for such a crown, and wh will not some do for a worse? In Races, all press towards the mark, but t foremost only wins the Prize. Not so here; her a reward for every one that deserves it, a prize  more than the foremost; not only he that ru swiftest and is soonest there, but every one th runs well, (though he comes behind) shall ha something. My advice therefore to you is, th you would so prepare your selves in the evening your day, for the approaches of your night, that things being ready for a change, you may co Death to conveigh you from the work to the  ward. And it may not unfitly be said of you, as that glorious coursr of Heaven, The Sun knoweth  ing down: and your setting here, may but
you rebound to shine more glorious in a higher Sphere, in a word consider that He that doth in a few years to Heaven climb, Ends a long Journey in a little time. 8. Sort your selves with the best company you can find to travel along with you. Remember thou art a Kings Son, (said Mindemus to his Pupil) so sa I to thee, Christian Pilgrim, thou art Son to a greater King than Mindemus was, and wilt thou undervalue thy self with base company? shall one so nearly al∣lyed to the Prince of Light, be a companion for a brat of Darkness; an heir of Heaven, for a fire∣brand of Hell; the Son of a King, for the slave of a Devil. It may be guest by the company we keep, to whom we belong, for birds of a feather will flock together (saies our common Proverb.) 'Tis most certain that nothing of good can be gained by bad company; and to shun the workers of evil, is the way to decline an evil work; for we are apt to be drawn more by example than precept, and to mitate those we have most converse with (be it o good or evil;) better therefore to have no com∣any at all, than not have good. I had rather go o Heaven alone, than to Hell with company. How hen are we all concerned to make choice of such eligious consorts, as by their Heaven-like conver∣tions may draw us to a trade of godliness, such as ay be thought fit (by the most wise God) to e both our companions upon earth, and with us to e admitted Denizens of Heaven. To keep com∣any with our betters, is the way to improve our lves; for as a late Author wittily observes, that to e best in company, is the way to grow worse; d the best means to grow better, is to be the orst there. If therefore you have chosen such,
endear your selves each to other; for there's no such friend to a tedious journey as a good companion; and let your souls be (as it were) linkt in the bonds of true friendship, that as David and Jona∣than, ye may be lovely in your lives, and in your deaths may not be divided. And like the same Da∣vid ye may bid defiance to the works and workers of iniquity, with a depart from me ye wicked; so shall ye clearly quit your selves from the number of those that shall at the last day be terrified with that direful excommunication of the Great Judge, Depart from me, for I know you not. 9ly and Lastly, I advise you as Joseph did his Bre∣thren: Take heed that ye fall not out by the way For Brethren and fellow Sojourners to disagree is against the rules both of Piety and Policy; smal harmony nor delight in that journey where Trave¦lers do jangle. When two Israelites fell at variance Moses a spectator of the Discord, useth no other a¦guments of perswasion to compose and appease th difference, than this, Sirs, ye are Brethren; intim¦ting that 'twas not for brethren to wrong one ano¦ther. The Father of the Faithful, how tender wa he in preserving friendship with his Nephew Lo Let there be no strife betwixt me and thee, for we a Brethren. What manner of men were those who ye slew at Tabor, (said Gideon to Zeba and Zalm¦na) Oh! they were my Brethren. Oh! had y favoured them, I should have spared you. For  Brethren and Companions sake, (saith David) I  wish thee prosperity. 'Tis for enemies to fall out,  for such near and dear Allies to disagree; they m hold together, live together, and walk together love, as being related in an higher and nobler se than that of Nature; being Fellows of one Fami Sons of one Father, Children of one Mother, Sto of one Building, Branches of one Vine, Sheep
one Fold, Members of one Body, and Professors of one Truth, Made by one God, Redeemed by one Jesus, and Sanctified by one Holy Ghost: one would think these ties enough to debar division from among such Friends. Esops bundle of Cud∣gels in the Fable are very remarkable; whilst they were all fast bound up with a band, they were se∣cure either from cracking or bending; but when once divided by one and one, easily snapt asunder. Whilst we are all under the bond of peace, we are secured by Gods protection; but when once divi∣ded, at the Devils mercy. Whilst we hold toge∣ther, we need not fear treating an enemy in the Gate, but when once broke asunder with distracti∣ons, a pray to them that hate us. Remember that Joab and Ahishai's united strength, put the Syrians and Ammonites to flight; consider that ye have Ene∣mies enow abroad, ye need not seek any so near home. Make not those the objects of your malice that should be the bulwarks of your defence against the impetuous storms and batteries of an ensnaring world, a bewitching flesh, and an envious Devil  Know that there's unity amonst wicked me (for hey hold together against the righteous.)  nd Levi are Brethren in evil, and shall we be ? Nothing can be done well that's not done  hat's not well done, that's done through distion, The Apostle tells us, That love is the fulfillig of the aw; how then can the Law be fulfilled without ove. Those blessed Angels who welcomed the ew Born Saviour into the world with a Song did  a short Sentence express both Tables: T song, lory to God on High, Good will to men. Peace on arth makes joy in Heaven, and those that will not mbrace peace on earth, shall have nothing to o ith rhe God of Peace, or the Peace of God n eaven. You know what our Saviour said to
Disciples, By this shall men know that ye have an inte∣rest in me, if ye love one another. If ever therefore e expect to end in peace, or have peace in the nd, be peaceable in your Pilgrimage, so shall ye in good time arrive at your Journeys end, and be no longer Strangers-abroad, but Kings at home. But to close all my Directions, I add one Dlvio, a noated Interpreter of the Scripture; and after him, the Author of the Holy Court, relate bth, the Vision of a wise Man, who on a day sought for the Court, or House of Consci∣ence (as eagerly as thou now art seeking for the New Jerusalem) and it seemed to him, he beheld a City built with goodly Architecture, beautified with five Gates, which had as many narrow paths end∣ing in one large way: upon this way stood a Regi∣ster, who took the names of all Passengers to Re∣cord them: beyond that, he saw two Tribunes at∣tended with a great concourse of common people, who governed the inferiour parts of the City. A∣bove was beheld a Citadel, wherein a great Princess commanded, who had a Scepter in her hand, and a Crown on her head: by her side was a Lady very antient and venerable, who in one hand held a Torch, wherewith she lighted this Princess, and in the other, a Goad, wherewith she pricked her, if she Governed not according to her discretion. The Wise Man amazed, asked in his heart, what all this meant? And he heard a voice within, which said unto him, Behold, thy self before thou art aware, art arrived at the House (or Court) of Conseience which thou soughtest for: The five Gates which thou sawest, are the five Sences, the way wherein they meet is com∣mon sense; all the people which thou sawest enter in by heaps, are the Creatures in the World, which
first touch our Sences, before they pass into the Soul. The Register is Imagination, that keepeth Re∣cord of all things. The two Tribunes, are the two Appetites: The one called the appetite of Concupi∣cence, the other the Appetite of Anger, extreamly striving to oppose all obstacles which oppose its good, eal or pretended. This mass of people are the Passions, which make ill work in the inferiour part of the City. The Princess in the Citadel with a Crown and Scepter, is Reason. Now, dear Pilgrim, wouldst thou know who this ntient Lady is (why, I tell thee) it is thine own Conscience) which if rightly inform'd will now nd then dictate to thee the right Road thou shouldst ake, if ever thou intendest to reach Heaven at the end of thy Journey. She will likewise goad thee nd prick thee, if thou turnest aside into By-paths hat lead to Hell and destruction; and therefore have a care thou offerest not violence to her, for she must bear thee company to the other world, and be thy best Friend when all others leave thee. And nw, kind Pilgrim, if you resolve to follow all he Diections I have given you, you may esteem your self as much deserving the name of a Pil∣grim as he, who forakes his House, his Wife, is Children, and all that is near and dear nto him, that he may travel into a strange Country. And oh! how very lightly and merrily ay he travel that hath nothing about him that may rove an impediment to him in his Journey. Af∣er he had uttered these words (first having me up o an high Mountain, and shewing me a sight of that Heavenly Country to which I was travelling, a glimpse  which wholly ravisht my heart with Delight) he ery kindly shook hands with me, wishing me safe t my Journeys end, and so departed. After which, or an hour and an halfs time being extraordinary,
melancholy by reason of the loss of so faithful a Guide, and so good a friend, I went to a thatcht Cottage that adjoyn'd to a neighbouring Grove, where having rest∣ed my self for a little time, I call'd for a Pen and Ink, and writ the following Verses, Viz. I. Farewel false World! I must be gone; Thou art no home, no rest for me! I'll take my Staff and travel on, Till I a better world may see. II. Why art thou loath my Heart? O why Dost thou recoil within my Breast? Grieve not, but say Farewel, and fly Ʋnto the rk my Dove! there's rest. III. I come, my Lord, a Pilgrims pace, Weary and weak I slowly move, Longing, but yet can't reach the place, The gladsome place of rest above. IV. I come my Lord! the Floods here rise, These troubled Seas foam nought but mire; My Dove back to my Bosom flies: Farewel poor World! Heaven's my desire. V. Stay, stay, said Earth, whither fond one? Here's a fair World, what wouldst thou have? Fair World, Oh no! thy beauties gone, An Heav'nly Canaan, Lord, I crave. VI. Thus th' Ancient Travellers; thus they Weary of Earth sigh'd after thee; They're gone before, I may not stay, Till I both thee and them may see.
VII. Put on my Soul! put on with speed, Though th' way be long, the end is sweet: Once more, poor World! Farewel indeed, In leaving thee, my Lord I meet. And so up I arose, and putting my self into a Pilgrims habit from head to foot, and getting all things with me that might defend me against wind and weather, or whatsoever else might obstruct me in my Journey, I took (as I thought direct steps to the Celestial Paradice) but I had not travel∣ed above seven Miles and an half, but there comes three High-way-men (as I thought them at first sight to be) brusling up to me, and demanded of me who I was, and whether I was going in such post hast; to which I answered, to the Holy City Jerusalem; as soon as they had heard me say so, they cry'd to me, Stand, Stand, or go back, for we are resolved if you go a step further towards Jeru∣salem, we will bind you hand and foot, and after∣wards stab you with our poysonous Darts, upon which I askt, Who are you? and they answered, World, Flesh and Devil; upon which hearing their Names, I call'd to mind that my Guide told me when I first set out, that I must expect such Rascally Fellows to way-lay me if ever I travel'd to Jerusalem; but for all that I trembled and quakt, and was almost ready to die for fear they should be too hard for me (as they at last proved to be.) And I shall now tell you how I entred the Lists with them all, and how weak a Combatant I proved amidst those Encounters wherewith I grapled.
CHAP. VI. Shewing how the Pilgrim Encountred with the World. THe Field where I pitched was Fifteen Miles di∣stant from the place where my Guide lived, and five miles distant from any house, so that I could have no hopes of relief in two hours time; but for all this, I was so strangely animated with hopes of a glorious conquest, that I made an attack in the the first place upon the World, but that proving a place full of Snares, and such as suited all Estates, begun presently to be too hard for me. Formerly! could not see that place, wherein I could enjoy true peace; but now on a sudden, that which in reason should have been my contempt, became my con∣tent, and those May-buds of prosperity, honour and humane glory which were scattered here and there to take me; no sooner now were they seen by me, then they took me. That retired Cell, wherein I both enjoyed my self, and the contemplation of Him that made  had now for a season been estranged from me.  found such charming Objects in the World, as I con∣demned my self for hasting so fast out of it, to the Celestial Paradice. If I desired to be Rich, I found means how to purchase my ends: which, were they never so sinister, the custom was so general, as it authorized the error. Were it Honour that I sought after, I found a way quickly to enjoy her, tho the purchase made me an unhappy gainer. But for all this, my Conscience four or five times did twinge me severely with no fight, no victory; no Conquest, no Crown; and indeed, in the very first assault, I remembred my Creator; and to promote his ho∣nour, I made a fair shew, as if I would have enter∣tained
Death Cutts downe all, both great and Sm engraved panel of crowned skeleton surrounded by kneeling people The pest Houses engraved panel of corpses caused by the plague Bring out your Dead: Bring out your Dead: 6 The departing Christians last combate wth sata Flesh. world. deuill. Faith. hope. cha woodcut of figures depicting battle between good and evil.
the encounter, and still have marched on va∣liantly towards the Celestial Gate; in despite of all opposition but my resolution, by this unhappy ene∣my the Wrld, became weakned, and discovered my fickle temper. O Eternity, Eternity; how I forgot thee, and now forgo thee for one poor glimpse of Vanity! Had I remem∣bred what those glorious Martyrs suffered; how they combated; how they conquered. Had I but presented to my thoughts, what encounters those noble Virgins en∣dured; how they sleighted price, prayer and threats; and with their winning modesty, and resolved piety, quenched all unlawful heats. Had I recalled to mind, with what constancy, those famous Confessors profes∣sed the Faith, even in the face of Tyranny: and in despite of torments confirmed their fidelity: O then, poor Pilgrim, thou wouldst have holden all these encounters with the World light: and, in the discomfiture of them, shewn thy self a Christian, and in spight of all, have travel'd on: whereas now in thy defeat thou hast acquitted thy self like a weak Champion. CHAP. VII. Shewing how the Pilgrim Combated with the Flesh. WEll the World having thus bound me hand and foot, and left me for dead as it thought, yet I presently dintangled my self; but then the Flesh (the second powerful enemy come undomi∣neering over me, to whom I soake as follows, iz. Oh! proud Philistine, how thou insultest ove me! Is the n end of thy inlice? no bound to thy fury? Wilt  thy Mistress: and be a Comman∣der of t Syrigness? Remember how thou wert
made to be a Servant and no Mistress: a Subject and no Princess. Imperious Agar, do me not this dishonour. I have a noble Guest which thou hast long time wronged: one who was full of beauty, before thou blemishedst it: of a graceful presence, before thou disfigur'd stit. O tell me, thou unthankful one, bow comes it, that thou shouldst thus dishonour her by whom thou livest; disparage her by whom thou breathest: Pray thee, vile and stinking Carrion, hast thou life from thy self, or from another? If from another, why dost thou not tender her that honour that may become her, and make thee worthy of her? O whither wouldst thou hale me, thou hateful intruder! what have I received from thee but misery: and shall I now incline unto thee, who have been so oft-times deceived by thy folly? Withhold those sinful em∣braces from me: they have already undone me, let them not intangle me in more misery. O that I were stript of thee; or that I had loathed those de∣lights which thou hast suggested to me! O why did I so tenderly cocker thee, thou baleful Cockatrice! And why did I not crush the Sepent in the Egg! Why did I not shun the occasion of sinning, and so pre∣vent the means of my undoing! O what had I from thee but sin! And what other fruit brought Sin forth but death! whence camest thou, O treache∣rous Flesh, O my Darling Foe: and from whence was thy beginning? From Clay, vile Clay was thy Creation: from whence I received every clammy and earthy affection. Thou drewest my thoughts from Heaven to Earth; that I might be more like thy self, who tookest thy maerial Creation from Earth. Therefore be gone, be gone, Oh Enemy Flesh, for I'll travel on in spight of thee to nder Glory; and what will become of thee then! And moreover when I am dead, how will thy Honour lie in the
Dust? how wilt thou then be a stinking Carrion full of misery and corruption, meat for Worms. And alas, my Foe, how neatly so ever thou now art tricked, trimmed, tyred and gallantly armed, yet thou art no more but Flesh: and know that Flesh, and the beauty thereof is as the flower of the Field. And therefore I'de have thee to know, I'll not be hindred in my Journey by thee, if I can subdue thee. But now give me leave to talk a little with thee, O deceitful Flesh! And first resolve me, if ever I came into any place before I began my Travels to the New Jerusalem, wherein I could promise to my self peace. Nay even in this populous City of Silesia, I cannot take my walk in any Screet, wherein I am not subject to be taken by thy alluring deceit. Thou sendest forth those two light Spies, to purvey and bring in Objects of lust; by these am I wounded, by these do I suffer a continual Combat. Neither are these wounds cured yet; tho' my youth has left me; and tho' the daily Messengers of Death sum∣mon me. For, tho I be nearer my Grave, I fear I am little richer in Grace. Tho those follies of my youth have now left me- (and wo is me that I did not leave them before they left me) yet other aged maladies grow strong in me; against which I must prepare my self for the encounter, or I am undone for ever. Would you hear what my Distempers are They are these: Tho few be my hours; hoary my hairs (and my Journey long I have to go by a setting Sun) yet am I as numerous in my worldly cares, as if I were but even now entring into the World. I cannot without an envious eye see my Neighbours Field flourish; others prosperity gives me occasion of repining: others adversity grounds of rejoycing. Honour I would have, et can I hardly support my self, much less that Honour which is conferred on me: and all this is occasoned by thee.
And alas, tho now in my Pilgrimage I carry about me constant Companions of Mortality, as Aches, Agues, Cramps and Coughs, which are the Livery of a travelling Pilgrim, and tho Death waits at the Wicket, and lies in Ambush in what House soever I lodge, and in what path soever I walk, to seize me, or to bid me come away, and leave the World, and pre∣pare for a Shrowding Sheet; yet have I a months mind to be greater, or richer, or more eminent in the eyes of others, as if I could dispense with age, or make a truce with death; and all this is oc∣casioned by thy false suggestions, Oh sinful flesh. Therefore oh sigh and groan poor unhappy Pilgrim, take thy self now into the Ballance; weigh and examine thy self: Let not one hour pass over thee without a sigh; not a minute without a sob. Take away the force of this Engine, this fearful Ba∣silisk, with incessant Rivers of tears: Thou hast yet a little time left thee; bestow not one moment of it, but to Gods glory. See how every minute thou art nearer unto death; how the Messengers of the Grave tell thee thou canst not live long. There is not the least grain of sand which passeth through this Cre∣vit of thine Hour-glass, but may assure thee that thou art hasting on to the Sepulcher of thy Fathers. Canst thou then find any time to game, play and sport thy self, or to hearken to the Temptations of World or Flesh. CHAP. VIII. Shewing what Assaults the poor Pilgrim suffer'd by the Devil, both in company and in private. BUt I had no sooner utter'd these words, but I per∣ceived on a sudden, I had pretty well gotten the
mastery over the Flesh, and so I takes up my Staff and travels on again, imagining the third Enemy the Devil was fled, seeing how resolutely I en∣countered the World and Flesh; but I was mistaken, for it seems he lay all the while in secret, and I did not go half the length of a Field further before he rushes out of a private corner and Assaults me af∣ter a most furious manner, telling me tho the World and Flesh had been abused by me after a Dirty sort, yet he would not, and that he would, tho he was forced to raise all the evil Spirits under his com∣mand, obstruct me in my Travels, and leave me sprawling on the ground. (Hearing him say thus, I ral∣lyed all my courage that I had left together, and thus bespake him, O thou envious one, was it not sufficient for thee to lose thy self by thy Pride; but like a cruel cunning Nimrod, thou must hunt day and night after innocent blood. 'Tis true, Thou art for ever lost, and thou wouldst have my poor soul in the same state. And to bring thy pur∣pose about, thou hast practised with the people of my own Family, to betray my Fort unto the Enemy. Thou hast winnowed me: and as thou foundst me affected, thou wroughtst upon me. Thou hadst Baits in store for every soul, to take him napping in his Darling sin. If thou foundst him labour of that Birth wherein thou pe∣rishedst, thou couldst suggest to him thoughts of his own abilities; bring him to a disdain of others. Tell him, the Country did not take sufficient no∣tice of his worth. Advise him to hold an higher opinion of himself: and by contemning others, to raise his own estimate. But whereto aim all these trains? to undo him; for being fed with these con∣ceits, he begins to aspire to places of Honour, where∣in being crossed of his hopes, he falls into discon∣tent, which closeth the unhappy Scene of his life in misery and contempt. Or being deprived of what he once enjoyed, he is to an unexpected thraldom con∣fined,
and so with the heavy memory of his former sweet felicity, and present misery, he either lives desperately encountred with those affrighting thoughts of danger, or takes his leave at once both of life and honour. Again, if thou foundst him Covetous, thou hadst Achans wedge, and Geheza's treasure in readiness for him: He shall have his desires and a Leprosie to boot. If riotous, the Rich-mans table could not be better furnished, his delicious and liquorish appetite must be satisfied: nothing wanting that may tend to sur∣feiting, but with those Rioters before the Flood, he little knows how near he is perishing. If Lascivious, his flesh must want no provocation, to bring this deluded Minion to destruction. Fancies by night, and more visible Objects by day, are sent forth to seise on his pleased heart, and make him forgetfull of God. If Passionate, he shall find motives enough to inrage him; nothing he sees can content him. Fury is in his Eyes, and revenge in his Heart. Ma∣ny waters cannot quench this heat: for he aims at nothing but death. If Envious, others success finds him matter enough to work on. It is hard to say, whether his own gain or others loss please him bet∣ter. Those walks in fair flourishing fields which are made to recreate others, are justly made to ma∣cerate himself. For to see his Neighbours ground prosper, begets in him a distemper. If sloath∣ful, the Summer-beams, though they shine never so gloriously upon him, must not rouze him: there is an Adder in the way: yet a little, and then a little, makes him forget his poverty. If Heaven may be got by security, he may be secure of it for Eternity. But the purchase of Heaven is no such easie task. But thus, thus thou profest Enemy of mankind, assaultst him: and according to every occasion, pre∣parest thy temptation. And of all others, I poor
Pilgrim, became in these most miserable. For lit∣tle knew I thy subtilty, my weakness and infirmity. Whence it was, that formerly finding me no less ready to assent, than thou wert to assault, thou ma∣dest my own Family thy Garrison to keep that preci∣ous Fort which thou hadst like to have won from me. But now I'll be no more deluded and entrapped by thee, therefore fly Satan, fly; upon which words he vanisht.
CHAP. IX. Shewing how the Pilgrim called at a poor thatcht Cottage that lay in his way to Jerusalem, with an account how after he departed thence, be met with a Beggar, and pious Knight upon the Road, that were both desi∣rous to see the Celestial City, with his Discourses with them: then how again after this he had lik't to have lost his way in a little green Field, had not a fair Damsel, whose name was Piety, given him Directions: with an account likewise, how after this he falls into Company with other Pilgrims, who to∣gether with himself (being misguided and deceived by a treacherous speech the Devil made to them in the shape of a tall handsome man) travel into the Destructive City called Debauchery, where they had like to have been destroyed and burnt alive, but that one called sincere Repentance, and several other honest Souls hastily came to their assistance, and delivered them out of this City, and set them in their right way again that lead to Jerusalem; with the manner how after this they met with several other Persons with there Discourses with them, and then how at last the poor Pilgrim, first spoken of, lost all his fellow Tra∣vellers (by their sudden Deaths,) with the manner how after that he was forced to travel to Jerusalem all alone, &c. with many weighty things besides. AFter these encounters I began to be very thir∣sty, I therefore resolved at the next Country Village I came to, to call call for a little cool water to refresh me, but seeing a Thatcht Cottage on this side the next Town I was to pass through, I called there, and entring into the House I found a knot of loving Neighbours at a frugal Dinner, who seem∣ed to feast one another more with their mutual good
Conversation, than with any other Chear that was provided; their eyes told that they were very mer∣ry, and that there was a true love in their Hearts; their Countenance and free Converse did plainly de∣clare there was nothing superfluous, but all very handsom, no looseness but great freedom, no noise but much innocent pleasure; they were disposed to mirth rather than joy, to chearfulness rather than jollity, and to entertain themselves with a grateful variety rather than with abundance of meat and drink: this sight did very much affect me, and af∣ter I had called for a little Beer of Natures Brewing to squench my thirst, I began to discourse with them in praise of Temperance, Sobriety and other laudable Vertues, but I had not been there above a quarter of an hour before I had an inkling that those three Enemies, that I last encountred with, were again upon the search for me, upon hearing of which I took my leave of those loving Neighbours and travel∣led on again apace towards the Celestial City; some∣times crossing the Seas and great Waters that lay in my way thither, and sometimes again clambering up Huge Hills and Lofty Mountains, resolving now that no danger or difficulty whatsoever should retard my journey towards the New Jerusalem, forasmuch as I had had so man, hindrances hitherto, at last I came to an odd amphibious Country, indented all up and down with Rivers and Arms of the Sea, that I made a question whether I should call it Water or Land, yet t last I perceived that tho' the Sea was as it were nvited and ushered into some places of it, yet that t was churlishly pend out in some others, so that tho' the Sea foamed and swelled, and appeared as High Walls hard by me, yet the Natives of the place kept him from running over me, mauger all is Roaring and Swelling.
As I wandred up and down in this Watry Region, I might behold from a strait long Dike whereon I stood, a strange kind of Forrest, for the Trees mo∣ved up and down; they looked afar off as if they had been blasted by Thunder, for they had no leaves at all, but making a nearer approach unto them, I found they were a numberless company of Ship∣masts, and before them appeared a great Town in∣corporated up and down with Water. As I mused with my self, upon the sight of all this, I concluded that the Inabitants of the Country were notable Industrious People, who could so busie themselves upon the angry Ocean, and occupy those places where the great Leviathan should tumble and take his pastime in. As my thoughts ran thus, I met with a man who I conjectured to be betwixt a Mer∣chant and a Marriner; his salutation was so affable and kind, the Air also was so foggy that methought it stuck like Cobwebs on his Beard, and he was so dull in point of motion, as if his Veins had been fill'd with Buttermilk in leiu of Blood; when he was come up close to me, he askt me who I was, and whither I was going; I told him I was a melancholy Pilgrim, travelling all alone to another world, being weary of this: upon which demand of his I began to mingle words with him, and to expostulate something about this Country, and the People that dwelt therein, and indeed I sound a great deal of downright Civility from him. But as he was giving me an impartial Relation of this Country, and the na∣ture of the Inhabitants, he suddenly broke the thread of his discourse, and got hastily away from me, being haled by a Ship that was sailing hard by us, which troubled me a little to think I should so unexpected∣ly lose so sweet a Companion, but I had not walkt a fur∣long farther onwards of my Journey to Heaven be∣fore I kenn'd a certain Beggar all in ragged Cloaths,
not worth three-half-pence, with sad dirty feet (he being without either Shoes or Stockins) travelling, as I perceived, in the very road that led to Jeru∣salem, upon which I called out aloud, So Ho! So Ho! Honest Fellow, whither are you travelling so fast, if you'l but stay till I come up to you, if you are going my way, I will bear you company with all my heart to the end of your Journey. The Beg∣gar hearing me say thus, he looked back to see who it was that call'd after him, and resolves to stand stock still till I was come up quite to him, so when I was arrived, I thus saluted him, Pilgrim. God give thee a good Morning. Beggar. Sir I do not remember that ever I had an evil one since I set out on my Journey to Hea∣ven. Pilgrim. Well then, I perceive thou art travelling for the New Jerusalem as well as my self, verily I shall be extream glad of thy Company thither; but why Dear Heart, dost thou say thou never hadst an evil Morning. Beggr. Because I never was unfortunate or un∣prosperous. But Sir, I can assure you I shall be as glad of your Company as you can be of mine, to the Cecelestial City. Pilgrim. Be happy! What mean these words of thine? Beggar. Nor was I ever unhappy. Pilgrim. God save thee now at last, but man speak more plainly. Beggar. Truly Sir I will do it willingly, thou Sir, didst wish me a prosperous and good Morning, and I answered I never had an unprosperous or evil one; for when I am pinched with hunger I praise God: if I suffer cold, if it hail, if it snow, if it rain, if the weather be fair or foul in my Travels I praise God: if I be wretched and despised I likewise praise God:
and therefore there never happened any sad or evil morning to me. Thou didst likewise wish that I might be fortunate, and I answered, that I never had been unfortunate, because what ever God gave me, or I suffered, or whatever happened to me, whe∣ther it were agreeable to me, or otherwise, were it sweet or bitter, I gladly received it at his hands as the best, and therefore I was never unfortunate. Thou saidst moreover that God would be plea∣sed to make me happy; whereunto I likewise an∣swered, that I had never been unhappy; for I am fully resolved through his Grace to adhere, and on∣ly to cleave to the will of God as the best, (as abandoning mine own will) into which I have so wholy poured out mine own will, that whatever he wills that I will also, and for this cause as I said, I was never unhappy, seeing that I will cleave to his will only, and have wholly resigned mine own proper will. Pilgrim. This is very strange; but what, I pray thee, wouldst thou say if the Lord of Majesty would drown thee in the bottomless Pit and and so stop thee in thy Travels, couldst thou then be contented with his will. Beggar. Drown me in the Bottomless Pit! why certainly if he should, I have two Arms by which I would still imbrace him, and clasp fast about him: one is true humility, and that I lay under him, and by him I am united to his most sacred humanity; the other, and that is the right Arm, which is Love, which is united to his Divinity, and by this Love given to me from himself I hold him so fast, that he would be forced to go down to Hell with me, and it were much more to be wished by me to be in Hell with God, than to be in Heaven without him. By this I learned, that the most compen∣dious way to God is a true resignation with pro∣found
humility. Hereupon I spake again to the Beg∣gar, and asked him, Pilgrim. Good Lord! whence camest thou? Beggar. From God. Pilgrim, Where foundest thou God? Beggar. Even there where I lest all the Creatures. Pilgrim. But where didst thou leave him? Beggar. In humble and clean hearts, and in men of good will, which is his Temple and dwelling-place. Pilgrim. I pray thee Friend, who art thou? Beggar. Who am I! truly I am a King, and Je∣sus himself hath Crowned me with Peace, Power and Rest. Pilgrim. Art thou a King? but where is thy King∣dom? Beggar. Sir, the Kingdom of Heaven is within me, in my Soul (for all my cloaths are thus ragged and torn, and almost naked,) and I can now, and do by his power in me so govern and command all my inward and outward senses, that all the affecti∣ons and powers of the old man in my Soul are con∣quered, and are in Subjection to the new man in me; which Kingdom, no man can doubt but is better than all the Kingdoms, Scepters, Crowns and Glo∣ries of this world. Pilgrim. Lord! what brought thee to all this per∣fection? Beggar. My Silence, sublime Meditation, and above all my Ʋnion with the ever blessed God of Peace and Rest, which is my Kingdom, and to say the truth, I could Rest in nothing which was less than God; and now having found my God, I have forsa∣ken the unquiet world and am travelling to the man∣sion of Eternal Rest. The Beggar had no sooner uttered these words, but he falls down dead, and I guestion not but his Soul is safely landed in the Regions of Bliss.
But I was forc't by reason of this startling provi∣dence to travel all alone again (as soon as ever I had gotten his body decently buried) 'till at last I happened to light on a fair spacious clear Continent, a generous and rich soil, it was mantled up and down with large Woods, where as I ranged to and fro I might see divers fair Houses, Towns, Palaces and Castles looking like so many Carkases, for no hu∣mane soul appeared in them, and here methoughts on a suddain I felt my heart melting within me in a soft resentment of the case of so gallant a Coun∣try, and as I stood at amaze, and in a kind of astonishment, a goodly personage makes up-towards me, whom both for his Comportment and Counte∣nance, I perceived to be of a finer mould than that Companion I had so lately lost by a sudden Death: by the trace of his looks I perceived he was some Pious Knight that had been ruin'd by some sad dis∣aster: having accosted him with a fitting distance, he began with a masculine strong winded language, full of asperitions and tough Collition of consonant to speak to me as followeth. Knight. Sir I find you are a stranger (travelling through this Country to a better) because you stand s agast at the devastations of such a fair piece of the Continent, then know Sir, because I believe you are curious to carry away with you the causes thereof, that these riful objects which your Eyes now behold are the effects of nothing but sin and wickedness, folly and prophaneness, the knowledge of which hath quiet made me weary of this Country, and I have this twelve months time desired to travel to the Celestial City, but I know not one step of the way thither. Pilgrim. Say you so, Dear Sir, then come along with me, and I'le direct you as well as I can in the right way thither.
Knight. I give you ten thousand thanks, but pray r before you give me any Directions, do me the fa∣ur to tell me what moved you at first to betake your f to a Pilgrims Life? Pilgrim. I was driven out of my Native Coun∣ey, by a dreadful noise that Conscience had made  my Breast, to wit, that unavoidable destruction ould attend me if I abode in sinful state, and did t seek out for an Heavenly Kingdom. Pilgrim. But how did it happen that you came out of ur Countrey this way? Pilgrim. It was as God would ve itAs a late in∣genious Author words it. for when I was under e fears of Hell I did not know hich way to turn my self, but  meer accident I met with a ave Old Gentleman, whose name I could never rn to this day, and he directed me to an honest d skilful Guide who set me in the right way I should  to Eternal Rest, which way he told me lay rough this Country. Knight. Do you not think some∣es of theThe Pilgrim thinks of his Na∣tive Country. Country from whence  came. Pilgrim. Yes, but with much ef and trouble; but now I de∣e a better Country, that is an Heavenly one; Oh I g! I long to be at the New Jerusalem. Knight. But what is it that makes you so desirous to vel to Mount Sion. Pilgrim. Why, because I would fain be there ere I shall dye no more, and likewise enjoy that mpany that shall perpetually cry Holy, Holy, Holy, d therefore now Good Sir, come a little way with e, and I will faithfully instruct you in the way u must go.
Knight. But, Sir, are there no turnings and wind∣ings, by which a stranger may lose the way. Pilgrim. Yes there are many ways, but thus thou maist distinguish the right from the wrong, the right only being straight and narrow: the Valiant and Pious Knight hearing me say these words, he girt up his waste, and addrest himself to his Jour∣ney full speed, and he travelled at such a rate, that in three quarters of an hour he was quite gone out of sight, and I believe by this time he is safely arriv'd at the New Jerusalem; for methoughts he talkt when I first entred into Discourse with him like a man that would hold out to the end of his Jour∣ney. But I like a Resolved Pilgrim (though I had now again lost another Companion) kept still travelling on hoping that I my self likewise at length should arrive at my Journeys end. Till at last I came to a great populous City, but her buildings were miserably battered up and down, she had a world of Palaces, Castles, Long Streets, and goodly Churches: as I stepped out of curiosity into one of them, upon the North-side there was a Huge Grate, where a Creature, all in white, beckon∣ed at me, making my approach I found her to be a Vertuous Damsel, whose name was Piety; when she came close to me, she thus saluted me. Damsel. How now Father, whether travel you so fast? Pilgrim. I am going, Sweetheart to the New Je∣rusalem, canst thou tell me, whether or no I am in the direct way that leads to it. Damsel. Gentle Sir, I believe you have come right hi∣therto, but the way you have yet to go is very dangerous, and, if you are not very cautious to observe the right tunings, you will unawares fall into a Destructive Ci∣ty called Debauchery, and if you should happen to enter
into that place, 'tis a thousand to one if ever you get e to the New Jerusalem. Pilgrim. How should I know this City from others that I am yet to walk through) that so if I should ppen to come near it, I might keep the Road on e upper hand of it, and so avoid it. Damsel. Why Sir, it lies on the further end of that tle Field just before you, but you had need ke some faithful Guide along with you, else I am aid some Evil Temptation or other will bring you awares into it, for the way that you have to go to rusalem is both strait and narrow, but the very Gate  this City is so wide that a hundred thousand may go  together, yet 'tis divided into Five Divisions,The five Senses. and the way to it ms (to fools) to be strued with ses, and all manner of Fragrant Flowers: And ore this great Gate stands all manner of Fleshly lurements, on purpose to entice all those Pilgrims that e travelling to the Heavenly Jerusalem; there stands ewise before it a multitude of Fair Ladies, some th spotted Faces, naked Breasts and Shoulders, wling and wanton Eyes, so that the unwary cannot  be taken with the sight: therefore have you a great e good Pilgrim that you are not ensnared. Also there stands continually at the Gate, the Waits  the City with all sorts of rare and flesh ravishing sick, that make such a melodious sound, that the r is engaged presently. But to proceed, the Gate that lets into the City hath ee steps ascending, the first is the conception of st, the second is the sweet and flesh-pleasing con∣plation thereof, the third is free consent and lding thereto, which no sooner you get upon but you  in the City. It hath likewise three exceeding high and impregnable alls round about it, the first is blindness of
Mind, the second is presumption, the third unbe∣lief. Then under the Wall lyes a wonderful deep and dan∣gerous Ditch or Moat, which if any of the Inhabitants, who by striving to get out of the City, chance to fall into, 'tis a thousand to one if they ever get out again, but perish there for ever; the Ditch is called Dispair, and if it should be searcht, it is verily thought some thousands of Skulls of Men and Women would be found there, who the Devil himself formerly tumbled in. And then the Watch that keeps the Gate (for 'tis alwayes shut to them that are within) is Tyrant Sin, with divers Infernal Spirits all well armed, insomuch that without infinite power there is no escaping, There∣fore Sir, whatever shift you make avoid this dangerous destructive place. Now at the further end of the City is a Gate also as wide as the other, and that stands always open, the Porters name is Death. Moreover behind that Gate is an exceeding deep Lake, that sends forth nothing but a black sulphurous smoak of Fire and Brimstone: and all that dye in this City of Debauchery go out at that Gate, and so fall into the Lake that burns more fierce than Mount Aetna. In the heart of the Town is a strong and wonderful Castle, where the Devil keeps his Court, which is called Hardness of Heart. He that is keepe of his Castle is one Monsieur Obstinate, a very ipudent and grim fellow. The walk or path to the Castle is pleasant enough, but at the entrance of the gate is four steps very fair to set your feet upon; the first is called extenua∣tion of sin, to make great sins small, and little sins to seem none at all; some say, that this step is made of two sorts of materials, viz. not only to lessen or extenu∣ate sin, but also to make excuses about it, viz. I was drawn in; my heart is good, &c.
The third step is called delight in sin, and from ence it is defended, and pleaded for, by such who get  thus high. The fourth and last step is final Impenitence, and hen you are in the Castle. On the East-side of the City, towards a little Town alled Religion, is a very little Gate so straight, that ut a very few can get through, 'tis called Regenerati∣n; and he that opens it, (hardly one in a thousand, ho dwells in the City, does know) whose name is epentance; this Gate, as Tyrant Sin nor the Prince f Darkness never made it, so are they not able (not∣ithstanding all their Strength aad Power) to keep  allways shut; but they so blind the eyes of the Ci∣zens, that but few can find it. Pilgrim. Madam you have extreamly obliged me y your Civilities and Kindness to me in warning e of this dangerous City, and I hope (by the re I shall endeavour to take) I shall avoid it: nd therefore now Dear Lady Adieu. As soon as ever I had taken my leave of her, I rt up my loins and travelled on again, but by at time I was gotten the length of a furlong om the last City I past through, I chanced to hear veral Pilgrims, some of whose names were Youth, iddle Age, Old Age, &c. enquiring of those they et, saying, which is the way, Oh! which is the ay to the Celestial Paradice; we are afraid we are istaken in our way, for we fancy not above a arter of a mile before us lies that great and de∣ructive City called Debauchery, that ruines all (both ody and soul) that travel through it. I hearing em cry out thus, I ran up to them, and told them eir imaginations were too true, for that City be∣re them was most assuredly the great City called ebauchery, that ruines allmost all that pass through  and this I told them was no fancy of mine but
a reallity, for I was just now informed of this p¦nicious City, and cautioned against entring into it  a Vertuous Lady that lives not a furlong off from  place, whose name was Piety. But the Devil perceiving (by what means I canot tell) that they gave serious attention to w I said, all studying now which way to avoid t City, and that they were all enclining to go alo with me in the right way that lead to Jerusale he makes up to us all (first transforming himse into the shape of a tall handsome man) and spa to us with an audible voice) after the followi manner. viz. The Devils Speech. Gentlemen I perceive you are a Pilgrims travelling to the New Jersalem, and being afraid you have lo your right way thither, want instrctions from them that can direct yo in it; well then let me tell you,  have been formerly my self at tha very City you are travelling to, an the best Directions I shall give you t it are these, viz. you must wa through that City just before you which one of your Company call Debauchery, and this you may  without any manner of Danger, an yet get as safely to your Iourney end (as if you should go forty miles
about, and so you must if you go not through it) besides in this City you will find many flesh-pleasing De∣lights, which will be a great refresh∣ment to you now you are upon a long and tedious Iourney, and then when you are gone a mile beyond this City, turn upon your left hand into a Broad-way which leads into a Town called Sensuality, where you may live after a most Flesh-pleasing and Luxurious rate, which will soon bring you to the end of your Pilgrimage. But Gentlemen I do rather advise you to walk back again to your old homes, and never think of travel∣ling to Jerusalem more, for the way thither, I can assure you is very te∣dious and irksome, so that you will never be able to hold out to your Iourneys end. Sirs, do nothing rashly, but first go to yonders Hill on your left hand, and take a view or prospect of all the gallant Kingdoms of this present World, and the ravishing glo∣ry of them, and i'le warrant you af∣ter such a lovely sight your hearts and affections will soon be so glewed to the pleasant plains of this worldly Jordan, that you will not care to tra∣vel
farther to the New Jerusalem: Oh! what a vast and glorious Fa∣brick is here in which you are placed, (enough to charm the fairest heart) for 'tis full of nothing but astonishing wonders and amazing rarities, all which (if you will promise me to think no more of that Heavenly Coun∣try to which you have been travel∣ling) shall be yours, with all the allu∣ing Pleasures, delightfull Riches and gaudy Honours thereof, therefore talk no more, I beleech you, of a future state, or of walking to a better world, for what greater happiness can you desire than to have the present enjoy∣ment of the very sweets of Life which shall both charm your senses and please your minds. These sly Insinuations (through want of Christian watchfulness) prevailed so upon us, that we all resolved unanimously to venture through the City called Debauchery. When we came to it, our curiositys lead us to see all the manners and customs of the Inhabitants, toge∣ther with Strength, Government and Trade of the City, but we had not been in it above three days be∣fore we heard one Theologus, a learned and worthy Bishop (who as we afterwards understood, was sent on purpose by our blessed Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, to preach the Gospel to misguided and unwary Pilgrims, cry out, Oh Youth, Youth, Middle
Age, Old Age, &c. Oh! Pilgrims, Pilgrims, look about you, look about you for the Lords sake, fire! fire! fire! the City in which you are is on fire at one end, and also besieged by the wrath of God, you are all undone men if you do not speedily fly out to save your lives, you must Sirs get out or dye: Oh! how doth my soul tremble to behold what is coming upon you. And much more he spake to the same purpose with great Zeal, Courage and Compassion, Tears standing all the while in his Eyes beholding our woful condition. But when he had made an end of speaking, we told him the City was so strong, that we knew not which way to escape. To hear us say so rejoyc'd his heart (for he was afraid we had design'd to have dwelt there) upon which he told us, that there was a little Gate called Regeneration, which if we could but find, we might get out; but we told him it was very likely that Gate was locked, (well said he) but though it be, yet there is a Key which will open it, and that is Prayer. The Pilgrim (with others) in great Distress goes to Prayer. Then we all went to Prayer, and with many Tears and bitter Sobbs cryed to the Lord, and at last we found the Gate, but it was a great while before we could find the Porter, who is appointed to turn the Key, whose name is Repentance, for Prayer without his help cannot open the Gate of Regeneration, yet our Eyes being enlightned by the Spirit of Grace we got through the first Wall (but not without much difficulty) which was blindness of Mind: then we came to the second Wall called Presumption, and look∣ng about us, we saw divers other Pilgrims (who
had been in the City Debauchery a little before us, just at our heels thinking to get out also, but when they beheld this Wall they all stood still, for be∣tween these two Gates lies a largeThese Green Fields are the Pleasures of the World. Green Field, and those Pilgrims that came up to it were resolved to abide there, concluding now they were got far enough from the City, and therefore rested wholly upon the mercy of God; and so were kept in the City under some common illuminations of the Spirit by the strong wall of Presumption, which is the ruine of many thousands; for when their Consciences are awakened, and they begin to be sen∣sible, in some measure, of the woful state of fallen man, yet hearing of the infinite Grace and Mercy of God in Christ, they go no farther but remain in their sins, and never strive after the Gate of Rege∣neration, and yet hope to be saved: (but for ever blessed be almighty God) we were under a more special and through work, for we called to mind how Theologus had opened to us the nature of Gods Ju∣stice as well as his Mercy, and that he would in no wise clear the Guilty (and that we must there∣fore utterly forsake sin and be born again, or else could not see the Kingdom of God) therefore we durst not presume upon Gods mercy whilst we re∣mained in our Sins, nor trust to a Deathbed Repen∣tance (which seldom proves true) by which means we got through this Wall likewise. Then we came with the Porter to the third and last Wall called Ʋnbelief, which we no sooner behel but our hearts failed us, wherefore we here stood still and knew not what to do, fearing the Devil would come to us again and swallow us up quick (for his Eye was fixt upon us all the while) and our fears in part came to pass, for presently after
this the Devil bestirred himself to purpose, and ndeed threatned us, that if we endeavoured to go ny farther out of the City he would throw us over hat Wall into the Moat, out of which few ever es∣caped with their Lives. Upon this our hearts began to ake, and (like en half-dead) we trembled grievously, yet look∣ng back to our Joy, we saw several persons were coming up to us, having also got over the Wall of Presumption: But alas! our joy was soon turned to sorrow; for lo! on a sudden we perceived the De∣vil coming out upon some of those poor Creatures, nd by the help of that Monster called SIN, he hrew one or two of them into the Ditch or Moat f despair, and others he forced to retreat back again; his struck some terror to us, yet for all this (cal∣ing to mind what we formerly heard Theologus speak oncerning the vertue of Christs Blood and the na∣ure of Gospel Promises) we took fresh courage, so hat after a month or two crying to God, the Gate hat leads through this Wall was open, yet we had not power to venture through; for one of us more particularly (that had not exactly observed all pas∣sages before) calling to mind his notorious evil and debauched Life (he having lived a long time in vanity and folly) perceived the deep and dange∣rous Moat (through the Gate) which he conclu∣ded he should fall into and be undone for ever, for said he, we can never escape out of the City unless we can get over the Ditch, as well as through this Wall. But in conclusion whilst we were encoura∣ging one another (with these very words, viz. all would end well at last) a most sweet and lovely Lady whose name was Grace, whom we had met with some time before and received help from, appear∣ed to us, who bid us not fear, for, said she, here is my Eldest Daughter Faith, if you can prevail with
her she will soon (with the aid of my Daughters Hope and Charity) help you all through the Gate of Ʋnbelief, and over the Moat of Despair too, and indeed none else can do it. Upon this we were all again wonderfully com∣forted, and fell to singing of Psalms and Hymns of praise to God and the Lamb. But the Devil immediately after this most furi∣ously assaulted us again: yet Faith by turning her Shield against him made him quickly fly, which was no little joy to us to behold, so at last we were resolved to throw our selves upon the mer∣cy of God through the Blood of Jesus Christ, and advnture over, saying one to the other, if we perish we perish, there is nothing but Death if we go back or remain here. And thus we encouraged one another and ven∣tured in. And Faith that most noble Off-spring of God (with the help of other Graces) kept us from sinking, so that through infinite Goodness we every man of us escaped with our lives, and just as we got over the Moat, we espied a clear and lovely Fountain set wideZech. 14.1. open, and Faith helpt us to wash and bathe our selves therein, for she saw we were exceedingly polluted. Likewise as soon as ever we were over this Moa we saw at a great distance a most pleasant Mountanou Country, beautified with Woods, Vineyards, Fruits of all sorts, Flowers also with Springs and Fountain very delectable to behold; upon seeing of which we asked the Lady Faith the name of the Country, and s e answered it was Immanuels Land, and 'tis very common said she for all Christian Pilgrims when they come to it (for it lies in the way to Je∣rusalem) to refresh themselves in it, and for your encouragement when you come there you have but
a little walk to the end of your Journey, for being at this place you may see to the very Gate of the Celestial City, as those pious hearts that live there will make appear, which sight will make amends for all the troubles and dangers you have undergone in your passing through the City of Debauchery. After this we hasted away as fast as we could to∣wards a little Town called Religion, which lay in the direct way to the New Jerusalem (still bearing in our minds the Delectable Mountains, where we were told by the Lady Faith we should both meet with refreshment, and get a prospect of our Heavenly Country.) But Oh! with what difficulty did we pass along the Country, for the Devil pursued us close still, so that the first day we escap'd the Moat, we were forced to mount a mighty Hill called Opposition; and here we were stopt, not only by Infernal Spirits, and a whole Regiment of Hellish Temptations, but the Country People also were stirred up by some that were profest Enemies to our precious souls to hin∣der us in our flight, and to turn us back again if possible into the City Debauchery, yet for all this (by the providence of God) we got up the Mountain: but the next day we fell down into a deep Valley called Self-denial, and so difficult a passage this was that we were scarce able to pass through it, and yet we saw there was no other way to the New Jerusalem. But being got through it, we presently came to a certain Stile (which we perceived would also put us hard to it to get over) it being called the stile of Carnal Reason, but we not consulting with flesh and Blood, made little of it and jumpt over it. But alas! we were not gone a Pole from the Stile before we came into an howling Wilderness, through which Theologus had formerly told us we must pass,
and here we seemed for a while to be at a stand, there being so many turnings and by-ways: and our chief Enemies to amuse us raised up several subtil Impostors to put us again out of the right path that led to Jerusalem, one crying this is the Road and another that: besides we were assured the Wil∣derness had many deep and dangerous Pits in it, and that also 'twas very dark and dolesome, all which we found to be true, so that if we had not met some∣time before with an able and honest Guide who gave us Directions how we should walk over it, with Cautions also how to avoid the dangerous places, doubtless we had perisht in this place. But Truth now being our only Conductor, whose counsel always (as 'twas contained in the Holy Bi∣ble) we resolved to follow, we went not a foot out of our way through this dangerous place. But as it fell out two or three days after we were gone over the Wilderness we met with many Ly∣ons and other evil Beasts, yet we passed securely a∣long, they having no power to hurt us, though up∣on first sight of them we were possest with great fears that they would, but the Lady Grace travel∣ling some part of the rest of the way with us she vanquisht these doubts and desponding thoughts. But, yet the worst was not over, for lo! on a sudden we were beset with Thieves who threatned to knock us on the head, (but were restrained) yet they robbed us of all our Cloaths, and part of that little money (we had left) upon which ac∣count we were forced to travel stark naked five miles farther onwards of our way to a Gentlemans House that stood by a River side, where we begg'd (and obtain'd) a few rags to cover our nakedness the remaining part of our journey. And now though these hardships we met with after we were robb'd (of our Cloaths and mony) from
the Wind and Weather were irksome to flesh and blood, yet we calling to mind how wonderfully God had delivered us from sin and Satan, mattered none of all these things, for now to our inconceivable joy and comfort we were come into the sweet and pleasant way of the New Covenant: and at last get∣ting up upon the top of an high Rock called the Rock of Ages, we were safe enough; and here we had a full view (when we looked downwards) of the miserable City of Debauchery which we so lately, to the hazzard of our lives, past through, and when we looked upwards we saw (to the ra∣vishing of our hearts) the glory of that Heavenly Country we were going to. After this we all toge∣ther steered our course (through a most delicious Country) to another City that was nothing else but a kind of Posie made up of dainty green Hil∣locks, and tyed together by above four hundred Bridges, (but it lay in our way to Jerusalem) and therefore we were all forced to go through it, which we did without any stay or hindrance in the least: from this City in an instant we ferried over a-long and dangerous Gulf, and so through a Midland Sea into another Kingdom, where we felt the Clime hot∣ter by some degrees, than we had done all along in our Travells hitherto: for the most part this Country was a rough hewn soil and full of craggy barren Hills, upon which account all our walks here were rendred very unpleasant, but where there were Vallies and Water enough the Country was ex∣traordinary Fruitful, whereby nature it seems made her a compensation for the stirrility of the rest. As we rov'd here a while we encountred a grave man in black cloaths, we closed with him, and questioned him about that Country, and how far he thought we might have yet to the New Jerusalem, he told us he himself was wholly a stranger to that Country
we enquired after, and he could not tell us, but he said, he believed we had many thousand miles to it yet. So we took our leaves of him and travelled far∣ther, and as we wandered up and down in the Wilderness of this World, at last we chanced to come to a small Village, at the furthermost end of which (upon the Common) we espied a little Cottage, a poor old ruinous thing it was, the Windows being all broke, only they had cramb'd into the holes some old rags to keep out the cold, and by the propping of it up it seemed as if it were ready to fall, but however we remembring what Theolo∣gus formerly said, viz. that the poor receive the Gospel, and it now beginning to grow towards night we resolved to go thither and see whether we might not be refreshed there with sleep and entertain∣ment for one night, and have directions both how far we had to go (for we began again now to be at a loss) and which was our nearest way to Jeru∣salem. And being come up to the Door, we un∣derstood that the poor mans name who dwelt there was one Lackmony, now we knocked five or six times before we could have any manner of answer, for it seems he was asleep in bed with his Wife, but at last being between sleeping and waking he asked (though very faintly) Who is there, who is at the Door? Pilgrims. None but a few Friends, pray rise and let us in, for if you do not, it being now very late, and we strangers and Pilgrims in this Country, we know not whether to go this night for a lodging. We all listned very diligently, but could not hear what Lackmony said by reason of the noise that was within, for he having many Children it happen∣ed that by this time they were waked and fell into a fit of crying, some wanted Victuals and some of
them cryed for other things which he had not to give them, which made him one while to weep, nother while to fret and storm at the poor Chil∣dren, so that we could have no answer till we knockt again, which we did and that pretty hard. Lackmony. Who is at my Door? Pilgrims. Only a few Friends that are travelling o the New Jerusalem, but being benighted come hither to beg a Lodging. Lackmony. Friends do you say you are? I know ou not, pray what business have you here? Pilgrims. We tell you once again we come to eg a Lodging with you for one night. Lackmony. From whence come you Gentlemen? I doubt you have lost your way. Pilgrims. We come from a Stately-Mans House not ar off, whose name (his Neighbours told us) was worldly Pomp. Lackmony. Well! had he no lodging for you, that ou come to me? Pilgrims. No, he hath utterly refused to enter∣ain us, and not only so, but hath basely abused s, calling us at his pleasure, and also raised all the ude rabble of the Town upon us. Lackmony. He had some reason for it I warrant you, and truly I my self do not like very well what you talk f, for he is a man ready enough to open his door to any ho are worth entertaining, I mean profitable Guests; f you could get no lodging at his house, what ground ave you to think you should meet with any here; be∣des, tho I cannot deny but that (three) Weeks ago  heard (at a Neighbours House of mine) that there were me such men as you who went by the name of Chirstian ilgrims that were travelling to see the New Jerusalem, nd that the would call at my House for refreshment as hey went along; yet, Sirs, for all this, I know not so uch as one Man of you, and therefore I cannot tell that
you are those Pilgrims. And moreover, I am forbid by certain Edicts of this Country to entertain any suspici∣ous Persons, and they may be you as far as I know. 'Tis, Gentlemen, a dangerous thing to open ones door to Strangers at any time, but more especially now when there are so many grand Cheats and Robbers abroad. And I would have you to know, tho I have not much to lose, yet my life is as dear to me as any mans; and should I let you in, how you would deal with me, God knows. Pilgrims. Honest Friend, We will all assure thee (and that if thou pleasest one by one) that we will do thee no wrong, but contrariwise if you please to open the Door and give us but one nights lodging, you shall find us the best Friends that ever you met with in all your life, for we will instruct you in those Heavenly Truths that will tend to your eternal advantage. Lackmony. Gentlemen, you speak well! but what is it you will do for me to supply my present necessitys: Have you any Money to give me to buy my Family a lit∣tle good victuals (for we have had little else besides Bread and Water a great while to live upon) and some better cloaths? for my poor Children go almost naked. Pilgrims. We cannot at present supply thee with either Money or Cloaths, for you must know we have come a great way (our native Country being some thousands of miles distant from this place) and having but little Money in our Pockets when we first set out to travel, it is now almost spent, and we are afraid we have but just enough left about us to defray all our necessary charges till we arrive at Jeru∣salem. And as for Cloaths, we have none but what we have upon our backs, and they begin now to grow so very thred-bare, (and well they may, ha∣ving past through many a dreadful Shower and
Storm) that they'l hardly hang upon our backs to the end of our Journey; Come! come! let us in, let us in, for it is but for one night we desire to trou∣ble you. Lackmony. I will not do it, for you will not I per∣ceive promise me any present supplies, and as for your heavenly instructions I matter them not, for truly we poor Folks in the Country think 'tis Religion enough for us to bear an honest mind, and pay truly for what we have, and go to Church now and then to hear some good Prayers there, and to say the Creed, the Ten Commandments and the Lords Prayer, now and then at home when we come from work, if we do not chance to fall asleep first; for it has been so with me, God knows, many a time, the Lord help me; therefore be gone, be gone, and seek a Lodging some where else, for I will not entertain you, and by your twatling here you do but disturb my poor Wife and dear Chil∣dren, so that they cannot sleep for you. When we perceived that he would continue resolute, and would not give us so much as a nights Lodging, we concluded all with one consent to walk to the upper end of that Common, whereon his house stood and there all lie down together upon the bare ground, and sleep till morning, and then to travel on again; so accordingly we went there and laid our selves down upon the ground to sleep, and slept very sweetly (being hugely tyr'd with the last daies Journey) till about Four of the Clock in the morning, at which time I heard (before any of the other Pilgrims awaked) a shrill Voice crying out, Prepare for your Change! Oh! prepare for your speedy Change all you Christian Travellers that were overtaken by the Pilgrim in that little Field that lies on the other side of the City called Debauchery. When I at first heard this Voice, it a little surpriz'd me, so I immediately awaked all my fellow Pilgrims out of their sleep, and told them
that there was a Summons sent for them all immedi∣ately to appear before the Great King of Heaven: But they were not at all startled at the News, but as soon as I had told them, took me all by the hand one after another, and said, Well, Dear Pilgrim, now it seems then, we must leave thee, but we all heartily thank thee for thy good Compa∣ny and Counsel hetherto, and we hope it will not be long before thou comest to the end of thy Pilgrimage, that so we may meet thee once again, & that too likewise when thou art walking in the Streets of the New Jerusalem, where we shall enjoy thy sweet Company for ever: Therefore hold out as couragiously to the end as thou hast done hitherto, and trample down all oppositions, for he that holds out to the end shall for ever enjoy that Crown that we are just going to possess. But when I had heard them say so, I said to them thus, Dear fellow Tra∣vellers, are you not afraid of that River called Death, through which we must pass to enjoy this happiness; to which they answered No, no, not in the least; For alas man, said they, we are now go∣ing to our Heavenly Father, where all sorrow and sadness shall fly away; and tho with great difficulty we got safe hither, yet now none of us all do re∣pent of that trouble we went through to arrive to that hope of Heaven, which we have now in our own Breasts. When the very hour was come that they were to go hence and be seen no more on Earth, I accompany'd them to the River side through which they were to pass to the other World. As they first stept into the River, they all of them made a loving Beck'n of Fare∣well to me, and presently after cry'd out, Oh Death where is thy Sting; and as they went down still deeper and deeper, they said, Oh Grave where is thy Victory! And so they passed gloriously over, Trumpets sounding for them on the other side.
But glorious it was to see how the open Region was fil∣ with Horses and Chariots, with Trumpeters and ers, with Singers and Players on stringed Instru∣ts to welcome these Pilgrims as they went up, and wed one another in at the beautiful Gates of the New usalem. Oh! how delightful it was to behold how the very d to this River, through which they were to pass,  thronged with crouds of People to see them take their ght into the other World. And oh how pleasant likewise to see how the very banks nd the River weer full of Glorious Attendants, which re come down on purpose from above to accompany  too the City Gate. And now see how my Brother Pilgrims ride, Clouds are their Chariots, Angels are their Guide. CHAP. X. ewing how the Pilgrim, after the Death of his fellow Travellers, saw a very poor man entertaining himself with much pleasure under a Beech Tree, with what followed thereupon. AFfter the Death of these Pilgrims, Passed through a large green Forest that lay still in my way to rusalem, where I on a sudden encounter with a ightful Spectacle, which quite diverted me from nking much upon the great loss I had sustain'd  the death of my dear fellow Travellers. The Spectacle was this; as I passed by a large rn Field (it being now Harvest time) in the y heat of the day, I espyed a very poor man
all in ragged Cloaths, under a large Beech Tree, who was listning to the Musick which the Birds made in the Neighbouring Plains, and sometimes whistled himself to bear them company in their Melodies a long time I saw him thus entertain himself, and at last he pull'd out a piece of Bread and Cheese, which with eyes lifted up to Heaven, he seemed to acknowledge a liberal Dinner. And at the end of it he went and pledged the Birds in a little Stream that ran by him, giving God thanks again that had provided food for all his Creatures, I was much taken with the Innocence of his looks, and the con∣tentment which I thought I read in his Face, which bred a great desire in me to know him better, and see something more of a vertue hid under raggs, and so approaching nearer to him, and giving him the ordinary salutations which the time of the day required, I entred into free Discourse with him; and in conclusion, enquired of his condition, and how he came to lead so merry a life, being in ap∣pearance so very low in his worldly Fortunes, the poor man made no scruple to discover his heart to me, and being of a free and open disposition, and not caring who was privy to his thoughts, most readily consented to answer my desires. And he plainly told me, that the occasion of the present sa∣tisfaction, which perhaps (he said) I saw him ex∣press, was to hear the Birds so merry, who neither Sow nor Reap, nor have any Barns wherein to lay up their food; I could not chuse, said he, but bear a part with them in their mirth, and think my self at least so rich and happy as those silly Creatures. The World I see is as full for me as it is for them, all places are crouded with the blessings of God, and I know not where he should bestow more, they are so very full; and at present my wants are all sup∣plied, and I have no reason to doubt but they will
Arise yea Dead and Come to Iudgement engraved depicting the resurrection on the day of judgement
so for the time to come: for sure there is a God,  he must needs take care of his Creatures, and refore I conclude, I shall never want. And as n as he spake those words, he said, he must now ve me; forasmuch as his poor Wife and thirteen ildren which he had at home, expected him eve∣ hour; So I kindly shook hands with him and bid  adieu! adieu! having parted with him I girt up Loins & travel'd on apace, seeing night approaching.  went on the Road, I begun thus to reflect upon my : Oh! what a wretch am I, that have enough  bear my charges to my Fathers House, and yet  do nothing but murmur and repine, and this or man hath but from Hand to Mouth, and yet is rry hearted and content. Lord! make me for  future to be content with any thing, and to suf∣ any thing for thy sake, let me but have enough ear my charges to the Grave, and it shall suf∣! But now before I give any further account of my  or of what happened to me in my way to the estial Country, I will here as briefly as I can, e the Reader a Description of the City Jerusa∣, which I so much long'd to be at. CHAP. XI. erein the Pilgrim gives a pleasant account of the City Jerusalem, to which he was travelling together with a Discription of the General Resurection or Great day of Judgment fit for all Pilgr. to think on. Have no Faculty (it must be confessed of making  good Descriptions of those places which I have , and therefore it must not be expected that I nt you exactly a place which I know but by re∣t, it is sufficie that I tell you nothing but the
Truth, and do not imitate them who fill theia Maps with Chymera's of their own brain. Know th  that as to the Scituation of this City, it is agreed by all to be incomparablely sweet beyond the faist place that this World (through which I am travel∣ling to it) doth afford; for it is seated upon a exceeding high Mountain, loftier than Olympus it self, which yet is said to lift its head above the Clouds: There are nothing but pure and fragrnt Odours which perfume that happy Climate; the e is a perpetual Calm and quiet, which reigns in tht noble Region; there is noise, but that which infi∣nitely charms and delights the Soul. But that which is of greatest remark, is the glorious Prospect, which a place of this advantage yields. All the World here below presents it self before ones eyes, and makes them the Center in which the beauty and glory of it conspires to meet; I would not have you think I mean a World so small as that which we inhabit upon this Globe of Earth; but one which com∣prehends the Sun and Moon, and all other adjoyn∣ing Orbs, which are there beheld to move in comely measures about that Prince of Lights. It will be infinitely ravishing to see the winning beauty and fair proportions of every part of this vast frame, the fitness, usefulness and correspondence of it to all the rest of its neighbouring Parts, together with the exact and beautiful order of the whole. And can you imagin into what delightful transports it will cast your Souls, to hear the praises of the Great Creator sung out aloud by all his works of wonder. You have heard, no doubt of the Musique of the Sphears, which they say would ravish Souls from these mortal bodies, should it but strongly touch their Ears, and therefore is almost drown'd by the noise and clatter of this lower World. This is it which I am now commending to you even that sweet con∣sent
which all Creatures make among themselves, at rare harmony which there is in the motion of all e heavenly Orbs, which strikes the mind so agreeable∣  that one cannot chuse but dance for joy together th them. But yet the place is nothing so considerable as e Person that inhabits it, enquire not therefo e of e vastness of this place, the stateliness of is ilding, the riches of the Furniture, and such lie ings; but know that it is the City of the Great ing, the Seat of the Imperial Majesty of Heaven d Earth, the place where the Lord and glorious overnour of the whole World keeps his Court; d now what greater happiness can you wish if you ere to be the disposer of your own Fortune, than way to stand before the Soveraign of the World as e of his Ministers, Attendants and Favourites?  behold the wisdom of his Government, the good∣ss of his Laws, the admirable contrivance of all s works, the Universal care which he takes of all s Creatures, the infinite extent of his Providence, d the power of his Authority whereby he doth hatsoever he pleases in Heaven and Earth, and  deep places: it will strangely transport you to e the beauty of his Holiness, the splendor and ightness of his Understanding, the largeness of his ove, his uncorrupted Justice, his unexhausted oodness, his immovable Truth, his uncontrolla∣e Power, his vast Dominions, and to see how he  magnified and praised by whole throngs and ouds of Saints and Angels. But these things now  will leave to your own private thoughts, whilst I ke time to speak of the rest of the Celestial In∣bitants, especially of the Kings Son, who is a prin∣pal Ornament of this place. And of him I shall ed to tell you no more than this, that in his erson there is to be seen at once the most Il∣lustrious
Lover and Warrier that ever was. His Conquests have been innumerable, his Victories to mortal is able to recount: he hath triumphed ove the power of Earth and Air; he hath trailed th greatest Tyrant that ever was at his Chariot Wheel The general Resurrection or Great Day of Judgeme described on purpose for the perusal of all Transitor Pilgrims. But there is one Universal Triumph of his be∣hind, (which will be at the general Resurrection o great Day of Judgement) wherein there will be especial marks of his Honour set on all the Citi∣zens of Jerusalem who are to bear a part in it, which will astonish and ravish all your hearts with Admiration, Love and Joy: this will be the mo splendid sight that ever the Sun saw, for all An∣gels, and all men that ever have been, are, or shall be, will there be summoned to attend in some sort or other upon the Pomp of that Great Judgement Day: Then all the Citizens of Jerusalem will be seen with Crowns of Gold on their Heads, which this great Prince will bestow upon them when he comes in the Clouds as the Great and Impartial Judge of all the world, then shall all the Christian Pilgrims appear before him as so many Kings, and shall raign together with him: and then likewise all the Heavenly Inhabitants will ring with loud Ac∣clamations and Shouts of Joy and Praise to him that redeemed them, as they march along in his Train through the air to Jerusalem. And therefore now where ever I go methinks I hear the voice of the last Trumpet sounding thus in my Ears, Arise ye Dead and come to Judgement. And sometimes again methinks I see both Earth and Sea (and this second Emblem here attempts to re∣present
it to your natural Eyes) giving up all the ad that ever was, or ever shall be therein to the d of the World, that so all mortals might receive eir final Doom, by the Great Judge of Quick and ad. —And therefore now! rk how the last Trump frights the Earth, and Skies, d sickly nature groans before she dies. r naked Souls to Rocks and Mountains pray, ilst Rocks and Mountains shake as much as they. ristian! look there and smile! look up and see m for whom thou hast dy'd, who dy'd for thee. ere try, in thy bright Saviours Arms inshrin'd, at shoreless Seas of Joy and Heaven remain behind. Therefore now let all transitory Pilgrims be daily on the watch, for the time will one time or other ainly come of the general Resurrection or great dgement Day, (and that too as a Thief in the ht) wherein for the Tryal of Adams Treason d all mens Actions, a Sessions will be called, at ich time most assuredly The Trumpet blows, The Dead arise;For at the General Resurrection, Earth, Water, and Fire must give up all their dead. A Dreadful Sessions, Yet none dies. At this Great Assise the Judge will be terrible, the y severe, the Evidence impartial, the Cryer of the urt as Thunder, the Indictment fearful as Light∣g, wretched Souls the Prisoners, and all the Na∣ns that ever have been, or now are, the standers Oh what a day will this be (to all those that have n Pilgrims on Earth?) a day of Terror, and a
day of Triumph, a day of confusion to the Wicked, a day of comfort to the Godly. This will be likewise the last day, for no more day shall ever be after: there must never be another Sun, nor any other Moon, or any more Stars; a the Lights of Heaven will be put out, and yet  greater Light be seen, than ever mortal Eyes be∣held; in a word, this day will be the consummati∣on of Weeks, Months and Years. The Courts of Kings, the Pallaces of Noble Men, the Mannors of Lords, the Banqueting-houses o Rich Men, the full Barns of Farmers, the Cottages of Husbandmen, and the Stalls under which Beggars lye, will be as one, and all come to nothing on this Judgment Day. All the Kings upon Earth, all the Nations un∣der those Kings, and all those slaves that have been trod upon those Nations, shall be called on this day to an open Tryal: For behold then he is to come in the Clouds? and every Eye shall see him. Death then shall see an end of his Reign, the Grave will then be sa∣tisfied: nothing must remain but time, and that time must wait upon Eternity. On that day the Lord himself shall descend from Hea∣ven with a shout, and an Arch-Angel shall come with a great Power and Majesty, and he shall sound a Trumpet, whose sound shall be heard over all the pars of the World, and with his Tumpet shall Summon all Nati∣ons, and all sorts of People to come to the General Judgement. Who shall appeal from this Summons? who shall be able to avoid this Judgement? what heart will not tremble and quake at the terrible sound of this Voice? This Voice shall take from Death all her spoils, and force her to restore and pay back again whatsoever she hath taken from the World. All that are living shall be changed, all that are Dead
shall be Alive: the Prophets and the Patriarchs, the postles and Evangelists, Martyrs and Virgins shall here stand in white. The Graves shall open, and eliver their bodies, those bodies shall resume their wn Souls, and all those Souls shall appear together. The Sea shall give account of those whom he hath rowned: the Fire of those whom his flames hath onsumed: whom the Swords of Tyrants, the Saws, Axes and Wheels of Hang-men have mangled and ut to pieces, shall at this day have every Limb put nto his right place, every Joynt and Bone set to∣gether. For on a White Throne one shall sit, from whose Face Heaven and Earth shall fly away, and their place shall no more be found: before him shall stand the dead, both great and small: The Book shall be open∣ed, and one Book, which is the Book of Life: and the Dead shall be judged of those things which are written in these Books, according to their works. The Sea shall give up her dead, Death and Hell theirs, and Death and Hell shall be cast into a Lake of Fire, which is the second Death. On this Day God will have his pleasure in pu∣nishing such as have abused his Goodness, and re∣warding such as have set forth his glory. The Signs before the Day of Judgement. Of that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the Angels that are in Heaven, neither the Son himself, save the Father: watch therefore, for it is uncertain whether the Master of the House (being gone into a strange Country) will come at even, or at midnight, at the Cock-crowing, or at the dawning of the day. Howbeit, certain signs shall go before this day. St. Mathew says, before the coming of this Day, there shall be great Wars and Troubles in the World: Nation shall rise against Nation, and King∣dom
against Kingdom, and there shall be great Earth-quakes in many places, and Pestilence, and Famine and Terrible things in the Air, and other great Signs and Wonders: St. Luke says, there shall be false Christs, Wars, Sedition, Hunger, Plagues, Famine: Prophets, betrayed by their own Parents, by their own Brethren, Friends, and some of them shall be put to death. These are the Trumpets, the Pursivants, Vancurri∣ers, and Heralds, which go before, and make way for the Judge to come; then the day of Sessions draw∣ing nearer and nearer, there will appear other Mes∣sengers, far more Terrible; for thus saith the Lord by Ezekiel; I will cause the Stars of Heaven to be darkned on thee, and I will cover the Sun with a Cloud, and the Moon shall not shew forth her light; and I will cause all the Lights of Heaven to mourn, and I will send darkness over all the Land. The coming of the Judge. These Warning, and these dreadful Embassies be∣ing sent beforehand, at length the Judge himself ap∣proaches, before whom goes on universal Fire, which will burn and consume to ashes all the Glory of the World: the Fire shall be unto the wicked a begin∣ning of their Pains, and to the good an Induction to their Glory. Thus saith the Prophet Joel, A fire devoureth be∣fore him, and behind him a flame burneth up: the Earth shall tremble before him; the Heavens shall shake, the Sun and Moon be darkned, and the Stars withdraw their shining: This day of the Lord is great and very Terrible, and who can abide it? Listen likewise how an Evangelist sings upon the same Note: As the Lightning which cometh out of the East and shineth into the West, so shall the coming of
the Son of man be, the Sun shall be darkned, &c. and hen shall all the Kindreds of the Earth mourn, and they hall see the Son of man come in the Clouds with power nd great glory: and he shall send his Angels with a reat sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather toge∣her his Elect from the four winds, and from the one nd of the Heavens to the other. But further observe that the majestical manner of his Judges coming, is to the life set down by Na∣am the Prophet in this manner. (viz.) Our Lord hall come like a Tempest, and furious Whirlwind, and he Clouds are the dust of his feet: he shall take in∣ignation against the Sea, and it shall wax dry, and ll the Rivers of the earth shall be dryed up. The lit∣le Bason and Carmelus shall be withered, and the Mount Libanus shall fade and fall away: The Moun∣ains shall quake before him, and Hills shall melt: The earth shall burn in his sight, yea, the World and ll that dwell therein. Who shall stand before the ace of his indignation? and who shall abide the fierce∣ess of his fury? his wrath shall be poured out as fire, and the very Rocks shall become death before him. The World at first (for Sin) was drowned, and must at last on this day be burned: a Deluge of Water swallowed the one, and a Flame of fire must devour the other: all the World shall make but one Bone-fire, and in the Ashes of that fire the whole Earth must be raked up. This Dreadful Dissolution of the World, in which must perish the Earth, the Heavens, Sun, Moon, Stars, Planets, and all that move in the Waters, or over our Heads, is drawn in this excellent Picture by the hand of St. John in his Revelation, and in these curious colours, viz. I saw a mighty Angel loathed with a bright Cloud, his Face was like the Sun, he had a Rainbow for a Crown on his Head, his Feet were like Pillars of Fire, of the which one he set
on the Sea, and the other upon the Land. The Angel lifted up his Arm towards Heaven, and swear by him that liveth everlastingly, world without end, that from henceforth there shall be no more time. The Sessions, the Judge Seated, the Prisoners at the Bar, the Arraignment and Sentence. The Judge being (at this dreadful Day of Doom) placed in his Seat of Justice, it will be a full Court, a mighty Sessions; never in any Country or King∣dom hath been held so great an Assize. All the Children of Adam must stand before him: All be∣fore Noahs time, that were overwhelmed in the ge∣neral Flood, and all the Nations of the World, that ever have been, or shall be, shall at that day be raised out of their Graves, and give an account of their lives, and receive according to their deser∣vings. The Judge shall st in Majesty and Glory, round about him will stand Angels, Arch-Angels, and all the Principalities of Heaven. Before him, all the Souls of Men, Women and Children, are Prisoners: All bodys shall rise, but not all after one manner; for the bodies of such as have done well, shall be fair, beautiful, and bright∣ly shining as the Sun: but the bodies of those who in their lifetime upon Earth have done ill, shall ap∣pear ugly, black, horrid, ill-favoured, and filthy to behold, in as fearful shape as Devils. The guilty shall tremble at the sight of the Judge, the godly shall rejoyce. Will you see how the Judge himself will appear, how apparelled, and what Countenance he will carry? See then what Daniel saith, thus doth he describe him: I stood (quoth he) attentively, and I saw certain Seats set in their places and the ancient of years sat down, whose
garments are white as Snow, and the hair of his head ike pure Wooll. The Throne whereon he sat was like flames of Fire, and the wheels thereof like burning Fire, and a river of raging Fire issued and came forth from before him; thousand thousands were attendant to serve him, and ten hundred thousand thousands, stood wait∣ing before him: and I beheld all this in a vision of the ight: and I saw one coming in the clouds, who seem∣ed to be the Son of Man. This Son of Man must be our Judge, before him must be this Arrainment: before his Throne, so built up by Daniel, must all be set: then the Books must be opened. At one opening of these Books, those Emperors, Princes, and Rulers of Nations that have been wick∣ed, and not governed uprightly, will wish that their Kingdoms might fall upon them, and hide them from the Face of him who affrights them. All Churchmen that have, instead of being faith∣ful Shepheards over their Flocks, been Wolves to devour them, shall hear a Vae, a Wo pronounced against them: Judges that have upon any account taken Bribes: Courtiers that have flown upon the Wings of Pride, Vain-glory, Self-interest and Am∣bition: Lawyers that have eaten up their Clyents: Generals of Armies, Captains, and Private Souldi∣ers, that have been Drunk with Blood: Citizens, whose false Oathes and deceitful Wares, have to buy Lands, made away their Souls: Farmers, Gra∣siers, and Country-men, who have murmured at plentiful years, and in dear ones have grinded the faces of the poor. And lastly, common Beggers, who have made idleness their living, whose mouths have been filled with Cursings, with Prophaneness, with Damnable Oaths, and with Blasphemy: These, and the rest, and thousand others as bad as these shall have no Councellors allotted to plead for them, they are
therefore in a wretched estate, when the Judge and their own Conscience shall call them to a Tryal. They that on Earth have sumptuous Palaces, and Wardrops full of Embroydered Garments, who every day who are wherried through the Streets in thundering Coaches drawn with four Horses, shows of Footmen running by: troops of Gallants flutter∣ing before them, Trains of Attendants gallopping af∣ter them: these shall at this Sessions stand shiver∣ing, naked, dejected, and stripped out of all their Glories. Those Titles of High and mighty, Right Honourable, Most Heroical, Thrice Illustrious, Thrice Reverend, Truly Noble, Truly Valorous, Right-Worshipful, &c. shall here be laid by, and not re∣garded. A Cobler and a Caesar shall at this bar stand upon equal terms for Life and Death, about one and the same Offence, and that is Sin: One Judge must sit upon both, one Jury go upon both, and one and the same Sentence be laid upon them at their Condemnation. What will all the Idolatrous Kings and People, so often mentioned in the Old Testament, say, when they shall see tht true and Ever living God whom they mocked at, and blasphemed? How will the Jews curse their infidelity, hard∣ness of heart, and obstinate blindness, when they shall behold the true Messiah, whom they reviled, spit at, buffeted, scourged and Crucified? How will the Romans cry out upon their Jupiter, and 400 several gods, when they see themselves Arraigned before an Omnipotent Deity, and not one of their false ones able to help them? How will Herod, Caiphas, Annas, and Pilate look, when they see him sit in Judgement upon them, who was by them basely betrayed, sold, baffled, tor∣mented and condemned? Traytor Judas, what Hell wilt thou desperately
again cast thy self into, to see thy Lord and Maker sit in Glory, whom thou with a Kiss betrayedst to a bloody Cross, to an ignominious, barbarous, and cruel Execution? How will the Turks, and all their Grand Seigniors curse their Creation, and rail on Mahomet their delu∣ding Prophet, when before their Eyes sits the Father of all the Holy Prophets, whom they on Earth have laughed at: and hated all Christians, because they had their Names from Christ. Nay, how will those Christians hang their heads, and cry, wo worth to the Wombs that bare them, and to the Paps that gave them Suck, sithence they have gone astray out of Gods fold, lived licenti∣ously, spent their days in Drunkenness, in Whoring, in al sorts of varied sins, and have danced hand in in hand with Satan: What will they say? Is this he whose Body was nailed? hands and feet bored, side pierced, whose mouth had Vinegar and Gall offer∣ed to it, with a thousand tortures, disgraces and dishonours, only for us, to save us, to pay our debts, and yet how did we every hour again and again Crucifie him? Is this he, in whose Name (for Je∣sus Christ his sake) when but one poor Farthing has been begged we have denied to give it, though our Pockets jingled both with Gold and Silver? Is this he, who when we have sat at our Tables sur∣feiting in Wines and gluttonous Chear, have deni∣ed our Scraps and our broken Bread to those who on their Knees have asked for the tender mercies of our Lord Jesus? O wretched, miserable, forlorn, and forgetful Captives that we are. What will remain after this and the like Expostu∣lations, but beating of Breasts, tearing of Hair, cur∣sing their Creation, then Howlings, Ululations, Shrieks, Terrors, fear of Torments before their faces, and an assurance of everlasting Tortures,
which are to follow; but only this, the Sentence, Doom, or Judgment from the Judges mouth, and that is in two Words only, (Ite Venite) Go and Come: Go ye cursed, to those who have done ill, Come ye blessed, to those who have done well. Go ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Come ye blessed, and dwell with me in Heaven for ever and ever. I will begin here and speak something of this sen∣tence to the ungodly wherein every word speaks woe & wrath, fire and fury, death and damnation; & every syllable speaks the deepest Sorrow & dreadfulest Suf∣ferings to wicked Pilgrims. The Lord Chief Justice of the whole World, the Judge of the Quick and Dead is now (as it were) in all his Robes and Royalty, with millions of glorious Attendants, in the Glory f his Father, with all his holy Angels, set on the Bench. The poor prisoner, whose trembling Soul is newly reunited to the loathsome Carcass of his Body, is drag'd to the Bar, awaiting and expecting some doleful Doom. He is lately come from hell, to gve an account of his Life on earth, and to receive his Sentence; and loath he is to go back to that place of torments, as knowing that the pain of his Body will be a new and grievous addition to his mi∣sery, when that shall burn in flames as his soul doth already in fury. Therefore he pleads, Prisoner. Lord let me stay here (though poor wretch he hath his Hell about him in his accusing, af∣frighting Conscience) rather than go to that Dungeon of darkness. A sight of thy beautiful Face may possibly abate my Sorrows, and thy Presence may mitigate my Sufferings. Judge. No, saith Christ, here is no abiding for thee, be gone hence. Thou mayst remember when my Presence was thy Torment, when thou didst bid me depart from thee, choosing my room before
my company. Now my Absence shall be thy Terror, I like thee not so well to have thee nigh me. Depart, I say, from me. Prisoner. Lord, if I must undergo so dreadful a doom, as to depart from thee, the Father of Lights, and Fountain of Life, yet bless me before I go; One good wish of thy Heart, one good word of thy Mouth will make me blessed where ever I go. Those whom thou blessest, are blessed indeed; Bless me, even me, O my Father: At this parting grant me thy blessing. Judge. Sinner, be gone, and my Curse go along with thee. Thou hast many a time despised my Blessing when it hath been offered to thee, though I was made a Curse to purchase it for thee; therefore, I say, depart from me, and the Curse of an angry Lord, and of a righteous Law accompany thee for ever. Depart, I say, Thou cursed. Prisoner. Lord, if I must go, and thy Curse with me, send me to some good place, where I may find some∣what to refresh me under thy loss and curse. It's mi∣sery enough to lose thy presence, Good Lord, command me to some good place. Judge. No, Sinner, be gone with my Curse to that place which will torture and rack thee with ex∣tremity and universality of pains. The time hath been that thou hast wallowed in sensual pleasures, now thou must fry in intollerable flames. Depart thou cursed into fire. Prisoner. Ah Lord, if I must go with thy Curse, and to so woful a place as fire, I beseech thee let me not stay there long. Alas, who can abide devouring flames one moment? material fires of man's kindling are terrible, but how intollerable are those flames which thy breath, like a stream of brimstone, hath kindled? I beseech thee, if I must go to it, let me pass swiftly through it, and not stay in it. Judge. No, Sinner, depart, and my Curse with
thee, to those extream Torments that admit of no ease and no end, where the worm never dieth, and the fire never goeth out; to the Lake that burn∣eth with fire and brimstone for ever. Depart thou cursed into everlasting fire. Prisoner. Lord, this is dismal and dreadful indeed to go from thee, who art all good, and to go to fire which hath in it extremity of all evil, and to lose thee, and fry in flames for ever, ever, ever; yet, Lord, if it is thy Will it should be so, hear me yet in one desire, let me have such society as may mitigate, at least such as may not aggravate my misery. Judge. No, Sinner, thy Company must be such for ever as thou didst choose in thy life time. He who was thy Tempter shall be thy Tormentor. And they who led thee captive at their will, shall be bound with thee in Chains of everlasting darkness, and faggoted up with thee together for unquench∣able fire. Such fiery Serpents, gnawing Worms, stinging Adders, poisonous Toads, roaring and devouring Lions, hideous Monsters, frightful Fiends must be thy eternal Companions. Depart from me thou cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. But now, kind Readers, because particulars do usually most affect us, we may here again at this Gene∣ral Judgment, suppose we hear the Judge crying out with a loud and angry voice, saying, Bring now all the wicked Prisoners severally to my Bar, that so they may all distinctly receive their Sentence, for those particular sins by which they have most offended my Justice; And first, Come forth all ye ignorant persons: who have not known the Father, nor me, nor the my∣steries of salvation. Take them Devils bind them hand and foot.
2. Come forth all ye slothful and unprofitable persons. Had not ye talents committed to you for my use and service, and what have you done with them? did you bury them in the earth? or lay them up in a napkin? what, could you ly down and slumber, when you had so much work to do? could you trifle away so many hours, when time was so precious and sweet? Take them Devils bind them hand and foot. 3. Come forth all ye that have neglected Family-worship, and never sought after God in your Closets; Were not you creatures, and did the law of Crea∣tion require no worship? were not you subjects, and should not you have shewen homage to your Sove∣reign? did not you live upon God's finding and bounty every day, and should not you have acknow∣ledged your dependance? did not God bring you into your Family Relation, and did he require no duty? Did not he threaten to pour out his wrath upon irreligious Families? and yet would not you set up Religion in yours? Take them De∣v ls, bind them hand and foot. 4. Come forth all ye Sabbath-breakers, you that have spent the day in sleeping, in eating and drink∣ing to excess; who instead of holy meditations, have been thinking and contriving your worldly business; who instead of religious conferences, have discour∣sed only of earthly matters: instead of going to Church to worship God, have walked into the Fields, and spent the time in Recreations. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 5. Come forth all ye Swearers, and Profaners of the Name of God; did you never read or hear the third Commandment, which forbad this sin? Did you
never hear of my strict Injunction, that you should not swear at all in your discourses, but that your Communication should be yea and nay? were you never told that swearers would fall into condemna∣tion? was the great and dreadful name of God of so little regard, that you could not in only use it re∣verently, so frequently; but also even tear it in pieces by your Oaths? You call'd upon God some∣times to damn and sink you; can you speak in that language now, now damnation is so near you? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 6. Come forth all ye scoffers at Religion, and the zea∣lous professors thereof; who taught and spake of Re∣ligion, as if it had been a fancy, and cunningly di∣vised Fable; and of the most holy, humble, and self-denying Christians, as if they were the most mean spirited, foolish, and contemptible People up∣on Earth: and have used the name of a Saint in de∣rision, and proverb of reproach. Have you the same mind now, that Religion was but a fancy? Is your Resurrection and my appearance, but a fancy? Is your punishment eternal in hell, like to be but a fancy? Had you not a sure ground and bottom for your faith in the Scriptures? Could you have de∣sired more reasonable evidence of things done be∣fore your age? Could you laugh at Scripture threat∣nings: And can you laugh now you are come to Execution? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 7. Come forth all ye Persecutors of my Disciples; was it not enough for you to mock them; but you must persecute them too? Was it not enough for you to persecute them with the tongue, but you must persecute them with the hand? What, could
you betray them like Judas for a piece of money, on out of malice, which was worse? Could you disturb them in their service and worship of me, when they were praying for your very Conversion and Salvation? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 8. Come forth all ye intemperate and licentious per∣sons; who have indulged your flesh, and laid no re∣straint upon your sensual appetite; who have made provision for your flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof; but made no provision for my glory, and took no care to fulfill my commands; did you never hear of such a duty as self-denial, which I required of all my Disciples and Followers? Take them De∣vils, bind them hand and foot. 9. Come forth all ye Gluttons, who have prepared you flesh with delicious food, but never had the least regard to feed your souls. Take them De∣vils, bind them hand and foot. 10. Come forth all ye Drunkards, who if ye have not overcharged your bellies with excessive eating, yet have often intoxicated your brains with the fumes of excessive drinking; what excuse can you find for this sin? were you inticed to it, and overtaken be∣fore you were aware? But who could entice you to drink a potion which would kill your bodies? and was not the death and damnation of your souls more to be avoided? Take them Devils, b them hand and foot. 11. Come forth all ye Adulterers, you that hav ghed like full-fed-Horses after your neighbours  and assembled by troops into Harlots houses; or  not so, have committed this sin in secret corners; was
there no shame in you to keep you from this nasty filthy sin? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 12. Come forth all ye Covetous persons, whose treasure, and heart, hope, and confidence hath been in earth∣ly things. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 13. Come forth all ye unmerciful persons; whose bowels have been shut up against the poor and needy; who have spoken churlishly to the poor, and looked upon them afar off. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 14. Come forth all ye unrighteous persons; who have wronged Widows, and Orphans; who have over-reached your neighbours in your dealings; who have heaped an estate together by unrighteous practices; who have squeezed and oppressed the poor, which have had no helper. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 15. Come forth ye liars; you who have taught and accustomed your selves to this sin; who have not only reported lies, but also made them. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 16. Come forth all ye Slanderers and Back-biters; who have walked about with slanders, and carried about tales unto the reproach and injury of your neighbours good name: Did ou not know it was your duty to endeavour the preservation of your Neighbours Reputation as carefully as your own? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot.
17. Come forth all ye proud and ambitious persons; you that have builded your nests on high; that have taken many dirty steps to get into the seat of honour, whose hearts have been lifted up with high towering imaginations and conceits of your own ex∣cellencies, unto the scorning and contempt of others; who have had proud hearts, and proud looks, and proud speeches, and proud carriage towards others. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 18. Come forth all ye envious and malicious persons; ye that have grieved at the good of others, which they have had, or done; that have grieved at the good Estates of others, or because they have thriv∣ed faster than you in the world. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 19. Come forth all ye wrathful and contentious per∣sons; ye that have had fiery spirits, and fiery tongues; whose tongues have been like swords, wherewith ye have lashed and wounded others in your reproach∣ful reviling speeches. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 20. Come forth all ye civil and moral persons, who have had moral righteousness, and been upright in your dealings, but wholly strangers unto the power of godliness, who have observed some precepts of the second Table of the Law in reference to your selves and others externally; but have grosly ne∣glected the duties of the first Table. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 21. Come forth all ye Hypocrites, who have made a shew of Holiness; and have born the name of Zea∣lous professours of Religion, but have been acted
by carnal designs and principles, who have used Religion as a Cloak for your Covetousness, who fol∣lowed me only for the Loaves; who have been hol∣low at the heart, rotten at the Core, painted-Se∣pulchres, blazing-Comets, wandring and falling-Stars, for whom the mist of darkness is reserved for ever. Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 22. Come forth all ye Back-sliders and Apostates, from me and my wayes; You that turned back to ways of prophaness, and open wickedness, after some time of profession, and joyning your selves with my People, was my service so burdensome that you could endure it no longer? was the way to hea∣ven so unpleasant, that you would walk no longer therein, after some trial in shew of me, did you prefer and make choice of the Devil before me? Take them Devils, bind them hand and foot. 23. Come forth all ye impenitent Persons and Ʋn∣believers, all ye that have not yielded obedience to the Gospel; were you not called to repentance by Ministers, and the Spirit in Ordinances? and when a stiller voice was not heard, were you not called lou∣der by God in his judgments? did you not know, that except you repented you would certainly perish? Take them Devils, bind them hand and fot. Well Reader I fear I have made digression long e∣nough to tre you, ut what think you now after all I have said of a journey to Jerusalem, will not your pains tn you be well bestowed to travel to it, Oh! 'twill assuredly, for if you arrive there at the Gene∣ral Resurrection or Great Day of Judgement, when all
wicked Pilgrims are committed to the custody of Devils, with a go ye Cursed, you shall be kindly re∣ceived with a come ye Blessed and inherit that glori∣ous mansion prepared for you, as a reward for your troublesom Pilgrimage on Earth: but alas what need I mention these things, for if you take a journey to Jerusalem, you will certainly think your Pains and Tra∣vell well bestowed if it were nothing else but to see this Illustrious Person, who is the Protector of all Pilgrims, and the Guide and Rest of all Noble Tra∣vellers, and who bears a particular Affection to your self, and who hath endeared himself to you by a thousand favours. Further, There he intends to entertain you with an everlasting Supper, and to make you a never-ceasing Jubilee, and treat you with such sumptuous magnificence, that had you ten thousand tongues you could not be able to de∣clare his praises, and your obligations to him. But further, I think it is now high time to lead to other Spectacles which are worthy your sight: Well then, in this City all the glorious Ministers of State to the King of Kings have their Mansion Hou∣ses and noble Palaces, all the Heroes of ancient days do here make their abode, nay all the spirits of just men do here inhabit and have their constant resdence, and all those glittering Angels and brave minds that ever flourish in this Heavenly Court, I believe you will think sufficient of themselves, if there were nothing else to render this a very splendid place, and therefore worth the while (though through ten thousand hardships) to tra∣vel to it. Further, There you will be presented with a thousand Abrahams and as many Josephs, whose ad∣ventures were so strange, that fiction is not able to invent any thing so surpassing. There you will meet with no strangeness from any of the Inhabi∣tants,
you can meet no body there but will enter∣tain you with as much kindness and sincerity, as if they had known you five thousand years: there the Inhabitants intwine in the dearest embraces, there they open to each other their very hearts, there they think all that another has is as if they did enjoy it themselves. If there be any particular friendships there, they do not at all spoil the universal kind∣ness of the place, others will not be loved the worse for them but rather the better; and after the pleasures of a more general and large conversation, every one may retire to the delightful company of those he loveth most: There you will be met with such shining lights as St. Paul. Further, you will fall into the company of those pious Hearts who were martyred by raging Persecutors for the sake of Christ, and you need not question but you will be joyfully welcomed by them all, for their affections are not changed but only heightned and improved. And therefore judge how happy you will be in the acquaintance of such persons, and how much more happy in their excellent Friendship; and is the joy think you conceivable which you will feel, when you find your self in the Arms of those mighty Lovers; for my part I can imagine nothing less, but that we shall be in an extasie as soon as ever we see with what Love and Joy they come to see us at our first arrival into this Holy City; nay, further I cannot propound to my desires a plea∣sure more charming than this, unless it be to joyn both heart and voice with the whole number of those glorious Friends, to chaunt the praises of our Creator and Redeemer. And indeed it is beyond the measure of my poor skill to invent any words that can tollerably describe the melodies which will then be made, when the glorious Company of Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of the Prophets,
the noble Army of Triumphant Martyrs, the glori∣us Troops of Confessors, and the innumerable Hosts of Victorious Souls shall compose but one Quire to ing their Anthems and Hallelujahs to the God of Love: but in a word, the summ of what I can say of the Happiness of Jerusalem (to which I am tra∣elling) is, that its happiness consists in a raptu∣ous Love of God, and a most passionate Love of one another. Oh! how my soul breaths after this Heavenly Country, as the Hart pants after the Water∣brooks, even so my soul pants with earnest desires to arrive there: Oh! that I had the Wings of a Dove, then would I even fly thither from all my fears and troubles to enjoy Eternal Rest. I. Jerusalem my happy home, O that I were in thee, Oh would my woes were at an end, Thy joys that I might see. II. Oh happy Harbor of the Saints, Oh sweet and pleasant Soil, In thee no sorrows may be seen, No Cross, no Grief, no Toil. III. In thee no sickness ever is; No Hurt, no Ach, no Sore; There is no Death nor ugly Devil, But Life for evermore. IV. No Damp, no Mist is found in thee, No Cloud nor darksome Night. There every Star shines like the Sun, There God himself gives Light.
V. Thy Houses are of Ivory, Thy Windows Christal clear; Thy Tiles are made of beaten Gold, Oh would that I were there! VI. Thy Turrets and thy Pinacles, With Carbuncles do shine, Thy very Streets are pav'd with Gold, Exceeding pure and fine. VII. Within thy Gates can nothing come Which is not passing clean, No Spiders Web, no Dust, no Dirt, No Filth may there be seen. VIII. The Saints are Crown'd with Glory great, They see God Face to Face, They still Triumph, they still Rejoyce, Most happy is their case. IX. We that live here as Pilgrims, now Continually do Moan, We Sigh, we Sob, we Weep, we Wail, Continually we Groan. X. But there they in such Pleasure Live, And such Delight alway, That unto them a thousand years Doth seem but yesterday. XI. Thy Vineyards and thy Orchards are Most beautiful and fair, Full furnished with Trees about, Exceeding rich and rare.
XII. Thy Gardens and thy gallant Walks Continually are Green, There grows such sweet and pleasant Fruit, As no where else is seen. XIII. There's Nectar and Ambrosia, There's Musk and Civet sweet, There's many fine and dainty Drugs, Lie trodden under feet. XIV. There's Cinamon and Sugar too, There Myrrh and Balm abound; What Tongue can tell, or Heart conceive The Joys that there are found. XV. Quite through the Streets, with Silver Streams, The flood of Life doth flow, Ʋpon whose Banks on every side The Trees of Life do grow. XVI. The Trees do evermore bear Fruit, And evermore do spring: There evermore do Angels sit, And evermore do sing. XVII. There David stands with harp in hand, As Master o're a Quire; Ten thousand times that man is blest That doth this Musick hear. XVIII. Gods praises there are always sung, With Harmony most sweet; Old Zachary and Simeon, Have not their Song to seek.
XIX. There Magdalen hath left her moan, And cheerfully doth sing, With blessed Saints, whose harmony In every Street doth ring. XX. O Heavenly frame! Jerusalem At length I hope to see, Thy glorious Throne, and in the same For evermore to be. XXI. O pleasant City, fair and bright, When shall I come to thee? When shall my Travels have an end, Thy joys that I may see? But now, Reader, I shall stop here from giving th any further description of this Glorious City Jerusal either in Prose or Verse, and proceed to give th an account of what further progress I made towar it, by the help of those excellent Directions  Guide had formerly given to me. CHAP. XII. Of sudry new Troubles which happened to the Pgrim in his Travels to Jerusalem, and how he w delivered out of them. WEll then to proceed, A fine Sun-shiny mor¦ing it was when I first went out again travel, the Air was persumed with the sweet odo which the Sun exhaled from the Flowers, the Bir whistled and sung their Hyms to him that made th glorious Ligt; and there was no Hedge that I pd
by but welcomed me with some new Songs and easures; nor any Traveller I met but wished me od speed. I was so much pleased with every thing at I saw or heard as I went along, that I never ought my self at home till now, that I had no ome to go to, but was seeking one: I could do othing but compose praises to God that had ought me safely out of so many dangers: and I ade it still the business of every day, as I travel'd , to sing a certain ditty, the beginning and end  which (I remember was nothing but this) Bless e Lord oh my Soul: whether it was the novelty of ose objects that presented themselves, or the eatness and beauty of them, or the good society hoped to meet with three miles further, or an im∣ediate touch from that Spirit which my Guide rmerly prayed might be my Companion, or  l ese, or any other thing that made me so mer∣, I had no leisure to examine, but I never ex∣ressed so much contentment in any condition as in his new undertaking and resolution of mine, to tra∣el still on till I came to Jerusalem: yet I had not assed many miles in these rapturous joys, and fresh esolutions to travel to the Holy Land before I found hem so much abated; that I thought my self less appy than before I imagined I was, for the ways ere on a sudden grown a little more rugged, the eavens began to be overcast, and the fields through hich I went were more barren, and yeilded not hose Fruits which I had before tasted, which toge∣her with other things cast me into a damp, & procu∣ed to my soul more sadness than I had yet met with∣l in all my journey (though I had met with troubles nough before.) At the first indeed I was only oved with some wonderment to find such an alte∣tion, and thought that in six hours travel or in ch a space, especially before the Sun went to Bed,
I should recover more pleasant paths: but yet found contrary to my expectations that they sti continued uneasie, but at last I chanced to see som of my old Acquaintance, who called to me at som distance, and perswaded me to go back again, se¦ing me so much affrighted. Then after this come a man on Horse back to me (his name I could ne¦ver learn) and tells me that it would be my safes way to turn back, and betake my self to some neighbouring Village, for as much as the remaining part of the Road I was to travel through to Jeru∣salem, was all along very dangerously beset with Thieves and Rogues, and besides, that he said i was of a strange length thither, and indeed by ma∣ny doubted whether or no there were any such place, as that to which I was so eagerly travelling. But though this Path by the unexpectedness of it, made me reel and stagger a little, yet I soon recollect∣ed my self, and calling to mind what I had been for∣merly taught by my Guide, and repeating that charm which I always had about me, I am nought, I have nought, &c. I found my self presently as firm in my resolution to travel, as if I had never been as∣saulted with Dangers. CHAP. XIII. Shewing how the Pilgrim had a fair sight of the Hea∣venly Jerusalem, and what ensued thereupon. ANd so I trudg'd away again most briskly, till at last seeing a high Mountain just before me, I resolved to travel to it, so in about two hours time (notwithstanding the way to it was both up hill and down hill, slabby and dirty to boot) I got to it:
when I came to the foot of the Mountain, I encou∣ged my self to get up to the top of it, by the eetness of those pleasures, the conveniency of  height would afford me a prospect of saying to y self Mount up my soul, and on this Mountain stand; A taking Prospect, is the Holy Land. And having thus encouraged my self, up I went to e top of it, and being there I had as I fancied an eart-ravishing prospect of the whole Ʋniverse, and of  its glory and beauty. I likewise here met with a knot  most excellent persons, who recompensed me r those troubles and fears into which I had so late∣ fallen. The spectacle which presented it self, was  less wonderful than it was new; for here I be∣ld sundry Pilgrims, like my self, who had placed eir bodies there, though in several postures, as  they never meant to stir from that place, unless  were to be carried directly up to Heaven; some  them were fallen upon their knees, others of em stood gazing upon their tiptoes with their ouths open, and their eyes so fixed, as if their uls were gone half way out of their bodies, to fetch  something which they longed to enjoy: so I ob∣rving very narrowly these passages, I was resol∣ed to try if I could make any discovery of that hich attracted all these eyes and hearts unto it. nd I had not done so very long, but by the ad∣antage of this Mountain, and the clearness of the r, and the steadiness of my eyes, and the quiet nd silence I kept, I had a very fine prospect of the eavenly Jerusalem.
CHAP. XIV. Shewing the serenity of the Pilgrims condition after a his Clouds. BUt in a little time my pleased eyes began to fall from that ravishing sight on which they were fixed, but I did not lose all my pleasure by taking of my eyes from Jerusalem; for now the Road which lead thither, appeared so plain, so fair and smooth (though formerly rugged) so free from Briers and Thorns, and all that molested and galled me before, that it now proved the very beginning of Heaven to me: The earth I saw was every where loaded with so much plenty, that nothing troubled me, but only that I could not see Travellers enough to gather it; on every side of me there was so ma∣ny beautiful Flowers, that I could scarce tell whose invitation to accept, when they seemed to desire to be pluckt by my hands: the very stones had lost the hardness and roughness of their nature, and did soften and smooth themselves when the feet of Pil∣grims came to oppress them: all the way likewise was so quiet and still, that if a leaf wagged, it was y the sweet breath of those Musitians which sate among the Branches; one could not speak so much as a word, but an eccho from the Vault of Heaven would repeat it, as if she had a great desire to learn, or was much in love with the language; yea, all the Mountains, which I was still to climb, seemed of so easie ascent, that they differed nothing from the plain ground. Many a mile one might pass through a Forest of nothing but Mirtles and Law∣rels, under the shade of which the weary Traveller
might sweetly repose himself, and dream that he w the Crowns and Garlands which were wreathing r him in Jerusalem: every Wood also appeared ke a goodly Orchard, where an infinite variety of vely Fruit saluted them that passed through it: nd though the courteous Apples with all the rest emed to bow themselves to kiss the Pilgrims ands, yet by their fragrancy one would one judge at they were not of a meer terrestial growth. In a ord, the difficulties of my journey now seemed to be vercome, and every step I took I saw would bring e to a new pleasure. Now I thought I should be so appy as to live more above, and hold a constant ommunication with Heaven. I expected to surmount he Clouds wherein I had been wrapped, and to ve in a purer light, and enjoy a greater serenity f mind; in short, I now discovered on all sides, oth present satisfaction and future hopes. But be∣ng thus spurred by the sweet invitations of the way, n I went again, sometimes casting my eye upon Jerusalem, and sometimes upon my way, which now became more easie and more delightful to me than ever before. But having descended a little from the head of that lofty Hill where I had stayed about five hours; I observed that on a sudden I had lost that fare sight of Jerusalem which I so much admi∣red; at which I began to be surprised with a little quivering and coldness in my body, till at length I met with a Passenger, who I perceived was travelling my Road, who put new comfort into me (seeing me dejected) in telling me the whole way to Je∣rusalem consisted of Hills and Dales, and as now (saies he to me) you are going down from the heights wherein you have been, so shall you again advance in due time, and be presented not only with a fresh, but with a fairer sight of Jerusalem.
In fine he represented to me, that I was so far from descending now into into any dismal shades, that I was but going to ease my mind with a little variety in those cool levels, which were almost spent and exhaled by so long a sight of Jerusalem in those superiour Regions. CHAP. XV. Shewing how the Pilgrim afterwards feared he should not hold out to his journeys end, with an account how he hired a little House by the way to refresh himself in for a while, that he might be the better able to hold on his journey, with the manner how seven wicked Guests under colour of lodging with him, sought his undo∣ing at this place. ANd now (would you think it) for all I had gone thus far towards the Celestial Paradice, I begun to have odd fancies still, that I should ne∣ver get there after all my travels, but at last this cloud blew over too, for I began to consider that this could be no other than a melancholy thought; for I considered with my self it was very improba∣ble that I should overcome so many temptations, and yet not be near the place; how can it be thought that I should have so many sights of Jerusalem, and yet be ne're the nigher my journeys end: I remem∣bred likewise that the last prospect which I gained of that place was fairer than the former, and that it did seem nearer and closer to me. But my spirits now beginning quite to fail me, (and the season being excessive hot) I resoved at the next Town I came at, to hire a little House for a small time, and there to take up my Quar∣ters,
till I were well refresht and fit to travel again, accordingly a house I hired; but this undertaking had like to have proved my utter ruin at last. CHAP. XVI. Shewing how seven wicked Guests (whose names were Pride, Covetousness, Lechery, Envy, Gluttony, Wrath, and Sloth) under colour of lodging with the Pilgrim, sought his undoing; with an account like∣wise how by the treacherous assault of these seven Ene∣mies the Pilgrim's Cinque Parts, became endangered. FOr many instead of Turtles, have received Snakes, into their bosoms. And such was my unfortu∣nate condition. For upon a time sitting in my Sum∣mer Arbour (adjoyning to my new hired house) safe as I thought, from the encounter of any open ene∣my, or secret danger: even there, where my pri∣vate repose promised me no less than a secure and untroubled rest; suddenly there appeared before me seven Strangers; who complayning how they had lost their way, humbly besought me to bestow upon them one nights lodging: and that with a grateful acknowledgment of so free a courtesie, they would depart early from me the next morning. I must confess this their sudden aproach, did at first not a little amaze me, wondring much how these could find access unto me, seeing, as I remembred, I had shut the doors of my Garden, that none might disturb me. But even civility exacting an answer from me; having first fully taken notice and survey of them; I in this manner addressed my self unto them, viz. Gentlemen, (for you seem no less by your habits
or demeanours) though my privacy has seldom known the condition of hospitality; yet being stran∣gers, as you profess) your selves to be, I should hold it an act of great incivility not to entertain you. One night shall not brea squares amongst us. Therefore, pray gentlemen, come in, and carry your selves order∣ly in my house, and the best Room in all my Lodg∣ings is at your service; pray where have you been, tra∣velling, and what news do you hear? Are the Imperi∣alists and Turks yet come to engage, how goes things in the World? how doth it fare with our poor Bre∣thren in France? What news from England my na∣tive Country, when will Times be better? Come in, come in Gentlemen. I shall accommodate you with Lodgings immediately, though it may be not accor∣ding to your ranks and qualities, for I am a stranger to you, and am my self but a Pilgrim on Earth as all my Fathers were: And as for this Habitation which you see I now have, I hired it only for a little time till I am refresht, and fit for Travelling again toward Jerusalem, the place I first designed to go to, when I first set out from mine own home. With which answer, they seeming to be well plea∣sed, I left mine Arbour, and took them in with me; preparing such things for them as might refresh tem, for they seemed weary. After they were refresht, I took occasion to call them all aside into my Closet, purposely to converse with them after a most familiar manner, little doubt∣ing how these strangers came, rather to undermine me, than lodge with me, as you shall hereafter un∣derstand more fully. When they were come up into my Closet, I made bold to ask them where they were born, and in what parts they had most remained. As for their Birth they told me, they must beg my Excuse, for they should not inform me of that, for several rea∣sons
best known to themselves: but as touching the ce of their aboad, they told me that upon their st travelling for Entertainment in the Affections  men, they planted very near that glorious City bylon; where by their instructions they made the mmon people there such proficients, as leaving their rmer rudeness they betook themseves to such ceness and neatness, as they would rather neglect eir trade, than not observe all those things that eased their humours, being charmed by sensual easures, sweet Revenge, Palate-pleasing, requiting f Affronts, and Negligence. But they told me rther that their Commission was more General: eing enjoyned by their Superiour, the Father of ell and Damnation, to put in practice such directi∣ns in every City, Burrow, Corporation, or Village, s might win the hearts of all such inhabitants unto heir Prince: and by that means inlarge his king∣om. Wherewith drawing forth a long scroule, they hewed unto me a Brief of all such directions as were prescribed them, all which were exceeding pleasing to the Flesh: with a relation of such places and persons by whom they were best entertained. What Countries they had brought in and gained: how far their Dominions were enlarged, with divers other tempting alurements; the discovery whereof so much delighted me, as I desired nothing more than with more freedom yet to enjoy their com∣pany: resolving to importune their stay for a long time with me: and to my request they inclined readily. Albeit they told me, that during their so∣journing with me, they must sometimes of necessity crave my pardon, to resort to divers of their Ma∣sters especial Customers, as Painters, Perfumers, Periwig-makers, Usurers, Alehouse-keepers, with others; to the end they might keep their hands in ure, and their brains awork, to shape a Coat for the
Moon, and bring the world into a new fashion. And to the end they might the better do me a courtesie for my late hospitality; these obliging expressions of theirs so strangely madded me with the thoughts of bravery, and all manner of pleasures, that I thought now I should instantly enjoy, as I became wholly theirs, chearfully embracing whatsoever they com∣manded me: And within a short time now I became such a Vassal to them, as I thought any service well bestowed that I could do for them. Thus, thus became I poor Pilgrim (whilst I was on my way to heaven) assaulted; thus became I foiled. But why do I inveigh against their treach∣ery, I became to my self the most treacherous ene∣my? For by yielding my Fort to the spirit of Pride, my chiefest glory grew darkned. By entertaining Co∣vetousness my former content vanished. By cherish∣ing Lechery, both mine inward and outward faculties were disabled. By feeding Envy, it became a feeder of me, and so my spirits became wasted. By cocke∣ring Gluttony, my spiritual infirmities were strength∣ned. By harbouring Wrath, charity the choicest comfort of Christian society was banished. By fo∣stering Sloath, out of my great Masters check-roule, became my name to be razed. Neither were these unthankful Guests so contented; for by their trea∣cherous attempts, became my Cinque ports endange∣red. So as, those darlings of mine which had they been loyally affected, should have been my assistants, proved to be my private assassinates. Not one of them but they failed in performing those due offices to which they were deputed. My eye, indeed, knew how to look, but by wandring it correpted my un∣derstanding with the thoughts of lust. My ear knew how to hear, but by hearing amiss it distracted the intention of mine heart. My nostrils knew how to smell, but by rejecting those flowers of divine sweet∣ness,
I begun to snuffe up the wind with the wild Asse in the wilderness. My touch knew how to per∣form her offiice, but by touching unclean things, or by using clean things uncleanly, that sense became enslaved to all sensuality. My mouth became an open Se∣pulchre mine heart sins harbour. What then could this poor razed Fort of my surprized soul expect but utter ruine, misery and desolation? Foes wrought one me without: and fears seazed on me within. I had none left to comfort me: for my best com∣fort I had deservingly estranged from me; For had I not with Demas left God for the world, I might have had God for my Friend all along to the end of my pilgrimage. In this streight I knew not what to do, for to go now any further I was extreamly afraid, having so basely hugg'd in my very bosom, seven men that were utter enemies to that glorious City, I had been all this while travelling to, and to go back (after I had made such a large progress towards Jeru∣salem) I was asham'd; I therefore at last resolved at the next shady Hedge I came unto, to kneel down under it and go to Prayers, remembring how mira∣culously Prayer had delivered me formerly, and ma∣ny other Pilgrims that were then in my company, out of several unspeakable Dangers, that we encoun∣tred with in the City Debauchery, when nothing else could help us: so when I came to the Tree, I knelt down, and before I had prayed for the space of half an hour, I perceived all my seven Enemies were fled, whereupon I immediately arose from off my Knees, and got my self discharged of my new hired house, (sor I perceived it to be a place very lyable to Thieves and Robbers) and so I takes up my Pil∣grims staff again, and travelled further, hoping that at last I should come to my Journeys end, tho by a Prospective Glass I had in my hand, I perceived I had a long and dangerous way yet to travel, before I could arrive there.
CHAP. XVII. Shewing how the Pilgrim, having got rid of his seven deadly Enemies, fell unawares into a Dream, (as he was travelling still on in his way to Jerusalem) in which Dream, you have an account of the strange and prodigious Battel, that (he fancied) he saw fought in the Little Isle of Man; in which Battel his seven deadly Enemies, to the rejoycing of his heart, were taken prisoners. To this Chapter is like∣wise added abundance of weighty and delightful things besides. BUt (so it fell out) as I was travelling still on in my way to Jerusalem, I unawares fell into a brown study, what might become of these seven rascally fellows,Called Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Glut∣tony, Wrath, and Sloth. that by the force of Prayer, I had so lately both subdued and vanquisht, but I did not continue long in that solitary po-before commanding Morpheus (like a thief in the night, came stealing behind me, and clapt his soft hand upon my Eyes,The Pilgrim falls into a Dream. and I dreamed. And me thought in my Dream I was (like Abakuk in the painted cloath) carried (not down to a Den) but up to an huge high hill, in∣vironed with a deep River, and beyond the River a great champaign field, in the midst whereof there was a fair fair Castle, in the form of an Heart. This Castle was beleagar'd by two huge Armies: the one on the South-East side, and the other on the North-west. Forthwith I heard two Trumpets summoning a
Parley: whereunto an Answer being replyed, I did behold (or thought I did behold) a goodly young Damsel upon the top of the Castle, covered with a white vail, that I could not see her face: who de∣manding the cause of their Summons, a double re∣ply was made by two Heralds, with my Lord, and my Lord: but the Northwest Herald (whose boy∣strous boldness like blubd-cheekt Boreas bewrayed his meager manners) cryed in the Sclavonian tongue, my Lord Vitioso, base son and heir apparent to Sultan Pluto (sole Emperour of the North, from Babylon to Egypt, and so to the further part of Mare Rubrum to Mare Mortuum, even from the Sun set to the Sun rising) doth require entrance and friendly entertainment for him and his followers: Who swears and vows unto you (by his Horror and upon the word of a Soul∣dier) all love and service: And to that end (if you please) will send his Commissioners with Authority, to treat with you of a perpetual League, as also of a Marriage: and to conclude on articles and conditi∣ons thereunto belonging, &c. All which she having heard at large, (not answer∣ing one word) turned her about to the right side, to hear what th'other would say: who to the same pur∣pose (though after another manner) protested his Lords entire love and affection. And further put∣ting her in remembrance of a former alliance and neighbourly commerce held and continued between his Lord Virtuoso, and her deceased Father, who up∣on his death-bed motioned a Contract of Marriage between them; which if she would stand unto, then a large dowry should be ratified under his hand and seal to her, and the heirs of their two bodies for ever, &. His Embassie ended, she briefly thus replyed, Sir you that spake last I answer, first thus: I find not my self enjoyned by my deceased Fathers
Will, to any such contract upon a penalty, there∣fore I hold my self free to mine own will. But seeing it is so that both your Lords profess love (as you say) unto me, and each offereth ve∣ry largely, I thank them both; and that I might know which loveth me best, I will that he that can approve himself most Puissant and truly Valiant by the others Conquest, shall be Lord of me and mine. This Answer returned (as fast as Imagination could carry them) away they went to their Lords: who understanding her resolution, though they were both doubtful of their success (for the victo∣ry lay partly in her affecting) yet they resolved not∣withstanding on both sides to try the event. Then Lord Virtuoso speedily despatcht three Com∣missioners, Reason, Descretion and good Remembrance to solicit her the second time: And so did Pharo Neco Vitioso: viz. Temptation, Folly and Sensuality to use their best devoir to draw her to their parts. But Madam Cogitations stood fully resolved to be∣hold the fight first, and then as she saw occasion so she would conclude. Being out of all hope on either side to obtain her favourable aspect, (which would be very further∣some to the party affected) they prepare to the Battle: but the night before Don Vitioso, like a craf∣ty old Knave sent his sworn servant Sinior Sensuali∣ty secretly (like a Spie) to sow his slippery seed all over the Field, that Lord Virtuoso his Souldiers should not be able to stand, their ground should be so slippery. Now this right worthy Lord Virtuoso very early the next morning preparing to Battle: Thus march∣ed forward with his whole army; himself sitting in an Ivory Chariot richly garnished with Gold, Pearls and precious stones: there attending on the Chariot four worthy Knights: viz. Righteousness, Prudence,
Strength and Temperance: Next to the Chariot Rode seven Captains. The first was Humility riding on a Lamb, on his helm a Faulcon gentil stood. Next him followed Charity riding on a Tiger, who who carried a Pellican on his helm. The third was Patience on a Camel, he had on his Crest a Phenix. The fourth was Liberality on a Dromedary, and on his Crest an Ospra. The fifth was Abstinence riding on a Hart, on his helm a Popiniay. The sixth was Chastity, who bestrid an Unicorn, on his a Crest Turtle Dove was placed. Good Exercise was the seventh, who was mounted on a Panther: and a Crane he had on his Crest. Many petty Captains there were besides, as Pitty, Meekness, Goodness, Concord, Ʋnity, Patience, Honesty, true Friendship, Simplicity, Stedfastness, Quietness, Peaceablenss, Helpfulness, Discreetness, Serviceableness, Compassion, Good-order, Justice, Contentedness, Suffe∣rance, Foresightfulness, Contemplation, Reverence, Cur∣tesie, Indifferency, Lowlyness, Affection, &c. All these befere they march'd were dub'd Kinghts by their General Don Virtuoso. Don Vicioso also dub'd other 24 Knights of the Post∣haste, to animate them two to the conquest of the Gilt Spurs. Cunning also brought to the aid of Don Virtuoso certain Companies whose Captains were Nigro∣mancy, Geomancy, Magick, Adriomancy, Physiognomy, Palmestry, Ornomancy and Piromancy: but Tresnoble Virtue (scarce thanking him for his offer) told him that he never used (nor would) any such compa∣nions in the wars. Whereupon Cunning, with his Consorts being thus casheir'd, went to Don Vicioso, who (with all respect)
gladly received him and his Comrages, and placed them in his rereward all on Horse-back, and Crown'd them with Bays; and behold now in my Dream me∣thought I saw Vicioso, as a glorious Conqueror, leading the numerous hosts, like a victorious General, or Com∣mander in chief, under Apollion, King of the bottom∣less Pit, having thousands following him, with great shouts, Musick of all sorts, and loud acclamations, crying, great is Diana of the World. Now as touch∣ing the martial order they marched in, against Ma∣dam Cogitation and the precious Soul of man; take this briefly, first Tyrant Sin led the Van, (being him∣self more than an hundred thousand strong.) Next to him marcht Apollion, mighty Beelzebub, and Lucifer, heading three great Armies, composed of different kinds; yet all cruel Enemies to the Soul: The first consisted of the riches of this world, by which thousands have fallen: the second of Honours and sinful Preferments: The third was filled up with vain delights and pleasures: they are also called by three other names, viz. the lust of the Eyes, the lust of the Flesh, and the pride of Life. Af∣ter these, followed a man (if we may call him so) adorned in Cloath of Gold, with a tripple Crown on his head; and for a Scepter, a brace of Keys in his hand; who in my dream I took to be the great King of Babylon, Innocent the 11th, with a glorious reti∣nue of Cardinals, Abbots, Friars, Monks, Nuns, Se∣minaries, and Jesuits, and a number more following these, with a great train of Artillery; as, merit of Works, Limbus Patrum, Purgatory, Pardons, Indul∣gencies, Vows, Prayers to, and for the Dead, Penance, Holy Water, Pilgrims, Auricular Confessions, extream Ʋnction, Lamps, Candles, Torches, Tapers, Relicts, Oyl, Salt, Spittle, Crucifixes, Beads, Holy Garments, Signs, Gestures, Canons, Customs, and the Lord knows
what besides, as Blood, Slaughter, Massacres, Stake, Fire and Sword. Then came the Grand Seignior, or the proud and blasphemous Emperor of Turkey, attended with his chief Mufty, and a multitude of other inferiour Priests, with their Alcoran in their hand, and a great Army at their Heels, with Swords, and other slaugh∣tering weapons, swearing by their Beards, what they would do to all such that opposed them; being all true Sons and Vassels of Apollion; and this dreadful enemy Tyrant Sin who was the Lieutenant General of the whole Army. And then after these, an Army of fair Ladies drest in Samptuous Apparel, and in the newest Modes the City Debauchery hath of late found out; as spotted Faces, naked Breasts and Shoulders, beckoning to all the wanton Striplings, which they saw as they marched along to the general Rendez∣vous, saying, Come Boys, stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant, &c. Come therefore, Oh! come along with us, for we have deckt Beds for you, with Coverings of Tapestry, and carved works, embroidered with the fine Linnen of Egypt; we have likewise perfumed them too with Myrhe Alloes, and Cinamon, come, make no demur, but go along with us, and let us take our sills of Love till the Morning, at which time we shall all march out in good array against all that opposes our sen∣sual and lovely pleasures. And then again after these marched a number of debauched Lads out of Youth-shire, armed Cap-a-pee, being as true as steel to the interest of their Lea∣der, and very expert, methoughts in my Dream they seemed to be in all stratagems of War against God, Christ, and true Godliness. These taring Lads had a glittering Coach to attend them, which was drawn by four Horses called Rashness, Luxury, Spendall and
Folly, (their Coachman being the Devil) and one whom the Country people called Beggary, me∣thoughts I saw ride behind, and although the Coach did run a thundring pace, and these Lads did seem to be secure, yet there was abundance of folks, as Mer∣chants, Mercers, Booksellers, Silkmen and Taylors, &c. that did pursue them with cruel long Bills, so that for their courage in fighting for Tyrant Sin against the soul of man, they are like to pay dearly. But moreover, besides these there was a bloody and treacherous Brigade, who did lie in secret Am∣buscado, who were as dangerous as any of the rest, called Inbred Corruptions. In the Reer marched two Regiments, the first was made up of a base sort of Varlets called Renega∣does, i. e. being such as have deserted the Lord Je∣sus, and the Holy Profession, and have joyned in with the Enemy. The last was a Regiment of strange people, hard∣ly two of them being alike, and their Manners and Customs were as various, they come out of a Town which lies on one side of the City of God, called Heresie, and therefore may fitly be called erroneous and seditious Sectaries, being rotten at heart, and cor∣rupt in the fundamentals of the true Christian Reli∣gion; holding almost every abominable principle that hath been broached by the Devil in any Age, &c. Thus War being proclamed, and all the forces of Hell and darkness mustered, a Councel was called to consult about the best expedients to carry it on, and there being neither power nor pollicy wanting, what can we think to be the issue of it, but ruine and slaughter to the soul of man. And therefore to be brief, on both sides they ranged their main Battalions, and Vicioso Abbadono most couragiously gave the first onset, discharging his great Ordnance (which was basterd Cannons in
all his Army) which the Lord Grace (who com∣manded the Vanguard of the Prince Virtuoso's Army) avoided by the help of a rising Hill on the Southeast side, and intrenched on the Northeast side, well manned and maintained by right puisant Patience and heavenly Humility: so that all their small shot past over their heads without any detriment. Then they drew near, their Enemy scirmiging with their small shot, which the Lord Virtuoso's party manly bore off with their Targets of Proof, not yeilding one foot; joyning Battle, they fell to it pell mell, with such fury, that many were slain, many wounded, and many taken Prisoners on both sides: But the wicked weed that Sensuality had sown, made the ground so slippery, that Lord Vir∣tuoso's company could not stand; which Infidelity (standing on the left hand of Madam Cogitations) perceiving, inticed her to learn to Vicioso Apolliono's party: But true Faith on the right side counselled her to the contrary, but all in vain, for she not on∣ly favoured Mounsier Gogmagogo Vicioso, but took part with him also. All which, Lord Virtuoso perceiving, in great dis∣content left the Field for that time; and Signior Gracioso commanded a retreat to be sounded: Dog∣godomado Viciofissimo hearing that, his Army made a great, shout, and cryed follow, follow, follow, fol∣low Boys, for we shall all be Conquerors. But the Lord Grace having recovered the intrenched Hill, with Faith and Hope, maintained the fight till Sun∣set. Early in the morning by the break of day, wor∣thy Signior Gracioso (with a heavenly Oration) per∣swaded his followers to a second incounter; which Faith and Hope no sooner heard, but with a fresh courage they led forth their Vangard, advancing their Banners after a most gallant manner, and made
a second and a sudden assault (the enemy being in their Tents) at the charge whereof, came thrice puisant Perseverance to their aid, with a mighty Host from the Lord Virtuoso: which Signior Gratio∣so, with Faith and Hope perceiving, redoubled their courage, and cryed out aloud, Victory, Victory, Vi∣ctory! The Enemy hearing this, in all post haste trussed up their trinkets, and in a disorderly order, as well as they could (upon such curtoll warning) defended themselves: but most worthy Perseverance perceiv∣ing that, took the advantage, and so well behaved himself that day, that he made his foes to fly before his face: commanding Constancy with his couragious company, following close after that, methoughts in my Dream it rejoyced my heart to see it. Now Madam Cogitations seeing this, (ushered by her old servant Goodwill) secretly stole to her Castle: and meeting Lady Conscience at the Gate (in great sor∣row) craved her counsel how she might recover Lord Virtuoso his favour. Marry (quoth Conscience) you must go to Humility and Repentance: so disguising her self, that she might pass the better unknown, she met with Contrition, who with Repentance, brought her the next way to Humilitie's Tent, which was placed at the foot of the hill fast by the intrench∣ment: whom Humility seeing afar off, made haste to meet, and very lovingly embraced and kissed them: Cogitations discovering all her intent, intreat∣ed her best aid in her sute to Lord Virtuoso, which she most willingly condescended unto, and went with her to the Generals Pavilion, and there with Repentance and Contrition, falling down flat before his Excellency, confessed she had done amiss, and most earnestly and heartily craved pardon, which he most lovingly granting, lifted her up, set her on her feet before him, and most friendly communed with her.
In the mean while Perseverance with Constancy so behaved themselves, that Don Vitioso with all his whole rout, was undone, and clean overthrown horse and foot: when (as the Devil would have it) in rusheth a mad rogue, one Stroy-good with a Chariot (for his Lord was so sore wounded that he could not ride) and speedily conveyed him by a secret way out of the field. In this overthrow were taken Prisoners, seven Captains of note, or notorious Captains, viz. Pride, Covetousness, Envy, Gluttony, Letchery, Wrath, and Sloth, (who as it appeared to me in my Dream, were those seven Enemies that so lately had sought my life) with a number of the Rascaldry besides. Some were ransomed, others were taken prisoners by the Enemy: others committed to perpetual imprison∣ment: and some (like Haman) were hanged for ex∣amples to others. There were also ordained seven special Officers for the good government of this noble Isle of Man, for prevention of future invasions: viz. 1. Prudence, Lord Chancellour. 2. Temperance, Lord Treasurer. 3. Justice, Earl Marshal. 4. Perseverance, Lieutenant-General. 5. Grace, Lord Warden of the Cinque ports. 6. Reason, Chief Secretary. 7. Memory, Mr. of Requests and Recorder. As they were in consultation about the future good of this little Common weal, and election of in∣feriour Officers, a poor ragged Pilgrim that was travelling towards Jerusalem, all alone, seeing e ly asleep on the top of a hill, makes up to me (tho the hill was somewhat out of his way) and takes his Pilgrims staff, and gives me a huge polt on the head, and with that I awaked.
And being got upon my Leggs again, I saluted this Pilgrim very kindly, telling him withall, that I was very glad to find any Traveller, in that despised and narrow road I perceived he was going in: And I further told him, that seeing we were so happily met, that if he pleased, we would keep company together, and be helpful to each other in this our Pilgrimage. He answered and said readily, He wished with all his heart we might, For (said he) if either of us, after we have entred this path, and travelled so many miles herein, should look back and re∣turn again to the broad way that leads to hell, we shall make our selves for ever unfit for, and unworthy of the Celestial Paradice. After this Discourse was ended, I enquired particularly of him of what Country he was, he answered and said, He was born in the Wilderness below that hill upon which he found me asleep, that is called by some, (The false World) hearing of him say so, I told him that was a Country I knew very well: I was (said I) born in it my self, I dwelt in it many years, and con∣tinued there until Divine fury had overtaken me, and torn me to pieces, and tumbled me down into everlasting burnings, had not Divine Goodness war∣ned me of my danger, and put it into my heart to go on pilgrimage as you now see. After this discourse was ended, we began hugely to embrace one another, and to love each other extreamly, and now it was nothing but Brother and Brother at every word, and now we really went forward with more speed and swiftness than before, and travelled so fast, that in a few dayes, we were got many hundred Miles from the brink of Destruction, towards our Jour∣s end. And thus as we went forward, hand in hand talking together; we came at last to a place where there was two turnings, one of which led to the fresh enjoyment of all Earthly Delights,
upon seeing of which we were presently divided, was for walking streight on, and he for turning to the road that lay on the left hand, which led  this pernitious place; and do what I could I uld not perswade him, but that By-roads he would ke, I told him plainly, I was confident they were -paths, and I am very suspitious, said I to him, at all by-paths lead out of the way of Life: And  for the way wherein we now are, I am sure (said  that it is the right way, and that eternal glory lyes  the end of it, because my Guide himself set me to it, charging me withall that I should not dare,  ever I design'd to get to Jerusalem, to turn out  it either to the right hand or to the left, so that  you will not be perswaded to go along with me,  must not, nor I will not be enticed to go along th you, to be eternally miserable. Pray call to ind what you said, when you first overtook me, d with your stick awaked me out of the Dream I s in, when I lay asleep upon that hill we have left hind us, viz. How grievous it must be if any of us who ve walked together, as Pilgrims in the way to hea∣n, (and now are almost at Paradice) should after  this miscarry and be damned for ever. Having thus told him his danger, and finding him stinate in his way, I left him to his own Devices, d went forward again (all alone) on my Journey, wards the promised Land of Joy and happiness. ut I had not parted with him long, before I ob∣ined (as I thought) a fresh sight of Jerusalem, hich made me as I went along thus to cry. Blest be the day that I began A Pilgrim for to be; And blessed also be that Guide, That thereto moved me.
The new sight of Jerusalem again (as it had do in my Pilgrimage formerly) filled me with admir¦tion and wonder, and so much transporting joy, th I was resolved now (by the help of God) to hold o to the end, what ever it cost me: And you may we imagin, that after having a glimpse of the surprizi Beauty, and inexpressible Glory and Splendour  the New Jerusalem, I was (especially for a whil able to resist all Oppositions, Difficulties, and Dea¦ness of Spirit whatsoever. But by that time I ha travelled a mile further, and perceiving on a sudde I had utterly lost the sight of this glorious City,  thereby (even as it had fared with me before) lo much of that Comfort and Consolation which th sight of it yielded me: and indeed the whole wa (as was hinted just now) both before and after thi lay over Hills and Dales, sometimes I climb'd ov Mountains, and then by and by was in Valley sometimes, as I went along, I could behold the glo¦rious Sun arise upon me with reviving Beams, an at other times, I was so benighted, and such sab Clouds interposed between me and Paradice, that  was so far from seeing the Sun, that I was not able  discern either Moon or Stars, which made me as  went along thus to cry out, I. As weary Travellers, when the night is come, Do wish for home: Or as a Dove, that's wandred from her Nest, Is glad of Rest, So doth my Soul, tyr'd with this dismal way, Long for a Glimpse of everlasting Day. II. Thrice happy souls encircled are above With Joy and Love, Who Sin nor Sorrow shall not any more As heretofore.
Who have nothing left to hope or to desire; Happy in that their Joyes shall ne're expire. III. Time was their Race but newly was begun, Whose Glass is run. They on the troubled Sea were heretofore, Though now on Shore. And 'tis not long, before it will be said Of me, as 'tis of them, Alas he's dead. IV. Thrice happy Life to live with God above, Where nothing shall deprive us of his Love: And happy Rest, where Rest there shall be none From singing Holy, Holy, Holy, three in One. Towards the latter end of my Journey, when I gan to grow very near to Paradise, the Path herein I walked became (of a certain truth) more ooth and fruitful, and the winged Choristers, herewith the blooming and fragrant Groves on ther side of it were replenished, sang more sweet∣ than they were wont to do, and the Air likewise came more serene and clear. Yet it was not al∣ays so extraordinary well with me neither, but that  had some intermissions still, some Ʋps and some owns, some Sun and some Cloud, some Light d some Darkness: upon which I began to sing as llows, Let the most Blessed be my Guide, If't be his Sacred Will, Ʋnto his Gate, though I alone Climb up his Holy-hill. So I went on all alone, till at last I came to the electable Mountains (before in this Treatise spoken ) when I came to them I immediately endeavou∣red
to climb to the top of them, to behold the G¦dens, Fountains, Springs, Shady Walks, and glori Prospect I was formerly told I should have there the New Jerusalem, to which I had so long steer my course. As soon as ever I was got to the top, an able D¦vine presented himself to my view, his sober cou¦tenance, black cloaths, and grave aspect, struck  me an extraordinary reverence, for performi those complements that were fitting, I said. Pilgrim. Reverend Sir, is this the way to the ce¦stial City? Divine. You are just in your way. Pilgrim. How far is it thither I pray? Divine. A considerable way. Pilgrim. Sir, is the way that I have yet to go saf or dangerous? Divine. It is safe for those that walk uprightl but transgressors shall fall therein. Pilgrim. Is there on these delectable mountains a relief for poor weary Pilgrims? Divine. Yes, the Owner of these mountains ha given us a charge, not to forget Strangers and Pi¦grims, but to refresh them when need requires. After he had uttered these words, I took my leav of him, (first rendring of him thanks for his kin Answers to what I questioned him about) and walk¦ed to the further end of the Mountain, where  overtook a very lusty and jovial lad, whose nam was Self-conceit, that came out of a crooked lan hard by the place; I overtook him, so I aske him from what parts he came, and whither he wa going? Self-conceit. I was born in a Town six Miles o from this place that lyes yonder before us, a littl on the left hand, and Sir, I am now marching t the Celestial City.
Pilgrim. Alas thou dost not look like a man that ill hold out to that Glorious Place, for I perceive our nature is such, that you cannot undergo y difficulty, and you must expect to meet ith a thousand and a thousand before you come ere; for my own part I believe I have met with en thousand dangers hitherto, and expect to meet ith ten times as many before I get to the end of y journey. Self-conceit. Pray good Sir trouble not your self ith me, for I doubt not but to get to Heaven as soon d as safe as you, or any Christian Pilgrim of you . Pilgrim. But pray what have you to shew for your dmitance when you come to the City Gate, that ou are thus confident of your safe arrival. Self-conceit. I know my Lords will, and have been  good liver; I pay every man his own, I Pray, Fast,  Tythes, give Alms, and have left my Native Town r the sake of that place I am travelling too. After he had done speaking thus, I told him I elieved he was some Thief or Highwayman, and hat I was really afraid of him, upon which words e flung away from me, and turned aside into the road-road that led to Hell and Destruction. But I kept on my right Road still, which at last rought me to a rich and copious Country (much esembling the form of a Lozenge.) Now by that time I had gone a little way in this Country, I entred into a narrow passage, where I et a man whom the Devil had bound with a string alled Vainehope, upon first sight of him I began to remble and quake sadly, which a Native f the lace perceiving, made up to me, and  me he would not have me afraid of that sad object before me (for as much as he believed, it was no body else but one Formalist who dwelt for several year
frmerly in a large City called Apostacy, and I mig safely escape both him and his temptation, if were but cautious how I past over that Plain th lay just before me called Carelesness. I weighing well what he said, begged his com¦yany a little way with me, and resolved to set  watch over every step I fetcht: And being gon past him, I looked back and espied him still grov¦ling on the bare ground with this written in Capit Letters upon his Forehead, FROTHY WANTO AND MISERABLE SINNER. Then said the Cou¦try man to me, oh dear Sir, now I see what yo have just seen written upon his Forehead, I call t mnd that which was told me of a thing that se out to a good Pilgrim in this place: The name of th P  im was Small belief, but a good Christian, an he dwelt in a Village called Integrity: the thing wa this, at the entring in of the passage which yo and I just came through, there comes down fro Hell-read-gate a little entry called Bad-mans-row so called because of the robberies that are very o ten committed there upon the unwary Pilgrims i their way to the New Jerusalem: and this Small-be¦lief going on Pilgrimage as you now are, chance to fall down there and slumber, as possibly yo sometimes have done in your journey since you se out from your Native Country for about a quarte of an hour: now there happening at that time t come down the Entry from Hell-road-gate, seve sturdy Vagabonds (whose name were Pride, Cove¦tousness, Envy, Wrath, Gluttony, Lust and Sloth) accompanied likewise with three Rascally Highway men, whose names were World Flesh and Devil (thre Brothers in Iniquity) and they espying Small Be¦lief, where he lay slumbering on a little rising Hill came galloping up with full speed. Now the de¦vout Pilgrim was just awaked from his slumbers, and
was getting up to go on his journey, so the seven agabonds came with flattering Speeches and so ampered him; and the three Highwaymen with hreatning Language bid him stand. At this Small Belief looked as pale as a Clout, and had neither power to run nor fight: then the Devil (one of he Highway Thieves) perceiving this, said, Fel∣ow deliver thy chief Treasure to me (I mean thy heart) but he making no haste to do it (for he was loath to lose that precious Jewel) then Diffi∣dence ran up to him, and tript up his Heels, and hen bound him Hand and Foot, and left him as he now lies; upon which Diffidence cryed out Thieves, Thieves, Thieves, with that Ʋngodliness with his first Cozen Heynous Crime with two knotty Clubs, that were in their Hands, struck Small Belief on the Head, and left him, as you now see, sprawling on the ground; and all this while the seven Vagabonds with the other two Highwaymen World and Flesh stood smiling by. But at last they hearing that there was an Hew and Cry sent out into that Road for them, they be∣took themselves to their Leggs, and left this good Pilgrim to shift for himself: now after a while Small Belief came to himself, and getting up made a shift to march along on his way again: This was the Relation. Pilgrim. But pray Sir did they not leave him mo∣ney enough to bear his charges to the end of his Pil∣grimage. Countryman. Money enough! no, I doubt not, for they rob'd him of every peny he had about him, but they could not rob him of his good Conscience, for that sticks close to him still, and as I am told is resolved one time or other to go along with him into the other world: Therefore pray Sir, whate∣ver shift you make likewise in your Pilgrimage to
Heaven, keep your Conscience clean and undefiled, for that no man can steal from you. And therefore now to this purpose I will tell tell you a pat story which I would have you keep in mind, till you come to the end of your journey. The story is this, There was a man had three Friends, two where∣of he loved most intirely, the third he made no great account of. This man being sent for to come before his King, came and desired his first Friend to go with him, but he would not go with him, but brought him part of his way: he went to the second, and desired him to go with him, but he could not, but gave him something for a remem∣brance: he went unto the third, of whom he made no account or reckoning, and he went with him to the King and answered for him in all matters what∣soever. So poor Pilgrims in this world when they are sent for by Death, come to their Wives, Children, or Friends to go along with them into the unseen World, but they will not, but they go with them to their Graves. Then they desire their Goods and Sub∣stance to go along with them, but alas! they can∣not, yet they can give them a Winding Sheet, Cof∣fin and decent Funeral. But their Consciences, oh! their Consciences, they will and they must go along with them, and answer for them before the Throne of the Great God of Heaven and Earth. Once more therefore, Dear Pilgrim, I intreat you have a great care tht you keep a good Conscience in your Breast, for that will prove a sure and loving Friend to you to all Eternity. Pilgrim. King Countryman, I thank thee unfei∣edly for thy savory counsel, and for thy singular good Compny hitherto: and prethee man now forsake this vain World, and betake thy self to a Pilgrims Lie, and bare me Company to the New Jerusalem. And now I hpe
thou wilt readily close with this sudden motion of mine, for I perceive thou art one that is sensible of that vast Eternity to which all men are hasting. Countryman. Sir, you fright me, adieu, adieu, I have lately married a Young and Loving Wife, and I cannot have time to think of any such thing. With these words in his mouth he left me (by which I perceived he was only one that could talk well and no more, but I understand since that he is dead, but I am afraid that he hath many Brethren still living in England, I am sure he had when I left that place.) But I perceived as he went along, he would often look behind him, to see whether or no I kept still on in my right way to Jerusalem, which I did couragiously till I had walkt about a dozen miles from the place I left this new Married Youth. And now I began to be very hungry, and sick in my stomach for want of food, for I had neither eat nor drunk for two whole days together, which occasioned me to call at a little Inn that stood up∣on the Road, for some Corporal Refreshment.
CHAP. XVIII. Shewing what good cautions and instructions the Pil∣grim left to all such Holy Pilgrims, that should for the future set out after him with Resolutions to tra∣vel in the right road that leads to the New Jeru∣salem; wherein likewise he gives a full impartial and experimental account of the chief Rocks and Tem∣ptations they must of necessity avoid if ever they get safe there, together ith what happened to him, after this to the end of his Life: with his last Will and Testament. ANd after I had eaten very plentifully here, and had satisfied nature, I sate me down (for a little time) and call'd for Pen Ink and Paper, and marked out, as well as I could, (as you may perceive by the following pages) the right and nearest way to Paradice, for the sake and help of all those un∣wary Pilgrims, that should for the future seek after this Heavenly Country I was still travelling to. In which pages moreover I likewise endeavour to give a faithful account of the chief wiles and temptati∣ons all Pilgrims must of necessity avoid, if ever they get safe thither. And now it must not be here expected that I should bring any thing that is new, for the way to Para∣dice hath been allways the same since Christs Con∣summatum est, with whose Writings the World a∣bounds; but because there is much difference in limitations and descriptions of Roads, I shall here apply my self to set forth some of them, and i'le set down nothing but what I my self have found by experience since I set out for Jerusalem. Well then, Dear Pilgrims, your first passage is by the Plain of Obedience, and I must seat it in a Plain be∣cause the way of an obedient person is easie and
clear: For where there is misunderstanding the of∣ence cannot properly be called Disobedience; and contrariwise the Paths of persons disposed to raise doubts, are always rugged and perplexed. And al∣though the way to Heaven is far from being level, yet it is not (as I have by sweet experience found) altogether unpleasant: and with resolved Travellers, Countrys consisting of Risings and Descents are esteemed the most delightful and refreshing. Your next remove is over the Mount of Justice, I mean not Justice in the largest acceptation, for so it is as comprehensive as Righteousness (or rather con∣vertible with it, containing a distribution of all that in any kind can be due, as obedience to God him∣self, &c. But I take it as relating only to the Crea∣ture; and I give it an habitation upon a Hill, that it may have a fair and lovely Prospect: for no man can be just, but he must acquaint himself with circumstances, and the condition of him with whom he is to deal. The rule of Justice is to give eve∣ry man his due, and much more that which is his own in property. Within a stones throw of this Hill of Justice is easily to be seen in a clear day, (if the wary Pilgrim do but take a Prospective Glass) how that the four last Commandments of the ten save one, borders so far upon it, so as near half the Decalogue belongeth to it. And Justice is so im∣portant in Christianity, as he who meriteth the name of a Just man, is understood to be a man ex∣actly religious. A chief benefit arising from this vertue to those who are blessed with the habit of it, is freedom from the horror of Conscience, which is more frequently stirred up to disquiet by inju∣stice, than by any other offence whatsoever, and this exemption is more precious, because a troubled Conscience is the greatest unhappiness that can be∣fall any man in this Life.
At the foot of the Mount of Justice stands the House of Temperance, a frame built and situated rather for Conveniency than Curiosity, but wanting nothing that is useful for the entertainment of Pilgrims: here when I my self past by this place I found nothing of excess, and yet that which was convenient in eve∣ry respect. This Lady Temperance and her Family led a Life most contented, being not acquainted either with repining for want, or with extravagant desire of attaining more than they enjoy; their sleep is sweet, and they are not much in danger of Diseases, because most sickness arise from distempering and overclogging the Stomach. In this Family no good thing is forbidden, but the moderate use commanded. I find not in the Ten Commandments, either tempe∣rance litterally enjoyned, or the contrary forbid∣den, but certainly it is greatly serviceable in the way to Jerusalem. It preserves the faculties of the body and mind in their full strength as to all good duties, and therefore must be a very fit prepara∣tive for Devotion. But now it may be time for you to prosecute your journey beyond the House of Temperance, and therefore now when you have in a farewell salute ta∣ken leave both of Temperance and her two Daugh∣ters, Sobriety and Chastity. The next eminent thing in your way that offereth it self to view, is the mansion of Christian Fortitde, which is a Castle situated upon ground raised somewhat above the rest near it. This place had need to be defensible, for that precious treasure of truth seemeth to trust her self in it, and where can she be with more safety than in Custody of those who will lay down their life for her defence? This Fort hath arms offensive and defensive, since For∣titude cannot want the fire arms of holy Zeal sup∣plying Arguments sufficient to maintain truth, and
the armour of Patience is alwayes at hand, enabling o receive and bear without giving ground, the vio∣ent assaults of Errour and Heresie. And within his Castle there may be supposed to be kept a Re∣ord or Register of those eminent persons, who have either spent their lives in actual resistance against Invasions made upon the Church by Pagans, Sara∣ens, &c. or laid down their lives by suffering as Martyrs for the true Faith. And no person can be enrouled as a Christian Souldier, or Militant Pilgrim, in the noble and victorious Army of Martyrs, but by the means of passive Fortitude, or Constancy, as some style it. Having strengthened your selves at the Castle of Fortitude, you must descend into an obscure place, where there is a confluence of many Rivers, containing the waters of Affliction, upon these there is no Bridge, so as of force you must pass through them, and it is with much reluctation you will do it, but be∣ing within them, you will have occasion (if not necessity) of looking upwards towards Heaven, and of holding up your heads, lest you be overwhelmed. The cold of these waters hath such operation, as it driveth the heat inwards, making you to reflect upon your selves, and your former miscarriages. I speak only of those, who are furnished with grace sufficient to support them, for others there are, who being voluptuously disposed, make no resist∣ance, but are carried away with the stream, and utterly leave the path of Holiness, giving themselves wholly to be governed b the World, and the powers thereof. But those who are better disposed, use all their strength to recover the passage, and to con∣tinue in the right tract, and these are the only per∣sons to be directed. These are not fully recove∣red of damage by those waters, or at least the damage is not forgotten by them, when they pass
near to the bathing place of Repentance, and if they will, they may forbear to use the bathing; but their good Angel calleth upon them to purge themselves, telling them that their way having been narrow, they have made wandrings, so as it is very needful for them to be purged by Sorrow, for their deviations, and from the filth contracted thereby: and certainly Repentance is necessary in the way to Salvation. For can that Faith be true, which pre∣tendeth to an assurance of sins to be forgiven, which were never either generally or particularly repented of, or remission implored for them? From these waters by an ascent you will go (though with difficulty) by reason of your fainting Spirits, to the Garden of spiritual Consolation, a place not on∣ly pleasing, but useful: For there we may discern at a considerable distance, the Rock of Faith and the Temple of Holiness, as also the way to them. And in that Garden may be gathered the herb of Grace use∣ful for Nutrition and Sustentation, and Salvia (or the hope of Salvation) as an incentive to Perseve∣rance, from both which you may receive fresh vi∣gour, enabling you to undergo the residue of your journey. Now leaving the Garden of Comfort, you must de∣scend into the vale of Humility. This was altoge∣ther unknown to the Heathen, or at least not esteem∣ed a Virtue, which they alwayes placed in activi∣ty, and took this for a hindrance to it. I find it mentioned in the Proverbs of Solomon, as commen∣dable, but the Jews put it little in practice; so as we may term it purely Christian, especially that part of it which consisteth in relation only between man and man. This Valley is so invironed with tow∣ring hills, as it is altogether free from the tempestuous blasts of Ambition, and the Inhabitants are happy in the enjoyment of the blessings arising from peace and
quiet; for here comes no Promethean Eagle of Care feeding upon the heart, no ravenous Wolf of Con∣tention, no circumventing Fox, nor undermining Cony of humane Policy. All is peaceable, no noise of Complaint or Grief, their Musick being that of the innocent Turtle and the early Lark, the wakeful Nightingale, and such like. But before you leave this valley of Humility, you must come to the Fountain, or Well-spring of Charity, which is inex∣haustible, receiving its virtue and plenty from a Charity, of as much higher nature, as its habitati∣on is higher, even Heaven it self. Out of this Well-spring of Charity, continually floweth water composing the River of Beneficence, or good works, which divideth it self into many streams, that it may the better water and refresh those dry and thirsty grounds which need it. Lastly, I must give notice, that every Christian Traveller in this via lactea, or milky way to heaven, must drink very deep in the well of Charity, for he cannot have admittance to Paradice without doing so, there being no place for envy, Rancour or Malice, and such like affecti∣ons; whereas Charity which is the cement of Bro∣therly society, and bond of Perfection, hath clear and uncontrouled entrance there. Now having passed the Well-spring of Charity, you must leave the vale of Humility, and come to the rock of Faith. A Rock I may well call it, for our bles∣sed Saviour doth so, when Matt. 16.18. he saith to St. Peter, upon this Rock will I build my church. This Rock is high and hard of ascent; but you may help your selves in getting up, by the Scala sancta, or holy Stair of hope, and not improperly, since by St. Paul Heb. 11.1. Faith is defined to be the con∣fidence of things hoped for. But of what faith is this Book composed? Certainly not of that Faith where∣of the Devils are capable, who are said to believe
and tremble. Therefore it must be that Faith which we call Justifying or Saving Faith. But here I must not forbear to express, that from the height of this Rock of Faith, a good Christian may in a fair day see (as Moses did the promised Land from Mount Nebo) as much of Paradise, as is needful, to comfort him against afflictions, and to arm him against the terrours of death, whose gulf must be passed before admittance into Paradise; but of that more hereafter. Now I have thus chalked out the right way to Paradise, it will be needful to represent the dan∣ger of straying, for good Pilgrims have those at∣tending constantly upon them, who will not fail at every stage by Entisement or Terrour to mislead them. These are the World, the Flesh, and the Devil, all of them sworn enemies to Mankind, though pro∣fessing friendship. First, In the plain of Obedience, on the right hand, the World putteth Passengers in mind that Obedience is no way at all to prefer∣ment and honour. And on the left hand, the Flesh crieth up Liberty, and brandeth Obedience with the unpleasing name of Servitude. Ʋpon the mount of Justice, on this hand, the World representeth Pro∣fit by gifts, with the favour of great Persons to be obtained; and on that hand, the Flesh suggesteth great trouble and care in keeping the balance even, with danger by loss of Friends and favour; and in the way of Justice, in private dealings damage to our selves, by parting with that which we might hold. At the house of Temperance they lay several baits, and some terrour to keep us from entring in. To the young person the Flesh presents Beauty, tempting him to Incontinence, telling him that Youth will not last ever, and that it is folly to lose the pleasures of it. The aged person's Sobriety is assaulted by offers of Wine or strong drink, and he is told, that the uncomfor∣tableness
of his great years, is to be qualified by that which may render them chearful. And all ages are tempted by them with excess in Diet, and they all cry out with St. Paul's Epicurean, 1 Cor. 15.32. Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die. As for Christian Fortitude, they have several batteries against it. First, the Flesh represents the inconve∣niencies of Shame and Ignominy, then the terrours of Death: And lastly, the Devil affirms it the height of Folly, to suffer for Truth, which is strong and will prevail howsoever; and as for Rewards after this life, he cries them down as no ways to be be∣lieved. In the waters of Affliction the Devil hath one great artifice, which is by suggesting to the person that he is out of Gods favour irrecoverably, nay, in high displeasure with him; and therefore (like Job's Wife) he provokes him to curse God, and to apply himself to other remedies, wherein the World and the Flesh tender their assistance, as Se∣conds. At the baths of Repentance, the Devil pre∣tends godly sorrow to be useless, upon the same grounds newly delivered at the waters of Affliction, and that there is great want of Wisdom in those per∣sons, who wilfully render their lives unpleasant by grief, and by a refusal of those pleasures which of∣fer themselves to them. And in case he prevail not in preventing Repentance, then he seeks to keep them from entring into the garden of Consolation, by aggravating unto them all their past offenees, affirming that there is no hope of mercy, and by seeking to prove it by Scripture, as Ezek. 18.4. The soul that sinneth it shall die; and Matt. 16.27. Every man shall be rewarded according to his works, but still concealing those Texts that unfold the mer∣cies of God. In the vale of Humility, the Devil set∣teth forth how all men are of the same extraction from Adam, and that the meanest may have as good
natural parts as the highest. That since honours and riches are in the world, that man who affecteth Hu∣mility may and ought to have his part in them, as well as others. That an humble conceit of a man's self and his own parts, causeth others to conceive meanly of him, and that this keeps him under, so as he should do well to lift up his head, and forsake Humility, which is so disadvantageous to him. But the chief strivings of that infernal Spirit, are at the well-spring of Charity and river of Beneficence, Charity. being a vertue most opposite to his nature; but here again he will tell you, that Charity is opposite to all the ways of Eminency in this world, and that Honour and greatness are attained by supplant∣ing others, and Riches by imposing upon other mens weakness. And lastly, he expresseth the sweet∣ness of Revenge, which is perfectly opposite to Cha∣rity. As for the Rock of Faith, the Devil now of late endeavoureth to blow it up wholly by Heresie and Errour. Thus I have endeavoured to expess some of the chief dangers offering themselves in the way to Pa∣radise, that those Christian Pilgrims who are fore∣warned may be fore-armed. But now at present i'le insist no longer upon these instructions for fear I should be too tedious, &c. but proceed to give you an account of the remain∣ing part of my Pilgrimage. Well then thus it was, after I had left this Inn that lay on the Boad where I called for refreshment, &c. I travelled again towards Jerusalem as nimbly as if I had been inspired, but far I did not go be∣fore I found three Country Boobees, whose names were Folly, Lazibones, and Presumption fast asleep with Iron Fetters upon their Legs, but rousing them, I bid them have a care lest the Roaring Devils should find them and make them his prey. But
seeming not to regard me; The first said, I see no danger, the second, yet a little sleep; the third let eve∣ry Tub stand upon his own Bottom; So that I seeing there was no good to be done, I went away and left them to sleep on. Then going a little farther I met Dissimulation and Deceit, who would have per∣swaded me to go with them, but I refused it and passed on. Now when I was rid of them I went up a mountain called Difficulty and with much la∣bour attained the middle of it, where finding a plea∣sant House I went in, and pulled out my Bible to read, and whilst I read I fell asleep; but being a∣wakened by a heavenly voice, I started up, and let∣ting the Bible fall went away without it to the top of the Hill, where I met one Fearful and one Dis∣belief running back from the place they were tra∣velling too as hard as they could drive. When I demanded what was the cause, they told me they had been travelling to Mount Zion, but in the way stood two Robbers, and that they durst not go any far∣farther, and likewise advised me to go back, but I refused. Then feeling for my Bible I found I had lost it, which much perplexed me, so that I re∣solved to go back to the Arbour where I slept, and being come thither I found it to my unspeakable joy; for had I lost it my journey had been made in vain; then pressing forward in a narrow path I saw two Lyons and was afraid, so that I had gone back had not a voice called to me and bid me keep the middle way, for the Lyons were chained and could not hurt me. Then I walked on and came to a stately Palace called Delightful, built by the Lord of the Celestial City. Here I lodged for two nights with Discretion, Prudence, Piety and Charity, who shewed me many strange things, and to whom I related my adventures, who gave me a suit of Ar∣mour, and led me through the Valley of Humilia∣tion,
where they left me. So the next place I entred was the Valley of the shadow of Death. Now when I came to the border of it and beheld many dread∣ful shapes in it, I stood in doubt whether I had best enter or not. But I finding it was my way to the Holy City, I presently slighted all dangers, and was resolved to venture with my Pilgrims staff in my hand: so in I went, where I saw many dreadful things, as Satyrs, Ghosts and Hell it self flashing cut flames of fire, and Spirits rushing to and fro; then I began to be afraid and cryed out, O Lord I be∣seech thee deliver my Soul, Psal. 1.16. but going on I heard some one before me say, Though I walk through the Valley of the shadow of Death I will fear none ill, for thou art with me, Psal. 33.4. then began I to take courage, as knowing some others besides my self were on the way; So I travelled through a thousand dangers till I came to the end of the Valley, and then the Sun arose; and so I looking back I espied the perils I had escaped, and greatly rejoyced, saying, His candle shines upon my head, and by his light I travel through darkness, Job 29.3. Now after I had passed this danger I espied a man be∣fore me, and being desirous of Company I hasted after him, and found him to be one Trueheart who came from the same Country I came from and was there my Neighbour, upon which account we rejoyced greatly in each others Company, resolving not to part; for as the wse man saith, two are better than one. So on we went talking of the several adven∣tures we had met with in the way, and how we had escaped them. At last as we went talking along we met with a very aged man who told us his name was Adam, and first he inquired where we were going and we told him to Paradice. Then, said he, it will be better to come and live with me, and your lives shall be very delightful, and for our wages he
would leave me sole inheritor of his possessions; and further he told us that he had three beautiful Daughters whose names were Pride, Fleshly Lust, and Impiety, and that we should marry one or all of them. But we not liking him, knowing that if we went along with him he would make a bondslave of us, we turned away from him, at which he seemed very angry, and menaced us with grievous threats; and not so contented but he took hold of our flesh, and pulled so hard that we thought he had taken some pieces out: but turning to look him we saw this Inscription in his Forehead (Put off the old man with his Deeds) then we knew who he was. Now we had no sooner escaped him but one The∣ologus overtook us whom formerly we had received excellent instructions from, saying, peace be with you whom I intirely love. When we saw him we greatly rejoyced and welcomed him a thousand times, telling him all the snares we had escaped by taking his counsel. Then he laid before us all the glory that await∣ed us in the Celestial City if we persevered to the end. But said he, you will still meet with many trials in the way, therefore be faithful unto death and you will receive a Crown of Life. For, said he, you are still to go through a large Country call∣ed Prophaness, where is a great Market kept all the year, where all sorts of Vanities are made merchan∣dice of; here you will be hard put to it and find many enemies, and if you refuse to comply with their Vanities they will put you to death, but who∣soever lays down his life for the King of the Celestial City shall find life eternal; therefore by no means give heed to what they say, for he who is put to death there will take the nearest way to Heaven.
Then he left us, whereupon passing through a large Chace we entred into this Market, which it seems was established by the Prince of Darkness a∣bout two thousand years since. The chief mer∣chandice that is sold there is Vanities of all sorts, as Whores, Bauds, Houses, Trades, Lusts, Pleasures, Stately-preferments, Wives, Husbands, Children, Ma∣sters, Servants, Gold, Silver, Gems, Lives, Souls, Blood, and what not. Now when we were in the Market, we not only refused to buy these Merchan∣dices but slighted them, saying, we bought the Truth and not Trash, which so inraged some of the Rabble that they fell upon us and halled us before the Judge as contemners and disturbers of their Market, who committed us to the Common Prison, where we were derided and scoffed at, yet some good men of the Country were we where took our parts, but had e'ne as good have held their tongues, for they were abused for so doing. The next day we were brought to our Trials, where Superstition, Pick-thank and Envy swore against us, that we had spoken against the Lord of the Market, and strove to draw away his Subjects and all the Nobility that are his Kindred, as Carnal Delight, the Old Man, the Lord Desire of vain Glory, the Lord Luxurious, Lord Lechery and several others, nor have they, said the witnesses, refrained to asperse your Lordship. To all this my Brother True Heart made answer, since Belzebub was Lord of the Market, and conse∣quently an enemy to the King of the Celestial City, he did defie him and all that appertained to him, for his portion he had was not in this life, but in the New Jerusalem to which he was travelling. Up∣on which the Jury having received their charge, grounded upon certain Statutes made in the time of Nebuchadnezar, Darius and Herod, brought him in guilty, so that he was delivered to the tormen∣tors,
who after they had scourged him, slashed him with knives, and barbarously abused him, they burnt him to ashes: Now as he expired in the flames I beheld several Angels descend and fetch his soul into the aboads of bliss, sounding before him with loud Trumpets. Now whilst they were in this hurry in the Coun∣try, I like a resolved Pilgrim, through the As∣sistance of Divine Providence, made my escape out of prison, and got out of the Country of Pro∣phanness; so I went on again pondering upon my strange adventures, till I came to a style that led into a pleasant meadow, when finding the high way rough, I left it, and went over this style: but go∣ing a great way, after I was over, I found I was mistaken in my way, and therefore was resolved to return. But then the storms arose, and night coming on I could not find the way, but lying down under a little shelter, where falling asleep, a grim fellow next morning carried me to a dismal Dungeon, called Disbelief, where he beat me very grievously for about seven weeks time, but at last I opened the gates with a key called Promise, and got thence, making what haste I could to the right road, which led me to a delectable Prospect, called Contemplation, where I once again, to the joy of my heart, got a fresh sight of Jerusalem, and there I stayed and refreshed my self, and took new directions of the Towns-men that dwelt there, and then departed; but was again after this led out of the way by the Flatterer, and taken in a net, and there had certainly perished, had not one of the Celestial guard come by and delivered me, who, after he had given the flatterer correcti∣on, set me in the right way. So on again I went rejoycing, but I did not go far before I met with a man called Atheist, who had turned his back upon Zin, and who would have perswaded me to have
done the like. But I minded him not, but kept still travelling on, having the Glory of Jerusalem still in my eye, and (for ever be adored the riches of Divine Grace;) so it fell out that through abun∣dance of Vicissitudes and Changes, I came at last to a narrow River, which parted the Wilderness of this World, and the Heavenly Paradise, through which I was compelled to pass, in regard there was no other way to the New Jerusalem but that. Now this River through which I was to pass, was called by the name of Death, I was extreamly sor∣rowful when I first saw the River, and began to quake with Trembling, and wished that the going through that River, had not been the road to Jeru∣salem. But at last considering with my self, that there was no other road, and that he was unworthy of a Crown, that would not couragiously adventure through a thousand difficulties to win it, I pluck'd up my fainting Spirits, and called aloud to my three old Friends, Faith, Hope, and Charity, (seeing that formerly they had been so kind to me in my Pilgri∣mage, and upon all emergent occasions had promised to help me) and begg'd of them most earnestly up∣on my bended knees, that they would assist me now in my last moments, and bear me company, through the River, or else I was undone for ever, and should even at the last (though I had travelled so very nigh towards Jerusalem, and overcome so many dangers to get there) miss of ever arriving to that happy region. These three, though formerly my sweet and very dear Friends, and the only persons that were ready to relieve me under my Troubles, at my first call returned no answer, (and which was worse) seem'd not to listen at all, which on a sudden put me to a great plunge but Conscience, (thanks be to Almighty God) sweetly smiling upon me, which is the best
friend, when world, money, friends, earthly de∣ight, and all forsake one) I adventured to call gain, and called much louder than I did before, oping that they would at last for pity hear a poor ravelling Pilgrim, the time of whose departure was ust at hand; upon which second call, they all three made up to me, and bid me be of good chear, for as much as my warfare was now accomplish'd, for they would see me safely over the River, upon hearing f which words, my very heart leapt within me for oy, and being now in an holy transport, and much avish'd in soul, I thus bespake them. Oh my dearest, sweetest, truest friends, I am really ejoyced to see you all in my greatest extremity, so ready o help me (and even that at such a time, when my earest and tenderest relations do, and are forced to leave me; but this is now the very last time that ever ou can possibly have an opportunity to assist me, or to afford me comfort: for as soon as ever I am got over this River, which lyes just before me, and I have reacht the further shore, and am got safely within the gates of the New Jerusalem, (the place I set out for when I first begun to go on Pilgrimage, and where my dear fellow-travellers are already landed) I must then take my eternal leave of you. After I had uttered these words, they again, with many sweet endearments, repeated their late and kind promise of seeing me safe over the River: which very words of theirs (methoughts) set a gloss upon the very Face of Death, and made it really lovely in mine eyes, and filled me with so much joy, that I could now chearfully smile at the thoughts of its approach∣es, and triumph at the sight of my own Tomb, Death becoming more welcome to me now, than a joyful Trumpet is to poor Captives when it sounds out to a glorious Jubilee. And now with courage could I take my steps, and with triumph could I travel to that Ri∣ver,
whose streams must waft me over to Glory, a when I came just within prospect of it (I having le nothing behind me that I should carry to heave with me) I sate me down for about a quarter of  hour upon the stump of a green Willow tree, that adjo¦ned to it, and there I drew up my last Will and T¦stament after this following manner: My Soul I do bequenth to God; provided, That so small Legacies may be divided Among my Friends: Item, my Sins I give To my dear Jesus, whether die or live: Item, I give the World that did refresh The tender frailty of my feeble Flesh, My lesser Cares: I do bequeath moreover, To my poor body, home-spun-Cloath to cover, And hide her shame; and Food for needful diet; Some sleep, but not immoderate to quiet Distemper'd Nature, and in her Vacation, Some lawful Pleasure for her Recreation; My Charity, to my poor helpless brother, I give: My Prayers to the true Church my Mothe Whose watchful eyes I must desire still, To be the Overseers of my Will. But further my Will is, that after this vessel  Earth, this poor shell of corruption shall be to ear committed, and as near to the bones of my Ancest as the conveniency of the place may permit: a that my Funeral expences shall be discharged;  the performance of which Christian duty I appro of decency, but in no case too much solemnity (which has too often drowned the remembran of mortality in the lees of sensuality). After this,  say, my Will is, that this small estate wherewi God hath blessed me, shall be divided in equal par or portions amongst my dear and tender Children
And now, methinks, all my worldly cares are drawn near to their period Seeing then I am sail∣ing towards mine harbour, let me strike Anchor; that taking the wings of the Morning, I may fly to the bo∣som of my dear Redeemer. —Oh then, Why lingrest thou bright Lamp of Heaven? why Do thy Steeds tread so slowly on? must I Be forc'd to live when I desire to dye? Lash thou those Lazie Jades, drive with full speed, And end my slow pac'd days, that I may feed With joy on him, for whom my heart doth bleed. Post blessed Jesus, come Lord flee away, And turn this Night into the brightest Day, By thine approach, come Lord, and do not stay. Take thou Dove's wings, or give Dove's wings to me, That I may leave this world, and come to thee, And ever in thy glorious presence be. I like not this vile World, it is meer dross, Thou only art pure gold, then sure 'tis loss To be without the Throne t' enjoy a Cross. What, though I must pass through the gates of Death, It is to come to thee that gav'st me Breath, And thou art better (Lord) than Dunghill-Earth. When shall I come? Lord tell me, tell me, when? What, must I tarry Threescore Years, and Ten? My Thirsty Soul cannot hold out till then. Come dearest Saviour, come unlock this Cage Of sinful Flesh, lovingly stop the Rage Of my desires, end thou my Pilgrimage.
Go forth then, oh my Soul! what fearest thou go forth, why tremblest thou? Thou hast ha enough of this vain World in thy Pilgrimage a along; for what found'st thou there but anguish  Now then turn thy face to the Wall, and think o the Land of Promise. Oh now my heart then is ready, my heart is rea¦dy, for too too long have I sojourned here, in bein made a stranger to my heavenly Country. It is hig time for me then to discamp: and to leave thes tents of Kedar, that I may rest without labouring  rejoyce without sorrowing; and live for ever, with¦out dying, in the Celestial Paradise, even in tha New Jerusalem, to which for these threescore years  have been-travelling Say then, O my joy-ravishe Soul, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ. Eve so come, come, come Lord Jesus, come quickly. The Pilgrims Grave-stone. HE whom here this Stone does cover, Whilst he lived was no other Than a Pilgrim and your Brother, But too long the Worlds Lover. Would ye know that course of his? In an Abstract, it was this. Long in Idumaea living, Rich in favour, fortune, fame, Strong in power to shield the same, Never losing, ever thriving; He esteem'd himself sole blest In those treasures he possest.
Mines and Magazines of gain, Various objects of delight Sported with his appetite, Till those Guests hee'd entertain, Made him to consider well Earth was but the Sinners Cell. Pride first rais'd him to a Cedar. Avarice made him hug his Treasure, Envy pin'd him beyond measure, Wrath became his passion leader, Riot cram'd him; Lust belull'd him, Sloth by ceasing on him dull'd him. Thus environ'd, rest of rest, Solace, Soul, Society, Till Faith, Hope, and Charity Repossest him of a Guest, And those Guests he hugged so, That they to heaven with him would go. Seas thus calm'd, and storms appeas'd, To discover his content, He makes his Will and Testament. Which if (Christians) ye be pleas'd To partake here come with full eyes To solemnize his Obsequies.
THE SICK MANS Passing-Bell RUNG OUT, In Death-Bed Meditations, Wishes, Prayers, Expostulations, Legacies, Duties, Dialogues and Ejaculations. For the Instruction of his Friends, Neighbours and Relations, and all others whatsoever that shall chance to come within hearing of its sound. MEDITATION I. HArk! Hark! the Pilot Sickness rings my Passing-Bell and calls on me to embarque, and now Naboths Vineyard, Belshazzars Bowls, Janas Gourd can give me no content. Yet this my sudden and present sickness I bid welcome knowing is is the back door which must let me into the Kingdom of Heaven, and therefore Dear
The minister visiting the dyeing man: death coms. engraved panel of people praying at a dying man's bed The passing bell hath rung: the graues a diging. engraved panel of man digging grave in churchyard A Funerall Sermon is Preacht for ye dead man. engraved panel of a funeral
Friends run presently to the Clerk of the Parish and bid him toll the Bell that all good people may take otice how nigh I am to my end. Let them go toll the Bell whilst I tune my tongue o the Passing-Bell for the instruction of those dear Friends and Neighbours of mine that may live many years in this vain World after I am dead and rotten, well then my Dittie shall be Mortality, my Tune La∣chrime, my Time short semiquaver time which will admit of no manner of Rest, and therefore oh most indeared and kind Readers give me leave at this pre∣sent instant with my last breath to read you a Le∣cture of Mortality, before I go hence and shall be seen no more in this World. And assure your selves that every sentence there∣in shall give you notice of your end, and likewise ring such a Peal in your ears of your Dying Day that you shall readily subscribe to that great Truth fully treated of in the Pilgrims Guide, viz. That here we have no continuing City, &c. MEDITATION II. IN this Passing-Bell you may see the wicked man, though his Intrat may be Comical, his Exit is alway Tragical. Belshazzar's first Scene is re∣velling out his time in sin and pleasure, feasting and carousing with his Concubines in the Vessels of the Lord; but view him in the Catastrophe, and you shall find the hand-writing, and him trembling, Da∣rius rending away his Kingdom, and Death snatch∣ing away his Life. If you look upon the entrance of a wicked man, his Gates are Riches, his Seats Honours, his Paths Pleasures; he goes Delicately, fares Deliciously every day, he hath more than heart
can wish: but wait his going out and see a sad con∣clusion, in a moment one Disease or other throws him on a sick bed, and from thence he goes down quick to Hell. The man is cast out from God as an everlasting curse: destruction closes her mouth up∣on him, and now the Eye that hath seen him shall see him no more: his body is wrapt in the dust, his soul is buried in the flames, and his name is covered with darkness. But possibly as soon as ever sickness seizeth on him, and he verily believing he shall dye, he may immedi∣ately send for the Minister, (tho he never car'd to come near him before) and other Christian Friends to pray for him and with him, and likewise may desire Bills to be put up in the Church in behalf of his poor soul. But alas probably before the Sabbath is come, his Passing-Bell may be rung out, his Grave dug, and his Funeral Sermon preacht, and he stated in a condiion unalterabe for ever; all which mournful passages and Scenes ou may here see repesented to your Eye in this third Emblem. Verses relating to the third Emblem in this Book. I. The Minister visiting the dying man, Death comes. The Ministers call'd in, when Deaths at Dore, Ʋnhappy he that never call'd before. Keep certain watch! uncertain is thy fate, He dyes too soon, who does repent too late. II. The Passing-Bell hath rung, the Graves a digging. Now the sad Passing-Bells dull doleful clang, Through hollow air with sullen swinging rang, Signal to Worms and Neighbours, who prepare His Claret, these his Carcase those to share.
The man being dead ist strip & laid out on the bed. engraved panel of dead man being laid out in bed Thence is he hald in a winding sheet to his Cofin▪ engraved panel of man wrapped in a winding sheet Behold yr. own mortality in the Death of others! engraved panel of people at a gravestone Facies Natiuitatis suae James 1.2
III. A Funeral Sermon is Preacht for the Dead man. A Pious Soul that ever liv'd by Bread, In sure and certain hope he's gone to Bed. Let careful Overseers do what they can, Mony still makes the Saint as well as man. But now behold the perfect man, it may be thou maist see a few Tragical Scenes, the World hating, mocking, persecuting him; but the end of that man s peace. Though he may come forth weeping, yet he goes off at Death rejoycing; though he came forth combating, yet he goes out triumphing, so hat the Saints and Angels clap their hands for joy. When I therefore judge of a happy man, I'll wait his end, I care not for his entrance. MEDITATION III. From the Bells of the Church adjoyning, I am daily re∣membred of my burial, in the Funerals of others. WE have an ingenious Author, who writ a Discourse of Bells, when he was Prisoner in Turkie. How would he have inlarged himself, if he had been my fellow-prisoner in this sick-bed, so near to that Steeple, which never ceases, no more than the harmony of the Spheres, but is more heard. When the Turks took Constantinople, they melted the Bells into Ordnance; I have heard both Bells and Ordnance, but never been so much affected with those, as with these Bells. I have lain near a Steeple, by which there are said to be more than thirty Bells; and ne're another, where there is one so big, as
that the Clapper is said to weigh more than six hun∣dred pound, yet never so affected as here. Here the Bells can scarce solemnize the Funeral of any person, but that I knew him, or knew that he was my Neighbour: we dwelt in Houses near to one a∣ther before, but now he is gone into that House, in∣to which I must follow him. There is a way of cor∣recting the Children of great Persons, that other Children are corrected in their behalf, and in their names, and this works upon them, who indeed had more deserved it. And when these Bells tell me, that now one, and now another is buried, must not I acknowledge, that they have the Correction due t me, and paid the Debt that I owe? There is a story of a Bell in a Monastery, which, when any of te house was sck to death, rung always voluntarily, and they knew the inevitableness of the danger by that. It rung once, when no man was sick, but the next day one of the House fell from the Steeple and died, and the Bell held the reputation of Pro∣phet still. If these Bells that warn to a Funeral now, were appropriated to none, may not I, by the hour of the Funeral supply? How many men that stand at an Execution, if they would ask, for what dies that man, should hear their own faults condemned, and see themselves executed, by Atturney? We scarce hear of any preferred, but we think our selves, that we might very well have been that man, that is carried to his Grave now? Could I I fit my self to stand or ft in any mans place, and not to lie in any mans grave? I may lack much of the good parts of the meanest, but I lack nothing of the mor∣tality of the weakest; they may have acquired bet∣ter abiltis than I, but I was born to as many infir∣mities as they. To be an Incumbent by lying down in a Grave, to be a Doctor by teaching Mortifica∣tion by Example, by dying, though I may have Se∣niors,
others may be elder than I, yet I have pro∣ceeded apace in a good Ʋniversity, and gone a great way in a little time, by the furtherance of a vehement Fever, and whomsoever these Bells bring to the ground to day, if he and I had been com∣pared yesterday, perchance I should have been thought likelier to have come to this preferment then, than he. God hath kept the power of Death in his own hands, lest any man should bribe death. If man knew the gain of death, the ease of death, he would provoke Death to assist him, by any hand which he might use. But as men see many of their own Professions preferred, it ministers a hope that may be light upon them; so when these hourly Bells tell me of so many Funerals of men, like me, it presents, if not a desire that it may, yet a com∣fort whensoever mine shall come. But he for whose Funeral these Bells ring now, was at home, at his journeys end, yesterday; why ring they now? A man, that is a world, is all the things in the world; He is an Armie, and when an Army marches, the Van may lodge to night, where the Rear comes not till to morrow. A man extends to his act, and to his example; to that which he does, and that which he teaches, so do those things that concern him, so do these Bells; that which rung yesterday was to convey him out of the world, in his Vant, in his soul, that which rung to day, was to bring him in his Rear, in his body, to the Church; and this continuing of ringing after his entring, is to bring him to me in the Application. Where I lie I could hear the Psalm, and did joyn with the Congregation in it; but I could not hear the Sermon, and these later Bells are a repetition Sermon to me. But O my God, my God, do I that have this Fever, need other remembrances of my mortality? Is not mine own hollow voice, voice enough to pronounce
that to me? Need I look upon a Deaths Head in a Ring, that have one in my Face, or go for Death to my Neighbours house, that have him in my bo∣som? The PRAYER. O Eternal and most gracious God, who having con∣secrated our living bodies to thine own Spirit, and made us temples of the Holy Ghost, dost also require a respect to be given to these Temples, even when the Priest is gone out of them; to these bodies, when the soul is departed from them; I bless and glorifie thy name, that as thou takest care in our life, of every hair of our head, so dost thou also of every grain of ashes after our death. Neither dost thou only do good to us all, in life and death, but also wouldst have us do good to one another, as in holy life, so in those things which accom∣pany our death. In that contemplation I make account, that I hear this dead brother of ours, who is now carri∣ed out to his burial, to speak to me, and to preach my Funeral Sermon, in the voice of these Bells. In him, O God, thou hast accomplished to me, even the request of Dives to Abraham; Thou hast sent one from the dead to speak unto me. He speaks to me aloud from that Steeple; he whispers to me at these Ctains, and he speaks thy words; Blessed are the dead, which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, Rev. 14.13. Let this Prayer, therefore, O my God, be as my last gasp, my expiring, my dying in thee; that if this be the hour of my Transmigration, I may dye the death of a Sinner, drowned in my Sins, in the blood of thy Son; and if I live longer, yet I may now dye the death of the Righteous, die to Sin; which death is a Resurrection to a new life: Thou killest, and thou gi∣vest
life: which soever comes, it comes from thee, which way soever it comes, let me come to thee. MEDITATION. IV. Now, this Bell tolling softly for another, sayes to me, thou must dye. PErchance he for whom this Bell tolls, may be so ill, as that he knows not it tolls for him. And perchance I may think my self so much better than I am, as that they who are about me, and see my state, may have caused it to toll for me, and I know not that. The Church is Catholick Ʋniversal, so are all her actions; all that she does, belongs to all. When she baptizes a child, that action concerns me; for that child is thereby connected to that Head, which is my Head too, and ingraffed into that Body, whereof I am a member. And when she buries a man, that action concerns me. And here again see the next or fourth Emblem of our Mortality. As soon as the Passing-Bell, &c. hath done ringing, as was mentioned four or five pages be∣fore, why then the man being quite dead, he is stript and laid out all along on the Bed, and from thence in about three days time, his Face being pale and wan, his Cheeks fallen, and his Eyes being sunk into his Head) he is haled in his Winding-sheet to his Coffin, where the weeping Mother, sorrowful Children, and sighing Friends shed over him many, many a bitter Tear, whilst probably all this while the greedy Nurses are fighting and scuffling for his very Shirt and Cloaths, and the greedy and covetous Sons too Boxing and duelling of it valiantly for the Mony and Goods that he hath left be∣hnd, Thus, thus miserable and wretched is frail man!
Who walketh like a shade, and doth In vain himself annoy; In getting goods, and cannot tell Who shall the same enjoy. But further, Mans Life is compared, 1. To a Pil∣grimage, in which is uncertainty, Gen. 47.9. 2. A Flower, in which is mutability, Isai. 40.7. 3. A Smoak, in which is vanity, Psal. 102.3. 4. An house of Clay, in which is misery, Job 4.19. 5. A Weavers Shettle, in which is volubility, Job 7.6. 6. A Shepherds Tent, in which is variety, Isai. 38.12. 7. A Post by Land, which makes flying haste. 8. A Ship on the Sea, in which is celerity. 9. A Marriner, who sitting, standing, sleeping, or waking, ever saileth on. 10. A Shadow, which is nothing to the Body, Job 8.9. 11. A Hands-breadth, and a Vapour. 12. To a Thought, whereof we have thousands in one day. 13. To a Dream, whereof we have many in one night, Job 20.8. 14. To Va∣nity, which is nothing in it self, Psal. 39.5. 15. And to nothing, which hath no being in the world, Psal. 39.5. But I will inlarge no longer upon these Heads, for all these three mournful and teaching passages you may see here more fully represented to your Eye in this fourth Emblem. Verses relating to the fourth Emblem in this Book. I. The man being dead is stript and laid out on the Bed. Keep the Kings peace! as soon's the man is dead, They for his Mony quarrel round his Bed:
Fight Nurse, fight Lads, we'll make a ring about, E'ne let 'em have fair play, and Cuff it out. II. Thence is he hal'd in a Winding-sheet to his Coffin. When her dear Spouses last departures nigh, See where the Wife has made a shift to cry: He's now box'd up; (the Parliament be thanked) Whose Act has made my Rime in winding Blanket. III. Behold your own Mortality in the Death of o∣others, &c. Old Greybeard, and young Minx, as proud as fair, Lift up the little Brat, and all look there: His Play the Face, the Gold, is all the bliss, Yet all in a few years, must turn to this. And now Reader is it not, think you, a great folly, that men are so unwilling to think of death? Oh! questionless it is: for we see the Marriner, with joy, thinks of the Haven. The Labourer is glad to see the Evening. The Traveller is merry when his journey is ended. The Souldier is not sorry, when his fight is over: and shall we be grieved when the days of sin are ended by Death. And now in a word, all mankind is of one Au∣thor, and is one volume; when one man dies, one chapter is not torn out of the Book, but translated into a better Language; and every chapter must be so translated; God imploys several Translators; some pieces are translated by Age, some by Sick∣ness, some by Justice, but Gods hand is in every translation; and his hand shall bind up all our scat∣tered leaves again, for that Library where every Book shall lye open to one another: As therefore the Bell that rings to a Sermon, calls not upon the
Preacher only, but upon the Congregation to come; so this Bell calls us all: but how much more me, who am brought so near the door by this sudden sickness. But the truth on it is the Bell doth toll for him, that thinks it doth; and though it intermit again yet from that minute, that that occasion wrought upon him, he is united to God. Who casts not up his Eye to the Sun when it rises? But who takes off his Eye from a Comet, when that breaks out? who bends not his Ear to any Bell, which upon any oc∣casion rings? But who can remove it from that Bell, which is passing a piece of himself out of this world? No man is an Island, intire of it self; eve∣ry man is a piece of the Continent, a part of the Main; if a Clod be washed away by the Sea, Eu∣rope is the less, as well as if a Promontary were, as well as if a Mannor of thy Friends or of thine own were; Any mans death diminishes me, because I am involved in Mankind, and therefore never send to know for whom the Bell tolls; it tolls for thee. Nei∣ther can we call this a begging of misery, or a bor∣rowing of misery, as though we were not miserable enough of our selves, but must fetch in more from the next house, in taking upon us the misery of our Neighbours. Truly it were an excuseable cove∣tousness, if we did; for affliction is a treasure, and scarce any man hath enough of it. No man hath Affliction enough, that is not matured, and ripened by it, and made fit for God by that Affliction. If a man carry treasure in Bullion, or in a Wedge of Gold, and have none coyned into currant Monys, his trea∣sure will not defray him as he travels. Tribulati∣on is treasure in the nature of it, but it is not cur∣rant money in the use of it, except we get nearer and nearer our home, Heaven, by it. Another may be sick too, and sick to Death, and this Afflicti∣on
may lye in his bowels, as Gold in a Mine, and be of no use to him; but this Bell that tells me of his Affliction, digs out, and applyes that Gold to me: If by this consideration of anothers dan∣ger, I take mine own into contemplation, and so secure my self, by making my recourse to my God, who is our onely security. The PRAYER. O Eternal and most gracious God, I have a new oc∣casion of thanks, and a new occasion of Prayer to thee from the ringing of this Bell. Thou toldst me in the other voice, that I was mortal, and approaching to death; in this I may hear thee say, that I am dead, in an irremediable, in an irrecoverable state for bodily health. If that be thy language in this voyce, how infinitely am I bound to thy heavenly Majesty, for speak∣ing so plainly unto me? for even that voice, that I must dye now, is not the voice of a Judge, that speaks by way of condemnation, but of a Physician, that pre∣sents health in that: Thou presentest me Death as the cure of my disease, not as the exaltation of it; if I mistake thy voice herein, if I overrun thy pace, and prevent thy hand, and imagine death more instant upon me than thou hast bid him be, yet the voice belongs to me; I am dead, I was born dead, and from the first laying of these mud walls in my conception, they have moldred away, and the whole course of life is but an active death. Whether this voice instruct me, that I am dead man now, or remember me, that I have been a dead man all this while, I humbly thank thee for speaking in this voice to my soul.
EXPOSTULATION. MY God, my God, is this one of thy ways, of drawing light out of darkness, to make him for whom this Bell tolls, now in this dimness of his sight, to become a Superintendent, an Overseer, a Bishop, to as many as hear his voice, in this Bell, and to give us a confirmation in this action? Is this one of thy ways to raise strength out of Weakness, to make him who cannot rise from his bed, nor stir in his bed, come home to me, and in this sound give me the strength of healthy and vigorous Instructions? O my God, my God, what thunder is not a well-tuned Cymbal, what hoarseness, what harshness is not a clear Organ, if thou be plea∣sed to set thy voice to it? and what Organ is not well played on, if thy hand be upon it? Thy voice, thy hand is in this sound, and in this one sound, I hear this whole consort. I hear thy Jacob call un∣to his Sons, and say, Gather your selves together, that I may tell you what shall befall you in the last days, Gen 49.1. he sayes, That which I am now, you must be then. I hear thy Moses telling me, and all within the compass of this sound, This is the bles∣sing wherewith I bless you before my death, Deut. 33.1. This, that before your death you would consider your own in mine. I hear thy Prophet saying to Ezechias, Set thy house in order, for thou shalt die, and not live; 2 Reg. 20.1. He makes us of his Family, and calls this a setting of his house in order, to compose us to the meditation of death. I hear thy Apostles saying, I think it meet to put you in remembrance, knowing that shortly I must go out of this Tabernacle, 2 Pet. 2.13. This is the publishing of his will, and this Bell is our Legacy, the supplying of his present con∣dition to our use.
The PRAYER. O Eternal and most gracious GOD, who hast been pleased to speak to us, not only in the voyce  Nature, who speaks in our hearts, and of thy word hich speaks to our ears, but in the speech of speech∣ess creatures, in Balaams Ass, in the speech of unbe∣ieving men, in the confession of Pilate, in the speech f the Devil himself, in the recognition and attestation f thy Son; I humbly accept thy voice, in the sound of his sad and funeral Bell. And first, I bless thy glo∣ious name, that in this sound and voice, I can hear hy instructions in another mans, to consider mine own ondition; and to know that this Bell which tolls for another, before it come to ring out, may take in me too. As death is the wages of Sin, it is due to me; a death is the end of sickness, it belongs to me: And hough so disobedient a servant as I, may be afraid to die, yet to so merciful a Master as thou, I cannot be afraid to come; and therefore into thy hands, O my God, I commend my spirit, a surrender which I know thou wilt accept whether I live or die. MEDITATION V. The Bell rings out, and tells me in him, that I am dead. THe Bell rings out, the Pulse thereof is chang∣ed; the tolling was a faint, and intermitting Pulse, upon one side; this stronger, and argues more and better life. His soul is gone out; and as a man who had a lease of 1000 years after the ex∣piration of a short one, or an Inheritance after the
life of a man, in a Consumption, he is now entred into the possession of his better estate. His Soul is gone; whither? Who saw it come in, or who saw it go out? No body, yet every body is sure, he had one, and hath none. If I will ask, not a few men, but almost whole bodies, whole Churches, how the Souls of men at their departing from the body go out, I shall be told, they cannot tell. Saint Augustine studied the nature of the Soul, as much as any thing, but the salvation of the Soul, as and he sent an express Messenger to Saint Hierome, to consult of some things concerning the Soul: but he satisfies himself with this: Let the departure of my soul to salvation, be evident to my faith, and I care the less, how dark the entrance of my soul into my body, be to my reason. It is the well going out, more than the coming in, that concerns us. This soul, this bell tells me, is gone out, whither? Who shall tell me that? I know not who it is, much less what he was; the condition of the man, and the course of his life, which would tell me whither he is gone, I know not. I was not there in his sickness, nor at his death; I saw not his way, nor his end, nor can ask them, who did, thereby to conclude or ar∣gue whither he is gone. But yet I have one nearer me then all these, mine own Charity; I ask that, and that tells me, he is gone to everlasting rest, and joy and glory: I owe him a good opinion, it is but thankful Charity in me, because I received be∣nefit and instruction from him when his Bell tolled: and I do verily believe that his soul is gone to everlasting rest, and joy and glory. But for the Body, how poor a wretched thing is that? we can∣not express it so fast, as it grows worse and worse. That Body, which scarce three minutes since was such a house, as that that soul, which made but one step from thence to heaven, was scarce throughly
content to leave that for heaven: that body hath ost the name of a dwelling house, because none dwells in it, and is making haste to lose the name of a Body, and dissolve to putrifaction. Who would not be affected to see a clear and sweet Ri∣ver in the morning, grow a Kennel of muddy Land water by noon, and condemned to the saltness of the Sea by night? and how lame a Picture, how faint a Representation is that, of the precipi∣tation of mans body to dissolution? now all the parts built up, and knit by a lovely soul, now but a statue of Clay, and now these limbs melted off, as if that Clay were but Snow; and now the whole house is but a handful of Sand, so much Dust, and but a peck of Rubbidge, so much Bone. If he, who as this Bell tells me, is gone now, were some excellent Artificer, who comes to him for a Cloak, or for a garment now? or for Counsel if he were a Lawyer? if a Magistrate, for Justice? Man, be∣fore he hath his immortal soul, hath a soul of Sense, and a soul of Vegitation before that: This immortal soul did not forbid other souls to be in us before, but when this soul departs, it carries all with it; no more Vegitation, no more Sense: such a Mother in law is the Earth, in respect of our Na∣tural Mother; in her womb we grew, and when she was delivered of us, we were planted in some place, in some calling in the World; in the Womb of the Earth, we diminish, and when she is delive∣red of us, our Grave opened for another, we are not transplanted but transported, our dust in the mean time being blown away with prophane dust, with every wind. And here by the next or fifth Emblem of our mortality, where they are prepa∣ring in The house of Weeping, to carry the Corps of the dead person to the grave, you may see how that
Our Entrance and our Exit seem to meet, Our swadling Bands almost our Winding Sheet. Poor man from Mother Earth does just arise, Then looks abroad, returns again, and dyes. Some forty years perhaps with much ado He has prolong'd his tedious life unto, Then under Griefs and Cares he sinks away, His Carkass mouldring into native Clay. See where his Friends surround the sacred Ur Where all his fond Relations fondly mourn; And when the solemn Bell does sadly call, The drooping Pomp attends his Funeral, How he from Fortunes store can only have A Narrow Coffin, and a scanty Grave. — And here dear Mortal! Seest thou not plain the Emblem of thy State? Th' exact Idea of thy hasting Fate? The Figure's drawn to th' life, yea ev'ry part Is grac d and deckt with more than Zeuxian Art The first Scene showes when man's laid out for dea When th' sprightly Soul from th' Body's gone and fled His mournful friends no longer can endure The lifeless Corps, therefore they do immure And shut it close up in a Sable Hearse, As totally unfit for all Commerce; O're which they showre such store of tears that they Mourning, exhaust their Moisture and decay. With sorrow-wounded hearts they sob and cry Themselves to death, they take their turns to dye. Because one's death from th' other draws such grief, As kills the Soul in spight of all relief: Next is he brought on shoulders of his Friends Along the streets, where dismally attends A Crowd of Mourners, to the Church, where th Are twice foretold, and warn'd they are but Clay; First, by the words of th' Preacher, and then ne The Corps (tho tacitly) repeats the Text.
But lo the End's more dismal than the rest, Which brings the final Concalmatum est: Earth now is laid to Earth, and dust to dust, Earth ope's its mouth, the Coffin stop it must. This is the Lot of all, none can it flee: Earth's not quite full, there's room yet left for thee. A Wish upon hearing a Passing-bell ring. Hearing a Passing-bell, I wished and prayed too, that the sick man might have, through Christ, a safe voyage to his long home; afterwards I understood that the party was dead some hours before: and it seems in some places of London, the tolling of the Bell, is but a preface of course to ring it out. Bells are better silent than thus telling lyes, what is this but giving a false Alarum to mens Devotions, to make them to be ready armed with their Prayers; for the assistance of such, who have already fought the good fight, yea, and gotten the Conquest, not to say that mens Charity herein may be suspected of super∣stition, in praying for the dead. However my heart thus poured out, was not spilt on the ground. My Prayers too late to do him good, came soon enough to speak my good will, what I freely tender∣ed, God freely took, according to the integrity of my Intentions. The party, I hope, is in Abraham's, and my Prayers, I am sure, are returned into my own bosom. A Wish where a Funeral is a Rarity, as in Country Villages. Living in a Country Village, where a Burial was a rarity, I never thought of Death, it was so sel∣dom presented unto me. Coming to London, where there is plenty of Funerals, (so that Coffins and
Corps in the Grave justle for elbow room) I sligh¦ed and neglected Death, because grown an obje so constant and common: How foul is my Sto¦mach, to turn all Food into bad humors, Funera neither few nor frequent, work effectually on m London is a Library of Mortality: Volumes of a sorts and sizes, Rich and Poor, Infants Children Youth, Men, Old men dally dye. I see there i more required to make a good Scholar, than only the having of many Books. Lord I therefore wis that thou wilt be my Schoolmaster, and teach m to number my days, that I may apply my heart unt wisdom. NOw in the next place I shall give you a Dia¦logue, fancied between a Country Parson and a Stranger, upon the Road to London. Minister. Well overtaken friend, whither travel yo so fast? Stranger. Sir, I am going for London, and shal be glad of your good Company, if you will trave aIong with me. Minister. Sir with all my heart: and if you pleas by the way, we will have some heavenly conferences▪ which will render our way pleasant, and abate the teai∣ousness of the way. Stranger. With all my heart. Minister. Well then, because you have here no abid∣ing city, what are you to do that you may get the whole art of Living and Dying well? Stranger. I am ever to meditate upon five things. 1. Of mine own death; which is most certain that it will come, and uncertain when it will come. 2. Of the death of Christ; which was bitter to him, but sweet to, and for, his.
3. Of the deceitfulness of this world, which is ubtil to allure, and subject to change. 4. Of the joys of heaven, which are comfortable o think on, and glorious to possess. 5. Of the torments of hell, which are endless in hemselves, and comfortless to sinners. Stranger. What think you of such as are in miserie, nd desire to die, to be freed from miserie? Minister. I think their desires are not simply un∣wful, especially if they submit them to the will of God. I am vexed with a long and lingering dis∣ase, I would be freed by death, if God would free he: I am detained in prison, I would be delivered y death, if God would deliver me: I am exiled om my native countrey, I would go to heaven,  God would send for me. Do I sin in this? God orbid. Elias did it, when he desired God to take way his life, 1 Kin. 19.4. And Job did it, when e would have been contented to depart this life: nd many of Gods children have done the like. Stranger. But all this while you have no told me hat death is? Minister. It is nothing else but the privation of is natural life, or the departure of the soul from e body: or as it were the deposition of an hea∣y burden of troubles in this life, by which we are ased; especially if we carry not with us such a urden of sins as may weigh us down to the pit of erdition. Secunáus the Philosopher being asked this questi∣n by Hadrian the Emperour, said: Death is an ernal sleep, the dissolution of our bodies, the ear of rich men, the desire of poor men, an inevi∣ble event, an uncertain Pilgrimage, a robber of ankind, the mother of sleep, the passage of life, he departure of the living, and a dissolution of all. n a word, Death is the work of life, the rest
nature, the sleep of flesh and sence; the takin down these few sticks, thy earthly tabernacle wa built with; the putting off and laying up thy Ga¦ment of flesh and blood for a night, till the grea and joyful day of the Resurrection come: the farewe and good night of two old friends, parted for a sea¦son: our journey and quick passage into the othe world: our souls Goal-delivery from the prison o the body, our Birth-delivery into the unseen and be¦ter world: and so the way, the gate of Life. Stranger. Must I in my youth of necessity begin to li well? will not God accept of my service when I a old? Minister. Will you wound your self, that yo may go to the Chirurgion? and will you sin in yo youth, that you may sue for pardon in your o age: will you lay all the burden upon a lame hors when you have many stronger in your teem: sha the devil have your flowers, and God your weeds the devil yours wine, and God the lees? the dev the fattest and fairest of your flock, and God  halt, a lame, and a lean sacrifice? God forbid. Stranger. Yet if I have but time to say, Lord ha mercy upon me, though I had lived never so bad God will have mercy upon me, will he not? Minister. It is true indeed: that holy thief d it upon the cross, and God had mercy upon him Mary Magdalen did it after her leud life, and G had mercy upon her. But (first) are you not wo thy to want favour at your death, who have re sdie all your life? Secondly, do you think that your repentance unfained, which is but only for a few dayes hours? Thirdly, do you not see that such repentance often hypocritical, when men that recover fr s ckness, fall again to sin, after such a kind of ¦pentance?
Fourthly, do not many fall into desperation at their death, because they have not served God in their life? Fifthly, is it not a folly to do that all day, which you must be enforced to undo at night? Sixthly, do you not see that God in his justice doth take sense, and reason from many at their death, who have refused his mercy, all the dayes of their life? Stranger. Sir, but further, I would not die in a strange countrey, for fear of an ignominious Burial, what comforts can you give me here? Minister. Fear not, oh fear not that; for Abraham did, and died quietly: Joseph did, and he died ho∣nourably: many Saints did, and they died glori∣ously. Are you slain in battel? you have a tomb amonst the dead bodies of your enemies. Do you dye in travell? you are here a stranger, your coun∣try is in heaven. Death comes unto you masked, in these and such like shapes, take off the mask, and it is the same death wherewith women and children dye. Every place is alike distant from heaven. Stranger. But when I have seen all the world, would you have me willing to leave all the world? Minister. Why, you ever have seen the same ri∣sing and setting of the Sun: the same increasing and decreasing of nature: the like sins that have been in former times: and if you have seen all the world, consider but the vanity and mutability of this world, and either you will say that this world is a world of wickedness, or that now in this old age it is passing away, as a thred bare garment over worn. Stranger. Is it easie now, think you, to leave wife and children, father and mother, and all my friends?
Minister. Where you go you shall find more, an such as you never saw: and they whom you leav behind, shall shortly follow after you. Stranger. But what shall become of my wife, chi¦dren, friends, and kinsfolks, who depend upon me? Minister. All these belong more to God, then t you: he loves them best, and will provide best fo them; and such so left, have often risen to hig and great places. Stranger. Yet if I died not alone, I might hav more comfort. Minister. Alone: why? how many thousands i the world die in the same moment of time, whic you dye in, and yet (which God may grant to you but a few of them go to heaven? Stranger. But Sir, once again; would you have me to fear death, which causeth me to lose life, look like ghost, and which taketh away from me all the joys this visible world? Minister. By losing a temporal life, you find tha life which is eternal: you shall not be afraid whe you look ghastly, and that ghastly body of you shall one day be clothed with glory, and be mad like to the glorious body of your most glorious Sav¦our: and as for the pettie, add peacock joyes here you shall have joys eternal, and unspeakable here after. Stranger. Seeing then I must needs die, what m I do to dye well? Minister. 1. Labour that your sins dye in yo before you dye in the world. 2. Be ever ready and prepared, either for deat or judgment. Stranger. Well, but now Sir, suppose I should be ca upon a sick bed; what rules can you give me to obser at that time?
Minister. You are first to set your soul in order, nd see how you stand in the favour of God. Stranger. And what are the reasons of this rule? Minister. 1. Because the sickness of the body doth roceed from the Sin of the soul. Lament. 3.39. 2. The cure of the soul procures often the health f the body. Mat. 9.2. 3. If your sickness be a sickness to death, you hall dye more quietly: otherwise death is most earful in sickness. 4. By this you shall take your sickness the more atiently. 5. You shall so give example to such as come to isit you, to do the like. 6. All your friends shall by this be perswaded, hat you are the child of God. Stranger. Do you think in this case it is fit, whilst  am in good memory, and it may be in some hope of re∣very, to send for any godly Minister to comfort me? Minister. O it cannot, but be very fit: for he is, . The Lords messenger, to declare unto man his econciliation by Christ. 2. He is able to beat you down by the curses of he Law, and to raise you up by the promises of the Gospel. 3. He hath experience to speak a word in due sea∣on unto you. 4. He especially, as Gods Physician hath store of alves to cure your sick soul. 5. You may boldly uncover your sores to him, who will not discover him to your future shame. 6. He can see further into the nature of your heart, han oftentimes you your self can. 7. He will boldly ripp up your Ulcers, that after e may the better cure them. 8. If he comfort, or correct you for sin, you may e perswaded, that both come from God.
9. You shall, by this, much ease your own heart, by craving comfort from a gdly Preacher. 10 You shall cause others in the like visitation, to do as you have done; and you your self be fit∣ter to dye. Stranger. When I have taken this course for my soul, what must I do in the next place for my body? Minister. You are then to use the help of a godly Physician, and that for these reasons: 1. Your body is the souls house; if it be decay∣ing, you must seek to repair it by all the good means you can. 2. God hath given expert Physicians skill, to re∣store many diseases of the body. 3. God hath appointed many soveraign remedies, to recover man in his sick estate. 4. You shall better satisfie your self if you dye, in that you neglected not lawful means. 5. For want of this duty, many do perish, who might recover. Stranger. Well: say then, that I send for my Preach∣er: (and why should I not send for him, as well as for my Physician) what must I do when he is come unto me? Minister. You are bound, 1. To acklowledge and confess all such sins, as do any way so disquiet you, that you cannot be perswaded of the pardon of them. 2. You are to reveal those several temptations, by which Satan assaileth you in your sickness. 3. You are to desire comfort from him, against the burden of your sins, and those temptations of the devil. 4. You must believe, that whatsoever he saith to you, out of Gods word, is the voice of God. 5. You must hide nothing from him, by which you like a hypocrite, desire to be thought to be in a better estate than you are.
6. You must desire him to pray for you, that God may either recover your health, or receive your soul. 7. You must not be sorry if he say unto you, that your sickness may be a sickness to death, and that therefore you had need to provide for another world. 8. If you be ignorant in piety and godliness, you must never leave him till you have gotten a saving and sure knowledge of God in Christ. Stranger. And what must he do then to me? Minister. He must, 1. Examine your knowledge, saith, repentance, and reconciliation to your neigh∣bour. 2. Comfort you against the fear of death. 3. Pray for your continuance in faith. 4. Advise you to dispose well of your goods, and as you are able to remember the poor. Stranger. Sir But what shall I do if in my sickness my friends will not come at me? Minister. O, but God will never forsake you: and (especially in Cities) you shall have so many, as can do you any good: the fewer you have to gaze upon you, the fitter you are to look up to God. Stranger. But alas, I shall want my solemn funeral? Minister. What is that to the salvation of your soul, and resurrection of your body? comfort your self in Christian, not costly burial. Stranger. But now when I am sick of any disease, as I must reconcile my self to God, so ought I not to reconcile my self to my Neghbour? Minister. If you have wronged him in his body by striking, soul by seducing, person by imprison∣ing, goods by stealing, name by slandering, or any other way have done him hurt, you must seek to be reconciled unto him, Matth. 5.25. Stranger. What if I be so diseased, that he dares not come to me, or be so far absent, that he cannot come to me; what am I now to do?
Minister. In this case, 1. God accepteth the will for the deed. 2. You must testifie your desire to friends pre∣sent. Stranger. As for my goods, is it fit to make my will in sickness? Minister. Nay, rather you should ever have it rea∣dy in your health; if you have not, it is needful in sickness to make it for these reasons, (though ma∣ny think they must dye, if their will be made.) 1. In regard of your own credit, that others may think you a wise man. 2. Of your own Conscience, that having set all in good order, you may more freely depart in peace. 3. Of your loving Wife, for whom you ought to provide. 4 Of your Children, that each of them may have a convenient portion of your goods. 5. Of your Servants, that they may not depart empty away. 6. Of your Friends, that some legacies may be allotted to them. 7. Of the Church, that you may, as you are able, remember it. 8. Of the Common-wealth, that you may do good to such Societies as you have lived in. 9. Of the poor, that by giving to them, you muy send that portion of wealth before you to Heaven. 10. Of your possessions and goods themselves, that they may know their owners after you are gone. Stranger. How ought I to make my Will? Minister. It must be made according to the Law, 1. Of Nature, by which you are born. 2. Of that Nation in which you live. 3. Of God, by whom you have lived, and to whom you die. And this you must do in few, plain, and significant words.
Stranger. Say that I have gotten my goods badly: what must I do? Minister. You must make restitution to the true owners, if you know them; if not, the poor are the best inheritors of such goods. Stranger. Who are the fittest to be Executors of my Will? Minister. That person whom thou hast tried to be faithful to God, sincere in his conversation, wise in his own business, and who is like to be loving to thine, and trusty to accomplish the whole intent of thy Testament. Stranger. As I am about my Will, many friends will perhaps come and visit me: how shall I know who are my best friends? Minister. Surely they who give you good advice for your souls health, who have a fellow feeling of your sickness, and who wish rather your life to do good, than your death to have your goods: especi∣ally your best friend is a Good Conscience: for that will never leave you, nor forsake you. Stranger. But when my Friends come to visit me, am I to perform no dutie to them? Minister. You are to will them, 1. To serve God heartily. 2. To obey Governors faithfully. 3. To continue in the truth zealously. 4. To be loving one to another. 5. To be kind to your surviving alliance. 6. To meditate of death by your example. 7. Not to be over sorrowful at your dissolution. Stranger. Sir, Death when it stares me in the face it seems terrible to me, what comforts can you give me against the dread of it? Minister. 1. That Christ is to us the resurrection and the life: an whosoever believeth in him though lie were dead, yet shall he live, John 11.25.
2. That our death being converted into a sweet sleep, is the complement of the mortification of our flesh; so that he which is dead, is freed from Sin, Rom. 6.7. 3. That we are assured of the souls immortality, that it shall go by the transportation of Angels, to the assembly and society of the first born, which are written in Heaven, Luke 16.22. Heb. 21.23. and that our bodies do rest in the earth: so that one doth, not unfitly, call the Grave, an Haven for the body to arrive at. 4. That we believe the resurrection of the body, and everlasting life after death: for, for this is the faith of Christians only. 5. That (if Chysostom say true) death is but a bare name. Stranger. To draw to an end, and to come to my end, when the pangs of death come upon me, and the worms of the earth wait for me, if God give me then mine un∣derstanding, what, I pray, you, may be my fittest me∣ditation? Minister. Say now inwardly to your sick soul; Now my Pilgramage is ended, my harvest is inned, my journey is finished: my race is run, my glass is spent, my candle is in the socket: many of the god∣ly are gone before, and I am now to follow them: now think that you are come out of Prison, gotten out of Babylon, and are going to Jerusalem. Now think think that the Angels stand at your Beds head, to carry your soul into Abrahams bosom; where you shall enjoy the society of Angels, the company of the Saints, and the knowledge of them whom you never knew here: where you shall live eternally, reign triumphantly, and obey God perfectly. Me∣ditate now, that you must not be loth to leave this world, because you go to that which is to come; to leave your earthly preferments, because God will
set a Crown of pure Gold upon your head; and to leave your friends and acquaintance here, because you shall see them in glory hereafter. These and such like must be your meditations. Stranger. Now it may be (and I pray God it may be) that I may have speech unto the last gasp, what words are fit for me to utter then? Minister. If God give you that blessing, say now with David; Lord into thy hands I commend my Spirit: for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. With Simeon, Lord now lettest thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. I have fought a good fight: I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: from henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but to all them that love that appearing of his. Say, How sweet is my Saviour unto me! sweeter than the hony, and the hony comb. Say, Blessed are the dead, that dye in the Lord: for they rest from their Labours, and their works follow them. Say with Stephen, Lord into thine hands I com∣mend my soul. Say with the Saints, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Say, Lord, be good unto my Kinsfolks in the flesh, and my Friends in the spirit, that they may live in thy fear, and dye in thy favour. Say with Oecolampadius, to all that come to thee, I will tell you news, I shall shortly be wth the Lord. Say with Melancthon, if it be the will of God, I am willing to dye, and I beseech him that he will gra me a joyful departure.
Say with Peter Martyr, Farewel, my kind Brethren and dear Friends, I am now passing to Glory. Say, Blessed is God in all his ways, and holy in all his works: Naked I came out of my Mothers womb, and naked shall I return again. The Lord hath gi∣ven, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord. I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the last day on the earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet I shall see God in my flesh. Whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins are consumed within me. Say, in a word, Lord I thank thee, that I am a Christian, that I lived in a Christian Church, that I dye amongst a Christian people, that I go to a Chri∣stian Society. Lord Jesus, son of David, have mer∣cy upon me, and receive my soul. Even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen. Stranger. If I have time, these are fit, both medi∣tations, and speeches: but I may dye upon a sudden: what instructions can you give me against a sudden death? Minister. You may indeed dye suddenly, either by fire in your House, or water in your Ship, or earth falling into some Pit, or a casualty in your way, or impostumation, and an apoplexie in your body, or by travel in childbirth, if you be a wo∣man, or the sword in war, if you be a man. There∣fore think, 1. That death may come upon you unawares: wherefore as you would do for a suspected enemy, wait so for it, that it may never surprize you. 2. Know that many worthy men have dyed sud∣denly: Julius Caesar, disputing the night before of the good of sudden death, was the next day by Bru∣tus and Cassius slain suddenly in the Senate.
Johannes Mathesius having preached a Sermon of the raising again of the Widdow of Nains Son (and therein handling the knowledge, that one Friend should have another in Heaven) within three hours after slept peaceably in the Lord. Luther sitting at Supper, and discoursing of the same argument, about midnight after departed this life. One Mr. Read; an Alderman of Norwich, having read in the morning the Chapter of Henocks taking up, in the Counsel Chamber died suddenly at the table amongst his brethren. Stranger. Now since my soul must depart from my body, ought I to take any great thought for my burial? Minister. As the grave at your death is ready for you, Job 17.1. so you also must have care of it: and your surviving friends must have such respect to your dead body, that may be interred in a religi∣ous sort: for, 1. You are no Scythian, that your dead body should be eaten at some feast; nor Sabean, that it should be cast on a dunghil; nor Hyrcanian, that it should be devoured by Dogs; nor Lothaphagian, that it should be cast into the Sea; nor Indian, that it should be burned with fire; but a Christian, that it may be buried in the earth. 2. Your dead body is a member of Christ. 3. It was, as well as the soul, the temple of the Holy Ghost. 4. It was the Ordinance of God, that earth should return to his earth, as the soul doth to him, that gave it. Gen. 3. Eccles. 7. 5. That Christ, who redeemed your soul, hath also paid a ransom for your body. 6. It hath been an instrument used by God, to perform many services unto him.
7. It must rise again out of the grave, and in the day of judgment be made like unto the glorious bo∣dy of Christ, Phil. 5.21. 8. Religious and godly Friends have had this care to bury their dead: so Abraham had to bury Sarah, Joseph to bury Jacob, Israel to bury Samuel, Nicode∣mus to bury Christ, and the Disciples to bury John the Baptist, and Steven the first Martyr that suffered after Christ. 9. It is one of Gods judgements to want burial, Jer. 22.19. 10. The Saints complain for the want of it, saying, Psal. 79.3. The dead bodies of thy servants have they given to be meat unto the fouls of heaven, and the flesh of the Saints unto the beasts of the earth. Their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them. 11. Joseph gave commandment concerning his bones, Gen. 50. 12. Many heathen people have been very careful of this duty. The Egyptians embalmed, and so bu∣ried their dead: and the Hebrews made a law, that no nemy should lye unburied. Stranger. What think you of a place of burial? Minister. Abraham bought a field for the burial of his dead, Gen. 24. Christ was buried in a garden, according to the custom of the Jews, John 20. The Turks at this day bury none in their Cities: and it was one of the Laws of the 12. tables, amongst the Romans, that none should be buried within the walls. Amongst Christians, Churches and Church-yards are appointed for the dead, for these reasons. 1. To keep the City from contagion. 2. That our dead bodies should not be raked up again.
3. To shew our care for the Saints departed. Stranger. Ought there any care to be had to keep Chuch-yards in good sort? Minister. There ought: 1. They are the houses of Christians, and as it were chambers or beds to sleep in. 2. They are places to which we may resort, to be put in mind of our future mortality. 3. It argues little charity to abuse those places where our friends lie buried. Stranger. What think you of making monuments for the dead? Minister. I remember Tullie saith, that the Ro∣mans had a law, that no man should build a more costly sepulchre, than could be finished in three dayes. Lib. 2. de leg. The Egyptians builded gorgeous sepulchres, and mean houses, because the one was to them but as an Inn; the other, as they thought, an eternal habita∣tion. Celius Rhodig. Now that great and good men should have monu∣ments, as it is a thing indifferent, so I think it not not simply unlawful. 1. The Jews used such; as we may see in the Bible: David (saith the Scripture) is dead, and his sepulchre is with us to this day. Acts 2.29. 2. It is an argument that we loved such persons, whom we thus honour after their death. 3. We keep a memory of their excellent virtues. 4. We are moved to follow them in honourable actions. Stranger. Are the dead think you to be mourned for? Minister. Solon gave commandment, that the Com∣mon-wealth should mourn for him; but Ennias would not be mourned for. But as for us Christi∣ans, though we must not, with superstitios nations, hire mourning women, to lament for us, with their
ahone! ahone! yet it is lawful to deplore the de∣parture of the dead: for, 1. As the Egyptians mourned for Jacob seventy dayes, so his children lamented him seven dayes. Gen. 50. 2. Abraham mourned for Sarah, Israel for Jesias and Samuel, the faithful for Steven, the women for Dorcas, and David for his good friend Jonathan. 3. It was an argument of Gods wrath againsh Je∣coniah, that no man should say for him, Alas my bro∣ther. Jerem. 22.18. Stranger. May mourning apparel be used at funerals? Minister. If the heart mourn as well as the habit, I do not think it utterly unlawful; for, 1. By it we keep a memory of our friend. 2. We are drawn to some humiliation. 3. We are put in mind of our own mortality. 4. It argues his love that bestows it upon us. 5. By this means many poor are clothed. 6. It is but a legacy of the dead to the living. Stranger. And what think you of funeral Sermons; for many think it a sin to preach at that time? Minister. I doubt not but they may be preached; for, 1. We must preach in season and out of season. 2. Many come then to the house of God: and why should they depart empty away: 3. It is a fit time to teach, that one day we must dye. 4. Many accidents fall out in a mans sickness, which are fit to be published at such a time. 5. Many worthy vertues have shined in some mans life, which for the imitation in others, are not to be buried at his death. 6. Many corruptions have reigned in some, which then we may be exhorted to avoid.
7. They are not for the bare commendation of the dead, but for the instruction and consolation of them that are alive. Stranger. And do you think that any would be con∣tent to have his infirmities laid out at his funeral? Minister. Whether he will or not, if God may get honour, and the Church good, there is no wrong to the dead, to admonish the living that they take heed of such sins. I will deliver unto you a rare example: I knew a Gentleman of good sort, who seldom came to the Church in the time of his health: I was sent for to him in the time of his sickness, and after many instructions delivered unto him, he uttered unto me this speech: "Sir, I am beholding to you for this pains, and thank God for this comfort. But if God had now denied this favour unto me, he should have dealt with me but according to justice; I have lived a good time in this parish, I have been invited by my friends, called by the bell, moved by the good report I heard of you and others, to come to this Church: but I made many excuses, as of sickness, and going to other places, and did not come. And though I have many sins which I must answer for, yet none at this time grieveth me more, than that I have lived under a painful ministery, and yet was ne∣ver partaker of it: so that you and the whole parish may judge, that I am either of no Reli∣gion, or of a contrary religion to that which is professed in this kingdom: pray for me that this my sin may be pardoned: hear me make a confes∣sion of my faith, and that I dye in the faith of Christ, and am heartily sorry for this mine of∣fence: I pray you therefore make it known when I am dead and gone.
This I did, and thus must we do, yet in discre∣tion, that we may not be thought biters of the dead: if either for crowns, or gowns we do otherwise, it is a sin. Stranger. But pray Sir, tell me one thing more, be∣fore we part, for I perceive we are now within sight of London, and that is this, must Kings, Emper∣ours, and great men all dye, as well as men of meaner rank: will not either their Honours, or Riches shield them from the stroke of death? Minister. Even Princes, Kings and Emperours too are not spared, (when the hour-glass of their Life is run) by impartial Death; for he cuts down all with a valiant hand, and can as easily set the Pas∣sing-bell a ringing, for the Nobleman, Prince or Emperour upon the Throne, as for the meanest vassal that slaves for his bread: As for example, With what ease did Death ring the knells of Great Alexander, Victorius Saladine, and the famous Empe∣rour Adrian, entituled Charles the Great: as appears by this sixth Emblem, where you may behold, I. How Philip King of Macedon. Was daily rouz'd and call'd upon, By a stout Page whose Bon-jour ran, Remember, SIR, you are a man.Great Alexander's Page rung his Masters Passing-bell every morning. And then again, (when Diogenes takes Great Alex∣ander to visit the Tombs, to see if they could find cut his Father Philips Scull.) — How Diogenes in Cynick guise, Puts Alexander to surprize, I'th miscellany of the Dead Which is a King's or Common's Head.
Oh! how these awful sights please and displease Little Alexander, great Diogenes: Those mighty Sculls which once the world did scare, Now lie as low, and still as any there. II. —How AVictorious Saladine causeth his own Shirt, as it were, to ring his Passing-bell. Shirt is all remains in fine To victorious Saladine; At Death a piece of Linnen is All that great Monarch could call his: Poor Prince! who to his Son the East bequeaths, When Death had turn'd his Bays to Cypress wreaths. Poor prince! one Shirt must all his Trophys be, Deaths a far greater Conquerour than he. And thirdly, —How Adrian slights triumphal glory, And ith' GraveGreat Adrian rings his own Passing-bell, and that too, whilst he was in Pomp and grandure. founds his prime story: Before all pmp he doth preferr His Mausoloean Sepulcher. — And therefore here you may see, When Charles the great from trembling Europe goes, Hot Africk sweats a new beneath his blows: Till tyr'd with Crowns, he thus from Crowns did fly, And at his Funeral learned how to dye. And now here I will a little descant upon these three great and valiant Conquerours, who them∣selves at last had their Passing-bell rung in good ear∣nest by Deaths impartial Darts.
And in the first place, How remarkable is the an∣swer of Diogenes to Alexander What art thou mu∣sing on, Cynick, says this Monarch to him one day, having found him in a Charnel-yard, I amuse my self here (answers he) in search of thy Father Phi∣lip's bones among this great number, which thou seest; but my labour is in vain, one differs not from another. And now therefore, O great Alexander, what a hor∣rid spectacle is this, what a frightful object? See you not this great number of Dead mens sculls, which heaped one upon another, make a mountain of hor∣rour, and affrightment, whose baleful, and contagi∣ous umbrage, insensibly invites our bodies on to the grave. What a victory is this over these? but what an inhumanity? what a defeat? but what a butchery? May we not say, that fury and rage, have assassinated, even Natures-self, and that you and I do as it were now remain alive in the world, to celebrate its funerals by our lamentations, and regrets. Fathers, Mothers, Children, Nobles, and Plebeians, Kings, and their subjects are all pell-mell in this stack of rotten wood, which Time like a covert, but burning fire consumes by little and little, and not able to suffer, that ashes should be exalted above dust. Great Kings, the discuss of this answer, may serve you now as a fresh instruction, to insinuate to you the knowledge of your selves. You walk in triumph to the Tomb, followed with all the train of your ordinary magnificences: but by being arri∣ved at this Port, blown thither with the continual gale of your sighs, your pomp vanisheth away, your Royal Majesty abandons you, your greatness gives you the last Adieu, and this your mortal fall equals you now, to all that were below you before.
But if you doubt of this truth,Corruptio optimi pessi∣ma. be∣hold and contemplate the sculls of those Emperours and Nobles that are now in their Tombs. Their bald scalps have now no other Crown, then the circle of horrour, which invirons them; their disincarnated hands hold now no other Scepter but a pile of worms, and all the glories of their Court, now lie in the dust. And now here methinks, what a Prodigy of won∣ders is here! do I not see, the great Army of Xerxes, reduced and metamorphosed into a handful of dust? All that world of men in those days, which with its umbragious body covered a great part of the earth, shades not so much as a foot of it with its presence. Oh! be never weary of thinking of these important truths. Seneca in the Tragedy of Hercules brings in Alc∣mena, with grievous lamentation, bearing in an urn, the ashes of that great Monster-Tamer; and to this effect makes her speak: Behold, how easily I car∣ry him in my hand, who bore the heavens upon his shoulders. The sense of these words, ought to en∣gage all truly noble spirits to a deep meditation upon the vanity of things below, which seem most du∣rable. All those great Monarchs who sought an immortality in their victories and triumphs, have mist that, and found death at last, the enjoyment of their Crowns and splendours, being buried in the same Tomb with their bodies. Nay further, Death is so uncomely as to seize even beautiful Ladies with his clammy hands, and so occa∣sion the Passing-bell to toll for them too. The first Epi∣taph which was put upon Tombs, was that of the fair Rachel, as is partly remarkt from Sripture, and Borchardus assure us it was a Pyramide, which Jacob erected, sustained upon a dozen pretious stones, with this inscription,
Here lyes fair RACHEL composed of nothing but BEAƲTY and LOVE. Ladies let your sweetness and blandishments now change language, and let them tell us no more that you are fair, since Beauty is buried in the Tomb of the fair Rachel: But if you make Bravado of your crisped hairs, whose glistering charms dazle the eyes, and captivate mens souls at once: Her bright locks dispersed into a thousand golden wreaths, had the power to enchain mens hearts, and yet her vertue was to despise this power, be∣fore Death rung her Passing-bell. But for all this, notwithstanding Nature was never able to exempt from rottenness this Mistris, or Master-piece of the works of her hands. Suppose that Majesty it self, has no better Mirrour than from the clear reflecti∣ons of your ivory fore-heads: Rachel's was so per∣fect, that it is in vain to seek terms to express its accurateness, and yet now it is nothing but ashes, if so much. Let your Eyes (suppose) be more clear and beau∣tiful than the Sun, able to make a rape upon mens liberties, and enamourate the sternest hearts; those of Rachel were so admirable and bewitching, that she her self redoubted their force and power. Looking her self in a Mirrour, her own eyes enfla∣med her, and of this pleasing heat, she apprehen∣ded the influence, being her self even tempted to desire it: But for all this, those two sparkling won∣ders, quickned with Natures sweetest, and most amiable graces, are now nothing but rottenness and corruption. Be your Cheeks half Lillies half Roses, your lips Carnation-Gilly-flowers, your teeth Orient Pearl, your bosom purest Alabaster, and all these lovely
parts enlivened with a spirit divine: fair Rachel possest all these perfections soveraignly, and more than ever you saw or wisht, as elevated above your knowledge. But (O mishap) she her self, in whom all these rare beauties were united and assembled, is now nothing at all; or if she be somewhat, it can be but a little dust, earth, or ashes, which the worms keep possession of. Ladies, will you yet presume your selves fair, after you have thus now assisted in imagination and thought, to the funerals of Beauty it self after you have read, I say, the Epitaph, which is writ∣ten upon her Sepulture. I grant you have a thou∣sand sweets and graces: yet now at least confess ye, that these blandishments are but of so thin aerial worths, that the wind carries them away, as if they were composed of nought else; for scarcely have they birth, but you see them decay, and then the misprise, that each one makes of them, renders them more capable to produce pity than love. But in a word, all men and women that are now buried in every Church-yard, throughout the whole world, have every one plaid their part, and it may be, that the hour will soon knell, that you must act yours. If thou trust to thy youth, put thy head out of the window, and thou shalt presently see carried to the grave some not so old as thy self. If thou rely upon thy health which thou now enjoyest, 'tis but a false going dyal. The calm of a perfect health, hath ften∣times ushered the Tempest of a sudden Death. Death will no more spare him that wears a Crown upon his head, than him that carries a spade in his hand. Palsida mors aequo pulsat pede Pauperum tabernas, Regamque turres, &c.
There is no difference, Death hath made Equal the Scepter, and the Spade. No dreader Majesty is now I'th' Royal Scalp than Rustick brow. Fair Nereus has no beauteous grace, More than Thersites' ugly face, Now both are dead, odds there is none Betwixt the fair'st, and fowlest one. Tell me among'st the huddled pile. Of dead mens bones, which was ere while The subtil'st Lawyer's, or the dull And Ignoramian empty Skull? Was yond' some valourous Samsons arm? Or one that ne'er drew sword for harm. Or wink and tell me, which is which, Irus the poor, or Croesus rich? What are they now who so much stood On Riches, Honours, and high Blood? Ther's now no diff'rence, with the dead Distinctions all are buried. Only the Soul as Ill or Well, Is differenc't or in Heaven, or Hell. And here may therefore very properly be in∣serted, the Dialogue between Diogenes and Alexan∣der, concerning his Father Philip's Scull, who like∣wise rung in open field the Passing-Bell for thou∣sands of valiant Heroes that lived in his time.
The Dialogue is this. VIewing the ranges of a Librarie Of dead men's bones pil'd in a Coemitarie, Great Alexander finds Diogenes, And thus they dialogue. Alex. Cynick, among these Ruines of frail Mortality, what do'st look? Diog. For that wherein I fear to be mistook, I see thy Father Philip's Scull among This pell-mell undistinguishable Throng. Alex. Let's see, which is it? shew me. (Diog.) Sure 'tis that, Whose nose is bridge-faln. Alex. Dead men's are all flat. Diog. Why then 'tis that where shrowds perpetual night, Cav'd in those hollow eye-holes, void of sight. Alex. Still all are so, Diog. Why 'tis yon' skinless brow, Chap-faln, lip-sunk, with teeth-disranked row, Yond' peeled scalp, Alex. Thus still are all alike. Diog. So shall both you and I, and let this strike. Thy knowledge Alexander, and thy sence, 'Twixt King and slave once dead's no difference. —And now young gallant, Let not the splendour of high Birth Be all thy gloss without true worth, Let neither honour, nor vast wealth Beauty, nor Valour, nor firm health Make thee bear up too high thy head, All men alike are buried. Stare not with supercilious brow,
Poor folks are dust, and so art thou. Triumph not in thy worldy Odds, They die like men whom we count Gods, And in the Grave it is all one, Who enjoy'd all, or who had none. Death cuts off all superfluous, And makes the proudest one of us, Nor shall there difference then between, The dust of Lords, or slaves be seen. Together under ground they lye Without distinctive Heraldry; Ʋnless it be that some brave Tomb, Do grace the Great-ones in Earths Womb. But better 'tis that Heaven's door, Is oft'nest open to the poor; When those, whose backs and sides with sin, Are bunch't and swoln, cannot get in. Beware the Bulk of thy Estate, Shock thee from entrance at that gate. Give Earth to Earth: but give thy mind To Heaven where its seat's assign'd, If, as it came from that bright Sphere; Thither thou tend, not fix it here. Live, that thy Soul may white return, Leaving its Partner in the Ʋrn, Till a blest day shall reunite, And beam them with eternal Light. But further observe (which was very remarkable Great Alexander caused his Page every Morning as it were, to awake him with a Passing-Bell, sound¦ing these words, Remember, Sir, that you are a ma This great Monarch made himself to be rouze every day from sleep, with the News of Death, fear¦ing to be charmed with the sweets of Life. Great¦ness environ him on all parts, to make him forge his humility, but understand you not the delicat
air, which he causes to be sung to the tune of is miseries: the Pomp and Magnificence of his ches dazle his eyes with their luster, that he ight never consider the wretchedness which is roper to him. But you see how he makes him∣elf to be awaked with the noyse of this truth, ever o cherish its remembrance: Sir, remember that you re a man; oh how many mysteries are comprised  these words! behold the Alegory of it. Great Kings remember you are subject to many ore Miseries, then you have subjects in your Em∣ire. Great Monarchs remember that of all the great xtention of your Territories there shall not remain ou one only foot, so jealous are the worms of your lory, Great Princes remember that your Scepters nd your Crowns, are such feeble marks of Great∣ess, that Fortune sports with them, Time mocks t them, and the Wind shall sweep away their dust. Awake thy self then Reader, and where ever hou walkest, fancy to thy self, thou hearest thine wn Passing-bell ringing; and likewise let thy con∣cience and thy misery each in it's turn, serve thee s a Page every morning to put thee in mind, That thou art a Man, I mean a pourtraict animated ith Death, rather than with life, since thou canst o nothing but dye, but in this continual dying, midst the throng of evils and pains which are enjoy∣ed to thy condition; Consider also that thou art reated to possess an Eternity both of Life and Hap∣iness, and that all these infinite good things are xposed as an aim of honour and glory to the ad∣resses of thy Will; for if thou wilt, Paradise hall be thine, though Hell gape at thee eagerly: Therefore now up and be doing.
Oh rise! for a fair Morne brings on the Day, The Sun is mounted onward on his way, The Anthymn's high among the feather'd Quires, A lively breath the agile Aire inspires. Draw-ope the Curtains, do not close the Eye From the fresh beauties of the Azure-S ie. Mark what a smart Bon-jour his Page did bring, Each Morn to PHILIP, Macedonia's King, Remember (Royal Sir) you are a Man, The hours are wing'd, the length of Life's a span. This pow'rfull hint stirr'd up the King to rise, Whose name Heroick deeds immortalize. Gross-vapour'd, heavy-headed sleepers wake, In the bright Morne no more soft slumbers take: For Action man was made, our Life's a Race, He that would win the Prize, must run apace. Be not enchanted with the lulling Down, That charms the senses in Lethargick swown; Leave the enclosure of Bed-Canopie, And give the view more spatious Liberty: Forsake the grave-type Couch, where Death doth keep His nightly Sessions, imaged by Slep, He that's a Dormouse for the time is dead, And is entomb'd already in his Bed. Who knows how soon that sheet, whereon he lyes, May single serve t' enwrap him when he dyes? How soon these lazy feather-bedded bones May Coverletted be with Marble-stones? Where no joynt-suppling-warmth shall give refresh, To high-fed veins, nor ease improved flesh; Where those pufft grossures, which o're curious cost Hath surfet-swoln, are putrified, and lost, Who would be Epicurian, since 'tis thus We that eat all things else, worms will eat us? Or who would be o're haughty, since to Earth He must return, as thence he had his Birth?
Mean while, though Life's quick-sand doth hourly pass, A sluggard sleeps out more than half his Glass. Be active while you may, for Tim's post haste, Spurs on each forward Minute to the last. Such thoughts as these best fit the Morning's prime, To rouze Men's Spirits to redeem the Time. Let such our Matters be, ere Death's sad Knell. Summon our wandring Souls to Heaven or Hell. — And kind Reader, When haughty thoughts impuff thee, than Dictate thy self, Thou art but Man, A fabrick of commixed Dust, That's all the prop of humane trust. How dares a Clod of mouldring Clay Be Proud, decaying every day? And yet there is a way beside, Wherein may be a lawful pride. When sly Temptations stirr thee, than Tink with thy self, Thou art a Man, Rouze up thy Spirits, do not yield, A brave resistance wins the Field: Shall a Soul of Heavenly breath, Grovell so far, its worth beneath, Fouly to be pollute with slime, Of any base and shameful crime? Thou art a Man, for Heaven born, Reflect on Earth disdainful scorn, Be not abus'd, since Life is short, Squander it not away in sport: Nor hazard heavens eternal Joyes, For a small spurt of worldly Toyes. Do something ere thou do bequeath; To Worms thy flesh, to Air thy breath; Something, that may, when thou art dd, With honour of thy name be read.
Something, that may, when thou art cold, Thaw frozen spirits, when 'tis told, Something, that may, the grave controule, And shew thou hadst a noble Soul. Do something to advance thy bliss Both in the other World, and This. But now again in the second place, (by whic you may see, that great men must submit to gri Death when it comes) how remarkable was that o great Saladine, magnificent Conquerour of Asi and Monarch of the whole East, who carried awa to the grave for the fruit of all his victories, nothin but only one poor shirt, which covered the mould  his body, and even this scarp of linnen too, fo¦tune leaves him, as it were, but to give to th worms. Arrogant spirits, ambitious hearts be silent, an lend an ear to the publick, cry of this Herald, wh wh a voice animated with horrour, and afrightmen as well as with compassion and truth, proclaimet aloud, in the view of heaven and earth, and in th presence of a world and army of people: that a¦ter all his Victories, he was but a mortal ma Heres a valiant General ringing, as it were, his ow Passing-Bell; for here you see the richest Prince o te East, takes a glory of all his Treasures, to carr away but only a Shirt to his Sepulchre. What ca you answer to these verities, oh ye Great ones of th earth? For, Lo, Death invested in a Robe of Ermine, Dth often sit, embellished with Vermine, Ʋpon a Pile of great men's Sculls, his Throne, Pell-mell subduing all, and sparing none. A scrutinous judgement will the Type ressent, You may imagine, 'tis Death's Parliament.
Ʋpon the World its pow'rful Foot doth tread, For all the world or is, or shall be dead. This famous Saladine, the terrour of men, the valour of the earth, and the wonder of the whole world, esteems himself so happy, and so advantaged by ortune, in respect she leaves him this old ragg to over his corruption, that he makes this favour, to e published with sound of trumpet in the midst of is whole Army, that none might be in doubt on't: what beyond this can be your pretentions? I grant you may be seated like Xerxes, upon a Throne all of massie gold, canopied with a gliste∣ing firmament of pretious stones; and that on what side soever you turn your menacing looks, you may see nothing but objects humbled before your Royal Majesties. Yet you never seat your selves up∣on these Thrones of magnificence, but as it were to take leave of the assembly, continuing still to give your last God-bwyes, like a man who is upon point to depart continually, since he dies every moment. Insomuch, that all this pomp which accompanies you, and which gives shadow to the luster where∣with you are environed, vanishes away with you, when grim Death rings your Passing-bell. Be it again, that all the Gold of the Indies can be valued but to a part of your estate, and that all the world together, possess less treasure than you alone; what advantage think you to bear away, more than the most miserable of the world, that in this you should be so proud! Enjoys not he the same Sun which lights you? hath not he the same usage of the Elements, whereof you make use?
—Then if you please, Swell on unbounded Spirits, whose vast hope, Scorns the streight limits of all moderate scope. Be Crescent still, fix not 'ith' Positive, Graspe still at more, reach the Superlative; And beyond that too, and beyond the Moon; Yet al's but vain, and you shall find too soon, These great acquists are bubbles for a spurt, And Death will leave you nothing but your Shirt. Be Richest, Greatest, Pow'rfullest, and split, Fames Trumpet with the blast on't, there is it, That's all, a Coffin, and a Sheet, and then, You're dead, and buried like to Common men, This Saladine foresaw, and wisely stoops Ʋnto his Fate, 'midst his triumphant troops, A world of wealth, and Asiatick spoyles, Guerdon his glorious military toyles, Ensigns, and Banners shade his armies Eyes With flying colours of fled enemies: Yet humbly he doth his chief Standard reare, Onely his Shirt display'd upon a Spear. Mean while his valorous Colonels were clad In rich Coat-armours, which they forced had From subdu'd foes, and 't seem'd a glorious thing, Each man to be apparell'd like a King. The very common Souldiers out-side spoke, Commander now, and did respect provoke. Their former ornaments were cast aside, Which 'fore the Victory were all their pride, To check their Pomp, with clangring trumpet sound. A Herald loud proclaims in Tone profound: See what the Emperour doth present your Eye, 'Tis all; that you must look for when you dye. This Shirt is all even Saladine shall have Of all his Trophys with him to the grave.
Then be not over-heightned with the splendour Of your rich braveries, which you so much tender. Nor let your honours puff you, lest you find The breath of Fame jade ye with broken wind. The solemn passage of this Monarch story With greatest lustre doth advance his glory. Therefore here kind Reader, consider, that Were both the Indies treasures thine, And thou Lord of every Mine; Or hadst thou all the golden Ore, On Tagus or Pactolus Shore, And were thy Cabinet the Shrine, Where thousand Pearls, and Diamonds shine, All must be left, and thou alow'd A little linnen for thy Shrowd. Or if 'twere so thy Testament, Perhaps a goodly Monument. What better is a golden Chase, Or Marble, than a Charnel place? Charon hence no advantage makes, A half penny a soul he takes, Thy heirs will leave thee but a Shirt, Enough to hide thy rotten Dirt. Then be not greedy of much pelf, He that gets all may lose himself. And Riches are of this Dilemne, Or they leave us, or we must them. Death brings to misers double wo, The lose their Cash, and their souls too. Change then thy scope to heavenly gains, That wealth eternally remains. But to proceed in the third and last place: Oh how glorious is the Triumph over Death, as doth ppear by the next example of the Emperour Adri∣an,
who entred into his Empire by the port of h Tomb, thus to raign during his life, like a ma that dies every moment; he celebrates himse his own Funerals, and is led in Triumph to his S¦pulcher to learn to die generously. What a glor is this to over-awe That, which commands the who world? what Courage is this, to assail and combat That, which none could ever yet resist? and wha a power is it to tame That which never yet yield¦ed? Echo her self hath not rebounds enow to re¦sound aloud the wonders of this Victory of grea Adrian over himself. —But * A Funeral Herse with wreaths of Cypres crested, A Skeleton with Robes imperial vested, Dead march, sad looks, no glorious circumstance Of chief Atchievements, and victorious Chance, * Are these fit Trophy's for a Conquerour? These are the Triumphs of the Emperour! Adrian, who chose this Sable Heraldry Before the popular guilded Pageantry, 'Stead of Triumphal Arches he doth rear The Marble Columns of his Sepulcher. No publick honours wave his srict intent, To shrine his Triumph in his Monument. The Conscript Fathers and Quirits all Intend his welcome to the Capitol. The vast expence one day's work would have cost, He wiser far (sice t'other had been lost) To build a Mausolaeum doth bestow, W now at Rome is call'd Saint Angelo. Whee to this day, from Aelius Adrians Name, The Aelian Bridge doth still revive his fame, Now was the peoples expectation high. For wonted pomp and glitt'ring Chevaly:
But lo their Emp'rour doth invite 'em all, Not to a Shew, but to his Funeral. They look for Gew-Gaw fancies; his wise scorn Contemns those Vanities leaves their hope forlorn. For since all's smother'd in the Funeral Pile, He will not dally with 'em for a while. This was Self-Victory, and deserveth more Than all the Conquests he had won before. What can Death do to such a man, er Fate, Whose Resolutions them anticipate? For since the Grave must be the latter end, Let our preventing thoughts first thither tend. Bravely resolv'd it is, knowing the worst What must be done at last, as good at first. Let us therefore now, kind Reader, every day ake Funeral processions, or at least visit in meditati∣ every hour our Tomb, as the place where our bodies st make so long abode. Celebrate we our selves our n Funerals, and invite to our exequies Ambition, varice, Pride, Choler, Luxury, Gluttony, and all e other Passions, wherewith we may be attainted, to e end to be Conquerours, even by our own proper de∣t: For when a Man yields to the Meditation of eath, then reason commands sense; all obey to this prehension of frailty, and feebleness. Pleasures  little and little abandon us, the sweets of life em sowr, and we can find no other quiet, but in e hope of that glorious life to come. Proud Spirits, be ye Spectators of this Funeral mp, which this great Monarch Adrian celebrates  day: He invites the Heaven and the Earth to  Exequies, since in their view he accompanies  pourtrayed Skeleton unto the Tomb: His boy nducts thither its shadow, the originall the paint∣ figure in attendance, till a Metamorphosis be∣de both of one and t'other, O glorious action!
where the living takes a pride to appear dead, a dying already by his own choice, as well as neces¦sity. O glorious actions! where the Triumph takes a glory in the appearance of his overthrow O glorous action! where all the honour depend upon the contempt of the worlds honour. O glo∣rious action! where Garlands of Cypress disput the preheminence with Laurel and Palm. O glo¦rious action! where the Conquerour undergoin the Laws of Nature, elevaes himself above it, ma¦king his puissance to be admired, in his voluntar weakness. When I consider, that all the world together is but as it were a Caemitary or Church-yard, where in every hour of the day, some wretchedness, o other, brings to the grave those whom such thei miserable condition hath destroyed, I have  more passionate desire of life, since evils an troubles are proprietaries of it rather than w Who can keep account of the number of persons, th expire this very moment, that I am now speking to  or the different deaths, which terminate the court of their Careere? All is universally dreadful, an yet we quake not, either in horrour, or astonish¦ment. A Walk into Church-yards, and Charnels, thoug it be sad and melancholly, by reason of the dol¦ful objects there obvious, hath yet neverthele something in it agreeable to content good soul in the cuntemplation of those very objects, whic they there find. How often have I taken ple¦sure to consider a great number of Deadmens scal arranged one in pile upon another with this co¦ceit of the vanity, and arrogance, wherewith othe while they have been filled? Some have had  other care but of their hair, employing the grea¦est part of their time, either to frizle or
them; and represent unto your selves by the way, what recompence now betides them for all their pains. Others all full of ambition, had no other aims but at Coronal wreaths, consider a little in this their misery, the injustice of their pre∣tentions. I have remark'd in sequel how a little worm did gnaw the arm of some late Sampson, reducing thus all his force to an object of compassion, and wret∣chedness, since that arm heretofore so strong, and dreadful, had not now force enough left to resist a worm. Reader muze often on these truths. Stranger. But now, pray Sir, tell me (you having discours'd a great while concerning Death and dying, and the mortality of all ranks and degrees) what will become of my soul as soon as ever I am dead? Minister. You shall be carried to the bosome of Abraham, the celestial paradise, the house of your Father, the new, holy, and durable Jerusalem: you shall then enter into your Masters joy, you shall have an inheritance immortal, undefiled, which withereth not, reserved in the heavens: you shall rest from your labours, have peace from your ene∣mies, and behold the glory of God in Christ Jesus: in which place shall be such, and so many joyes, as all the Arithmetitians in the world are not able to number them: all the Geometritians are not able to weigh them: all the Grammarians, Rhetoritian; and Logitians are not able to express them in fit terms. There shall be joy above us for the vision of God, about us for the vision of the Angels, beneah us for the vision of the Heavens, and within us for the visi∣on of Happiness. There Solomons wisdom shall be re∣puted but folly: Absoloms beauy ut deformity: Azuels swiftness but slowness: Sampsons strenth but weakness: Methusalems long age but infancy:
and the kingdom of Augustus Cesar but beggery. Stranger. Shall my body only, or my soul only, or both body and soul together enjoy this felicity? Minister. Both body and soul: your soul shall be sanctified throughout, and your body made like un∣to the glorious body of Christ Jesus. Phil. 3.20. Stranger. Shall this very body of mine rise again to life after death? Minister. It shall assuredly: for, 1. The Lord keepeth all the bones of his Saints, that not one of them shall be broken: Psal. 34.21. and there shall not an hair of our head perish. Luke 21.18. 2. Every one shall receive, in his body, that which he hath done, be it good or evil. 2 Cor. 5.10. 3. This corruptible shall put on incorruption, saith the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. This saith he, pointing as with the finger at the same substance; and could not speak more expresly, unless he should have taken his own skin, with his own hands, as Tertullian well observed. 4. I am sure, saith Job, that my Redeemer liveth, and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my self shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me, though my reins are now consumed within me. Job 19.25. Stranger. O that you could teach me this by some such comparisons, as might confirm my faith concerning this doctrine: for there are many Sadducees in the world at this day that deny the resurrection of the body. Minister. Indeed I remember, that Gregorie in his Morals hath a like saying of some in his time, There are, saith he, a number of people, who (considering, that the soul is dissolved from the bo∣dy, that the body is turned into rottenness, that rottenness returneth to dust, and that this dust is
resolved into the first elements) cannot see how that by reason there should be any resurrection; and, beholding dry and dead bones, mistrust that they shall not again be clothed with their flesh, and so revive. Such men, though they cannot by faith believe as they ought, the bodies resurrection, yet let them be perswaded by this natural reason, what I pray, then doth the whole world, but imitate our resurrection daily in her elements? For, we see daily, that trees in winter want both leaves and fruit: and behold, suddenly in the spring time, out of a dry tree, as it were by a new resurrection, leaves bud out, fruits ripen, and the whole tree is apparelled with her revived beauty. Let them be∣hold the dead kernel set into the earth, how a tree sprouteth out of it: and let them devise if they can where that great tree was in so small a seed? Where was the body? where the bark? where the branches? where that plenty of fruit? Do they not perceive that all these were in the kernel or seed, before it was cast into the ground? Why then should they wonder, how a little dust, resolved into elements, should, when God will, become a living body again? seeing that so small a seed, coming first out of a tree, should, by the power of God become an huge tree again. For, as the tree is in the kernel, so are our bodies in the glorified body of Christ. And why now should it seem strange unto any that God is able to raise their body again at the last day? a Taylor can rip a Garment, and set it together again, though it be in a thousand pieces: a Clock-maker can take asunder every wheel of a watch: and joyn it together again: and shall not God be able to do the like for your body? Why, my dear fellow-traveller, did God create you of nothing, and can he not restore you from something? doth
he not hold all the Elements in his hand? is not he more skilful than that Alchymist, who can extract the quintessence of any substance? is not he the Lord God of all flesh? is there any thing hard to him? Jer. 32. Can the Phenix rise out of her own ashes, and shall not you arise out of your own dust? Can the Trees revive again in the Spring, and can∣not you revive again at the last day? You see that many birds and flies are dead all winter, and revive in summer: you know that the corn, which at seed time is cast into the ground, groweth up in harvest. Shall God (saith Augustine) quicken the rot∣ten and dead grains of seed, whereby thou livest in this world, and shall he not much more raise thee up, that thou mayest live for ever? Know then, that as every night hath his day; every sun-setting, his sun-ri∣sing; every sleeping, his awaking; every labour, his rest; and every winter, his spring time: so every Death shall have his Life. Say then, even when you are to dye, Post tenebras spero lucem: Af∣ter darkness I hope for light, Job 17.12. For, if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Jesus Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodys, by his Spirit that dwelleth in you. Stranger. Well then I believe that I shall see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the Living: but when I see him, what shall be the qualities where with my body shall be adorned? Minister. It shall be, 1. Immortal: for this mortal shall put on immortality. 1 Cor. 15. 2. Incorruptible: for, this corruptible shall put on in∣corruption. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Spiritual: it is sown a natural body, it shall rise a spiritual body. 1 Cor. 15. 4. Strong: it is sowen in weakness, it shall rise in strength. 1 Cor. 15.
5. Perfect: for, as Adam was in his first creati∣on, and Christ after his resurrection, so shall you be at the resurrection of the just. 6. Beautiful: it shall shine like the starrs, be bright as the Sun, and clear as Chrystal. Dan. 12. Matt. 22. The glory of the heavenly bodies is one, and the glory of the earthly bodies is another. Minister. Well Sir, now we must part; for we are at our journeys end. Stranger. Sir then adieu: and I thank you most heartily for your good company, and wholsome instructi∣ons; and I hope I shall bear them in mind to my Dying day.
Death-bed LEGACIES. Sick man. WHere is my Wife and my Children, a my Servants? Nurse. They are all here present. Sick man. Come hither then my dear Wife. My Dear, The sick mans Exhortation to his Wife.YOu see in what case I lye her sick, weak, and the prisone of God, looking every hour for m departure out of this world. An this visitation of God is unto me welcome, and  thank the Lord with all my heart for it. I doub not, but that when I am once gone out of thi wretched life, I shall be in a far better case tha ever I was in this world. Therefore I pray the good wife be not heavy, neither take any though for me, but rather pray that the good will  God may be done in me. And be as well content¦ed, that I should now at the Calling of God go fro thee, as ever thou wast to have me in thy compa¦ny. I have run my Race: I have passed thos years which the Lord appointed that I should liv in this world. And now is the time of my depar¦ture come. And I give over this my life willingly and with a free heart: therefore take no thought fo me. And doubt thou not, sweet Wife, but if tho goest forth to live in the fear of God, and to please him, God in the time of thy Widowhood will be a husband unto thee: he will be thy patron and de¦fender, he will be thy mighty shield and buckler  he will provide and foresee that thou and thine shall want no good thing; for he hath promised in his holy Word, that he will take charge of the widows and defend their cause. Therefore I doubt not but the Lord our God will abundantly provide
both for thee and thine. Notwithstanding wife, forsomuch as from the first time of our Marriage unto this present day, thou hast alwayes been unto me a very loving, true, faithful, honest, diligent, and serviceable wife, I have made thee mine execu∣trix, and given unto thee, in my Will, such a por∣tion as shall abundantly satisfie thee, both unto the bringing up of my Children, and also unto the maintenance of Hospitality. God hath lent me enough: and therefore I leave unto thee and thine enough. To forbid thee marriage after my departure according to the property of some hus∣bands, I will not. For the holy Scripture saith, the wife is bound unto the marriage, as long as her husband liveth. If her husband die, she is at liber∣ty to marry with whom she will, only in the Lord. If thou therefore after my departure (O Wife) hast a mind to marry again, marry in the name of the Lord our God. For I know as the wise man saith, that no Woman can live chaste, except God giveth the gift. Onely have this care, that he with whom thou dost determine to couple thy self in the bles∣sed state of honourable wedlock, be such a man as feareth God, loves his Word, is well reported of by his neighbours, deals righteously with all men, embraceth virtue, despiseth vice, &c. Follow not the manner of certain old doating Widows, which for bodily lust, in their old crooked age, couple themselves to yonkers, which might well have been their children, and unto whom they might also have given suck. But unto what end such marriages come, for the most part, daily experi∣ence teacheth. The one marrieth for bodily plea∣sure, the other for covetousness. Such marriages are not blessed of God.How the widow should choose her husband. Choose therefore such an hus∣band, as will love thee and not thy
goods only, as is equal to thee in condition, state a age, as also will tender my Children, and be a fath to them, and see them brought up in the fear of Go The sick mans exhortation to his children.NOw my Children come ye h¦ther to me. GOD bless yo and send you many, yea and tho joyful, and quiet dayes upon th earth. Ye see in what case I am, sore sick, an very weak, abiding the good pleasure of GOD▪ The end of this my life is come, and I am gla of it, and most heartily thank the Lord my Go for it. Let it not dismay you (my most dear Chi¦dren) that I shall now be taken away from you, fo albeit that I being your natural Father, shall n more serve you, nor provide for you as hitherto  have done: yet doubt ye not, but if you go forth as ye have begun, to fear God and serve him, h will not leave you comfortless, but in my stead h will be a Father unto you, receive you into his tui¦tion, and provide better for you than ever I was able to do. Therefore if you will have God a mercifu and loving Father unto you, fear him, love him, ho∣nour him, serve him, pray unto him, call on his blessed Name, be thankful unto him for his bene∣fits, and in all things seek to please his holy Ma∣jesty. Give your minds to the reading of the ho∣ly Scriptures: and whatsoever you read therein practise it in your lives and conversations. Be not only favourers, but also followers of the word: not only lovers, but also livers of the Gospel: not only professours, but also practisers of Gods holy Law: so shall God bless you, and all good men love you. Avoid Idleness, and too much childish pastimes▪ Let no time of your life pass away with∣out fruit. Eschew all evil company, and have no∣thing to do with them that be ungodly.
BUt now hear thou my son the words of thy Father,The sick mans exhortation unto his son. and mprint them well in thy memo∣y. Of all the sons that God hath iven me since I was married to this thy mother, hou alone art left alive. And I thank God for hee: for in thee lieth the hope of my posterity. ook therefore that thou servest God all the days f thy life, that thou maist be the father of many hildren, through the blessing of God. If thou ost resemble me as in countenance and liniaments f body, so likewise in manners and conditions of fe and conversation, it shall not repent me to ave begotten such a son: neither shall it trouble hee to have had such a father. Take heed there∣ore that thou dost not degenerate and grow out f kind. In the time of thy youth take heed that hou defilest not thy self with whoredom, but ring an honest and chast body unto the estate of onourable Wedlock. And when the ripeness of hy age doth require thee to marry, take heed hom thou choosest to be thy yoke-fellow. Fol∣ow not the corrupt manners of the wicked world∣ngs, which in choosing their wives have their rincipal respects unto the worthiness of the stock, nto the wealthiness of the friends, unto riches, eauty, and such other worldly vanities. Consider hou rather the godliness, than the worthiness of he maids parents, the honest and vertuous bring∣ng up of her, her chaste and sober behaviour, her hristian and godly manners; her modesty, gra∣ity, sobriety; and womanlyness; her faith, obe∣ience humility, silence, quietness, honesty, house∣ifeliness, and such other fruits of God's Spirit. Therefore when thou art once joyned with her in he holy order of Matrimony, seek after no strange
flesh: beware of whoredom. Entangle thy se with no othar mans love, but be glad with the wif of thy youth, let her breasts alway satisfie thee and be thou ever contented nay ravished, with he love. And if God send thee children, thank him for them: and let thy study be to bring and trai them up in the fear, nurture, and doctrine of th Lord; that they may learn to know God even from their cradles. The sick mans exhortation un∣to his daugh∣ters.WHat shall I say unto yo my little daughters?  pray God bless you, and mak you joyful mothers of many chi¦dren. Serve God, obey your Mo¦ther, be diligent to please her, give ear to he wholsome admonitions, and follow them, do no¦thing without her counsel and advisement. Whe your age shall require to be married, follow th counsel of your mother, and other your faithfu friends which wish you to do well, in choosin your husbands. Take heed ye be not corrupte with the gifts of naughty packs, nor deceived wit the flattering tongues of wicked and unthrifty pe¦sons: for many in these our days seek not the wo¦man, but the womans substance. Couple you¦selves with such as fear God, love his Word, an be of honest report. And when ye be once ma¦ried, reverence your husbands, know them to b your heads and governours appointed of God obey them, and submit your selves unto them. Su¦fer not your love to depart from your husband neither know any man besides them, but keep th bed undefiled, that your matrimony may be ho¦nourable and pure in the sight of God, and of hi holy congregation. Look well unto your hou hold, and be an example unto your maids of go¦liness
and honesty. Be no gadders abroad, nor aunters of Taverns, but keep your houses conti∣ually, except some lawful and earnest business rovoke you to go forth. Be not babblers nor ain talkers, but for the most part use silence: for ilence is an ornament and precious jewel unto a odly woman. Apparel your selves in comely ar∣ay, with shamefac'dness and discreet behaviour: ot with broidered hair, either gold or pearls, or ostly garments, but as it becometh women that rofess godliness, through good works, If you ob∣erve these lessons which I your sick father have ow given unto you, doubt you not but you shall ight well prosper, and live a joyful and quiet lie n earth. Yea, God shall be your father and de∣ender. Well, stand aside a little while, Gods bles∣ing be with you. Come hither ye my servants. DEar servants,The sick mans exhortation to his servants. see in me what shall be the end of all flesh, ven a departure from this world or we are but strangers and pil∣rims on the earth, as our fathers were before us. e have no continuing City here, but we seek one  come. The ordinance of God is, that all men hall once die. There liveth no man that shall not ie. A man in his time is but grass, and flourish∣th as a flour of the field. Our life is even as a apour that appeareth but a little time, and then anisheth away. On this condition came we into he world, that we should leave it again. We have een sure of death, ever since we were conceived  our Mothers womb. These things do you now ee practised in me. The time of my departure out f this world is now at hand. I thought it good herefore to send also for you, and to take my leave f you till we meet again in the kingdom of God.
I thank you for the good service ye have done me I have not forgotten your serviceable hearts and good wills towards me. If the good pleasure o God had been, that I should have longer continue with you, I would have considered your servic better. But I have given to every one of you such portion of money, as shall declare some part of my thankful and well willing heart towards you. Thi now remaineth to be craved at your hands: a ye have hitherto faithfully, truly, and honestly ser∣ved me in my life time; even so after my depar∣ture so long as ye tarry here, shew the like faithful∣ness, truth and honesty toward your mistriss. The duty of a good servant is, to serve his master and mistris willingly and with a free courage, even fo conscience sake: not with the eye, but with the heart to obey them, to honour them, gently to an∣swer them, not to pick or steal away their goods, but to be faithful to them in all things. See there∣fore that ye on this manner behave your selves towards your mistris. Avoid all stubborness, chur∣lishness, cursed speaking, telling of tales, lying, pilfering, waste, idleness, negligence and sluggish∣ness. Eschew all evil and riotous company. Flie drunkenness, and wheredom. Abstain from vain oaths and foolish pastimes. So behave your selves in all your life and conversation, that the name of God and his doctrine be not evil spoken of. But now faithful servants, and dear relations, stand aside (for the pangs of Death are upon me) but I shall pray to my last gasp, that the Blessing of God be with you to the end of your lives.
A Prayer to be said by a dying man, in the case of a sudden surprize by Death, as by a mortal Wound, or any other evil Accident, &c. O Most gratious God, Lord of heaven and earth, Judge of the living and of the dead, behold thy Servants running to thee for Pity and Mercy in be∣half of this thy servant, whom thou hast smitten with thy hasty rod and smarting blow; if it be thy will, preserve his Life, that there may be place for is repentance and restitution: O spare him a little, hat he may recover his strength before he go ence and be no more seen. But if thou hast other∣wise decreed, let the miracles of thy Compassion, and wonderful Mercy, supply to him the want of the usual measures of Time, and the periods of Repentance, and he trimming of his Lamp: and let the greatness of he Calamity be accepted by thee, as an instrument to rocure pardon for those defects and degrees of unrea∣iness, which may have caused this accident upon thy ervant. Lord, stir up in him a great and effectual ontrition, that the greatness of his sorrow, and hatred gainst sin, and the zeal of his love to thee, may in a t time do the work of many days. And thou who egardest the heart, and the measures of the mind, ore than the delay and measures of time, let it be thy easure to rescue the soul of this thy servant from all the il he hath deserved, and all the evils that he fears, at in the glorifications of eternity, and in the Songs hich to eternal ages thy Saints and holy Angels shall g to the honour of thy mighty Name, and invalu∣ble Mercies, it may be reckoned among thy glories, at thou hadst redeemed this Soul from the dangers  an eternall death, and made him partaker of the ist of God, which is eternal Life, through Jesus Christ.
An act of holy resignation to be said by a sick pe in all the evil accidents of his Sickness. O Eternal God, thou hast made and sustained m thou hast blessed me in all the days of my lif and hast taken care of me in all variety of accident and nothing happens to me in vain, nothing without th Providence; and I know thou smitest thy servants  mercy, and with designs of the greatest pity in t world: Lord, I humbly lye down under thy rod,  with me as thou pleasest; do thou chuse for me not on the whole state and condition of being, but every ti and accident of it. Keep me safe by thy Grace, a use what instrument thou pleasest of bringing me  thee. Lord, I am not solicitous of the passage, so may get to thee, only, O Lord, remember my infirm¦ties, and let thy servant rejoyce in thee alwayes, a feel and confess and glory in thy goodness. O be thou  delightful in this my medicinal sickness, as ever thou we in any of the dangers of my prosperity, Oh! let me not pe¦vishly refuse thy pardon at the rare of severe disciplin The Malefactors Passing-Bell. POor hearts, by the sound of your Passing-bell, y most assuredly know your time is short, a therefore my discourse to you shall not be lon not many days betwixt you and Death, and the¦fore not many words, lest I keep you from t thoughts of Death. I dare not be so unchristian,  to think you prepare not your selves for the last ¦tal stroak; and therefore take one only pray from me (if you have not a better from others)  your selves.
O God! most powerful, yet most pitiful; by thy wer preserve them that are appointed to dye, and re∣eem them from the sentence of death, which is past pon them, if it may stand with thy Goodness. But if thy Providence hath appointed this time for heir period, and this way of hanging for their dissolution, et by thy pity save their souls from eternal death, and rant them all those graces which are necessary for their alvation. Remember not their ignorances, Forget the sins of heir youth, and forgive the sins of their age; Give hem a sight of all their sins, Give them a sense of all heir sins, and true repentance to bewail them; Give hem a sight of all thy Promises, and true Faith to pply them. Suffer not their Ghostly enemies to assault them to y present desperation, (in their last moments) for their ormer presumptions against thy Justice. Send thy holy Angels to take their souls, as they did he soul of Lazarus, and carry them into Abraham's osom; and let thy everlasting Gates be opened to re∣eive them, for his sake, who by overcoming the sharp∣ess of Death hath opened the kingdom of Heaven to ll believers. Make and keep their senses intire, their understand∣gs right, their penitence unfeigned, their hope well ounded, their Faith firm, and their charity perfect. Give them, O give them a quiet and joyful depar∣re,  by carrying their eyes back unto Jesus, who died  them, and forward to those Joyes, which are pur∣sed for them, by the life and death of Jesus Christ, men.
An Act of holy Resolution of Amendment of life, in case of recovery from a fit of Sickness. O Most just and most merciful Lord God, who hast sent evil Diseases, sorrow and fear, trouble and uneasiness, briers and thorns into the World, and plan∣ed them into our Houses; and round about our dwellings keep sin from our Souls, or drive it thence, I humbly beg of thee that this my Sickness may serve the ends of the Spirit, and be a Messenger of Spiritual life and an instru∣ment of reducing me to more Sober and Religious Courses, I say, O Lord, that I am Ʋnready and Ʋnprepared in my accounts, having thrown great portions of my time away in Vanity, which have set me hugely back in the accounts o Eternity; and I had need live my life over again, and live it Better. But thy Counsels are in the great deep and thy footsteps in the Water; and I Know not wha thou willt determine of me: if I die, I throw my sel into the Arms of the Holy Jesus, whom I love abov all things; and if I perish, I know I have deserved it but thou wilt not reject him that loves thee, but if I re¦cover I will live by thy grace to do the Work of God  and passionately pursue my interest in Heaven, and serv thee in the labour of Love, with the fervency of a Ho¦ly Zeal, and the diligence of a firm and holy obedienc Lord, I will dwell in thy Temple, and in thy Sevice Religion shall be my imployment, and Alms shall be m Recreation, and patience shall be my rest, and to d thy will shall be my meat and drink, and to liv shall be Christ, and then to die at last will be gain spare me a little that I may recover my Health, befor I go hence and be no more seen; but thy will be done o Earth as it is in Heaven, Amen.
A Preparation concerning the contingencies and treatings of our departed friends after their Death in order to their burial, &c. WHen we have received the last breath of our Friend, and closed his eyes, and compo∣sed his body for the Grave, then solemn and ap∣pointed mournings, are good expressions of our dearnss to the departed soul, and of his worth, and our value of him. The Church in her Funerals of the dead, used to sing Psalms, and to give thanks for the Redempti∣on and Delivery of the Soul, from the evils and dangers of mortality. But it is good that the body be kept veiled and secret, and not exposed to curious eyes; neither should the dishonours wrought upon the face, by the changes of death, be stared upon by imperti∣nent persons. When Cyrus was dying, he called his sons and friends to take their leave of him, to touch his hand, to see him the last time, and gave in charge, that when he had put his veil over his ce, no man should uncover it. And Epiphanius his body was rescued from inquisitive eyes by a mi∣acle. Let it be interr'd after the manner of the Countrey, and Laws of the place, and the Dignity of the person; For so Jacob was buried with great solemnity, and Joseph's bones were carried into Ca∣aan, after they had been embalmed, and kept 400. ears, and devout men carried St. Stephen to his bu∣ial, making great lamentation over him. And Aelian ells us that those who were the most excellent per∣ons, were buried in publick, and men of ordina∣y Courage and Fortune had their graves only im'd with branches of green Olives, and mourning lowers, together with a few sprigs of Rosemary a s.
But nothing of this concerns the dead in real and effective purposes; nor is it with care to be provided for by themselves, but it is the duty of the living; for to them, it is all one whether they be carried forth in a Chariot or a wooden Bier, whether they rot in the air, or in the earth, whe∣ther they be devoured by fishes or by worms, by birds or by sepulchral dogs, by water or by fire, or by delay. Concerning doing honour to the dead, the con∣sideration is not long; antiently the friends of the dead used to make their funeral Orations, and the Custom descended, and in the Channel of time it mingled it self in the veins of the earth, through which it passed. And now a days, men that die are commended at a price, and the measure of their Le∣gacy, is the degree of their vertue. But these things ought not so to be, the reward of the greatest ver∣tue ought not to be prostitute to the doles of com∣mon persons, but preserved like flourishing Laurel and Coronets, to remark and encourage the noblest things. But that which is most considerable is, that we perform the will of the dead, the Laws oblige us, and will see to it; but did they not, certainly it is the noblest thing in the world, to do an act of kind∣ness to him whom we shall never see again, but yet hath deserved it of us, and to whom we would do it if he were present: and unless we do so, our charity is mercenary, and our friendships are direct merchandize, and our gifts are brokage; but what we do to the dead, or to the living for their sakes, is gratitude, and vertue for vertues sake, and the no∣blest portion of humanity, kindness and love.
The reasons why we shut the Eyes and Mouth of the Dead. IN the first place, when our dear Friends and Relations are dead, we close their Eyes and Mouth, which a learned Author says, is a Custom hat was used by the Primitive Christians, to re∣present that the death of the faithful is, according o the Oracles of Scripture, nothing else but a Re∣pose; since after having been asleep for a while, hey shall be awaked to Eternity. Moreover by shutting their Eyes and Mouth, we do intimate, That he dead are no more to take delight in the Objects of this visible World, their Employment now being tedfastly to behold all the ravishing Beauties of he other world, and continually to praise God, who is the glorious and bountiful dispenser of hem. The Reasons why dead Bodies are often Kissed, Wash∣ed, Perfumed, and Cloathed: together with the Customs of several nations in the burial of their Dead. MAny persons, 1. Kiss, and kindly salute their dead Friends and Relations, to shew he natural tenderness and love they had for the deceased; but this custom is now quite abolished with us in many places, though this practice ought not o be altogether discommended. 2. As for the usage hat is in some Countries, of washing the dead, St. Chrysostom tells us, that it was derived at first from he person of our Lord and Saviour, whose preci∣ous body was washed as soon as they took it down rom the Cross. And we read in the ninth Chap∣er of the acts of the Apostles, that a woman of
Joppa called Tabitha, whom St. Peter restored to life, had been wash'd before she was laid out for the grave. The Indians burn their dead. 3. The Custom of Perfuming and Embalming the Corps, hath in our daes been (especialy in Eng∣land) much observed. And indeed the very rea∣son, why the Primitive Christians were so careful to perfume the dead, was, because they regarded them as so many Members of the Mystical Body of the Redeemer of the world. Tertullian in his Apology, upbraiding the Heathens with the vast expenses of sweet Scents and Perfumes, consumed in the Temples, tells them that those Odours would be better employed, in perfuming and embalming the Bodies of Christians, and their dear friends de∣parted. At the Canary Islands they bury their Dead with a bottle of wine standing by them. 4. As concerning the manner of Apparelling the Dead, all Christians use not the same practice; for some do only cover them with a large Winding-sheet, as they do in France: and others dress them in the very same Cloaths they were wont to wear, as in Italy, and several other places. And others dress them and lay them in their Coffin, in a white Shirt, a clean Cap (with their Toes tyed with a black Ribband) and sometimes (as a late Act of Parlia∣ment enjons) in Flannel, this is the Custom in England. And likewise here it is the Custom to set the body, when drest in order to the Grave, either in the Entry, or the principal and most pub∣lick room of the house, and that for this reason, that by this sight those that pass by it at the Fu∣neral, may be taken off from terrestrial things, and fix their thoughts on those that are heavenly, by being thereby put in mind of their latter end, and that it will not be long before they must lye in the like posture too, in order to be carried on
their friends shoulders to their Graves, as this their Friend or Relation is now to be carried. The Chi∣neses always before they bury their dead (if he was a married man) bring him to his wife, that so she might first kiss him, and bid him farewel. The manner of Burying the Dead in England, with the reasons of the Pomp and Ceremony wherewith the English carry their Dead to the Grave. NOw having thus far taken care of the dead bo∣dy, the next thing is to consider the reasons and manner of the Pomp and Ceremony, where∣with the English carry their Dead to the Grave, the manner is thus: The whole Company of invited Guests (being the Relations, Mourners for, and Friends of the de∣ceased) march in a sorrowful procession, first to the Church, and then to the Grave, attended with more or less Pomp and Ceremony, according to the the Quality of the party deceased: at the head of this solemn attendance, the Minister that is to bury the Corps, walketh before the Corps (and if the party deceased was a person of Quality or Fashion) then goes a vast number of young Blew-Coats (Boys and Girls) singing Psalms and Hymns most melodi∣ously, all the way to the Church; next to these ranks now recited, goes a huge croud of Mourners and other people, that accompany the Corps, whereof usually some are weeping and lamenting, whilst others are swooning, and sometime almost fainting away by reason of grief for the party deceased. (Though such excessive lamenting usually lasts not long, as appears plainly by the story of a woman, who did passionately follow her husband to the grave, and would by all means be buried alive with him yet (being of a base and wanton temper) as soon as ever the black atyre of her Husbands Funeral was over, the next day
she married a brisk Youngster, with whom she lived jocundly all her days.) But to proceed, if 'tis not a person of Quality that is diseased, this great ceremony in England is rarely observed. Last of all, when they are arrived at the Church, after the usual Ceremonies are over, and Funeral Sermon preached, the Corps is interr'd in the Chancel (if it was the body of a Rich and honour∣able man) or Church-yard, if it was the body of a mean and ordinary person. But now I talk of the Church-yard: Oh! how did triumphant Death fill the Church-yards in London, by the dreadful Pestilence that was in the year 1665. At which time he rung the Passing-bell for thousands in a week, sparing neither Man, Woman nor Child; but with his Syth and his Darts mowes and cuts down all. Oh the cryes that he caused then daily in every street; Bring out your dead, Bring out your dead. sounding in every place. And oh how busie likewise was the Devil now with every departing Christian, to dis∣turb his hopes, and unsettle his faith; but blessed be Almighty God, there were many Christians in this ve∣ry time of the Plague, that encountred him bravely by the help of Faith, Hope and Charity, and that upon their very death-bed too, though the Devil had alwayes at hand (as his seconds) the alluring World, and deceitful Flesh. But here in this seventh Emblem of Mortality, you may see these things more fully represented to your eyes; for here you may behold, I. How Death cuts down all, both great and small. — And here, Raw head and bloody bones now thinks it fit To murder all, without or fear or wit. See how the hangman layes about like wild, Nor will he spare Man, Woman, or sucking Child.
II. Here you may see in what manner men with their Bells and Carts with them ful of dead bodies cryed, Bring out your Dead, Bring out your Dead; when Death did as it were, ring the City's Passing-bell, in the year, 1665. Bring out your dead, the horrid screech flyes round, Nor can a worse till the last Trumpet sound. Bring out your dead, ye wretches that survive, If any yet within remain alive. And thirdly, How the true Christian is forced to combate with Satan and his two seconds, World and Flesh, to his very last gasp, even till he bids the World a final adieu. And here you may see, The World and Satan in the front appear, Placing the charming Sorceress in the rear; Though had the Flesh charg'd first unarm'd undrest, The silly Devil might have spar'd the rest. The Weekly and nightly Passing-Bell. THe Graves and Tombs of our Ancestors we pass by once in the week, do, as it were, so often ring our Passing-Bell, for who can see them there lying, all covered with green Turfs and withe∣ring Grass, and forget his own dying? Before we come into the Church, the Church-yard presents this prospect to our eyes; as if unfit to hear Gods Word until, Oh! man thou remembrest thy end. We take a view of the Graves of our dear Pa∣rents and Friends, once in seven days, as if from one to seventy, a seventh of our time were to be set apart to put us in mind of our mortality. Carry eyes in thy head, and ere thou gettest in∣to
the Church, thou hast presented to thy presenc a Funeral Sermon. Happy are those Christians whom the sight o Graves, and Tomb-stones in the Church an Church-yard, ring a peal in their ears of their Ex¦eamus. The Bell ringing calls thee into Gods Church t hear and to learn, the Grave being digged, warn thee to make fit for sickness and to dye: thou the who so oft hast passed by thy dead friends Grave, re¦member with them thou must be reduced to dust. But then again, when I go to sleep at night, wha is my Bed but, as it were, a Passing-Bell, to remem¦ber me every four and twenty hours of my morta¦lity, and that the Grave must speedily be my Bed, Clod my pillow, and the moulds and worms my co∣vering: when I put but off my Shirt, it puts me i mind of my Winding-sheet, and last shroud tha must cover me when I rot under ground. And thus my Bed every night proclaims Death i on his march towards me, and means speedily to quarter with me. The exact Method that ought to be observed in Funera Processions, for most ranks and degrees of men. First Children of the Hospital. Two Conductors▪ Poor Men. Gentlemens Servants in Cloaks Gentlemen in Cloaks. Gentlemen in Gowns. Alder∣men in black. The Preacher. A Penon of his own Arms. Helm and Crest. The Coat of Arms. Chief Mourners. Two Assistants. Aldermen not in Black-Master of the Company if, &c. Master of the Hos∣pital. Then all Gentlemen not in black. Neighbours and others. And now I have done ringing the Sick mans Passing-Bell.
lexander and Diogenes among the Tombes. Sir Remember that you are a Man. engraved panel of people standing before a rack of skulls o! all that monarchs can cary to y•. graues. Sic transit gloria mundi. &c. engraved panel of three figures on horses n Emperour Celebrating his own Funerall. engraved panel of a funeral procession
Next follows Fifty several Plea∣sant Treatises, rarely, if ever handled before. That Author fittest is to write, That mixeth Profit with Delight. TREATISE I. An Awakening Dialogue between the Soul and Body of a Damned Man; each lay∣ing the fault upon the other. Fancied in a Morning Dream. The SPEAKERS. 1. The Author. 2. A Soul Departed. 3. A Dead Carkass. 4. The Devils. The Author. IT was about the Summer Solstice, when the Mea∣surer of Time, that glorious Luminary of Heaven, allowed but little above three hours Night to co∣ver this part of the Hemisphere; That after my first Sleep, a second stole gently upon me; which happen∣ed about the Dawning o he Day, when those grosser sort of soporiferous Fumes, that are wont to ascend from
the Stomach, to lock up the outward Senses for the natural Repose, being dissipated and spent, the purest kin of subtle rarified Vapours rise up to the Region of t Brain, which use to represent more plain and even O¦jects to the Imagination, and make the Story and ci¦cumstances of Dreams more coherent and clear; thoug the most lucid Fancies that appear unto us in sleep,  but as Stars in a cloudy Night, or the Branches  Trees in a thick standing Pool. I say, it was about t break of day, that I had an unusual Dream, or Vision And in a word, thus it was. IN silence of a Summers Night, A sleeping, yet a waking Sprite; A lifeless Body to my sight, Methought appeareth thus addight. 2. In that my Sleep I did descry A Soul departed but lately, From that soul Body which lay by, Wailing with Sighs, and loud did cry. 3. Fast by the Body thus she moans, And questions it with Sighs and Groans. O wretched Flesh, thus low, who makes thee lye, Whom yesterday the World had seen so high! 4. Was 't not but yesterday the World was thine And all the Countrey stood at thy Devotion? Thy Train that followed when thy Sun did shine, Is slunk away (O doleful Alteration.) 5. Those Turrets gay of costly Masonry, And larger Palaces are not now thy room; But in a Coffin of small quantity, Thou ly'st interred in a little Tomb. 6. Thy Palaces, what help they thee, or Buildings Thy Graves scarce large enough to hold thy Feet Henceforth thou canst hurt none with thy false Judgings For thy Misdeeds in Hell we both must meet. 7. I, I poor Soul, O  a noble Creature, Formed and made in likeess of my God;
Adorn'd with Graces of most comely Feature, Am now so chang d, as fouler than a Toad. 8. O wretched Flesh, with me that art forlorn, If thou could'st know how sharp's our Punishment; How justly might'st thou wish not to be born, Or from the Womb to Tomb to have been hent. 9. This, I confess, no wonder, for in Life To one good deed thou never would'st agree; But to each greatest Sin did'st run with strife, For which for ever we must damned be. 10. I am, and aye must be in bitter pain; No Tongue of living Man hath power to tell One of the smallest Torments I sustain, Where (which is worst) I must for ever dwell. 11. Where be those Lordships thou hast lay'd together, Thy lofty Palaces, thy Castles strong? Thy heaps of Gold, which were thy chiefest Treasure, Thy Rings and Jewels which about thee hung? 12. Where thy rich Beds, thy sumptuous Tapestry, Thy change of Raiment, many colour'd Vesture? Thy dainty Spices, (Baits of Luxury) Plate, Tables, Carpets and rich Furniture? 13. Where now thy wild-Fowl, and thy Venison, Thy dainty Fishes, and thy chosen Wine? n thy now Kitchen meat is dressed none; Such Plagues for Sinners God doth still assign. 14. How lik'st thou now, poor Fool, thy latter lodging, The Roof whereof lies even with thy Nose? Thy Eyes are shut, thy Tongue cannot be jogging, Nothing of Profit rests at thy dispose. 15. Whate'r thou hast most wretchedly been scraping, By Usury, Deceit, Rage and Oppression, n all thy life, with Toil and greedy Gaping, s hid by Death in Earth and Putrefaction. 16. Thou art not now begirt with Troops of Friends, The Flower of all thy Beauty lies in dust: The Bands of every Love do here take end; Yea, thine own Wife now thinks all Tears unjust.
17. In thy left Kindred henceforth trust no more For, for thy Vineyards, Fields of Grass, and Corn And (which thy Plagues increase, thy treasur d Store Few days (know Fool) thy after Heirs will mourn 18. I do not think thy Wife or Children left Would lose one Penny, or one patch of Lands For us, which are from her and them bereft, Though it might quit us from these horrid Bands. 19. Now, wretched Flesh, thou seest how nough reputed Is the Worlds Glory, false, deceitful, fell, With Anguish fraught, with Sin and Vice polluted, And cloathed in the noysome bane of Hell. 20. Thy Garments, wretched Fool, are far from rich Thy upper Garment hardly worth a Scute; A little Woollen shrouds thee in thy Ditch, No Rents nor Gifts men bring, nor make their Suit 21. Think not, though yet no Torments thou en¦dure Thou never shalt, but sleep for ever free; For all Gods Scriptures, which are true and sure, Witness, at last, thou shalt be plagu'd with me. 22. Thee, which the Poor did'st rob, and not defend Worms gnaw in Earth, and Rottenness thy Bone: But longer stay I must not, here I end; To this, I trow, answer thou knowest none. The Body answereth. THus said the Soul: At last the Ghastly Coarse Strains up it self, as being new reviv'd: And with deep Groans, as if it had been hoarse, Ask'd who such witless Reasons had contriv'd? 24. Art thou, quoth it, my Soul which thus do' fain All that thou say'st is neither true nor stable: For I will prove with Arguments most plain, If some be true, in many thou dost fable. 25. I (as thou say'st) have led thee oft astray, And from well-doing have enforc'd thy Love:
But if the Flesh can lead the Soul away, The fault's more thine than mine, which thus I prove. 26. The World and Power of Hell did both conspire, And did the Flesh to them associate; Which if the constant Soul cause not retire, Both must needs enter at Sin's wretched Gate. 27. But, as thou say'st, our God did thee create Good, noble, understanding he thee made; nd like himself he fashioned thy state, nd made me Servant to whate're thou said. 28. Therefore, if thou my Mistris ought to be, nd reason had, by which thy Office was s both to govern; why did'st suffer me ithout restraint in wicked race to pass? 29. Is't just to charge the Body as the Sprite? hich being rightful Mistress, yet will serve o tame the flesh, the Spirit ought of right ith Abstinence, and Stripes, if she'l not swerve. 30. The Bodies works be from the Soul deriv'd; y means thereof in life it flourisheth: hat Flesh which by the Soul is not assisted, y easie Baits the World soon vanquisheth. 31. The Body of it self none ill hath known, ll that it knows proceedeth from thy Head; I do what thou bid'st, the fault's thine own, or without thee the Body resteth dead. 32. Why should poor Hand-maid (Flesh) be charg'd with blame working only as thy Instrument? he Soul commandeth all, hers be the shame all my Frailties, since I want Judgment. 33. Therefore, I trow, thy Guilt exceedeth mine following my Lust so frail and soul: t, Oh! the Worms do tear me in my Shrine; herefore say no more: Farewell, poor Soul.
The Soul replyes. NAy, said the Soul, I'le stay by thee a while, And, if I can, thine Arguments confute: Why rail'st thou on me in this bitter Style, Sriving to me the whole Guilt to impute? 35. Most wretched Flesh, which in thy time of life Wast foolish, idle, vain; why do'st thou wreak Thy wrath in railing words, to make new strife? Though for the Substance 'tis true that thou dos speak 36. For truth it is, and stands with reason plain I should have bridled thee, and rul'd thy Will: But thou through love of Pleasure foul and vain, And sensual Appetite, me resisted'st still. 37. When I would thee, O Body, have controul'd And have subdu'd with Watching, Fast and Pain; Strait the World s Vanity did thee with-hold, And to his vain-delights drew thee again. 38. So thou of me did'st get the upper hand. And of my mildness made so bad Construction, That thralling me in worldly pleasures band, Eternally hast drown'd me in Destruction. 39. I know my Guilt, and this my Trespass was That being chief, I did not thee restrain: But thou deceiv'dst me with so sair a Glass, That thy Offence the greater ought remain. 40. The vain Worlds Practices, Baits and Delights If thou had'st left with stedfast Constancy; And so withstood Satans inchanting Sleights, Heaven had been ours, with Saints and Deity. 41. But flattering Fancies of the World did please And made thee hope a lasting life to have: Thou never thought'st to die, till Death di seize, And hal'd thee from thy Court to dirty Grave. 42. The World and subtle Men have both one Guise Where most it smiles, and most bestoweth Honou
There soonestoit deceives, soonest Death cryes, And changeth Wealth to Worms, to Stench and Horror. 43. He which in life did fawn, and was thy Friend, Will not now cast a look upon thy Grave. Then gan the Body weep, weighing this end, And lowly in his Style such Answer gave. The Body answereth. I In my life which had so great Command, In Jewels, Riches, Lands did so abound; Built Palaces, and judged many a Land; Think'st thou I thought of Tomb in this base Ground? 45. Oh, now I see, and find it to my grief, That neither Gold, nor Wealth, nor larger Rent, Honour, Strength, Knowledge, nor sovereign Herbs relief, Can cure Death's bitter Sting, nor it prevent. 46. Before our God we guilty both do stand, And both in fault, but not both equally; The greatest Burthen lyeth on thy hand, And this to prove full many Reasons lye. 47. No wit so mean, but this for truth it knows, ustice it self, and Reason both agree: That where most Gifts of Vertue God bestows, There most is due, and ought repyed be. 48. Life, Memory and powerful Understanding, God gave to thee, and with it sense of might, Wherewith thou should'st have curb'd at thy com∣manding Concupiscence, and followed that was right. 49. Then since thy Dower of Vertue stretch'd so far, And foolishly thou gav'st thy self to me, And my enticements never would'st debar, That thy fault greater is all men may see. 50. Further, I add, with anguish of my Heart, Which mine own case doth plainly demonstrate; The Flesh can nothing do, if Soul depart, t neither moves nor stirs, early or late.
51. It neither sees, nor speaks, then this is prov'd The Soul gives life, no power in Flesh doth rest. If then the Soul rightly her God had lov d, The Flesh had never her great pow'r supprest. 52. If God s Love, living, thou had'st holden dea And poor Mens Causes rightly had'st defin'd, And unto wicked Counsels giv'n no ear, Nor me, nor thee, World's Vanity had twin'd. 53. I that liv'd gay, and gorgeous in Attire, Lo, what of all now unto me remains? Worms, Rottenness, and narrow lodge of Mire; These after all Delights are lest my gains. 54. And Oh, I know, that at the latter hour I shall arise, and as I did offend, With thee shall find a second Death most sour; An everlasting Death, Death without end. The Soul confesseth. WIth hellow fearful Voice then howls the Sou Oh had I not amongst the Creatures been Why with God's Creatures did God me enroll, Whom he foreknew should perish thus for Sin? 56. Happy are you, brute Beasts, happy your state You wholy die at once, and only rot; Once dead, all Torments cease, such is your fate: Oh! were such end for Sinners, such their lot! The Body asks the Soul a Question. THen quoth the Body to his pensive Ghost, If thou hast been among the Fiends in Hell, Tell me, I pray, what saw'st thou in that Coast? Is no help left, from thence with Christ to dwell? 58 For Kings and great Men what is their provision Which living, lorded it in high degree? For them is any hope left of Redemption, For Money, Lands, Bequests, or other Fee?
The Soul gives Answer. THe Question, sensless Body, wanteth reason; For when to Hell the wicked damned be, Redemption then is hopeless, out of season; Bootless are Alms-deeds, Prayers and Charity. 60. If all the Piety of all men should pray, f all the World in price were offered; f all good men should fast both night and day; For this not one should be delivered. 61. The roaring Devil, cruel, and full of rage, For infinite of Worlds, or any gain, Would not forgo one Soul shut in his Cage, Nor ease his Torments, nor make less his pain. 62. And to thy Question, what is there prepar'd For Lords and great ones, God's Law is express; The more that here one is advanc'd or fear'd, More fearful is his fall, if he transgress. 63. A rich man therefore, dying in his sin, No man shall sharper Torments feel than he; How much more pleasures that he lived in, So much more grievous shall his Torment be. The Author in Vision. AFter the Soul had say'd these mournful words, Behold, two Fiends more black than Pitch or Night, Whose shapes with Pen to write, no wit affords, Nor any hand of Painter pourtray right. 65. Sharp steely pricks they did in each hand bear, Sulphur and Fire flaming they breath'd out; Tusked their Teeth, like crooked Mattocks were, And from their Nostrils Snakes crawl'd round about. 66. Their Ears with running Sores hung flapping low, Foul filthy Horns on their black Brows they wore,
Full of thick Poyson, which from them did flow; Their Nails were like the Tushes of a Boar. 67. These Fiends in Chains fast bound this wretched Soul, And with them hal'd her howling into Hell; To whom on flocks ran other Devils more, And gnashing with their teeth to Dancing fell. 68. They welcom'd her with Greetings full of woe, Some wrested her with Cords, sensless of dread; Some snatch'd and tore with Hooks drawn to and fro, Some for her welcome pour'd on scalding Lead. Devils. SUch Horrour we do on our Servants load: Then, as half wearied, the Devils cry'd; Now art thou worse than is the crawling Toad, Yet thousand-fold worse Torments thee abide. The Soul cryes out. AFter all this the groaning Soul deep sigh'd, And with what voice it could low murmured; But when within the Gates of Hell she enter'd, She howled out Jesus the Son of David. The Devils answer. THen all the Devils together loud did cry, Too late, too late thou callest on thy God; Here is no room for Miserere mei; No hope of easement from this bitter Rod. 72. Never henceforth shalt thou the light behold, Thou must be alter'd to another hue: Thou art a Souldier of our Camp enroll'd; Such is the Comfort that in Hell is due. Ʋpon this methought the Damned Soul vanished I knew not how. And now 'twas high time for me to awake;  I did.
The Author concludeth. THen I awaked full of fear, And much amaz'd, my self did rear: To God I say'd with folded hands, O shield me from such grievous Bands. 74. I left the World, and it forsook; Of Goods and Lands no care I took: I did renounce each worldly thing, And gave my self to Christ my King. 75. The World is drown'd in Sin and Vice; All Order chang'd, not one man wise; Both Justice and Religion lost, And all the World in turmoil tost. 76. The World to ruine runs amain, False Gods are now set up again: Unto the Rich their hands men hold; He is the God that hath the Gold. 77. The Vertues of Divinity, Are choak'd; Faith, Hope and Charity: The Brood of Covetise and Craft, Bear all the sway, and sit aloft. 78. Be thou noble, wise and fair, Courteous, lowly, debonair, And poor; thou may'st do what thou can; 'Tis only Money makes the Man. 79. If I be clad in rich Array, And well attended every day; Both wise and good I shall be thought; My Kindred also shall be sought: I am, say men, the case is clear, Your Cousin, Sir, a Kinsman near: 80. But if the World do change and frown, Our Kindred is no longer known; Nor I remembred any more By them that honour'd me before. 81. O Vanity! vile love of muck;
Foul Poyson, wherefore hast thou struck Thy self so deep, to raise so high Things vanishing so suddenly. 82. For if the World could three things give, Lusty Youth, and long to live, Children strong, and fair of feature; Riches then were a good Treasure. 83. But know, poor Fool, these end with Death; From first till now all lose their breath: Living to day, to morrow gone; All flesh must dye, Death spareth none. But now at length the Oriental Gate Of gray fac'd Heaven 'gan to open fair, And Phoebus, like a Bridegroom to his Mate, Came dancing forth, shaking his dewy Hair, And hurls his glitt'ring Beams through gloomy Air. So Rest to Motion, Night to Day doth yield; Silence to Noise, the Stars do quit the Field: My Cinque Ports all fly ope, the Phantasie Gives way to outward Objects, Ear and Eye Resume their Office, so doth Hand and Lip; I hear the Car-mans Wheel, the Coachman's Whip. Th' Apprentice (with my sense) his Shop unlocks, The Milk-maid seeks her Pail, Porters their Frocks, All cryes, and sounds return, except one thing, I hear no Bell for Pray'rs to toll or ring. Being throughly wak'd, and staring on the light, Which silver d all my Face and Sight, I clos'd my Eyes again to recollect What I had dream't, and make my thoughts reflect Ʋpon themselves, which here I do expose To every knowing Soul; and may all those (Whose Brains Apollo with his gentle Ray Hath moulded of a more refined Clay) That read this Dream, thereby such Profit reap, As I did Pleasure; then they have it cheap.
TREATISE II. The Picture of the Devil. HE is that Damned Ghost, the first Sinner, the first Seducer; One knowing much, yet never obedient, but by constraint. He is but a Slave, as base as he is beggarly; as malicious as cursedly mischievous; blasphemously careless of God, tyrannously cruel to Men, a continual Tempter, God's Gaoler, a dreadful Tormentor: Ever is he out with God, and a hater of the Good: What God commands he condemns; he will allow what God dislikes. A bright Angel he was in Heaven, but now the black Fiend in Hell: To no Man a Friend, to the Church a most malicious Foe: He is driven out of the Penitent, he harbours in the Dis∣obedient: The Lewd are his Lodging, the Pro∣fane his Habitation. He is the unclean Spirit: The place most full of Abomination is his com∣mon Harbour: All his Motions are to satisfie Lust: He would have us live after our liking, to work Wickedness, to rage in Rebellion a∣gainst God. He knows himself to be damned; all he cares for is to make others like himself. This cursed Spirit is that Lyon roaring, strong, fearful; that Old Serpent, subtil, guilefull; that Red Dragon, bloody, terrible: He reigneth where he gets any rule, and whom he gaineth, those willingly he will not let gò. Antichrist is his eldest Son, the damn∣ed Crue his cursed Children. He is the Inventer of all Villany, the Author of Heresie, the Setter up of Idolatry, the Plotter of Conspiracy. He rai∣seth Rebellion, and works Treason. He turns Re∣ligion into Superstition, Love into Lechery, Friends
into Foes, Consent into Contention, Peace into bloody Persecution: He comes where the Godly be, and good Exercises; not for love to them, but ma∣liciously, as an Instrument to hinder them. He will send Cain to sacrifice with Abel, but afterwards to murther him; he will thrust Judas among the Apo∣stles, but to betray Christ. He is equally envious as malicious: If Christ plants a Church, he will erect a Chappel. If he have Apostles, this will raise up false Teachers: If Christ sowe Wheat, he will scatter Tares. He deceived Eve, which brought a Curse to the Earth: He provoked David to fall to numbering, that the People might be plagued. He is that grand Liar, that shameless Slanderer; he is as impudent as irrepentant. He tempted Christ himself importunately; he vexeth his Members, and that daily: He is full of fair words: He makes ma∣ny Promises, but doth never perform what is good. He is a Machiavilian; when he pretendeth most to do well, then he intendeth most mischief, and to do ill. He keeps men in Ignorance, and per∣swades them of Faith, he puts them in hope of Salvation; and yet disswades from the Grace of Sanctification. He would have the wickedly dis∣posed to presume of Mercy, and the Godly Penitent to despair in apprehension of Justice. He induceth his to believe, that good meaning, without the Word, is warrant enough in Gods Worship, and blind De∣votion to be a great growth in Religion. He com∣mends Wickedness with Titles of Goodness. He puts a fair Vizour over the ugly face of Sin: Ex∣cessive Pride must be cleanly Decency, no Pomp; filthy Lust, but a trick of Youth, no Carnality; bad Company with Pot-mates, good fellowship, no Va∣nity; Covetousness in the Niggard, thrifty Husban∣dry, no sordid Quality; Prodigal Expences, Frank∣heartedness, no Unthriftiness; Intemperateness in
Meetings, neighbourly Merriments, no Gluttony, nor Drunkenness; Riot, Recreation; idle Musing, Contemplation. Thus he blindeth him that cares not to see Sin, that so a Man may be secure in hast∣ning to Hell. He that is most in Transgression, is his best Son, yet is the greatest Sinner his basest Slave; Whoso doth most for him, shall in the end be most tormented by him. God commands his Children for their own Salvation; but Satan his Servants to bring them to Confusion. All his are either carnal Atheists, gross Idolaters, hypocritical Time-servers, foolishly Superstitious, damnably Mis∣chievous, proud Hereticks, or idle-headed Schisma∣ticks. He will allow some of his to be of the visible Church, yet only a Cain, an Achitophel, a Saul, a Judas, without invisible Grace: He will give them leave to profess, but not to practise: He lets them know Verity, but not acknowledge it with Sin∣cerity; their Service is only fashion: Hypocrites are his Saints, Custome his Canon, Sophistry his Reason: His Kingdom is Darkness, Schismaticks his zealous Servants, Hereticks his chief Champions; his Company the accursed, the Profane his princi∣pal Attendants, next to the Fiends, the hellish Inhabitants; the Reward to his, Wrath from God, Seclusion from the Good: The place for their abode is the infernal Pit, there to be tortured in torment, and plagued with eternal Pains without end. PRECEPTS. OH wretched Sinner, seek peace to thy poor Soul, seal not up thy Damnation by doing service to this De∣vil: Stop thy Ears, hear him not; if thou do'st, believe him not. Wherein he most seemeth a Saint, therein bold him a most accursed Creature. Thô his Promises pretend Peace and Salvation, yet ever in his Reasoning deny his
Conclusion. Make no peradventure of the Word; if thou doest, he will forthwith contradict the truth. If thou be a doubting Eve, to say, lest I die, he will be a Ser∣pent, and dare confidently say, Thou shalt not die. Be not a slave to him, that made suit to lodge in Swine. Be not ruled by him, if thou beest truly penitent, who reigneth only over the disobedient. Be no subject to so base an abject: nor a friend to so great a foe. Leave his Lusts, else look for no life: Forsake the world, else thou gainest nothing by the word; If thou wilt needs be led by him, look for no Heaven: if thou securely sin, pre∣pare for Hell. Remember the end, the due reward of wickedness, both in the Devil and the damned. From which misery the God of compassion deliver thee (Reader) of his tender mercy. Amen TREATISE III. Being an affectionate Discourse concerning a Death-bed-Repentance. COncerning a late or Death-bed-Repentance, it must first be acknowledged, that one of those two things is ordinarily understood by it, either the per∣fecting our accounts with God at that time, reinforcing all our former good resolutions, and shutting up that bu∣siness of our Souls, which in time of health had been sincerely begun, but not perfected; or else the begin∣ning of that work of Repentance at that time. And now Gentle Readers, the Design of this Trea∣tise is to intreat you, to beware of that infinite ha∣zard that attends a Death-bed-Repentance; Oh venture
not Eternity upon your last Breath! Make Religi∣on your early, your continual Business, your Duty, your Obligation; which will administer a delightful Reflection on your following years, prove the truest Frugality and Improvement of Time, the greatest ease, and quiet, comfort and safety both of Life and Death. Those that now load themselves with guilt under the delusion of Pleasure, that gives them secret disquiet while they are laying it on, treasure up shame and sorrow for the time to come, horror and despair for a dying hour. All men seek the Lord some time or other; only wise men betimes, while he may be found. Old Age is the Lot but of a very few, grievous and burthensome enough of it self; but disconsolate and opprest indeed, when Men come to possess the Diseases, and Infirmities of it, together with the Iniquities of their youth; bit∣ter, if not fruitless Repentance for their mispending it. Yet Death observes not the course of the Law of Nature, but the Determination of God. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. Possibly this day may bring forth thy Death, how then shall to morrow bring forth thy Repentance, or make thee another Tender of this dayes rejected Salvation. Every day puts a Period to many lives, as well secured as ours, and who have had the same Reason of Hope with our selves. No man ever miscarried because his life was short, but bad: 'twas no loss to Gideon, that he returned from Victory before the Sun was up. There's no danger of being wise and good too soon; but all the wis∣dom to be learnt in another World, comes too late to remedy any final miscarriage in this. We may be instantly surprized by Death, or a Disease that inca∣pacitates us to call for Mercy in general; much more to make our selves meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in life.
The face of Death will have a sad Appearance to those that have loytered, unthriftily trifled away their Time, that never knew the worth of it until their last hour, and they have their work to do. Eternity at Hand, gives value to all Holiness and Sense of God in spite of the world, and lessens all things else into less than nothing, and Vanity; im∣prints a ghastliness and horror upon wickedness and sensuality. The Thirty pieces are nothing worth, and the Innocent Blood above all value, when Men suffer in the Agonies of Conscience, and fears of the ap∣proaching Judge. An House-ful of Silver and Gold will not buy a Man to resist God, when the Terrible Majesty appears to him: nothing is so precious then, that a man will not fling to the Bats and Moles. When the Breath is going out of the Nostrils, how precious is sincere Holiness to those that have slight∣ed it as a thing of nought. As if the great Truths of Gods Word were never true till a day or two be∣fore we die. But these things are alwayes so rich and valuable. True Wisdom is alwayes so precious, that it disdains to borrow Esteem from a Minute of Ex∣tremity. And therefore, it mostly falls out, that those who would have none of its Counsel, and de∣spised all its Reproofs, when they come to seek it now, cannot find it, but it laughs at their Calamity, and their Misery confutes their Confidence. A good Death is the natural consequence of a Holy life; else, there's no such thing in Nature, nor Grace neither, except by a Miracle of Grace. The most profligate and obdurate, cannot but think that they must repent, and acknowledge the Prudence and safety of the Religious, whom they contemned. They own their own folly and mistake, when it's too late to remedy: They desire to die the Death of the Righteous, and promise to live their life too, if they recover from sckness. And if a Holy life be then
looked upon necessary to be lived, it cannot be suf∣ficient meerly to resolve it. Religion never gave any man a Dispensation to Sin, that's one thing. We have entered into a Covenant with God to forsake the Devil and all his works. The Conditions of our Salvation, are our giving up our selves, Bodies and Souls, not a dying, but a living Sacrifice unto God. To deny ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly, in this pre∣sent world. The wicked must not only forsake his ways, and the untighteous man his thoughts; re∣turn from all his wickedness that he hath commit∣ted, unto the Lord; but keep all his Statutes, and do that which is right, acquire and exercise the Ha∣bits of every Grace, as well as mortifie and overcome all corrupt Affections, and vitious Inclinations. Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purifie unto himself a peculiar People, zealous of good works. He bare our Sins in his own Body upon the Tree, that we being dead to Sin, should live unto Righteousness. And is it Reasona∣ble that this should be wholly frustrate by those sup∣posed to be Redeemed by Him we dishonour, and endeavour to make void the purpose and design of his Sufferings, and Redemption, if we think them to be a shelter for our ungodly Living. The Gospel (the highest display of Mercy) is not a Salvation of men, in, but from Sin; and by Repentance means a Reformed course of life; and only by very silent Inti∣mations (the Tract of which is hardly discerned) leaves it possible that he should pluck some as brands out of the fire, by giving them Repentance at last: whereas, this is now become the only Repentance in use, the universal Refuge. But, the goodly price of a Death-bed-Repentance, at which God is prized by most, even then when Religion is at the lowest, is rejected with Indignation, and the Everlasting
state purchased by it, may be sadly called an A¦dama, a Field of Blood. It's in vain to ask whether God cannot save a Man after a vicious life, since his own will seems to re∣strain his Power; that he will not save men without a recovery to Holiness. He is Holy, Just, and True, as well a Merciful. The same word that Informs us He is merciful and gracious, likewise tells us, He will by no means clear the guilty. That if we live after the flesh, we shall die. That he cannot lye, nor deny Himself. I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord; wherefore turn your selves, and live; Imply∣ing, except we turn to him, his Mercy will do us no good. What Reason have we to expect it, which we have used to evil purposes, and his dishonour? that he should work Miracles for us, while we despise the means? Cause the Sun to stand still for us, be∣cause we have trifled away our day? Turn Stones into Bread, for us who have been slothful, and are ready to perish? That he should stand ready for us with that grace at last, which we have so long refu∣sed, and rejected. God is as peremptory for the Time, and Season, as for the Duty it self. There's a Time when he will not be found, nor accept our Of∣fering. The Day of Grace, lasteth not so long as the Day of his Patience: The fruitless Fig-tree stood still in the Vineyard, uncut down, but withered away under that fatal Curse, Never Fruit grow on thee more. Though he will-pardon the Infirmities of the sincere, yet there's a certain Period set for the return of Sinners, beyond which, all their Industry is ineffectual. Jerusalem neglected the day of her Vi∣sitation, and the things of her Peace were irrevoca∣bly hid from her Eyes: Esau found no place of Re∣pentance (in his Father) though he sought it care∣fully with Tears: The Foolish Virgins saw, and were troubled, that they wanted Oil, and endeavoured af∣ter
it, but too late, the door was shut, and no knock¦ing powerful enough for their admission.. The design of the Parable of the Vineyard, (so grosly abus'd) where those that went into it at the last hour, were rewarded equally with those that bore the burden and heat of the day; was to teach the Jws, that, though God had chose them first to be his People, yet at the Eleventh hour (i. e. in Go∣spel Times, or end of the world) He would call in, accept of, and reward the Gentiles as largely as they, notwithstanding their repining and murmuring at this his Grace and Mercy; the Reward being to all of Grace, and not of Debt. At least it's no Advantage or Encouragement to those that are call'd upon and ingaged, yet refuse, and delay coming in till old Age; Adjourn their serving God, to their going out of the world; for those that went in at the Eleventh hour, were not call'd before, but found standing Idle, because no man had hired them. And as for the Thief upon the Cross, (that hath stole away so many Souls for the Devil;) it's a bare Ex∣ample, not confirm'd by any Promise: It's a single Example, without a parallel in the whole Word of God: It's an extraordinary Example, ranked among the Miracles Christ wrought when he left the world: It's an Example impertinently alledg'd to warrant delay in us, who have the sound of the Gospel continually in our Ears, yet wretchedly cheat our selves of the Remedy of our miserable Condition, by adjourning the use of it to a late and uncertain futurity, which seldom or never succeeds well. Vain Men, to con∣clude an Universal Law, from one single Instance; a personal Grace and Priviledge, extended to that one Person, that stood close to that Sacrifice, that was of∣fering it self up to God; when he Conqueror was Triumphing over Principalities and Powers, and making a shew of them openly upon the Cross; and
displaying the Power of the dying Mediator, to for¦give Sins in his lowest Humiliation. The Scripture that are an History of more than Five Thousan years, have but this one Instance of one accepted upo a Death-Bed-Repentance; and in that, such an extra¦ordinary Conjunction of Circumstances, as will ne¦ver fall out again. No man professing Christianity hath any Reason to expect to fare as this Thief did till Christ come into the world, and suffer again, and that between two Thieves, and he be alive at tha time and place where he suffers, and be one of th Thieves, and the good one too; exercising so ma¦ny Acts of a true Repentance and lively Faith i Christ, when (probably) first Preached to him▪ when he saw him in so despicable a state, under al the Infamy and Misery of a shameful and painfu Death, and nothing to make such a greatness as he ascribed to him, probable; which will never be▪ But further, concerning the Thief upon the Cross, it is observable. First, That it appears not of him, (nor have we any reason to charge it on him) that he ever procra∣stinated, or purposely posted off his Conversion to this so late a date; and so he will not be matter of Com∣fort to them that do. Secondly, That as far as we have any knowledge, he seems not ever to have heard of Christ, at least, to have been called or instructed by him, till he met him upon the Cross; and consequently he can be no President to any that hath lived an Age, or great part of it, under the preaching of the Gospel. Thirdly, That for the Thief to be converted then, and believe in Christ in that state of greatest Humility, upon the Cross, (which so scandalized the Jews, when by all other Motives they were inclined to believe on him) was a most notable, illustrious eminent Act of Faith, and ought in any reason to be preferred be∣fore
that which is ordinarily found among men. Fourthly, That it was accompanyed with as many Effects of sincere Conversion as that condition was ca∣pable of, Confession of Christ, and devout Prayer to him for his Mercy, or remembrance when he came to his Kingdom. Fifthly, That it was not extorted by the fear of Death, but proceeded from a sight and acknowledg∣ent of the Innocency and Power of Christ, even up∣on the Cross; and this was an Argument to himself nd others, (and was, it seems, so acknowledged by Christ) of the sincerity of his Faith, and Conver∣sion to God, and that being supposed sincere, will undoubtedly be accepted be it never so late. Sixthly, This was done by the Thief in the midst of ll Temptations to the contrary; the Cross one great Temptation, and such as almost all the Disciples were haken with; and besides, the other Thief was his Tempter to the contrary, railing on Christ, &c. Luk. 23.39. And also the chief Priests, and Scribes, and Elders moc∣ked him, and they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, Mat. 27. And so that new-convert-Thief was a singular person, almost the only Confessor in the company. These particulars being observed, will give us reason to acknowledge the difference great betwixt the example of the Thief, and any that make use of that example to deferre their Repentance till the last, and will consequently advertise us, that though it succeeded very well to him, it may succeed very ill to us. They dreadfully mistake themselves, that crowd up Repentance into so narrow a Room, as a Sick-Bed, when Men have scarce Time to reckon up all the particular Duties that make it up. That imagine the Tree that hath been alwayes Barren, should bring orth good Fruit now it is a cutting down: That a man hould live a life of Holiness, when he is just a dying:
That a weak infirm Person, of disabled, disturbe Faculties, should build that in three dayes, whic others, notwithstanding all their Abilities and Di¦ligence, find hard enough to do in forty Years: Tha those who have had the knowledge of God, an been call'd upon all their lives to give up themselve to him, should be accepted when they pour out to him, in stead of the generous Spirits of Life, th Lees and Dreggs of it. When the Blood cools i the Veins, and the Spirits are ready to stand still the Season of the Pleasures of Sin are over, and  man is no longer to live where they are; to cast him¦self upon Religion, when there's nothing else to vi with it, when all things else fail: That he must tak us in at night, though he hath in vain stretch'd ou to us his hand all the day long; as if this stat were prepared only for a Stage for men to a their Vices and Exorbitances upon, and then Go should remove them to Heaven, that have but jus begun to acknowledge him by some weak Devotio extorted even out of necessity, and given the bul of their time to Sin; that have sacrificed the Male o their Flock to Lust, and even with impious design kept the corrupt thing for him. That the easi Yoak, the light Burthen, which cost the Son of Go his Life to obtain Heaven upon, an intolerable Load and to be had on easier Terms. That God shoul have only the faint and feeble Services of a Death bed, for his Mereies vouchsafed us all our dayes: Tha he should accept of such a Commutation for the O¦bedience due to him, as a Death-bed-Repentance a few Sighs, and Groans, Tears, Promises, scatter¦ings of Devotion, in exchange for all our Duties sufficient to expiate a whole life of Impiety, wit a breath to retract all the dishonour we have don him in it; as if he had made us to take the De¦lights he most abhors, and after all to give us such
stupendious Reward. From the Word of God Men ave no Promise to warrant such a Confidence; If hey have, let them shew it; if they have not, they ust thank (or rather Condemn) themselves, for ringing themselves into a Condition without the Covenant, wihout a promise, hopeless, and misera∣le. And oh how miserable must he needs be, that es upon the brink of Eternity, incountering the hrows and horrors of an Imminent Dissolution, the oubts what will become of him in another World, he fears of Hell, the uproars of a guilty Conscience; hom God hath left to the Boyling Sea of his own errors, and thrown him out no Anchor of Hope. ut to close all in a word: CAnst thou recover thy consumed Flesh From the well-feasted Worms, or put on fresh? anst thou redeem thy Ashes from the Dead? r quit thy Carkass from her Sheet of Lead, anst thou awaken thy earth closed Eyes? nlock thy marble Monument and rise? ll this thou may'st perform with as great ease, s to repent thee, Mortal, when thou please: is thy Grave, not Bed, that thou art in h'art not asleep, but thou art dead in sin. TREATISE IV. eing an Ingenious Farewell to all the Sweets of Life, and Charming Grandeurs of State. FArewell, ye gilded Follies, pleasing Troubles, Farewell, ye honour'd Rags, ye Chrystal Bubbles; ame's but an hollow Eccho, Gold, pure Clay, onour the Darling but of one short Day;
Beauties chief Idol, but a Damask Skin; State, but a Golden Prison to live in, And torture free-born Minds, Embroydred Trains But goodly Pageants; proudly swelling Veins, And Blood allay'd to Greatness, is but loan, Inherited, not purchas'd, nor our own. Fame, Riches, Honour, Beauty, State, Trains, Birth, Are but the fading Blessings of the Earth. I would be Rich, but see Man too unkind, Digs in the Bowels of the richest Mine. I would be Great, but yet the Sun doth still Level his Beams against the rising Hill. I would be Fair, but see the Champion proud, The World's fair Eye oft setting in a Cloud. I would be Wise, but that the Fox I see Suspected guilty, when the Ass is free. I would be poor, but see the humble Grass Trampled upon by each unworthy Ass. Rich, hated; Wise, suspected; scorn'd if Poor; Great, fear d; Fair, tempted; High, still envy'd mor. Would the World then adopt me for her Heir; Would Beauties Queen entitle me the fair; Fame speak me Honour's Minion, and could I With Indian-Angels, and a speaking Eye, Command bare Heads, bow'd Knees, strike Justice dumb, As well as blind, and lame, and give a Tongue To Stones by Epitaphs, be call'd great Master In the loose lines of every Poetaster: Could I be more than any man that lives; Great, Wise, Rich, Fair, all in Superlatives; Yet I these favours would more free resign, Than ever Fortune would have had them mine. I count one minute of my holy leisure Beyond the Mirth of all this earthly Pleasure. Welcome, pure thoughts, welcome ye careless Groves; These are my Guests, this is the Court age loves. The winged People of the Skies shall sing Me Anthems by my Sellers gentle Spring.
Divinity shall be my Looking-Glass, Wherein I will adore sweet Virtues face. Here dwells no heartless Loves, no pale-fac'd Fears, No short Joys purchas'd with eternal Tears. Here will I sit, and sigh my hot Youth's Folly, And learn t' affect an holy Melancholly: And if Contentment be a Stranger, then I'le ne're look for it, but in Heaven agen. TREATISE V. Morning Fancies. DArkness no sooner gives way to the Approach of the Sun, but the whole Theatre of Nature seems to smile; the Clouds put on their several-co∣lour'd Habits, the musical Inhabitants of the Groves warble forth the Air in varied and delightful tones of Harmony; the Flowers draw forth their Several Flames and Beauties, offering sweet Incense from their fragrant Bosomes; all Mists and Foggs break up and vanish; and that which before dissembled so bright a lustre, hath lost it in the light of the Sun. And now my Senses loosned from the soft Chains of sleep, enjoy the Prospect of the Glory of the Heavens, the pleasant view of the Woods, Fields, Rivers: But as there be Groves and Caves where the Sun hath not access; so my Body is that Cave, where without the Beam of Reason, to discern the Cau∣ses and Effects of those Works I externally behold, it is still in Darkness; nay, I shall still continue so, if with the reflext Beam of Reason I look not into my self, and see what habits and Affections my Soul wears, and what belongs to me in respect of Duties and several Relations without: Nay, I am still in darkness, if I behold not with the eye of Faith the Sun of Righteousness, arising (as it were) out of the
immense Ocean of his Goodness and Mercy, dart∣ing into my Soul the glorious Rayes of his Truth and Goodness; then doth my little World rejoyce, and my Flesh rejoyces in the living Lord; then are all my Affections, the Birds in my little Grove, tuned with his Praise; then doth each thought wear a several Livery of its Makers Praise, put on from the Contemplation of his several Works; then are all the false Splendours of Vanity obscured, the Mists and Foggs of Passion break up and vanish; then do the Flowers of Vertue salute him with that lustre and odour he himself bestowed on them; some yielding their Sweets at a distance, as the ten∣der Vertues of Mercy, Compassion, Liberality; o∣thers impart not their fragrancy till bruised and crushed, as the Vertues of Patience and Constancy: And now Lord, my imprison'd Soul beholds thy Beams through the Chinks (as it were) of thy Crea∣tures; but a full Vision of thy Presence is reserved for the State of Glory. Let my mind so feed on thy Works, that they be digested into thy Praise; and let me look out so constantly through these Cranies, at the Rayes of thy Goodness, Wisdom and Power, that at last my Spark may be swallowed up in the Immensity of thy Light. TREATISE VI. Sweet Entertainments for the Close or Evening of every Day. HEavens sable Curtains being drawn, Darkness makes all things alike: The feather'd Mu∣sicians of the Wood repose their aerial Spirits amidst the leavy Groves; a silent Horror seems
to possess all places, while those Silver-footed Nymphs, that by so many windings arrive at the watry Arms of Neptune, send forth their plea∣sent murmurs louder, not drowned with greater noise: If the Sun hath set in a Cloud, it hath pre∣saged Storms to the ensuing day. I find a resemblance in my lesser World, of Nights Livery, when I wink the World into dark∣ness, by which all Beauties lose their distinctions; all lye lovingly together in the bosom of Sleep, and agree in their obedience to these soft Injunctions, and delightful Commands of Nature. Here the Mi∣ser is pleasantly rob'd of his Store, and the misera∣ble man of his sense of being poor. The ambitious man leaves to court greatness, and is content with the ordinary favours of Morpheus: The Lover layes aside the sweet tortures of his Amours, and solaces himself only in the dusky Embraces of Sleep: The Soldier, in making his passage to the Gates of vocal Fame, ceases to invite Death, and is here content with its Image. Now do our Senses, which are the Birds that make the musick in mans little Grove, shrowd themselves under the downy Wings of Sleep. Thus doth Death equalize all things only for a longer time; in its Habitations a quiet horror seems to dwell, where all lye lovingly in the bosom of their Mother Earth, silently crept under the soft Coverings of Ashes; where our divided parts revel in their loosened Mo∣tions, which had before been crowded together in our sickly Composures. I lye merrily down in my Bed, though I expect to rise again, to resume the burthen of all my fears, hopes, and griefs, the constant Attendants of my life; and yet look sadly and mourn∣fully upon the Grave, my Corruption belonging to the maintaining of the Order of the Ʋniverse; where at my next rising, much gayer clad than before, I shall awake to Immortality and endless Joy. With
the eye of Reason I can look through the Glory  the world, and behold Vanity, and Oblivion; with the eye of Faith I can look through Oblivion and Corruption it self, and behold Glory and Eternity Now I find, how many things do not (that are esteemed in popular judgements to) make one hp∣py; how little they contribute towards it, to me alone, till I be mixt with those people, and take plea∣sure in those Opinions. We entertain with true and real passions the Sce∣nical compositions of the Stage; there being in mans life Plays, not acted, but lived; solemn fictions, not feigned, but believed. Men now acknowledge their own Natures, whom Precept had taught to regulate themselves all day, and familiarly own the impres∣sons Nature hath charactered on them. Now doth the ever-running streams of Gods fa∣vours, which run over our hard and stony hearts, speak louder to us, not drowned with the noyse of worldly thoughts. If the Sun hath gone down in the clouds of our envy and malice, it presages fu∣ture storms of passions to our life. And now, Lord, I will seek him in my Bed, whom my Soul loves: Let me find thee, in the rest thou givest my Soul from Sin and Vanity, in the sleep thou givest my affections, they being all quiet∣ly reposd in thee, and thus I rest on thee, more than on where I lye.
TREATISE VII. The most Ingenious Art of Print∣ing SPIRITƲALIZ'D. GReat Blest Master-Printer come Into thy Composing-Room: Wipe away our soul Offences: Make, O make our Souls and Senses The Ʋpper and the Lower Cases; And Thy large Alphabet of Grces The Letter; which being ever fit, O haste Thou to distribute it: For there is (I make Account) No Imperfection in the Fount. If any Letters Face be foul, O wash it, e're it touch the Soul; Contrition be the Brush, the Lye Tars from a penitential Eye. Thy Graces so distributed, Think not thy work half finished; On still, O Lord, no time deferr, Be truly a COMPOSITER: Take thy Composing-stick in hand, Thy Holy Word, the surest band: O sure the Work can never miss, That's truly Justifi'd in this. The end of Graces Distribution, Is not a meer dissolution; But that from each part being cited; They may be again Ʋnited. Let Righteousness and Peace then meet, Mercy and Truth each other greet; Of these Leters make a Word, Let these Words a Line afford;
Then of Lines a Page Compose, Which being brought unto a close, Be Thou the Direction, Lord, Let Love be the fast-binding Cord. Set, O Lord, O set apace, That we may grow from Grace to Grace, Till t'wards the Chase we nearer draw, The two strong Tables of thy Law; Of which the two firm Crosses be, The Love of Man, next after Thee. The Head-sticks are Thy Majesty, The Foot-sticks, Christ's Humility, The Suppication of the Saints, The Side-sticks, when our Faith e're faints: Let the Qints be thy sure Election, Which admits of no Rejection, With which our Souls being joyn'd about, Not the least Grace can drop out. Thy Mries and Allurements all, Thy Shooting-stick and Mallet call. But when all this done we see, Who shall the Corrector be? O Lord, what thou Set'st can't be ill, It needs then to Correctors skill. Now tho these Graces all be Set, Our Hearts are but White-Paper yet; And by Adam's fist transgression, Fit only for the Worst Impression. The Holy Spirit the Press-man make, From whom we may Perfection take; And let him, Lord, no time deferr, To Print on us thy Character. Let the Ink be Black as Jet; What tho? it is comely yet, As Curtains of King Solomon, Or Kedars Tents to look upon. Be Victory the Presses Head, Which o're Oppression may tread:
Let Divine Contemplation be The Skrews, to raise us up to Thee: The Presses two Cheeks (unsubdu'd) Strong Constancy and Fortitude: Our slavish Flesh let be the Till, Whereon lay what trash you will: The Nut and Spindle, Gentleness, To move the work with easiness: The Platten, is Afliction, Which makes good Work, being hard set on: The Bar, the Spirits Instrument, To Sanctifie our Punishment: The Blanket a resemblance hath Of Mrcy in the midst of Wrath: The Frisket, thy preventing Grace, Keeps us from many a sullied Face: Christ Jesus is the Level Stone, That our Hearts must be Wrought upon: The Coffin wherein it doth lie, Is Rest to all Eternity: The Cramp-Irons that it moves on still, Are the good Motions of the Will: The Rounce, the Spirits inspiration, Working an Holy Agitation: The Girts, the Gift of Continence, The Tether of th' unbridled Sense: The Winter whereon all doth lie, Is Patience in Adversitie: The Foot-step, Humbleness of Mind, That in it self no worth can find. If there be such a chance as this, That any Letter batter'd is; Being come unto thy view, Take it out, put in a new. Or if Satan that soul Fiend, Mars, with a pretence to mend, And being at thy Goodness vext, Make Blasphemy of thy pure Text;
Find it out, O Lord, and then Print our Hearts new o're agen. O Lord, unto this work make haste, Tis a work that long will last, And when this White Paper's done, Work a Reiteration. But to summe up all. THE World's a Printing-house, our words, our thoughts, Our deeds are Characters of sev'ral sizes: Each Soul is a Compostor, of whose faults The Levites are Correctors: Heaven revises; Death is the common Press, from whence being driven, W' are gathered Sheet by Sheet, and bound for Heav'n. TREATISE VIII. Curiosity severely Checkt. OFten have I thought with my self, what Disease I would be best contented to die of; none please me: The Stone, the Chollick, terrible as expected, intolera∣ble when felt: The Falsie is death before Death; the Consumption a flattering Disease, cozening men into Hope of long life at the last gasp: Some sick∣ness besot, others enrage men, some are too swift, and others too slow. If I could as easily decline Diseases as I could dislike them, I should be immortal: But away with these thoughts; the Mark must not choose what Ar∣row shall be shot against it. What God sends, I must receive: May I not be so curious to know what Weapon shall wound me, as careful to provide the
Plaister of Patience against it? only thus much in general; commonly that Sickness seizeth on men, which they least suspect; he that expects to be drown'd with a Dropsie, may be burnt with a Fea∣ver, and she that fears to be swoln with a Tympany, may be shriveled with a Consumption. TREATISE IX. The Humours of the Raw Di∣vines of this present Age. SOme raw Divines, no sooner are spous'd To their first Wives, and in the Temple hous'd, But straight the Peace is broke; they now begin T'appoint the Field, to fight their Battails in; Schoolmen must war with Schoolmen, text with text; Te first's the Chaldee's Paraphrase; the next Te Septuagints: Opinion thwarts Opinion; T Papist holds the first; the last th' Arminian; Ad then the Councils must be call'd t'advice, What this of Lateran says, what that of Nice: Ad ere the point must be a new disputed, Arius is false, and Bellarmine's confutd: Tus with the sharp Artillery of their Wit, Ty shoot at rndom, careless where they hit: T slghtly studied Fathers must be pray d, though on small acquaintance, in to did, Wose glorious Varnish must impose a gloss Ʋon their Paint, whose gold must gild their dross. ow Martin Luther must be purg'd by them, From all his Errors, like a School-boys Theam: Free-will's disputed, Consubstantiation, And the deep Ocean of Predestination.
Where, daring venture, ost too far into 't, They Pharaoh-like, are drown d both Horse and Foot; Forgetting that the Sacred Law enjoyns New-married men to sit beneath their Vines, And chear their Wives; they must not venture out To Wars, until the Year be run about. TREATISE X. A Lash for Laziness, or a Spur for our English Divines. SHameful my sloath, that have deerred my Night-Prayer, till I am in Bed: This lying a∣long is an improper posture for Piety: In∣deed there is no contrivance of our Body, but some good man in Scripture hath hanseled it with Prayer; the Publican standing, Job sitting, Hezekiah lying on his Bed, Elijah with his Face between his leggs: But of all gestures give me St. Paul's, For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of my Lord Jus Christ: Knees when they may, then they must be bended. I have read a Copy of a Grant of Liberty, from Queen Mary to Henry Ratcliffe, Earl of Sussex, giv∣ing him leave to wear a Night-Cap or Coif in her Maje∣sties presence, counted a great favour, because of his Infirmity. I know in case of necessity, God would graciously accept my Devotion, bound down in a sick dressing; but now whilst I am in perfect Health, it is inexcusable: Christ commanded some to take up their bed, in token of their full recovery; my lazi∣ness may suspect, least thus my bed taking me up, prove a presage of my ensuing Sickness: But may God Pardon my Idleness this once, I will not again offend in the same kind, by his Grace hereafter.
TREATISE XI. The Queen of Sheba's Glorious Pro∣gress to King Solomon's Court. IT spreads the sweet Perfume of Solomon's Fame, Affects the Coasts; and his Illustrious Name Cannot be hid; the unbeliev'd report Must fry wth Eagles wings to th' honoured Court Of Princely Sheba; Sheba must not rest, Ʋntil her eyes become th' invited Guest, Of Fame's loud Trumpet; her Impatience strives With light-foot Time, while her Ambition drives, Hr Chariot-wheels, and gives an airy passage To th' quick delivery of her hearts Embassage: True wisdom, planted in the hearts of Kings, Needs no more glory than the glory 't brings; And like the Sun is view'd by her own light, Bing by her own reflection, made more bright: The emulous Queen's arriv'd, she's gone to th Court, No eye-delighting Masque, no Princely Sport, To entertain her: No, her eye, her ear Is taken up, and scorns to see, to hear Inferiour things; Sh' allows her ear, her eye No less than Oracles and Majesty: How empty pastimes do dissolve and fly To their true nothing, when true Wisdom's by! Th' arrived Queen has Audience, moves, disputes; Wise Solomon attends, replyes, confutes; She objects, he answers; she afresh propounds; She proves, maintains it, he decides, confounds; She smiles, she wonders, being over-daz'd, With his bright beams, stands silent, stands amaz'd. How Scripture like Apocrypha's appear To common Books! how poor, when Scripture's near!
The Queen is pleas'd, who never yet did know The blast of Fame less prodigal, than now; For now th greatst part of what she knew By Fame, is found the least of what is true; We often find that Fame in prime of Youth; Does add to Falshood, and substract from truth: The thankful Qeen dos with a lib'ral hand, Present him with the Riches of her Land; Where Wisdom goes before, we often find, That Temporal Blessings seldom stay behind: Lord, grant me Wisdom, and I shall possss Enough, have more, or have content with less. TREATISE XII. An Hour well spent, or the Ar∣raignment of the false and de∣ceitful heart of Man. I Thought I had so well surveyed this little piece of Earth, that I had known every turning and winding in it: but, since I had a holy purpose be∣tray'd to some easie temptation, I suspected tat there was something yet undiscovered. Whereup∣on in a vacant hour calling my Travel, Study, and Observation thither, I found a strange Labyrnh, which the thred of my Reason was too short to un∣wind me out of; I found it so incircled with the Serpentine windings of Sin, so encompassed with those flexuous embraces, that I perceived Vanity n∣tring under the conduct of its adversary, apt to Glo∣ry in the contempt of Glory, and grow proud in the lowest debasing my self: and upon demand of Rea∣son for any good, it would inform me, That it owed its original to some secret passion, which would unti∣tle it again.
There is nothing but darkness, and wandrings, here; so that I perceive, O Lord, I was more secure than safe, since I lodged here such deceitful guests, that answered at te light knock of every Idle passion. I desired to have discovered my heart to thee, but found it first necessary, that thou shouldst discover it to me; where was such a Wilderness of Passions, such rocks of Pride, such Meanders of Deceits, and perplext paths o contradictory motions, that it mockt my past endeavours, and taught me to know, that other things might be in the light to me, yet I in darkness to my self. And since thy sacred Spirit hath dictated to me, that it is desparately wicked and inscrutable, I arraign it before thy Throne, as that corrupt Foun∣tain, whence hath flowed those bitter streams of Vanity, which have overflowed my life; I beg of thee, my God, another Creation, first, of a clean heart; and that then thy sacred Spirit would move upon the face of these waters, and form this Chaos into that beauty, and order, where thou wouldst have thy own Power and Wisdom manifested. Oh reath forth thy Heavenly Light into my Soul! in the shades which Crosses and Afflictions shall cast upon my life, in conformity to my Saviours suffering, my Soul rejoyces. TREATISE XIII. Chamber-Christians. NO matter whether (some there be that say) Or go to Church, or stay at home, if pray; Smith's dainty Sermons have in plenty stor'd me, With better stuff than Pulpits can afford me:
Tell me, why prayest thou? Heaven commanded so; Art not commanded to his Temple too? Small store of manners! when thy Prince bids Come, And feast at Court; to say, I've Meat at home. TREATISE XIV. Spare Minutes, or sweet Con∣templations upon a Private Life. THe Poets sometimes gratifie the largeness of mans Soul with their lofty flights, writing to immortality; and in the excess of their fancy, con∣verse with Deities, tumbling among the Stars with Jove: and anon, let the motions of their Spirits down again, to view the contents of moderate and private Fortunes. Thus we see sometime the Scean of the greatest mens lives altered; now representing you the prospect of Armies, Triumphs of Victories, Grandeur of State, the glory of Courts, Camps, and Cities; anon, in their rooms, succeeding Groves and pleasant Rivers, private Walks, Discourses of the Worlds Vanities, Experiments of Nature, and such Companions of solitariness: When all the swel∣lings of Pride and vain Opinions are faln, and Nature freed from those affectations it hath got abroad, it acknowledgeth it self, its own Bents and inclinati∣ons. A Life led according to Nature, is the real enjoying of things themselves; but if according to Art and Opinion, it's like as in Pictures; they view things drawn well to the Life, representations of Love, Honour, and Vertue; yet nothing but Co∣lours, that lose their glories by mens nearer ap∣proaches. The joyes of an active life are more agree∣able
to Nature, moving in the Sphere of Vertue, than any recessions from Society can afford, whose priviledge can only be, to think Vertue. The Mas∣culine power of the mind is not beholding to places for their satisfactions; but what is the true and real dignity of one place before another, by an intelle∣ctual Chymistrie he can extract, and translate to his own mind their preheminencies. There can in no place be wanting Groves, Rivers, singing of Birds; our bodies are a shadie Grove, where our Souls st contemplating; the Musick of the Birds without, are all Gods creatures, which, as it were, in so ma∣ny diversified Notes do sweetly sing their Makers praise; that Rivers, are the flux wherein all hu∣mane things are, Times, Persons, Things, which by a succession of their corruptible and alterable parts do still keep up that current. These thoughts are, as it were, the better Genius, which attends the Lakes: without which, their retirements are but the refuges of mens sickly humours; where they be∣gin to live of their malady, rather than to cure it; and do only sacrifice the fumes of melancholy, for that incense of service, which they owe as a tribute for their being. Those that would make loneness acceptable, by advising men, as through a Prospective, to behold the greatness of Structures, and bravery of Courts, through the humility of the Cottage, do make ones deluded fancy the ground of their content, imagining that he still enjoys those things, which commonly so swells mens minds, that they cannot with that even∣ness of judgment taste those purer pleasures, which arise from the observation of Nature, making as it were his Disease his Cure; the immoderate esteem of the other having so vitiated his pallat, that he can relish nothing else, though it be by the proxy of the fancy. Lord, give me Jacobs Dreams, that my very ima∣ginations
may represent things as Ladders, whereo I may see thy Goodness, Wisdom, and Power de¦scending, our Allelujahs ascending. TREATISE XV. A Duel amongst the Affections or a Battel between the Flesh and Spirit. WHen my rebellious Flesh doth disagree With my resisting Spirit, methinks I see Two mighty Princes draw into the Field Where one must win the Day, the other yield. They both prepare, both strike up th ir Alarms; Both march, both well appointed in their Arms. They both advance their Banners, th' one displays A bloody Cross; the other Colours blaze A Globe Terrestrial: Nature carries one, And Grace the other; each by's Ensign's known. They meet, encounter, blows exchange for blows; Dart is return'd for Dart; they grapple, close: Their Fortune's hurried with unequal Sails, Sometimes the Cross, sometimes the Globe prevails. We are that Field; and they that strive to win us, Are God and Satan: Those that war within us, The Flesh, the Spirit: No parting of the Fray, Till one shall win, the other lose the Day. My God, O weaken this rebellious Flesh, That dares oppose: O quicken, and refresh My dull and coward Spirit that would yield, And make proud Satan Master of the Field. Dear Lord, the Field's thine own, thou thought'st it goo To purchase't with my dying Saviours Blood:
'Tis thine, great God, by title and by right; Why should'st thou question what's thy own by Fight? Lord, keep possession thou, and let th' accurst And base Usurper do his best, his worst. TREATISE XVI. The best Bed-maker in time of Sickness. WHen a good man is ill at ease, God pro-promiseth to make all his Bed in his Sickness; Pillow, Boister, Head, Feet, Sides, all his Bed: Surely that God who made him, knows so well his measure and tem∣per, as to make his Bed to please him. Herein his Art is excellent, not fitting the Bed to the Person, but the Person to the Bed, infusing Patience into him. But O! how shall God make my Bed, who have no Bed of mine own to make? Thou Fool, he can make thy not having a Bed, to be a Bed unto thee. When Ja∣cob slept on the ground, who would not have had his hard Lodging, therewithall to have his heavenly Dream? Yea, the poor Woman in Jersey, which in the Reign of Queen Mary, was delivered of a Child, as she was to be burnt at the Stake, may be said to be brought to bed in the Fire; Why not? If Gods Justice threatned to cast Jezabel into a Bed of Fire, why might not his mercy make the very Flames a soft Bed to that his patient Martyr.
TREATISE XVII. A Discourse proving Lawful Stealth. I Find two (Husbband and Wife) both stealing and but one of them guilty of Felony. An Rachel had stolen the Images that were her Father and Jacob stole away unawares to Laban the Syri¦an: In the former a Complication of Thest, Lying, Sa¦criledge, and Idolatry; in the latter, no Sin at all: Fo what our Conscience tells us is Lawful, and our Dis¦cretion, dangerous, it is both Conscience and Dis¦cretion to do it with all possible secrecy. It was a lawful for Jacob in that case privately to steal away as it is for that man who finds the Sunshine too ho for him, to walk in the Shade. God keep us from the guilt of Rachel's Stealth▪ but for Jacob's stealing away, one may confess the fact, but deny the fault therein. Some are said to have gotten their life for a prey; if any, in that sense have preyed on, or (if you will) plundered their own Li∣berty, stealing away from the place where they con∣ceived their selves in danger, none can justly con∣demn them. TREATISE XIX. Concerning our Delilah, or Bo∣som Sins. HOw loath is Flesh to yield, the Spirit to win The glorious Conquest of a Bosom-sin! O how th' ingenious Flesh will plead, abuse The height of Wit to argue or excuse.
At length it yields: O give it leave to stay A year, a month, a week, at least a day; And if not so, yet let my breaking heart t hugg it once or twice before we part; Let me but take my leave, my thoughts shall bind me From the least touch; let me but look behind me; Nay, sin, Gehazi-like, will have a blow At cleans'd Naaman's bounty, e're she go. TREATISE XX. Dr. Tare-Text. I Heard a rouzing Preacher take for his Text, Am I not thy Ass upon which thou hast ridden ever since I was thine unto this day, was I ever wont to do so unto thee? I wondered what he would make thereof, fearing he would starve his Auditors, for want of Matter. But hence he observed, 1. The sillyest and simplest being wronged, may justly peak in their own defence. 2. Worst men have a good Title to their own Goods. Balaam a Sorcerer, yet the Ass confesseth twice he was his. 3. They who have done many good Offices, and fail  one, are often not only unrewarded for former Service, ut punished for that one Offence. 4. When the Creatures formerly officious to serve us, tart from their wonted Obedience (as the Earth to be∣ome barren, and Air pestilential) Man ought to reflect n his own Sin as the sole cause thereof. How fruitfull are the seeming barren places of Scrip∣ure! Bad Plow-men which make Balks of such Ground. Wheresoever the Surface of Gods Word doth not laugh and sing with Corn, there the Heart
thereof within is merry with Mines; affording, wher not plain Matter, hidden Mysteries. TREATISE XX. A Discourse concerning our Bles∣sed Saviour and the Pope of Rome, who calls himself Christ's Vicar. MEthinks thy Vicar Gen'ral bears the Keys, And executes thy Place with greater ease, And in one Jubilee enjoyes more mirth, Than thou, my dying Lord, didst from thy Birth: Alas! thou hadst not wherewithall to fill Thy craving stomach; he has Cates at will: Thy empty Coffers had not to defray Thy Tribute-charge; to him, Kings Tribute pay: Foxes have holes; thou hadst not whereupon To rest thy wakeful head; he snorts in Down: In short, thy Life was nothing but the Story Of Poverty, and his of Princely Glory. When tempting Satan would have giv'n thee all The Wealth and Glory of the world, to fall And worship him; at thy refusal, Lord, Thy Vicar took the Tempter at his word: So came thy wants so great, so great his store; The Vicar is so rich, the Lord so poor.
TREATISE XXI. A Pious Intriegue. WHen HEROD had beheaded John the Baptist, some might expect that his Disciples would have done some great matter in revenge of their Masters Death; but see how they behave themselves: And is Disciples came, and took up the Body, and buried it, and went and told JESƲS. And was this all? and what was all this? Alas, poor Men! it was some so∣ace to their sorrowful Souls, that they might lament their loss to a fast Friend, who though for the pre∣sent unable to help, was willing to pity them. Hast thou thy Body unjustly imprisoned, or thy Goods violently detained, or thy Credit causlesly de∣famed? I have a design whereby thou shalt revenge thy self: even go and tell JESUS, make to him a plain and true report of the manner and measure of thy Sufferings, especially there being a great dif∣ference betwixt JESUS then clouded in the Flesh, and JESUS now shining in Glory; having now as much Pity, and more Power to redress thy Grievan∣ces. I know, it is counted but a cowardly trick for Boyes, when beaten but by their Equals, to cry, that they'l tell their Father; but during the present ssity, it is both the best Wisdom and Valour, even to complain to thy Father in Heaven, who will take thy case into his serious consideration.
TREATISE XXII. Several Sins, or the Devils Brats describ'd in their proper Colours. Gross sin IS like a Show'r, which 'ere we can get in Into our Conscience, wets us to the skin. Sin of Infirmity IS like the falling of an April Shower; 'Tis often Rain, and Sun-shine in an hour. Sin of Custom. IS a long Shower, beginning with the Light, Oft-times continuing till the Dead of Night. Sin of Ignorance, IT is a hideous Mist, that wets amain, Though it appears not in the form of Rain. Crying Sin IT is a sudden Shower, that tears in sunder The Cope of Heaven, and alway comes with Thunder. Sin of Delight IS like a feathered shower of Snow, not felt, But soaks to th' very skin, when 'ere it melt. Sin of Presumption DOes like a Shower of Hail, but wet and wound With sudden Death; or strikes us to the ground. The Sin of Sins IT is a sulpherous Shower, such as fell On Sodom, strikes, and strikes to th' Pit of Hell.
TREATISE XXIV. Night Prayer. DEath in Scripture is compared to Sleep. Well then may my Night-prayer be resem∣bled to making my Will. I will be care∣ful not to die intestate; as also not to de∣ferr my Will-making, till I am not Compos mentis, till the Lethargy of Drowsieness seize upon me. But being in perfect memory, I bequeath my Soul to God; the rather because I am sure the Devil will accuse me when sleeping. O the advantage of Spi∣rits above Bodies! if our Clay-Cottage be not cooled with rest, the Roof falls a-fire. Satan hath no such need: the Nsght is his fittest time. Thus Mans Va∣cation is the Term for the Beasts of the Forrest, they move most, whil'st he lies quiet in his Bed. Lest therefore, whil'st sleeping I be outlawed for want of Appearance to Satan's Charge, I commit my Cause to him who neither slumbers nor sleeps: AN∣SWER FOR ME, O MY GOD. TREATISE XXV. A Discourse concerning a Glori∣ous Prospect on a Fair Day. LOok up, and there I see the fair abode And glorious Mansion of my gracious God: Look down; in every garnisht corner lies Favours objected to my wondering eyes:
Look on my right hand; there the sweet encrease Of joyes present me with a joyful Peace: Look on my left hand; There my Fathers Rod Sublimes my knowledge, from my self to God: Look forward; There I see the lively story Of Faiths improvement, and of future Glory: Look backward; There my thankful eye is cast On Sins remitted, and on Dangers past: Look inwards; And mine eye is made partaker Of the fair Image of my glorious Maker. Look up or down, about, above, or under; Nothing but Objects of true Love and Wonder. TREATISE XXVI. Of one Converted, that went t hear a Sermon in Jest. THere was a notorious Drunkard, (says worth Mr. Firmin) whom the chief Swearers, Drun¦ards and Debauchees of the place where he liv'd, cal¦ed Faclus, that needs would go to hear what Wils said, out of no other design, it seems, but to scoff a that Holy man; but in the Prayer before Sermo his heart began to thaw, and when he read his Tex which was Joh. 5.14. Sin no more, least a worse thi come upon you; he could not contain, and in that Se¦mon the Lord changed his heart, tho so bitter a Enemy, that the Minister on Lecture-dayes was ¦fraid to go to Church before his Shop-door: Lo, th are parts of his wayes, but how small a portion is know of him?
TREATISE XXVII. Clasping of Hands. LOrd, thou art mine, and I am thine, If mine I am: and thine much more, Then I or ought, or can be mine; Yet to be thine, doth me restore; So that again, I now am mine, And with advantage mine the more: Since this being mine, brings with it thine, And thou with me do'st thee restore. If I without thee would be mine, I neither should be mine nor thine. Lord, I am thine, and thou art mine: So mine thou art, that something more I may presume thee mine, then thine. For thou didst suffer to restore Not thee, but me, and to be mine: And with advantage mine the more, Since thou in death wast none of thine, Yet then, as mine, did me restore. O be mine still! still make me thine: Or rather make no Thine and Mine. TREATISE XXVIII. Rules, Which whosoever follows, shall Live long and happy, and attain to what he Desires. 1. LEt thy Thoughts be Divine, Awful, Godly. 2. Let thy Talk be Little, Honest, True. 3. Let thy Works be Profitable, Holy, Charitable. 4. Let thy Manners be Grave, Courteous, Chearful.
5. Let thy Dyet be Temperate, Convenient, Fruga 6. Let thy Apparel be Sober, Neat, Comely. 7. Let thy Will be Confiant, Obedient, Ready. 8. Let thy Sleep be Moderate, Quiet, Seasonable. 9. Let thy Prayers be Short, Devout, Often, Ferve 10. Let thy Recreation be Lawful, Brief, Seldom 11. Let thy Memory be of Death, Punishment. TREATISE XXIX. Grief Venting it Self to the Life. O Who will give me Tears? Come all ye Springs, Dwell in my Head and Eyes: Come Clouds and Ra My Grief hath need of all the watry things, That Nature hath produc'd. Let ev'ry Vein Suck up a River to supply mine Eyes, My weary weeping Eyes, too dry for me, Ʋnless they get new Conduits, new supplyes To bear them out, and with my state agree. What are two shallow Fords, two little spouts Of a less World? the greater is but small, A narrow Cup-board for my Griefs and Doubts, Which want Provision in the midst of all. Verses, ye are too fine a thing, too wise, For my rough Sorrows: cease, be dumb and Mute, Give up your feet, and running to mine eyes, And keep your measures for some Lovers Lute, Whose Grief allows him Musick and a Rhyme: For mine excludes both Measure, Tune and Time. Alas, my God!
TREATISE XXX. The Heavenly Traveller. A Black Cloud makes the Traveller mend his pace, and mind his home; whereas a fair day, nd a pleasant way, wastes his time, and that steal∣th away his affections in the Prospect of the Coun∣rey: However others may think of it, yet I take t as a mercy, that now and then some clouds do nterpose my Sun, and many times some troubles o eclipse my Comforts; for I perceive, if I should nd too much friendship in my Inn, in my Pilgri∣mage, I should soon forget my Fathers House and y Heritage. TREATISE XXXI. Conscience twinging the Sinner. PEace Pratler, do not lowre: Not a fair look, but thou dost call it foul; Not a sweet Dish, but thou dost call it sowre, Musick to thee doth Howl. By listning to thy chatting Fears I have both lost mine Eyes and Ears. Pratler, no more, I say: My thoughts must work but like a noiseless Sphere. Harmonious Peace must rock them all the day: No room for Pratlers there. If thou persistest, I will tell thee, That I have Physick to expell thee.
And the Receipt shall be My Saviours Blood: when-ever at his Board I do but taste it, strait it cleanseth me, And leaves thee not a word, No, not a Tooth, or Nail to scratch, And at my Actions carp or catch. Yet if thou talkest still, Besides my Physick, know there's some for thee; Some wood and nails, to make a staff or Bill For those that trouble me: The Bloody Cross of my dear Lord Is both my Physick, and my Sword. TREATISE XXXII. The Doleful End of Swagger¦ing Worldlings. JOrdan that famous River, no doubt runs throug many a pleasant Meadow, by many a shady Gro and flowery Bank, and yet at last is forced to empt it self into a dead Sea; and not only so, but thos fresh Crystal Streams, that made those famous Brook lose both name and worth, are turned into the dea Sea themselves; just so it is with a Wicked Man here he walks through the Meadows of worldly Plea¦sures and Rest, under the shades of earthly Com¦forts and Sports, and wallows himself amongst th flower; of worldly delights, but at last runs himsel out into a dead Lake, and is cast into Hell among the number of those that forget God; and nor only so, but his very Heaven it self, that made up all hi happiness, is turn'd into Hell; his Beauty is turn'd into horrour, his honour into shame, his lusts into devils, his pleasure into bitterness, his Scarlet into
flames of fire and brimstome; so that that which was his fresh Stream here, is his salt Sea there: Lord! let me be a pure Stream, that may end in Heaven! I care not what stony veins I run through here on Earth, so I may but there lose the name of Weakness and Corruption, for glory and perfection. TREATISE XXXIII. Charms and Knots. WHo rad a Chapter when they rise, Shall ne're be troubled with ill eyes. A poor Man's Rod, when thou dost ride, Is both a Weapon and a Guide. Who shuts his hand, hath lost his Gold; Who opens it, hath it twice told. Who goes to bed and doth not pray, Maketh two nights to every day. Who by aspersions throw a stone, At th' Head of others, hit their own. Who looks on ground with humble eyes Finds himself there, and seeks to rise. When th' hair is sweet through Pride or Lust, The Powder doth forget the dust. Take one from ten, and what remains? Ten still, if Sermons go for Gains. In shallow Waters Heav'n doth show, But who drinks on, to Hell may go.
TREATISE XXXIIII. Rachel amiable in Jacob's Eyes. YOu have heard of the bloody Siege of Troy, and yet it was said of Hellen, that she was so beau∣tiful, that she deserved ten years war more; and what was Hellen, but a glorious heap of Clay? you have heard of the hard labours of Jacob, yet Rache was so amiable in his eyes, that he thought her wor∣thy of fourteen years service: If these deserved so much, Oh, what doth Jesus Christ deserve? who is altogether lovely, before whose shining Glory, the beauty of the whole Creation is but an indigested Chaos. Therefore be not discouraged, Oh my Soul, though thine Enemies be fierce, thy assaults cruel, thy resistance even unto blood; thou fightest for a beautiful Christ that deserves it: Neither be disheart∣ned, Oh my Soul! though Rules be strict, duties hard, thy labours great, thou servest for an amiable Christ, that will sufficently reward it. Look but up∣on the lovely beauties of thy Christ, think but up∣on the glorious day of thine espousal, and these four∣teen years will be nothing to thee: Lord, let me al∣ways have thy beauty in my eye, so shall I quickly find no difficulty in my hand. TREATISE XXXV. Dooms-day. COme away, Make no delay. Summon all the Dust to rise, Till it stir, and rub the eyes;
While this Member jogs the other, Each one whisp'ring, Live ye Brother? Come away, Make this the day. Dust, alas, no Musick feels, But thy Trumpet; then it kneels, As peculiar notes and strains, Cure Tarantulaes raging pains. Come away, Oh! make no stay! Let the Graves make their Confession, Lest at length they plead Possession: Fleshes stubbornness may have Read that Lesson to the Grave. Come away, Thy Flock doth stray. Some to Winds their Body lend, And in them may drown a Friend: Some in noysome Vapors grow To a Plague, and publick Woe. Come away, Help our decay. Man is out of order harl'd, Parcel'd out to all the World. Lord, thy broken Consort raise, And the Musick shall be Praise. TREATISE XXXVI. The Resolved Traveller. WHat Heir, travelling to take Possession of a rich Inheritance, either lets a green Mea∣dow, or a pleasant Garden detain him, or a black Cloud, or a soul way dishearten him? O my Soul!
Thou art Travelling to take Possession of a glorious Inheritance among the Saints, wilt thou turn aside to crop every flower? wilt thou stand still to hear every melodious sound? wilt thou leave thy way to drink of every gliding stream of Carnal pleasure? what is this but to view a Meadow, and lose a Mannor? for a dying Flower, to part with an eternal Crown? for a flying vanity, to lose an immortal felicity? to forsake the way of Sion, to gather one of the Apples of Sodom? or else, Oh my Soul! What if thy way be in tears, and thy days in sorrow, all clouded, and a swelling Sea, so that not only the lading of the Ship, but thy very Life is in danger? yet here is enough to comfort thee, that a good Father, and a large Por∣tion, a sweet Rest, and an everlasting Refreshment, will make amends for all: Therefore, vain World, promise not, for I will make no deviation, because my way lyes to purer Comforts, and surer Glory: Vexing World, threaten not, for I will make no re∣tarding, because I am travelling to my Fathers, to my Countrey▪ to my Happiness. TREATISE XXXVII. The Pilgrimage. I Travell'd on, seeing the Hill, where lay My expectation. A long it was and weary way, The gloomy Cave of Desperation I let on th' one, and on the other side The Rock of Pride. And so I came to Phansies Meadow strow'd With many a Flower:
Fain would I here have made abode, But I was quickn d by my hour. So to Cares Copse I came, and there got through With much ado. That led me to the wild of Passion, which Some call the World; A wasted place, but sometimes rich. Here I was robb'd of all my Gold, Save one good Angel, which a Friend had ty'd Close to my side. At length I got unto the gladsome Hill, Where lay my Hope, Where lay my Heart: and climbing still, When I had gain'd the brow and top, A Lake of brackish Waters on the ground Was all I sound. With that abash't and struck with many a sting Of swarming Fears, I fell, and cry'd, alas, my King! Can both the Way and End be Tears? Yet taking Heart, I rose, and then perceiv'd I was deceiv'd. My Hill was further: so I flung away, Yet heard a Cry Just as I went, None goes that way And lives: If that be all, said I, After so foul a journey Death is fair, And but a Chair. TREATISE XXXVIII. The Conscientious Lawyer's Guide. MY Calling is lawful, I question it not, no wise man doth question it; or if any man doth question it, yet God being the ancient Law-maker,
and the eternal Law-giver, would soon decide it, and determine my Calling to be lawfull; all my fear is, whether I use not my lawful Calling unlawfully? That I may not, I propose these Cases of Conscience to my self. 1. Whether Gods glory or mine own gain moved me to make choice of this Calling? 2. Whether I take Fees in right or wrong Causes? 3. Whether I afford a Tenth or a Tantamount of my abundant Fees to the relief of the Poor? And when these are Resolved, I acknowledge it my Duty, as it is every mans Duty, to Pray God to direct me in my lawful Calling, and so I do. O most just and righteous God; who to preserve Peace amongst men, and to prevent men from wronging one ano∣ther, hast ordained the Profession of the Law, and hast appointed me to that Profession; I beseech thee give me Grace, so to execute my Profession, that I may do right to all men; sanctifie my Tongue, that my words be not deceitful, and sanctifie my Heart, that equity, not opu∣lency, be the chiefest mark I aim at; keep my Hands from taking Fees to plead in, or maintain an unjust Cause; and when I shall take a Fee in a just Cause, and do not deserve it, either by my neglect, or multipli∣city of other Imployments, give me Grace to restore it: While I am busied to obtain earthly Goods for my Cli∣ents, let me not forget to make Thee my Advocate for obtaining the Eternal good of mine own Soul: In all my Pleading before an earthly Judge, give me Grace to re∣member that great and last day, when I, and all men besides, must appear before Thee, the Judge of Heaven and Earth: And because then, not subtle Words, but a pure Heart, a good Conscience, and not a full Purse shall speed, so direct me by thy Spirit in this Calling of the Law, that in my whole Practice, I may endavour to execute Justice, and maintain Truth, and then re∣ceive, as thou hast promised to them that walk uprightly, Glory and Immortality, through the Merits of Him
that is the Advocate of Sinners, and the Propitiation for our Sins, Jesus Christ the righteous. Amen. TREATISE XXXIX. The Lawyers Character. NO wise man sees him, but he thinks upon his Estate, and is glad there are such men, with∣out whom themselves cannot live in Peace, nor their Estates be secure; none but Fools grudge at their abundance, since by their diligence we possess such abundance as we have tranquillously; be as Rich as you can, so you be Honest, and though your Law cannot, yet the Gospel will find a way to cut off the Intail of difficulty to Heaven from Riches; else, Vae vobis TREATISE XL. The Honest Physicians Guide. NO Man that hath Pulse in his Body, or Passion in his Heart, or Brain in his Head, or Ʋrine in his Bladder, but will confess the lawfulness of my Profession; or if any man be so mad or malicicious, yet Asa's preposte∣ousness in seeking to the Physician before the Di∣vine, and Hezekiah s application of a Figg to his Plague sore, will Confute him and tell the whole world, That the Physicians Profession is lawfull and honourable, because not a wise man sees him, but he thinks of Death; not a Fool, but send; for him in Sickness; and therefore a happy man he is in the mean time, that is welcome to Fools in extremity, and to wise men at eve∣ry opportunity.
He is indeed as happy as any man living, if he ascribe not too much to second causes; if he make God his, as God hath made him other mens Physician; if he shew God his tears, as he looks upon his Pati∣ents Ʋrine, he may then as well Prognosticate his own Health, as his Patients Death: The sight of him shall ever put me in mind of Death, that I may not be afraid of Death, when I cannot have the sight of him, the Physician; to whom I propose this one Case of Conscience. Whether his Prescriptions and Aims are more for his Patients Recovery, or his own Gains? And then let him pray thus, or otherwise as it pleaseth him. O most wise, most powerful, and most gracious God! who hast created Man for thy felf and service, and all other things for the service of Man; and amongst men hast ordained several Professions, and amongst them the Pro∣fession of Physick, to repair the Health, and to recover the Sickness of men, I beseech thee to give me Grace to remem∣ber, that I must one day answer for what I do all the dayes of my Life, and therefore withall I beseech thee for a Blessing upon all those Prescriptions I shall direct for my Patients, and to trust in and expect only from thee the first cause, a virtuous operation upon the second cause, for the good of my Patients; and as I feel for the evenness or unevenness of their Pulse, I may keep the Pulse of mine own Soul in an even and just temper before thee, that as I behold their Ʋrines, thou mayest behold my Tears; that as I prescribe their Diets, I may alwayes keep a tempe∣rate Diet my self; and so keep my Body under, that my Soul may continually have recourse to Thee, until thou take me to thy self, through Jesus Christ. Amen.
TREATISE XLI. The Physicians Character. HE is Natures best Friend, as alwayes following her dictates and directions: He is a good friend to Grace, for when he sees Nature spent, he bids his Patient send for the Divine; nor do I blame him for it, that he puts Divinity after Physick, since I know, Men are more sensible of Flesh and Blood, than they are of Soul and Spirit. TREATISE XLII. The Careful Seaman's Guide. THat my Calling is lawful, honourable and an∣cient, Noah s Ark, David's wonders in the deep, Solomon's sending Ships to Ophir for Gold, and St. Paul's escaping danger at Sea, by the help of the Shipmaster, Pilots and Mariners, do abundantly satifie and confirm; yet before I go to Sea, I shall propose to my self this Case of Con∣science. Whether I have taken this Calling by the direction of my Parents, the guidance of Providente, or the love of Money, and desire of seeing Fashions? And being resol∣ved, I am lawfully called, I pray: O God! who hast appointed me to goe down into the Sea in Ships, and to do my business in great waters, Bless me there. O God! who doest whatsoever thou pleasest in Heaven, in Earth, and in all deep places, Have Mercy upon me.
O God! I am now ready to commit my self unto the waters, I am now floating upon the bottomless Sea; and that my sins may not go along with me, nor provoke thee to vex me with thy storms, Have mercy upon me. The Ship that I am now in, is but a vain thing to save a man; and that Pyrates may not board us, that windes and waves may not drown us, that Infidels may not cap∣tivate us, Have Mercy upon us. That the Devil may not infect us, that we may be con∣stant in our Religion, that we may be true and just in our dealings, that in all places, we may demean our selves as the Professors of Christ, and give no occasion to the Adversary to speak evil, Have mercy upon us. That the great Leviathan may not seize upon our souls, as the Whale did upon Jonas his Body, for sins we stand guilty of, Have Mercy upon us, and blot out all our Offences. TREATISE XLIII. The Seaman in a Storm. O God! who didst save Noah and his Family in the Ark, from perishing by water, Help us, or else we perish. O God! who didst hear the Prayer of thy Propht from the bottom of the Sea, and out of the belly of Hell, Hear us, and help us, else we perish. O God! who hast commanded, and raised the stormy wind, which liteth up the waves of the Sea, Help us, else we perish. O God! these winds and these waves mount us up to Heaven, and bring us down again to the depth, and melt our souls, Help us, else we perish. O God! we reel too and fro like drunken men, and are at our wits end, Help us, else we perish.
Our sins have raised thy Anger, O God! and thy An∣ger hath raised these Storms; in Justice thou mayest deal with us, as thou didst with Pharaoh and the Aegypti∣ans, but we beseech thee to deal with us in Mercy, as with Moses and the Israelites in the red Sea; cast our sins into the bottomless Sea of thy Mercy, drown them in the red Sea of Jesus Christs blood; and as he did rebuke the waves and the Sea, so do thou turn this Sea into a Calm, and bring us to our desired Haven: Spare us a little longer before we goe hence, and be no more seen; guide us in this whole Voyage by thy Power, govern us with thy Mercy, return us with thy Grace, that we may give up our Lives in the Land where we received them: Or if thou hast sooner appointed us unto Death, prepare us for death, in the full remission of our Sins, in the free justifica∣tion of our Persons, in the fruitful sanctification of our re∣maining dayes, and in the future glorification of our Souls, through Jesus Christ. Amen. TREATISE XLIV. The Seaman after a Storm. THat thou hast heard us from above, and drawn us out of many waters, My Soul doth magnifie thee O Lord! That thou hast delivered us from all our Fears, and hast not suflered the water-floods to overwhelm us, nor the deeps to swallow us up, My Soul doth magnifie thee, O Lord! That thou hast shewn us thy wonders in the deep, and yet delivered us from death, by preserving us in the Ship, and commanding the waves to be quiet, and the winds to be still, My Soul doth magnifie thee, O Lord! That thou hast brought me safe to the shoar, and com∣forted me with the sight, and life, and health of my Friends, My Soul doth magnifie thee O Lord.
TREATISE XLV. The Seamans Devotion at his Return. AND now, what shall I render unto thee, O Lord! for all thy benefits? My Soul and Body I dedicate unto thee, and beseech thee to consecrate them unto thy self: They have been washt in the waters of the Sea; Oh! now wash them in the laver of Regeneration: They have tasted the saltness of the Sea; Oh! let them now taste the Me∣rits of my Saviour; and then my Soul shall never con∣sent again to sin, my Body shall never again commit sin: And that this may not prove Presumption, but that I may bring my promise into performance, Behold, O God! with the earnestness of my Soul, upon the Knees of my Body, I beg thy Assistance, and the Graces of thy Holy Spirit, that I may conquer sin; the commanding pow∣er of sin, and never again obey it; the condemning guilt of sin, and never despair under it: And this for the bitter Agony and precious death of my Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, Amen. TREATISE XLVI. The Seamans Character. IN him I see a warrantable, a dangerous, a gainful, and an honourable Calling; so warrantable, that Christ of his twelve Apostles chose four Sea-men, An∣drew, Peter, James, and John; so dangerous, that there is never above a foot and half betwixt him and death; which made one Poet say, Ille robur, &c. He had an heart of Oak that first adventured to Sea: and another; Aut insanit, &c. He is either a mad∣man,
or a begger, or desirous to die that goes to Sea only they are so happy in this danger, that they see Gods wonders in the deep, and give him thanks when they are by him brought unto the haven; so gainful, that Solomons good houswife is compared to a Merchants Ship that brings riches from a far Countrey; so hono∣rable, that of old the Merchants of Tyre were called Princes; and of late years, those of Genoa, Venice, and the Low-Countries are arrived so high, that a great part of the world envies them, the rest admires them: to them we are beholding for Balm from Gilead, for Incense from Sheba, for Gold from Ophir, for Cedar and Firr from Tyre, for Gumms and Spices from India; and somewhat more than ordinary there is in this Calling, since Christ hath graced it with the immaterial Let∣ters of his own name. . TREATISE XLVII. The Pious Travellers Guide, in matters relating to his Soul. I Am now taking a journey by Land; whether for the necessity of business, or the visiting of my friends, or the wooing of a wife, I need not scruple my self; so I am sure, it is not for vanity or sin; I may pray God for his protection; and thus I address my self to his Throne of Grace. O most gracious God! who didst protect thy Servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in their several journeys; conduct me also in this my journey by thy Angels, that I may be safe from the violence of Thieves, and guide me by thy Spirit, that I may be safe from the assaults of those great Thieves of my Soul, the Flesh, the World, and the Devil: against the World give me the staff of Faith; a∣gainst
the Devil, give me the Bag of Charity; against the Flesh, give me the bottle of Tears, that as a Pllgrim. I may not be cumbred with any thing of impediment, but only furthered with all things of emolument; and in eve∣ry step of this journey, remember my great journey from Earth to Heaven, and keep such an even pace in the path of Grace, that thou mayest return me back from this jour∣ney to my home; receive me at the end of that journey to thy City of Glory, for his sake, who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, Jss Christ. Amen. TREATISE XLVIII. The Travellers Devotion at his Re∣turn. O Most Merciful God! that many have miscar∣ried in their Travels, I hear and know; some in their Purses, some in their Lives; that I am returned safe in both, and injured in neither, I feel and know, and know no cause of it but thy Providence; and therefore know my self bound to acknowledge the Duty of my thankfulness to that Providence of thine; which I do, and ever will bless, not only for this, but for all the preservations of my whole life, and consecrate the remainder of my whole life to thy Service; wherein I beseech Thee so to bless me in my whole race upon earth, that I may bless Thee in the long race of Eternity in Hea∣ven, for his sake who took his Journey from Hea∣ven to Earth, and returned again from Earth to Heaven, to prepare a place for me, and now sits at thy right hand to intercede for me, Jesus Christ my Saviour. Amen.
TREATISE XLIX. The Honest Travellers Character. HE is a just and a wise man, he never goes on Foot, but when he wants an Horse; nor doth he ever ride, but when he hath business; he spends like himself, little or much; nor doth he make much account of his expences; for he layes up that before he finds, or has forc'd occasions to use it; if he Tra∣vels with safety, and returns without danger, his first Salutation is Gratias Deo. TREATISE L. The Valiant Souldiers Guide. SOme men in the World have questioned the lawfulness of my Calling: But I have God's Word for my Warrant, and God's Servants for my Pattern. God's Word sayes, When thou goest out with thine Host, or when thou goest to War; and that very Word (when) doth suppose it; and sure I am, God s Word doth not suppose any thing which is unlawful. As God's Word, so his Servants too warrant it; yea and his choicest Servants; Abraham, Joshua, Deborah, Sampson, Gideon, David; they were all Warriers; they waged War, some of them offensive, some of them defensive; and therefore I need not doubt of the lawfulness of my Calling: All the doubt is in resolving these Cases of Conscience. 1. Whether I am lawfully called to this lawful Call∣ing?
2. How I may be assured that I am lawfully called, and may with a safe Conscience take up, and make use of these Weapons? And that being done, I thus address my self to Je∣hovah, the Lord of Hosts. O Almighty God, who hast styled thy self a Man of War, and hast now called me to be a Man of War, I beseech thee teach my hands to war, and my fin∣gers to fight; give unto me, and to every one of my Fellow-souldiers, the Strength of Sampson, the Courage of David, and the Wisdom of Solomon; that we may undermine all the Attempts, and over∣throw all the Plots, and overcome all the Gyants that fight against thy Truth; yet even in the heat of fury give us Pity, that we may rather spare than spoil; and while we gird our selves with Armour to resist these Enemies of ours, do thou put upon us thy whole Armour, that we may resist that Enemy of Mankind, and quench all the fiery Darts of the Devil. Go thou forth with us, against them that are come without thee against us; animate our, and abate their Courage; confound their Devices, but convert their Souls. And because Death is before our eyes, give us Grace to be mindful of it, and prepared for it; that while we fight against them, we may also fight the good fight against all our ghostly Enemies, and receive a Crown of Righteousness. Take our Bodies into thy protection, and defend us; take our Souls into thy tuition, and sanctifie us; that though we return not home, we may be receiv∣ed into Heaven, through Jesus Christ. Amen. The Souldiers Character. HE is the Father of Peace, and Mother of Pati∣ence: His Subtilty begets Peace, his Magnani∣mity nurses Patience; in both, he is the Founder
and Supporter of Kingdoms. If he be conquered, he sowes Patience, if he conquer, he reaps Peace: in that he founds, in this he supports the Kingdom. If he be able to second the Peace of Victory with the Grace of Humility, he is the Breeder of all Virtue, and the Bane of all Vice; for then good Laws are put in Execution, and bad Men in the House of Correction; so necessary he is in Peace, that else we lose it; so necessary it is in War, that else we have no hope of it; so necessary in both, that no Kingdom can subsist long without him. If you chance to see him, you see a Head quick of Wit, a Tongue full of Eloquence, an Eye of Vigilance, a Face of Courte∣sie, a Hand of Bounty, and an Heart of Valour: And for his good Parts, say, God bless him, so that he remember his Lesson, Neminem concutite, neque calumniamini. The diligent Tradesmans Guide. THis Calling is of a large extent: For the extent of Trades is very large; so many several Trades as there are, so many several callings to those Trades there are too. The best mark whereby to know the lawfulness of a Trade, is, To find a ground for it in Scripture; or, if humane Inventions have found out some Trades, that the Scripture gives no ground for; yet if the Scripture forbids it not, the Trade is lawful, and a man may lawfully make use of it; e. g. There is no mention made of a Chimney-sweeper in the Word of God, yet though there were nothing conducing to this Trade, this Trade notwithstanding is lawful, be∣cause it is not forbidden; whereas on the other side, The Trades of Ʋsury, and Pawn-taking, are directly for∣bidden in the Word of God, especially the latter, The taking of such things to pawn as are necessary for lively∣hood and subsistence.
But I thank God my Profession is not forbidden; (for I am a Merchant, I am a Mercer, I am a Taylor, I am a Carpenter, &c.) and therefore I may safely use it: and that I may use it honestly, I pray: O God! who for the sin of Adam, hast appointed that every man shall earn his living by the sweat of bis brows, and shall eat his bread in the sweat of his face, and hast also forbidden that man to eat, who will not work; and to this end hast ordained several Callings, to some where∣of every particular man should apply himself, whareby, with thy blessing, he should provide for his Family and Posterity; and amongst all hast called me to this Trade and course of life, and herein hast promised to bless my honest labours and endeavours; I beseech thee that I may comfor∣tably and contentedly undergo it, without grudging there∣at, as at some uneasie burthen, driving not only at mine own private gain, but also at the pvblick good; not seek∣ing Riches by wronging of others, by false Weights, short Measures, or deceitful Work, (Be such thoughts▪ and things, O God! ever far from me) but only seeking a competency and honest encrease, doing to and dealing by others, as I would others should do to, and deal by me; and that I may so do and deal, I beseech thee let me ever remember, That the wages of unrighteousness, and Riches gotten by wrong and Robbery, are put into a broken bag, and shall soon diminish and be devoured; or if they do continue, they shall be for my greater hurt, and such Pro∣sperity shall destroy me; That a little with thy blessing is better than great Revenues with thy curse; That thy all-seeing eye is ever beholding me in all my doings; and all my doings, however close from the world, are naked in thy sight: Add to this grace of remembrance, the grace of holy care, whereby I may walk uprightly, and approve my self before thee in an even behaviour toward all men; and if it shall please thee to bless my labours, and increase my store, by my honest industry; O let me not set my heart upon that increase and make those Riches my strong Ci, y, lest such deceitfulness choak the seeds of thy graces in me,
and steal my heart from thee, from the Poor, from my cal∣ling; but let me follow my Calling in an holy measure, not wholly ingulphing my self into, nor wholly sequestring my self from the business of it; but giving my self all con∣venient opportunities to serve thee in piety, and to relieve the Poor in Charity; that when thou shalt put an end to these dayes of labour, thou mayest say unto me, Well done good and Faithful Servant, enter into thy Mastres rest. All which, and all other things needful for me, I beg of thee in the Name, and for the sake of Jesus Christ. The Tradesmans Character. HE is a good Commons-wealths-man, but a bad States-man; and then the best, when he med∣dles least with it: The Ware in his Shop, next to the ware of his Soul, should take up his Time and Tongue: For if he make no Conscience how he spends his Time, he hath no care for Eternity; and if he care not to guide his Tongue, he sets the Greater and the Lesser, himself and the whole World, on fire and combusti∣on: Happy he, if he prayes aright, and endeavours to do as he prayes, without injuring his Customer by false weights and measures. An Impartial Treatise concerning Devils, Apparitions, Spirits, Pharies, Hags, Witches and their Imps; Con∣jurers, Impostors, and Ghosts of Persons walking after they have been dead and buryed in their Graves for a considerable time, &c. Together with two actual and real Dialogues that pass'd between the Devil and two famous Divines, to whom he appeared at two several times. THat there are really Magicians, Conjurers and Witches, who have Commerce and familiarity with evil Spirit, is so clear and plain, both from Holy Scripture, Councils, Canon and Civil Laws of all Nations, that none but those Atheists ho would en∣deavour to perswade themselves there are no Spirits, and conse∣quently no life after this, ever denyed it; but since the reality of
this Converse with Demons and their Appearances, and Posses∣sions, has been so clearly demonstrated in former Ages, but espe∣cially in this, by Persons of most acute Judgments and Learning wherein they have fully answered all Objections to the contrary, I shll not now ingage in the least in the Controversie, but shal only give an account of the miserable Deaths of some Persons mentioned in History who were concerned in these cursed Arts▪ and likewise of some remarkable Apparitions, and Actions o evil Spirits, and their taking possession of the Bodies of severa Persons, and tormenting them; with several other strange Feas and Illusions of Satan; many of which are to the life represen∣ted to your view in this 8th, and last Emblem, vvherein you may see, under the Head of, 1. Apparitions, Spirits, and Ghosts of dead Persons, How Protean Devils poor Men to mock or scare, Put on thin Shapes of masquerading Air: In which the World has equal folly shown, Whilst the Fool credits all, the Atheist none. 2. Hovv the Devil discourses with Mr Rothwel the Minister. Bold Rothwel on bold Satan ventures hard, Reliev'd his Prisoner, and beat up his Guard; Which made him, losing cunning, grow uncivil; And when he could not harm, he roars like Devil. And then 3dly,—Here you may see under the Head of Pharies, Haggs, Witches and their Imps, How that, The Devil's an Ass; yet he was ne'r too stout To play atFor he'd rather be deluding poor, old, silly Women, and discontented Men, than be doing no mischief at all. small Games, rather than stand out. But never will be make the Atheist steady; What need he fright what is his own already? Apparitions, Spirits, Specters, Phantasms, and Ghosts o dead Persons walking after they have been dead, &c. 1. GIlbert writes in the eighth Book of his Narrations, that a young Gentleman of Lorrain, of a good Family, but cor∣rupted by ill Company, frequenting often Ordinaries and such like Houses of Debauchery, was one day walking in the Fields melancholly by himself, for want of Money; to whom a Spirit appearing in Man's shpe, asked the reason of his Solitariness▪ proffering to do him service in whatever troubled him, provi∣ded he would steadfastly belive all that was in a little Book he would give him, and swear never to open, or shew it to any
body: This when the young Man had promised, the other pro∣duced a little Book in his left hand, and shaked 60 Crowns out of it into his right, bidding the young Man do the like; who produced the same effect: But at last, when he wanted for no∣thing, being overcome with Curiosity, he resolved to see what was contained in it; and opening it, he saw in the midst a round Circle, divided with certain Lines in form of a Cross, on which was painted a horrible face of a Devil. At this sight the young Man was so frighted, that his Eyes became black, and his Brains turned, that he thought to have some heavy load on his Shoulders; He was forced therefore to confess the matter to his Friends, who perswaded him to throw the Book into the Fire, which, although there was nothing in it but Paper, yet remained an hour in the Fire before it consumed. 2. A Gentleman near the City of Torga, who got his living by robbing and ranging the Fields, met one day with a Spirit in form of a Horsman, who saluted him, and proffered him his Svice: The other accepting of it, made him his Groom, and ever when he went out, gave him special Charge of a cer∣tain Horse which he esteemed very much of; the Devil finding he could never please his Master concerning this matter, and that (notwithstanding all his double diligence) his Master never thought him well enough lookt after, took the Horse one day, when his Master was abroad, and carryed him to the top of a high Tower, and put his Head out of the Window. The Horse seeing his Master come home, began to neigh and stamp, as though joyful of his return, but the Servant never came again to fetch him down, and left all the Neighbourhood in great admiration. 3. Froissard reports, that a certain Priest going to law with a Parishioner, was cast by him; and, that resolving not to stop there (for he had skill in Magick) he raised a Spirit whom he sent to torment him, upon Promise of such a Reward. The Spirit posts immediately to the Gentlemans House, and there, by his noise, and the Pranks he play'd, soon manifested what he was. The Gentleman upon this strange vexation, got his Neighbours, good Religious Men, to watch with him; and when at Midnight the Spirit came, it was resolved he should speak to it. The Devil, according to his agreement with the Priest, ne∣ver mist his hour, but came as he used to do that night, throw∣ing the Chairs and Stools up and down the House, making a noise and great disturbance. Whereupon the Gentleman bold∣ly asked in God's Name what he was: Ah, quoth the Devil, and laught, do you not yet know that I am a Spirit? Yes, said the Gentleman again, but who sent hee hither? The Priest, said the Spirit, because thou overthrew'st him at Law, and hath promised me also ten Crowns for my pains. Away, said the
Gentleman, for shame; art thou so bae as to serve such a piti∣ful Rascal for so little mone? I will give thee forty Crowns to serve me; and all thy business shall be only to bring me News from all parts of the World. I'le do't, said the Devil; but if ever you desire to see me, you shall certainly lose me. Thus did this Gentleman know, before any Post could come, of all the Trans∣actions in the World, and had news from the remotest Parts of it; insomuch that he began to be sought after by every one for News, since nothing in the whole World was done, of which he had not Intelligence. 4. Alexander ab Alexandro writes, that a Monk of the Mo∣nastery of Ardens, going early in the morning through the Forrest, to a Town thereby, overtook a Man of a stern coun∣tenance, loose kind of Vesture, and very tall stature, with whom he travelled till at last they came to a great Wash, where the Man proffered the Monk, being a religious Person, to car∣ry him over on his Back. The Monk glad of this proffer, got up, but casting his Eyes down toward the Water that was ve∣ry clear, and seeing his Porters Feet of a strange and deform∣ed shape, he blessed himself with the sign of the Cross; a which the Devil hasted so fast away in a Whirlwind, that i¦tore up a great Oak by the roots; which gave the poo Monk cause to think, that if he had not in time perceived th Devil to be his Porter, he should have been stifled in the water by him. 5. I judge there is none so ignorant of the Manners an Fashions of his neighbouring Countries, but knows they an far ifferent, and in some manner how they differ. I sha leave it therefore to the judicious Reader to suppose in h fancy; a Country-man of France, in his wooden Shoes, le¦ther Doublet, and high-crown'd Hat, his Sythe on his shou¦der, Bag and Bottle at his waste; which things, though in En¦land have nothing admirable, yet in Persia, Muscovy, and theli foreign Nations, the whole Habit will seem most strange an wonderful. Such a poor Countrey fellow going to a piece Ground two or three Miles distant from his own Habitatio to mow, is overtaken by a man on Horse-back, whom taki for no other than some Countrey Man, he fell into discour with him concerning his journey; so that at last, being both go the same way, the other proffered him the use of his Ho to ride behind him; which the honest Mower willingly acce¦ted of; but being well seated, and thinking now to have p¦ceeded in his journey, he is carryed through the Air with su swiftness, that the astonishment gave him no time to spe and fear made him hold fast to the other. Thus passed th over many Towns and Countries, till at last, coming over  Market-place in Turky, Good God, said he, what people these, and whither am I going? The Spirit confounded at
holy Name, let him fall into the midst of the multitude; but by reason of the great store of Tents and Cloahts tht kept the Commodities from the scorching heat of the Sun, the vehe∣mency of his fall was abated, and in short space he came again to his Senses. By this time an infinite number of Turks were assembled in a ring around him, but a great distance; for some supposed he was a God dropt from Heaven; others that Saturn the Heathen Deity of time, with his Sythe on his shoulder, was come to hide himself again on the Earth; others interpreted it that Time was ceasing to be, and that the World was now at an end: In brief, all were amazed, as you may imagine, as well at each particular part of his Habit, which was wonderful, as the strangeness of his coming being no less admirable. Yet still their Astonishment increased, to hear him speak in a strange Dialect; but he thinking they could not hear him, approaches towards them; on the other side fear still makes them to recede. By this time News of this rare acci∣dent came to the Grand Seignior, and Interpreters were sent to know the matter perfectly; which being done, he was sent back to France by the Ambassadors means then residing in Tur∣ky, that the King might be certified of what strange things had happened. 6. Marsilius Ficinus, as Baronius relates, made a solemn Vow with his fellow Platonist, Michael Marcatus (ater they had been pretty warmly disputing of the Immortaity of the Soul out of the Principles of their Master Plato) that whether of them two died first should appear to his Friend, and give him certain Information of that truth; (it being Ficinus his fate to the first, and indeed not long after this mutual Resolu∣tion) and indeed he was mindful of hs Promise when he had left the Body; for Michael Marcatus being very intent at his Studies betimes in a Morning, heard an Horse riding by with all speed, and observed that he stopped at his Window; and therevvith heard the voice of his Friend Ficinus, crying out aloud, O Michael, Michael, vera, vera sunt illa. Where∣upon he (much affrighted) suddenly opened his Windovv, and spyed Marsilius on a white Steed, whom he called after, but he vanished in his sight. He sent therefore to know how Mar∣silius did; and understood that he died about that hour he call∣ed at his Window, to assure him of his own and other Mens Immortality. 7. Alexander ab Alexandro vvrites an admirahle History of a Gentleman that had newly buryed his Friend, and returned to Rome, lay at an Inn by the way: Where being alone, and avvake, there appeared to him the Phantasm of his deceased Friend, pale and vvan as vvhen he died; vvhom vvhen he savv, and could scarce speak for fear, he ask'd at last what he would
have: But the Spectre returning no ansvver, seemed to pull off his Cloaths, and came to lye by him in the same Bed. The other being extreamly frighted, gave way to him, vvho per∣ceiving he accepted not of his Company, lookt upon him vvith a stern Countenance, and having dressed himself, departed: The other (out of exceeding fear) fell extreamly sick, affirming for truth, that the Feet of his Phantasm were as cold as Ice. 8. Philip Melancthon reporteth that he had an account from tvvo men of good credit and repute, that a certain young Wo∣man of Bottonia, tvvo years after her death, returned again in humane shape, and vvent up and dovvn the House, and sate at meat vvith them, but eat little; this young Woman being one time in company among other Virgins, a Magician came into the place; vvho being skilfull in diabolical Arts, he told the People about her, That that Woman was but a dad Car∣kass carryed about by the Devil; and presently he took from un∣der her right Arm-pit the Charm, which he had no sooner done, but she fell down a dead Carkass. Next follows the two Actual and real Dialogues that past between the Devil and two Eminent Divines, &c. DIALOGUE I. 1. IN the Life of Mr. Richard Rothwell (a famous Preacher at Mansfield in the County of Nottingham, about the year 1627.) vve have this remarkable Account, as it vvas dravvn up by Mr. Stanly Gower of Dorchester. There vvas one John Fox living about Nottingham, who had no more Learning than enabled him to write and read: This man vvas possessed with a Devil, who would violently throw him down, and take away the use of every Member of his Body, which was changed as black as Pitch while those Fits were upon him; and then spake with an audible voice within him, which seemed sometimes to sound out of his Belly, sometimes out of his Throat, and sometimes out of his Mouth, his Lips not moving; and thus he continued for a confiderable time. Many Prayers were put up to God for him, and great resort was made to him, especially by several famous Mini∣sters; as Mr. Bernard of Batcomb, Mr. Langly of Truswell, and others, betwixt whom and John Fox there passed many Papers in Writing, he discovering his Temptations, and they wting him Answers, because he was struck lumb, as ye shall fid aferwards. Among the rest Mr. Rothwell went to see him; and before he came, the Devil told all  were in the House of it, saying, Yonder comes Rothwell,  I will make Fool of him before he gos: Whereupon the ople looked
Apparitions, Spirits, & ghosts of dead Persons, &c. engraved panel of numerous people and mythical beasts The Deuill Discourses with Mr: Rothwel y minstr engraved panel of man on horseback with depiction of devil yonder comes bold Rothwell but ile make afooll of him. Thou Shalt not suffer a witch to this exod: 22.18. engraved panel of three witches with cats, imps and fairies The form of hags, witches, & yr Imps. Pharies.
out, and saw him coming about a quarter of a Mile from the House: As soon as he entred the Room, the Devil said, Now Rothwell is come; and as some say, added; Thou sayest there is no Possession; what think'st thou now? Here is a Man opens not his Lips, and yet he speaketh: And after a while he said, Say nothing to me of this Man, for I tell thee he is damnd; and he aded threto many fearful Blasphemies. Rohwell. Thou art a Lyar, and the Father of Lyes; nor art thou so well acquainted with the mind of God concerning this man which makes thee thus to torment him: Therefore I be∣lieve thee not. I believe he shall be saved by Jesus Christ. Devil, He is a Murderer; and thou knowest no Murderer must come into Heaven. Rothwell, Thou lyest again: For David murdered, and is in Heaven; and the Jews with wicked hands crucified the Lord of Glory, yet Christ prayed for them; and St. Peter exhorted them to repentance, that their Sins might be blotted out. Devil, But this man hath not, cannot, shal not repent. Rohwell, If he had not repented, thou woudest not have told him so: But if he have not, I believe God will give him Repentance, and thou shalt not be able to hinder it. Devil, Thou so art a Murtherr, and yet talkest thou thus? Rothwell Thou lyest again: I have fought the Lords Bat∣tels against his known Enemies, the Idolatrous and bloody Papists in Ireland, Rebels to Queen Ezabeth my Sovereign, by whose Authority I bore Arms against them; otherwise I have killed no man Then the Devi swore and blasphemed, saying, Thou didst murther one this day as thou camest hither, and there is one behind hee that will justfie i Upon which Mr. Rothwell looking over his shoulder, the Devil set up an hideous laughter, that nothing could be heard for a long while, and then said, Look you now, did not I tell you I would make Rothwell a Fool? And yet it is true, thou didst murther one this day; for as hou camest over such a Bridge (which he named) there I would have killed thee, and there thy Horse trod upon a fly, and killed it. It seems Mr. Rothwell's Horse stubed at that place, the Devil having power to cause it, though without hurt either to Horse or Man. Mr. Rothwell then said, Thou hast often beguied me, I hope God will in time give me wisdom to discern, and power to with∣stand all thy delusions, and he it is that hath delivered me out of thy hands, and I doubt not, will also deliver this poor man. The Devil then blasphemed fearfully, and quoted many Scrptures out of he Old and New Testament, both in Hebrew and Greek, cavilling and playing the Critick therewith, and
backing his Allegations with Sayings out of the Fathers and Poets i their own Language, which he quod very readily, so that he Company trembled to hear such things from one that understood no Learning, and neither mv'd tonue nor lip all the while▪ But Mr. Rothwell wa wonderfully enabled by di∣vine Power to detect the Devils Sohistry; upon which the Devil said, What stand I talking wi h thee? all men know that thou art BOLD ROTHWELL, an fearst no bdy, nor carest for word, therefore I will talk to thee no more. This name he carryed to his Grave, for he People would say, This is e whom the Devil called Bold Rothwell. Mr. Rothwell turning to the People, said, Good People, you see the goodness of our God, and his great power: Though the Devil made a fool of me through my weakness, God hath made the Devil dumb now: do but observe how the Man lies: Therefore let us go to Prayer, and that God who hath made him dumb, will, I doubt not, drive him out of this poor man. The Devil hereupon raged, Blasphme, and said, and wilt thou go to Prayer? if thou dst, I will make such a nise, that thy Prayr shall be dstracted, and thou knowst God will not hear a distracted Prayer: But thou hast got a device, because thou wilt not be distracted, thou shuttest thy eyes in prayer, (for so he alwayes did) ut if thou pray, I will pull out thy Eyes. Rothwe, I look to find thee as great an Enemy in this Du∣ty now, as I have done heretofore; but I fear not thy threats, I know thou art limited: God heareth the Prayers of the up∣right, and hath promised to give his Spirit to supply Infirmities. Therefore in confidence of his promise, and powerful assistance of his Spirit, and in the name and intercession of his Son Jesus Christ, we will go to Prayer; And accordingly they did so, Mr. Rothwell kneeling by the Bed-side where the poor man lay: the Devil for above a quarter of an hour made a most horri∣ble noise, however Mr. Rothwell's voice was loudr than his; and a while aftr the Devll roared even at the very fce of Mr. Rothwell, whrewith the Body of the Man moved, and the hand was h ld up, whch was the frst time be strred; M. Rothwell took the hand, and held it down with much ease, two men being scarce able to hold the oher hand; yt Prayers were stil con∣tinued, and at length the Devil lay silent in the Man, and soon after departed out of him: the Man then fetch'd several de p sighs, insomuch that they thought he had been dying, but his colour suddenly returned to him, and the use of all his Members, Senses and Understanding, and at the next Petition, to the glo∣ry of God, and amazement, but comfort of all the company, he said Amen, and so continued to repeat Amen to every Petition.
Prayers are hereupon now turned into Thankgivings, where∣with the Cmpany concludd. After which John Fox said, Good Mr. Rothwell leave me not; I shall not live long, for the Devil tells me, he will choak me with the first bit of meat that I eat. Mr. Rothwell answered, Wilt thou believe the Devil that seeks thy destruction, before thou wilt trust in God, through Jesus Christ, that seeks thy Salvation: Hath not God by his Almighty Power dispossssd him? had he had his will, thou had'st been in Hell before now: But he is a Lyar; and as he is not able to hinder thy Soul's life, so neither shall he be able to destroy the life of thy Body: Werfore get me something (saith he) ready for him, and I will see him eat before I go, and will beg a Blessing upon it. When it was brought, Eat, (said Mr. Rothwell) and fear not the Devil; and urged him to eat, as being a means appointed by God to preserve life, and quoted the Example of Jairus's Daughter, whom our Saviour, after he had restored her to life, com∣manded to give her meat, Luk. 8.55. With much a∣do, and great trembling, at last he took and eat; Look you, syes Mr. Rothwell, you all see the Devil is a Lyar; the first bit hath not coakd him, nor shall the rest. Mr. Rothwel then left him; after which he was struck dumb for three years together, and continued to be tempted, though no longer posses∣sed; at length, by Prayer likewise, which was in∣stantly put up to God for him, his Mouth was open∣ed, and his Speech restored to him at that very in∣stant when a Minister praying for him in the Con∣gregation where he was present, used this expressi∣on; Lord, open thou his Lips, that his Mouth may shew forth thy Praise; to which he presently answered Amen, and so continued to speak, and lived religi∣ously and virtuously to his dying day.
DIALOGUE II. ABout the year 1644, the Lord Grandison, a Scottish Nobleman, took up his Habitation for some time at Berwick upon Tweed, and brought his Family with him; in which, among others, was the Steward of his House, who was a very religious Man, but was then very much afflicted in mind. Among others Mr. Robert Balsom, a very zealous Minister in those Parts, came to visit him, and for the present somewhat satisfied him: But two or three dayes after being again sorely afflicted, Mr. Balsom was sent for, who finding him very much weakened by the violence of this distemper of mind, began to speak comfortably to him; but perceiving he could fasten nothing upon him, he whispered to him in his Ear to this purpose, I doubt there is something within which you would do well to discover: Hereupon the Ma's Tongue swelled immediately, and came out of his Mouth, so that he was not able to speak; Mr. Bal∣som continued to discourse with him, till at length, to the astonishment of all that were in rhe Room, (who were many, and some of them Persons of good Quality) a shrill voice was heard, as coming out of his Throat, without any motion of his Tongue, saing, What dost thou talk to him of Promises and free Grace? He is mine. Mr. Balsom apprehending it to be the voice of the Devil, replyed; No Satan, thou dost not know any man to be thine while there is life in him. Satan; But this is a notorious wicked Wretch, and therefore he is mine. Balsom; Yet the Blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all Sin. Satan; If God would let me loose upon you, I should find enough in the best of you to make you
Balsom; But thou art bound, Satan: And so tur∣ning himself to the standers by, he said with a chear∣ful countenance, What a gracious God have we, that suffers not Satan to have his will upon us! The Devil hereupon began to curse, swear, and to blaspheme the blessed Trinity in a most fearful and horrible manner; to whom Mr. Balsom said, The Lord rebuke thee Satan. Satan; But this Man is mine, for he hath gi∣ven himself to me, and sealed it with his own Blood. Balsom; I do not believe that the Father of Lies speaketh truth; and I do believe (how confident soever thou art) that thou wilt lose thy hold before to morrow mor∣ning. The Devil then continued to curse and swear abominably, and said, How canst thou endure to hear thy God thus blasphemed? I will never give over blaspheming as long as thou stayest in the Room. Balsom; I will pray for the Man. Satan; Wilt thou pray for a Man that is damn∣ed? Balsom; I will go home and pray for him, and get all the force I can in the Town to joyn with me. After this there being no voice any more heard, Mr. Bal∣som went home about eleven a Clock at night, where he found in his House divers Christian Friends which he intended to have sent for, waiting for him; and upon the sight of them he spoke to this purpose; Friends, I wonder at the Providence of God in bringing you hither at this time; for otherwise I must have sent for you; and so declaring to them what had befallen the afflicted Person, he desired them to joyn their Pray∣ers with his on his behalf, which they continued for some part of the night▪ And the next morning Mr. Balsom going to visit him again, found him in a very comfortable condition; and asking him how he did, he answered; Through the Goodness of Go I have ove∣come
Satan, and am now as full of comfort as I was be∣fore of Trouble: Thus he continued chearful (though very weak) all that day, and the next morning dy∣ed, no disease being apparent on him. Of Places Haunted. THre was in Athens a great and spacious House, but very infamous for a report that it had for a long time been haunted by an evil Spirit. That in the dead time of the night a strange noise was heard, at first as it were from the Yard, which came near∣er and nearer, till there stood before them an old Man lan, pale, and with a long Beard, having his Hands and Feet chained, which he often shaked. By these terrors the Inhabitants fell sck, and many dyed; for the remembrance of the Image impressed on their fancy, caused a deadly fear, insomuch that at last it was left dsolate. Nevertheless, Bills were set up in several places of the City, if peradventure any one would venture to hire and inhabit it. At that time the Philosopher Athenodorus came to thens, and reading one of these Bills, and the small Bnt it was to be lett at, by reason of its Infamy, bought it, notwithstanding what the People reported of it▪ and gave order the first night, that his Bed should be made in the frst Room of it, some Books, and his Pen and Paper to be brought, that his Mind being employed and busied, might cause no vain fears. In a studying posture therefore he watched, and when at midnight he heard the noise of Chains and Irons, as had been reported to him, he neither lift∣ed up his eyes, nor lest writing till it seemed to be in the Room. Then looking towards the Door, there appeared the Image of an ancient Man loaded with
Chains, beckoning, as it were, for him to follow: the Philosopher on the other side, made signs with hand that he should stay a little till he had made an end of what he was writing. But the Spirit began again to shake his Chains, at which the other left off writing, and taking the Candle in his hand, follow∣ed the Ghost, who proceeded slowly, as if he were very aged, and much loaded with his Chains, till he came into the yard where he vanisht. The Philo∣sopher being lest alone, left a mark upon the place, and the next morning caused it to be dug up; where were found the bones of a man chained, for the flesh was putrified and eaten away; these being gathered and buried publickly; the house was never haunted afterwards. 2. Erasms in his Eipstles writes, that on the tenth of April 1533. in an Inn of Sciltac a Town in Swit∣zerland, there was a certain hissing heard about night time, which seemed to come out of one of the Cham∣bers of the house; wherefore the Host fearing there might have been Thieves, ran thither immediately but could find no body, yet still heard the same noise in the Garret, and not long after upon the top of the Chim∣ney: then supposing that it was an evil Spirit, he sent for the Priest to exorcise him, who no sooner began his Conjuraion, but the Spirit answered he cared not for them, s nce one was a Whore-master and both were Thieves, and therefore he would in spight of them burn the Town as he had undertaken (all this was thought afterwards to proceed by the means of a Familiar Spirit, which the Maid of that house con∣fessed on her death bed, to have had familiarity with for the space of fourteen years) the Spirit therefore, took this Maid to the top of the Chimney, and commanded her to spread such fire as he gave her, which she did, and in less than an hours time all the Town was consumed, notwithstanding the great abundance of water the inhabitants brought to quench it.
11. Fazelus writes, that a certain Sicilian called Lyodor, a most notorious Magician, got himself great repute in the City of Catania, by his wonderful Illu∣sions: for he seemed by the Extraordinary working of his Charms and Spells, to transform Men into brute Beasts, and to bestow upon all things else such form and likeness as himself pleased; and by general Report he drew to him as soon and as easily Persons that were distant from thence many dayes Journey, as those that were in the same Place; he did also many injuries and shameful outrages to the Citizens of Catania; so that the common People bewitched with a fearful and false Opinion fell to Worshipping of him; and when for his wicked deeds he was condemned to die, he by virtue of his Charms esca∣ped out of the Hangmans hands, causing himself to be carryed in the Air by Devils from Catania to Con∣stantinople, and after that brought back again from thence into Sicilia: This made him admired of all the People, who imagining the Divine Power was laid up in him, they ran into an horrible Errour, offering him Divine Honour: But at last Leo, Bishop of Catania, inspired with a sudden Zeal, laid hands on this Devilish Magician in an open place before all the People, and caused him to be cast alive into an hot burning Furnace, where he was consumed to Ashes. Schotus Phil Curios. 12. Delrio in hi Magical discourses gives this Re∣lation. Two Magicians met together in the Queen of Englands Court, as I have it from unquestioned witnesses; these two agreed, that in any one thing they should infallibly obey one another; the one therefore commands the other to thrust his Head out of the Casement of a Window, which he had no soon∣er done, but a large pair of Stags Horns, were seen planted on his Forehead, to the great pleasure of the Spectators, who joked upon him with a thousand abuses, and mocks; he resenting the disgrace, and
thirsting after revenge, when his turn came to be obeyed, he with a Charcoal drew the Lineaments of a man upon the Wall, and then commanded the same Magician to stand under that Picture, that the Wall should immediately give plce to receive him; the other apprehensive of the extream danger he was in, began to beseech him that he would excuse him, but the other absolutely refused; being therefore compelled he stands under it, and then the Wall seemed to open, and he being entred therein, was never afterward seen more. The same Author sets down another Relation as a matter of undoubted truth: A notable Conjurer, for a Tryal of his great skill, had cut off the Head of the Inn keepers Ser∣vant, where he lodged, and when he was about to set it on again, he perceived he was hindered by the presence of another Magician, that chanced to be by at that time; he therefore besought him that he would not oppose him; but the other not regarding his request, the first Magician caused a Lilly to Spring out upon the top of the Table, and when he had chopped off the Head of it, together with its Flow∣ers, upon the sudden down falls the Magician that had hindered him, headless to the ground; that done, he sets on the Head of the Servant again, and speeily conveys himself away, lest he should be que∣stioned for the Murder of his Rival. Delrio, Disquis. Magick. Of Conjurers Imposters and Cun∣ning-men, as they are by many simple people called. COrnelius Agrippa the great Magician, going one day out of Town from Lovain where he dwelt, left the Keyes of his Study with his Wife, charging
her strictly to let no body go in; but it hapned so that day, that a young Companion of Agrippa, a Scholar, and having ever had a curiosity to see some of this Negromancers books, came to the House, and with much importunity gained the keyes; then entring the room and viewing the Books, he per∣ceived a Manuscript of Agrippa's amongst the rest, as it were a Compendium of them: this he reads, and in short space raises an ill favoured Devil; who en∣tring the study, asked what he would have that he call'd him so; the young man unexperienced, fright∣ned, and ignorant what to say, was choaked by the Spirit, and left dead on the ground. Agrippa not long after returns home, and finds the Devil dancing, and shewing tricks upon the house top; at which, astonished, he goes into his study, and finds the dead body, which he commands his Spirit to enter and carry to the place where the Students used to meet; this being done, and the Spirit quitting the Bo∣dy, it fell down and was buryed for dead, having some Marks only of Strangulation about the Throat. But not long after the matter was discovered, and Agrippa for safety fled to Lorrain. There was in the Emperor Mazamilians Court, seve∣ral Impostors and Cunning-men, as the s mple people call'd them, which did several strange things, and de∣luded the Ignorant hugely: but I'le now proceed to the next head. A Discourse of Witches, Wizards, and Witchcraft, and of Hags, and their Imps. I. What a Witch is. THe Conception which I, and (I think) most men have, is, That a Witch is one who can do, or seems to do, strange things beyond the known
Power of Art, and ordinary Nature, by Vertue of a confederacy with evil Spirits: strange things, not Miracles; these are the extraordinary effects of Di∣vine Power, known and distinguished by their cir∣cumstances, but strange things are really performed, and are not all Impostures and Delusions. The Witch occasions, but is not the principal efficient, she seems to do it, but the Spirit performs the won∣der; sometimes immediately, as by Transportation and Possessions, sometimes by applying other natu∣ral causes, as by raising Storms, and inflicting Dis∣eases; sometimes using the Witch as an Instrument, and either by the Eye or touch conveying malign in∣fluences and these things are done by vertue of a Co∣venant, or compact between the Witch and an evil Spirit. 2. As divers very worthy Authors have credibly related several wicked actions committed by Witches, and Wizards, so some of them have recorded the manner of their entring themselves into that cursed Profession, and the Ceremonies thereof, as they have been discovered by those who have renounced those detestable practices, which it may not be im∣proper here briefly to relate. The Wizards and Witches being met at a place and time appointed, the Devil there appears in human shape, admonish∣ing them to be faithful, and promising them success and length of Life; then those that are present, re∣commend the Person who is to be entred; the Devil then requires him to renounce the Christian Faith, and Sacraments, and giving him his hand, tells him, that this alone is not sufficient, but that he must worship him likewise, and give himself to him Body and Soul for ever, and bring as many as possibly he can into the same Society; and that he must prepare himself certain Ointments, and then be confirmed therein. Manlius writes, that in the Year 1553, Two Witches stole a Neighbours Child, and murdering
it, cut it in pieces, and put it into a Kettle to boil when the sorrowful Mother looking for her Infant, came by chance into the House, and found the Limbs thereof horribly consumed; for which abominable Fact the Authors of it were burnt, having confessed this their Villany. Another Author says, Two other Witches are reported to have killed abundance o Children, and that in Germany Eight Witches were ta∣ken, who confessed they had murdered an hundred forty and five Children in making their Ointments; they are also reported to have each of them a Spirit or Imp attending on them, who are to assist and obey them in all things, and to give them notice of their solemn Meetings, or appointments, at which time it is said, they separate themselves from all company and night being come, they strip themselves naked, and anoint themselves with their Ointments, then are they carried out of the House, either by the Win∣dow, Door, or Chimney, mounted on their Imps, to their meeting place, which is sometimes many hundred miles from their dwellings, where they find great numbers of Wizards and Witches arrived by the same means, who all make their accustomed reve∣rence to Lucifer in his Throne, adoring him, pro∣claiming him their Lord, and rendering him all ho∣nour, as their King; this Solemnity being finished, they sit at Table, where no delicate Meats are want∣ing to please their appetites, after which they dance, and the Incubusses in the shape of proper men satisfie the lusts of the Witches, and the Succubusses serve for Whores to the Wizards; sometimes at their solemn Assemblies the Devil commands each to tell what wickedness he hath done, and according to the de∣testableness thereof, he is honoured and applauded; these, and many other such wonderful things are mentioned by Authors of good credit, and several Persons have made Confession, and given an account thereof.
The Remarkable Tryal of a Witch. 3. IN the year 1645. One Rebecka Jones, being sus∣pected for a Witch, was brought before Sir Harbottle Grimstone, and Sir Thomas Bows, Justices of the Peace for Essex, to whom she voluntarily con∣fessed, That about 25 years before, living with one John Bishop in that County, there came one Morning to the door a very handsome young Man, as she then thought, but now she thinks it was the Devil, who asked her how she did, and desired to see her left wrist, and then he took a Pin from her sleeve, and pricked it twice, and there came out a drop of Blood, which he took upon his finger and departed; and going a while after to St. Osyths, she met a Man in a ragged Suit, with such great Eyes as much affrighted her, who came to her, and gave her three things like to Moles, having four feet apiece, but no tails, and black, and bid her Nurse them till he desi∣red them again; she asked what she must give them, he answered Milk, and that they would not hurt her, but would avenge her on her Enemies, and bid her murther some, but not too many, and he would forgive her, and then went away; after which she said, She sent one of these Imps to kill a Sow of one Benjamin Hows, which was done accordingly; she then with one Joyce Boanes, did send each of them an Imp to kill one Thomas Brunstead of St. Osyths, who dyed about three weeks after, and she believes the two Imps kil∣led him; she confest likewise that she sent another of her Imps to Brunsteads House to kill his Wife, and that the reason of her offence against them, was, because they beat a Son of hers upon a small occasi∣on: for these and other Villanies this Woman was arraigned at Chelmsford, and upon her own Confessi∣on condemned and hanged. Inform. of Witches.
Of Pharies, Familiar Spirits, and Goblins. OF Pharies also, those little Mimick Elves, that ap∣pear alwayes very small of stature, and busie themselves chiefly in imitating the operations of men; we read in Georgius Agricola, that great search∣er of Subterraneal mines, that they appear frequent∣ly in those places whence precious Metals are dug, and from their manners are called Cobali, or Imita∣tors of men; these seem to laugh, to be cloathed like the work-men, to dig the Earth, and to do many things, that really they do not; mocking sometims the work-mn, but seldom or never hurting them▪ The Latins have called them Lares and Larvae, fre¦quenting, as they say, Houses, delighting in neat¦ness, pinching the Slut, and rewarding the good Housewife with money in her Shoe. Siarra hath left us this notable Relation: That there lived in his time in Spain, a Table and Beautifu Virgin, but far more famous for her excellence a her Needle; insomuch that happy did that Courtie think himself, that could wear the smallest piece o her work, though at a price almost invaluable. I hapned one day, as this admirable Semstress sat working in her Garden, that casting aside her Ey on some fair Flower or Tree, she saw, as she though a little Gentleman, yet one that shew'd great-Nobi¦lity by his cloathing, come riding towards her from behind a bed of Flowers; thus surprized how any body should come into her Garden, but much mor at the stature of the person, who as he was on Horse∣back exceeded not a foots length in heighth; she had reason to suspect that her eyes deceived her. But th Gallant spurring his Horse up the Garden, made i not long, though his Horse was little, before he cam to her; then greeting the Lady in most decent man¦ner,
after some Complements past, he acquaints her with the cause of his bold Arrival; that forasmuch as he was a Prince amongst the Pharies, and did intend to celebrate his Marriage on such a day, he desired she would work him Points for him and his Princess against the time he appointed. The Lady consent∣ed to his demand, and he took his leave; but whe∣ther multitude of business caused the Lady to forget her promise, or the strangeness of the thing made her neglect the work, thinking her sight to have been deceived, I know not: yet so it fell out, that when the appointed time came, the work was not ready. The hour wherein she had promised the Phary Prince some fruits of her Needle, hapned to be one day as she was at dinner with many Noble Persons, having quite forgot her promise, when on a suddain casting her eye to the door, she saw an infinite train of Pharies come in: so that fixing her eyes on them, and remembring how she neg∣lected her promise, she sate as one amazed, and a∣stonished the whole company. But at last the train had mounted upon the Table, and as they were prancing on their Horses round the brims of a large dish of white-broth, an Officer that seemed too busie in making way before them, fell into the dish, which caused the Lady to burst into a suddain fit of laughter, and thereby to recover her senses. when the whole Phary company was come upon the Table, that the brims of every dish seemed fill'd with little Horse men, she saw the Prince coming towards her, and hearing she had not done what she promised, seemed to go away displeased. The La∣dy presently fell into a fit of Melancholly, and being asked by her friends the cause of these alterations and astonishments, related the whole matter; but notwithstanding all their consolations, pined away, and dyed not long after.
The Sighs and Groans of a Dying Man. GOod Lord, I confess that I am but a Worm of Yesterday; my production was out of the Dust, and I must thither return in my ultimate resolution; for (as I have heard) in the sick Mans Passing-bell, Dust I am and to Dust I shall return: Let me there∣fore alwayes be in a readiness for my last change, seeing I know not how soon the silent Grave may involve me under its Wings, where I shall lye in obscurity, till the last Trumpet shall sound, at the morn∣ing day of the Resurrection, Arise ye Dead, &c. Good Lord, though now I appear as a living Object of thy Favour, yet I know not how soon the Scene may be altered; for this very day I now breathe in, may be the last I shall ever count: And so many wayes may the Thread of my Frail Life be snapt asunder, that I cannot pro∣mise my self an hours time upon Earth; a little Stone from the House top, as I pass in the Street, a slip of my Foot, or the stum∣bling of my Horse, a suddain Mischance (among a million that may befall me every Day) which I know not of, may reduce me to my first Original, and leave me a pale Carkass to be Sacrificed to the gaping Grave: Oh let me often therefore consider where will be my Eternal abode, when the black attire of my Funeral is over, and all my Weeping Friends gone to their several Houses and homes: Let me often think how meanly and poorly Clad I shall enter into my Coffin, with only one poor Shrowd and other Dresses fitted to cover me, Oh then what will become of my rich Attire, my haughty Deckings, my over curious Trimings, for to the Grave now I am a going  and then when I am arrested by the cold Hands of Death, how Pale and Wan to all shall I seem? even rea∣dy to nausate my very Spectators: Good Lord, let such thoughts as these keep me humble; and keep down all proud aspiring thoughts▪ that shall at any time arise in my Corrupted Heart; For 'tis true, Dust I am, and to Dust I shall speedily return. FINIS. Descants upon the Author of this Book. ANd now being refreshed with these fragrant Leaves, wha shall I say? Blessed Author, art thou yet alive? Breath longer in this fruitful Air, and extract more out of this so rich a Stock. A Scribe so well instructed cannot have spent all, but must have new or old to bring out of his Treasury. D not hide, but improve thy Talent; be not only a good and wise but a faithul Steward, and yield us more o thy pleasant Fruits Thou hast begun well, who, what should hinder thee? Thy pre¦sent (were there no succeeding) Reward is Spur enough t
future work. Religion is Recreation, and Heaven is the way to Heaven: Good men are there on this side the Grave. Thy longing Soul was still peeping into it, and sending thy Thoughts as Spies, to view this Promised Land. But art thou at rest from thy Labours? This (among others) thy Work follows thee, and hath here erected thy lasting Monument. Where-ever thou wer't buried, Obscurity shall not swallow thee. Every good Heart that knevv thee is thy Tomb, and every Tongue writes thee an Epitaph: Good men speak vvell of thee, but above all God delights in thee. Thy Thoughts vvere still fluttering up∣vvards, richly fraught with Divine Mditations, and ever aspi∣ring, till unlading themselves in the Bosm of thy Beloved. We are hugely thankful that a fevv dropt from thee for the com∣fort and example of fainting luggish Mortals belovv. Thou lived'st in deed, vvhilest others live only in shew; and hast chan∣ged thy Place, but not thy Company. ADVERTISEMENTS. The following Books are lately Printed, for John Dunton at the Black Raven, at the Corner of Prin∣ces-street, near the Royal Exchange. 1684. 1. THE Compleat Tradesman, or the Exact Dealers daiy Companion, instructing him throughly in al things ab∣solutely necessary to be known by all those who would thrive in the World, and in the whole Art and Mystery of Trade and Traffick, and will be of constant use for all Merchants, Whole-sale-men, Shop-keepers, Retailers, Young Tradesmen, Countrey-chapmn, Industrious Yeomen, Traders in petty Vil∣lages, and all Farmers, and other that go to Countrey Fairs and Markets, and for all men whatsoever, that be of any Trade,  ave any considera Dealings in the World. By N. H. M rchant in the City of London. The Second Editi∣on, with large Additions. 2. A Continuation of Mornin-Exercise Questions and Cases of Conscience, prcticaly rsolved by thirty one Reve∣rend Divines in the City of London, in October. 1683. 3. THE Travels of True Godliness▪ from the beginning of the World to this presnt day, in an apt and pleasant Allegory, sh wing the troubles, oppositions, reproaches and per∣secutions h hath met with in every Age. Together wih the danger he sems to be in at this present time by Vice, Papistry, and othe grand Enemys; also where he ma es his last nd
final Abode. The Fourth Edition, to which is now added five lively Cuts, together wi h True Godlinesses Voyage to Sea, and many new Additions besides. By B. Keach, Au∣thor of War with the Devil. 4. THE Progress of Sin, or the Travels of Ʋngodliness: Whe ein the Pedigree, Rise, (or Original) Antiqui∣ty, Subtilty, Evil Nature, and prevailing Power of Sin, is fully discovred, in an apt and pleasant Allegory: Toge∣ther with the great Victories he hath obtained, and abomi∣nable Evils he hath done to Mankind, by the help of the De∣vil, in all his Travels from the beginning of the World to this very day: As also the manner of his Apprehension, Ar∣raignment, Tryal, Condemnation and Execution. By B. Keach, Author of the Travels of True Godliness, War with the Devil, and Sion in distress; with a lively Embl m. 5. THe Pilgrims Guide, from the Cradle to his Death-bed, with his glorious passage fro thence to the New Jerusalem represented to the life in a delightful new Allegory, to which is added the Sick mans Passing bell, with fifty pleaant Trea¦tises besides, rarely handled: To these are annext, (1.) Th most ingenuous Art of Printing spiritualized. (2.) An awa¦kening Dialogue between the Soul and Body of  Damned man fancied in a Morning Dream. (3.) A Duel amongst the Af¦fections. (4.) The Devils Picture. (5.) An imparal Trea is concerning Devils, Apparitions, Sirits, Pharies, Hags, Witch¦es and their Imps, (with a remarkable Tryal of a Witch Conjurers, Impostors, and Ghosts of Persons walking afte they have been Dead and Buryed in the Grave for a cons¦derable time, &c. Together with two actual and real Dia¦logues that past between the Devil of Hell and two actual Di¦vines, &c. And lastly, The Sighs and Groans of a Dying Man By John Dunton, late Recto of Aston Clinton in the Cou¦ty of Bucks. lustrated with Eight curious Copper Pates. 6. A New Present for the wary Citizens, another for t Countrey Lads.
I.D. printer's device of John Dunton depicting black raven
