F2197DA 99832568 37042
A PACKET OF NEWES, Yea, True and Faithful News, of ISRAELS and JUDAHS Call; AND Of the Manner, Place, and Time of Christs Com∣ing and reign in glory among his Saints upon the Earth. As also, Judahs Past, with Englands Present Miseries Parallel'd; With sundry other Particulars, very profitable and necessary for Christians of all Degrees, to know the Mysteries of God. Collected out of the Scriptures this 22. of the 11th moneth (corruptly called January) 1647. for the benefit of all, but chiefly for such, who hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, Err in Vision, and stumble in Judgement. By JAMES FRESE Merchant. Ps. 96. 10. and 104. 5. Eccles. 1. 4. 1 Chron. 16. 30. The World shall be Established that it shall not be moved for ever. Eze. 43. 7. Even the place of the soals of my feet, where I will dwell for ever. Zach. 2. 12. For the Lord shall inherite Iudah in the holy land, and chuse Ierusalem again. Ier. 31. 6. 8. And then shall they say, Arise Let us go up to Zion, unto the Lord our God. Zac. 8. 7, 8, 23. And then shall ten Men (of all Nations) take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, saying. We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you. LONDON, Printed for Matthew Simmons, 1651.
To the RIGHT HONORABLE Most Truly NOBLE, And VICTORIOUS, HIS EXCELLENCY, Oliver Cromwell, Lord General of all the Forces raised in England and Ireland, for Defence and Regainment of Englands Rights and Liberties. MOst Noble and Victori∣ous Sir, whose Name (by the Will of Divine Providence) is become Englands Honor, Her Enemies Terror, and Europes Won∣der. For the Continuation, Increase,
and Perfection whereof, to the Glory of God, your Countries happiness, and Your own eternal Fame, he most hear∣tily and earnestly wisheth, who in his greatest straits under the Iron yoke of Cruelties close restraint many yeers, was sundry times made partaker of your truly Christian bounty, to the pre∣servation of his Life and Being, and (after many years Imprisonment) of some breathings of Liberty. For which in way of due thankfullness (as ever in his heart abhorring the grand sin of Ingratitude) he returns unto Your Excellency most humbly and hearty thanks, and in assurance of the continuation of your most noble Pa∣ternal favour towards him; he pre∣sumeth to shroud this ensuing treatise (of the Personal Reign of Christ upon
the earth) under the wing of your Execllencies favorable Protection: most humbly presenting the same unto your Excellencies view, acceptance, and most noble Boerean perusal; The glimpse of which favour extended, is the highest pitch of his ambition, who in all true Christian humility to his God, and fidelity (in the band of love) to his Country, and your Excel∣lencie, Subcribes himself. Most Noble, Excellent, and Right Honorable,  Your Honors most humble Servant to be commanded James Frese. London the 19th. of the 6th. Moneth, cor∣ruptly called August, 1651.
To all such true and faithful mem∣bers of the Lord Jesus, as walk close to the Sacred Truth, by the rule of Righteousness, and stand as firm as Nehemiah, for the ad∣vance of the true honor of God, in true judgement, justice, and mercy, and the speedy restauration of the fundamental Laws, Rights, and Liberties of this their Native Countrey. Excellent, Honorable, and truly Beloved in the Lord Jesus, I Here present unto your favorable view and Christian perusal, this small Trea∣tise, containing some Collections of holy Scripture, cleerly manifesting the Personal Reigne of the Lord Jesus among his Saints upon Earth in the Land of Israel (it being the choisest Fruit of my Labors, in the time of my close Imprisonment in the Tower-Chamber
in the Fleet-Prison, for the space of almost four yeers, by Henry Hopkins Warden of the Fleet, under locks and bolts, to the apparent hazard of my life, without any just cause by him shewed to this day for his so doing) craving in all humi∣lity your favourable acceptance of these my La∣bors, and a Berean perusal of them: In the reading wherof, the Lord Jesus grant unto you his sacred Spirit of Wisdom, to be your Directer and In∣structer, bringing the Truth thereof home unto your souls, that so your hearts being seasoned with the apprehension of the expressed joys and comforts contained in it, you may live in expe∣ctation of the Lord Jesus his glorious Appearing with all Saints, in the glory of God the Father, Psal. 143. 10. Psal. 142. 5. Exod. 15. 13, 17, 18. Isa. 8. 8. Ezek. 32. 25, 26, 27.and of the holy Angels, and in his Kingdom; and of the enjoyment of eternal life in glory with him, and▪ all the Saints, within his holy habitation, in the land of the living, even, in the lot of his Inheritance, where he the Lord Christ shall reign for ever and ever; even as he assured∣ly remaineth in expectation of the same▪ who in all humility subscribes himself, Excellent, Honorable, and truly Beloved in the Lord Jesus,  Yours in all love and Christian Charity, and his Countries Servant in all Fidelity, during the short time of his continuance in this almost expired vanities world of misery, James Frese. London this 15th of the 10th moneth, 1650.
The Epistle, To the Honest, Impartial Reader. COurteous Reader, I do earnestly wish, and heartily desire of the Lord, that thy perusal of these few Collections of holy Scripture (taken as a drop of water out of the vast Ocean of Gods Word, and sent forth as a Lamb among censorious Wolves) may be seasoned to thy soul by the Spirit of Truth, that so the eyes of thy Understanding may thereby be inlight∣ned, to Gods glory, and thine own souls eternal comfort, and joy unexpressable in the glorious eternal world to come. And for the better help and inlightning of thy Under∣standing in the profitable reading of this Treatise, I do ear∣nestly desire thee to note well these particulars following. 1. That the ten Tribes 1 Kin. 12. 16. 19, 20.which fell from Rehoboam, and made Jeroboam their King, were then called, The Kingdom of Israel, whose Kingly Seat or City was Samaria. And the other two Tribes under Rehoboams government, were called the Kingdom of Judah, and the People, Jews, whose Royal Seat was the Mount of the Lord God, called Psal. 48. 2, 8.Zion, adjoyning to the North side of Jerusalem. The City of the great King, Matth. 5. 35.Christ Jesus. 2. That all the ten Tribes of Israel were 1 King. 17. 1, 3, 6.carried away into captivity beyond the River of Aethiopia, called Euphra∣tes Zeph. 3. 10, to 17. 2 Esdras 13. 40, 41. 43, 44. Isa. 49. 11, 12. Jer. 24. 5. Jer. 29. 10., by Shalmanazer King of Assyria, in the days of King Hoshea, into a far Country, about eighteen moneths journey from the holy land of Palestina (called in the Syriack Assa∣reth, but in the Hebrew Sinin) three hundred twenty and six yeers before Judah was carryed captive into Babylon by Ne∣buchadnezzar King of Babylon; from whence Judah re∣turned to their own Land again within seventy yeers: But the ten Tribes (called Israel) as yet never returned to this day: So that Israels captivity hath now continued about two thousand six hundred and twelve yeers. Therefore will the Lord make Israel (that was wholy cast
out) a mighty Nation; but Judah (or the Jews) that re∣turned, and halted, Isa. 11. 12. Mic. 4. 6, 7, . Lu. 19. 14 27. John 19. 15.ye rejected him, saying, We will not have this man to reigne over us; for we have no King but Caesar, is now dispers d among the Nations, and shall be on∣ly a Remnant. For as ye wre a curse among the Heathen (saith the Lord) O House of Israel, and House of Judah, Ia. 66. 20.so will I save you, and ye shall be a Blessing: For in those days, and at that time, the children of Israel, and the children of Judah shall Ier. 5. 4, 5.come together; They shall ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward, saying, Come, Let us joyn our selves to the Lord in a Perpetual Covenant that shall never be for∣gotten. Matth. 24. 30. Then shall the Tribes of Israel mourn (when they see him whom their fore-fathers rejected) and shall Zach. 12. 10. Isa. 66. 19, Isa 60. 9. Isa. 66. 13. 20.declare my glory among the Gentiles; and they (the Gentiles) shall bring your brethren unto the Lord, out of all Nations, in their Ships, and upon Horses. and in Litters, and in Chariots, and upon Mules, and upon swift Beasts (or Dromedaries) to my holy In the New or Heavenly Jeru¦salem.Mountain Jerusalem, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusa∣lem, saith the Lord. For as the New Heaven and the New Earth which I will make▪ shall remain before me, so shall your Seed and your Name remain (saith the Lord.) And the Gentiles Isa. 60. 3, 4, 5. Ezek. 37. 14. Luke 2. 32.shall come to thy Light, and Kings to the brightness of thy rising; When I have raised you out of your graves (then) thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy side: And the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. Then will I return Zeph. 3. 9. 15, 16. Psal. 5. 4.to the people a pure language. They shall not see Evil any more, for Evil (the Divel) shall not dwell with thee (Christ in glory) saith David. And because salvation is far from the wicked, for they search not Gods statutes, yea, they are hid from their eyes, neither can they know them, because they are By the Spirit of Truth.spiritually discerned: Therefore ye that truly fear the Lord God of salvation, eternal life, light, and glory (Christ Jesus) Search
the Scriptures, Iohn 5. 39. 2 Tim. 3 15. 16for in them ye look to have Eternal Life, and they testifie of me (saith our Saviour.) For the Scriptures only (comparing spiritual things with spiritual things) are able to make you wise uto salvation; Knowing this, that the Scriptures are not of any private 2 Pet. 1. 20▪ 2 Cor. 4. 7.Interpretation: For we have this Treasure (of Gods revealed Will by his Word) in Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the Power may be of God, and not of us; for none knoweth the things of God, but the Spirit of God. So that it plainly appeareth, that all mens Interpretations (of what quality or degree of Learning soever) or paraphrasing upon the Scriptures, is only a private Interpretation, and so is uncertain; for, there is no man that can truly say that he is immediately sent from God (as the Prophets were) and hath an infallible unerring spirit, and that his interpretations of the Scripture, and his paraphra∣sing on them, are most infallibly true. Therefore, Wo to them that are wise in their own Eys, and prudent in their own sight: Wo to them that put Darkness Isa. 5. 20, 21.for Light, and Light for Darkness; That broach the Di∣vels Doctrine of lyes, for a Truth; and force all men to obey and receive them as the Truth. Lak. 16. 13, 14. For no man can serve two masters, God and Mammon, Christ and the Divel: But the learned Pharisees who were covetous, derided Christ (the Wisdom of God) saying, Is not this the Carpenter, the Son of Joseph? And Jesus said Mark 6. 3.unto them, Ye are they which justifie your selves before men, (to have much Learning, Wisdom, and Piety,) but God knoweth your hearts; for that which is highly esteemed Matth. 23 28.among men, is abomination in the sight of God. Even so ye also outwardly appear righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisie, and Iniquity, and devour Widdows hou∣ses; Lu 20. 46, 47.yet for a shew (of feigned Piety) make long Prayers: (like most of our covetous Priests) Therefore beware of the Scribes, which walk in long robes (or garments) and make merchandise of the VVord of Truth, by Sermons of all Pri∣ses, Sacrament, Christnings, Churchings of Women, an bury∣ing
I dare not speak of Tythes, because so many Parliament. men are concer∣ned in t' em. of the Dead at several Rates, Easter-book, New-yeers-gifts, and Excommunications, with several other pecuniary offences, at several Rates. These several Truths, with the following matter contained in this Treatise, I recommend to thy conscientious and dili∣gent perusal, without a prejudicate opinion; beseeching thee (as thou expectest eternal life in glory in the land of the li∣ving) to search the Scriptures, and try the truth of this fol∣lowing matter, even as the noble Bereans did: The happy issue whereof, I refer to the blessing of the Almighty God, and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; who only in and by his Son, works in us both the VVill and the Deed: Desiring thee also to consider, that the Testimonies of the Lord are true, and wonderful, giving light and understanding to the Num. 16. 22. Num. 27. 16. Hebr. 12. 9. 2 Peter 1. 17.simple. For, by thy Word, thou (O Lord) hast made me wiser then my Teachers, saith David. With which saying I also conclude, committing thee to the Direction and Tuition of the Almighty Goodness of the great God and Father of all Spirits (the Excellent Glory.) Remaining thine (in the Lord Jesus the God of Salvation) to my Power, James Frese. Psal. 29. 67, 71, 75, 76. Being still in Bonds, which fain I would not be, The man I was, I wish, I nere had bin; Thy hands affliction, hath drawn me home to thee; Lord grant thy work may more on me be seen: That Asia's seed, in Europ's Soyl may spring, And bear a Pleasing fruit to Israels King: And Englands Sons and Daughters also may Psal. 58. 2. 1 King. 8. 1. Bring thy People in that most happy day To Sions hill; and there Present to thee Themselves, with Iudah, a most Pleasing Tree; 1 Cor. 1▪ 27. Where they shall see thee, and thy Saints be known To them, their friends, and children, which they own. Lo, God hath chosen the foolish and weak things of the world, to con∣sound the wise and mighty. And having hid these things from the wise and prudent, hath revealed Matthew 11. 25.them unto Babes. And thus you see it plainly doth appear To be a truth, most evident and clear, That some Proficients are in natures schools, And yet in Christ's, meer novices, yea fooles. Probatum est, 1647.
JUDAHS PAST, WITH ENGLANDS Present Miseries paralleld. And the holy Land of PALESTI∣NA with ENGLAND paralleld, the one being Asias, the other Europes Canaan, or Land of Plenty. SECT. I. THUS saith the Lord. smite with thine hand and with thy foot, and say, Alas for the evill abo∣minations of the Land; Behold, an evill, an on∣ly evill is come, it watcheth for thee: I will shortly pour out my fury upon thee, and I will judge thee according to thy wayes, and all thy abominations, for vio∣lence is risen up among them into a Rod of wickedness; The day of vengeance is near, therefore let not the Buyer re∣joyce, nor the Seller mourn, for wrath is upon all the mul∣titude thereof; neither shall any (of them) strengthen them∣selves in the iniquity of their life; for the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence shall devour them; all hands shall become feeble,
horrour shall cover them, their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them, but it shall be given into the hands of the wicked for a spoil; their souls shall not be sa∣tisfied, nor their bowels filled therewith, because it is the Stumbling-block of their iniquity: O that they were wise to understand this, that they would consider their latter end, and the thing that maketh for their peace; even the free administration of Justice, Judgement, and Mercy; but now it is hid from their eyes:Read Isa. 58. 3, , 5, 6, 7, 8, 12, 14. For the Land is full of bloo∣dy crimes, and the City is full of violence; Destruction cometh, rumour upon rumour, the King shall mourn; and the Princes shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of all the people of the Land shall be troubled, yea they shall seek Peace, and there shal be none. SECT. II. O Thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? put up thy self into thy scabard, rest and be stillRead le. 6. 13, 14, 21, 22. le. 7. 3, 4, 5, 6. At Judas did.. How can it be quiet, seeing the Lord hath given it a arge, and hath set his Face against us for evill, and not for good; because there is no Justice, nor Mercy left in the Land? a deceived heart hath drawn them aside, and Cove∣tousness (which is Idolatry) causeth them to sell the great and dreadfull Lord God (of Justice and Mercy) daily for the abominable price of Iniquity, in all their Courts of Op∣pression, falsly by them called Courts of Justice. SECT. III. 2. 26, 28. ANd because they are thus departed from the Lord, the Lord is also departed from them; and hath poured out the cup of his Fury, even the spirit of division upon them, and they shall drink and be moved, and be mad, be∣cause of the Sword which he will send among them; for Is. 1. 14.behold, the Lord hah mingled a perverse spirit in the
midst of us; for thus saith the Lord, Lo, I bring (or brought) evill upon the City called by my Name (and gave it the 2  15. Psal. 4 8. Psal. 76. 2. Gen. 14. 18. Baruch 4. 30.name JERU-SALEM, and shall ye be unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished; for I will call for a sword upon all the Inhabitants of the earth; (saith the Lord) and will pu∣nish the Host of the high ones, and of all the Kings of the earth; for, the Indignation of the Lord is upon all Nations, and his fury upon all their Armies. SECT. IV. All Kings shall fall and rise no more, le. 13. 18. Ezek. 21. 25, 26. 2 Edr. 15. 22. 27. ANd the Kings of the Iles, yea, all the Kings of the North farre and neer, one with another, shall drink the Wine of the wrath of God, and be drunken, and spue, and fall, and rise no more: But the dregs of it, shall all the wic∣ked of the world drink; for my hand and sword shall not spare them (saith the Lord) that shed Innocent▪ blood in the earth; for now are the Plagues upon the whole earth, and ye shall not be delivered: Is. 28. 3.For the Crown of Pride, Op∣pression, and Drunkenness, shall be troden under foot. SECT. V. Queen Mary came to King Charles out of France, with the King of Spain and King of France that love Ido∣latry, which is aly. The Lawyers that rob the people of their Estates, Rights Liberties, and Lives. ANd the Kings Daughter of the South shall come to the King of the North (whose Tabernacle is between two Seas) that hath intelligence with them that forsake the holy Covenant, and do wickedly, and love a ly, (which is Idolatry) but she shall not retain the power of the Arm, nor stand on his side with them that brought her▪ and strengthned her in these times; neither shall he stand, nor his Arm, but he shall stumble and fall, and not be found: (Also the robbers of the people shall exalt themselves, but they shall fall) but out of the branch of her root, shall one stand up in his estate which shall come with an Army, and shall enter into the Fortress of the King of the North, and shall deal against them, and shall prvail, for the thing
Ecces. 1. 9, 10. The things that have been acted on the Jews, shall be acted on the Gentils. Read Isal. 21. 5, 6, Isa. 49. 5, 6. Ioh. 17. 2, 5. Gen. 1, 1. Ioh. 1, 3. that hath been, is that which shall be; and that which hath been done, is that which shall be done, for there is no new thing under the Sun, and there is a time and purpose to e∣very thing under the Heavens; for, is there any thing whereof it may be said, See this is nw; for it hath been already of old time before us? and known unto God (or determined) are all his workes from (or in) the beginning; (Christ) in whom all things were created, and by whom all things were made. SECT. VI. FOr in the first two dayes (or age of the world) before the Law, NIMROD was the mighty hunter or warriour; and in the other two dayes (or age of the world) under the Law the Kings of Judah were the great hunters, or warriours, to the terrour of many Nations: So in these two last dayes of the world under the Gospel, have the Kings of England (or Gentils land of Canaan, fowing with all good things) been the great hunters or warriours, to the terrour of many Nations farre and neer: And as Pa∣lstina was divided into two Kingdoms▪ and they at mor∣tall warres for many yeares▪ so is this Iland divided into two Kingdomes, and have been at mortall wars together for many yeares. SECT. VII. ANd as Judah was brought under the Latine or Roman Yoke; So hath England been brought under the Nrman or French Yoke. And as the Kings of Judah were accounted Defenders of the Faith, and Law of Gods Truth; So are the Kings of England entituled, by the Popes and Bishops (yea accounted) Defenders of the Faith, and Gospel of Jesus Christ: Yet have most of them been great Idolaters and Persecutors of the Truth, and of all
true Professors thereof, as well as the Kings of Israel. And no marvel, for the Lord having shut up all in unbe∣lief (or mis-belief) doth ift all Nations with the Sive of Vanity, as he did his own People the Jews; putting the hook of Error into their chaws, causing them to err through and by the delusion of the Spirit of Error: For a further proof of this Truth, read Isa. 24. 5. Isa. 25. 7. and 30. 28. and 60. 2. Jer. 30. 23, 24. Mic. 5. 3. SECT. VIII. King Herod Idoliz'd. Acts 12 1, 2, 3. 21, 22. Dan. 11. 21, 22. 36, 37, 38. ANd as that Fox, King Herod by his Flattery, and for his cruel work of persecution against the Saints and Servants of Christ, was by the two High Priests, Elders, Doctors, Lawyers, Scribes, Pharisees, Sadduces, Libertines, and all the common People, Deified; crying out, it is the voice of God, and not of man: So Henry the eighth King of England, and his Successors, have been by their two Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Doctors, Ministers, Judges, Magi∣strates, Lawyers, and all the common people, honoured with several Titles proper only to God alone; in attributing to them the several Titles of Most Sacred Majesty, Most High, Most Mighty, and Most Excellent Prince, in all Divine Titles attributed to Kings.their Prayers, in all their Petitions, and by all other their frequent Addresses to them. Which several Titles are truly and onely proper to the Prince of Peace, being the Most Excellent Maesty of God the Father, who only and alone is Most High, Most Mighty, Most Excellent, and Most Math. 19. 17.Sacred; yea, there is none good but one, and that is God. Lam. 5. 7. 1 King. 14. 22, 23.Behold, thus have our Fathers sinned, and are not; and we have (and still do▪) bear their iniquity, and delight in these their waies of Idolatry.
SECT. IX. Mat. 23. 2, 3, 4. 8, 9, 10, 11. 1 Sam. 8. 2, 3. ANd as the Jews (through Covetousness) by Money purchased of the heathen Romans, the setting up of two high Priests, who also climed up (with the Pharisees) into Moses chair, which was the Seat of Justice (for Moses was a Princ and Judge, and not a Priest.) So had England two Offices o Mi∣nister and Bi∣shop bought for Money.Arch-Bishops, who by themselves, and their Ministers, and Agents, purchased with money the Priestly and Episcopal Offices, and did clime into, and possess the Seats of Justice for many yeers. And as the Jews imbraced the manners 2 Sam. 23. 2, 3.of the Latines (or Romans) to have their causes of contro∣versie pleaded in Courts of Justice, by Heathens, stiled cts 24. 2. 26. This Profession is of the Divel, and not of God.Common Prators, such as Tertullus was, who for a merce∣nary Fee, accused Paul falsly; So have we a very great number of the like persons, called common Lawyers, or Praters. And as the Jews then put Justice to sale for certain Fees and Rewards; So have we done ever since the Conquest, From William the Noran.for these five hundred and sixty yeers; whereby the Rich and Mighty have eaten up the Rights of the Poor and Needy, and murthering thousands of them in the several Goals and Prisons in this Kingdom. Acts 6. 9. Acts 8. 1. And as those High Priests, Elders, Pharisces, Sadduees, Libertines, and Lawyers, for some forty yeers together per∣secuted Luke 11. 34, 35.the Saints and Servants of Christ; stiling them Pestilent fellows, Raisers of Sedition and Sectaries, Here∣tiques, or the Sect of Nazarites: So did our Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Deans, Ministers, Lawyers, and Magistrates, from time to time (and still do persecute) banished, imprisoned, pillored, whipt, hangd, and destroyed divers of the poor followers of Christ, and in like manner falsly styling them Pstilent fellows, Sectaries, Heretiques and raisers of sedi∣tion; stiring up the common people against them; and thus I am. 4 13. 14.like those Priests in the Lamentation, they have (by the
spirit of errour) been led and wandred like blind men, and By their works ye may know what spirit they are of. Ezek. 13. 18, 19, 20. Luke 11. 46, 47. Zach 13. 4, 5. 2 Esdras 15. 52, 53. Rev. 3. 1, 2. Isa. 5. 8, 11. 22, 23. have shed the blood of the just, and have polluted them∣selves with the blood of the innocent, whereby they have discovered their own nakedness and shame; for the Lord had not thus proceeded against them in his jealousie, if they had not exalted the stroak of their hand, and slain his chosen people; wherefore the Lord hath also made them con∣temptible among the people of the Land: for they have a Name that they live, and yet are dead: By oppressing him that reproveth, and making a man an offender for a word; Thus they add sin to sin. SECT. X. ANd because O Lord God of Hosts, all they that thus forsake thee the God of Justice and Mercy in thy pri∣mary Attributes (Justice and Mercy) shall be written in the earth; Death shall swallow them: Therefore will I look unto thee, yea, I will wait for the God of my salvation, Psal. 119. 81.for he will hear me. Rejoyce not therefore against me O mine enemy, though I sit in Darkness, in the bands of cruel affliction, and shut up close in prison Seven yeers.; yet the Lord shall be a light unto me, and I will bear the indignation of the Psal. 37. 23, 24. 2 Thes. 1. 8. 10.Lord, Because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute Judgement for me upon all my Oppres∣sors; for he will bring me forth in the light, and I shall be∣hold Psal. 119. 78. 84, 85 87 92.his Righteousness and Glory at his Appearing, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints and to be admired of all that believe; in that day, at the resurrection of the Luke 14. 14. Phil. 3. 20. 2 Thes. 1. 7. 2 Fe. 3. 7.Just (and not of the wicked) from the Dead, and not with the Dead; taking vengeance on them then living that know not God, nor obey the Gospel of Christ; who himself shall then change our vild corruptible bodies, that they may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, and shall then give us rest in glory or ever. Which shall be according to the time and number of
days, or yeers, answering the number of yeers from the Creation of this World, to the end of Noah's Flood, which was 1657. yeers; and thus answerably from the second Adam's work of Redemption, to the time of his coming in Glory, decked with eternal salvation and royal Majesty, shall be the like number of yeers, or days of time, 1657. Math. 24.as doth plainly appear by Christ's own words in Mat. 24. where the Disciples ask him of the time when his coming in Glory should be, and also the Manner of his coming, and of the signes of the end of this world. SECT. XI. TO both which questions, he gives them a very full and satisfactory answer. 1. His Resolve for the time when, Mat. 24. 3. 27. 37, 38.followeth in these words; For as the days of Noah were, so shall the coming of the Son of man be. And then he tells them the very manner of his coming. and of the end and sudden destruction of this World, in these words; For as I uke 17. 34, 35, 36. Zac. 14. 6, 7. Ml. 4 1, 2. 2 Thes. 2. 1.in the days that were before the Flood, they were Eating, and Drinking, and Marrying, &c. So shall also the coming of the Son of Man be: Even as Lightning that cometh ont of the East, and shineth into the West, &c. SECT. XII. YEt of that natural day nor hour knoweth no man, no not the Angels (nor the Son) but the Father only; there∣fore he chargeth all his Followers to pray, That their flight (or gahering together unto him out of all Countries) may not be on the Sabbath day▪ nor in the Winter season; for then shall be great tribulation: when the Lord shall send Mal. 3. 2.his Angels to gather together his Elect (not the Damned) from the four winds of Heaven, into the Land of Palestina: Hs. 6. , 3. Isa. 18. 17.For he will raise us up after two days, and the third day (of Rest and Glory) we shall live in his sight. In that time shall
a Present be brought unto the Lord, of a people scattered Isa. 18▪ 7.and peeled, To the Plac f the name of the Lord of hosts▪ The Mount Zion. SECT. XIII. Is. 43. 2, 6. Typified by the thre Children in the fiery sur∣nace, Dan. 3. 17 21, 22, 25, 26. ANd then (in this their Journey) when they pass through the waters, the Lord will be with them, and the Rives shall not overflow them; and when they pass through the fire, (when the Elements shall be on fire) yet shall they not be burnt; neither shall the flame kindle upon them: Then shall he (the Lord) say to the North, Give up; and to the South, keep not back; bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth; Even every one that is called by my Name. Christ shall fight for  Zion. Isa 31. 4. o. Rev. 12. 7. For the Lord shall come down▪ to fight for Mount Zion, and for the Hill thereof; for his fire shall be in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; For the Lord will clense his Land, and throughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat (or Elect) into his Barn (or Kingdom of Glory) but will burn up the Chaff (or wicked,) when he shall appear upon Mount Zion. Then shall two be in the field, the one shall be taken (or carried away by the Angels of Christ) and the other lef; (to Destruction, or for the Destroyer) two shall be in a bed, the one shall be taken away, and the other lef; (to Destruction) two shall be grinding at a Mill, the one shall be taken away, and the other left to Destruction; (or for the Destroyer.) SECT. XIIII. Christ is the Body and wee the Branches. THe Disciples then asked him, where all this should be? (or whither all these should be gathered together?) He answered, where the body is (or Christ shall appear thither wil the eagles or elect) be gathered together even to Mount Zion. For they shall ask the way to Zion, with their faces Ier. 50. 5. Zach. 8. 2.
thitherward; saying, come let us joyn our selves unto the Lord in a perpetuall Covenant, that shall never be forget∣ten: Ier 31. 1, 6, 7, 8▪ 12.and arise, let us goe up to Zion, unto the Lord out God, and say, O Lord save thy people, the Remnant of Israel. Yea; many people and strong Nations shall come To the Lord of Hosts in Jerusalem. At the same time will the Lord be The God of all the Families of Israel, and they shall be his people. In Zion his dwelling place, the holy Moun∣taine. SECT. XV. ANd for a further proof of the time of this his glorious Coming▪ Compare Daniel's vison which he had in Add 43 years to 1657. years and it makes u 2300. dayes or years.Babylon▪ about the seventh yeer of his Captivity, which was about six hundred forty three yeers before Christ's Na∣tivity, with the expressions of our Saviour Christ in the aforesaid place of Matth. 24. and yu shall find them to a∣gree together in the number of years: And I heard on Dn. 8. 13, 14.Saint say to the Wondrful Nuberer of Secrets (Christ) which spake; How long shall be te vision concerning the Transgression of making Desolate? And he said unt me: Palestina len∣sed.Uno two thousand three hundred days, Then shall the San∣ctuary (or holy land) be clensed▪ For afer two days will he (the Lord) Revive us, and raise us up, and we shall live in These two last dayes shall be shortned, as the first two dayes before the flood. Psal. 50. 2. 3. Eternall lie in Glory  here. Psal 133. 3. Dn. 7. 18. his sight; Which two days, I understand to be these two lat days under the gospel; which days Christ hath promised o shorten for the Elects sake, and will as I finde and beleeve) be shortned, answerable to the first two days of this world which was destroyed by water, being at 1657. yeers of age: For so our God shal come, and shal not keep silence, a fire shall devour before him, and it shall be very temp∣stuous round about him (saith David) when he shall come down upon the Mountains of Zion, as Rain upon the Morn∣ing grass for there God hath commanded the blessig (to man) even life in Glory fr evermore.
SECT. XVI. Luke 13. 43. Where Adm transgressed there Christ suffered, Eek. 21. 30. ANd in that very place where the first Adam was crea∣ted, and transgressed, there did the second Adam Christ Jesus, make full satisfaction for that Transgression in Paradice, and there the old Serpent▪ (Sathan) bruised his heel, and there shall he break his head; when he shall be there placed by his Father, As King of Eternal Glory, in Exod. 15 17. 18. 1 Thes. 3. 1.the lot of his Inheritance; where he (the Lord) shall Reigne with all his Saints gloriously for ever and ever. Rev. 21. 3. And I heard a voyce saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men; and he (the Lord) will dwell with them: and then shall all the Kings of the Earth praise and sing in the waies of the Lord; When they shall hear the words of his Psal. 138. 4. 5.moth; Then the praises of God shall be in their mouths, and a two Edged Sword in their hands, Terrible as an Cant. 6. 10. 13 Psal. 149. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.Army with banners, as it were the company of two Armies (Israel and Judah) to execute vengeance pon the heathen; to bind their Kings with chains and their robles with ft∣ters of Iron, to execute upon them the judgement written; This honour have all his Sints. Then shall they Inherit the Earth, and delight themselves in the aboundance of Psal. 37. 9. 11. 18.peace, and (then) their Inheritance shall be for ever. 1 Cor 6. 2. Dn. 7. 22. Luke 12. 32. Mah. 6. 13. For know ye not that the Saints shall judge the world? for, then judgement shall be given to the Saints, and the saints shall then possess the Kingdom, for it is their Fathers pleasure to give them the Kingdom; for his is the Kingdom, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever; and the Saints shall possess the Kingdom (of Glory) for ever, even for ever and ever. There where God hath commanded (or Dan. 7. 18. Psal. 133. 3.ordained for mn) the blessing, Even life in Glory for ever∣more; Therefore let the Children of Zion, be joyfull in here glory is appointed for man and where Judgement for the wicked.their King (the Lord of life Christ Jesus) who shall also judge the dead men of this world of Darkness▪ In the valie of Iehosaphat.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, eve. 20. 12. Matth 23. 38, 39. sa. 24 22. Isa. 27. 1.and the books were opened, and the dead were judged; Then shall they (The dead) see him whom they have pier∣ced, and shall know that he is the Lord God, dwelling in Zion, his holy mountain; For the wicked shall be shut up in the prison (of the grave) and after many days (even the sabbattical thousand years rest in glory) shall they be visi∣ted, and in that day will the Lord punish Leviathan that piercing crooked Serpent, the Dragon in the Sea, (or in the eve. 20. 10. The great Powers of the East and West tormented.multitud e of Nations in this world) and he shall be cast into the lake of fire and Brimstore, where the Beast (or Imperiall power) and the False Prophet Mahomet are and shall be tormented for ever, and ever. SECT. XVII. ANd this Judgement day (of the dead) shall be after A. 1. 11. Iohn 5. 20, 21Christ hath Reigned the thousand years (or day of rest) among the Saints Bodily (yea, in that very body which he hath carried up for that purpose) and hath raised all the Elect out of their Graves, From the dead or children of death and Hell, called Sathan; For Christ being the Iohn 6. 57.Resurrection, and the life, shall come down upon them that are his as the Rain upon the Mown grass; For thus saith the Ezek. 37. 13, 14, 22. 24▪Lord, I will open your graves, O my people, and bring you into the Land of Israel; then shall ye know that I am the All in Christ shall rise at his coming 1 Thes. 4. 14, 17. Zac. 6. 13.Lord your God, when I have opened your graves, and put my spirit in you, and ye shall live, and I shall place you in your own land, then shall ye know that I am the Lord that have performed it; For those which sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him; For the councel of peace (eternall life and glory) shall be between them both (even Father and Son) and so Psal. 102. 18.shall they (the Saints) be ever with the Lord. This shall be written for the Generations to come, and the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord, In the Regenrtion Mah. 19. 28.(or Resurrection when the Son of man shall sit on the throne
of his Glory; Then will he make them (even Israel and Judah) one Nation, in the holy land, upon the Mountains of Israel, the land of his Inheritance; A Glorious high Ier. 1. 12.Throne is the Place (or land) of our Sanctuary from the beginning of the Creation of God; for though all the earth be his, yet Zion hath he chosen to be the place of his habi∣tation for ever, and will goe in and out before his people there even as a shepherd goeth before his flok. SECT, XVIII, Ezek. 34. 2. ANd then one King shall be King over them all, even David, and they shall have one shepherd, Christ: for my Tabernacle shall be with them, yea, I (the Lord) will be their God; For I am the Resurection and the life, and blessed are they that have their part in the first resurrection, Luke. 20. 35. 36 Iohn 11 25. Rev. 20. 5, 6. Luke 14. 14. Ioh. 5. 29.Even the Resurrection of the Just; for they that have done good shall come forth unto the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil (or the works of the divel) shall come forth unto (or not until) the Resurrection of Damna∣tion, (death eternal, or day of Judgement) for the Righteous, A twofold resurrection af∣ter Christ his Glorious com∣ing.shall not come into condemnation, (or Judgement) but are passed (or passe here) from this temporal death to life; being the children of the Resurrection, Christ; and were reconciled to Christ before their departure out of this life; For as the Tree here falleth, so it lyeth. SECT. XIX. 1 Cor. 6. 2. Psal. 17. 14. Luk. 6. 24, 25. The wicked have their hap∣pines in this world 1 Sam. 2. 8, 9. Isa. 26. 14, 19. Psal. 5. 5, 11. FOr, know ye not that the Saints shall Judge the world (or the dead men of this world) who have their portion in this life, where they have, and do receive their Consola∣tion and Glory? But the Saints shall Reigne with Christ a thousand years before the day of Judgement, or Resurre∣ction of the damned; for, all that time the wicked shall be silent in darkness, they shall not live, they shall not rise, the foolish shall not stand before thine eyes.
But thy dead (or the dead in Christ) shall live, with this  Pet 3. 8, 13, 16. Ioh. 3 36. When the judg∣ment day shall be.my body shall they arise, yea they shall shout for joy; But the unbeleeving shall not see life (or Christ the Prince of life in his Glory) because the Wrath of God (death and hell) abideth on them, till the day of Judgement; for after the Sabbattical thousand years Reigne, then the Trump shall blow, And the Dead shall be Raised and brought to Judgement, and then shall the last Enemy (called divel, death, hell, and darkness) be put under his feet (by the Father) and shall then be cast into the bottomless pit of horror and perpetuall darkness. Ioel 3. 12. Where man was Created and Transfigurd, there shall he be judged. See Ezek. 21. 30. Ezek. 28. 16, 18. Ezek. 31. 8▪ 9, 16. Ezek. 36. 8, 9▪ 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 35. Gen. 2. 14, 15. Amo. . 14, 15. Palestina was, and shall be the Garden of Christ, or Para∣dise of eternal Glory Isa. 49 9. 1▪ 11. But Israel hath not as yet, been brought back into their land▪ Psal. 37. 29. Luke 22. 1, 18, 29, 30. Yea all the wicked shall be gathered out of all parts of the world, and brought into the Land of Palestina; for they must be judged in the same land where the first Adam was Created, and Transgressed, and the second Adam (Christ Jesus) was Renounced, Denied, Judged, Tormented, and Crucified, even in the land of Israel s nativity, in the very Valley of Jeosapa; being in the land of Palestina, Eden, Paradise, the Mount of God, the Garden of God; &c. SECT. XX. THen shall they say, This Land that was desolate is be∣come like the Garden of Eden, for then the Mountains shall drop sweet wine they (the Saints) shall not hunger nor thirst; but they shall feed in the ways, and he that hath mercy on them, shall lead them and guide them by the spring of waters and I will make all my mountaines a way (for them) And I will bring again the captivity of my peo∣ple Israel; and they shall plant Vinyards, and drink the wine thereof, and make gardens, and eat the fruit thereof, and I will plant them upon their own land, they shall no more be pulled (or taken) out of their Land: For the righteous shall inherit the land (then) and dwell therein for ever; and they shall eat and drink at Christ's table, in his kingdome of glory.
SECT. XXI. THen shall five Cities of the land of Egypt speak the lan∣guage of Canaan, and Ethiopia shall also stretch forth Egypt, Assiria, and Ethiopia, shall be call d wit Israel.her hands unto the Lord-God of Israel. In that day shall Israel be the third with Egypt and As∣sria, even a blessing in the middest of the land, from the River of Egypt, to the River Euphrates; Whom the Lord of Gen. 15 18.  33. 17.hosts shall bless saying, lessed be Egypt my people, and Assi∣ria the work of mine hands and Israel mine Inheritance: their eyes shall then see the King in his glory, because Egypt and 2 Cor. 9. 1, 8. 1 Kin 1. . They sought him first yt shall be last cal∣led. Matth. 2. 2. Assria shwed favour to Israel and Judah in time before, and Ethiophia's Queen came to hear the wisdome of Sol∣mn; and after that, they sought afer Christ, saying, Where is he tht is born King of the Jews? and had the favour above all other Nations in the world, to see ad know his Star, and were directed by it to the place of his birth, Bethlehem. And then the Mountains of Israel shall bring forth their fruit to the people of Israel, for they are at hand to come; for he shall say to his Angels, Gather my Saints together, Psal▪ 50. 5.those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice, (even Israel and Judah) and they shall come from the East, Luke. 13. 28. 29. Math. 8. 11. 1 Ezd. 1. 38. Micha 5. 5. Oba. 21. Gen. 15. 18. Isa 19▪ 18, 24, 25.and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and all the Prophets, in the Kingdom of God; to whom the land was given, and the land shall be then dig∣ged and sown, and Israel shall be multiplied upon it, and the Cities shall be built, and Inhabited by Man and Beasts▪ and they shall be setled after their old Estate, yea, I will do better unto you then at your beginning; yea, I will cause my people Israel to walk upon thee, O Land, and thou shalt be their Inheritance, and shalt bereave them of me no more. Therefore thou Land (of Palestina) that hast devoured
Palestin shall be Israel's In heritance, and shall devour men no more. Eek. 36. 24, 25, to 36. Heb. 2. 5. sa. 45. 17. No spirit of darkness shall b suffered to enter into the Kingdom of Christ. Isa. 27. 6. Eek. 37. 14. Cant. . 12. 13. Cant. 8. 9. 14. men, and bereaved the Nation (Israel and Judah) shalt de∣vour men no more, neither bereave the Nations any more, saith the Lord God; For unto the Angels of darkness hath he not put in subjection the world (of eternall Glory) to come, even that everlasting world that shal be without end; But this world of sin, which was, and is given to darkness, is and ever hath bin in subjection unto Lucifer, the Divel, and his angels of darkness; but this evil, the divel, shall not then dwell with goodness, light, and glory, Christ Jesus; and Israel shall then fill the face of the world (of Glory) with fruit, when he hath raised them, and brought them into his vinyard, for there will he give them his land, even upon the Mountains of spices. SECT. XXII. Gen. 13. 14, 15. Gen. 26 23. Gen. 28 13. Acts 7. 5. Heb. 11. 9, 10, 13, 16. 2 Ch10. 20. 7, 11. Gen. 33. 19. Abraham hath had no iheri¦tance as et in Palestina. Heb. 11. 10, 13, 15, 16. ANd when Israel and Judah shall be gathered out of all Countries and thus brought to their own land, then shall they be cleansed from all their filthiness, and a new heart, and a new spirit will the Lord give them, and they shall dwell in the Land which he gave to their fathers, A∣braham, Isaac, and Jacob, who as yet have had no inheri∣tance in it, no not to set their foot upon it, but died in faith, not having received the promises, but seeing them a far off, im∣braced them, and confessed that they were strangers and Pil∣grimes on the earth, desiring a better, even a heavenly (du∣rable, glorious, and everlasting) countrey and inheritance, given to them of God by promise, of which (Countrey) God is not ashamed to be called their God. SECT. XXIII. Ehe. 2. 19. ANd he hath also prepared for them a City, where we shall be all fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of the Iet. 31. 28, 29, 40.houshold of God; a City which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God (the Lord) For, it shall be built
to the Lord upon the hill Gareb, and shall compasse about to Ezak. 47. 15 to 20. Jerusalem shall never be de∣stroyed any more.Goath; and the whole value of the dead, and all the fields, unto the Brooke Kidron, unto the Horse gate, shall be holy unto the Lord, yea, it shall not be pucked up nor thrown down for ever. Rev 3. 12. Rev. 21. Ezek 43. 4. Ezek. 45. 3, 6. Ezek 48. 30, to the end. 1 King. 6. 7. The fashion, Greatness, height, and Glory of the new Jerusalem. Ezek. 47. 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, 22, 23 A furlong is halfe a quarter of a mi, and thus  furlongs makes 1500. miles. the thickes of the wal 864. foot. Even this great City, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from my God▪ ready amed of material preci∣ous stones; Even as Solomons Temple was brought out of the wilderness ready framed, and so built and laid together without knock of hammer or axe, or any other toole of Iron: The streetes of this City, shall be of pure transparent Gold, whose wals shall be great and high, built of Jasper, and garnished with all manner of precious stones, having twelve Gates, on the East side three Gates, and on the North side three Gates, on the South side three Gates, and on the West side three gates; and the gates of the City shall not be shut; and the fashion of the City shall be foure square, the length, bredth, and height of the wals of the City shall be of equal measure; Twelve thousand furlongs broad, and twelve thousand long, and twelve thousand furlongs high, and the thickness of the Wall shall be one hundred forty and foure cubites of a man (which is six foot) and makes up in the whole thickness, eight hundred sixtie and foure foot. SECT. XXIIII. The Nations that are sed, shall walk in this glorious City▪ Rev. 3. 12. Rev. 4 1, 2, 3. Rev. 21. 2, 3. Ee. 43. 7, 12. ANd the most high God the Father, and the Lord Christ, shall be the Temple in it; and the glory of God the Father, and of (the Lord) Christ, shall be the light thereof, and onely those nations that are saved shall walke in it, and Kings shall bring their glory and honor into it, and none shall enter into it but they that are written in the Lambs Book: For (thus saith the Lord) The place of my throne (Palestina) and the place of the soals of my feet, where I will dwell in the midd'st of the children of Israel for ever,
Christ will dwell in Pale∣stina for ever, and the land shall be then most holy. Eze. 48. 35. and my holy name, shall the house of Israel no more de∣file, neither they nor their Kings; The whole limit there∣of shall be round about most holy, And the name of the Ci∣ty from that day shall be, The Lord is there. Then the heathen (or Gentiles) shall know, that I the Lord build and plant the ruines and desolate places (of the land of Israel) I the Lord have spoken it, and I will do it. SECT. XXV. Psal. 69. 35, 36. FOr God will save Zion, and will build the Cities of Ju∣dah, that they may dwell there; The seed of his servants shall inherit it, and they that love his name shall dwell Rev. 5. 10. Psal. 102. 16. Christ shall build Zion.therein, and shall be Kings and Priests unto God, and raign on the earth. For when the Lord Christ shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory, when the people are gathered to∣gether, and the (Elect out of all) Kingdoms to serve the Lord, to declare his name in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem. Iohn 14. 2, 23.Then will he receive them unto himself, that where he is (in glory) there they may be also; and they (the Father and Son) will love them, and will come unto them, and make their Zath. 6. 13. Eph. 5. 5. Psal. 68. 16.abode with them; For, the Councell of peace (and eternal glory) shall be between them both in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; and the people and kingdoms shall be gathered together, to declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Ierusalem: For, unto the Father (incomprehensible) Ephe. . 21.shall be glory given in the Church Triumphant, by Christ Iesus (and all his Saints) world without end. SECT. XXVI. Heb. 1. 8. Heb. 2. . Psal. 48. 2. Christ will dwell and raign in Zion for ever. FOr this Mount Zion scituate on the North side of Ie∣rusalem, is the Hill which the Lord desireth to dwell in, yea the Lord will dwell in it for ever, where his Throne and Scepter of Righteousness shall be for ever and ever, even in the World to come, whereof we speak; and
he shall raign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his Luke 1. 33. Isa. 9. 7.Kingdom there shall be no end, even upon the throne of Da∣vid. Psal. 96. 10. When Christ shall raign. Psal. 87. 2, 3, 5. Psa. 12. 13, 14. 2 Chro. 20. 11. Then shall they say, The Lord raigneth, The world also shall be established that it shall not be moved; for the Lord loveth the gates of Zion, more then all the dwellings of Ja∣cob; Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God; For the highest himself shall establish her: Yea, he hath desi∣red it for his habitation, saying, This is my rest for ever, here Psal. 76. 2. Gen. 14. 18. Iohn 3. 23. Palestina shall be like Eden, and to abide for ever. Isa. 51. 3. Psa. 125. 1. Heb. 12. 22, 27. Eccle. 1. 4. Eccle. 3. 14. 15. The earth to be restored to per∣petuity. Acts 3. 21. will I dwell, for I have desired it. For, in Salem is his Ta∣bernacle, his dwelling Place in Zion; For, the Lord will comfort Zion, he will make her wilderness like Eden, and mount Zion shall never be removed, but abideth for ever; Being the City of the living God; the heavenly Jerusa∣lem which cannot be shaken, but shall remain like the earth which abideth for ever: for, I know (saith Solomon) what∣soever God doth, it shall abide for ever, and that which is to be, hath already been, and God requireth that which is past, (even the world to be restored) to its first Purity, Glory, Excellency and determined perpetuity; Spiritual, (which is eternal) for the spirits of all men are eternal, (whether for Light or Darkness) and the Saints continu∣ance in glory, shall be eternal; For, their bodies shall then be of the same eternal duration as their spirits are; this be∣ing the true state of the things we call Spiritual, which is eternal for there our mortal bodies shall put on immortali∣ty, and this corruption shall put on incorruption, to and for which, a true pious and charitable life in this world its us, by the sacred Spirit of light, Christ Jesus. SECT. XXVII. Act. . 19, 21. FOr God will establish the Earth for ever, when the time of refreshing shall come, and Restitution of all things, which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his Prophets since the world began. For the Lord that hath
Psal. 48. 8. Christ will dwell in Jeru∣salem for ever Zach. 2. 10, 11, 12. Pro. 8. 4. Deut. 32. 9. Zach. 3. 9, 10. Isa. 55. 5. Isa. 30▪ 9. Zach. 8. 3. Judah shall be first gathered and led by David. Zach. 12. 7. Cant. 6. 10, 13. Judah and the faithul Gen∣tils, shall be dreadful to all the icked. Zach. 12. 6. Isa 5. 28, 29. chosen Zion will dwell in the midd'st of her; And inhorit. Judah his Portion, in the holy land: and choose Jerusalem again. For heaven is the throne of God, but the earth hath he given to the Sons of men to be inhabited for ever, being their proper Sphere. For the Lords Portion is his people, Iacob is the Lot of his inheritance, For he will remove the iniquiy of that land in one day, and Jerusalem shall then be called the City of Truth, when the sons of Zion are raised out of the pit (or grave) wherein is no water, and shall save them as the flock of his people; and the Lord (by David their leader) shall save the tents of Iudah first; for, David shall be their Prince, and Nations that know not Iudah shall run unto them, who shall then be terrible as an army with Banners, as it were the Company of two armies (Iudah, and Gen∣tiles) whose arrows are sharp, and all their bowes bent, their horses hoofs shall be counted like flint, and their wheels like a whirl-winde, their roaring (of their hose) shall be like the roaring of a Lyon, yea they shall roar and lay hold of the prey, and shall carry it away safe, and none Isa 40. 31. The Turks and all the Idola∣trous people there, Christ will plead wi Is∣rael face to face, as he did at their coming out of Egypt. en 15. 18. k. 10. 34,  37.  . . 14, 15.shall deliver it, (as it was at their coming out of Egypt) yea they shall mount like Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint. Then the sinners in Zion, shal be afraid, fear shal take hold on the (now) inhabitants of Palestina, because of the Lord God (Christ) who also will then plead with his people in the wilderness (of their own land) face to face, like as he plead∣ed with their forefathers in the wilderness of the Land of Egypt; thus will he cause them to pass under the Rod, and then will he bring them into the bond of the Covenant (made with Abraham, Isaac and acob) and then will he speak comfortably to them, and they shall then enjoy their vineyards, as in the dayes of their coming out of the land of  7 5.Ep, so will he shew unto them marvelious things.
SECT. XXVIII. Rev. 16. 12. Isa. 11. 15, 16. THen shall the great River Euphrates be dried up in the seven streams thereof, and the Egyptian Sea utter∣ly There shall be no more sea.destroyed, that the way of the Kings of the East (the lea∣ders of Israel) may be prepared, even of the seven shepherds and eight principal Leaders, that they (and all the peo∣ple Mich. 5. 5. Oba. 21.of Israel) may go over dry-shod, as when they came out of Egypt; and then will he raise unto Israel Sviours The Prophets shall be Israels Leaders.(called Kings, such as Ioshuah) for Leaders, even, Abra∣ham▪ Isaac and Iacob, Hesea, Amo, Micha. Iol, O∣badiah, Ionah, Nahum, Habbakuk, Zphany, Haggaiah, Zacharah, and Malachy. 2 Ezdras 1. 39▪ Zach. 9. 11, 13. For, these fifteen Saviours, Kings, or Leaders, shall come on Mount Zion, to judge the Mount of Es, (or Kingdom of Edom, Gog and Magg) who are hated of Christ, for they shall put all the wicked to shame, because God hath despised them, therefore shall they never see the Psal. 53, 5, 6.light (Christ Jesus in his Glory) then the Kingdom shall be the Lords, when he bringeth back the Captivity of his people, then Jacob, (or Iudah) shall rejoyce, and Israel shall be glad, when the Lord God of Israel, (Christ Jesus) shall appeare in his glory, even in the glory of God the 2 Cor. 4. 6.Father, which is and shall be in the face and presence of Jesus Christ, being that individual glory which he had Iohn 1. 3.with the Father before the world was made by him. Col. 1. 19. ohn 17 5.  eter 1. 17. Eph. 3. 11. For it pleased the father, that in him should all the ful∣ness (of his glory) dwell, even in that measure of unexpres∣sible transcendent glory which the sacred Excellen glory and incomprehensible Maiesty, the Father, hath pedeter∣mined from all eternity, to be from him (by Christ the God of mercy) conferred upon the Creature, accordig to the Creatures meted out capacity, or predetermined ph. . 7.  4. 4▪ Capabillity; then to be conferred on him by the inviible and incomprehensible Majesty of God the Father, whic
shall be a fulness of joy, exceeding glory, and unexpress∣ble pleasures, in the Kingdome of glory for evermore. SECT. XXIX. Iohn 14. 6, 9, 10. Col. 2. 9. Chri the Or∣dained visible God of Salva∣tion. Psal. 24. 3. Iohn 5. 37. Iohn 6. 46. compared with. Gen. 3. 8, to the 17. Gen. 18. 1, 3, 10. Exo. 24. 1, 9, 10, 11. Exo. 33. 11, 18, 19. Jud. 6 14, to the 25. Chap. 13. See Isa 40▪ 18. To whom will ye liken God? or what like∣nes will ye compare unto him? Eph. 3. 9. For there is (but) one Per∣son or Body; nd one spi∣rit, see for this. Ep. 1. 4, 6, 7. Eph. 2. 16, 18. Rev. 3. 14. Iohn 1. 1, 2. Gen. 1. 1. Co. 3. 15. ANd this excellent eternal life, joy, and glory, is to be manifested to the creature, and conferred on them in and by his beloved Son Christ Jesus, the visible God of Sal∣vation, and in whom the invisible Godhead dwelleth bodily. And thus is he the true Image of the most high invisible God▪ the Father, and also his sacred comprehensible glorious presence, in the lot of his inheritance Palestina, The holy land, The hill of the Lord, The holy place, The Moun Zi∣on, The glorious world to come, given unto him by the most high God and Father of all Spirits, being the Excellent Glory. To whose excellency and incomprehensibleness of most glorious being, man's comprehensible and limited capa∣city cannot attain or reach unto, no more then to pourtray a true shape to a voyce, to the winde, or to hold the Sea in his hand, for▪ no man hath ever heard the Fathers voyce at any time, nor never seen his shape; Therefore what person, shape, or voyce can the limited frail fancy or wit of man prescribe, devise, imagine, or attribute to this. most High, most Sacred, most Mighty, most Excellent, and most Incom∣prehensible Unrevealed Deity, and primary Fountain and Cause of all Being, whom they never saw nor heard at any time? So that it is very plain, and most true, that Christ Jesus onely and alone, (being the beloved) and (from all eterni∣ty) the anointed visible God of Salvation, light and eternal glory) is the onely and alone true representative, capable, apprehensive, visible personal presence of the Invisible, Un∣apprehensive and Incomprehensible Father (and holy Spi∣rit of God) The beginning of the Creation of God (the Father.)
SECT. XXX. FOr this God of salvation, the Lord of life and glory Christ Jesus, will yet chuse Zion, the place where his Psal. 6, 2.Congregation hath dwelt, and wherein he hath dwelt; and Isa 14. 1. 2. Psal. 74. 2. Gen. 14. 18will set Israel in their own land: and the strangers (or Gentiles) shall joyn themselves unto them, and cleave to the house of Jacob (or Judah) saying, we will goe with you, for we have heard that God is with you; and the Zch. 8. 13. Israel shall pos∣sess the Gen∣tiles in the land of the Lord. Palestina. Salvation is of the Jewes. Iohn 4. 22. Rom. 9. 4, 5. people shall take them and bring them to their place (or land) and the house of Israel shall possess them, In the land of the Lord, for servants and handmaides; for, Salvation is of the Jews, to whom pertaineth the adop∣tion, and the Glory, and the Covenants, and the Promises (of eternal blessedness) whose are the Fathers (to whom the promises were made) and of whom concerning the lesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for ever, (of or) by the Father. SECT. XXXI. THen shall this world of sin and grace be dstroyed by fire, as the firstworld of sin was by water; wherein it repeted the Lord Christ that ever he made man; but the third world of grace and eternall Glory shall continue for ever; then shall they say, now is Salvation and the King∣dom The Kingdom and Power of Christ, when. Rev. 12. 10. Can. 2. 8, 11, 1. Affliction shall vanish when Glory appeareth of our God, and the power of his Christ (the God of salvation,) The voyce of the beloved, behold he com∣meth leaping upon the mountaines, skipping upon the hills, travelling in the greatnes of his strength; for lo, the winter (of affliction and misery) is past, the Raine (or stormes of persecution) is over, and gone, and the flowers (of glory and eternall excellency) appear on the earth, and the time of singing of birds of Paradice (or Saints) is come, and the (Glorious) voyce of the Turtle Dove (Christ Jesus) is heard
in our Land (of Palestina) saith Solomon; coming from Isa 63, 1, 3, 4.Edom, from Bozra, (the chiefe City of Edom) Glorious in his apparel travelling in the greatness of his strength, nugh∣ty to save. SECT. XXXII. FOr the hastning of which sacred Kingdom of glory, he Matth. 6. 10, 13.(the Lord) hath taught us to pray continually, saying, Thy Kingdom come, and thy will be done on Earth as it is (now) in heaven, and by faith to acknowledge and beleeve, that his is the Kingdom, the Power and the Glory, for ever, Gen. 22. 14.and ever. For then, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen (saith Abraham) even in Mount Zion, the Transcendent Glory and Excellent perpetuity of being. Hag. 2. 9. 2 C 3. 2. And the glory of this latter house shall be greater then that of the former (built ly Solomon) and when the Chil∣dren The Saintes sha b Remo∣vd no more out of Palesti¦na. 1 Co. 16. 31. 1 Cro 17. 9, 10, 12, Luke 1. 2, 33▪ Ezek 37. 27, of Israel shall be thus planted and dwell in their own land and place (in Glory Eternal) to be Removed no more▪ Nor the Children of wickedness, that is, (of the Divel (to wast them any more, as at the beginning. Then the Lord will build the house, and God the Father will establish his Throne and Kigdom for ever, for of his King∣dom there shall be no end. SECT. XXXIII, ANd when his Tabernacle (or personal presence) shall be among them, Then shall they say among the Nati∣ons, The Lord Rigneth, and the heathen (or Gentiles) shall Ezek. 3. 7. 28, 25.know that I the Lord do sanctify Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the middest of them for evermore; and my ser∣vant David shall be their Prince for ever. en. 49. 0. And (then) the Scepter shall not depart from Judah, as Shilo (Christ) cometh (in Glory) for to him shall the ga∣thering
The Figure of the holy City Jerusalem, with the proofs out of the Prophets and Apostles for the same. Aeron Br st▪ plate was a figure of h City Exo, 8, 1▪  21, 12, North. East. South. West. Ruben. Judo. Levy Josep. Beian. Dan. Simem. Jsocha▪ Zbvlou Ezek. 48. 31. Rev. 21, 16. Isa. 26, 1, Rev. 3, 12, Isa. 33, 17, 20, 24, Isa. 66. 18, 19. Isa. 60. 11, 14, 15. Ier. 31. 38, 39, 40. Isa. 49. 16, 17. Heb. 11▪ 10, 14, 16. Ezek 47. 7, 12. Baruch 4. 30. Zach▪ 14. 10, 11▪ Ia. 54. 11, 12, 13. Is. 2. 18▪ 1.
Matth, 13, 40, 1. And they shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend and work iniquity. Rev. 21. 27. And there shall no unclean thing enter into it, nor any Rev. 22. 14. 15.that worketh abomination; but only they that are written in the Lambs book. (Therefore) Blessed are they that do his Commandments, that they may enter through the gates into the City. Psal. 87, 3, Isa. 50, 18. Glorious things are spoken of thee, thou City of God, Ierusalem the holy City, from thenceforth shall no more come into thee the unclean. Isa. 45. 13. Heb. 11. 10. I have raised him up, and he shall build my City; for we look for a City, whose Builder and maker is God; for I Psal. 27▪ 13, Isa, 46, 13, Psal, 102, 16,had fainted unless I had believed, to see the goodness of God (Christ Jesus) in the land of the living; I will place Salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory; for when the Lord doth build up Zion, he shall (then) appear in his glory. Then Jerusalem shall be called the City of truth, and he Zach, 8, 3,will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And the name of Ezek, 48, 35, Zach, 6, 12,City from that day forth, shall be the Lord is there. Yea he shall build the Temple of Jehovah. Heb, 11. 16▪ Rev. 21, 14. For he hath prepared for them a City having twelve foundations. Mich, 4. 8. For he will glorifie the house of his glory, and I will make he Place of feet glorious.
of the people (of his blessing) be, and not of his curse, for he shall (at his coming) send forth his Angels of light, to gather them together; and where the body, Matth. 24. 3.(Christ) is thither will the (elect) Eagles be gathered together. Judah rejected Christ. But the Scepter was departed from Judah about 640. yeares before Shilo (Christ) came in the flesh; Neither were the people of Judah gathered unto him, (but rejected him) and Israel heard not of him, being carried away by Israel was carri∣ed away captive 964. yeares be∣fore Christ hi Incarnation, and so knew him not.Shalmanazar King of Assiria, about 964. years before Christ's coming in the flesh. For, Christ his coming in humility was, when Judah's Iniquities were fully ripe; and thus he came in the fulness of time▪ to be a light to us Gentiles, that had then fate almost 1800. years in Darkness, and under the bondage and Luke 2. 32.shaddow of death and Hell. But shall then (at his coming) be the glory of his people Israel who as yet have not known him, nor shall not know Matth. 23. 38, 39.him, till they shall see him, and say, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord, for so is God's decree. Psal. 102. 26. Haba. 2. 14 Isa 11. 9. Gen. 14. 18. Then all things shall become new, for the Lord will renew the face of the Earth; and then the whole earth shall be filled with the knowledge (of the Glory) of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea (for he shall come in the glory of God the Father) yet that which is to be, hath already bin, Eccles. 3. 15. Psal. 37. 2. Psal. 68. 10. Ier. 31. 34. Zach. 41. 4, 8, 9, 10. Christ shall stand in Glory on the Mount of Olives. The Land of Glory shall be all turned into a Plain. Eze. 47.  to the 23. and they shall all know the Lord,. from the least to the greatest of them (from a childe of a span long, to the man of full stature.) And then will he Remember their sins no more; for the Lord shall then appear in his glory, and shall stand upon the Mount of Olives, and the mount of Olives shal cleave in the middest, towards the North, and towards the South, and it shal become a very great valley, yea all the land (of Palestina) shal be turned into a plain, from Gheba to Rimon, south of Jerusalem, and shal (again) be meted out to the Tribes of Israel, as at their coming out of Egypt.
SECT. XXXIIII. THen shal they say, arise, let us go up to Zion, to the Lord our God; and they shal go from year to year, and from one Sabbath to another, to worship the King the Lord Ier. 31. 6, 8, 9, 10, 12. Zac. 14. 16, 17. Isa. 66. 23. Isa. 65. 9, 17, 18, 19, 25.of hosts at Jerusalem; for I will bring them from the north Country, and gather them from the coasts of the earth; for he that scattered Israel wil gather them, even as a shepherd gathereth his flock; and they shal come and sing in the height of Zion, and flowe together to the goodness of God Jerusalem shall be a place of re∣joycing. Psal, 133. 3. (Christ,) a great company shal return thither, and mine Elect servants (only) shal dwel there, and inherit it; for I wil Create Jerusalem a Rejoycing, and her People a joy: And I wil rejoyce in Jerusalem, and Joy in my people; for there God the Father comanded the blessing, even life for evermore. Every creature shall be restored to the state, it was created in. Is. 65. 25. Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9. Rom. 8. 19, 20, 1. Gen. 3. 14. Hosea 2. 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. And then all things shall become new, (or the natures of all creatures shal be changed to the state and condition wherein they were first created,) for, the wolf and the lamb shal feed together, the Lyon shal (then) eat straw like a Bullock, and dust shal be the Serpents meat. They shal not hurt nor destroy (any) in all my holy mountaines, (saith the Lord) For, the very brute creature, who was made subject to corruption through mans transgression, waiteth for the (Time) of the manifestation of the Sons of God, and to be restored into the glorious liberty of the Sons (or Saints) of God, even eternal incorruptible being. Psal. 145. 10, 21. Ezek. 34. 25, 27. For then shal the creature also be delivered from this bondage of corruption (Death;) and then all his works shal praise him, and all flesh shal bless his holy name for ever and ever; for in that day wil the Lord make a Covenant for his people with all the beasts of the field, with al the fowls of heaven▪ and with al creeping things of the ground, and The Saints shall dwel safe∣ly.al (evil) bests shal then cease out of the land, and his peo∣ple shal dwel safely in the wildernes, and sleep in the woods,
and they shal be safe in their land. For he wil sowe the portion of Israel, and the portion of Iudah, (even the land of Palestina) with the seed of Ier. 31. 25.man, and with the seed of beasts; for, he that hath delive∣red them in these six troubles (or these 6000. years or Iob 5. 19, 231days of labour, trouble, and sorrow) will not suffer evil (or the Divel) to touch them in the seventh day of his glori∣ous Rest, for the beastes of the field shall be at peace with them, and Sathan shall be shut up al that thousand years or Rev. 20. .seventh day of rest in glory; all which is typified unto us by Exo. 9. 4, 6. Exo. 10. 23. SECT. XXXV. Isa. 18. 2, 3, 7. Isa. 66. 2. From the Turkes terri∣tories; who holds the Iewes in Bondage. IN that time shal the present be brought unto the Lord of hostes, (by the faithfull Gentiles) of a people scattered and peeled (from a people, terrible from their beginning a nation meted out▪ and trodden under foot whose Land (Palestina) the Rivers, (or Nations of the Gentiles) have spoyled, they shall be brought to the place of the name of the Lord, to mount Zion. In that day shall the branch of the Lord (Israel and Iudah) and all the saints, be beautiful and Glorious; for I Iohn 15. 15.am the vine (saith the Lord) and ye are the branches, and the fruit of the earth shall (then) be excellent; for I say Zach. 3. 10. Luke 22. 16, 18. There shall be eating and drinking in the Kingdom of glory Psal. 22. 26. Num. 14. 24.unto you, I will no more (eat nor drink of the fruit of the vine, untill the Kingdom of God shall come,) and untill I drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom; and (then) the meek shal eat and be satisfied, and shal live for ever, when the Lord hath washed away the filth of the daughter of Zion, then shall we see his glory, and live ever in his sight; For all the earth shall be filled with the Glory of the Lord. Then shall it be said to the Israel of God (by the Angels of Christ that shal be sent forth to gather them together) Arise, for the light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is
Isa. 601. 13, 14, 15, 16, 19. risen upon thee, the sons of them (the wicked) that afflicted thee shal come bending, and bow themselves down to the soals of thy feet (even as Joseph's Brethren did to Joseph) for thou shal suck the milk of the Gentiles, and the brests of Kings; then shalt thou know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, the mighty one of Jacob. The People that will not serve Israel shall pe∣rish. For the Nation and Kingdom that wil not serve thee shal perish, and shall be utterly wasted, but the Lord shal be unto thee (O Israel) an everlasting light, and thy God, thy Glory, the people also shall be all Righteous, they shall Inherit the land for ever. For thy maker (Christ Jesu the God of salvation, light, Isa. 54. 5.and glory) is thy Husband, and thy Redeemer, the Lord of hostes is his Name. The God of the whole Earth shal he Iohn 1. 51. Gen. 28. 12, 13, 1, 17.be called; then shal wee see heaven open, and the Angels of God ascending and descending, as Iacob did: who in a vision was shewed the glory of it, and by the spirit of truth was forced to confess that the place was none other then the Gate of heaven, the house of God, and that the Lord is in that Place. SECT. XXXVI. Isa. 49. 8. Exod. 10. 23. Moses and Elias. Rev. 11. 3, to the 13. But the second of Esdras speaks of Isaih and Iermy by name. 2 Ezdr. 2. 18. Exod. 8. 6, 17, 24. Exod. 9. 6, 10, 25. 1 Kin. 17. 1. 2 Kin. 1▪ 10, 12. BUt darkness shall then cover the earth, (or the men of this part of the world of darkness,) and grosse dark∣ness the people, such as shall be felt, typified unto us by the severall great plagues of darkness inflicted on Egypt, and shall be acted in like manner on the now inhabitants of Palestina by the two witnesses (conceived to be by their workes, Moses, and Elias) at the time of Judah's gather∣ing together, for three years and six moneths: for they shall have power to send forth fire, to turne the waters into blood, and to smite the earth with all manner of plagues as often as they list, yea, they shal have power to shut heaven all that time, that it raine not, even for three years and six moneths, as Elias did before in Ahab's time, for three years and six moneths.
SECT. XXXVII. THen all the wicked of the land shall be as though they had never bin, because Israel shall be a fire, and Judah shall be a flame, and the wicked shall be as stubble, Israel and Judah shall destroy all the wicked in thir Journs. 2 Sam.  7. Naho. 1. 15. Rev. 9. 16, 17. Oba. 17. 18. Isa. 9. 5. 2 Sam. 23. 7. Psal. 49. 14. Isa. 24. 23. Ierusalem sall be ihahited in his own Place Gloriously▪ and they (even Israel and Judah) shall kindle and devour them, for they shall be utterly burt with fire in the same place of their abode, and all the wicked shall become ashes under their feet, for this battel against the wicked shall be with burning, and fewell of fire; for a fire shall devour his enemies before them, death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning (or when the morning Christ Jesus appeareh) upon mount Zion, and before his antients (Abraham, Isaac, and Iacob, and al the Prophets) gloriously; for Jerusalem shall be inhabited again in his own place, and the Lord shall save the tents of Judah first. SECT. XXXVIII. Gog and Mgg shall come to fight agin Ju∣dah then in Jerusalem. Rev. 16. , o the 11. Dan. 11. 44. Exek. 38. 8. THen all the nations of the world, even Gog and Magog, (East and West, Turk and Pope) shall be by the evill spirit (Sathan) brought into the land of Israel, to fight against Judah in Ierusalem, (that now is, where our Lord was crucified) for tydings out of the East shall affright (Gog and Magog,) when they shall hear of the gather∣ing together of Judah, and all the saints, and they (Gog and Magog) shall go forth with great fury to destroy, (when they shall hear that Judah hath taken Ierusalem) for Isa. 5. 30.Gog and Magog, shall come roaring, like the roaring of the Sea, and shall come in like a flood; but the Lord Isa. 59. 19, Zach. 14. 14. Ezek. 38. 21.shall lift up a standard against him, and they shall come upon the mountaines of Israel, but then shall darkness, sor∣row, and ear take hold of them, (as it did on the Egypti∣ans Gog and Magog shall destroy on another.in the red sea) and a great tumult from the Lord shall
be among them, and every ones hand shall be against his This was fore tould by Hanna the Mother of uel. And Declared by Ezekiel. 1 Sam. 2. 9. 10. Ezek. 38. 21, 22. Psal. 53. 5. Rev. 6▪ 2, 17. Rev. 14 19, 20, Psal. 37. 34. neighbour, and every mans Sword shall be against his bro∣ther; for, the Lord shall cause his glorious voyce to be heard, and shall shew the lighting down of his arme, with Indignation and anger, and with devouring fire, with scattering tempest▪ and hayl stones, and then shall they be destroyed upon the mountaines of Israel, by the hand of the Lord; for God (in his Eternal decree) hath scattered the bands of him that incampeth against thee, (O Judah) who shall all be buried in the valley of Hamon Gog▪ and they shall never see light; (or Christ in his glory) and when the wicked are cut off, the Saints shall see it. SECT. XXXIX. Read Ezek. 38. and the 39. Chap. Isa. 17. 18, 13, 14. Isa. 59. 18, 19. Zach. 14. 1, 13▪ 15. A City built called Hamona The weapons of Gogs host shall be burrning 7. years and their Bones in bury∣ing 7. moneths. er. 30▪ 23. 24. ANd with whose Innumerable carcasses will the Lord make a feast unto all the beasts of the field, and fowls of the aire, who shall eat the flesh of the mighty▪ and drink the blood of the Princes of the Earth. And for an eternal memorial of this great deliverance, there shall be a City built in the valley of Hamon Gog, and it shall be called Hamona, and seven years shall the Saints be burning of their weapons of war▪ and seven moneths shall they be burying of the bones of Gg and Magog's mighty Hoste, that was as the sand of the sea for Multi∣tude; and the land shall be soaked with their blood▪ and the dust made fat with the fatness (of their bodies) for it  the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompence for the controversie of Zion; in the latter dayes ye shall consider it. SECT. XL. Mal 1. 4. 5. Isa. 24. 21, 2. Psal. 37. 34. THus shall the Lord punish the host of the high ones, and of the Kings of the earth upon the earth, and hey shal be gatheted together, as Prisoners into the pit, or grave,
and shall there) be shut up, and after many dayes (ever after the thousand years of rest in Glory) shall they be visited▪ And they shall be called the border of wickedness, against whom the Lord hath Indignation for ever; and your eyes shall see this, and you (the Saints) shall then say, the Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel, when he shall take them away as with a whirlewind, both living, Psal 58. 9, 10.and in his wrath; then shall the righteous rejoyce, when he seeth the vengeance, for they shall wash their feet in the blood of the wicked. The day of Judgement. And when all the host of heaven shall be rolled together like a scroll, and the trump shall blow, and the Judgement shall be set, and the dead raised (at the end of the thousand years rest in glory) and Judged and cast into hell, into the dry These parts of th earth shall be the Hell. Isa. 34. 4, 9, 10. land wherein is no water, even these parts of the earth (or lowest of the Globe) whose streams shal be turned into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the land (or earth) shall become burning pitch, and it shall never be quenched; for the smoke thereof shall go up for ever. Isa. 33▪ 14. O, who among us shall then dwell with everlasting burnings? Then the saints shall go forth (to the border) and look upon them that have transgressed, whose fire shall not be Isa▪ 66. 24.quenched, and they (the wicked) shall be an abhorring unto all flesh, and there shall be a great gulf fixed between the Kingdom of heaven, (or glory) and the Kingdom of hell Luke 16▪ 23.and darkness; Sathan, and the wicked shal ee the glory and blessed state of the Saints in Christs Kingdom a far ost; And shall weep and howl, and gnash their teeth. SECT. XLI. Ier. 3▪ 17. 18. Ierusalem shall be the Trone of the Lord. IN thosedayes Judah shall walke with Israel in the land given for an inheritance unto their Fathers, and at that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of the Lord, and all
the nations shall be gathered unto it, yea all nations whom Psal. 86. 9.the Lord hath made shall come and worship before him, and Israel shall sing there (the new song) as in the dayes of their youth, when they came out of the Land of Egypt. Isa. 52. 1, 8. Then shall the sword and the battel be broken out of the earth, for the Lord Christ (the God of Salvation, light and Glory) will marry his people unto himself in peace, and in righteousness, and in loving kindness, and in mercies, for Isa. 12. 6. Ezod 24. 10, 11. Exod. 33. 11. Numb. 14. 14. Inhabitants of Zion. Num. 14. 21. Iohn. 16. 33. Iohn. 18. 36. Act. 14. 22. Christ his Kingdom is not of his world.he will plant his people in the earth, and they shall see eye to eye, yea, face to face, as Moses and the seventy Elders did, as also all Israel. Then shall they say, cry out thou inhabitant of Zion, for great is the holy one of Israel in the middest of thee, and his (place of) rest shall be Glorious; for, then shall all the earth be filld with the Glory of the Lord; (even the earth or place of Glory) for in this world ye (the Saints) shall have tribulations, (because) my Kingdom is not of this world, but in me (or my Kingdom of Glory) ye shall have rest, saith our Saviour; and we must through many tribulations enter into the Kingdom of heaven (the land of Glory and The earth shall be Glorious.happiness) for he will make the place of his feet (the earth) Glorious. Isa. 5. 26, 27. Non of the Saints shall be weary in their Journy to Jeru∣salem, Isa. 11. 11, 12. Israel that was cat out, Judah dispersed. And the Saints shall come with speed swiftly, none (of them) shall be weary nor stumble, none shall slumber nor sleepe, neither shall the girdle of their loynes be loosed, nor the latchet of their shooes be broken, for the Lord shall set his hand againe the second time to recover the remnant of his people, and shall assemble the out-casts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah, from the four corners of the earth. SECT. XLII. Then shall the waters fail from the sea, and the rivers shall be dryed up; for the Egyptian sea shall be utterly destroyed, that men may go over dry shod (or in hooe:
then shall there be an high way for his people (the Saints) as it was to Israel in the day when they came out of the Isa.  Ier. 23. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Zach. 14. 9. Lo, the doctrine long taught u of our climing up into the lements plain∣ly disproved.land of Egyyt, then shall the King of righteousnes Reigne and prosper, and Execute Justice and Judgement in the earth. In his dayes Judah shall be saved, and Israel (the ten tribes) shal dwel safely, and this is the Kings name (that shal Reigne in the earth of glory) the Lord our Righteous∣ness, for in that day there shall be (but) one Lord, and his name one. SECT. XLIII. Rev. 5. 10, ANd he that sate on the Throne shall dwell among them (the Sainto) and they shall Reigne (with; him) on Rev. 7. 15.the earth, and he said unto me, write, for these words are true and faithful, Blessed are they that do his Command∣ments, that they may have Right in the Tree of life (Christ Jesus) and their parts in the first Resurrection, on such the second death shall have no power, neither shall evill (the Psal. 5. 4.Divell dwell with him and his saints, as he doth in this his Iohn. 18. 36.own world of sin; for Christ his Kingdom is not of this world, but of the Glorious world to come. Out of which world of Eternal glory, the Divell (called Evill, Sathan, death and Hell) shall be banished, and not suffered to molest, disturbe or suggest any of his evill disobe∣dient thoughts into any of the children of the Kingdom of glory, or to have any rule at all there, as he hath in this his world. Therefore is Christ said not to Reigne in this world, but only to rule and to carry the predominent power in the hearts of all his Elect who though through Sathans sugge∣stions they fall into sin daylie yet Christ supports and holds them up by his power, whom the father hath Sealed and Psal. 5. 4, 5. Psal. 15. 3.given unto him, out of this world of evill, (the Divell) who being the Prince of this world, Ruleth in the hearts of all his, the Children of wickedness, disobedience, darkness,
Evill, Sathan, Death, and Hell, for so is he called in the holy Scriptures. The Priests, Gods ordinance of mercy sell. The Lawyers, by injustice them excell. Iohn 8. 44.  Thus one, The word of mercy sells for Gold, The other, Justice, Impiously and bold. An Exhortation to the conscientious Reader. ALye therefore that truly love and fear the Lord God Rom. 2. 7. Col. 1. 12. 13. Heb. 6. 5.of salvation Christ Jesus, and by patient continuation in well doing, seek for glory, Immortality, and eternall life, and have tasted of the good word of God, (Christ) and of 1 Thess 2. 12. 2 Thess. . 1.the power of the world to come, and look for the day of his glorious appearing; When the time of refreshing shall Acts 3. 19, 21. 2 Tim▪ 4. 1.come, of the Restitution of all things, and our gathering to∣gether unto him, at his appearing, and his Kingdom, Comfort ye one another with these things, that ye may 2 Cor. 1. 8.be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Rom. 8. 9, 10, 11. Rom. 15. 5.Lord Jesus direct your hearts into the true love of God, and the patient waiting for Christ; and grant you to be like minded one towards another in love, (or in the God of love Christ Jesus) according to the commandment of Jesus Christ, who hath called us unto his Kingdom and Iohn 13. 34. Iohn 17. 5. Matth. 25. 1.Glory, (even the glory which he had with the father before the world was) when he shall come in his glory. For the time of this his glorious appearing is at hand, to the eternall comfort and unexpressible joy of all the Saints of God, but to the unsupportable horror, dread, and Matth. 8. 2. 2 Cor. 13. 5.eternall confusion of all the dead men of this world (or men of death) Children of death, hell and darkness, called Sathan. Prov. 16. 4: For God hath made all things for himself, even the
wicked for the day of wrath, Evill, Darkness, judgement, Death eternal; to whom it is not given to know the truth, Rom. 15▪ 4.nor the mysteries of his Kingdom of glory and joyes eternal, to be there enjoyed by the Saints for ever. And know this also that whatsoever things were written afore time, were written for our learning, that wee through patience and comfort of the Scriptures▪ might have hope of eternal life and Glory in the world to come. th. 6. 3. Luke 11. 35, 36. Psal. 45. 7. Therefore pray, that the light (or spirit) that is in you may not be of the darkness, but of the true light Christ Jesus, which inlighteneth every man unto Salvation, whom God his God hath anoynted with the oyle of gladness above his fellowes (even aboue all Spirits) that so by that sacred Primary spirit of truth and light Christ Jesus, (whom God the father hath appointed heire of all things, by whom Heb. 1. 2. Iohn. 5. 25.also he made the world, and who by him (the father) was sent in the flesh to be a light to us gentiles, but shall be the Luke. 2. 32.glory, yea a King of eternall glory to his people Israel) ye may be inabled to hear his voyce, and to be raised from the dead, at his appearing in glory with all his saints. Rev. 20. 5. Isa. 26. 14. But the rest of the dead shall not rise or live, for they only that are his, possessed by his spirit of life, shall hear his voyce; verily, verily I say unto you, the hour is coming Iohn. 5. 24, 25. 26.when the dead shall hear the voyce of the son of God, and they that hear (his voyce) shall live: But they that hear not his voyce being the children of death, shall still remaine in the bonds of death and hell, for they are dead, they shall not rise, yea, they shall not live at the resurrection of the just, Isa. 26. 14. Luke 14, 14, Iob. 14. 12▪ Psal. 1. 5. Psal. 5. 5. Psal. 88. 10.they shall not awake, nor be raised out of their graves till the thousand years of rest and glory be fulfilled, but they shall be gathered into one pit, and shut up in the prison of the grave, and after (the thousand years) or many days shall they be visited. 2 Cor. 4. , 4. Isa. 26. 19. For the dead in Christ shall rise first, even they that are Christs at his coming; for thy dead men (Christ Jesus) shal live, with my body shall they rise, yea, they which shall
be accounted worthy of the worldtand tha, resurrection from Luke 0. 35, 36.the dead, are (or shall be) equall to the Angels (of light) and are the children of God, being the children of the re∣surrection The children of the Resurrecti∣on shall dy no more.(Christ Jesus, who is the resurection and the life) neither can they dy any more, death hath no more dominion over them. O therefore love the Lord all ye his Saints, for the Psal. 31. 23.Lord preserveth the faithfull, and plentifully rewardeth the constant doer; be of good courage therefore, for he shall strengthen your hearts, all ye that trust in the Lord. Now if this plain demonstration of the truth (of Christs 1 Cor. 2. 7, 10, 11, 12.glorious personal reigne on the earth among his Saints in the land of Glory, which God the Father hath ordained before the world, unto our glorie that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God) be still hid, it is hid to them whose mindes are blinded by the God of this world, (the Divell) that they should not see nor apprehend the excellency of the eternal Glorious being, ordained of God for us before the world was, even, eternal life and glory unexpressible, in the land of the living. But God doth reveale them to his poor servants by his spirit, for the spirit searcheth all things, yea the deep things of God, that we might know the excellency, and become partakers of the Majestie and unexpressible glory of Christ, in the glorious world to come, at the appearing of our Lord Isa. 6. 1, 5. ccle. 1. 15. Iob 6▪ 2.and Saviour Jesus Christ, the King of eternall life, Light, and Glory, (seen of all his Prophets) who hath built an everlasting foundation with men, and shall continue with their Seed. Isa, 49. 8. Iohn 0. 17. And who also is (by God the Father) given for a cove∣nant to the people, to establish the earth, even he the be∣loved, who is ascended to his Father, and our Father; to his Rev. 1. . Rev. . 12.God, and our God; for thus saith the Lord, I am Alpha, and Omega, which is, which was, and is to come. The Almighty, him that overcometh will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God, the new Jerusalem which cometh The Glorious new Jerusalem shl come down from heaven. Deut. 6. 4. down out of heaven from my God. Hear therefore O Israel (or Elect) the Lord thy God is one Lord. 1 Cor. 8. . For, to us (the Saints) there is but one God, even the Father, of whom are all things (even spirit of light, and spirits of darkness) and we in him, and one Lord Jeus Christ by whom are all things (formed and made into externall viible shape and being; and we by him, by whom he (the Father) made the world, that is, decreed what this present world of darkness should be, and what the glory of the world to come should be. Acts 15. 18, For, known unto God the father, or determined are all his works, by, in, and from the (or this sacred) beginning Christ Jesus. 1 Cor. 8. 7. Zach. 5. 13. Isa. 10 17. Mar. 5. 7. 1 Iohn 1. 11. 1 Iohn 3. 2. Howbeit, there is not in every man that knowledge, for the Councell of peace shall be between them both, even be∣tween Father and Son of the most high God, the light of Israel, and his holy one, or beloved one, by whom he hath given unto us eternal life, and this life is in his son, and when he shall appear the second time unto salvation, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is, and live ever in his sight, even in the presence of his son Christ Jesus, the true God and eternall life, who is over all God, blessed for 1 Iohn 5. 20. Rom. 9. 5.ever of the Father. Col. 3, 3▪ 4. For our life (or eternal being) is hid with Christ in God (the Farher) but when Christ which is our life shall ap∣pear, then shall we also appear with him in his glory. For, He that is Elect, and his name writen in the book of life, or secret decree of the most high (God the Father) shall Psal. 91. 1.ever abide under the shaddow and guidance of the al∣mighty Lord, the ordained God of Salvation, Christ Jesus, and to whom belong the Issues of death, he being the or∣dained Psal. 68. 20▪resurrection, and the life of eternall rest and glory to
the Creature, for he is gone up to prepare a place for us, and Iohn, 14. , 23,then both he and the father will come and make their abode Iohn. 20. 17. hn 5. 20, 22, 2. 27.with us; for he is ascended to his father, and our father, to his God, and our God, untill his enemies be made his foot∣stool by the father. For as the Father hath life in himself▪ so hath he given to the son, to have (the spirit of) life in himself, and hath given him Authority to execute Judgement also; for the Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgement to the Son. Ihn 6. 5. And as he liveth (not of or by himself) but by the father, so do all the elect live by him the Christ, and shall live for ever (in glory) with Christ, and addresse all Glory and Eph. 3. 21.prayse unto the father, by Christ Jesus, in that world of glory which shall be without end. Iohn 6. 4. For none can come to the Son except the father draw him, ohn 6.  3, 0.(that is, as I conceive) none but such as are predestinated by him to glory, and their names written in the book of life, having the fathers work, or Spirit of truth and life in them, by which they are drawn or alotted to Christ, and given to him by the father. Eph. 4. 6. Even that one God and Father of all, who is above all, and in all; or (saith Christ) the father is greater then all, therefore Greater then he, who after God the father (like∣ness, Power, and Glory) is by him created, righteousness, and trute holiness; and being created or made perfect Hb 5. 5. 5, 10.(or perfection it self) he (thus) became the author of eter∣nall Salvation (and glory) to all them that (believe) and obey him (or his will). But Belzebub is created Darkness, unrighteousness, wick∣dness▪ Ier. 17▪ 5, 6. Rom. 9. 22. Gen. 7. 22. Psal. 68. 6. Ier. 50. 12. Isa 34. 8, 9, 10. Iob 10. 22.evil, vanity, unholiness, destruction (or the destroyer) hel, and perdition, and to him are given or allotted the reprobate men of this world of darkness, orchildren of perdition and disobedience, called vessells of dishonour, who are predesti∣nated (by the father) to dwell in a darke and a drie land, with the destroyer and all his angells, or spirits of darkness, for ever,
But the children of the world to come being vessells of honour, life, light and glory, (Christ) are prdestinated by Rom. . 23, 24.the father to dwell in the land of righteousness, life, light, Exod. 15. 17. 18. Psal. 94. 12. 13.and glory, the inheritance and land of glory which the father hath alotted to the Prince of Glory, light, and life, (Christ Jesus) and so is it called. Matth. 19. 28. Psal. 105. 9. 10. 11, 12, 13. Psal. 125. 3. Ier. . 17▪ Ier. 17. 12. Eze. 43. 7. Psal. 56. 13. Col. 1. 27. Psa. 57. 11. Col. 2. 10. The lot of his inheritance, where they shall walk before God the father, and shall be led and guided in and by this sacred light of the living, which is Christ the Lord (who is now in us the hope of this glory) to be enjoyed in the land of life (or the living,) in due time, where God the Father shall be exalted above the Heavens, and his Glory, (Christ) upon all the earth, whom he hath made (or ordain∣ed to be the head of all Principalities and powers in hea∣venly places, even of all spirits of light, and spirits of darkness. Heb. 5. 5, 9, 10. Called of God the Father an high Priest, being the or∣dained righteousness of God unto salvation. Heb. 7. 16, 24. Who (by the Father) is created, after the power of an endles life, and to save them that come to God the Father. Therefoe is he stiled, Psal. 68. 20. The God of salvation, to whom belong the Issues from death. Col. 1. 15, 17, 18, 19, 20, Being the Ordained Resurrection? and the life, and the image (or visible personall presence) of the invisible (and incomprehensible) God the Father, the first Created (or born) of every creature. Who being the beginning, hath in all things the prehemi∣nence; for he is before al things, for it pleased the Father, that in him should all fulness of Power, Maiestie, and Glory dwell; for all power is given unto him by the Father both in heaven and earth, who hath predestinated to reconcile, all things unto himself by Jesus Christ; for the councell of Zach. 6. 13.peace (is and) shall be (for ever) between them both▪ even between Father and Son, (Christ) who of God the Father, is made unto us,
1 Cor. 1. 30. 1 Cor. 11. 3. eb. 5. 5, 9. Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. For Christ hath not (thus) glorified himself, but he the Father that said unto him thou art my Son this day have I begotten (or created) thee, hath glorified him; in whom he is well pleased, and appointed him for the work of mer∣cy and eternall being to the creature in light and glory; and thus is he made by the Father heir apparent of all things, in and by whom, man is come and admitted to the knowledge of this great incomprehensible God the Father, 1 Cor. 1. 21.  Cor. 2. 9.to salvation. For the time was, that the wotld, by this sacred wisdom, (Christ) knw not God the Father. For in this God of sal∣vation (Christ Jesus) dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead (Father and holy spirit) personally or bodily. 1 Tim. 6 15, 16. Iohn 1 4. Iohn. 1. 18. Iob. 26. 13, 14. Iob 11. 7. Iohn 6. 27. Iohn 5. 37. ol 2. 9. Who is the beginning, Prince or head of and over all Principalities, and Powers. Being the blessed Prince and only ordained King and Lord (and Immortality) dwelling in the Incomprehensible light of God the Father, that none can attain to the know∣ledge of; whom no man did ever see nor can see. For him hath God the Father sealed, (or determined for the work of mercy and glory to the Creature,) and in him he delighteth; in whom the fullness of his power and spirit dwelleth Bodily, or in and by whose personall presence the omnipotent power of God the Father, and holy spirit of God, is represented and manifested unto us in all fullness, according to the creatures meted out or alotted Capa∣city, Who is the beginning of the creation of God; for in this Rev. 3▪ 14. Gen, 1. 1. Iohn 1. 1, 3. n. 2. 3▪ 4▪  Cor. 4 5.sacred beginning (the anoynted God of salvation,) God the Father created (or decreed) the heavens and the earth, and by which sacred beginning all things were made into externall visible shape and being. And God (the Father) who commanded the light (of glory) Christ, to shine out (or from) the darkness (Blze∣bub) hath (now) shined into our hearts the light, even the
knowledge of the Glory of God the Father in the face (or by the personall visible apprehensive presence) of Jesus Christ. 2 Cor. 6. 14. 15. For, this sacred light Christ, hath no communion or agreement with darkness, Beelzebub; neither shall Iniquity (Beelzebub) possess the just, but the wicked are (or shall be) Prov. 12. 21.full of evil, or the spirit of Beelzebub. 2 Cor. 5. 18, 1, 21. 1 Cor. 1. 30. And yet all things are of God the Father, who hath reconciled us (and all the elect of God in Christ) unto him∣self, by (this sacred light) Christ Jesus. Ep. 4. 7. That we might be made Righteous to God in him, ac∣cording to the measure of the gift of Christ. 1 Cor. 8 7. Isa. 43. 10, 11. Isa 44. 6. sal. 59▪ 10. Psal 68. 2. Isa. 42. 6. But there is not in every man that knowledge; for be∣fore him there is no God created, neither shall there be after him; for he is the Lord, the God of mercy and Sal∣vation; for God the Father hath given him for a covenant to the people, for a light to the Gentiles. 1 Cor. 8. 6. For to us (the elect in Christ) there is but one God (the Father) of whom are all things (created) and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ, (the ordained▪God of salvation) by whom are all things (made into an externall shape and being) and we by him, even by Jesus Christ the Son of the Matth. 5. 7. Ier. 51. 15, 19.most high God the Father, the Portion of Jacob (or of the Elect) the former and maker of all things, for God the Father decreed the earth to be made by this his sacred power. Isa. 49. 8. Established the world by this his sacred wisdom, and stretched out the heaven by his sacred understanding, the Lord of Hostes is his name, the God of Israel, the God of Ier. 32. 27. 3. Ier. 27. 5. Ier. 33. 2.all flesh, who hath made the arth, the man, and beast, the portion of Iacob (Christ) is the former of all things, the Lord of hosts is his name. Gen. 17. 5▪ Gen. 18. 17. Thou art the Lord, the God who didest choose Abra∣ham. Nehe. 9. 6, 7, 12, 13. Thou ledst them in the day by a cloud, and in the night by a pillar of fire, thou camest down upon mount Zion, and spakest with them face to face).
Exod. 23, 10, 11, 16. Exod. 33. 28. Gen. 32. 28, 30. Exod. 16. 12. Psal. 41. 13. Psal, 68. 20. For they saw him the God of Israel▪ and the Lord (even the God of Israel) spake to Moses face to face, as a man speaketh to his friend; yea, Iacob did see this God of Israel (or of the elect,) face to face; who testifieth of himself say∣ing, and ye shall know that I am the Lord, your God, even the God of Israel; he is the God of Salvation, he hath made us. Psal. 100, 3. And the world was also made by him the Word of God. Heb. 11. 3. Rom 9. 5. Iohn 11. 25. And unto the God of (Christ) belong the Issues from death, being the ordained resurrection and the life, and so is he God over all blessed for ever. Rom 15. 13. Being the God of hope, even (to the elect) the hope of glory, in eternal life. Col. 1. 27. Col. 3. 10. 1 Cor 1. 24. ph▪ 4. 24. 2 Chion. 20. 21. In the true Image of him that created him, Christ, the power of God, the wisdom of God, Righteousness and true holiness, yea, the beauty of Holiness, and glorious in holiness. Psal. 33. 12. Hab. 3. 18. Psal. 144. 15. Blessed is the nation whose God is the Lord, and the peo∣ple whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance, for they shall rejoyce for ever in the Lord God of their salvation; happy are the people whose God is the Lord, for he shall govern the nations upon the earth. Psal. 67. 4. Isa. 49. 8, 9. He shall say to the prisoners, and them that are in dark∣ness, goe forth and shew your selves. Heb. 1. 8, 9. For God the Father his God hath anoynted him with the oyle of gladness (eternal light, life, and glory) above his sellowe, seven above all spirits what ever.) 1 Cor. 11. 3. Acts . 15. For God the Father is the head of Christ, even as man is the head of woman, and hath ordained him to be the Prince of life. Gen. 1. 1, 4. Iohn 1. . Psal. 27. 8. Iohn 8. 32. Exod. 33. 19. Exod. 34. 6, 14. The beginning, the light, the day, the Person, the Presence, the face, the Angel, the Name, the truth, the goodness, the power of God the Father, unto Salvation, the Prince of peace and love, whose nature and property is even to have mercy, to forgive, and to preserve.
For he the Lord God is the preserver of Isracl, yea, the preserver of men, The God of Salvation. Psal. 68. 20. The Christ of God the Father, for the worke of mercy and glory. The divel. lob 5. 2. lob. 35. 8. Psal. 125. 3. Psal. 5. 4. Psal. 45. 7. Prov. 13. 6. Eccle. 8. 8. Isa. 9. 18. 19. 1 Cor. 5. 8. Eph. 6. 12. Exod. 15. 7. Heb 1. 2. Gen. 2. 4. Iohn 1. 1. Iob 35. 8. Iohn 14. 8, . But darkness (the divel) is the Prince of death and de∣struction, the destroyer, the hater of man▪ the roaring Lyon, the raging power evil, wickedness, the merciless enemy, the unrighteousness the night. The wrath of God, the star of the morning, (or the star darkness, separated from the morning star, or bright star of righteousness, light, and glory. Christ Jesus, the anoynted God of salvation) whom God the Father hath appointed heir of all things, and by whom he made the worlds being the word and voice of God the Father, the visible brighness of his Fathers glory, and his expresse Image in his person, for he that hath seen him hath seen the Father (or the Fathers power to salvation) for he upholdeth all things by the sacred power. Who is made heir of all things, and hath obtained a more excellent name then all other spirits what ever, for the Exod. 23, 1. Isa. 12. 2.name of the Father the Lord God, Ichovah, the God of salvation, is in him. Heb. 1. 5, 8, 10. Psal 2. 7. Isa. 43, 13. Prov. 8. 22, 23. Who said, I will be to him a Father, and he to me a Son; yea, this day have I begotten thee. For before the naturall day was, (in being) he was brought forth, yea before the earth was formed. Gen. 1. For according to the Fathers decree; The foundations of the earth were lay'd in or by this sacred beginning; yea, the heavens are the work of his hand. Heb. 1. 2. Heb. 2. 10, 11. Exod. 15. 11. 2 Cho. 20. 21. For it pleased the Father, for whom are all things, and of whom are all things, in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain or Prince of their salvation (Christ) perfect, glorious in holiness yea, the beauty of holiness, fearfull in praises, doing wonders. For he that sanctiieth, and they who are sanctified are all
Rom. 11. 36. of one, for which cause, he (the Christ) is not ashamed to call them brethren; for of him, and through him, and to him are all things. Acts. 17. 28. For (he being the Resurrection and the life) in him we live, and move, and have our being; being created (by God Gen. 1. 1. Eph 2. 10.the Father) in Christ Jesus, who is the Beginning, the day, the life, the light, and glory. 1 Thessa. 5. 4. 5▪ 8, 9, 10. Therefore are the Children of the light no more in bon∣dage to darkness, Hell and death (the divel) being redeemed by the light (Jesus) they are all become the Children of the light, and Children of the day; for God the Father hath not appointed (or determined) them unto (or for) wrath (the divel) but to obtaine or enjoy salvation (in glory) in Eph. 3 9. Luke. 9▪ 20. Rev. 3. 14. Phil. 2. 11. Eph. 3. 10, 11, 1.and by Jesus Christ; where we shall all live together with him, who is the Christ of God the Father, by whom all things were made to the glory of God the Father, accord∣ing to the eternal purpose (of the Father) which he pur∣posed in Christ Jesus our Lord▪ that so unto Principalities and powers (of darkness) in heavenly places might now be known (by the Church) the manifold wisdom of God the Father (Christ) of whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. That is, the spirits of life in all things, named, appointed and disposed of to their severall functions and conditions Eph. 4. 24. Eph. 4. 67.of being by him, who after God is created in righteousness and true holiness, by that one God and Father of all, who is above all▪ through all, and in all, and by whom is given Ier. 44. 11. Ier. 46. 18. Ier. 5. 5, 19, 57. Isa. 49. 5, 6, 8, 9.(or conferred) on the elect, grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ, whose name is the Lord of Hostes, the God of Israel. (or elect) who shall be Glorious in the sight of God the Father, and this his God shall be his strength, and he shal be his servant, to raise up the tribes of Iacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. And to be a light to us Gentiles, and the Fathers In∣strument of salvation to the ends of the earth. And by the Covenant to establish the earth, that he may
say to the Prisoners (of death) go forth and shew your Isa▪ 4.▪ 1, 5, 6, 7. Ezek. 37. 14, 15, 16. Zach. o. 11. Isa 45. 11▪ 12, 15. Isa 52. 13. Isa. 43▪ 10, 11.selves, when he shall put his spirit of life into them, and the▪ shall live. For in the Lord (Christ) shall all the seed of Israel be Justified, and shall glory; for he shall be exalted, and be very high. For before him there was no God created, neither shall there be after him. He is the Lord, and besides him there is no Saviour. Eph. 1. 15, 19. Iohn 10. 29. Iohn 14. 28. Iohn 13. 17. For, the Father is the God of our Lord Jesus Christ. The Father is greater then all, yea, greater then he; if we know these things, happy are we; for this is life eternal to know God the Father (aright) and Jesus Christ whom he hath sent; whose being in the Father, and the Father in Iohn 14. 10. Phil 2. 6. Exod. 23. 21. Exod. 33. 14. Iohn 14. 13. Iohn 10 30. Christ is stiled the mercy of God unto Sal∣vation. Exod 34. 6. him, thought it no▪ robbery to be one with him; because the fulness of the Fathers spirit, Power, presence, and Name. (God) is in him, and so the Father▪ is glorified in the same. Thus he and the Father are one, because the Father acteth nothing for the worke of mercy and glory to the Creature, but in and by Christ his beloved Son, the ordained God of salvation, life, light, and eternall glory; the Lord God merciful and gracious, the God of Israel. Iohn 15. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Iohn. 6. 38, 39, 40. Luk. 9. 20. For the most high incomprehensible God the Father, is said to be the husbandman and the Lord God Christ Jesus, the God of salvation, is the true fruitful pleasant vine, in whom God the Father delighteth; and all the elect (saints by calling) are the branches of this sacred vine, the Christ of God the Father. 1 Sam. 2. 2. For there is none so holy as the Lord, neither is there any Rock like our God; for God the Father hath blessed him for ever. Psal▪ 45. 2. Therefore O Israel (or elect) fear this Glorious and fearful name. Dent. 28. 58. Psal. 21. 6, 7. The Lord the God (Christ Jesus) whose glory is great Dignity and Honour, hath the Father laid upon him, and hath made him most blessed for ever.
Psal 21. 7. Psal 2. 8. Wisd. 15, 1, 3. And through the favour of the most high (God the Father) he shall not be moved, for Jehovah is the most high God for evermore. Who governeth all things by his mercy, (Christ) through and by whom all addresses must be made to the Iohn 14. 6.most high God the Father; and by and with whom eternal life in glory is conferred on the creature; and therfore is he stiled, the way, the truth, and the life, the glory of God. Iohn 4. 7, 9, 10. For he that hath seen Christ, the God o salvation, hath seen the personal, visible, active, powerful presence of God the Father▪ and holy Spirit, yea the word and work of the Father, Iohn 17. 2, 3.the first begotten of every creature; who hath Power, given to him by the Father over all flesh, that he should give eter∣nall life (in glory) to as many as the Father hath given him. Rom. 9. 5. 1 Tim. 6. 15. 16. And thus is he God over all blessed for ever (or for eternall being in glory with his Saints the elect,) in whom (or in whose personal visible presence) the God-head Ion 3. 34, 35. Iohn 17. 9, 11, 21. Iohn 3. 11. Iohn 14. 23. Gen. 1. 26, 27. Gn. 3. 22. 2 Cor. 4 4. Isa. 63. 9. Psal. 13. 7.dwelleth bodily, even in him whom the Father sent into the world to save sinners as he himself saith, that they may be one as we are, even as thou (O Father) ar in me and I in thee; that they may be one in us, as we are; for we speak that which we know, and testify that we have seen, and ye receive not our testimony (even the Father and Sons) we will come and make our abode with him▪ for man is be∣come like one of us, like the Image of God Christ; for Christ is the Image of God the Father, yea, the spirit or Psal. 44. 24. Col. 1. 15. 1 Tim 6. 16. Iohn 15. 9, 10, 11. Iohn 17. 22, 24,Angell of his presence. The face of God the Father, the image person, presence, or likeness of the great Invisible God the Father, who is the light that none can approch unto, whom no man can see, who only hath loved the Son, as the Son loveth his Saints▪ and hath ordained them to be partakers of his glory, Prov. 8. 12, 14, 22, 24, 30, 35, 36.according to the predestinate decree of God his Father, who created him Christ, Wisdom, counsell, understanding, strength, Lve, mercy, Righteousness, yea, he God the Father, possessed him in the beginning of his way, before his
works had any being, he was brought forth by the Father and was his delight. rejoycing alwayes before him, Isa. 43▪ 11.He is the Lord God of salvation, and besides him there is no Saviour, for he is the ordained life and peace to the elect saints that love him. Mark 3. 22▪ But all they that hate him, love death, Beelzebub, Luci∣er, Sathan, darkness, the ordnaied God of Damnation, Psal. 68. 20. Ier. 23. 6. Acts 10. 42. Acts 17. 31. Psal. 8. 5, 9. Psal. 110. 1.called the destroyer; but the God of the elect to Glory, is the God of salvation, even the Lord our righteousness, the ordained God of salvation by the Father, who hath crowned him with glory and honour, and hath so decreed that he the Christ shall sit on his right hand of power, until he make his enemies his foot-stool. Isa 49. 6, 7, 8. For thus saith God the Father, the redeemer of Israel by Jesus Christ, and his holy one, or of this his holy one Jesus. Art thou lighter, then that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob or Judah, and to restore the dissolutions of Israel, to establish the earth for ever, that thou mayest be my glorious Instrument of Salvation to the ends of the earth. Rom. 15. 8. Luke 1. 32, 33, Psal. 45. 2, 3, 4. 7. Iohn 13, 3, 16, Even to confirm the promises made unto the Fathers; for God the Father, shall give unto him the throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; because God the Father his God, hath anoynted or appointed him for that work of mercy and glory to the creature above all other spirits whatsoever: yet this sacred servant is not greatet then his Master, neither is he the am∣bassador that is sent by the Father, greater then he that sent him, and ordained him the lfe, therefore because he is life. We the elect shall live also for ever with him in Glory, Iohn 14. 19. 1 Cor. 19, 2, 27. Rom▪ 16. 2.for he shall bruise Sathan shortly under our feet; for the Father hath put all things under our feet, even all Principa∣lities and powers in heavenly places, therefore it is most clear and manifest, that he the Father is excepted which hah put all things under him.
1 Cor. 15. 28. And when all things are subdued unto him, then shall he himself also be subject unto God the Father, that put all Iohn 14. 20. Iohn 15. 1, 2.things under him, and then shall wee know that he is in the Father, and we in him and he in us; for the Father is as the husbandman, Christ is as the vine, and the elect are 1 Thessa. 1. 10, chap. 2, 12.the fruitful branches of that vine; therefore let us wait for this his Son from heaven, by whom he the Father hath called or Elected us unto his Kingdom of glory. Psal. 33. 12. But, that was not first which is spiritual (or eternall) but that which is naturall, temporall or fading; and as is the earth (Adam) such are they (in the Fathers decree) all that are earthly as is the heavenly; such are they also 1 Cor. 15. 4, 4.that are heavenly or eternall, and as we have born the image of the earthly or temporal Adam, so shall the elect also bear the Image of the heavenly or spirituall Adam, Christ, which is eternall. For as many as the Father hath given or alotted to Iohn 18 9. Iohn 12. 46, 49.Christ, he hath lost none of them, neither can they be lest, because they are spirits of light, decreed by the Father for glory, who changeth not from his eternal purpose in Christ Jesus, whereby he hath made them heires of glory, yea, Rom. 8. 16, 17.joynt heires with Christ, to be glorified together with him. Whose spirit beareth witness to our spirits, that we are the Children of God the Father, and heires with Christ, Rom. 9. 5.who is the Ordained God and Lord over all, blessed for ever. Iohn 1. 5. Psal. 33. 6. Ecles. 24 1▪ , , 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 3. Eph. 4. 24. Heb. 1. 2. Gen 1. 1. Rev. 3. 14. Heb. 1. 3. He came out of the mouth of the most high God the Father; and so is he the word of God. For the Creator of all things gave him a Command∣ment, and ordained his tabernacle (or personall presence) to rest. Saying to him, let there be a firmament, and let thy dwelling be in Jacob, and thine inheritance in Israel. Yea, he came forth as a brook from a river, for he the Father created him, the beginning; and he shall never faile
and thus is he established in Zion, in the beloved City (Jerusalem) is his rest and power, being the portion of his inheritance. Where he the word, the life, the way, the truth, the righteosness▪ and the lght is by the Father decreed to dwell in gory with all his saints for ever. Eccles. 23. 12. Dan. 2▪ 22. There is also a word which is called upon with death, who is called darknes, hell, falshood, vanity, unrighteous∣ness, wrath, destroyer, Sathan, wickedness, Eccles. 39. 28, 31, 34. God grant it be not found in the heritage of Jacob the Saviour. But this word was found in Jacob (or Judah) when they renounced the word of life and glory, (Christ) saying▪ we have no King but Caesar, and his blood be on us and our Children. Psal. 17. 4. Psal. 2. 5. Exod 15. 7. Psal 9. 6. xod. 12. 23. Io 15. 21. Iohn 8. 44. 1 Cor. 10. 0, Psal. 78. 31, 49. Psal. 109. 6. Gen. 1. 4. Eccles 33. 14, 15. Then spake he unto them, in or by this word of darkness▪ his wrath, (the divel) and vexed them in his sore displeasure; for they were given up by God the Father to him, (the wrath) therefore said to be of their Father the divel, the de∣stroyer. For, as God (or goodness) is set by the Father against evill, the divell; light against darkness, mercy against wrath, life against death, the Saviour against the destroyer; even so is the Godly against the Sinner, and the Sinner against the Godly. Even so also look upon the works of the most high God the Father, and there are wo (Christ and Belial, the accepted and the rejected) and their two works are one Eccles. 39. 24, 25.against the other. The ways of Righteousness are plain and easy to the righteus, but his commands are stumbling blocks to the wicked. And for the Children of Righteousness are good things created (or decreed by the father) in the (or this) sacred beginning. Even life eternall in glory, but for the sinners (or the
Children of the disobedient one) or evill things created (or decreed) even eternall being in the land of horrour, drought, Rom. 1. 18.and darkness, for ever with their Father the divell, for the wrath of God is revealed now, but shall then be mani∣fest. Psal. 103. 21. Psal. 104. 4. Col. 1. 13. Psal. 78. 31, 49. Called Principalities, Powers, Hosts, Ministers, (that at the Almighty's pleasure on his works) yea powers of dark∣ness, Beelzebub, that act by fire, famine, sword, and pesti∣lence, punishing the wicked to destruction, and boasting themselves in mischief and destruction; whose nature and property, is cruelty and destruction; therefore stiled a roar∣ing Psal. 52. 1. The wicked one. See Psal. 109. . Psal. 28. 2. Lyon, the destroyer, but not the Saviour, Christ; whose nature and property is mercy and preservation; and, there∣fore is he stiled the preserver of men, yea, the Oracle or mouth of God the Father. Thus you see that all things are double (or decreed for a Eccles. 42. 17, 23.double use) one against the other; some for the light to abide in glory, and some for the darkness, (Beelzebub) to abide for ever in darkness. Psal. 37. 9, 10, 11, 18, 29. For all that obey or do his will shall reap perdition; but they that walk in the light, and are Children of the light, shall inherit the land or earth of glory, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace. Rom. 9. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. Thou wilt say, why doth he then complain? for who hath or doth resist his will? for can I do any other then I am lead forth unto, or made to do? But O man, who art thou which pleadeth or speaketh against God thy maker? for shall the thing formed say Isa. 45. 9.unto him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus? hath not thee Potter power; of one lump to make one vessell, to honour (or for the acting of the spirit of honour and glory, Christ Jesus,) and another to dishonour (or for the acting of the spirit of dishonour and reprobation Beelzebub?) what and if God will, (to manifest wrath, and to make his) the sdivels elotted or meated out power known to the Creature, uffer the vessels of wrath prepared or decreed to de∣struction,
to act the will and works of wrath, and that he Luke 9. 20. Acts 2. 36. 1 Cor. 1, 24.might also declare the riches and power of his glory, for Christ is the glory and power of God unto salvation, upon the vessels of his mercy, Christ the mercy of God, which he Act 7. 2.hath prepared or decreed unto glory, to act the works of mercy here, for glory hereafter. For if thou be determined for glory, and the vessell or body be filled at present with the Spirit of glory, truth, and righteousness (Christ Jesus) then shalt thou act and be led forth to the works of glory, truth, and Righteousness. For the meanes shall never be wanting, that drives on to the end of the Fathers decree. But if thou remaine under the power and guidance of the spirit of darkness, then canst thou do none other works then the works of darkness; and then thou wilt apprehend the word, works, and actings of Christ in his vessels of honour (called saints) to be ridiculous, and foolish∣ness; for he that is not for Christ is against him. Math. 12. 03, Isa. 49. 9. Isa. 54. 5. But wo unto him that striveth with this his maker Christ Jesus, the Lord of life and glory, for this maker the Lord our Righteousness, is the husband or bridegroome to the Isa 46. 13.Saints, and he will marry them unto himself in Righteous∣ness and glory everlasting; for he will give unto them sal∣vation in Zion. Isa. 43. 24. Eccles. 15. 11. 12. Wisd, 12, 12, O therefore say not thou, it is through the Lord Christ my maker that I perish, for he causeth me to err, for who dare say unto him, what hast thou done? or who dare stand against his Judgement, to whom all power is given by the Father both in heaven and earth? or who dare ac∣cuse him for the nations that perish, whom he hath made? Matth, 28, 18, Mark 3, 22, 28, 29, 30,or who dare stand against him to revenge the cause of the wicked, that are by him cast off or rejected? therefore hap∣py, yea, thrise happy are all they that are possessed and Eccles, 1, 4, 9, 10, 19, 20, 22,guided by this sacred spirit wisdom. For she was created, or produced by the Father, be∣fore all things; she hath built her everlasting foundations
Prov. 8. 14, 15, 20. 22, 23, 24, 30, 31. Psal. 2. 2, 5, 9. with men, and is given by the rather to be with their seed in glory for ever. For all such as band themselves against Jehovah, and against his anointed power for  are described and known to be disobedient men of this earth, or world of Psal. 3. 8. Psal. 5 4.darkness, guided by the rebellious spirit of wrath▪ dark∣ness, and enemies to the obedient spirit of sight, life and determined glory, to the elect and obedient. Isa. 64, 4, For since the beginning of this world ear hath not heard, nor eye seen what is prepared for them that love him, the obedient and beloved Son Righteoues and are made 1 Cor. 2. 9. Phi. 2. 9▪ 11.to wait for Christ his appearing in glory, whom God the Father hath exalted highly above all and hath given him a name above every name. Eph. 3. 9. Eph. 2. 10▪ Gen. 1▪ 1. Iodn 1. 1. In whom the father created or decreed all things, and by whom all things were made into external shape and being, according to the fathers decree, or production of spiris in this sacred beginning Christ; who is the beginnig of the Gen. 1. 26. 27. Eph 1. 17, 22. Rev. 3. 12, 14.creation of God the father▪ the first created o every crea∣ture, to be the immediate image, or visible personal presence of the father Incompreenible. Who is the God of ur Lord Jesus Christ who hath Acts. 2. 36.made (or decreed) that same Jesus, both Lord and Chist, saying by Jeremy, This is his name whereby he shall be called and known, Ir. 23 6. Acts 10. 42.The Lord our rig=hteousness; the God of Salvation, the or∣dained Judge of quick and dead. Psal. 68. 20. Psal. 95. 3, 6, 7. Rom. 5. 21, Rom. 6. 22, 23. Act 10. 0. Even the power of God unto salvation, to reign in and among the elect  o unto eternall life. For, the gift of God the Father to all the elect is eternall life in glory through and by Jesus Christ, whom he hath made both Lord and Christ. yea, Ier. 10. 10. Prov. 8. 23. Heb 1. 12. Iohn. 6. 27. The only true God of salvation, the living God▪ or God of life and everlasting King of glory▪ who proceede h from the father everlasting; for him hayh God the Father sealed or decreed for the work of mercy and glory to the creature,
and conferred by the God of the Prince of Peace, and Fa∣ther Psal. 80. 17. Ro. . 23. Rom 10. 6. He 13. 22▪ 2 et. 1. 11.of this our Lord Jesus Christ, on the elect Sains▪ who shall be inhabitants of the everlasting Kingdom; For the Kingdoms of the world shall be the Kingdom of our great incomprehensible God the father, and of his Christ; and e the Lord God of salvation shall reigne over the Saints in Mich. 4. 7.Mount Zion for ever. O who can think upon these things wory: Or know the waies of the most hgh God and father of all and his power▪ Christ? Wisd 12▪ 1. Wis. 1. 23, Pal, 36, 5, Wi, 9, 13, Whose incorruptible Spirit is in all things; for he is the oye of ous; and by whom the heavens and all things were made into external visible form and being. O therefore who can truly think what this our Lord God of salvation is? much less to comprehend the infinite Majesty of God the father and Creator of all Spirits of light and Spirits of Wsd, , 4, 0, 27, 28.darkness; who loveth none but this sacred Spirit of Wisdom, Light, and Glory and all his Saints. Psal, 45, , For God his God hath anointed him the ▪Emanuel with the oyl of gladness above his fellows; above all Spirits and hath made him most blessed for ever; Honour and Ma∣jesty Psal, 21, 4, 5, 6, 7,hath he laid upon him▪ and through the mercy of the most High shall he not be moved; who hath given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give eternal life to as Ihn 17. 2,many as he (the Father) hath given him. Iaes 1. 1, 18, Re, , 1, R  16 od, 24, 9, 10 Who of his own Will begot the Creatures with the Word of Truth, Christ Jesus; and thus is he  Beginning of the Creation of God, The Word of God▪ The King of kings, and Lord of lords, The God of Isrel▪ or Elect; whose glorious coming is at hand. Even so come Lord Jesus the Beauty of Holiness the Christ of the most high God the Father, ordained by him to be the God of our salvation, and the power of od o ohn , 3,eternal life and glory▪ determined for the creature; for this life eternal is in his Son, and his Name is in him; The Exod, 23, 21, Ia, 12. 2.Lord Jehovah, the Truth, the Light, the Life, the Begin∣ing of the works of the most High God, and Father of all
Num, 16, 22, Heb. 12, 9 Eph, 4, , 2 Tim, 1, 16, Eph, 2, 10, Iohn 1, 18, Col, 1, 16. 1 Cor, 1, 24, 30, Col, 1, 12, 13, 15, Psal, 27, 8, 9. Gen, 32. 24, 28, 29, 3, Exod, 24, 10, Exod, 33, 11, 41, Num, 12, 8, Psal, 6, 20. Gen, 2, 19, 20, Spirits, who is above all, and by his holy Spirit worketh through and in all, being the Invisible or only wise God, or God of wisdom, Christ; whom no man hath ever seen, nor can see; for no man hath seen God the Father at any time, nor ever heard his voice; by whom all things invisi∣ble were created in Christ Jesus (the Beginning) that are in heaven and earth; but only as he hath been pleased to manifest himself to the creature, in and by his Name, Face, Presence, Power, Wisdom and Love, Christ, the visible God of salvation, the Lord God of the elect; with whom Abra∣ham Isaac, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, the 70. Elders, and all the Prophets talked▪ face to face, and mouth to mouth, as one friend talketh with another; even with the Lords anoynted, the Lord God of Israel, merciful and gracious, whose Nature and Property is Mercy and Love; by whom the whole fa∣mily of Heaven and earth is named and to whom all power Iohn 5, 26. Heb, 11, 3, Exod. 33, 14.is given (from the Father) both in Heaven and Earth; who is the Image, Face, and Presence of the great invisible God the Father, and in whom the invisible and incomprehensible God-head dwelleth personally, bodily, or representatively; who of God the Father is made unto us (creatures) wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and Redemption. 1 Tim, 6, 15, 16. 1 Iohn 1, 1, 7. Who also is the blessed Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of lords, and who only hath immortality; dwel∣ing in the light (he Father) which no man can approach unto, whom no man hath seen nor can see; even the Christ, Rev, 3, 14. Gen, 1, 1.the Power of God, the Wisdom of God, the beginning of the Creation of God, in whom all things were created (by the Father) the God of all Spirits. Iohn , , 2, Num. 16, 9, 22 1 Chron, 8, 6. Co, 1, 1 , Eo, 20, 11, Cen, , 4, , Iohn, 1, 1, 3, 1 or, 12, 3, 5, 6, For to us there is but one God, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, the God of Israel, (or Elect;) by whom are all things made, and we by him; who is the Lord God, former and maker of all things. being the express visible likeness (or Image) Face, Presence, Hand, and active Power of the Invisible God the Father▪ for the work of mercy, salvation, and glory to the
creatur; whose excellency of being is in no manner revealed 2 Cor, 4, 4, 6, 1 Cor, 2, 24, Heb, 1, 2, 4,to the Sons of men, other then in and by his comprehensi∣ble beloved Son and heir of all things, The visible God Christ Jesus; The Lord, the life, and hope of glory, of (and Col, 4, 24.by) whom we shall receive the reward of the inheritance; even eternal life. Gen, 1, 3, 4, For, the Father being the author and produce of all Spirits (even of light and darkness) from himself, his glory must needs be far ecxeeding theirs; who is pleased in speci∣al Pro, 8, 30▪ Psal▪ 104, 24, Gen, 2, 4,to delight, love, and dwell in Emanuel, the Anoynted or Ordained God of love and Salvation, light and eternall glory; by whom he made the worlds, and by whom all things were made; yea, all things were made by him, and he is before all things excepting him the Father; that 1 Cor, 25, 27,hath made him Lord of all things, and hath put all things under him; to whom all power is given (from the Father) Matth, 28, 18,both in heaven and earth, who is the beginning of the workes of God, the first begotten of every creature. Ier, 14, 22, Ier, 10, 16, O Lord our God (the God of salvation) thou hast made al these things, the Lord of hosts is his name, Behold I the Lord ma the God of all flesh, the former and maker of all Ier, 32, 17, 19, 21, 26, 27, Eph, 5, 23, Gen, 2, 4, Isa, 54, 5, Christ shall be calld the God of the whole earth.things, and the Saviour of the body, yea the Lord God maker of heaven and earth; for thy maker is thine husband, the Lord of host is his name, thy redeemer, the holy one of Israel, the God of the whole earth shall he be called; but he is not now so called by the men of this world, nor by his own chosen people the Jews, who do now daily deride him, and call him the impostor, and crucified God of the Gentiles; Heb, 12, 9, Lo, thus you see that the Father is the most high invisible and incomprehensible God and Father of all spirits; Creator of all things▪ of whom are all things, and Christ is the visible 1 Cor, 3, 23, Heb, 1, 9, Gal, 1, 3,Lord God (the beloved Son) the former and maker of all things (into external form, and shape▪ being) by whom are all things, and thus are we Christs, and Christ is Gods; Psal, 68, 20.For he that is our God, is the God of Salvation (Christ) or
of the elect, and not Lucifer the God of damnation (or of the reprobates, and unto God (the Lord Christ) be∣long the Issues from death, Hell, and Damnation, Bel∣zebub. Rom, 11. 36, O the depth and power of (Christ) the wisdom of God! how unsearchable are his works, and his ways past ing out? for of him▪ through him, and to him are all things, and he is (the Fathers delight) before all things, in whm he is well pleased. To whom be ascribed (as due is) all honour, glory might, majesty, and dominion eternal, from all his workes in Psal, 119, 71, 92,generall, and from him in particular; to whom the law of his mouth is become better then thousands of Gold and silver; for unless his law had bin my delight, I had peri∣shed in these mine afflictions, of more then ten years conti∣nuance in these severall places of mans Inhumane cruelty, but are to me Schools of Gods correction and fatherly chastisement. Where if Christ (the goodness mercy and power of Psal, 132, 2, 3, 6,God) had not bin on my side, mine enemies had swallow∣ed me up, when their wrath was kindled against me; yea, they had brought my life down to the ground be∣cause they are too mighty and strong for me; but blessed be the Lord my God, and Saviour anoynted, who hath not given me over as a prey to their teeth, though my soul hath long bin under the power and among these cruell ones whose teeth are speares and arrows, and their tongues a sharp sword. Rom, 16, 17, 18, I beseech you therefore brethren, marke them which cause divisions (Persecutions, Oppressions, and Offences) and avoid them; for such as they serve not our Lord Jesus Iohn▪ 8, 44, a Pet. 2, 14, 15, 17, 1,Christ, but (their father the Divel and) their own bellies, and by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple: an hert they have, exercised with covetous pra∣ctises (of Oppression, gain, honour, and preferment) fol∣lowing the way of Baalam, who loved the wages of un∣righteousness. 1 Pet, 3, 2,
And know this, that there shall come in the (or these) last days, Scoffers, walking after their own lusts (prescribing a service to God after their own vaine devises (as our Bishops did, and Priests still doe) making a mercenary trade of the Gospel of Christ, and his ordinances of the sacra∣ments of baptisme, and the Lords supper, burying of the Col, 2, 8,dead, and divers other things; and by speaking great high words and vanity (they) spoyle many through Phylosophy 2 Cor, 1, 4, 2 Cor, 2, 17, Mar, 7, 6, 7,and vaine deceit▪ after the vaine Traditions of men, after the (Idolatrous) rudiments or wisdom of the world and not after Christ, nor the rule of his word; challenging als o to have dominion over your faith, they compel men to serve 1▪ Cor, 1, 20, 26, 27. 1 Cor, 3, 18, 19, 20,Christ in their vaine devised ways; and thus they lord it over Gods heritage, but how can such hypocrites seek Gods honour truly, when they thus seek after lordship, domini∣on, and honour, one of another, as wicked lawyers do? but where is the wise? where is Scribes? where is the (Doctor or great) disputer of this world? hth not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? (or all worldly wisdom) for not many wise▪men (after the fle sh) not many mighty, not many noble are called, but God hath chosen the foolish and weak, to confound the wise and mighty; for the wis∣dom of this world is foolishness with God, he taketh the wise in their own craftiness, and knoweth that their thoughts (and rts of subtill Sathanicall Sophistry) are vaine. Psal, 32, 11▪ But be glad and rejoyce in the Lord, O ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are (meek) and upright in heart, for ye shall receive the crown of glory and these your (proud insulting) Oppressours shall be no more. For what soever is not of Christ, is of Beelzebub; But Covetousness, Pride, Injustice, Tyranny, Oppressi∣on, and Uncharitableness, is not of Christ, Therefore of Beelzebub. And his children (or ser∣vants) ye are to whom ye obey.
Oxon. & Can∣tabr. This reall truth of Christ's eternall Reigns With all his Saints in Judah land again. Oxford and Cambridde with their Phiophy Their subtil Logick, and cunning Sophistry, Their learned quirks, and their Sch . Though back by Egypts Art, though f'd  Styx, Shall nere this truth obscure, or now this light Breaks forth most clear to many Christians sight. Yea, though with blood they have long dampt this truth, And many hundred years stiled it (forsooth) An heresie, yet now it flames again, And will consume their learned glosses Fame, Their Pride, Ambition, Covetous tything fee, Their Romish Trumpery ere long you'l see. And in this way by them call'd heresie, I'l worship still my God in verity; Ʋntill the time he please to call me hence At his appearing in great excellence; His people Israel to attend, and praise Matth, 24, 36, 37, 38, With them, Great Zions God in sight alwayes. None knows that natures day, nor hour, but yet The time and year with his own words do fit, For as the dayes of Noah, so shall be His glorious coming then, in Majesty. From Noah▪s flood, unto this worlds Creation Is sixteen hundred fifty seven, by computation: But now the Priests the Lord of mercy sell; And by Injustice, the Laywers them excell. Thus one, the word of mercy sells for gold, The other Justice, Impiously and bold. FINIS.
