H491C 23364481 109550
The Divils cruelty to Mankind. BEING A true Relation of the Life and Death of George Gibbs, a Sawyer by his Trade, who being many times tempted by the Divill to destroy himselfe, did on Fryday being the 7 of March 166▪ Most cruelly Ripp up his own Belly, and pull'd out his Bowells and Guts, and cut them in pieces: to the Amazement of all the Beholders, the sorrow of his Friends, and the great grief of his Wife, being not long married: and both young People. To the Tune of The Two Children in the Wood. GOod Christian People lend an Ears, to this my dolefull Song, A sadder tale yon nere did heare, exprest by any tongue: The Divill hath very busie béen, now in these latter dayes, For to entrap, and to draw in, poor souls by severall wayes. He tempt's not only them that be, given over to all vice, But such has lives most Civelly, be strives most to entice, As by this Subject now in hand, which I shall here unfold, As much as I could understand, the truth by neighbours told. George Gibbs a Sawyer, by his Trade, and did in Hounds Ditch dwell, A very civell man tis said, and liv'd indifferent well, Not long time Married as I heare, nor charge lay on his hand, Nor yet no babis as he did fear, as I do understand. His Wife and he liv'd lovingly, 'twixt them noe discontent, A very good report hath she, her case most to lament, On Fryday being the Seaventh day, of March, some did me tell, Gibbs oft his Pen-knife whets they say, that night this Chance befll. AT twelve a clock at night he rose, his Wife being then a bed, And down to ease himself he goes, thus to his Wife he said, His Wife perswaded him to stay, but he was fully bent, The Divill prompting him on 's way, and out he present went, When he came there he shut the door, and out his Penknife slip't, His Belly wih it Cut and tore, and out his Bowells rip't, His carefull Wife did present rise, but when se did come there, And did behold it with her eyes, she trembled with such fear. Few words she spake to him but went and in some Neighbore brought, Thinking the worst for to prevent, and save his life they thought, Whilst she was gone he made the Door fast to himself within, But they did break and down it tore, and suddenly got in. His Belly he had rip't up quite, and out his Bowels re, That such a Devillish bloody sight, scarce shown by man before, The Divill did do it to be sure, he could nere procéed, His strength and heart could nere endure to do that cruell deed. Some of his Gutts were cut in two, and mangled in such sort, That he himself could never doe, but had some helper sor't Eight hours or more this man did live, in grievous woe and pain, What Sustinance they did him give, came straight way forth again. The Divill he said did temp't him long, and many times before, For all he did resist him strong, he nere would give him ore, Thus have you heard the doleful end, of Gibbs, which is too true, And take this councill from a Friend, for fear you after rue. Trust not too much to your own strength to God continual pray Resist the Divil els at length, hée'l lead you his Broad way, Yur Swearing Dam-me ranting-boyes he minds not them at all, They are so Wedded to his wayes, he hath them at his call, While some strives all the power they have, his wayes to flée and shun For some there be that counts it brave: to Hell hear-long to run, Now to conclude I wish you Friend, to God for ever pray, To kéep you from untimely Ends, and guide you his right way C. H. Londno Printed for William Gilbertsoni at the Bible in Giltspur-street.
