J327A 12350438 59967
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT royal blazon or coat of arms A PROCLAMATION, For a thanksgiving throughout the Kingdom of Scotland, for the late Defeat of the Kings Enemies. JAMES by the Grace of GOD, King of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, To Our Lyon King at Arms, and his Brethren Herauld, Macers of Our Pri∣vy Council, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms; Our Sheriffs in that part, conjunctly, and severally; specially constitute, Greeting: Forasmuch as James Scot late Duke of Monmouth, and Archibald Campbel late Earl of Argile, with their Traiterous Confe∣derates and Accomplices, Having most presumptiously Invaded both Our Kingdoms of Scotland and England by Armed Force, of purpose to have destroyed Us, and all Our good and Loyal Subjects, and subverted Our Government in Church and State; but it having pleased Almighty God, (by whom Kings Reign, and Princes decree Justice) by his Miraculous Providence and Omnipotent hand, to confound and blast the Hellish Devices and Projects of these our Enemies, and utterly to discomfite and subdue them. We have therfore from a Due and Reli∣gious sense of Gods so great Mercy and Deliverance towards us, and Our People in these Realms, Thought fit, with Advice of Our Privy Council, Hereby to set apart solemn days of Thanksgiving, for offering solemn Praise to Almighty God, for so great and miraculous a Deliverance, and making humble Prayers and Suppli∣cations, that his Divine Majesty may continue his undeserved Goodness towards Us, and these Our Kingdoms▪ And to the end this Solemn and Religious a Thanks giving may be gone about in a devout manner, We do hereby Recommend to the Most Reverend the Arch-Bishops, and the Right Reverend the Bishops, that they cause the Ministers in their Diocesses respectively from their Pulpits, Read and Intimate this our Royal Pleasure on the Lords Day immediately preceeding the Dyets appointed for the said Thanksgiving, which are after-mentioned, viz. These for the Diocess of Edinburgh, upon Thursday the Twenty Third Instant; and these of all the other Diocesses of this our Kingdom, upon Thursday being the Thirteenth Day of August next. And We hereby Require and Command all Our good Subjects Peremptorly and Religiously to Observe these Solemn Days of Thanksgiving, as they would tender the Glory of Almighty God for so Signal a Deliverance▪ and not incur Our high Displeasure; yet We are not hereby to lessen the Resentments of our good Subjects on this Occasion, but allow them, after Divine Service performed, to use all lawful demonstrations of Joy and Gladness. And that Our Pleasure in the Premisses may be known, Our Will is, and We Charge you strictly, and Command, that in continent, these Our Letters seen, ye pass to the Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and all the other Mercat Crosses of the Head  urghs of the Shires of this Kingdom, and thereby open Proclamation, in Our Royal Name and Authority, make Publication of Our Pleasure in the Premisses, that all Our Subjects may have Notice thereof, and give Obedience accordingly. Given under Our Signet at Edinburgh, the Sixteenth day of July, 1685. And of Our Reign the first Year. Per Actum Dominorum Secreti Concilij. COL. MACKENZIE, Cls. Sti. Concilij. God save the King. Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred Majesty, 1685. And Reprinted at London by E. Mallet, in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge.
