L8A 11859515 49999
A True Coppy of a second LETTER, From a Friend in UTRECHT, To a Friend in LONDON. Giving an account, not only of some remarkable passages relating to his Grace, James Duke of Monmouth, but likewise to the present concerns at Hamburgh. SIR. IN order to my last promise, I have been, and now am as good as my word to you, though you have not been the like to me, for give me leave to tax you with breach of promise, not writting to me, since your last which bore, date the 2d. In∣stant, according to your stile; which I take most unkindly from you. But by the way you shall not tax me with the like ungratitude, for I am resol∣ved to continue that succict accompt I promis∣ed
you in order, to what you were pleased to desire of me, in Relation to his Grace, James Duke of Monmouth, who being now more remoate, par∣don me, if my relation be not to so particular as it otherwise should have been, what I now give you shall be impartial unbiast, and without flattery I shall be so generous with you, as to communicate no∣thing to you, but what is a certain reallity. Sir I hope you will accept it, and so I will assure you it is. In my last I gave you an account of the Dukes arrival, since which time he hath thought fit to take a journey to Amsterdam, and the places ad∣iacent, I am informed by persons of considera∣ble Quality, his reception there, was every way corospondent to his Quality and Birth; al∣though not to bely the business, persons there as well as elce where were on the contrary faction; in his passage, he and our Agent dined with our Prince, being entertained very Coldly, upon what accasion is not yet known neither shall I so far intermedle with the concernes as to dis∣cuss it. It seems his Grace hath not behaved himself so ill, but that he was complimented by the cheif Majestrates of this place, as well as o∣ther places where he made any considerable stay It is thought he will cut is journey short, and retire to Hamburgh, but until better informati∣on I dare not affirme it for a truth; though no∣thing is more talked on at present, and that by
the most sollid Heads: truth it is, he hath re∣moved himself from Amsterdam, and designes to Visit North-Holland, but whether he in∣tends to fix at Hamburgh or not, I as yet can∣not affirme in relation to the proceedings there, it is conceived there will be an accomodation. But upon what terms is not known in Publique, to give you ground for what I say, the Danes has withdrawn Five Sail of his Men of War from the Elbe, and some part of his land forces from before the Town, and not only so, but admitted them to convey in Five Hundred head of Cat∣tel small and great, which was as a thing unreaso∣nable as I conceive, had not an accomodation been privately concluded, so that in any reaso∣nable persons judgment, nothing can possibly be imagined, but the Ratification of some particu∣lar Articles already concluded and agreed on: which what they are may be imagined but not affirmed, or at least wise Confirmed, until my next, as far as I can inform my self the Articles are these following. First that the Hamburgers will admit of his Majesty as Supream, not deny∣ing him either the priveledge of his progenitors or predicessors (always excepted) their antient Liberties may be reserved, intire without any Diminution. Secondly that for satisfaction of the Damages by them sustained; they should be duly and faithfully reinbursed such Charges as they had laied out in their own defence, du∣ring
this present Siege. Thirdly that no persons whatever, either Foreigners or Natives, should be exempted from free pardon upon all accounts whatever, in relation to the Vindication of the interest of the City. Fourthly that his Majesty of Denmark should not only pass his royal word, but publish the same by Proclamation, within few daies after these Articles signed. Fifthly, that all things relating to this place should re∣main in the same Nature as they did before the beginning of this late War, and no persons what∣ever should sustain any damage for their allegi∣ence according to the Five Articles above men∣tioned. Sir, This is what I can assure you from this Weeks abservations as to the Articles, although I have them from a good (and I think Infallia∣ble Author) yet I will not affirm them, until my own eyes convince me of their truth, which a few daies I will certainly do, till then excuse me from a further Relation, which shall be fur∣ther amplified in my next, by. SIR, Your humble Servant, B. L. ƲTRECHT, Octob. the last 1679.
