M1326 13355412 99233
A NEW TREATISE OF ARCHITECTURE, ACCORDING TO VITRUVIUS. Wherein is Discoursed of the five Orders of Columns, viz. The TUSCAN, DORICK, IONICK, CORINTHIAN, and COMPOSITE. Divided into seven Chapters. VVhich declare their different Proportions, Measures, and proper Names, according to the Practice of the Antient Architects, both Greeks and Romans; as also of all their parts General and Particular: ne∣cessary in the building of Temples, Churches, Palaces, Castles, Fortresses, and all other Buildings, with their Dependants: As Gates, Arches-Tryumphant, Fountains, Sepulchres, Chimneys, Crossbard-Win∣dows, Portals, Plat-forms, and other Ornaments; serving as well for the beau∣tifying of Buildings in Cities, as for necessary Fortifications of them. Designed by JULIAN MAUCLERC, Lord of Ligneron Mauclerc, Brossandiere and Remanguis. Whereunto are added the several Measures and Proportions of the famous Architects, Scamozzi, Palladio, and Vignola: With some Rules of Perspective. The whole represented in fifty large Prints, enriched with the rarest Ornaments of Antiquity, and Capitals of extraordinary greatness, with their Architraves, Frieses, and Cornishes proportionable. A work necessary for Architects, Painters, Carvers, Engineers, Gold-smiths, Masons, Carpenters, Brick-layers, Joyners; in general, for all that are concerned in the famous Art of BUILDING. Set forth in English by Robert Pricke. Licensed, May 27. 1669. ROGER L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed by J. Darby, and are to be sold by Robert Pricke, at his Shop in White-Cross-Street, near Cripple-gate: Where likewise you may have choice of other Books and Prints, as Maps, Copy-Books, Chimney-pieces, Ceiling-pieces, &c. 1669.
To the Reader. GLory is the Recompence of good Actions. And although they say of Virtue, that it is the Reward of its self, it is nevertheless very seldom that any man is induced to do well upon this Principle. Glory is rather his more-pleasing and continual Object; He loveth it, and by the effect of this his love, he is ea∣gerly carried on to undertake all that may enable him to possess the same. He becometh moderate, he be∣cometh couragious, he becometh prudent, and by a thousand proofs that be sheweth of his virtue, he pro∣duceth a thousand Witnesses of the desire that he hath to possess this Glory. By this desire all men bend the inclinations they receive from their Birth, towards Virtue. By this desire some have attained the Title of Valiant, others of great Politicians. Many have embraced Learning; and according to the excellent motions of their mind, some have been praised for their Piety, and others have carried away the glory of having attained to the perfection of that which they have undertaken, and to be an Example to all those that love the Reputation of their Countrey, as much as they do their own. The Author of the Work which I present thee, Reader, is become of the number of these vertuous Ones: He was a Gentleman, and that he might render its due to his Profession, he followed Henry the Great whithersoever the occasions of that Prince did call those of his condition. But after that France had received, from the goodness as well as from the Valour of its King, a general Peace; Monsieur de Mauclerc retired himself home; where following the in∣clination of his Genius, he made this Work; which is become no less glorious for the French, than it is for the Author himself. The matter hereof hath been handled by divers strangers: But he hath understood it as well as they; and al∣though they have preceded him in the publishing of their Meditations, they have no further advantage of him than in time only. He hath made such Observations therein, which are as so many Rules, and such Illustrations as ought to pass for solid instruction; and throughout all, the ordering is so admirable, it compelleth us to believe he did not reduce it into the estate in which it is, but in a long time, and very curious inquiry. His death was the cause that this Work hath not seen the light sooner. But now it is restored to France, after half an Age since he was taken from it. It is the whole Body of Architecture; it is a perfect Treatise of that Art, much enableth Marble and Stone to become the delights of men, which maketh them the Glory of Palaces, the Ornaments of Churches, and the most durable Monuments which the ambition of men could ever find out to make their Riches and Power recommendable to Posterity. It hath alwayes been so esteemed; it hath, as it were, become familiar in the Courts of Kings and Princes: And for the Credit it hath got among magnificent Rich Ones, it maketh us still to report of their Virtuous Inclination, as well as of their great Fortunes. The People that first perfectly possessed it, are the first also that acquired Elegancy of Behaviour, and the perfection of Sciences. From the Greeks it passed to the Romans: And although the great understanding of this latter People could have invented some things new, yet they alwayes conformed themselves to the Rules which the first delivered concern∣ing this Art. They also added thereto worthy Augmentations: and both the one and the other have received the Glory of that whereof they were the Authors. The Grecians Province, called Doris, gave its name to the Dorick Column; the Ionick is so called of Ionia, which is a part of Greece: and the famous City of Corinth hath encreased much its Re∣nown, by having invented the Corinthian Column. The Romans named the Tuscan Column, which they found out: and the Composite is a sort of Column that receiveth all the Beauty and Ornaments of the other within its body. Lastly, Every Nation hath set forth stately Testimonies of the esteem which they have all had of this Art. The Jews much boast of the Temple of Great Solomon: The Assyrians their Babylon: The Egyptians talk much of their Pyramides: The Greeks of the famous Temples which they built for the memory of their Godds. Rhodes boasteth of its great Colossus: Rome setteth before our eyes its Temples, its Ampitheaters, its Arches of Tryumph, and its thousand stately Palaces, which makes us still to admire its former greatness. I will end with our selues, and without mentioning innumerable particular Houses, which are as many Palaces comparable to those of Antiquity: I will say that the Louvre is an Abstract of all the Curiosities of Architecture, and that its Magnificence far excelleth all that the ambition of stran∣gers can arrogate to themselves therein. This witnesseth to all the World, that the French have had the perfect knowledg of this Art, and that our Author intended not so much to give Instructions to his own Countrey-men, as to make it known that this Art was very acceptable amongst them. He hath written thereof all that ought to be said, but this not being his whole intention, he hath set them forth, and caused them to be Engraven in Copper. His Work sheweth the care he hath used therein, the exact justness he hath given to the Measures of his Columns, the excellency of the most fitting Ornaments, and of the least particularities he hath observed in the Bodies, and in every Member thereof, might make his Work to pass for a Miracle, if Strangers had not forestalled our Contemplation with that which they have written upon this Sub∣ject: Yet howsoever the Work is altogether new, seeing it hath not hitherto been published; and those skilful Architects to whom I have shewed it, have made me highly esteem thereof. I have made an entry into the body of the Book, with an Addition of divers particular Members that I have borrow∣ed from the Italian Architects; which are the separated parts, I have been advised to add thereto, and chiefly the Or∣naments of the Frieses in each Order: which in respect of their great length, could not there be placed in their just propor∣tion and measure; and the Ionick Scrole, with the Rule for its Constitution, according to the manner of Vignola, A Profile for the Ionick Capital, some Imbossings, Frontlets and Cornishes, to take up empty places: which together may afford both variety and satisfaction for the Curious. At the end of the Book you may see also several Plates, which I have added. The first part doth shew the demonstrations of all the Proportions of the Heights, Distances, Breadth{us} and Openings which are to be allowed to the Enter Columns, and to the Arches Projecters, that are in the frame of a great Building; the which I have borrowed from Palladio. The other Plates contain all Architecture in general, by representing the different Columns of each Order, with all their Proportions and Measures, as well of the Bodies as the
particular Members, according to that which hath been allowed them by the famous Modern Architects, Scamozzi, Pal∣ladio, and Vignola: the one allowing more or less to the Pedestal, the other to the top or point of the Column; Also to the Architrave, Friese, and Cornishes, where each of them have studied how they might add the more comeliness thereto. And because that the measures which they have observed are different, I supposed that if I should make to appear, in an Ab∣stract at the end of the Book, a brief of the Resolution of each of them, I should be able to give some light to them which have not the whole knowledge thereof, and particularly to those which have not alwayes at hand the Works of those divers Architects, as well in respect of their rareness, as for those that have not the understanding of the Language in which the Originals are written: Translation being subject to Omissions or Augmentations; or else, that often to express some Se∣ction, or proper Name, they put in many needless words, which do more obstruct the Reader, then give him any true light; I mean such Translators as have no knowledge in Architecture: For to Discourse well of this Subject, we must un∣derstand it rightly. I have Composed a brief Instruction at the end of the seventh Chapter of this Book, which directeth to the foresaid lat∣ter Plates, where their Measures are also described on the side of each Column, with a Scale of the models and parts which the Architects have used in measuring them, that I might shew more distinctly all that dependeth thereon: for I know well, that when there is need of turning over a leaf to seek the instruction that is intended by some Figure or Letter-significa∣tion, one may be so troubled, that they can hardly find that which they had before their eyes: This also hath caused me to have the proportion of the Columns of this Book printed in one leafe, in a small size, that nothing thereof might be cut off, and that thereby might be seen altogether the whole Column in its proportion. And so much for that which concern∣eth the Augmentations of this Book. But not to deprive them of the Glory to whom it is due, we are to know that Monsieur de Mauclerc hath followed the great Vitruvius; and that all which he hath written thereof, and brought into design, is nothing but a faithful demon∣stration of that which this chiefest of Architects hath discoursed thereon: He hath bent himself wholly to illustrate his Pre∣cepts; He hath kept, throughout all, the justness of his Rules; and, neither diminishing nor adding any thing to his Instructions, he hath used them as the most solid Foundation he could build his Enterprize upon.
A New Treatise of the TUSCAN ORDER. CHAP. I. THE first Column, which is the Tuscan, is like unto a gross man, strong and well set, therefore it is call'd the Rustick Work. The height of this Column, with the Pedestal, Architrave, Friese, and Cornish, is divided into nine parts, whereof two shall be for the Pedestal: These two parts divided in six, one shall be for the Basis, the other for the Cornish. The four parts remaining, are to be drawn into a square, which are to be divided by two Diagonal lines; within this square, set a Circle be made, and within that Circle let another square likewise be made; and within this,The Diameter of the Column below, noted A. The diminish∣ing of the Co∣lumn, noted B. The Projecture of the Cornish on the side, no∣ted C. The division of the Basts on the right side of the Pedestal, noted D. The division of the Cornish of the Pedestal on the right side, noted E. The division of the Base, which is set upon the Pedestal, noted F. The height of the body of the Column, noted G. The height of the Capital, noted H. The Neck, no∣ted I. let a Circle be made which shall be the thickness of the body of the Column below noted A; but the out∣most square shall be the breadth of the Plinth of the Basis, noted B. The thickness of the body above, shall be the square which is in the middle, to be divided into eight parts; whereof two shall be the di∣minishing of the body of the Column. The Projecture of the Cimatum of the Plinth, noted C, shall be divided into six parts; whereof one must projecture where the square must be, as you shall see it marked with a Cross on the right side. The Basis, on the left side, noted D, must be divided in two parts, one shall be the Plinth: the other divided into four, the one shall be the Fillet above the Basis; another of the said four parts divided into two, one maketh the lower Fillet, which must project into the square, as may be seen in the great Pedestal following. And by this the whole Projecture shall be the seventh part of the Pedestal. The Cornish of the Pedestl on the left side, noted E, is divided in∣to four parts, whereof one is to be given to Cima, two to the Plinth, the fourth to the Astragal. The Base of the Column noted F, is to be set upon the Pedestal, at half the thickness of the Column, di∣vided in two parts, whereof one shall be the Plinth; the other divided into three parts, whereof two are for the Thorus, and the part remaining for the Fillet: The Projecture is as much as from the outward square unto the inward square; the Fillet must project one square beyond the Column, and the remainder must be for the Thorus. The height of the body of the Column noted G, is of six parts of its diameter with its Base and Capital. The Capital noted H, shall be as high as half the body of the Column below, and is divided into three parts, whereof one part is to be for the Abacus of the Capital, another for the Boultin; the part remaining for the Neck, the Egs and Achors, being di∣vided into four parts, one part shall make the Fillet, the rest make the Egs and Anchors. The Neck noted I, is divided in two parts, which is marked with two little Crosses, the one is the breadth of the Astragale; this Astragale again divide into three parts, whereof one shall be for the Fillet, the eighth part of the thickness of the body of the Column below, shall be the Projecture of the Capital: the Astragale must project in a square; as may be seen more plainly in the great Capital following the projecting of the body of the Column noted K; is made after this manner, The said Column in its length, between the Base of the Column and the Astragale, it shall be divided into six parts,The manner of diminishing the Column, as it ought to be, no∣ted K. where∣of two shall remain below, and is the third part of the height; having made a division from the bot∣tom to the top, you shall draw lines passing through on each side; and upon the line of the third part, you shall set a Compass compassing from one end to the other; apply the Compass to the side, and divide the Circle from one of the sides of its half Circle, unto the place where the Perpendicular line falleth off the Scapus or thickness of the Column above, until it be on the sixth part of Icnographia, being on the Pedestal, where they divide the round of the side into four parts, which you shall make with lines across, as it appeareth in this Figure. Likewise you shall draw out of each part, a line pro∣ceeding upward, beginning on the outside, and reaching unto the sixth part of the body of the Column, and so following the second and third of the lines so drawn, each in his place; let the lines of the di∣minishing be drawn, proceeding across unto the other, and by this the body shall have its diminish∣ing: and to render it more equal and pleasant to the eye, whereas the Circle is divided into four parts, divide the same space into 5, 6, 7 or 8, and the body of the Column likewise; for the more divisions you make thereof, the said diminishing will be the more equal and pleasing; but I would not make it into more then four; for to make the manner thereof more intelligible to those that have less skil in this Art, the which having practised in four divisions, will make the other more easie to them. There is yet another manner of diminishing of Columns, which Vitruvius sets forth in his third Book, Chap. 2. which is made after this manner; it is, That each of those Columns which shall reach from the Basis unto the Capital, about fifteen foot of height, the Diameter of this Column below,Another man∣ner of dimini∣shing Columns. ought to be divided into six parts; and of this it will suffice that the end above have five of them: Of those which shall be from fifteen to twenty foot, the greater end below shall be divided into six parts and a half, whereof you must allow five and an half for the end above: of another, which may have from twenty to thirty feet, let the Diameter below be divided into seven parts and an half, whereof there
shall be allowed six and half for the end above, and the lessening thereof will be convenient: when one shall be presented between thirty and forty feet of height, divide the end below into seven parts and a half, then allow six and a half for the end above, and so the Columns will have a good dimi∣nishing.Yet another manner for Columns of 30 feet, noted 3. But if you find any between forty and fifty feet, you must divide their Diameter below in eight parts, whereof you shall allow seven for the diminishing the end above, and that shall be done rightly which belongeth to it; nevertheless observe the manner here above described, noted by the Fi∣gure 3. The height of the Architrave and division of it, noted L.Above the Capital is the Architrave noted L, and hath half the Diameter of the body of the Column below; and being divided into six parts, one part is for the Cimatum; and the said part being divided into three, one part shall be for the Fillet, on the left side. The other five parts of the Archi∣trave divide into nine, whereof five shall be for the upper Fascia, the four for the lower. The whole having Projecture,The height of the Friese, no∣ted M The Projecture of the Cornish on the left side, noted N. as this Figure sheweth. Over the Architrave, is the Friese noted M, of which the height is half the Diameter of the Column below; over the Friese shall be set the Cornish, and it is of the same height with the Friese. Its Projecture noted N on the side, is equal to its height, and is divided into four parts, whereof the first is for the lower Cimatum, divided into three, one for the Fil∣let, and the two remaining for the Cima. Of the three parts remaining of the Cornish, one is for the Boultin and Fillet: the said part being divided into four, one for the Fillet, and three for the Boultin. The two parts remaining of the first parts are for the Projecture of the Corona, which is equal to the height: the part below is divided into eleven parts, whereof two are for the Fillet, and one for the Dentecules; it is fitting to have three as deep as large. This is the Description of this Column, with the true Symmetry and Compartition of its parts, used by the Romans and Ventians, according to that which I have been able to gather thereof out of all the most antient Authors which God hath given me the opportunity to see; And to make the use and practice of the Members of the said Column more easie here above, to particularize to the Reader and Artist very exactly, to observe the Measures and Proportions which ought therein to be kept, he shall find hereafter, in a great propottion, a Pedestal accompanied with its Basis enriched; the said Pedestal being noted in the middle with O, and the said Basis with the letter P. in its Plinth. In the other part of the leaf, on the left side of the said Pedestal and Basis, may be seen a Capital of great Proportion, agreeable to the said Basis and Pedestal, which is noted in his Friese with Q. And above the which Capital is the Icnography thereof, answering proportionably to the Icnography or plain which is described within the said Pedestal, marked O. And on the side of the Capital may be seen the Draught of the Egg or Oval, Geometrically described for the benefit of the Workman, whensoever he would use the same in his enrichments, for to make them the more perfect and pleasing to the eye. After you may see in two pages following, two different Architraves, Frieses, and Cornishes, likewise in great proportion, garnished with their Enrichments requisite, according to the capacity of the said Tuscan Order, where the one of the said Pourtracts containing the Architrave, Friese, and Cornish; the one is noted in its Friese with R, the other being over against it with S. Here followeth the Antiquity of the Tuscan Column first in Order. BEcause the Tuscan Column is more gross and stronger then any of the other following, it hath been more used by the Antients in Fortresses, because it is more fit, as being less charged with moulding, and by this means less subject to be corrupted. Pliny the Historographer speaketh of its Antiquity, that the Tuscans which at present inhabit the Coun∣trey about Florence, were descended from the Greeks, wherefore the Tuscan much resembleth the Dorick. Some Architects do write, that this Column hath its name from a certain Gyant named Tuscan, of whom, as they say, the High Dutch Almaius are descended. But it is true, that the Tuscan is the thickest and strongest of all; by reason of its strength, I have set it in the first place, as hath been said before; for the said Tuscan hath but six Diameters of its Body at the bottom in length or height, the Dorick seven, the Ionick eight, the Corinthian nine, the Composite ten. An especial Advertisement to Workmen that have only hand, practice and use of Rule and Compasses. FOR the better intelligence of Workmen that have a desire, but are not much experienced in the said Art of Architecture, they may be helped by the said measures, in setting up Columns or Pilasters, whether for ornament of the fore-parts of Lodgings, Porches, Gates, Windows, or other chief Work which they would enrich with Columns or Pilasters, taking notice to both sides of one of the Columns hereafter set forth of this said Tuscan Order, as likewise of the other fol∣lowing, as well of the Dorick Order, Jonick, Corinthian, as of the Composite; that is to say, Of those which are on the right side, void of Figures and Characters, for to bring them to their perfection, he shall find on the side of the same, two Perpendicular Lines, the one of which being noted TV at the end, and that on the other side XY, each of them di∣vided into ten equal parts, each of the said parts supposed to be one foot, and each of the said feet divided into twelve lit∣tle marks, for to signifie the twelve inches that the foot by the Standard doth contain; one of the which inches may be divided into twelve other parts, by which means the Proportions and Measures of the said Columns may be more exactly found; by the means of which feet and inches contained in the said two Perpendicular Lines and Parallels, laying a Rule upon the said two lines, crossing from each of the figures contained in the said Perpendicular Lines, to the other beginning below it; the Pedestal two inches and an half above the two feet, marked in the said two perpendicular lines with the fi∣gure 2. which is the entire height of the said Pedestal, its Basis and Cornish in ten foot of height, the said Column con∣taining all its Members, that is to say, the Pedestal, Basis, body of the Column, Capital, Architrave, Friese, and Cor∣nish; which the said Workman continuing, going upwards towards the top and Cornish of the said Column, shall find the measures of all the particular Members in the said Column; as also in all other heights of Columns propounded, with∣out changing the Pourtract, changing only other perpendicular lines; as if instead of ten feet, which we have supposed for example, the said perpendicular lines were divided into fifteen parts, signifying fifteen feet, and each foot into twelve in∣ches, as hath been said above, and consequently also of all other heights which shall be propounded to the said Workmen, which have but only the practice of the Rule and the Compass, may be able by this means to help themselves by the said Pourtracts of Columns, and use them for any heights, as they shall please, without altering or changing the Measures and Proportions of the same; a matter of great benefit for ordinary Workmen which have not been bread up in learning, the which I was willing to add at the end of this first Chapter of the said Tuscan Column, according to a promise made by me in the brief of the first Book of my works of Architecture. But considering with my self that this Advertisement would be more convenient in this place then in any other, I had a desire to insert it, and yet I shall not cease to make men∣tion thereof in the end of some other Chapters following, for the help of the said unlearned Workmen, having, as is said, only the practice of Rule and Compass, and a hand fitting to perform any piece of Work undertaken by them, of what kind soever they may be, whereunto the said Colums and Pilasters may be fitly applyed.
A New Treatise of the DORICK ORDER. CHAP. II. THE second Column, which is the Dorick, is compared to a Gyant, because it is gross, strong, and robust; the height thereof is divided into eight parts, whereof two shall make the height of the Pedestal; these two divide into three others, the one for the thickness of the body of the Column below; and seven such parts shall make the height of it with its Base and Capital; and thus the Body noted A, with the Pedestal joyned to it,The height of the body of the Column, noted A. shall have in height ten parts; divide the thickness of the body into four parts, two of them being joyned thereto, do make the largeness of the Pedestal; and after you shall add to each side, one part for the Projecture of the Cornish of the Pedestal. The height of the Pedestal noted B, is divided into seven parts, whereof the two outward do make the Cornish and Basis; the five parts remaining shall make a square,The height of the Pedestal, noted B. according to the height of the Pedestal, Cornish and Basis; the Diagonal Line thereof being erect, shall make the height of the Pedestal between the Basis and Cornish. The Basis on the right side noted C, divide into two parts,The division of the Basis of the Pedestal on the right side, noted C. The division of the Basis of the Pedestal on the left side, noted D. The Projecture of each Cima∣tum, noted E. The division of the Cornish of the Pedestal on the right hand, noted F. The division of the Cornish of the Pedestal on the left hand, noted G. The division of the Base of the Column, noted H. The largeness and Projecture of the Root of the Body of the Column, noted I The diminish∣ing of the body of the Pillar, noted K. The height and division of the Capital, noted L. The Projecture of the Capital, noted M. The division and Projecture of the Archi∣trave, noted N. The height and division of the Friese, noted O Of the space re∣quisite for Me∣tope, which they set be∣tween the Trig∣liph and their enrichment, noted P. The height and division of the Drops noted Q The height and division of the Cornish on the left side, noted R. The height and division of the Cornish on the right side, noted S. one for the Plinth; the other divide into three, two for the Thorus, the third for the Fillet. That on the left side, noted D, which is of another fashion also, divide in two parts, whereof the one shall be the Plinth; the other likewise divide in two, whereof one part is for the Thorus below; the o∣ther divide into three, two for the Thorus, the third for the Fillet. The Projecture of each of them is in a square; the Projecture of the Plinth, shall be the sixth part of the largeness of the Pedestal. The Cornish of the Pedestal, noted F, divide into five parts, one for the Astragal, two for the Cima, and the two other for the Plinth, which divide again into three. The Cornish of the Pedestal on the left hand, noted G, divide into four parts, one for the Astragal, two for the Ci∣ma, the remainder for the Square. The Base, which is placed upon the Pedestal, noted H, is the half Diameter of the body of the Column; which divide into three parts, one part for the Plinth; the remaining divide into four, one part for the Thorus above, the remainder divide in two equal parts, one shall befor the Thorus below, the other for the Scotia: After having divided this into seven parts, one shall make each Fillet, with the which it is inclosed. The Fillet of the body below, noted I, shall be made after this manner; Divide the largeness of the body of the Column into four parts, take there∣of the half of one fourteenth part for the largeness, and the other half for the Projecture: The Pro∣jecture of the remainder shall be made, as it is noted in the Ichnographia of the body above the great Capital. The diminishing of the body of the Column, noted K, shall be of the one part, and of the other of a fourteenth part, as it is said before of the Tuscan, to the end that the height of the body may have twelve parts in thickness. The height of the Capital, noted L, is the half of the body be∣low; divide it into three parts, one for the Neck, the other for the Boultin; the third part again divide into three, two for the square; the third part of the Square is the Cimatum. The Projecture of the Capital, noted M, shall be such as every part project into a Square, over the Capital. The Architrave is placed, noted N, which hath half the thickness of the Column; the seventh part there∣of is the Tenia, and hath as much Projecture, as the body of the Diminishing, and place it as it appear∣eth in this Figure. The Friese followeth, noted O, the height thereof on the left side, is of three such parts as two of the Architrave; the third part of the Friese divide into three, one shall be the Fillet over the Trigliph, which is made after this manner; Its height from the Architrave unto the Fil∣let above, divide into three parts, whereof two shall be the breadth of the Friese, and three the height. From one Trigliph unto the other, shall be a perfect Square, in the which spaces, noted P, when for the greater Ornament one desireth to enrich them, they may carve therein the heads of Beasts, with Plates or Dishes, named by Vitruvius Methopes, and not without signification; for the Antients purposing to make a Sacrifice of Bulls, used also Plates or Dishes; and placed such things for enrichment about their Temples. Under the Trigliph are hanging six drops, noted Q: the which shall have in bigness the sixth part of the height of the Architrave; the Fillet on which they hang, is the fourth part of the Drops. Above the Friese, on the left side, is placed the Cornish, noted R; which is of the same height with the Architrave: The Cornish shall be divided into two parts, whereof the first is to be divided into four, one for the Cimatum, two for the Corona, the rest for the little Cima, which is placed above. The se∣cond part divided into seven, is the O. G. which is set upon the Cornish, and one seventh part joyned thereto, shall be the Fillet upon the O. G.; its Projecture must be square. But the Projecture of the Cornish above the Cima, is made in this manner; the Architrave divide into three parts, two shall be the Projecture of the Crown. The right side, noted S, is made in this manner. Divide the Architrave in three parts: four such parts shall make the height of the Friese, and the same height shall also be the Cornish. The tenth part of the Friese shall be the Fillet above the Trigliph. But you shall divide the Trigliph, as it is said before in the Trigliph of the other side, noted O. This Cornish divide into nine parts, whereof two shall be for the two Facias; one part shall be allowed for the Thorus or Boultin: two to the Modelians, two to the Crown, two to the Cima: The Modellions divide into three, one part shall be for the O. G. which
is upon the Modillions, and the Projector is made also in such manner; The two parts below, which are allow∣ed for the Facias, divide into six parts, two for the lower Fascia, three for the upper Fascia, the rest for the Fillet under the Boultin.The division and Projecture of the Car∣touse, noted T. The Modillions, noted T, are made in this manner; the Boultin to begin from the middle unto the end on the right side; divide into six parts, one for the half Modillion, three between two, and two for the Cartridges en∣tire, three for the Projecture: all the other parts project in a Square. But if you will flute the Column, you shall make twenty four Futes, noted V, and you shall hollow them in the manner which you see in the Ichnography or Plat-form, over the great Capital enriched, accompanied with its Base, marked G G: and as it appeareth also in the body of the Column,The manner of making the Flutes, noted V. noted V. It is that from the Flutes, or one side to the other of the space of the fluting, there shall be drawn a right line, the which shall be the side of a Square; and the said Quadrant or Square finished, shall be set in the Center thereof, noted I, the Centrick foot of a Compass; and with the other point shall be touched the one and the other Angle, noted 2, and 3; and bringing it about, they shall make its just hollowing; the which shall make the fourth part of a Circle; as it is demonstrated in the above-said Ichnography or Plat-form. For the fluting, which are made with an out∣standing ridge; but the Flutes of the Columns which are accompanied with a Plate-band or Fillet, called by Vitruvius Strix, about the end of the third Chapter of his fourth Book, shall be the said Strix divided into five parts, whereof four shall be allowed for the said Flute, and the fifth for the Fillet or Plate-band, according to that which shall be more ful∣ly declared in the Treatise of the Ionick Order in the Ichnography of the great Capital enriched, noted N, and its Ichno∣graphy noted S. But if one would make a delicate Column seem to be gross and material, it will be needful to make 28 Flutes. The Dimension made, as is above said, the Column will have its true Symmetry and Proportion, as it appeareth in the Figure hereafter. To make the Practice and use of the Members of the said Column here above particularized, more easie to the Reader and Workman that is curious, exactly to observe the Measures and Proportions which ought to be kept, he shall find hereafter in a great Proportion, a Pedestal noted in the middle with Y: And in the other part of the leaf, on the other side of the said Pedestal, a Basis and Capital of proportion agreeable to the greatness of the said Pedestal, noted Z. Above the which Capi∣tal is the half of the Ichnography or plain of the same, from the which the Workman may be able to draw as much benefit as if it were compleated, the which could not be made, in respect of the bigness of the Plate upon the which the said Base and Capital are engraven. There follows in two other pages, two sorts of Architrave, Friese and Cornish, likewise in a great proportion, adorned with enrichments necessary, according to the Antiquity of the Dorick Order, whereof one of the said Portratures, containing the Architrave, Friese and Cornish, is noted in the said Friese in the midst A A; where one may see designed in small, all the Ornaments of the said Friese: and the other over against it, noted B B; where one may see likewise designed in small, the under props of the said Cornishes, which in respect of the incapacity of the Plate, could not be set there in their just proportion. Those which would make use thereof, may reduce them together as is fitting. The Antiquity of the Dorick Column, being the second in Order. AS for the Original and Antiquity of the said Dorick Column, and of the first Buildings that have been adorned there∣with, I thought it fitting to make mention in this Chapter, for to ease the Curious Reader of the labour of reading many other Authors which have written thereof. Amongst the rest, the most excellent Vitruvius, in the first Chapter of his fourth Book, where he writeth, that the said Dorick Column, is the first and antientest of all others. The which was first invented by a Prince named Dorus, Lord of Achaia and Peloponesus in Greece. The said Dorus built first, by an occasional chance, a Temple of this form in the City of Argos, and afterwards others like in many other Towns of the said Countrey, the Symmetry, Proportion and Compartition of the Measures, being not then as yet found out. But afterwards those of Athens, with their Captain Ion, Son of Xanthus, making War in Asia, conquered the Countrey of Caria, and named it Ionia, according to the name of the said Ion; and having begun to build Temples of their Godds, they built the first to Apollo, after the likeness and fashion of those which they had seen in Achaia. And the said Temple of Apollo was by them named Dorick, because that they had seen such like in the Countrey of Doria; but when as they would in the said Tem∣ple, place and erect the Pillars; they found not any Proportion, Measure, nor Symetry certain; and seeking a means to make such as might bear a great weight, and nevertheless be pleasant to behold, they took their Dimensions upon the foot of a Man, which they found to be the sixth part of him, which they transported and appropriated to the said Column, in such manner as the body of it was by them lifted up six times the Diameter of the body of it below, containing therein its Capital. Thus the Dorick Column took at first its Proportion and Measure according to the bigness and strong stature of a Man. Accordingly the Edifices and Buildings after a manner pleasing to behold, both firm and strong, to the which afterwards, for the greater pleasure, hath been added a Diameter more by those of Modern times, which are seven Diame∣ters, leaving the six for the height of the Tuscan, being the thickest and strongest of the Columns. An especial Advertisement for ordinary Workmen, who have only the Use of the Rule and Compass. BUT for further understanding to ordinary Workmen, they shall find on the side of them, viz. those that are void of Figures and Characters, two perpendicular lines; the one whereof being on the one side of this said Dorick, noted CC and DD at their ends; and that of the other side with EE and FF, each divided into 15 equal parts, supposing each of those parts for a foot, and each of the said feet divided into 12 small points, to shew the 12 inches that a foot by the Standard must contain; the one of which inches may be also divided into 12 other parts, that by this means they may more exactly find the Proportions and Measures of the said Columns: by means of which feet and inches contained in the said perpendicular lines and Parallels, placing a Rule upon the said two lines, traversing each of the Cyphers contained in the one and the other of the said Perpendiculars, beginning below at the Pedestal, at 9 inches above the 3 feet, marked in the said two perpendicular lines, with the figures 1, 2, 3. which is the entire hight of the said Pedestal, with its Cornish and Base therein contained, at 15 feet of height; the said Column containing all its Members, viz. the Pedestal, Base, Body of the Column, Capital, Architrave, Friese and Cornish; the which the said Workman continuing, ascending towards the top and Cornish of the said Column, shall find the measures of all the particular Members in the said Column, as also in all other heights of Columns proposed, without changing the Pattern, changing only other perpendicular lines; as if in the place of 15 foot, which is made for Example, the said perpendicular lines were divided into 20 parts, signifying 20 feet; and each foot into 12 inches, as it is said above; and consequently of all other heights which shall be propounded to the said Workman which hath not learning, but onely the practice of the Rule and Compass; they may by this means help themselves by the said Patterns of Columns, to use them for all such heights as they shall think fit, without changing and defacing the Measures and Proportions of them. The which I was willing to add at the end of the Chapter of this Dorick Column, according to promise made in the first Chapter of the Tuscan Order; for the benefit which I know ordinary Workmen may draw from thence, for satisfaction of those which shall set them to work. I purpose, for the benefit of the Workman, to add the same Advertisement at the end of every Chapter of each Order; forasmuch as he which should have need but of two Orders of Columns; as for Example, of the Dorick and Ionick; intending to pass over the other (if it were not described but at the end of the first Chapter of the said first Book, and at the end of the second, according to my said promise) by this means the said Workmen would be frustrated, if they had not recourse to the said foregoing Chapters; as also my self of the desire that I have to instruct them to do rightly, according to the curious path of search∣ing out of Measures, which the good antient Architects have taken the pains to find out in the said Columns, to bring them to the perfection of their excellent Beauty, for adorning of the stateliest Temples and magnificent places which may be built, and which could not heretofore be forecast nor projected.
A New Treatise of the IONICK ORDER, VVithout the PEDESTAL. CHAP. III. THE third Column, named Ionick, without its Pedestal, is made after the like∣ness of a Woman. The total height of the which, noted A,The height of the Column with its mem∣bers, noted A. shall be divided into seven parts, of the which one part noted by the Italian A, shall be divid∣ed into twenty two parts, which is the whole largeness of the Plinth; below which twenty two parts there shall be left to each side of the said Plinth, three parts for its Projecture, together with the Base of the said Column; the 16 parts remaining are for the thickness of the body of the Column, noted B: the height of which, with the Base and Capital,The height of the body of the Column, noted B. The height of the divisions of the Base of the Column, noted C. hath eight times the thickness of the Column below. The Base, noted C, hath the half height of the body, which is divided into three parts; whereof one is the height of the said Plinth; the two remaining parts divide into seven parts, three for the upper Thorus; the rest divide into eight parts, two for the two Astragals of the middle; and the half of one part shall be for each of the Fillets, which are both upon the Plinth, and above and below the Astragals. That which is under the Thorus, shall contain two parts of one of the said eight parts, as it is plainly shewed in the figure of the great Base enriched, noted under its Plinth, and in the middle thereof with the letter D. The Fillet, which is set over the Thorus of the Base of the Column, noted D, is made after this manner;The division, height, & Pro∣jecture of the Fillet which is set on the Base of the Column, noted D. divide the breadth of the Body into 12 parts, one part of each side shall be the diminishing of the Column, and the half of one part shall be the largness of the Fillet and Projecture; the remaining parts shall have their Projecture, as is shewed more plainly in the figure of the Base, being on the other side of this said Column, set and figured in a greater form, which you shall find noted in its Plinth with N, ac∣cording to the frame of the Base enriched, as above described. On the top of the body of the Co∣lumn, is set the Capital marked E, which is made after this manner;The manner to make & frame the Ionick Ca∣pital as it ought to be, no∣ted E. Divide the largeness of the Column below into eighteen parts, the which you shall set on the Abacus of the Capital, adding to each side one half; but the Fillet, on which are the eighteen parts, ought to have the breadth of half one of these parts, which maketh the Cima, so that it be large, one part and a half with the Fillet. Of these eighteen parts of the Fillet, you shall apply nine to the side of the Capital, and shall distribute them in such manner, that one part may be for the Cima, two for the Trochilus of the Voluta, two for the Boultin, adorned with Egs and Anchors; one for the Astragale, with Beads; and the three parts remaining, for the half Circle below. Under the Scroul you shall take four of the eighteen parts which make the Friese; but on the top of the Column, you shall make an Astragale, which shall have in height the twelfth part of the largeness of the Column; whereof the third part is the Fillet, the rest for the Boultin, having the Projecture equal to the height: And for the plainer understanding of the said Capital, I have made on the left side of this another in a greater proportion, by this means very intelligible, the which you shall find noted in the midst of its Trochilus with O. The Scrowl,The manner of framing the Scrowl of the Capital, noted F. The diminish∣ing of the bo∣dy of the Co∣lumn, noted G. noted F, is made in the form and manner, as it is declared in the framing of the great Scrowl of the Capi∣tal, set and expressed on the right side of the said Column, noted by the said O, in its Trochilus. For the diminishing of the body of the Column, noted G, from the Base below, divide it into six equal parts, whereof you shall leave two; but from the second part of the Column below going upwards, you shall draw on each side right lines, and traversing, by each part of these divisions, and after you have drawn all these lines, you shall make upon the line of the second part, an half Circle, from one end of the breadth of the third of the Column, unto the other. After this, you shall divide the Arch of the Semi-circle, which is contained within the lines erected upwards, into four equal parts, the which you shall joyn together by cross lines, so that the first and highest of them may touch the lines which are erected from the twelfth part, in the place in which it maketh the Circle; and when this line, so erected, cometh to touch the end of the sixth part of the Column, you shall draw also the lines from the other Sections and Pertitions of the Circle, and they shall agree with them. These lines being thus drawn, you shall draw within the Semi-Circle, the lines of the diminishing, as is to be seen in this Figure. And by this manner the Column may be diminished, as it is more largly declared in the first Chapter of the said first Book, treating of the Tuscan Order. Over the Capital is placed the Architrave, noted H, having the height of the halfe thickness of the Column below: This Architrave divide into seven parts; let one be the Cima, so that the third thereof be for the Fillet; the six parts remaining divide into twelve, three parts for the Fascia below, four for the middle, and five for the upper, having their Proje∣cture and place as this figure sheweth. The Friese, noted I, is of the same height with the Archi∣trave,
and is divided into nine parts, one of them is the little Sima under the Teath and Dentiles; the third of the remainder is for the Fillet: the two other parts make the Sima; over the Sima are placed the Teeth and Dentels, noted K on the side, whereof the height is equal to the Facia of the middle of the Architrave; the Projecture agreeth with the height; their breadth is the half of the height, and two thirds of the largeness make the spaces which is between them two. To the Teeth and Den∣ticles, add a little Cimatum, which is to be as high as one sixth part of one of the Teeth and Den∣tiles; the third thereof is the Fillet, the remainder is the Sima, which ought to project in a square. Afterward the Corona is made, noted L, which is as high as the Facia of the midst of the Architrave: the third thereof is the Cima, and the rest the O. G.; the Projecture thereof is equal to the distance that there is of the Friese, to the end of the said Teeth and Dentiles, as it is shewed by the figures of them, noted M. Upon the Corona, they set the O. G. noted M, which is as high as the height of the lesser Facia of the Architrave, the which is marked with a Cross; a seventh part of which being joyned thereto, is for the Fillet, the remainder for the Cima: The Projecture of the Fillet shall be equal to the height. If you would flute the Column, you shall divide the circum∣ference of it into 24 parts; one of them divide into five, whereof one fifth is the Flute, and the re∣mainder shall be for the Strix; and this being done, you have accomplished the true Symmetry and proportion of this Column, according to the custom which the most excellent antient Romans, and other excellent Common-Wealths have made use of. And for the more large declaration, to put in practice the members of the said Column here above described and particularized; in the two next Portracts of the Ionick Order with the Pedestal, may be seen in the two pages following in a great proportion, a Base and Capital adorned with their En∣richments, and the Ichnography or Plain. By the means of which Capital and Base enriched, the curious Artist shall be largely instructed how to adorn the said particular Members, whensoever it shall be fit for him to use them, and occasions shall offer themselves; the which Base is noted under its Plinth, and in the middle of it with P: and above the Base, you may find the Scrowl designed at large, according to the Rule of Vignola, and it is made as it is here described; you must draw a perpendicu∣ler line, called by him Cathette, and divide it into sixteen equal parts, whereof nine shall be for the part above, and seven for the part below; and the separation A, shall be the Center of the Scrowl: After you must draw three other lines traversing, which shall divide the Center, and part its Circum∣ference into eight parts; and then make the Triangle, as it is here on the side easie enough to be un∣derstood without any other description; only I shall say, That its line B C, shall have the nine parts heretofore named, and the line C D the seven parts; the other lines, without measures, do finish the Triangle, in which you must make the 25 figures, which are to serve for the proportion, as it is done on the side of the great Ionick Base. Having drawn your Cathetus, which being divided into 25 parts, as was said before, place the Center of the eye of the Scrowl upon seven parts upwards, and about that Center describe a Circle, whose half Diameter must be one part: this Circle shall be the eye of the Scrowl; then draw a strait line through the Center, which must cut the Cathetus at right Angles: this divides the eye into four equal parts or Quadrants; then divide the Quadrant in two equal parts, and through the two opposite divisions, draw streight lines, which must be continued out to a convenient length, as it may contain the breadth of the Scrowl in that place; so you have the eye divided into eight equal parts; then set the foot of your Compasses on the point C of the Triangle, and carry the other foot to the division marked 1; then remove your Compasses with that distance to the Scrowl, and set one foot in the mid∣dle of the eye of the Scrowl at the Center, noted A, and the other foot to the top of the Cathetus to the figure 1; this being done, remove your Compasses to the Scale again, and placing one foot in the Center of the eye, as before, remove the other to the division, noted 2. Then remove your Com∣passes again to the Scrowl, and place one foot on the Center, noted A, as before, then direct the other foot to the second line, and it will fall where the figure of 2 is: Then remove your Compasses to the Scale again, placing one foot on the Center, noted C, as before; and the other guide to the fi∣gure 3: then carry your Compasses in the same distance again to the Scrowl, placing one foot at the Center A, as aforesaid, directing the other foot to the third line, and it will fall on the figure 3; then remove your Compasses again to the Scale, as before, placing one foot on the Center C, and the other on the figure 4, removing your Compasses to the Scrowl, placing one foot on the Center, noted A, as aforesaid, guiding the other foot to the fourth line, and it will just reach the point marked 4; then remove again the Compasses to the Scale, placing one foot on the Center, the other on the division, marked 5; then remove that to the Scrowl, as aforesaid: So you must do by the sixth, seventh and eighth, and so to all the rest, till you come to the number 25, as you may see over the great Ionick Base, noted under the Plinth with the letter P.
A New Treatise of the CORINTHIAN ORDER, VVithout the PEDESTAL. CHAP. V. THE Corinthian Column, in respect of its beauty and comeliness, was judged by the antient Architects to come nearer to the shape of a fair young Maid, than any of the former, either Tuscan, Dorick, or Ionick; the which they have (as is heretofore said) in the first, second, third and fourth Chapters fore-go∣ing, appropriated, as well to the strong stature of a Man, as to that of a Wo∣man, which are of a far thicker shape and grosser then the Virgins; to the likeness whereof they have erected the said Corinthian Column: the whole height thereof conteining therein all the principal Members; that is, The Base, Capital, Architrave, Friese and Cornish, noted A,The whole height of the Column with all its Mem∣bers, noted A. The height of the Plinth, and the projecture of the Base, noted B. The height of the Column with its Base and Capital, noted C. The height and division of the Base of the Column, noted D. The height and projecture of the Fillet, which is set upon the Base, noted E. The division height and pro∣jecture of the Capital, noted F. The diminish∣ing of the body of the Column, noted G. is divided into eight parts, the uppermost of them divided into five parts, you shall take away from the top the fifth part. The eighth part of the Column below, noted B, is divided into 22 parts, which is marked A.B. of another manner then the former letter A, and is the largeness of the Plinth; sixteen of them make he thickness of the body of the Column. The Column, with the Capital and Base, noted C, must have in height nine times the thickness of the Column below. The Base of the Column, noted D, hath n height half the thickness of the Column below. The fourth part of that, is the height of the Plinth: The remainder divide into five parts, one is for the upper Thorus: after, divide one of these five parts nto four; and one of these four parts added to the fifth part below, shall be the lower Thorus; which may be seen more plain in the great Base following enriched: the space between the two Thorus, divide nto 12; give the lower Scotia 5, for each Fillet half a part; for the upper Scotia likewise 5: the two parts remaining maketh the two Boultins. Divide the thickness of the Column into 12 parts, one of these shall be the diminishing of the Column, and one half of each side shall be the height of the Fil∣et, and one half is the Projecture. The Projecture of the Members remaining is as appeareth more plainly in the Base, being on the left side of this present, in a bigger proportion, marked O, in the middle, and below its Plinth. The Capital, which is set upon the Column, noted F, is as high as the Column below is thick. The seventh part of the whole Capital is its Abacus, and hath as much Projecture as the Plinth of the Base, which divide into three parts; whereof the highest shall be for the Boultin, and a third for the Fillet of the said Abacus, which is divided, as is more plainly shewed in the figure of the great Capital, being on the left side of the same, noted P, above the Rose, being in the middle of its Abacus, and more plainly declared by the great Capital, being on the right side of the great Base enriched; the said Base being noted Q, the said Capital with R, the Platform or Ichnography of the Capital, the fashion of the Leaves and of the Volutes is shewed as well in the Fi∣gure of the said great Capital, as in that which is framed in a greater proportion, accompanied with its Ichnography or Platform. The Fillet next following the said Corinthian Columns: At the end of the Column is the Astragale, which is in height the twelfth part of the thickness of the Column below, and is divided into three parts, whereof the Fillet containeth one part, and the Boultin two; the Pro∣jecture is equal to the height: the body of this Colum, noted C, hath such diminishing as appeareth in the figure of the first Ionick, and is fluted, as you may see in the second Ionick:The division, height and pro∣jecture of the Architrave, noted H. But the lower third part of the height of it is round, as may be seen in this figure. After the Capital followeth the Archi∣trave, noted H, being of the same height with the Base; whereof the seventh part is the Simatum, which is divided into three parts, whereof the Fillet shall have one part, the Sima two; the rest of the Architrave divide into twelve parts, whereof three parts are allowed to the lower Fascia, four to the middle Fascia, and five to the upper Fascia. The eighth part of the upper Fascia is for the Bead, under the said Fascia; likewise the eighth part of the lesser Fascia maketh its Bead under it,The height and division of the Friese, noted I. The height, division and projecture of the Dentiles, noted K. The height of the Boultin, noted L. The division and height of the Corona, noted M. and hath such projecture as the figure sheweth. The Friese followeth, noted I, and is made in this manner: Divide the Architrave into four parts; five such shall be the height of the Friese. The eighth part of the Friese, is the Simatum, which di∣vide into three parts, whereof the Fillet hath one third, and the Sima two thirds: After the Sima is the Teeth and Dentiles, noted K, which with its Fillet, is as high as the lesser Fascia of the Architrave, which is noted with a Cross, containing therein its Astragals: The Fillet upon the Teeth and Dentiles, containeth the seventh part of the height therein, and hath as much projecture as height: The Teeth and Dentiles have in breadth half the height, and the space between two, is two thirds of their breadth. Over the Teeth and Dentiles is set the Boultin, noted L, which must be as high as the lower Fascia of the Architrave, noted O. After followeth the Corona, noted M, which is as high as the lesser Fascia
of the Architrave, marked with a Cross, as is said before. Two thirds of this Corona make the Fas∣cia,The division of the O. G. noted N. and a third is for the Sima, which is set upon the Fascia; the which is divided into three parts, two shall be for the Sima, and the third for its Fillet. Above the Corona is set the O. G. noted N; the height of this O. G. is a seventh part greater then the lesser Fascia of the Architrave; and this said seventh part is the Fillet above the O. G. and the Projecture is in a square; also the whole Cornish must project in a square, adding thereto two Quadrants of a Fillet; and doing this, you have finished the Symmetry and proportion of the Column, according as the most Antient Architects were accustom∣ed both at Corinth, Rome, Venice, and other places. The Reader, and Curious Artist, may see at large in the page following; the great Capital, being on the side of the great Base enriched, a Pour∣tract, containing the Architrave, Friese and Cornish, in a great proportion agreeable to the said Base and Capital heretofore mentioned, noted S; and other pieces, that is, two impost above its great Base, a Profile of the Corinthian Volute, and under props of the said Order in a small proportion. The Antiquity of the Corinthian Column, without its Pedestal. THis fourth sort of Column, named the Corinthian, imitates the shape of a fair and comely Virgin, neatly adorned, and cloathed with rich Ornaments: It would not be fitting to forget the antiqui∣ty thereof, and especially its Capital, which was found out by an excellent, and one of the antientest Architects, named Callimachus; who for his skill in buildings, and works of Marble, was accounted amongst the Athenians, most excellent. And to come to the antiquity of the said Capital, and the in∣vention thereof, it is to be noted, that in the City of Corinth, there was a Maid, of Age marriageable, who hapned to be taken with a sickness, of which she died; Whereupon her Nurse or Keeper, conceived such grief and sadness of heart, as well for the love that she bore to her living, as to see her so to fail in that flourishing Age, adorned with so excellent Beautie and Virtues, that every time that this good Matron and Governess hapned to find any piece of the Works wherewith this young Beauty was accustomed to busie her self, the same did bring into her mind all the griefs and bitterness passed: seeing the which, she was constrained, for a remedy thereof, and to defend her self from the same Au∣dient, at least of so sad a life, to gather together all the said Works and Implements with which the said Maid was accustomed to busie her self, which she put in a Wicker Basket covered with a Tile, the which she caused to be put on the top of the Grave of the said Virgin. And by chance there was found under the Basket, the Root of Acanthus; the which being loaded with the weight aforesaid, began at the Spring time to bud forth and seek a place to put forth its Sprouts and Leaves, in such manner, as the Branches were compelled to bend and crook themselves downward in manner of the Volute; at which the said Callimachus took great delight and pleasure to see the novelty of this Herb, and took thereby a Pattern to enrich the said Column and its Capital, for to use it in the City of Corinth, to the which he gave most excellent Symmetry and Proportion, as one may see by the Pourtracts and Delineations of the said Column and Capital here set forth. An Advertisement for ordinary Workmen, having only the Hand-practice and Use of the Rule and Compasses. FOR the more ample understanding of ordinary Workmen to help themselves by the said Mea∣sures, to erect Columns or Pilasters, either for the adorning of Fronts, Poarches, Gates, Win∣dows, Garret-lights, or other chief Works which they would enrich with Columns or Pilasters: taking notice of the two sides of one of the Columns hereafter set forth of the said first Corinthian Or∣der; as also likewise of others following, either of the Corinthian with Pedestal, or the Composite; that is; of those that are void of Figures and Characters, to bring them to their apparent and exact Perfe∣ction, he shall see on the sides of them two Perpendicular Lines and Parallels, the one of which being on the left side of the said Corinthian without Pedestal, noted T. V. in its two ends, and that on the right side with X. Y. each of them being divided into fifteen equal parts; supposing each of these parts for a foot, and each of the said feet divided into twelve little Points to shew the twelve inches, which the lawful foot ought to contain; one of the which inches may be divided into six or into twelve other parts; that by this means more exactly may be seen the Proportions and Measures of the said Columns: by the means of which feet and inches contained in the said two Perpendicular Lines and Parallels, lay∣ing a Rule upon the said two Perpendiculars, traversing each of the figures contained in the one, and the other of the said Perpendiculars, beginning below at the Base, two inches under the figure 1; in the said two Perpendicular Lines drawn from the twelve points, which the said foot containeth, marked with the said 1, there will remain for the height of the said Base of the Column, ten inches, at fifteen feet of height, the said Column containing its Base and Capital only: the which the said Artist conti∣nuing, ascending towards the top and Cornish of the said Column, shall find the measures of all the particular Members of the Column; as if the said perpendicular lines did begin from the end of the said Cornish, tending downwards; as he shall also do in all other heights of Columns proposed of the like Order, without changing the Portract, changing only other lines perpendicular; as if instead of fifteen feet, which we have supposed, for Example, the said Perpendicular Lines were divided by twen∣ty parts, signifying twenty feet, and each foot into twelve inches, as is aforesaid: and consequently so of all other heights, which shall be propounded to the said Workmen, which have not Learning, but only the practice of the Rule and Compasses; they may by this means be able to help themselves by the said Pourtracts of Columns, and use them to all such heights as they shall think fit, without chang∣ing or defacing the Measures and Proportions of the same.
A New Treatise of the CORINTHIAN ORDER, VVith its PEDESTAL. CHAP. VI. THis Corinthian Column is very like to the former, excepting the Pedestal, which it hath more; and likewise that its Cor∣nishes differ from the former Corinthian, which seemeth to be far more strong and firm. The height of the Column, noted A, is divided into nine parts,The whole height of the Column with all its Mem∣bers, noted A. whereof the two first parts below shall make the height of the Pedestal; which two parts being divided into 9, one shall be for the Cornish of the Pedestal, and an other for the Basis; the remainder divide into five parts, where∣of three are for the largeness of the Pedestal. The Basis, noted B,The division, height and pro∣jecture of the Basis of the Pedestal, noted B. divide into five parts, whereof two shall be for the Plinth; the remainder divide into four, one part shall be for the lower Thorus, two for the Scotia, and the rest for the Astragale above the Scotia, whereof the Fillet hath the third: the fifth part of the Scotia, is the Fillet above the Thorus; the Projecture is the sixth part of the largeness of the Pedestal; the Projecture of the Members remaining, is such as this Figure sheweth it, and as it is more fully declared in the Basis of the Pe∣destal, being in a greater proportion on the other side, noted O, in the middle, and below the Plinth of the said Basis. The Cornish of the Pedestal, noted C,The height, division, and projecture of the Cornish of the Pedestal, noted C. divide into two parts, the upper part shall be the Fascia, together with the Si∣matum divided into three, one part is for the Simatum, the two other parts shall be for the Corona; the second and lower part divide into four, whereof the fourth part shall be for the Scotia; the three parts remaining divide in two, the first part of the two shall make the Fascia above the Simatum; the third of which shall be allowed for its Fillet, and the other half shall be the Boultin under the Fascia or Corona; the projecture of the Cornish, is as the projecture of the Basis, that is of one Quadrat: Upon the Pedestal is placed the Column with its Base and Capital, which divide in this manner; The whole largeness of the Pedestal into six, four shall make the thickness of the Column, and on each side remain∣eth one part for the projecture of the Base. The Column, together with its Base and Capital, noted D,The height of the body of the Column with its Base and Capital, noted D. hath nine times in height the thickness of the Column below. The Base of the Column, noted E, hath in height the half Diameter of the thickness of the Column below; the height of the which divided into four parts, one of them shall be the Plinth,The division and height of the Base of the Column, noted E. the three parts which remain, divide into five, whereof one part shall be the upper Thorus; divide afterwards one of these five parts into four parts, and 5 such parts shall be the lower Thorus upon the Plinth; the space between the two Thorus's divide into twelve parts, two shall make the two Astragals of the middle; the half of the one of them maketh the Fillet under the upper Thorus, one other half maketh the Fillet or Girt above the Astragale, the other half maketh the Fillet under the Astragales. The Base being on the right side of the present,The diminish∣ing of the body of the Column, with the large∣ness and pro∣jecture of the Fillet, being upon the Base; noted F. in a great Volumn, differeth in nothing from the present but in the Plinth, which beareth the third of the Diameter thereof, whereas the other beareth but a fourth; the Fillet above the Base of the Column, where you see the twelve parts, is made after this manner; Divide the Diameter of the Column below, noted F, into
twelve parts, to each side one part; this is the diminishing of the Column, one half is the height of the Fillet, and must project one whole part; the Projecture of the other Members is shewed in the Base of the first Corinthian Column, which is in a great form on the left side of the same, noted O. The division and height of the Capital, noted G.On the Column is set the Capital, noted G, which is as high as the Diameter of the Column be∣low: The height of the said Capital, is divided, as may be seen in the great Capital on the left side, no∣ted P, over the Rose, in the midst of the Abacus. The Volutes and Leaves are made, according to the Declaration of the figure of the said Capital, and are more fully declared in the figure of the great Capital, noted R, over the Rose of its Abacus, being on the right side of the great Base enriched, declared at the end of the Chapter of the first Corinthian Column without a Pedestal. Under the Capital is the Astragale,The height and division of the Astragal which is put under the Capital, and is made within the lady of the Column, noted H. noted H, which hath in height one twelfth part of the largeness of the Co∣lumn below, the which being divided into three, you shall allow one part for the Fillet, and two parts for the Astragale; the Projecture is agreeable to the height; the diminishing of the Column, as that of the first Ionick Column, in the third Chapter of the Book. This Pillar may be fluted as the Ionick, or as the first Corinthian, as it is noted in the Ichnography of the said great Capital of the first Ionick Column, noted upon its Abacus N: the said Capital being on the right side of the great Ionick Base enriched, in the third Chapter of the Book. Upon the Capital is set the Architrave, Friese and Cor∣nish; its height is the fourth part of the height of the Column, and is made in this manner; Divide the fourth part into ten parts, allow the Architrave three parts, the Friese three parts, the Cornish four parts. One seventh part of the Architrave, noted I, maketh the Simatum; the rest divide into twelve parts, whereof the lower Fascia shall have three, the lesser four, and the upper five: this being done, divide the upper Fascia into eight parts, one for the Bead; likewise one part for the Bead is to be allowed to the lesser Fascia, and its projecture and placing, is as the figure sheweth it: The three parts of the ten parts abovesaid, make the Friese, noted K, as it is above said. The Cornish upon the side, divide into nine parts, one for the Simatum above the Friese, two for the Boultin, two for the Modi∣lions, and two for the O. G. After this divide the Boultin into seven parts, and allow for the Fillets on both sides two parts: the fourth part of the Modilions maketh the little Sima above the Modili∣ons; which divide into three parts, one for the Fillet, and the rest for the Sima; and one fourth part of the upper Sima shall be for the O. G. The rest divide into six parts, whereof one part is the Fillet; the projecture of all the Cornish ought to be in a square. The Modilions, noted M, shall have equal breadth and height, and equal distance; their proje∣cture, as is to be seen in this figure, and more plainly in the great Cornish on the left side of the said Columns; the which Cornish you shall find, noted O in the Corona, and more plainly in the great Cornish following enriched, noted P upon one of its Modilions. The Ornaments of the Frieses of the said Cornishes are on the side designed in small. The height of the Cornish on the left side, noted L, divide into five parts, one shall be for the Boultin with its Fillet, two to the Modilions, one to the Corona, and one to the O. G. One third of the Boultin is the Fillet. Divide the Modilions in∣to eight parts, the upper shall be joyned to the Corona, another shall be the Sima next the Modilions; the Fascia must be divided as those of the Architrave; the Modilions must be square in breadth, length, height, and thickness; and there must be so much distance, that a Quadrant of the Corona may enter in there: One third of the Corona maketh the Sima. The O. G. must be divided in six parts, the upper maketh its Fillet; the projecture of the Cornish must be equal to the height. Being done as aforesaid, you will have the true Symmetry and proportion of all the parts of the second Corinthian Column, as the Antients have used, and as may be seen at present in the City of Rome in the Pantheon, otherwise called the Rotunda.
A New Treatise of the COMPOSITE ORDER. CHAP. VII. THis fifth Column is called the Composite, because it is compounded and gathered together out of the three precedent Orders. The whole height of this Co∣lumn, noted A, must be divided into thirteen parts, whereof you shall take three for the height of the Pedestal, which you must divide into ten parts,The whole height of the Column with all its Mem∣bers, noted A. The division, height and pro∣jecture of the Basis of the Pedestal, noted B. one for the Basis, and one for the Cornish: the half of the parts remaining shall be the largeness of the Pedestal. The Basis, noted B, on the left side, is divided into seven parts; two of them for the Plinth, one for the Thorus; two for the Sima, one for the Scotia, and one for the Astragale. One third of the Astra∣gale maketh the Fillet above the Scotia; the Fillet above hath the half large∣ness of the Astragale. The two parts of the Sima shall be divided into six parts; so as the Fillet on both sides, shall each have one part: but the whole projecture of the said Basis, is one sixth part of the largeness of the Pedestal. The projecture of the Members, is as the figure sheweth: and as may be more plainly seen in the Basis of the larger Pedestal on the left side of this Column, noted M. The Cornish of the Pedestal, noted D, must be divided into five parts;The height, division, and projecture of the Cornish of the Pedestal, on the right side, noted D. The division, height and pro∣jectue of the Cornish of the Pedestal on the left side, noted C. one for the Astragale with the Fillet, two for the Friese, two for the Corona: one third of the Corona maketh the Sima; the two parts remaining make the Fascia: one fourth part of the Friese is the Fillet under the Corona. The Projecture of the Cornish is equal to the Projecture of the Basis. The Cornish of the Pedestal, noted C, must be divided into seven parts, one of them is for the A∣stragale and Fillet, two to the Friese, one to the small Boultin, two for the Corona: one part may make the Simatum, and two parts the Fascia. Each part or Member must project in a square. Upon the Pedestal is set the Column, which hath such thickness as it is said in the Corinthian Column, that is to say in this manner: Divide the largeness of the Pedestal into six parts; four of them shall be the thickness of the Column, and the two remaining shall make the Projecture of the Base, which is set upon the Pedestal. The Column, together with its Base and Capital, noted E,The height of the Column with its Base and Capital, noted E. The division and height of the Base, noted F. is ten times as high as the Diameter of the lowest part of the body of the said Column. The Base of the Column, noted F, hath in height the half thickness of the lower part of the said body of the Column, and hath the same parts and pro∣portions as the Corinthian; except that where there is two small Astragales, in this there is one small Thorus; or, as it is more plainly shewed in the Base, which is in a bigger form on the left side n,oted N. The Fillet, which is set upon the Base, where you see the twelve parts, is made in this manner: Di∣vide the Diameter of the Column into twelve parts, two of them make the diminishing of the Column on each side; one half part is the breadth of the Fillet, and one whole part is the Projecture. The Capital, noted G, the Column, the Astragale, the Diminishing, is made,The division of the Capital, noted G. so as it is said in the Corin∣thian, and as it appeareth also in one of its said Columns. The Column may be fluted according to the Ionick, and some also according to the Corinthian. Above the Capital is the Architrave, noted H; which divide into six parts,The height and division of the Architrave, noted H. whereof one is for the Simatum with its Boultin: which divide into four; one for the Fillet, two for the Sima, one for the small Boultin; the remainder divide in twelve parts, five for the upper Fascia, four for the second Fa∣scia, the other three for the lower Fascia: the Fascias being divided into eight parts, one is allowed for each bead. Over the Architrave is the Friese, with the Cattoozes, noted I,The division and height of the Friese, noted I. and is as high as the Co∣lumn above is thick: divide the Friese into six parts, and one part shall be the Simatum; the Cattoo∣zes are as large as high, and are hollowed after the manner as they appear in the figure: the space be∣tween them is to be square. Upon the Friese is set the Cornish of a like height on the left side, noted L; the half of the Cornish is the O.G. the other half is the Corona, with the Cimatum above the Cattoozes;The height and division of the left side, noted L. The division, height & pro∣jecture of the Cornish, on the right side, no∣ted K. one 4th part of the Corona makes the Simatum; one 7th part of the O.G. shall be its Fillet. All the parts of the Cornish must each of them project in a square. The upper part of the Cornish on the right side, noted K, must be divided into six parts: the inferiour or lowest part of these parts maketh the Boul∣tin under the Sima, the three parts make the Sima, and two parts make the Fillet over the Sima; it pro∣jects its thickness: The Fascia hath as much Projecture as the Simatum which is above the Cattoozes: The upper Cimatum hath his Projecture in a square. This is in brief the Symmetry and true measure and proportion of the said Column, which finisheth and accomplisheth its height in thirteen parts, as appeareth by the Columns in Rome in the Amphitheater, which at present is called the Colisas. The manner how to hollow and round the Cimaes or Cornishes is shewed very plainly in the Cornishes, in a great proportion, on the left side of the said Columns, which is for the more plain understanding, noted P. that on the left side, and that on the right with Q; to the which Cornishes are added a Frontlet, as appears in the Chapter of the Ionick Order, with the Rule for its construction, and in that follow∣ing a Cornish of the Rule and Measure of Vignola with its Proportions, to the end that the curious may chuse that which pleaseth them best. The Frontlet is made in the same manner with the Frontlet here∣tofore described in the 4th Chapter of the Ionick Order, with its Pedestal; but instead of marking the
Arches, as in the Frontlet, you must draw streight lines from C unto A, as many as there is in the Cor∣nish of the Order of which you make it; and then you shall make all the lines to come down upon the line E, as in the Frontlet. The Antiquity of the Composite Column. OF the three last kind of Columns, that is, of the Dorick, Ionick, & Corinthian, proceedeth an In∣vention of the Column called the Composite, and it is more slender then the Corinthian, for it is composed of the three foresaid kind of Columns joyntly put together in a good proportion of ten Di∣ameters of height, as it appeareth by the Pourtracts of them hereafter set forth. For the benefit of Workmen, as is aforesaid, that have only the practice of the Rule and Compasses, they may observe the two Perpendicular Lines on each side the Column which is finished, the one noted R. S. the other I.V. each of them being divided into 30 equal parts, supposing one of those parts to be a foot, and each foot to have 12 inches, as is afore said in the latter part of the Tuscan Chapter; the se∣veral divisions which each Order doth allow, must be observed; as the lines on each side the Tuscan Co∣lumn are divided in 10 parts, the Dorick into 15, the Ionick with its Pedestal into 20, the Corinthian with the Pedestal 25, and this present Composite Order into 30, as aforesaid; so observing the Rules that the Author hath set down at the latter part of the Tuscan Order, he may use the same in all the rest. An Advertisement for the Enter Columns, Arches or Portals, and of the divers Measures of Columns of Scamozzi, Palladio, and Vignola, which are at the end of this Book. WE must now speak of Spaces which Scamozzi, Palladio, and Vignola have observed between the Columns, and for the Portals, Gates, and Arches, for the which they have resolved upon a mea∣sure necessary for their perfection: and that I may not be tedious, I will discourse but of one sort, therefore I mean that of Palladio, for that I have applyed my design thereunto for its variety; begining then with the Tuscan Order, where he nameth his measure a Module, instead of which our French Archi∣tects have given it the name of a Foot by the Standard: Nevertheless the one cometh home to the o∣ther; for if that lawful foot be divided into 12 inches or parts, and one part into 12 points, it is for the better to find out the smallest divisions of the least Fillets: and the Module of Palladio is divided into sixty minutes, which meaneth so many parts, as likewise Vignola nameth parts of the Module; and all to the same end, to find the better the said divisions. Scamozzi nameth it also a Module divided into six∣ty minutes; whereby it must be noted, that he which would allow the proportion to a Column, ought to use that measure which the Order which he would follow hath used to compass it. 1. Palladio hath allowed to the Enter Columns of the Tuscan Order, two Modules and a half of distance between the two Columns, to measure the space from the body of one Column, to the body of the other Column below, as you shall see it marked in the design that I have made thereof at the end of the Book, where all the Arches, or Portals, or Enter-columns of each Order are reduced into small, to serve for a demonstration only to the Reader: the Arch or Portal of the same Order must have six Modules, and 25 minutes of opening or largeness, to take the space or largeness of the middle of the body of one Column of the said Arch, to the middle of the body of the other Column on the opposite side, as it is marked in the said design, with a little Angle pointed in the middle of the bottom of the Column of the said Arches, observing the same in every Order; and the height of the said Arch or Portal, shall have 7 Modules, & 40 minutes from its Plane, unto its Center or Mould, even as it is marked in the said design by little ends of lines pointed. 2. It must be marked in the Dorick Order, because Palladio hath divided his Module into two in this Order only, and the Module into 30 minutes, whereas in others he hath made 60 thereof, the Enter-column of the said Order shall have 5 Modules and a half to measure, as hath been said in the Tuscan Order; and the Arch or Portal shall have 15 Modules of opening or largeness, and its height shall have 20 Modules and a half from its Plane, unto its Center or Mould, as it is said of the Tuscan Order. 3. Of the Ionick Order, its Enter-column shall have two Modules, and one fourth of distance; and the Arch or Portal shall have 7 Modules and 17 minutes of opening or largeness; and its height shall have 11 Modules from its Plane unto its Mould to measure, as it is said here above. 4. Of the Corinthian Order, its Enter-columns shall have two Modules of distance, and the Arch or Portal shall have 6 Modules and a half of largeness, and its height shall have 11 Modules 10 minutes from its Plane unto its Mould, measuring as here above. 5. Of the Composite Order, its Enter-columns shall have one Module and a half of distance, and the Arch or Portal shall have 7 Modules and 15 minutes of opening or largeness; its height shall have 12 Modules and 20 mi∣nutes from its Mould, measuring as here above; and Vignola alloweth to all the Order, to the Arches or Portals two lines, their opening or largeness for their height, to measure the said largeness of the corner of the Base of one Pedestal to the other, excepting the Corinthian Order Pedestal, to which he alloweth in height one Module more. It must be considered that the Columns of the Arches or Por∣tals must have projecture from the Pilasters against which they are placed, one third part of a Module more then their half, because that the Projecture of the Impost goeth forth just the half of the Co∣lumn: and this shall be a general rule to be observed in all the five Orders. I shall not discourse here of the divers Proportions which the Architects here above named have given to the five Or∣ders of Columns, and whereof the design and Profiles of Columns that are represented in several Prints at the end of the Book, because that upon them the said Proportions are described in brief; the which I believe might be sufficiently intel∣ligible for those which shall allow themselves the leasure to read the seven Chapters contained in this Book with atten∣tion, which shall furnish them with the opening and knowledge of the proper names and words particularly used in Ar∣chitecture, without the knowledge of which it is very hard to understand it well. There are Rules also for diminishing of Columns; Likewise how to make the wreathed Column of Vignola, translated out of Italian into French, and out of French into English: Likewise you may be satisfied that you have in this Book the Measures and Proportions of Vi∣truvius exactly; and you may see at the end of the Book, those of the most famous Modern Italian Architects, where it seemeth to me that there is all that one can desire that would learn Architecture; the others being but weak imitaters of these, will never have much authority.
Different proportion of the Tuscan order.
Different proportions of the Dorick order.
Different proportions of the Ionick order.
Different proportions of the Corinthian order,
Different proportions of the Composite Order.
Rules for deminishing of Columnes, & for the wreathed Columne of Vignola The deminishing of this Columne of Vignola, is like that of Mauclere the deminishing of this Columne ✚, is of Vignola. He saith that haueing Ordered the measures of the Column, you must draw a Line infinite begining at C and continuing by D. then cary the measure C, D, to the point A. vntill that it devide the perpendicular at the poynt B, and let A, B, be continued vnto E, from thence one may draw as many lines as they will which must come from the perpendicular and goe to the Cercumference of the Column, over which carying back the measure C, D, they shall finde as well aboue as below, the swelling of the Column, this may be ap∣plyed to the Ionick, Corinthian and Composite, To make the wreathed Column like▪ vnto those which are in St Peters Church at Rome: you must make a Circle which shall be its plaine▪ the little Circle in the midst sheweth how far it must extend it selfe, which you must devide into 8 parts, from the midst therof by a per∣pendicular lyne must be drawne 4 paralells then devide the whole Column into 48, equal parts which shall helpe to make ye spiral line or rising from the midst and serueth for ye Cen∣ter to the Column vpon which shall be borne the thi∣thicknes of the Column lyne by lyne as may be plainly seene, But obserue that the 4 figures 1.2.3.4. marked vpon the plaine ought not to serue but for the first halfe ascent because the begining procedeth from ye Center and from thence vpwards ought to follow the largenes of the little Circle vn∣to the last halfe ascent aboue for it must also follow that below, where are the 4 figures afore said▪
RVLES OF PERSPECTIVE FOR THE WELL ORDERING OF EMMINENT BVILDINGS FIGVRES TREES AND ALL OTHE OBIECTS VPON WHAT PLANE Soeuer it bee, set at the end of this Booke for recreation to the curious reader which hath desire to be instructed therein &c, Of the Horison, The Horison is a lyne which seperate thy Heaven from the Earth and this lyne is alwayes as high as the eye of him yt looketh▪ so that if the looker be as high as A▪ his Horison shall be A, B, if his height be at C, his horison shall be, C, D, being sell or on his knees as at E it shall be E, F, of the poynt of the sight of th Horison. Vpon the Horison high or low one must take ye poynt of the sight. A. which wee say is in ye front when it is in the midst of the table and on the side when it is not there, at this poynt all the lynes must be drawne which are per∣pendicular to our eye. as those B, B, B, drawne to ye poynt. A, must be held for perpendiculars, vpon the lyne of ye earth. C, D, at ye bottom of the table, of the poynt of Distance, The Poynt of distance. E, ought likewise to be taken vpon ye Horison and as far from ye poynt of ye sight, A, as the looker ought to be effectively for to soe the vse of this poynt wee finde all the shortnings of the Obiects, for example the lyne, C. D, being the side of a sqa∣re if you draw the Diagonall C.E. its intersecti∣on, F▪ maketh, D, E, equall in appearane to C, D, and if F, G, be made Parallels to, C, D, you shall have the Perspective square C, D, F, G, A pauement of squares seene vpon ye front, To mak a pavement of squares yu must devide ye lyne of the ground C, D, into many equall parts, and from these divi∣sions to draw radii to ye poynt A, & where the diagonall lyne C, E, shall devide there you must draw Paralell lynes to C, D, & ye square C, D, F, G, shall be devided in many oth A pauement of squares seene by Angle, To make another pavement as the squares as may be seene by the Angle you may devide the lynes of the ground. H, I, into as may equall parts as you please, and haueing drawne the two ends, H, I, to ye poynt of the sight, A, and the Diagonall. H, E, to frame the square, F, G, H, I, you must draw all ye other divisions of this lyne of the ground, H, I, to ye poi∣nts of distance, E, E, and you will have the pa∣vement according to your desire. To raise solid Bodyes If from a pavement of squares one would rayse a Cube as that marked M, one must from the Angles of the square rayse vpright lynes as a, b, c, d, then bring the height wh∣ich one would haue it and set vpon one of ye first lynes as d, e, and frome to draw a lyne to A. which shall devide yt elevated from b to f, then draw from ye points, e, f, paralells, a, c, d, and  be it finished, the Pilaste N. is made in the man̄er of the vper and lower parts of Obiects, Every Obiect whatsoever it bee, being elevated aboue the Horison is to bee seene vnderneath because it is aboue our eye as is the Figure, A, and that which is vnder the Horison and by consequence lower then our Eye is to be seene on the vper part, as the figure, B, of Trees and Pilasters, when one would set in order and at equall distances many Pilaisters or Trees they must first set ye breadth or distances that they will allow them vpon ye lyne of ye ground, as G.H, thence they must draw to the poynt, A, then set ye number of ye Pilast¦ers and their distance H, I, K, F, vpon the line of ye ground, F, G, from which drawing to ye poynt of the distance, E, one shall devide ye Radii, G. A, and H, A, from these sections yu shall elevate lynes which must goe to the Radius R.A, &c, To sett Figures well in Order, The Rules which have bin given for Trees and Pilasters, ought likewise to serve for Figures, for having made Figure yt must from the feet. M, and from its head N, draw Ra∣dii to the point A, set by discretion vpon the Horison▪ betwene the which Radii you must finde the heigh of all the other Figures: for example if at the point R, you would have a Figure high in appearance as M, N, you must from. R, draw a lyne Paralell to that of the ground which cutteth the Radius M.A, at the point b, from which you must ele∣vate a line vprigh as b, c, this line b, c, shall be the height for the Figure R, the others noted s, may be found by the same Operation To sett in Perspectiue an Irregular Plane,  on this Plane to raise a Solid Body. Having set the Plain as A, B, C, D. E. F, and the line of ye ground K, L, you must elevate perpendicular lines from all its Angles vnto K, L & from ye Sections which shall be made therein as G, to draw Radii to the point H, for to have the depth of ye Angles there is neede of ye Geometricall ones to draw Paralells to K, L, which shall give ye Sections a, e, f, b, d, c, vpon ye line O, which ought to be caryed withall its measvres vpon K, L, begining at G, as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, in passing from ye Sections to ye point I, yu must make other notes vpon the Radii G, H, as a, e, f, b, d, c, from ye which you must draw Paralelle to K. L. and make a point vpon ye Radius yt is proper to it: after of the points found to frame a plaine, from ye Angles of which yu must elevate Perpendiculare to cary vpon ye heights which are betwene M. N. or in ye 9th figure,
