N972 99834097 38582
News from Ireland. BEING THE Examination and Confession OF VVILLIAM KELSO, A SCOTCH REBEL, Taken in IRELAND, Whether he Fled, After the Defeat of the REBELS in SCOTLAND; BEFORE GEORGE RAWDON, Esquire; One of His Majesties Justices of the Peace there. ALSO A LETTER from C. George Mac Cartney, Giving an account Of several Barks full of Scotch Rebels, seen coming from Scotland to Ireland. TOGETHER WITH A PROCLAMATION Set out by the Duke of ORMOND, For their Apprehension. Printed in the Year 1679.
The Examination of William Kelso, of the Town of Air in Scotland, Chirurgion and Apothecary, Aged 27 Years, taken at Lisburn, June 27, 1679. WHo being demanded why he came to be in the Company of the Rebels in Scotland, saith, that Robert Hamilton, who is only known amongst them by the name of Collonel Hamilton, and was the chief in Command amongst them, and he sent for him this Examinant from Air to come and be helpful to them in the Exercise of his Profession in Chirurgery; whereupon being also perswaded to it by his Neighbours, he went on Wednesday was sevennight to their Camp, then at and about Hamilton, where (to the best of his judgment) they were in Number about 8000 Foot, and 14 Troops, some being about 60, and others more; and being demanded who were their Captains, and what Collonels or Field-Officers he saw of the Foot, saith, he did not see or hear of any Officers stiled Captain, but saith, that some of the chief amongst the several parties, out of the bounds and parts from whence they came, commanded them. And he further saith, that it was commonly spoken, that they intended to disperse of themselves, and return to their Dwellings, 'till they had notice that the King's Forces were to imbody at Leith. And as to this Examinants particular condition, he saith, that he was resolved to remove himself and Family out of Scotland, to London, and was selling his Shop, being weary of troubles by his living in Scotland, and did then resolve not to return again to the Rebels Camp. And he saith, that on Friday last, one of the Scouts of the Rebels being wounded, and shot through the Thigh, about two Miles from the Camp, he was sent out to dress him, but found him dead at the place he received his Wound; whereupon he, this Exa∣minant, left the Camp next Morning, and went Nine Miles off, to Ryland, at which time there was no notice of the marching of the King's Forces that day, being Saturday; but upon Sunday, about Nine in the Morning, this Examinant heard the Ordnance playing, and not long after divers fled thither, and declar'd, the King's Army had marched all that Night, and that the Rebels Army was beaten and routed by the Ordnance the King's Forces had planted at Buddelbrig, a pass that the Rebels had endeavour'd to maintain, but were beaten from it, and that the Canon played from thence upon the Rebels Camp, and broke their Horse, who run away; and after that, he this Examinant made hast towards some Port, to be Transported into Ireland, intending to go to Dublin, and take shipping for London. And being demanded what he heard farther on the way by such as escaped from the Rebels Camp, says, divers of them, some being four or more in company, and others more, affirmed dolefully, the Rebels were all broken, and fled several ways, but they could or would not tell what Execution was done, or what Number was slain or taken, but saith, none of those he spoke with were wounded, or did fight, as he believes; and saith, it was generally spoken, the Duke of Monmouth commanded the King's Forces in chief, and was there in person with them, and that General Dalyel, and General David Lesly, and those Officers named in the Proclamation, for Assem∣bling the Heritors to attend the King's Standard, was there also, as he believes, and further saith not. Deposed before me GEO. RAWDON.
Belfast, June 27th. 1679. SIR, THis day there came to Town one George Lyon, Master of a Glasgow Ship, who gave an account of some Boats he met at Sea, to my Lord Mount Alexander and me, when we were together, but after my Lord was gone, I had some more serious discourse with him, and he told me, That yesterday before he came into the Lough of Carrickfergus, he saw 12 or 14 boats and Barks at Sea coming from Scotland to Ireland, and that he met with two of them that were come into this Lough below Carrickfergus, and that he went Aboard one of the vessels laden with Coales, and that there appeared to his sight seven or eight Men, and that there was one Gentleman amongst them, but he could not get his name, which Gentleman was very well Armed with Sword and Pistol as were several of the rest, and that the other boat was full of Men, and that they had Arms also, but all very much dejected; he says they told him, that there was an Engage∣ment between the Kings party and the Rebellious party on Sunday last, and that they begun about seven of the Clock to Skirmish, the Presbyterian party being then about 11000, the Kings party not above 4000, but they did not Engage in Battle till nigh Nine of the Clock, and that the dispute did not last above an hour, till the Horse of the Rebellious party retreated and broak through a wing of their own Foot; These men say, they came off in a party of about 300 Horse, and when they were about 2 Miles off, on the Top of a Hill, they looked back and saw their Foot standing on their Ground, and firing very hard, but this party before they halted came to Kilmares in their Roadway to Irwin, but as they lay upon the Grass to rest themselves on Monday Morning, a friend of their own came and told them, that the Foot was broke, and the Kings party was in pursuit of them, and that there was Order for no quarter for some time, neither quarter to any who harboured them and denyed them, upon which that party presently took Horse and Shifted every one for themselves to several Ports to get passage to Ireland for shelter; These two Barks this Man met with came from Irwin on Wednesday last, and he faith, he verily believes the rest of the Boats and Barks he saw were all full of Men, and came from Irwin and other parts thereabouts: And he told me also, that these Men desired him to take them aboard his Ship, and bring them a shore, for he was laden with Deal-boards coming from Norway, but he denyed to bring them ashore; saying, if they came ashore he doubted they would be put in prison, and he, should he bring them, upon which they both went to Sea again, but whether they returned to Scotland, or gone to some other part of this Country, he knows not. Sir, this was all the account he could give, which I thought fit to acquaint you of, and remain with my respects, Sir, your humble servant George Mac Cartney.
By the Lord LIEUTENANT and COUNCIL. ORMOND. VVHEREAS there hath been a Notorious and Vnnatural Rebellion lately raised in Scotland, by several Traiterous and Disloyal Persons, who did in great Numbers, take up Arms against His Majesty, and gave Battle to His Ma∣jesties Forces there, which, by the Success it has pleased God to give His Majesties Army there, is now suppressed, and many of the said Rebels killed and taken, and the rest dispersed. And whereas many of the Persons who were guilty of the said Rebellion, may, to avoid the just Punish∣ment which they deserve, endeavour to fly into this Kingdom of Ireland, and conceal themselves here. We have thought fit to require all Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, and other His Majesties Officers and Ministers, both Civil and Military, That they make diligent search after all such Persons as lately have come, or hereafter shall come out of Scotland into this Kingdom, and to seize and secure all such of them as shall not give a sufficient account of their Loyalty, or whom they shall find just cause to suspect to have been concerned in the said Rebellion; And all His Majesties, and other Loyal Subjects, in the several Sea-Port Towns, and other places of the Kingdom, are hereby also required, to make strict and diligent Search after such Persons, and to bring them before one of His Majesties Iustices of the Peace, in such County where they shall be seized on. And the said Iustices of the Peace are from Time to Time, to give us an account of what Persons shall be so brought before them, and secured by them. And we do hereby also strictly Charge and Command all His Majesties Subjects in this Kingdom, that they do forbear either Harbouring or Re∣lieving any of the said Rebels, so coming out of Scotland; and that they forthwith make a Discovery of such of them as they shall at any time know to be residing in this Kingdom, unto any of His Majesties Iustices of the Peace, under pain of their utmost Perils, and being looked upon as Persons guilty of the same Traiterous Designs with them. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin, the 30th of June, 1679. Mich. Armagh, C. Jo. Dublin, Aran, Blessington, Lanesborough, Hen. Mid. Ca. Dillon, Ro. Booth, Jo. Keating, Jo. Bysse, Jo. Davis, Ol. St. George, Tho Jones, Will. Flower, Tho. Newcomen, Tho. Ratcliff. GOD SAVE THE KING.
