P20 R218255 99829865 34311
THE REIGN OF CHRIST; Unto which, He hath had a Right from everlasting; WHICH, God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the World began, Acts 3. 21. LONDON: Printed in the Year
The PREFACE. NOAH, a Preacher of the Righteousness of God, and a walker with him therein, gave signal Warning a hundred and twenty years together, of the approaching judgment on all de∣spisers thereof; Gen. 6. 3,-9. Mat. 24. 38, 39. 2 Pet. 2. 5. The neglect of his alarming ministry, was so universal, that the flood came and swept them all away, save Noah's family of eight persons. And so shall also the comming of the Son of Man, be; say's Christ; Mat. 24. 37,-39. The like dark midnight-state, shall the World be found in, at Christ's second coming. People will be generally given up to sensuality, signified by eating, drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, and so will also be found scoffing at any such thing as Christ's coming to reign on Earth. 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. But, the Spirit, he will come in, will prove a mystical Fire, that will burn up and consume all the highest excellencies in the fleshly, earthly, changeable, corruptible first-creation-nature of Man or Angel, sig∣nified by all the Kingdoms of this World and glory of them; Mat. 4. 8. This will be an amazing surprize, and cause a consternation in all, concerned therein, beyond and above all conception or language, by the understanding or tongue of natural Man or Angel Even, when Christ is at the door, ready to come forth, about this terrible work, in righteousness to judg and make war on all first-creation vanities, will Men generally, more than ever, contradict and blaspheme the spiritual Watchman's warning thereof, so that he, with his Fellows, shall be men wonder'd at, reckon'd mad-men, and the contemptiblest Fools in the whole World, for believing or asserting any such thing. Hence, will
that day of the Lord (or the Lord, coming forth, in that judgment-day-light of his all-searching, all-discovering, all-trying new-creation Spirit) be a general surprize to the World, Sea and Land, all inha∣bitants of the Earth and of the Sea, in the but reformed, or in the polluted spirit of nature. He will come as a Thief, with his irre∣sistible light upon them, in their midnight darkness, never less ex∣pecting or more deriding any such doctrine or thing. The temper of the World, before the general destruction of it, by Water, is made, by Christ himself, a representing figure of the desperately rebellious condition and most evil circumstances it will be found in, immediately before the near approaching destruction of it, by Fire. Abel, Enoch, and others, doubtless, though not all recorded, did, in the true new-creation spirit of prophecy, warn the people of their day, of their groundless security and self-flattery, as to any approaching judgments. Enoch, before that destruction by Water, prophesied the second destruction of it, by Fire, at Christ's second coming with the ten thousands of his Saints; Jude ver. 14, 15. His being the seventh from Adam, may seem not to be taken notice of, without some concerning sig∣nificancy. It was the judgment of the more enlightned sort of Jews, when in their flourish, that the World would stand six thousand years, a thousand years for a day, answering the six days works of God in the first-creation, and then, Christ would come in the glory, power and marvellous light of the new-creation, to keep his seventh thousand years Sabbath-day, wherein to proclaim a ju∣bilee to the World, and so, a rest or cessation from all the works of man, in his own, work-a-day, first-creation spirit, life, or activity. Of the said six thousand years, 5678 are past. Whether that say∣ing of Christ (speaking of the great tribulation in these last days, beyond all that ever was, or will be) that for the Elects sake
those days shall be shortned, may not import a period of Satan's reign and Man's day in this World, before the sixth thousand year be fully expired, is a question, with some. But, what less can it signify? The Jews appropriate that perswasion, as to this World's continuing six thousand years, more peculiarly to Elias. Elias complained; he was left alone, in his spiritual testimony, as to any associates with him, in the awaken'd exercise of the same spirit; as also, that his witness was universally rejected, and person persecuted by those in power. God's answer to him was, he had seven thou∣sand men (in that Israel) who had not bowed to Baal, that is, not wilfully and knowingly (through self-love to their earthly life and state, Satan's dwelling place) rejected and hated the heavenly life of that new-creation spirit, that is God's dwelling place, for ever, in which he will dwell amongst, shine upon, and own his true Sion-Saints, as his People, and himself their God, for ever∣more. Any, that have come forth in the awaken'd exercise of the true new-creation spirit of prophecy, grace and prayer, everlasting righteousness and truth, have experienc'd an almost universal contra∣diction and discountenance, as Fools and mad Men. The Apostles and primitive gospel Christians (when clothed with a wonder-working power, under the former rain, or first shower of the spirit, from Christ's ascended humanity) seem to have had the best on't, as to this; yet how were even they, yea, the most eminent teachers a∣mong them, hated and disturbed, contradicted, blasphemed, and murdered? I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought and in vain, says Esay, in my prophetical ministry, declaring the righteousness of God, as the only true way of Salvation, to Man. This he concludes, as relating to the next to no success, he found, amongst Men. But, he found the Lord's approbation judgment, and, that his work found acceptance, and he, a reward, there;
Esay. 49. 4. So Paul, if our ministry (says he of himself and fellow-Gospel teachers) prove (through mens wilful neglect and hatred of it) a sa∣vour of death unto death; yet are we, therein a sweet savour of Christ, unto God; 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16. No big looks, nor stout words of contradicting Enemies, should appale or discourage God's Commission'd Messengers of Truth. How were they mock'd, misus'd, and despised, even in Jerusalem, till there was no Remedy? 2 Chron. 36. 16. God charg'd Ezekiel to discharge his Watchman's Office, in speaking his Words to them, Whether they would hear, or obey, or whether they would forbear, that is, rebel against, and reject them. So also, does he command Jeremy to arise and speak his words to them, and not be dismaied at their Faces, lest (says he) I confound, or break thee in pieces, before them. Jeremy Prophesied amongst the, then, only professing People of God in the whole World, and yet had the whole Land against him, the Kings, Princes, Priests, and People of Judah. But, God made him, in the strength of his true Spirit of Prophesie, too hard for them all; a defenced City, an iron Pillar, and brazen Walls, against the whole Land; Jer. 1. 17, 18. Yet notwithstanding all this fencing and steeling him, to bear the shock of such an universal opposition and con∣tempt, we find him (through the wrangling distemper of his oppressed na∣tural man, that's the disputer of this World, in the Saint himself) at a sore loss, and ready to make very strange Conclusions. I am in derision daily, every one mocks and reproaches me, for speaking the Word of the Lord. Then I said, I'le speak no more in his Name. But his Word in my heart, was as a fire, and I could nor forbear, or hold from declaring it; Jer. 20. 7,—9. When his particular denunciations of desolating Judgments on Jerusalem were accom∣plished, the Jews dispers'd and confounded, he was still at the same pass, tossed up and down from post to pillar, under a universal contradi∣ction. As for the word thou hast spoken unto us in the name of the Lord, say the Jews, we will not hearken unto thee; but, do whatso∣ever goes forth of our own mouth; follow the words of our own wis∣dom; Jer. 44. 16, 17. This they conclude upon, come what will. De∣sperate resolutions! When Johanan the Son of Kareah, and all the Cap∣tains of the remaining Forces (left by Nebuchadnezzar) and all the Jews, from the least even to the greatest, had besought Jeremy, to seek the Lord, on their behalf, as to what course they should steer,
after the murder of Gedaliah, whom the King of Babilon left to be their Governour, he told them the Lord's message, that if they stay'd in their own Land, they should be safe; if they went to Egypt, for which he saw their inclination, the very Sword of Nebuchadnezzar, they causelesly fear'd at home, should be sure to meet with them, there. Jo∣hanan the Son of Kareah, and all the proud Men, tell him, he speaks falsly, and that the Lord had not sent him to say; go not into Egypt, to sojourn there. So, they, not only, go, but force him and Baruch along with them, in flat contradiction to their own message. And when there, we have seen how obstinately they demean themselves against him, and all his words. All this, have we, Jer 42. 43. and 44 chapters. At this rate, are true witnesses of God, handled all along this World. Christ himself, had, in a manner, a universal contradiction to his whole Gospel-ministry of the second covenant, from the professing Jews, with their Teachers, Priests, Scribes, Pharisees, &c. in the first. He came to his own people in the first, who received him not, but blasphem'd and murder'd him, for the doctrine of the second, though exactly consonant to their own Law and Prophets, rightly understood; and so, became they no people of God, at all, in first, or second. What they had, was taken from them, for rebel∣liously refusing the great and true Salvation, by him, farther discovered and offered to them. Christ's meek and quiet bearing such universal con∣tradiction of mystical Sinners, to his whole Gospel-ministry, is set before his followers, therein, lest they be quite tired out, and faint in their minds, on like occasion; Heb. 12. 3.
Concerning the KINGDOM of GOD, to vvhich Christ hath had a Right, from Everlasting; Testified by Saints in all Ages; unto the visi∣ble Possession vvhereof, the signal slaying of the Tvvo Witnesses, and the raising them again, by the angelical Preachers of the everlasting Gospel, into an Association vvith themselves, vvill be an immediate fore-running and preparatory Dispensation. THERE is not any Truth more frequently foretold, or positively asserted in the whole Scripture, than the Second Comming of Christ to set up his visible Kingdom, on Earth. On his joyful appearance for this, blessed Angels and Saints hopes have, from the beginning, been fixed, as the season for such an Opening the Temple of God in Heaven, as will render the Divine Inhabitant thereof, visible on Earth. This, by first cleerly stating and declaring the infinite and absolute Soveraignty of Gods divine Essence, above all: And next unto this di∣vine unity, the high and superlative Prerogative of the first, divine and creature-composition, in the Mediatour's person: Thirdly, the great and peculiar Priviledges of the most heavenly Saints: And lastly, the just and immutable Rights and Advantages of blessed Angels, and other glorified Saints, above whatever was to be found in the natural, first-crea∣tion state of either. Hence the whole new-creation seed of Christ, from a subjection to chang and vanity, in their first-creation life and clothing, have been secretly groaning and panting after that deliverance and freedom, that's to be brought to them, by this second, visible, spiritu∣all coming of our Lord Jesus, from heaven, to Reign on the earth. And this, will they, more impatiently then ever, desire and long after, toward the end of the encreasing, unreasonable Bondage, under Satan's reign and Man's day. This, that the whole Creation groanes after and expects, is the peculiar hope, the certain and wel-grounded perswasion of spiri∣tual Saints, whose Faith becoms an undoubted evidence to things not seen to the natural understanding; Rom. 8. 22-25. Heb. 11. 1. They on∣ly have the first-fruits and earnest of this (yet invisible) Spiritual Life, in
which Christ will appear to all. They have the tasts of the new Wine of his Spiritual Kingdom. And hence, do they greatly thirst after the full draughts thereof, in his Kingdom. They are, therefore, un∣cessant in Prayer to God (and this, in Obedience to, and agreement with the command and will of Christ) for the comming of this King∣dom, as those Spiritual Watch-Men, that, in harmony with the Holy Angels, cease not, Day nor Night, to cry unto God for the Personal com∣ming of their Spiritual Lord to make his nevv Jerusalem, a praise in the vvhole Earth; Esay, 62. 1, 6, 7. For, this will compleat the adoption of Sons, by the redemption of their body, and manifestation of the Sons of God, in a visibility of their spiritual life. This will be a Jubile to the whole World. How deeply, then, are Angels, Saints, and all Men con∣cerned, to be rightly informed, and have their hope fixed in this Im∣portant thing, the comming of their Spiritual King, in his new-crea∣tion Glory, to reign over them? For, therein will be comprehended all their distinct Interests and Advantages. Peter, by way of Prophecy (speaking of this spiritual kingdom) positively asserts it, not to be of a Fabulous or controversible nature, but grounded on clear Evidence, and undoubted Demonstration. For, he had the honour of being an Eye-vvitness, by faith, of Christ, as from the beginning, living in his root, clothed with Glory and Honour; 2 Pet. 1. 16-18. And, since his ascent in our nature, have spiritual Saints been waiting for his descent, therein. God, by setting him at his right hand, therein, has Endovved him vvith the Povver and Glory of his Fathers Throne, to set up his visible king∣dom on earth; Jo. 5. 22, 27. Act. 17. 31. All this seems implied in the voice, Peter heard from the excellent glory, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am vvell pleased; as having descended and finished the vvork given him to do, in our earthly nature, by the compleat death there∣of, as to all changable, first-creation life; And ascended into the ever∣lasting new-creature and divine life of God the Mediatour, his Root and Father; in which, fitted for the visible rule of his spiritual kingdom on earth. For this blessed thing, are Saints [out of, or in the body] all vvaiting, as his Members, Servants and blessed Retinue, to enter with him into the actual possession of this Glorious Kingdom, in the visibility of their, before, hidden, Spiritual Life, which will be the manifestati∣on of the Sons of God. The glad tydings of this second comming of Christ, in his spiritual glory, to Reign, as that of his natural birth, in order there∣unto, will be, first, signally given by his angelical Messengers, as that which
will, most certainly, bring Glory to God in the highest Heavens, through a union of peace with his new Heavens and Earth, or higher and lower ranks of Spiritual Saints, together with undeniable marks of his good vvill to all Men in general, that are under his happy government; Luke. 2. 14. All men, that have not excluded themselves by a fixed enmity to this spiritual king, shall have their Eyes so far opened, at, and by his appear∣ing, as to see and admire his long-suffring towards them, and his restor∣ing to them, what, at first, they lost. So will the whole new World joyn in unanimous praises to God, through Christ, their new-creation King. And, if this be so, a distinct considering the spiritual nature, as well as certain visibility of this kingdom, will be requisite; and this, so much the more, as the day of his second comming approaches, and drawes nee∣rer. This growes more evident, dayly, from the general decay of all natural and moral goodness amongst men, and the increase and abound∣ing of all Iniquity, litteral and mystical, that, as foretold, will accomplish man's day, and period this World. Through the extream abounding of iniquity, nothing of support or comfort will be left spiritual Saints or rea∣sonable men, but a rightly Informed Faith, as to the certain approach of the Lord, in his spiritual kingdom. In the stedfast, wel-grounded hope hereof, are they called on, by Christ, to lift up their Heads, as knovving his second appearance, and consequently, their full redemp∣tion dravvs nigh, and will soon be accomplished. For this great and most concerning thing and Truth, have we a Cloud of Witnesses, in Scripture, even for the glorious Comming and Kingdom of our Lord, as also an account of the distinct hands by which given, divine and crea∣turely, or both together. God, in his infinite divine Essence; the Me∣diator, in his conjunctive divine and creature-nature; and the pure creature-spirit of Faith, living in a succession of spiritual Saints, from first to last, do all agree in their Testimony to this Truth. The Mystery of God, and of the Father, and of Christ, Col. 2. 2. is all opened by Christ the Branch, which Paul earnestly desires, Saints may be filled vvith the rich and full assurance of. And, 1 Cor. 11. 2, 3. treating of the same high and glorious Truths, he layes down the original and fundamental Ordinances of Truth, as he received them from Christ's own hand. He declares it necessary for men to know, That the Head of every Man is Christ; and that the Head of the Woman, is the Man; and the Head of Christ, God. In these gradations of a three-fold-Headship, he summ's up the essential Foundations of all Truth, divine and creaturely; to wit, of God, in his
divine unity; then, of the Mediatour, in his supream, divine and crea∣ture-composition; and then thirdly, of Christ, as Son and Branch, the appointed means for rendring the said divine and creature-glories of God the Mediator, visible to blessed Angels and Saints. The highest of these Ordinances of Truth (though last expressed) is, That the Head of Christ is God. God the Mediatour, in his conjunctive, divine and creature-form of God, confesses and ownes the single and uncom∣pounded divine Essence, as his absolute Head and Father. This is the first and highest Ordinance of Truth. Next unto this, Christ is the head of every man; that is, Christ, as Me∣diatour, in the first and highest conjunction of divine and creature-na∣ture, is the immediate Head of himself, as the first-born Creature and Resurrection-Lamb, and consequently, of every Angel and Man, in both creations, natural or spiritual. And then, as the third and last Or∣dinance of Truth, is the Man Christ as Resurrection-Lamb, in his spiri∣tual, new-creation Life, Head of the Woman, or Natural-state, in Christ's person (as brought into subjection to the new-creation Man) and also, of all his heavenly and earthly glorified Saints and Angels; or Church, Col. 1. 18. There is a like relation of Father and Son, in the Mediatour's creature-nature, Root and Branch, as of the divine Father and Son, in the divine nature. And, so is his Creature-nature, throughout, and on all accounts, the supream creature-likeness of the infinite divinity. 'Tis the absolute and peculiar Prerogative of the divine nature, not only to be the original of its own Being from Eternity, or to be what it is, without all begin∣ing, but also, of that purely divine Form and Image of it self, in the Mediatour, to whom God, in the single divine Esence, is Head and Fa∣ther. It is therefore said, 1 Tim. 2. 5. There is one God, in the divine Essence, uncompounded with any creature-being; and, in distinction from God, in this supream consideration, One Mediatour betvveen God and Men, mediating between, and therefore consisting of two natures, divine and creaturely. A Mediatour is not of one, but God is one. To the Mediatour, in this Composition, is the single divine Essence, Head. And the divine nature, or purely divine form of God, which is one with the divine essence, as the immediate former of his own creature-spirit, from everlasting, Prov. 8. 22, 23. stands in a headship or superiority to that creature-spirit, which is his own divine workmanship, in his own person. As the purely divine Son of God, is he under a like impossibi∣lity
with the Father, of being immediately seen or known by any, but the divine Being it self. For, in this divine relation of Father and Son, are they fitted, only, for the fruition of each other. And so, the divine Son lay shut up in the bosom of the divine Father, till the good will and mind of both was, to build a creature-house for themselves, which was the Root and former of all meer creature-beings, in both Worlds, Heb. 1. 2. This original Word, or creature-beginning, vvas in God, and vvith God, and vvas God. And by it, vvere all other things made; John 1. 1. 3. The distinction of divine and creature-nature in the Mediatour, is intirely preserved in their personal Unity. His creature-nature is called the Be∣ginning. His divine is without all beginning. Again, the infinite divine builder of the supream creature-house for himself, is above the house, so built by him, (though taken into personal union with the divine Inhabi∣tant thereof) as is implied, Heb. 3. 3, 4. The infinite divinity wrap∣ping up it self, in a fellovvship or personal union with its own creature-house, makes up that wonderful Mystery; Ephes. 3. 9. The Fellowship of divine and creature-nature, was, before all time, a Mystery hid in God. But, in this supream divine and creature-fellowship, was the certain foundation laid, from everlasting, for God's revealing his own divinity to Angels and men, when made; which otherwise had remained invi∣sible and unapproachable to them all, for ever. The divine Spirit, in Building its ovvn creature-house, hevv'd out the seven Pillars thereof; Prov. 9. 1. This signifies the fulness and variety of this creature-building or spirit, in the capacity of Root and Branch, Father and Son. And, through the Son and Branch (as admitted into union with the divinity, in the same personal fellowship, with his Root) comes all to be beheld by blessed Saints and Angels. But, for better understanding this whole Mistery, consider farther, the relation of Root and Branch, or, Father and Son, in the Mediatours creature-nature, as well as in the divine. This distinction was fitly figu∣red out, in the top and foot of Jacob's Ladder, the divinity of the Media∣tour standing above, or, on the top of it, as Head thereof. And, this top of it, or, creature-root, is Head to its ovvn foot, the Branch; and, as fitted by immediate Personal union with the divinity, receives the fulnes of that divine Ocean, to which so united. But, in this first and highest Marriage-union of divine and creature-nature, is God, yet, in too great a height, for the creature's immediate sight or enjoyment of him. The scorching Beams of the Mediatour's divinity, are not so allayed and tem∣pered,
in this highest union thereof, with his supream creature-Spirit, the root of all creation, as that Angels or Men may receive or converse therewith. This highest creature-mount or spirit, in the Mediatour, was fitly typed out by that mount, under the Law, that was so glorious and dreadful, as to become present Death to all that (immediatly) touched the same. But, there is a lower capacity in the mediatour's crea∣ture-nature, called the Son and Branch, which answers the creatures vvish, in an immediate Head-ship, to them. This Son and Branch is to be con∣sidered in his invisible, angelical state, before the foundation of the World, and that, both in a pure, but changable first-creation state, as the first-born therein, and as the Lamb slain, and so, by the death of that mortal state, taken into personal union with his creature-root, in new-creation-Life; and through that, with his divinity, also. So comes the Son and Branch to be filled with all the fulness and life of both. And, the same thing did he, in and with our visible humane nature, in the fulness of time. He made the like sacrifice thereof, for the like end. And thus is the son and branch, in his resurrection-life, the blessed medium, by which, the vision of the divine Glory is let down and given to his creatures, which, by the root, or top of his creature-building, singly considered, was incommunicable to them. By the branch, is it brought so neer, as, with a meet regard to the dignity of the mediatour, and safety of blessed creatures, to become fit for the sight and injoyment of Angels and Saints. The twofold resur∣rection-state, or Heavenly and Glorified earthly Spirit or Life of the ex∣alted branch, is the mistical Golden Pot, into which the divine Manna (the everlasting Food or Bread of life, to happy Angels and Saints) is put, and hath been hid, from before the foundation of the world. This capacity in Christ, as branch, is of the same Date with his creature-root, as possessed thereby, in the beginning of his vvay, toward's the creation of the world; Prov. 8, 22. By the Man Christ Jesus, as living in his new-creature root, did all things receive their invisible existence, and visible creation. By him, so considered, vvere all things made, and vvithout him, vvas not any thing made, that vvas made, or created; Jo. 1. 3. 1 Col. 15-17. Heb. 1. 2. Thus, the sutable medium, by which God condescend's to let down himlelf to creatures sight and enjoyment, was prepared, as the immediate hand, by which they received their creation. In the spirit of the branch, as standing up in his root, had Angels and the spirits of men their first, invisible existence, and thereby, as their parent, are brought forth into their personal subsistences, by creation. And, in him is trea∣sured
up the Bread of everlasting Life, for their Immortal spirits, which they are not capacitated to feed on, in the mortal life of their first-creation; but, immortal life, by a second. This never-perishing food is suted only to a never-perishing Life. Both root and branch, or creature-Father and Son, in the mediatour, had, from everlasting, not only the enjoyment of each other, but of the divine glory, also, in the same blessed person. And so, did God most high, with delight, behold all his designs and purposes, finished in him, before any thing was brought forth, by creation. And, in the wonderful fellowship of divine and creature-nature, in himself, did God the Mediator rest also from all his vvorkes, before any of them were brought forth, as beholding all the contrivances of his divine mind (in the first conjunction of his divine nature, with his creature root) thus declared and executed in the Son and branch. This branch, also, had his peculiar delight in the principality or headship given him, over Angels and Men (as existing in him, and look∣ed on as the habitable parts of his Earth) before the foundation of the World; Prov. 8. 30, 31. He rejoyced alwayes, before his father, not only as enjoying the vision of the divine glory, but, as the same was in him trea∣sured up; and by him, communicable to them. And, thus see we the need of root and branch, in the mediatour's creature-nature, as the ascent and descent of his great creature-building. By the former, is he qualified to receive the divine vision, in the im∣mediate Ocean-fulnes thereof: by the latter, to conveigh and communi∣cate it, to his blessed Angels and Saints. In the creature-root, or top of his creature-house, is his divinity shut up from his creatures, till reveal∣ed or opened by the branch. The branch is the mystical Door of this great creature-building, and also opener thereof, to his creatures. David, by faith, saw and heard the great Lord the Mediatour, in his highest and first Union of divine and creature-nature, speaking to Christ the branch, as David's immediate Lord and Head, saying, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right Hand, until I make thy Foes thy footstool; Psal. 110, 1. Here is a Prophecy of Christ, the polished Shaft, hid in Gods Quiver, as to what he was to be and do in our nature, for exalting it into the Glory, long before, attain'd by him, as Resurrection-Lamb, and therein, head, not only, to the immortal Spirits of Men and Angels, but, in a peculiar manner, to his spiritual Church. He will appear in our glorified nature, at the appointed season, for actual setting up of his visible Kingdom, on Earth. Thus may we, with admiration, behold the ascents
and descents of the mediatours creature-building, by which, marvelously fitted for preserving the dignity of his own divinity, and accomplishing the blessednes of his creatures. The ascent or top of it, is a fitly capacita∣ted immediate habitation for the divinity. And, the descent of it, in the branch, is that, wherein Christ becoms a two-fold Head to his Angels and Saints, from whom they receive their immortal beings, and also the hea∣venly life and clothing thereof, by which fitted for their mansions in this his Fathers House. This Son and Branch, though but foot-stool to himself as creature-root and Father; the Throne, on which his divinity sits, is in a headship and preheminency over all blessed Angels and Saints, by the appointment of his divine and creature-lord. This foot-stool, or lowest part of the creature-Throne or House of God, in the mediatour, is the immediate object of Faith, as that, by which the divini∣ty, in the top of this creature-House or Throne, invisible and inaccessible to his creatures, is let down to them. By this blessed medium, are Angels and Saints admitted to the sight and injoyment of the divine glory, for ever. Christ, when on Earth, witnessed his spiritual life, as Son of man in Heaven, into which he returned with our nature, and so, into that enjoyment of the divine glory, he had, both as creature-root and branch, before the foundation of the World, according to his pray∣er; Jo. 17. 4, 5. He that descended and he that ascended, is still but one and the same Son of man, in the invisible angelical, and visible humane Life of the branch; Eph. 4. 10. This did he, that he might fill all things. In the transformed angelical state, as spirit of the branch in his own crea∣ture-root, the Son of Man in Heaven, was he head and parent to the im∣mortal spirits of Angels and Men, by a first creation: and of the spiritu∣al being and state thereof, by a second. In this first capacity, as spirit of the branch, is Christ the heavenly place, in which Angels and Saints have been blessed, as chosen thereunto, before the foundation of the World; Eph. 1. 3. In the second, as a visible head to them, in our glorified nature, i he qualified, actually to give them a life of everlasting blessednes, with the never-perishing meat thereof, the divine and new-creature glories together with the life, in which alone they can see and enjoy them, were both and all treasured up for them, in him. Our exalted nature in him, i the adapted conveyer of his divine, and otherwise invisible, creature-glories, to us. In our glorified nature, he declares the Gospel, or glad tydings of salvation, to men. By this, are they made capable of receiving the joyfull news of mansions provided for them, in his Fathers House, and
of entring into them. No entring for us, but by his entring first, in our nature, into the state of everlasting life. Christ, thus, is the Key of the house of David; Isaiah 22. 22. In his creature-root, was treasured up, from everlasting, the divine glory. This must be unlock'd and set open, to blessed Angels and Saints, by the creature-branch, in the second or visi∣ble capacity of it, even in our exalted nature. This is the mystical Key that opens his heavenly creature-life, and gives the vision of the divine glory, to us. By his coming in flesh, and death and resurrection there∣of, has he entred into that state, himself, as our Head. Spiritual saints, under the Law, safely shut up in the faith of Christ's so comming and doing for them, rejoyced therein. Christ, in his first capacity of crea∣ture-branch, as resurrection-lamb, in his angelical spirit, was the invisible Door to his own great creature-building, as Root. The very Door, yet, was invisible, as well as House, and divine Inhabitant. At least, that Door was not opened, nor the divine and creature-glories of the House and Inhabitant, revealed, as now. In our visible nature, glorified (the second capacity of the branch) does he compleat the Door of en∣trance into the House, and is the spiritual Key and Opener thereof, so, in both capacities of the Branch, fitted to be the Authour and Finisher of our Faith. And, so was he presented, at first, to Angels and Men, as the compleat Object of their Faith, for the perfecting their Salvation. Blessed Angels therefore desired to prie into the blessed consequents of the man Christ's ascending, to give such openings of divine and spiritual mysteries and glories, as never, before, were given to them or saints; 1 Pet. 1. 11, 12. John 7. 39. Rom. 16. 25, 26. Ephes. 3. 9, 10. Thus, have we the ground and reason, why our spiritual Levi stood up, from everlasting, in the Loins of his great mystical Father, and that, in the two-fold spirit of the Branch, invisible and visible, as a twofold natural and spiritual Womb and Parent, to blessed Angels and Saints. As natural or spiritual Children then, to him, are they to pay the like Tithes due from them to him (even the spoiles of all, in their own na∣ture, by death, and sacrifice) that the mystical Levi, in his person, paid to his spiritual Aaron, his Root. He requires, from his Children, all the glory, due from the descent of his great creature-building, to the ascent or top thereof; as also, from both, to the divinity of the Media∣tour; and, through his conjunctive divine and creature being, to God most high and absolute, in his single or uncompounded divinity. For, vvithout controversie, the less is blessed of the greater, Heb. 7. 7. And in
the due observation of this rule, every part of the Mediatour's person is preserved in an absolute unity, to the praise and glory of God most high, and Head of all. In the great and compleat mystery of Godliness, then, we find a three∣fold Headship. The first, Of God, in the simple unity of his divine Essence, soveraign Head to the Mediatour's whole divine and creature-being. The second is, The headship of the first and invisible conjunction of divine and creature-nature in the Mediatour, to the twofold spirit of his humanity, in which, properly, the Branch. Thirdly, This Branch, also, in his twofold humane capacity, is found in an immortal natural, and everlasting spiritual headship over blessed angels and saints, having in all things a preheminence, above them all, next under his divine Lord and creature-root, as exalted into per∣sonal union, with both. Next then, consider the distinct testimonies, given by every of these head-ships, to the present truth; the certain visibility of the Kingdom of Christ; declaring all povver, in Heaven and Earth, given to, and visi∣bly to be exercised by the man Christ Jesus, who, as in our glorified na∣ture, shall be seen and acknowledged, as, by God and his Father, made the only Potentate, King of Kings and Lord of Lords; 1 Tim. 6. 15. and Rev. 19. 16. Yet, will not the man Christ take the honour of exercising this power, unto himself, but, make it his busines to unveil and shew the two∣fold distinct headships over him, in the pure single divinity, and invisi∣ble conjunction of divine and creature-nature. And, both these, give their distinct testimonies to him, as the invisible, glorified son and branch, in order to his visible exercise of universal power, therein, over all, as the blessed medium, exactly calculated for declaring and execut∣ing the whole mind and will of both, in reference to all Angels and men, good and bad. This could no otherwise be discovered and done, save by the branch, the man Christ. For, it is below the dignity of the single infinite divinity, the divine essence, or, the first and highest conjunction of divine and creature-nature (or the divine and supream creature-form of God, in the Mediatour) immediatly to exercise the power, belong∣ing to them both. They, therefore, delegate the exercise of this their power, to Christ, the branch, as set up in the express likeness of the di∣vine glory, to whom, therefore, the divinity of the mediatour says, Thou art my Son, that I have begotten in my own likeness, in personal union
with me, and appointed thee, heir of all things; Heb. 1. 2, 5. Christ, as creature-root, is heir of all, as the great and supream creature-spouse of his own divinity, who brings forth the creature-son and branch, in his likeness, the visible Image of his invisible creature-spirit, as that is the invisible Image of the infinity divine. So is this son and branch made visible heir of all things, receiving the power from his own crea∣ture-root, that his root has, from his own divinity. Hence, when, as glorified branch, brought forth in the visible likeness of his invisible-creature-root, his root declares him, his vvel-beloved Son, vvhom all the saints and Angels of God are to vvorship; Heb. 1. 6. This, first-be∣gotten son and branch, is the happy and marveilous day of the media∣tour's own making, in vvhich blessed Saints and Angels are to rejoyce; Psal. 118. 23, 24. For, by this, the divinity in its simple unity, and in its first and invisible conjunction with creature-nature, in the mediatour, do first give themselves forth, in a day-break of knowledg and revelati∣on, to Angels and men. Thus come the distinct divine and creature-glories to shine forth upon them, through this son and branch. And, in their name and power, is he visibly to rule over all. The title, then, of this branch, to such universal Rule, is twofold. For, it descends upon him, and is derived to him, first, from God, in his simple divinity, as ab∣solute head to the mediatour. Secondly, from the mediatour to Christ, in our glorified nature, which is his visibility, as that, in which, dvvels the fulness of the God-head, bodily; Col. 2. 9. From this twofold foun∣tain and original headship over him, has the man Christ his right, to the exercise of a universal visible rule over all creatures, made sure and un∣doubted, by their twofold testimony to him. But, in possessing and ex∣ercising this rule, must he still acknowledg the twofold head-ship of the pure divinity, and first conjunction of divine and creature-spirit in the mediatour, over him. These are both, in themselves, invisible and incommunicable; and, consequently, at too vast a distance, and emi∣ent a height, to have ever been seen or approached, by creatures. Their condescention, therefore, to have come forth, in either of these capa∣cities, in a visibility to angels or men (and so, in the immediate exercise of the power, essential to both the said headships over Christ, the branch) had been too great for them, and unsafe for their creatures. Hence, hath God, of his free Grace, in order to the creation of the World, and communications of himself to angels and men, when created, contri∣ved a twofold distinct creature-building and capacity, in the mediatour,
the inferiour part, whereof, is exactly fitted to answer all the intents and designs of God, towards his creatures, as to the declaration and exercise of his power over them, and giving the safe and comfortable enjoyment of his presence to them, which, in the two former headships, without the branch, would have been a consuming fire, to them; Heb. 12. 29. and everlasting burnings, to any meer creature-organs, natural or spiritu∣al. The pure divinity or infinite divine essence and Father; and, the first, invisible conjunction of divine with creature-nature, in the media∣tour, are, both, above the capacity of immediatly creating angel or man; and then, much more, above the immediate exercise of rule, over them. But, the whole will of both these distinct heads to the man Christ, is exactly answered and executed by the creature-son and branch, in the heavenly and immortalized earthly capacity thereof. The twofold glorious creature-building in the mediatour, taken into personal union with his divinity, makes up such a blessed instrument, for doing the whole will of the divine nature, that it is infallibly impossible, any thing but the divine will, should be executed, by it. Yet, though each part of the said creature-building live in a perfect voluntary subjection to the divine will, the whole does preserve and retain its own creature-will, in the said subjection, distinct from the divine. And thus have we seen the distinct testimonies of the divine father and son, to the twofold capacity of creature-nature, in the mediatour, root and branch. The divine son, or form of the divine essence and father, from all eternity, is the purely divine likenes and unseen shape of the fa∣ther; and, the creature-root is the unseen likeness of the divine son; but, then, is creature-son, or branch, the visible Image of its own crea∣ture-root, by which, all divine and creature-glories are let down, to the understanding and injoyment of creatures. And, each of these Images of God, divine and twofold creaturely, in the mediatour, are, accord∣ing to their distinct natures and gradations, the representations or like∣nesses of each other. And, not only the divine, but supream creature-likenes of God, in the mediatour, the original of all creature-beings, on which the soveraign power of the divinity descended, from ever∣lasting, is of too neer a kin to the divinity, and in too transcendent a sublimity, above any creatures understanding, sight, or enjoyment, to come forth in the immediate exercise of the soveraign divine power, imparted to it, and committed to its trust. It is the proper immediate receiver of the divine will, but, above the capacity of executing it. The
declaring and executing the divine Will, is committed to Christ, as creature-son and branch, exactly fitted for it. This Son and Branch is the body that gives visibility to the Mediatour's whole divine and great creature-being. And, though inferiour to its creature-root, is it in per∣sonal union with it, and the divine nature of the Mediatour (and this, in a twofold resurrection-life, heavenly and glotified earthly) to the com∣pleating his personality. The two distinct Offices of the Mediatour's twofold creature-nature, root and branch, are significantly figured out, by the Candlestick all of gold, vvith a bovvl on the top of it; Zech. 4. 2. This Bovvl, or Top of the great creature-building, in the Mediatour, is the fitted immediate reception of the divine mind, in order to the executi∣on of it, by his inferiour creature-capacity, signified by the golden Candle∣stick. This inferiour part, as living in personal union with the superiour, and, through that, with the divinity it self, in the Mediatour, is said to be God's equal or fellovv, who, thus found in the form of God, accounts it no robbery (or presumption) to be equal vvith God; even in our sove∣raignly exalted nature, as therein fitted to declare and execute the whole will of his divine and creature-lord; Zech. 13. 7. Phil. 2. 6. This in∣feriour creature-capacity of the Mediatour, is the second reception of the divine will and power, which was first received by, and treasured up in his creature-root, and, by that, transmitted to its Son and Branch, to exercise and execute the same, as fitted thereunto. From the crea∣ture-root, does the branch receive the power of creating the worlds; Heb. 1. 2. as also, the essentials of all Rule and Government. For all these undertakes, does the Son and Branch become abundantly qualified, through personal conjunction with his creature-root and divine Lord; even, to create all things, and make Laws, whereby, clearly to state & con∣serve the absolute headship of the single divinity, and the Supream Pre∣rogative of the first conjunction of divine and creature-spirits, in the Me∣diatour. The Man Christ, as Son and Branch, declares the deriving all his power from the two headships over him, and his exercise thereof in a visible rule over this world, in perfect subjection to them, according to the righteous Laws of his own making. And, he allowes unto An∣gels and Men, all such priviledges as are essential to their spiritual, ratio∣nal, and sensual Principles, in the life and exercise of their intellectual beings. So, does he render them, according to their creature-liberty, free Agents, as well as immortal spirits. Thus deep is the foundation laid for the Rule and Power of the King∣dom
of Christ, as visibly to be exercised by him, in our glorified nature. And, this power does he ascribe to his conjunctive divine Lord and crea∣ture-root, and in harmony therewith, to God's absolute divine unity, as above all, and head to all. Thus, does Jesus Christ, as subjected Lord over all, under the said twofold headship over him, ascribe and bring the glory to God most high, in his single divinity, the great and high Fa∣ther of all. So, through the happy union of divine and twofold crea∣ture-nature, in the Mediatour, may we behold, the Government of Peace, under which, blessed Saints and Angels are to live everlastingly, as shin∣ing forth betvveen them both (Zec. 6. 13.) to wit, both his creature-capacities. In the higher, he is the immediate receiver of the divine mind: in the lower, the executour of the divine will, in all things. This twofold office of the mediatour, is excellently figured out in the essen∣tial parts of man's make, and the distinct usefulnesses thereof, by which, fitted for the compleat exercise of his whole being. Yea, the whole person of the mediatour, in all the essentials of his constitution, may fitly be represented by what is found in man. For, as a shadow of the divinity, his spirit or intellectual part is the conceiver of its own will. Then, his Soul, as figure of the mediatour's creature-root, is the fit∣ted reception of the said will and mind of the spirit. And thirdly, the will thus conceived by the Spirit, and received by the Soul, must be brought into visible exercise and execution, by the third essential part in man, the body (1 Thes. 5. 23.) figure of the inferiour part, or ca∣pacity, in the mediatour's creature-nature, as visible branch to his in∣visible creature-root, in vvhom the god-head also dvvells bodily, and so becomes visible to Angels and Saints. Thus, by owning every distinct part in the mediatour and in man (and accordingly, assigning to them their proper offices) the usefulnes of the whole, both in type and substance, is compleated, as also, their respective personalities. And, as the body is put for the whole man, (as that, by which, the invisible Soul and Spirit are rendred visible, in the exercise thereof, which dig∣nity belongs to it, through its personal union with its invisible Soul and spirit) it bears the Title and denomination of the whole man, in the fi∣gure, after the same manner as in the substance, the person of the Medi∣atour. Hence, every distinct Name of the Mediatour, is applyed to Christ, the Branch, as in our nature glorified. For, therein, the fulness of the Godhead dvvels bodily; and, in personal union therewith, shines forth visibly, to Angels and Men.
In the lowest essential part of the Mediatour, in Christ the Man-child that's to be manifested in the glory of his Father, put upon our exalted nature, in him. And so, is the Government of his divine and creature-lord, put upon his Shoulders. Hence, is he called, by his Father's wonderful Names; The vvonderful Counsellour, the mighty God, the everlasting Fa∣ther, and Prince of Peace; Isa. 9. 6. This is a full, significant Prophecy of Christ, the Branch, in our nature, glorified, as the body and visibility of the Mediatour, by which, his other, superiour essential parts, his di∣vine spirit, and creature-soul, are brought to light, and rendred visible to his creatures. So, is the Man Christ Jesus, the one Mediatour betvveen God and Men; 1 Tim. 2. 5. Yet, does not the Mediatour, hereby, lose either his divine or creature-name, in the first conjunction thereof; but, on the contrary, that divine Light, and original Creature-immortality, which was inaccessible, invisible and incommunicable to creatures, is made visible in the Man Christ, as glorified and exalted on the Throne of David, in personal union with his divine and creature-lord, Of the encrease of vvhose Government, through the said union, there shall be no end; vers. 7. For hereby, is this happy Prince of peace, abundantly qualified, to execute and fulfill the whole divine and creature-will. And so, through the perfect subjection of the visible body, our exalted nature in him, to the invisible creature-soul and divine spirit, is the will of God, and of the whole person of the mediatour, declared and fulfilled. The will of all, is manifested and done, by the actual setting up of the kingdom, over which, Christ is to reign, as son and branch, in the glory of his divine Lord and creature-father. This is significantly figured out, by Hilkiam the Father, and Eliakim, the Son; holding forth this relation of our mystical Eliakim, the branch, bearing the same date with his spiritual root, and father, Hilkiam, in his invisible angelical life, that he had in his root, from everlasting. And, in his appointed time, must all the glory of his Fathers house be visibly put upon our nature, in him, on earth, as invisibly inherited and possessed by him, in Heaven. So comes he to be clothed with the twofold Robes of mystical Hilkiam, his root and father, when this son and branch shall appear in the visible exercise of all power in heaven and earth, essentially belonging to the Throne of his Fathers glory. And then, will his father visibly place this his son, on the said Throne, as clothed vvith his Robes and strengthned vvith his girdle, to exercise his whole Government, put into his hands. As the distinct Testimonies of the Mediatour, in his invisible divine and crea∣ture-natures,
will he visibly set his creature-son and branch, on his holy Hill of Sion, committing to him the exercise of all his own rule and power, in a visible dominion over that House of Juda and Israel, that comprehends the whole heavenly and glorified earthly family of Christ. The season for this, hath yet been, by God, kept in reserve, figured by the clothing of litteral Eliakim, in which, Christ, our mystical Eliakim, as son to the mediatour, his invisible father, is to have all the distinct glories of that mystical fellowship and unity, that his divine and invisible creature-nature live in, so hung upon him, as to be visibly seen and acknowledged by the whole world. Their distinct testimonies will be known and owned at that second comming of Christ, in our glorified nature, in which he will cause to shine forth his invisible conjunction of divine and creature-nature. And so also, by the man Christ, shall be Administred and given forth the distinct and differing measures of his fathers divine glory, as the everlasting Portions of blessed Angels and Saints, according to their respective receptivities, as vessels of greater or less capacity, even from Cups to Flagons. And, in this universal Kingdom of his Father, shall the Man Christ be established, as a Nail in a sure Place, for ever∣more. And, by him, shall blessed Angels and Saints ascribe the glory, due to the purely divine nature, and the invisible conjunction of divine and creature-nature. The Son and Branch acknowledges, all his Pow∣er to be from his God and Father, in personal union with him. He de∣clared, that, of himself, in our single fleshly nature, he could do nothing; and that he receives all his ruling power, as exalted into personal union with his God and Father, therein. Thus comes the Son and Branch to be possessed of all the strength and power of the Mediatours whole per∣son. And, so is enabled, not only to see, but do all things. Whatever the Father doth, that doth the Son, also. For, all the Power of the Fa∣ther, through personal union, becomes the Son's. The same Will lives in both. But, this Will, as living in the Father, cannot be declared to, or received by creatures, but as descending to, and manifested by the Son. On this ground, Christ himself declares, The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all Judgement to the Son. So, the whole will of the Father is executed by the Son. Hence, in obedience to the Father, All must honour the Son as they honour the Father. Thus does Christ shew, how all that power, which, originally, is his Fathers, comes to be his; and, that all which is his, thus again, becomes his Father's; and he exer∣cises the same, in perfect subjection to his Father. Yet, is the new crea∣ture-will
of the son, distinct from the divine will, though one with it, through personal union with the divine. In this union, and absolute subjection, will Christ, as son and branch, rule his spiritual kingdom, as declarer and doer of the divine mind, which could, no otherwise, be known or done. Christ would not put any weight on himself, in the will of our single fleshly nature; Yet, is he one that beares a distinct record or vvitness to himself; and will, by the command of his Father, give it unto him, as exalted into personal union with God; and, as so, the truth, he told the Jews, worthy of their belief. For, in our exalt∣ed nature, is he the only immediate object of faith, to Angels and men, and the only way and means for their knowing, or comming to, the fa∣ther. Christ justified his bearing vvitness to himself, as thus considered, to the Jews, on their offence at his owning himself in this union with the father, as knovving vvhence he came, and vvhether be vvas to go. He knew, he was to return, by way of resurrection, into that life, whence he de∣scended, as spirit of the branch, into our fleshly nature, in which, he en∣joyed the divine glory of his father, through union with his root, before the foundation of the World; and this, for the compleating his mediatour∣ship. So is there a threefold distinct will in the mediatour, in perfect unity. This was figured by the tvvo or three vvitnesses, under the Law, whose joynt testimony was sufficient, to pronounce sentence of Life or Death, on any one. For, so will that will of the mediatour, be, which shall be pronounced, by Christ, in our glorified nature, as the mouth and visible declarer of the united wills, in his whole person. His glorified humane will, though the lowest, through perfect union with the higher and highest, becomes equally authentick with them, in its dis∣tinct witness. So, over the kingdom that descends to him, by the gift of his father, will he exercise a visible rule, in his new-creation life and glo∣ry, at his second comming. Christ's own testimony to this his spiritual kingdom, at his second appearance, did cost him the life of his first. And, thereby did he finish his vvork on earth, even in his single earthly humanity, that he had, long before, perfected, in his invisible angelical state. The visible repetition thereof, he was neither afraid nor asham∣ed of, before the evil powers of this world. For, when, by the Jews, brought before Pilate, he positively asserted; he had a kingdom; but, of a spiritual nature, and not of this World, to be brought to light, by the death of our earthly nature, in him. The joy of his spiritual life, state, and kingdom; set before him, made him-willingly take the bitter Cup
of death to his natural spirit, as the only way and passage to the said spiri∣tual life and kingdom, wherein to exercise the whole of the divine and creature-power of the mediatour. Having then seen the distinct testimonies to this visible spiritual king∣dom of the man Christ, from the threefold will of divine and twofold creature-nature, in the mediatour; we are, next, to consider the distinct testimony, given to the same, by the true spirit of saintship, in all Ages. In order to this enquiry, consider first, what is the spirit of true saint∣ship, that has, from generation to generation, given testimony to the visible spiritual reign and kingdom of Christ. This spirit of saintship is at a great distance from the divinity; yea, perfectly distinct from the first, immediate conjunction of the divine and creature-names or natures of the mediatour, on the one hand; and from the single first-creation name, nature, or spirit, on the other. The true spirit of saintship, in the members of Christ's Heavenly or Earthly glorified body, is found allwayes, in a true subjection to the man Christ, as their new-creature Lord and Head. And, yet, in their subjected places, under him, are they joyned with him, in a headship over the whole natural, first-creation state, which is the Woman, that in the saints, as well as in Christ, must own the new-creation spirit or man, in both, for head. Yet, the saint, thus joyned in a state of spiritual headship, with his head, is in a state of subjection to the Prerogative headship, belonging to every part of the mediatours being, divine or creaturely. The highest Saint, in his most heavenly exaltation, into new-creation glory, remains for ever in a single creaturality, as his distinguishing make, from the glorious person of the mediatour. But, as the saint must not assume the peculiar two∣fold divine and creature-name of Christ, so must he not be denied a new-creation name, through participation of, and union with the new-creature spirit of Christ, in which highly exalted above his own first-crea∣tion life, name, or nature, as far as heaven is above the earth. For, the spirit of man, at highest, in first-covenant life, is but earth, or of the earth, earthy. Though it be, in dignity and power, placed over all things below it self (Psal. 8. 6.) yet is it inferiour to what is spiritual and heavenly. He cannot so much as discern things spiritual. 'Tis as im∣possible for it to go beyond the sphere and bounds of its natural activity, as for the brute Beast to exceed his bounds, and Judge of things rational. Nothing below the spirit of man, wanting his intellectual and rational faculties, can discern the proper things of man. So, nor
can man's intellectual or rationall powers, exercised only in a natural, or first-covenant light, judg of, or comprehend the things of that spiritual, new-creation state, which is superiour to it. This is the peculiar, essenti∣al priviledg of the true saint, in new-creation life. This capacitates him, not onely, to know all things below it self, and all its own, spiritual, heavenly things; but to search out, find, and see the most deep and hid∣den things of the very infinite divinity; 1 Cor. 2. 9-15. This great priviledge, coms saints to, by partaking of the new-creature spirit of Christ, which God has promised in his new and everlasting covenant, made, on their behalf, with their mistical father Abraham, Christ himself, to set up in them. This new-covenant spirit is perfectly distinct, in the nature of it, from the first. This is spiritual, that natural: This, heavenly; that earthly. In the pure natural, earthly, first-covenant spirit, Christ was a husband to Angels and man, in innocency, before the fall of either. But, in this mystical Land of pure nature, did all men, in and with the first, and many Angels, fall off from Christ, and so lost their first-covenant spousal relation to him. No such apostacy or chang is in∣cident to the second covenant gift. The relation of God and creatures, founded in that, can never be forfeited or lost. When God, by way of distinction from the first-creation spirit (in which first-covenant com∣munion with, and relation to him, is founded) sayes, he vvill vvrite or put his nevv-covenant Lavv or spirit in his. Peoples hearts, they shall never depart from him, nor, vvill he, from them; Then are they his People, for ever, and can never again, become no People, as his first-covenant People do, after all communications from him, and communion with him, therein; Jer. 31. 31-33. and, 32, 40. By the fresh gift of his first-covenant spirit, he brought them out of the house of bondage, the cor∣rupt spirit or state of nature, Typed by Egypt. But this his covenant they brake, though he vvas a Husband to them, therein. This evidenced the changable nature, and life of that spirit, in which this covenant was founded, and undertaken to be managed, on mans part. But, the new-creature, or second covenant spirit, in the true saint, is a principle of everlasting righteousness, and infallible truth. This fit's man for personal union with the fountain thereof, in the man Christ, and so, for everlasting obedience, with the same spirit in him, to the divinity, it self. The whole divine will or law is written out, in this spirit, the true saint is of, and in unchangable union with. The life of this spirit, then, in saints, enables them to read, know and do the divine Law and will, as the
said spirit, in Christ himself. In this spirit, as a mystical table, is the divine Law so powerfully written out, as to cause immutable obedience there∣to, in all the partakers thereof. It never sins, nor can sin, in Christ or saint; any, born thereof, that live and vvalk therein, 1 Jo. 3. 9. The saint, in this spirit, that is of a spiritual, heavenly, nature, is no more a ser∣vant, as in the former, natural, changable, earthly, first-covenant or first-creation state, life, spirit (in which, it is impossible to know his Lords spiritual mind, things, and secrets) but, with Abraham, a friend of God, enabled to know, not only the secret things of his heavenly, spiritual creature-mind, but divine also; the deep things, the vvhole counsel of God, about the salvation of men. Christ promises to reveal to such friends, all that the father has made knovvn to him; Jo. 15. 15. The new crea∣ture-spirit, partaken of, from Christ, becomes, in the quickened up seed thereof, a new spiritual life, light, nature, name, wisdom, righteousness, in saints. By it, are they fitted to take in the visions of the divine glory. For, this spirit, in Christ, is in personal union with the divine. In him, it receives the whole divine glory, which, from him, descends and is let down to all his spiritual members. By this blessed medium, his new-creature-spirit, (by which, they are made lively Stones in his new-creature City and Temple) must they, for ever, receive the vision of the divine glory. A portion of this spirit in them, is the nevv Ear or intellect, by which they are enabled to hear and understand that voice of their spi∣ritual King, that gives forth the divine and new-creature will of their Lord, in one sound; and to feed on that vision of the divine glory, which is the Manna, hid from all natural understanding, the most ex∣cellent thing, any creature can receive. So, though the saints name be not the result of divine and creature-nature, in one person, Christs pe∣culiar prerogative, yet is it a partaking of that new-creature name or nature of Christ, which, even in him, is preserved in a distinction from his divine, though in personal union with it. Though highest saints may not pretend to the priviledg of the lowest part of the mediatours creature-nature or name, to wit, personal union with the divinity, yet, are they partakers of the higher part of his creature-nature, as well as lower, yea all spiritual saints do partake of the twofold or single new-creature spirit of their head, as their peculiar names of saint-ship, recei∣ved and derived from him, to, and in vvhich, chosen and blessed, before the foundation of the vvorld; Eph. 1. 3, 4. By virtue of the fathers choice, and the sons peculiar work-manship upon them, are they
brought into a living union with his new-creature-spirit; and so, safely returned into their prepared places, to enjoy, according to the fathers distinct choice of them, their respective visions of the divine glory, in the relation of Spouse, Friends, or Servants. So have every of them their joy, full and compleat. But, none of them exceed the nature or name of a pure new-creature spiritual man. What ever their portion of his new-creature-spirit be, single or double, capacitating them to receive and enjoy a single or double portion in the vision of the divine glory; yet, are they all, but new-creature spiritual men, filled with the vision of God, according to their distinct capacites. This new creature-spirit of saintship, through the personal union of it with God, in Christ, is called the spirit of God. Hence, is it an infallible mark of a true saint to have this spirit dvvelling in him. This spirit of God (Ro: 8, 9.) is, in the same verse, called the spirit of Christ, distinct from the divine spirit of Father or Son, divine essence or form. The Seed of this new crea∣ture-spirit in saints, is called, also, the seed of God (1 Jo. 3. 9.) Which preserves the saint from such wilful sin and enmity in his natural spirit, or carnal mind, as would be eternal death to him; Rom. 8, 6, 7. The desires, and appetites of the fleshly or carnal, natural mind and spirit, in the saint himself, till subjected to his spiritual, are after that na∣tural state which is death. But, at same time, the mind of the new-creature spirit, though hid from his own heart, in which sown, God and Christ do see, to be after that life, which gives everlasting peace with God. The spiritual seed, quickened up in the saint, is, in all its life and motion, purely obedient to Christ, and by its powerful influences upon the natural spirit, will not cease to teach and beget in that, the like un∣changable subjection to it self, and so of the whole saint, to Christ, and God most high. And, as subjection and love to God, is natural to the new-creation-spirit; disobedience and enmity to God, is grown natural to the old or first, since the fall. Hence, is it impossible, therein, to please God; Ro. 8. 8. Paul, therefore, rejoyced in that work of the Cross, by which his natural mind was brought into a like subjection to his spiritual, as that, to Christ. Through this subjection of the natural to the spiritual, and so, of the whole man, to Christ, have saints the certain witness of Christ's spirit, dwelling in them. His spirit beares vvitness, not only, in, but to them, that they are the Children of God, Members of and Coheirs with Christ, therein, of God. Ro. 8. 17. The new-creature-spirit, from its universal obedience to God, in head and members, is called love,
1 Cor. 13. It is that, in which only God becomes the object of his crea∣tures unchangable love, and they, of his. The natural spirit is described by fear. 1 John. 4. 18. Perfect love casteth out fear. The spiritual life of love, perfected in the saint, the life of his natural spirit, with all its things, thoughts, lusts, carnal reasonings, doubtings, and feares, is ex∣tinguished, abolished, and cast out. They that dwell, live, and walk in the spirit of Christ (which, in him, is in personal union with the di∣vine) are said to dwell in God. He that dvvelleth in love, dvvelleth in God; and God, in him; vers 16. God has declared the height of his love, and greatnes of his condescention, in this marveilous contriving a mar∣riage union of divine and creature-nature, by which, to preserve his di∣vinity from being touched, or immediatly beheld by saints; and to come forth, in such a safe and sutable discovery thereof, to his creatures, through the man Christ, as to be a food of everlasting blessedness, to them. The saint is made one vvith the new-creature-spirit of Christ, as that, vvith God; Jo. 17. 21. That spirit of Christ is the blessed shelter, and fitted medium, by which the divine vision is given to saints, so as not to be a consuming fire, to them. Saints, by partaking of this spirit, become parts and Pillars of that nevv-creation sanctuary, Gods place of meeting vvith the vvhole congregation of his true Israelites, Angels and Saints, amongst vvhom he vvill dvvell and vvalk, for evermore. In this spirit, have they all, an accesse unto, and vision of the divine glory, yet partake not of the divinity, as an ingredient into the constitution of their persons. But, by partaking of that spirit, that from personal union with the di∣vine, in Christ, is called God, (Jo. 1. 1.) they are said to partake of the divine nature; 2 Pet. 1. 4. The creature-spirit of Christ, is the holy un∣ction, in, and upon saints, by vvhich they knovv all things. The holy Oil, or Ointment, of his heavenly and glorified earthly spirit, runs dovvn, from their high-priest, to the lovvest Skirts of his new-creation Garments, or meanest spiritual Members. This spirit, in Christ and saints, is Truth and no Lie; an infallible spirit, in head and members, distinct from the divine spirit in Christ, and natural spirit of man or Angel, at best. The lowest capacity of creature-nature in the mediatour, is above the highest saint. The spousal saint, one with Christ, in his most heavenly and exalted creature-life, sees not or enjoyes the divine glory as the lowest part of creature-nature in Christ, does, by personal union therewith. The new-creature spirit, in its highest and most heavenly, or lowest earthly glorified life, is inferiour to the divine, but, superiour to the first-crea∣tion
spirit of nature, at best, because incorruptible and unchangable in the life and goodness thereof. In the first, being corruptible and chang∣able, man is in perpetual bondage and fear, as impossible to be secured from death, therein; Heb. 2. 15. This therefore, was never intended, by God, for an abiding state of rest and true blessednes, to Angel or man, not being a spirit of unchangable light and life, or that can qualify them to receive the vision of the divine glory. This shews the absolute necessity of the saints being clothed vvith a House from Heaven, by the new-creating vvorkmanship of Christ, for his everlasting blessedness. From what has been said, then, it appeares to be the peculiar privi∣ledg of the mediatour, to be, in every part of his creature-nature, in personal union with the divine. Consequently, is it a crime, equally un∣pardonable, for any creature to deny to him, or assume to himself, his con∣junctive divine and creature-name. His comprehensive creature-spirit or nature, is the living Book, wherein the whole divine mind or Law is written, in order to be declared to Angels and men. If any man, then, or Angel from heaven shall dare, on pretence of adding thereto, to make Christ's person, only and purely divine (and so, divide and take from him, his creature-nature, which is the supream Book and Table, on which the divine mind is engraven, and, by which, the di∣vine glory shines forth to his creatures) or on the other hand, derogate and take from the authority of this most authentick Book of the divine mind, by denying Christ's divinity, and owning him, only as the most excellent creature-being; this twofold fault of adding to, or taking from this Book, will be declared equal, by the equal punishment of both, eternal death. Neither of them shall have any part in the life and blessings of the said Book, but only in the plagues and wrath, vvritten and treasured up in it, for such offenders; Rev. 22. 18, 19. Deut. 32. 34. No lesse then so, is the danger and guilt, in denying the conjunction of divine and creature-spirit, as the peculiar constitution of the mediatour, the only means of creating Angels and men, and of revealing the di∣vine glory to them, in their second and spiritual make. To deny this, is to deny the creation, on, at least, any possibility for creatures beholding or enjoying God. The foundation of their blessedness is layd in the union of two natures, in the mediatour, as the utmost result of Gods free love, and contrivance of his divine wisdom. The deep founda∣tion of creatures blessednes, was laid in the first, invisible fellowship of divine and creature-nature, in the mediatour. The actual giving this
blessedness to them, is, by the lowest part of his new-creature-spirit, and communication thereof to them, to qualify them for receiving the di∣vine vision. Having thus found out the spirit of true saintship, let us consider the distinct testimony to the present truth, the visible kingdom and univer∣sall reign of Christ, given by saints in all ages. Enoch the seventh from Adam prophesied this sabbatical rest and kingdom; Jude 14, 15. To enumerate every particular herein, were endlesse; when, from the whole course of scripture, it may be observed, that the final result and utmost end of every dispensation, has been, to point out the invisible state of truth, which, by Christ's second appearance, was alwayes by God designed, to be made manifest. For, though Christ, in that invisible Angelical life, he had from everlasting, in his root, were, to the Seed of faith, before and under the Law, a Land of distances, very far off (Esay. 33. 17.) Yet, by faith, savv they this spiritual King, in the beauty, of his new-creation glory, as the resurrection-Lamb. This sight of him, through faith, became the spiritual food, on which they lived. And, in this faith, they died, with a steadfast hope to partake thereof. This hope became to them, the Waters that failed not, and the bread by which they were nourished up, unto eternal life. The vision hereof, by faith, vvas the substance of those things, after, to be manifested. And they rejoyced in the meanes, they, by faith, discerned, for the manifestation thereof Christ, in the Angelical life of the spirit of the branch, was, from the be∣ginning, the object of faith, to Angels and men. And, in that his in∣visible life and state, was laid the sure foundation of his visible kingdom, here spoken to. As thus seen and understood, he and his Kingdom, have been witnessed by true saints, from first to last. In this Archangel, did God, from the beginning, so put his divine name, as, thereby, accord∣ing to Moses his experience, to give the view of his one divinity, which otherwise, had remained absolutely invisible to any meer creatures. By this means, did saints, under the law-dispensation, look into that spiritual Canaan into which, they nor did nor could enter, till their spiritual Joshua or Jesus went before them, thereinto. The holy Ghost vvas not given till Jesus vvas glorified; Joh. 7. 39. The discerning this, by faith (before Christ's comming in flesh) even his visible rule over Angels and men, in our glorified nature, appears; 2 Sam. 23. 3, 4. where 'tis said, He vvill be just, because ruling in the true fear and perfect love of God, over the whole earth. And this man Christ, that will so rule, vvill be abi∣ding
place from the Wind, and a covert from the storm, as the comforting shade of that great and high Rock, the mediatours first and invisible di∣vine and creature-conjunction, wherein, unaccessible to the highest saint. Through the branch, as their blessed shade, do they condescend to shine forth, to the unspeakable comfort of all saints, from the highest to the lowest. They do all, in the twofold spiritual, resurrection-life of the branch, receive those beams of the divine and most glorious Sun, that without such an interposing shade (Christ's exalted humanity, in which he is the saints covert) would be a consuming fire to them, from the vast distance and infinite disproportion of the object and subject. The glorified man Christ, becomes the safe defence of saints, as fitting them for Gods looking down with favour upon them, and their look∣ing up to, and beholding him, to their everlasting comfort. As united with his glorified humanity, they enjoy, for ever, his divinity. The man Christ then, in our glorified nature, will, in answer to the sight of faith, in all ages, and uncessant desires of his Angels and saints, actually avv and rend the heavens, so as to shew himself in his heavenly state and glory, in which, yet, concealed and shut up, as his far countrey, till the restitution of all things, at his second appearance, in the visibility of his spiritual kingdom-state. Then shall he be as the light of that morning, which is to succeed the dismally dark Night of mans degenerate day, under Satan's reign, the Lightning out of the East, that shall shine even unto the West, over all, in a moment; 2 Sam. 23. 4. Mat. 24. 27. This vision, David had, with other saints, by faith, vvas made to speake, by the comming, death, and resurrection of Christ, in our nature, in which were comprehended all that died in the faith thereof, who then came actually to partake of that life and glory, which, by faith, they knevv, vvas to be revealed, or set open, in Christs person. By faith, did they see their blessed lot in the said spiritual state, and divine vision, is thus to be given in Christ's person, by whose presence in flesh, and performances therein, the shadowy ceremonies, and types of the Law, fled avvay, through which, till then, saints faith did feed on the invisible substance, as the good things to come, in which they rejoyced. And, their mystical House, or individual persons were not to grow, under the visible shadowy ministration thereof, in their day, on earth; yet, saw they themselves secured, in the everlasting covenant, compleated in their ead, in whom they discerned all things ordered and made sure for them;  Sam. 23. 5. They saw the works of redemption, finished, in Christs
invisible state, as the Lamb slain before the foundation of the World, the object of their faith. And, they knew, all would be made visible, in our nature, by him. In both these respects, was he the object of all their desire and delight. This was their bed of rest, whether in or out of the body, patiently waiting for, and diligently enquiring vvhat manner of time the spirit in them did signifie, vvhen it testified before hand the suffering of Christ, and glory that should follovv. 1 Pet. 1. 11. And, it vvas revealed to them, that not unto themselves, but us (under the gos∣pel-dispensation, witnesses both of his comming in flesh, and state of grace, or resurrection-life, which was to follow) they did minister such things. The Apostles and other Saints, in the gospel-day, received that spirit, not before given, Jo. 7. 39. by which, the mystery of Godliness became opened, even through Christs being manifested in flesh, justified in spirit, and, in our nature, exalted into heaven. All this, visibly accompli∣shed in Christ's person, is the sum and substance of the gospel-testimony. The resurrection-state is, now, no longer, a land of distances, very far off, but brought neer, and set open in Christ's glorified humanity. Hence, is the gospel-dispensation much more spiritual then that of the Law, the object of faith being now brought into sight; though spiritual saints under both these dispensations, found a like acceptation with God. The elders and worthies under the Law, vvere, through their powerful faith, pleasing to God, Heb. 11. 39. as well as spiritual-saints, under the gospel. They obtained a good report by faith. They; willingly and cheer∣fully confessed themselves strangers, on earth, or, as to their natural state and principle, though not actually possessed of the spiritual and heaven∣ly. This better thing vvas kept, in reserve, as neither given to, nor re∣ceived by them, in such manner as after Christs comming, for the com∣pleating of their blessedness, and finishing of that faith, he was authour of, before. But, the whole seed of faith, spiritual saints, before and un∣der Law and Gospel, agree in their witness to Christ's resurrection-state, as that new name and life, vvherein alone, any ever were, or can be saved, or receive the vision of the divine glory. And, though the gospel-mini∣stration be more glorious then that of the Lavv, as a ballance to this privi∣ledg of saints under the gospel, those under the Lavv vvere made the first-fruits unto Christ, in his resurrection-state, in our nature. For, to their imprisoned spirits, shut up in the faith, of what was to be revealed, Christ appeared, and in the first degree of his resurrection-life, preached it to them, or bestowed it on them, rendring the state of those just spirits, a paradise,
by entring among them, in his resurrection-life and glory. And, after this, he poured forth his glorified spirit, on saints, in the body, which rendred them powerful, experimental witnesses of his resurrection-life, and new name. Thus, the whole generation of faith (whether as pro∣phetical messengers, before Christs comming in flesh, or declarers of him, after come) have all, most harmoniously agreed in their testimony to the spiritual nature and visibility of Christ's kingdom, here treated on. And thus having seen the testimony of the divine nature itself, and the infallible creature-testimony of Christ and his saints, to this truth; as a secondary general confirmation of it, we may observe the various types and figures in Gods providential workings, for strengthning his Peoples faith in this important truth. Even, before the fall, every voice of God to man, was, to point out this spiritual State of Rest, he was to look after. But, all this counsel of God, was neglected by him. Yet, did God, even after the fall, and before the giving of the Law, warn Noah of this his twofold great design, to wit, of taking down the old, or first creation-World, and setting up that new one, in which, to establish this visible kingdom of Christ. As a token hereof, vvas he commanded to build an Ark, and, by his obedience to God, therein, did he condemn that sinful World, which wilfully neglected the voice of God, therein. But, Noah, by faith, saw Christ in that resurrection or kingdom-state, figured by the Ark, as a spiritual Rock of safety to himself and whole spiritual seed, from that destruction, figured out by the floud, which, all Angels and men, that obstinately fix themselves in the old World, or first-creation state, against God and the second, bring upon themselves. And, this deluge or destruction of man-kind, by water, points out the far greater destruction by fire, in that day of the Lord, wherein he will destroy the very heavens and earth, on pur∣pose, reserved, for the exercise of Gods long-suffering. For, their abuse of all, will ripen them for a final consumption, by the fire of God's wrath; 2 Pet. 3. 7. Then, even amidst those flames, will he, most certainly, set up that spiritual kingdom, in which, shall be a like visible protection and safty to his saints, as Noahs litteral Ark was, to him and his family. The next remarkable type of this spiritual truth, before the giving of the Law, was Abrahams conquest of the four Kings, as figuring out, not only, the corrupt, but righteous principles of nature, in men and Angels, which, as singly naturall, are all, in a combined interest, against the spiritual seed of faith, and Christ, their head. These are signified
in Abrahams person and his followers. And, their victory was a type fthe compleat and final conquest, our spiritual Lord Abraham, with all his saints, will obtain, over all that come against them, to oppose the setting up of his spiritual kingdom, visibly in the world. After this, have we another signal figure hereof, in Gods remarkable dealing with the Egyptians, as his enemies, on behalf of the Israelites, his friends, in his marvellous wayes of punishing the one, and delivering the other, by his own right hand and out-stretched arm. Both were types of that irresistable power, in which, Christ, in these last dayes of greatest bondage and oppression to his people, will give them a more remark∣able deliverance then ever. In these last and worst of times, will be a combination, in religious and civil principles, against them, figured by the Egyptian powers, and the Magicians; by the latter, counterfeiting, and, by the former, persecuting the new-creation spirit and power, they both hate, which Christ is ready to break forth in, and, thereby, to be∣stow on his spiritual Israelites an absolute deliverance out of all their lit∣teral and mystical captivities. And, by the same power, will he so judge and deal with his enemies, of all sorts, as never to suffer them to rise up, more, against him or his spiritual Israelites. Moses his whole govern∣ment, with the sanctuary and other things in his ministration, were speaking figures and significant voices of this universal kingdom of Christ. No circumstance, in the civil or religious constitution of that government, but, remarkably signified the present truth. And, by sig∣nal sounds of his providence, under every dispensation, has the Lord been declaring, and setting this truth, before the faith of his People. The sanctuary or tabernacle was not to be fixed, as in its resting-place, till his People were possessed of their resting-place, the typical Land of promise. Next this, was Solomon's Temple, on various accounts, a signal type of Christ, and of what he was to do. The taking it down, by the Babylonian power, and the rebuilding it, in Cyrus and Darius his dayes, by the command of God, were figures of the first and second comming of Christ. He took down himself, in his first and fleshly building in our nature, by a holy death; and raised himself up, therein, into a spiritual, everlasting righteous life, in which he will set up his visi∣ble kingdom, on earth. The second litteral Temple, in reference to this spiritual new building of our nature, in Christ's person (in which, visibly to rule and reign over all) is said, greatly to have exceeded the beauty or glory of the first; however singly in the letter, so inferiour thereunto, that
the Old men, that had seen the glory of the former, Wept; Ezra 3. 12. Haggai 2. 3, 7, 9. By all these significant types, and figures, did God feed the faith of true saints, under the Law, who saw to the end of that ministration, which was suitable to that non-age of the world, their lot was fallen in, as also to the changable nature of first-covenant-life, in the highest dispensati∣on thereof. Thus, seeing the end of all that vvas to be abolished, were they, in the right use thereof, pointed unto Christ, both in his invisible Angelical state of resurrection-lamb, living in his root; and also, as to descend out of that, into a visibility, and so, to come forth in our glorified nature. By the shadowes of the Law, and signal voices of providence, did the spiritual seed under the Law, by faith, behold this twofold day of Christ, invisible and visible, and rejoyced therein. Q. But, if the visible kingdom of Christ be thus certain, as evidenced by the testimonies of God, Christ, blessed Angels and Saints; and signified to us by law-types, and by the providences of God in all ages, Why does Christ suffer himself to be kept, so long, out of the possession thereof; or, suffer his title thereunto, to be denied him, by the profane; and most injuriously questioned, even by the religious party, among men? Men, at highest, in holy flesh, righteousnes of man (with evil Angels, in their natural excellencies) are the worst sort of scoffers, that will be found, in the last dayes, against this visible kingdom of Christ, on earth; and, that, in a self-condemning light; 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. And saints, in whom the first-covenant Temple-building is taken down, by the crosse, in order to the rebuilding them in the spiritual glory of the second, in which, to reign with Christ, are (with all their doctrine) spectacles of scorn and wonder to natural Angel and Man, who have set up them∣selves in the glory of the first, against the second; 1 Cor. 4. 9. A. For a satisfactory answer to this question, it will be needfull to look back to Gods method from the beginning, as to all the rule and power given to Christ, in his invisible creature-day, before either the actual transgression of angel and man, or creation of them. As to manifestation, that which is natural, was first, in Christ's person. Christ the branch, in his invisible state, was the first-born natural-Spirit, before the first begotten from the dead, the Resurrection Lamb, in a spiritual, new-creation life. The originally unchangable creature-spirit of Christ, was the High-Priest, that sacrificed the said first-born, and so, raised it into its own twofold new-creation life, the original nevv heaven and nevv
earth. And, thus, by the death of his invisible natural state, as a pur and spotless sacrifice, did he lay the sure foundation of his visibility,  the said spiritual life, to be brought to light, in our glorified nature. I that first death of nature in Christ, was exhibited the necessary tryal of a mens and angels obedience to the will of God, by the like sacrifice and death of the natural state, in them. This was shewed them both and all in innocency, by spiritual light; that by a faithful following of the Lord's own suffering steps, they might have been translated into tha spiritual state, which, alwayes, according to God's wise method, was to follow. Christ, through such sacrifice of his invisible natural state, did in∣separably unite, in his own person, the natural and spiritual, or first and second-creation spirits, which are still distinct, though united. And, hereby, has he a right of dominion over all the works of God's hands▪ in both worlds, or creations, natural and spiritual, as Maker and Heir of all things, in both; Heb. 1. 2. But, though Christ thus laid a sure Foundation of blessedness for those vvhose names vvere vvritten in his re∣surrection-book of Life (inasmuch, as their persons, comprehended in his death, would yield up nature to death, in like obedience, with him) yet, many angels and men, do finally refuse, through inordinate love to the life of nature, to exchange their natural for his spiritual State. So, do they keep up their natural state, as a wall of partition between them and God's spiritual, in which alone, true blessednes can be found. Since the fall, all mankind have an inherent seed of enmity in them, to God, Christ, and his spiritual Life. This enmity, in the evil angels, by whom sown in men, is unchangable and incurable: In man, barely as a consequent of the first sin, not so. But, this disease in man, till cured by such obedience to the Cross, as was at first refused, is an infectious leprosie in him, and becoms as mortal and incurable in him, as in the evil angels, when found guilty, on the like personal account, with our first parents. By the purifying fire of the Cross alone, can the enmity contracted by the fall, be melted down, or that obedience performed, which alwayes was the duty of the first-creation, spirit, in man or angel, before their fall, in order to their establishment in a spiritual state of everlasting blessedness. The disobedience of man and angel has made no change in God's proceedings, as to the death of the natural, in order to a spiritual life; but has rendred man's suffering part, under the Cross, much more hard and difficult, through an actual enmity, and struggling, contrary mind, thereunto, set up in him, by the Devil. But, in this hard work, the over-ruling providence of God
makes the utmost malice of visible and invisible enemies, serviceable to the bruising the saints heel, or crucifying his natural man, which is abso∣lutely necessary for his receiving that spiritual life, in which, to break the enemies head. The allotted time for the compleating this work of patience, on the whole spiritual body of Christ, is the saints suffering Season; on the finishing whereof, they are all, to enter into a state of everlasting rest and blessedness. And, this is the ground of Gods pa∣tience towards all sorts of wilful enemies of himself and saints, during the time, the Prince and Power of the Air, is permitted, in answer to his own desire, to have the active, ruling power, in and over the natural state and principle, which, in greatest love, God has absolutly denied to Christ and his saints. So has God cursed this earthly state or first-creation life (at best, and in the most excellent part thereof) that if saints, in their love, are found running out, after the same, they meet with nothing but mystical Briars and Thorns, therein. For this cause, till the work of pa∣tience, or, suffering, be accomplished on the whole body of saints, Christ is content to remain passive and silent, though in his own person, posses∣sed of that irresistible power, in heaven, his far countre, in which he sits, laughing all his enemies to scorn, looking dovvn, in a holy contempt, upon them, from his heavenly place. And, he over-rules, all along this world, all opposition of visible or invisible enemies, in a direct contrariety to their own designs, to make them instrumental to his, by removing out of his Saints, what let's and hinders the setting up of his Kingdom, in and with them, visibly on the earth. Christ makes all, that enemies do against him and his saints, in his passive, and the enemies active season, a preparative to his and his saints active season, in his visible kingdom, and to the dreadful passive season of all their enemies, for evermore. Hence is it, that the passive season of Christ, and active power of the Devil and World, in perverted first-creation Principles, whilst in a per∣fect contrariety, as to design, hold exact proportion, as to time, begin∣ing and ending together. And, at the time of the end, will be manifest∣ed Christ's wonder-working power, that, all along the said active season, of world and devil, and passive season of Christ and Saints, has made serviceable to his own designs, the most opposite purposes and actings of implacable enemies, rendring all exactly conducible to the setting up of his spiritual kingdom, over all, in a resurrection life and glory, never to be done avvay. By his visibility herein, will he period the active power of the Devil.
This then, may serve for answer to the present question, as cleerly demonstrating the reason of Christ's so long deferring his second com∣ing, and active season. And, hence, is there no ground, from such delay, to doubt the certainty of his visible spiritual comming. For, all along, has Christ kept closs to the wise and holy orders, by God ap∣pointed, at first, for giving a day of manifestation, first, to that which is natural; reserving that which is spiritual, to the last. The Devils best time is first, his worst, last, and that, for ever. And, though permitted to make a seeming interruption to Christs exercise of his reigning pow∣er, all along this world; Yet, so far has he been, thereby, from disap∣pointing the designs of God, for revealing his spiritual and everlasting state of truth (and so, for the setting up Christs visible kingdom therein) that, all his opposition to the same, has been made serviceable thereunto, even to the active reigning power and kingdom of Christ and his saints. The Praise of all is to be ascribed to the marveilous and unsearchable wisdom of God, which has made the most contrary appearances, uni∣versally serviceable hereunto. And, in these mysterious workings, has the wisdom of God, not been altogether undiscerned by spiritual saints, under every dispensation. This has quieted, and supported them, in the blackest hours of opposition from World and Devil. They have seen all, by the over-ruling influences of Christ, useful for the carying on of his designs of grace and peace, to them. But, the discerning and testimony, had and given by saints, before and under the Law, as to the visibility of Christ's spiritual kingdom, at his second comming, was greatly strengthened and heightened, as given in Christ's own person; because till then, the spirit of Truth, vvas not, by actual participation, given, till our nature in him vvas glorified; Joh. 7. 39. Then did he poure down of his glorified humane spirit, on saints, Act. 2. which distinguished them from spiritual believers under the Law. He was pointed out in his resurrection-life, to them, under the Law, in types and figures, as to be revealed in the very thing it self, under another, succeeding dispensation. Yet, from a powerful spiritual faith therein, were saints under the Law, not only clear and strong in their testimony to the said spiritual state, and visible kingdom of Christ, there∣in; but, by that faith, received a satisfying demonstration of the certain∣ty thereof, and embraced the substance of those things they waited for. They had the undoubted evidence of things, then unseen, as to actual manifestation. They saw and knew, they should actually par∣take
of the same Resurrection-Spirit and Life of Christ, at the apoin∣ted time for the pouring out thereof, from our glorified Nature, in Christ's person. And, their Spiritual Faith herein, had a powerful, transforming operation upon their natural Man, in that Law-day, and before. Yet is the difference of the Law, from the Gospel-Ministra∣tion, very great. For, by the latter, have we the glad tydings of the visible gifts of that Spirit, which was waited for; and, by Faith only, laid hold upon, under the former. And, this begets a new and more excellent sort of Spiritual Faith, or discerning, in Gospel-Saints, through Christ's actually setting up in them, his revealed and communicated Resurrection-Life, and Glory, which former Saints waited for. Believers, under the Gospel-ministration, receive the ve∣ry end of that Faith, under the Law, even the Spirit of Adoption, where∣by they cry, Abba, Father. The first heavenly rain or shower of Christ's new-creature Spirit, we find an account of (Act. 2.) on the Apo∣stles and other primitive Saints, of the Gospel-day, as the accomplish∣ing of that Promise of the Father, which, between his Resurrection and Ascension, he commanded them to wait for, from him, Luk. 24. 49. Act. 1. 4. By this first pouring forth of the Holy Ghost or new-crea∣ture Spirit of Christ, upon them, did he institute the Gospel-dispen∣pensation, in distinction from that of the Law. And, hereby, were the Saints of that day, much more eminently, then ever before, qua∣lified to give a clear and full witness to this Spiritual State of Truth, as actual partakers of that glorified Spirit of Christ, which, till then, had never bin so given, or received. So, the dispensation, under which, given, must be more Spiritual, than any former Saints were under. The least, under this dispensation, is greater and under higher priviledges, than the greatest, under the Law-ministration. The first Gospel-shower gave the World a signal taste of this great mercy, by which, to expect the latter rain, of the same Spirit, which will be far greater and more general, on the Spiritual Seed in all Na∣tions, as the fore-running dispensation to Christ's second personal coming, in the full blessing of the everlasting Gospel, the joyful news of Christ's near approaching Spiritual Kingdom, which shall be preach∣ed to all the World, and then comes the end; Mat. 24. 14. The very Apostles, while Christ was with them, in the Flesh, and, after his Resurrection, also, when speaking to them of this great thing (the in∣corruptible Seed of Spiritual Life, not yet quickned up in them)
were altogether ignorant of the Spiritual nature of his visible King∣dom, yet to come, and of that Spirit and Life, in which it will be managed. According to appointment, were they assembled on the day of Pentecost, waiting for the Holy Ghost, that Spirit, in which Christ's Kingdom is to be managed. That day, under the Law, was a commanded feast of first fruits, reaped in the Typical Land of Promise. This type significantly re∣presents the mystical truth or substance, the first fruits of the true Land of Promise, or Christ's risen Spirit, brought forth in, and by Saints. This Spirit came upon them, as a sound from Heaven, of a rushing mighty wind, and sate upon each of them, as cloven Tongues, like Fire. So, they spake with other Tongues, words which the Holy Ghost taught them, as that Spirit gave them utterance. These other Tongues, were the new Tongues, Christ promised them, they should speak with, Mar. 16. 17. The new-creature-Spirit of Christ, partaken of, by Saints, becomes another, or new Tongue in them, distinct from and superi∣our to any Tongue, thoughts, or words, found in their natural Spi∣rit. This new Tongue, both from its own nature, and operation of it, on the natural Spirit of the Saint, may fitly be typed out, by a visible cloven, or twofold fiery Tongue. First, From its own nature, as consisting, in Christ's person (the true original thereof) of a two∣fold Resurrection-state and building, inseparably united, though di∣stinct from each other. Secondly, From its twofold secret, invisible operation upon man, transforming, yet not burning or consuming him, by its fire-baptism upon him. It empties him of all his change∣able life and wealth, unmakes, and builds him anew, and fill's him with its newness of Life, and true riches. And, as in Christ, so, in his peculiar spousal Saints (capacitated by their double portion of Christ's twofold Resurrection-Life, to receive the double vision of the divine Glory) are the twofold spiritual Principles of Christ's new-creature-nature, fitly represented by cloven Tongues, as Fire. The inferiour, earthly glorified Saint, of the single portion, in spiritual, resurrection-life, as found in unchangeable harmony with those of the double, may, both, and altogether, be fitly signified by cloven Tongues of Fire, as distinct from each other, and yet, inseparably join'd toge∣ther. The Holy Ghost, that descended upon the Apostles, is that new-creature-Spirit, which, in Christ, lives in personal union with the Divinity, in both parts thereof, upper and lower, or most hea∣venly
and glorified earthly, all spiritual, and above the first-creation-building or natural state of Angel or Man, at best, as far as the ma∣terial Heaven is above the Earth. No wonder, then, if the effects of this Spirit, poured down on the Apostles, were amazing to all na∣tural observers thereof. For, as a figure of this commanding Tongue, or new-creature Spirit, could they make themselves under∣stood by all their hearers, of whatever differing languages. By this litteral miracle, was given an undeniable demonstration of the com∣prehensive nature, and universal knowledg of this new Tongue or Spirit, including all spiritual, both heavenly and earthly-glorified wisdom, and knowledg, and also comprehending all single natural knowledg, in it self. Hence, fitly said to know, see, or judg all things; 1 Cor. 2. 15. This new-creation-tongue, that could make itself un∣derstood by all, in that primitive Gospel-day, was a type of the powerful ministration of the Gospel, in the last days, under the latter rain, or pouring down of the same Spirit or new-creature Tongue, in a visibility and discernableness to all, so as to command its acknow∣ledgment from all hearers thereof, through its suitable sound or voice, to every one's understanding; and irresistible demonstration of its intrinsick excellency, to all hearts. The wonderful effects of its first showring down, were, that the receivers thereof, did work mira∣cles, cast out Devils, and healed all sorts of Diseases, litteral and spi∣ritual. This precious mystical balm of Gilead, became, in them, a powerful antidote against all inward and outward Poison; Mar. 16. 17, 18. They could, thereby, not only discern, but cure all diseases of Spirit as well as Body. Yea, a union, by Faith, with this Spirit, under the Law, was of such power, that Elisha, at a great distance, was able to discern and declare the secret designs of God's and his People's Enemies, and to cure diseases, spiritual as well as bodily, as in Naaman the Syrian. He, not only, by his counsel, cleans'd him from his bodily Leprosy, but (as seems implied, by bidding him, go in peace, and Christ's owning his coming to a spiritual Prophet, as a re∣proof to the Jews, for rejecting his spiritual ministry and gospel-doctrine; Luk. 4. 27.) of the enmity of his Spirit, by an effectual faith in the new-creation name of the true Son of Peace. He was able also to discern the inward disease of enmity, in Gehazi, to be mortal, and incurable, as was figured by the outward Leprosy, which was curea∣ble in Naaman, but, rendred unchangeable in him and his unbelieving
Seed, forever; 2 King. 5. 27. And, by the like new-creature power of spiritual Faith, did he raise the Widow's Son, from bodily death; typing forth the like power of raising the natural Spirit out of its state of enmity and death. All this, as fore-running types of what was fulfill'd on the natural spirit of Saints, by the first Gospel-rain of Christ's risen Spirit upon them. And, this yet, was but a type of the more abundant effects of the latter rain of the same Spirit, in the last days. Under that first rain, were they impowred to find out and cure both bodily and spiritual diseases, by forgiving all Sins, that were of a pardonable nature; Joh. 20. 23. But, under the former or latter rain, are Saints not to assume any thing to themselves, but as∣cribe all to the new-creation power of their Lord and Head; Act. 3. 12,—16. To him, must they ever own and pay their subjection, though in marriage union with him, by partaking of his Spirit. Nor does the Saint, by surrender of his will and life, to Christ, in order to live in his will and Spirit, any more lose his distinct personality from Christ's, than the distinction of sexes is lost, in the litteral marriage-union of man and woman. The Saint, by union with Christ, lives wholly in his will, at last, and so, is possess'd of his power and riches. Whatever he asks in that will, new name, or life of Christ, is given him. Joh. 16. 23. This Spirit qualified Saints (above all the in∣ticing words and thoughts of man's or Angel's natural wisdom, that's but vain Philosophy) for their distinct respective Offices in the Gospel-Church, as Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, &c. By the diversity of the gifts and operations thereof, was every of them fitted for their distinct Offices, in the assemblies of Saints; 1 Cor. 12. 4,—11. They were, thereby, enabled; rightly to discern and deter∣mine all things, according to the mind of Christ; And, hereby, did they gain Love, from those that believed; and fear, from those that would oppose them. The powerful presence of the risen Spirit of Christ, fitted them for the marvellous conversion of believers, and stopping the mouth's of gainsayers; None were able to withstand the power and wisdom of that Spirit, they came forth, in; Act. 6. 10. Three thou∣sand were converted by Peters first Sermon, in it. Act. 2. 41. They could, also, find out diseases of body and mind, and discern whether they were mortal and incurable, or not; and, accordingly declare or pronounce Sentence. Ananias and Saphira pretended a compli∣ance with the believers of that day, for selling all their possessions,
and bringing the price thereof, for the good of the community, Peter, in the power of the Spirit of Christ, found out their secret crafty agreement, for keeping back part of the price; And, he was able in such an irresistible, convincing manner, to detect and set home the guilt thereof, upon their hearts and consciences, as became an imme∣diate execution as well as sentence of death, upon them; Act. 5. 1,—10. From the severity of the punishment (for suffering their hearts to be fill'd with Satan, the Father of Lies, so as to lye to the Holy Ghost, or infallible Spirit of truth) may it appear, they were guilty of the same Sin, spiritually as well as litterally understood. The litteral was a type of the Spiritual, even of that which is an un∣pardonable fault in any, the keeping back any part of the mystical riches and life of the natural Spirit, at best. For, this is a lying a∣gainst the convincing discoveries of the Holy Ghost, that declares and requires all to be surrendred to Death, in sacrifice to God, as his due, and their duty. And they, under pretence of all, bring but a part, and lay it down at Christ's Feet, as the whole. This rendred them (and so, any others, found in the like practice) guilty of the like witchcraft and rebellion, with Saul, in laying down, only the refuse-things and lusts of the corrupt spirit of nature, for sacrifice, but, keeping the best, the righteous first-covenant-life, with the riches, fruitfulness and glory thereof, as, therein, fitted Priests, to offer Sacri∣fice to God. All this, they know, God requires, in sacrifice, as Saul acknowledg'd, in letter; 1 Sam. 15. 21. The spiritual Law of the Cross requires the best things, in nature, for sacrifice. All is to be laid at Christ's feet, the true Melchisedec and Priest of the most high God, and, in the death, not life thereof, to be offered up, in sacrifice, to God. When any (clearly convinced of their duty, as to the whole-burnt-offering, which their natural Spirit, in the utmost first-covenant righteousness, wisdom, life and glory, is to be) do bring but a part, and pretend that to be the whole sacrifice, God requires of them, they do, wilfully and knowingly, lye against the Holy Ghost; and are found in a wilful conspiracy with the Father of Lies, who has filled their heart. In this Sin, shall hypocritical Sinners in Sion, pretenders only to Gospel, and Spiritual Saintship, be discerned, and, thereupon, de∣tected and sentenced to death, by the Spirit of Christ, in his Saints, in the latter days, much more eminently and frequently than in the primitive Gospel-times. The declaring of this sort of spiritual guilt,
will so powerfully stir up and awaken the condemning conviction thereof, as to cause a spiritual death on all such wilful Lyars against the Holy Ghost. By the convincing light of it, are they, at once, shewed the fading nature of all their first-creation-life and treasure, and the unchangeable nature and excellency of the second. After all this, to prefer the former, in hatred and despiteful opposition to the latter, is unexcusable and unpardonable. Such blaspheming the Holy Ghost, or thinking and speaking evilly and contemptibly of it, as a wicked Spirit, a Devil (as the righteous first-covenant Jews call'd it, in Christ's person) is a Sin not to be prayed for. Nor Christ, nor Saints will intercede on behalf of such as are known guilty thereof; 1 Joh. 5. 16. God will not have any pray, for what he will never grant, the pardon of what he will never pardon. The Jews called that creature-spirit of Christ, that lives in unchangeable union with the divine, the Devil. Saints, instead of praying for such, were im∣powred, in the primitive Gospel-Church, in harmony of mind with God himself, to pronounce a just sentence of death, upon them. Such signal honour was conferred upon them, in the first institution of the Gospel-ministry. And this was a spiritual and eternal excom∣munication of them, the Anathema Maran-atha (1 Cor. 16. 22.) ac∣cording to the mortal and incureable nature of their disease and guilt. Where the spiritual disease was not mortal, but cureable, the excommunication was but temporary, for their cure, by destruction of their Flesh, or natural Spirit, in order to their Salvation in Christ's Spirit of everlasting righteousness and truth. So, 1 Cor. 5. 5. The In∣cest, with his Father's Wife, spiritually understood, was a temporary joining (through the strength of temptation, and his own weakness) with the evil angelical nature, which, in the innocency thereof, was the highest natural, first-covenant spouse of Christ (the Parent of Angels and Men, Father of Spirits) in a superiority to humane na∣ture, in first-creation life, at best. The Evil Angels did, at first, pra∣ctise lewdness among themselves, in that first-covenant-state, against Christ, in the second. And men, from their first sin and fall, have been committing the like spiritual Fornication, under their conduct, and by their example. Spiritual Saints could (in the alsearching spi∣rit of Christ) find out such spiritual diseases, and judg, whether mor∣tal and incurable, or not, so accordingly dealt with those that were guilty. The Gospel-Church, assembled in the new-creation name or
Spirit of Christ, did, in that power of the Lord Jesus, pronounce such an excommunication on that incestuous person, a member of their Church, as was called a delivering of him up to Satan. Yet, was this but a temporary punishment, exposing him to the furious buffetings of the Devil, as a means to procure his recovery and lasting health. For, by the power of this new name of Jesus, put forth upon him, was he recovered as a brand out of the Fire, by the powerful con∣suming his natural desire, through the operation of the Cross, in which Satan himself was made use of, as in Job's and other Saints cases. Af∣ter this wonderful manner, were the first Gospel-Ministers fitted to discharge their Office, in all respects, towards that flock, over which the Holy Ghost had made them overseers; both for ministring spiritual nou∣rishment to them; and, healing spiritual, as well as litteral diseases, in them. A power, had they, suitable to these great ends. Paul, in the practise of the ordinance of Baptism, did, in the power of Christ's new name, and Spirit, baptize with the Holy Ghost, certain Disciples at Ephesus, who, as yet, knew not whether there were a Holy Ghost, or such a dispensation of the Spirit of Christ, distinct from the wash'd, renew'd natural Spirit, the effect of John's baptism and mi∣nistry; Act. 19. 1,—5. Paul baptized them in the name of the Lord Je∣sus, that is, into a true acknowledgment and experience of his new-creation-life and Spirit. So, in that other institution, the laying on of Hands (ver. 6.) was the Holy Ghost actually given them. On this, such new Gospel-Believers, immediately spake with new Tongues, and pro∣phesied. So, that other ordinance or institution, for anointing the sick, was practised by them, with like success, at that time. The El∣ders of the Gospel-Church anointed such, with the new name of Christ, as the soveraign cure for spiritual and bodily diseases; Jam. 5. 14, 15. Those spiritual, teaching, apostolical-elders, who were the highest Order in the new Gospel-Church, by their powerful prayer of Faith, in the name or spirit of Christ, did actually cure the sick, strengthen the weak hands and feeble knees of faulty spiritual-saints. Thus, have we seen the power and spirituality of the gospel-mi∣nistration, beyond that of the Law; by the actual dispensing of that Spirit, which was only witnessed by faith, under the Law: But, brought into sight, under the Gospel. Gospel-Saints then, are thankfully to receive the convincing discoveries hereof, by spiritual light; and to shew themselves willing and ready, on any terms, to
enter into the promised (yea, shew'd and offered) new-creation-Land or state of Life, by personal union with Christ in his heavenly or glorified earthly spirit, which will prove such a state of blessedness, the gates of hell, all the powers of darkness can never prevail against, or disanul. But, on the contrary, such as evilly entreat Christ's mystical Spies (the spiritual discoveries, sights and tasts of his Resurrection-life, given, in conviction, suited to their natural spirit) so as wilfully to reject them, and discover and betray them to the enemy, the Devil (joining with him to mock at, and do despite thereunto) God will swear in his wrath they shall never enter into his rest, that new-creation-land or state of life, by them, finally refused, and contemned. The spiri∣tual light, as a spirit of prophecy, given to them, received and exer∣cised by them, for a season, Saul's case, (by which they see the great ad∣vantage of accepting God's offered spirit of Grace, on his declared terms) shall depart from them, and in the room thereof, an evil an∣gelical Spirit (with the highest deceitful light) shall enter into them. And, thence-forward, will they express implacable enmity against the spiritual David's, Christ, and his Saints. Thus, the Gospel-ministra∣tion and light, received as a temporary blessing, and the Gospel-Life, or eternal blessing thereof, wilfully rejected, that tempo∣rary blessing is turned into an everlasting curse and judgment, on them. Bare spiritual light then, which makes a spiritualized natural understanding, is no ground of a firm rejoycing, though, for a season, they be enabled thereby, to cast out Devils, or obtain a victory over the corrupt spirit of nature, brought into, and instigated in Men, by the Devil. This, Christ signi∣fied to the seventy disciples; Luk. 10. 17,—20. All spiritual light may be withdrawn, if the life, thereby shew'd and offered, be hated and rejected. And then, the evil Angel or Spirit enters, with its coun∣terfeit imitation of the true Spirit of prophesy, as into Saul, which did presently excite in him, an enraged malice against David, because he saw the Lord was with him; 1 Sam. 18. 10,—12. Till then we expe∣rience a change of principle and life, from natural to spiritual, by which infallibly to see and know our names written in Heaven, Christ's new-creature-book of Life, we have no firm ground of spiritual joy. The unspeakable gift of the Spirit of truth itself, is the full accomplish∣ment of the promise to Saints, under the Law. Jeremy and other Saints were shewed the means and season for this Gospel-gift, as the
new thing and wonder to be done in the Earth of our fleshly nature, in Christ's person. It is expressed by a Womans compassing a Man; Jer. 31. 22. This was fulfilled, in letter, by the Virgin's compassing, or containing in her, the holy Thing, begotten and conceived by the Holy Ghost, or new-creature Spirit of Christ, the builder of its own visible house, in our nature. But the mystical and principal mean∣ing, was; the natural Spirit of Man, figured by the Woman, in Christ, did compass or contain in it, a holy seed of his new-creature-spirit of truth, and by the death thereof, brought forth the new-cre∣ation man-child, which received its first visibility, in and through the earth of our glorified nature, in him. This new man-child-spirit, or principle of life, till thus manifested, lay, as a mystery, hid in God, not discerned by Angel or Man, but through Faith. And, so had it remained for ever, had not the Son of Man in Heaven, from everlasting, prepared this natural capacity in himself, for partaking of our fleshly nature, and by the death and glorification thereof, become the de∣clarer of his own invisible man-child-Life and Spirit. The natural Man of Christ, that was to pass through a mystical child-bearing and death, was the Woman (and so, in Saints) shewed John (Rev. 12.) who was with Child, and travelling in pain, cried out to be delivered. This was effected by such a pure subjection of Christ's natural to his spiritual man, that he was pained and straitned, till the fire-baptism had accomplish'd the death of the former, on which, the new-creation-life of the latter, might shine forth, in, and through it. And, this did he, in a publick capacity, as the means to obtain a birth of new-creation-life for the whole spiritual seed of his heavenly and glorified earthly Family. On their behalf, John heard a sound of joy in Heaven, for the victory thus obtain'd for them, by Christ, in our nature, as the only means for their obtaining the same victory, and blessedness, with him. Now is come Salvation and Strength (ver. 10.) to the whole new-creature seed-royal, by the death of that state in Christ, the old Serpent is a Prince and Ruler, in. Thus, did Christ handle our na∣ture in himself (as his Followers are to do, in themselves) and by such Death, overcame all enemies. This Christ did in our nature, as a declaratory repetition of the first battel in Heaven, fought by Michael and his Angels, against the Dragon and his; ver. 7. Christ, as a Resurrection-Lamb, and his good Angels (that, with him, quit∣ted and exchanged their changeable first-creation-life, for his un∣changeable
second) beat the Devil and his Angels, who did, rebelli∣ously, set up for themselves in the first, against God, Christ and his Angels, that obediently followed their head, into the life of the second; Ezek. 1. 20. & 10. 11. This twofold Victory, obtain'd by Christ (in the resurrection-state of his invisible, angelical nature, before the foundation of the World; and, since, in our glorified humane nature) makes up the glad tidings of the Gospel-state of Christ, in his conquering man-child-spirit, the leading witnesses whereof, were extraordina∣rily qualified, by the first shower of it, to become more than Conque∣rors. The way of their Conquest, was, by suffering. This is the my∣stical Weapon, by which the Lord and Servant were both to fight this spiritual battel. By steddily enduring all sorts of oppositions and suf∣ferings, they became triumphant overcomers. All the persecutions, primitive Gospel-Saints met with, in and for their witnessing service, tended only to the working out those marks of the dying of the Lord Jesus, in their mortal Flesh, that were matter of rejoycing to their immortal Spirits. All the sorrow of their natural man, outward or inward, was soon forgotten, for joy, the spiritual Man-Child was born, in them. This man-child-spirit was the mystical Reed, like a Rod, given John, to distinguish the inner from the outer Court, and according∣ly to measure the Temple of God, the Altar, and them that worship there∣in. This work could be done by no other Reed, save the glorified Spirit of Jesus, fitted for discerning or judging (in harmony with the divine and new-creature mind of Christ) between the first and second creation-spirit, as also between the twofold distinct branches, of the new-creature-spirit, or building, in Christ, and of the differing ranks and orders of Saints, belonging thereunto, who will find their respe∣ctive places and portions in the vision and enjoyment of the divine Glory. This high priviledg, through the spiritual mind and judg∣ment of the Lord, thus set up in the Saint, Paul esteemed, of so in∣estimable a value, as, in comparison thereof, to make no account of his own or others, natural judgment, in the highest and most ac∣curate exercise of it; 1 Cor. 4. 3. The new-creature-building, or spi∣ritual life, in Christ's person, and glorified manhood, consists of two parts, or principles, heavenly and earthly glorified. The full assert∣ing these, renders any one Saint, or more, Christ's twofold, or two witnesses, as declaring the comprehensive fulness of his new-creature-Spirit. Though Abraham, as a figure of Christ, was the Parent of
a twofold seed, or first and second covenant Jew; he was also, in a farther sense, a figure of him, as Parent of a twofold spiritual, new-creature seed, his heavenly and earthly glorified members, experi∣mental witnesses of the twofold principles of his new-creature build∣ing. This mystery was frequently represented, by types and shadows, to the faith of spiritual Saints, under the Law: but, the distinction, and inseparable union of these two parts of Christ's comprehensive creature-nature, received their first visibility in Christ's glorified hu∣manity. By this, the (before) invisible temple of God, was opened; and the first shower of his risen Spirit, sent down, on Gospel-Belie∣vers, which qualified them (by a single or double portion, in the twofold parts of the new-creation-building) to be his two witnesses. Such are assigned their distinct witnessing-work, according to John's vision (Rev. 11.) as members of his heavenly or earthly glorified body. These two sorts of witnesses of Christ's spiritual life, as all joined together, declare and make up the fulness of his creature-build∣ing, as members of his mystical, spiritual body. This twofold new-creature principle, in Christ and Saints, was lively figured out, in the request for the two Sons of Zebedee, by their Mother, who was a figure of Christ, our spiritual Parent, in his desire to his Father; to wit, that his two sorts of witnessing Sons or Saints, may sit on his right and left hand, in an everlasting fruition of his divine glory. And, these are the two spiritual anointed ones, Olive-trees or Sons of Oil, placed on each side of Christ, the Lord of the whole Earth; Zech. 4. 3. & 14. Rev. 11. 4. John also saw a Sack-cloath-state, these two witnesses would be brought into, notwithstanding their first eminent visibility, in the power, and under the strong and clear Sunshine of the spiritual pre∣sence of Christ, amongst them. And, this dark season of their Sack-cloath prophecy, must, in faith and patience, be passed thorow, by them; and, the visibility of their spiritual state be taken or withdrawn from them. All this seems figured out to John, by that Woman, clothed with the Sun, having the Moon under her Feet; Rev. 12. 1. Hereby, is represented, First, the birth of the conquering man-child spirit, in Christ's person: Secondly, the powerful witness of it, in and by his spiritual members. Then, John saw this man-child caught up from the Woman, or Church, to God, and to his Throne. And, on the with∣drawing this man-child-spirit from the Woman, or crucified mem∣bers of Christ, is she commanded into the Wilderness, as the prepared
place for her, where, to remain, by God's appointment, 1260 days or years, the allotted time for their sack-cloth prophecy. During this sack-cloth state of his Church on Earth, Christ takes care for the nou∣rishing their inward Man, by invisibly feeding that, from his own Spirit, with his hidden spiritual Manna, through such angelical visits, as their own natural understanding may be little sensible of. This Wilderness-state, and Sack-cloth prophecy, therein, is a peculiar dispen∣sation of the Cross, suited to the time of the man-child-spirits absence, as to any visibility thereof. During this season, the Woman (spiri∣tual Saints, in their crucified natural man) is shut up, as in a secret Chamber, or Wilderness, in which, secured from any dangerous or hurtful assaults, by World or Devil; and is, therein, by Faith, chast∣ly and quietly to wait for the return of her spiritual Lord and Hus∣band, in the visible glory of his man-child, spiritual life and state. Then, John saw, also the means, by which, this mystical Woman, or Spouse of Christ, was to be carried into the Wilderness, as her pre∣pared place or state of safety. Two wings of a great Eagle were given her, by which, to flee into the said Wilderness-state, out of the reach of any hurt, by the utmost expressions of her inward or outward ene∣mies malice, which would certainly be sent after her as a flood; ver. 14, 15. The great Eagle, by whose wings she is carried into this place of security, is the person of Christ, as head to his new-creature Saints, by making his own natural spirit or state, under the cross, that dead carkass, to which they are gathered; (Mat. 24. 24.) in a conformity to him, by the like death of nature in them, in order to receive his in∣visible, spiritual, new-creation-life. This, by a fixed faith in the two distinct principles of his new-creature-Spirit, the two wings of that spi∣ritual Eagle, by which they are safely carried and guided into the wilderness-state of their crucified natural man, under the Cross. By these wings, is the inward man of Christ's mystical dead body, pro∣tected, kept in perfect safety (and invisibly nourish'd for a time, times, and half a time) from the hurtful fury of the Serpent. The sack-cloth prophecy, then, is dated from the Woman's actual flight into the Wilderness, which was, at the withdrawing and absence of the man-child Spirit, from her, as to such visibility thereof, in true signs and wonders, as was afforded, and, for a season, continued, in and to the primitive Gospel-Church. So, her proper cloathing became sack-cloth, in which, she is to remain, waiting the return of her spiri∣tual
Lord, in the latter rain of his Spirit, in the last days, whereby spi∣ritual Saints will, again, come forth, in a visibility of spiritual life (all along their sack-cloth state, hid with Christ, in God) through the wonder-working power thereof, beyond what was experienced in the primitive Gospel-day. Between these two signal rains, or powrings forth of the Spirit, the dead body of Christ, or crucified na∣tural man of Saints, is the state wherein they are shut up, for a like trial and fixed exercise of their faith in Christ's second and spiritual coming, as the true seed of Faith were shut up in, under the Law, as to his first coming, in Flesh. But, with this advantageous difference; by his first coming, suffering, and exaltation, in our nature, the birth of the man-child-spirit therein, became a means of the actual and visible powring forth of the said Spirit, on Saints, as long as the first shower thereof, continued. And, the withdrawing the visible presence of that Spirit, ever since, is so far from being any just argument, whence to conclude the total ceasing thereof, that it ought, rather, to be a strengthning motive, for expecting the like, yea, and a greater pow∣er and demonstration, that it will break forth in, at its return. This should quicken up, in Saints, a steddy, fervent and well-groun∣ded desire, after the same, in the latter rain thereof, which is to ripen and bring in, the full harvest of the spiritual seed, of which the former rain afforded but an earnest and first fruits. This ought to encourage the (as yet) invisible Spiritual Saints, by faith, to wait for that re∣turn of his Spirit, in the end of the year, or last age of this World, by the powring down thereof, in a much more transcendent clearness, and visible demonstration, than ever, before. Spiritual Saints, then, in this long season of God's withdrawing the visible presence of his Gospel-Spirit, for wise and holy ends, are, by a fixed faith therein, to be faithful witnesses of Christ's spiritual life, in their sack-cloth state of prophecy, experienced for many past ages; forasmuch as those infallible marks of Christ's visible spiritual presence, whilst pretended to, by all, have bin found wanting in all societies of Christians, ever since his withdrawing. During this season, sack-cloth is the safest clothing for the chast spouse of Christ, in which, she is, by a perfect subjection to his will, to wait for his second coming, with longing desire; and, not dare, in the life and activity of her own will or spirit, to be found untimely stirring up or awakning her beloved, before the appointed time for his return from his far Country. By faith, are
they to wait, for this, and not make haste, from the impatience of their own spirit; but, by a constant growth in his, to hasten towards his spiritual coming that they may, daily, be more fitted to see him, through an encreasing likeness to him, therein; 1 Joh. 3. 2. They are to withdraw from the voice of every Stranger, not bowing to any false power or spirit, and to acquit themselves as Christ's faithful witnesses in their very sack-cloth prophecy, and invisible spiritual saintship. After this manner, has God kept his witnessing-work, on foot, in this long black and dark season of sack-cloth-prophecy. The second of the two days (Hos. 6. 2, 3.) was the primitive Gospel-day, by the former rain, or, first shower of the resurrection-spirit, from our glo∣rified nature, in Christ; instituting, for the season of it, a much more spiritual revelation and worship of himself, then in the first witnes∣sing day of spiritual Saints, by faith, under the dark dispensation of the Law. But, this first Gospel-day, as to the visibility thereof, has had its succeeding long night-season of Sack-Cloth-prophecy. After this, then, is to follow a third and more joyful day, than ever before. The dawning, or morning-light of this, will begin, on the latter rain, by which, God will revive and raise up his people, causing his spiritual life, resurrection-power and strength, to shine forth in them, beyond what was experienced in the former Gospel-day. In this third and last day, will he raise up his Saints, out of the grave of their crucified natural Spirits, and cause them, for ever, to live in his sight, in the visible glory of his new-creation-life. This third day begins, after the ending of the Sack-cloth prophecy; on the ending of which, the two witnesses are to be slain, by the beast, ascending out of the bottomless pit, with new, hidden weapons, to war upon them, overcome and kill them. And, their dead bodies must lie in the street of the great City, spiritually called Sodom and Egypt, where, also, our Lord was crucified; Rev. 11. 8. The peculiar season for an eminent slaying the two witnesses, may ap∣pear, by the means or hands, by which to be slain, spiritually, or literally. It is, by Satan's coming out of the bottomless pit, with the utmost depths of deceit (in which he has lain hid from the beginning) by his conjunctive visible and invisible power, to war against, and kill them. These subtile workings, by his said twofold power, reserved by him, for the last times of all, has Christ fore-warn'd his Saints, of. First, he will, then, more powerfully, than ever before, influence both the clean and corrupt principles of nature, in men, so as to cause
a more universal abounding in all sorts of iniquity, then ever, before. Hereby, will he render men, as willing and ready instruments, to exercise his persecuting malice, against the Saints of the most high, as he can desire. In that season, above all other, will Saints be hated and betrayed by all Nations, and killed for Christ's new name-sake, ha∣ving nothing left them, but such an enduring to the end, as shall render them more than Conquerors. For, it is Christ's quarrel, not their own, in which they contend. Under this sharp trial, destitute of all visible relief, will they be somewhat helped by God's outward providential dealings with (and punishings of) the World. Hereby, in some measure, will he avenge his own and peoples quarrel, so that while all natural principles shall center and agree, in the slaying them, God will, from unknown causes, set every man's sword against his fellow, causing a universal commotion, war, and rumour of wars, thorow-out the whole Earth. Nation shall rise up against Nation, and Kingdom against Kingdom. Yea, and divers places shall, after a wonderful manner, be visited with Famine, Pestilence, and Earth∣quakes. Yet, though a signal hand of God will be evident in all these judgments, this last and most sinful age of the World, will, in a self-condemning-light, be willingly hurried by the Devil, so as in a hardned contempt and wilful neglect of all the voices of God's provi∣dence, to gratify themselves, in all sorts of lusts and vanities. And, they will practise the same, in an enraged enmity against God, Christ, and Saints. All this will ripen them for their final destruction. From their implacable malice, for the just hand of God, upon them, will they take all opportunities to effect what they have long desired, even the compleat slaughter of the two witnesses. And, in all this, the Devil discovers himself, only, in his powerful influencing of outward and visible means, towards the carrying on this great design. But, he is furnished, also, with inward, mystical weapons (to fight against God and his spiritual Saints, in this latter age) that are of a more dangerous nature, than the other. For, these will he use, as in the very name and authority of Christ, committing, therein, the highest treason against him. In such exercise of his diabolical power, will he send forth his false spirits, in Christ's new-creation-name, as false Christs, to make false Apostles, joining men with themselves, in all sorts of spiritual craft, to deceive Spiritual Saints. This, by such lying signs and wonders, of such a deep, hidden nature, as, if Christ had not laid
an impossibility on them, would deceive the very Elect. On the one hand, in imitation of the Cross of Christ, will Satan say, he is in the Wilderness or secret Chambers: on the other, in a counterfeit resurre∣ction-state, will he exalt himself, by sinful transformation, into his heavenly, spiritual life. All this, by an angelical ministration, know∣ing Christ's fore-running dispensation to his everlasting Gospel-day, by his holy Angels, to be at hand, as the only means to raise up his slain witnesses out of their Graves. And thus, have we observed the hand or means, by which, the two witnesses are to be slain, and, what the slaying of them, is. Visi∣ble and invisible enemies, Men and Devils, will combine against them, to bring them into such a captivity, as all former, under Law or Gos∣pel, have bin but fore-running types of; and so seen, by spiritual Prophets, and Saints, under both dispensations. Jeremy, Ezekiel, Daniel, &c. have declared this last and great day of sore trouble, such as never hath been, or shall be. So, also, hath Christ himself prophesi∣ed; Mat. 24. 21. This very season is, indeed, the sum of Daniel's many visions; the result of what is held forth, by the two Kings of the North and South, in all the variety and differing appearances they have bin in, towards one another, through the common profaneness of the former, in the cold, dead, corrupt spirit of nature; and the warmth or zeal of the latter, in, and for the first-covenant life and righteousness of Man. Through the powerful influence of the Devil, on both, can he soder and unite them, in a combination against the Saints of the most high, so as to bring forth a day of utmost trial and trouble, to them. For this end, Daniel saw these two Kings, joined to∣gether, as the Devil's twofold weapon, in the corrupt and refined principles of nature, speaking lies at one Table (Dan. 11. 27.) and setting, or joyning, their hearts and hands, to mischief true Saints. And so, both of them, in union of mind with the Devil, will do his work, in effecting the death of the two witnesses. Thus, will Satan, by the practise of the most refined spiritual wickedness, and in the expressing greater malice than ever before (when his reign draws neer, to an end) employ all his instruments of cruelty, muster up all his force, and power, for the slaying of Christ's two witnesses. And he, with his instruments, will prosper herein, to the accomplishing of their death. This we find in the mighty King in Daniel, that was to arise last; and the beast, in John's vision, that at end of the Sack-cloth
prophecy, was to ascend out of the bottomless pit, furnished with all sorts of weapons and instruments, not only to war upon, but overcome and kill Christ's twofold witnessing Saints, magnifying himself against the God of Gods. The same thing was repeated to Daniel, in the vision of the four beasts, commonly understood to point out those four Monarchies, that are to spend out the remaining ages of the World, during the Devil's active power, and man's day. The fourth beast, is described, as far worse than any of his Fellows, being strong, dreadful and ter∣rible; and, so furious and malicious, as with its great iron teeth, not only to devour and break in pieces, but stamp the residue under his feet. This beast had also ten horns, and another little horn came up among them, which is, in a signal manner, to war with and prevail against the Saints of the most high; Dan. 7. 21. The fourth beast and little horn figure out the utmost strength, the Devil, from the beginning, kept in reserve, for this last and most bloody design. At the end of the Sack-cloth pro∣phecy, in the appointed time of three years and an half, will the two wit∣nesses be slain by the little horn, Daniel saw come up last, and, in the least and most unlikely appearance for such a design; yet, by it, the most bloody battel is to be fought, in which the twofold witnesses are to be o∣vercome and killed, and that, in such an enraged malice of their Ene∣mies, as not to have any burial permitted them. By all, may appear, the Devil will then rally up all his forces, in an universal conjunction of all sorts of principles that are singly natural, humane and angelical, to bring this most dismal season, that ever was experienced by Saints. Herein, will Satan cause, as was shewed Daniel, such abominations, as shall make wholly desolate all sorts of visible worship and humane affairs. Then will all moral and civil Laws, customs, and constitutions be broken and changed; to the setting open a flood-gate, and causing an inundation of all sorts of wickedness, litteral and spiritual. And, hereby will be denied, both liberty to Saints, and propriety to men; even to all, that shall either from spiritual or rational principles, at that season, refuse to receive the mark of the beast, by not joining with the Devil, for slaying the two witnesses, litterally or mystically. This sad season, to be brought on the true spiritual Israel of God, was lively represented to Ezekiel, by the valley of dry bones; Ezek. 37. 1, 2. Thus, by faith, had he a view, so long before, of these two witnesses that are to be brought into the most deplorable circumstances, to the en∣lightned reason of man, imaginable. This is implied in the judgment,
the then house of Israel, figure hereof, made of themselves, say∣ing, our bones are dried, our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. Secondly, On this sad condition and slaughter of the two witnesses, or whole house of spiritual Israel, in the last and most perillous times, their enemies will be found in the height of joy and satisfaction, looking, with great delight, on the dry bones or dead bodies of the said house of Israel, the two witnesses, during the three years and half, or time of them utmost extremity, in which, not permitted burial. As an expression of this joy, and gratification of their spiritual lust, will they send pre∣sents to each other, as triumphing over the slain witnesses of Christ, which has long bin their hearts desire, even all along their Sack-cloth prophecy in which, they have bin contending with and troubling all that dwe upon the Earth, or in earthly, first-creation-principles; Rev. 11. 10▪ On this honourable account, as contending on God's behalf, are they, at length, to be slain, mystically, if not also litterally. But, nor their mystical nor litteral death should have been permitted, as Christ said in Lazarus his case, but that the power of God may be the more clearly manifested in raising them up again, out of their sleep. And then, and so, will they be fitted to execute the wrath of God, on his and their implacable enemies, as a just recompence for that death of theirs, which has bin precious in his sight; Rev. 11. 11. Ezek. 37. 10. Such honour shall all his Saints have, as the Lord's army, to execute vengeance on the Kings of North and South, with their heathen and first-covenant-people, who joined in a combination, to destroy them; Psal. 2. 1, 2. & 149. 6,-9. They shall then receive the Crown, reserved for this last ge∣neration of Saints, that bring up the rear of all those spiritual worthies and witnesses, that have bin, from the beginning. The true witnes∣ses of Christ, have, all along, found but slender and cool reception for their testimony; yea, they have, always, found opposition, more or less. And, how much greater may be expected, in this last and utmost assault, by visible and invisible powers, when the great thing, all along, witnessed, the second personal coming of Christ, is at the door? The extraordinary voice of God's outward providen∣ces shall then also give an undoubted demonstration to all natural hearts, that some strange and wonderful change is hastning upon the World. And, the fear and conviction, hereby, wrought in Ene∣mies, will produce the utmost expressions of rage and fury, on the
sack-cloth prophets, as witnessing this unwelcome truth to them, Christ's second comming, to be at hand. Great reason, then, to ex∣pect, not only a more, then ever, violent breaking in pieces of the earthen vessel, in which the precious witnessing treasure is; but also, a more enraged spirit, discovering itself, against the very spiritual treasure. On this account, will it come forth, in its spiritual wicked∣ness, in heavenly places, and so, with their angelical weapons, gilded with a likeness to Christ's truly spiritual ones, war against the inward mind, as well as by material weapons, against the outward body of the two witnesses. But, by neither, shall they be able to suppress, or hinder their witnessing-work. For, God will make them, a defenced City, iron Pillars and brazen Walls, for an unshaken, steddy endu∣during the utmost malice of all enemies, visible and invisible. They shall conquer them, even while slaying them, by surviving all bodily deaths, and spiritual assaults, in an unchanged mind and Spirit. And, having thus considered the time and means, in and by which, the witnesses are to be slain; next, are we to enquire, by what hand or means, they will be raised out of the said death. For, it is no more possible for the members, than head, to be held by the bands of death; Act. 2. 24. But, redemption out of the mystical death of the natural Spirit, and out of all death, can only be by a new-creation-power. And, this was that power and glory of the Father, by which, Christ, in our nature, was raised out of the both mystical and litteral death thereof. This done, in a publick capacity, and relation to his mem∣bers, ascertain's the like to be done for their crucified natural Spirits and dead Bodies; and that, by the same means. All that are planted together, in the likeness of his death, shall be also, in the likeness of his re∣surrection (Rom. 6. 5.) or, be sure to partake of his new-creature-life. The putting this life into them, is the means, by which, the witnesses are to be raised, after slain, and lying in the Streets of spiritual Sodom and Egypt; Rev. 11. 8. The new-creation-spirit of Life, from God, enters into them, quickens and calls up their natural man, into an everlasting union with, and subjection to their spiritual, as that to Christ and God; and so, sets it upon its right Gospel-Feet. The new-creation-spirit of true prophecy, will raise the whole, slain na∣tural man of the Saint, out of its mystical and litteral grave, death of spirit and body, as to all the mortal first-creation life of either,
causing the dry bones of the two witnesses, to live; Ezek. 37. 12;-14. This Spirit of Christ was, always, the prepared means, for loosing and breaking the bands of death, from Saints, and raising their whole crucified natural man, into the glorious life and liberty of their spiritu∣al. But, this will be done in a more signal manner than ever, at the raising the two witnesses, in the third and last day, mentioned (Hos. 6. 2.) as their slaying will be more signal then, then in any former perse∣cutions. The new-creature-spirit of Christ, then, put into their crucified natural man, or dead body, will be the efficient cause of their resurrection. The instrumental hand or cause thereof, under Christ, will be the holy Angels, as honoured with the first powerful sounding forth the new-creation-trumpet, voice, or everlasting Gospel-life of their risen Lord, by which, the new-creation-breath or spirit of the head, will enter into the dead bodies of his crucified Saints. The said Angels will be found the highest and chief ministers of Christ, till that seed of Abraham, laid hold on, from everlasting, as Christ's first born Church, come to take their place in Christ's second resurrection-life, over the heads of all Angels and glorified earthly Saints. Our nature, in Christ, is raised into both these lives, heavenly, and glorified earthly, the twofold spiritual and everlasting new-creation-life. The man Christ, has also a third resurrection-state, as advanced into, and filled with the very divine life, in an infinite superiority to all Angels and Saints. In him, dwells the fulness of the God-head, bodily, and per∣sonally. He is thus anointed above all his fellows or brethren; as also, with the original and fountain of twofold spiritual-creature-life, which none of them are; but with derived portions thereof. In the days of the highest Saints non-age and minority, are the holy Angels, teaching and nursing guardians to them; Heb. 1. 14. They are the highest and fittest instruments, to convey Christ's mind to Saints, un∣der Law or Gospel. From them, have choice Saints and Prophets, under both, received their manifold visions and communications of the mind of God. The Law was ordained to be dispensed by Angels, in the hand of a Mediator, or, under the conduct of Christ, their head; Gal. 3. 19. Act. 7. 53. In these angelical flames, Christ, as head of them, descended on mount Sinai, and, by their voice or ministry, pro∣mulged the Law; Exod. 20. Psal. 68. 17. By them, was Moses shew∣ed, through faith, his and their new-creation-head, by which, fed and maintained forty days together, without any visible food. They
were the mystical Ravens, by whom Saints received that new-crea∣tion-food, that sustained and nourished them, unto eternal life. By their angelical representations, was Christ, the head-Angel of God's covenant, revealed to the Patriarks before, and to Prophets and Saints, after the giving of the Law. They appeared on all occasions, as em∣ployed by Christ, in all the messages of God's will, to them. They opened Heaven, to Ezekiel, who, through a powerful faith, was ena∣bled to see & take in those wonderful visions of the very divine glory, through the new-creature-nature of Christ, his head, so as to hear the voice of the almighty divinity. They were the hand, that oft lifted him and others, up, beyond and above the sight and motion of the natu∣ral spirit, and body, whilst yet in the same. By the hand or power of their new-creature Lord, did they carry him to them of the captivity, by the river Chebar; Ezek. 3. 14, 15. And, by the same hand, was he led into the valley of dry bones, declared, by them, to signify the whole spi∣ritual Israel. They, likewise, shewed him that new-creation-spirit of prophecy, by which, the dry bones, or slain twofold witnesses, in the last and worst of times, were to be quickned and made live again; Ezek. 37. 1,—14. The Scripture abounds with instances of this kind. Christ, the true Michael sent his ministring Angel or Messenger, Gabriel, to reveal to beloved Daniel, those visions that were to remain a sealed book, as to their full accomplishment, till the time, shewed him, for the twofold witnesses to be slain; as also, how, by the peculiar work of the good Angels, in a preparitory ministration to Christ's second coming, they should be raised into the same life and spirit, which the Angel shewed Daniel, his lot was fallen in, so long before his actual possession of. And, as Angels were Christ's messengers, in giving forth this resurre∣cton-life, through a spirit of faith, under the Law, before Christ's first coming; so, were they the first actual dispensers and declarers of the said life, and glory, under the gospel. They first preached the glad, gospel-tydings of Christ's resurrection, in our nature. This ho∣nourable service, Christ employed them in, as a just recompence of their being his first followers, out of the changeable first-creation, into that unchangeable, resurrection-land or state of life, without ever sinning against Law or Gospel; Ezek. 1. 12, 20. & 10. 11. Hereby, did they preserve to themselves, in this first-resurrection-state, that precedency, in place, and nature, God gave them, in their first creation. And now, as additional to that, are they chosen, by Christ,
to be his highest-Officers therein, for giving the first report of the said resurrection-state of our nature, in Christ's person. He is not here, but is risen; Luk. 24. 6. And, as in the two days under Law and Gospel, Angels, under Christ, were the first preachers of the resurrection-state, unto men; so, much more powerfully, yet, will they be, in the third and last day. By their powerful sounding the new-creation trumpet, or preaching the everlasting gospel-life, will the dead witnesses be raised, and the elect gathered together, from one end of Heaven to the other; Mat. 24. 31. They will come forth, in such power of the new-creation-spirit of prophecy, as to cause it to enter into and build up every part of their crucified nature, into the life there∣of, and compleat union with their angelical helpers, and Christ him∣self, therein; Ezek. 37. 4,-10. And, herein shall they be found the twofold united witnesses of Christ, in his heavenly and earthly glorifi∣ed spirit, signified to Ezekiel, by the two sticks, he was to write upon, for Judah and for Joseph, with their companions; Ezek. 37. 15,—22. All this, done by the holy Angels, in the preparatory dispensation, amounts not to the Saint's glorified body. For, that change will be the immediate fruit of Christ's personal coming, and presence. But, these angelical reapers are to gather together, the first-born Church, written on the heavenly stick, sharers in Christ's heavenly and most excellent new-creature-life; mark'd with their Father's name, on their foreheads and fitted for the marriage-bed of their heavenly Husband. And then, are they to gather all those whose names are written on the earthly glorified stick, also; even an innumerable multitude, in the white robes of Christ's spiritual, everlasting righteousness; Rev. 7. 9. Both these, are the Angels to gather, by preaching the everlasting Gos∣pel, to them. By their preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, to all the World, in the third and last day, before the full end come, will be ful∣filled; Mat. 29. 14. They will powerfully waken up the spiritual seed of the Kingdom, in all nations; and, all that are ripe in the life thereof, shall be immediately joyned with them, even with Christ's heavenly host of Angels, for the work and service of that day. And, at the same time, will they raise up other spiritual Saints, into a land of light, a spiritual Goshen, and pour forth the full vials of Plagues, on the hardned enemies of God and them. God, by his holy Angels, will lead Saints out of all captivities (as Moses, Israel, out of Egypt) raising out of their great and last grave, the whole mystical dead
body of Christ. Of this preparatory angelical ministration, was Christ's transfiguration, in his unchang'd body, before his death, a figure. He caused the transforming power of his new-creature-life, in which, Son of man in Heaven, to shine so strongly, on his inward man, or spirit, that his very outward, also, was made to shine. His face, or spirit, shined as the Sun, and his raiment, or outward man was white as the light. So, the crucified spirit, dead body, or natural man of the two witnesses, shall by the Angels powerful preaching the everlasting Gospel, be so raised into the powerful exercise of Spiritual life, as to make their unchang'd fleshly bodies, shine, as a high de∣gree of redemption, from the bondage of their whole corruptible first-creation-life. Such Saints, with holy Angels, shall shine as Stars, through a more signal partaking of Christ's risen Spirit, the bright mor∣ning Star, from whom, they all receive their distinct measures of new-creation-light and life. In this season and dispensation, will Christ make good, to his Saints, what he, long before, promised to Joshua, as associated with Angels, under him, his joint powerful instruments for the great work of this preparatory day. Of this priviledg, was Moses, also, a signal type, as, through faith, taken into such angeli∣cal converse, and, thereby, admitted so near access to Christ, the head of Angels, as will qualify them to receive the lively oracles of Christ's own mind, and become his mouth, for declaring the same, to others. This honour will be put on Saints, in the preparatory dispensation to Christ's second coming. And thus, have we seen, by what means or hand, the last genera∣tion of Saints are to be slain; and by what, to be raised again; and, their high priviledg, and honour, thereupon. This, by the angeli∣cal ministration, for this very purpose, to raise up the two slain witnes∣ses, by quickning up the seed of the twofold new-creature-spirit of prophecy, in them, into a powerful and irresistible demonstration. So, the preparatory, angelical ministration, is to take place, immedi∣ately, on the death of the witnesses. In this newness of Life, shall their dead natural spirits be made stand on their feet, in a proportion∣able obedience to the Spirit of Christ, with their spiritual man. And, so shall they, with Gideon, the type (Judg. 6. & 7.) become men of valour, for destruction of enemies, and salvation of friends. All this, in such an absolute subjection to Christ, that the whole glory of the victory will be seen to be God's. In this angelical day (as
was signified by the seperation, twice made, in Gideon's army) shall be used, only, such spiritual Angels and Saints, as are dignified with a spiritual skill, for this war, upon enemies. On the first separation, in Gideon's army, returned two and twenty thousand from the war. In the second test or trial, only three hundred, that lapped of the water, putting their hand to their mouth, and refusing to bow down upon their knees, to any first-creation-reliefs; but found singly, in a true subje∣ction to Christ; these were to perform the war. And each of them were to have a Trumpet, with empty Pitchers, and Lamps in the Pitchers. These empty Pitchers fitly represent the compleat work of the Cross, on the whole natural man of Christ's spiritual Gideonites. So, as wholly emptied of all first-creation-life and strength, are they filled with the new-creation-spirit of power, to perform the work of this preparatory day. The new-creature lamp or spirit of Christ, shall be set up in the empty Pitcher of their crucified natural man, and un∣changed body, rendring their whole man, a burning and shining Light. And, this lamp is the very weapon, by which, the work of the said day is to be done. 'Tis by the Sword of the Lord, and his spiritual Gideonite's (the new-creature-spirit of Christ, in his Saints, who are, thereby, in marriage-union with their spiritual Lord Joshua) the vi∣ctory is to be obtained. Not by might, not by power, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of Hosts, as in the type; Zech. 4. 6. No first-creation-strength or weapon, shall be used in this War. The spirit of the Lord will be the two-edged sword in their hands, to execute vengeance on their combined enemies, heathens and a first-covenant-people; Psal. 2. 1, 2. & 149. 6, 7. By this sword of the Lord and his Gideonites, will Christ cause them to triumph over all enemies, visible and invisi∣ble, Men and Devils. They shall break in pieces, the serpentine head and whole party of first-creation-rebels, against God and the second. The Lord will, then, by his fiery sword, plead with all Flesh (Isa. 66. 16.) even with every false Spirit, as included in that word, Flesh. For this purpose and work, will he descend, with his angelical host, into the mystical valley of Jehosaphat (on the raising of the dead carkases or dry bones of his twofold spiritual witnesses) to make a true decision between his Friends and Foes. Then shall the slain by this spiritual sword of the Lord, in his Angels and Saints, be many. And, this weapon shall be seen to be wholly directed by the will and command of Christ, their Head and King, whose powerful word will give the
quick and terrible motion to those angelical Chariots, in which, An∣gels and Saints, jointly commission'd by him, shall drive furiously, to carry on the swift execution of his will, on enemies. Of this mini∣stration of Angels (furnish'd with the sword or spirit of the Lord, as join'd in commission, with the two sorts of spiritual Saints, and so, making up a twofold band or army, of Angels and Saints, in this pre∣paratory day) is there a full account given, Joel 2. First, here is a command for blowing the spiritual Trumpet, as the first, infallible alarm, to this work. This is to be sounded by Angels, as the appointed gatherers together of the elect seed, among men, to the said mystical battel. And, when these spiritual Warriers are provided with their offensive and defensive weapons, the Angels will blow their spiritual Trumpet in Zion, and sound their alarm in the holy Mountain, for the joyful as∣sembling the ripen'd seed of spiritual Saints, into an association with themselves, which will make all the inhabitants of the earth, tremble. These fore-running messengers of Christ, in their new-creation-light and power, shall come as horses and horsemen, and the thundring sound of Chariots, on the tops of the mountains, riding, in a commanding power over all visible and invisible strength, leaping and rejoycing before their great Lord and Master, as spiritual David's, before the my∣stical Ark, for his-new-creation-strength and life, put into them. For, by the angelical flames of fire, shall they devour the enemy, as stubble. They shall run like mighty men, expert in this spiritual war; so swift, as none shall be able to flee or escape them, in their most orderly march (without breaking their ranks) upon the old, first-creation-World or City. They will climb up, upon the mystical Houses, even the persons of enemies, and, enter in at the Windows, like Theives. By their all-searching new-creation-light, will they ransack and search their ene∣mies hearts, so as to find out, and detect all the deceitful works of un∣righteousness, in the mystical earthly Jerusalem. And, this work will make the hypocritical Sinners in Sion, to fear and tremble, as found wilful enemies to this spiritual army. They will kindle a mystical Fire, in their spirits, that shall, forever, burn in them; and, this, yet, but preparatory to what is reserved by Christ's final sentence, to be brought upon them, which is near at hand. When he comes, he will utter his own voice before his Army, as head of them; Joel 2. 11. And, the execution of the said voice, will be very terrible to all op∣posers, who shall be devoured by the fire that proceeds out of their mouths,
as found implacable enemies to the glad tydings of the Lord's approach. That, which is unspeakable joy, to friends, will be unexpressible terror and vexation, to enemies. This twofold differing reception and effect of Christ's second coming, we find, on the concluding sound of the seventh Trumpet of Christ's new-creation-voice, on which, he actually takes possession of all the visible and invisible Kingdoms of this World. On this, follow loud acclamations of spiritual Saints; but, anger, vexation, and madness, in the enemies thereof; Rev. 11. 15,—18. The work, then, of the preparatory dispensation to Christ's com∣ing, is twofold. To the joyful receivers of their everlasting Gos∣pel, will the holy Angels administer suitable recompences of Christ's love, as true fearers of his name, small or great, single or double-portion'd, heavenly or earthly spiritual Saints. And, the pecu∣liar generation of Saints (that are to be his two-fold witnesses, slain for their faithful testimony) as their particular recompence, will be called up, by the holy Angels, into a fellowship with them, in their angeli∣cal ministration. And, by the powerful entrance of Christ's new-creature-life, into them, will they be raised, as found by the angeli∣cal reapers, the full ripe corn, to be gathered up, by them, into that preparatory service, with themselves. Next these, will they take care of that precious seed-wheat, that lies hid, under the earth of the natural spirit; or, at most, appears but in its young and tender blade. These spiritual Watchmen and preachers of that day, are, by Christ's command, to take care of such. The Angels that were to o∣pen the Seals, and pour forth the vials of God's wrath on the Earth, are required not to hurt the grass of the new Earth, neither any green thing or tree; not the seed, or any the least beginnings of an ever-green spi∣ritual life. The spiritual seed, however hid in the earth of the, yet, active natural spirit, shall, by their powerful preaching the everlasting Gospel, be made wonderfully to spring up, grow and prosper; so that this holy seed, from among all nations, shall abundantly flow in, unto them, in those days of such a universal return out of all captivities, as hath been the well-grounded hope, and relieving expectation of Saints, in all former ages. From the redemption of the spiritual seed, by the preparatory ministry of Angels, will flow a full restituti∣on to the whole Earth. The Earth, not yet brought to trial, shall, by the powerful preaching of the Angels, become as the garden of Eden;
and, by obedience thereunto, be, in measure, restored to their first-creation-state, in order to their experiencing a far greater mercy, by Christ's personal presence, if the fault be not their own, when brought under such great and high advantages. And, having thus seen the first part of the work of this preparato∣ry dispensation, in reference to the good seed and innocent earth: the second, we shall find to be, in reference to the evil seed, who' after all trial, by wilfully rejecting the truth, have shewed themselves the accursed earth. John saw the same time apointed for a recompence of love, to the one; and wrath, to the other. These latter, are the Nations that will be angry, at Christ's second coming. Yea, by the pre∣paratory dispensation thereunto, will there be set up such a condemn∣ing testimony in the hearts of the incorrigibly wicked, as will ren∣der, even that, a day of gloominess, clouds, and thick darkness, to them; Joel 2. 2. Even their restor'd natural state, on which they have do∣ted, shall be so signally judg'd and blasted by the breath of the Lord (in this his preparatory day, set up in his Angels and risen witnesses) that it shall be left behind them, as a waste and desolate Wilderness, with whom, the Lord will have no more to do, in any way of love, or trial; ver. 3. This season is to put a period to the Serpent's active reign (and Christ and his Saint's passive) and to bring the seat of the Whore and Beast, to judgment, who will therefore, be enraged, more than ever, against Christ, and his Saints and Angels. Then will they come forth in the most subtile imitations of Christ's preparatory ange∣lical ministers. For this, will Satan prepare his evil angelical Cha∣riots, and take his fixed evil seed, among men, into a like associati∣on, as Christ's blessed Angels and Saints, so, as exquisitely to counter∣feit this preparatory ministration of Christ, to the deceiving, if possible, the very Elect. He will cloath his false Apostles, Prophets and Servants, through his sinful transformations, with an appearance of Christ's re∣surrection-Garments. And so, will he assume to himself, the very creature-throne of Christ, setting up himself, in that glorified Temple, in imitation of Christ's united divine and creature-natures, shewing himself to be God: 2 Thess. 2. 4. This, will the Devil, by his inspired instruments, set himself to do, in these latter days, counterfeiting the Spirit of Christ, in himself and Saints, as spiritual Magicians, to fight against the spiritual Moses's of that day, blessed Angels and Saints, in the most subtile imitation of their spiritual and true won∣der-working
power. This will Satan do, to weaken the authority of their spiritual ministration, from implacable hatred thereunto. In this mystical way of opposing Christ (and his work, to be done by Angels and Saints) will he and his party of Angels and Men, be counterfeiting the signs and wonders, wrought by the new-creation-power and spirit of Christ. This will they do, notwithstanding the signal judgments of God, upon them, as on the type, Pharaoh and his Egyptians. God's judgments, then, instead of working them in∣to an obedience to his message, were, by them, abused, to the en∣creasing their wilful hatred of that hand and power, they could not but confess just, in smiting them. Yet, in height of contempt, would they be imitating that new-creation-power, by which, they were convinced, the wonders of that day, were wrought. All this was but a type of what, the mystical Pharaoh and his Subjects will do, in the preparatory day to Christ's second coming. And, for a season, will they be permitted so to do, to try and prove many. Many, that are spiritually wise, will be found stumbling and falling, hereby. But, being unwillingly mistaken, their very mistake will be caused to tend to the purifying of their faith, and also, to the ripening of their enemies, for destruction. This was figured by the red Sea, that became a to∣tal destruction to the enemy, and salvation, to Israel. All this shall be more eminently seen, in wilful hardners of their hearts, against this powerful ministration of Angels. On such wilful Sinners, in that day, will the said Angels pour forth the vials of Gods wrath, sealed up, from the beginning, to this appointed season. In whatever deceitful appearances, such Sinners will be found out, and punished, under the distinct vials of wrath, poured fourth upon them. And, they shall all be made to stand as convicted and condemned persons, in their own consciences, by the powerful light of this angelical ministry, as Christ's inferiour court of judicature, in order to receive an irrever∣sible sentence of Death, from the highest seat of judgment, from which can be no appeal, being set up in Christ's person, by whom as sove∣raign Lord, to be pronounced. Yet, shall not this sentence be finally executed upon them, but, on purpose, suspended, during the thousand years active reign of Christ, in which they are to be so chained up, as to be disabled to make the least resistance, or give any interruption thereunto. This powerful restraint, as to the expressing their enmity against the peaceable reign of Christ and his Saints, will
much encrease their torment. But, let us, now, resume, and come to a more particular and distinct consideration of all these things. First, What is meant by the Seales, the opening thereof, and pouring forth of the said Vials? Secondly, how, and in what manner are they to be poured forth, and upon whom? Thirdly, how far are the judg∣ments thereof to reach, visible or invisible, in this preparatory dis∣pensation? We shall find information, as to each of these particulars, in the visions given John, not only of things present, but, to come. This, by opening the heavenly door of the resurrection-state, in Christ's person, on which, he heard the sound of an angelical Trumpet, saying, Come up hither, and I will shew thee things to come; Rev. 4. 1. Hence, John acknowledg'd all the light and information he received of that state, to be given him, by the ministry of Angels, as revealers of the sealed-up judgments, for all sorts of enemies, answerable to their more or less criminal offences. And, these judgments are to be visibly manifested, in the last, preparatory dispensation to Christ's se∣cond coming. To the first. At the appointed time, for opening the Seals, are the Vials, and judgments therein contained, to be poured forth. Both and all, are to be, in the preparatory dispensation to Christ's second coming. Then is to be dispensed that wrath of God, wilful Sinners in this old World (or first-creation-state) against the light of the new, have bin treasuring up to themselves, against this day. After all trial, and God's long forbearance, these judgments, which have bin long sealed up, are to be executed upon them. And, they shall be seen by them, on whom executed, to have bin justly deserved by them, and accor∣dingly, inflicted on them. By the light of this angelical ministry, shall all such Sinners be convinced, that the distinct vials of wrath, poured forth upon them, justly belong to them. This twofold work, John was shewed to be the joint business of blessed Angels and Saints, in this preparatory dispensation. He gives a large and full account thereof; Rev. 5. 6. & 7. He saw the Lamb, the head of Angels, open∣ing the Seals for them, and also for Saints, who are called up, into an association with them, in the same Gospel-ministry, as jointly used by Christ, in the said work. They are both, by their spiritual Head, joyned, in commission, for this work, the opening of the sealed-up judgments of God, to the World. So, under Christ, come they forth,
in his conquering new-creature-spirit, over the World, as was decla∣red to John, on the Lamb's opening the first Seal, on which the blessed Saint and Angel, as horse and rider, arm'd with Christ's risen spirit, go forth, conquering and to conquer; Rev. 6. 1, 2. So, on the succes∣sive opening the other Seals, according to their distinct commissions, are they to make every part of the condemned World, quickly to feel the effects of the judgments, contained therein. For, by opening the second Seal, peace is to be taken from the Earth, or, earthly natural principle and state of life, corrupt or righteous, that, from its sensual and devilish mind, instead of willingly and obediently submitting, has wilfully and rebelliously done despite, to the spirit of grace. As the just punishment of such offence, the Son of peace will depart from them, as to his gracious offers; and come upon them in a final dispensation of wrath. And so, will he take peace from them, both his true peace, offered them, and that false peace they have pleased themselves with. All such as are fixed in the natural or earthly principle, will he make a mystical Babel, heightning their vexation and disturbance, by such division, as will cause them, in revenging God's just quarrel against them all, to hate and kill one another. So, by opening another Seal, Death and Hell come on the fourth part of this accursed Earth. Blessed Angels and Saints, for this, are to kill them with sword, famine, death, and beasts of the Earth. All these are typical to the same judgments, spiritually understood, as their eternal punishment, signified by the Hell, that followed death. Then, see the effects of opening the sixth Seal; Rev. 6. 12,-14. The Heaven, that will depart as a scrowl, is, in mystery and truth, the most excellent and heavenly part of the first-creation-spirit, with which, evil Angels and Men have bin counter-feiting the new-creation-state; but, shall, no longer, be able, so to do. The mystical Sun, Moon, and Stars of this first-creation-spirit or World, in its fading life and glory, will be turned into darkness and blood, by the bright-shining light of the spirit of truth, in this prepa∣ratory day; and, become so antiquated, as no longer to remain in any credit or esteem; but, as a decayed, old garment, laid aside. And, all the mystical Figs or Fruits, springing forth from the old root of single nature, will wither and fall to the ground, before the mighty wind, or powerful breath of this Spirit of the Lord. It will also cause such a terrible Earthquake to all earthly or meer natural principles, foundati∣ons and buildings, as to remove every Mountain and Island, mystically
understood, out of its presumptuously assumed place. It will make all the rich and mighty, bond and free (not so made, by a willing subjecti∣on to the new-creation-spirit of Christ) cry out to evil angelical Rocks and Mountains, and all sorts of first-creation rocks or strength, to co∣ver, hide, and secure them, from the wrath of the Lamb, convincingly set before them, by the spiritual light of this preparatory day. But, they will both feel and know, there is no possibility of escaping the same. On opening the third Seal, also, John saw a black horse, and he that sate on him, had a pair of ballances in his hand, And, he heard a voice, saying, A measure of Wheat for a peny, and three measures of Barley for a peny; and, see, thou hurt not the Oil and the Wine. The Ballances sig∣nify the justice of that day, in recompences of love to friends; and wrath to enemies. Both these recompences, have bin so sealed up in the living book or word of God, the new-creature-spirit of Christ, as not to be discerned, till this preparatory dispensation, and powerful preaching of the everlasting Gospel, by which, the secrets of all hearts shall be search'd out, declared, and judged; Rom. 2. 16. Then, all that have faithfully labour'd in Christ's Vineyard, and rightly improv'd the Talent, received from him, shall receive an answerable recompence, consisting in the rule of five or two Cities, and enter into the joy of their Lord. On the contrary, they that have made no use of their Talent, or, an evil one, by an unrighteous detaining the present truth, in a wilful refu∣sal to improve it, by exchange of their own legal or natural spirit, life, or state of bondage, for Christ's new-creation-spirit, and Gospel-principles of true freedom; God will be strict in marking all, done amiss herein, by them; and accordingly, pour out his wrath upon them, in this dispensa∣tion. All principles and actions will then be weighed in God's new-creation-sanctuary-ballance, as the right test for Wheat, Barley, &c. And, whatever, men's attainments be, on single, first-creation prin∣ciples, they will be found too light, for acceptance with God. So, their punishment, for detaining any part thereof, will be just. And, a peculiar care will be had, of God's new-creation Oil and Wine, and, a righteous recompence, given to a faithful witness-bearing, in his spi∣rit of true freedom, for which, they have suffered, all along Satan's reign. This shall, in its place, be more fully spoken to. And, then will be declared God's most wise and holy grounds, why the injuries, done to the Souls under the Altar, slain for the testimony of Jesus, have
lain, so long, unaccounted for. Under this preparatory dispensati∣on, shall the murderers of Jesus, and his spiritual Martyrs, be punished, according to their works. All these judgments and mercies are to be opened by the seven new-creation Trumpets, sounded by seven Angels, on the opening of the seventh and last Seal; Rev. 8. 1, 2. On the sounding of these Trumpets, the judgments, sealed up (for foes, amongst the treasures of mercy for friends, Deut. 32. 34, 35.) will be executed, by the pouring forth of the seven Vials. All this, as the performance of God's promise, on behalf of the two slain witnesses (Rev. 11.) for raising them up, into an association with spiritual Angels, for the powerful preaching of Christ's everlasting Gospel-life. For this, will they have power to shut and open the blessings and judgments of Hea∣ven, in perfect harmony with the spirit and will of Christ, distribu∣ting both, in love or wrath, to the inhabitants of the whole World. This is implied in the command given them over that mystical Fire, by which, the wrath of that day is to be executed; and, in their power, also, to give or withhold the heavenly rain of Christ's risen-Spirit; and, likewise, for turning the Waters (of the cleansed natural state, as turned into enmity against the same) into blood, from the just wrath and displeasure of God. By all ways, literal and mystical, will the sealed-up judgments of God, be opened, to smite the accursed Earth, in such a successive pouring forth of wrath, upon it (figured by the plagues on Pharaoh and Egypt) by the hands of Saints and An∣gels, in this fore-running dispensation, on this side the glorified body of Saints, as was figured in Eliah, subject to like passions with other Saints, in the unchang'd body; Jam. 5. 17. Saints, in this dispen∣sation, will not only have power over the material Heaven, so as, by the spirit of true faith and prayer, to withhold or give the rain thereof; but, in a like command, with Elias, to cause the angelical fire to come down on their Enemies, for their destruction, as he did, on the Captains with their Fifties, that came in opposition to the new-creature-spirit of prophecy, by the powerful workings whereof, in him, he was seen to be a man of God. Wilful enmity to this spirit, God will come forth in signal displeasure against. Now, if this power, literally and spiritually, was thus manifested in Eliah, by a union of Faith only, with Christ, in his new-creature-spirit, before the former Gospel-rain thereof (Act. 2.) what will be impossible to the power of it, in Saints, on the latter rain thereof, for the ripening of Angels and Saints,
therein, to a full harvest, fitting them to do all things needful, to make way for their Lord's second coming? And, having thus considered, what is meant by the opening of the Seals, and pouring forth of the Vials, in the preparatory day to Christ's second coming, by Angels and Saints; we are, next, to enquire, how, and in what manner and measure, they are then to be poured forth; and upon whom? For this, it is observable, that every Vial hath (and that, from the beginning) bin suited to the more or less crimi∣nal nature, of the several wilful Offences, which now shall be laid open, however, before, hid and sealed up. This is implied by the distinct places or parts of the accursed first-creation-Earth, each Vial is to be poured upon. John hears a voice out of Christ's new-creation Temple, into which the good Angels were first brought, as the first faithful, obedient followers of their Head, Lord and Master, there∣into. They are sent out of this Temple, with the seven-fold new-creation Trumpet, given them, by the Lamb, for his service, as ministring spirits and first sounders forth of this his new-creation-voice, to his Saints, who, thereby, become qualified, with them, to preach the everla∣sting Gospel of the Kingdom, or, declare the glad tydings of their Lord's coming in the seven-fold glory of his resurrection-state, to the whole Earth. And, not only so; but, they are also fitted to be joined with the holy Angels, for pouring forth the Vials of God's wrath, on the fixed inhabitants of the Earth, who are enemies to his spiritual, heavenly appearance, and Kingdom. Thus, we find the first Vial, poured forth upon the Earth (Rev. 16. 2.) the second, on the Sea; the third, on the Rivers and Fountains of Water; the fourth, on the Sun; the fifth, on the seat of the Beast; the sixth, on the great River Euphrates; the seventh, on the Air. In these distinct vials and places, are held forth the particular as∣signed judgments, according to the sealed up wrath of God, for eve∣ry part of the sinful, first-creation-Earth. The first Vial is poured out, upon the Earth; not the corrupt, but restored Earth, repaired by Christ, as to their loss, by the fall of Adam; and so, capacitated to answer Christ's heavenly call. He hath, therein, afforded them clear convictions of his new-creation-life, for their everlasting blessedness. But, through wilful refusal of this, and despite thereunto, are they sound guilty of worshipping the Beast, and receiving his mark, which is the peculiar Sin, for which, punished. They voluntarily pay that
homage to the wicked Angel (that's due to God) who hath, by his own act, made himself the mystical Beast, here meant, in his self-cho∣sen earthly sensual spirit, by a fixed unchangeable enmity to God, and his heavenly creature-spirit, rendred devilish. The same, fixed in by Man, with its wisdom, and all its first-creation excellencies, is devilish, also; Jam. 3. 15. This renders a Man, a Devil, Christ called Judas, so. One of you is a Devil; Joh. 6. 70. The changeably evil spirit of Man, baptiz'd and transform'd by the unchangeably evil spirit of the Devil, into unchangeable union with him, in enmity to God, ren∣ders man a Devil. If baptiz'd into the unchangeably righteous spirit of Christ, man becomes, with Abraham, the unchangeable friend, lover, and beloved of God. The cleansed mystical house, or enlightned, righteous natural man, receiving the evil angelical spirit, is, thereby, fixed in enmity to God. In this case, Christ found and asserted the professing righteous Jews, with their teachers, to be. Ye are of your Father, the Devil; so far were they from being the true spiritual seed and Children of Abraham, or of God, as they flattered and asserted themselves, to be. This end or last state, is worse than their first, in the corrupt nature, as born dead in Sin, but not unchangeably so; as now they are. Mat. 12. 43,-45. Joh. 8. 38,-44. Such incorrigible, wilful Sinners against the Holy Ghost, and its convincing spiritual light, set up in their consciences, will fall under the sad effects of the pour∣ing fourth of the first Vial of God's Wrath, a noisome, grievous sore, an∣swering those sad curses, threatned (Deut. 29.) for wilful disobedi∣ence to God's Law, when convinced of that state of everlasting righ∣teousness and eternal life, that is (in the true spiritual, and full comprehensive significancy of it) shew'd and offered to them; After, such conviction and experience, as by fleshly Israelites, through spiri∣tual light, confessed (Jos. 24.) as having been, by the mighty hand of God, brought out of Egypt, or the corrupt spirit of nature, and pos∣sessed of the refined state thereof, figured by literal Canaan; to turn, after all this work of the true God, in and upon them, to strange Gods, evil Angels, and receive Satan's indeleble character and mark, even his spirit of unchangeable enmity to God, renders their disease incure∣able and remediless. Their sin is unpardonable. For, a more excel∣lent state of true life and everlasting blessedness was set before them, wherein to serve and enjoy God, for ever. And, after all their apo∣stacy and turning from that spiritual light, by which shewed it, shall
the said light be set up, a fresh, in them, in wrath, to be a witness for God, and against themselves, in their own consciences, that ever∣lasting condemnation to signal and endless punishment, is but such re∣compence of their error and wilful disobedience, as is meet, and most just. The second vial is poured on the Sea, which import's the corrupt spi∣rit of nature, fixed in, and so, as a raging Sea, continually, foam∣ing, and casting up mire and filth; Esay. 57. 20. They give them∣selves up to vile affections, with literal Sodom, and God, in judg∣ment, gives them up, to take and run their course therein, which brings them to the same just recompence of their error, the vengeance of eternal fire; Jude 7. In such a state and course of gross wickedness, men cannot, on any pretence, look for peace, with God, after con∣viction, as to the means for cleansing them from such filth of Flesh. They love their gross darkness and bondage, so as disdainfully to re∣ject Christ's enlightning, cleansing and restoring gifts. The wrath poured on this Sea, turns it into blood, so that every living Soul, that will not come out of that Sea-state, becomes dead. The horrid ugli∣ness and deformity of this corrupt Spirit of nature, will, by the bright light of this preparatory day, be so discovered, as not to be able to stand before the same. Their hearts, with Nabal, from the weight of their own guilt, now convincingly set before them, will sink and die within them. The Plague, by pouring forth the third Vial, lights on the Rivers and Fountains of Water, turning them into Blood. These Rivers and Foun∣tains of Water, may fitly represent that cleansed earthly state and par∣ty of Men, which have not yet received the spirit of the Devil, as their unchangeable mark; but, are, in God's way of trial, brought to the test, under the cross, which requires the turning of that righteous natural state, though received from Christ himself, into blood, by way of sacrifice, in exchange for Christ's new-creation spirit and life, in which to enjoy an unchangeable union with him, as their spiritual Lord and Husband. If now, with Zipporah, they cry out of Christ, as a bloody Husband, for requiring them to yeild to his spiritual Cir∣cumcision, for cutting off, even holy Flesh, righteous nature; and so absolutely reject him, in his spiritual life; the Vial of his just wrath will turn that very cleansed natural state, into blood and death, in a way of final judgment on them. In the voice of the Angel, that pours
forth wrath on these Waters, is included the voice of the convinced con∣sciences of these Sinners against their own Souls, acknowledging God righteous, in thus judging them (Rev. 16. 5.) for their envious, mur∣muring mind, against his new-creature-spirit; for which, they have spilt the blood of his Saints and Prophets. So, are worthy to have blood given them to drink; ver. 6. The fourth Vial is poured forth upon the Sun, with power given the Angel, thereby, to scorch men as with fire. On this, they blaspheme God, and repent not, to give him the glory. The Sun, here, may fitly signify the utmost spiritual height, attainable in first-creaton-life. This, received from Christ, in a way of love and trial; and then, retained and used in a deceitful counterfeiting Christ's spiritual state, thereby shewed and offered, is such an unpardonable offence, as de∣serves a scorching with unquenchable Fire, by the kindling of God's wrath, upon them. And, under this torment, they discover their unchangeable enmity to God, in blaspheming that new-creature name of Christ, that has power over these Plagues, not repenting, to give him glory. The like sad effect we find on the pouring forth of the fifth Vial, on the seat of the beast, rendring his Kingdom full of darkness. They gnawed their Tongues, for pain, blasphemed God, and repented not of their deeds. By the seat of the beast, must not be understood the cor∣rupt principle of nature, under the prevailing influence of the Devil, carried into all manner of gross abominations, filth of Flesh. For, in this seat or throne of rule, is he discoverable by the common light of reason, in all mankind. The invisible place or seat of this evil ange∣lical Beast, is that heavenly place, or appearance, by which, he pra∣ctises all sorts of spiritual wickedness, in and upon the most refined and hightned principles of nature, as made serviceable to his most dange∣rous design, against the new-creation-spirit of Christ. In reference to this, as a peculiar favour to John, the Angel shews him this great wonder and mystery of iniquity, on which, the seat of this Beast is e∣stablished, together with the punishment thereof. The new-creation-spirit, in Angels and Saints, can discover all these depths and devices of Satan. For this, was beloved John led into that mystical Wilderness, where he was shewed that Whore or Woman, that, in a yet, greater depth of deceit, removed from the waters of cleansed nature, to the scarlet-coloured beast, decked with precious stones, having a golden cup in her
hand, &c. Rev. 17. 1,-7. This Whore, on the scarlet Beast, is the evil angelical nature, transforming itself into the highest appearance of the spiritual, resurrection-state, in Angels and Men. The natural state in both, is figured by the Woman, as the spiritual new-creation-state, by the Man, which, this Woman would personate, with design to make the highest opposition thereunto. In this posture, do evil An∣gels and Men, the Whore and Beast, come in their distinct natures, to practise their utmost wickedness, against Christ, and commit all sorts of spiritual whoredoms amongst themselves. All this, when this Whore comes to be judged (in the pouring forth wrath, on this seat of the Beast) shall be found out, and wicked Angels and Men, thereby, detected, in their highest and most secret uncleannesses, to∣gether. The evil Angel will fill the golden cup of refined nature in men, with his angelical excellencies, and, endeavour, in Christ's preparatory dispensation, to make the whole Earth drunk therewith. In these last days, will this woman deck her self, with more subtilty than ever, in the attire of an Harlot, signified by the Gold, Silver, and pre∣cious Stones, with which, then to be adorned. And, by riding on her humane Beast, is held forth the willingness of evil men, to serve the said mystical Woman, or evil Angel, in all her designs. Both will be arrayed with the highest natural, first-creation-excellencies, trans∣formed into the likeness of the second, the forbidden linsy-woolsy garment, presumptuously put on, by both, to commit all sorts of spi∣ritual fornication and whoredom, together, against the true spiritual Lord and Husband of blessed Angels and Saints. In stead of yeilding obedience to his command, in parting with the fading life and glory of their fleshly natural state, in exchange for his unchangeable new-creature spirit and life, they retain and deck the former, with the ap∣pearance thereof, on purpose, to give the utmost shock of oppositi∣on, to it. This will ripen them, for that full Vial of Wrath, that's to be poured upon them, as their just recompence. In this preparato∣ry day, every sort of spiritual wickedness shall be found out, and judged, answerable to the measure of light, received, and sinned a∣gainst. All of them will be found such, as, from wilful enmity to Christ's new-creation-spirit, have made themselves so drunk, by taking in the wine of the first, from the old Serpent, as from thence, to be∣come drunk with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, for own∣ing his new name, life, and words thereof. So, do they make up
Babylon in a mystery, guilty of the deepest and most criminal spiritual idolatries and uncleanness, little before, taken notice of, by spiritual Saints themselves; who, with John (when by this angelical ministry, made to see the twofold mysterious name of this Woman and Beast) will be astonish'd, and greatly wonder at so foul a spirit, under such fair appearances. For, then will they see high blasphemies, spiritual fornications and idolatries, committed by evil Angels and Men, in exact imitation of the chaste wedlock-union of Christ and his Saints. This highest sort of mysterious wickedness, the Devil has kept in re∣serve, till these last days, by the most exquisite counterfeitings of the heavenly, resurrection-state of Christ and Saints. This twofold work, then, the finding out and judging the most secret spiritual wicked∣nesses of evil Angels and Men, is to be the great business of the ange∣lical ministry, preparatory to our Lord's coming. In the beginning of it, shall they waken up and open the spiritual senses of Saints, to see the mystical name (and nature) of the Woman and Beast; and, hereby, fit them to be joyned with themselves, before the end of their dispensation, for the full detecting and judging the Whore and seat of the Beast. When the new-creation-voice of Christ, shall, by blessed Angels and Saints, be harmoniously sounded forth, not only the se∣cret spiritual evil of every one shall be found out, but the wrath due to all, guilty thereof, signally poured forth, upon them. And, hereby also, will the just and irrevocable judgment of God be set up in the conscience of the Whore and universal Kingdom of the Beast. This is signified by that fall of mystical Babylon, which will be very great. This fall will be effected by the powerful light of this prepa∣ratory day, shining forth in blessed Angels and Saints, to the laying flat, all opposers, with all their subtilties and disguises. This, by such an irresistable discovery of the inward mind of the Woman and Beast, as to make their evil union appear, without any shelter, pretence, or cover. And so, both, therein will be found to make up the great mystical Babylon, as incorporated together, the hold of every unclean spirit, and cage of every foul and hateful bird (Rev. 18. 2.) whatever fair and religious shews, they have, hitherto, bin covered with. The light of this preparatory dispensation, will be also the mystical fire in and upon this Whore (mystical Babylon) by which, she is to be burnt. This fire, will the Lord irresistibly kindle, in and upon his implacable enemies, so as to render their place or state, perpetual deso∣lations.
Hereby, will be blasted, all the fruits of their natural state, at best, after which their Souls have inordinately lusted, so as wilfully to disdain the new-creation-state and spiritual fruits thereof. So, as their just punishment, all those things of their natural state, which, in their day and season, were good, shall depart from them, and they shall, no longer, find any pleasure in them. Plagues and punishments shall come thick upon them, to the full; even spiritual death and famine, as the unchangeable portion of all such offenders. When God shall begin to deal thus, with those mystical merchants of the Earth (that have bin, thus, traffiquing in the mercinary principles of the Law, set up by them, in a known opposition to the Gospel) will the said judgments be executed upon them. But, such as have a seed of true Saintship, though they have bin involved in the same error, for a season (ig∣norantly, as Paul, once) by the new-creation-voice of Christ, soun∣ded by Angels and ripen'd Saints, will they be waken'd up into the exercise of spiritual senses, and come out of the said mystical Babylon, and so, not partake of her Plagues. They shall, then, stand for off from her, in a holy admiration at their own deliverance, and wonder to see her so great riches, in a moment, brought to nothing. All this shall hap∣pen, on the opening of the sealed up judgments, for the evil Angels and their serpentine seed amongst Men (their associates and atten∣dants) and the pouring forth of the Vial of wrath upon them, which they have bin filling up, by their wicked practices. And, hereupon, will the Kingdom of the Beast be full of darkness. For, himself and sub∣jects will be, all, discovered in their unchangeably black, dark na∣tures and principles, as fixed in unchangeable enmity to God and his new-creation-spirit of light and truth. So, will they be able, no longer, to hide themselves, or deceive others, by their crafty, sinful practices, as, before, they have. And, this beginning judgment on them, as a degree of God's unchangeable wrath, will make them gnaw their Tongues for pain. And, though forced to see the punishment, just, will they retain an implacable enmity to the hand that once of∣fered to do them good; implied, in their blaspheming the God of Hea∣ven, for their incureable spiritual sores; and, not, in the least, repenting of the evils, that brought them. The sixth Vial (towards the compleating the just judgments of God, on every part of the first-creation, as set up against the second) is pou∣red on the great River, Euphrates. This, with the consequents, we
find; Rev. 16. 12,-16. This River, in Scripture, holds forth the first-creation-spirit, as having had its allotted season, to be owned of God, as beautiful, in the right use thereof, on a convincing sight, therein, given, of the better thing and state, by God provided for, and offered to them. In order to this, they find, that by obedience to the law of the Cross, God, in love, requires, from them, that that River be dryed up. Whoever refuse to submit to the dispensation, that is to do this; the same thing will be done by the same hand, in displeasure, pouring out this Vial of wrath, which will blast and dry up the most flourishing streams of this great River, that must univer∣sally be dried away, and brought into a state of mystical death, in all Men, good and bad. In a more remarkable manner than ever be∣fore, is this to be the work of the preparatory dispensation, to make way for the coming of the spiritual Kings of the East, Christ and his choice Saints, to raign on the Earth; Rev. 5. 10. The glorious Sun of everlasting righteousness, will fill the whole Earth, with his bright rays and beams, when he personally shines forth. Then, all, in the first creation, that shall not willingly disappear, as to their own fading life and glory (which is the due homage to his greater and everlasting) shall have Vials of wrath poured on them, so as signally to blast and dry up all their life and fruits. And, if when they see and feel this, as God's just dealing with the first-creation-state, they do, in a wil∣ful enmity to the light of the day, keep up the same, still, as their place of rest and safety, then shall all their strength and labour there∣in, come to nothing. All their sowing in and to the flesh, shall afford them no other fruit to reap, but corruption. Their most beautiful Garments, wrought and woven in that spirit, shall not warm or secure them. The most curious webs, spun and made up, therein, shall, by the light of this day, be discovered insufficient to cover them. Their best works are iniquity; Esay 56. 6. The changeable nature of work, principle, and worker will be manifested. The strength, therefore, and vigour of all, will be then more signally dried up, than ever be∣fore. And, then shall God's twofold great design be evident, for taking down the first-creation-building, and setting up the second, in a visibility. The former is called Man's House, the latter Gods. On what pretence soever, then, any shall, in that day, presume to build or establish their own house, in opposition to God's, they will be blasted and disappointed. At that time, Angel or Man, that shall lay
anew the foundation of the old building (that's then to be pull'd down and laid wast) will find themselves under the curse (threatned on the rebuilders of demolished Jerico) and be totally frustrated, as to their vain attempt, and rebellious design, as they at Babel, for setting up the first-creation-principle, in a towring and gigantick height, to war against God and the second, or Heaven itself. God will command the Heaven to with-hold its dew; and the Earth, her fruits, suspending and withdrawing the first-covenant-presence and fructifying influence of Christ, as a fleshly Bridegroom, formerly, for a season, afforded them. By the new-creation-voice of Christ, all the first World and glory thereof, shall be (as declared) dealt with, as grass and, all its fruits blasted and withered, by the spirit of the Lord; Esay 40. 6, 7. Their (holy) Flesh shall consume away, while they stand upon their Feet; their Eyes, in their holes; and Tongues, in their Mouth; Zech. 14. 12. All this shews the vanity and misery of Man, as endeavouring to keep up the whole, or any part of his make, in single first-creation-life, which is but a fading flower, at best. For, if not obediently surrendred, and chang'd for what is spiritual and unchangeable, the sentence of death passed on it, in all, will be executed, in final displeasure on the wil∣ful resisters thereof. And, when this Euphrates is dried up, in wrath (So as no longer to cover the deceitful workings of Angel or Man, in the form, against the power of godliness and righteousness of God) John saw three unclean spirits, like Frogs, come out of the mouths of the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, that is, evil Angels and Men that are of their party, in worldly States and Churches, shall then be seen and known, in those shapes and births, in which, they have, till then, lain hid, by a sinful transforming of themselves into the likeness of Christ and his Apostles, Prophets, and Saints. By the light of this day, will they be detected; and so, lose all their former credit and authority. Therefore, though still working false Miracles or lying won∣ders, in a spirit of falshood to deceive, they shall prevail only on such Men, as are ready to be made unchangeable in their evil minds, whom the Devil will then gather together, even the Kings and chief in∣habitants of his wicked earth, against the great day of God Almighty, or, of Christ's personal presence. And, herein, will he be permitted, till by Christ's own sentence, sent into a chained up-state, or place. But, in all this, have we seen the opening of the Seals and pouring forth of the Vials, only in their invisible operations, for laying open
all sorts of natural principles, and the secret hypocrisy and enmity, that is the old leaven, which hath sowred and corrupted the whole lump of man's natural being. The hidden works of dishonesty and darkness, herein wrought, shall now be discovered and proclaimed, as if done on the house top, visible to all. And all this, yet, is but a fore-running report, to the full punishment, from Christ's own pre∣sence, to be inflicted on such incorrigible Sinners. This report will smite them with raging madness. The visible effects of the Seals and Vials, open'd and pour'd forth, will shew how far this preparatory day is to extend, in its influence on the material parts of this World. As the destruction of the former World, was a requisite punishment of the Inhabitants, by Water; will the super-abounding iniquity of this, expose it to an universal destruction, by Fire; 2 Pet. 3. 6, 7. The water-destruction pointed out the Sin of that day, under that dispensation, an abuse of the restor'd natural state, as rather turn'd into pollution, then rightly used, as a passage into the spiritual. So, what God gave as a blessing to them, they turned into a judgment. So, the water-punishment, declared the nature of their Sin. The present World is guilty of the same wilful abuse of renewed natural principles, and also spiritual enlightning gifts, by which, the state of true life and salvation is now brought so near, through our ascended nature, in Christ's person, as to give remarkable tasts there∣of (Heb. 6. 4, 5.) even to the natural principle. Yet, it is too ge∣nerally refused, or at least, not diligently hearkened unto and heeded, in this present age. The nature of this sort of wilful offences, fits the invisible parts of this World, for a spiritual, everlasting burn∣ing of wrath. And, as the compleating of this punishment, must this World pass through such a material burning, as will become the certain distruction of it. Of this twofold burning, for spiritual as well as literal Sodomy, all defilement and unclean practices, in Spirit, as well as Body (which the World, in this last time, will be more filled with, than ever, and so ripen'd for judgment) we find the Sin and Punishment of literal Sodom, a presaging type. The sin and punishment, in this last, and most Sodomitish age of the World, is pointed out; Jude 7. Angels, for mystical Sodomy, in an unclean spiritual union together; and literal Sodomites, as also mystical, a∣mong Men, going after strange, evil angelical Spirits, as false Christ's and Gods, as well as strange flesh, suffered the twofold vengeance of eter∣nal
Fire, or, were made to feel the twofold operations of it, out∣ward and inward, for a total and everlasting destruction of them. So will the Fire, on this Sodomitish world, abounding in all sorts of iniquity, spiritual and fleshly, be inwardly kindled in every guilty conscience; and seconded, with an outward burning up of the cor∣rupt World, with the sinful fashions and constitutions of it, civil or religious, melting down and causing all, to pass away, as also the ma∣terial parts thereof. For, the Vials, in this dispensation of wrath, are not only to be poured on the Earth, Sea, and Rivers, &c. my∣stically, but also literally understood. This will cause the Heaven and Earth, in every consideration thereof, as singly natural, and of the first-creation sort, to melt, and pass away, as not able, any lon∣ger, in the corrupt or righteous spirit and principles thereof, to bear up, or stand before the bright light and burning of this preparatory day of the Lord. The evil policies and practices, with the forms of religious fashions of the first-creation Heaven, or first-covenant Churches, will render both, fit fuel for the Fire of this day. So, e∣very part of this old-creation-Sodom shall be destroyed. But, before this, as in the type, will true Saints, with Lot, be secured by ange∣lical hands, as of the great family of Christ's heavenly or earthly glorified members. The Angels, that have the command of this two∣fold Fire, in its inward and cutward operations, shall, in dispersing it, fulfil the commands of Christ. The seventh Angel pours out his Vial (upon or) into the Air; Rev. 16. 17. Air is the first-creation-spirit, in all the parts and branches thereof, whereby, the Devil, from first to last, has come forth, in his several shapes and various ways, to fight, against the new-creation-spirit of Christ. This Air (as by him corrupted, through his pra∣ctice of all sorts of wickedness, by word, spirit, and letter) comes now, in the comprehensive principle thereof, to receive its appointed and prepared just and righteous judgment, pronounced and poured forth by the seventh Angel, Christ himself, as head of Angels, in his un∣vailed new-creation life and Spirit. On this, comes a loud and power∣ful voice from the heavenly temple and throne; even the glorious new-creation-building, the house and throne, in and on which the Medi∣ator's divinity dwells and sits. In our exalted nature, in which, im∣mediate head to Angels and Saints, will he sound forth the very mind of his infinite divinity, and new-creature temple, as in personal uni∣on
with both. And, from this eminent heighth, will he pour forth this Vial of final wrath, on the whole first-creation air or spirit, or An∣gels and Men, as fixed therein, in unchangeable enmity to God and the second. In the said almighty divine and irresistibly mighty new-creature-authority and power, he says, it is done (Rev. 16. 17.) that is, the destruction of all his unchangeable enemies, is finished. This is implied in the effects and dreadful consequents of this voice, upon them; voices, thunders, lightnings, and a great earthquake, such as ne∣ver was, before, seen, or felt. This is the voice, that will, once more, shake, not the Earth only, but also Heaven (Heb. 12. 26, 27.) so as to shake all earthly foundations, and the most spiritualliz'd, heavenly buildings, set thereon. This voice, and the judgment, therein, pro∣nounced and executed, will leave nothing remaining of beauty and glory, that's but of a single, changeable, earthly nature. The voice of Christ, in and by the ministry of Angels, in giving the Law, declar'd its heavenly authority then, by shaking the Earth. But, this con∣cluding gospel-voice will discover and shake all first-creation-life (in the most spiritual dress, and counterfeit imitation of the second, it can appear or come forth in) irresistibly demonstrating the perishable nature thereof. By this voice, all counterfeit heavenly spiritual buildings, whose foundations are found earthly and mutable, will be tumbled down, and the sandy foundation discovered. Ezek. 13. 14. All disguises, put upon earthly principles, by the sinful, transforming art, skil and subtilty of Satan, shall be taken off, by this voice of Christ, importing the clear, naked manifestation of new-creation light and life, in his own person. For, then will be voices, thunders, lightnings, and such an universal Earthquake, as will utterly over-turn all things, that are but of a mutable nature and can be shaken (however firm they have appeared to Men) that those things that cannot be shaken, even the rocky, new-creation-building or spirit of Christ and things thereof, may take place, come into publick view, and remain, for ever. The voice and appearance of Christ, in this invincible new-Jerusalem-spirit, will be certain and everlasting destruction to all that fight against it; Zech. 14. 12. This voice will rent asunder every part of the first-creation building, however subtly and artificially set up, by the workmanship of the Devil. As the marvellous and ama∣zing effects of the pouring forth of this seventh and concluding Vial of wrath, on the said Air, or first-creation-spirit (kept up, in enmity
to God and the second, by evil Angels and Men) will it be taken to task, and dealt with, root and branch, to the not only shaking but utter ruine and downfal of the whole Fabrick, with all its sinful trans∣formations into a counterfeit spirituality, by which, they have en∣deavoured to fortify and strengthen themselves, to make the greatest and highest opposition, against the new-creation-life, and the second coming, and Kingdom of Christ, therein. For this, the three parts of the great City Babylon, the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, the De∣vil (or whole evil angelical nature) with humane worldly magistra∣cies and ministries, his serpentine seed, amongst men, these are by the just judgment of God, divided, or put into unspeakable confusion and discordancy, through the terrible thundrings of Christ's new-creation voice and presence, upon them all. So, are they made to bear a share in executing his judgments upon one another, as all found in unchangeable enmity to him. This was figured by Moab, Ammon, and mount Seir, or Edomit's, destroying each other, in the valley of Jehoshaphat; 2 Chron. 20. 22,-25. Thus, the whole mystical Babylon will fall flat, as the walls of Jerico, under the weight of their just condemnation, receiving the cup of the Wine of the fierceness of God's wrath; Rev. 16. 19. This Babylon is the whole comprehensive sin∣gle earthly generation and party of evil Angels and Men, who will have nothing to pretend, as to God's omitting any ways or means, for the doing of them, good. In Israel's case, he gives an account of the method of his proceedings with all his Creatures, Angels and Men, in reference to their everlasting happiness; Esay 5. 4. All that set up for themselves, in the first-creation-spirit, against the second, instead of good kindly fruits, bring forth wild Grapes, from a root of bitterness and known enmity to him. In this, do they practise all sorts of my∣stical uncleanness, idolatry, and fornication. And as we have seen the ruine of the old World or first-creation (as exalted against the second) gradually carried on (as to the judg∣ments of God on the several parts thereof, and at length, upon the whole, to their total and irreparable ruin) in this preparatory dis∣pensation, and close thereof; So, are we to consider what's done, therein, and by, towards the building the new. Christ will send his Angels, for this, with the great sound of their seven-fold Trumpet, to ga∣ther together his Elect, from the four Winds, from one end of Heaven, to the other; Mat. 24. 31. This, by powerfully wakning up the seed of
spiritual life, in all Nations. Then will the Earth bring forth in one day, and a Nation of spiritual Saints shall be born at once (Esay 66. 8.) and this marvellous, wonder-working hand of the Lord, which will so be made known towards his Servants, will be attended with, and made serviceable to the discovery of his indignation towards his Enemies; ver. 14. All the power and strength of the first-creation, shall then, like the Walls of Jerico, fall, without hands, before the clear shining forth of the resurrection-power of Christ, in his Angels and Saints, causing the destruction of the old World, and passing away of all the old things thereof, as an immediate introduction to the building of the new, the new Heavens and Earth, to be set up by Christ's new-crea∣tion-workmanship, wherein he will delight and rejoyce, for ever; ver. 22. & Isa. 65. 17,-19. Come we then, particularly to consider the second general part of the preparatory work, the laying the Foundations of the new World, or preparing the spiritual materials for the new-creation-building and kingdom of Christ. In this second, as well as first part of the work of this preparatory day, will Christ make remarkable use of his An∣gels and ripen'd Saints, fitly qualified, in his spirit, for the same. This second part of the preparatory work seems necessarily to accompany the former. For, if this old World, for the fleshly and spiritual de∣filements thereof, must be destroyed by Fire, mystical and literal, as altogether unfit for Christ's presence, there must be such a new Heaven and Earth, built up, as may be found faultless, before him, fit for his divine and new-creature residence, as answering God's mind, for the exercising of a visible rule and dominion of love, over his Saints and Angels, and also, of good will over all mankind, on the Earth. In order to this, will these preparatory builders, Angels and Saints, powerfully assert Christ's right, to the visible universal rule and mo∣narchy of this World. And then, secondly, will they declare the great advantage of his assuming the same, to all the inhabitants thereof. Both these particulars, shall, in this fore-running dispensa∣tion, be so clearly stated, and asserted with such demonstration, as to prevail on the whole new Earth, not only to own Christ's right of ru∣ling over them, but to express their impatient desires, for the same, as their unexpressible benefit, as well as his unquestionable right. For, hereby, shall they be totally redeemed from the unreasonable bondage under the oppressive governments of this World, and
brought under the peaceable and righteous rule of Christ, so as to perform universal obedience to him, in the new-creation-principles of true love and freedom. In order to this, has Christ reserved a greater effusion of his Spirit, in the latter rain thereof, to be showred down, in this preparatory dispensation to his second coming, than the former, in the primitive day, amounted to. The gradual opera∣tions of this, shall cause all the Kingdoms of this new World, to become the Lord's, and his Christ's. And, every member and subject thereof, shall receive his summons, his Lord's actual coming, being, now, at hand. By the powerful angelical ministry, accompanied with the rain of Christ's risen spirit, shall the true seed of the Kingdom be u∣niversally awaken'd and quicken'd up, as a beginning to that full restitution of all things, to be accomplish'd by Christ's own personal spiritual coming, in his new-creation-temple of our glorified na∣ture. And, herein, will he be beheld, before his visible presence, on Earth, on the opening the doors of that his Temple, in Heaven, by the powerful preaching of his everlasting-Gospel, in the preparatory mini∣stration, so as to make the divine inhabitant thereof, to be seen, through Christ's creature-nature, as with open face. And, this sight shall also have its powerful and peculiar effect, on all the mystical members of Christ, so as to change or transform them into a likeness to him, in his new-creature-spirit, as members of his heavenly or earthly-glorified body. This great charge is committed to the spi∣ritual and powerful preachers of his everlasting Gospel (as, in figure, was shewed Ezekiel, chap. 43. to give his mystical Israelit's, a more clear view, than ever, of the exact form and fashion of the new-creature House and Temple of their great Lord and Head; and that, in such a manner, as to shew them all the ascents and descents, and every coming in and going out thereof, with all the distinct Laws and Ordinances, be∣longing to the same. And, this will beget in them, a like admiration to that of the Queen of Sheba, that came from the utmost corner of her natural Earth, to behold the divine and new-creature glory of her spiritual King Solomon, in the figure thereof. When Saints shall see the divine King, and the glory of his creature-House and Temple, with the subjected ranks of his attendants, in blessed harmony a∣mongst themselves, and universal obedience to him, they will jointly ascribe all the glory of that order, and their blessedness, therein, to the wisdom of their divine Lord, and spiritual King Solomon, the maker
of those spiritual Laws, in observing of which, they shall live, for ever, in perfect blessedness and freedom. The sight of this divine King and creature-Lord, and of the everlasting blessedness of his Ser∣vants and Subjects, is to be given, in this preparatory dispensation. This was exactly figured out, in the setting up of the tabernacle or worldly Sanctuary, before Israel's entring Ganaan, the type of this visible spiritual Kingdom of Christ. For, in this preparatory day, must be proved and fitted all sorts of materials, needful to the setting up of Christ's visible Kingdom, as then, for Moses his Tabernacle. And, the means, as there, must be the free-will-offerings of the People. The natural man, spirit, life or state, at best, in the persons of Saints, is their free-will-offerings, figured by the Israelit's literal. So, by a happy transformation or translation into the spiritual life of Christ, become their whole persons, at length, true lively Stones in his new-creation-Sanctuary, figured by the literal 1 Pet. 2. 5. This comes to pass, and this come they to, by being, with Paul, obedient to the heavenly vision, or discovery of Christ's spiritual, heavenly life of truth, for which, made willing, in this day of his power (the power∣ful, angelical preaching the everlasting Gospel) to part with, the but earthly, natural, fleshly life of their own spirit or nature, even with the freedom and life of their own wills, as their true free-will-offer∣ings to God, under the kindlings and in the same mystical fire, Christ himself kindled on the spirit of our nature, at best, in his own very person. To this, will Saints be induced, by the Angels preaching the everlasting Gospel-life of Christ to them, presenting the riches and fulness of his new-creature-nature, to the inward senses of his heavenly and earthly glorified spiritual Seed. This will, not only, fill them with unspeakable joy, but, powerfully convince all unpre∣judiced reasonable men, of the worship, due to Christ from all. Then shall the new-creature Temple in Christ (figured by Solomon's, the pattern for which, was received from the true temple-spirit; 1 Chron. 28. 12.) be so open'd, as, not only, to give a view of the divine inhabitant thereof, to be worshipped; but, allow and war∣rant a free access, and safe approach to the divine Majesty. For, Christ is both the house and builder thereof, the presenter also of Saints Prayers, unto God most high. And, for the said House sake, will all be accepted, according to promise; even all persons and per∣formances, found to be done in the spirit of the House, true Sanctu∣ary-light
and, life: Then, shall the seed of the Kingdom be qualified in their awaken'd spiritual senses, both to look into and read, with delight and comfort, the law of God's divine mind and will, engra∣ven in Christ's new-creature-nature, or, spirit of truth, which is the living Book, or, word of God, in and by which, is given the vision of the divine glory, for their everlasting blessedness; and also, the whole of his requirings from them, in reference thereunto. The powerful preaching or opening all this to them, will, in a high degree, priviledg them, both to see and do the whole will of God. Now, in order to such a Gospel-preaching, as shall be the effectual means of bringing such great and glorious things to pass, the preachers will be endowed with that universal new-creature-tongue, and under∣standing, which comprehends all other tongues and knowledg. The confusion of languages at Babel, as to the words of man's wisdom, in his own spirit, nature and way, will be no obstruction to this uni∣versal Gospel-preaching to all Nations, in the words of God's wisdom, or true new-creature-spirit of prophecy. A demonstration hereof, was given by the said Spirit, in the Apostles. They could make themselves understood by people of various Languages; Act. 2. 4,—11. In this universal new-creation-tongue, will the angelical prea∣chers raise the seed of first-born-Saints, out of their Grave, or cruci∣fied nature, into such a heavenly spiritual life, as will capacitate and qualify them to judg the highest elect angels, as exalted into a life, light, and discerning, above them. Yet, till then, they receive in∣struction from spiritual Angels, as their teachers and guardians; Heb. 1. 14. The next service of Love, these angelical preachers will per∣form, is, to the earthly seed of spiritual Saints, to whom, under Christ, they are, ever to be the instructing and nursing Parents, ha∣ving received from Christ, the highest earthly glorified wisdom, in the highest conjunction with, yet, subjection to the wisdom of the heavenly creature-spirit, which is above it, and them. So, will An∣gels be subjected rulers, under Christ, over his first-resurrection-Saints, in a glorified earthly spiritual life. Thirdly, in their natural make, distinct from both the former qualifications, are the holy Angels fit∣ted to preach the highest single natural wisdom, to the rational righ∣teous man, in the largest and most extensive intuitive way of com∣munication, that principle, in Man, is capable of receiving. These angelical Ministers, will, also, declare the right use, Men are to make
of such instruction, by growing out of this lowest degree of Christ's obedient Subjects, that's but a changeable state, into an everlasting blessed state of spiritual life, and true freedom, the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. And, herein, have we seen these spiritual builders, or preachers, fitly qualified to provide all sorts of materials, for the visible Kingdom of Christ. This, by speaking the words of wisdom, suited to every distinct principle and understanding, in those of whom this Kingdom consists, as an adaequate, agreeable knowledg of God, to all. They will declare the good will of God, for restoring to all, in general, the free and orderly exercise of their intellectual, rational, and sensual powers, they were, first, created in. But, all this, in order to their yeilding subjection to a spiritual state, kept in reserve, for them; through which, to be brought into such unchangeable union with Christ's new-creature-spirit, as that is in, with the divine. The very divine Oracles and Laws of God's mind, shall then, as in Moses his time, be committed to these spiritual Ministers, who by their new-creation-tongue, and universal knowledg, will be capacitated for the declaring thereof. They will be furnish'd with the very essentials of all right ministry and magistracy, by which, to lay the sure founda∣tions of both, as to spirituals and civils, on which the visible King∣dom of Christ, must be built. Hereby, will the everlasting benefit of the government in both, become so evident, as irresistibly to pre∣vail, not only with awaken'd spiritual Saints, but enlightned and re∣formed natural Men, for their full consenting to the same. So, without the least force or compulsion, the Nations of this new World, shall, in an abundant manner, flow in, unto the Lord (volun∣tarily yeilding a ready subjection to Christ's angelical preachers) so as to shew the same, not to proceed from fear, but, for conscience-sake. And, Christ shall have the whole glory of all. For, the holy An∣gels will declare it to be in the power of his spirit, they do all; and that it is his will, alone, is done by them, in all their proparatory work. This work will so influence the Nations of the new World, as to cause the congregation of spiritual Israelites, to bring themselves, as free-will-offerings to Christ, the spiritual materials and subjects, of which his new-creation-Sanctuary and Kingdom, is to consist. So, see we the high honour of these spiritual builders and preachers, in this pre∣paratory day. Their feet will be beautiful and glorious, in this angeli∣cal
mount, or, ministration, proclaiming the glad tydings of their Lord's sudden coming, to reign, visibly, in this World. They will power∣fully and undeniably assert and demonstrate his right, to the universal monarchy of the whole Earth. And having thus seen, in a parallel to Moses his day, how all the materials of Christ's visible Kingdom, are to be provided, the mystical Stones, hewed, squared, and polish∣ed, for compleating the new-building; we are next, to consider, by way of parallel, also, the view, that from an angelical hand and glory, is to be given, of the Throne and heavenly Temple of Christ, as was, of Moses his Tabernacle, by the rearing thereof, before fixed in the Land of Canaan. Through the angelical light of the prepara∣tory day, shall the new-creation-Temple of Christ be opened, and ren∣dred much more perspicuous, than ever it hath, yet, been. And this, as a needful qualifying of the new Earth, for so great a glory as will shine forth upon it, by Christ's personal coming, to set up and establish his visible and everlasting Kingdom. In order to this work, let us, yet, more particularly, examine the type, in which, Moses, in every thing, relating to it, received exact direction from God, and was, also, shewed the original patern (of the typical Tabernacle) in that holy Mount, the same with this angelical ministration, that's to reveal Christ, the original and substance of all. According to this angelical sight, through faith, given to Moses, was he to provide e∣very Pin and Board, belonging to the Tabernacle, and answerable to the pattern, joyn and linke every part of the whole, together. And, so became it a lively figure of the compleat new-creature-building in Christ and his comprehensive body, head and members, who must all be, exactly and inseparably joyn'd together, in a spirit of faith and love, by that supply to each other, which must be made by every joint and member, according to the effectual working of the distinct mea∣sure of the new-creature-spirit of the head, in every part, to the increase and perfecting of the whole body, in love; Eph. 4. 16. Of this compleat creature-building, in the invisible existing state of the new-creature-seed, in their head, before Angels or Men, personally and individu∣ally, were; and also, as to be brought forth in his spiritual life, and, inseparably, therein, joyn'd to Christ, their Head, and Parent, in their distinct, subjected places, as lively spiritual Stones in his new-creation-Temple (1 Pet. 2. 5.) was the literal Tabernacle an ap∣pointed type. The foundation of Christ's visible Kingdom is laid, in
this preparatory dispensation, giving Pisgah-sights and views of the glory of Christ, and his true spiritual Land of Promise, before his actu∣al appearance. This will, yet, be more evident, from the spiritual meaning of all things, belonging to Moses his Tabernacle, the type, both of Christ's invisible Being, and visible Kingdom; Exod. 40. There was, first, the Tabernacle itself, then, the tent of the Tabernacle. and, thirdly, the cover of the tent; each, a cover to the other. This done, in the truth and substance, makes the new-creature-house in Christ, a fitted reception for the divine inhabitant, and to blessed Saints and Angels, also. This was also, figured out by the covering Mercy-seat, Ark, and Testimony, the holy things, put within the Tabernacle. So, in the figure, is a compleat view given of the original patern, or creature-building, in the Mediator, of which it was the appointed representation, as to be acknowledg'd in root and branch, fitly figu∣red by the threefold distinct covers on the infinite divinity, which the Tabernacle consisted of. The single fleshly humanity of Christ, was the outermost cover, put upon the twofold immutable being of his creature-nature, his heavenly and earthly glorified spirit, fitly represented by the Tabernacle and tent thereof; and, as so, the fit∣ted receptacle to the most choice, high, and holy things, his eternal power and divinity: and then, also, to those things of his eternal Power and God-head, to wit, his original creature-being or root, the immediate workmanship of his own divinity. In this twofold re∣spect, may he, not unfitly, be represented by the Ark and covering merey-seat. The divine and creature-nature of the Mediatour, in this first and invisible fellowship or conjunction, are the things, as in type, preserv'd in such an invisibility, as not to be immediately look'd upon or seen, by any. Therefore, on purpose, did they lodg and seat themselves in that mystical Tabernacle, the body or visibility of the Mediatour, provided also, by himself, as the new-creature-Tem∣ple and Sanctuary, pitch'd by God, not Man, in which his invisible holy divine and creature-nature, or things, are laid up, out of the im∣mediate sight of any. But, they are to shine forth, through the said blessed Tabernacle, with safety, and to the comfort of every worshipper, and attendant about the said Tabernacle, according to the lesser or greater distance, in which, placed. The true Taber∣nacle, in the capacity of branch; exalted into personal union with the Mediatour, as his divine head and creature-root, is become that Tem∣ple
of God in Heaven, that, by the setting up of Christ's visible King∣dom, is to be open'd, on Earth; Rev. 11. 19. And so, will the com∣pleat personality of the Mediatour, be beheld, in his divine and two∣fold creature-being. Thus, by considering the spiritual meaning of the Type, have we the reason, why the literal Tabernacle, was to consist of so many co∣vers; and also, for the invisibility of the holy things, with which, furnish'd; to wit, as the significant types of the great original, that is, the invisibility of the divine, and also, creature-nature, in its first conjunction with divine; and, so also, of the fulness and variety of his new-creature-nature. For, it was needful, his divine and creature-nature, in their first and invisible conjunction, should wrap up them∣selves in Christ the branch, as in a threefold cover, or Tabernacle; and this, as the only means to give the vision of his divine-nature and creature-root, to Angels and Men. And, having thus considered the distinct parts of the Tabernacle; and holy things, wherewith furnished; consider, next, the form and manner, in which set up, to wit, in a four-square shape, God assign∣ing the distinct places of every Attendant about it, from highest to lowest. At East, or upper-end, were placed Moses, Aaron and his Sons. At each side, and West or lower-end, were the other Levit's placed, according to their respective charges, as chosen into the room of the First-born Israelit's, for the service of the Tabernacle, in a sub∣jected service of love to the high-Priest's office, preparing and slaying the Sacrifices: but, not permitted, immediately to draw nigh to God, by offering the Sacrifices, or touching the Ark and holy things, there∣in. Thus Moses, Aaron and his high-Priest Sons, together with the whole Tribe of Levi, were the first Attendants, in their higher and lower places, round about the literal Tabernacle. Then about the same, and Court thereof, at a greater distance, were the whole Congregati∣on of Israel, placed, in their several Tribes, with a Prince and Head to every Tribe; and other inferiour Rulers, appointed (according to Je∣thro's advice, approved by God) over thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. Thus were the Attendants of the Tabernacle, compleated, in a spiritual and civil capacity. The first, were offering Priests and mi∣nistring Levit's; the other, chief and subordinate Rulers, with sub∣jected obeyers; all which, are significant Types of what will be found in the original, when made visible; as the house or Temple, shew'd Eze∣kiel;
and, new-Jerusalem City shew'd John, do evidence. In every cir∣cumstance, will be found such exact proportion and agreement, as to manifest, all in the litteral Tabernacle, harmonious figures of Christ's new-creature building, that's to be made visible, in his Kingdom, on earth, as possessing the throne of his Father, in heaven. This visible Kingdom is charactred by the coming down of the new Jerusalem, out of heaven, and setting up the Tabernacle of God, amongst men; both, four-square, and walled about, with the respective Attendants, as the litteral. The new Jerusalem, John saw, to have a wall great and high, &c. Rev. 21. 12. And, as the outward form of the spiritual City and Taberna∣cle, was exactly figured out in the litteral, so also the spiritual Atten∣dants thereof, by those of the litteral. The first row of Attendants may fitly represent those in the second resurrection-state of spiritual life; and they were held forth, also, by the twelve foundations of the spiritual City, on which, were written the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb, as his highest attendants, in bridal-union with him, as par∣takers of his heavenly creature-name or nature; and therein, under him, rulers over all others. In this second resurrection-state, (amongst these peculiar inhabitants of the third Heaven, a select row of Atten∣dants, immediately surrounding the house or throne) will be found, also, a distinction of place and offices, as in the first row, about the litteral Tabernacle. One star, in the firmament of this third Heaven, will differ from another in glory, as inheriting an elder or younger bro∣ther's portion therein. Though, with Joseph and Benjamin, types thereof, they be all born of the same Mother, as well as Father, par∣taking (according to their appointed measur's) of the second resur∣rection-spirit; yet, in the division of the spiritual, figured in that of the litteral land of Promise, the peculiarly beloved Joseph, must have a double portion, not only, to the other Sons of Jacob, not admitted any place in this first row of Attendants; but, also, to the spiritual youn∣ger Brother, Benjamin, who is also in that first row. This was fitly represented by the distinct offices and scituation of Aaron and his priestly Sons, with other inferiour Levit's, about the Tabernacle. The highest in this first order of Saints, are the bride, the Lambs wife, pos∣sessed of the full blessing of Christ's new-creature-spirit, by which, priviledg'd to enter within the first vail of the new-creation Sanctua∣ry, Christ's earthly glorified Spirit, so as to behold the most holy things, therein, even the divine glory, as shining through the pure,
transparent, heavenly, creature-face, nature, or spirit of their Lord and Husband. The dignity of these high Priests, unto God (in a pe∣culiar marriage-union with Christ, in his heavenly creature-spirit) is, to be placed at upper end of the new-creature Tabernacle of God, as admitted to the nearest and most intimate enjoyment of the divine glory, any meer creature's are capable of. But, inferiour to these, are those members of the second resurrection-state, who also make up the first row of Attendants. These receive but a single portion, in com∣parison of that, the high Priests receive. Yet, in a union of love, with the said Spirit, are they given to the service of the high Priest's office, even to Christ himself and his priestly Sons, as accepted in their inferiour service of love, and placed above all the earthly glorified congregation of spiritual Israel. These, though least and lowest in the first row, or second resurrection-state, are above the highest and greatest in the outward row of Attendants, in but the first resurre∣ction-state, wherein Angels are the chief. This was typed out, in John Baptist; though they be not the Spouse her self, they are faithful Friends, and true lovers of the Bride-groom and Bride, or of the pe∣culiar bridal-union of Christ and their elder-brother Joseph-Saints, so as to find their joy compleated, by hearing the nuptial Voice. This service of love, performed by the younger brother-Saints, in the second re∣surrection, to Christ, and their elder spiritual Brethren, in the high-Priesthood, (the mystical Aaron, and his peculiar Sons) is their per∣fect freedom. And, as recompence of this labour of love, shall they be placed on each side, and at bottom, or West end of the said hea∣venly Tabernacle, in Christ's Person, to the compleating the first row of select Attendants, or making up the foundations of the Wall of the said mystical City, on which, in the single or double portion of the said resurrection-spirit, are written the names of those twelve Apo∣stles, that comprehend the whole second resurrection-state, in distin∣ction from the twelve gates of the City, on which are written the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, or whole innumerable multitude of glori∣fied earthly or first-resurrection Saints, that make up the new Earth, in Christ's new World or Kingdom, figured by the twelve Tribes of Is∣rael. And, as in the second resurrection-state, may seem to be a dif∣fering degree of spiritual light and glory, not only in the other Le∣vit's from the Priests, but from one another also, as their differing dignities in scituation, on the right, left-hand, and lower end of the
Tabernacle, do intimate; so, among first-resurrection-Saints, will be found a differing of one Star from another, in that glory. The variety of Rulers and Governours, and also of Subjects and Obeyers, there∣in, were figured out, in the Princes of the Tribes, and subordinate Rulers, under them, over thousands, hundred's, fifties, and tens. All these, compleat but the outward row of Attendants, about the spiri∣tual Tabernacle. These are represented, as the great and high Wall of the new Jerusalem, and the twelve Princes, or, chief Rulers, are the Angels, at the gates thereof, as under Christ and his heavenly Saints, the highest Rulers over the earthly glorified Wall, or first-resurrecti∣on Saints. And, under them also, are subordinate Rulers over infe∣riour spiritual Saints, in the first resurrection-state. All these, with the lowest subjects therein, make up the outward row of Attendants, about the new-creation Sanctuary. So, the two distinct rows, though parted by the Court, yet joyned in a blessed harmony, make up the compleat attendance of the Tabernacle, in their further or nearer distances, and differing scituations, or places. Thus, the first and se∣cond-resurrection-Saints (though distinguished by the names of new Heaven and new Earth, that abide for ever) do, in an unchangeable union of love, make up the whole blessed society and corporation of the new-Jerusalem City, which, so united, is invincible; for the name of it is, the Lord is there. The two-fold new-creature Spirit of the King thereof, in highest, lowest, and all intermediate members of it, unites them all in an indissoluble bond of love, for ever. In it shall be no more curse. For, nothing of the enmity of the mystical first-creation Heaven and Earth, Angels or Men, shall be found in Christ's new Earth, the lower part of his Kingdom, or meanest of his spiritual Subjects. This was, also, typed by Canaan, and the li∣teral Tabernacle, there erected, as God's resting place. Hence, John saw that Sea (representing the first-creation-Spirit, as fallen into uni∣versal enmity) pass away, as forc'd to give place to the new Heaven and Earth, or two-fold Principles of Christ's new creature-Spirit, on which the new Jerusalem is built. In this City, John, also, saw the Throne of God, and of the Lamb; who (in the shining forth of his divine and creature-name, in personal union) is the light thereof, to all the Inhabitants; the whole heavenly and earthly glorified family of Christ; the train, or blessed retinue, shew'd John, belonging to, and standing with the Lamb, on mount Sion; even the Church of the first-born,
and whole assembly of Saints and Angels, that are perfect Spirits, waiting to be establish'd in their place of attendance, about his spiritual Tem∣ple, that's to be open'd by the setting up of his visible Kingdom on Earth. Then, the most inferiour spiritual Subjects in it, shall be cloathed in long white Robes, and have palms in their hands, garments of immuta∣ble righteousness, and palms of victory, as redeemed from the change∣ableness and bondage of the first creation Spirit of nature, and tran∣slated into new creation-principles of true freedom, in which to per∣form an everlasting service of love, to Christ, in their respective pla∣ces, about his Throne and Temple. The vision of all this, was given John. An Angel open'd to his faith, the door of the mystical Tem∣ple of Christ's glorified humanity, in which he beheld a Throne, and (as Stephen) God the Mediator, sitting, and Jesus, his Son and Branch (in our glorified nature) standing at his right hand, as having, in that soveraign exaltation, committed to him, his Father's whole rule and authority, under him, as in personal union with him, sitting on the same Throne. And, round about this Throne, John saw twenty four seats, and, thereon sitting, twenty four Elders, clothed with long white robes, and having crowns of Gold, upon their heads; Rev. 4. 4. By these, are charactered the highest rulers, under Christ himself, to be, by him set up, in his Kingdom. They are second resurrection-Saints, who are the first row of attendants and encompassers of the Tabernacle and Throne, sitting on their distinct seats, according to their Services. The highest seat for the highest of these, is beheld in a subjected di∣stance, not only, from the true Moses, the Mediatour; but from the true Aaron, Jesus, in our glorified nature, the supreme high-Priest and Parent of his highest priestly Sons, that are a select number out of the second resurrection Saints, peculiarly qualified for his marriage-bed, by a twofold resurrection-garment, earthly glorified and hea∣venly; as also, by a double portion of the glorified earthly, and hea∣venly spirit of their Lord, implied in the distinct kinds of holiness, as well as differing measures, by which the high Priests are distinguish'd from other Levites. These highest, priestly Saints, seem peculiarly represented by the twenty four Elders, who, with the younger brothers, in the single portion of the second resurrection-state, make up the first row of attendants, about the Throne or Tabernacle. To all these, John saw given (over and above the white raiment of the earthly glorified congregation, members of the first resurrection) crowns of
Gold, that is, either a double or single portion of Christ's heavenly or second resurrection-life or spirit. And, before this Throne, thus set up, in the third Heaven, encompassed with Spiritual Priests and serving Levites, John saw a Sea of Glass, clear as Christal, and, round about the Throne, four beasts, full of Eyes, before and behind. One, like a Lion; another like a Calf; a third, a Man; a fourth, an Eagle. By these angelical, rational, and sensual faces, or likenesses, may be re∣presented the whole number, in the first-resurrection-state, consisting of angelical Princes, or chief rulers, and of subordinate rational ru∣lers and obeyers. For, in this first-resurrection-state, as well as se∣cond, are mystical Stars, or spiritual Saints, differing from one another, in glory; yet, all, with the whole earthly congregation of spiritual Israelites, Christ's new Earth, make up, but the second, or outward row of attendants about the spiritual Throne, or Tabernacle. And, the clear cristal-Sea (typed out by the Court of the Tabernacle, divi∣ding and distinguishing the first and second resurrection-attendants, through its transparent nature, causing them to behold each other, and in all their various distances, to behold the Throne itself) may fitly represent the glorified humanity of Christ. This is the blessed and proper medium, by which, himself and his first-born-Church, do converse with Angels and Saints, in the first resurrection-state; who, though without the Tabernacle, Court, or cristal Sea before the Throne, yet, through the union of these two distinct spiritual states and principles, in Christ, do all, with unspeakable joy, behold the Throne of God, the Lamb, and also Bride, the Lamb's Wife. And so, do all live, in an absolute, unchangeable obedience to Christ, and perfect union of love with his peculiar spouse, and their elder-brother-Saints. This appears, by the blessed harmony of these first and second resurrection-Saints, attending at several distances, about the Throne, signified by twenty four Elders, and four Beasts, all falling down toge∣ther, before the Throne of God and the Lamb, in an unanimous discharge of the duty of their respective places, crying, day and night, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, is, and is to come. These two distinct communities of Saints and Angels, ascribe everlasting Glory, Honour and Power, to God and the Lamb, who created all things, as their due praise, for their immortal and glorified beings. The last circumstance, in the parallel between the literal and my∣stical Sanctuary, or new-Jerusalem City, is this. No fleshly defiled
persons were to enter the former: no fleshly or spiritually defiled, the latter. The touching a dead Soul, is, in mystery and truth, such a touching the first-creation-spirit and life of nature (through enmity to God, become a dead, unclean thing) as imports a love to, and u∣nion therewith. This touch, renders men unclean, on which, they are to be cast out of the spiritual Camp and Kingdom of Christ. Such mystical Dogs, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Murderers, and Lyars (as from wilful hatred to Christ's new-creature-spirit of truth, chuse their own spirit of lyes and falshood) are for ever, to be excluded out of Christ's new-Jerusalem City, or Kingdom. In this twofold work, of leading men to Christ, the true door of entrance, and keeping out all that climb up some other way, will Christ use his Angels, typed by the twelve Princes of the Tribes. They then, as the literal Princes, must number the true subjects of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, for his service, in order to take their appointed places, in the same. In dis∣charge of this Office, will they rear up the Tabernacle, as Moses, in the very way of Israel's travelling into Canaan. This will they do, in their preparatory work, by giving the angelical sights and views of Christ's Kingdom, before its visible establishment, by his own pre∣sence. This, in a like exactness as in the type, where nothing was wanting, as to the building or attendants thereof, at its first rearing, in the Wilderness; Exod. 40. The form of the House, or City, with the several places of the members or attendants thereof, was, from the like angelical hand, given Ezekiel and John, as also, all the Laws and Ordinances, to be observed by the attendants, in their several stations. All this will they do, as a preparing the way to their spi∣ritual Lord's coming; and fitting of the new World, for such a de∣scending of the holy City, out of Heaven, upon it, as will be the visible setting up of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, in it; even, by his visible coming with all his Saints, according to Enoch's prophecy; Jude 14. These are to take their places, in his visible Kingdom, as the inward or outward rows of attendants, about his Throne. This, according∣ly as they are found to be the seed of the Kingdom, quicken'd and rai∣sed by the said preparatory dispensation, into the first or second re∣surrection-life, though yet remaining in the vile body. For, they are fitted, on Christ's personal call of them, to be immediately chang'd into their glorified bodies, without death. This, by Christ's own sound∣ing forth the trump of God; 1 Thess. 4. 16, 17. 1 Cor. 15. 51, 52. Then
shall death be swallowed up into victory, in all the members of Christ, written in his new creature book of Life, from everlasting. This will be the happy conclusion of that preparatory day, when Saints shall shine forth, in more brightness, than ever, in any former-dis∣pensation. Yet will this day be but as night, to the Sun-rise of Christ's personal presence. But yet, in the evening of this prepara∣tory-day, it shall be light, by the approach of that Sun, that shall ne∣ver go down, more. Zech. 14. 7. Then will the Angels do, as the Angel that finish'd his wrastling-work with Jacob, and found him, on the utmost trial, an heir of everlasting Salvation; and, as so, secu∣red, by the weakning of his nature, under the Cross. When he had thus prepared him, for the breaking forth of the new-creation-day upon him, he does, in the same faithfulness to his master, say to him, let me go, that the glorious day of my Lord may break forth, whose ap∣pearing is my lawful discharge (as to my preparatory service there∣unto) by his yet far greater light. The holy Angels, John saw, at the twelve Gates of the new Jorusalem, rejoyce with thanksgiving, in their being imploy'd by Christ, for the good of the elect seed of men, in general; yea, and for those select spouses, and peculiar heavenly friends of Christ, heirs of a higher state of Salvation, than themselves. All of them, while but in the childish, natural state of Servants, do need the instruction and conduct of these ministring Spirits, for the safe bringing of them to the doors of the new-creation-City, by com∣municating their visions thereof, unto them. They lead them to Christ, the true door of that City, who, also, is the immediate opener, and giver of actual entrance, thereunto. As Guardians, even to Christ's heavenly, first-born-Church, among other Saints, while with∣in their jurisdiction, will they conduct them to the gates of the hea∣venly City, and; there deliver them up to Christ himself. Till they enter the said City, must they own their sights and views thereof, to these most proper instruments, (used by Christ) the holy Angels. These chief rulers in and over the first-resurrection-state, are the fit∣test co-workers with Christ, in the preparatory setting up, or shewing of his Kingdom, to all Saints. John in the whole vision, given him, of things to come (the resurrection-life and glory, in which Christ's visible kingdom is to be set up) acknowledged all to be received from the good Angels, under the number seven, the figure, all along Scrip∣ture, of the new-creation, or resurrection-state. By a participation
hereof, do they take their principality or chief rule, over the earthly glorified congregation of spiritual Israelites. As testimony hereunto; John saw those seven Angels (implying the whole number of elect Angels) standing before the Throne of the Lamb, as partakers of his re∣surrection-life. The like is signified by the sevenfold Trumpet, given them, by which, fitly capacitated for the said work, as Christ's chief Ministers, to declare his resurrection-life and glory; and so, to give the joyful tydings of his spiritual coming and Kingdom, to all the Earth. All this honour is put upon them, as a just recompence for their obedient quitting their own natural Land and Habitation, their first-creation mutable earthly life and state, and becoming the first faithful followers of their head, into the true, new-creation-land of Promise. From the moment, in which, made or found willing, to make this exchange of life and principles, was the vision of God, through faith, given them, in the resurrection-state. So, may they, properly, be called Elders, or chief, over the good seed, among Men, who receive, from their hand, the same Manna of life in Christ, themselves feed on. They, by their more penetrating sight and na∣ture, especially, as exalted into the spiritual, new-creation sight and vision of their head (as admitted into personal union with the divinity, in our glorified nature, and, sitting on his Throne) and his Bride, have bin, and are signally useful, to communicate the vision of both, till the time for these heavenly Saints exaltation into the possession and enjoyment of the marriage bed. Thus, they shewed John, the Lamb, and his Bride, or peculiar, and most heavenly Saints, in a subjected love, unto both, as inferiour to both, yet, having their joy compleated by a perfect love to both; acknowledging themselves to be neither Bridegroom, nor Bride, but true friends and faithful Servants, unto both. This, their admirable love, to Christ and his most hea∣venly Saints, is notably figured out, in that of Jonathan to David. David is a figure of the most heavenly Saint, as made, most compleat∣ly, after God's own heart. Jonathan's true love to him, figures out that of the elect Angel, to the superiour, heavenly Saint. His love to David exceeding the love of Women, properly describes the spiritual union of the good Angel with the most heavenly Saint, as maintained by pure new-creation-principles, in both. Such love and union must needs greatly excel any love, exerciscable in the natural or first-crea∣tion-spirit, typed out by the Woman, which (Diotrophes-like) covets a pre-eminency, in its own name and glory. Contrary hereunto, new-creation-principles
cause the angelical Jonathan's, not only, unchange∣ably to love the heavenly David-Saints; but, from that love, to be∣come freely serviceable, with Jonathan, to place such David's on the Throne, in a state, superiour to themselves; and that, as faithful in their service to Christ, therein. Thus, through a union of love be∣tween Angels and heavenly Saints, are the Angels, under Christ, in∣strumental to the bringing the whole Church of first-born David's, into those places in Christ's Kingdom, wherein to be, for ever, far su∣periour to themselves. And, till, seated there, do they exercise the utmost of their power, to protect the said Davids from the malice of their invsible enemies, Devils, typed out by Jonathan's faithful in∣forming David of all Saul's mischeivous and malicious intendments, discovered towards him; and protecting him, from them. While these Princes or most heavenly Seed of Saints, are, in their unchanged bodies, walking on foot on the Earth (or, in the single earthly spirit and mind) this foot or earthly principle is kept by them, from any such wilful dashing against (or stumbling at) the mystical stone, Christ's new-crea∣ture-spirit, as excludes from the true rest, therein only attainable. In a like practice with Jonathan, in letter, they discover all the secret and subtile contrivances of mystical Saul's malice, against these spiritual Davids, that they may escape him. They thus protect them from the evil Angel; and, on the other hand, inform them of Christ's spiritual Kingdom, by communicating their visions thereof. In both these di∣stinct works of love to Saints, will they appear more visibly than ever, in their dispensation, immediately preparatory to Christ's second com∣ing. And herein, as owned by Christ, so ought they, by Saints; Rev. 22. 16. I Jesus have sent mine Angel, to testify these things to the Churches; the things of the new-Jerusalem-Kingdom of Christ, which will suddenly be made visible; and, not only so, but to testify of me also, that I am the bright morning-Star, or, in my exalted humanity, head of these angelical Stars, in that resurrection-glory, wherein they shall shine forth, in their preparatory morning-ministration, so as to be signally owned by me, in their faithful service to me. This is im∣plied (ver. 6.) These sayings are faithful and true. For, the Lord God of his holy Prophets hath sent his Angel, to give them, the fore-running sights of things, that as to publick and general manifestation, are yet to come; but, now at hand; and therefore, no longer to be sealed up, but, open'd by Angels, to them, in Christ's preparatory day. And so also are the sealed up judgments, by them, then to be opened, and
visibly poured forth upon the enemies of his approach and Kingdom. This honour have the blessed Angels, even of being chief instruments in setting up the Kingdom of Christ, by communicating their sights thereof, to Saints, belonging to the upper or lower new-Jerusalem, or, spiritual Kingdom, in their distinct relations thereunto, as the heavenly, or, but earthly glorified seed. And, this ought, by them, both and all, to be thankfully acknowledged. When the Angel shew'd John the Lamb and his Bride, clothed with her wedding robe, her Husband's hea∣venly spirit, he fell at the Angel's feet, to worship him. But, the Angel said, see thou do it not; for, though in this dispensation, I am above thee, yet am I but thy fellow-Servant, under our great Master, to mi∣nister to thee, who wilt, in conclusion, be exalted far above me. And then also, must we both, as holding of Jesus, our head, in the true new-creation-spirit of prophecy, worship God alone. The heavenly seed of Saints, that receive the first revelations or visions of the glory of Christ's Kingdom, from Angels, will be found to have an interest, su∣periour to theirs, therein, when they take their places about the ex∣alted Throne of Christ, set up in the third Heaven. Then will the Angels give up their guardianship over them, as no longer, needing it, being exalted above them. Yea, then will the Angels of God re∣joyce to receive instruction from them, to whom they, before, gave it. Then shall the marvellous and manifold wisdom of God, appear, in causing the Church of his first-born-Saints, when exalted into their hea∣venly places, to make a suitable return to the good Angels, for all their faithful service of love to them, in communicating their higher visions of God (in such measure, as they are capable of receiving) than ever yet was attained by them. They will, under Christ, reveal to them that manifold-grace of God, that's the blessed portion of second-resurrection-Saints, received by them, immediately from Christ, and from him, by them, let down and revealed to Angels. Thus, makes he his blessed creatures, Angels and Saints, in the beauty and harmo∣ny of his dispensations towards them, useful to one another; and, so to remain for ever, in their higher and lower places and offices, in Christ's body-mystical, as is figuratively signified; 1 Cor. 12. 21. Many, who in their single unchang'd humanity, Angels are the teachers of, will be in a superiority to all Angels, and, in that sence, said to judg, even the holy Angels, as in a higher sort of spiritual life and light, judgment, or discerning, then they; and so, fit instructers of them,
God, to them, as Christ's highest and chief Ministers. These will make known to Christ's Angels and glorified earthly members the fel∣lowship of that mystery, which, comparatively to the revelation, as yet, given thereof, hath bin, till then, hid in God. They shall fully re∣veal the whole mystery of divine and creature-fellowship in God the Mediatour, from everlasting, to everlasting; and so, the manifold di∣vine and creature-wisdom if God, to their inferiour-fellow-creaturs, which is, in the compleat fulness thereof, their continual vision and food. But, though when the first-born heavenly Church take their seats in glory, Angels cease from the exercise of rule over them, yet do they remain as door-keepers to the said heavenly City and Society. They were placed from the beginning, as Christ's spiritual Watchmen, over this tree of Life or whole spiritual state. And, in the faithful dis∣charge of that office, have, ever since, with their flaming Swords or angeli∣cal weapons, bin made use of, by way of defence and service to the said state, for directing the holy Seed to the right door of the blessed Ci∣ty; and, for the keeping any spiritually profane persons, from entring thereat. They are ready, with their angelical flames, to destroy all such. And when the good seed, even the first-born Church are all entred, and have taken their places, in a superiority to them, will they, still, for ever, hold the same place and station, as door-keepers, in the nearest relation to the said first-born Church. To be such a door-keeper to the second-resurrection-state, David saw, was to be prefer∣red above the highest glorified Saints, in the first, as nearest to the heavenly Citizens, or first encompassers of the Throne. Also, under Christ and his heavenly Saints, are the holy Angels Princes or chief Rulers, in and over the first-resurrection-state, the outward row of encompassers; and therein, to remain for ever. And, as now we have seen the good Angels business, in the prepa∣ratory dispensation; we may observe the approbation, they will re∣ceive from their great Lord and Master, for the same. As recompence of their labour of love to his Saints, will Christ, at end of their prepa∣ratory dispensation, say to them; well done, good and faithful Servants, enter into the full joy and enjoyment of your Lord, prepared for you, and reserved to be given or conveighed to you, by the hand of my hea∣venly Saints, at my command. These highest instruments, under Christ, are to fill their angelical vessels with that manifold grace and wisdom of God, which till thus, by heavenly and most exalted Saints, could not, is not to be reveal'd to them, being of too vast and com∣prehensive
a nature, to be received by them, immediately, from Christ's own hand. Their portion therein, and visions thereof, are appointed to be given forth to them, by his heavenly Church of first-born-Saints. Eph. 3. 10. All others are too inferiour, and at too great a distance, to be immediate receivers thereof, from Christ, who, in all the distributions of the glory of this state, is to be seen and acknow∣ledged head of this first-born-Church. And, in like manner, will the ge∣ral assembly of earthly glorified Saints, acknowledg Christ, head of the angelical rulers over them, on the finishing their preparatory dispen∣sation, for taking down the whole old, first-creation-World, and laying the foundation of the new. All this, by such an opening of the sealed up judgments of God, due to every part of this sinful World (on the utmost trial, discover'd to be that accursed Earth, which will not be made better) who shall, by the light of this ange∣lical ministery, be discovered, and have a fire kindled in and upon them (as condemned persons) that shall never be quench'd. They shall, in mystical chains and fetters, put upon them, be secured and impri∣soned, in order to their final sentence, and execution thereof, from Christ's personal presence. Then, as the King in the parable, will he say of the earthly-Jerusalem-Citizens, as wilful refusers of his raign over them, bring, and slay them before me; Luk. 19. 27. This shall be, when the Son of Man, the declared King of the whole World, shall sit on the Throne of the Fathers glory, on Earth; Psal. 2. 8. For this, will he sum∣mon and assemble before him, all Nations, in order, to separate his chast Sheep, from Satan's lustful Goats (who through inordinate lust after, and love to the fading life, wisdom, power, and glory of their own old nature, have despised and rejected Christ's new-creature-nature, and life, wisdom, righteousness and power of God, therein) and will send both, to their respective places, or final states of eternal life or death; Mat. 25. 31,-46. Then will incorrigibly wicked Angels and Men be chained up in unexpressible torment, so as in their height of rage a∣gainst God, Christ, blessed Angels and Saints, not able to do any thing against them, to disturbe their peaceable raign with Christ, du∣ring his thousand years visible Kingdom, on Earth. And, to the Sheep on his right hand, the prepared spiritual members of his visible King∣dom, will Christ say; come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the King∣dom, prepared for you, from the foundation of the World, either in a spi∣ritual or natural, religious or civil capacity. This was declar'd to John; even, that all those Souls, that had been, mystically or literally,
beheaded for the testimony of Jesus, or word of God (who, by the cha∣stity of their spirit to Christ, have bin kept from worshipping the Beast, his image, or receiving his mark in their foreheads, even an unchangeable enmity to God) shall, in one or other of the said capacities, live and raign with Christ, in the first resurrection-state, whereby secured from any hurt by the second death. The young and tender seed, also, to be awaken'd by the preparatory dispensation (that shall not, after that, in this powerful day of light, degenerate into strange plants) shall, likewise, in their successive generations, grow up, out of their restored principles of nature, into first or second resurrection-members of Christ's visible spiritual Kingdom. This season, to obedient Sheep, and lustful, rebellious Goats, will be found the best and worst of times. For, then will be made an abundant recompence, to Saints, for all the hard usage for Christ's new name and life sake, they have met with, from World and Devil. Then, shall they find the performance of all the great and glorious promises, so as to fill them with joy, and ren∣der them blessed, beyond what the narrow natural heart of the great∣est Saint could imagine, conceive, desire or wish. But, quite con∣trary, to the inhabitants of the Earth, the Goats on the left hand, will this day of Christ, be the greatest and saddest wo, imaginable. For, they will find the greatest disappointment, as to their mis-grounded hopes of everlasting happiness, and true rest; and in the room thereof, the height of a restless vexation of spirit, under a self-condemning light, awaken'd up in them, in judgment, so as ever to see it brought upon them, by their own wilful folly. And, they will, also, see themselves stripp'd of all means of coming out of the same, or of delivering them∣selves from, or, being reveng'd on, that power, against which they have rebelled, and, incorrigibly hardned themselves. Yet, will they retain the utmost height of malice, for ever, to him that slays them, that divine and new-creature spirit, and life of Christ and God, which are unspeakably above them. They will proudly and presumptuously in their Luciferian spirit of unchangeable enmity, say, before him that slays them, I am God: but, shall be forced to see themselves but Man, and not God, in the hand of him that slays them; Exek. 28. 9. And, thus have we, in some small measure, observ'd the near ap∣proach of Christ's visible Kingdom, in the preparatory dispensation to it. In the beginning hereof, the two witnesses are to be signally slain. These are a twofold generation of spiritual Saints, that are to be his heavenly and earthly glorified congregation, or new-creation Heaven
and Earth, for ever. These two sorts of spiritual Saints, do make up, and give forth the compleat witness of Christ's new-creature-life, who, now, in the end of this World, are to suffer the utmost extremity of mystical, or, litteral death. The design of God, in suffering this ex∣tream suffering of his witnessing Saints, (in such a day of trouble to them, as never was, since there was a Nation) is, to introduce his an∣gelical preachers and witnessing-risen-Saints, whose joint-ministry will powerfully shake, and overturn all earthly buildings, foundati∣ons, or principles. The voice of God's providences, is such, as af∣fords significant signs, to the reading or understanding of rational men, of his present controversy with the whole Earth. For, in a way of righteous judgment, is he confounding and overthrowing all world∣ly constitutions, religious and civil. The light of the day, so remarka∣bly judges and discovers the rotten foundation, upon which, both are built, as undeniably to convince all, they can, no longer, main∣tain or uphold their own structure. Yet, as the saddest lamentation, how little are these remarkable dealings of God, in order to these wonderful designs, taken notice of, not only, by the World, in gene∣ral, but the professing party, amongst whom must be found, as to seed, the wise-Virgin-spirit? Even such, also, are slumbring and sleeping, in this dark day; and, in such a remarkable calm of security, as is a most certain prefage of a storm. And, if this be the temper of God's friends, a spiritual seed, what can be expected from incorrigible ene∣mies, on such a wonderful commotion and shaking of their power, but a coming forth in their utmost strength and highest expressions of rage and malice, to maintain themselves against that power, the very light of the day convinces them, will undermine and destroy them, and all their worldly interests, literal and mystical? But, to spiritual Saints, awaken'd and found alive, this dispensation (that is so ama∣zing and confounding to others, as to make their Hearts fail for fear of what is coming upon the Earth) becomes a cherishing food, causing them to lift up their heads, though involv'd in God's outward chastisement of the World, as having a common share therein. They are supported and owned by God, as Friends, to whom he communicates the secret of his designs in all. He shews them, he is, therein, pleading their cause, in destroying his and their enemies, and securing his beloved Lots, mystically, and also litterally, so far as is for his glory, and their good. Though, therefore, the Figtree, their natural Spirit, blossom not, nor fruit be in the Vine, or true and choice
plants of the Kingdom; though the labour of the Olive fail, and there be no meat in the Field, no stock in the fold, or herd in the stalls, (Hab. 3. 17.) that is, though there be a mystical as well as litteral Famine, by the total drying up of all Food to the natural mind, as well as body; yet, to the powerful faith of spiritual Saints, is it a time of rejoycing in their spiritual Lord, invisibly communicating his hidden and incor∣ruptible Manna to them, which is a Bread of Life, not only to their spiritual, but natural Man, also, which lives not by that Bread which is the single food of the natural Spirit, but such as the living Word of God, is, and gives unto the whole Man of his Saints, for ever; Mat. 4. 4. And then shall their natural man, as with Hinds feet, walk upon the high places of this first-creation-world, in a conquering and victori∣ous spirit, over them. Saints will find themselves, more and more esta∣blished in their spiritual faith, and expectation of Christ's visible King∣dom, by those very ways and means, concerning which the fleshly mind or natural spirit, at best, as well as the profane world, do, with with the Samaritan Lord, judg, impossible to bring about such a design. The true Believer, is so far from thinking God's arm shortned, or hand weakned, on this withdrawing all sort of visible help from them, as thereby to be quickned up, into the expectation of those angelical powers, Christ hath in reserve, to work their deliverance, by. Nothing, to them, seems lacking, but such a powerful exercise of their precious faith, as may give them a patient waiting upon God, for the perform∣ance (and that, with great advantage) of whatever he hath promi∣sed, as to the actual setting up of Christ's kingdom, and rule of love over them. Then will our blessed Lord arise, out of his holy, new-crea∣ture-Temple, and in his spiritual glory or second appearance, take a visible possession of that universal power and authority, which was always his right, from the foundation of the World. He will bow, and open those Heavens, in which, all this while, retained; Act. 3. 21. He will descend, and actually let down that new-Jerusalem-glory, out of the said Heaven, which is the proper clothing, provided by him∣self, for his heavenly and earthly-glorified Saints. For, when the preparatory work is compleated, the King himself, will suddenly ap∣pear. Even so, come Lord Jesus, and all thy Saints with thee; come quickly. Amen. FINIS.
