P2019 12545070 63030
Tenenda non Tollenda, OR The Necessity of Preserving TENURES IN CAPITE and by KNIGHT-SERVICE, VVhich according to their first Institution were, and are yet, a great part of the Salus Populi, and the Safety and Defence of the King, as well as of his People. TOGETHER With a Prospect of the very many Mis∣chiefs and Inconveniences, which by the ta∣king away or altering of those Te∣nures, will inevitably happen to the KING and his KINGDOMES. By Fabian Philipps, Esq Claudian Lib. 2. Ne pereat tam priscus Honos qui portus honorum. Semper erat, nullo Sarciri Consule Damnum. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Leach, for the Author, and are to be sold by Abel Roper at the Sign of the Sun in Fleetstreet, 1660.
To the Right Honourable Sir Edward Hide Knight, Ba∣ron of Hindon, and Lord Chancellor of England. My Lord, EVery man who hath not been out of his Wits or his own Country, or like the Poet Epimenides, who is said to have slept more than Twenty years. And hath but understood or experimented the many Miseryes and Confusions which our new Reformers and Modellers of Go∣vernment, (who like unskilful Architects, cannot amend a part of an house without over∣turning the whole Fabrick upon the heads of
the Owners) have treated the Faction and Ignorance of too many of the seduced peo∣ple of this Kingdom withal; And sitting by the Waters of Babylon had not forgot Je∣rusalem, or but remembred the happi∣nesse of the Condition we before enjoyed under a gratious and pious Prince in an Antient, and for many ages past, most happy Monar∣chy, and with Tears of Joy welcommed it again in the Return of his sacred Majesty, and all our peace and plenty from a sad and long oppressing Captivity, must needs think himself obliged not only to pray for the Peace of our Syon but to endeavour all he can to uphold the Kings Rights and Jurisdictions. Who being our Lex viva, and guarding Him∣self, us and our Laws, is with them the sure support of us and all that is or can be of any Concernment to us and our Posteri∣tyes; And therefore when we are taught by our Laws, and the sage▪ Interpreters and Expounders thereof, That every Subject hath an Interest in the King as the Head of the Wele Publick, and as the in∣ferior Members cannot estrange them
selves from the Actions or Passions of the head,Hollands Case in Coke 4 Reports. no lesse can any Subject make himself a Stranger to any thing which toucheth the King or their su∣preme Head, And that not a few but very many knowing and able men are of opinion not ushered in by Fancy or first Notions, but well weighed and built with Reason and good Authorities that the exchanging of the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, for a constant yearly payment of 100000 l. will level the Regality, and turn the Sove∣raignty into a dangerous popularity, and take away or blunt the Edge of the Sword, by which his Majesty is to defend his people; I could not but conceive it to be my Duty (and a failer of my Duty and Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy not to do it) to offer to consideration the antiquity and right use of Tenures in this and other Kingdoms, that they are no Slavery nor Grievance, how from a project in the beginning of the Raign of King James, it came to trouble several Par∣liaments, the small benefits will come to the Subjects by altering those Tenures, and the
many Inconveniences and Mischiefs which will inevitably follow, and that it is such a flower of the Crown, as the power of an Act of Par∣liament, and consent of the King and his Nobility, and people cannot take away, wherein, though I may well say it is a matter, as Livy said of his undertaking to write the Roman History Immensi Operis, and that the disquisition of it requiring greater Abilities than I can lay any claim unto; and the excellent Order heretofore used, that all Books of the Law, or very much concerning it▪ should be perused and allowed by the Reverend Judges of the Law, before they should be Printed and published, might have been e∣nough to have made me either to desist, or have attended their approbation; Yet when the good intentions of many Parliament men of the House of Commons to make the King a con∣stant Revenue were so busy to prepare an Act of Parliament to dissolve those more useful and honourable Tenures into a Socage, which will never arrive to the Salus Populi they aim at. I have like some well-wishing Roman to his Countries good, in my Cares,
and fear least any thing should hurt, dislocate, or disturb, that well ordered and constituted Government, under which our Progenitors en∣joyed so much Honor, Peace und Plenty, hasted Currente Calamo, to a modest inqui∣ry into the grounds and motives, for the disso∣lution of them, and the Court of Wards, and an examination of that to be prepared Act in the General (for as to the Preamble, Clu∣ses or Provisoes, they are not permitted to be seen before the Act passeth) the Rogatio Le∣gum as it was amongst the Romans, being not here in use in some cases as it may be wished it were, and when none else would publiquely endeavour to rescue them, have without any Byasse or partiality as well as I could, represented what hath been the right use of them, and what may be the Inconveniences if they should be changed or altered, and that they are not guilty of the charge which is supposed, but never will be proved against them. And confesse that it deserved a better Ad∣vocate than my self, who having attempted to do it horis Succsvis & interturbationes re∣rum, am Conscious to my self that much
more might have been said for it, and that the matter was capable of a better form, and might have appeared in a better dresse, if my care to do something as fast as I could, had not for want of time hindred me from doing what I might. But I hope that your Lordship who hath trod the Pathes of Affliction, and in the at∣tendance and care of a persecuted Monarchy, and an Afflicted most Gracious Prince, who hath born the burthen of His own Sorrows & Troubles, as well as of a Loyal party that Suf∣fered wih & for Him and His Royal Father▪ have in Your Travails and residence in many Kingdoms and parts beyond the Seas, viewed and seen the Fundamentals and Order of o∣ther Kingdoms, the Policies and good Reigle∣ments of some, and the Errors and Infirmities of others, will with your learned Predecessor the Chancellor Fortescue in the Raign of King Henry the 6h. the more admire and love the Laws and excellent Constitutions of England, which as a Quintessence of right reason, may seem to have been Limbecked and drawn out of the best of Laws, and choice
of all which might be learned out of other Na∣tions, or the Records or Treasury of Time, and find reason enough to be of the opinion of that well knowing Statesman,Fortescue de laudibus Le∣gum Anglae. that non minime erit regno accommodum, ut Incolae ejus in artibus sint experti, & quod domus regia sit tanquam gymnasium supremum nobilitatis regni schola quoque Stre∣nuitatis probitatis & morum quibus reg∣num honoretur, & floret ac contra Irru∣entes securatur, & hoc revera bonum ac∣cidisse non pottuisset regno illi, Si nobili∣um fili Orphani & Pupilli per pauperes amicos parentum suorum nutrirentur, and greatly approve as he did of our Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service (which have heen since better ordered, and more deserve that, and a better commendation) and to put forth your hand to rescue them, who have hi∣therto as great Beams, peices of Tymber, or Pil∣lars, helped to bear up and sustain the Fabrick of our Antient and Monarchical Government, and have no other fault, but that they are mis∣understood and misrepresented to the vulgar, who by making causelesse complaints & multi∣plying
them, have done of late by our Laws and best Constitutions, as the Boys are used to do when they hunt Squirrels with Drums, shouts and Noyses; And that your Lordship who is able to say much more for that Institution and Right use of Tenures, will be pleased to accept of my good Intentions, and pardon the Imperfections of London 23. November 1660. Your Lordships most Humble Servant Fabian Philipps.
THE CONTENTS. CHAP. I. OF the antiquity and use of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, in England, and other Nations. page 1. CHAP. II. The holding of Lands in Capite, and by Knight service, is no Slavery or Bondage to the Tenant or Vassals. 12. CHAP. III. Tenures of Lands in Capite, and by Knight service, are not so many in number as is supposed, nor were, or are any publique or general Grie∣vance. 29.
CHAP. IV. How the design of altering Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, into Socage Tenures, and Dssolving the Court of Wards and Liveries, and the Incidents, and Revenue belonging thereunto,  out of the Forges of some private mens imagi∣ions, to be afterwards agitated in Parlia∣nt. 145. CHAP. V. The Benefits or Advantages which are expected y the people in putting down of the Court of wards nd Liveries, and changing the Tenures in Capi∣e and by Knight service, into free and common Scage. 154. CHAP. VI. The great, and very many Mischiefs and In∣conveniences which will happen to the King, and Kingdom, by taking away Tenures in Capite, and Knight service. 157. CHAP. VII. That Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, holden of the King, and the Homage and Inci∣dents thereunto appertaining, and the right of the Mesne Lords, cannot be dissolved, or taken a∣way by any Act of Parliament. The Conclusion. 258.
Errata's, or Faults escaped in Printing, by the hast of the Presse. PAge 1 line 1 leave out and, p. 2 l 28 for be read by. p. 6 l 12 for or Knights, r and Knights, p. 8 l 16 leave out that. ib. r in Capite and Knight service. p. 9 l 25 for where r were. p. 17 in the margent leave out the quotation note. p. 21 l 18 r. his enfant. p. 23 l 23 r. be the lesse free, p. 24, l 26. for was r. were. p. 36. l 12, r them, 20 H. 3.6. p. 38 l 3 for E 1 r. E 3. p. ib. l 6. r person, 42 E 3.5. p 40. l 31. for of, r. or p. 43. l 18. r thought to. p. 54 l. 16. leave out and. p. 68 l. 14 leave out was. p· 81 l. 12 for a r. in p. 82 l. 15 for E. 3 r E 1. p. 100 l. 7 for 1648 r. 1643. p. 111 l. 2 leave out his. p. 125 l. 1 for Episcopium, r Episcopum. ib. l 18. r hold by. ib. l. 23, r nor could, 126. l 12 for e r. to. p. 131 l 32. r For it. p. 13 l. 1 leave out Lawes after the. ib. l. 2 leave out the. ib. l. 15 for and r. for. p. 135 l 6. r or by p. 136 l. 14 for and  which. p. 138 in the margent leave out Litletons quotation, p. 140 l. 13 leave out an. p. 154 l. 10 r. Grand and Petit. p 159. in the margent for XI r II. p. 162. against l 12 in the mar∣gent put V. ib. against l 33. put VI. p. 163. l 4. for Protections, r Portions▪ ib. in the margent against l 8, put VII. ib. against  20, put VIII. p. 164 l 4. for and, r shall. ib. in the margent a∣gainst l 15, put IX. p. 165 against l 33. put X. p. 166 against l 5. put XI. ib. against l. 10 put XII. ib. against l 14, put XIII. ib. against l 26. put XIV. p. 17 r l. 15 for amore r. more▪ p. 174 in the margent, for Olbertus r. Obertus. p. 183 in mar∣gent for Lovelaces r. Loes. p. 184 l. 16. leavo out in. p. 185 l. 32. leave out they. p. 187 l. 9. for enernate, r enervate. ib. l 24. for displaced r. displayed▪ p. 192 l. 15. leave out if not recompensed by some Annual payment. p. 194 l. 8. r. under the penalties of. ibib. l 9. leave out under the penalties. p. 212, l 22. r be a Baron, ibib. leave out of Holt. p. 217 l. 2. for deri∣ved r. deemed. p. 222 in the margent against l. 15 put L. p. 241 in the margent against l 6. put LXIV. p. 24 against l 4 put LXV. p. 246. against 26, put LXXII. p. 247. l 4. for know r knowing, p. 254. l 20, r which is, ib. 28, r and the p. 255 l 24, r or that. p. 259 l 18. for it r them. ib. l 23 leave out upon all. p. 268. l 4. leave out and. p. 269, l 15, r or to p. 274. l 33 for of, r if. p. 275. l 11, leave out would ruine  l, 13, r Baronies would be ruined.
CAP. I. Of the Antiquity and use of Tenures in capite and by Knight service in Eng∣land and other Nations. THe Law of Nature, & that secret and great Director under God, and his Holy Spirit of all mens Actions, for their safety, and self preservation, by the Rules or Instinct of Right Reason, and the Beams of Divine Light and Irradiations; (So far as those Laws of Nature are not contrary to positive and Humane Laws which are al∣wayes either actively or passively to be o∣beyed) having in the beginning of time, and its delivery out of the Chaos, made and allow∣ed Orders, and distinctions of man-kind, as they have been found to be more Rich, Wise, Virtuous, Powerful, and Able, than others, & therfore the fitter to Protect, Defend, and do good unto such as wanted those Abilities & Endowments, and constituted & ordained the faith and just performances also of Con∣tracts, Promises, and Agreements, and the
acknowledgements of benefits and favours received, being no strangers to those early dayes; when the Patriarch Abraham had leave given him by Abimelech King of Gerar to dwell in the Land where it pleased him, and that Abimelech in the presence of Phicol the chief Captain of his Host, who took himself to have some con∣cernment in it, required an Oath of him, That he would not deal falsly with him, nor with his Sons son, but Genes. 21.23. according to the kindnesse that he had done unto him. and to the Land in which he had Sojourned; And that Abraham thereup∣on swore (which somewhat resembles our Oath of Fealty or Fidelity) and took Sheep and Oxen (for then Pecus was instead of pecu∣nia, which is derived a Pecude) and gave unto Abimelech, and both of them made a Covenant. It will (though as in many other mat∣ters not tending to mans Salvation, which are not expressed in the sacred Story; there is not so full and clear a light & evidence, as to intitle the holding of Land by the service of going to War to so great a Warrant or Original, as that of a Scripture direction or example.) Notwithstanding be no wild or improbable conjecture, that some such, or the like obligations, more than the affections, & good will, of the people, did lye upon them, or their Estates, not to forsake their King and Country in time of Wars and
distresse, the Law of Nature teaching the necessity of the Members readinesse and combination to preserve the head & its well being, as well as their own Estates and well beings, in that of their King or Supreme Governour, and every mans particular in the General, when as the antient Inhabi∣tants of the Earth, or some of them at least, as appears by Iacobs blessing to his Sons upon his Death-bed, became Servants to Tribute, and Moses by the advice of Iethro his Father-in-law, did choose able men ou of all Israel, and made them Heads over the people, and Rulers, which were afterwards called Captains of thousands, Rulers of hundreds, fifties, and tens, to be as a standing and certain Militia, and all the people young and old that had not rebelled with Absalom, went out with David, Rehoboham his Grand∣child ou of the two Tribes of Iudah and Benjamin, could muster an hundred and fourscore thousand chosen men which were Warriors, to preserve their Prince in War, and defend his, as well as their own Estates, and that some such, or the like obligations, passed betwixt Solomon and Hyram King of Tyre, when he gave him the twenty Cities in the Land of Gallilee. And that from thence either by Tradition, or Travel of Philoso∣phers or wise men into those more
knowing Countries and Regions of Palestine or Egypt, where Gods chosen and peculiar people of Israel, had a nearer communica∣tion with him, and his Divine Illuminations, or by those secret dictates, and the Edicts Statutes and Decrees of the Law of Na∣ture, whereby as the Judicious and Learned Hooker saith, Hooker Ecclesiastic. Polit. lib. 1. Humane Actions are framed, and the Chincks and Crannyes, by which the wisdom of the Almighty, that in∣tellectual worker as Plato and Anaxagoras sti∣led him, is wont imperceptibly to diffuse & impart its impressions, into the Customs and manners of men. That custom now about 2293 years agoe, used by Romulus in his new established City or Empire of Rome, took its rise or beginning of appointing the Plebeian or common peo∣ple, to make choyce of whom they could out of the Patricij, Senators, or Eminent men, to protect them in their causes or concernments, in recompence or lieu whereof, the Clyents were to contribute, if need were, to the marri∣ages of their Daughters, redeem them or their Sons, when they were taken Gellius lib. 1. cap. 13. Captives in War, as bearing a reverence or re∣spect to their Lords, or Patroni; Budus in Annotat. ad Pandect. to the end, that they might be defended by them, & that they should reciprocally propter benefi∣cium, the help & favour received from them, maintain and defend their dignity, and that duty or Clientela was therefore not altogether improperly called Homagium or Homage, as
a Service pro beneficio prestandum, for a bene∣fit had, or to be injoyed, & accipitur pro pa∣trocinio & protectione, and taken to be as a pa∣tronage and protection, insomuch as upon the Conquest or reducing of any province into their obedience, they did in Clientelam se dare Romanis, acknowledge a Duty or Hom∣age, either to the Senate, or certain of the Nobility, or great men to be their Patroni or Protectors, quae necessitudo, or near relati∣ons, which were betwixt tem, id serebat saith Oldendorpius Oldendor∣pius. ut Clientes perpetua Patrono∣rum protectione defenderentur, ac vicissim eos om∣ni obsequio colerent, brought it so to pass that the Clyents enjoyed a constant protection of their Patrons, or great men, and exhibited for it a duty and obedience unto them. From which kind of Customes, and usa∣ges, Tutandae vitae ac fortunarum omnium, for the defence of life and estate, Olden∣dorpius. veluti scintillis quibusdam caepit initium benificiariae consuetudin∣is quae aucta est multum propter continuam bellorum molestiam, as from increasing sparkes or small beginnings that beneficial Custom taking its original, which by continuance of wars and troubles was much increased; another kind of Clientela was introduced, (though there be as Craig saith, a Craig. de Feudis▪ great difference betwixt Clientela and Vassalagium,) qua vel dig∣nitas vel praedium aliquod, alicui datur, ut et ipse istius posteri, et haeredes beneficii auctorem perpetuo agnoscant, et quasi pro Patrono colant, ejusque caput existimationem et fortunas tueantur; where∣by
either some dignity or lands were given to any one, to the end that he and his heirs should always acknowledge the giver to be the Author of that benefit, reve∣rence and esteem him as their Patron and de∣fend him, and his life reputation and for∣tunes. In resemblance whereof, or from the eommon principle of Reason, that pri∣vate or particular men, or their estates can∣not be safe or in any good condition, where the publick is either afflicted, or ruined, was the use or way of Tenures in Capite, or Knights Service, found out and approved by Kings and Emperours, ut cum delectus edici∣tur in Cujacius de seudis. lib. 1. militiam eant vel vicarium mittant, vel certum cesum domini aerario inferant, that when a muster was to be made, or a going to War, they should either go in person, or send one in their stead, or pay a certain rae in mony, and was so antient and universal, as whilst the Germans would intitle them∣selves to be the first of Nations, introdu∣cing it, the Gaules or French were so unwil∣ling to come behind them, as they indea∣vour out of Caesars Commentaries, to make themselves the right owners of it, where he saith, that Eos qui opibus inter Gallos valebant multos habuisse devotos quos secum ducerunt in bel∣lo Soldarios sua lingua nuncupatos quorum haec e∣rat conditio, ut omnibus in vita commodis cum ijs fruerentur quorum amicitiae se dedissent, quod si quid pervim accidisset, aut cundem casum ferrent ipsi, aut mortem sibi consciscerent; the Gauls which
were rich or had good Estates, had some which were devoted unto them, which fol∣lowed them in the Wars▪ & in their language were called Souldiers, and injoyed a lively∣hood under them, and if any evil happened unto them, either endured it with them, or willingly ventured their lives with them, o∣thers attribute it to the Saxons, ubi jus antiqui∣ssimum feudorum semper viguit et adhuc, saith the learned Craig. religiose observatur, where the feudal Laws were, and are yet most religi∣ouly observed, and Cliens and Vasallus, in matters of Fwds and Tenures, are not sel∣dome in the Civil Law, and very good Au∣thors become to be as Synonimes, and used one for the other. And the later Grecians since the Raign of Constantine Gerardus Niger in Cuja∣cio lib. de feu∣dis. Porphyrogenneta in the East, and the Roman Emperors in the West, before, & since the Raign of Charlemain, or Charles the great, were not without those necessary defen∣ces of themselves, and their people; And such a general benefit, and ready and certain way of ayd and help, upon all emergencies in the like usage of other Nations, making it to be as a Law of Nations. There hath been in all or most Kingdoms and Monarchies of the World, as well Hea∣then, as Christian, a dependency of the Sub∣ject upon the Prince or Soveraign, and some duties to be performed by reason of their Lands and Estates, which they held under their Protection, and in many of them, as
amongst the Germans, Saxons, Franks, and Longobards, and several other Nations de∣scending from them; Tenures in capite, and Knight service, were esteemed as a founda∣tion and subsistency of the right and power of Soveraignty and Government, and being at the first Craig, de origine fudo∣rm, deg. 4. precariae ex domini solius arbitrio, up∣on courtesie at the will only of the Prince or Lord, were afterwards Annales from year to year, after that feuda ceperunt esse vitalia, their Estates or Fees became to be for life, and after for Inheritance. So as by the Law of England, we have nt properly Allodium Cke 1. parte Instt. so. 1. b. (saith Coke) that is, any Subjects Land which is not holden of some Superior, and that Tenures in capite, appear not to be of any new institution in the book of Doomsday, or in Edward the Confessors dayes, an. 1060. in King Athelstans, an. 903. in King Canutus his Raign, in King Keulphus his Raign, an. 821. or in King Ina's Raign, an. 720. In Imitation whereof and the Norman (no slavish) Laws, and u∣sages which as to Tenures, by the opinion of William Roville of Alenzon, in his Preface to the grand Customier of Normandy, were first brought into Normandy out of England, by our Edward the Confessor, & the Customs & Po∣licies of other People and Kingdoms, pru∣dent Antiquity having in that manner so well provided by reservation of Tenures, for the defence of the Realm. William the Conque∣rour sound no better means to continue and
support the Frame and Government of this Kingdom, then upon many of his gifts and grants of Land, (the most part of England be∣ing then by conquest in his Demeasne) to re∣serve the Tenures and Service of those, and their Heirs; to whom he gave it in Capite, and by Knight Service; and if Thomas Sprot Spelmans gloss. p. 58. and other antient Authors and Traditions, mistake not in the number of them Selden tit. Hon. p. 692, 693. (for that there were very many is agreed by the Red Book in the Exchequer, and divers Au∣thentiques) created 60215 Knights Fees, which with their Homage, incidents, and obligations, to serve in Wars with the addition of those many other Tenures by Knights service, which the Nobility, great men, and others, (besides those great quan∣tities of Lands and Tenements, which they and many as well as the King, and others our succeeding Princes, gave Colonis & Ho∣minibus inferioris notae, to the ordinary and in∣ferior sort of people to hold in Socage. Bur∣gage, and Petit Serjeantie) reserved upon their guifts, and grants to their Friends, Follow∣ers, and Tenants, who where to attend also their mesne Lords in the service of their Prince, could not be otherwise then a safety and constant kind of defence for e∣ver after to this Kingdom; And by the Lear∣ned Spelman▪ gloss. Sir Henry Spelman said to be due, non solum jure positivo sed & gentium & quodammodo naturae, not only by positive Law, but the Law of Nations, and in some sorts by the
Law of Nature. Especially when it was not to arise from any compulsary or incertain way, or involuntary contribution, or out of any per∣sonal or moveable estate, but to fix and go along with the Land, as an easy and benefi∣cial tye, and perpetuity upon it, and is so incorporate and inherent with it, as it hath upon the matter a co-existence, or being with it; and Glanvil and Bracton are of opinion, that the King must have Arms, as well as Laws to Govern by, and not depend ex alio∣rum Arbitrio, it being a Rule of Law, that quando Lex aliquid concedit, id concedit, sine quo res ipsa esse non potest, when the Law grant∣eth any thing, it granteth that also which is necessary and requisite to it. And therefore the old oath of Fealty, which by Edward the Confessors Laws was to be administred in the Folcmotes, LL. Ed. Con∣fessor. cap. 35. or assemblyes of the People once in every year, Fide et Sacramento non fracto ad defendendum regnum contra Alienigenas, et Inimicos cum Do∣mino suo, Rege, et terras, et honores, illius om∣ni fidelitate cum eo servare, et quod illi ut, Do∣mino suo Regi intra et extra regnum Britanniae fi∣deles esse volunt, by faith and oath, inviola∣ble to defend the Kingdome against all strangers, and the Kings Enemies, and the Lands and dignity of the King, to preserve, and be faithful to him, as to their Lord, as well within, as without the Kingdom of Britain, which was not then also held to be
enough, unlesse also there were a tye and ob∣ligation upon the Land, and therefore en∣acted that, debeant universi liberi homines se∣cundum feodum suum, & secundum tenementa Lam∣bert fo. 35▪ sua arma habere, & illa semper prompta conserva∣re ad tuitionem Regni, & servicium Dominorum surum juxta preceptum Domini Regis explendum & peragendum; every free man according to the proportion of his Fee and Lands, should have his Arms in readinesse for the defence of the Kingdom, and Service of their Lords, as the King should command; And it was by William the Conqueror ordained, quod omnes liberi homines fide et Sacramento Spelman: gloss in verbo fidelitatis▪ affir∣ment, quod intra & extra universum Regnum, Willielmo Regi Domino suo fideles esse volunt terras & honores suos omni fidelitate ubique serva∣re cum eo & contra Inimicos & Alieniginas de∣fendere, that all Free-men should take an Oath, that as well within as without the Realm of England, they should be faithful to their King and Lord, and defend every where him and his Lands, Dignity, and Estate, with all faithfulnesse against his E∣nemies and Foreiners; Et Statuit & firmiter precepit, ut omnes, Comites, Barones, Mi∣lites, & Servientes, Teneant se semper in Ar∣mis & in Equis ut decet & oportet, & quod sint semper prompti & parati ad servicium suum inte∣grum explendum & peragendum cum semper opus adfuerit secundum quod debent de eodis & tene∣mentis suis de jure facere, Appointed and commanded, that all Earls, Barons, Knights,
and their Servants, should be ready with their Horse and Arms, as they ought, to do, their Service which they owed, and were to do for their Fees and Lands when need should require, and was beneficial to the Vassal or Tenant. CAP. II. The holding of Lands in Capite, and by Knight Service, is no Slavery or Bondage to the Tenant or Vassal. FOr his lands were a sufficient recom∣pence for the service which he performed for them, and his Lord besides the lands which he gave the Tenant, gave him also a protection and help in lieu of the service which he received from him; For though as Bodin cap. 7. Bodin observeth, vassallus dat fidem nec tamen accipit▪ The Tenant makes fealty to his Lord, but receiveth none from him, there is betwixt them, mutua fides et tuendae salutis, et dignitatis utriusque obligatio contracta, a mu∣tual and reciprocal obligation to defend one another. And when the Donee had lands freely con∣ferred upon him and his Heires, upon that consideration, (omnia feoda, as well in Ca∣pite and Knights service tenure, as Copy∣hold
and more inferior Tenures, being at first, ad arbitrium Domini) no man can rightly suppose that he would refuse the reservation of Tenure and incidents unto it, or imagine it to be a servitude, or any thing else but an Act of extraordinary favour arising from the Donor, which by the Civil Law and Customes of Nations, chalenged such an hereditary gratitude and return of thankful∣nesse as amongst many other priviledges thereupon accrued to the Donor, if any of the Heires of the Lord of the Fee happened to fall into distresse, the Heires of the Tenant, though never so many ages and descents af∣ter, were to releive them, Besol∣dus discurs. Polit. p. 74▪ Spelman gloss. p. 254, 256. Alber. Genti∣lis p. 696. Domini uti∣litatem proferre et incommoda Propellere, et si cum poterit non liberaverit eum a morte feudo sive be∣neficio suo privabitur, such a Donee or Tenant was to advance the good of his Lord, or Benefactor, and hinder any damage might happen unto him and forfeit and be depri∣ved of those lands, if he did not when he could rescue him from death, for Feudum ut habeat, et Dominum non juvet rationis non est, it is no reason that he should enjoy that land or benefit, and not help or assist him which gave it, and by our Law, if such a Tenant ceased to do his ser∣vice (if not hindred by any legal impedi∣ment) by the space of two years upon a Cessavit per Biennium, brought by the Lord, the land if no sufficient distresse was to be had was forfeited, if he appeared not
upon the distresse, and paid the ar∣reares. And such Tenure carrying along with it an end and purpose in its original institution, not only of preservation and defence of the Donor, but of the Kingdome and protection also of the Tenant, and the land which was bestowed upon him. And being a voluntary and beneficial pac∣tion submitted unto by the Tennant (inso∣much as Feudum, whether derived from the German word Feec or warre or a fide pre∣standa, or a faedere, inter utros{que} contracto is not seldom in the Civil Law called benefici∣um,) may with reason enough be conceived to be cheerfully after undergone and appro∣ved of by the Tennants and their Heirs, re∣ceiving many Privileges thereby as not pay∣ign any other aydes or Tallages besides the service which their Tenures enjoyned them, (wch. by a desuetude or necessity of the times is not now allowed them) not to be excom∣municated by the Pope or Clergy, which (H. 2. Mat. Pa∣ris, 100. amongst other Laws and Customes ob∣served in the time of his Grandfather, H. 1.) in the Parliament at Clarindon, claimed as a special priviledge belonging to him and those which held of him in capite, (which in those days was worthily accounted amongst the greatest of exemptions) and of creating like Tenures to be holden of themselves with services of War Wardship, Marriage, and other incidents, to have their heirs in mino∣rity,
not only protected in their persons and estates, which in tumultuous and unpeace∣able Times, was no small benefit, but to be gently and vertuously educated in Bellicis ar∣tibus, feats and actions of arms taught to ride the great horse and manage him, and himself compleatly armed with Shield and Launce, married without disparagement in his own or a better rank and quality, his equitatura, or Horse and Arms could not be taken in execution unless he dishonourably absented himself when his service was requi∣red and then all that he had was subject to execution saving one horse which was to be left him propter dignitatem militiae, and have no usury (which in those dayes especi∣ally until the reign of E. 1. By Jews and a sort of foreiners called Caursini was very oppressive and intollerable) run upon them for their fathers Debts whilst they were in wardship. Besides many other great priviledges belong∣ing to Knights & Gentry (the original of ma∣ny of whom was antiently by Arms and mili∣tary service) allowed them by our Laws of England, as wel as by the Civil Law and Law of Nations, as to bear Arms, make Images, and Statues of their Ancestors, and by the Ci∣vil Law a preheminence that more credence should be given by a Judge to the oath of two Gentlemen, produced as Witnesses,Bartou de testibus. then to a multitude of ungentle persons, ought to be preferred to Offices before the ignoble
in uio enim presmitur pro nobiliate ad efficia regenda and honoured in the attire and ap∣parrel of their bodies as to wear Silks and purple colours and ex conseudine non suspen∣duntur sed decapitantur are not when they are to suffer death for offences criminal,Sr. John, Fere glory of generosity. 78. used to be hanged but beheaded, with many other priviledges not here enumerated, which our common people of England in their abun∣dance of freedom have too much forgotten. Were so much respected here in the raign of H. 2. saith the eminently learned Mr. Sel∣den as one was fined one hundred pounds (which in those days of more honesty and less mony, was a great sum of mony) for striking a Selden tit. on. 783.784. ro. Mag∣ H. 2. 39 E. 3 Bracton Chap. de appell de mayhems. Knight and another forty Marks, because he was present when he was compelled to swear that he would not complain of the in∣jury done unto him, the grand Assize in a writ of right which is one of the highest Trials by Jury and Oath in the Law of England is to be chosen by Knights and out of Knights & a Baron in a Jury for or against him, may challenge the Pannel if one Knight at the least were not returned of the Jury, if a Ri∣baud or Russian stroke a Knight without cause he was to loose the hand that struck him, Kings have Knighted their eldest Sons, and somtimes sent them to neighbour Kings to re∣ceive that Honour, and Barons, and Earls have taken it for an addition of Honour, and not any lessening to be knighted. And had no cause at all to dislike such milita∣ry
Tenures, which were not called vassalage, as Common People may now mistake the word, but from vassus or Cliens qui pro benefi∣cio accepto fidem suam autori benificii obligat or from Gesell, a German word which signifieth Socius or Commilito, a fellow Souldier, the name and profession reason and cause of it being so honourable and worthy. Or to deem them to be burthens which were at the first intended and taken to be as gifts and favours, which none of the sons of men, who are Masters of any sense or reason do use to find fault with, but may well allow them to be very far distant from Slavery, when as Servitude is properly,Selden tit. hon. ca. 5.784. quum quod acquiritur servo ac∣quiritur Domino when that which is gained or acquired by the servant is justly and properly the Lords, and a freeman is contra-distin∣guished by quod acquirit, sibi acquirit, in that which he gaineth is his own, or hath a property in it and that among the Southern Nations (a more gentle and merciful bon∣dage being paternd by that of Abraham and his successors the Patriarchs and allowed by the rules and government of God,) dura erat servitus Dominorum imperia gravia, service or the condition of Servants was hard, and the severity of Masters great, who had potestatem vitae & necis, power of life and death over their Servants who having nothing which they could call their own, but their misery, were put to maintain their Masters
out of their labours and enduring vilissima et miserrima ministeria, all manner of Slave∣ries, ab omni Militia arcebantur were not suffered to know or have the use of Arms, apud Boreales tamen gentes justior suit semper ser∣vitus et clementior, but amongst the Northern Nations there was a more just and gentle u∣sage of their Servants for that they did de∣vide their Lands & Conquests amongst their Souldiers and Servants pactionibus interpositis inter Dominum et servientem de mutua Tutela upon certain agreements betwixt them for mutual defence. Which made our English as well as other Nations abundantly contented with it as may appear by the acquiescence of them and the Normans, under the Norman and next succeeding Kings, and of Edward the Confessors Laws, and other English cus∣tomes retaining them, the reckoning of it a∣mongst their liberties, fighting for them, and adventuring their lives and all that they had at the making of M. S. Mr. Rob. Hill concerning Te∣nures. Magna Charta, and in the Barons wars, wherein those great spi∣rits, as Mr. Robert Hill saith, so impatient of tyranny, did never so much as call in question that great and antient prerogative, of their Kings or except against Tenures, escuage, releifs, and other moderate and due incidents thereof. The care taken in the Parliament of 52 H. 3. Stat. Marl∣bridge. 52 H. 3. to prevent the deceiving of the Lords of their wardships by fraudulent con∣veyances,
or Leases, of 18 E. 10. in the making of the statute of Quia 18 E. 1. Quia emptores &c. emptores terrarum, that the Feoffees or Purchasers of Lands holden of mesne, Lords should hold by such services and Customes as rhe Feoffor did hold the Registring and Survey of Knights Fees by H. 2. H. 3. E. 1. E. 3. and H. 6. Escuage Aydes and Assessements in Parliament and the Marshals Rolls in time of War and necessity. The esteem antiently held of the bene∣fits and liberties accrewed by them inso∣much as many have by leave of their Lords changed their Socage Tenures into Knights service,Somner de Gavelkind 60. and thought themselves enfranchi∣sed thereby. The value put upon them by the Commons of England in the Parliament of 6. H. 4. when they petitioned the King in that Parliament,Rot. Parl. 6 H. 4. that all Feoffements of Lands and Tene∣ments holden by Knight service, and done by Collusion expressed in the Statute of Marl∣bridge might upon proof thereof be utterly void. The opinion of Chief Justice Fortescue in the raign of H. 6. in his Book de laudibus legum Angliae commending them as most necessa∣ry as well for the Common-wealth,Fortescue de laudibus le∣gum Angliae ca. 44. as for those and their Heirs who held their Land by such Tenures. The retaining of it by the Germans who did as most of the Northern Nations, saith Bodin, libertatem spirare, only busie them∣selves
to gain and keep their liberty and from the time of their greatest freedom to rhis present, and now also, could never tell how to find any fault with them. Their Princes, Electors of the Empire, and the Emperial Cities, or Hanse townes, who take thrmselves to be as free as their name of freedom or liberty doth import, not at this day disdaining or repining at them, & the Switzers in their greatest thoughts of free∣dom, taking their holding of the Empire in Capite to be no abatement of it. The use of them by the antient Earles and Governours of Holland, Zealand, and West∣freezland who having been very successful in their Wars without the use of Tenures in Capi∣te or knights service,Cornel Ne∣osad▪ de Feudi juris scripti Hollandici, West Frisicique successione ca. 2.4. et 5. but finding that ipsa vir∣tus amara alioqui per se at{que} aspera praemiis excitan∣da videretur simul uti fisco, ac Reipublicae consuler∣tur, saith Neostadius, that the hardship of vertue needed to be sweetened with some rewards, & that the old custom of the Longobards in crea∣ting, and reserving Tenures in Capite, and by knights service, would be not only a saving of Charges to their Treasury, but a good, and benefit to their Provinces or Common∣wealth, did create and erect such or the like Tenures. And to this day by the Scotish Nation in a time, and at the instant of their late obtain∣ing (if they could be thankful for them) of all manner of liberties and freedom▪ do suffi∣ciently evince them to be as far from Slavery as they are always necessary.
Wherein, if the primitive purpose and institution of Tenures in capite knight service and Socage be rightly considered, every man may without any violence or Argument u∣sed to his reason or Judgment, if self-conceitedness and obstinacy doe not choke or disturb his Intlctuals; Easily conclude, whether, if it were now  Choice, he would not rather take Land by a Ser∣vice or Condition, only to go to warr with the King, or his mesne Lord, when Wars shall happen, which in a Common course of accidents may happen, but once or not at all in his life time, & then not tarry with him a∣bove forty days or less, according to his pro∣portion of Fee or Land holden, & to have e∣scuage of his own Tenants, if they shall refuse to go also in person with him, and to have his heir, if he chanced to die which in times of less Luxury happened not so often, & but once perhaps in three or four descents, to be left in his minority to be better educated than he could have been in his life time, married without disparagement and himself as well as his own & Childrens estates protected. Or accept of a Mannor freely granted him, to hold of the King, by an honourable service of grand Serjeanty. Then to hold in Socage and be yed to do yearly and oftner some part of Husbandry, or drudgery upon his Lords Land for nothing, or pay an annual Rent, besi many other ser∣vie payments & duties as for Rent Oats, rent Timber, rent Wood, Mal, rent Hoy, rent for fishing, & liberty to Plow, at certain sea∣sons and the like.
And if they had been esteemed, or taken to be a bondage the Rot. Parl. 1 R. 2▪ n. 16. Commons of Eng. certainly in the Parliament of 1 R. 2. Would not by their Speaker have commended the Feats of Chivalry, & shewed to the King that thereby the people of England were of all Nations renoumed, and how by the decay thereof the Honour of the Realm was, and would dayly decrease. Or in Rot. Parl. 9 H. 4. n. 46. 9 H. 4. Petitioned the King, that upon seisure of the Lands of such as be, or should be attainted, or grants of such Lands by the King, the services therefore due to other Lords might thereupon be reserved. The good and original benefit whereof de∣rived to the Tenant from the King, or mesne Lord that first gave the Lands, and the consi∣deration, that by the taking of that a way, eve∣ry one was in all justice & equity to be resto∣red to his primitive propriety and that which was his own, and so to reduce the Lands to the Heirs of those that at first gave them restrain∣ing them might be in all probability the rea∣son that not only Capite, and Knight service Tenures, but Copyhold & other Tenures and estates also having as much or more pre∣tence or fancy of servitude in them, were ne∣ver so much as petitioned against in Parlia∣ment to be utterly taken away. Some instance whereof may be had in that of Villinage which being the heaviest and most servile of all kind of Tenures (though some thousand Families in this Kingdom (there being antiently some Tenants in ville∣nage belonging almost to every Mannor) by
desueude & expiration of that course of Te∣nures, now esteeming themselves nothing less were never in any Parliament desired to be a∣bolished. Bracton & Feta, & other antient Au∣thors in our English Laws alleging it to be de jure Gentium and that nihil detrahit libertai is not to be reckon'd a servitude, much less sure∣ly then are Tenures in Capite and Knight ser∣vice, which the learned Grotius in the ut∣most that he could in his Book de antiquitate reipublicae Batavicae, alleage for the freedom and independency of the Hollanders, though he could not deny but that the German Em∣perours did claim them to hold in vassalage, or as a Feiff o the Empire, will not allow to be any derogation from their liberty,Hugo Go∣tius de anti∣quitate Rei∣publicae Bata∣vicae edit an. 1630. 53. L. no dubito ss. de Captivis. but concludes, quod etsi optinerent non eo desinerent Hollandi esse liberi, cum ut Proculus egregie de∣monstrat nec Clientes liberi esse desinant, quia Patronis dignitate pares non sunt, unde liberi feudi orta est appellatio, That if it should be granted it would make the Hollanders not to be free, when as Proculus very well demonstrateth Clients (or vas∣sails) did not cease to be free because they are not equall to their Patrons in dignity, whence the name or Term of franck Fee was derived, and Sr. Henry Spelman saith, quem∣admodum igitur omnibus non licuit feudum dare, ita nec omnibus accipere, as it was not lawful for every one to give lands to hold of him, so it was not allowed to every one to take, pro∣hibentur
enim ignobiles servilis{que} conditionis homi∣nes (et quidem juxta morem Heroicis seculis re∣ceptum) munera subire militaria, for ignoble and men of servile condition according to the usage of Heroick times, were orbid to attempt military Offices, and Imployments, as may be evidenced also in those antient Customes and usages of those grand & emi∣nent Commonwealths of Rome, and Athens, in the latter of which notwithstanding the opi∣nion of those who deny the use of Tenures by military service, to have been in Greece before the time of Constantine Porphyrogenneta, it ap∣pears that Solon had long before made a se∣cond classis or degree of such as could yearly dispend three hundred Bushels of Corn, & o∣ther liquid fruits,Sigonius de ntiquo ju∣re Civin Rom. 54.97. et de Repub. Athen. 47.4. Plu∣tarch in vita Solonis. & were able to find a Horse of service & called them Knights, Soli igitur saith judicious Spelman, nobiles feudorum suscep∣tibiles erant quod praeusticis et ignobilibus longe agiliores habiti sunt ad tractanda arma regendam∣que militiam. And therefore the Nobility and Gentry were only capable of such Fees or Tenures in regard that they were more a∣gile and fitter for the use of Arms and mili∣tary Government and Order,Perionius de Rom. et Gae. Magi∣strat. and was there∣fore called by the French heritages nobles, et liberis et ingnuis solummodo competunt, a noble inheritance, and only belonged to men that were free born and of rank and quality. And wereno longer ago than in Anno Dom. 1637. in the argument of the case of  Ship-mony in the Exchecquer Chamber,
so little thought to be a Slavery to the peo∣ple, or any unjust or illegal prerogative of the Kings, as Mr, Oliver, St. John, (none of the reverend and learned Judges of England then contradicting it) alleaged them to be for the defence of the Realm, and that they were not ex provisone hominis, not of mans provision, but ex provisione legis, ordained by Law, and that the King was to have the benefit that accrew∣ed by them with Wardships primer seisins Licences of Alienation and Reliefs, as well to defend his Kingdom, as to educate his Wards. Nor can they be accounted to be a Bon∣dage or Slavery; unless we should fancy (which would like a dream also vanish, when men shall awake into their better sen∣ses and reason) that those ornaments in peace and strength in time of war, which have been for so many ages and Centuries since King Inas time, which was in an. 721 now above 940 years agoe (and may have beene long before that) ever ac∣compted to be harmlesse and unblameable, and in King Edgars Time, by a Charter made by him unto Oswald Bishop of Worcester, said to be constitutione antiquorum temporum, of antient time before the date of that Charter, were an oppression, that all rankes and sorts of the People should en∣dure a slavery and not know nor feel it, nor any of the contemporary wri∣ters, antient or modern take notice of it, that the Peers of this Kingdom should be in Slavery, and not know or believe it; The
The gentry of the Kingdom should be as worshipful Slaves, and not understand or perceive it; And the Commons of the King∣dom what kind of Slaves it should please any, without any cause, to stile them; That Honours, Gifts, and Re∣wards, Protection, Liberties, Privileges, and Favours, to live well and happily of free gift and without any money paid for the pur∣chase, should be called a Bondage, when as a Tenure in Socage, ut kam ap. quae per solam consue∣tudinem &c. & Coke 1 part. init. cap. 5. . 117. in condemnatos ultrices manus ttant, ut alios suspendio alis membrrum detruncatione, vel alijs modis juxt quantitatem delicti puniat; To be an Hang∣man or Executioner of such as were condem∣ned to suffer death or any loss of Members according to the nature of their offences, could neither be parted with, or taken to be any thing but a benefit. And that a claim was made by one th held Lands in the Isle of Silly, to be the Exe∣cutioner of Felons which there was then usu∣aly done by letting every one of them down in a Bas∣ket, from a step Rock, with the provision only of two Loaves of Barly bread, and a pot of water to expect as they hung the mercy of the Sea, when the Tide should bring it in. And that those which held by the easy and no dishonourable Tenures of being Tenants in Capite, and Knightservice, should as Mr. Robert Hill a learned and judicious Anti∣quary in the beginning of the Reign of King James well observeth, rack and lease
their Lands to their under Tenants, at the highest Rents and Rtes, and neither they nor their Tenants call that a slavery which (though none at all) may seem to be a far greater burden than any Tennt in Capite, and by Knight service which holdeth of the King, or any Tenant that holdeth by knight service of a mesne Lord endureth when as the one is always more like to have the bag and burden, which he must pay for, laid upon him in his Bargain, then the other who is only to welcom a gift or favour, for which he payeth but a grateful acknowledgment. Nor is there in that which is now so much complained of, and supposed to be a Grievance, which, (whatever it be, except that which may as to some particular cases happen to the best and most refined Consti∣tutions, and the management thereof) hath only been by the fault of some people, who to be unfaithful, and deceive the King in his Wardships, or other Duties, have some times cast themselves into the trouble and extremityes which were justly put upon them for concealments of Wardships, or making fraudulent conveyances to defeat the just Rights of the King, or their superiour Lords, or by some exorbitances, or mul∣tiplications of Fees since the erecting of the Court of Wards and Liveries by an Act of Parliament in 32 H. 8. any malum in se, ori∣ginal innate or intrinsecal cause of evil or in∣convenience in them, Active or Prxime me¦erly arising from the Nature or Constitution
of Tenures in Capite and Knight Service. To be found upon the most severe examinati∣ons and inquiries which may be made of them, nor are they so large in their number as to extend or spread themselves into an uni∣versality of grievances, nor were or are any publick or extraordinary Grievance.
CHAP. III. Tenures of Lands in Capite and by Knight ser∣vice, are not so many in number as is supposed, nor were, or are any publick or general grievance. FOr the Number of Knights▪ Fees which were holden in Capite and by Knight service of the King, have by tract of time Alienations Purprestures, As∣sarts, incroachments, deafforrestations, and concealments, been exceedingly lessened▪ and decreased. 28015 which were said to be parcel of the 60215 knights Fees created by William the Conquerour, being granted afterwards by him or his successors to Monasteries Abbyes, Priories, and re∣ligious houses, or parcelled into Glebes or other endowments belonging to, Cathe∣drals, Churches, and Chantries, or given away in Mortmain, and very many quillets and parcels of Land after the dissolution of the Abbyes, and religi∣ous houses, not exceeding the yearly value of forty shillings. And now far exceeding that value granted in Socage by King Henry the eighth, besides
many other great quantities of dissolved Ab∣byes and religious Lands granted to be hold¦en in Socage. Much of the Abbye Lands retained in the Crown or Kings hands, as part of the Royal Patrimony, and many Mannors and great quantities of Land gran∣ted to divers of the Nobility, gentry, and others, with reservations many times of Te∣nures of but half a knights Fee, when that which was granted would after the old rate or proportion of knights Fees have been three or four knights Fees or more, and somtimes as much or more then that (no rule at all as touching the proportions of Lands or Tenures, being then in such an abundance of Land and Revenue as by the dissolution of the Abbye came into the Kings hands or disposing  all kept) which might have made many knights Fees were not seldom granted with a Tenure, only of a twentieth or fortieth, and sometimes an hundreth part of a knights Fee, whereby the knights Fees which were granted to the Reli∣gious houses being almost half of the number which William the Conquerour is said at the first to have created, might well decrease into a smaller number and many of those which diverse of the Nobility and great men held of the King, as those of Ferrers, Earl of Darby and the Earls of Chester, those that came by mar∣riage as by one of the Daughters and Heirs of  Earl of Hereford, and Essex, by escheat, as the Earldome of Clare, or by Resumptions, Dissolution of Priors, Alien, Knights, of
St. John of Hierusalem Attainders, Escheats or Forfeitures, which in the Barons Wars were very many, or holden as of honors &c. Mer∣ging and devolving into the Royal Reve∣nue, did take of very many of the number, especially since the making of the Act of Parliament in 1 . 6. cap. 4. that there should be no Tenure in Capite of the King by reason of Lands coming to the hands of him or any of his Progenitors, Heirs, or Suc∣cessors, by Attainders of Treason, misprision of Treason Premunires, dissolution or surren∣der of Religious Houses, And not a few of the Mesne Lords and those which held also of the King did make as great an abate∣ment in their Tenures, by releasing and discharging their services before the making of the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, gran∣ting Lands in Socage, Franck Almoigne, or by copy of Court Roll, and cast∣ing out a great part of their Lands, as well as the Kings of England did, not For∣rests, Chases, & many vast Commons which they laid out in Charity, for the good of the poorer sort of people, infranchising of a great number of Copyholders, selling & gi∣ving away many and great parcels of their demesne Lands, disparking of many of their Parks, & deviding them into many Tenements to be holden in Socage, endowing of Churches, Chantries, religious houses, & the like, the forrests, Cha¦ses and Commons of the Kingdom making
very near a tenth part in ten of the Lands of the Kingdom, and the Socage Lands, Bur∣gage, Franck Almoigne, and Copyholds more than two parts in three of all the remainder of the Lands of the Kingdom. So as it is not therefore improbable but that there are now not above ten thousand, or at most, a fourth part of those 62015. Knights Fees to be found. And that in antient and former times ei∣ther by reason that great quantities of Man∣nors and Lands, as much sometimes as a∣mounted to a third part of a Shire or Coun∣ty were in the Nobilities or great mens pos∣sessions, some of whom held of the King a 100 or more Mannors, and had as many Knights Fees holden of them, besides some Castles, Forrests, Parks, and Chases, or that the two Escheators which were many times all that were in England, the one on this side, the other beyond Trent, did not nor could not so carefully look to the death of the Kings Tenants, which the Statute of 14 E. 3. ca. 8. complaineth of or that the smaller sort of Lands in Capite, or mean mens estates were not so much looked after (And yet the old Re∣cords of the Kingdome do speak a great deal of care, and looking after every part of the Kings Revenew,) the not mentioning in deeds or conveyances of whom or how the Land was holden, the more frequent use of Feoffements
with Livery & seisin in former times (which being not Inrolled, hindred or obstructed, the vigilance of the Escheators and Feodaries,) their sleepinesse in permitting where any one Mannor or parcel was holden in Capite, many other Mannors or Lands of the same Tenure to be found in the same Inquisi∣tion by an Ignoramus of the Tenure & services & the craft & industry of many, if not most men to evade and elude, as much as they can, the Law or any Acts of Parliament, though when they are sometimes catched they dearly pay for it. Or by some other cause or reason not yet appearing many of the said Knights Fees are lost and never to be discovered, the Offices post mortem now extant in the Tower of London, being in the last year of the reign of King H. 3. in the beginning of whose reign they first began to be regularly found, and recorded but — 187. in an. 35. E. 1 — 153. in an. 20 E. 2— 52. & of the succeeding Kings untill the end of E. 4. when such Tenures were most valued and respected, are in every year but few in number, sometimes less than 200, and many times not above 300, in the most plentiful years of those times. And of the Knights Fees & Lands holden in Capite and by Knight service which are now to be discove∣red in the greatest diligence of Escheators & their better looking unto them in this last Century of years, where there hath been an Escheator for the most part in every County
to look to the Tenures and Wardships, there will not upon exact search thereof appear to be in an. 21 Jac. Regis any more than 71.22 Jac. 73 — in 2 Car. Regis primi— 112 in 3 Car. Regis primi—85. Custodies & wardships granted, under the great Seal of England which in Wardships of any Bulk or concern∣ment doe most commonly pass that way leaving those of ordinary and lesser value to passe only under the Seal, of the Court of Wards and Liveryes & in an. 10 Car. primi. not above—450 offices post mortem some of which did only entitle the King to a Livery, are to be found filed & returned; & in an. 11 Car. Regis not above; 580 which may give us some estimate of the small number which now re∣mains of that huge number which former a∣ges & writers talked of, & that after that rate if there be 10000 Knights Fees holden in Ca∣pite there is scarce a twentieth part falls one year with another to make any profit or ad∣vantage to the King, by Wardships, Mar∣riage, Reliefs, primer seisin &c. Nor are there unless by some unluckiness or accidents commonly above one in every three or four discents in a Family, holding in Capite, which do die and leave their Heirs in minority, & then also it is either more of less chargeable to the Family, as the Males shall be nearer unto, or more remote from their full age of 21, or the Females to their age of 16, some of the supposed Inconveniences be∣ing prevented by an earlier marriage of the
Inheritrixes, or the Kings giving the honour of Knighthood to some of the Males in their minoritie, which dispenseth with the value of their marriages. And yet those Tenures Wardships, and incidents thereunto, though so antient, legal, and innocent in their use and insti∣tution, were not without the watchful eye and are of Parliaments, to prevent or pluck up any Grievances, which like weeds in the best of Gardens, or per accidens, might an∣noy or blemish those fair flowers of the Crown Imperial, as that of 9 H. 3—that the Tenant, by Knight Service, being at his full age when his Ancestor dyeth shall have his inheri∣tance by the old relief according to the old custom of the Fees the Statute of Merton in anno 9 H. 3 ca—2. and 3 E. 1 ca— 2. the Kings Tenant being at full age shall pay according to the old custom that is to say five pounds for a Knights Fee or lesse according to proportion ca—4 and 5. The Keep∣er of the Lands of the Heir within age shall not take of the Lands of the Heir but reasonable issues customs and services, without distruction and wast of his men and goods, shall keep up the Houses, Parks, Warrens, Ponds, Mills, and other things pertain∣ing to the Lands, with the issues of the Lands, and deliver the Lands to the Heir when he comeh of full age stored with Plowes and all other things, at least as he recieved them ca—7. A Widdow shall have her Marriage inheritance and tarry in the chief house of her Husband forty days after her Hus∣bands death with reasonable Estovers within which
time her Dower shall be assigned, if it were not as∣signed before, The Wards shall not be married to Villains or o∣ther, as Burgesses where they be disparaged or within the age of fourteen years or such age as they cannot consent to mariage, and if they do and their Friends complain thereof, the Lord shall loose the Wardship, and all the profits that thereof shall be taken, and they shall be converted to the use of the Heirs, being within age after the disposition and provision of their Friends for the shame done unto them, a Writ of Mortd'auncester shall be allowed to the Heir with dammages against the Lord that keepeth his Lands after he is of full age. Heirs within age shall not loose their Inheritance by the neglect or wilfulnesse of their Guardians, 52 H. 3. cap 7 and 16. The Lord shall not after the age of fourteen years keep a Female unmarried more than two years after, and if he do not by that time marry her she shall have an Action to recover her Inheritance, without giving any thing for her Wardship or Inheritance, 3 E. 1 ca. 22. A Writ of Novel disseisin shall be awarded against any Es∣cheator that by colour of his Office shall disseise any of his freehold with double dammages, and to be grievously amerced Westmr. 1.3. E. 1 cap. 24 In aid to make the Son of the Lord a Knight or to mar∣ry the Daughter, there shall be taken but twenty shil∣lings for a whole Knights Fee, and after that rate proportionably ibm. 35. If the Guardian maketh a Feoffement of the Wards Lands, he shall have a Writ of Novel disseisin, and upon recovery the Se∣isin shall be delivered to the next friend, and the
Guardian shall loose the Wardship 3. E. 1. ca. 47. U∣surpation of a Church during the minority of the Heir shall not prejudice him, 13 E. 1.5. Ad∣measurement of Dower shall be granted to a Guar∣dian, and the Heir shall not be barred by the suite of the Guardian, if there be collusion, 13 E. 1.7. Next Friends shall be permitted to sue if the Heir be loyned, 13 E. 1.15. If part of the Lands be sold the services shall be apportioned Westmr. 3.2. Escheators shall commit no waste in Wards Lands, 28 E. 1 18. If Lands without cause be seised by the Escheator, the Issues and Mesne profits shall be re∣stored, 21 E. 1.19. where it is found by Inquest that Lands are not holden of the King, the Eschea∣tor shall without delay return the possession Stat de Escheatoribus 29 E. 1. Escheators shall have sufficient in the places where they Minister, to an∣swer the King and his People if any shall complain, 4 E 3.9.5 E. 3 4. Shall be chosen by the Chance∣lour, Treasurer, and chief Baron taking unto them the chief Justices of the one bench and the other if they be present and no Escheator▪ shall tarry in his office above a year 14 E. 3.8. A Ward shall have an action of waste against his Guardian, and Esche∣ators shall make no waste in the Lands of the Kings wards 14 E. 3 13. Aid to make the Kings Son a Knight or to marry his Daughter, shall be in no other manner then according to the Statute thereof formerly made 25 E. 3 11. Traverses of offices found before Escheators upon dyings seised or alien∣ations without licence shall be tried in the Kings Bench 34 E. 3 14. An Escheator shall have no Pec of wood, fish, or venison, out of the wards
Lands 38 E. 3 13. An Idempnitate nominis shall be granted of another mans Lands seised by an Escheator 37 E 1.2. No Escheator shall be made unless he haue twenty pounds Land per annum or more in Fee and they shall execute their offices in proper person, the Chancellor shall make Escheators without any Gift or Brokage and shall make them of the most lawful men and sufficient 12 R. 2.2. An Escheator or Commissioner shall take no Inquest, but by such persons as shall be retorned by the Sher∣iff they shall retorn the offices found before them and the Lands shall be let to farm to him that tendereth a Traverse to the office 8 H. 6.16. Inquisitions shall be taken by Escheators in good Towns and open places and they shall not take above forty Shillings for finding an office under the penalty of forty pounds 23 H. 6— 17. Women at the age of fourteen years at the time of the death of their Ancestors without question or difficulty shall have Livery of their Lands 39 H. 6.2. No office shall be retorned into any of the Kings Courts by any Escheator, or Commissioner, but which is found by a Jury, and none to be an Escheator who hath not forty markes per annum, above all reprises, the Jurors to have Land of the yearly value of forty shillings within the Shire▪ the Forman of the Jury shall keep the Counter part of the Inquisition and the Eschea∣tor must receive the Inquisition found by the Iury as also the offices or Inquisitions shall be received in the Chancery and Exchequer 1 H. 8 ca. 8. Lands shall be lt to farme to him that offereth to traverse the office before the offices or Inquests retorned, or within three Months after 1 H. 8 ca. 10. the re∣spite of Homage of Lands not exceeding five
pounds per Annum, to be but eight pence the yearly value of Lands not exceeding twenty pounds per annum to be taken as it is found in the Inquisition, except it by examination otherwise ap∣pear to the Master of the Wards, Surveyer, At∣turney, or Receiver General, or three of them, or that it shall otherwise appear and be declared in any of the Kings Courts, No Escheator shall sit virtu∣te officii where the Lands be five pounds per an¦num or above, the Escheator shall take for finding of an office not exceeding five pounds per annum but six Shillings, eight pence for his Fee, and for the writing of the office three Shillings four pence, for the charges of the Jury three Shillings and for the officers and Ministers of any Court that shall re∣ceive the same Record two shillings upon pain of five pounds to the Escheator for every time so of∣fending, the Master and Court shall have power to moderate any Fines or Recognisances 33 H 8.22. The Heir of Lands not exceeding five pounds per annum may sue his General Livery by warrant only out of the Court of wards although there be no Inquisition or office found or certified. The Inter∣est of every lesser Tenant for Term of years Copy∣holder or other person having interest in any Lands found in any office or Inquisition shall be saved though they be not found by office. The Heir upon an aetate probanda shall have an ouste le maines and the profits of his Lands from the time that he comes to age and if any office be untruely found, a Traverse shall be allowed or a Monstrans de Droit without being driven to any petition of right though the King be entitled by a double mat∣ter
of Record. A Traverse to an office shall be al∣lowed where a wrong Tenure is found, an igno∣ramus ound of a Tenure shall not be taken to be a∣ny Tenure in Capite and upon a Traverse a Scire facias shall be awarded against the Kings Patentee 2 and 3 E 6. ca. 8. And if there had been any certain or common grievances or so much as a likelyhood of any to have risen or happened by such Tenures and benefits which many were the better for, and had no reason at all to find fault with & wch. many more were striving to deserve of the Kings of England & the Nobility & great men of this Kingdom, the Parliaments that have been ever since the 8th. year of the reign of H. 3. would not have made so many Acts of Par∣liament for their establishment, or tending to their preservation, & if we should believe (as it cannot be well denyed) that Parliaments have been sometimes mistaken and enacted that, which they have afterwards thought fit to repeal. Yet it comes not within the virge or compass of any probability, that Parliaments where all grievances are most commonly re∣presented, should for almost four hundred years together in a succession of many Kings & Parliaments, enact or continue grievances instead of remedies, & neither find those Te∣nures to be inconvenient, or not fit to be con∣tinued, or so much as complain of them, but as if they were blessings of a part of the well being of the Nation, not at once but at seve∣ral times, in several ages, and several Gene∣rations,
support and uphold them by after Laws, & constitutions, as, That no Freeman should from thence give nor sell any more of his lands, but so that of the residue of the lands the Lord of the fee may have the services due unto him which belong∣eth to the Fee, Lands aliened in mortmaine shall ac∣crew to the Lord of the Fee 9 H. 3. ca. 32. & 36. the Ward shall pay to the Lord of the Fee the value of his marriage, if he will not marry at the request of his Lord for the marriage of him that is within age, say the Statute & the makers thereof, of meer right pertaineth to the Lord of the Fee, 20. H. 3, cap. 7. The Lord shall not pay a Fine for distraining his Tenant for Services and ustomes, 52. H. 3, cap. 3. A fraudulent conveyance to defeat the Lord of his ward shall be void, cap. 6. The King shall have primer seisin, neither the heir nor any o∣ther shall intrude into their Inheritance before he hath received it out of the Kings hands, as the same Inheritance was wont to be taken out of his hands, and his Ancestors in times past, if the lands be ac∣customed to be in the Kings hands by Knight ser∣vice, or Serjeanty, or right of Patronage, 52. H. 3. cap. 16. If an heir marry within age without the consent of his Guardian before he be past the age of fourteen years it shall be done according as is con∣tained in the statute of Merton, and of them that marry after that age without the consent of their Guardian, the Guardian shall have the double va∣lue of their marriage, such as have withdrawn their marriage shall pay the full value to the Guardian for the trespass, and nevertheless the King shall
have like amends; And if the wards of malice or by evil council will not be married by their chief Lords where they shall not be disparaged, then the Lords may hold their lands and Inheritance until they have accomplished the age of an heir male, that is to wit, of twenty one years and further until they have taken the value of the marriage, 3 E. 1.22. A Tenaent shall have a writ of mesne to acquit him of his services, and if the mesne come not he shall loose the service of his Tenant, 13 E. 1.9. Priority of Feoffment shall make a title for wardship, cap. 16. the chief Lord shall have a Cessavit against the Te∣nant if he cease for two years to do his service writs of Ravishment degard allowed to the Lord, and the Party offending, though he restore the ward un∣married, or pay for the marriage, shall nevertheless be punished by two years Imprisonment, 13 E. 1.35. The Feoffee shall hold his lands of the chief Lord and not of the Feoffor, 18 E. 1. Quia emptores terrarum, A saving to the King of the antient aydes due and accustomed, 25. E. 1.6. The King shall have the wardship of his Tenant which holdeth in chief & the marriage of the heir, primer seisin as∣signement of dower to the widdow, marriage of the women Tenants deviding their lands in Coparcine∣ry holden of him, and they which hold of him in Ser∣jeanty shall pay a Fine at the Alienation, 17. E. 2. A Free-man shall doe his homage to his Lord, 17. E. 2. Knights Fees shall not pass in the Kings grants with∣out special words 17 E. 2.16. he shall be answer∣ed the mesne rates of Lands coming to him by his Tenants death. 28. E. 3.4. & where sundry of the Kings Tenants holding
of him immediately, as of his Dutchy of Lan∣caster, did by sundry Recoveries, Fines, and Feoffments in use, defeat the King of Ward∣ships of Body and Lands. It was Enacted that the King, and his Heirs, shall have the Wardship and Custody of the Body and Lands of cestui que use, and if they be of full age, shall have relief, not∣withstanding any such conveyance, and an exact provision made for Writs to be granted upon the imbesiling of any such Heir, Rot. Parl. 22 E. 4. N. 16. & 17. The Lord of Cestui que use, no will being declared &c. shall have a Writ of Right of Ward for the Body and Land, and the Heir of Cestuique use being of full Age at the Death of his Auncestor shall pay a relief, 4 H. 7.17. Avwry may be made by▪ the Lord upon the land holden of him without naming his Tenant 21 H. 8.19. And no grievance was thought be in them at the time of the making of the Act of Parliament of 27 H. 8, 2. when as it was expresly provided by that Act, that Tenures in Capite should be reserved to the King of all mannors, lands, and hereditaments be∣longing to Monasteries & religious houses, which had lands, Tenements, and hereditaments not exceed∣ing the clear yearly value of two hundred pounds, which he should afterwards grant for an estate of In∣heritance; nor did the Parliament in the 31 year of the raign of that King, retract that good opinion which was formerly had of them, when enacting that the King and his heirs and Successors should be put in actu∣al possession of all mannors, lands and here∣ditaments of any yearly value whatsoever belonging
to Monasteries, they saved to the King, his heirs and Successors, all rents, services, and other du∣ties, as if that act had never been made; Nor in the Act of Parliament of 32 H. 8. cap. 46. For erection of the Court of wards and Live∣ries wherin it is acknowledged that Tenures in Capite and wardships, with their incidents, did of right belong to the King in the right of the Imperial Crown of this Realm; In the Act of Parliament of 32. H. 8. And an explanation thereof in 34 and 35 H. 8.5. giving power to those that held lands in Capite and by Knights service, to devise two parts thereof reserving to the King wardship, primer seisin, and Fines for alienation of the third part, and Fines for alienations of the Freehold, or Inheritance of the two parts. The Crown being secured of the Tenure of the two parts by the statute of Quia emptores terrarum. Nor at the making of the statutes of 35 H. 8.14. & 37 H. 8.2. Whereby the King might reserve Te∣nures in Socage or Capite at his will and pleasure up∣on grants of lands not exceeding the value of forty shillings per annum, belonging to religious houses. And that the Kings former right shall be saved not∣withstanding any Traverse, & a remedy for the rents of the mesne Lords where the King hath the ward∣ships, 2 and 3 E. 6. cap. 8, And those that held by such Tenures besides the care of so many Acts of Parliament, were not unhappy also in that provision of the Common Law, where it was an Article or inquiry in the Eyre if any Lord novas leva∣vit consuetudines, had charged his Tenant
with any new Customes, if any Eschea∣tors or Subescheators had made any wast in the Wards Lands, or seised Lands which ought not to be seised. Et omnes illi qui senti∣unt se super hiis gravatos, & inde conqueri volue∣rint audiantur & fiat eis Justitia. All that were grieved, were to be heard, Capia iti∣nris in vet. magn. Charta 157 158. & Coke 4. part institutes tit. Cr. Ward. and have Justice done them and the Tenant had his remedy by a Glanvil lib 12 cap. 9 & 10 Register 4 & 59 Coke magna Charta cap. 10. writ of ne injuste vexes, where his Lord did Indebita exigere ser∣vitia. And least any thing should but come within the suspition of a Grievance, or that the power of the Court of Wards and Live∣ries, and the latitude which the Act of Par∣liament of 32 H. 8. had given it, (which was to be as fixed as the trust which was committed to it, should in the intervalls of Parliaments or seldomest Cases be any thing like to a burden or Inconvenience, the dis∣posing and granting of wardships was by King James his Commission and instructions, under the great Seal of England in instructi∣ons King Jmes in Anno 1622. an. 1622. to the end that the people might stand assured, that he desired nothing more, than that their Children and their Lands which should fall unto him by reason of wardships might after their decease be committed in their neerest and trustiest friends, or to such as they by will or otherwise commit the charge unto upon such valuable considerations as are just and reasonable, that the Parents and An∣cestors may depart in greater peace in hope of his
gracious favour; their friends may see their chil∣dren brought up in piety and learning, and may take such care as is fit for the preservation of their inheritance, if they will seek the same in time. Ordered that no direction for the finding of any Office be given for the wardship of the body and lands of any Ward until the end of one moneth next after the death of the Wards Ancestor, but to the neerest and trustiest friends of the ward, or other person nominated by the Ancestor in the wards behalf, who may in the mean time become Suiters for the same, among whom choice may be made of the best and fittest. No composition, agreement, or promise of any wardship or lease of Lands be made until the office be found, and then such of the friends to have pre∣ferment as tendred their Petitions within the moneth, they yeilding a reasonable composi∣tion. The Master Attorney Surveyor, and other the Officers of the Court of Wards were to inform them selves as particularly as they might of the truth of the Wards estate, as well of his Inheritance, as of his Goods and Chattels, the estate of the deceased Ancestors, and of all other due circum∣stances considerable, to the end the Compositions might be such as might stand with (the Kings) re∣sonable profit, and the Ability of the Heirs estate. No Escheatr shall inforce any man to shew his evidence. That all Leases of Wards lands (except in cases of concealment) be made with litle or no Fine,
and for the best improved yearly rent that shall be offered, consideration being had of the cautions a∣foresaid, that no recusant be admitted to compound or be assignee of any wardship. That where it shall appear, that neither the King nor his progenitors, within the space of three∣score years last past, enjoyed any benefit by Ward∣ship, Livery, Primer seizin, Releif, Respect of Homage, Fies, or mesne rates of any lands, the Master and Councel of the said Court, were autho∣rized to remit and release all benefit and profit that might accrew to the King thereby; And in all cases where covenants were pformed to deliver bonds, which were taken concerning the same. And that upon consideration of circumstances, which may happen in assessing of Fines for the marriages, of the Wards and renting of their lands, either by reason of the broken estate of the deceased, want of provision for his wife, his great charge of Child∣ren unprovided for, infirmity or tendernesse of the heir, incertainty of the title, or greatnesse of in∣cumbrance upon the lands, they shall have liberty, as those or any other the like comsiderations shall offer themselves, to use that good discretion, and Conscience which shall be sit in mitigating or a∣bating Fines or Rents to the releif of such ne∣cessities. In pursuance whereof, and the course and usage of that Court as well be¦fore as after the said Instructions, Ward∣ships, nor any Custody or Lease of the Wards or their Lands were not granted,
in any surprising or misinforming way, but by the care and deliberation of the Ma∣ster and Councel of the Court of Wards and Liveries, upon a full hearing and examination of all parties and preten∣ders, they to whom they were granted Co∣venanting by Indenture under their Hands and Seals with Bonds of great penalties to perform the same, to educate the ward accor∣ding to his degree and quality, preserve his lands and houses from waste, fell no Coppice, Woods, grant no Copy-hold estates for lives, nor appoint any Steward to keep the Courts without licence, and to permit the feodary of the County where the land li∣eth yearly to survey, and superintend, the care thereof and had reasonable times of payment allowed them. And could not likely produce any grievan∣ces in the rates or assessing of Fines for marri∣ages, or for rents reserved during the minori∣ty of the wards, or for primer seisin or any o∣ther Compositions, when as the Kings of Eng∣land since the Raign of the unhappy R. 2. and the intermission of the Eyres and those strict enquiries which were formerly made of the frauds, or concealment of the Eschea∣tors or their Deputies in the businesse of Tenures, and Wardships, and their neg∣lect or not improving of them, (most of those former Officers and those that trucked with them not doing that right which they ought to their Consciences and their Kings and Benefactors.
Have for some ages past been so wil∣ling to ease their people, or comply with their desires, as they have no regarded a all their own profit, or taken such a care as they might to retain hose just powers which were incident or necessary to their Royal Govern∣ment; but by leaving their bounty and kind∣nesse open to all the requests or designs of the people, have like tender hearted parents given away much of their own support and suste∣nance, to gratify the blandishments, or neces∣sities, of their Children, and not only enerva∣ted, but dismembred, and quitted many of their Regal powers and just Prerogatives in their grants of Lands and Liberties, and thereby too much exhausted and abandoned the care of their own Revenue and Treasure, as may easily appear to any that shall take but a view of those many Regalities, Fran∣chises, and Liberties, which (being to be as a Sacrum patrimonium, unalienable) have heretofore either been too liberally granted by the Kings Progenitors, of which H. 3. was very sensible in his answer to the Prior or Master of the Hospital of St. Johns at Jerusalem, Daniel 168. or not well looked after in those Incroachments, and Usurpations, which have been made upon them. Or consider the very great cares and pro∣vidence, as well as prudence, of former ages, in the Managing, Collecting, and Improve∣ing of the Kings Revenue in England, whe∣ther
certain or casual. The strict Inquiries, & Orders, and the care of every thing which might make a profit, or prevent a damage which made some of the Kings of Eng∣land to be so litle wanting money▪ as King Canutus, as the Abby Book of Ramsey hath re∣corded it, Lib. Cae∣nobij d Ram∣sey Sect. 114. et Spelmans glossar. in ver∣ Fiscus. was able out of his Hanaper or travailing Trunk, when he lodged at Vas∣sington in Northamptonshire, to lend the Bishop Etheruus (who sbita pulsus occasione, had a great occasion to use it) good store of money. And that in William the Conquerours time, and in the height of his plenty and prosperi∣ty, no repairs of Castles and Houses were made but upon accompt by Oath. Inquiries were made by some of the suc∣ceeding Kings and Claus. 3. H. 3. their Officers after windfalen trees & a few trees were not given, nor Cheverons nor Rafters allowed towards the repairing of a Grange, or Farm, without the warrant of the great Seal of England Judges commanded to look to the Fines im∣posed in the Eyre or Circuits, and in all the Eyres & Plait.  3 E. 3. Rot. 58. Circuits, a Clark who kept par∣ticular Rolles or Duplicates of the Judges Rolles, or Records of their Proceedings was for the King especially appointed, and atten∣ded, and as smal a sum as 2d. accompted for a Deodand. Nor was any thing as far as Humane vigi∣lance, Industry, or Providence, might foresee,
prevent, or remedy, suffered to be done or con∣tinue, that might endammage or lessen the Royal Revenue, which King Henry the 3 d. could so watch over as the Court of Exche∣quer hath sometimes seen him there sitting, and taking his own accompts. Which kinds of wariness, and care, have been so much disused or neglected by many of his Successors, as though by time and the course thereof, the alteration of the value of mony & Coyne from twenty pence the ounce to five shillings & a peny, the ounce, of Sil∣ver, the prizes & rates of Provision and Com∣modities to be bought with it almost yearly raised and inhaunced, and the more charge∣able way of living which followed thereup∣on; might have put them in mind to have given lesse, or demanded more, for what was justly their own, when as in the 14th. year of the Reign of King Edward the 3 d. 40 shillings per diem, was thought by the King and his Councel to be a royal and sufficient expence for Edward Baliol King of Scots & his train, whilst he tarried 46 E. 3 par. Parl. 2 in 20 & 34. at London, and 6 s. per diem when he travailed. And in the reign of King H. 6. Medow-ground in 23 H. . Escaet. Leicester∣shire was valued but at eight pence an Acre and that as appears by a Remonstrance made in Parliament in or about the 11 th. year of the reign of that King, who was King in possession of France, as well as of England, now not above 227 years agoe, he did right worshipfully as the Record saith, maintain
the charge of his houshold with sixteen thou∣sand pounds Sterling per annum, and could not then defray it with less than Twenty four thousand pounds per annum, which now can∣not well be done under ten times as much, when an Annuity or Pension of ten pounds or twenty marks per annum, which was then sufficient for the Kings better sort of Servants, is now scarce enough for a Foot-man and the most ordinary sort of inferior Ser∣vants. Did notwithstanding not lessen their bounty, or raise the Rents or Rates of their Revenues, but permitted their Escheators in matters of Tenures and Wardships, to ad∣here unto their former courses, and find the value of the Lands in their Offices or Inqui∣sitions, at the old or small yearly values, the rule which the Escheators took for the find∣ing of the values of the Lands upon Inquisiti∣ons, being at the highest but the tenth part of the true yearly value (which was the guide also for the rate of the primer seisins where they were to be taken) & as much lower as the unwarrantable kindness of too many of those which were trusted, and should have looked better unto it could perswade them. The Feodaries also upon their Surveys seldom raising the yearly value to more than about a third part of such a gentle value as he should be entreated to adde to that which the Ju∣rors and Escheators had friendly found it.
So as somtimes a Mannor of above one hun∣dred pounds per annum was found but at thir∣teen shillings four pence per annum, and other times if mingled with other lands, of a great yearly value at no more than forty shillings per annum And no longer agoe than in the reign of King Chales the first, above one thousand pound per annum, hath been found to be but of the yearly vaue of twenty Marks. And an Estate — consisting of very few Mannors, and as few Coppyholders, but most in Frms and demsnes upon an improved and almost racked▪ Rent worth six thousand pounds per annum, found at no greater yearly value than one hundred eighty three pounds eleven shil∣lings, which is lesse than the thirtieth par, hough the Escheators with Knights and Gentlemen, and sometimes men of greater mark and quality were Commissioners, the Jurors made up somtimes of Gentle∣men, and most commonly of substantial Freeholders, and all of them, such as might better have understood an Oath, who take∣ing an ill custom to be warrant enough for a bad Conscience, did when they were by the Writ to enquire upon their Oaths de vero Annuo valore, of the true yearly value of the Lands, thnk that they did honestly and well enough to find it at a very small or low year∣ly value, because they were sure it was wel worth so much. Neither were the paymnts o  of
Homage so troublesom, as to make a complaint of when as by an Order made in 13 Eliz. by virtue of her pri∣vy Seal by the Lord Burghley Lord Treasu∣rer and the Chancellour and Barons of the Exchecquer, which the Lords and Commons of England in primo Jacobi, did pray and pro∣cure to be enacted by Parliament. It was after such an easy and old fashioned rate or value of the Lands, as it was but in every fifth Term to be paid in the Exchecquer by a rate and apportionment, and might have been saved by an actual doing of Homage as was antiently used to be done upon their Livery, and first coming to their Lands and their res∣pit of Homage and howsoever may as well be taken to be a favour as they do of their mesne Lords or one to another, in paying three shillings four pence per annum as a quit Rent for respit of suit of Court. And that it was therein and thereupon al∣so enacted, that no processe ad faciendum Ho∣magium, or fidelitatem, scire facias Capias or di∣stresse, should issue out of the Exchequer, but upon a good ground. And that the Clerks of the Treasurers Re∣membrancer in the Exchequer, shall pay all issues that any shall loose after he hath paid ordinary Fine for respite of Homage, and so may be proved by any of their Acquittan∣ces. Neither were the Rates for Licences of A∣lienations
burdensom when they were paid by the rich and improving and most com∣monly advantage taking purchasors or by the gainers by the settlement or alteration of Lands or Estates, and are in passing Fines not usually above a thirtieth part, and so after an antient & un-improved small yearly value, as six thousand pounds per annum, hath within three years last past paid but a little above one hundred and twenty pounds for a Composition or Licence of Alienati∣on. Which with other of the Kings casual pro∣fits by a long remissenesse and usage of some ages past whilst the people to save their own Purses, and favour one another choosing the open Rode and track and following the pre∣cedents and too common use of under valu∣ations, which hath ever been; and is the great obstructor and diminisher of royal Re∣venues, would as much as they could never for∣sake or go much out of it as is visible enough in the Escuage upon Knights Fees and va∣luatiōs in several ages & Kings reigns in that of a tenth in 36 H. 3. demanded in Parliament to be paid out of all the Ecclesiastical Reve∣nues after the full yearly value, where adjun∣cto magnae verb offensionis, as Mat. Paris 849. Mathew Paris tells us it was taken the worse in regard it was required to be taxed non secundum estimationem pristinm sed secundum, stimationem noam ad inquisitionem strictissimam not according to the former estimation or
rates, but a nw and most severe valuation, & was not at all granted. And in a Parliament at Bury, in 5 H. 3. the Clergy denyed to be rated by the Laity or Justa & alta taxatione By a just & high valuation. Mat. Paris 100 Sed tantum ut taxatio staret antiqua, But only that the old taxation might stand, nor was it much o∣therwise in the rates of fifteens and other pro∣portions of taxes granted by Parliaments, though somtimes ordered to be assessed upon oath the greatest tye and obligations that can be laid upon men and their Consciences, wherein litle or more then a tenth or smal part was paid or collected of the true yearly value. But like a numerous family of Children spending much, wanting much, and drawing all that they can from the kind and self-de∣nying common parent, together with the bounty and munificence which Kings and Princes are not seldom necessitated unto in the way of Government and care of the ge∣nerality, would never be brought to any just valuation or improvement no more than that of customs for goods exported or impor∣ted at the rate of twelve pence in the pound, and for the subsidies given by Parliament, whereupon no more was used to be paid than two Parl. 4 Car. primi. shillings, or two shillings eight pece in the pound, for Moveables, Debts, defalked and 4 s. in the pound, and most commonly not so much according to the yearly value of Lands, Rents, Annuities
or other yearly profits, after an easy and accustomed great undervaluation, no more than that of Tenths and first Fruits, or of Tax∣ations or Valuations of Benefices in the Kings Books at the tenth or fifth of the true yearly value, though every age, of one or two ages last past, and every thirty or twenty years in the age of Century, in which we now live, have hugely raised the yearly value of Lands every one striving who shall do it most in their own particular Estates. And if there were not (as there are) so very many plain and evident Demonstrati∣ons of it, may well be believed to be possi∣ble, when the publick, though made up of the private, is dayly gnawed, and preyed upon by the private, and every one lurches, and takes what he can from the Publique, to add to his private, when the numberlesse Number of the Private, is more than the Head or Monarch, when the people are to assesse themselves, and will ease one another, when interest and partiality are the Load∣stones that attracts, and the Cards and Compasses which the most of men do sail by, every man is a well-wisher to the Pub∣lique, but very few well-doers, every one pretends good unto it, but intend, if not all, yet a great deal more unto themselves, and do make it their businesse to be the Kings Cozens, though they are not of the blood-Royal, and by the help of bad Consciences,
and no good affection to the publique, or Common-weale, do think no more evil to be in such purloinings, than to fetch or take water from a great River, or stones, or gravel, from a vast and high Mountain. And the Nobility and Gentry, and most of the Land-Lords in England, have for many years last past in the publick Assesse∣ments, which were made to maintain the miseries and iniquityes of our latter times to their cost and grievance experimented, that where the Tenants were to pay for their Stock, they could so order it, as to lay the most of the Burden upon the Land-Lords, upon pretences, that they had but a small Stock of Cattle when it was in their power not only to undervalue what they had, but to lessen or make it more, any Fair or Market-day before or after. Wherby, and the effects which best disco∣vers the truth and intention of all men, and their matters be their pretences never so plausible, much coloured or varnished over, the Conclusion will necessarily follow the Premises, that the outsides and noyse of great ayds and Subsidyes, have been always a great deal more than the reality of them; that the Kings and Queens of England have always had in their Revenues fair blossom∣ings or Bloomes, but little more than the Tenth of it hath come to be fruits or gatherings
into their Treasuries, witnesse, if there were nothing else to prove it, the great and more than treble or a better Improvement which hath been lately made of them, since they came to be wrongfully possessed by pri∣vate men; and that the Revenues of the Kings and Princes of England could never yet ar∣rive to the Fate of great Rivers, which fer∣tilizeing all the Neighbouring shores, and carrying many a great Burden and Vessel, which dayly sail to and fro upon them, are notwithstanding so farre from emptying or impairing themselves, as the further they run, they are sure enough to be made greater by an Addition of many little Brooks, and great Rivers which fall into them. But by a continual emptying and deflux, must of necessity sink it self into a great de∣cay and deficiency, when as that which was accounted Providence, and good Husbandry in King H. 2. (or H. 1. if Daniels History. Samuel Daniel, and others be not mistaken) to change his Rent, Provisions of Corn & Victuals, which in every County was paid in Specie, into year∣ly Rents or Summs of money, because con∣luebat ad Regis Curiam, Multitud Coloorum oblatis vomeribus, in signum deficientis Agri∣culturae, A Multitude of Plow-men and Hus∣band-men, (occasioned probably by the many vast Demeasns, Commons, Woods, and Forrests which then took up much of
the Lands of the Kingdom) came with their Plow-shares to the Court, to shew the King the decay of Husbandry, saith the Black Book in lib. ni∣gro Scaccarij & Spelmans glssar in verbo firma. of the Exchequer; when as a lit∣tle before a measure of Wheat, for bread for a hundred men, was valued by the Kings Officers but at one shilling, the Carcasse of a fat Oxe one shilling, of a Sheep four pence, and for Provender for twenty Hor∣ses but four pence. And thought himself to have been on the surer side when he ordered six pence in every pound to be taken overplus or D'a∣vantage, least the rate and value of money should diminish, is now not the hundreth part of the value of the old kind of Rents and Provisions; and reducing also many incer∣tain Customs into a certainty of yearly Rents, which being then some thing proportionable unto it, is not now the 50th. or 100th. part of what was then the value in the intention and estimation, as well of the Kings, which were to receive it, as of the Tenants who were to pay it; And therefore notwthstanding the great Estates and Revenues of some Rebelli∣ous Subjects which have sometimes been for∣feited, & came as an accession & supplement to the wasting and decying Crown Lands, much of them being either in mery or poli∣cy restored afterwards to the Heirs of those which justly forfeited them. The languishing Condition of the Royal Revenues were so
little remedied, as the Royal Expences in defraying the more expencefull Charges of their houshold, Family, and princely Retinue. After the new enhaunced Rates and Prizes, whilst they recelved their Rents and other Profits after the old, carrying so great a dif∣ference and disproportion. As there is betwixt one hundred four pounds seventeen shillings and six pence, paid by Thomas Earl of Lancaster, in the reign of King E. 2. for 184 Tuns of Clarret-Wine, and one Tunne of White, but litle exceeding eleaven shillings per Tunn, and that which is now the price of the like quantity & between one hundred forty seven pounds seventeen shillings and eight pence for seven Furres of variable Miniver, or powdered Ermin; se∣ven hoods of Purple three hundred ninety five Furres of Budge for the Liveries of Barons, Knights, and Clerks. 123 Furrs of Lamb for Esquires bought at Christmas as appears by the accompt of Henry Leicester the said Earls Cofferer. Twenty four shillings for a fat stalled Oxe, twenty pence for a Mutton, two pence half penny for a Goose, two pence for a Capon, a penny for a Hen, and twenty four Eggs for a penny, which were the pri∣zes assessed by the Magistrates, and then thought to be equal for the Buyer, as well as the Seller, between the price of Cloath, for two Gowns for the Clarks of the Chamber,
to the Lord Mayor of London now, and that which in the raign of H. 6. cost but two shillings per▪yard, and betwixt the price of a Capon in the middle of the reign of Queen Elizabeth at six pence, and the rate of 2 s 6 d. or 3 s. which is now the least will be taken for one. And that by reason of the Gentry and all private mens racking and inhauncing the Rents of their Lands, letting it too often by the Acre, and the strictest measure, and the most that will be bid for it, and the plenty of pride to an extremity of excesse, rather than a plenty of mony in the Nation, the rates of Victuals and Provisions and manner of living, are increased to almost a third part more than what they were within this 20 years last past. There must needs follow that Tabes or Consumption which is so apparent and visi∣ble in the Royal Revenue, which will be as little for the peoples good, who (unless they can think it to be either Goodness or Wisdom in the Members to make or suffer the head to be sick and languish) are by Subsidies & As∣sessements to support it in its sicknesse or languishing condition, as it will be for the King to presse or perswade them to it. But least it should be objected, that as the well ordering, right use, and man∣age of the best things, is that only which blesseth and crowneth the Intention, and first Institution of them, and the ill is that
which corrupteth and blasteth all that was hoped for, or expected by it, and that the In∣nocency and necessary use of Tenures in Capit and Knight service may amount unro a grie∣vance if the Court of Wards should either by the wickednesse, extortion, or avarice of the Judges, or their ignorance, which is as bad as either, or their lenity or connivance to the Officers, or those which are employed under them. intend more their own profit than the Kings, and in stead of being a pro∣tection to Wards, pillage and ruine them and their estates, or be like (as they were not) an Assembly or Congregation of men met together in the formality of a Court where rapine, avarice, and injustice, under the vi∣zard or Hypocrisie of doing justice, strives who shall most advance their ends by a pro∣pension to what is unjust, and an aversion from all that may relieve the oppressed. It may be necessary to shew by whom or what manner of persons that Court of wards and Liveries was governed, and guided. Which was not like that Court of Civil Law, upon whose Bench and Tribunal in our late times of delirium and confusion, sate as Judges two common Lawyers Hugh Peters a a Traytor to his King and Country, some∣times a Prompter at a Play-house, and after∣wards an extemporary Preacher, together with an Atturney at common Law, a Tradesman, & a Country Gentleman, who would not at any
time think it safe, or becomming them in that their never the like practised in any age or time before Antipodes or contrarieties▪ to right reason, or the way of understanding, or do∣ing Justice, to mention any Text or part of the Civil Law, though it was daily and learnedly pleaded before them by the Advo∣cates, but when any Books or Authorities of the Civil Law, were cited and urged, which their capacities could not reach, some of them like the Woman in Seneca, which did not complain of her own want of sight, but found fault with the darknesse of the House, could to throw by the trouble or any further consideration of what they did not under∣stand, find no better a way than causelessely to rail at, and reproach the Common Law as well as the Civil, and unadvisedly and publickly declare them to be but Inventions to get mony. Was not like the Court to remove Ob∣structions in the Godly as they called it, but ungodly Purchasers, where all the Kings grants after 1636. or thereabouts were ad∣judged as null, and not to be allowed, and all manner of obstructions laid in the way of Loyal and Distressed men, to clear and make an open passage for their own Partie and such kind Purchasers▪ Not like that of Haberdashers-Hall, where the Just and Innocent were Sequesterd (by the tender Conscienced Party as they sti∣led themselves) for their Allegiance to their
King, following of the Scripture, their Con∣sciences, and the known Laws of the Land were notwithstanding their many Petitions, and Importunities several years whilst their estates were Sequestred and taken from them, kept in a starving Con∣dition, before they could be heard, to litle purpose, where Sons and too well descend∣ed to be so unworthy, were invited to accuse their Loyal & Aged Parents, whom the Jewes would have rent their Clothes to have seen, encouraged, and made to be sharers in the spoyl of their Father. Not like the Committee (or Court impro∣perly called) at Salters-Hall for relief of Cre∣ditors against their imprisoned Debtors, where some of those Judges and Commit∣tees, if not wronged by printed Complaints, were in good hopes to have made some pre∣parations to sell the Debtors Lands to their Friends or Kindred at good Penniworths. Nor like the Committee for Plundring, rather than Plundred Ministers, who to take away all the Benefices of England and Wales, from the Tribe of Levi, and confer them up∣on the Tribe of Issachar, and their Factious, and Mechanique guifted Brethren, and keep out the Orthodox and learned Clergy, could make their costly orders for the trial of them that were more Learned then them∣selves, concerning the Grace of God, and their utterance for Preaching of the Gospel with private and deceitful marks, and litle close
couched or interposed Letters, hid or put under or over some other Letters, whereby to intimate to their Subcom∣mittees in the Countries, that howsoever the men were without exception, and found to be so upon Certificates and Examination, they were to be delayed, and sent from Post to Pillar, and tired boh in their Bodies and Purses, and be sure never to be in∣stituted and inducted. But was a Court compos'd of grave, learned, knowing, and worthy Masters of the Wards, such as William Marquesse of Winchester, William Lord Burghley, and his Son the Earl of Salisbury, and many other who made not the Court, or any of the bu∣sinesse thereof, to Lacquy after their own Interest. Had for Attorney Generalls of that Court, who sate as men of Law and Judges therein, and assistants to the Masters of the Wards Richard Onslow Esq after∣wards Speaker of the House of Commons, Sr. Nicholas Bacon Knight, afterwards a most learned Lord keeper of the great Seal of England, and a great Councellor of Estate to Queen Elizabeth, Sr. Henry Hobart after∣wards Lord cheif Justice of the Court of Common-pleas, Sr. James Ley Knight and Baronet, afterwards Lord cheif Justice of the Court of Kings Bench, after that Earl of Marleborough, and Lord Treasurer of England, Sr. Henry Calthrop Knight, Sr.
Rowland Wandesford Knight, and Sr. Orlando Bridgeman Kt. now Lord Chief Justice of the Court of Common pleas, all very emi∣nently learned Lawyers, and of great estates, honour, honesty, and worth in their several generations, who upon any difficult or weigh∣ty matter of Law, to be discussed in that Court, did usually intreat the presence, and had the assistance of the Lord cheif Justices, Lord cheif Baron, or of any of the other lear∣ned Judges of the Land, whom they should please to invite unto them, where a variety of learning, grave deliberations, a great care of Justice, and right reason most lively and clearly represented, have left to posterity as guides and di∣rections for after ages; those conclusions and resolutions, of cases of great learning and weight in that Court, reported by the Lord Dier, Cook, and other learned Sages of the Law. Nor were the Masters of the Wards At∣torneys, Auditors or Escheators loosely tied by Oaths, as some of the Committee Juris∣dictions were, when they did swear only in general, faithfully according to their best skill and knowledge, to discharge the trust com∣mitted to them, and would not for favour or affecti∣on reward, or gift, or hopes of reward, or gift, break the same. Or as little restraining them from Acts of Oppression or Injustice, as the
Oath of the Controlers for the sale of the Kings and Queens lands, ordered by that which called it self a Parliament 17. July 1649. The Oath of the Commissi∣oners for managing the estates of Delin∣quents & Sequestrations at Haberdashers-Hall; Ordered by no better an Authority the 15 of April 1650. or that, which by that, which would be called an Act of Parliament, of the 10 of December 1650. for establishing an high Court of Justice within the Counties of Norfforlk, Suffolk, Cambridge, and Hun∣tington, for the Tryal of Delinquents was only ordered was to be taken by those that were to be the Judges, that they should well and tru∣ly according to the best of their skill and knowledge execute the several powers given unto them; Which bound them not from doing wrong, to those whom they made to bear the bur∣dens of all the cruelties which they could possibly lay upon them. But were compassed and hedged in by Oaths,Master of the Wards Oath. as warily restraining, as they were legal, for the Master of the Wards was by Act of Parliament enjoyned to swear to mini∣ster Justice to Rich ond Poor, to the best of his cun∣ning and power, to take no gift or reward in any Case depending before him,32 H. 46. and to deliver with speed such as shall have to do before him.Attor∣ney of the Wards Oath. The Attorney was sworn truely to counsel the King, and the Master of the Court, and with all speed and diligence to endeavour the hearing and deter∣mination,
indifferently of such matters and causes as shall depend before the Master of the Wards, and shall not take any gift or reward, in any matter or cause depending in the same Court.Auditors Oath▪ The Auditors sworn to make a true allowance in their Offices to every person, which shall be ac∣comptant before them, and not to take or re∣cieve of Poor or Rich any gift or reward in any matter or cause depending, or to be discussed in the Court but such as shall be ordi∣narily appertaining to their Offices,Eschea∣tors Oath. and the Es∣cheators to treat all the people in their ayliwicks, truely and righteously to do right to every man as∣well to poor as to rich, do no wrong to any man, neither for promise, love, nor hate, nor no mans right disturb, do nothing whereby right may be di∣sturbed, letted, or delayed, and shall take their En∣quests, in open places, and not privy. And might better content the people, Then when in former ages the Ward∣ships and their disposing were left to the care and order of the Chancellour, as to Thomas Bcket in H. 2. time,Math Pa∣ris 101. or to Hubert de Burgh Chief-Justice and Earl of Kent, in the Reign of H. 3. sometimes to the Treasurers or Chamberlains & most comonly, let to farm by Escheators, & sometimes by under-Sherifs or when the next Wardships or Escheats that should happen were before hand assign∣ed towards the payment of some of the Kings Debts, as to William de Valence Earl of Pem∣broke in the Reign of E. 1. or that the Ward∣ships
and Escheats which should happen in 6▪ or 7. Counties were before hand granted to some particular man. And can never be so good or for the ease of the people as when the King by a constant and well ordered Court shall be rescued from the importunityes and necessityes of great men, and preserved from the Errors which an indulgence or munificence to so many Cravers, Petitioners, and Pretenders, as do usually throng the Courts, and presence of Princes, might draw or perswade them unto and the Wards and their Friends, not put to seek Remedies or just Defences in their Suits or Concernments in other Courts a∣mongst a multitude and intermixture of Causes of another nature, nor to pro∣cure an accesse for their Petitions to their Kings, or at their Courts or Residences, where a continual assembly of all the weigh∣ty cares and emergencies in Government, will inevitably inforce or necessitate delayes, and notwithstanding the help of some costly Mediators and intercessors, cannot nor ever could be easily got through, but may in such a fixed and peculiar Court as that of the Wards & Liveri with a small expence of time, or attendance, and the assistance of certain allowed Fees to proper and appoint∣ed offices, which cannot be any grievance where they shall be any thing within the bounds of Reason or Moderation, know
how to find out and go to their proper Remedies as readily as an Apothecary can to his Boxes of Medicaments, or the Physician to the experimented directions of his Books or Recipes, and were sure to be heard and have redresse in a Court of Justice, guided and governed by wise, and good men, who being as great as they were good, were fenced and com∣passed about with comprehensive and re∣straining Oaths, enjoyning all manner of right, and forbidding the least of Injustice, and wrong to be done unto the People. Preserved the estates, inheritance, and evidences of the Wards, guarded, and res∣cued the estates of Lunatiques, and Ideots, from those that would deceive them, help∣ed the Wards in the discovery, and recovery of their debts, and rights, rescued them from all wrongs, enjoyned, and prohibited other Courts from any cognizance, or determi∣nation of their concernments, except when a Will was to be proved, or an Administration granted, or the like, to, or for the use, and benefit, of a Ward, and committed the edu∣cation of such, whose Fathers dyed Papists, so to Protestants, as many, and amongst them some Earls, and Nobility, have by the di∣rection of the King, and the care of that Court, been put under the Tuition of some Bishops, and thereby become Protestants, and their Posterities fastened in that Reli∣gion,
most of which cares of that Court, and benefits received by the people, could not be at all, or not so well had and enjoyed, when there was no Court, which besides the pr∣venting and punishing of stoln marriages, and many other benefits not here mention∣ed, may notwithstanding some deviations, and irregularities, which have been com∣mitted by some Officers, and Clarks, which may easily be remedied, be as useful as other of the great Courts in Westminster-Hall, which were not dissolved or put down in the reign of King E. 1. because all the Judges of the Kings Bench, common Pleas, and Exche∣quer, except John de Metingham, and Elias de Beckingham were by judgment of Parlia∣ment,Spelmans glossar 416. et Daniel 189. found guilty and grievously Fined for Briberies, extortions, oppressions, and other great misdemeanors, but to the great good and comfort of the people and nation, have as before those offences committed by some of their Judges in the absence of the King in Gas∣conie, ever since continued as great Magazines of Justice, and the Asylums or Sanctuaries of all that are distressed. So as no Serpent, for ought ever appears, lurked under that green grasse, nor any Cro∣codile nourished, or bathed himself in those wholesome waters, laid not his eggs in the Sand of our Estates or Properties, assaulted not the innocent Passenger, nor spoi∣led our Flocks of Sheep, or herds of Cattle:
and a Marvail or wonder it may therefore be, that so good, so necessary, and so beneficial an Institution, should have any Innate, or origi∣nal evil or grievance in it, and the quaeru∣lous humour of the vulgar, who, like a herd of Swine, do too often cry, when one of many of them is but justly pinched or wrung by the ear for his unjust Trespassings, or as those irrational Guards of the night do use to howl or bark because one of their kind half a mile off, torments himself in a Moon-light night in barking at his own or any other shaddow, should never stuffe out, or en∣large their complaints, against that which was accounted to be no grievance in Edward the Confessors time, whose memory was, and is yet like the Nard, or Spices of the East, and his Laws so venerable, as our English fore-fathers could in the loss and ru∣ines of their Country, hide them under his shrine at Westminster, and thought them∣selves happy, when as with Tears and Importunities they obtained of William the Conquerour to be restored to them, and left them as rich Heir-looms, and a pre∣cious Legacy to their Posterity, who got the care and observation of them to be afterwards inserted into the Coronation-Oath of the succeeding Kings of England. And could no way be suspected not to be
highly contented with them, when as they were Leges propriae, Laws of their own Coun∣try, & consuetudines antiquae in quibus vixerant Patres orum Chronic Leichfeldense. & ipsi in eis nati, & nutriti fue∣runt; and the antient Customs in which their fore-fathers were born or bred up in, not col∣lected or put together by incertain reports partial or doubtful, upon reasonlesse tradi∣tions, or hear-says of an afflicted trembling, or affrighted degenerate people, under the sense and miseries of a late Forreign Con∣quest, but per praeceptum Regis Wilelmi electi sunt de singulis totius Angliae Comitatibus 12 viri sa∣pietiores quibus jurejurando injunctum fuit coram Rege Gulielmo ut quoad possent tramite neque ad dextram, neque ad sinistram, declinantes legum suarum & consuetudinum sancita patefacerent, nil praetermittentes nil addentes, nil praevaricando mutantes, orderly and judicially inquired and sought out by a fair and just election of twelve of the wisest men of every County in England, by virtue of King William the Con∣querours Writs or Commission to whom being brought into the Kings presence, they were injoyned by oath, that as much as possi∣bly they could▪ they, should have a care to do right, and neither incline to the right hand, nor to the left, & without any omission, addition, collusion, or deceit should certifie their legal Customs, which being done, and written out by the Kings com∣mand,
by the proper hand-writing of Alde∣red Arch-Bishop of York, and Hugh Bishop of London, were by the King ratified by his Proclamation, and made perpetual, per to∣tum Regnum Angliae inviolabiliter tenendas sub paenis gravissimis, Throughout all England under grievous penalties to be observed and kept; And so approved by the people, as about 70 years after, the Citizens of Lon∣don, (as the continuation of Florence Wigorni∣ensis mentioned by that learned Knight Sr. Roger Twisden in his preface to the Laws of William the Conquerour, published by the eminently learned Mr. Selden informs us) Continu∣ation Floren. Wigor et Sr. Roger Twisden in prfat. ad leges Willielmi 1. did importune Maud the Empresse, ut eis Ed∣wardi Regis Leges observare liceret quia optimae erant, That the Laws of King Edward might be observed, because they were the best. And when William the Conquerour order∣ed the Rents, and Revenues of such as held of him, to be paid into the Exchequer, it was non simpliciter nec haeres ab hereditate, M. S. Cot∣toniana. nec ut ab ipso haereditas tollitur, sed simul cum haereditate sub Regis custodia constitutus tempr pupillaris aeta∣tis, Not to take away the Inheritance, but to keep and educate him during his Minority. For It could be no inconvenience to the publick welfare of the Nation, to have the Children of the best ranck and qua∣lity (for such were then the Tenants in Ca∣pite and by Knight service) virtuously and
nobly educated in Arts and Arms, whereby to be enabled to do their Prince and Coun∣try service, and their Lands and Estates in the interim, to be protected and defended from Neighbour or other injuries. Nor to be married to their own degree or a nobler quality, when as by the means of in∣termarriages betwixt the Saxons & Normans, as between York & vincent Cata∣logue of Eng∣lish Nobility. Lucia the Sister of Morchar Earl of Northumberland, a Saxon, and Juo Tal∣bois a great Norman Baron, and betwixt Ralph de waiet a Saxon, by a British or Welch Wo∣man, & Emme the Daughter of William Fitz Os∣bern Earl of Hereford, by which he was by the Conquerour made Earl of the East-Ang∣les. And many more which might be instan∣ced, their mutual discontents and animosi∣ties calming into reconciliations and friend∣ships, had the like effect, as the tye and kind∣ness of the intermarriages had not long be∣fore in King Ina's time, who himself marry∣ing with Guala a M. S. inter L. L. Regis Edwardi. British woman, & his Lords and great men intermarrying with the Welch, & Scots, & their Sons also marry∣ing with their Daughters, the Nation became to be as Gens una, one people, in a near con∣sociation, and relation, and the Norman H. 1. afterwards found it to be not unsuccessefull in his own marriage with Matilda the Daugh∣ter of Malcolm King of Scots, by the Sister or Niece of Edgar Atheling of the Saxon Royal line.
It was no grievance when the Charter of Liberties (which was the original of a great part of our after Magna Charta,) was granted to the people of England by K. H. 1. who is therein said omnes malas consuetudines quibus Anglia opprimebatur auferre, to abolish all the evil customs with which England was op∣pressed, when it would have been strange that Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service should remain as a part of the Kings just pre∣rogative, and be so well liked of, and appro∣ved, consilio & consensu Baronum, By advice and consent of the Barons, if there had been any grievance originally or naturally in them. Nor so much as a Semblance of it in the reign of H. 2. Mat Pais 99. & 100. when a general Inquisition was made per Angliam cui quis in servitio secula∣ri de jure obnoxius teneretur, thorough England What secular or temporal services due by Law were not performed. And as little in the Parliament at Clarendon in the same Kings reign, where in the pre∣sence of the King, Bishops, Earls, Barons, and Nobility, Mat. Paris 100. facta fuit recognitio, sive recordatio, cujusdam partis consuetudinum, & libertatum An∣tecessorum suorum, Regis viz. Henrici Avi sui & aliorum quae observari debbant in Regno & ab omnibus teneri, A recapitulation and rehear∣sal was made of some of the Customs and Liberties of their Ancestors, and of the King, that is to say of King H. 1. and others which
ought of all to be observed and kept in the Kingdom, in which there was nothing a∣gainst the Feudal Laws or Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service, but many expressi∣ons, and allowances of them. And if otherwise it would have been some∣thing strange that the issue and posterity of those Barons, should in King Johns time ad∣venture all that could be dear, or near unto them, to gain the Liberties granted by H. 1. with some addition, and never grudge that King the same Prerogative, when as hazard∣ing the forfeiture of their own Magna Charta of Heaven, to gain a Magna Charta on Earth for their posterities. They had greatly over∣powered their King, at Running Mede where their Armies stood in procinctu & acie, Facing one another, & Pila Mat. Paris. minantia pilis, Threat∣ning death and distruction to each other, or would so willingly have hung up their Shields, and Launces, and returned to their peace and obedience, by accepting of that Magna Charta, if they had not taken it to be as much for their own defence, & the good of the Kingdom, as it was for his, nor so will∣ingly afterwards in the reign of King Henry the 3 d. his Son have clad them∣selves in Steel, made a Combination, and boud themselves by oath one to another never to submit to a peace, until they had a just performance of what his Father had granted them, endured the Popes then dire∣ful Fulminations, and never rested until the
King himself had confirmed that Magna Charta by a most solemn oath, in procession with the Bishops who with lighted Tapers in their hands; anathematiz'd all the infringers thereof, if Tenures in Capite and the enable∣ing their Prince to defend them, had not been a part of their own Liberties, nor could they be imagined to be otherwise, when as by an Act of Parliament also of that King the great Charter was to be duely read in all Counties of England, and Writs, and Let∣ters were sent to all the Sheriffs of England, commanding them by the oaths of twelve Knights of every County, to enquire what were the antient Rights and Liberties of the People, no return was ever made that Te∣nures in Capite, and by Knight service, either were or could be any obstructions to them or that, so often bloodily contested and too dearly purchased, Magna Charta, nor was it a∣ny publique grievance, when as in the Parli∣ament of 26 H. 3 in a great contest betwixt him and the Baronage and great men of Eng∣land, touching his ill Government, and diverse exactions, and oppressions, the profits which he had by his Tenures and Escheats were said to have been sufficient to have kept him from a want of mony, and oppressing his Sub∣jects. Nor in Anno 42. H. 3. when the King upon those great complaints and stirres be∣twixt him, and the then Robustious and
sturdy Barons of England occasioned by his misgovernment, which busied the people with Catalogues of grievances, he by his Writs or Commissions appointed in every County of England; Mat. Paris 977. Quatuour milites qui considerarent qut et quantis granaminibus simpli∣ciores a fortioribus opprimuntur et inquirent dili∣genter d singulis quaerelis et injurijs a quocunque factis, vel quibuscunque illatis a multis retroactis temporibus, et omnia inquisita sub sigillis suis in∣clusa secum coram Baronagio ad tempus sibi per breve praefixum; Four Knights, men of known worth and wisdom, loving and be∣loved of their Countryes, to enquire what grievances or oppressions the smaller sort of people suffered by the greater, and also of all injuries and ongs done by any person whatsoever, either lately or former∣ly, and to certifie it under their Seals to the Barronage, which what ever they were, or if ever or never recorded, (for they have not for ought appears, been certified or record¦ed,) no Record or Historian of that, or the after times, have said that Tenures in Capite and by Knights service, were thereupon retorned to be oppressive, or so much as in∣convenient. Neither are to be found amongst any of those huge heaps of evils which Mathew Paris that sower and honest Monk of St. Albons (who lived in those times and especially re∣marked them) hath delivered to posterity.
The 24 Reformers or Conservators of the Kingdom, in that Kings Reign, appointed by the Baronage, never intimated any thing of their dislike of that honourable institution. It was not complained of upon the refu∣sal of Roger Bigod Earl of Norfolk, Marshall of England, Humphry Bohun Earl of Hereford and Essex, Constable of England and Gilbert de Clare Earl of Glocester, and Hertford, great and mighty men and of Princely Estates, to go at the Command of King E. 1. Pat. 30. E. 1. unto his Wars at Gascony, upon pretence that the warning was to short, whereby the Kings dis∣pleasure was so much incurred, Walsing∣ham ypodigm Nuster. 487. a Bohun and Clare, to escape the Seisure and forfeiture of their Lands and to purchase his favour a∣gain were glad each of them to marry one of his Daughters, without any Dowry, and sur∣render their Earldoms, Honors, Offices, and Lands unto him, & take back Estates thereof in Tayle to them, and the Heirs of their Bo∣dies upon their wives to be severally begot∣ten, and Bigot surrendring also to him his Earledom, and Marshals rod together with all his Lands, Claus. 30. E. 1 and taking Back a grant of an Estate for life in his honors and Lands, the reversion to the King if he should not have any Issue of his Body begotten the King in Parliament pardoned them, and John de Fer∣raris, and other Earls, Barons, Knights, and Esquires, parl E. 1 and all other of their fellow∣ship, confederacy, and Bond and all that held
twenty pounds Land Per annum, whether in chief of the King or other that were appointed at a certain day to pass over with him into Flanders, their rancour and evil will and all other offences committed against him. Were not in the Roll of general grievan∣ces, which the Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Eals, Barons, and Commons, sent him when he was at the Sea side ready to take shipping in∣to Gascoigne, Daniels Histoy 195. concerning his Taxes, and other impositions. Neither any vestigia, or footsteps to be found of any grievance by them, in that grand search, or inquiry by the Commissions of Traile Baston, in, or about the 33 of E. 3. after intruders into other mens Lands, exactions, and oppressions, or in the presentments in the Eyres, when the Justices thereof in several Kings reigns, care∣fully travailed into the several Counties and places of England, and found out, and re∣turned the complaints, and oppressions of every County, and where the Natives them∣selves, & the witnesses cannot be supposed to be so much their own enemies, as to conceal, the Countries oppressions & the Jurors were solemnly charged to present them upon their Oaths, and if they should omit to do it, had the malice of their Neighbours to watch & accuse their Perjuries, and the severity of the Judges, to punish any failings in their duty. Or in the Reformation which the Lords Ordainers, as they were afterwards called,
in or about the fifth year of the Raign of King E. 2. pretended to make in that unadvi∣sed Commission, which he granted them for the Government of the Kingdome. No pretence, or so much as a mur∣mur against them by the Reformers in Wat Tylers and Jack Straws commotion, when they were so willing to overthrow and extirpate all the Nobility and Gen∣try, which should withstand their rude and unruly designs of making all Bond∣men free, and taking away Villenage, and of making Wat Tyler, and several other of their party, Kings in several Counties, and to devise what Laws they listed. Or by Jack Cade, or Captain Mend-all as he falsely stiled himself when many a grievance was picked up to colour his Rebellion in the reign of King H. 6. but could find nothing of that for a garnish of his Roguery. Or Robert Ket the Tanner, in the reign of King E. 6. sitting in judgment amongst the Rabble, under his tree (as they called it) of Reformation, where Tenures and Ward∣ships, being so obvious, and every where in∣sisted, upon, they would not probably have omitted them out of the Roll, or list of their complaints if there could have been but a supposition, or dream of any grievance in them, which being the more noble benefi∣cial, and better sort of Tenures may better
deserve an approbation of the People, and Parliaments of England, than Tenures in Villenage, which by an Act of Parliament in 25 E. 3.18. may be pleaded, and a Villain seized though a libertate probad, be depend∣ing. And it was enacted in the Parliament of 9 R. 2.2. that if Villaines fled into places infranchised and sued their Lords, their Lords should not be barred thereby, and by an Act Par∣liament in 8 H. 6.11. that a Villain should not be admitted▪ or put to be an Apprentice in the City of London, and by an Act of Parlia∣ment in 19. H. 7.15. If any Bond-man pur∣chase Lands, and convey away the Lands, the Bond-man being estui que use of thse Lands, they shall be seised by the Lord. Nor did the Act of Parliament of 25 E. 3. 25 E. 3.1. which provided that none should be constrained to find men of Armes, Hblers, nor Archers, but by common assent, and grant made in Parliament, mistake when it inserted a saving, and exception of all those that held by such services. Neither did the Commons in the Parlia∣ment of 5 R. 2. Rot Parl. 5 R. 2.11. & 14. upon the Repeal in Par∣liament, of the Manumissions of Bond-men, extorted from the King by Wat Tyler, and his Rout, or men of Reformation, think they did themselves, or those they represented, any hurt, when they cryed with one voyce, that the Repeal was good, and that at their request the
Repeal was by whole assent confirmed. Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service, were not complained of in the Parliament of 13 R. 2. though the Commons in Parlia∣ment had prayed, and were allowed, that euery man might complain of the oppression of what per∣son or Estate soever without incurring the pain of the Statute of Rot Parl. 13. R. 2▪ n. 45. Gloucester (which under great penalties prohibited, false Newes and Lies of the Nobility and great men of the Realm, Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of both Benches, and other great Officers of the Bench) made in the second year of the King. Nor was there so much as an Apprehen∣sion of any evil in them in the Parliament of 4 H. 4. where the Commons pray that The Act of Parliament of the 1 of E. 3. Declarat. Lords and Commons, in Collect. Par∣liament decla∣rations, 386▪ & 390. that none shall be distrained to go out of their Counties, but only for the Cause of necessity of suddain com∣ing of strange Enemies into the Realm, and the Statute made in the 18th. year of the Reign of the said King, That men of Armes, Hoblers and Archers chosen to go in the Kings Service out of England; shall be at the Kings wages from the day that they do depart out of the Counties where they were chosen, and also that the Statute made in the 25th. year of the Raign of the said King, that none be compelled to find Men of Arms Hoblers nor Archers, other than those which hold by such services, unlesse it be by common assent and grant made in Par∣liament, be firmly holden and kept in all
points, it was upon the granting of their de∣sires, and an Act of Parliament made for that purpos (as the Declaration of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, against the Kings Commission of Array, in an. 1642 mentioneth) especially provided, that by force or colour of the said supplication, nor of any Statute thereupon to be made, the Lords nor any o∣ther that have Lands or Possessions in the Counties of Wales, or in the Marches thereof, shall in no wise be excused of their Services and Devoires due of their said Lands and Possessions, nor of any o∣ther Devoier, or things whereunto they or any of them be especially bound to the King, though that the same Lords and others, have other Lands and Possessions within the Realm of England; nor that the Lords, or other of what Estate or Condi∣tion soever they be, that hold by Esuage or other Services due to the King, any Lands and Possessi∣ons within the said Realm▪ be no way excused to do their Services and Devoirs due of the said Lands and Possessions: nor that the Lords, Knights, Es∣quires, nor other Persons, of what Estate or Conditi∣on they be, which hold and have of the Grant or Confirmation of the King, Lands, Possessions, Fees, Annuities, Pensions, or other yearly profits, be not excused to do their Services to the King, in such manner as they are bound, because of the Lands, Possessions, Fees, Annuities, Pensions▪ or Profits afresaid. And might challenge their quietus est, or Proclamation of acquittall, when there
were no complaints made against them in the former ages when there were so many Taxes laid upon Knights Fees, as 20▪ shillings then a great sum of money, & as much almost as 20 markes is now, upon every Knights Fee, imposed by King R. 1. toward his ransome 26 s. 8 d. upon every Knights Fee by King Iohn, and another also of the same sum to∣wards his expedition into Wales, 20 s. upon every Knights Fee towards his Charges in Normandy, & an Escuage of 20 s. upon every Knights Fee to be paid the one half at Easter, and the other at Michaelmas besides the Escu∣age which he had upon the marriage of his Sister Isabel to the Emperor Frederick, two Escuages imposed by H. 3. and an Escuage upon the marriage of his Daughter the Lady Margaret to Alexander King of Scots. 20 s. of every Knights Fee by H. 4. the many servi∣ces in person done by those which held in capite, and Knights Service, in forinseco servi∣tio, in all the expeditions and Wars in France, from the time of the Norman Conquest, to the end of the Raign of E. 4. and at home in the Wars betwixt England and Wales, and be∣twixt England and the Scots, where very many Inhabitants of the Counties of Cumberland, Westmeland, and Northumberland, that held by Cornage a kind of Knight Service, to blow a horn upon the invasion or incursion of the Scots, and to help to repell them, and had their
Lands sometimes at the Will of the Lords conferred and given to the younger and more lusty Sons who were able to undergo that service, could before King James his accession to the Crown of England, the paci∣fication of the English and Scottish hostilities, & placing them under one obedience, scarce rest in their beds by reason of the Scots sudain or nightly alarmes and depredations, dri∣ving or stealing their Cattell, and spoiling all that they had. And in all the troubles of England before and since the Barons Wars upon any Rebel∣lions and inquietudes of the people, when those that held by Knight▪service were fre∣quently and hastily summoned to come to the King cum Equis & Armis, and the great charges, trouble, hazard, and ex∣pences, which the Lords Msne, were put unto, by Assessements of Escuage and otherwise; And that immediately up∣on the death of the Kings Tenants in capite, & by Knight Service, the Escheators did usually seise not only the Lands of the greatest of the Nobility, Gentry, and meaner men; But the Stock and Cattell upon their grounds, and the Goods in their Houses, insomuch as their Executors were many times constrain∣ed to Petition and obtain the Kings Writs and Allowance, to have the Stock and per∣sonal Estate delivered unto them. And yet no complaints made at all against those Tenures or necessary defences of the King¦dome,
nor against Tenures by grand or Petit Serjeanty, in the thirty confirmations of our Magna Charta, upon as often Breaches to be supposed of it. Never complained off in the making of thirty six Acts of Parliament concerning Wardships and Tenures in the several times and Ages from 8 H. 3. to this present, nor at the making of the Act of Parliament in 32 H. 8. for the erection of the Court of Wards. Nor in so many thousand Petitions which have been in 186. several Parliaments, for almost four hundred years last past, or before 9 H. 3. or ever since this nation could re∣member any thing either in our Parliaments Micel-gemots Wittena-gemots conventus sapien∣tum, or Magna Concilia, where all the Grie∣vances, and Complaints of the people not to be remedied else where, came as to the Pool of Bethesda, for help and relief, and wherein if any in some one or more Parliaments should so much neglect their duty, and the more than ordinary business and concern∣ments of their Kings, themselves, and Coun∣tries with which they were intrusted, and to which their Oaths of Allegiance, if nothing else, must needs be their Monitors, it cannot (without a supposition and belief which will never be able to find entertainment in any rational mans understanding) be ima∣gined that the whole Nation for so many A∣ges, past and in so many Assemblies, of those that should be the Sons of Wisdome, should
be bound up under such a fate of Stupi∣dity or Ignorance, as to represent those that were sick and not know of it, or that all or any of them should propter imbecillitatem, vel pernegligentiam, by a to be pitied weakness or negligence, not either seek or find the way to the ears or audience of so many worthy and just Kings and Princes as this Kingdom hath been happy in, who would have been as wil∣ling to give a remedy as they could have been to seek it, if there had been any ground or cause for it, that so many Petitions of small concernments, or of no greater consequence than for the paving of Streets, killing of Crows, not taking of young Herns out of their nests without license of the owner of the ground, and the like, should get admittance, and cause Acts of Par∣liament to be made thereupon, and that of Tenures in Capite, if any grievance could at all be found in them, and of so long a conti∣nuance (which usually makes light burthens to be heavy) should be so dipped in a Lethe or Oblivion, as not at all to be remem∣bred. Which had nothing at all of grie∣vance in their essence or being understood of them, in the making of the Statute of 1 H. 8. cap. 12. Coke 4. part Institu∣tes 197. 1 H. 8. against Empson and Dudley, by whom the Kings Subjects had been sore hurt, troubled, and greived, in causing untrue Offices to be found, retorning of Offices that never were found, and in changing Offices that were found.
No Grievance perceived to be in them, in Primo Jacobi, 1 Jaco∣bi▪ 5. when in the Statute concern∣ing Respites of Homage there was a Proviso, that in case it shall be thought fit, for the true know∣ledge and preservation of the Tenures appertaining to the Crown, and so ordered in the open Court of Exchequer, that proces should issue out of the said Court against any, came not within the Suspi∣tion or Jealousy of a Grievance, when in the Parliament of 7. Jacobi Regis, Sr. Francis Bacon then his Majesties Sollicitor, Sr. Fran∣cis Bacons speech in Par∣liament in 7. Jacobi, touching a Composition to be made for Tenures in Capite. in his speech, as one of the House of Commons in Parlia∣ment, to the Lords in Parliament, perswading them to joyn with the Commons, to Petition the King to obtain liberty to treat of a Com∣position with his Majesty for Wards and Tenures, acknowledged in the name of that Parliament, that the Tree of Tenures was plan∣ted into the Prerogative by the Antient Common Law of England, fenced in and preserved by many Statutes, and yeildeth to the King the fruit of a great Revenue, and that is was a noble Protection, that the young Birds of the Nobility and good Families, should be gathered and cluck∣ed under the Wings of the Crown. Nor in Primo Car. primi, 1 Ca primi . in the Act of Parliament touching the rating of Officers Fees in the Exchequer, upon pleadings of Licences or Pardons for Alienations, when the Lords and Commons in that Par∣liament assembled, did declare that the
Kings Tenures are a Principal flower of the Crown (which being in England, the safety and protection of the people cannot be said or proved to be adorned by their sorrows and miseries) and ought not to be concealed. And that in the petition of Right, in 3 Car. primi. wherein all the Grievances and Burdens of the Subjects, and breaches of Laws and Liberties, that any way concer∣ned them or their Posterities were enume∣rated, and remedies for the future establish∣ment of the quiet, and happines of the peo∣ple propounded and granted, Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, with their incidents, were not reckoned or accounted as Grievances, though all that troubled the people, were at that time so largly thought and beleived to be redrest as a publick joy, upon the Kings granting of that Petition of Right, was com∣manded to be celebrated by the Musique and ringing of Bells in every Parish Church of the Cities of London and Westminster, which vied each with other who should pro∣claim and tell their joyes the loudest; And the blaze of numberless Bonfires, repre∣senting the flame of the peoples affection to∣wards a most gracious Soveraign, seemed to turn the sullen night into a morning or day which the Sun beams had newly guilded, whilst Alecto and her Sister Furies despairing in their hopes of kindling a sedition, and
bringing the miseries of a Civil War upon us, had thrown by their Torches, and em∣ployed their Hellish griefs in the tearing of their Snakie loks. Were no Sirtes or Rocks to shipwrack or hurt the people, when Sr. Edward Coke, who was so willing to have Tenures in Capite and Knight service, to be changed into Tenures by Fealty only, as of some of the Kings Ho∣nors, and all their Incidents, as Ward∣ships, primer seisin, Licences of Alienation, &c. taken away and recompenced by a greater yearly profit, then was, then had or received by them, and a rent to be inseperably annexed to the Crown, with some necessary Covenants and Privisoes, as he hoped that so good a motion as had been made in the Parliament of 18 Jacobi, tending as he thought to the Honor and Profit of the King and his Crown for ever, and the quiet and freedome of his Subjects, and their Posterities would one way or other, by the grace of God, and Authority of Parliament, take effect and be establish∣ed, could not but acknowledge between An∣no 3. Car. Regis primi, Coke 4. part Institutes tit. Court of Wards 193 and the 12th. year of his raign, that the Objection that Wardship was a Badge of servitude (which would be a Grievance indeed, and of the greatest Mag∣nitude) was groundless and without a Founda∣tion, for that the King by taking money for the marriage of the Ward, doth it not as for a Ran∣some, but taketh such moderate sums of money, as in respect of the quality, and state of the Ward He or
She, all circumstances considered, is able to pay, and in regard thereof, hath the protection of the Court of Wards during Minority; And giving Tenures by Knight service no worse a Cha∣racter, than the Wisdome of Antiquity, for his Iustification therein, citeth a place out of the Red Book Coke 4. Institutes & lib. ru. Scac. in the Exchequer, where it is said that mavult enim princeps domesticos, quam Stipendiarios Bellicis apponere casibus, the King had rather be served by his own Subjects, than Hirelings or Stipendary Souldiers. No Scylla or Charybdis taken to be in them, in the Parl. of 17. Car. prim. at the making of the Act for the better raising and levying of Souldiers for the present defence of the Kingdomes of England and Ireland, wherein it being said, that by the Laws of this Realm, none of his Majesties Subjects ought to be impressed, or compelled to goe out of his Country, to serve as a Souldier in the Wars, they excepted cases of necessity of the sodain coming in of strange enemies into the Kingdome, or where they be otherwise bound by the Tenure of their Lands or Possessions; In the Re∣monstrance of the House of Commons 15. De∣cember 1641. and that unhappy Amasse, and collection of Complaints against the Go∣vernment, the Tenures themselves were not so much as complained of, but the exceeding of the Jurisdiction of the Court of Wards, Exact Collections of the King and Parlament Declaratios 8. that thereby the estates of many Families were weakned, some ruined by excessive Fines, for Composition for Wardships exacted from them, which if in
some few particulars, where the Estate it self was weak, or incumbred with Debts, or charge of Children, connot rationally conclude or argue the Fines to be excessive, no more than a common weight or burden which may easily be born or carried by any man in health, doth make it to be of a great∣er weight or burden, because another man by reason of sicknesse, or other disabilities, is not able to bear or stand under it, or that a reasonable or small rent, which Tenants are to pay to their Landlords, is therefore too much or unreasonable, because a poor or decayed Tenant cannot so well bear or pay it as he was wont, Exact Collectons of the King and Parliament Declarations. 8. or as one that is thriving, or before hand might doe; That all Leases of above One hundred years were made to draw Wardships contrary to Law (when as such or the like Collusions, were by the Statute of Mar∣lebridge prohibited) and the Parliament was mis-informed, for long Leases under 500. years were not made by that Court lyable to Wardships, and that undue proceed∣ings were used in the finding of Offices to make Ju∣rors find for the King (which was but to adjorne or bind them over to the Bar of the Court of Wards, in case that there was any doubt of the Law or Evidence. Or when the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament the second day of June 1642. by the nineteen Propositions Exact Collection of the Kns and Paamnts Dlrations 307. which were (as they alleaged) for the establishment of the Kings honour and safety, and the wlfare and
ecurity of his Subjects and Dominions, and being granted, would be a necessary and effectual means to remove those jealousies and differences which have unhappily fallen betwixt him and his people, and procure both his Majesty and them a constant course of honour, peace, and happiness. Did propose, petition, and advise, that the Lord high Constable of England, Exact Collection of the Kings and Parliaments Declarations and Messages. 308. Lord Chancellor, or Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, Lord Treasurer, Lord pri∣vy Seal, Earl Marshal, Lord Admiral Warden of the Cinque Ports, cheif Gover∣nour of Ireland, Chancellor of the Exche∣quer, Master of the Wards, Secretaries of State, two cheif Justices, and cheif Baron, may alwayes (which shewed they had no desire for the present or the future to take a∣way the Tenures in Capite and by Knight ser∣vice) be chosen by approbation of both Houses of Parliament. Did not conceive them to be any Di∣sease or Gangreen in the Body Politique, at the making of the 2d. Declaration of the Lords & Commons in Parliament, dated the 12th. of January 1642. Concerning the Commission of Array, occasioned by a book then lately published, Entituled his Majesties answer to the Declaration of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, concerning the said Commission of Array, Printed and Published by the care of Mr. Samuel Brown, then and now a Member of the House of Commons, wherein many Arguments being used (and if they had been
grievances, would not have become the Par∣liament to have urged or pressed them as an argument) against the Kings, having power to raise men by his Commissions of Array, and were then so little denyed to be for the necessary defence of the King and his Sub∣jects, as they were rather taken by that Parliament to be as the hands and Arms of the bodie politique, worthy a continuance & perpetuity, and very well deserving the good opinion which the Parliament then had of them in the expressions following. We deny that there is an impossibility of defence, without such power, viz. the Commissions of Array. And affirm that the Exact. Collect. of the Kngs and Parliament Declarations 850.856.857 Kingdom may be defended in time of danger, without issuing such Commissions, or executing such power. For, we say, that the Law hath provided several ways for provi∣sion of Arms, and for defence of the Kingdom in time of danger without such Commissions 1. All the Tenures that are of his Majestie by Barony, Grand Sejeanty, Knight service in Capite, Knight service, and other like Tenures, were all o∣riginally instituted for the defence of the Kingdom, in time of War and danger, as appears by the Sta∣tute of 7 E. 1. of Mortmain, which saith, ser∣vitia quae ex hujus modi feodis dbentur ad defen∣sionem Regni ab initio provisa fuerunt, vide Chart. H. 1. irrotulat in libro Rubro Scac. Coke Instit. 75. Bracton 36.37. Britton 162.35 H. 6.41. Coke 8.105. Coke 6.. Instit. 1 part 103. These Tenures in the Conquerours time were many, and since they are much increased; and these are all bound to find men and arms, ac∣cording
to their Tenures, for the defence of the Kingdom. 2. As those Tenures are for the defence of the Kingdom, so the Law hath given to his Majestie diverse Priviledges and Prerogatives for the same end and purpose; that with the profits of them, he should defend himself and his people in times of danger, of which his Majestie is, and always hath been in actual possession since his accesse to the Crown. For the defence of the Kingdom, his Majestie hah the profits o Wardships, Lveries, Primer seisins, Marriages, Reliefs, Fines for Alienati∣on, Customs, Mines, Wrecks, Treasure trove, Es∣cheats, Forfeitures, and diverse others the like ca∣sual profits, That by these he may be enabled to de∣fend the Kingdom, and that he enjoying them, his Subjects might enjoy their Estates under his Protection, free from Taxes and Impositions for defence. Therefore it is declared 14 E. 3. chap. 1. That all the profits arising of an aid then gran∣ted to the King by his people; And of Wards Mar∣riages, Customes, Escheats, and other profits riseing of the Realm of England, should e spent upon the safeguard of the Realm of England, & on the Wars in Scotland, France, and Gascoigne, and no pla∣ces elsewhere, during the Wars. And the Lords and Commons in Rich. 2 time, (knowing the Law to e so) did ▪as appears y the Parliament olls 6 Rich. . m. 42) passe a etition, that the King would live o his own Revenues, and that the Wards, Marriages, Reliefs, Foritures, and other profits of the Crown, might be kept to be spent
in the Wars for the defence of the Kingdom. 3. If the said Tenures and casual profits rising by his Prerogative, will not serve for defence, but more help is necessary, by the fundamental Lawes and Constitutions of this Kingdom, his Majestie is intrusted with a power to summon Parliaments as often as he pleases, for defence of himself, and his people, when his ordinary Revenues will not serve the turn; And there is no other legal way (when the others are not sufficient) but this, and this last hath been ever found by experience, the most sure and successefull way for supply in time of imminent danger, for defence of the Kingdom, and to this the Kings of this Realm have in times of danger fre∣quently had recourse. A main end why Parliaments are called, is for defence of the Kingdom, and that other Supplies thn thse before mentioned, cannot be made with∣out a Parliament. Nor was there any publique or general da∣mage so much as supposed to be in them the first of February 1642. when in the proposi∣tions sent by those Lords & Commons, which remain'd in Parliament, to the King at Oxford, to be treated upon by the Earl of Northumber∣land, William Pierrepont Esq Sr. Wil. Armin & Bulstrode Whitlock, Esq their Commissioners. There was nothing desired or proposed for the taking away of the Court of Wards or changing of Tenures, but did conclude that if that which then was desired of the King should be granted, the Royalty & greatnes of his
Throne would be supported by the loyal, and bounty∣full affections of his people, Propo∣sitions sent by the Parliament to the King at Oxford 1 of Febuary 1642. & their Liberties and Priviledges, maintained by his Majesties protecti∣on and Justice. They were no part of the Bills, or Acts of Parliament, sent to the King at Oxford, in order to a peace in July 1648. No part of the Demands, or Bills, or Acts of Parliament, proposed by the Parliament in the Treaty at Vxbridge, betwixt them and the King, 23 Novemb. 1644. And there was so litle of grievance or inconvenience, or none at all to be found in Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, by reason of any accidents, for naturally or ori∣ginally there can be none at all proved to be in them. As notwithstanding the Vote of the House of Commons in Parliament, made the 20th day of September 1645. Which being less then an Embrio, and no more then an opinion of the Major part of that House, a recens assensio, velleity, de∣sire or intention only, which our Laws take no notice of; was left to an after more mature de∣liberation, when an Act of Parliament should be brought in upon it, & have gone through all its necessary requisites, formalities, and debates, the Parliament it self were so litle resolved, or beleiving any Grievance to be in them, as the Lords and Commons by their Ordinance of the first day of November
1645. did ordain that the Master and Councel of that Court, should proceed in all things belong∣ing to the Jurisdiction of that Court according to Law. And the House of Commons shortly after, viz. the fourth day of November 1645. being informed that by reason of a Vote passed in that House the 20th. day of September 1645. that the Court of Wards should be taken away, di∣verse Wardships, Liveries, Primer seisins, and Mesne rates, which theretofore fell and happened, were not compounded for as they ought to be; It was declared that all of them which have happened, or shall fall or happen before the Court of Wards, shall be put down by the Parliament, shall be an∣swered to the Common-wealth, and the Master and Councel of that Court were required to proceed accordingly, so as it extended not to any whose Auncestors being Officers or Souldiers have been slain or died in the service of the Parliament. But the 24th. of February 1645. upon oc∣casion of a debate concerning the Ward∣ship of the Son of Sir Christopher Wray, who dyed as they said, in the service of the Parliament, an Ordinance was brought in and made by the Lords and Commons, for the taking away of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, which saith one of their allowed Mercuries, was first given to the Crown for defence of the King∣dom, but the Parliament would take care for o∣ther supplies.
But that Ordinance notwithstanding was so little liked of, as that without the giving satisfaction which they promised to the No∣bility Gentry and Mesne Lords for the losse of their Tenures by Knight service, and satis∣faction to the most part of the Officers of the Court of Wards, it was no more or not much thought of, but lay from that time in a slumber, untill the first of August 1647. when the mighty Mechanicques of the Army driven on by their ignorant, and seditious Agitators, who were but the Engines of Cromwell's lurk∣ing and horrid designs, had by their Remon∣strances, like Wolves cloathed in Sheep∣skins, bleated, and seemed to thirst only after godly and purified Reformations, and Hew∣son the Cobler, and Pride the Dryman, and o∣thers of the Colledge of their nw apientia, busying themselves in State, as well as Par∣liament affairs, and thombing the Scriptures, and the English Translations of Livy and Plutarch at the wrong end, thought every one of themselves to be no less than a Solon and Lycurgus, admired Agrarian Laws, and other old exploded grievances, dream∣ed they were excellent Politiques, and not knowing our good old Laws, but suspecting them (as well they might) to be averse, and no well-wishers to their ungodly, and worse than Machiavillian devices, did all they could to destroy them, root and branch, and at the same time, when (in their New-England Phrase,) they held forth a more than
ordinary Care of the Kings Honour and Dig∣nity, and the freedom, rights and interests of the seduced people, proposed (or com∣manded rather) that the Proposals agreed upon by the Council of the Army to be tendred to the Commissioners of the Parlia∣ment residing with the Army 1 August 1647. Ordinance for ta∣king away the Court of Wards and Liveryes be con∣firmed by Act of Parliament, provided his Ma∣jesties Revenues be not damnified therein, nor those that held Offices in the same, left without Re∣paration some other way. Which howsoever it were, to the re∣maining and small part of that Parliament, who durst not say it, but found themselves under a force which against many of their will▪ had undertaken to be their Guard and safekeeping, a motive or spur enough to make them put that Vote and ordinance a∣gainst the Court of Wards and Liveries in∣o an Act as they▪ would call it, of Parlia∣ment, after 10000 l. given & paid to the Ma∣ster of the Court of Wards, for the loss of his place 5000 l. to Sr. Roland Wandesford, At∣turney General of that Court 6000 l. to Sr. Benjamin Rudiard, Surveyer General, 3500 l. to Charles Fleetwood, late Governour of the de∣stroying Committee of Safety, for his suppo∣sed loss by the Receiver Generals place of that Court, which he pretended he ought to enjoy by a Sequestration from Sr. Will. Fleet∣wood his Brother, who was then attending his Master the King at Oxford, and to Mr. Bacon, 3000 l. for a pretended loss of his Office, for the making and ingrossing of Licences or pardons for alienation, all of them but Sir Ro∣land Wandesford, being Members of Parlia∣ment,
it did without any mention made or remedy provided for those only supposed E∣vils, in Tenures in Capite, and Chivalry in the Billsor intended Acts of Parliament, which were sent to the King the 3 of March 1647. when he was at Holmby under a re∣straint fall asleep for many years after, and left all other to expect their satisfaction up∣on the Parliaments promises, and further proceedings. And there was so little cause for putting that Sentence in execution against them, in the judgment & opinion of some of the most knowing sort of the Arraigners of antiquity, and the actions of their more understanding fore-fathers, as Nat. Ba∣cons historical Discourses of the Kings of England 202.254.296. & in 2 part 241. Mr. Nathaniel Bacon in his Historical discourses of the uniformity of the Government of England under the Bri∣tain, Saxon, Danish, Norman and other Kings of this Isle until the reign of King E. 3. pub∣lished in Anno 1647. and in his 2 part from King E. 2. until the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth, printed in Anno 1651. in a design to make all, or most of the Actions of those our Kings and Princes and the Nobility and Clergy in their seve∣ral reigns, for at all of them (like one of the Ephori sitting in Censure rather than Judgement upon the Spartan Kings and Go∣vernment) and the Acts of Parliament, made in the several Reigns, of those Kings, he aimed, and flung his Fancies, clad in a
sober Stile and Gravity, rather than any Truth or Reason, by pretending that they were made and contrived only under their influence to be arbitrary and oppressive to the freeborn people of this Nation, for which he got several Preferments under Oli∣ver the Protector of our burdens & miseries. Though if the Records and Journals of our Parliaments may be credited (as certainly they ought to be) before him, most if not all of our Acts of Parliament were granted and assented unto by our Kings upon the Pe∣titions of the Commons, representing the people in Parliament as alsoms and great Remedies and redresses of all that they could complain of, deliverances from the op∣pressions, frauds, and deceipts of one another, and prevention of evils which might happen to them and their posterities, wherein our Kings have almost in every Parliament given away many, & diminished very much of their own just & legal Rights and prerogatives by granting and confirming their Liberties and Estates with such an infranchisement and freedom as no Nation or people under Hea∣ven now enjoyes. And when as heretofore in former Parlia∣ments they gave to their Kings & Princes (& many times too unwillingly) any aydes or Subsidies, were sure besides the blessings which accrewed to them by many good Laws and wholesome Acts of Parliament to gain
a great deal more by their Acts of grace and general pardons only, then the aids and Sub∣sidies did amount unto. Unlesse it were in the Reign of King H. 8. when the Abby Lands were granted unto him, & in the raign of King E 6. when the Chanterie & remaining peices of those reli∣gious Lands (were given to him where∣in only the Founders and the religious to whom they properly belonged, were the only loosers) and yet by reason of King H. 8. his Endowments and erection of the Bishoppricks of Oxford, Peterborough, Chest∣er, Gloucester, and Bristol, the Colledge of Christ-Church in Oxford, and the Deanary of Westminster, Deanries and Prebends of Canter∣bury, Winchester, Worcester, Chester, Peterburgh, Oxford, Ely, Gloucester, Bristol, Carlile, Durham, Rochester, and Norwich, and his large gifts and grants to divers of the Nobility, who had formerly been the Founders, or great Benefactors to ma∣ny of the Abbyes and Prioryes, and also to other of his people, and the grants of E. 6. Queen Eliz. and King James considered, very little of those Lands and Revenues doe at this time continue in the Crown. And our many Acts of Parliament against Mortmaines without the Kings Licence, Pro∣visions by the Pope, or any appeales to be made to him▪ under the most severe pe∣nalties of Premunire, the Act of Par∣liament taking away the Popes Supre∣macy,
the fineing and putting the Clergy of the Provinces of Canterbury and York, under Premunires by King H. 8. An Oath of Re∣nunciation of all fealty and appeales to the Pope, an Engagement to observe all Lawes made against his Power, Na. Ba∣cons historical discourses of the Kings of England▪ 219. the losse of 72 Mannors or Lordships out of the Re∣venues of the Arch-bishopprick of York, and of sundry great Mannors and Possessions taken from the Sees of Canterbury, Ely, and London; The demolishing and disso∣lution of Religious Houses, 3845. Parochi∣al Churches, (being more than a third part of all the Churches in England) impropri∣ated and gotten into the hands of the Laity, many of the Vicarages confined to the small and pittiful maintenance of some 20 l. per Annum, others 10, and some but 6 l. per An. several Acts of Parliament made in the reigns of several other Kings and Princes, clipping the Clergies Power in making Leases, or chargeing their Benefices with Cure, restraining their taking of Farms, for∣bidding Pluralityes, intermedling as Com∣missioners in Lay or Temporal Affairs, or to make Constitutions in their Sy∣nods or Convocations without the Kings Assent, may declare how little power for some hundreds of years past, the Clergy of England, have before or since the Reforma∣tion, either encroached upon, or been able to get or keep. Finds not in his mistaken Censures and Distortions of most of the Acts of our
Kings and Parliaments to make way in the deluded peoples minds for the erecting of O∣livers Protean, and Tyranical Government. Any fault with the erection of the Court of Wards and Liveries, nor with Tenures or Wardships, but justifying them, sayes, that the relief paid by the Tenant upon the death of his Ancestor, was in memorial of the first Lords favour in giving him the Land, and was first setled in the Saxons times, that the Law of Wardship may seem more antiently seated in this Kingdom, than the Normans times, that Wardship was a fruit of the Service of the Tenant, and for the defence of the Kingdom. Which that Parliament, or the following Conventions, or Assemblies, made no hast to overturn or take away, until Oliver Cromwel that Hyaena, or Wolf of the Evening, having fil∣led the Kingdom with Garrisons, & several Regiments of Horse and Foot, amounting to 30000. men, which were to be constantly maintained at the peoples charge, to keep them quiet in their slavery; had upon the humble petition and advice of that which he called his Parliament, acknowledging with all thankfulness the wonderful mercies of God in delivering them from that Tyranny and Bon∣dage,Petition of advice of the Commons of England as∣sembled in Par∣liament in An, 657▪ both in their Spiritual and Civil Govern∣ments, which the late King and his party (which in a Fog or Mist of sin and delusion they were pleased most injuriously to averre and charge upon them) designed by a bloody
War to bring them under (when as then they were under none, and all but the gainers by the spoyles of those Wars, have since had more Burdens, Grievances, and Taxes entailed upon them, then ever was in any Nation in Christendome) allowed him in a constant Revenue for support of the Govern∣ment, and the safety and defence of the Nati∣ons of England, Scotland, and Ireland, a yearly Revenue of thirteen hundred thousand pounds, whereof ten hundred thousand pounds for the Navy and Army; which far exceeded tha which accrewed to the Crown or Kings of England by Wardships, Tenures, and Ship-mony, which were but casual, and upon necessity, and but at some times or sel∣dome, and alwayes less by more than eight parts in ten of those justly to be complained of awful and yearly Asessements. Procured the Assembly or Parliament so called in Anno 1657. to awake that sleeping Ordinance, and dresse it into an Act as he called it of Parliament, wherein It was without any Cause or Grievance expres, or satisfaction given, or promised to those that remained the loosers by it, enacted that the Court of Wards and Liveries, and all Ward∣ships, Primer seisins, and Oustre le maines, and all other charges incident and arising for, or by reason of any such Tenures, Ward∣ship, Primer seisin, or Oustre les maines,
be taken away from the said 24th. day of February 1645. (though notwithstanding this pretended Act, he could for his own profit continue and take the Fines upon Ali∣enations) And that all Homages, Licences, Seisures, Pardons for Alienations, incident or arising for, or by reason of Wardship, Livery, Primer seisin, or Oustre le maines, and all other charges incident thereunto, be likewise (according to the new mode of making retrospective Acts of Parliament) taken away from the said 24th. day of February 1645. And that all Tenures in Capite, and by Knights service, of the late King, or any other person (when as the Parlia∣ment that made the Ordinance for taking a∣way Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Ser∣vice, did as was said, promise that all the mesne Lords, and others which held of the King, and had others held of them, should be recompenced for the loss of their Te∣nures) and all Tenures by Socage in cheif to be taken away and turned from the said four and twentieth day of February 1645. into free and common Socage. Whereby in all probability, he did but cause those Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, to be put down, to the end that he might take them up again at his pleasure, when he should have finished his wisht and devilish designs of making himself a King o∣ver a degenerate (as to the generality of the people) sinful and harassed Nation, or in
stead of them, to rule as he had begun, with his Janisaries, and Bashawes, or Major Ge∣nerals. But whatever he or his over awed and flattering Assemblies, would make a long & often deluded Nation to believe concern∣ing Tenures in Capite and Chivalry, or that kind of fixed and constant part of the Militia, It was not accompted in the holy Scripture to be any grievance to the people of Israel, that Saul in the government of them,1 Chronic. 12.23, 29, 30, 33. had in every Tribe, and of every kindred many thousands of men of War of the most valiant in a standing Militia, as of the Children of Ephraim, twenty thousand and eight hundred mighty men of valour, famous (and such were our Nobles & Tenants in Capite) throughout the house of their Fathers; and of Zebu∣lun, such as went forth to Battle, expert in war, and were not of double heart fifty thousand; or that of the Children of Benjamin, the greatest part of three thousand kept the Ward of Sauls house. Or that David, a King after Gods own heart, did appoint the Chief Fathers and Cap∣tains of thousands and hundreds,1 Chonic. 27.1. and their Offi∣cers that served the King in any matter of the Courses which came in and went out Month by Month throughout all the Months of the year, and of every Course twenty and four thousand (which were as our Knights Fees or Tenures in Chivalry out of a select or more refined and fit part of the People, whose Estates, as well as their Persons, made them lyable un∣to
it, for the general Musters or trained Bands did by many hundred thousands exceeding that number) which were only as a Land∣guard or ready help and defence upon all e∣mrgencyes, & although it be not there said that they held their Lands by that, or any military Service, yet a great resemblance and affinity may be discerned betwixt that, and the cause & reason of Tenures in Capite, which amongst that people was lesse requi∣site & necessary, for that they being alwayes Marshald under Captains of Thousands, Hundreds, Fifties, & Tens, were by some not expressed Tye or Obligation, or their grand Obedience to the command of their Kings and Princes, which by a set Law of the Al∣mighties own enacting, in all matters as well military as civil,Deut. 17.12, had no lesse a punish∣ment than Death affixed to the Transgressors thereof) always ready to go up to bat∣tle with their King, against any neighbour Nation or others, that did them injury, and leaves but this only difference betwixt our Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Ser∣vice, and (if they were not then in use a∣mongst them,) their fixed provisions for wars offensive or defensive, that theirs was a continual charge upon so many of the peo∣ple in every year by turns or courses, and ours upon the Princes, Nobles, and many of the Gentry, and better part of the people (for all of the Gentry had not the happiness
to have Lands originally given them to hold by such kind of Tenures, or did not after∣wards purchase them of the first proprietors of those beneficiary and noble kind of Te∣nures) when wars should happen, which being not often, or might not perhaps be commonly once in forty or more years, were not then also called out to War them∣selves but when the King went in person, or sent his Lieutenant, and then were to tarry with him or send one in their stead at their own charges but for forty dayes. No wrong was done by Solomon to the people of Israel,2 Chroni. 8.7.8. when he made the peo∣ple that were left of the Hittites, Amorites, Perezites, Hevites, and the Jebusites, and their Children which were not of Israel, to pay Taxes and doe publique work. And the Children of Israel, no Servants for his work, but men of war, and chief of his Captains of his Chariots and Horsemen. Jehoshaphat did not any evil in the fight of the Lord, when as notwithstanding that the Fear of the Lord had fallen upon all the Kingdoms of the Lands that were round about Judah,2 Chron▪ 17.2.3▪10. so that they made no War against him and the Philistines (the old Enemies of Judah and Israel) brought him presents, and Tribute Sil∣ver, and he waxed exceedingly great, and built in Judah Castles and Cities of Store, pla∣ced Forces in all the fenced Cities of Judah,
set Garrisons in the Land of Judah, he under∣stood it whilst the Lord was with him,2 Palip. 17.2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19; Lib. 1.81. & he walk∣ed in the first ways of his Father David, to be a Salus Populi to have the men of War mighty men of valour in Jerusalem eleaven hundred and threescore thousand men which waited upon the Kings besides those whom he put in the fenced Cities. It was no Imposition upon the people of Israel,1 Sam. 14.52. neither is it in holy Writ made to be any Error in Government, that Saul (whom our Kings & Nobility in the Creation of mi∣litary Tenures did but imitate) when he saw any strong man, or any valiant man took him unto him. Or that David after he was King, hearing of the fame of the Hebronites, sought for them, and when there were found among them at Jazer of Gilead Jerijah the chief,1 Chronic. 26.31, 32. and two thousand and seven hundred mighty men of valour made them Rulers over the Reubenites, and it seems were also but of some part of them, for that in the next Chapter the Ruler whom he appointed over the Reubenites the Gadites, and the half Tribe of Manasseth was Eliezer the son of Zichri, & over the half Tribe of Manasseth in Gilead, Iddo the Son of Zechari∣ah. Nor did Nehemiah that great and good ex∣ample of Magistracy put any grievance upon the people, when as in the re-building of Ie∣rusalem, and to repell the Enemies and hin∣derers thereof, (there being as much necessity to defend a City or Commonwealth, after it is built or established, as it can be in the
building, framing or repairing, of it) he ordered the one half of the servants to work, and the other to hold the Spears, the shields, Bows, and Habergeons,Nehemiah 4.15, 16, 19, 20, 11. v. 1.14. and every one of the builders had his Sword girded by his side, and the Nobles were ap∣pointed when the Trumpeter should sound that stood by Nehemiah, because they were separated one from another to resort thither unto him upon occasi∣on of ight or danger, and did after their work finished, cause the Rulers of the people to dwell at Jerusalem, and out of the rest of the people by lot, to bring one of every Tribe to inhabit and dwell in there, such as were valiant, or mighty men of valour, and had for o∣verseers the principal and most eminent men, and Zabdiel the Son of one of the mighty men. David did not turn aside from God, nor bind heavy burdens upon the people, because he had mighty men about him, and that Joshebbasse∣bet the Tachmonite sate (like a Constable or Marshal of England) chief amongst the Cap∣tains, nor did Solomon bruise the broken Reeds,2 Sam. 23.8. because he had many Princes and great Offi∣cers under him, as Benajah, the Son of Jehoia∣da, (who served his Father David, and was Captain over his Guard) was over the Host, Azariah the Son of Nathan, over the Offi∣cers, (like as in England, a Lord great Cham∣berlain or Lord Chamberlain of the Kings Houshold) Zabud the Son of Nathan, Principal Officer, and Aishar (as a Trea∣surer, or Comptrouler) over the Houshold, none of which could take it for any injury to
enjoy those great Offices and places during the Kings pleasure, but would have esteemed it to have been a greater favour if they had a grant for life, and most of all, and not to be complained of, to have it to them, and to their Heirs, or after Generations, for that all good things and blessings by a natural propension and custom, amongst the Sons of men, are very desireable to be continued and trans∣mitted to posterity, and the sacred Volumes have told us, that it is a reward of wisdom, and vertue, to stand before Princes. Nor was it any dishonour to the men of Ju∣dah, and people of Israel, that the Queen of Sheba wondring even to astonishment at the Attendance of Solomons Servants,1 Reg. 10.4, 5. and Mini∣sters, and his Cup bearers, or Butlers, as the Margin reads it, pronounced them hap∣py that stood continually before him. Or to the Subjects of Ahasuerus, who reigned from India,Esther 1.10.14. to Ethiopia, over an hun∣dred and seventeen Provinces, that besides his seven Chamberlains, or Officers of honour, he had the seven Princes of Persia, and Media, which saw the Kings face, and sate the first in the Kingdom. Nor any to our heretofore hap∣py Nation, enjoying in a long Series, and tract of time, an envied peace and plenty, under famous and glorious Kings and Princes, that they did give Places, Castles, Man∣nors, and Lands, of great yearly values, to certain great and well-deserving men, and
their Heirs, to serve in great Imployments, Solemnities, and Managements of State-af∣fairs, to the honour of their Soveraigns, and the good, & safety of the People, in the Offi∣ces of great Chamberlain, high Steward, Con∣stable, or Marshal of England, chief Butler of England, and the like. For when the guift of the Land it self was a great kindness, it must needs be a greater to have an honourable Office & Imployment annexed to it, & that an act of bounty done by a Prince, in giving the Land, should oblige the claim or re∣ceiving a far greater, in the executing of that Office or Attendance, which belonged to it. And could have nothing of affinity to a burden, when as besides the original guift of the Lands, which were very considerable, and to be valued, many of those personal servi∣ces by grand Serjeanty, were not unprofitable or without the addition, or accession of other Bounties and Priviledges, as the guift to the Lord great Chamberlain of forty yards of Crimson Velvet, for his Robes, upon the Co∣ronation day, the Bed and furniture that the King lay in the night before, the silver Bason and Ewer, when he washed his hands, with the Towels, and Linnens, &c. The Earl Marshal to have the granting of the Marshals, and Ushers, in the Courts of Exchecquer, and Common Pleas, with many o∣ther guifts and Priviledges, and Dymock
who holds some of his Lands by the service of being the Kings Champion, and to come upon the Coronation day into Westminster-Hall, on Horse-back, compleatly armed, and defie, or bid battel to any that shall deny him to be rightful King of England, is to have the Kings best Horse, and were not in the least any charge to the people, or laid upon them as Cromwel did the stipends of his mock Lords or Officers of his imaginary Magnificence, to be paid out of the publick Purse or Taxes, as were the self created Lords of his Counsel, who had 1000 l. per an. for advising him how to fool the people, & build up himself by the wickedness of some, and ru∣ines of all the rest, or as the Lord so called Pic∣kering, or Chamberlain of his Houshold, and the quondam would be Lord Philip Jones, who was called the Comptrouler of his House∣hold, had to buy them white staves to cause the people to make way and gape upon them. No Prejudice to the Common-wealth that the Beauchamps Earls of Warwick, did hold Land by right of inheritance to be Panterer at the Kings Coronation, and to bear the 3 Sword before him the Duke of Lancaster, before that Dutchy came a∣gain into the possession of the Kings of Eng∣land, to bear before him the sword called Curtana, or the Earls of Derby as Kings of the Isle of Man, to bear before the King at his Coronation the Sword called Lancaster, which Henry the 4th. did wear when he re∣turned
from exile into England, or for the Earl of Arundel to be chief Butler of England, the day of the Coronation. No disfranchisement to the City of London that some Citizens of London chosen forth by the City served in the Hall at the Kings Coro∣nation assistants to the Lord chief Butler, whilst the King sits at Dinner the day of his Coro∣nation,Cromp∣tons Iurisdict∣ion of Couts. and when he enters into his Chamber af∣ter Dinner, and calls for Wine, the Lord Mayor of London is to bring him a Cup of Gold with Wine, and have the Cup afterwards given to him, together with the Cup that containes water to allay the Wine, and that after the King hath drunck, the said Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen of London, are to have their Table to Dine at, on the left hand of the King in the Hall. Or to the Barons of the Cinque Ports, who claim & are allowed to bear at the Kings Coronation a Canopy f cloth of Gold over him, with four Staves, and four Bells at the four corners, every Staff having four of those Barons to bear it. Also to Dine and sit at the Table next to the King on his right hand, in the Hall the day of his Coronation: And for their Fees to have the said Canopy of Gold, with the Bells and Staves. Or that at the Coronation of Elinor, Wife to King Henry the third Marchiones de Marchia Walliae videlicet Joannes filius Alani Radulphus de mruo mari Joannes de Monmouth, et Walterus de Clifford nomine Marchiae jus Mar∣chiae esse dicebant hastas argenteas inveniendi et
las deferendi ad sustentandum pannum Sericum quadratum purpureum, in Coronatione Regum et Reginarum Angliae; The Lords Marchers of Wales, videl. Iohn Fitz Alan, Rafe de Morti∣mer,Lib. rub. in Scac. et Camden Brit▪ 523. Iohn de Monmouth, and Walter de Clif∣ford, in behalf of the Marches, did claim and alleage it to be their right, to provide silver Spears or Launces, and with them to bear or carry a four square Canopy of Purple Silk over the Kings and Queens of England at their Coronation. For those Tenures in grand serjeanty, were ever (as in all reason they deserved to be) accompted to be so honourable as some have made it their Sir-name, as the noble Earls of Ormond in Ireland, descended from an an∣tient and worthy English Family have done, who carry in their Coat of Armes, or part of their now marks of honour, or bearing the Symbols, or remembrance of the Office of cheif Butler in Ireland, which with the pri∣sage which is a part of it, hath by King E. the 3d. been granted to the Ancestors of the now Marquesse, & Earl of Ormond by Inheritance, and a Knightly and good Family of the Cham∣berlaines in England, do account it no dishonour to have been descended from th Earls of Tan∣kervile, who were Chamberlains to our King H. 1. in Normandy. And some branches of the noble Family of the Grey's of Wilton, being antient Barons of England, holding the Mannor of Waddon in Buckinghamshire of the King, per servitium custodiendi unum Gerfalconem Domini Regis, by
the service of keeping a Gerfalcon of the Kings, do use or bear as a badge or marque of honour in their Armes a Gerfaulcon, & the Mannor of Wymondley, in the County of Hert∣ford, being holden of the King by Grand ser∣jeanty, of giving to the King the first Cup of Wine or Beer upon the day of his Coronati∣on, The Family of "Argentons, being by the marriage of a Daughter and Heir of the Lord Fitz Tece, become at the Conquest the possessors of it, have thought it honourable saith Camden, to bear in their Shields in me∣mory thereof three Cups argent in a feild Gules. No oppression to the people of Eng∣land to be kept safe in their peace and plenty, from the Incursions of Foreign Enemies, Camden Brit. 353. when William the Conquerour fortified Dover, a strong and principal Bulwark betwixt Eng∣land and France, with whom we had then continual Wars or Jealousies, and gave to Iohn Fines, then a Noble Man of great prow∣esse and fidelity, the Custody of that, and the rest of the Cinque-Ports, with 56 Knights Fees, willing him (as that Learned Antiqua∣ry Mr. Lambard tells us) to Lambard perambulation of Kent 362▪ communicate some parts of that gift to such other valiant and trusty persons as he should best like of, for the more sure conservation of that most noble and precious Fort and Castle, Who thereupon imparting liberally out of those Lands to eight worthy Knights, viz. William of Albrance, Fulbert of Dover, William Arsick,
Geffery Peverel, William Mainemouth, Robert Porthe, Robert Crevequer, and Adam Fitz-Wil∣liams, bound them and their Heirs by Tenure of their Lands received of the King to maintain 112 Souldiers amongst them, which were so devided by Months of the years, as five and twenty of them were continually to watch, and ward within the Castle, for their several parts of time, and all the rest ready upon necessity, each of which eight Knights had their several Charges in several Towers and Bulwarks, and were contented (as well they might) at their own dispence to maintain and re∣pair the same. Of whom diverse of the Towers and Bulwarks do yet, or did but in Queen Elizabeths reign bear their names. No inconvenience or mischief to the pub∣lique that the Castle and Camden Brit. 505. Barony of Aberga∣venny in Monmouthshire, was holden by John Hastings per Homgm Wardam & Maritagium cum accideit & s guerra fuerit inter Regem Angli∣ae & Principem Walliae deberet custodire patriam de Over went sumptibus proprijs meliori modo quo poterit pro commodo suo & utilitate Regis & defen∣sione Regni Angliae, by Homage, Ward, and Marriage, when it should happen, and if War should be between the King of England and the Prince of Wales was to guard at his own charges the Country called Over went, the best way that he could for his profit, and benefit of the King, and defence of the King∣dom of England.
No cause of complaint to the Town, or an∣tiently called City of Leicester, for that vete∣ri Instituto by antient Custom, they were to furnish the King with twelve Burgesses or Towns∣men, Camden Brit. 463. in 4. when he went to War, and i per Mare in Hostes ibat mittebant quatuor Equos us{que} Londinum ad arma comportanda vel alia quae opus essent, he went by Sea were to send four Horses as far as London, to carry his Arms or other necessaries. Nor to the Town of Warwick to be enjoyn∣ed by Tenure, to send Camden Brit. 505. twelve of their Bur∣gesses or Towns-men with their King to War, and qui monitus non ibat centum solidos Regi emendabat, he which was summoned and did not go, was to forfeit & pay one hundred shillings to the King, And cum contra Hostes per Mare ibat Rex, quatuor Botesuenas, vel quatuor libras denariorum mittebant, when the King should bo by Sea against his Enemies, should furnish four Boat-Swains or Marriners, or send four pounds in money. No harm done to give Lands at Seaton, which Sr. Richard Rockslye Knight did hold by Serjeanty to be Ro. in. 11 E. 2. Coke 1 part Instit. 70. vantrarius Regis the Kings fore-footman when he went into Gascoigne, donec per usus fuit parisolutarum precij 4d untill he had worn out a pair of Shoes of four pence, then the price of a pair of Shooes for a worthy man not 4 s. 6. or 5 s. as they are now. Or Lands to another to furnish duos Amigeros, two Esquires to march in his Vant-Guard, upon occasion of War with the Welch.
Or that the Princes of Wales, ab antiquis temporibus very antiently, did hold that Prin∣cipality and part of Brittain of the Kings of England, in Capite, by Military or Knight Service, and that, upon that ground only as he was a leige man and subject of England, Leoline Prince of Wales was for raising of War against his Superior Lord imprisoned, and hanged or beheaded by King E. 1. and the Principality of Wales as an Escheat annexed to the Crown of England. And as litle when any held of the King in Capite by some other Service and not in Chivalry and by Knight Service, as the Town of Shrewsbury to cause 12 Towns-men apud Camden Brit. 530. Angliae Reges excubare cum in illa urbe agerent; To watch and ward about the Kings Person (which the affrighted Cromwel with his guilty and terrified Conscience would have been well content with) totidemque con∣comitare cum venatum prodirent, and as many to attend him whilst he rode on hunting, Or when Richard Pigot of Stanford in the County of Hereford, or his Ancestors had two Yard Land given him there by the King to hold in Capite per servitium conducendi The∣saurum Domini Regis, (which Sir Edward Coke calleth Firmamentum pacis, et robur Belli, the Foundation of Peace, and strength of War) de Hereford usque ad London quotiescun∣que opus fueries sumptibus Domini Regis et in rede∣undo sumptibus suis propriis, et etiam summo∣nendi
Episcopium Hereford ad portas Manerij dicti Episcopi de Bromyard si contingat Domi∣num Regem praedictum Episcopum implacitare; By the Service of conducting the Kings Trea∣sure from Hereford to London as oft as there should be occasion, at the Kings charge in going thither, and at his own, in his retorn, and to summon the Bishop of Hereford at the Gates or door of his Manour of Bromyard, when it should happen that the King should implead him. Never troubled the heart of Roger the Kings Taylor, when the King gave him a good quantity of Land in Halingbury in the Coun∣ty of Essex, tenendum per Serjeantiam solven∣di ad Scaccarium Domini Regis unum Acum argen∣teum quolibet anno in crasino Sancti Martini, To hold the Serjeanty of paying yearly at the Exchequer upon the morrow of St. Martin a silver Needle. Nor did the Donees, or those who had those Lands of so free a gift or bounty esteem them to be any burden, could it be heavy or troublesome to their Heirs or those that should succeed them in those Lands, when∣as our Kings did successively give away so great a part of the Lands of England as were holden in Capite and by Knight Service, ei∣ther to follow or serve them in the Wars for their own defence as well as theirs, or for their attendance (whrein they re∣ceived more honour than their Princes gain∣ed
by it) at their Coronations, or other great Solemnities by grand Serjeanty or by petit Serjeanty, to present them at some times of the year with a Rose, or a Hawk, or a pair of Spurs, or an Arrow, to keep them a Hawk or Hounds, provide necessa∣ries in their Progresse for their houshold Ex∣pences▪ Sumpter Horses in their Journey to some particular place, Straw for their Bed, and Rushes for their Chamber, as if they gave away all to receive almost nothing for it, and so willingly as be put themselves to some trouble to devise what kind of grateful acknowledgments should be made them in a perpetuity, or as far as they could reach to a supposed or hoped for Eternity, & that many of their Tenures where there were not neces∣saryes in war or peace reserved, do seem to be but so far for pleasure and merryment, as they did not care what was reserved, so it was but something, as to hold the Kings head at Sea when he should sail betwixt Do∣ver and VVhitsand, or hold the Cord by which the Sail was tyed, when the Queen (not to shoot with Guns and Canons, as some of the Covenanters for the late Kings good could find the way to do at his deer Wife the Queen Mother that now is) should pass the Seas into France, cum multis aliis, with many other sortes and kinds, not here to be enumerated without the trouble of a volume, which those honester times
having a better opinion of gratitude, and not thinking it to be so crazy or mortal as now every one finds it to be, did liberally create and bestow. No wrong was done to them that had Lands given to them and their Heirs by a Mesne Lord, before the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, as our forefa∣thers the Saxons, long before the Con∣quest believed; when as Byrhtrick a Saxon of great note and eminency in Kent, hold∣ing Lands of Aelsrick a Mesne Lord, did by his last will and testament in the first place, give to his natural Lord a Bracelet of fourscore marks of Gold, one Hatchet of half as much, four Horses, two of them trapped, two Swords trimmed, two Hawks, and all his Hounds; and to the Lady his wife, one Bracelet of thirty marks of Gold, and one Horse to intreat that his Testament (wherein he devised great quantities of land to divers persons, and to charitable uses, and the Lords consent was very necessary) stand may, and prayed his dear leefe Lord that he do not suffer that any man his Testament do turn aside. Nor to the County of Hertford, or places adjacent, when Leofranus Abbot of St. Al∣bans, gave in Edward the Confessors reign, unto Turnot, Waldef, and Thurman, three Knights, the Mannor of Flamsteed in the County of Hertford, to be holden by the ser∣vice, ut regionem vicinam contra latrones defen∣drent, to the end that they should defend
the neighbour-hood against Thieves. And no hurt to the Common-wealth, when as the Nobility and great men of Eng∣land, imitating the bounty and munificence of their Kings and Princes, for the enabling themselves to serve their King & Country, did bountifully give much of their own E∣states▪ & Demess to divers of their friends & Camden Brit. 361.followers to hold of them by Knight ser∣vice, or some honourable & seldom services about their Persons or Estates; As the Earls of Oxford, Arundel; Norfolk, Hereford, & Essex, Hertford, & Gloucester, Leicester, Chester, Lan∣caster, Northumberland, & other antient Earls, did when they severally gave to those who had so litle wrong done them by their kind∣ness, as they have for many ages, and doe yet continue men of worship and great e∣states in their Counties, as many as 100 Knights fees, many times more, and sel∣dome less, to be holden of them by Knight service, which at the now value of Lands, reckoning every Knights fee as Sr. Edward Cooke doth, if at 100l. per annum, which is the lowest value, would be 10000l. per an∣num, & at 200l. per an. which is the most pro∣bable medium rate, will amount unto no less than 20000l. per annum. That Harden Castle in Cheshire, with the lands thereunto belonging, of a great year∣ly value in the County of Chester, was given by an Earl of Chester, to be holden of the Earl
and his heirs, per senescalciam comitum Cestriae,Camden Brit. 604. by the service of being Stewards to the Earls of Chester. Or that the Castle and Mannor of Tun∣bridge, and the Mannors of Vielston,Lambards Perambulation of Kent. Hors∣mund, Melyton, and Pettis in the County of Kent, were holden by Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, of the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, by agreement and com∣position made betwixt the said Earl and Bo∣niface Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, in the raign of King H. 3. by the service of four Knights Fees, and to be high Stewards, and high Butlers to the Arch-Bishops of that See at their Consecration, taking for their service in the Stewardship, seven competent Robes of Scarlet, thirty gallons of Wine, thirty pound of Wax for his light livery, of Hay and Oates for eighty Horse for two nights, the Dishes and Salt which should stand be∣fore the Arch-Bishop in that Feast, and at their departure, the dyet of three dayes at the cost of the Arch-Bishop, at four of his then next Mannors wheresover they would; So that the said Earls repaired thither but with fifty Horse, and taking also for the Office of Butlership, other seven like Robes, twenty gallons of Wine, fifty pound of Wax like livery, for sixty Horses for two nights, the Cup wherewith the Arch-Bishop should be served, all the empty Hogsheads of Drink, and for six Tun of Wine, so
many as should be drunk under the Bar; all which services were accordingly perfor∣med by Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and Hertford, at the Inhronization of Robert Winchelsey Arch-Bishop of Canterbury; and by the same Earl to Arch-Bishop Reignolds; by Hugh Audley, afterwards Earl of Gloucest∣er, to John Stratford Arch-Bishop of Canter∣bury; by the Earl of Stafford, to whom the Lordship of Tunbridge at length came, to Simon Sudbury Arch-Bishop of that See; and by Edward Duke of Buckingham, to William Warham Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and ex∣ecuted the Stewardship in his own person, and the Butlership by his Deputy Sr. Thomas Burgher Knight. No disparagement to the Knightly fami∣ly of the Mordants, in the County of Essex, that they hold the Mannor of Winslowes in Hempsteed, in the said County, of the Earls of Oxford, by the service of a Knights Fee, and to be his Champion, and to come to the Castle of Hedingbam the day of the Earls mariage, riding in compleat harness to Defie or bid Battel to any that should deny him to be Earl of Oxford, and to see what order was kept in the Hall there, which Ro∣bert Mordant Esq performed in his own per∣son the 14th. day of December, in the 14th. year of the raign of Queen Eliz. being the day of Edward Earl of Oxford's marriage, though it was not there solemnized.
Or to Sr. Giles Allington, the Auncestor of the now Lord Allington, to hold his Man∣nors called Carbonnels and Lymberies in Hor∣sed in the County of Cambridge, by the ser∣vice of a Knights Fee and a half, and to at∣tend upon the Earl the day of his marriage, and to hold his stirrop when he goeth to horseback, which service he performed in person at White-Hall the 14th. day of Decem∣ber in the 14th. year of the raign of Queen Eliz. being the marriage day of the said Edward Earl of Oxford, in the presence of the Earls of Bedford, Huntington, and Lei∣cester, the Lord William Howard, Lord Chamberlain of the Queens houshold, and the Lord Burleigh &c. Those Dreams or Fancies of Grievances by Tenures in Capite and Knight Service, were never presented in those thousands of Court Leets, or Law daies, which twice in every year now for almost 600 years since the Conquest, and very long before, made it a great part of their businesse to enquire upon oath of Grievances, Extortions, and Oppressions. Nor in those yearly grand enquests to the like purpose, which have been twice in every year, for many hundreds of years past, by the oath of the most sufficient Knights, Gentle∣men and Free-holders, of the County of Middlesex. It neither was, nor is, nor can by any rea∣sonable intendment, be taken to be a grieve∣ance, to do, or perform that which by the
Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, the Laws, reasonable Customs, and the fundamental Laws of England, hath so often, and through all times and ages, and the memory of man and Records, which are monumenta veritatis, & vetustatis, ever been allowed, repeated, and confirmed in Parliament, without the least of any contradiction, or repeal, and is but upon necessity and occasion to defend the King, themselves, their Country, Friends, and Neighbours, and to do that which every Gentleman, and such as are e meliori Luto, of the more refined Clay, and better born, & bred than the vulgus, or common sort of peo∣ple would be willing to do & as that learned French Lawyer Bissonius well observeth,Barn. Brisson. in Ba∣silic. lib. 6. tit. 13. Qu' en la necessite de guerre toutes ls gentilz hommes sont tenus de prendre les Ames pur la necessite du Roy, That in necessity of War, every Gentleman is bound to take Arms, and go to the Wars,21 E. 3.3.45. E. 3.. for the defence of the King, which by our Laws of England, is so to be encouraged, as it is Treason to kill any man that goeth to aid the King in his Wars, and is no more than what the Oaths of Allegiance, and Supremacy doth bind every Englishman unto, though they should tarry in the Camp more than forty days,Iudges 5.23. or not have Escuage, or any allowance of their charges from their own Tenants, and is but that duty which Deborah and Baruch be∣lieved that every Subject was bound to per∣form,
when they cursed Meroz (not as some of our Pulpit Incendiaries did when they trai∣terously inverted the Text, to encourage the people to fight against their King) in that they came not forth to battel to help the Lord against the mighty, and the loyal Uriah would not forget, when the King himself could not perswade him to go into his own House, to eat, and to drink, and lye with his Wife, when the Ark, and Judah and Israel abide in Tents,2 Sam▪ 11 11. and his Lord Joab, and the Servants of his Lord were incamped in the open field, and which the good old Barzillai, in the rebellion of Absolom against his King and Father David, thought was incumbent upon him, when he could not bring his loyal mind to think it to be enough to provide the King of sustenance, while he lay at Mahanami, unlesse when he himself was fourscore years old, and could not taste what he eat or drank; he also should come down from Rogelim, and go as he did with his Son Chimham, over Jordan, with the King to conduct him, and would not accept of the Kings offer or re∣ward, to live with him at Jerusalem (which those that hold in England their Lands and goodly Revenues by those beneficial Tenures in Capite, of a free guift, and in perpetuity may be said to do and have more also then was offered Barzillai for the remainder of an old and worn-out life,2 Sam. 19.31 32, 33.35. & 36. but sayes why should the King recompence it with such a reward. And is but the performance of the origi∣nal
contracts made betwixt the kind Do∣nors, and the thankful Tenants, and the obser∣ving of faith and promises, which is the in∣gens vinculum, and next unto the Divine Pro∣vidence, the grand support of the world, and the quiet repose and peace of all man∣kind, makes a certainty in all their actions, and leads to the Mountain of Holi∣nesse, and the Hill of eternal rest and bles∣sednesse. No grinding of the face of the poor, which (if it were any as it can never be e∣vinced to be) could not commonly, or or∣dinarily be in the case of such Tenures, when as those which are any way concerned in it, are men of good Estates and Revenues, and would be loth to be under any other notion to pay a reasonabe Escuage assessed in Parlia∣ment, when they went not themselves, or sent any in their stead, and where their Te∣nants went not in person to defend their Lords as well as their King, to have as much assessed upon them, and by no other than a Parliament, wherein the Commons of Eng∣land had their Representatives of their own Election. Neither were the Kings of England, or the Mesne Lords in the case of those Tenures a∣ny Egiptian Task-Masters, when those that held under them, had such benefits and boun∣ties of free guift, and if they have been since transferred, and aliened, that part of it, viz.
the Tenures, and a gratefull acknowledge∣ment of the favour of the first givers were neither sold or paid for in the purchase, but the Services were by Act and operation of Law, and the Statute of Quia emptores ter∣rarum, reserved to the first Donors, by an expresse Covenant in the deeds of purchase to be performed to the Lords of whom they were holden, and it is a maxime in Law, Quod nemo plus juris in alium transferre potest quam in ipso est, that no man can grant or transferre a greater right than he hath, or is in him. And are if a right consideration of things shall not be, as it hath been too much in the times of our late Frenzies, and Distractions, adjudged a premunire, or committing high Treason. More noble Tenures than that of Soccage, by how much a rustick and Plow∣mans life, and demeanor, was ever in all a∣ges, and amongst all Nations, which had any civility, and understanding, justly ac∣compted to be so far inferior to the Equestris ordo, Gentlemen, or men of more noble im∣ployments. As that those and not the military Te∣nures were truly accompted to be a kind of Slavery, according as they were in their original Institution, before the fa∣vour obtained of the King and Mesne Lords, to reduce their drudgeries, to easy and small quit Rents, and to
be but litle better than Joshuas Gibeonites, Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of Water, or So∣lomons Perezites, and Jebusites, to be imploy∣ed as his Servants and Work-men. And as now they are, or expect to be in that which they would imagine to be their better condition, holding in free and com∣mon Soccage, by fealty only for all ser∣vices, and being not to be excused from Aydes, to make the Kings eldest Son a Knight, or for the marriage of his Daugh∣ter, or to pay a years value of their Lands, and sometimes double the rent which is to be payed at the death of every Tenant, and may amount to a great deal more than the ordinary, low, and favourable rate of five pounds for a releif for every Knights Fee, 50 shillings for a half, and 25 shillings for a quarter of a Knights Fee, and lesser ac∣cording to the smaller proportions of the Lands which they hold; would in all like∣lyhood if they might but enjoy the antient, and long agoe discontinued priveledge, which the Tenures by Knight service, in Ca∣pite,Charta H. 1. et Regis Io∣hannis et 9. H. 3. cap 10. were to enjoy by the Charter or Mag∣na Charta of King H. 1. of not having Lands of that kind of Tenure which was in their own Demeasne charged with any o∣ther Assessements or services than what they were obliged unto by their Tenures. And was no more than what was before the common Justice and right Reason of this
nation, be now very well content to ex∣change their free as they call it Socage Lands, which was antiently understood to be no other than feudum ignobile et plebeium, an ignoble and plebeian Fee or Estate,Spelmans Glossar 260, 261. and as Sr. Henry Spelman saith, nobili opponitur, et ignobilibus, et rusticis competit nullo feudali pri∣vilegio ornatum, et feudi nomen sub recenti seculo perperam, et abusu rerum auspicatum est, is op∣posed or contra distinguished to the more noble Tenures, and being not entituled to any feudal priviledge, belongs only to Ig∣noble and Rusticks, and hath of late times improperly and by abuse gained the name of Fee, for Lands holden in Capite, and by Knight service; So as they might be free from all assessements and charges of War, under which burden the Owners of Lands holden by any kind of Tenures have for these last Twenty years heavily groaned, and if Mr. Prynne had not publiquely and truly said it did muis parasangis, by many and very many degrees out goe all that was pretended to be a Grievance, by the Court of Wards, and Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, which all things rightly considered, are a more free, beneficial, franck, and noble kind of Tenure, the Mariages of the Heirs in Minority only excepted, which not often happening are notwithstanding abundantly recompenced by the freenesse of the gift, seldom Services and other Immunityes. Then Socage, which those many Tenants which hold by a certain rent of Sir Anthony
Weldens Heir for Castle-Guard to the ruined Rochester Castle in Kent, to pay 3 s. 4 d. nomine paenae, by way of Penalty for every Tide, which after the Time limited for payment, shall run under Rochester Bridge, and the Rent and Arrears refused, though tendred the next day, do not find to be the best of Tenures, or so good as that of Knight Service, & in Capite. Which is better than that which the Te∣nants in Cumberland and other Northern Partes do claim by a kind of inheritance and Tenant Right,Littleton cap. 9. wherein they can be well con∣tented to pay their Lord a thirty peny ine at every Alienation, and a twenty peny upon the Death of an Ancestor, or the death of their Lord according to the Rate of the small yearly Rent which they pay to their Lords,Fitz Her∣bert N. B. 12. b. 14. & 165. Better then all or most kind of Estates or Tenures, and better than that at will, which many are well apaied with, and better than those of Copyholders,Mich. 7 E. 4.19. who if the Lords of Manours put them out of their Estates, have no Remedy but by Petition to them. Can have no Writ of Right-Close to com∣mand their Lords to do them Right with∣out Delay according to the Custom of the Manour. No Writ of false Judgement at the Com∣mon Law upon Judgments given in the Lords Court, but to sue to the Lord by Petition, nor can sue any Writ of Monstraverunt to com∣mand their Lords not to require of them other Customs or Services than they ought to do. Are to pay upon their admission an
uncertain Fine at the will of the Lord, who, if they be unreasonable, the most they can be compelled unto by a∣ny Court or Rule of Justice, is a reasona∣ble Fine, commonly adjudged or estima∣ted at two years value, and either certain or uncertain, are to be paid at the death or alienation of every Tenant (which doe as in Socage happen more often and con∣stantly than that of Escuage and Knight Service) and have many Payments, For∣feitures, Restraints, and Dependencyes attending that kind of Estate and Inheri∣tance, as in some places the Heir to forfeit his Land, if after three Solemn Procla∣mations in three several Courts he comes not in, payes his Fine and prayes to be admitted, or shall without any reasonable cause of ab∣sence wilfully refuse to appear after sum∣mons at his Lords Court Baron, or to be sworn of the homage, or denie himself to be a Coppy-holder, payeth not his Fine when it is assessed, or sues a Replevin a∣gainst his Lord distraining for Rent-ser∣vice, payes not his Rent, or permits or commits voluntary wast, by plucking down an antient built house, and building up a new in the place, or cutting Timber with∣out licence, may be fined or amerced, if he speak unreverently of his Lord, or behave himself contemptuously towards him, is at his Death to pay his best beast, or if he hath none, the best peice of his housholdstuffe for a herriot, and in some
places for it varies according to several cu∣stomes, is to give the Lord a certain sum of mony every month during Wars, to bear his charges, cannot be sworn of the Homage, or bring a plaint in the nature of an Assize, un∣till he be admitted Tenant to his Land, the Wife shall not have her Bench or Life in her Husbands Copyhold Estate, if she marry without Licence of the Lord, and in some places, if she will redeem it, must come ri∣ding into the Court upon a lack Ram, or as in the manner of South Peveton in Somerset∣shire, being H▪ l. 7. E. 1. coram Re∣ge. an anient Dmesne, where a Widdow convicted of Fornication, shall as an Escheat to the Lord of the Mannor, forfeit all her Lands and Goods, and the Tenant is by a peculiar custom in some places before he can inforce his Lord to admit any one to his Coppyhold to make a prosfr thereof to the next of the blood, or to his Neighbours ab ori∣entesole, inhabiting Eastward of him, who giving as much as another, is to have it, and many more inconveniencies, and unpleasing customes, not here remembred, which they who in the Raign of H. 3. and E. 1. Or when Bracton and Fleta wrote, were but Te∣nants at the will of the Lord, and by an accustomed and continued charity, fixed and setled upon them and their Heirs, are now become to be the owners of a profitable and well to be liked inheritance, secundum consuetudinem manerij, according to the cu∣stome of the Mannor, could never by any
manner of Reason or Justice, require a bet∣ter usage, o find the way to complain of, un∣till our late horrid and irrational Confusi∣ons, when Injustice accused Iustice, Op∣pression complained of Right, and the wickedest o Gains, was called the refined Godlinesse, and when they got so much in∣couragement, as in the height of a grand and superlative ingratitude, to cry aloud and cla∣mour against their Lords who were nothing else but their, good and great Benefactors, and would make as many as they could, be∣leive that their Coppyhold Estates which were great Acts of Charity in the time of the Saxons, were now nothing lesse than Norman Slaveries. Are better also than Estates for lives or years, which are not (unless in case of a seldome happening minority, which is other∣wise recompenced) so happy in their con∣ditions, as Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, but are more clogged and incumbred with Covenants or operation of Law, then Knight Service, as the Tenant to be punished with treble dammage, and a forfeiture of Lo∣cum vastatum, the place wasted, for wast com∣mitted or permitted to be done, in but cut∣ting down an Apple tree in an Orchard, or a few Willows or other Trees that grow a∣bout the House, or plowing up land that was not arrable, cannot Assigne his Term, or make a Lease of part of it, or cut down Tim∣ber of Wood without leave of his Lord, is
stinted to his fewel or firewood, and to have so many Loads only to burn, is not to carry any dung of the ground, is to forfeit his Lease, if he pay not his Rent, if demanded at the time appointed, and many times strict Nomine Penaes for every day after in which it shall be unpaid, must carry so many loads of Wood or Coal, every year for his Land-lord, pay quarters of Wheat; Rent Capons, a Boar, or Brawn, a Mutton or fat Calf, and the like, renewing thereby again the old kind of Socage, by their own Cove∣nants, or for their own conveniency, agree∣ing to find so many men furnished with Pikes▪ or Musquets, in the service of their Land-lords, in the time of Wars, which was not long agoe done in Ireland, by some Te∣nants of the late Lord Conway, which is no lesse then a Military Tenure, Wardships, and Marriage only expected. And whether for lives or years doe live un∣der as many other harsh and uncomfortable Covenants and Conditions, as the wari∣nesse, distrust, or griping of their Land-lords, will put or enforce upon them, which he that hath not the property of the Land which he renteth, and knows it to be none of his own, is to endure the more pati∣ently, because if he will not take it, or hold it, so, another will be glad to do it, and that Covenants and Obligations which were at first but voluntatis, at the Tenants will and
pleasure, before they were entered into, do af∣terwards as the Civil Law saith, become to be necessitatis, and cannot be avoyded. So as Tenures in Capite and Knight ser∣vice, being more beneficial, and most com∣monly less troublesome and incumbred, than either Socage, or Copyhold Tenures, or Estates for lives, or years, which are more than two parts of three of the Lands of the Kingdom, and are yet well enough endured, purchased, and daily sought for, and when all is said that can be truly, and rationally alleadged for any good that is in them, that in Capite, and by Knight service, being the most noble and best of Tenures, will weigh heavier in the ballance of any reasonable, impartial, or knowing mans un∣derstanding; it cannot be imagined from which of the many points of the compasse, or Card of the vulgar, and unruly appre∣hensions the Wind, or Herian of the com∣plaints can come which are made against them, unless any should be so bruitish as to think the payments of Rent to their Land-Lords, or the performing of their oaths when they make Fealty, or their Covenants, Promises, or Contracts, are a grievance. And therefore until upon any account of truth, or reason, a just, and more than ordina∣ry care of the King, shall be reckoned to be a Curse, Favour a Fault, Protection a Persecution, Benefits shall be taken for Bur∣dens,
Blessings, for Bondage, performance of promises, a Sin, and compelling of them an injury, and gratitude and due acknowledge∣ment for Subsistance, Lively-hood and Li∣berty, be made a cause of complaint, & every thing that gives the people not a Liberty to undoe, cheat and ruine one another, be cal∣led (though it never deserved it) a grie∣vance, it must and may well remain a won¦der never to be satisfied, how Tenures in Ca∣pite, and by Knight service, which until these distempered times, had no complaint made of them, nor could ever be proved to be any publique, or general mischief or inconveniences, (for seldom, or as to some particulars, there may be in the best of Insti∣tutions, or the most eminent, or excellent of sublunary things, or actions, something of trouble or molestation,) should after so long an approbation of so many ages past, without any reason given, other then by a bargain for increase, or making a constant Revenue to lessen the Majesty and just power of our Kings, which the Parliament will certainly endeavour all they can to uphold, be now so unlucky, as to be put and inclosed in the Skin of a Bear, baited under the notion of a grie∣vance, and cryed down by a few, and not many of the people, as many other legal and beneficial constitutions have lately been, by the vote and humour only of the common-people, or a ruining Reformation, which as to that particular was first occasioned by.
CHAP. IV. How the design of altering Tenures in Capi∣te, and Knight Service into Socage Te∣nures, and dissolving the Court of Wards, and Liveries, and the Incidents and Re∣venue belonging thereunto, came out of the Forges of some private mens imagin∣ations, to be afterwards agitated in Parliament. OLD Sir Henry Vane the Father of young Sir Henry Vane, who helped to steal away the Palla∣dium of our happinesse, and under the colour of sacrificing to Minerva, or a needlesse Re∣formation, was instrumental in bringing the Trojan Horse into our Senate, & like the craf∣ty Sinon taught the people, weary of their own happiness, how to unlock him, and to murder
one another, and massacre our Religion, Laws, and Liberties. And Sir John Savil whose Son the Lord Savil, afterwards Earl of Sussex, (was too busie and active in the hatching of our late Wars, and troubles) and some other men of design and invention per∣ceiving about the first or second year of the reign of King Iames, that his Revenue and Treasure by his over bounty to his people of Scotland, and their necessi∣tous importunities and cravings, which is too much appropriate to that Nation, were greatly exhausted, did to srue themselves into some profitable actions, and imployments, upon a pretence of rai∣sing the King a constant Revenue, of two hundred thousand pounds per annum, propose the Dissolving of the Court of Wards and Liveries, and the changing of Tenures in Ca∣pite, and by Knight service, into free and common Socage, the only attempt and busi∣nesse whereof, bringing some of them out of their Countries, and colder stations, in∣to the warmth of several after Court prefer∣ments, which like the opening of Pandoras Box, proved afterwards to be very unhappy & fatal to the most of all the kingdom, but themselves, and those that afterwards traded in the miseries and ruine of it. It was in that Parliament after a large debate, resolved, saith Justice Iones, in his argument of the Ship-money, by the whole Parliament, that such an Act
to take away the Prerogative of Tenures in Capite, would be void, because it is inherent in the Crown, & it being again in the seventh year & the eighteenth year of the reign of that King, earnestly afterwards moved, & desired to be purchased of him, and the King ready to grant it, & recomending it to the Parliament, it was then found upon advice & consultation with all the Judges of England, to be of prejudicial conse∣quence to the Subject, as well as impossible, in regard that all Lands as well as persons in the Kingdom, be∣ing to acknowledge a Superiority, if the old Tenures should be put down, a new of a like nature might be again created, and the recompence given for it still continue in the Crown, as may be instanced in the Dane-gelt, which continued here in England, till the reign of King H. 1. long after this Nation was freed from the Danes, and the Alcavalas or Cruzadas in Spain, being a kind of Taxes there used and if new Tenures should not be created, the old perhaps might be again assumed▪ And with good reason was then denyed when King James was heard to tell his Son, the late King Charles, That such an yearly Reve∣nue as was offered in lieu of those Tenures, might make him a rich Prince, but never a great, and when so many Troops, and Brigades of evils do march in the Rear or Company of that design, which was so per se and non paril, as the necessity of Robert Duke of Normandies, raising of money, for want whereof he pawn∣ed
that Dutchy for ten thousand pounds, sterling, to enable him in his voyage to Je∣rusalem, to recover the holy Land, the impri∣sonment & troubles of K. Richard 1. in his re∣turn from thence, and his ransom of one hun∣dred thousand marks, of Sam. Daniel 121. silver, raised by twenty shillings upon every Knights Fee the fourth part of the Revenues of the Clergy, as well as the Laity, with the tenth of their goods, and the Chalices and Treasure (which may tell us how litle money, and more ho∣nesty England was then able to furnish) of all the Churches, taken as well here as in the Territories beyond the Seas, to make up the sum, & those necessities which King John had upon him, & the great want of mony which his Son King H. 3. endured in the Barons wars when he was forced after sale of Lands and Jewels, to pawn Gascoigne, after that, his Imperial Crown and Jewels to supply his wants, & having neither credit to borrow, nor any more things to pawn,Rot. claus. 37. H. 3. Clus. 46. et 47. H. 3. could not deny his wants, the gaging of the Jewels and Or∣naments of St. Edwards Shrine, and in the end as Sir Robert Cotton, if he were the Author of the short view of the long life, and reign of that King observeth, not having means to defray the Dyet of his Court, was constrain∣ed to break up House, and (as Mathew Pa∣ris saith) with his Queen and Children cum Abbatibus, & Prioribus satis humiliter hospitia & prandia quaerere, to demand entertainment and Dyet at some Abbies, and Priories, and con∣fessed
to the Abbot of Peterburgh, when he came to borrow money of him, majorem Ele∣mosinam fre sibi juvamen pecuniare quam alicui ostiatim mendicanti Mat. Pa∣ris 758. that it would be a great∣er act of Charity to lend or give him money then to one that begs from door to door. Could never perswade them to any such re∣medies, worse then their diseases, nor did the unruly Barons of King H. 3. when they had him or his Father K. John, at the most disad∣vantages ever demand it of them or any Eng∣lish man, untill the beginning of the reign of King James, & the broaching of this project, ever adventure to ask, or give such demands any room or entertainment in their imagi∣nations, and is more then the Athenians and Romans ever aimed at, who in all their po∣pular and restlesse turmoils, seditions, and agitations by the people or their Tribunes, concerning the Agrarian Laws, and making and changing of many other Laws, and several forms of Government, did never seek to take away or root out those long lasting monuments of benefits, and the ac∣knowledgements and returns of gratitude, which ought to be made of them. More then the people of France in those hard Conditions which they would have put upon the Daulphine of France, afterwards Charles the fifth of France, in the troubles and imprisonment of his Father King John in England, in the Raign of our King Edward the third, and the strange and insolent beha∣viour
of the Citizens of Paris towards him, when the Provost or Mayor, put his own hood half blew & half red upon his head, & compel∣ling him to wear his Livery, did all that day wear the Daulphines, being of a brown black, embrodered with gold in token of his Dicta∣torship did ever demand, nor did in those great afflictions & wants which were upon Charles the seventh, when he was reproached by his Subjects, and the English had so much of France in their possession in the Raign of our King H. 5. and King H. 6. who by their nu∣merous Armies, and the gallantry of their nobility and Tenants in Capite, and by Knight Service, were Masters of the Field, as well as of that Crown,John de Serres history of France. as he was in disgrace called the King of Berry, being a small Province, wherein he made what shift he could to de∣fend himself, & when his Table failed him, so that he eat no more in publick, but sparing∣ly in his Chamber, attended by his dome∣stical Servants, & had pawned the County of Gyan for mony, ever require to be discharged of their Homages and Tenures, and the du∣ties and incidents which belonged to them. Neither did the Justices or domineering Officers of State in Arragon in their height and extravagancy of power, which (for some time, until by its own weight, their Ty∣ranny, or the subtile & politique patience of their Kings, it came to be dissolved into the Royal & proper Rights of that Crown & Go∣vernment) they excercised over their Kings,
ever make that to be any part of it, nor did the wants of John King of Arragon, when he had pawned the County of Roussilion to Lewis the eleventh King of France, nor of Fer∣dinand the Second, Emperor, when within these forty years in those devouring and de∣stroying Wars of Germany, when the pale horse of death, and the red of destructi∣on, rid up to the bridles in blood, he pawned Lusatia and Silesia to the Duke of Saxony, and the upper Palatinate to the Duke of Bavaria, beget any such motion of the people, or Condiscention of their Prin∣ces. And that unhappy project and design, had in all probability no more disquieted our old Albion, or Brittain, sitting upon a Rock mediis tranquilla in undis, in the midst of all our late Storms and Tempests, which had broken the bag of Eolus, & getting loose, vied with the ra∣ging waves of a distempered Sea, who should be most destructive, and play the Bedlam. Had not a necessity of the Parliament in An. 1645. and their want of mony to main∣tain their Wars, put them again in mind of that way of raising mony, all other that could be almost thought upon as far as the mony, which should be spared by one meal in every family in a week, having been be∣fore put in Execution (so dangerous and of fatal consequence, are sometimes but the at∣tempts or beginning of designs) and then as the vote tells us, the house of Commons ha∣ving
received the report from the grand Committee, which was ordered to consider of raising of monyes for supply of the whole Kingdom, after some debate thereupon, or∣dered that the Court of Wards and Liveries, with the Primer Seisins, Oustres les maines, and all o∣ther profits arising by the said Court, should be ful∣ly taken away, and be made null and voyd. And that the Sum of one hundred thou∣sand pounds per Annum, should be raised in this Kingdom, instead of the Revenue there∣of, to be disposed for the good of this Kingdom, and that the proceedings of the said Court, should conti∣nue Statu quo prius, untill an Ordinance for ta∣king away the said Court, and paying the yearly Sum of 100000 l. be brought in, and past both Hou∣ses. Which might well have been forborn, when no general or extraordinary, and not otherwise to be prevented evils, but only want of mony for ought yet appears, did, or could perswade them unto it for a Subver∣sion of so grand a Fundamental of the Go∣vernment, Regality, and Laws, will never be able to avoid the dangerous consequences which will inevitably follow thereupon, and though it should be done by Act of Parlia∣ment, will but produce and usher in many numberlesse mischiefs and inconveniences to the King, Kingdom, Nobility, Gentry, and the most substantial and considerable part of the people. And will never be recompenced by the be∣nefits
hoped for, or which may happen by the intended dissolution of that Court, and alteration of those Tenures, which in the prospect or event will appear, if so many to be no more than these.
Chap. V. The Benefits or Advantages which are ex∣pected by the people in the putting down of the Court of Wardes and Liveryes and changeing the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service into free and common Socage. BY taking away the Ser∣vice of Warre without the Kingdom, when the King or his Lieutenant goeth to warre for for∣ty dayes bearing the Charge of a man and Horse, and the pay∣ment of Escuage to be assessed by Parliment, if he neither go nor send one in his place. Respites of Homage, petit Serjeanties, Fines for Alienation, Wardships, and payments of Fines for the marriage of the Heirs in minority, a rent for the Lands in the interim, Reliefs, primer seisins, Oustre les maines, Mesne Rates, Liveries, and assign∣ment of Widdow Dower.
The troublesome and powerfull process of the Exchequer, costly and long pleadings  of their Evidences, to avoid seisures for not sueing out Licences of Alienation, thereby enforcing them to procure pardons and to plead them. Costly Attendance upon Escheators, and Feodaries, finding of Offices or Inquisiti∣ons  post mortem, producing and finding (if the party hath a mind to it) of their Evidences, Compositions, chargeable passing, and ob∣taining grants of the custody of the body, and Lands, of Wards. Trouble and charge of Writs of diem clau∣sit extremum quae plura & melus inquirendum, Processe of privy Seals, Messengers, Infor∣mations, Bills, & Demurrers, (as the Case may happen,) Answers, Traverses, Replications, Rejoynders, Commissions, Examinations, & Depositions of Witnesses, Orders, Hearings Decrees, Injunctions, (all which are but to help to recover or defend the Wards rights, and if not in that Court, would be with as much or more cost and trouble as in other Courts) Extents, Seisures, Accompts before Auditors, Surcharges, and Ex∣ceptions, Fees to Auditors, and their Clarks. Concealment of Wardships, vexatios & chargeable hunting after them, and the cun∣ning  search and Inquisition which is made after them by the Escheators, Feodaries,
or Informers, busie and malicious Adversa∣ries, (which is not often, and but where the parties endeavour to deceive the King, and the Court, and evade the Law) and the ex∣tremities put upon them by granting it, and the Mesne rates, to the fierce discoverers, or such as seek profit out of other mens troubles and afflictions. Restraints from felling of Timber without Licence of the Court, begetting the charges of motions, & the attending upon the Court and their many Officers. A constant and certain yearly Revenue of eighty thousand pounds per annum, or so much more as the Revenue shall fall short of twenty thousand pounds per annum, which the alienation office now yields to be added to it, will be duely answered and paid, to his Majesty which will with all charges & expences deducted as is alleaged, be as much as was yearly gained to the Crown by the Court of Wards and Liveries, or any depen∣dances thereof, against which if there shall be opposed, and put into the other end of the ballance, these inconveniences follow∣ing they will weigh very much the heavier.
CHAP VI. The great and very many Mischiefs, and In∣conveniences, which will happen to the King and Kingdom, by the taking away of Te∣nures in Capite, and Knight Service. FOR that Lands in Socage will  if the Mothers be alive, du∣ring the minority of the heirs, most commonly fall until the age of fourteen years, into their Guardianships, who as all women which have an estate considerable, either real or personal, in their own right or their Childrens, do more then nine in every ten, (unle, which seldome happens, they shall be such good women and loving, as for their love to their Children, and dead Husband, to deny themselves their expected content by a second Husband,) by the temptations and flatteries of younger Brothers, or men of de∣cayed Estates, transire ad secundas nuptias, mar∣ry again, all too often within the first year,
which the Civil Law reserved for the time of their mourning, or retirednesse from world∣ly pleasures, and do too commonly bring the Childrens Estate to be as a Sawce to the hun∣gry enough appetite of a Father in Law, who being many times as good a Guardian to the Children, as the Woolf or Fox is to the Lambs, will be sure if he do not spend both the Mo∣thers and Childrens Estates, and bring them to beggery, to be gnawing and put many a lurch and trick upon them. Which might be the Reason that the prudent Romans were so little willing that the Mothers of any Children should after their Husbands death be the Guardians of them, as they had a Custome that the Mo∣thers themselves should be in perpetua Tutela in a perpetual Wardship or Guardianship, for Cicero would have it that Mulieres propter infirmitatem Consilii,Cicero otat. pro Mu∣ena. Women though of full Age should by reason of their unfitnesse to govern or give Counsail be, in Tutorum Po∣testate, have Tutors assigned them, and the Judicious Cato declared it openly, in publicae Concione in a publique Speech concerning the Oppian Law that,Cato a∣pud Livium. Majores nostri nullam nè privatam quidem rem agere Faeminas ine Auctore vluerùnt, Their Ancestors did not permit Women to meddle not so much as in private affairs without a Director or Overseer, And Vlpian tells us that, Lege Atilia sancitum
ut mulieribus et pupillis Tutores non habentibus a Praeore et majore parte Tribunorum darentur,Ulpian tit. 11. & Si∣gonius de an∣tiquo Jure Civium Rom. lib. 1 cap. 13. It was enacted by the Atilian Law, That the Praetor or Lord Chief Justice, and the grea∣ter part of the Tribunes should appoint Guardians to such Women and Children as had none. And if the Mothers should either make  themselvs, or be allowed by the Magistrate, as one way or the other it will be most like∣ly to be, the Guardians before the Heirs age of 14. or if at 14, the Children should be left, as they must, to chuse their Guardians them∣selves the Fear and Awe of the Mothers, or their second Husbands Inticements and Kindnesse but for that instant, will in all pro∣bability induce them to chuse no other, & so whether before the age of 14 or after, it is likely to be no otherwise but that where the Mothers are living & marryed again, the self-seeking and purloyning Father in Lawes of the Kingdom will be the Guardians, and where there are a second Brood of Children which will not be seldom, the Estates of the Children of the first Husband shall be sacri∣ficed by the Mothers Consent or permission to the benefit of the second Children, whose Father making much of the Mother or flatter¦ing her, finds it to be no hard matter to make her as willing to it as himself, and if she would hinder or doth not like, it can but steal her sighs and weep and lament in a
Corner, for that which she may wish wer otherwise, but cannot help it when she is, Sub potestate viri, Under the Power of a second Husband. And if not granted to the Mother or her second Husband, but to the Friends of that side which cannot inherit, which where the Mother is not an heir must of necessity be to her kindred, it will not then also e∣scape another common, often, and sad∣ly experimented fault or evil, that the af∣fections and care which doth usually assist and incourage honest and fair Dealings, will not be so much in the kindred on the Mothers side, which is but taken out of their Family and transplanted into that of the Fathers, (where the Mother her self is to forget her Fathers house and kindred,) nor equal that affection, care, and obligation, which is on the part of the Fathers kindred to preserve that Family which weares their Name as well as their Blood. And whether the Guardian in So∣cage shall be Tutor Testamentarius, ordained by the Fathers last Will and Testament, or a Pretore datus appointed by a Judge will not arrive to any better Fate or Condition than that where there be Executors or Administrators in personal Estates or Tru∣stees in Real or Personal, for Children and minors, or for payment of debts, who can many times neglect and forget the dying re∣quests of Parents, on their death Beds, to
to be careful of their Children, and their own imprecations, that God should do so and so to their own Children, if they should not perform the trusts, and let out their Con∣sciences Hackney to the Devil, to find ways to deceive and wrong them, of whom and many other such Guardianships and faithlesse per∣formances of trusts, our Courts of Law and Equity do dayly heare more Complaints of fraudes and cosenings, than they can ei∣ther easily find out or remedy. Which with that also of Father in Laws do in a woful experience exceed ten to one all that hath been but only surmised of the Court of Wards, which being a standing Court where there are no Interest, but a care only of the Kings and the Peoples just Rights, and their Oaths cannot be so pre∣dominant or inchanting, as the Interests, advantages or designs of single Persons; And it is not now to learn that the Mischiefs done to Infants and their Estates are more where they be in Socage then in Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, that there is a great difference between accompts that are to be made to a Court and impartial Audi∣tors, and where the Guardians will ac∣compt when or where they list, and give no security for true Accompts, and discharge of their trust, and without it are not to be trusted, for that many times they faile in their Estates and are impoverished, and the Evils that have happened to the heir of
Hele or of Davenport, where some of the Souldiery which were formerly Tradesmen have in the usurpations of authorities made themselves to be more then like the Master of the Wards, and tossed and tumbled their Estates and Marriages at their pleasure, and complaints, are obvious where an Heir by the unconscionablenesse of Socage, Guardi∣ans have by the spoyl and wast of their Woods and Estates▪ been damnified ten or twenty thousand pounds. The Kings Tenants will be enabled to ali∣enate their Lands to such as may be open enemies, or ill affected to his Person, Suc∣cession, or Government. Which will leave him a lesser power over his Subjects, in relation to his enants and those that hold of him, then every Gentle∣man and Lord of a Mannor hath in England over his Coppy-holders, or such as hold of them by Leases for lives or years. Which every Land-Lord finds, aswel as believes, to be so necessary as Citizens and Burgers, and all manner of Land-Lords, doe both in litle and great estates and leases, especially provide against letting, setting, or assigning without their license first had in writing, unless it be sometimes to Wives or Children, which in the Kings case, in matter of free-hold, was in 32 H. 8. al∣lowed his Tenants, so as they left a full third part to descend to the Heir. The education of the Heirs in minority of
Recusants, or persons disaffected to the King, or his Government, or to the Ortho∣dox Religion. Provisions for protections for younger Children, and care of payment of Debts, preservation of the Wards Estate, Woods and Evidences will be neglected. The finding of Offices or Inquisitions, post mortem, of the Auncestor, and the true extent and quantities of the Mannors and Lands, and many times the finding or men∣tioning of Deeds or Evidences in the Offices, which in antient aswell as latter times, have given a great light and help to titles and de∣scents of Land, and the recovery and making out of Deeds or Evidences lost, will now be laid aside, and all things left in the dark∣ness of ignorance and incertainty. Genealogies and Pedigrees, which by such Offices have only since the beginning of the raign of King H. 3. been deduced and brought into great certainties, will now be left like those of the Welch, to beleive one Ap after another, and Ap John, Ap Jenkin, Ap David, and whatsoever the wild tradi∣tions and boastings of our New men or up∣starts and our Bards, or undertaking ignorant Painters▪ to draw money out of their credu∣lous customers purses, shall be pleased to fancy, and shall not be so happy▪ as the Jews in their return out of their captivity▪ who were not to seek for the registers of their Genealogies, but be like the dull Thracians, who are said to have so short a memory as
not to count above the number of 4 or 5, Or being like a House with the windowes or lights only backward; or as a people with their eyes only in their backs, and in the time to come, not be able to give an account of our Ancestors further then our Grand-Fathers. And no other course or way being yet found to preserve the memory or right of Armes, or certainty of descents of our No∣bility and Gentry, the people (which the more Peysant and Mechanick part will be glad of) will be left to fool and make one another believe their own Rhodomantadoes and Delusions. Cause increase and multiply contention be∣twixt the Kindred and near Relations of the Orphans and Minors, in striving who shall have the Manage and Protection of their Lands and Estate, or as too often happens, most cleanly or hypocritically deceive or ru∣ine them, or make an Interest or Advantage for themselves, friends, or kindred by their Marriages, which in these last twenty years, and the practise of Counterfeit Religion and Honesty, calling every successfull knavery a Providence of the Almighty, (who not only hates, but will punish it;) can take 500l. or or more at a time to make Mathes, where they pretend great friendships, and in an Age of all manner of cheating and cunning devices to maintain Pride, is become the be∣neficial imployment of many that would be thought to be Gentlemen, or people of great respect or worship; and if a Trades-man
or Citizen, whose riches and influence have of late been too much upon all men or their estates in the Kingdome (more especially those that are prodigal or vitious) should get a Guardian-ship, may doe as the Dutch are now complained of, who out of their Weis Ca∣mer, Chamber, or Court of Orphans, can send their monyes to trade as far as the East-Indies, not for the Childrens, but for their own advantage, and in the mean time make delayes and pretences enough not to pay them their money, insomuch as a young Girle whose Parents dyed when she was but three years old, was of late so out of pati∣ence with Petitioning and attendance, untill she was 17. as shee had almost clawed out the Grefer or Registers eyes, and in the chase of such controversies, which upon pretences of nearer of kin, weakness of Estate in some, or bad life and conversation, and unfitness in other, may aswel be lengthened and made to be very chargeable, as those are concer∣ning Executors or Administrators, which doe too often make the Infants money and E∣states the lamentable paymasters. Whereas in the Court of Wards, Con∣troversies or Competitions for Wardships, were by reason of the instructions and rules by which they walked, easily and quietly determined in an hour or litle more time spent, Summarily and upon Petition, on∣ly in the Council Chamber of that Court. There will not be that ready help or care which was used to be, for the preservation
of the Wards estate from false or forged Wills, fraudulent or forged Conveyances, unjust Entries, and pretended Titles, and other Incumbrances. Nor for Tenants in Tayl and their Heirs, whose Deeds being found in the Offices, did many times prevent their disherision by Heirs, by second Venter, and forged Conveyances or Wills. Creditors cannot for want of such Offices sound, know how the Debtors Lands are setled, or what is in Fee-simple to charge the Heir. An Heir may now be disinherited by the frowardness of an aged Father, Instigated by the cunning and practise of a Step-mo∣ther, whereas a third part could not have before been conveyed or given from him. In Socage Tenures there will be nothing for the defence and safety of his Majesties Kingdome, Person, and People, when e∣very man shall be holding his Plow, or be supposed to hold by it, but the moyety of the Excise of Ale and Beer, to the value of one hundred thousand pounds per annum. The Kingdom will upon occasion of war or invasion, lose the ready defence, and per∣sonal service of the Nobility, who held per Baroniam, or as Tenants in Capite, and of ma∣ny worthy and able men, Knights, Esquires, Gentry, and other sufficient Freeholders, and men of good Estate and Reputation, well educated and fitted for war, and compleatly armed on Horse-back, & not like to be Run-aways
or treacherous which hold the remain∣der, and yet to be discovered Knights Fees, or any part thereof in an ordinary course of defence for forty days service (which in those times, and after the manner and way of war, and the Militia then used, was time e∣nough to determine all or a great part of the unhappy controversies of War) by, and out of so many several Estates, than at twenty pounds per annum, since improved to two or three hundred pounds per annum, with not a few of their Tenants, Friends, Servants, and Attendants, going along with them, and may call or summon them to go with· him out of the Kingdom in case of a diversive War, or otherwise, which by the Statutes of 1 E. 3.8 E. 3.25 E. 3. & 4 H. 4. & 17 Car. he cannot do to Hoblers, Archers, Footmen, or the Train Bands, but in case of necessity, and suddain comming of Foreign Enemies into the Realm, and would have been sure of a gallant Army of Horse, which being the more active and ready part of an Army, fittest for charge or retreat, forage or tra∣versing a Country, is by the French whose Nobless in War are presently on Horse-back, and make it their Ioy and subsistence, to ap∣pear in the defence of their King and Coun∣try, found to be a great part of the Successe in war as well as the Persians have done, who hath many times overcome the Turk by the strength of Horse, as the Hungarians and Poles have often done; And the Germans and Italians, did heretofore make great use of
their Nobility in Wars, and made their Ar∣mies to consist most of Horse, for that they presumed quod in Equestri militia praevalerent nobiles, that the Nobility would do best, and prevail when they served on Horseback,Nolden de etu nobilium, 62. for as the great Estates of England; were held by Knight Service, so it was most performed on horseback, and such as found or furnished out Hor∣ses in War, were to be men of Gentility and value and did in person go with their Prince or their Lieutenant) and until H. 5. Time, Gen∣tlemen which every high Constable and Me∣chanique,Water∣house discourse of Arms and Armories. now thinks it to be too little to usurp the Title of) were not distinguished by any Title of addition, but by their forinsecum ser∣vitium, which was Knight Service, and in Kent where they claimed Gavelkind, were never put under that kind of partition. It must needs be very prejudicial to the King who is to protect his people, and to his peo∣ple, who are to be protected by him, when as the King that hath none or very few Inland, Castles, Citadels, or places of strength, as Holland, Flanders, France, Italy, Germany, & most Nations have to retard the March of an Ene∣my landed, untill he can summon or call to∣gether his Subjects and Forces, and cannot at once, or upon a suddain, be able to raise so many men as may be able to incounter, or vanquish him in the Field. Shall have no Legions, or standing parts of
an Army, as Oliver and his Son Richard had paid at the charge of the publique to rally and unite at pleasure, redresse Rebellions, Repel and Oppose an Enemy, and if need be, visit him at home, and make his Coun∣try rather than his own, Sedem Belli, the Stage of War, to indure the Spoyles, Plundrings, Insolencies, and free quartering of Souldi∣ers. But shall when the Floods shall rore and lift up their voice, his Enemies compasse him in on every side, and there be none to help him, be as a Prince disarmed, and left to intreat and expect the good will of his people, or the care which they will be pleased to take for themselves in the first place, & for him at leasure & hoping that they will not devide into parties of facti∣ons call or summon a Parliament, which will take up forty days or six weeks, and give the Enemy all that while the mastery of the field, and time enough to make up all his ad∣vantages, and in the mean time must not so much as require aid of them who have had their lands freely given them, or of those who hold Offices or Annuities under him, for the performance of their Homages, Oaths, Fealties, Contracts, Promises, and grateful acknowledgments, and when the Parliament are met, must tarry until the majority of opinions shall agree how and in what manner he shall be helped, which will not if it should be agreed upon the second or
third day, but useth not to be in so many weeks, be speedily furnished when the mo∣ny must be first raised (which in the late ne∣cessity of disbanding and paying of Souldi∣ers, could not be finished in two or three months) and the men after leavied, armed, and cloathed, which where the Enemy, shall in the mean time have gained some Forts, Passages, or Counties, will not be so ready a way, or help at hand, as the use of Tenures, in Capite which like so many Garrisons invisi∣bly dispersed, but no way oppressing their several Neighbourhoods are upon the score of gratitude as well as loyalty quickly called out and imbodied, which made the Kingdom have the lesse use of Forts & Castles, & to be able in the Raign of King Stephen by agree∣ment betwixt him and Henry the second to demolish at once 1150 Castles. Will loose also his Homage of his Te∣nants in Capite, and by Knight service, being the Seminary and root of the Oath of Allegi∣ance, and the Genus or original of Fealty, which saith Sir Edward Coke is a part of Ho∣mage,Coke 1. part Istit. 64. and is so much saith Sir Henry Spel∣man,Spelmans Glossar. in ver∣b Homagij 356▪ a part of Homage, as a release of Fealty is a discharge of Homage, which (the Oaths of Allegiance and Fealty, & the duty of them being now by the delusions of Satan too much disused, and strangely Me∣tamorphosed into factions) will though the Oaths of Allegiance and Fealty should faile, remain fixed and radicated in the Tenures of
Lands in Capite and by Knight Service, and when they concurre, do altogether if rightly observed, make a threefold Cord which will not easyly be broken, and were therefore by as careful as wise Antiqui∣ty invented to fasten Subjects to their Duty, any one of which cannot now with any safe∣ty to the King or his Kingdom and people, be separated or disjointed, more especially that of Homage, for that former ages un∣derstood the Obligation of self Preservation and Interest to be more binding than Oaths as Salmuthius in his learned and accurate Comment upon Pancirollus well noteth,Salmutius in Pancirollum 280. Ut amore humani ingenii pro illis habeant max∣imam Curam, in quibus suam vident esse posi∣tam Substantiam, That men most common∣ly take most care of that, wherein their Lands and Estates are concerned, which that antient Committee-man and old Sequestrator the Devil well understood when he got an Order or Permission to ruine the Righteous, Job in his Estate, and our last twenty years can inform us how impotent and un∣able Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, Protesta∣tions, National Covenants, with hands lifted up to heaven, calling God to witnesse Loyalties, hot and fiery Zeals, and pretences of Religion, setting up of Christ, and his Interest, and walking with God in the more (as it was wrongfully called) re∣fied way of his worship, to resist or stand in the way of Interest, Dangers, Hazards, Self-seeking, and Self-having, in this world, but nothing at all in the better.
Which the reserving of Fealty, or its being always to be taken upon Tenures in Socage, and as well upon Leases for years, as Estates of freehold and inheritance will not reme∣dy, when as Sir Henry Spelman hath well ob∣served, Fealty, though it be taken upon Oath is not so obligatory as Homage though it be not taken upon Oath, for that the Words of Homage are devenio homo vester ab hac die in posterum, de vita, de membro, & de terreno honore verus, & fidelis vobis ero, & fidem vobis portabo ob terras quas a vobis teneo, I become from this day forward, your man of life, member and earth∣ly honour, and shall be faithful and bear faith unto you, for the Lands which I hold of you. And is not so awful & binding as that which was used in the British or Saxon times, or shortly after the Conquest, viz. ad defen∣dendum Regnum contra alienigenas, & contra ini∣micos, una cum Domino suo Rege, & terras, & honores, cum omni fidelitate, cum eo servare, & quod illi intra & extra Regnum fidelis esse voluit, & intra & extra Regnum defendere. that is, to defend the Kingdom against Foreigners, and Enemies, within and without the King∣dom, and with the King to defend his Lands and Honours, with all fidelity, and would be faithful to the King within and without the Kingdom, & that that which is prescribed by the Statute of 17 E. 2. (in which also the form and words of the Homage is declared and expressed) ever since used, viz. Quod
vobis ero fidelis et legalis, et fidem vobis feram de tenementis quae de vobis teneo, et legaliter vobis faciam, Consuetudines et servitus quae vobis face∣re debeo, ad terminos assignatos ut deus me adjuvet, that I shall be faithful and loyal, and faith bear to you for the Tenements which I hold of you, and shall lawfully doe and perform to you all Customes and Services which I ought to doe at the Tearms assigned▪ So God me help, is far lesse obliging and com∣prehensive,Spelmans glossar 268.  269. and so litle in the opinion of the Tenants or Fealty makers, as sufficit plerun∣que; As Sr. Henry Spelman saith, si pactos reddi∣tus, exoluerit sectamque Curiae Domini, ex more praestiterit Domini autem non milit at nec ar∣mis cingitur; they most commonly think it extendeth but to pay the rents agreed upon, and doe the accustomed suit and service to their Lords Court. Which in the Civil Law, form of an Oath of Fealty, used in the parts beyond the Seas in this manner, viz. Ego juro ad sancta dei Evangelia quod a modo in antea ero fidelis ei ut vassallus domino nec id quod mihi sub nomine fide∣litatis commiserit pandam alii ad ejus detrimentum me sciente, I swear upon the holy Evangelists, that from henceforth I shall be faithfull to him (id est the Lord) as a vassal to his Lord, nor shall willingly discover to another any secret which under the name of Fealty he shall commit unto me, was taken and found to be so slender a tye or obligation, as Alia de novo super fidelitatis juramento inventa forma
et utentium consuetudine quae hodie. When Obertus de Orto wrote his books de feudis in omni curia videtur obtinere, Olbertus  Orto, lib 2. e feudis, & Cujacius A∣nno. in eundem lib. 5, 6, 7. a new form of the Oath of fidelity was found and invented, and is used saith he almost in eve∣ry Court, and approved by those that used it, Scilicet ego Titius juro super haec sancta dei E∣vangelia quod ab hac hora in antea usque ad ulti∣mum diem vitae meae ero fidelis tibi Caio domino meo contra omnem hominem (& where it is to a mesne Lord) excepto Imperatore vel Rege, I Titius doe swear that from this hour to the last day of my life I shall be faithful to thee Caius my Lord against all men, except the Emperour or the King, which saith the great Cujacius by reason that the genuine sence or meaning of the words would not be so well understood by ignorant men, haec adijci solet, other clauses & words were used to be added (which amounted to as much as the duty of one that doth homage for Lands holden by Knights service) which Cujacius thought to be necessary enough, quod plaerique fidem sibi promitti satis non habent nisi et fidei partes munia∣que specialiter enumerentur veleo maxime si quid contra ea fecerint ut non possint negare se commisi∣sse in Jusjurandum et feudum amisisse, for that they did not think it to be enough to have fealty & promises made unto them, unless the duties and parts thereof should be especially enumerated, to the end more especially that i they should doe any thing contrary therunto, they should not be able to deny that they
had broken their Oath, and forfeited their Fee and Lands, so litle were they satisfied with the slight, or general words formerly used in the Oathes of fealty, though in more just and honest times, about the reign of Charles the great Emperour, the word fidelis, or a fealty, did contain in it (howsoever not expressed) a promise, de tuenda vita et hono∣re domini et si quid aliud specialiter jureju∣rando exprimi solet, to defend the life and honour of the Lord and every thing else, which was specially expressed in the Oath; so great a care was taken to make the first intentions and promises of those that had those Fees given them to come up and be answerable to the good will and expect∣ations of those that gave them. And therefore it may prove to be of evil consequence, if any of our new Socage men should like the Snakes thinking them∣selves the younger by casting off their Skins, fancy in their old or the next factious humour they shall meet with, that they are only to pay their rent and doe the services belonging to their Lands, but are not bound to pay that principal part of their natural, as well as sworn Allegiance, to take Armes to de∣fend the King and the Kingdome, more espe∣cially when they shall hold their Lands, in libero et communi Socagio, et pro omnibus ser∣vitiis per fidelitatem tantum, in free and com∣mon Socage by fealty for all services, which may be more than a litle preju∣dicial
to the Kingdome and the salus populi, safety of the people so much fought for, as was pretended to exchange the men of Armes and such as are fit for war, as the Tenures in Capite doe truly and not feignedly import, for those that shall claim exemption from wars, and are by all nations understood to be the unfittest for it; when those that by Tenure of their Lands and by reason of their Homage and Fealty, were alwayes ready and bound to doe it, and those that by a fealty not actually or but seldome taken, will suppose themselves not to be bound at all unto it, but being most disloyal, will as some thousands of Phanatiques have lately done, imagine themselves to be most faithful, and where the Knight Service men were to forfeit their Lands so holden, if they did not doe their service within two years, or pay Escuage assessed by Parlia∣ment, if they went not when they were sum∣moned, or sent another in their stead, the new or old Socage men shall be under no manner of penalty of forfeiture at all. Which may seem to be the cause that England, and all other Civilized and well constituted Nations & Kingdoms, did put that value upon Homage (of which there is some likeness & of Fealty▪ also in that of the Princes & mighty men of Israel, and all the Sons like∣wise of King David submitting themselvs at his command unto Solomon, & giving the hand
under Solomon as the margent renders,Chroic 29. v 42. (like that Oath of Abrahams Steward) as they un∣derstood it to be of the Essence of Soveraignty, the great Assistant and preserver of it, and the Bond of Obedience fixed and radicated in the interest of mens Estates, kept in and guarded by their fear of loosing them. And made our Kings so highly prize the Homages of their Subjects, and conceive them to be the Liaisons, or fastenings that kept their Crowns fast upon their heads, as King H. 2. when he had unadvisedly made his Son Henry King in his life time, caused the English Nobility to do Homage unto him, and R. 1. returning out of Captivity, had found that his Brother Iohn had almost stollen into his Throne, caused himself to be Crowned the second time, and took the Homages of his Nobility; and our Kings have been heretofore so careful, as al∣wayes at their Coronation, to take the Ho∣mages of their Nobility; and after a vacan∣cy of a Bishoprick, not to restore the Temporalties, until the succeeding Bishop shall have done his Homage. And appears to be no lesse valued by Fo∣reign Princes, when as Phillip King of France would, and did to his cost, refuse to receive the Homage of our King E. 3. by proxie, but compelled him to do it in his own person, for the Dutchy of Aquitain, and an Arch-Duke of Austria, was constrained in person to do his Homage to the King of France, between the hands of his Chancellor, for Flan-Flanders,
and the now Emperor of Germany hath lately and most industriously travailed through many of his Dominions and King∣doms, to receive the personal Homages of the Princes and Nobility thereof, and not omitted to go to Gratz, and Carinthia, to have it as formally, as really done unto him. And was such a Jewel in their Crowns, as they could sometimes to pacifie the greatest of their troubles by the Seditions and Re∣bellions of their Subjects, find no greater or fitter a pawn or security to assure the per∣formance of their promises and agreements, than an absolving their Subjects from their Homage and Obedience (which were as Sy∣nonimes, or of one and the same significati∣on) in case of Breach of promises, as our King Henry the 3d. did in his necessities to Richard Marshal Earl of Pembroke,Mat. Pa∣ris, 1232. that he should be freed from his Homage Si rex pact∣um suum violaret, if the King should break his agreement, and as the Antient Earls of Bra∣bant, are said to have done in their Reversals, or Grants to their Subjects, if they should infringe their Liberties or Privileges. Which the seditious party that depo∣sed King Richard the 2d. knew so well to be a grand Obligation or Tye, which Kings had upon their Subjects, as they put themselves to the trouble of inventing a new trick of Treason solemnly in the name of the three Estates of the Kingdom, viz. Lords Spiritu∣al
and Temporal, and the Commons, to re∣nounce their Homages, Fealties, and Alle∣giance, and all Bonds, Charges, and Servi∣ces belonging thereunto, which would have been to as little purpose, as it was contradi∣ctory to all the Rules of Right, Reason, and Justice, if they had not forced the distressed & imprisoned King by a publick instrument upon Oath to absolve all his Subjects a Jura∣mento fidelitatis & homagiis omnique vinculo lige∣anciae,Rot. Parl. 1 H. 4. M. 20. from their Oaths of Fealty and Ho∣mage, and all Bonds of Allegiances, and to swear and promise never to revoke it, and is so precious inestimable, of so high a nature, so useful, and of so great a value, as nothing but the Kingdom it self can be equi∣valent unto it. And our Nobility did so esteem of the Homage and Service of their Tenants, and build as is were their Grandeur and Power upon it, as they did antiently grant one to another Homagium & Servicium of such and such Tenants. Maud the Empresse gave to Earl Alberick de vere servicium decem militum, the Service of ten Knights. An Earl of Lei∣cester gave to Bygod Earl of Norfolk, ten Knights Fees, which after the manner of those times, may with reason enough be conceived to be only the Homage and Service of so ma∣ny, for the purchase of the Office of Lord high Steward of England, and John Earl of Oxford in the Reign of H. 7. did at his Castle of Hedingham in Essex, actually re∣ceive
the Homages of many worthy Knights and Gentlemen that held of him. May very much prejudice in their Digni∣ties  and Honors, as well as Estates, the anti∣ent Earls and Barons of this Kingom, by taking away Tenures in capite & changeing them, and Knight service Tenures into So∣cage, when as the Earls of Arundel, do hold the Castle and Rape of Arundel, which is the Honor and Earldom it self by the Service of 84. Knights Fees, the Earldom of Oxford is holden by the Service of 30 Knights Fees, and that by a modus tenendi Parliamentum, so beleived to be true, that King John caused it when he sent our English Laws into Ireland to be exemplified, and sent thither under the Great Seal of England, it is said that every Earldom consisteth of 21 Knights Fees, and every Barony of 13 Knights Fees, and a third part of a Knights Fee, and were of such a value and esteem, as they were wont here∣tofore to bring Actions and Assizes for them, and their Homage and Services. And so litle lesse in France, as the wealth of that great and populous Kingdom, is not as may be rationally supposed enough to purchase of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, the transmutation of their Fiefs nobles into the Roturier or Feifs igno∣bles, nor are the Princes or Nobility of Germany likely to be perswaded out of their antient Rights and Tenures into that of the Boors or common sort of People.
The Nobility and Gentry of England, when  their Military Tenures and Dependencies shall be taken from them, will not upon necessities of War and Danger, according to the Tenures of their Lands, their Homa∣ges, and Oaths of Allegiance, and their na∣tural and legal Allegiance, be able to suc∣cour or hep their Prince and Father of their Country, their Defender and Common Pa∣rent, as they have heretofore done, when as they stoutly and valiantly helped to guard their Standard, and Lions but for want of those which held Lands of them, and the Tenures by Knight service, will be forced to abide with Gilead beyond Jordan, and not be able to imitate their noble Ancestors,Dugdale Illustration of Warwickshire, 116. nor each or any of them bring to his Service three Bannerets, sixty one Knights, and one hundred fifty four Archers on Horseback,Dugdale Illustration of Warwickshire 316. as Thomas de Bello cam∣po Earl of Warwick, did to E. 3. in anno 21. of his Raign at the Seige of Caleis, or as the Earl of Kildare did to King E. 3. in the 25th. year of his Raign, when he besieged Calice,Spelmans Glossar in ver∣bo Hobellarij. when he brought one Banneret, six Knights, thirty▪ Esquires, nineteen Hoblers, twenty four Archers on Horseback, and thirty two Archers on foot. It will take away the subjection of the Bi∣shop  of the Isle of Man, who holdeth of the Earl of Derby as King of the Isle of Man, and not of the King of England, and there∣fore cometh not to Parliament. Take away from the King, Nobility, and Gentry, who have Lands holden
by Knight service, all Escheats of such as die without Heirs, or forfeit or be convicted of Felony, and the Kings Annum diem & vastum, year, day, and wast, where the Lands are holden of Mesne Lords, the Escheats of those that held of Kings, imediately being so con∣siderable as the Castle of Barnard in Cumber∣land, and the Counties of Northumberland, and Huntington, which the Kings of Scotland sometimes held of England, came again to the Crown by them, and the power which King Edward 1. had to make Baliol King of Scots, and to determine the competition for that Kingdom, was by reason it was held of him, the Earldoms of Flanders, and Artois were seised by Francis the 1. as forfeited, be∣ing Fiefs of the Crown of France, & Flanders, and many other Provinces, forced to submit themselves upon some controversies, to the Umpirage of France, of whom they held. Enervate at least, if not spoil our original & first Magna Charta, which was grante by H. 3. tenendum de se & heredibus suis, and all our Li∣berties, and the many after confirmations of that Magna Charta, will be to seek for a support, if it shall be turned into Socage, & the Librties also of the City of London, & all other antient Cities, and Boroughs, and such as antiently and before 9 H. 3. did use to send Burgesses unto Parliament. Alter if not destroy the Charter of K. R. 1.  granted to the City of London for their Hust∣ings Court, to be free of Toll & Lastage through
all England, and all Sea-Ports, with many other Priviledges, which were granted to be held of the King and his Heirs, and the same with many other immunities granted & con∣firmed by King John, with a Tenure reserved to him and his Heirs, for where no Tenure is reserved nor expressed, though it should be said, abs{que} aliquo inde reddendo, it shall be intended for the King and the Law will cre∣ate a new Tenure by Knight service in Capite.Coke 9. Report, Leonard Love∣laces Case. A Socage Tenure for Cities and Boroughs, which have no Ploughs, or intermedle not with Husbandry, will be improper when as there is not any fictio juris, or supposi∣tion in Law, which doth not sequi ra∣tionem, so follow reason, or allude unto it, as to preserve the reason or cause which it ei∣ther doth, or would signify, but doth not sup∣pose things improper, or which are either Heterogeneous, or quite contrary. Put into fresh disputes the question of pre∣cedency, betwixt Spain & England, which be∣ing  much insisted upon by the Spaniard, at the treaty of peace betwixt the two Kingdoms, in anno 42. of Q. Eliz. at Calice occasioned by the contests of the Embassadour of Spain, and Sir Henry Nevil, Embassadour for England, it was argued or adjudged that England be∣sides the arguments urged on its behalf, viz. Antiquity of Christian Religion, more au∣thority Ecclesiastical, more absolute autho∣rity Political, eminency of royal dignity,
and Nobility of blood, ought to have pre∣cedency, in regard that it was Superiour to the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, and the Isle of Man, which held of i, that Spain had no Kingdom held in Fee of it, but was it self Feudatory to France, and inthral'd by oath of Subjection to Charles the fifth King of France, in anno 1369. holds a great part of the Ne∣therlands of France, Arragon, both the Indies, Sicily, Granado, and Navarre, Sardinia, Corsi∣ca, and the Canary Islands of the Pope, Portugal payeth an annual Tribute to him; and Naples yearly presents him with a white Spanish Genner, and a certain Tribute. Lessen, and take away the honour of the King, in having the principality of Wales, Kingdom of Ireland, Isle of Man, Isles of Wight, Gernesey, and Jersey, holding of Eng∣land as their Superiour in Capite. Enervate or ruine the Counties Palatine of Chester, Lancaster, Durham, and Isle of Ely, if the Tenures should be Levelled into Socage. Very much damnifie all the Nobility and Gentry of England, who hold as they have antiently divers Mannors and Lands, or Offices by grand Serjeanty, as for the Earls of Chester, which belongeth to the Princes of Wales, and the eldest Son of the King, to carry before the King at his
Coronation the Sword called Curtana, to be Earl Marshal of England, and to lead the Kings Host to be Lord great Chamberlain of England, which is claimed by the Earl of Oxford, to carry the Sword called Lancaster before the King at his Coronation due to the Earl of Derby as Kings of the Isle of Man, to be grand Faulconner or Master of the Hawks claimed by the Earl of Carnarvon, and the Kings Champion at his Coronation claimed by the Family of the Dymocks in Lin∣colnshire, and very many others holding by divers other grand Serjeanties. Prejudice the Families of Cornwal, Hilton, and Venables, who though not priviledged and allowed to sit as Peers in Parliament, are by an antient custome and pre∣scription allowed to use the Title of Baron of Burford, Baron Hilton, and Baron of Kinderton, because they hold their Lands per Baronam. Disparage the Esquires and Gentry of  England, the first sort of which being as an∣tiently as the dayes of the Emperour Julian, called Scutarii, of their bearing of shields in the Wars,Selden tit. Hon 875. and the other as our excellently learned Mr. Selden teacheth us, called Gen∣tlemen, a gente, or the stock out of which they were derived, or because they were ex origine gentis of noble kind distinguished from them whom Horace termeth sine gente, or that they had servile Auncestors, had by
their fears and prowess in War not only gained great reputation, but Lands given to them and their Heirs for their reward, sup∣port, and maintenance, from which cust∣ome and usage amongst the Romas, sath Pasquier,Pasquier de Rocherches de France li-seond 202. the French in imitation of the Gaules did call those Esquires & Genmen, Quilz vient estre pourvuz de tels benefices, whom they did see so provided with those benefices or rewards, Et pour autant quilz veterent ceux cy n' estre chargez d' aucune redevance pecuiare à raison de leurs terres benificiales envers le Prince et outre plus qu'a l' occasion d'icelles ils devoient pren∣dre les armes pour la protection et dffense de Roy∣aume le peuple commenca de fonder le seul et unique degrè de noblesse sur telle maniere de gens, or that they did see that they were not charged with any Assessement in money to the Prince by reason of the Tenures of their Lands, and that therefore they were upon all occasions to take Armes for the protection and defence of the Realm. the people took them to be a degree of Nobility, as appeareth by the stature of 1 E. 2. touching such as ought to be Knights and came not to receive that order. Take away a great part of the root and foundation of the Equestris ordo, and antient and honourable degree of Knighthood in England, which was derived and took its be∣ginning from the service of their Lands which were military, for the cheif Gentle∣men
or Free-holdes of every County, in re∣gard they usually held by Knights service, saith the learned Selden,Selden ti. Honor cap 769, et 770▪ were called Chiva∣lers, in the statute of W. 1. touching Coro∣ners, and was so honourable a Title as the name of Chivaler was antiently given to e∣very temporal Baron, whether he were dub∣bed a Knight or no. Blast and enernate that also of our not  long agoe instituted order of Baronetts, which are, though there be no Tenure ex∣pressed in their Patents, held by service in War, and a more noble Tenure then So∣cage. Take away the cause and original of that  antiently very eminent degree of Banneret, when as such as hold Lands in Capite, and by Knight service, and had many Tenants also holding of them by Knight service, were a∣ble in a more then ordinary manner to do their King and Country service, by bring∣ing their own Banner in the Feild, which was to be displaced by the King or his Leive∣tenant. Make our heretofore famous English Nati∣on  in matters of Armes and feats of Chival∣ry, to be as a Pastoritium, or agreste genus ho∣minum, to be Rusticks and Plowmen, which the followers of Romulus, which were many of them but Rubuli et opiliones, Sheppheards and Heardsmen, did not take to be a degree worthy the Founders of that great Empire
of Rome, nor could be content with any les then that of their Patricij or Equites, Sena∣ors or Knights; And was therefore called Feudum nbile et cognoscitur mulis privilegiis inhaerentibus, viz. Gardia, Fidelitas, Homagi∣um, Curia, Consuetudins, Jurisdictio in Vassal∣los, Banni, et retrobann privilegium, jus Colum∣barij jus molendini, &c. A noble Fee which hath many priviledges belonging to it, viz. Wardship, Fealty, Homage, a Court, Customes, Jurisdiction over Tenants, pri∣viledge of Ban, and Arriere Ban, calling them to War in defence of their Prince, a right to have a Dove-house and a Mill, the two latter of which others could not heretofore build or enjoy without the Kings licence, Equibus liquet ingentem maneriorum nostrorum multitudinem Normannis,Spelmans glossar 261. enim abunde auctam videmus ex privilegiis ad feuda militaria olim spectantibus originem sumpsisse, by which it is manifest that our great number of Mannors came to be abundantly increased by the Normans, and took their begining from the priviledges belonging to Knights Fees; Take away all the Mannors and Court Ba∣rons of the Kingdome,Spelmans glossar in verbo fdum nobile. which being before the statute of Quia emptores terrarum, created by the Lords, who parcelled out the Lands, which the King had before given them to se∣veral Friends or Tenants to be held of them and their Heirs by Knight service, and some other part in Socage, to plow their Lands
and carry their Hay, &c. and to do suit to the Courts (of which the Free-holders are said to be the Homage) holden for their Mannor in whose Jurisdiction the Lands do lye, and are no small part of the legal and necessary priviledges and power of the Gen∣try or Lords of Mannors over their Tenants, which were as Sr. Edward Coke saith given them for the defence of the Kingdome,Coke 1. part Institutes 58 and doe not only very much conduce to the well ordering of their Tenants, but to the universal peace and welfare of the Nation, in their inferior Orbes and Motions subor∣dinate to the higher. Were all at the first derived out of Knight service, as evidently appears by Edward the Confessors Laws, wherein it was ordained that Barones qui suam habent Curiam de suis ho∣minibus,Spelmans glossar which have their Court consisting of their men and Tenants, Et qui Sacham et Socam habent id est Curiam et Jurisdictionem super Vassallis suis,LL Ed∣wadi Rgis 9.21. have a Court and Jurisdiction over their Tenants, are to doe right to their Tenants, and by the fall of those many thou∣sand Mannors, & Court Barons in the King∣doms, which will at the same time dye and perish with the Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service. Extinguish the Copyhold Estates, which  belong unto them, which by the destructi∣on of the Mannors, and Court Barons, will also fall, for as there can be no Court Baron
without Freeholders, so no customary Court without Copiholders. And once lost, or but altered, cannot be created again, for that now a Subject can∣not make a Mannor, which must be part in demesnes, and part in services, to hold of him by services and Suit of Court, which is to be by a long continuance of time a tem∣pore cujus contrarij memoria hominum non existit, and if there be no Court the Customary Te∣nants, or Copiholders cannot enter their Plaints, make Surrenders, and be admit∣ted. Turn the Tenures in Capite, which are only so called from the duty of Homage, and the acknowledgement of Soveraignity, and Headship in the King, into a Tenure in So∣cage, which is so far from acknowledgeing the King to be chief, or to ingage, as the o∣ther doth their Lands, to do him service as it is but a Tenure, as it were a latere, & is no more then what one Neighbour may acknow¦ledge to hold or doe to another, for his Rent, or money be a Lease for a Life, or one or more years, or as Tenant at will, and levels and makes rather an equality, then any re∣spect of persons, which if ever or at all rea∣sonable, or fit to be done, is in a democra∣tical or popular way of Government, but will be unexampled, and is not at all to be in Monarchy, & may make many of the peo∣ple which are not yet recovered out of a
gainful Lunacy, to beleive they were in the right when they supposed themselves to be the Soveraigns. Ireland, which in the subverting Olivers time, was to have their Swords by the like Tenure, turned into Plow-shares, though their warres and taxes were never intended to leave them, was to pay but 12000 l. per annum, to turn their better Tenures & Con∣ditions into worse, will if they be not come again to their wits expect the like prejudicial bergain. Bring many inconveniences and mischiefs to the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, if  their Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, and those which are holden of them as Mesn Lords, shall as ours, be taken away with their services and dependencies, Licences of Alienation, benefits of Investitures, infeoda∣tions, and the like, it being amongst others as a reason given for Wardships in that Kingdom, in the Laws of Scotland, in the reign of their Malcombe the 2. (which was before the Conquerours entring into Eng∣land, Ne non suppeterent Regiae Majestatis facul∣tates, to the end that the King should have where-withall to defend the Kingdom. And a letting loose of a fierce and un∣ruly people, who are best of all kept in awe & order by a natural & long & well enough liked subjection to their Mesne Lords and
Superiours, into a liberty which cannot be done without a disjointing and over-turning all the Estates of the Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom, and may like our late English Levellers, either endeavour to do it, or bring themselves and the whole Nation, to ruine by a renversing of the fundamental Laws, and that antient order and constitution of that Kingdom, wherein the estates and live∣lyhood of all the Nobility and Gentry, and better part of the people are hugely concern∣ed. And besides a great damage to the King in his Revenues, and profits arising out of such Tenures, if not recompenced by some an∣nual payment. Will howsoever take away that antient Homage and acknowledgement of Superio∣rity, which from that Kingdom to this of England, cannot be denyed to be due, and to have been actually and antiently done, and presidented, and not in one, but several ages, fidem & obsequium ut vassallos Angliae Regibus, & superioribus dominis jurejurando promisisse, to have done their Homage and Fealty as vas∣sals to our English Kings, and bound them∣selves by oath thereunto, as namely, to Al∣fred, Edgar, Athelstane, William the Conqueror, William Rufus, Maud the Empresse, Henry the second, and Edward the first, the later of whom with all the Baronage of England, in a Letter to the Pope, did upon the search of many Evidences and Records stoutly assert it.
Will be no small damage and disturbance  to the Kings other Regalities, and Preroga∣tives, and in the Tenures of the Cinque Ports, who are to provide fifty ships for the guard∣ing of the Seas, and the Town of Maldon in Essex one, the Town of Lewis in Sussex, as the Book of Doomsday informeth, where King Ed∣ward the Confessor had 127 Burgesses in do∣minio & eorum consuetudo erat, si Rex ad Mare custodiendum sine se suos mittere voluisset, de om∣nibus hominibus cujuscunque terrae fuissent collige∣bant 20 slidos & hos habebant qui in manibus ar∣ma custodieant, had 127 Burgesses in his demene of the King, and when he sent any of his men to guard the Seas, they were to gather 20 s. a man, which was to be given to those that manned the Ships, & in Colchester where the custom then was, that upon any expedition of the Kings by Sea or Land, every house was to pay six pence ad victum soldariorum Regis, towards the quarter or livelyhood of the Kings Souldiers, and likewise prejudice him in his grand and Petit Serjeanties, and many thousand other reservations of honour and profit, by and upon Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, which revived and called out of their Cells, wherein those that are to do and pay them, are content they should sleep, and take their rest for ever, would go near to make and maintain an Army with men and Provisi∣ons.
The King when the Tenures in Capite shall be taken away, shall never be able to errect his Standard and to call thereunto all that hold Lands, Fees, Annuities, and Offices of him, to come to his assistance, according to the duty of their Tenures, and the Acts of Parliament of 11 H. 7. chap. 18. And 19. H. 7. chap. 1. of forfeiting the Lands and Offices holden of him under the penalties, which was the only means which the late King his Father had to protect as much as he could himself, and his Subjects or to manifest the justice of his Cause, in that War which was forced upon him, and was very useful and necessary heretofore for the defence of the Kings of England, and their People, and proved to be no otherwise in the Bellum Ethelredus Abbas Rienal∣ensis. Standardi, so called in the reign of King Stephen, where some of the Barons of England, and some of the English Gentry, gathered themselves to the Royal Standard, and repelled and beat the King of Scotland, and in several Kings reigns afterwards repulsed the Scotch, and Welch Hostilities, and Invasions, and at Flod∣don Field in King H. 8 ths. time, when the Duke of Norfolk and his Son the Earl of Sur∣rey, and diverse of the Nobility and Gentry which accompanied them vanquished, and slew the King of Scots. The benefit whereof the Commons of England had so often experimented as in diverse Parliaments they Petitioned Rot. Parl. 6. R. 2. m. 33.. H▪ 4. m. 24. the King and Lords to cause the Lord Marchers, and other great men, to repair into their
Counties, and defend the borders, and was so necessary in France, to assemble together the Bans, and Arrierebans which were but as our Tenants in Capite, as it helped King Charles the 7th. of France, to recover that Kingdom a∣gain out of the hands and possession of our two Henries, the 5. and 6. Kings of England. And if any Rebellion or Conspiracy shall  hereafter happen. When —Cum Virgill 1 Eneid. saepe coorta Seditio saevitque animis ignobile vulgus. Fury, and Rage of War shall burn, And the Ignoble to the worst side turn. Must be left to hire his Souldiers or Assist∣ance, out of the Rascallity, Debauched, and Ruder sort of People, and such as know nei∣ther how to fight, or be faithful, if his Trea∣sory or yearly Income, upon such an increa∣sed Revenue, can do it, when as without the necessity of his Subjects, preserving their own Lands and Estates by performing the duties and service of their Tenures, the money which the late King could have procured, could never have brought any considerable number of men to his Standard, of whose fi∣delity, being Hirelings, and such of the Vul∣gar and ignoble part of the people, as had neither courage virtue or Estate, or such as
for a litle more pay, would either have deser∣ted or betrayed him, nor could he be so cer∣tain, and assured as he was in the aid and as∣sistance of that of the Nobility and Gentry, and better part of the people, virtuously e∣ducated, and descended from worthy Ances∣tors, furnished out, and ready to attend him, with the hazr of all their Estas and Foues, and whose great Sous ctd by a nobler principle, made them scorn to stoop to any unworthy Actions, basensse or vil∣lany, which caused our brave King H. 5. af∣ter the Batte at Agencourt, in a Muster, or Leavy, which he was to make of Souldiers to passe with him into France, publiquely to Proclaim, that none should presume to go with him (for then they needed no other impressing but the obligation of their Tenures and glory and honour of serving their Prince, and Country) but such as were Gentlemen, and had Tunicas armoum, did bear Arms, except such as had served him at the Bat∣tel of Agencourt, though they had none. For if a War, which will be sure to loose  no opportunities; but pick & cull its advanta∣ges, should break out before the rent day, or the monyes can be gathered, he cannot like∣ly want distresses or misfortunes either for himself or his people, when they shall not have wherewith to hire an Army; And failing of a necessary defence and assistance at Land, for want of his Tenures in Capite,
and Knight service, shall also loose the help of his Ships and Navy at Sea. And if the King or any of his Successors should be so happy as to have money in their Treasury, which as the course and charge of War is now, must be no small sums to hire, provide, and continue an Ar∣my, it may be seized on as his Revenues, and all the money in the Exchequer, and much of his Plate and Houshold stuffe were in the late Wars, and if he could be so well before hand as to have any Magazines, may have that as easily taken from him as his Ma∣gazines at Hull, and the Tower of London were, when his Tenures per Baroniam, and in Capite, and by Knight service were not. Can have no manner of assurance, that when any sedition or commotion of the peo∣ple shall be bred or increased by the practise of some great men, or inticements of any of the Clergy, and a Bellum flagrans, or a War as suddain and unexpected as it shall be dan∣gerous, shall breake out not only in one, but several parts of the Nation, that the people or most vulgar and common sort of Hirelings will especially in a frenzy or humour of sedi∣tion be hired or drawn to fight for him by a small and inconsiderable pay, and the support of an Hospital when their wounds shall bring them into it, or a small allowance which the statute allows wounded Souldiers until they
be cured, or maimed Souldiers which are in∣curable, shall be so very disproportionate to their danger and hazards. When the hireing also of common Sould∣iers upon a suddain and in case of necessity, will (if he could get them) be more charge∣able and difficult then when he was to be served and defended in his Wars by men of worth and quality, under the ingagement of their Lands and Tenures, which made our former Kings, besides those aids and safe∣guards by Tenures of Lands, to stipend and pension certain of their Nobility and Gen∣try whom they found most proper and fit to serve them by Indenture, with so many men at Armes or Souldiers, as for instance, Thomas Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, retained in 46 E. 3. by Indenture to serve the King in his Wars beyond Seas for one whole year with 100 men at Arms, of which num∣ber himself to be one, 160 Archers, 2 Ban∣nerets, 30 Knights, and 77 Esquires, a try∣al or proof whereof would easily have mani∣fested the difference betwixt the one way & the other,Dugdale Illustration of Wariekshire 321. if when the late King in his march or expedition against the Covenanting Scots in An. 1639. had such a gallant Army as he had of his English Nobility & Gentry, had disban∣ded them & taken as well as he could in their rooms only milites Gregarij, or Tirones, com∣mon and mercenary Souldiers; And may expose him in any distresse, when his mony
or hirelings shall fail him, to that disloyal and rebellious late opinion too much enter∣tained and taken in by Newtrals double deal∣ing or time serving people, that where the King cannot protect them, their Oaths and Consciences gives them a liberty to make the best bergain they can for themselves, Take away also the foundation of the House of Peers in Parliament, whom the  Laws and Records of the Kingdom, do prove to sit there only as Tenants in Capite, and per Baroniam, which well might be the grand foundation of so noble a Senate, when as a∣mongst the Romans, their Senators were Lecti in senatum ex equestri ordine,Sigonius de antiquo ju∣re Rom. chosen into the Senate out of the degree of Knighthood, and even by Brutus in his Consulship, and great endeavours to restore that people to their Liberty, was so approved, as that many ages after, Perseus Macedoniae Rex apud Livium lib,Livy lib. 42. 42. Equites Romanos appellat principes juventutis & seminarium Senatus, calleth in Livy the Ro∣man Knights, the Princes or Flower of the youth▪ and the Nursery of the Senate,Sigonis. de antiquo jure Rom. 76. and saith that inde lectos in patrum numerum, they where thence chosen to be Senators, and ex ve∣teri instituto, the Custom was as Isiodore saith▪ that when the Senators Sons came to be of Age,Perionius de Senatu Rom. lib. 25. they were not to be admitted into the Senate, until they were Knighted. And A∣lexander Severus the Emperor,Lampridius in vita Severi. would not as∣sumere libertos in equestrem ordinem, ordain or
make Yeomen, or such as were nwly  to be Knights, or give  (as he did) Lands to hold by Knight , dicens · quod seminarium  E∣questrem sse locum, that it was the seminary for the Senate, amongst the Germans, who were as jealous to keep their Honor, as they were their Liberties Nobiles vocati Ritter id est Servator,Nolden de statu nobilium 60. & 62. Noblemen were ter∣med Ritters, which signifieth a Saviour or De∣fender, quod virtute & fortitudine servent patri∣am, because by their vertue and manhood, they defended their Country, amongst whom the degree of Knighthood is worthily recko∣ned to be honoris species exercitium nobile & pro∣prium nobilium, a degree or part of honor, a noble exercise, and proper breeding for No∣bility, hinc militum nomen in Jure feudali pro nobili usurpatur, and thence a Knight was in the feudal Laws taken and used for a No∣bleman, and though Hector Boethius calleth equites Barons,Hector Boethius, Hist. Scot. lib. 11. speaking of those that paid for Wardship and releifs to Malcolme the King of Scots, yet Sir Henry Spelman is cleer∣ly of opinion,Spelmans Glossar. 85. that Miles quem ea tempestate Baronem vocabant non a militari cingulo quo e∣quites creabantur sed a militari feudo quo als pos∣sessor & libere tenens nuncupatus est nomen sumpsit that a Knight, which in those imes they called a Baron, was not so called from the Military Belt or Girdle by which they were
created, but took his title or denominati∣on from the Knights Fee, of which he was otherwise caled Possessor, or free Tenant, had jus Annulorum amongst the Romans a right to wear Rings, and was gradus ad Senatorium, a step or means to be a Senator. For Nobilium Ordo pro seminario munerum praecipuorum habetur, quia liberaliter educati sapi∣entiores esse censentur saith Besoldus the degree of Nobilitie hath been accompted to be the foundation or original of the greatest Offices or places, for that being liberally and more then ordinaryly educated, they were judg∣ed to be the wisest, and therefore Comites or Earls being antiently in the reign of the Em∣perour Charlemain, (which was in anno Christi, 806.) if not long before, praefecti Provincia∣rum, & qui Provincias, Administrabant, the Governours of Countries, and Provinces un∣der their Emperours and Kings, were with Dukes also and Barons not only in France, in those times, but in Germany also, afterwards inserted or put into the Matricula,Besoldus de Comitibus & Baronibus Im∣perij. Germani 117. or Roll of the States of the Empire, & in Comitijs jus suffragij habuerunt, and had voice or judica∣ture in their Dyets, or greatest Assemblies, which corresponds with that more antient Custom amongst the Hebrewes,Num. 11. Joshua 23. Jeremiah 26. in Gods once peculiar Commonwealth, where the Prin∣ces of the twelve Tribes, summo Magistratui in consilijs assidebant, did assist the chief Magi∣strate in their great Counsels and Arumae∣us as well as many other, is of opinion that
it was libertatis pars, a great part of the peoples Liberties, & fo their good, that delibe∣ratio odinum consili & authoritate quorum peri∣culo,Arumaeus de Comitiis 7. res agitur suscipitur & qui apud Principem in mgna gcia su, in those great Counsels Resolves should be made by those who should be inressed, or pertakers in any dangers or misfortunes, which should happen there∣upon Arumaeus de Comitijs 223. & jure Comitiorum una & perpetua privativa est mediata subjectio qua qui infectus est nec Comitiorum particeps esse potest. That it is a Rule or Law in such Assem∣blies, that those that sit there, or have voice and suffrage in it, are to hold immediately of the Empire, and the Reasons of the first Institution of the Parliament of France, com∣posed of the Nobility by the antient Kings of France, and King Pepin was as Pasquier, that learned Advocate of France, observeth in partem solicitudinis, to assist their Kings, for the better management of the Affairs of Government, who did thereby communicate les Affaires publiques a leurs premiers et grandes seigneurs come si avec la monarchie ils eussent vou∣lu entre mesler l'ordre d'vne Aristocratie et Go∣vernement de plusiurs personnages d'honner,Pasquier des Recherches de la France liure 2.72. & 7. the publique affairs to their chief and greatest Lords, to the end, to intermingle, and blend with Monarchy, the order and manner of an Aristocratie, and Government, by many per∣sonages of Honour, et ne se mettre en hain des grands Seigneurs & Potentats, and not
to draw upon them the envy of their great and mighty men,Pasquier es Recheches de la France livre 2.72, 74, et 76. Et estans les grands Seigneurs insi los unis se composa un corps general de toutes les Princes et Governeurs par l' advis desquels se viudereient non seulement les differents qui se presenteroient entre le Roy et eux mais entre le Roy et ses Subjects, And the great Lords being so united, composed, and made one general body of all the princes and Governours of Provinces, by whose advice and council, not only the differences which should happen betwixt the King and them, but between the King and his Subjects, might be determined, Et estoit l' usance de nos anciens Roys telle qu' es lieux ou la necessite les su∣momioit se uvidojent ordinairement les affaires par assemblees generales des Barons, and it was the usage of the antient French Kings in all cases of necessity, most commonly to consult of their affairs in the general Assemblies of their Barons, and accordingly by the directi∣ons of reason, or of that and the more anti∣ent Governments amongst the Greekes, in their great Council of Amphiction, or of the Romans in their Senate, our Saxon Kings did in Anno 712. which was almost one hundred years before the raign of the Em∣perour Charlemin, call to their Assem∣blies, and great Councels for the e∣nacting of Laws,Lambard d Priscs Ang∣lerum legibus. and redressing of Grive∣ances, their regni Scientissimos et Aldermannos Aldermen, Earls, or Governours of Pro∣vinces
& the wisest & most knowing of the Kingdome, & thereore after the Conquest, King John did at the request of the Barons, not to call to his Parliaments the Barones mi∣nores, the men of lesser estates, which hod also in Capite, promise under his great Seal, Ut Archiepiscopos, Abbares, Comites et majores Barones Angliae sigillatem per literas summoniri faceret, that he would severally summon to Parliaments the Arch-Bishops, Abbotts, Earls, and greater Barons of England, and that the lesser Barons were summoned or sat in Parliament, falsum esse ipsa ratio suadet, saith the no less Judicious than Learned Sr. Henry Spelman,Sr. Henry Spelmans glos∣sar in diatriba de Baronibus 79, et 0. reason it self will not allow for a Truth, when as there was as he ob∣serveth ingens multitudo, a great number, et plus minus 30000 quos nullo tecto convocari poterat, and no less then 30000 which no one house was able to contain, Quemadmodum itaque saith he nequ Barones ipsi consiliavè majo∣res neque minores quempiam in Curiis suis ad Ju∣dicia ferenda de rebus sui Dominij admittant nisi Vassallos suos qui de ipsis immediate tenent hoc est milites suos et tenentes libere ita in summa Curia to∣tius Regni nulli olim ad Judicia, et Consilia ad∣ministranda personaliter accersendi erant· nisi qui proximi essent a Rege ipsique arctioris fi∣dei & homagii vinculo conjuncti hoc est immediate vassalli sui; As therefore neither the greater nor lesser Barons do admit any in their Courts to advise them, or meddle with mat∣ters
of Judicature concerning things be∣longing to their Estate or Jurisdiction, but their Tenants, and such as hold immediately of them, that is, Freeholders, and such as hold by Knight Service; So in the great Court of all the Kingdome, none were anti∣ently personally called to give Judgement and advse therein, but such as were near to the King, and bound and obliged to him by a greater Bond and Tye of Faith and Ho∣mage, that is to say, his immediate vassals, Barones nempe cujuscunque generis qui de ipsi te∣nuere in Capite ut videndum est in breve de sum∣monitione (wherein they are summoned in fi∣de & homagio quibus tenentur, in the Faith and Homage by which they held) & partim in charta libertatum Regis Johannis, and Barons of any kind whatsoever which held of him in Capite, as may appear by the Writs of Sum∣mons to Parliament, & the Charter of King John. Hence the Barons of England are in our laws said to be Nati Consiliarij, born Coun∣sellors of State, and Baro signifying Capitalem Vassallum majorem qui tenetur Principi Homagij vinculo seu potius Baronagij hoc est de agendo vel essendo Baronem suum quod hominem seu clientem praestantiorem significat, A Baron who is a chief or Capital Vassal, is bound to his Prince by the Bond of Homage, or rather Baronage, which is to be his Baron or man, or more considerable Clyent, and makes a threefold dvision of Barons, who by Bracton are called Potentes sub Rege, great or mighty men under
the King, & Barones hoc est robur belli, and Ba∣rons, which is as much to say, as the strength of War, into feudal or by prescrip∣tion, 1. Qui a priscis feodalibus Baronibus oriun∣di suam prescriptione tuentur dignitatem, which being discended from Antient feudal Barons, do continue their dignity by prescription, 2. Rescriptitios qui brevi Regio evocantur ad Par∣liamentum,Spelmans glossar 80. which are called to Parliament by the Kings Writs, & 3. Diplomaticos, which are by Letters Patents and Creation, and that Barones isti Feodales nomen & dignitatem suam ratione fundi obtinuerunt, those Feudal Barons doe hold their dignity by reason of their Lands and Tenures, and that Episcopi suas sortiuntur Baronias sola fundorum investitura, Bishops are Barons, only by investiture of their Baronies Lands and Temporalties; And the most excellently Learned Mr. Selden, who was well known to be no stranger to the old and most choice Records and Antiquities of the Kingdome, doth not doubt but that the Bishops and Ab∣bots did sit in Parliament and were summon∣ed thither only as Barons by their Tenures per Baroniam,Seldens Epistle to Mr. Vincent con∣cerning his book against York. and in his Epistle to 47. H. 2. in dors m. 7 & Pat 48 H. 3. Selden tit. ho∣nor 716. Mr. Augustine Vincent concerning his Corrections of Yorkes Catalogue of Nobility doth most learnedly prove it by many Instances besides that in he Case of Thomas Becket Arch-bishop of Canterbury in 11▪ H. 2. and the claime made and allowed in Parliament in 11 R. 2.
by all the Bishop, Abbots, and Priors, of the Province of Canterbury which used to sit in Parliament, that de Jure et consuetuine Regni Angliae, all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and other Prelates whatsoever per Baroniam Domini Regis tenentes,Stamford lib. 3▪ cap. 62. holding of the King by Barony were Peers of the Parliament which agreeth with the opinion of Stamford that the Bshops, ne ont lieu en Parlement eins in respct de lour possessions annexes a lour,Camden Brit. 120.122. dignities have no plae in Parliament but in respect of their Possessions annexed to their Dignities, and that Mr. Camden saith that divers Abbots and other spiritual men, formerly summonned by writ to Parliament, were af∣terwards omitted because they held not by Barony,Seldens tt. honor. and that it was mentioned and allowed to be good Law in a Parliament of King E. 3. que toutes les religieuses que teignent per Barony soient tenus de vener au Parle∣ment, that all the religious which hold by Barony are to be summoned to Parliament. And as to the temporal Barons, doth besides what he alleageth of the Thanes or Barons of England in the Saxon times, that they held by personal service of the King, and that their honorary possessions were called Taine-Lands, and in the Nor∣man times after denoted by Baronies, and the eminent and noted Case of the Earls of A∣rundel claiming, and allowed to be Earls of Arundel by reason of their holding, or Tenure
of Arundel Castle, and Sir John Talbots being Lord Lisle ratione Dominij et Manerij de Kingston Lisle doth by 22 E. 3, fo. 18.48. E. 3. fo. 30. & other good Authorityes conclude, that the Tenure of a Barony is the main & principal Cause of the Dignity that 130 temporal Ba∣rons by Tenure were called by several writs to assist the King cum equis & Armis, with horse and Armes, and the spiritual being a∣bout 50 were called, ad habendum servicium su∣um, and that the greatest number of Barons during all that time were by Tenure, that the most part of the Barons by Tenure and Writ untill the middle of the Raign of King R. 2. and those that were called by Writ, were such as had Baronyes in Possession, that the honorary possessions of Earls were called Honors, and reckoned as part of their Earldoms which were holden in Capite, the chief Castle or seat of the Earls or Barons were called Caput Comitatus seu Baroniae, the head or chief of the Earldom or Barony, and that in this sence Comitatus integer is used for a whole Earldom in the grand Charter, and Bracton and Servicium quarte partis Comitatus for the fourth part of an Earldom, that Hugh de Vere Earl of Oxford, Magnavile Earl of Essex and divers other antient Earles were Cingulo Comitatus & Gladio Comitatus cincti girt with the Girdle or sword of their Earldoms, which he conceiveth to be an Investiture.
All which may by the Records of this Kingdom be plentyfully illustrated by ve∣ry many instances, and by the Rolls of the Constables and Marshals of England in which upon the March of the Army of King E.. 1. towards Scotland in the 28 year of that King, Humfridus de Bohun, Co∣mes Hereford & Essex Constabularius Angliae recognovit per os Nichoai de Segrave Baneretti sui & locum suum tenentis se acquietari per ser∣vitium suum per Corpus suum in Exercitu pre∣senti Scotiae pro Constabularia in Comitatu Here∣ford,In Rotuli Humfridi de Bohun Comitis Hereford & Essex de re∣cognitione ser∣vitiorum Domi∣ni Regis Angli∣ae pro guerrae sua Sctie An. 28. E. 1. Humfry de Bohun Earl of Hereford and Es∣sex Constable of England, declared by Sir Ni∣cholas Segrave his Baneret and Lieutenant, that he was to be acquitted for the Constabulary in the County of Hereford (where it seems some Manors or Lands in that County were annexed to the said Office or held by grand Serjeanty) by the Service of himself in the Army for Scotland, I tem idem Comes recog∣novit per eundem Nicholaum Servitium trium feodorum Militum faciendum in dicto Exercitu pro Comitatu Essex per Dominos Iohannem de Fer∣rariis Henricum de Bohun et Gilbetum de Lind∣sey milites, Also the said Earl acknowledgeth by the said Sir Nicholas Segrave e Service of three Knights Fees to be performed in the said Army for the Earldom of Essex (which shews also that then those Antient Earldoms of England were no other then by Tenure and Feudal) by John de Ferrers, Henry de Bo∣hun,
and Gilbert de Lindsey Knights; And in the same Constables Roll and at the same time Walter de Langton Bishop of Cventry and Lichfield, recognovit et offert Servitium du∣orum Feudorum militum pro Baronia sua facien∣dum per dominos Robertum Peverel, et Robertum de Watervile, milites, acknowledged and offered the service of two Knights Fees, to be per∣formed for his Baronie, by Sir Robert Peverel, and Sir Robert Watervile Knights, & Mr. Selden is aso of opinion that to hold of the King in Capite, & to have Possessions as a Barony, & to be a Baron and sit with the rest of the Barons in Parliament, are according to the Laws of those Times Synonimies. And upon this and no other ground or foundation is built that as noble and illu∣strious as it is antient Pairage of the 12 pairs of France, all of whom even the Earldom of Flanders now in the hands of the King of Spain do hold in Capite or Soveraignty of the French King, and that great and eminent Electoral Colledge in Germany and the migh∣ty▪ Princes thereof are no other than Tenants in Capite and holding their vast Terrytories of the Empire by grand Serjeanry, and have feuda antiqua concessa & acquisita generi & fami∣liae connexam habentes Principatibus et Territoriis suis dignitatem Electoralem, and have an anti∣ent Fee (or Territory) granted and acquired to their Issue and Family,Rusdorff. vindiciae causae Palainae, 34. and a dignity Electoral annexed to their Principalityes and Territoryes.
And it cannot with any reason or Autho∣rity be said or beleived that the late Charles King of Sweden could by the Treaty or Paci∣fication at Munster have been made a Prince of the Empire, or have had place or voice in their Diets, if he had not had the Bishop∣prick of Breme and other Lands and Provin∣ces as Fiefs of the Empire in his Possessi∣on, to have made him a member thereof, and that the Prince Elector Palatine who by reason of that Territory justly claimeth the Vicariat of the Empire, had never been made the eighth Elector if he had not had part of the Palatinate which he now enjoys. For certainly if the care and wisdom of our Progenitors or Ancestors, could not think it fitting to compose that high Court of Ju∣dicature of Strangers, or grant them an In∣heritance in it, which had no Lands or Pos∣sessions (to make them a concernment, and to be more careful of the good of the King∣dom) as Oliver or Dick of the Addresses would have done their Mungrel Scotch, that had no Lands at all in England, but a stock of Knavery, but would rather bring in such as had the best Estates, and holden by the most noble and serviceable Te∣nures, in order to the defence of their King, and Country, and were the most honourable, wise, and understanding, then such as had been Servants, or of a low
extraction & race of mankind, & by their folly and whimsies had not long agoe tossed and tumbled about poor England like a Foot-Ball, which may call to our remembrance that opinion or a lage of the Antients, that Jupi∣ter subdxit servis dimidium mentis, that God would not allow ervants or men litle better, or rudely and ignorantly educated, any more then to be half witted, some of our late Le∣vellers at the same time making a difference betwixt the antient great Estates, of the Peers and Barons of England, and that lesser which they now enjoy to be an objection against the House of Peers, in Parliament, for that now as they mistakenly surmised they could not as formerly be a banck or ballance betwixt the King and the people. And howsoever that the temporal Barons as well those which were since the middle of the reign o R. 2. created by Patent to be u∣num Baronum Angliae, as in Sir John Beauchamps Patent to be Baron of Holt, or as many later to have loum, voem, et sedem, in Parliamento, to have voice and place in the Parliament, as those that hold per Baroniam, and that those that hold per Baroniam, and were Barons by Tenure, do not come to Parliament but when they are summoned by the Kings Writ, (as the Bishops also do not) and as in the Earl of Bristols Case was adjudged in the late Kings time, are to have their Writs of
Summons ex debito justitiae, as of right due unto them, yet a first, second, or third Summons, which is only and properly to give notice when and where the Parliament beginneth cannot as Mr. William Prynne hath learnedly proved,Mr. Pryn▪ Plea for the House of Peers. any way make or intitle any man which shall be so summoned to be a Peer or Baron, that is not a Baron by prescription, or was not created, nor doth that Clause in the Pa∣tents of Creation, doe or operate any more then that such new created Barons, who are also Tenants in Capite, and as all the other Ba∣rons doe ought to do their Homage, shall be one of the Barons in Parliament, & have voyce and place there, deny that they that sit there by Tenure and per Baroniam, doe not sit there and enjoy their Honors and Digni∣ties as Tenants in Capite, and per Baroniam, or that those that come in by patent amongst them, doe enjoy their places as incorporated and admitted amongst them, and not as Te∣nants in Capite, and being added to them, do help to continue the Society or Court, though they be not of one and the same Ori∣ginal or Constitution, as Prebnd added o a Cathedral Church, may make them to be of the old Constitution, but takes it not away, and as the grant of King H. 8. to the Ab∣bot of Tavestock, quod sit unus de Spiritualibus et Religiosis dominis Parliamenti, could not have altered his former and better condition if he
had held any Lands per Baroniam; And though the Creations by Patents, may well enough sustain the priviledges of those that sit and were introduced by it, yet the greater number, or as many of the Earls and Barons as hold per Baroniam, such as the Earls of A∣rundel and Oxford, Lords Berkley, Mowbray, Abergaveny, Fitz walter, Audley, De la ware, and that great number which were before R. 2. and were not created by letters Patents, and had not the Clause of locum vocem et sedem in Parliamento, will lose their Peerage, and right of sitting in Parliament, if the other doe not when as their Patents giving them, sedem vocem et locum in Parliamento, doe but entitle them to be of that House whereof the other Earls and Barons were, and to be but as the former Barons were which hold per Baroniam, and in Capite; As if a Lord of a Mannor could create a man to be one of his Coppy-holders, he should be no otherwise then as a Coppy-holder of that Mannor, and those Patent Lords doe by their Patents hold their Honor and Dignities in Capite, though it be not expressed in their Paents, and should pay as great a Releif as the other Earls and Barons doe by Tenure, for no man can sit there but as a Tenant in Capite, and acknowledging his Soveraign, unless a Coor∣dination should be supposed and that danger∣ous Doctrine again incouraged, nor can these by Creation sit if the House should be dis∣solved,
by the change of the others Tenures, for that they were but Adjuncts and Associ∣ates of them. Which was so well understood by Sir Edw. Coke to be a shaking, if not an over-turning of the foundation of that high and most ho∣nourable Court, or Judicatorie, as in the Parliament of the 18h. year of King James, in the proposition which was then on foot to change the Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, into free and common Socage,Coke 4h. Part Iututes it Court of Wards. he and some of the old Parliament men advised a Proviso to be inserted in that intended Act of Parliament, that the Bishops notwithstanding that their Baronies should be holden in Socage, should continue Lords of Parliament, and in our late times in that great inundation of mistaken Liberty, when the outrage of the vulgar and common people, greedily pursu∣ed the dictates of their ignorance and fancie, and that after the House of Lords had been shut up, and voted to be uselesse and danger∣ous, the persons of the Barons of England, which the Law, and the reasonable and an∣tient, as well as modern Customes of Eng∣land, did never allow to be arrested, were arrested and haled to Prison. In the seeking a remedy wherof some of the Baronage plead∣ing their Priviledge, it was in Easter Term,Cremer versus Burnet in Banco Regis Pas. 1650. 1650. in the Kings or upper Bench, in the ar∣gument of the Countess of Rivers Case, argu∣ed, and urged that all Tenures as well as the House of Lords were taken away, so that the Court holding that the Priviledge was not
allowable, for that she never had reference to the Parliament, or to do any publique ser∣vice the Cause was adjourned. Wherefore seeing that the custom of a Court is the Law of a Court, and the inter∣rupton of a Custom,Coke 9. report Abbot de sata Marcellas case. Prescription, or Fran∣chise, very dangerous, and Cessante causa tol∣litur effectus, the cause or foundation taken a∣way, the effect or building faileth, that a Lord of a Mannor is not able to create a Mannor, or make a Lease-holder, or Tenant of one Mannor, to enjoy the same priviledges which he did formerly, & be incorporate & a Te∣nant in another Mannor, a House with a Common Appendent, or which was before belonging unto it, once pulled down, though built up again, looseth its Common and Prescription, or if a Coppy∣hold estate come to the Lord by Forfeiture,Coke 4 Rep. 31. Escheat, or otherwise, if he make a Lease, or otherwise, it is no more grantable by Co∣py of Court Roll, or make a Feoff∣ment upon condition, and after enter for the Condition broken, it shall not be regranted by Copy. Coke 6. Reports Hig∣gens Case.And if a man hath libertyes by Prescripti∣on, & take letters Patents of them, the matter of the Record drowns or takes away the prescription as was held in 33 H. 8. tit. pre∣cription Br. 102. &c. Or if as in the Acts of Parliament for the dissolution of the Monasteries, the King shall
be before the Tenures be ordained to be in free and common Soccage, made or derived to be in the actual Sesin and Possession of all the Lands. There will be cause and reason enough to make a stand or a pause, and inquire further into it. For if the subversion of Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Service, will not to∣tally, or at once, ruine and dissolve the House of Peers in Parliament, or put upon it a new constitution, it will not be good cer∣tainly to leave that House, and most high and Honourable Court, and all its just Rights and Privileges, which hath already so much suffered by the Assaults and Batte∣ries of Faction and vulgar Frenzies, to an after question of moote point, whether or no it be not dissolved or put upon a new Foundation. And must needs be very dangerous, when as one of the three Estates under the King (which is Supream and not Coordinate) viz. the Bishops, and Lords Spiritual being lopt off, the second which is the Lords Tem∣poral, shall be but either suspected, or doubted to have a being, and the third which is the House of Commons, shall up the next advantage, or distemper of that pay which lately gained so much by  supposing it to be the Soveraign, b ancied o be above both it and the King, who as the head is above them both, and too much gratifie that late illegal and unwarentable opinion, and
practice of the Soveraignty of the House of Commons in Parliament, or that they alone are the Parliament of England. Destroy the hopes and rights of the Bi∣shops, being the third Estate in Parliament, of ever being restored or admitted again into it, from which after a force and a protestaion solemnly made against it, & twelve of them imprisoned for making of it, they were by an Act of Parliament in an. 17. Car. Regis primi, prohibiting them as well as all other Clergy men to intermeddle in any temporal affairs or proceedings, excluded the House, had all their Estates afterwards by an Ordinance of the Lords and Commons without being cited or heard, and without the Kings consent, and after his going from the Parliament, and in the midst of a War, and Hostilities betwixt them, confiscated and taken from them, & by the taking away of Tenures per Baroniam, being the only cause and reason of their sitting there, and constituting them a third Estate, will now after his Majesties happy restoration, when the waves and rage of the people are so calmed and ceased, as the Halcyon is preparing to build her nest, be more then ever made to be altogether impossible. Hinder and restrain our Princes from re∣covery  of Foreign Rights, a necessary inlar∣ging their Dominions, making an offensive War, or pursuing a flying or like to be re∣cruited Enemy, which in keeping a Kingdom in peace and plenty, or maintaining the
Commerce thereof, will be according to the rules of policy and good Government, as ne∣cessary as that of Davids revenging upon the Ammonites, the affronts done to his Embassa∣dors, the Wars of our Edward the third, or H. 5. in France, of the great Gustavus King of Swe∣den in Germany, or the now King of Denmarks, and Marquesse of Brandenburghes, Wars up∣on Charles late King of Sweden. And when any of those occasions or ne∣cessities shall offer themselves, or inforce a forinsecum serviciu, or service in foreign wars, shall have none but Auxiliaries & Hire∣lings to go along with them, when as several Acts of Parliament do prohibit the enforcing Hoblers, which were a kind of light horsemen, Archers, Trained Bands, and common Soul∣diers, to go out of their Countries, unlesse it be in cases of necessity, which the common people know not how to judge of, and the little Parliament so called in the beginning of the year 1640. upon the invasion of an Army of actius Scots, and a letter produced by the King that they had written for aid to the French Kng, did not rightly apprehend, for it is not to be doubted, but that the cheer∣ful and ready aids upon all occasions given to the Kings of England by the Tenants in Ca∣pit, and Knight Service, and the Nobility and Gentry, and their Tenants Friend, and Followers, taking Arms, and folowing the Royal Standard, was a great cause f their
Conquests in France, and Warlike atchive∣ment in that and other parts of the World, often beating back the incursions of the Scotch and Welch, and deending the borders. The taking away of th Knights Fees or  Tenures by Knight Service from the Nobi∣lity and Gentry without any Recompence, if they would be content to part with them or to accept it. Will be an Act of great Injustice, Regula quippe feudalis et firma est quod Dominus nec in totum nec pro parte minuere adimereve Jus vassallo quesitum possit sine culpa eoque non convicto,Rusdorf vindiciae Cau∣sae Pltinae 85· for it is a fixed and con∣stant Rule in the Feudal Law, That the Lord cannot neither in the whole nor in part without a forfeiture or conviction of his Tenant, diminish or take away the Vassals Right, and it would be against Right, Reason, and Equity not to give a Recompence in Case of pulling down or fireing a House in a Necessity of War to prevent an Enemy, but much more against it and our Magna Charta in Case of no Ne∣cessity to Sacrifice without a just Recom∣pence given for it, the Estates and Rights of some to pacifie the Fears of others, and disturb and incumber the Estates of all or a great many to free the Estates of a few, which would be a unjust, as for the Lords of Mannors to make By-laws, for∣bidding the Services of their Tenants, and without any forfeitures or convictions, grant
or sell away their Lands or Copy-hold In∣heritances▪ to Strangers, or dedicate the Profits thereof to the publick wherein the owners or Proprietors shall get none or very little share in it, or such as will be impreceptible, and appeared to be so much against Law and Reason, as when in the dissolution of the Abbyes and Monasteryes, the Nobility and great men who had been Founders of many of them, or given a great part of the Lands thereof; were to be the losers of that which should have reverted or come unto them if they could not con∣sist with the first Intentions; King H. 8. did take a care to gratifie many of them with great quantityes and Portions thereof, and to some granted intire Priories and Nunneries of their Ancestors founding, as to John Earl of Oxford the Priory of Colne, and Nunery of Hedingham in Essex and the like to many others which might be here re∣membred The Publique Faith (which was wont to have so much care taken of it when she bor∣rowed  money to make our unhappy warres and Contentions) of so much of the Nati∣on as hold by the Tenures in Capite and Knight Service, and of all the other parts of the people who by Oaths of Supremacy, Protestations and Covenant were not to prejudice the King, nor by their Covenant,
any other in their Rights and Liberties will now be broken, which when Livy a Heathen Writer and one that very well understood affairs of State, upon the making of a Law at Rome to pacify a mutiny, that the Prisoners for Debt should not be bound or fettered as the manner then was, could say that Ingens vinculum fidei, a great Obligation or Bond of Faith amongst men was that day broken, he would have without doubt said more were he now aive as to our breach of Faith amongst men, but a great deal more (if he had been Christian) as to God Almighty. Lindiman∣nus in dedi∣c Exercitat, eudi & Ro∣th usal in Sy∣nops; ad Lcto∣rem. §. 1.Take away not only the Honor, but the publick Benefits of those Tenures and feudal Rights which are so highly and justly e∣steemed in all other Kingdoms and Princi∣palityes which are so happy as to live under Monarchy the best of Governments, as they can give them no other Character then that, Jura Regnorum Ducatuum Marchionatuum adeoque totius Imperij Leges Fundamentals ac nervi quibus Monarchiae Romanae cum ipso senes∣cente mundo languescentis lutei pedes colligantur iniis continentur,Calvin in  Ddca∣tor. Juris pru∣dent▪ fudal. Therein are contained the Laws and Rights of Kingdoms, Dukedoms, Maquisates, the Fundamental Laws of the Empire, and the Nerves and Sinews by which the Empire, languishing in the old age of the world hath been sustained, And that Feuda Feudorumque Jura delitatem & i∣dem publica pacem & incolumnatem Commu∣nis
Patriae firmant irmissimum Militiae contra Communes Reipublicae hostes nevum ac praesidium suministrat adeoque fulca Germanico Romani Imperi  desiderant, Feuds and the Rights thof do six and consolidate the Fi∣delity, publique Faith, Peace and wellfare of the Common-wealth, and administreth the greatest help and strength in war against the Common Enemy, and is worthy to be called the Prop of the German and Roman Empire. Make our Nobility and Gentry, who have  by their Chivalry and high Attempts by Sea and Land, rendred them second to none, and published the Fame and Glory of their Actions, as far, and farther than ever the Roman Eagles flew, to be like the Roturiers or Paysants o France, and a reproach or hissing to all Natioas, or like Davids Embassadors, when the Children of Ammon had misused them, and shaved the one half of their Beards, and cut off their Garments in the middle,2 Sam. 10▪4, 5. even to their Buttocks, and to be put behind all but the Dutch and Switzers, the former of which, do Trade under Taxes, & Excise & the latter are but the Mercenaries and Hirelings of the French and Spanish Kings in their Wars and Hostilities, and ranking us with them, and those little and despicable Commonwealths of Luca, and Geneva, cast us into the Giddy, and at last woeful Presidents and Con∣sequences of the unquiet headed Argentini∣ans,
Lindorians, Citizens of Siena, Genoa, and Florence, who by ruining and rooting up the Nobility and Gentry, and making three rancks and degrees of their Citizens, some great, some mean, and the rest of the vul∣gar, the two last putting out the first, cast themselves into a Circle of blood and mi∣sery, out of which nothing but their former  Government was able to refcue them. Occasion the losse and ruine of purchasers, and Mony-lenders & enlarge their complaints of double & treble Feoffments & Mortgages which (by the disuse of the Court of Wards, and finding of Offices after the death of Te∣nants in Capite, and by Knight Service, have been more than formerly and wherein some of our late Reformers were known more to have exercised their wits than their Consci∣ences) conceal'd, & Dormant, and fraudulent Assurances carried in the Pockets of some to pick the Pockets of others, which by reason of the Tenures in Capite, and finding of Offices wherein the Evidences being produ∣duced, and many Times found, did not on∣ly find but declare what Estate the deceased was seised of, and if the truth did not then appear, which could hardly be hid, when as the Jury were commanded by the Writ of Diem clausit extremum, to inquir upon their Oaths of what Estate the last Ancestor dyed seised of, and that the vigilancy and cares of the Feodaries and Escheators who
were also to be present to attend them, would cause them to be the more careful and if the fraud of the Heir should be able to make its way, or escape thorough them, the E∣state found in the Office would after prove to be an Evidence against them, and either overthrow or perplex the Knavery of such wicked designs. The Recompence of 100000 l. per Annum if it could be raised without Injustice, or the breach of the Laws of God, Nature, and Nations, and our oftentimes confirmed Magna Charta, and the inforcing of 19 men in every 20 to bear burdens which nothing at all appertains to them, will not be adaequate to the losse of a great part of the Kings Re∣venue which did serve for the maintenance of his Crown and Dignity, and to exempt and ease the Subjects of extraordinary Taxes and Assessements, which the Necessity of Princes for the good and Defence of the Kingdom must otherwise bring upon them; Nor to the want of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, & the Services & Incidents belonging unto them (being a certain and ne∣ver failing Defence of himself and the King∣dom) Castle-guard Licence of Alienations giving him notice and continuing him safe in the Change of his Tenants (being so neces∣sary to Government as some have been grie∣vously fined for alienating their Lands in Ca∣pite without it) Mariage & Dependancy of the Heirs which hold of him, Livery and Reliefs,
Grand Serjeantyes, and a great part of the Honour and Priviledges which all other neighbour Kings ond Princes are neither de∣sired to part with, nor can he perswaded so much to lessen themselves and their Regali∣ties. For gold and Silver and precious Stones or any thing lesse than the whole Kingdom of England it self is not of value or to be com∣pared to the Honour of a King, and the ho∣mage and duty of his Subjects, the Grati∣tude, Faith and Promises of their Ancestors which should descend to them with the Lands holden by those Tenures, whenas Om∣nes habent Causam a primo et ex tun, non ut ex nunc, are bounden to the Cause which obli∣ged their first Ancestor and Progenitor, and are to consider that it is now,Per Collg. Bononiens. inter Consil. Fran∣cisci Carti Consilium 50. et Rusdorff. in vindicits cau∣sae Palatinae. as it was then, a most ready means and help which did and doth naturally and kindly arise for the De∣fence of themselves and the Kingdom, for as it is not the weight of an inestimable Dya∣mond or Ruby that makes either of them to be better than a Flint or any other Stone, but the lustre, vertue, and scarcenesse of them; and that a greater poise or weight of a man makes not a Solomon an Alexander Sir-named the great, or an Aristotle, but that all men and things are to be esteemed according to the vertues and Excellencyes which are in them, so it will not be the yearly Profit in mo∣ney which was made of the Wardships
primer Seisins, Liveryes, and Incidents which belong to those Tenures, but the Ho∣mage Dutie gratitude and necessary Atten∣dance in War, not only of those that held im∣mediatly of the King, but those that were the mediate Tenants, and came also with the immediate, the grand and mutual Tye betwixt the King and his people and the Regality, Prerogative, intrinsical, and true worth and value of them, when there should be any use of those necessary Defences of the King and his Kingdom, in making a diversive War, or succouring his Friends and Allies, which are not seldom or were in more heroick times justly accounted to be as Outworks, Ante Mu∣rales, or Bulwarks of the Kingdom, & that the Rate which is now offered for those Tenures, are but like a Tender, or Offer to give the weight in Gold for an incomparable, not to be got again and unvaluable Meddal, or for Aarons Brest-Plate, Moses rod, or the Scepters of Princes, if they could have been purchased at all, and by weight. It will be as unsafe as unusual to take  money or Turn into a Rent that which in its first Institution, and a happy, long and right use which was made of it, was only intended for a defence of the Kingdom, when the King is not likely to be any aver by it, and shall not gain 90000 l. per Annum (his own In∣come by Licences of Alienation deducted) for the clear Profit of the Court of Wards which the Lord Cottington when he was Ma∣ster of that Court, did but a year before the
Troubles make as much by it, besides the many great and royal Prerogatives which he shall lose to gain more mischiefs and In∣conveniencyes to himself & his People, then at the present can be instanced or numbred. The giving the King a Recompence by an yearly Rate amounting to one hundred thou∣sand pounds per Annum to be charged upon all mens Lands, Tenements and Heredita∣ments holden in Capite, or Socage by Copy-hold, Leases for Lives, or Tenants at Will, or for yeares will be against right, Reason, Justice and Equity, as well as un∣warranted by any hitherto Law or Custom of England to make 19 parts of 20 (for so much if not more will probably be the odds) that were not liable to Wardships, or any imagined Inconveniences which might hap∣pen thereby, not only to bear their propor∣tionable part of the general Assessements for War but a share also in the burden of others where it could never be laid upon them and wherein they, or the major part of them by more than two in three have no Lands in Fee simple, Fee taile, or by Leases for 100 years or any longer Term nor are never like to be pur∣chasers of any Lands at all and if they had mony to do it are not likely to buy Inhe∣ritances, & if inheritances, not Capite or Knight Service Lands, when there is by more than 9 parts in 10 of Socage or Copy-hold Lands to be purchased, were not, nor are like to be
in any danger of Wardships, or under any fear or Apprehensions, of it and ren∣der the Capite Land three or four years purchase dearer than it was wont to be, and the Socage Lands three or four years pur∣chase the cheaper, only to free the Nobili∣ty, Gentry and men of greatest Riches and Estates in the Kingdom, which are subject to those small Burdens which are only said to be in Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service. Or if laid upon the Moyety of the Excise  upon Ale, Beer, Syder and Coffee &c. or any other native or Inland Commodity will fall upon those that have no Land as well as those which have, as upon Citizens Me∣chanicks, Children, Servants, and the like, and heaviest uon the poorer sort of people, and be a burden which the lowly Cobler and reverend Applewomen, the Botcher and Stockingmenders, in their pittiful subterra∣neous Tenements, and the poor Women which in the Streets do cry Fruits and Fish by a double retail, and pay twelve pence a week for the loan of twenty shillings, and pawn a Petticoat for security, the Chimney Sweepers, Brooom-men and Beggars cannot escape. Will be no good way of raising mony, nor an Honourable Revenue, and though it might become the Dutch in their grand ne∣cessities of War where they have but few Gentlemen, will not be for the honor of England, and the Nobility and Gentry of
England, to have their provisions of War and Defence arise out of so low a businesse as Ae and Beer, and make the Brewers and Ale-house-keepers, to be as it were the Te∣nants in Capite, and to supply the Knight Service in the exchange, of that which is but pretended to be a Greivance for a most certain and undeniable greivance, and for one Greivance if it could be proved to be one for a Seminary and complication of Greivances and to take away wardships from the estates of 1▪ in every 20. of the people when they should happen and make 19 in every 20 to be every day in every yeare in wardship to an Excise upon a considerable part of their dayly Dyer and Sustenance. That small Sum of 100000 l. per an. may  upon any discontent of the people, by rea∣son of the payment of that Excise, be Petiti∣oned against or taken away by Parliament, or by some insurrection or mutiny of the common people, which Naples, and France, & this Kingdom, can tell us, do sometimes hap∣pen, and the wisdom of Kings and Princes do use to suspect and provide against, or if some other unlucky difference (which God avert) should happen betwixt the King and his peo∣ple, may fall into the Case or Example of the Customs, and Poundage, and Tonnage, in the beginning of the Raign of his late Majesty, which being stopped by the Parliament, and declared against, did put him into unit ne∣cessities, and made those unhappy contro∣versies and misunderstandings betwixt him
and many of the shorter Parliaments, which disabled him from aiding his Friends and Allyes, and was the beginning of our never enough to be lamented national Calamities and Reproaches; and proved to be the ru∣ine and disturbance also of a great part of Christendome. Such an imposed or continued excise, will  by the Arts and Deceipts of the Brewers and Ale men, and those that gather and pay it in the first place, be as all excises commonly are, double charged upon the people, who in∣stead of 100000 l. per an. laid upon their Beer & Ale, will by the abuse which will be committed therein, as to quantity and quali∣ty, lay and charge another 100000 l. per an. upon the people, and the Brewer in every 6 d. or 12 d. Excise to be laid upon every Barrel of six shillings Beer, will be sure to make his Beer so, as he shall get double, if not more than that Excise amounts unto. And as it could never have been at first set∣led without the awe and help of Garrisons, Troops of Horse, and Companies of Foot, in every County and City, and the Souldiers assistance to enforce and gather it from those that would not pay it, or were not able, so in all probability, it will be now again never be brought into a constant yearly Revenue, without a constant & formerly used way of keeping a standing Army at the charge of
sixty or ninety thousand pounds per mensem, or the month, which will be more trouble∣some and chargeable than 52 Escheators, and as many Feodaries, who may be men of wis∣dom Integrity, & good Estates in their Coun∣tries; for there will be a great difference between the charge or yearly Revenue of the Court of Wards, which is made up of many small parts, and favourable and easy Rents, Fines and compositions, quietly gathered and paid in by the Justice and Order of a Court of Wards, & honest and responsable Officers, and 90000 l. per annum being to be Collected by this Excise at the charge of as much for every month in the year, from the ruder and most ignorant part of the people, who will (not Tributorum causam quaerere sed quaeri) sooner murmure and complain of Taxes or Tributes, than rationally enquire into the causes of them, and by a weeping & woful Arithmeticque of the poor, and inferi∣or sort of people in every County be reckon∣ed to be no great part or peice of Husbandry to purchase off 90000 l. per annum, yearly charges to free those that held in Capite, at the rate of 100000 l. (or rather 200000 l. per annum,) which is to be paid out of the Excise, and pay 90000 l. per mensem, or 60. or 30000 l. per mensem besides for collecting of it, besides the free quarterings, and other in∣solencies of the common Souldiers.
And by making that part of the Excise  perpetual give the people to understand that the next occasion given or made, may intro∣duce a perpetuity of Excise upon all other things, which to have been introduced, but upon a temporary and not like to be long lasting necessity, would before Olivers Sadle had been put upon the peoples backs, have put them into multitudes of Complaints; And in the Raign of King James, and that of our late blessed Martir King Charles, before he was driven from his Throne, would have been but only in the advising of it more Ca∣pital and offensive, than that which was charged upon the late Earl of Strafford, and made more in one single fault or crime, than all the accumulations of Crimes against him could arrive unto, and was so dreadful to this Nation, and before hand hated, as they were afraid of every thing that tended that way; So as in a Parliament in the Raign of King James, some of the House of Com∣mons having been informed that the King had imployed a Gentleman into Holland to inquire concerning the manner & manage of their Excise (which as afterwards appeared upon examination, was but for curiosity and learning sake) were so troubled at it, as the Gentleman hardly escaped a vote, whether he should not be most severely punished. And whether Excise or not Excise, will if those Tenures in Capite, and by Knight Ser∣vice,
which have hitherto been as the Life and Land-guards of the King and his people should be taken away, some other wayes of means are to be found out to supply it, for the people being sworn by their Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to assist and de∣fend the King and all his Rights and Juris∣dictions, if they would not defend him, and take a care of those Oaths, will likely be willing enough to defend themselves in de∣fending him; Or if they should not, their Representatives in Parliament, would as they have for this twenty years last past, not only assesse them, but make them find Men, Horses and Arms, for the defence of the Kingdom, which hath hitherto been a costly Knight Service, and so far exceeding forty days Service at their own charges, as they have besides the outrages, free quarterings, and plunder of Souldiers, and losse of their debts by the ruine and death of their Debtors, born the trouble of forty Six moneths continual Assessements far exceeding the Es∣cuage and all the Taxes in 600 years before laid upon our Fore-Fathers, and the question will then be of no great difficulty, whether will be the better, the old way or the new? And when the King shall be as he ought to be the Judge of dangers or necessities, and want the Assistance of his Subjects, and it cannot when the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service shall be taken away, be pre∣tended,
as it was in the Case of the Ship-money that his Tenures and Wardships, were to defend him and the Kingdom in cases of danger and invasion, untill a Parliamens could be As∣sembled. Or shall as his late Royal Father was in the later end of the year 1642. when the long shut up Janus Temple had by the Salij or Priests of Mars been against his will bro∣ken open, and the miseries or troubles of War overwhelmed him and his loyal people, and the Plowers made Furrowes upon his back, be∣ing hindred from putting his Commissions of Array in Execution, be told by the Parli∣aments Declaration, that his Tenures in Ca∣pite, and their incidents, (and not his Com∣mission of Array,) were the allowed and or∣dinary means for his defence, until more could be obtained from the Parliament, and shall have no military Tenures but only 100000 l. per annum, or if that should fal him. Or he shall need to transport an Army in∣to an Enemies Country, to keep off, or hinder an Invasion, succour or back his Allies, whilst they imbroil or weaken his common enemies, shall be told that he may not impresse any men or Souldiers, to go out of their Countries, unlesse he can do it by order of Parliament, or perswade them that there is a great neces∣sity. Whether he will not when the people shall
cry unto him as the woman that had in the siege of Samaria, boyled her Child & eat of it, Help my Lord O King, shall not be able to doe any more, then answer, as he did, Whence shall I help thee, 2 Reg, 6.26, 27. And finds himself as his noble Progenitor King Ed. the 3. pub∣liquely declared in a Writ of Error, wherein Blanch, the Wife of Thomas Wake, of Lidal, was Complainant that he was Ratione dignitatis in exhibitione justitiae quibuscunque de regno debitor & ad statut Progenitorum facta,29. E. 3. Coram Rege. observanda vin∣culo juramenti astrictus, by reason of his Kingly dignity, a Debtor to every one of his King∣dom, in the doing of Justice, and bound by his oath to observe the Laws of his Progeni∣tors, in the care of himself and his people, whom he is by his Coronation Oath bound to defend and protect, and of the Salus Populi, ne quid detrimenti Respublica capiat, for the safety of his People, and to the end that the Com∣monwealth may receive no damage, be in∣forced as it were to raise and keep a standing Army always, in readinesse with Garrisons, to protect both himself and his people. And then it may be easily experimented whether is the better, to have some that ought to bear the charges and burdens of their Tenures, if they will enjoy their Lands, or to have the whole Nation groan and la∣ment under the burden of maintaining a standing Army and Garrisons, by publique Assessements, or to have the Nobility and
Gentry of England, and five or ten thousand men, and all those that hold of them, to at∣tend them, and be always in readinesse by the obligation of their Tenures, without any charge to the publique, or thirty thousand unruly Souldiers to be yearly or for ever maintained at the charge of the People. An instance whereof we need not go fur∣ther to look for, then in Holland and Zeland, whenas the Emperour Charles the fifth, live∣ing out of the Country and Governing them by Regents or Deputies, & fearing least that Nation in re militari longo usu bellorum exercita, being by long experience become Warlike, and holding their Lands by Knight ser∣vice, simul ingenio soli quod natura depressum ac uliginosum tum incilibus passim Fossis la∣cbus{que} ac paludibus intercissum haud san faciles invasuro aditus confisa ad turbas ac seditio∣num praemia converteret, together with the na∣ture of the soyl, which was flat and moor∣ish, and cut into many Ditches, Lakes, and litle Islands, would not easily give him en∣trance if he should be put to invade them, or send Forces to suppress any rebellion, or that they confiding in such their strengths, might prove seditious, and abuse the bene∣fits and intention of their Tenures,Jusn. lib 1. did in a policy perhaps, such as Cyrus is said to make use against the Lydians, by giving way to their Vices and Luxury; release (if Cornelius Neostadius be not mistaken) to them some of
their military services (for to this day the Emperors of Germany, as their Countryman the learned Grotius confesseth,Cornelius Neostadius de eud success. a∣pud Hollandie 4. doe claim the benefit of those antient feudal rights) ea ta∣men lege ut fundi Clientelares publicis sunctionibus quibus hactenus immunes fuissent in posterum non secus atque patrimoniales obnoxij existerent, upon condition that those Lands so holden should not as hitherto be free from publique charges and taxes, but hereafter should doe as others did. Which hath done both sides no good, for those Dutch afterwards falling into discon∣tents with some of their feirce and over ri∣gid Governours, did by necessity and for want of their Tenures and antient domestick military Aydes betake themselves to foreign Forces as they could hire them, and have by force and continual warrs in that Coun∣try, which hath for more then sixty years been a Cockpit for all Christendome, and the hireling Souldiers of it not only brought great miseries and neighbour warrs upon themselves and all Christendome, but so tired the Kings of Spain his Successors, and wasted the wealth and profit of his West-Indies, as he hath been enforced to make a peace with them, and allow them to be a free State as they call it, and a Republique. Are themselves become of a very Active and Warlike Nation, so Lourdish and un∣warlike, as they are only found to be men of
Trade, Fishing, and Navigation, filling their Country with many strong fortified walled Cities, Towns, Citadels, and Gar∣risons, and living under the shelter of a con∣stant, well paid, and disciplined Army, doe by the cunning of an universal Trade and Commerce with almost all the World, and out doing all Nations herein, carry the Ecise on their backs, and make the States & Richer part (but not the multitude or poor∣er) the better for it, and yet sometimes doe find the want of their former Tenures, and the readiness of their aydes as in the late warrs of Denmark, where they were con∣cerned to adventure through many dangers to ayde the Danes against the Swedes, found their design more out of order then it would otherwise have been, for that the Sea∣men where they doe not use to impresse, would not be perswaded to goe at all without a greater pay then ordinary, And whether that discharge of the Emperor Charles the 5th. did absolve them from their Clientelage or holding of the Empire or no? it is well known that they keep all or most of the incidents belonging to Tenures in Capite, as their Laudemia's or Reliefs, Investitures, Fines for Alienation, and the like, and li∣ving under those great burthens, and other∣wise intollerable Taxes, Contributions, and Excises, which are made only tollerable by their hostilities and depraedations exercised
upon Spain and its Dominions, do notwith∣standing almost in every Frontier Town in the winter time, make their Inhabitants hold by a kind of Service as to their own defence, in the alotment of every house or street, to break dayly a proportion of Ice in times of Frost in their Town Ditches. The Assessements for horse and foot Arms, and charge and pay of Armies, and so much as for Ribbons and Trophies as they are now called (which in the time of our Military Tenures, the people were not at all or so much troubled with, will swell and be the greater, when so many as were to be con∣tributary in a more especial manner, shall be exempted from that, and put under the general Assessement, which will make the burthen to be the heavier, and will be as little for the ease of the people, as if all the many Hospitals and Almes-Houses in Eng∣land, which were built and endowed at the great charge of the Founders, with large and perpetual Annual Revenues in many Pa∣rishes and places in England, and the great number of Charities and charitable uses, which since the Protestant Religion esta∣blished in England, have by wills and Testa∣ments been given to the poor, should be ta∣ken away and put to other uses, as those lo∣ving and tender hearted Statesmen, the late committee of Slavery rather than Safety, or the Rump Assembly, were about
to do and put into some Godly Treasury, and they that must pay a great deal more in their Rates and Assessements for the poor, left to make Affidavits, that the remedy was taken away, and a Disease put in the place of it. The King who is Pater Patriae, the great and careful Parent and Father of his people, and who by God Almighty is trusted with the Welfare, Protection, and Defence, of them, shall only have that part of the Court of Wards, and kind of Preroga∣tive left unto him to provide and take care for Lunatiques and Ideots Shall not now enjoy that antient and well performed trust of protecting the Fatherless, nor have that power in looking to Orphanes, and their Estates in their Minorities, as the Dutch and States of Holland have, who (though the people under the Jurisdiction of that Republique, do hold neither by Knight Service of it, nor can be well said to hold in Soccage, or as Fie Roturier, where they have so little Land, but by Navigation rather and Commerce) have their Wees Kamer, or Court of Orphanes, do not think it fitting to trust them and their Estates to the Mothers, (although they have thereby a Custom and Pacta antenuptialia,Peckius de pactis an∣tenuptialibus. a Joyntenancy and power of dispose to their own kindred) nor the kindred on either side to make their profit by them, and sub amici fallere no∣men, under a colour of love and kindnesse, ei∣ther
ruine them, or leave them to ruine them∣selves, by selling them and others good bar∣gains. And shall not have so much privilege as the City of London hath, who by antient Custome have an absolute Court of Wards in the City, though it passe under the name of the Court of Orphanes, as may appear by their antient Customs, viz. The Mayor and Aldermen that are for the time,Customs and usages in London in an old Mnuscript in French in Guild-hall. by custom of the Ci∣ty shall have the Wardships and Mariages of all the Orphans of the said City after the death of their An∣cestors, although the same Ancestors do hold in the City of any other Lord by what Service soever. Ought to inquire of all the Lands and Tene∣ments, Goods and Chattels, within the said City, appertaining to such Orphans, and safely keep them to the use and profit of such Orphans, or otherwise commit the same Orphans, together with their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to others their Friends by suficient Surety found of Record in the Chamber of Guild-hall, to maintain convenient∣ly the said Orphans during their nonage, and their Lands and Tenemnts to repair, and their said Goods and Chattels safely to keep, and thereof to render a good and loyal accompt before the said Mayor and Aldermen, to the profit of the same In∣fants when they shall come to their age, or when they shall be put to a mistery, or shall marry by the advice of the said Mayor and Aldermen. And that in all Cases except that it be otherwise
ordained and disposed for the same Orphans, or for their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, by the expresse words contained in the Testaments of their Ancestors. And no such Orphans ought to be married with∣out the assent of the said Mayor and Aldermen, and also where Lands or tenements, Goods and Chattels, within the City, are devised to an Infant within Age living with his Father, and that such an Infant is no Orphan, yet by usage of the said City, the said Lands and Tene∣ments, Goods and Chattels, shall be in custody of the Mayor and Aldermen, as well as of Orphans to maintain and keep them to the use and profit of the same Infant, except that the Father of the Infant, or some other of his Friends, will find sufficient surety or Record to maintain and keep the said Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels, to the use and profit of the said Infant, and thereof to ren∣der a good and loyal accompt as is aforesaid. And may if the Kings Court of Wards shall be dissolved, and the Tenures in Capite taken away, be indangered or petitioned a∣gainst, which within these last twenty years, hath been a notable Engine and peice of Artillery of the factious, who made great use of Petitions, & many a causeless com∣plaint to overturn any antient useful constitu∣tion of the Kingdom, & well approved Rights and Liberties of the people in general or of some men in particular.
Will renverse and overturn many of the  Fundamental Laws and Constitutions of the Kingdom, & throw them with their heels up∣wards into a Ditch of all manner of evils and confusion, which will so increase and fall upon them and us, as no after endeavours by any new Bills or Acts of Parliament will be able to rescue them, and being once dead or destroyed, will not meet with any that either can or will be able to call them like Lazarus out of the grave, or their winding Sheets. It will be against the Peoples Oaths of  Supremacy to desire, to purchase of, or di∣minish the Kings Rights and Jurisdictions. And against their own safety to weaken the hands and power of their Prince, that should protect and defend them, and commit the trust of protecting and defending the op∣pressed poor to the oppressing Rich, the Chickens to the Kites, & the harmless Lambs to the cunning Foxes, or greedy Wolves; the weak and the Innocent to such as shall endeavour to hurt them, and charge and bur∣den themselves and their Posterities, with a Rent and excise for mischiefs and in∣conveniences enough in perpetuity. Take away that power and ready means  of protecting and defending them, and that which should enable him to procure accord∣ing to his Coronation Oath to the Church of God and the Clergy, and people, firm peace and uni∣ty in God according to his power and to administer indifferent and upright Justice, by forsaking a
certain & willing way of defence, for a con∣strained or incertain, & by taking away the best, for so much of it, of all defences, for that which in the very birth of it, is justly feared to be the worst. Draw a Curse rather than any expected  blessing or happinesse upon all such Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, as by seek∣ing to purchase their Homages, and obedi∣ence to their Prince, and a better and long experimented, and prosperous way of defence of themselves & posterity, shall seek or endea∣vour to break the reiterated oaths and con∣tracts of all their Ancestors, to be but a part & for a short time of the general defence, of the Kingdom like a Life-guard, at hand to skir∣mish and make head against an Enemy, un∣till a Parliament can be called, and have time to consult of the means, or the whole Nati∣on summoned for help and imbodied, & will be a perjury more sinful, then that of the Chil∣dren of Israel, to the deceitful and turn-coat Gibeonites, and may be more severely punish∣ed by God Almighty, upon the hereafter withering Estates of those men, and their ge∣nerations, who shall not only break their own oaths, and faith, but the oaths and faith also of their more grateful Ancestors who would never have done it. Will make our common people, which  were wont like the lesser Wheels, in a well ordered watch to be governed by the great∣er or superior, to run themselves into as ma∣ny
blessings as they did in these last twenty years, when they wrested the Sword out of their Kings hands (and by the power of those two great Devils Interest & Reformation in the abuse, and not right use of the words, which may well wear the name of those Devils which were called Legion) to cut murder, pil∣lage and rob the honest and loyal part of the the people, & lasciviendo in quaerelas & quaestio∣nes, playing the wantons in their complaints, and evil practices, which they found to be so beaten a track or rode of prosperity, to the journeys end of their wickedness, complain of every thing that likes not their fancies, or ig∣norance, and from Wardships and Tenures, return again in their ingratitude to God and man, to their late design of taking away Tithes, & Coppyholds, by enforcing the Lords to take a year or two years purchase for the rights of their Mannors, & Copyhold Estates, & from thence to the Act of Parliament, intended in our Reformers late deformations, to abate Rents where the Landlords were not so well affected as the Tenants, to make or main∣taine War against their Soveraign. And if there had nothing been said or written, as we hope there is sufficient to justify the Innocency or right use of Tenures in Capite and by Knight service, it had been enough (as it was to the vertuous Seneca, to be persecuted and put to death by Nero, who loved all Ill and hated all Good) that Crom∣wel, that Minotaure, to whom in his Labrinth
of Subtilties, Hypocrisy, and abused Scrip∣ture, our Lawes and Liberties were daily sacrificed by the Flattering Addresses of a company of Knaves or Fooles, very well know after he had cut down the Royal Oak, and blasted all the lofty Pines and Firres in Druina's Forrest, procured an Act for renouncing and disannulling the Title of our now most graciovs Soveraign, and his Brothers to the Crown of England, and their Fathers Dominions, and all other which should pretend any Title or Claim, from, by, or under them, or any of them, how much it concerned his most wicked pur∣poses of establishing that which should be called a Common-wealth, under His and his posterities Protectorship, and most Ar∣bitrary and Tyrannical Government, by a perpetual standing Army of 30000. Horse and Foot, an intollerable Excise, and monthly Assessements to pay them & set up the other, or tother House instead of a House of Peers, made up for the most part of Mechanicks transformed into Colonels and Major Generalls, and some other who might have been better Englishmen then to have been catched in the Trap of Ambition, or Titles made the wrong way; By which he might check the growing Factions in the House of Commons, and destroy their pre∣tended Soveraignity, Tax and Rack the estates of all men, and more then a
Grand Seignior or Turk ever durst adventure upon; Command as he should please the Bodies and Souls of the people, take a∣way every Surculus or little Sprigs that might grow out of the remaining Sap of that mighty Tree, and every thing that might either contribute to it, or remain but as Re∣liques of the Regal Estate and peoples hap∣piness, did by an Ordinance as he called it of himself and his Council the 12th. of April 1654. not only ordain an Union betwixt the two Kingdoms, but that all the Nation of Scotland should be discharged of all Fealty, Homage, and Allegiance which is or should be pretended to be due to his Majesty that now is, and that neither he nor any of his Royal Brothers, or any deriving from the late King should hold Name, Title, and Dignity of King of Scotland, and that all Herritors, Proprietors, and Possessors of Lands in Scotland, should hold their Lands of their respective Lords by and under their accustomed yearly Boones and Annual ser∣vices, without rendring any Duty or Vassal∣lage, and discharged them of all military services, and well knowing that their old Customes being taken away, the Court-Ba∣rons would also fail, did by another Ordi∣nance erect new Court-Barons for them. And having made store of Slaves in that Kingdome, made all the hast he could to compleat his wickednesse in this, and did the
17th. day of September 1656. procure his houses of Parliament or good will and plea∣sure, rather to doe as much for England, and take away all Tenures in Capite & by Knight service, and all Homages, and Reliefs, & not only do all he could to destroy the heirs thereof, but cut the Nerves & let out the blood of a most noble & antient Monarchy. But if there could be any hopes in the Ex∣change of those innocent as useful Tenures in Capite, and Knight service, of bettering the condition of the Commonwealth and people, increasing their Liberties and con∣tent, and to maintain and keep them in a most happy peace and plenty, (which will never be done if the Sword and Scepter of the King shall only be like the Ensignes and Ornaments of Regality, and made only to represent a Majestie) there will another dif∣ficulty stand in the way and meet the design of doing it by Act of Parliament) and offer this question to consideration; Whether an Act of Parliament, and the consent of the House of Peers, & the desire of all the Com∣mons and People of England, which must be understood to be signified by their Represen∣tatives, and the Roy le veult, the King giving life and breath, and being to it can in the great power and respect which ever hath been by the Law, and justly ought to be al∣ways attributed unto it. Take away Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, grand and
Petit Sejeanties, Homage, and all other in∣cidents belonging unto them, or the right which the Nobility, and Gentry, and mesne Lords have to enjoy their Tenures by Knight service, & the incidents thereunto belonging. Which howsoever that in many other things it hath been said, that Consensus tollit errorem, & Conventi vincit Legem, Consents and Agreements are more binding then Law, will by the Laws of God, and Nature, and Nations, and the Laws of this Kingdom, and the opinion of some eminent and learn∣ed Sages and Lawyers thereof, be resolved in the Negative, viz.
CHAP. VII. That Tenures in Capite, and by Knight ser∣vice, holden of the King, and the Homage and Incidents thereunto appertaining, and the Right of the Mesne Lords cannot be dissolved or taken away by any Act of Parliament. FOR that Gods Law, and the Law of Nature, and Nati∣ons, have taken care not on∣ly to preserve the Rights of Soveraignity, and the means and order of Government, but the Rights & property of every particu∣lar Subject, & do prohibit all injustice, & it is a Maxime, or Aphorism undeniable that Laws made against the Word of God, & the Laws of Nature or which are impossible, or con∣tra bonos mores, right Reason, or natural E∣quity,
will be void in themselves, be the Seal or Stamp of Authority never so eminent. And therefore, if as the Law hath often de∣termined, that the Kings Charters are void, and not pleadable by Law, when they are repugnant to the Laws, Acts of Parliament, Maxims, and reasonable Customs of the Realm, that it is not in the Kings power by his Charter or last Will and Testament, to grant away the Crown of England, to another Prince, or Potentate, as it was resolved in the Case of the supposed grant of King Ed∣ward the Confessor, to William Duke of Norman∣dy, and that grant of King John to the Pope, to hold England, and Ireland of him, and that notwithstanding the grant made by William the Conquerour, to Hugh Lupus, of the Earl∣dom of Chester, tenendum per gladium, and ita libere, as the King himself did hold England, the Earldom of Chester, was holden of the King, that the grant of King H. 2. to the Monks of St. Bartholomews in London, that the Prior & the Monks should be as free in their Church,13 H. 6. as the King was in his Crown, was adjudged to be void, for that the Prior, and the Monks were but Subjects, and that by the Law, the King may no more denude him∣self of his Royal Superiority over his Subjects, then his Subjects can renounce or avoid their subjection to their King, and the reason why such or the like grants of the King by his Charter are void, is not in regard it was
granted without the consent of the people in Parliament, but that it was in disherison of his Crown, and disabling himself to govern; or if he should by his grant exempt a man from paying his Debts, or maintenance of hise Wife and Children, the joyning of the Lords and Commons with him in an Act of Parliament would not make such a Law to be binding or obligatory. And therefore the King cannot saith Dier re∣lease or grant a Tenure in Capite to any Sub∣ject, Dier 44. when King Edward the 3d. granted to the Black Prince his Son the grant of the Dutchy of Cornwal, all Wards, Marri∣ages, and Reliefs, non obstante, the Kings Pre∣rogative, it was adjudged that the Prince could not seise a Ward which held of the Kings Ward,43. A∣ssise plit. 1. because it belonged to the King by his Prerogative. And in 2 R. 2. Robert de Hauley Esquire, being arrested and pursued upon an Action of Debt, in Westminster Abby, where he took Sanctuary,Rot Parl 2 R. 2 111.72, 73, & 74. was in the tumult slain at the high Altar when the Priest was singing high Masse; And the offence and breach of priviledge (as it was then pretended to be) complained of in Parliament by the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, and the rest of the Prelates and Clergy, and prayed that due satisfaction and amends might be made of so horrible a fact; It was opposed by the
Lords and Commons, and they vouched Records, and called to witness the Justices and others that were learned in rhe Lawes of the Land, that in the Church of England, it hath not been accustomed, nor ought to have Immunity for Debt or Trespass or other Cause whatsoever, except for Crime only; And certain Doctors of Divinity, Canon and Civil Lawes being thereupon sworn and examined before the King himself to speak the plain truth, said upon mature and sound deliberation, that in case of Debt, Accompt, or Trespass, where a man is not to lose life or member, no man ought to have Immuni∣ty in holy Church, and said further (in the highest expressions those times could afford) that God saving his Perfection, the Pope saving his Holiness, nor any King or Prince can grant such a priviledge, and that if the King should grant such a priviledge, the Church is and ought to be favoured and nourished ought not to axcept of it, whereof offence or occasion of offence may arise, for it is a sin and occasion of offence (saith the Record) to delay a man willingly from his Debt, or the just recovery of the same; And if an Act of the Commons alone, or of the Lords a∣lone or of both together, cannot amount to an Act of Parliament, the King himself can∣not grant away his Regality, or Power, or means of governing by his Charter, or any Act which he can singly doe, his concur∣rence with both the Lords and Commons
can no more make an Act to confirme that which should not be done or granted, then his own grant or Charter could have done, or than if he and the House of Commons only had made an Act; As it appeareth by the Ordinance which the Lords Ordainers, so from thence called, did obtain from Edward 2. whereby he delegated much of his Regal Authority unto them, which was after∣wards complained of in Parliament, made void, and the Authors or Lords Ordainers punished; for it hath been clearly asserted by eminent and learned Judges and Sages of the Law, as the Lord cheif Justice Hobart, Sr. Francis Bacon, and Sr. Jonh Davis, Attor∣ney General to King James in Ireland, that the Superlative power of Parliaments above all but the King, is in some things for restrain∣ed, as it cannot enact things against Right Reason, or common Right, or against the Lawes of God or Nature, that a man shall be Judge in his own Case, as that the King shall have no Subsidies whereby to defend himself and his people, that Children shall not obey their Parents, and the like. And that Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, are of so transcendent a nature, and so radically in the Crown and Fundamental Lawes,Case of Imposiions▪ as no Act of Parliament can take it away or alter it, and are so inseperable as Sr. John Davis saith that in a Par∣liament holden in England in the latter end
of the raign of King James, it was resolved by the House of Commons, that the Wit of man could not frame an Act of Parliament whereby all Tenures of the Crown might be extinguished. And Judge Hutton, who in the Case of the Ship-money, would allow the King no more Prerogative then what could not be denyed him, did publicquely deliver it for Law which in that great and learned Assem∣bly of Judges and Lawyers was not contra∣dicted, that Tenures in Capite, are so insepe∣rable in the Crown, as the Parliament will not nor cannot sever them, and the King cannot re∣lease them. And such is the care for the defence of the Kingdome which belongeth inseperably to the King as Head or supream Protector, so as if any Act of Parliament should enact that he should not defend the Kingdome, or that he should have no aides from his Subjects to defend the Realm, such Acts would not bind, but would be void, because they would be against all natural Reason. And Judge Crooke also doth in his Argu∣ment against the Ship-money, wherein he concurred with Justice Hutton, alleage that if a statute were made that a King should not de∣fend the Kingdome, it were void being against Law and Reason. And when a Parliament is called by the Kings Writ to preserve his Kingdom, and Magna Charta so little intends that any future Parliament should alter or take away any
Liberties granted or confirmed thereby, or any fundamental Laws, which are incorpo∣rate with the essence of Government, as it hath been by several confirmations of it en∣acted, that all Laws hereafter to be made to the contrary, shall be Null and void, and with good reason as to the King and Mesne Lords, in the changing of their Te∣nures into Socage, when as ex contractu obli∣gatio, and ex obligatione Actio, should as well hold in those benificial pactions, which were in the Creation of those Tenures betwixt the King, Lords, and Tenants, as in Bonds Bills, and Assumpsits, or any other contracts what∣soever. And is so great a part of right Reason, in the opinion of Forreigners, and accord∣ing to the Law of Nature and Nations, as in the German Empire, (though it hath heretofore lost much of its power and authority,Conringius de Germanici Imperii Repub∣lic. by the greatnesse of some of the Princes, and the many Liberties and Privi∣ledges granted to Cities & Towns) its remain∣ing Prerogatives notwithstanding are said to be Jura Majestatis & instar puncti divisionem non recipientia adeoque Imperatoris personae cohaerent ut nec volens ijs se abdicare aut alium in con∣sortium vocare possit,Arumae de Comitijs Romai Ger∣manici Imperij ca. 3. §, 2. &. 3. so inseperable as they are capable of no division, and do so adhere unto the Emperors person, as he cannot if he would renounce or transferre them over to any other. And Bodi that understood France very
well,Bodin de Republica lib. 1.273. saith, that Si Princeps publica praedia, cum imperio aut jurisdictione & eo modo fruenda con∣cesserit quo ipse fruetur, etiam si Tabulis jura Ma∣jestatis excepta non fuerunt ipso jure tamen excepta judicantur, if the King shall grant any of his Lands, to hold as freely, and with as much power and jurisdiction as he himself enjoyed it, the jura Majestatis, or Regalities are always adjudged and taken to be except∣ed though there be no reservation or excep∣tion in the Letters Patents. Bodin ibm 59.And the Parliament of Paris were so care∣ful of the Kings Rights, in Governing as when Francis the first, had granted to the Queen his Mother, a Commission to pardon and restore condemned persons, it declared that such a grant quum sine Majestatis diminu∣tione communicari non possit, seeing it could not be granted without diminution of his Royal Authority, was void, & thereupon the Queen Mother intermedled no more therein. The Conclusion. WHen all therefore which can be but pretended against Tenures in Capite, and by Knight service, shall be put together, and said, and done they will come to no more then this. The general Assessements for men and Horses, and necessaries for War, whether men will or no, are a service incumbent upon
every mans estate, though they bought and purchased their Lands, & the Knight service which is now complained of, is but where their Lands were given them for that pur∣pose, and ex pacto & voluntate, by Agree∣ment. For it hath allwayes been accompted to be no less than reason, that qui sentit commo∣dum sentire debet et onus, the Rose and the Prickle must goe together, and he that hath the profit may be well contented to doe something for it, especially when it is no more then what he did agree to doe, and beleived it to be a favour. And if they now take those Lands to be a burden, may if they please give themselves an ease by retorning of them to those that gave it. And should not be murmured at, or com∣plained of, when as those that live near the Sea, doe live under a Charge or Imposition which is annual, and sometimes very great upon all. And in Holland are commanded and ordered yearly by the Dijck Graven, or Magistrates appointed for that purpose, to repair and amend their Sea walles; Or as it is also in England, by Direction of Law and Commissions of Sewers, and doe but in that though their Lands were dear∣ly paid for, and not freely given, as those doe which hold their Lands by Knight ser∣vice, and defend themselves by defending others.
And it will ever be a Rule and Maxime in Loyalty, as well as in Law and right Rea∣son, that by the Lawes of God, Nature, and Nations, as well as of England, there is and ought to be a natural Allegiance to the King, that Oaths of Allegiance and Supre∣macy doe enjoyn every Subject to defend his Prince, and his just Rights and Jurisdicti∣ons; And that the safety of every man in particular, and his own discretion should advise him to it, unless they will think it to be wisdome in the Citizens of Constantinople, who in the Seige thereof would rather keep their money and riches for the Turks to plun∣der, then help themselves or their Emperour with it, & make thereby themselves & their posterity Slaves to the enemy of Christen∣dome then put it to the right use of defending their Prince, themselves, and Posterities. And will all resolve in this, a defence of the King & his people will be eternally necessa∣ry, an ordinary, a speedy, a ready, a wil∣ling, and the most ingageing & obliging way, will be better then that which shall be extra-ordinary a far off, and to seek, or be enforced. And the most ready means for a defence and at hand, must needs be the most proper and beneficial, for upon that ground Kings have their Treasuries, Armories, and Ar∣senals, which Republicques are content to imitate; Our Constables and Justices of Peace in England, being as standing Officers
and Guardians of the Peace, are more for the safety of the people, when they are made before hand, to be ready upon any breach of peace, then if they were to seek, or to be made afterwards, and i would be no dimunition of the strength or defence of the Kingdome to have the Nobi∣lity and Gentry of England by the Te∣nure of their Lands as it were listed, and undertaking upon all occasions to serve their Prince and defend their Country, for the smallest understandings can find the way to determine that it will be better and more easie for the Subject to have the King and their Country served by a Knight ser∣vice, in acknowledgment of great Estates only given them for that purpose, than to have 10 or 12000 men provided by the Sub∣jects by a constant Pole money and Assesse∣ment upon them and their Heirs, for a rea∣dy Guard and Assistance for the defence and safeguard of the Country as well as of the King, which the Danes after their late so great misfortunes and miseries by the in∣cursions & furious attempts of the Swedes, have learnt to be wisdome, & have there∣fore lately bound themselves and their po∣sterities to maintain a guard of 10 or 12000 men to be paid by a Pole or Assessement. And unless the divine light of reason, and that which hitherto hath been called wis∣dome, have altered their courses and resol∣ved that which is retrograde and quite con∣trary
to be the better, the most safe and na∣tural way will be as it ever hath been to have our men at Arms to be Natives rather than Forreigners, such as are of the better sort, and bred and educated in Feats of armes, rather then such as have neither skill nor courage, and such as have Lands and Estates of their own to make a concernment, rather than such as have none. Better to have the Nobility and Gentry who are bred and trained up in War, and understand the necessity and causes of a War to be ingaged in the defence of the Kingdom, than the vulgus who are often called, and too often experimented, and best know how they came to deserve it mobile & imperitum vulgus, a Beast of many heads, and without a Superiour or Governours, are it only to attempt again the building of Babel, wherein if they were all of one language, they would for want of agreement or wit, ei∣ther totally miscarry in the building, or make it to be an unimitablepeice of defor∣mity. For it was certainly no fault in Abraham that he had 318 Servants born in his own house to Arm in a case of necessity to re∣scue his Brother Lot;Genesis 14, v. 14. Nor in David that he had Servants to passe before him to War. Or when he well understood that the Children of Israel when they had no King,1 Reg. 15. v. 18. & 19. and every one followed his own Imaginati∣ons,
were often delivered into the hands of the Midianites, Philistims, & many of the Nati∣ons round about them, and that Deborah & Baruch, having undertaken to releive them were enforced to pronounce a Curse against thos that came not to help the Lord against the mighty, when Reuben had great devisions, & did abide amongst the Sheep-folds, Dan remained in Ships, and Ashur continued by the Sea-Shore. And that he had tasted of the fickleness & infidelity of the men of Judah & Israel in the Rebellion of Absalom, did though they were afterwards so kind unto him, as to wrangle with the men of Judah for bringing him home to his Kingdom, and not giving them a share in the honor of it, not think it to be repugnant to the good and safety of the people to settle a strong & well formed Militia, and to have a Life-guard of 24000 valiant men to attend by months, and courses the safety of his per∣son, and his peaceable Government, which must needs be better than to be left to the humor of the people to go or not to goe with their Prince to war, as the wind of their Interest, or faction shall blow them, which may make such kind of aids in the greatest of necessities to be hardly compassed. And the Delectus of the Roman Soul∣diers in their growing greatnesse, and most virtuous condition of that State or Com∣monwealth before their course and custom of Patronage, & Clyentelage had taken root
and gained approbation, and their often Mutinies and refuseing nomina dare to list or Inroll themselves, unless usury might be les∣soned, and Lawes cut out to their Fancies, hath told us how like Egiptian Reeds such a away of raising men to defend the King, themselves and the Kingdome will be to those that shall most trust or leane upon it. So that then the Gorgons head and the Bugg-beare of the Tenures in Capite and Knight Service being only the marriages and puting the Wards Estates under a rent, whilst they shall be in minority if rationally considered with allowance of the seldome happening of it or but once in three or four descents, and two yeares value being all∣owed upon the death of every Tenant in So∣cage or Coppy-hold Estates, at the admissi∣on of every one of their Heirs, will with their reliefs and herriots, possibly make the ac∣compt of the mony and charge of the ward∣ship to be something equal, if not a great deal lesse. Which howsoever may be removed or made to be more familiar and better un∣derstood or born, if the Tenants in Capite and by Knight Service, shall be exem∣pted from all other Taxes or Assessements for War, but what belongs to their Service, as by Law they antiently were and ought to be; the Wards nor their Estate during that time, being never heretofore charged with any such Assessements, as our late Tax-Masters
have laid upon the People, when as the fifth, and many times the third part of the Wards yearly Rents, besides a fifth part of the value of their real estate, and a twentieth of the personal, and revenew enforced & ta∣ken from them to maintain Iniquity, would have saved more mony than the Wardships cost. Or if that will not still the causelesse out∣cry, that the Licence of Alienation (which as well as in Capite & by Knight Service, are by the Custom of many Manors to be paid in Socage) and the Homages, Grand and Petit Serjeanties, Reliefs, Primer Seisins, and Liveries, and all other incidents belonging to the Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, be reserved and continued to the King and Mesne Lords, and the Maria∣ges of the Wards be put to a just apportion∣ment and rate (not to boxing or bidding with every pretender, or such as shall be procured on purpose, and was thought by the Sons of Rapine to be a parcel of godliness) according to two years present value of the Estate, and a moderate Rate or Rent for the Lands. And if that they do not like to sue or be sued in that Court, may do it either in the Exchequer or Chancery, and try which of those Courts they shall like the better. There being no Reason to be shown why Wardships Rents, and Marriage Money should not be paid as quietly, or without the Noise or Clamour of Oppressioon by
some orderly Course to be taken in the col∣lecting of it, as the first Fruits of Arch-bi∣shoppricks, Bishoppricks, and all the Cler∣gyes Benefices, which was at first derived from the Popes Usurpations, and after∣wards setled in the Crown, or as the Tenths of all the Monasteryes and Religious Lands which by Act of Parliament were setled in the Crown for the Support and Maintenance thereof. And now all the Lines are come in, and meet in one Center, we may aske the Days that are past, and demand of the Sons of Novelty how it should happen, or where the Invisible Cause or Reason lurketh, that a People, at least too many of them, not long agoe covenanting, whether his late Majesty would or no, to preserve his Honor, Rights and Iurisdctions, and calling God to witness that they had no Intention to dimi∣nish them, should presse or perswade the King to part with the vitals of his Regalitie, or let out the blood thereof to take in water instead of it, which that learned John Earl of Bristol, who in his many Travails and Em∣bassies to forrein Princes, had observed the several Strengths, Policyes, and defects of Governments of all the Kings and Princes of Christendom,Motives of the Eal of Bristol for ad∣hereing to his  Mjesty 58. could think no otherwise of that high and just Prerogative of Kings then that, to discharge the Tenures in Capite would be consequently to discharge them of their Service to the Crown.
When as their can be neither Cause nor Reason to make any such Demands, and that all the Lords of Mannors in England who may already find the Inconveniences of making too many small sized Freeholders, and I wish the Kingdom may not feel it in the Elections of Parliament men, and Knights of the Shire, as well as it doth al∣ready by the Faction and Ignorance of such as choose Burgesses in Towns and Corporati∣ons who many times choose without eyes, ears, or understanding, would not be well content to have the many perplexed and tedious Suits at Law betwixt them and their troublesome Tenants about Customs and Fines incertain, which in every year do vex and trouble the Courts in West∣minster Hall, or that which the late feavor∣ish Fancies of some would call Norman Sla∣veryes should be either a Cause that they must be forced or over intreated to part with their Copy-hold Estates, Herryots, Fines for Alienations, and all other Incidents thereunto belonging, or that it would be a good Bargain to have no Compensation or Recompence at all for them, or no more than after the Rate of what might Commu∣nibus Annis one year with another be made of them. Whenas to have the intended Recom∣pence for the Court of Wards paid as is now proposed by a part of the Excise or
Curses of the People, or to have the poor bear the burden of the rich or those to bear the Burden of it which are not at all concer∣ned in any such purchase or Alteration, and will be an Act which can have no more Justice or Equity in it, then that the pay∣ment of First-Fruits which is merely Eccle∣siastical should be distributed and charged for ever upon the Layety, and the other part of the People as well as the Clergy. That the Tenths which the Layety and some of the Clergy do now contentedly pay should be communicated and laid upon all the Kingdom in general in a perpetuity. That the draining or maintaining the Banks and Sluces and Misfortunes many times of the Fenns in Lincolnshire and other particular Places should be charged upon the Estaes of all the men in England that could not be concerned either in profit, losse, or Dnger. Or that in the enclosing of Commons or in Deafforrestations, the Commoners should have their, Compensation paid by all men in City Town▪ and Country, for that which was not  nor was ever like to be any Gain or Avatage to them. Or that the losses of Merchants by Ship∣wacks, Pirates, or letters of Reprisal, should be repaired and born by all the rest of the people that went no partnership or gain with them; Or which way the people of
England should think it to be for their good or safety, that as it was in the dayes of Saul, there should not be a Sword or Spear in Is∣rael, that the Lords of England, whose great Auncestors helped to maintain all our Liber∣ties, being in Parliament in the 20th. year of King H. 3. pressed by the Bishops to E∣nact that Children born before Matrimony, when their Parents after married should be legitimate, answered Nolumus mutare Leges Angliae, we will not change the Lawes of England, should not take the overturning so many of the Fundamental Lawes and Liber∣ties of the Kingdome, to be the ruine or de∣struction of it, to be of a greater concern∣ment. And that the King will not think it to be a most Christian as well as an Heroick an∣swer of John King of France,John de Serres History of France. when he was a Prisoner in England, to our King E. 3. and was denied his Liberty unless he would a∣mongst other things doe Homage for the Realm of France, and acknowledge to hold it of England, That he must not speak to him of that which he neither ought nor would doe to Alie∣nate a Right Inalienable, that he was resolved at what price soever, to leave it to his Children as he had received it from his Auncestors, that affliction might well ingage his person, but not the inviola∣ble right of the Crown, where he had the honour to be born, over which neither Prison nor Death had any power, and especially in him who should
hold his life well employed sacrificing it for the Im∣mortal preservation of France. And that the people of England should not rather imitate the wisdome as well as good∣ness of the Elders of Israel, when as Benha∣dad not content with Ahabs Homage, had demanded unreasonable things of him,1 Reg. 20.8. Say unto the King, hearken not unto him nor consent. But remember that it was their fore-Fa∣thers, which in a Parliament of King E. 3. holden in the 42th. year of his raign, decla∣red that they could not assent to any thing in Parli∣ament, that tended to the disherison of the King, and his Crown, to which they were sworn, that in a Parliament holden in the 14th. year of the raign of King Richard the 2d. the Lords and Commons did pray the King that the Prerogative of Him and his Crown may be kept, and that all things done, or attempted to the contrary, may be redressed, and that the King might be as free, as any of his Progenitors were, which the King granting, gave to it the force and power of an Act of Parlaiment. And consider that the innovation of Laws, or change of Customs are dangerous, and as St Augustine saith, non tam utilitate (if there were any profit in them) prosunt quam Novite perturbant, do more hurt than good by their Novelty, that it will be unsafe to take away or dig up foundations, that where the incon∣veniences in the old Laws are not apparant,
and the conveniences to come by the new not infallible or not likely to deceive our ex∣pectation of them, it will be perilous to change our Laws, more perilous when they be many, and most of all, when they be fundamental. That the more Power and Might is in the King, to defend us, the better will be the Ends which by the Means is in∣tended, and that therefore in the Parlia∣ment of 7 E. 1. the Prelates, Earls, Barons, and the Commonaltie of the Realm, did acknow∣ledge that to the King it belonged of his Royal Signory, streightly to defend force of Armour, and all other force against the Peace, and to punish them which shall do contrary, according to the Laws and usages of the Realm; and thereunto were bound to ayd their Soveraign Lord at all Seasons when need shall be, that to make a Captain of a Cripple, or a Constable, which should keep the Peace in a Parish, and be ready to repell any violence which should be offered to the Inhabitans, to be blind or Bed-rid, would not answer the End, or b for the Safety of those that expect it from him. And that his Majesties opinion expressed in his Message or Declaration from Breda, before his return into England, is and ever will be a maxime composed of very great reason and truth that his Majesties just rights are the best preserver of the peoples Liberties. And may believe before it be too late
that to take away Tenures in Capite, and introduce the inconveniences before mentio∣ned, will be but as a Prologue, or usher to Le∣velling, and the gate or entrance, to the A∣grarian Devices, and the supposed Saints ta∣king possession of the Estates of those which they call the wicked. And that the laying by of Tenures in Capi∣te, and their services, and making use of Mercenary and Mechanick Souldiers, may help us to as many miseries and follies, as we have pertaked of in our late troubles, from our Servants, make them to become our Masters, and by inureing them to inso∣lencies against others, teach them how to domineer over the people, which shall be their pay-Masters, after that over Parliaments garbling and purging the House, pulling out, and putting in whom they please, turn Legis∣lators, and Remonstrance▪ makers from their head quarters, make themselves not the Repair∣ers of Breaches, but the makers and causers of them, ingrosse, all the places and imploy∣ments of the Kingdom, throw down Laws and Government, create out of themselves and their own Party, Mayors, Generals, to ty∣ranize awe the people, and abuse their Laws, and Liberties, and play the fools at Coffee-Houses, with disputing and discoursing of Rotas, and Balloting Boxes, and which of their Whimsies, and ignorant contrivances would best make a Government Committ Perjuries
in abundance, and make their oaths more changeable, and lesse to be trusted then the Wind or Weather, or a Lillies Almanack and make it their only businesse to enslave and insult over the people, and Metamorphose them into as many shapes of baseness, per∣juries, Hipocrisies, dissembling and wicked∣nesse, as poverty hope of gain, or to get or preserve estates, (though it be but to have Po∣liphemus his curtesie to be last of all ruined) fear or flattery, or an accursed ambition to raise an estate out of other mens miseries, could perswade or draw them unto. That the taking away of Tenures in Capite & by Knight service, is not desired by any u∣niversal or general Petition at all of the Peo∣ple, that not one in every 20 of those that are concerned, & hold by those Tenures, nor one in every 100 of those that hold by other Tenures, and are not concerned, do desire it. That the injudicial and inconsiderate desires of a very few of the common people, who doe sometimes (as they have many times done in our late troubles, and too late repented it) out-do Children in asking Stones instead of Bread, and Serpents for Fishes, are not to be hearkened unto, that the Surfets upon Liberty, are many times very dangerous, & may prove as fatal & unhap∣py, though granted or asked with the best of intentions, as that of giving great Sums of money to the Scots, in the begining of our unhappy Wars, & calling their invasion a
brotherly assistance, or that of giving Liberty to the long Parliament, not to dis∣solve without their consent. That if Augustus Caesar, when by his great Prudence he had put the broken peices of the Roman Republick, which was Civilibus Discordiis lacerata, wofully torn with civil Discords into a well composed Monarchy, and blest the Empire & a great part of the World with an universal Peace, could find no better a way to fix and make it lasting, then to put many of the Souldiers under a Gratitude and Concernment to love and cherish it by giving them Lands for Life or Inheritance to engage them to their former Duties when occasion should happen, which saved the Charge and Trouble on all sides, as well to the conquered as the con∣quering in maintaining Roman Legions made up of a Medley or Gallimausry of all manner of Nations. It cannot now be good when the long lasting Monarchy of England hath been late∣ly and lamentably torn into peeces to make up a Common-wealth, could never be a∣greed upon to alter or take away a Course of constant and ordinary defence which hath been for so many Ages past the happy Support of this Antient Mo∣narchy. And that it could not have been any bad or likely to be unsuccessefull Policy, but a means of an Establishment of our late Soul∣diers
and Controullers had in the Allowance of their cheap purchases been tyed to Te∣nures by Knight Service for the Defence of the Kingdom, as the late King of Sweden was to hold of the Empire by the Treaty of Munster. And if that Bracton who was a Lord Chief Justice in the Reign of King H. 3. was of o∣pinion that by a patition of Earldoms and Baronies,Bracton lib. 2. cap. 34. deficeret Regnum quod ex Comitatibus & Baronijs dicitur esse constitutum, would ru∣ine the Kingdom which is constituted of Earldoms and Baronies, he would now certainly foresee greater Mischiefs and In∣conveniencies in the taking away of Tenures in Capite and by Knight Service, or change∣ing them into Tenures in Socage. That by the Civil Law, that universal and great Rule of Reason,Instiur. Justiniani in proaemio. Imperatoriam Ma∣jestatem non solum armis decoratam sed etiam legi∣bus oportet esse Armatam ut utrumque Tempus et Bellrum et pacis recte possit gubernari, The Im∣perial Majesty or Power ought not only to be adorned & strengthened with Armes & the power thereof, but with Lawes, to the end that as well in time of War as Peace, he may rightly govern. And that therefore we may well tremble and shake at the name of Innovations, and desiring to find the way again into the old Paths of Peace, Plenty, and Security. Have cause enough to say as the learned
Grotius did concerning Holland, (only chan∣ging the word Respublica, into a better of a Kingdom) that multum debems majoribus nostris qui acceptam a primis conditoribus Rempub∣licam per se egregiam nostro vero ingenio nostrisque studiis aptissimam pace servatam bello recuperatam nobis reliquere, we owe much to our Ances∣tors, who having received the Common-wealth, which is excellent in it self, and fit∣ed to our Customes and manners from those which first founded it, and left us to enjoy in peace, what they had recovered in War, & nostrum est si nec ingrati nec imprudentes esse vo∣lumus Rempublicam constanter tueri quam ratio suadet probant experimenta & commendat Anti∣quitas. And if we would not be ingratefull or unjust wee ought to defend that Kingdome and Government which Reason perswadeth us unto, Experiments approve, & Antiquity commendeth. Collapsa ruent subductis tecta columnis. FINIS.
