p289 12246797 56965
The Paper which was Seized in the E. of Shaftsbury's Closet by Francis Gwin Esquire, One of the Clerks of His Majesties Privy Council, and Read Novem∣ber 24. 1681. at the Old Baily, before His Majesties Commissioners of Oyer an Terminer. VVE the Knights, &c. Finding to the grief of our Hearts, the Popish Priests and Iesuits with the Papists, and their Ad∣herents and Abetters have for several years last past pursued a most ernicious and hellish Plot, to root the true Protestant Religion as a pestilent Heresie, to take away the Life of our Gracious King, to subvert our Laws and Liberties, and to set up Arbitrary power and Popery. And it being Notorious that they have been highly en∣couraged by the Countenance and Protection given and procured for them by J. D. of Y. and by their Expectations of his succeeding to the Crown and that through  Popish Councils his Designs have so far prevailed that he hath created many and great Dependents upon him by his bestowing Offices and Preferments both in Church and State. It appearing also to us, That by his Influence Merce∣nary Forces have been levied and kept on Foot for his se∣cret Designs contrary to our Laws; the Officers thereof having been named and appointed by him, to the appa∣rent hazard of His Majesties Person our Religion and Go∣vernment, if the danger had not been timely foreseen by se∣veral Parliaments, and part of those Forces with great difficulty, caused by them to be Disbanded at the King∣doms great Expence: And it being Evident, that notwith∣standing all the continual endeavours of the Parliament to deliver his Majesty from the Councils, and out of the Power of the said D. yet his Interest in the Ministry of State and others have been so prevalent, That Parlia∣ments have been unreasonably Prorogued, and Dissolved when they have been in hot pursuit of the Popish Conspira∣cies, and ill Ministers of State their Assistants.
And that the said D. in order to reduce all into his own power hath procured the Garrisons, the Army and Am∣munition, and all the power of the Seas and Souldiery, and Lands belonging to these Three Kingdoms to be put into the hands of his Party and their Adherents, even in opposition to the Advice and Order of the last Parliament. And as we considering with heavy Hearts how greatly the Strength, Reputation and Treasure of the Kingdom both at Sea and Land is Wasted and Consumed, and lost by the intricate expensive management of these wicked de∣structive Designs; and finding the same Councils after ex∣emplary Iustice upon some of the Conspirators, to be still pursued with the utmost devilish malice, and desire of Revenge; whereby his Majesty is in continual hazard of being Murdered to make way for the said D's Advancement to the Crown, and the whole Kingdom in such case is de∣stitute of all security of their Religion, Laws, Estates, and Liberty, sad experience in the Case, Queen Mary ha∣ving proved the wisest Laws to be of little force to keep out Popery and Tyranny under a Popish Prince. We have therefore endeavoured in a Parliamentary way by a Bill for the purpose to Bar and Exclude the said Duke from the Succession to the Crown, and to Banish him for ever out of these Kingdoms of England and Ireland. But the first Means of the King and Kingdoms Safety being utterly rejected, and we left almost in Despair of obtaining any real and effectual security, and knowing our selves to be intrusted to Advise and Act for the preservation of His Majesty and the Kingdom, and being persuaded in our Consciences that the dangers aforesaid are so eminent and pressing, that there ought to be no delay of the best means that are in our power to secure the Kingdom against them. We have thought fit to propose to all true Protestants an Vnion amongst themselves by solemn and sacred promise of mutual Defence and Assistance in the preservation of the true Protestant Religion, His Majesties Person and Royal State and our Laws, Liberties and Properties, and we hold it our bounden Duty to joyn our selves for the same in∣tent in a Declaration of our Vnited Affections and Reso∣lutions in the form insuing.
I A. B. Do in the presence of God solemnly Promise, Vow, and Protest to maintain and defend to the utmost of my Power, with my Person and Estate, the true Protestant Religion against Po∣pery and all Popish Superstition, Idolatry, or Innovation, and all those who do or shall endeavour to spread or advance it within this Kingdom. I will also as far as in me lies maintain and defend His Majesties Royal Person and Estate; as also the power and priviledge of Par∣liaments, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject, against all Incroachments and Usurpation of Arbitrary power whatsoever, and endeavour intirely to Disband all such mercenary Forces as, we have reason to believe, were raised to Advance it, and are still kept up in and about the City of London, to the great Amazement and Terror of all the good People of the Land. Moreover I. D. of Y. having publickly professed and owned the Popish Religion, and notoriously given Life and Birth to the Dam∣nable and Hellish Plots of the Papists against His Majesties Person, the Protestant Religion, and the Government of this Kingdom. I will never consent that the said I. D. of Y. or any other, who is or hath been a Papist, or any ways adher'd to the Papists in their wick∣ed Designs be admitted to the Succession of the Crown of England, But by all lawful means and by force of Arms, if need so require, ac∣cording to my Abilities, will oppose him, and endeavour to Subdue, Expell and Destroy him if he come into England, or the Domini∣ons thereof; and seek by force to set up his pretended Title, and all such as shall Adhere unto him, or raise any War, Tumult, or Sedition for him, or by his Command, as publick Enemies of our Laws, Religion and Countrey, To this end we and every one of us whose hands are here under-written, do most willingly bind our selves and every one of us unto the other joyntly and severally, in the Bond of one firm and loyal Society or Association, and do promise and vow before God, That with our joynt and particular Forces we will oppose and pursue unto De∣struction all such as upon any Title whatsoever shall oppose the Iust and Righteous ends of this Association, and Maintain, Protect and Defend all such as shall enter into it in the just performance of the true intent and meaning of it. And lest this just and pious work should be any ways obstructed or hindered for want of Discipline and Conduct, or any evil minded prrsons under pretence of raising For∣ces
for the service of this Association, should attempt or commit Disorders, we will follow such Orders as we shall from time to time receive from this present Parlia∣ment, whilst it shall be sitting, or the Major part of the Members of both Houses subscribing this Association: when it shall be Prorogued or Dissolved, and obey such Officers as shall by them be set over us in the several Coun∣treys, Cities, and Burroughs until the next meeting of this or another Parliament, and will then shew the same Obedience and Submission unto it, and those who shall be of it. Neither will we for any respect of Persons or Causes, or for Fear, or Reward separate our selves from this Associ∣ation, or fail in the Prosecution thereof during our Lives upon pain of being by the rest of us prosecuted, and sup∣pressed as Perjur'd persons, and publick Enemies to God, the King, and our Native Countrey. To which Pains and Punishments we do voluntarily submit our selves, and every one of us without benefit of any Colour or Pretence to excuse us. In Witness of all which Premisses to be inviolably kept, we do to this present Writing put our Hands and Seals, and shall be most ready to accept and admit any others hereafter into this Society and Association. LONDON: Printed for Sam. Mearne, and Jo. Baker, 1681.
