P3178B 99830538 34990
Psal: 139.14 Transported with THY Excellence!— Abi Vanitas! Persuasives from an inordinate Love of ye World to GOD. By Mr BP. 1695. Pratt Invent: I. Drapentier
A Persuasive FROM THE CREATURES, To a Perfect RESIGNATION OF THE WILL TO GOD's. By B. Pratt, of Merton Coll. Oxon. An Inordinate Love of this cheating World, is attended with only Superficial Joys, which end in Pain and Repentance. Senec. de Beat. Nothing but an entire Consignation to the Dic∣tates of Right REASON, can make you TRULY Happy. idem Alib. The Second Edition Corrected. To which is added an APPENDIX. LONDON, Printed for G. Conyers at the Golden Ring, W. Newton overagainst Saint Bartholomew's-Close-Gate, and J. Pero at the White Swan, in Little-Britain, 1695.
TO THE Right Honourable The LADY M. H. OF NORFOLK. MADAM, THE Honour I re∣ceive by Acquain∣tance with YOU, and the Illustrious Vertues with which You
are, I know [Beyond a Stranger's Credit] so Extra∣ordinarily Bless'd, has [since the Departure of that Friend [in Obedience to whom this Trifle was at first design'd] peculiarly obliged me to pre∣sent it at Your Ladyship's Feet. I am sorry, for Your sake, it is not as I could wish it Compos'd, [I have Higher Thoughts on this Subject, which I cannot yet express.] But Your Honour will consider, 'tis a Work of YOUTH; and for several Private Reasons by none Review'd
till it pass'd from the Press. I am not for Tedious DEDICATIONS; in them I had rather speak Less than More than the Ingenuous Modesty of such Persons as Your LADYSHIP will permit. [For You are above the want of an EN∣COMIUM, and I may be easily thought guilty of that Flattery I hate,] so I would conclude [with my Hearty PRAYERS to Almighty GOD, that it may please Him to be still Your GUIDE,
till You arrive at Eternal Rest.] Your Ladyship's And RELATIONS Most Obedient, Humble Servant, B. P. Kensing∣ton, Jan. 12. 1694/5.
To the Worthy READER. THE subsequent Intro∣duction is an Apology so sufficient for this slender Work, that a Formal Preface would, I think, have b en al∣most Superfluous here, [though by Custom you should expect it.] But I have further to say, That, I would ask your friendly Censure hereon. For, I presume, a Piece is then
Accomplish'd, when it chiefly answers the Ʋnderstanding of the Person for whom 'twas par∣ticularly design'd. — This Work was at first compos'd, not to Teach the Learned, but for Philomuse [though Great, BƲT Qualify'd according to IT's Language and Sence] my Intimate Friend, to whom I might always be Free: so that if I Rise and Fall, nay, often change the Style of, and ascend not too High in this Divine Discourse, the Reasons which cause will excuse — That the Largeness of Sen∣tences, and seeming Excursions of the Book, must be imputed to the Vigour of that Ʋnruly
Flame which incens'd me to This. That I could not but some∣times Express my self in the sence of some Authors I have MIX'D myself with. That I have follow'd the Me∣thod of Sir Roger L'Estrange's Seneca, in my Translation of those select Scraps of St. Au∣stin which end the Advice: And, That I am truly Yours, B. P. M. Coll. Nov. 11. 1694.
To the Ingenious Mr. P. On Information of his De∣sign to Attempt [Persua∣sives to God, &c.] SUch a Discourse from Thee! Proceed, Aspiring Youth! Be Free, Accept the Dictates of the DEITY. Think, in Old Age, and when Thou canst not Taste A Mortal Joy, about to Breathe thy Last, What Consolation, what Celestial Bliss, Such Juvenile Performances as THIS Will then afford thy Soul! J. M. B. D.
Persuasives FROM THE CREATURE To a Perfect RESIGNATION Of the WILL to GOD's. Dearest Philomuse! COnquer'd by your fre∣quent Importunities, at last I'm Resolv'd, and you've a Present of my Attempts, retarded till now,
not through want of Rea∣sons to Please you, you have so much Oblig'd Me, that I am proud to tell the World what you, I hope, are sure of, That there is not any Earthly Comfort more af∣fects me, than Desires that aspire to Serve Philomuse, but a sense of my own In∣capacity to write Worthily on a Subject so Noble as THIS. So that from admiring be∣fore you had not my Pre∣tences Sooner, you may de∣scend to wonder Now, in so Nice an Age as This, I dare thus be Rude.
But I would tell you, Tho' for your sake only I could endure to be in Print, af∣ter long Deliberation, I be∣lieve, That since an Occa∣sion has happen'd which justly requires this Discourse from my Hands, particu∣larly 'tis my Duty, [where∣as besides I have been all along Bless'd with Extraor∣dinary Favours from the Di∣vine Goodness] I prosecute that Just Thought first start∣ed in my Mind, then Back'd on by your Pious Entreaty. I think I shall not be so vain to value the Censures of All Men; though indeed, Philomuse, at first I fear'd,
for me not in Orders, and so Young, to pretend to This — 'twas Bold. But notwithstanding I consider'd I am not one of, or yet design for the Clergy, and that ALL I now write may [even to Me] when I'm capable of Better, ap∣pear a Mean Performance, I found not but the precedent Incentives to This, were still Motives to follow the Design. For, Since Inanimate Beings (ac∣cording to the Psalmist, &c.) should Praise God,Psal. 148. and the Age we war in; Philomuse and my Self cannot be too much reminded of our great∣est
Concerns. It again oc∣curs, That I fed at theUnivers. Head of GOD's Streams, and above the Classes of Mean∣est Things, should immedi∣ately (for I know not when my Flight will be) do some∣thing for GOD our Father in this kind, especially to it mov'd by an Uncommon (methinks) Impulse, atten∣ded on by Convenient Time and Place, be it only fit for such as I [not yet fully con∣firm'd in a Habit of Inordi∣nate Love.] But I wave further Apolo∣gies for a Design, I hope, will Excuse it self, (though I might further tell Those
that argue against the Need of it, The large Discourses on this Subject, long since extant, That ALL Men should employ their Time not as it pleases Others, but their own Genius to a good End. — And because some have been Zealous on a Subject for GOD, is not a Reason sufficient others should desist from the same. The Almighty GOD (whose Glory in all our Actions we should aim to Celebrate) is so charmingly Excellent (e∣ven to us) when consider'd, as dissolves the Proudest of his Creatures into a Regret andBeyond them∣selves. Resolutions, makes
them, when lost in Admira∣tion of his Wise Dispensa∣tions, not only exclaim with the Apostle, O!Rom. 11.33. the Depth of the Riches! — with the Psalmist, Oh!Psal. 107. v. 8, 15, 21, 31. Psal. 42.1. & 119.5. & 150.6. that men would therefore praise the Lord! — but exstasy'd, to pant like the Hart, for numberless Com∣panions, to leave that fallen World, to know to joyn with them in Eternal Hale∣lujah's. To wave, I say,Sect. 1. further Excuses: Though I attempt Persuasives from the Creature, I mean not, we should not use these Creatures of GOD at all. I am not such a Stoick,
to suppose you can or must wholly contemn these Crea∣ted Goods. Nor believe I, those things are only to be us'd which we absolutely need: The Man who can so Command himself, is his own Master indeed, but no better than his Fellow-Chri∣stians. GOD saw that ALL his Creation was good in themselves; Dares Man then think them not? — Why should we abstain?1 Cor. 10.23, 26. Rom. 14.14. ALL things are lawful.—Were they not, Flesh and Blood would presume themselves worse then (Pardon the Compari∣son) Tantaliz'd, show'd Things endow'd with Appe∣tites
for [unless rid of them by Habits of Abstinence] and Powers to reach them, then punish'd by the Indulgent Father of the Universe! The Most Wise GOD made ALL Things (as was told you) GOOD in their kinds to be us'd,Heb. 10.24. that in the Enjoyment we might more readily be transported with the Love of Him we cannot duly Admire. But all Things are not Expedient; for the Devil has help'd us to find out many Inventions,1 Cor. 10.23. 2 Cor. — (yet if we can use them to the End they were by GOD de∣sign'd, we are not hurt.)
I intend not to Argue for the Vices of the Times: Lo∣vers of them, are Men sick, or they would not, like Wo∣men with Child, Long, for their Ruine. God no more created Appetites for those (as all that consider the Di∣vinity, will affirm,) than He did Death; and yet you see, Philomuse, we [free to act] have took care to bring them on us. If 'tis ask'd, Why He suf∣fers them? — For the Tryal of us, that we may glory in the Conquest,Jam. 1.23. ibid. v. 13, 14. when our Souls shall be free.
No, Philomuse,Sect. 2. my Design is not, you should not rightly use God's good Creation; but I would not you abuse that, or wrong your self; I would not have you borne down with the Thoughts or Enjoyments of the Creatures; I would not have you lose your self in the Love of them, or rest on what will fall and deceive you. By the Creatures, I mean, ALL GOD's Works, with their admirable Concomi∣tants, Learning, Arts, Wits, Good Nature, &c. For they are all Rays of the Divine Perfection, and come from
Him; —and you should use them not as so many Fetters to enslave you to them, but as Stars to lead you to the Deity. Thus (but let not the Witty think I only dissuade Others, like the Tailless Fox, from what, perhaps, I've lost my Self, that's too impious —) when you see a Beauty, with all the Charms a Mor∣tal can have, you should conclude, That (as a certain Saint did, I remember I have read of,In Anthel. Hist. p. &c. who Dining with a Person of Honour at Table with his Lady, look'd so in∣tently on her Incomparable Form, that nothing could
persuade her Lord to Admi∣ration, but Knowledge of his Age [a Preventive, sure, against his committing A∣dultery in's Heart] why he look'd so wishfully on her. He ask'd? The good Old Father, with exalted Eyes, Lord!Psal. 139.13. says he) if a Creature is so Fine, what art THOƲ Thy Self! or we shall be, when at the Resurrection! —But no further. All the Oriental Lustres of the Richest Gemms; all the Inchanting Beauties of Exterior Shapes, the Exqui∣siteness of Figures, the Love∣lyness of Colours, the Har∣mony of Sounds, the Light
and Clarity of the Enliven∣ing Sun; the Ravishing Form and Order of All, pro∣ceed from GOD. All the Heroick Vertues of the Bra∣vest Minds, with the Purity and Quickness of the High∣est Intellects,Psal. 100.3 are all (as Sir Owen Feltham somewhere says) but Emanations from the Supreme Deity, and were by it design'd not to enslave and detain our Passions, but to Refine and Exalt our Con∣ceptions; to persuade us there is certainly in GOD much more than we can ei∣ther see or comprehend: And therefore the Seraphick Mr. Boyle assures you, That
(to use his own Ingenious Expression) If you'd make the rightest Use of Fading Beauties,Ser. Love. &c. you must (as was hinted before) consi∣der GOD and Them, as you were wont to do your Mistress's Picture and its Crystal Cover; where, tho' that Native Glass were pure and lovely, and very richly Edg'd; yet to gaze on it, was not the chiefest Business of your Eye, nor did you in it terminate your Sight, but greedily look thorough and beyond it, upon the Adored Image that solid Veil betray'd.
I cannotNon possum dicere quia nec videre possum, ta∣men aliquid non impudentèr dice qui ex scripturis dice. Aug. Ser. &c. here attempt Descriptions on one Ray of the Superlative Excellence;Sect. 4. — my weak Eyes are far more able to gaze on the Meridian Sun, than they are on a Glympse of His Super∣eminent Beauty, [aThe sight of HIM would let in Joys, and then create Desires too mighty for Mortality to bear. The ravish'd Soul, if shewn such Excel∣lence as This, forthwith would hate, so eagerly she'd break those Leashes that confin'd her to the Body, so prevent her Flight to that Transporting Good she wish'd to be united with. And there∣fore GOD tells Moses (when he importun'd Him for a Glance of what he knew was Inconceivable) he could not see his Face: For, none could see his Face and live, Exod. 33.20. Beau∣ty so vastly Transporting,
that it makes the pretty Che∣rubs,Isa. 6.2. &c. veil theirs in a Holy Place. His makes Heaven!] Nor shall I now offer Tastes of that Milk and Honey which flow in the Land of Canaan. Those Pledges of a future Happy Eternity, which God vouch∣safes to them in this Veil of Tears, who wholly resign to Him, the Pleasures of their Reatifick State you shall guess anon. I should now tell you,Sect. 5. as a Persuasive from the Crea∣ture, That 'tis as Reasonable, as I shall prove it Necessary, we set not our Affections too
much on Things Below; but make the Beauty of God's Creatures [what I told you they were chiefly design'd for] Prevailing Incentives to the Love of Him. For the Almighty God, that Supreme Ens and Wisdom it self, with whom is fullness of Joy,1 Cor. 2.9. and at whose Right-hand are Plea∣sures for evermore,Heb.—. made us to be supremely Happy, People for Himself. And if we will not make use of those excel∣lent Means He has been pleas'd to offer,Heb. 4.1. Isa. 66.24. that we may be so, an Eternity of Repentance will not reconcile us to the Heaven we lose, when this World is no more.
But to hasten from so dreadful a Consequence of Disobedience to the Divine Will,Sect. 6. that you may be more willingly attracted, Philo∣muse, to your own Salvation, consider, the Mercy of God, who not only design'd these Terrestrial Beauties, as Lad∣ders to exalt you to your pro∣per Center of Content,Psal. 119. Isa. 65.1, 2, 3. but to demonstrate further, That He did not only at first intend, but still condescends to de∣sire you should be Happy for ever with him: He has withal made ALL his Crea∣tion, in their fullest Enjoy∣ment, utterly unable to sa∣tisfie
the Soul of Man, that so you might never rest till to that Center you arrive. [And to encourage us on our Way,Ps. 31.21. Isa. 63.3, &c. HeGod's Grief at the Sinner is such, as pleas'd him to offer His only Son a Sacrifice for Man's Salvation; which, without producing the least Discomposure, causes Effects of the most sensible Pity. Grieves when we slip, raises us by Stratagems of Mercy when we fall, lights us by his Word, dissembles Anger when we wilfully Err,Ps. 30.5, Eph. 4.30. Ps. 86.15. leads us with that Hand might have struck us in Hell; and when forc'd [to prevent our im∣mediate Ruine] corrects us with so Paternal a Concern,
as would break our Hearts, might we know. The Royal Psalmist, after deep Contemplation of this, in an Epiphonema, patheti∣cally exclaims, Lord!Ps. 8.4. what is Man, that Thou art so mindful of him? or the Sons of Men, that Thou regardest them? Surely 'tis because GOD is the LORD, and changes not, that we are not rather consumed.— O!Mal. 3.6. Ps. 19.14, 15. & 107. from v. 1. to the end. Lam. 3.22. Ps. 18.50. & 89.5. ibid. 9. — & 34.3. & 40.6. & 66. — that therefore Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the Wonders that He does for the Children of Men! O Lord! the very Heavens shall praise Thy Wondrous Works. (For) O LORD
GOD of HOSTS! who is like unto THEE?] Now,Sect. 7. this Disability of the Creatures for true Satis∣faction, with that sad Anxi∣ety that attends their Enjoy∣ment, though a Subject (as others) has been before dis∣coursed on, shall, since still I see we disquiet our selves in vain,Ps. 39.7. by this Mite I humbly cast [as Persuasives from the Creature] be fully display'd. I call each Existence un∣der the Sun, VANITY; for, its Fruition disappoints, and Results cheats.
To confirm you in which, Solomon, Homo (as Victo∣rinus styles him) Homi∣nem Excedens, the Wisest Man that was, who by aAs the word in the Origi∣nal signi∣fies, Ec∣cles. 1.3.  chap. ibid. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. chap. 2. ver. 10, 11. Sedulous Search, and Prac∣tick Experience travers'd the World, neither wanted nor spar'd Means to ransack all, in hope of Happiness Below, with Me impartially con∣sents. In displaying this Vanity of Vanities, I shall dissect its several Parts, and ac∣cordingly treat; that on this Sea of Trouble, Philomuse,Mat. 11.28. you may leave God to steer, who will bring you to the Haven of Eternal Rest.
Man then,Sect. 8. the LORD of the World, is, [by Nature, since the Fall, so unworthy our inordinate Love, that we but fling away our Time, to think on Him, unless with Re∣solution only to be Enamor'd of God, or to Beware of Him] when an Infant, like Wax, to be influenc'd by every Stamp of Vice: He walks in a vain Shadow, and dis∣quiets himself in vain; is as inconstant as the Wind, and varies with every airy Noise:Ps. 39.13. Jer. 4.22. Ecclus. 9.14, 15, 16, &c. 1 Cor. 1.21. His purest Part's disturb'd by's Body's Ills; and a sad Dream, or cloudy Day, can change this wretched Creature into other Thoughts:
An idle Story told him, makes him part with dear∣est Friends, and inconside∣rately to wish their Death; nor can he be persuaded (whatsoe'er they are) but they must merit that! How ardently we love some common Goods, a Fit of Choler makes us ever hate? Our own Mistakes makes o∣thers bad with us: So easily is Reputation lost! A Frown, a slip o' the Tongue, or some such No∣thing, makes us cancel all the Bonds of Secrecy and Trust, and enter into Leagues with Enemies, not ended e'er they're broke! Our
Favourites do, with our Pla∣ces, change; and we lov'd that Before, which makes us sick to Day! Thus is the Work of Hea∣ven (to speak in general) become (though not their Scorn [for they're All-good]) its Pity too, who so resents our Best Perfor∣mances Below, as Wits of th' Age look back on theirs when School-Boys, — Novices — Nor are we [but our Heavenly Father's Love] less Troublesome to Him,Sect. 9. than to our selves. Cor∣ruption mixes with our Pu∣rest Acts; we're short in
paying Homage to our God, and sin when we neglect. When Thoughts of Him [who's All-conspicuous] we pretend, alas!Eccl. 9.16, 17. we cannot Think aright. — The Devil, if he offers us the Bait, we take it, though we knew the Consequence; nay — many times prevent him by our Eagerness to Act. Inclin'd to Piety, some∣times we rudely seem to teach our Father what we want [as if He knew not, till we told Him our Ne∣cessities,Ps. 56.8. & 139.2, 3. or when to give us what we truly need] we Clownishly demand what God in Mercy will not let us
have; and beg for present Vengeance on our Enemies He knows deserves it not, or will be Penitent. How∣ever — we deny'd,Ps. 53.1. are sure there is No GOD, or that regards not US. [—But, Let me, LORD, (says Austin) wish for THEE alone!Solil. c. 12. Allure my Longings with Thy Secret Raptures from Above, those Pleasures which Thou hast re∣serv'd and hid, as yet, from them that Trust in THEE, that with incessant Pantings they may wish for THEE, lest th' Inward Relish being in∣dispos'd, may think that Bitter's Sweet!]
We Fear what we should Slight, but never Value what we most should Dread: Like Birds, false Men of Clouts do fright, are taken yet by the destroying Ginn.Ps. 139. We care to act our Sins in pri∣vate, out of Mortal view, regardless of the Heavenly Judge that sees. We Phy∣sick our distemper'd Carcas∣ses, but mind not how our Soul's dispos'd. Or if we do, not with that Thoughtfulness we ought; or else, relying on our proper Strength, im∣plore not Heaven's Aid. So we no sooner got in Ver∣tues Paths, are weary of
them quite: Or if a second time, to make amends, like Jehu,Isa. 64.6, we attempt with speed; alas! the Journey scarce be∣gun, has tyr'd us. — We cease; — but then dis∣satisfy'd, we force our selves a little forward; but with subtle care we ar'n't expos'd thereby. Thus move we on a Crip∣ple's pace, till unconsider'd Difficulties dark our Paths, and then, likeAn Allegorical Description of the gene∣ral Causes of Despair. Those wretched People once mistaken, do usually hug their Errors, are persuaded against others Expositions, and apply every hard Word of GOD to their own Vexa∣tion, Isa. 8.14. Tra∣vellers at Night, on un∣known
Roads remote, un∣able to return, or now pro∣ceed, with out-stretch'd Arms we grope, incredulous of Night-Directors; till at last some harmless Thunder dying in the distant Skie, distracts our fearful Minds, and we Despair, when in some dismal Forest we are lost, or from a Precipice in mighty Waters fall. Our Beauty and our Wis∣dom too, are vain;Sect. 10. for they're imperfect, and will soon de∣cay with Us they so adorn.Ps. 39.6, 12. Isa. 40.6, 7. Jam. 1.10. 1 Pet. 1.24. Though Casualties should spare us, [which they sel∣dom doe,] Age of necessity
destroys: Then how per∣plex'd our great Admirers are? A Blow or Bruise on th' Head, may spoil the Learned'st Master in Philo∣sophy, and subject him to those before he scorn'd. Our greatest Sensual Plea∣sures are but Vanity. Much Time we throw away in anxious Cares and Trou∣bles to enjoy; and when we doe, we cannot as we would: our Torch will speedily burn out, and we are vanish'd from our Earthly Joys:Says Mar∣tial, Quic∣quid amas cupias non placuisse nimis, &c. or else our jealous Mind sug∣gests a thousand Reasons for our sudden Loss of what [possess'd of sully] but effe∣minates
the Efforts of the Soul. Depriv'd of what we doated on, our Soul's unspi∣rited, and in a torpid fright we much bewail the Loss of Satisfactions that before, by long Possessions, and a near access, [like My LordThe Sensitive Plant in His Honour's Gar∣den at Cue, near Richmond. Capel's Plant] contracted all their Charms; we now, as Pictures at a distance seen, mistake for Excellently Fine; and then 'tis long before we are our selves again, or relish other Joys. You know, my Philomuse,
that this and more is true. [To mention, by the bye, now what may be excus'd, that pretty— B.J. ad imp. (Jul 4. N — 92. M.ob.F. 13. N— 9¾. T. Little Shadow (as I us'd to call it) of the Greatest FAIR: (I mean, the Person sojourned with your Friend) [a Sign but to convince that GOD was near] when with extra∣vagant Affection grasp'd,Marcus An∣toninus di. . prov'd so indeed: — 'Twas REASON hid Himself, and it was gone.] And as the usual Objects of our earthly Pleasures are so Finite in their Nature,Sect. 11. they are Few; the compass of these Satisfactions is more
short than Life; none to be had, but what before we loathed. — —Versamur ibidem atque Lucret. insumus usque, Nec nova vivendo procudi∣tur ulla voluptas. Or those we soon look over, and cast by, like wither'd Flowers from our Bosoms we are weary of. The Sacred Bonds of Friendship, whose Delights alone, even here on Earth, could they without Cessation be enjoy'd, might represent us Heaven, sure would be declin'd by Thoughtful Men,
but 'tis an Exercise of Ver∣tues. We often love our Second Selves (our Real Friends I mean) with such Sincerity and Care, that Fortune ruins Both, when she strikes One; — and never gives Content [whatever Good she sends] but whenThis is experienc'd in Perfect Friendship: Remember David, and his Concern at the dread∣ful News of his Brother's Death, 1 Sam. chap. 4. from ver. 17. to the end. Se∣rene and Free from Jea∣lousies, they are Together Bless'd. Riches and Honours too are also vain;Sect. 12. they fail us in
the deepest Need, and can't secure us from the Jaws of Death, nor mighty Stings of Conscience. — Non Domus aut fundus non Aeris Acervus & AuriHor. Aegroto Domini deduxit corpore Febres, Non Animo curas. — If we but use ourOmnis Pecunia Levis, fugax labilis, angui∣larum & serpentum instar Lubrica. C. Agrip. Wealth, immediately theyr'e gone; but if we keep them only, then we have 'em not! They're wing'd; and though a while, till they seduce us to Intem∣perance,. Plat. we may possess
them, they will flee away; and to the Care we had in getting them, add fresh and greater Troubles then. But — I am weary of De∣scriptions, such as these. If, Philomuse, you'd further be inform'd, how Vain we are, and what we Toil about, contemplate Me. Our Life then,Sect. 13. (to con∣clue Persuasives, That this World of GOD is vain to try our Vertue, and that we may aim at Heaven Above,) when but consider'd, plainly does appear (as an IngeniousMr. J.D. in A — Z. Author says) a Cheat to All Considering Men: And
yet such Fools we are, we ever hope against Experi∣ence; believe to Morrow sure will make amends for Ye∣sterday's Misfortunes, but in vain! This Day deceives us more than those be∣hind, lies worse; for whilst it flatters us with hopes of some new Satisfaction, it robs us of the present we pos∣sess'd! None therefore would live over Days are past, yet most (so silly are we) are in Expectation of new Joys from those which are to come. ('Tis strange! That from the Dregs of Life, we All should look for Pleasures or Contents the
first brisk Running never could produce!) Why should we doat then on these Fal∣lacies? or not immediately transplant our highest Love to GOD, by Resignation to his Blessed Will? — But, I must desire you to con∣clude,Sect. 14. Philomuse, That all I have said to depretiate the Creatures Worth, which is wont to inveigle the Incon∣siderate's Affections from their proper Object, to Death, was meant rather by way of Preparative, than Motive to conduct you from the Love of them to GOD [aiming
(as was told you by the pre∣ceding Discourse) [not to Abuse the Works of GOD, or those Ingenious Beauties, some of which I have the the Honour to know, but] to Disabuse those Men which doat on them to Excess, and rectifie their degraded Minds, that with compos'd and im∣partial Thoughts they may judge of the Counsel is ad∣vis'd.] For, Though by Doating on the Creature,Sect. 15. you affront it to the degree of Sin, when you give it that Respect which is due unto GOD, and are accordingly punish'd;
though (I mean) you're con∣vinc'd, That to neglect the Commands of GOD, is Death, I would not there∣fore only you Resign to Him; that is a greater Fault than any of the World's; for which I persuade you to shun it, and will prevent you the Charms which do truly please the Sovereign Wisdom Commands. So that were You and I, Philo∣muse to reap no Advantage from Submission to Him, and God incapable [which cannot be granted] to over∣rule our Wills; though we were Objects now of his Hate; we have yet reason
to Obey Him: For, 'twas HE which Made us, (not to doHE is above the Need of His Creatures Help. Him Service: Can a Man— Quid enim Immortalibus atque Beatis, Gratia Nostra queat, &c. Lucret. ex Epic. be Profitable to GOD? but) purely out of Love, e're we were.Ps. 100.10. Job 22.2, 3. Rev. 4.10. [So little could we deserve it, that we might be Happy with HIM. Indeed, as the Israelites,Sect. 16. to make them resolve on returning to their Happy Land, stood in need of that cruel Bondage in Egypt, we often want the harsh Usage
of an afflicting World to un∣deceive us in its Charms, that we may fly to God; it is not to assure you, we must therefore only aspire to Him, [as if God needed to be recommended by his Creatures Defects! and so made them vain, that we might run to Him, to com∣pleat the Happiness of the Most Blessed GOD! Or, it is fit to make Him the Re∣fuge of a Defeated Passion, whose Transcendencies en∣title Him to more than the most Exalted and Entire! We have made our selves so frail by the Fall, that (as) the Seraphick Mr. Boyle will
tell you) we are unfit to procure, and ready to desert our own Good, and neither God's Excellence is a suffi∣cient Motive to carry our Addresses to Him, nor his Possession a compleat Tye to intercept in us all Designs of Revolt: And therefore, in Mercy, we are us'd as froward Children are, who (on the one side) when their Mouths are out of Taste, and they refuse what is ne∣cessary for them, must not only have it offer'd, but forc'd on them, and be, as it were, made to receive it; and who (on the other side) must be restrain'd from Gad∣ding,
when the Beauty of the Mansions they may live in, cannot invite their A∣bode.] The Chastisement of God in this Probation-state [as by all before was suggested unto you,Sect. 17. is purely design'd for our own Good, and is an Effect of that Mercy which endures for ever, so should transport us, without more to doe, through a true sense of his Super-eminent Excel∣lence, to an entire Resigna∣tion to his Holy Will, [who not only Made us, and has therefore oblig'd us to Obey, (as before,) but continues
to Love, us, tho' His Enemies.] By whose generous Favours He condescends to assure He counts them none, unless they vanquish Obstacles, as well as want Motives from us. By ResignationSect. 18. (to which I earnestly persuade you from an Inordinate Love of the Creature, which you see is Vain, Inconstant, and not to be Rely'd on, Deceitful, of no Continuance, and therefore impossible to sa∣tisfie the Soul of Man,) I mean, a Universal Submis∣sion or Consignation to the WILL of GOD, so as not only to acquiesce, with as
much Satisfaction as you can, under every Accident or Affliction in the World, with a stedfast Belief they proceed from that Unerring Wisdom, and Paternal Hand, whence no Stroke lights sooner, or falls heavier, or stays longer than the Occa∣sion that extorted it exacted; but to Rejoyce, and be ex∣ceeding glad at ALL that Pleases GOD; using This World as not abusing it, (that is,) living in it, as see∣ing Him which is Invisible. It consists not with my Degree,Sect. 19. to Philosophize on the Nature of GOD, or from
thence to prove GOD is the Head-Sourse of True Con∣tent, and Man's Proper End, into whom 'till he joyns, he can never have perfect Rest, and so to confirm the Possi∣bility and Necessity of Re∣signing to Him: It has been the Business of some former Leaves to declare it. And besides, That this is a Life of Probation, in which we are to fight out our Salvation by the Rules of GOD, or we shall perish at last, and have not Leases of our Lives, is by all of Sence most seriously own'd. [Let it suffice to say, in Contradiction to Un∣thinking Men, That GOD
is the Absolute First Being, and has therefore in his Rich Essence all the scatter'd Ex∣cellencies of Inferiour Ones, in a more perfect manner than themselves have, with some peculiar Excellence of His Own besides; and is therefore to be granted the Supreme Good, if so He is, that supports himself on the Basis of his Own All-suffi∣ciency, and is therefore His Own End and Center, and is as Willing as Able to be also Man's. For the Na∣ture of GOD involves, as in Notion and Conception, in Truth and Reality too, (as the Ingenious Mr. Norris,
in his Coll. of Miss. p. 316. whence this Argument, in effect, is borrow'd, does af∣firm at large,) Absolute and Infinite Perfection, and con∣sequently includes a Benifi∣cent and Communicative Disposition; for this is a Perfection. Nor does the Supreme Ex∣cellence of Almighty GOD only evince him Communi∣cative, but to be the most Communicative and Self-Diffusive of All Beings: For, as all Kinds, so all Degrees of Excellence must of necessity be included in a Being infinitely and abso∣lutely Perfect, such as GOD. Therefore, HE is not only
the most Communicative of All Beings, but will also communicate Himself in such an ample Measure too, as per∣fectly to content the most Aspiring Wish of Man. And this Willingness of God, That Man should partake of His Fulness to the highest degree, we are further assur'd of from express Revelations: First, By Words; Wherein He de∣clares HimselfAs I live (says Almighty GOD) [when His Paternal Threats, through misconstruction had caus'd the foolish Israelites to despair of His Love] I desire not the Death of a Sinner, but that the Wicked would turn and live: Turn you! Turn you! [How affectionately spoke!] from your Evil Ways, for WHY [O! most endearing Condescention, that THOU shouldst Reason so with Us!] WILL you DIE, Oh! House of Israel? Ezek. 3.11. Passionate∣ly desirous of the Salvation
of Man. Secondly, By Two Signal Acts: The consigning to the World a Copy of His Will: And, The sending His Beloved Innocent Son from the Mansions of Inef∣fible Bliss, to suffer that Ig∣nominious Death on the Cross, [a vast Incentive to our Love of GOD: By it He revealed the severest Justice, and the highest Mercy; the greatest Ha∣tred of Sin, and most fervent Love to Man,] that we may again enter in, if we please, to the Joy of our LORD.]Sect. 20. I should now further discourse on that Super∣eminent
Excellence of GOD I before mention'd: For [though I have already prov'd, 'Tis your best way to Resign to Him, or you cannot be in perfect Peace, or see Him Above; and, as another Incentive to your present and continued Union with HIM, I have assur'd you, He Loves you without Ends; That our Best At∣tempts rather need his Par∣don, but cannot Profit Him, to whom we must ever be in debt, and after All, should conclude we are unprofitable Servants, and that our Righ∣teousness is as filthy Rags,]Isa. 39.6. I find it Needful, e're our
mistaken Minds will do themselves Right: For, not the Knowledge only of our Exemption from Misery, by this happy Compliance, will sufficiently attract our Cross∣grain'd Wills; we must be often reminded, That there is in GOD what will re∣plenish with Joys. HE is then, that Immense Ocean of Over-flowing Good, that Eternal Supreme above All Vertues, that Fa∣ther of Lights with whom is no Variableness,Jam. 1.17. neither Sha∣dow of Changing, whom the Most Dignify'd and Sensible Beings, the Holy Hierarchy of Angels, & Departed Souls,
who cannot Lye,Rev. 4.10, 11. grant to be the only Just, and Wise, and Great God, is HE at whose Feet the Elders of Heaven, All-sensible of their own Un∣worthiness, compar'd with HIS (even to Them) incon∣ceivable Worth, cast their glorious Crowns, rejoycing to confess HE is the LORD, Eternal Maker of ALL: HE it is of whose marvellous Worth the Courts of Hea∣ven do continually ring with Ecstacizing Airs from the Hearts of Ten thousand times Ten thousand,Rev. 5.11, 12. and Thousands of Thousands of its most Charming Happy Choir [who for ever thus
delight to Celebrate their Light and Life]Ch. & Ser. &c. those Lovely Harmless Little Of∣ficers of GOD, whom the Prophet saw as muchThey were asham'd, at their Comparative Deformity, and therefore they are represented as veiling their resplendant Faces before the Pre∣sence of the more Transporting GOD, Isa. 6.2. a∣sham'd as pleas'd to stand round the Throne of GOD, dissolv'd with Love of Him, shouting out, by turns, Holy! Holy! Holy! LORD of HOSTS! do intimate, by their frequent Repetitions, their Impossibility of doing Justice to GOD; and that they can never satisfie them∣selves
enough in singing Prai∣ses to HIM! HIM! who be∣sides, is (as HE calls Him∣self) The LORD,Exod. 34.6, 7. the LORD GOD, Strong, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniqui∣ty, &c. that will by no means clear the Guilty; and is so far beyond Descriptions, that the loftiest Hyperbole's, and most exquisite Figures of Rhetorick us'd by Men as well instructed as inflam'd and transported by that in∣accessible Light where JE∣HOVAH dwells, cannot arrive so far as I say, not
to reach but so much as to approach the Subject they would pretend to so∣lemnize! But from this short Des∣cant on the Excellence of GOD,Sect. 21. as the strongest In∣centive to your Resignation to HIM; let me now in∣form you, Philomuse, of those Troubles you will be rais'd above, and the Inestimable Joys you will, even in this Life feel, by an entire Consignation to that Holy WILL; only think it no Digression that I tell you first; That, besides a Prepa∣rative, the due Contempla∣tion
on that most happy Ob∣ject I ventur'd to discourse of above, will be to the Re∣ception of those unutterable Joys you may be bless'd with, it should provoke you to a careful avoiding of all Sin. Indeed, the Heroick Hea∣then could tell you,Senec. that, Licet sarem Homines ignora∣turos & Deum ignosciturum tamen peccare nollem ob pec∣cati turpitudinem: Though I were certain Men could never know, and God would furely forgive, I shouldHow he hated Wil∣ful Sins! scorn to Sin, for the Foulness and Disho∣nesty that attends it.
Doubtless, since 'tis directly contrary to the Nature of GOD, there can nothing more unfit our Intellects for Sublime Satisfaction, than the Transgression of that Law enjoyn'd by GOD; or more Unman us, than the Commission of what makes us so vastly Err from that Perfect Ens we should be most ambitious to imitate! —Oh!Gen. 39.9. how can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against GOD? was the Just Que∣stion of the Right Noble-Spirited Joseph to his impor∣tunate Mistress. I observe, 'tis the Sin, not the Punish∣ment he sticks at; as one
that would have abominated the Crime, though there had been no Hell. And whereas, though the LORD himself had prepar'd the Prophet Isaiah for that Vi∣sion wherein he was Bless'd (as much as Mortality would permit) with an intuitive View of the Divine Majesty,Isa. 6. — and a Hearing the Seraphick Spirits Harmonious Anthem, and thereby (though Mor∣tal) he was so highly sensible of the Almighty's Worth, that he would fain have joyn'd [though he wanted Skill] in Consort with the Heavenly Host; he dar'd not, because he
was impure; nor could he enjoy that mighty Satisfac∣tion would have flow'd from thence, had he been free from Sin; but was reduc'd to exclaim, by the dismaying sense of his Dissimilitude from Them, Wo is Me!Isa. 6.5. for I am undone, because I am a Man of polluted Lips, and I dwell in the midst of a People of polluted Lips; for mine Eyes have seen the KING and LORD of HOSTS! I am led to conclude, That we must be as free as possible from wil∣ful Transgressions, or we cannot enjoy the Beatifick Sight; and should be terri∣bly
afraid to presume on pleasing our selves by An∣thems to God, unless we are first rightly prepar'd as HE has order'd and expects. When you have once,Sect. 22. through a due Contempla∣tion of what has been wrote, submitted (as is told you) to the Divine Will, you can∣not be insnar'd by any Earth∣ly Good: for you will know them well, and on their Ex∣cellencies then look down with Eyes as unconcern'd as Eagles, you may fancy, cast on silly Glow-worms, after they have newly gaz'd on the Meridian Sun.
You cannot Sin with Plea∣sure, Philomuse, or Wil∣fully; and therefore you'll be free from those Torment∣ing Stings of Conscience trouble most, from servile fear of a Discovery, and in∣ward mighty Shame. — You need not dread the Horror of a Dying State, from sad Reflexions on your vanish'd Days, or that you have not liv'd as GOD com∣manded you: No Accidents of Providence, how dark so∣ever, will surprize your Mind; nor can you be, with Reason, long Concern'd (or ever Discompos'd) for any Loss Below.
For,Sect. 23. by this near Conjun∣ction of Your WILL to GOD's you will, in time, find it nothing, to Deny your self; since thereby you will be wholly devoted to GOD, and perfectly cleans'd from all that basest Dross of Self∣ishness, or Ends with which before you were unhappily alloy'd. So that 'tis impos∣sible any thing should hap∣pen to cause your immoderate Grief; for you enjoy all your Desires in General and Bulk, though not always, perhaps, in Retail. And whereas your greatest Wish is, That God's Will be done; your Assu∣rance,
That 'tis HE is the Supreme and Uncontroll'd Disposer of Events; does per∣swade you, All Accidents that can fall on you, are but exact Completions of His Divine WILL, and therefore of Your's, so far as 'tis com∣priz'd in His: And there∣fore His Dispensations to you, are, in effect, but the Acts of your own Will, with the superlative Advantage of their being directed by Him who is Wisdome, Power and Love. Then you'll be convinc'd,Sect. 24. That GOD is Just in All, and that you have reason to
Bless HIM, with Job. — Your Thoughts will then be such as these;Job 1.21. — HE takes but His Own, and he lends us All.—ch. 2.10. — Shall we receive Good at the Hand of GOD, and shall we not receive Evil? — Well!1 Sam. 3.38. 'Tis the LORD, let Him do what seemeth Him good.Isa. 63.9. — He grieves not the Sons of Men willingly, but in all our Afflictions is HIM∣SELF Afflicted! — and will give us Grace to help in time of Need.Heb. 4.16. —However, Though HE Kill me,Job 13.15. yet will I Trust in HIM! You will not be Con∣cern'd, if you have not an immediate Return suitable
to your Prayers to GOD: You'll remember the Para∣ble told by Christ,Luk. 11. from v. 5. to v. 14. — That HE is your Father, your peculiar Friend: That 'tis easier for an Affectionate Mother to forget her Dar∣ling and First-born Child, than for God to forget You: Though She should, yet can∣not HE, He tells you so.Isa. 49.15. — The Heathen Satyrist,Sect. 25. by Natural Reason, was so sure of this, that after deep Con∣templation thereon, saysJuv. &c. he (what I would not have dis∣lik'd, for being forgot in it's proper place) —
Permittes Ipsis Expendere Nu∣minibus Quid Conveniat Nobis, Rebusque fit utile Nostris: Nam pro Jucundis Ʋtilia queque dabunt DI, Charior est Illis Homo quam Sibi—&c. Cast All your Care upon the DEITIES, THEY Love us Better than we do our selves, And will, for Pleasant things, what's fittest give. I ascend now to that high∣est Advantage from Resig∣nation to GOD,Sect. 26. the Enjoy∣ment of HIM.
But as you cannot by a Book of Anthems be justly enamour'd of their Harmo∣nious Sound, or the Delights they can cause, if you are not skill'd in Musick, or at least, have not heard them sung, it is wholly impossible I should, by all I can say, let you know so much of those inexpressible, exqui∣site Pleasures (resulting from that Union with the GOD of Love) as will in the least degree Transport you [as you ought] with a Desire for Them, unless you were capable to Enjoy, or had be∣fore Felt them.
An Illiterate Man may be∣lieve, indeed, when he sees a Fam'd Author's Learned Book, it is certainly Fine; but he is no more capable to Enjoy, (less, sure, to be affected with a bare Infor∣mation that the Work is Great, (a Scholar's first de∣gree of Pleasure there-from,) the Satisfaction it affords an Intelligent Reader) than the World is, by only All the brave Expressions in it, the Comforts which proceed from the Presence of GOD. However, since, Blessed be GOD, (though as Men born Blind, cannot, by the best Descriptions, be made
truly sensible of the Diffe∣rence of Colours, or the Comforts of Sight, no one in a wicked State can taste the Pleasures of Resigning to GOD) All Men may con∣form, if they will, I shall now, I say [having per∣suaded from thence] use my utmost Endeavour, we may, in some measure, conceive what I promis'd you should, to excite thereto. Those Happy People then,Sect. 27. who are so united to their GOD of Love, (though not able to enjoy a full Fruition of HIM Below,) have their Eyes so fix'd by Contempla∣tion
(that excellent Vehicle of the Mind, by which, like Moses in the Mount,Exod. 34.29, 30, &c. by an assiduous Converse with God, it acquires a Lasting Lumi∣nousness) on their FutureThose , whereof who can here con∣ceive? State, [where they will be perpetually swallow'd up in the perfect Compre∣hensions of GOD, and inces∣santly, for ever, be supreme∣ly Ravish'd with the incon∣ceivable Glories of His Di∣vine and Superlative Beau∣ty,] (that in their Voyage here to Heaven, (tho' they are Naturally frail as we, they are so pleas'd therewith) that the greatest Excellencies here on Earth can at no time
make 'em glance aside from that mighty Object of their Faith; but on it, with as much Intension their Eyes remain,Ye men of Gallilee, &c. as Christ's Disciples on their Ascending Saviour did, who were diverted there∣from, neither by the Pre∣sence nor Reproof of even ANGELS themselves. Those Blessed Persons do possess their Souls in Peace; They shall not be afraid of Evil Tydings;Psal. &c. for their Hearts are fix'd, and they enjoy the Contentments of an innocent Piety; are sweet∣ly bedew'd with the Influ∣ences of the Holy Spirit, and the Transports which
shoot abroad in their Qua∣lify'd Minds. They are only troubl'd that they cannot Love GOD more, and are unable to con∣tribute something to the Happiness of HIM that is so Good to All. It grieves them, indeed, to find them∣selves reduc'd to be only Passive, and Receivers in the Commerce; but whereas they know HE has All things at Command, and is inThe Divine Nature [as the Epicurean Lu∣cretius could own] is Privata dolore omni, privata periclis. Ipsa suis pollens opibus, &c. HIMSELF Supremely Happy, their Concern is turn'd into Joy, and they
breathe out their Souls in such following Strains of the Holy St. Augustin, (till their Corruption has put on Incor∣ruption, till they are launch'd into the Ocean of Eternity, and theyPutas qualis TUNC erit splendor Animarum, quando Solis Claritatem habebit Lux Corporum! Aug. Ser. 12. in Verb. Apost. shine like the Sun in the Firmament Above, when they are surrounded with the GLORY of GOD, and will fully Hear and En∣joy thoseSemper omnibus in mentem veniat HAEC Aeterna faelicitas de cujus Excellentia si omnia dicta fuerint quibus omnium Hominum linguae sufficiant vix tamen infima ejus particula delibata fuerit. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 25. Pleasant Things which Eye has not seen,1 Cor. 2.9 nor
Far heard, neither have enter'd into the Heart of Man to con∣ceive.) S. August. Med. Lat. O Lord!Sect. 28. thou King of Saints, these mighty Goods are the Rewards of those that Pant for THEE, Thou Hope of him that saints! Thou Comfort of the Help∣less Man! Thou Crown of Glory for the Conqueror! and Everlasting Satisfaction for the Man that will Deny himself for THEE! When I consider how Un∣reasonable it is for us to look for Heaven, who take De∣light in All on Earth, my Soul refuses Comfort here
Below, [my Dearest GOD!] that I may live with Thee! O Gracious Father, help me to contemn these worldly Toys! Make all things taste to me like Gall, but Thee, thou Everlasting, Only, Plea∣fant Good! whose Presence made the holy Stephen estimate those Stones by which he dy'd, as sweet: For whom St. Law∣rence willingly expir'd upon the burning Coals; and the Apostles from the Counsel of the Jews departed,Act. 5.41. greatly pleas'd that they were wor∣thy to endure Reproach for Thee. St. Andrew joyfully was crucify'd, because he'd haste to Thee. Therefore,
the Chief of Thy Apostles chose the Cross; the other lov'd the Axe. St. Bartholomew, enamour'd of thy Beauty, wil∣lingly was Flea'd alive: And John, disdaining Death, drank up the Poyson'd Draught immediately. When Peter tasted Thee, forgetting all inferiour Things, like one beside himself, acknowledg'd to be There, was good; and talk'd of Making Tents for Those Above, that he might view Thee still! — A Sight of Thee, O Lord, creates Delights ineffable! —When Peter was made sensible of Thee, how he contemn'd all other Things?
— But, Oh! had he but seen THEE as THOU art, or those Great Things Thou hast laid up for Deficated Souls, what wou'd he then have said! —Surely he tasted of that Spring of Life, who, in an Ecstasie, exclaims, Oh! how Great is that Good∣ness which Thou hast laid up for them which Fear THEE! — And so had he who pas∣sionately said, Oh! taste and see how Good the LORD is! — In Hopes of this my Maker, GOD, we always are at War: For THEE we're Killed every Day, that We may Live with THEE!
Again: I am in Love with Thee,Sect. 29. my Dearest GOD! and ve∣hemently Long to Love Thee more and more; for truly, LORD, Thou'rt Sweeter than the Honey∣comb; more Nourishing than any thing that is, and more Resplendant than the glorious Sun; and therefore all the purest Gold the World contains, the finest Silver, and most precious Gemms, I value less than Nothing, in respect of Thee! — Now I am Ravish'd with Thy Excellence, and Thoughts of the Sublime Delights the
Beauty of Thy Palace will Transport Me with. — Oh, how I scorn these coun∣terfeit, destroying, greatest Goods Below! — Oh, Ever∣lasting Mighty Flame of Love! Inflame Me, yea, Inflame Me wholly with a Perfect Love of Thee! — Oh, wretched is that Man, unless he loves the Creatures, purely for Thy sake! — Oh, that I could but Love Thee as I would, because Thou lov'st me first! — Can Men or Angels justly Praise the LORD? or any thing declare Thy mighty Love to Me! — Thou, out of Nothing, madest Me
much above the Sensible and Things Inanimate, a little lower than Angelical Ex∣istences, after Thine Own Incomparable Form, and breathed in Me Thy Breath, my SOUL; created'st All Things for my Use, and still continuest (though I've often forfeited) my Life, that I might come to Thee! Again: How Happy is that Soul that's once let free!Sect. 30. that's out of Prison, rid of that de∣pressing Load, its Body! — swifter than Thought, 't would fly, and pierce the Clouds, but to be link'd to
Thee! — where She would eagerly for ever Gaze on Thy Transporting Beauty, LORD of Lords! where She would over-look the Ravish'd Che∣rubims as they are passio∣nately singing HALELUJAH's to the GOD of LOVE! and joyn in Consort with the Mighty Host, till She's In∣toxicated with the Glories of the Place, the Pleasant Odours, and Transporting Sounds rebounding in the Vast Celestial Courts, in Praise of THEE, O GOD of JESƲ, Saviour of the World! — O Blessed! Blessed are the Citizens of Heaven Above! How the
Communion of Saints would Comfort me! There we should think what Troubles we endur'd on Earth, but how Rewarded Now, where we shall never be offended more! What Instruments! What Anthems! What Di∣vine Melodious Composi∣tions of the Heavenly Sym∣phonists will THERE be ever heard! [And, Oh! how Charming do the An∣gels look, whilst They are Ravish'd with their Object, GOD!] There is no Want, no Shame, no Discontent, no Need of Pardon, Fear or Punishment: But There is
Perfect Peace, and Love, and Joy; for there is GOD, Rest, Everlasting Satisfaction in the Holy Ghost! — Oh! that I could but hear the Angels Antiphones to HIM! But more than Happy should I be, if I could chant forth one of those Exhilerating Songs of Sion to the LORD! — Oh! that the Time was come, when I might so em∣ploy my self! Again: Most Merciful Endearing Father, GOD!Sect. 31. who hast so Loved, so Enlighten'd, so Exalted Us, how Sweet are Thoughts of Thee! —
The more I do Contemplate Thee, the Sweeter and the more Admirable Thou art to Me! and therefore I do love to often Think on Thee! incessantly desire to See Thy Beauty in this Vail of Tears, and be Belov'd by Thee! O Lord, Thou hast In∣flam'd Me, and I Burn! I greatly Long to come and be with Thee! I am beside my self, almost, with vehe∣ment Desire to See Thy Face! — I am resolv'd to stand upon my Guard, to keep my self awake, and always sing away the Time in Praise, in Praise of Thee!— I'll pierce the Skyes with my
Entreaties, and will fancy I am with Thee Now! On∣ly my Body, then, can be in Pain, my Heart is with my Dear Beloved Treasure there Above! But, Lord, I am Dissatis∣fy'd, I cannot Compre∣hend Thee, by my deepest Thoughts, aright! Thine Honour, Thy Divine Re∣splendency, Thy Might, Thy Glory and Thy Ma∣jesty, Thy Goodness and Thy Mercy! — every thing of Thee exceeds the Highest Intellect! Again: My Soul!Sect. 32. were we to suf∣fer
daily Torments here on Earth; nay, were we for some Ages to endure the Fire of Hell, that we might see at last Christ Jesus, and the Glory of the Lord, that we might be among the Saints at Rest, with what Content we should accept of All! Let Hell, or all the Devils in it, do their worst then, to me here: What tho' I'm Tempted, almost Starv'd for Want, Naked, con∣strain'd to Labour with my Hands, or Beg; if I can never Sleep, am always Sick, and all the World Abuse me; I shall see my God; and
then shall shine with Ever∣lasting Light, when HE has made His Jewels up, to be with Him in Endless Joy! Again: My Conscience tells me,Sect. 33. Lord, that I have sinn'd exceedingly; but yet I don't Despair: For though my Crimes abounded, GRACE aboundeth more. — That Miserable Man that fears he never shall be Pardon'd, does deny that GOD is Merciful, so wrongs the Holy One. The Father of the Universe is Love, is Powerful, is Truth; so that I faint not,
though I went astray. — I doubt not of his Love, but He'll accept of Me; nor of His Truth, but He will keep his Word; nor of His Power, but He can Re∣deem. — Sometimes the Enemy, indeed, will make me question, Why, but what am I, that I should look for such a Happiness as Heaven? Why should I hope for what I never yet deserv'd? But I have thought again, I know in whom I Trust: GOD has adopted me his Son; His Promises are stedfast, He can never change, and is Omnipotent. I am not terrify'd with a
Reflexion on my Wicked Life, when I consider, that Christ Jesus dy'd to save such Men as I: — Surely, my Sins do not exceed his Sufferings; the Nails by which He hung upon the Cross, the Spear that pierced his Blessed Side, cry out to me, Fear not; if you will Love the Father, he is throughly Reconciled to you: Lon∣ginus Open'd me a Way to Satisfaction, by the Wound He made. — O yee of little Faith; But, Love the Lord! Love turneth Fear away. — Christ stretched out His Arms upon the Cross, to signisie, He's ready to
Embrace Returning Prodi∣gals. — Again: Oh,Sect. 34. Thou Incomprehen∣sible, Eternal Source of Good! let Thy Abundant Mercy flow on me! — Rouze up, my Soul! un∣cloud thy self, and with thy utmost Understanding la∣bour to Contemplate what a Sea of All-sufficiency [how Beautiful and Happy] is the LORD! If every several Thing be so Delectable, how Pleasant! how Delightful! certainly, is That Almighty Being, God! which in Him∣self enjoys the QUINT∣ESSENCE
of every Real GOOD! If Crea∣tures are so Charming, Lord! what Mortal can endure a Sight of THEE, and not be melted down! THOƲ Maker of ALL Things. — Oh! Philomuse! — the Rays of the Divinity do now break in upon my Soul, — I stagger, — and have lost my self; — I only can spare Time to ask you — If the Spouse's Bowels were so mov'd, when CHRIST, Si Momentanea DEI visio tantùm potuit apportare laetitiae cumulum; Quid potuit visio EJUS Aeterna? Gerhar. Med. 48.
her Lover, did but put his Hand (here) thorough the Hole within the Door; how will her Soul be Ravish'd, when she sees HIM as HE is, throughly, at once, with∣out a Prejudicial Vail be∣tween, in that Celestial Pa∣radise of GOD! — Think not, Oh, Think not more of these Delusive Joys on Earth! Immediately Resign, and be with GOD! — There you shall hear not those Harmonious Flourishes from Instruments play'd on by Men, which us'd to so Tran∣sport you from your Self on Earth, but Finer, much
beyond Conception, — An∣gels Compositions for the KING of Kings, the GOD of Melody! Exceding what we can expect should ebri∣ate the Perfectness of Be∣ings, SAINTS Above! Farewell. . (M. Coll. Octob. 3. 1694. Oxford.) [Ae. M. 18.] FINIS.
AN APPENDIX. BY what has been said, we find it truly Reasonable that, even for our own sakes we set not our Affections too much on Things Be∣low, but Resign up our Wills to the Will of GOD, for thereby we shall in THIS Life be Bless'd with that PEACE which the World cannot give, and may be infallibly assur'd that we shall perfectly enjoy the Su∣perlative Good in HEAVEN. HEAVEN! a Composition of such Eternal Charms as are beyond the Skill of ANGELS to Express! to
Men? nay ONE ANOTHER per∣fectly, thô they are most Intelligent! HEAVEN! a Place of Ecstacy so great, as yields us every Real Good but Tongues to tell our Joys! — We are so full of them! HEAVEN! I say! at which when we are once arriv'd, we shall not so much as fancy 'mongst our then transporting Plea∣sures, that 'tis HEAVEN's the Seat of Them! so far our NOBLEST Thoughts of IT on Earth fell short of what we see! Now, The Way by which we may consorm our Wills to the Will of GOD, is by having an Humble and True Opinion of our own No∣thingness compar'd with the uncon∣ceivable Majesty of Almighty GOD which may restrain us from every Sin.
That we might Thus think of our selves, was the Design of some part of the METHOD in the for∣mer Discourse, yet the Question still is HOW, after we have this Hum∣ble Opinion of our selves, we may be perfect in our Resignation to GOD as much as Mortality can without Danger of Revolt? or, How a Habit of Sin may be perfe∣ctly Broken? In general then, and to be very Brief, according to St. Paul's Ad∣vice, and the Opinion of the Church. By a constant Mortification of our selves. By always denying our selves principally that Evil to which we seem most enclin'd. By ever avoiding the Incentives to Vice, Evil Con∣versation, and Excess in the Neces∣saries
or Reasonable Diversions of this Life. Or thus: By living only in perpetual Temperance: Contem∣plative, according to the Excellent Example of the Holy JESUS and the incomparable Rules which GOD's Wisdom in the Scriptures Enjoyn'd. Without These, we may in vain talk of the Folly of Vice, and in∣veigh against the Licentious Man! The next new Assault like a Torrent over whelms OUR Sense, and WE are Born away from our Use of Reason, with the tempting Cheat! I heartily wish we would all live Thus: Certainly we should not on∣ly be freer from corporal Pains, but those frettings of the Soul which at∣tend a less heedful Life. We should be deliver'd from that Curse of God:
which cuts us off e'er half our days are spent, and be made happy with those inward mighty JOYS I so often mention. That PEACE which Exceeds the greatest Pleasure from the strongest and most lofty Lines of Sense! more charming than the most Exalted Ravishments of the finest Strains! Nay! than the Comforts of Friendship in Perfecti∣on! A PEACE—? —Ineffable! B. Pratt.
Reader, The Author not being consulted 'till too late, some literal Faults and Mis∣pointings have still escaped sight, which you are desired to censure friendly, and with these correct EPist. Ded. p. 2. l. 3. r. have. p. 26 l. 9. for its r. their. ibid. l. 10. r. resent. p. 61. for perfect Ens. r. compleatest Being. p. 34. by the word FAIR in the margin, r. GOD. p. 60. l. 11. r. Seirem. p. 70. l. 6. r. qu que. p. 85. l. 17. r. O! p. 95. l. 17. r. poterit. p. 96. l. 2. for through r. by. p. 97. l. 6. r. PERFECTEST. in post. p. 6. l. 8. after contemn r. and want it not. * Dele [s] superfluous at the ends of Words, and contract others for their better sound. * These Crotchets [] are us'd here as they ought; i. e. when the Sense is particularly to be observ'd.
THE POSTSCRIPT. A LETTER from, and its ANSWER to a Critick who perus'd the Written Copy of this Book, with∣out the Author's Know∣ledge, through the Gen∣tleman's Pleasure to whose Care the Impression was consign'd. They are both as follows:
Mr. P—tt, MY Knowledge of YOU, was the Reason I Importun'd and Prevail'd with the Un∣willing Mr. M. for a Sight of the Book you were about to Print. — I tell you, Sir, you are a Gentleman, indeed, of an Admir'd Life, Ingenuity and Language, but not well acquainted with the World, or a Lady's Humour yet:
All the Sex love to be [tho' they know they are] Flat∣ter'd, and I never heard of one yet, who was above an Encomium from You — I Dislike too that Expres∣sion in your Proem to the Piece. viz. You shall not value the Censure of Men: — You should Va∣lue All that Good Men say, and I wish you had been Plainer on a Thought or two in this Pretty Work; I cannot comprehend them well at first.
Pardon (if it be need∣ful) this Effect of a Hasty Survey; I had the Copy but a Night, and could not have an Opportunity to interrupt you in time, be∣fore now I am least pre∣par'd. I am, Truly Your's, —L' S. Sion Coll. Lond. 94/5.
The Author's Answer. SIR, I Thank you for your Last: I never yet saw a Book so Excellent, but by an Hypercritick [such as you] it might be Cavil'd at. You expected not, sure, to see Mine without Fault. — As to your particular Objections, I tell you, Sir, first, [with leave,] you're Mistaken: There are some of the Female Sex to whom Flattery is as Nauseous as
it would be to you, or that Expression of your's to most of them, who Value themselves only on their own Deserts, and are a∣bove an Encomium, though from you your self; for they Contemn it, (as you may know, if you please.) You tell me, in your Postscript, you survey'd the Book in Haste: I Be∣lieve you, [so do most of Your Excellent Parts:] I'm sure, had you deli∣berately perus'd thePag. 3. Ex∣pression [I think I shall not be so vain, to value the Censures of All,] and
consider'd then, that in the Epistle to the Worthy Reader, [I desire Their Friendly Censure thereon,] you would not therefore have found Reason to Dis∣like, or from thence con∣clude, I contemn'd the Cen∣sures of the Good. I referr you to the Preface next; (let what has already been said, suffice for this Manual here.) — Those Thoughts you complain of, may with Ease be under∣stood by Considering Men: If it had pleas'd you to suspend Reflexion till you had read them a second
time, you had been better prepar'd to judge, and needed not to ask Pardon of Obliging, SIR, Your Servant to Command, — P—tt. Oxford, Jan. 21. 1694/5. THE END.
READER, These follow∣ing Faults have escap'd the Press. IN the Epist. Ded. page 2. line 12. read have: p. 15. l. 17. r. through: p. 38. l. 2. r. couclude: p. 42. l. 11. after please a period, no point after Commands in l. 2: p 53. l. 7. r. Inef∣fable: p. 56. l. 3. a Colon after Great, no point after God: p. 60. l. 11. r. scie∣rem: p. 80. l. 7. a period after Draught, no point after immediately in l. 8: p. 81. l. 2. put a comma after THEE: p. 85. l. 17. r. O! JESU!
