R2203 8223471 41105
TWO SPEECHES IN PARLIAMENT: The one Concerning Religion, and fit men to be chosen for the ASSEMBLIE. The other Concerning a West Jndie Association at a Com∣mittee of the whole House in the Parliament, 21. Iacobi. By Sir Benjamin Rudyerd, Knight, Surveyour of His Majesties Court of Wards and Liveries. LONDON: Printed by B. A. for Henry Seile at the Tygers Head in Fleet-street, 1642.
Mr. SPEAKER: GOD hath wonderfully blessed Us this Par∣liament in Discoveries, and Deliverances, in Prevailings and Successes: what manner of Men therfore ought we to be, in Acknowledgment and Thankfulnesse? And let us return a Reall concreate Thankfulnesse, expressd in Action. We have often said and profess'd, that Religion, as it is the chief, so it ought to be our first businesse; yet many other have gotten Precedence of it, we have hitherto made but a small Progression. Wherfore M. Speaker, let us not now slack to pro∣ceed in it, with Sobriety, Wisdome, Charity, untill wee have setled it in a solid grounded, peaceable way, sutable to the quality, and importance of the Cause; when That is done, every thing else will be done the better, for it. Concerning sit men to be chosen for the Assemblie. Mr. Speaker, I am glad we are comming towards Religion, to bind up the loose scattered Pieces of it in an Orderly regular Government.
The Master-piece of this great work will be the Election of fit Agents; wise, learned, unbyass'd Men, such as have shewed themselves desirous of Reformation, in the Government, in the Lyturgie, willing to remove whatsoever may offend or scruple weak and tender Consciences. Men not hide-bound in their opinions, Lo∣vers of Peace, more then of themselves. Peace is Tran∣quillitatis Ordo, and Order is the soul of outward things, it keeps them quiet and clear from jusling and interfeering one with another. A man may bee a very good and able Pastor of a Parish, a very learned and painfull Lecturer to a great Congregation, and yet not so fit for this active, exten∣sive Imployment. For, a man may be Learned with a∣nother mans Learning, but he must be wise with his own Wisdome. Therfore, they should not be narrow, shady, speculative men, but rather, men of large, sober practicall understanding, prudent men. Prudence is, Re∣rum Agibilium Ratio, the Reason and Rule of things which are to be Acted. Wherfore, M. Speaker, It behoves us to be exactly carefull, that we chuse such men as may give counte∣nance and authority to the work, else we shall weaken and hazard the whole Frame. For mine own part, I will take no Exceptions against any, but leave them wholly upon the Consciences and Judgments of their Choosers.
My humble Motion is, that after this long-desired, and long-delayed Reformation, we may now all of us joyn as one Man, for the Peace of Jerusalem, and the Israel of God; So shall we prosper, because we love it. The second Speech, concerning a West-Indy Association, at a Committee of the whole House of Parliament. Sir Dudley Digs, I Do professe, that as my Affection, my Reason, and my Judgment, go strongly with the scope and drift of this Proposition; so shall a good part of my poor fortune, when it comes to Execution. For to my understanding, there was never propoun∣ded in Parliament, a design more proper for this Kingdom, nor of more pregnant advantage to it, whether we consider the Nature of our situation, or the quality of our Enemies Forces. As we are an Jland, it concerns our very being to have store of ships to defend us, and also our well-being by their Trade to enrich us. This Association for the West Indies, when it shall
be regulated and established by Act of Parliament, and therby secured from the violence and injury of any intruding hand, it will certainly give many men encouragement and confidence, voluntarily to bring in large and liberall contributions, towards so noble, so profitable an Enterprise. So that in short time, we shall see many new ships built, many brave men imployed, and enabled for the service of their Country, none of this money shall be carried out of the Kingdome, but laid out for shipping, which is the defence of it, and bestowed upon our own men, who must be fed and maintained, though they stay at home. For this, we shall reap the fruit of whatsoever benefit Plantation, Trafficke, or Purchase can procure us, besides honour and security. Now, let us a little consider the Enemy we are to encounter, the King of Spain. They are not his great Territories which make him so powerfull, and so troublesome to all Christendome. For it is very well known, that Spain it self is but week in men, and barren of Naturall Commodities. As for his other Territories, they lye divided and asunder, which is a weaknesse in its self; besides they are held by force, and maintained at an extraordinary charge insomuch, as although he be a great King, yet is he like the great Gyant, who was said to have too hands, but he
had 50 bellies to feed, so that ratably, he had no more hands then another man. No Sir, they are his Mines in the West Jndies, which minister fuell to feed his vast ambitious de∣sire of universall Monarchy: It is the money he hath from thence, which makes him able to levie, and pay Souldiers in all places; and to keep an Army conti∣nually on foot, ready to invade and endanger his Neighbours. So that we have no other way, but to endeavour to cut him up at root, and seek to impeach, or to sup∣plant him in the West Jndies. By part of which course, that famous Queen of most glorious memory, had heretofore almost brought him on his knees. And this our undertaking (if it please God to blesse it) must needs effect it sooner and quicker: the whole body of the Kingdome being united and concurring in a perpetuall supply to this action, so that he will have no free time given him to rest. Moreover, this will be a means not only to save but to fill His Majesties Coffers, enabling the people to give him liberally, and often; the Kings ships will have little to do, but to guard the Coasts, for the Sea-war will chiefly be made at the charge of the subiect. Thus, (Sir Dudley Digs) I doubt not but that in short time, both King and people shall be safe at home, and feared abroad.
To conclude, I shall be very glad to hear any man make Objections against this Designe, so that he do it with an intention to refine and perfect the work; but if any shall speak against it with a mind to hinder and destroy it, I must intreat him to pardon me, if I do scarce think him to be a good English-man. FJNJS.
