R412 13454383 99613
THE PATTERN of Pure and Undefiled RELIGION, Exhibited in the Preaching and Life of the HOLY JESUS: Shewing the true Genius and Spirit of Christianity. WITH An Introduction Concerning the restoring of true Religion by Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom. Non enim qui immaculatas Hostias caedit, qui thuris Acer∣vos dat igni concremandos, Numina censendus est colere: Cultus verus in pectore est, & oppinatio de Deo digna, &c. Arnob. contr. Gentil. l. 4. By GEORGE RAYMOND, M. A. Minister at St. Lawrence in Ipswich. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1689.
Imprimatur. June 20. 1689. Guil. Needham.
To the Honourable PEYTON VENTRIS, Esq One of the Justices of Their Maje∣sties Court of Common-Pleas. SIR, WHen I had once deter∣min'd to let these Pa∣pers see the Light, I could not in the least hesitate about their Dedication. Not that they are worthy of your Name or Pa∣tronage, upon any other ac∣count, but their subject-matter, and pious design only; but that custom hath prescribed to men of our Function this way, (as seldom having any other) of confessing their Obligations, and
expressing their Gratitude. In compliance with such custom, I chose rather to incur the cen∣sure of Presumption, for affixing your Honourable Name to so small a performance; than that of Ingratitude, by passing over in silence the great Obligations you have laid upon me. How∣ever, I perceive I must not de∣scend to particulars, nor yet at∣tempt the Blazonry of your Me∣rit; not for fear of being suspe∣cted of Flattery, but of offend∣ing your Vertuous Modesty; and of swelling the Dedication into a greater Bulk than the Treatise it self. I therefore only take leave to Congratulate, not so much Your self as the Publick, your being placed in that Eminent Station,
in which, as I am sure you will always be an Eminent Example, and assiduous Patron of Pure and undefiled Religion; so I doubt not but your great Worth, by becom∣ing more conspicuous, will command that Esteem and Ve∣neration from all Men, that it doth from Your most obliged, Humble and Affectionate Servant, Geo. Raymond.
TO THE READER. THE Knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, containeth not the reso∣lution of Philosophie Curiosities, and Scholastic Disputes; such as the Order of the Divine Decrees, the consistence of the divine agency with Man's liber∣ty, and of the divine Providence with the contingence of Events; with other such like Speculations, of which yet some Systems of Christian Religion are wont to be compounded. This is to me most evident, from the declared necessity and usefulness of the Christian Doctrine; which can't be affirmed of those fruitless speculations, without the knowledge whereof Men may (and must, if at all) be wise and happy; as also, from the deep silence of sacred Writ concerning those points, and the quite different te∣nour
of its voice and instruction; and from the remaining Disputes about those things, the questions continuing still in the same undecided state, in which the Pagan Philosophers left them, and ra∣ther embarass'd and puzled, than dilu∣cidated and resolv'd by later School∣men. But the effusion of Gospel-Revelation and Grace, is certainly vouchsafed by God, to render men truly wise and emi∣nently good: to add a new light and au∣thority to the Principles of true Reli∣gion, and obligation and assistance to the Practice, and to furnish and maintain a quick and powerful sense thereof. We therefore ought to search the holy Scri∣ptures, and acquaint our selves with them; not that we may be provided for subtile Disputes, but that we may be impregnated with a divine nature and Heavenly dispositions:Jud. 20, 21. that we may build up our selves on our most holy Faith, and keep our selves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto Eternal Life. To assist in such a use of the holy Scri∣ptures,
ought to be the scope of all Books of Religion; and is the mark aimed at in this. In which I have endeavoured such a representation of the general de∣sign of Christianity, and in particular of the Doctrine and Life of Jesus; which being received and becoming familiar, may lead men into a wise understanding of their holy Religion; and direct and help them to draw from the sacred foun∣tains the true and proper nourishment of the divine life. This taste of the sincere milk of the Word, may serve to prepare and excite the appetite; that it shall covet only such repast as is agree∣able and good, and have a quick sense and savoury relish of that which is so. Intending such a taste only, I was obliged to couch things as close as I could; and to offer brief hints rather than a strict discourse upon each parti∣cular. Yet I hope this brevity hath not hindered, but that most things may be sufficiently plain to the understanding of attentive Readers; and I fear too plain for the Consciences of most, who had ra∣ther dwell in Clouds and thick darkness,
finding nothing but matter of self-accu∣sation and reproach, in such intelligible Notions of Religion. Two Requests I have to ask of the Reader. The one, that he be not too hasty and severe in censuring this Es∣say; which doth not pretend to exactness and perfection: but is (so far as I know) the first in its kind, and offereth it self to be improved and finished by better hands. Yet withal, if the Cen∣surer please to try, he shall be forced to confess, that 'tis not possible to draw the moral, any more than the natural Pi∣cture of our blessed Saviour to the Life. The other Request is, that he will af∣ford this Discourse more than a Curso∣ry reading; and that if any thing strike him upon the first view, he will allow it a farther consideration. For my hope is, That the hints here offered, will be∣come more useful, the more familiar they are made; and may instil by de∣grees, a true relish of the wisdom and goodness of our holy Religion; and a true tincture of the excellent temper and spirit thereof.
To which good effect, God Almighty prosper the labour and pious intention both of the Author and the Reader; for his mercy in Christ Jesus our Lord. Amen.
Introduction Concerning the restoring of true Re∣ligion by Jesus Christ, and his Kingdom. THE Messiah was promised for a light unto the Gentiles, Isa. 42.6. by that name the Jewish Ma∣sters call him, and John the Baptist proclaimeth him,Joh. 1.9. the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the World: and our Saviour averreth fre∣quently of himself,Joh. 8.12. c. 9.5. c. 12.35, &c. that he is the light of the World, and he that followeth him shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of Life. By this is signified to us the extream neces∣sity, the glorious Excellency, the quickning and refreshing Influence of his Doctrine and Example: where∣by when the World lay in Midnight-darkness,
they had their Eyes open∣ed, and were marvellously enlight∣ened, their Ignorance relieved, their Errours and Prejudices dispossessed and driven away; and they being raised from the deep sleep of sin, were turned from darkness to light; from the power of Satan unto God. This Light of Life, dispersed throughout the Gospel of our Savi∣our Jesus Christ, 'tis the design of this little Tract to collect, for instru∣ction in the true Spirit and Genius of Christian Religion. For since to be a Christian is to put on Christ, i. e. to imitate him, by copying out the Excellencies of his Spirit, and Holi∣ness of his Life; it is necessary we should have the true Idea of his Mind and Spirit, and the true Characters of his holy Conversation in intimate knowledge and constant remem∣brance, as well as in highest vene∣ration and love. Our profession ob∣liging us to walk as he walked, and the efficacy of Example consisting much in being acted before our Eyes,
it is highly necessary that we look unto Jesus; form to our selves such an exact Idea of his Life, that see∣ing him (as it were) walking be∣fore us in every path of Vertue, we may follow him more accurately, treading in his steps. In this consists the true study and use of the holy Gospels; not in learn∣ing to make or defend Systems and Scheems of Orthodox Opinions, but in receiving the light of Life, or as the Apostle calls it, in 1 Cor. 2.16. the mind of Christ, i. e. the imbibing the true sense and tincture of his Heavenly Doctrine, and partaking of his Spirit therein lively express'd, that beholding as in a Glass the glory of the Lord, we be changed into the same image from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.18. In order hereunto it must be ever remembred, that Jesus was mani∣fested to destroy the works of the Devil; to rescue Religion from that depravation, which was the disho∣nour of God, and reproach of Man;
and to restore Men at once to Truth and Happiness. The Mind there∣fore and Spirit of his Doctrine will be best conceived, as opposite to those pernicious Errours, which had depraved Religion, debauched the Lives, and enslaved the Spirits of Men; which had brought them to become Vassals of Satan, the Author and Abetter of such false Opinions and wicked Practices. Christianity is to be considered as a supplement to natural Religion, restoring it from depravation, adding a new light, authority and sanction to the truths and precepts thereof; and by confirming what was doubtful through the ignorance and prejudi∣ces of Men, clearing what was dark, rectifying what was abused or mi∣staken, reducing Men to the true knowledge of God, and rendring them true Worshippers of him. To this restauration of Religion, and of Man, it was necessary; first to set them upon a firm basis and foundation, by enlightning their
darkness, satisfying their doubts, and helping their infirmity; and then to prevent their falling again (which they are extreamly prone to do) in∣to these pernicious conceits by which they had departed from God, were captivated unto Satan, and enslaved in his Kingdom of darkness. In order to the first, viz. the fix∣ing Mens Minds upon a solid foun∣dation, by satisfying their important Doubts, relieving their Ignorance, and helping their Infirmity; 'twas necessary for the Saviour of the World, 1. To reconcile God to Man by a propitiatory Sacrifice. 2. To demonstrate the Immortality of the Soul, the certainty of a future Life and Judgment. 3. To reveal the ob∣ject of Worship. 4. To set a perfect Example of Life. 5. To succour Men with supernatural Grace, a strength Divine. First, A propitiatory Sacrifice, and the most solemn Declaration that could be, of God's being reconciled to returning Sinners, was necessary
to pacify Mens guilty Consciences, to satisfy their diffident and doubt∣ful minds, to make an end of all that anxious, busy, and fruitless Religi∣on of Expiations, which could nei∣ther purge the Conscience, nor im∣prove the Man; which by becom∣ing the chief subject of religious so∣licitude, jostled true Religion, i. e. Wisdom and Goodness out of the World. Natural Religion knows no Sacrifice but Eucharistical; 'tis a service of Love and Gratitude: but guilt is diffident and anxious; sin begets dread of God, as well as alie∣nation from him; and he that knows himself sadly in arrears to the Divine Justice, and obnoxious to Almighty Anger, must first be sa∣tisfied, that that Justice and Anger appeas'd, and God reconciled, be∣fore he can be prevail'd with to love, and thankfulness and holy imitati∣on; that is, before he can be made to repent and return unto God. 2 Co. 5.19. Rom. 3.25. 1 Jo. 4.10.God therefore was in Christ, recon∣ciling the World unto himself; setting
him forth a propitiation for the sins of it; declaring himself reconciled, and publishing an Act of Oblivion, and Patents of Grace and Pardon ratified and seal'd, with the bloud of that most inestimable Sacrifice. By the most solemn, sacred, sensible and af∣fectionate pledges of his love, he hath assured us that he wills not the death of Sinners; but his will is their return and happiness; that he will communicate himself to his Crea∣tures, according to their capacity; and that Repentance is a sure Capa∣city for his greatest Blessings, but im∣penitence the only accursed thing that separates from God; and that because it renders uncapable of those blessed streams, which are ever flow∣ing from the inexhaustable Fountain of Divine Goodness. And as by the bloud of Jesus he hath pacified the Conscience of Sin∣ners; so by the revelation of his di∣vine Mercy and Goodness, by the Promise of the holy Spirit, and of Eternal Life, he hath revived their
desponding Hearts; he hath begot∣ten them again to a lively hope, that they may be filled with joy and peace in believing,1 Pet. 1.3. Rom. 15.13. and abound with hope, through the power of the Holy Ghost: that they may return with humble Confidence, and chearful readiness to him, who waits for that happy opportunity to shew them mercy; and being recon∣ciled to God by Faith and Repent∣ance, may be inseparably united un∣to him, in love and hope, and the participation of his holy Spirit. Secondly, To the Restauration of true Religion, 'twas fundamentally necessary to banish all doubtfulness about the immortality of the Soul; and to render the future Life and Judgment indisputably certain. Men lost, with their Innocence, their hope in God; and the sense of those im∣mortal Capacities the divine good∣ness had bestowed upon them. They corrupted also that Tradition which should have supported their hope; and forgot both what their Reason, and their Fathers had told them from
God, concerning his design to make them Eternally happy. And the Ar∣guments of Philosophy were too fine and artificial, to encounter the pre∣judices of Lust, and jealousies of guilt; and to perswade minds that knew very little of God or of themselves; that rather dreaded the presence than desired the enjoyment of the Divinity; and whose secular Religi∣on taught them to look for no other rewards, than the averting a mis∣fortune or a plague, or the procu∣ring the comforts and emoluments of this Life.Ʋt averte∣retur im∣minens ira, vel ut jam tumens & saeviens placaretur. Caecil. in Minut. Foelic. And with the Philo∣sophers themselves, their most la∣bour'd Discourses did not conclude strongly; but inferred only a feeble hope, and a disputable probability. They proved Man capable of Im∣mortal Happiness; but a mind over∣grown with corruption, depress'd with guilt, and a terrible dread of the Divine Majesty, could not strong∣ly conclude, that God will finish that Capacity, and confer so great a Bles∣sing; nay, could scarce entertain a thought or desire of it.
God therefore sent his Son from Heaven, that he might bring life and immortality to light; to make a plain discovery of the important truths re∣lating to Eternal Life: and to make Faith of them in an easy and con∣vincing method, rational and sure in it self, and yet aptly accommoda∣ted to the meanest understandings. God hath pledged his veracity for the truth of what Jesus taught in this matter; by the Miracles which he and his followers wrought; and confirmed our Faith, by raising him from the dead. His Resurrection is a demonstration of the possibility and certainty of ours; and a pledge of his coming to judge the World. And if we believe not, we make God a Lyar; because we receive not the Re∣cord that God gave of his Son: and this is the record, that God hath given to us Eternal Life; and this life is in his Son, 1 Joh. 5.11, 12. Moreover the Declaration of the Divine Good∣ness, and the propitiation and re∣demption, through the bloud of Je∣sus,
by exciting our love of God, and creating a hope in him, do facilitate our Belief of this his gracious Pro∣mise, how vast soever the contents of it be. Thirdly, It was also necessary, in order to the restoring of true Reli∣gion, to reveal and declare the ob∣ject of Worship; the true, but (to the generality of Mankind) unknown God: whom they served not at all, or ignorantly worshipped. The ser∣vice of innumerable Patron deities, as immediate superintendents of hu∣mane affairs, had jostled out the ser∣vice of the supream God; who had no publick offices, nor proper Rites appropriated to him: and the wor∣ship of wrong objects, alienated the minds of the Worshippers from the true one. They served Creatures so much more than the Creator, and gave his glory in such sort unto them; that 'twas impossible, for un∣derstandings so anxiously superstiti∣ous and given to Idolatry, strongly to intend the true Deity, or to re∣tain
any tolerable knowledge of him. The worship proper to God, was rendered to Angels, or Heavenly In∣telligences; and to the Sun, Moon and Stars, their reputed Seats or Temples; to Aerial Spirits the Mes∣sengers and Ministers of the Celesti∣al ones; and to Baalim, or the Can∣nonized Ghosts of departed men; and such too, (according to the re∣port of their own Writers) whose Lives had nothing worthy of God in them. And what was still worse, the Spirits of darkness, these Ene∣mies of God and Man, exacted di∣vine honours from their ignorant Vassals; who offered to them the dearest pledges of their Lives and Fortunes: they sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils, Psal. 106.37. They served these with mournful, barbarous, cruel and unnatural Rites, as authors of evil; they atoned them, that they might not hurt,His ne no∣ceant, &c. Arnob. adv. gent. l. 7. or might drive evil from them. Yea they pay'd their homage, not only to intelligent be∣ings, but to Images and Shrines, to
inanimate and irrational Creatures; to bruit Beasts, and to the most vile and mischievous of them; to Dogs,Oppida tota canem ve∣nerantur, &c. Juve∣nal, Sat. 15. and Serpents and Crocodiles. Yea they superstitiously venerated every thing that look'd high, or great, or strange; lofty Trees, thick Groves and dark Grots, great Rivers, Lakes and Ponds, were regarded as having Divinity in them.Lucus frequens arbori∣bus altissimis, specus in magnam laxitatem exca∣vatus, animam quâdam Religionis suspicione per∣cutient. Magnorum flumi∣num capita veneramur. Stagna quaedam vel opa∣citas vel immensa altitu∣do sacravit. Senec. E∣pist. 41. To such madness doth superstition indulged carry men; to such reprobation of mind are they liable, who depart from the spiritual service of God, and by sensible objects of worship, change his Glory into a Lye; who first serve the Creature beside, and then more than the Creator who is Blessed for ever. Whilst the minds of men were thus debased with unworthy, and distracted with various objects of worship; God set up his memorial with the people of Israel; and taught them to direct their worship aright,
to the Maker of all things, the Pos∣sessor of Heaven and Earth. Who also was the God that redeem'd them from Aegyptian Slavery, by terrible wonders, and a mighty power; that appeared gloriously on Mount Sinai; that went before them in the Pillar of Cloud and Fire; that afterwards sat down between the Cherubims, as on a Throne; and dwelt in the Temple as in a Royal Palace, the God and King of Israel. The Laws he gave, and the Rites he appoint∣ed them, had this name intent, to be signs and bands of unity between God and them; to direct their wor∣ship to the true object, and to re∣strain them from wandring after the Gods of the Nations that were round about them. But as this remedy was appro∣priated to one people, so neither did it effectually cure their Idolatry; but they continued still fond of the way of the Heathen, and made fre∣quent Apostasies into it. God there∣fore in the fullness of time, sent out
of his Bosom his Son; That Eternal Word, and Prince of Angels, neither unbegotten like God, nor created like Man, who unites the Creator and the Creature, and is the Mediator betwixt them, as Philo describes him.Phil. Jud. lib. de Hae∣red. rer. divin. This eternal Lord, and Heir of all things, who presided over the Israelites in the Cloudy Pillar, who appeared to Moses and the Elders on the Mount burning with Fire, who exhibited a glorious presence in the Tabernacle and Temple, and delivered infallible Oracles from between the Cheru∣bims; he in the fullness of time ta∣bernacled in our Flesh, and dwelt among men as one of them; and exhibited a more true and divine Sheckina, or presence; for his glory was as became the glory of the only begotten of the Fa∣ther, full of grace and truth, Joh. 1.12. In him the Father was manifested, and revealed by him; who hath ex∣presly commanded all men to repent of their Idolatry, and to worship God only; to direct their Prayers to God in Heaven, and not to seek
him in any symbol on Earth; nor through any medium, but that of his Eternal Son,Heb. 1.3. Colos. 2.9. Joh. 10.30, 39. who is the brightness of his glory, the express image of his per∣son; in whom the Godhead dwells, the Father being in him, and he in the Fa∣ther, so that the Father and he are one. Right reason confesseth the Unity of God, inasmuch as he being su∣pream, knows no equal, and being All-sufficient needs no Partner; and necessity of Existence, can't reason∣ably be affirm'd of more than one most perfect Essence. But understand∣ings depressed by sense, and depra∣ved by Worldly Lust, first sought God in a Symbol; and chain'd him to a place, for the better resort to him on all emergencies. And when they had framed in their imaginati∣ons a local God, their Fancy multi∣plied Deities, as their Superstition did Shrines; and 'twas a pleasure to think, they had so many Patrons of their persons and affairs, Gods to ad∣dress themselves unto, or to go be∣fore
them upon all occasions. This gross but pleasing delusion, could not be sufficiently detected, but by a light from Heaven; God from thence revealing, and asserting the perfection and unity of his Essence; letting the World know assuredly, that there is none beside him; nor any other Image or Symbol of his Divinity, but the Eternal Son, who is the brightness of his Glory, and never to be conceiv'd of without the Father, nor any other Minister of his Providence, worthy of divine honour; but that the Holy Ghost, the Author of all divine gifts is so: being the Eternal Spirit of the Father and the Son. Upon this Basis he hath fixed the wandring minds of Men, determined and directed their worship; condemning the conceit of many Gods, and many Lords or Mediators, as false and wicked; for that there is but one God the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him; and one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, 1 Cor. 8.
5, 6. This one God, that made the World, and all things therein, is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and dwelleth not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped with Mens hands, as though he needed any thing; but he it is that giveth unto all, Life and Breath, and all things, Acts 17.24. Fourthly, To restore true Reli∣gion, 'twas necessary to redeem Men from their vain conversation, recei∣ved by tradition from their Fathers, by setting them a perfect pattern of Life; both to demonstrate what is the service agreeable to God, and that such holy living is practicable by Man. False Religion was not only wrong in the object, but also in the matter and instances of wor∣ship; it lost the true God amongst the croud of lesser Deities, and his true worship amongst the heap of childish and unprofitable Ceremo∣nies. Its Votaries were very busy, and its service full of noisy labour, of pomp and pageantry: but the Rites,
some of them were unreasonable and foolish, much below, not only the Majesty of God, but the dignity of Man; others lewd or cruel, magi∣cal and unnatural, contrary to hu∣manity, a reproach and provocation to the Author of our Beings, but singular symptoms of reprobate minds, and badges of slavery to wicked Spirits. And whilst their Gods were represented as Patrons of Vice, and their most sacred myste∣ries were shameful works of darkness, their Religion ingaged them in lewd∣ness and inhumanity; what could be expected in common conversati∣on, but such a deluge of wickedness as is described, Rom. 1.29. filled with all unrighteousness, fornicati∣on, covetousness, maliciousness, en∣vy, murder, deceit, malignity; void of Piety, Charity, Mercy, Faith, yea, even of natural Affection. This vain conversation was recei∣ved by Tradition, and confirmed by custom; and better Examples were very rare, and those extreamly de∣fective:
and the Discourses of Philo∣sophers (whom the vulgar regarded as a few singular and odd men, and suspected of Atheism) were of little force against the torrent of custom, in which themselves too were not a little involved. Tradition, Law and Custom, had made Religion to con∣sist in performing the wonted Rites; but solid vertue, as no part thereof, but a needless and impracticable theory, was abandoned to the specu∣lation of the Learned. Jesus there∣fore came to restore Religion, not only by the light of Heavenly Do∣ctrine, but by the Lustre of a great Example. His Life demonstrated wherein the Kingdom of God con∣sists; the Works that are acceptable, and the Persons that are dear to him. His Example exhibits an invincible conviction, of the necessity, the beauty, and the practicableness of a holy Conversation; of a Life, wise, and good, and useful; of a Spirit un∣biass'd by the interests of the Flesh, and the World, deaf to their solici∣tations,
and unshaken by all their terrours. He demonstrated to the World, that the Servants of God must not be slothful, or idle, but busy Ministers of his Providence and Grace; and be shewed too, that their business did not consist in ope∣rose Ceremonies, Bodily exercises,In operosis Ceremoni∣is, & ri∣tibus ad di∣gitos tan∣tum perti∣nentibus. Lactant. or trivial Rites; but in doing good, and distributing the gifts of Heaven, in watching over our selves and o∣thers, in a persevering practice of Godliness, Righteousness and So∣briety, in charitable and humble mi∣nistrations unto men, and a profes∣sed service, and constant imitation of the true God. By his own Ex∣ample, and that of his immediate Followers, as so many concurring Lights, making a path to shine af∣ter them, he described the way to Heaven, and the enjoyment of God; demonstrated beyond exception, the necessity of holiness to the Vision of God, and the possibility of that pu∣rity which qualifies for the enjoy∣ment of him.
Lastly, To the restauration of Re∣ligion, and of Man, 'twas necessary to quicken those who were dead in trespasses and sins, not only by a great Example, but with a divine Principle and supernatural strength. Instruction and Example were pro∣per to awaken the understanding, and to excite the Conscience; but the Law in the Members, is not so easily subjected to the Law in the Mind: Inclination and Passion is too strong for the efforts of naked Reason; beloved Lust, and enslaving custom, will not give place to wi∣ser emulation; so that this struggle between the Flesh and Spirit, doth but demonstrate the power of cor∣rupt inclination, and the strength of vitious habit. They who with the mind served, i. e. approved and con∣sented to the Law of God; were still by reason of the Flesh, subject∣ed to the Law of Sin. Though the Conscience was awaken'd, the Will was enslaved; and whatever feeble desires and imperfect choice,Rom. 7. an in∣lightened
understanding might pro∣duce; yet they that were accustom∣ed to do evil, could not find how to perform that which is good: the good they would, they did not, but the evil they would not, that they did. Their judgment condemned their practice; but though an awa∣ken'd Conscience set the Man against himself, yet inclination and custom mastered the judgment, and carried all before them; and held them in Captivity to Sin, and thereby to the powers of darkness. Under this wretched Slavery, the generality of Mankind was insensi∣ble, and harden'd; but those that felt their yoke, were nevertheless sub∣jected to it: and whilst they dispu∣ted about the origine of Sin, submit∣ted to the dominion of it: They could not tell, whether Man in his present state, were the ruins of some∣what that had been great; or whe∣ther his nature had only the Rudi∣ments and Foundation of some greater excellencies to be built upon
it:. de Isid. & Osir. . Simpl. in Epictet. c. 34. whether there were two first Principles, the one of good, the o∣ther of evil; (which was the most ancient and universal opinion, as Plutarch tells us) or whence else those lapses and errours of the hu∣mane Soul, should proceed; whence it was, that the brutish part had en∣slaved the rational, and the sensitive appetite broke loose from the go∣verning power. They knew not the head of this over-flowing Nile; but found themselves involved in the Inundation: whilst their understand∣ings reasoned tolerably well of Ver∣tue, their inclinations engaged them powerfully in Vice: So that either despairing of liberty, they tamely yielded to the torrent of inclination and custom, or else with great per∣plexity, but little success, strove a∣gainst the mighty stream; and in so great a streight (as was natural) look'd up to God,Plutar. de superstit. () who is the hope of Vertue, but not the Patron of Sloth and Cowardize. Although they sometimes magnified
humane nature, yet experience of their own infirmity, at other times extorted this confession from them, that a divine impulse was necessary to make a Man truly great and good;Nunquam vir magnus sine divino afflatu. Ci∣cero. . Py∣thag. Aur. Carm. and that there is something divine in holy men, that informs and guides them. Which differs but little from that of St. John, 1 Ep. c. 2.20. Ye have an unction from the holy one, and know all things. But the knowledge of their remedy, was not equal to the sense and pressure of their Disease: they could cry out with St. Paul, Oh wretched Man that I am! who shall de∣liver me? but could not answer with him, I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. It is the Redeemer of the World, who by a divine strength hath re∣lieved the weakness of Man; and by the law of the spirit of life,Rom. 8.2. made them free from the law of sin and death. The Sun of Righteousness, just be∣fore his rising upon the benighted World, had emitted some twilight Rayes into the darkness of it; by
raising up some eminent Philoso∣phers, (Preachers of Righteousness) to check the superstition and mad∣ness of the Priests: and to scatter some rayes of knowledge among the people, thereby to prepare the way to the Eternal Word, who was to bring with him the treasures of di∣vine Knowledge and Wisdom. But when this glorious Sun was risen, he not only shed a divine light, but quickening heat and influence upon the benummed and frozen World. He revived the dead, restored the languishing, redeem'd the Captive, and enabled Slaves to break off their Fetters:Joh. 8.36. and those whom the Eter∣nal Truth set at liberty, were free indeed. He plentifully poured out that Spirit that rested on himself; even the Spirit of wisdom and under∣standing,Isa. 11.2. of counsel and might, of know∣ledge and the fear of the Lord. By the miraculous effusion of the Holy Ghost, he awaken'd the stupid World, and called them into his Church, an unconquerable never-failing
Principle of Eternal Right∣eousness. By the abounding of this grace he hath provided,Rom. 5.21. that (as sin hath reigned unto death, so) right∣eousness may now reign unto Eternal Life. The Gospel preached in the demonstration of the Spirit, made a speedy and wonderful reformation, in the understandings, tempers, and lives of Men; and yielded a most powerful conviction, that God was both able and willing to restore his lost Image in them. And all the treasures of this divine Spirit, are promised to those that humbly ask, and are willing to receive them. The Conscience therefore awakened by the light of Truth, is no longer amazed or distracted; but confiding in the divine aids, and strengthened with his Heavenly Grace, pursues its conflict with the Flesh to a compleat Victory. Every good motion is from the same Spirit of Truth and Grace, which hath made such admi∣rable Conquests over Ignorance and Lust; and he that hath the same
Principle in himself, can't but have a good hope of the same blessed Fruits. The Soul that feels a divine strength, cannot but expect from the same Fountain, a constant sup∣ply; and thus united to God in the same design of restoring his Image, and animated with the holy Spirit, can't fail to master all opposition; for greater is he that is in us, than he that is in the World. This therefore is the Foundation, on which Christs Kingdom of Righ∣teousness and Grace is built; viz. Faith establishing the heart, by a full and certain perswasion of these Fundamental Points, viz. That, God is Reconciled, and Par∣don and gracious acceptance sure to returning Sinners. That, a future Judgment and E∣ternal Life, and consequently the dif∣ference of moral good and evil, are indisputably certain; and unquesti∣onable realities. That, there is but one God, the Creator of all things, and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ; the only ob∣ject of worship, and Fountain of Bles∣sing: whom we must glorify in, and worship through, as he blesseth us by the Eternal Word, and Spirit. That, the true service of God con∣sists in the imitation of him, of which the Life of Jesus is our Pattern; that such Holiness is indispensibly neces∣sary, certainly practicable, and can never fail of the divine acceptance. That, the corruption of nature, and the power of inclination and cu∣stom, are infallibly conquerable by the grace of God; and God most rea∣dy to prevent, and follow us with his grace; and that he will never fail to assist and prosper our endea∣vours, till they are crowned with Everlasting Success. This is the Gospel;. upon these fundamentals of religious Belief, must the Superstructure of Holiness and Happiness be raised and built. Now Christians even of the meanest Ca∣pacities, believing Jesus to be the Son of God, and receiving that account
the Evangelists give of him, have thereby most evident demonstration, lively perswasion, and certain know∣ledge of these fundamental truths: such as the most learned Philosophers could not attain unto; and the ge∣nerality of the World were extream∣ly far from. This Foundation being laid sure, God having made Faith of these truths to all men in a most easy and certain way, and most powerfully and solemnly attested them, by the miraculous effusion and demonstra∣tion of the Spirit; that which re∣mains for restoring Religion and Man, for perfecting the Kingdom of Christ; is, to build upon this ho∣ly Faith, the true Image of God, and Spirit of Holiness: to pluck up those prejudices that debauched Mens minds, the Sources and Tap-roots of false Religion; and to inculcate those truths which contain the true Spirit and Genius of pure and unde∣fil'd Religion. With this design the Doctrine and Life of Jesus travail,
viz. to introduce amongst his Fol∣lowers, that excellency of Spirit, that was in himself; which is the true Image of God, the glory and the perfection of Man. And as this spirit obtains, so his Kingdom comes with effect; and when it shall rest uni∣versally upon his Followers, then shall come salvation and strength, the Kingdom of our God, and the power of his Christ:Rev. 12.10. c. 11.15. for the Kingdoms of the World shall become his; and he shall reign for ever and ever. This is the Summ and Accomplishment of all these glorious Prophecies concern∣ing the Kingdom of the Messiah; That the Knowledge of the Lord shall fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the sea, Isa. 11.4. The plentiful effusion of this spirit upon the primitive Christians, made them hope for the speedy accom∣plishment of these Predictions; and speak of the perfection of Christ's Kingdom as near at hand. But so great a Reformation was a work of time, and Christ had foretold, not
only a failing of the spirit of Chri∣stianity, but a reviving of the King∣dom of darkness; an Apostasie from the Faith, such a return of the eject∣ed prejudices, and depravation of Religion, as should undermine the very Foundations;1 Tim. 4.1, &c. and subject men again to the ignorant infidelity, anxi∣ous Superstition, abominable Idola∣try, and foolish Lusts of the benight∣ed Pagans. But that himself in due time, will again set up his King∣dom, and restore to his Followers,2 Tim. 1.7. the spirit of power, of love, and a sound mind; make truth, righteousness and peace to reign, and so break the Em∣pire of Satan, that he shall never be able to erect it more. In the mean while he hath left with us his Hea∣venly Doctrine and holy Life, as an Antidote against those delusions, which are the passages to, and the very Sinews and Strength of Satan's Kingdom, whether Pagan or Anti∣christian: and powerfully to incul∣cate the contrary truths, which con∣stitute the genuine Spirit of Christi∣anity,
building men up into the I∣mage of God, and into the Glorious Kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ. First, Sensuality and the Love of Sin, is the inlet of errour, the root and sap of false Religion; but Purity and the Love of Righteousness, in∣culcated in the Doctrine and Life of Jesus, is the Friend of Truth and Wisdom, and the way to be filled with the knowledge of God. They who love their Lusts, cannot love the truth that is contrary to them; nor endure the light that discovers their vile deformities. An impure mind is unmeet to receive the know∣ledge of a pure and holy God; and a guilty mind cannot bear it. The effect of such knowledge upon im∣pure spirits is dread; and that quick∣ly converts into Superstition. For a guilty Conscience (like a drowning man that catches hold of every twig) embraces every expedient of∣fered, to compound with an offen∣ded God; and will do any thing to please, save only the rendring that
holy obedience that he requires of him. If atonement may be made by Sacrifice, the Altars shall flame and smoke continually; their Flocks and Herds be all devoted, they will make, if possible, Rivers of Oyl to run from the Sacrifices: yea they will not spare their own Bowels; but give the fruit of their body,Mich. 6.6. an expiation for the sin of their Soul. They will not fail to build Temples and adorn Shrines, nor to visit them devoutly; nor think much of a cost∣ly and painful devotion; if they may have but hope to fatisfy God for the arrears they are in to his Ju∣stice. And when they have labour'd it hard, they begin to hope it may do; and that God will surely be pleas'd that they have done so much to gain his favour.2 Thess. 2.11. And just it is with God, to send them strong delu∣sion, and give them over to the be∣lief of lies; who loved not the truth, nor were obedient to it. But the Spirit of Obedience, is the Spirit of Children; to be followers of God
makes us dear to him; and the do∣ers of his will shall know the Do∣ctrine: this is the Lesson which Christ inculcates. A pure mind hath a lively perception of truth; is very apprehensive of Errours, dishonour∣able to God, and that deface his I∣mage: and such purity it is, that the Doctrine and Life of Jesus travel to produce; all Knowledge is of no further value than as ministring to, proceeding from, or accompanied with it. All the Sacrifices of the wicked are declared an abomination, but the delight of God, is in those that love him, and do his Command∣ments; for they shall be loved of God; he will manifest himself unto,Joh. 14.21, 22, 23. and make his abode with them. Secondly, Sense and Imagination, Fondness for external shew and pomp, is the way of Superstition, and false Religion: but the love of spiritual worship, and a rational ser∣vice, is the spirit of Christ, and that way of his Kingdom. God is a Spi∣rit, and chiefly to be worshipped
with ours. And although, so long as we are cloathed with Flesh, our Religion must have a Body as well as Soul; yet by an uninstructed fond∣ness for the Bodily part, Men have ever departed from God, into dotage and superstition; and rendred them∣selves a prey to the powers of dark∣ness. This is the mistake of the vulgar especially, or of Souls as mean and unimproved as theirs, though hang'd with better trappings. By this fond∣ness for representation, pomp and solemnity, the Patriarchal Rites which were few and grave, grew up at length into a theatrical and magnificent Religion; that required a great Ministry, and a huge body of Rubricks for the exact perform∣ance of it. For now the height and magnitude, and shape of the Altar, the number of its steps, and horns, and innumerable things of like sort, entred into Religion; and exercised the servile Superstition of the Wor∣shipper.
At this door came in Images, with all their train of Foppish and Ido∣latrous Ceremonies; and became stumbling blocks to the souls of men, and snares to the feet of the unwise; the singular diligence of the Artificer help∣ing forward the ignorant to more super∣stition. This devising of Idols was the beginning of spiritual Fornication; the invention of them the corruption of life. Wisd. 14. The proneness of the Jews to revolt unto the way of the Hea∣then, the fondness of those that be∣came Christians for their old Rites, whether of Paganism, or Judaism, the great multitude of these early obtaining in the Christian Church, together with the necessity that the Apostles and first Reformers found of indulging for a time the accustom∣ed Rites and Ceremonies; these are convincing demonstrations of the power of this Childish fondness, for somewhat sensible and pompous in Religion; and of the danger of fall∣ing into false Religion, by multiply∣ing Rites to the subverting of spiri∣tual
worship, or laying the stress of Religion on such bodily service. But Christianity teacheth a spiri∣tual worship, and rational service; viz. that of the Mind illuminated with true Knowledge, and quickned with a lively sense of God, and re∣ferring all unto him. And the very bodily part is either the spiritual Sa∣crifice of Prayer and Praise; or the Ministry of the Word and Sacra∣ments for spiritual ends and purpo∣ses; for the help of Faith, Devoti∣on and Resolution, and the more ef∣fectual uniting the heart unto God in fervent love, in thankful and du∣tiful affection.Rom. 14.17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; for he that in these things serveth Christ, is accepted of God, and approved of men. But he that has a mighty opinion of bodily labour, that values a Cere∣mony before a Vertue, his opinion about a Rite before Charity or Peace, that acts his fancy more than his un∣derstanding; is more nice and cu∣rious
about the bodily than the spi∣ritual part of worship; such an one is departed from the genuine spirit of Christianity, entred in at the gate of Superstition, in danger of all the extravagance and dotage thereof, and thereby of Apostatizing into the Kingdom of darkness. Thirdly,2 Tim. 1.7. A dark and servile dread of God, is the temper and spirit of false Religion; but the Spirit of Christianity is light and love, and a sound mind. When Men become a∣lienated from God by wicked works, and serve him chiefly with their vain imaginations, then they lose the true and amiable notion of him; they consider him only as terrible and dreadful,, Plu∣tarc. de su∣perst. who is the supream good, and only happiness of his creatures. They conceive of him altogether as arbi∣trary power, who is Eternal mind and wisdom, and the glory and perfection of whose nature it is, that as he can do whatever he will, so he can will nothing but what is wise and good. The Dreams of such dark and timo∣rous
minds, are very frightful, wild and extravagant; they worship the Idol of their own brains, express their own ill nature, and disturbed imaginations, in that worship, which should be a confession of the excel∣lency and perfection of the Deity. Hence Men came to place Religion in solemn darkness, in cloud and mystery, venerable because hidden or unintelligible Rites, obscure Ora∣cles, sacred Paradoxes, and Arks and Clefts full of divine and wonderful secrets: of which the Priest and the Devil taking advantage, made them∣selves absolute Masters of the belief and reverence of the people, and by these of their Estates and Fortunes. But this is the Message which we have heard of Christ,1 Joh. 1.5. that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all. That the Principles of his Service are Knowledge and Love; and he re∣gards not the Religion of those that worship they know not what, nor why. That we direct our Service and Obedience, by what we clearly
know of him; and that the more we know, the better we shall please him; who will not be served with a blind submission, nor with unintel∣ligible mysteries, but with our best understanding; not with a servile Flattery, and Court-like Address, by many Intercessors, with a ritual niceness, or a pompous Pageantry, or any such devices of ignorant and superstitious Minds; but with pu∣rity of Heart and Life, with a spirit of Love, and of a sound Mind; not with Terrour and Melancholy, but with Hope and Alliance; not with scruple and perplexity, but gene∣rous Resolution; not as an Arbitra∣ry Tyrant, but as a wise and lo∣ving Father. Fourthly, The Devil is the God of this World; and the Spirit of errour is an earthly and secular one, but the Kingdom of Christ is Heavenly; and such is the spirit and genius of his Religion. The love of the World, and an inordinate estimate of the goods thereof, was ever a mighty
source of Superstition, and Pillar of Satan's Empire. With such Worldly-minded Men Interest is always more ponderous than Truth; and that Re∣ligion best that most effectually pro∣vides for their temporal concerns. To such secular Spirits, 'twas a ve∣ry agreeable conceit, to imagine, that every business of theirs was un∣der the especial care of some Patron Deity; whose Rites, if they careful∣ly performed their affairs, should succeed according to their wish. The multitude of such Tutelar Gods, for Cities, Families, and particular af∣fairs, the superstitious regard to Ora∣cles and Prodigies, the observation of times, and all the Arts of divina∣tion and augury, which made up the Pagan Superstition, plainly shew the spirit of its Votaries: viz. that their hopes and fortunes were Em∣barqued in this World, and that they regarded the good and evil thereof, as the sole reward of their labour, or punishment of their negligence in Religion. This principle the Ido∣latrous
Jews plainly avowed to the Prophets Head, (when he expostu∣lated with them concerning their sorsaking of God, Jer. 44.17.) that they would burn Incense to, and serve the Queen of Heaven as their Fathers had done to good purpose; for then they had plenty, and saw no evil; whereas since they had left off their service, all things had gone to ruin. Nor was this a vulgar conceit, but the best defence the greatest Men among the Pagans could make for the worship of those many Lords;Caecilius in Minut. Felic. Orig. c. Cels. l. 8. Jul. Ep. 51. that by their singular care the good things of life are distributed to men: so Caecilius, Celsus, and the Emperour Julian defend the Cause of Daemon-worship. It is also a mighty temptation un∣to Men, to imagine that God must needs love such Riches, Magnifi∣cence and Glory in his Service, as they find themselves to be extreamly delighted withal; that the long flourishing of a Religion is a demon∣stration of the truth of it, and the
misfortune and calamity of Men, an argument against their way of ser∣ving God. Thus they are apt to conclude, who mind Earthly things, and over-rate the concerns of this Life, and judge every petit affair thereof worthy of a divine deci∣sion. But Christianity teacheth us to consider our selves as Strangers and Pilgrims here; whose estate and in∣terest doth not lye in sublunary things, but in spiritual Promises, and Immortal Hopes. We are Ci∣tizens of Heaven, and only travel∣ling through this World thither. Upon this our Heavenly Relation and Interest only, we may value our selves; and ought to love our Reli∣gion because it secures these to us, and designs the improvement of our Spirits for the eternal Vision and En∣joyment of God. We are instructed therefore to have our affections very moderate and cool towards Earthly things, but warm and tender to∣wards Heavenly Objects. This is
the finishing Lesson, and most ex∣cellent effect of the Christian Reli∣gion; which is a Heavenly Philo∣sophy: and to make it truckle to the affairs of this Life, or turn it into Maxims of secular Policy, is the great∣est abuse and subversion thereof. Lastly, The spirit and genius of false Religion, is selfish, narrow and stingy; but that of Christianity, Charitable, and generous and large, as the Kingdom and goodness of God. Superstition converts Religion in∣to a private Commerce; imagining God to gain by the service done him, and expecting the return of that ser∣vice only in personal and private Blessings. And no wonder if they who conceive God to seek himself in the homage he exacts from his Crea∣tures, imitate the Deity they wor∣ship; and centre in themselves in every thing they do: or that they who serve an arbitrary Deity, should expect to oblige and render him par∣tial to their interest, by the multi∣tude
of their services. Hence arose the conceit, that the divine favour and beneficence might be monopo∣lized by certain persons, was appro∣priated to particular places; or an∣nexed to the performance of pecu∣liar Rites: and happy they, that had the secret of that Monopoly, the mystery of engrossing the divine protection and care. Hence every Family had its tutelar Gods and sin∣gular Rites, and they changed the Shrine, the Rite, or the place, when any ill success defeated their expecta∣tion.Fugiunt{que} penates quis{que} suos, sua cui{que} domus fu∣nesta vide∣tur, & quia causa latet, locus est in cri∣mine notus. Ovid. Met. l. 7. So Balaak repeated the Sacri∣fice, and shifted the place, in hopes at last to make the God he supplica∣ted favourable to his request, Numb. 23.13. He said unto Balaam, Come I pray thee with me unto another place; and Curse me them from thence. So the Syrians having fought unsuccessfully with the Israelites up∣on the Hills, resolve to change the place, and to have recourse to the Gods of the Vallies, in hopes of bet∣ter success, 1 Kings 20.23. Their
Gods are Gods of the Hills, therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. Hence such who found, by suc∣cess, that their interest in their Gods was great, boasted this reward of their Superstition, and trampled up∣on such who seem'd neglected of the Deity, or greatly fallen from his favour and protection. Whom God had forsaken (either for their neg∣lects of his service, or for the arbi∣trariness of his own will, casting them out of his protection) they look'd upon as abandoned to neglect and contempt, and cruel treatments. If kindness were due to any, it was only to those whom God distinguish∣ed by his Favours, or who served him in the same manner with them∣selves; and that kindness too was arbitrary and precarious as well as partial, and ever gave place to the efforts of a narrow, stingy, and self∣ish Spirit. Hence also the Spirit of Persecution became an ingredient of
false Religion, the Friends and Fa∣vourites of God (as they thought themselves) conceited they did him service in destroying his Enemies; or at least, that they had right to use as they pleased, to crush and ruin those despicable Wretches, who were reprobated and out-law'd, and fallen from the protection and care of Hea∣ven. But Christianity teacheth us to serve God, not as if he needed such service, but for the reasonableness and excellency thereof; because his service is perfect freedom, and true Religion the perfection of Man. It teacheth us to seek our improvement and happiness in subjection to those laws of God, which are the tran∣script of his most perfect and blessed nature, and are design'd for the per∣fecting and felicitating ours; and contains in them the true Elements, the certain principles and necessary means of such felicity. It teacheth us to consider God, not as a respecter of persons, but as God both of the
Jews and Gentiles; the universal Fa∣ther of the whole Family of Heaven and Earth, governing by the eter∣nal measures of Wisdom and Good∣ness, and by Laws that respect and provide for the welfare of the whole: As the inexhaustible Fountain of Goodness, ever communicating him∣self to all his Creatures, according to their Capacities; and requiring on∣ly such service as capacitates for the enjoyment of him. It directeth us to seek the glory of God, not in the tri∣umphs of his Arbitrary Power, but in the consummate effects of his in∣finite wisdom and goodness; the perfection of his works, and especi∣ally of that grace he hath bestowed on Men; in the most perfect com∣munication of himself to them, which is life and happiness everlasting. And as our God, so our Religion is love; Charity is the summ and substance of it, generous goodness, the most courteous gentleness, the most perfect humanity, the truest greatness of Mind, and largeness of
Heart, are the genuine and excellent fruits thereof. It obligeth us to con∣sider our selves but as stones in the great building of God, disposed by the wisdom of the Almighty Archi∣tect, with regard to the whole Fa∣brick; and that we become useless and insignificant, by centring in our selves, and minding only our own things, without respect had to the common interest.Rom. 12.3, 4, 5. Just as the mem∣bers of the body are beautiful in con∣junction, and considerable in their operations, conspiring to the com∣mon welfare: for the Eye doth not see for it self, but looks out for the whole Body; and the hand is useless whilst it grasps to it self, but its mi∣nistrations to the Body are necessary and excellent. It obligeth us to ac∣count all the gifts of God, as design∣ed to render us useful to others; not to make us glad and full of our selves. In short the whole oeconomy of the Gospel, travels with this de∣sign, to better the Societies of Men, and perfect the Communion of Saints;
to edify the Body of Christ in the Spirit of Love ruling in all its Mem∣bers, to render Believers of one Heart and one Soul, as their God, their Faith, and their Hope, their Profession, Business and Interest are one; that they may be one as the Father and his Son Jesus Christ, by a Communication of the same ex∣cellent nature and communion in the same divine riches and treasures. And the Christian thus instructed values himself, and expects his approbation from God, not by his enjoyments, but by his usefulness; not by the number of his talents, but by the improvement he makes of them. This is the true spirit of Christ's Religion and excellent proceed of his Kingdom; the true Members whereof being by a right and lively Faith fixed upon a solid Foundation, firmly perswaded of the mercy of God, and of Eternal Life, of the necessity of Holiness, and the effica∣cy of the divine Assistance, are built upon this Faith into a most excellent
temper; inform'd and govern'd by the spirit of sincerity and purity, delighting in the spiritual worship of God, united to him in filial trust and affection, placing their Happi∣ness, and seeking their Interest not in the things of this World, but those of a better, pursuing them with tender and warm affections, having their spirits enlarged by the know∣ledge of God, and fill'd with gene∣rous goodness in imitation of the di∣vine beneficence, do seek their own felicity in the perfection and con∣summation of the Kingdom of God. For the effecting hereof, Christ hath left with us the Record of his Do∣ctrine and Life; that we beholding therein the glory of the Lord,2 Cor. 3.18. may be changed into the same Image, from glory to glory, by the spirit of the Lord. To minister hereunto is this Tract designed. First, By exhibiting the true Principles of Christian Doctrine, levelled against the most pernicious errours, and restoring true Religion,
as they are contain'd in the Sermons and occasional Discourses of Jesus, recorded by the Evangelists: and by considering how Jesus inculcated and abetted this holy truth, as a pat∣tern to us, how we should hold, and profess, and propugne such his Do∣ctrine. Secondly, By exhibiting the true spirit and genius of the Chri∣stian Life and Practice, collected from the Example of Jesus. And that first, By drawing the great lines of his Life, as the admirab pattern of ours. Secondly, By appying the light of this Example for or Instru∣ction, in the necessity, nature, ex∣tent and excellency of true holiness. Thirdly, By shewing what obliga∣tion and encouragement the Life of Christ contains, to render us fol∣lowers of him; concluding with an Exhortation to that purpose.
THE PATTERN Of Pure and Undefiled RELIGION. CHAP. I. Containing the Principles of Christian Doctrine. JEsus being a Teacher sent from God, to restore true Religion, levell'd his Doctrine principally against those Errours contrary thereunto, which yet Mankind was very prone to fall into; and inculcated those prime and fundamental truths, which make up the genuine Spirit, consti∣tute the Essence, and are (as it were)
the Informing Soul of true and unde∣fil'd Religion. As, First, Concerning the Nature and Government of God. He that lay in the bosome of the father,Joh. 1.18. hath reveal'd him to us. Whom Men rather con∣ceived of, as a powerful, than as a good Being; a God of wrath, and the object of their dread, rather than a God of perfect Wisdom and Good∣ness, the object of their love and ho∣ly imitation: One whom they might possibly appease by Gifts, and atone by servile performances; little ap∣prehending in the mean while, that He was most easy to reconcile, and forward to do them good, and suffi∣ciently pleased if they were but wil∣ling to be made happy by him. This was the degenerate and mis∣shapen notion of God, that inform'd the Religion of the World, and ren∣der'd it servile, superstitious, unsa∣voury, and uncomfortable. As for the Jews, God was their King, and they consider'd him as the Lord of their Hosts; dreading his Power, and
limiting his goodness. Whilst they reverenc'd his Sanctuary, hallow'd his Sabbaths, and paid his tyth and ob∣lations, they were safe under his Al∣mighty Protection; and to them possibly he might make some allow∣ance, and bear with the transgressions of his peculiar people: but the Na∣tions of the World they look'd upon as the people of his Wrath, and ei∣ther devoted to destruction, or not regarded by him; who, whatever goodness he had in his nature, had appropriated that to the Jews only. Jesus therefore who hath shew'd us plainly of the Father, inculcates wor∣thy apprehensions of God; teaching us to conceive of him, as the Father of Mercies, as kind to the unthank∣ful, and freely good towards all; and that Universal Love, the most gene∣rous and fervent Charity, the most tender Bowels of Pity, these are his true Image, and make us like God, the children of our Father which is in Heaven, Math. 5.44. He therefore tells the Jews, that God loved not
them only, but the whole World; and that to such degree, as he sent his only Son into it, for the Salvation of all, that should become willing to be saved by him, Joh. 3.16. That He came to seek and save that which was lost; and that Repentance and remission of Sins, should be preach'd in his Name, to All People without exception, Luk. 24.47. that God is gracious and reconcileable in his na∣ture, and that there is Joy in Heaven at the conversion of a sinner, Luk. 15.7, 10. In a word, the true notion of God is, that he is indeed to be Re∣verenc'd for his excellent Greatness, but that he is especially to be loved for his Goodness, as being the excel∣lent pattern of all that is good, and original of all perfection, whom to know is Life Eternal; to be like him is to be as perfect as we are capable, and to see God our supream felicity; and that Vision is the portion of his Children, that strive to imitate the Being they Adore and Love, that Copy out his Purity, his Righteous∣ness,
and Mercy; they shall be bles∣sed, for they shall see God, Mat. 5. such are the excellent notions of God, which the Doctrine of Christ in∣spires, banishing those narrow and stingy, mean and servile conceptions of him, that had infected the minds, and vitiated the Religion of Jews and Gentiles, and which Mankind are ex∣ceeding prone to fall into. Secondly, Jesus in his preaching, did especially inculcate the truth of divine Worship, with what things God is pleas'd, and what is the Wor∣ship and Homage he requires of us; dispelling the gross Ignorance, and dangerous Errours, both of the Jews and Gentiles. God he tells them is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, with the Mind and Soul, with∣out shadows and ceremonies, Joh. 4.23. as he will not be honour'd with Images, so he little regardeth any external performances. That he va∣lues neither place nor time, but e∣very where, and at all times, he will
have Men call upon him, holding up pure hands, with sincere and fer∣vent minds. That he preferreth Mer∣cy to Sacrifice; and is only glorify'd by our being fruitful in good works, Joh. 15.8. that the Gentile Image-wor∣ship was abominable, and the Jews Ceremonies trifles, and the Phari∣saick superstition intolerable with God. To turn Religion into noise and shew, to place it in Fringes and Phylacteries, in distinguishing opi∣nions, or unprofitable speculations, in regard to Altars and Shrines, to difference of meats and days, and such like Traditions of Men; this was an offence and scandal that mo∣ved the Spirit, the meek and gentle Jesus, and made him reprove sharp∣ly, and lash severely, the abetters of it, Math. 23. Especially they having advanced these trifles and superstiti∣ons, into the place of Justice, Mercy and Faith, and the greater things of the Law, and made void the Command∣ments of God through their traditions. There is nothing (our Saviour tells
us) entring into the Man that can defile him in the estimate of God, but the evil things that proceed out of the heart, these defile the man, Mark 7.18. nor can any thing on the o∣ther hand avail him, but what pro∣ceeds from a mind full of God, and is a genuine fruit of the true knowledge of him. That true Religion and true Happiness (its natural issue) consist in, and are the results of a due tem∣per of mind; the poor in spirit, the penitent Mourners, the meek,Math. 5.3, &c. the merciful, the pure, and peaceable; these are the true Worshippers, and truly happy Men. That God need∣eth not our Prayers to inform him of our wants, or to move his pity; nor are we heard the sooner for our much speaking, but that our due apprehensions concerning God, and humble confidence in him, fervent application of our Soul towards him, and a ready obsequiousness to his Will, these render us capable of his Blessings, and secure them to us. When our hearts are full of the sense
of his power and goodness, and our Prayers oblige us to honour him in our Lives; when we forgive others as heartily as we desire God to for∣give us, and pray to our Father in secret, with a full trust to be heard and approved by him; then we wor∣ship him aright, and shall be the bet∣ter for such our serving God, though he that is infinitely perfect needs not our Service, nor can be profited by us, Matth. 6. Jesus instructs us therefore to make our Prayers short and grave, fervent and apt to excite Devotion, after the Pattern he taught his Disciples, Mat. 6.9. And that we pray continually and importunately, for those things the desire whereof doth greatly ex∣alt and improve our Spirits, Luk. 11.1, 13. thus did this great Instructer call Men back to the true worship of God, admonishing that they no lon∣ger should trust in Sacrifices and ob∣lations, in pompous Rites, and cere∣monious Addresses, or any thing of that nature; but worship God in Spi∣rit
and Truth, and be followers of him as dear Children, and then they might rely upon it, that their Heavenly Fa∣ther both knows their needs, and will most readily succour them in all their distress, and bestow upon them all his goods. Thirdly, Another main Principle  of true Religion, taught by the holy Jesus, concerns the true motive, rea∣son and end of our duty and obedi∣ence, in which Mankind had grosly misconceiv'd and mistaken; and such mistake is most fatal and pernicious to Religion, and to that satisfaction and happiness that should be attain'd by it. The Pagans ploy'd their Al∣tars, and practised their Religion, to avert a Pestilence or Famine, to obtain the Commodities of Life. The Jews would not serve God for nought, but were encouraged to ex∣pect affluence and prosperity as the reward of their Obedience. The wicked Pharisees had prevaricated to the utmost, and presumed they might satisfy for Injustice and Op∣pression,
by a strict observation of the Ceremonies of the Law, and Traditions of the Elders. The peo∣ple generally expected from Christ secular Immunities and Priviledges, they followed him for the Loaves. Their Fathers (they tell him) did eat Man∣na, were wonderfully fed and prote∣cted in the Wilderness, and planted at length in a land flowing with Milk and Honey, but what sign shewest thou? Joh. 6.30, 31. Upon which, and all apt occasions, Jesus instructs them in the true reasons, motives and ends of obedience to God, telling them, that to make Religion a Cloak to secular designs, is to prostitute and profane it; and to procure to themselves an inevitable and great damnation, Matth. 23.14. That they should not seek any longer the meat which perisheth, but that which endu∣reth to eternal Life, Joh. 6.27. That his Kingdom was not of this World, nor did he promise his Followers ex∣traordinary immunities in it: but rather it would frequently so happen,
that they should be hated, reviled, and persecuted for their adherence to him. There is indeed a true and great felicity, the natural result, and inseparable consequent of the righte∣ousness taught by Christ, but then poverty of Spirit, and contempt of the world, are parts of that Righteous∣ness, and Ingredients of that Blessed∣ness; and being revil'd, disgraced, afflicted, and persecuted,Math. 5. Mark 7.34. are well e∣nough consistent with it. Blessed are they that suffer for Righteousness sake, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven, and their reward shall be great in Hea∣ven. That his Disciples must take up the Cross; and no Man can be his Disciple, that is not resolved to part with all for his sake, Luk. 14.33. and the hundred fold restitution that he promiseth, is such as consists with persecution, Mar. 10.30. That there∣fore his Disciples ought not to have the interests of this World in mighty Reckoning; nor value themselves up∣on any thing, besides their interest in the future and better Life. Nay
even those miraculous gifts they were endowed withal, far exceeding all the gifts of Nature, or of Fortune, yet were not a sufficient foundation for any great complacency, or rejoy∣cing in themselves; Luke 10.20. Re∣joice not in this that the spirits are sub∣ject to you, but rather rejoice because your names are written in Heaven. His Promise to his Followers is, that he will Raise them up at the last day, that where he is they shall be also, that they shall have a beatifical Vision of God in Life Everlasting; that in the mean while, they shall b the Children of God, and have the lively hope of his Favour, the Conscience of their own Integrity, the feeling of a happy temper and excellent state of mind, and the consolations of the Ho∣ly Spirit for their support and encou∣ragement. Upon these motives, and from the principles of equity and in∣genuity, love and gratitude to God, and a desire of being like him, and of attaining that perfection they are capable of, he wills them to practise
all Righteousness, he recommends their duty to them. And this is it which constitutes the Spirit and Soul of Christian Righteousness, and gives the true stamp and complexion to all our Obedience, viz. that it being founded in a right knowledge of God, cherished by a holy Acquaintance with him, expressed in those things that are Worthy of him; making a due difference between the greater and lesser matters of the law; be acted from love and gratitude, from a con∣viction of the excellency of Holiness, and with delight in it, from the hope and desire of Eternal Life, and a full perswasion of the necessity of holi∣ness to perfect our nature, and make us capable of seeing God, and meet to enjoy him. This is the Truth as Je∣sus taught it; which he that heartily imbibes, and suitably expresseth in his Life, he is a Christian, a Disci∣ple indeed, and shall receive the end of his Faith, the Salvation of his Soul. Lastly, The Doctrine of Jesus hath  also given Light, to the Measure of
Righteousness, and extent of our du∣ty, with respect to some allowances made to the Jews, or such things as God winked at in former times of Ignorance. For we are assured by him, that unless our righteousness ex∣ceeds the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of God, Math. 5.20. That not only murther and maim∣ing, but hatred and revenge, yea causeless and immoderate anger will cer∣tainly expose us to the judgment of God. That ineffectual Lust makes us guilty before him, as well as actual Adultery. That the occasions of evil must be avoided, and the first motions of Lust repelled, or we pe∣rish by our indulgence, fondness and softness, as well as by accomplish'd wickedness. That although God to∣lerated the hard-hearted Jews, and winked at the ignorant Gentiles, in the matter of Polygamy and Divorce, yet from the beginning it was not so: nor should be for the future a∣mong the Disciples of Jesus. That
trivial and common swearing makes guilty as well as Perjury; but such truth and faithfulness ought to be a∣mongst Christians, that their credit might not need the support of an Oath. This is the substance of our Saviour's Sermon, in Matth. 5.20. to the 37 verse. Farther he enjoins, that his Disciples should excel in meek∣ness, and patient bearing of injuries, not resisting evil, but over-coming it with good. That they should not violently impose their Religion on Men, nor yet endeavour the destru∣ction of such as with violence oppo∣sed it. To call for Fire from Hea∣ven on the Churches Enemies; to kill extrajudicially, a bold Seducer of the Brethren from true Religion, were acts of holy zeal, once com∣mended and rewarded; but Christi∣ans are required to be of another spi∣rit, Luke 9.55. And the son of man came not to destroy mens lives, but to save them. He calls his Followers to the most excellent heights of all ver∣tue, that they may shine as Lights
before Men, and become as the salt of the earth to season the manners of others, and keep them from stinking corruption. So that whereever his Re∣ligion should come, it should produce many eminent lights, and incompara∣ble Examples; and should have such a general influence, as to render the Conversations of all more tolerable and savoury. Such is the instruction contain'd in the preaching of Jesus, exhibiting to us the true Principles of Christian Religion, declaring the genuine spirit and temper of it. He moreover assert∣ed his own Authority and Mission from God to restore his true Religion and Worship; he confirm'd the for∣mer Revelations, and taught a just Reverence of them; he reveal'd ma∣ny things concerning the following state of his Church, and promised farther information in those matters by the pouring out of his Spirit upon it. But these are things foreign to our present business. I shall therefore here shut up the first Chapter.
CHAP. II. The manner of Christ's teaching, instru∣ctive to us, how we ought to profess, abett and maintain his Doctrine. JEsus the great Prophet that was to come into the World, did by his Preaching Inlighten the Dark∣ness, and dispel the gross prejudices of it: he did moreover, by the man∣ner of declaring his Doctrine, recom∣mend it to our regard, and instruct us how to profess and propugn it. For first, It is frequently taken  notice of, by the Evangelists,Matth. 7.29. Luk. 4.32. Mark 1.22. that he taught as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes; that the people were astonished at his Doctrine, be∣cause he spake with Authority, i. e. as became the Majesty of divine truth; without affectation or artifice, without ostentation of Wit or Elo∣quence; not dealing in subtilties, nor descanting upon the traditions of El∣ders, or referring to the testimonies
of famous Rabbies; but he delivered plain and useful Instructions, in a grave, sincere, and authoritative sort, as a Messenger of God, fully satisfied of the truth of what he spake, and referring to the Conscience of his Au∣ditors, appealing to the Scriptures, and demanding audience and credit for his works, which proved his Mis∣sion from God. The things of God must be reverently handled; his truth is a sacred depositum, which as we must not be ashamed to own, so we must not triflingly expose. 'Tis too great and noble a thing, to be brought forth, barely to entertain or divert the Company; it carries its own Authority when solidly proposed, and confirm'd by Sacred Writ, but 'tis enfeebled and diminish'd when dress'd with exquisite art, as if it nee∣ded trimming or varnish: It is pro∣faned, if we so blend it with Fancy, Wit, Eloquence, or other small Arts; that it serves only for an occasion of shewing our selves, or that it appears not in its native beauty and majesty,
by reason of the spots and bedeckings that we bestow upon it; to shew our art not to serve the Interest of the truth. Religious truths are vene∣rable, they had their proper seat in the Conscience, must be received thither with a full Conviction, and rule there with a divine sway; and we must endeavour to transmit and fasten them in the Conscience of o∣thers, with all that Authority and venerable regard, that they have, or ought to have in our own. Secondly, It's noted of Jesus, that  he taught with becoming freedom and boldness; his very Adversaries confessed he taught the way of God in truth, not regarding the person of men, Matth. 22.16. He conceal'd no ne∣cessary or useful truth for fear of of∣fending. He freely and sharply re∣proved the Scribes and Pharisees, though the most potent Faction, of greatest interest and repute. He nei∣ther courted the people, nor their Rulers; he desisted not from refu∣ting popular Errours, though they
more than once took up stones to cast at him; nor was discouraged, when he was told that Herod sought to kill him. Go ye (saith he) and tell that fox that I cast out devils, and do cures to day and to morrow, and the third day I shall be perfected, Luk. 13.31. There was nothing more offensive to the Jews, than his healing on the Sab∣bath days, and the Pharisees who were exceedingly Superstitious in that point, watched him with an e∣vil Eye; yet he cured the sick in their presence, and confounded their superstition with his free discourse upon that subject: Is it not lawful to do good on the Sabbath days? and which of you having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a Pit, will not streightway pull him out on the Sabbath day? Luk. 14.1, 5. Thus he taught us sincere∣ly and freely to profess necessary and useful truth, and boldly to refute Errour, and reprove Vice; not to hold the truth with respect of per∣sons, nor in the just defence of it to fear the Faces of Men.
Yet thirdly, Jesus taught with  great Wisdom and Prudence; taking fit seasons, and accommodating him∣self to the needs and Capacities of Men. By familiar and apt Parables from things well known, he did in∣struct the vulgar, and at the same time did escape from the insidious and captious; did pass by the obsti∣nate and untreatable, leaving them in their blindness; or he shut their Mouths, and defeated their Snares. He pointed and barb'd an Arrow, which flew more directly, and stuck the faster in their Consciences, for the Pa∣rable it was winged with. Such was the Parable of the two Sons, whom their Father commanded to work in his Vineyard, representing the inex∣cusable obstinacy and impenitency of the Pharisees; and that of the Hus∣bandmen miserably destroy'd, for re∣fusing to their Lord the fruits of his Vineyard, for killing his Servants, and at last his Son, whom he sent to re∣claim them; for they themselves confessed the justice of the proceed
against those wicked Men, and there∣in past Sentence on themselves, even whilst they knew, that he had spoken these Parables of them, Matth. 21.41, 45. With like Wisdom he defeated their captious questions, and put them to silence with his Interrogato∣ries. Thus he asserted the Rights of God and the King; and yet avoided the snare of the Herodians; when they asked him concerning paying tribute to Caesar, Matth. 22.21. So he asserted his own Divinity, and si∣lenced his Adversaries; by question∣ing with them, how Christ could be both the son and the Lord of David, v. 45. So he silenced the Sadducees in their own way; for if they from the re∣lation between the Woman and her seven Husbands, argued against a future state, much more reasonable was it to prove a future state, from the Relation that God owned be∣tween himself and good men, even after their death, viz. that he is the God of Abraham, &c. for that relation is real and effectual, and therefore re∣quires
the existence of the Subjects, that they live to God in a capacity of his love and favour. For he is not the God of the dead but of the living, Mat. 22.31, &c. 'Twere endless to ob∣serve all the instances of that wisdom and prudence, wherewith Jesus re∣futed errours, and vindicated truth; not shewing himself afraid of his Ad∣versaries, and yet prudently avoid∣ing them. After which Example, he hath willed us to be wise as Serpents, though innocent as Doves. Not to be ashamed of him and his words in an evil and adulterous generation, and yet not to cast Pearl before Swine, nor holy things to Dogs, nor impru∣dently to provoke the untreatable and unreasonable. Fourthly, The Holy Jesus in all his  Discourse, shewed such zeal and fer∣vour, as manifested that he was in great earnest, and executing a trust, that he had received of God. In him was fulfill'd that prophetical passage, the zeal of thine house hath even eaten me up, Joh. 2.17. he used diligence
in teaching, and sharpness in reproof, when the case required it. Ye Hypo∣crites! Ye generation of Vipers! How can ye escape the damnation of Hell? So he rebukes the self-concei∣ted, wicked Pharisees, Matth. 23.33. Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offence to me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God; was the earnest reproof he gave to Peter, who opposed his own fancies and prejudices to the wisdom and truth of God, Matth. 16.23. He loved to do the work of God, and refus'd not to travail for the Conversion of a poor Woman, and she a Samaritan; neg∣lecting his meat at a time when he was both hungry and weary; for this was his meat, to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work, Joh. 4.34. Yet in the last place, This his zeal was tempered with a mighty pity and compassion, to the infirmities, needs, and prejudices of men. He was ten∣der of their Souls, and pitiful to their Weaknesses. His Bowels were moved in him, and he had compassion on
the multitude; when he saw that they were scattered abroad as Sheep having no Shepherd, and fainted for lack of instruction, Mat. 9.36. He did bear with the weakness and pre∣judices of his Disciples, though he was grieved for, and complain'd of the dullness of their understanding, and hardness of their heart. He re∣peated his Instructions, expounded his Parables, heard and Answered their Questions, and endured their Infirmities. He wept over the infi∣delity and obstinacy of the Jews, with passionate wishes, that they would have known the things of their peace in the day of their Visitation. He foretold their destruction with sad∣ness, and all the expressions of pity and compassion. From all which we learn, not on∣ly to receive the Christian Doctrine with forwardness and readiness of Mind, as that wherein the glory of God, and the interests of our Souls, are nearly concern'd: but also to profess it steadily, as those that are fully
perswaded, both of the truth, and the high importance of it, being ve∣ry zealous and in earnest in teaching and defending it; using all wisdom and prudence to gain, or silence the Enemies thereof; to defeat their de∣signs, and avoid their snares; fearless of whatever may betide us in the re∣gular, and necessary confession of the truth; and with meekness, tender∣ness, and long-suffering, endeavour∣ing to conquer the contrary errours and prejudices of Men. This is the instruction we reap from the preaching of Jesus; we are thence admirably inlightened in the true Principles of pure and undefiled Religion; and instructed how we ought to hold, profess, inculcate, and defend them.
CHAP. III. The Life of Christ consider'd as our Pattern and Example. THE Son of God came into the World, to restore Religion and plant Holiness in it, not only by the instruction of his Doctrine, but by the lustre of a great Example. He hath not only guided us with his Mouth, but led us also by the hand; as we must abide in his words, so we must tread in his steps. Therefore he dwelt among us, that he might give the World (what it never had be∣fore) a perfect and unerring Exam∣ple of Life; and therefore his Life is upon record by the care of the Holy Ghost, that we might have the in∣struction and the incouragement of it; and be obliged and perswaded to make it the pattern of ours. In order to which, we shall first make an ex∣tract out of the holy Evangelists, of the Life of Jesus, as an admirable
pattern of all Vertue; and then con∣sider the instruction and the obliga∣tion of it. In the Life of Christ we have a perfect and unerring Example of Vertue, without any allay or mix∣ture; so fitted to all conditions of Men, that in every case they may draw instruction, and encourage∣ment from thence. More particu∣larly First, Christ hath left us in his Life an Example of Piety; of a con∣versation led much with God, testi∣fying a right knowledge, an affectio∣nate sense, a superlative love of God, by all proper expressions and genuine fruits thereof. His Life was visibly devoted to the service of God, his fixed resolution, and his profess'd business was to do his will. I came into the World, saith the holy Jesus, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me, Joh. 5.30. Most rea∣dy he was to fulfil all Righteousness, and execute every command of his Heavenly Father, Matth. 3.15. this
he accounted fit and becoming; 'twas more necessary in his esteem, and pleasant in his sense of it, than his necessary food, Joh. 4.32, 34. I have meat to eat, that ye know not of, for my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work. Nor did his resolution flag when tryed to the utmost; for he refused not to drink the Cup which his Father gave him;Matth. 26.39. he prays that God's will may be done, with full consent, and with∣out any reluctance of his own; and he bowed his head upon the Cross in humble submission to the Execu∣tion of the Divine Will. He left us an Example too of con∣stant and fervent devotion, testified by a reverence for, and adherence to the holy Scriptures, that contain'd the mind of God; by a diligent fre∣quenting the publick Assemblies for the worship of God, both in the Temple and the Synagogues; by ha∣ving recourse to God upon every fit occasion, and praising him and gi∣ving him thanks in all things; by
extraordinary Prayers and Fasting, and watching thereunto upon extra∣ordinary occasions, by a religious care of his Family, or constant at∣tendants, praying with them and in∣structing them; and all this practi∣sed in the most intense degree, and reverent manner. He spake with all manner of regard and deference to Moses and the Prophets, Search the Scriptures, for in them ye have eternal life, Joh. 5.39. and think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; for whosoever shall break one of the least of these Com∣mandments, and shall teach men so, shall be call'd least, i. e. shall have no part in the Kingdom of God, Matth. 5. he constantly worship'd in the Sy∣nagogues on Sabbath days, Luk. 4.16. and was daily, that is, frequent∣ly in the Temple, Mark 14.49. and a religious observer of the Passover and other Festivals, Joh. 10.22. he dis∣coursed much of God, gave him thanks at his Meals, retired fre∣quently for private Prayer and Hea∣venly
Solitude; he taught his Disci∣ples to pray, and he prayed with them; the Garden in which he was apprehended, was a sort of Family-Chappel, or Oratory, whither Jesus was wont to resort, with his Disci∣ples, for the Exercise of their Fami∣ly-Devotion, Joh. 18.1, 2. In the Life of Jesus, we have a pat∣tern of zeal for God and his Glory, tender, and earnest, and constant; though pure from affectation, and from bitterness, not transporting him beyond just, and peaceable, and charitable bounds. Careful he was that God might have the glory of all that he said and did, Joh. 14.13. he never shewed himself so concern'd as when the honour of God was at stake, nor angry but when that was violated. This made him, who was meekness it self, so sharply reprove those Monsters of Men, the Scribes and Pharisees, who made bold to serve themselves of God, and made void his Commands by their Tradi∣tions, Matth. 23. therefore he seems
transported at the prophanation of the Temple, the House of Prayer being turned into a Den of Thieves, Luke 19.46. Joh. 2.15. he rejected the Devils proffer of the Kingdoms of the World, the price of Idolatry, with holy indignation, Get the behind me Satan, Matth. 4.10. and he rejects Peter as if he had been another De∣vil, when he opposed the will and the glory of God, Matth. 16.23. Get thee behind me Satan, for thou art an offence unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of Men. So fervent and zealous was the piety of Jesus, it was unaffected, yet great and constantly professed, not boasted, but unshaken; that was not imprudently importune, and trou∣blesome to others, but steady and even, and absolutely conquering all opposition it met withal. To love God with all the heart, and Soul, and strength, includes somewhat more than a right knowledge, or honour∣able opinions of him; it implies fer∣vour,
and delight, and constant reso∣lution. Religious and holy Men, must put on a presence and greatness of Mind, and not be afraid or ashamed to appear what they are, such as love God, and desire, and seek, and delight in him above all things. Thus Jesus teacheth us by his Example, in which also, we see a Life of Godliness and Devotion, not led in a Cloyster, but (which is more perfect) in the World in a busy station, where Godliness and Charity went hand in hand, and took their turns; and he that was so zealous for God, was also useful and profitable to Men. For secondly, In the Life of Christ  we have an unparallel'd pattern of the greatest good will, and noblest Charity towards men; evidenced in his whole Conversation, conspicuous in all his Discourses, the Life and Soul of every thing he did. For his Life was a constant Scene of Charity, and his Death the consummation of it; for he laid down his Life for the be∣half, and in the stead of Men, to pro∣cure
them the greatest good they are capable of, reconciliation to God, and Eternal Life. To collect therefore the instances of his Charity, would be to recount all his Miracles, which St. John saith, the World could scarce contain the voluminous account of; 'twould be to recite the story of his whole Life, which was one intire de∣monstration of good will, a most use∣ful and benign conversation. But to hint some particulars, He exemplifi∣ed his Charity by a free and obliging Conversation; accessible and affable to all sorts of men, complyant with their Customs, and easy in his de∣mean toward them, so far as might consist with Innocence and Prudence. For this frankness of his Conversati∣on, he underwent the reproach of a Wine-bibber, and a friend of sinners, Matth. 11.19. And the supercilious Pharisees were offended at this, that he accepted the Persons and the In∣vitations, and made himself a Guest to Publicans and Sinners, Matth. 9.10. If he were a Prophet (say they) he
would have known who touched him, for she is a Sinner. But our Saviour an∣swered them, that the Physician is proper Company for the sick; that he conversed with all sorts of men, because he sought the good of all; for he came to seek, and to save, and to call to repentance, Matth. 9.12, 13. Nor indeed is it the property of Cha∣rity to be shy and estranged, morose and rigid; but to be complaisant and accessible, and to please all Men, in all things that are innocent and in∣offensive. A good Man can't indeed chose his intimate Friends among the dissolute and profane rout; for what agreement hath Light with Dark∣ness; but he is affable and courteous to all, and separates not himself from their Conversation, unless in great Charity, by order of Church-Cen∣sure, for the bringing a Sinner, by shame, to Repentance and Amend∣ment. Again, Jesus full of good will and Charity, studied quietness, and to preserve peace and order amongst
Men. He espoused no Party, nor pro∣voked any by busy pragmaticalness; he would not be a judge or divider, Luke 12.14. Tender of giving of∣fence, he was gentle and mild in his reproofs, where the case would admit of it. Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith, Matth. 14.14. He both taught and practised Obedience and subje∣ction to Government; that Piety should not be a pretence to the dis∣charge of Loyalty, but that Caesar have his rights as well as God, Mat. 22.21. He paid the tribute of the Sanctuary, at the expence of a Miracle, rather than he would give offence, notwith∣standing he might have held himself excused in strict right from that pay∣ment, Matth. 17.27. He rebuked Pe∣ter when he drew the Sword against the Officers of the High Priest, though it was to defend his innocent Master; and denounced upon that occasion destruction to all that shall usurp the Sword without legal Commission; They that so take the Sword, shall perish by it, Matth. 26.52. Thus he taught
us by Example as well as Precept, to follow Peace, to study the quiet and welfare of Societies, to do what in us lies to render Government easy and prosperous; as a noble instance of Charity and good will to Mankind. Farther, Jesus exemplified his Cha∣rity, and instructed ours, by that pi∣tiful and compassionate sense that he constantly expressed, of the Needs, and Miseries, and Misfortunes of Men. He had compassion on the multitude, and heal'd their sick, Matth. 14.14. His Bowels were moved, when he saw the desolate Widow mourning over her only comfort, then departed, and in his pity he restored her Son to life, Luk. 7.13. He wept over the City of Jerusalem, at the thought of that desolation that was to come upon it, though as a just punishment for their outragious injuries against himself, Luk. 19.41. much more was his ten∣der spirit grieved, and troubled for the hardness of their hearts, Mark 3.5. and because they knew not in the day of their Visitation, the things of their
Peace. This is Charity like that of God; who is the Father of pities, and full of Bowels, James 5.11. and such must ours be if we be his Children; we must put on as the elect of God, bowels of mercy, be tender-hearted, and compassionate one towards another, Colos. 3.12. Nor did the Charitable Jesus only pity, but he relieved also the needs of Men. His Charity set on work all his powers, and drew forth all his treasures for the help and succour of the miserable. He went about doing good, Acts 10.38. his very Garments were tinctured with benign influen∣ces; and all his Miracles were works of Charity, demonstrations of his love; and he did these good turns most readily and chearfully, in the most obliging manner, and most pro∣fitable kind. He gave Alms to the Poor, out of his small and precarious Revenue, Joh. 13.29. He relieved at once the bodily and spiritual wants of sick and sinful Men; and taught us to judge our Charity by the good
fruits of it, by our readiness to every labour of love. Again, the Charity of Jesus exem∣plified was of the right Stamp, not soon angry, nor at all revengeful, but shew'd it self in meekly bearing affronts, and forgiving injuries. When his Disciples would have fetch'd fire from Heaven, to avenge the rudeness of the Samaritans; they mistook (as he tells them) the Spirit of their Ma∣ster, for he came not to destroy, but to save, Luk. 9.55. Therefore as all the contradiction and opposition of bru∣tish men, did not alter the sweetness of his disposition towards them; so when he fell into their malicious hands, he endured their mockery and cruelties, without ever reviling them, or answering again to their taunts and derisions, and when they put him to death, he forgave the most ungrateful Enemies that ever were; he mildly ascribed their wickedness rather to Ignorance than an obsti∣nate malice, and prayed for them to his Father; Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do, Luk. 23, 34. Thus the Holy Jesus is become a pattern to us of a busy and fruitful Charity, full of good fruits, and of a meek, long-suffering, gentle and for∣giving Charity; that could no more revenge ill turns, than refuse to do good ones. And this his beneficence and love to men it was universal; not confined to a Party, to his Followers and admirers, but extending it self to all men; and to all their needs. He did good to the unthankful and to the injurious; to those that did him all the evil they could, and this good he was constantly ready to do, for his Charity was fervent and un∣wearied; he sent none away ashamed that had recourse to him for succour, but rather wondering at his kindness, blessing God who had rais'd him up, and blessing him for so frank and great relief as he bestowed on them. No opposition could make him give over his charitable designs, and he pursued them with all manner of condescention as well as industry;
making himself a Servant, or as one that served; bearing the follies, the prejudices, and the weakness of men, and denying himself his own liberty, and ease, and times of refreshment; spending the day in charitable im∣ployments, and redeeming time as he could from the night, and from sleep, for Heavenly Solitude, which no doubt was very delightful to him that so perfectly knew God, and the happiness of enjoying him; and there∣fore 'twas the greater self-denial, to cut himself short in those divine plea∣sures, for the sake of doing good to Men. By this Example of Christ we learn, that it is more blessed to give than to receive, that it is better to forgive injuries than to revenge them, that we have no reason to except against any labour of love, and that true Cha∣rity can't be cold and indifferent; that it is insolent pride and folly to stand upon punctilio's of place or preroga∣tive, but that rather after the example of Christ, he that is greatest should become servant of all.
Thirdly, Jesus hath left us an Ex∣ample of spotless Innocence and pu∣rity, from all the defilements of the Flesh and the World; of the due go∣verning those desires and affections that respect pleasure and delight. John the Baptist put on the habit of a Hermite, professed abstinence and severity, Matth. 11.19. but Jesus came eating and drinking, not forbearing the use, but the excess of comfortable en∣joyments. He neither retired from the World, nor yet ran eagerly into the embraces of it; his conversation was grave, but not morose; he was above the vanities and impertinencies of the World; but was not trouble∣some in quarrelling and censuring such as were innocent and tolerable. He ever expressed a mind full of the sense of a better World, and too great to be allured or cheated with the gai∣eties of this. He with holy indigna∣tion rejected the proffer of riches and honour, yea all the Kingdoms of the World, when his Innocence must be the price, and God must be dishonor'd
for them, Luk. 4.6. He chose not his pleasures and delights from sense, and the World, but from Reason and Re∣ligion, from spiritual injoyments and well doing. He lived upon the Pro∣vidence of God, and the benevolence of his Followers, who ministred to him of their substance, without solici∣tude or complaining; though he had no setled Revenue nor fixed abode; not so much as where to lay his head, Matth. 8.20. Yet he had a chearful, ge∣nerous, and hospitable mind in that mean condition, and was better plea∣sed in it, than Worldly Men are in their greatest affluence and superflu∣ities. His conversation was useful and charitable, savouring of God, and Rea∣son, and the Spirit, not of the World and Flesh. He chose too some severities and hardship, fasting and watching, and self-denyals; not because he needed them, but to shew us the way of keeping the body tame and governable; that it may neither clog and hinder, nor boldly interrupt the application of our minds to God and
things divine. From which Example we learn the true rules and measures of Temperance, how we are to esti∣mate, pursue, and use the pleasures and delights of Life, viz. that in our setled judgment and fixed choice, pre∣ferring the things of another Life be∣fore all the interests and delights of this, and keeping a constant acquain∣tance and conversation with those better things; we abstain from all that use and injoyment, not only which makes an Inroad upon Justice or Charity, but from that too which deadeneth and palls our taste for Spi∣ritual things, and abates our delight in them: Such pleasures as make the mind soft, and feeble, and trifling, and leave a fondness for, and awaken our passions towards this World, but cool and trash us in our desires and pur∣suits of a better. Moreover, that we not only be chearful and contented in every lot, but that we daily con∣tract our desires and Appetites, and have our minds more free from im∣portune and violent longings. And
then (as the consummation of the habit) that the sense of carnal and secular delights, be swallowed up in the brighter and more gustful plea∣sures of Virtue and Holiness. When we are crucified to the World, and almost wholly indifferent, as to the delights of it; when we neither doat, nor long, nor fret, nor envy, nor yet swell with hope, or seem ravished with injoyment; but rather think meanly of all the entertainments of this World, as having nothing agree∣able to our Heavenly Mind, nor wor∣thy of a passionate regard. To this consummate State we must be daily pressing forward, and judge of our safety by our approach to it, viz. as the sense of Worldly delights cooleth, and that of Heavenly ones grows and swells. Fourthly, In the Life of Christ, we  have an admirable Pattern of an In∣vincible Fortitude, of a Mind as much above the terrours of sense, as the de∣lights of it; that could no more be broken by the troubles and misfor∣tunes
of Life, than soften'd by the in∣joyments and pleasures thereof. He is become an Example to us how to maintain our Resolution and Inte∣grity; and to keep a due decorum in the midst of great sufferings, or great fears; and not to be vanquish'd by the frowns of the World, any more than by the blandishments and al∣lurements of it. For Jesus was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; he drank deep of the Cup of Afflictions, being as∣saulted on every side; afflicted by God, and persecuted by Men, and pursued by the utmost art and malice of Devils. He suffered contempt, and contumely, and the blasphemous con∣tradictions of Sinners; their insolent mockeries and barbarous insults and triumphs over him, as baffled and conquer'd: Save thy self, thou King of Israel, and come down from the Cross, and we will believe on thee, Luk. 23.37. and when he was not in their hands, yet he had always reason to appre∣hend their malice, and to fear their
power. His condition was mean and friendless, and his Adversaries po∣tent, such as had persecuted former Prophets, and openly declared their hatred of him; such as had the Go∣vernment in their hands, and had used it against him, by decreeing to Excommunicate those that should own him. But in the midst of these his fre∣quent Sufferings, and continual fears, he maintain'd a firm Resolution, and a venerable decorum; and left us an Example, that we should tread in his steps. He was neither fearless of evil, nor stupidly insensible under it. When his Passion drew nigh, his Soul was troubled, and sore amazed, heavy and exceeding sorrowful, Matth. 26.38. Though he refused not the Cup, yet he pray'd, if possible, it might be removed, Matth. 26.29. He resented the Hypocrisy, the Ingratitude, and Cruelty of his Enemies; Many good works have I done, for which of these do ye stone me? Joh. 10.32. He did not dare, and provoke their rage, but
prudently avoided it, whilst inno∣cently he might do so. But he did not so fear the power of his Adver∣saries, as to omit his duty; or to do any evil thing for the avoidance of it. He resolutely professed and taught the truth, which they were not able to bear; He encountred the errours and prejudices of the Age; and re∣proved the Vices of it. He did not sooth or flatter any party of Men; but dealt plainly, and spake freely, and lanced smartly the ulcerated Hy∣pocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, that were the most potent and popu∣lar Faction. He would not shrink from the truth, nor mince the mat∣ter, though they heard him with ma∣lice in their hearts, and stones in their hands, Joh. 10.31. He would venture again among them to raise Lazarus from the dead, though they had so lately sought to stone him, Joh. 11.8. He would go up to the Passover, ac∣cording to the Law, though he fall thereby into the hands of the Chief Priests, who will be sure to Sacrifice him to their rage.
When he was overtaken with evil, he did not struggle and complain; he was not over-born and sunk with it; he indured all their taunts and re∣proaches, without being discouraged; and when he was reviled he answer'd not. And he suffer'd with undaunted Courage and resolution, and unbro∣ken Patience, a violent, shameful, and cruel Death. Nor was it lowness of Spirit that made him silent; for he was not afraid to confess the truth to the last. But his Mind was exalted above the impression of evil, by di∣vine consideration, Faith in God, and reverence of his Government. He knew the power they had against him was from Heaven, Joh. 19.11. and he acquiesced in the equity and goodness of the divine determination and disposal. Hence he maintain'd his Empire over the Passions, free from the disquietude of anxious Fear, or the torment of ouragious Anger, the smart of peevish Impatience, or the sinking load of melancholy de∣spair. He possessed his Soul in Pati∣ence,
steady in the greatest change of condition, as one that expected it, that was not mightily concern'd at it, that consider'd chiefly how he might adorn every Lot, and honour the supream disposer of it. From whose great Example we learn, not foolishly and imprudently to provoke Enemies, or to throw our selves into their hands, or bring our selves into a state of suffering; but that we chearfully take up the Cross, when God lays it in our way, so as we cannot, with a safe Consci∣ence, step over, or beside it. We learn too, to consider the state we are in, and not to flatter our selves with a constant immunity from the affli∣ctions of it, to expect as Jesus did, the hour and the assaults of the pow∣ers of darkness: At least always to re∣member, that there is nothing un∣changeable but God, nor constant but his favour. That we ever mix with the considerations of this state, our lively hopes of a better; for then only will these momentany afflictions
seem light and short, when the massy Crown of eternal glory is put into the counter-ballance. That we learn to value our selves altogether upon our interest in God, and in the World to come; that so we may neither in∣ordinately fear, nor resent the loss of such things as leave our greatest con∣cern and interest intire & untouch'd, and secure to us. That we may then rejoice in our better portion, and be thankful to the donor of it, when he cuts us short in the possessions and interests of this Life. Yea, that we rejoice in every condition of Life, so far as it may administer to our Eternal Salvation; and that we be upon our guard to do nothing, that is unbecoming the dignity we are ad∣vanced unto by the grace of God and the expectations we have from him. That therefore all our contrasts with the evils of this World, may be as un∣passionate as is possible; and we our selves as calm, unmov'd, and generous, as becometh the Heirs of a better. We see that all the Afflictions of
Jesus did not lessen him with God nor good Men; no more can ours, if we bear them as he did. Nay he shone brightest in suffering, by the Evidence he gave of a great Mind in a narrow Fortune, and an afflicted State. So that we are invited to wish for his Portion, and to be in his stead; rather than to pity him, or dread his condition. We see too that though his sufferings were incomparably great, the divine strength and consolations were suffi∣cient for him, and the same God has promised not to lay upon us more than he will inable us to bear, and we shall be ashamed to sigh under our pettit burdens, if we consider how holily and composedly Jesus bore those vast and heavy loads. There is also no provocation to anger, fear, or impatience, which Jesus hath not conquer'd; and thereby made it easy for us to do so after him. For how can we complain of any portion, that is far less bitter than that of the Son of God was. How shall we complain of God, if he chastens us gently for
our sins, and for our profit, that we may be partakers of his holiness; when he so grievously bruised his own Son for our iniquities, who him∣self was innocent and pure. Or how can we think much of any ill treat∣ment from Men, after that which Jesus met withal. Never any person deserved so well from the World, ne∣ver any suffered so barbarously from it. But nothing can harm that doth not provoke us; and we see from the Example of Christ, and a multitude of his eminent followers of all condi∣tions, that it is both possible and glo∣rious to surmount all the afflictions of this life, to expect the changes and tempestuous Calamities of it, without anxious fear; and to bear them, without murmuring and despair. Fifthly, In the Life of Jesus, we  have an unparallel'd Example, of wonderful humility and lowliness of mind; and he hath bidden us learn of him to be meek and lowly, Matth. 11.29. the Apostate Angels became such, by aspiring to be higher; but the Son
of God emptied and humbled himself, to the form of a Servant, to the por∣tion of Sinners, to the Death of the Cross; he made himself of no reputation, Phil. 2.7. He was not ashamed of the meanness of that state he had descen∣ded into; nor did he seek to appear other or greater than he was. He sought not his own glory, but the ho∣nour of him that sent him, Joh. 8.50, &c. When the people admired his Works, he took care that God might have the praise of them, professing that he had received all from the Fa∣ther, who was greater than he; that he could do nothing of himself but as the Father gave him commandment and power. In his whole Life there is not the least passage that savours of vain-glory. He conceal'd his Works of Fame and Wonder as much as might be, and laid restraints on the publishers of them. He would not permit his Disci∣ples to publish his glorious Transfi∣guration till after his Resurrection. And when to fulfil a Prophecy he rode in triumph to Jerusalem, he was
still a humble King, riding upon the foal of an Ass, and going then to humble himself to the shameful death of the Cross, Joh. 12.15. He dispu∣ted not the will of God, whatever pains or condescentions were implied in doing or suffering it. He came not to be ministred unto but to minister; and he yielded himself with courte∣ous condescention to all sorts of Men. He disdain'd not the poorest or the vilest, nor stood upon punctilio's of state or distance; for he had taken upon him to be the Servant of God, and a dispenser of his grace to Men. He stoop'd therefore so low as to wash his Disciples Feet, the meanest office of a Servant; and he did this to give us an Example, that we should learn humility of him, Joh. 13.15. And as he was sweet and lowly towards all, and entirely submitted to the will of God, so he could bear to be ill thought of, and evil intreated, indured meekly the contempt and obloquy, that he most unjustly met withal. He did not aggravate the affront, by suffering
pride and self-conceit to mix with his resentment of it, but mildly expostu∣lated with those that affronted him, in such sort as might convince and melt them: If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom do your Children cast them out? Matth. 12.27. so he refutes the most blasphemous impu∣tation of the Pharisees; who ascribed his Divine Works to a Confederacy with Hell. He mildly censured per∣sons that were in a fault, if there were hopes to bring them to Repen∣tance, and cast a covering over their shame: Go and sin no more. And he that is without sin let him cast the first stone, Joh. 8.7, 11. Thus was he at once free from any high conceit of his own Excellencies, and from being a proud and censorious Remarker of the defects and faults of others; gen∣tle towards all Men, lowly in his own esteem of himself, and a humble Ser∣vant of the will of God. Now from this Example we learn, that true humility consists not in Satyrical Declamations against our
selves; which are often rather the effects and instruments of spiritual Pride: but to be humble, is to have a high veneration of God, and a pro∣found submission to him; it is to e∣stimate and consider our selves as ab∣solutely depending on his free good∣ness; it is to ascribe all that is good wholly unto God the Author of every perfect gift, and to call nothing our own but our Folly and Sins; to be content to be disparaged and meanly thought of; and to be willing to give to others that praise that is their due: It is to be free from ostentation and vain-glory, to be courteous and con∣descending, to love to be conceal'd, to be modest and treatable, content with a low station, and submitting to rule and government; to be mo∣derate in our designs, and calm in our pursuits, patient of disappointment, and candid towards the faults and in∣firmities of our Neighbours. And all this because we are self-diffident, and depend upon God, and acknowledge him to be all, and our selves but Va∣nity and nothing.
And what temptation can we have to Pride, when Jesus was such a Pat∣tern of Humility? Never was there such Knowledge, Wisdom and Power in any Man; nor was there ever any so full of the spirit of God, and yet he was meek and lowly: Who was the Heir of all things, the desire of all Nati∣ons, the Consolat on of Israel, the glory of the Gent and whom the Seas and Wind, and ll things obey'd, he having all Power in Heaven and Earth. What can we possess of com∣parable value to all this? or what can we contrive or bring to pass, comparable to the undertaking of Christ, and the great design of his Doctrine and Miracles; of his Life and Death? But we have much more reason to be humble, for whereas the great indowments of Jesus were not blemish'd with any fault of his, we have nothing but folly and shame to call our own. Repentance is our best Wisdom, and that is a conviction of Sin and Folly; and yet we are un∣steady in our Repentance, and fre∣quently
depart from our better pur∣poses, and have reason to blush and be humbled for so doing. Besides, it was the Wisdom and Perfection of Jesus, that kept him from being chea∣ted, or imposing on himself: Pride is all errour and delusion, but humi∣lity is truth. 'Twas humility that made all his other excellencies illu∣strious, and render'd him at once highly beloved of God and Men. And from his Example we learn, that he that humbleth himself shall be exal∣ted; for we see Jesus for his humility exalted to the right hand of God, and Crown'd with glory and honour. Lastly, As for particular relative  Virtues, Christ indeed did not enter into all Relations; but his Example was sufficiently compleat without it. He intended us a pattern in special of the most eminent Virtues, and most difficult to our frail and corrupt na∣tures; of substantial and zealous Piety, universal and fervent Charity, generous contempt of the World, in∣vincible Fortitude, and gentle and
self-denying Meekness and Humili∣ty; and he that follows him thus far, will need no farther instruction; but may easily become his own guide. He in whom Christ is thus formed, will certainly adorn every relation, and excel in it. 'Twill be natural and ea∣sy for him to conceive, what the ho∣ly, and charitable, the meek and lowly Jesus, would have done in such circumstances, if he had entred into them; and then he hath his pattern to go and do likewise. Nor yet are we without the Example of Jesus for our direction in several instances of this sort. His subjection to his Pa∣rents is upon record; and his tender care of his Mother, even in his last extremities, making provision for her on the Cross, by recommending her to the care of his beloved Disci∣ple, Joh. 19.27. His quiet subjection to Governours, when unjustly pro∣secuted by them. His pious care for the instruction of his Family, and training them up in Religion and Piety. But (as I said before) he that
hath received the Spirit of Christ, will not fail to express it in every condition; and he that acts by the measures of Piety and Charity, Puri∣ty and Humility, shall discharge him∣self of the duty of every relation, and be a true Follower of Jesus in it. This therefore may suffice for an extract of the Life of Christ, as a per∣fect unparallel'd pattern of all Holi∣ness, Virtue, and Goodness; that which follows is, That we apply the Light of this Illustrious Example, for our instruction, in the absolute ne∣cessity, genuine nature, due extent, and admirable excellency of true Holiness and the Christian Life. CHAP. IV. The particular instruction we reap from the Life of Christ. THE Life of Jesus consider'd as  our Example, doth fully in∣form and perswade us, First, Of the
absolute necessity of holiness, in or∣der to the Vision of God; and that the undertaking of Christ for us will no farther avail us, than as we are made partakers of his Spirit, and do copy out the Excellencies of his Life. 'Twas a design worthy of the Son of God, to plant and restore Holiness in the World, by his Doctrine and Ex∣ample, by his Life and Death, by all that he said and did to minister in∣struction and help thereunto, and to bind it upon us with such sacred Ob∣ligations, and fast ties, as are not ea∣sily to be broken. It is true, that Ho∣liness in general, that Piety, Justice, Charity, Sobriety in particular, do attract us with their native Beauty, and proper lustre; we can't but di∣scern the necessity of these Virtues to the perfection of our nature, to the attainment of Peace and Happiness, to the good and welfare of Society, and to the rendring us capable of in∣joying God. But because the voice of reason is too faint and low, and its representations too languid and
feeble to be much regarded, in the croud and noise of impetuous Lusts and Passions; and authority, exam∣ple and custom, false notions and prejudices, and levity of mind, op∣pose themselves strongly to the di∣ctates of Conscience, and endeavour to hide the shame, and abate the fol∣ly and absurdity of Vice: Behold therefore God hath spoken from Hea∣ven to awaken our drowsy Faculties; and sent his Son to shew us the only way thither. We may now be infi∣nitely certain, that there is no en∣tring into the glory of God, by any other path, than that which Jesus walk'd in; that we can become the Children of his love no other way, than by being conformed to the I∣mage of his dear Son; that we are not capable in this life, of any greater good than to have Christ formed in us; for this was God's ultimate de∣sign in giving his Son to us; that we through him might be made parta∣kers of the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.3. What a veneration for Religion, and
love of Holiness should this conside∣ration beget in us; that it is the best thing we are capable of, the sum of all God's merciful and kind intentions towards us; that best of Gifts, which the charitable Jesus, by his Incarna∣tion, Life, Death, Resurrection, A∣scension, (by all that he hath done, or shall do for us to the end of time) doth aim to bestow upon us, to in∣dow us withal. What a foolish and wretched judgment do we then make, if in opposition to the Wis∣dom and goodness of God we prefer Lust and Folly, and sensual delights? What divine Light and Grace do we resist and despise; if we still abide in darkness, continue in sin? And how foolish, false, and insignificant, are all our pretences to be Christians; whilst we are led by another spirit than that of Christ; and follow any Example sooner than his? For this is to reflect upon the Wisdom of God, and to despise his Grace, to reject his counsel for our Salvation, and to judge our selves unworthy of Eternal Life.
Secondly, From the Life of Christ  consider'd as our Copy and pattern, we are infallibly informed, wherein pure and undefiled Religion doth consist; or what are the things un∣doubtedly pleasing unto God. The Life of Christ was designed to be a perfect and unerring Example; such as the World needed, but never had before, nor should receive again. There can therefore be no heights nor degrees of perfect goodness, which his Life was a stranger to. But from his practice we learn, what are the things most agreeable to the mind of God; and most effectually recommending us to his love. And from him we learn, that the Essence of true Religion consists in spiritual holiness; that the most perfect Life, is a life of Charity and well doing; that to lay out our lives, and to be ready to lay them down, for the glo∣ry of God, and the good of Men; this is the top and consummation of Religion. When the inspired Writers of the Life of Jesus propound him to
our imitation, they do not shew him in a Cloyster, ranting at the World, and disdaining the Society of those that live in it, as unclean or less ho∣ly: we hear nothing of ecsttasies, and raptures, and passive unions with God in the fund of the Soul, of whip∣pings and rolling himself upon thorns and nails, and other severe Penances; of Miracles done in a private Cell, meerly for his own reputation, and to shew how dear he was to God up∣on the account of his austere and retired Life. After this sort, the Saints of the Roman Church are propoun∣ded as patterns of the most Heroick Deeds and perfect living. But if this be perfection, and the height of that Religion which Christ design'd to in∣courage; the holy Evangelists have quite mistaken the account of his Life; which was (as they report it) an exact transcript of his Doctrine: teaching us to seek perfection, by be∣ing like God in wisdom and good∣ness. In a word, to practise all Vir∣tue as we have opportunity, and a∣bove
all others to excel in Charity, to have our intentions and affections pure and holy, and to value our selves altogether upon the interests of another Life, but very little upon any advantage of this; herein con∣sists the true spirit, and height, and perfection of Religion, as it was taught and exemplified in the Life of Christ. It doth not then consist in a blind submission of our judgments to unintelligible Mysteries; in a zea∣lous adhering to a party, or in any particular Mode of worship, much less in the pompous splendour of ex∣ternal rites; in beautifying and en∣riching Altars, Shrines, and Images; in distinguishing days and meats, in vows of obedience, in voluntary or imposed Penances, in devout ge∣stures, or any thing of that sort: in all which unprofitable exercises, a man may be extreamly busy and zealous; and yet not transcribe any part of the Life of Jesus. And a Man may on the contrary walk as Christ walk∣ed; and yet have little or nothing to
do with the forementioned matters. He accepted indeed the oblation, and the penitential affectionate address of Mary Magdalen, when she anointed his Feet;Mat. 26.10, &c. he vindicated the Woman and her deed; and taught us not rash∣ly to censure the devout persons, stri∣ving sensibly to express their inward fervent Resentments: but at the same time he grants that Charity to the Poor is the most acceptable and in∣despensible Offering, and in ordina∣ry the better Test of Religion. As for himself he went about doing good; and taught us by his Exam∣ple that the Kingdom of God is not Meats and Drinks, or any thing else, but Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy-Ghost: a pure, a cha∣ritable, humble, and godly Mind and Life; without which nothing else can avail us, and with which in Sin∣cerity and good Degree, nothing else can be wanting to render us accep∣ted of God, and happy in his Favour. In short, if Religion were whatsome men make of it, the life of Christ is
very far from being an excellent Draught and Copy of it: and on the other hand, if the life of Christ be a true guide in Religion, then it will be found at last to be quite another thing than too many foolishly and wretchedly take up withal. Thirdly, From the Life of Christ  we learn, that his Disciples ought to excel, and not to rest in the lowest attainments. We do not else imitate his Life, which was a Copy of the most worthy and excellent perform∣ances of virtue and goodness in its greatest height, and brightest lustre. He hath required that our Righte∣ousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees; even such of them, who not only pretended, but did indeed live according to the strictness of their Sect, Matth. 5.20. And he will take an account of us what we have done more than o∣thers, and what approaches we have made toward the Heavenly Pattern, the perfection of God, Matth. 5.47, 48. If you love them that love you, what
do you more than others? Do not even Publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect. To abstain from scanda∣lous Crimes, is but the first Element of Christian Life; if we had learn'd of Christ,Ephes. 4.17, &c. Galat. 3.27. Galat. 4.19. Phil. 2.5. 1 Joh. 2.6. we must not only put of the old conversation, stinking with corrupt manners, but we must become new Men, and bear the Image of God in Righteousness and true Ho∣liness. To be Christians is to put on Christ, to have him formed in us, to have the same mind in us that was in Jesus, to be led by his spirit, and to walk as he walked. And that certainly implies more, than the forsaking of Idols, and the grosser debaucheries of those that knew not God; it sig∣nifies too, that Christians should be as conspicuously and eminently good, as those miserable Pagans were no∣toriously and infamously wicked. That we be rich in good works, fill'd with the fruits of righteousness, which are to the praise of the grace of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1.11. That we
shine as lights before Men, and be∣come the Salt of the Earth; such Ex∣amples of all that is good, as may re∣strain, direct, provoke, and influence others; season their Manners, and preserve them from stinking. Christ who hath set us so admira∣ble a Copy, will expect of us a pro∣portionable imitation; and he that walks in the flats of Virtue, upon the Borders of Vice, that indulgeth him∣self in the utmost of what he judges may be innocent; doth not walk as Christ walked, who busied himself in the best things; chose what was most severe towards himself, but most for God's honour, and towards o∣thers most kind and charitable. He that barely studies to be free from those sins that are clamorous in his Conscience, doth not answer the de∣sign of the Gospel; which hath a farther aim, to render its Votaries more perfect; partakers of the di∣vine nature, and Heavenly minded.
CHAP. V. The Obligation and Assistance of the Example of Jesus. HAving seen what instruction the Life of Christ contains, how it demonstrates to us the abso∣lute necessity of Holiness, the true nature and greatest instances there∣of. Let us now consider, what ob∣ligations to Holiness, and what in∣couragement and assistance therein, is derived to us from this great Ex∣emplar, and admirable Pattern of the Life of Jesus. For First, What else could be the de∣sign of God in thus giving his Son, not only to be a Sacrifice for sin, but also an Example to us of holy living? What, but to oblige us most pow∣erfully and indispensably to be fol∣lowers of him in the Excellencies of his Spirit, and of his Conversation. God gave his Son to be the Light of the World; not only by the Intro∣duction
of more excellent Rules of Life, but also by the lustre of a great Example; and his purpose and de∣cree was, that we might thereby be conform'd to the Image of his Son, that he might be the first-born among many brethren, Rom. 8.29. Therefore Je∣sus hath commanded us to learn of him, Matth. 11.29. and he that saith he abideth in him, ought himself to walk as he also walked, 1 Joh. 2.6. the sum of our Christian Profession and Duty, is to put on Christ, Rom. 13.14. i. e. to imitate the whole Body of his Sanctity; to bear the Image of the Heavenly, to resemble our Lord and Master in the Excellen∣cies of his Spirit, and in the actions of his holy Life. And this was the end, not only of his Life, but his Death too, he suffer'd for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.21. His Blood was the expiation of our Sin; but his Death too was a great Example of Self-de∣nial, and Charity, of Constancy in the truth, of resignation to God, of
Patience and Meekness, and other suf∣fering Graces; and the design was to reconcile our wills, as well as our Persons to his heavenly Father. 'Tis of great use to us to have a living Rule; an unerring Pattern of the divine and happy Life. Such a Perfect Exem∣plar the World wanted, all that had gone before having been blurred and blotted: the best of Men were Ex∣amples of Vice as well as Virtue, and the Precepts of wise Men, though short of perfection, were held for impracticable, because they them∣selves lived not as they taught; the Wisdom of their Discourses serving but to reproach the folly of their actions. Nor could Virtue plant and support it self by Philosophy and ar∣gumentation; whilst Vice had got the reputation of custom, and the advantage of mighty Examples. God therefore sent his Son from Heaven, to redeem men from their vain con∣versation received by tradition, con∣firmed by the custom of their Fathers; not only by laying down Rules and
Precepts of a Divine Life, and holy Conversation, but by setting a per∣fect, amiable, and inviting pattern of it. Now he that hath vouchsafed us so great a grace, hath obliged us to use it; and he that gave the Ex∣ample wills us to follow it. Beside, since the Life of Christ is but the transcript of his holy Precepts, our imitation is obedience and duty; and if we neglect to walk as he walked, we at once renounce his authority and despise his grace, and frustrate the design of his undertaking for us. But secondly, The obligation of so  great an Example is not greater than the energy and assistance of it. So that if we but look unto Jesus and consider his Life, it will by a holy influence and efficacy assist to the conducting of ours. For besides the general advantage of an Example, which is ever more prevalent than Precept; that of Jesus hath a singular influence, and eminent advantage to recommend and assist Piety and Goodness. For
First, In it the whole circle of our duty is represented, as possible, and easy, and suitable to our Life and State. Jesus so conversed with Men, that they after his Example might converse with one another. He pro∣pounded himself to our imitation, as a Man of the same mould with our selves; in a Conversation fitted to our circumstances, and complying with the weakness and necessities of our state. His Life was Natural, Ea∣sy, Innocent, Useful, well consistent with humane Society, and greatly advancing it. We can't indeed ar∣rive at his spotless Purity; but we may Copy out his Integrity, his Con∣stancy, his fervent Devotion, and in∣dustrious Charity; he hath shewn us by his Example, that his Yoke is easy, and his Commandments are not grievous. The Life he led, ap∣proves it self to our Reason and Judg∣ment, as fit for us; and therefore practicable by us. It is not a Life of transports, and prodigious Sallies; there wants nothing but a reasonable
resolution and holy prudence to make us followers of him and he hath pro∣mis'd his Spirit to supply that to us; and therefore hath in all things chalk'd out a way for us proportion'd to our strength, complying with our needs, and suitable to our Capacities. Secondly, In the Life of Jesus we discern the Beauty of Holiness, to at∣tract and invite our love and pursuit of it. How lovely, and with what majestick Beauty did his Innocence and Goodness shine? How magnificent and generous did his Charity, and his unshaken resolution; how amiable, decorous, and inviting, did his whole Conversation appear? With what assurance of Mind, serenity of affe∣ctions, greatness of Spirit, did he discourse, and act, enjoy, and suf∣fer, pursue all his designs, and bear all that befel him. Who can consider his demean in the hardest circum∣stances, even when oppos'd, revil'd, and persecuted, and would not wish to be in his case, and do as he did; who acquitted himself so well in e∣very
point, and enjoy'd so much of God in every Lot? Instructions may gain the understanding, but such an Example possesseth our choice and affections; and draws the whole Man to follow willingly in those ways that appear on all sides so beau∣tiful and pleasant. Thirdly, Every difficulty in our way is easily removed or conquer'd by looking unto Jesus. Pride and backwardness to condescend, must needs be ashamed and blush, and va∣nish; when we consider Jesus the Son of God, in the form of a Servant, ministring to the needs of all Men, and humbling himself to the Death of the Cross. Impatience at affronts or injuries, will no longer seem rea∣sonable or tolerable; than till you look unto the meek and patient Jesus, and see him unmoved at the great∣est Calumnies and Insolencies; pray∣ing and dying for the most outragi∣ous Enemies. We shall cease to com∣plain, and repine under our hard for∣tune; when we bethink our selves
that we are Sinners, and that Jesus who was free from Sin, bore with perfect submission those heavy and grievous loads, which God laid on him by reason of ours. The timorous and bashful, the faint-hearted must be confounded, or else inspired with vigorous resolution; if they but cast their Eye upon Jesus standing before the Chief Priest; witnessing a good Confession before Pontius Pilate, ha∣zarding his Life frequently in pub∣lishing the truth, and shedding his Blood willingly for the confirmation of it. For in all this we are to con∣sider, that it is pride and mistake of our selves that creates the difficulty of doing, or suffering the will of God; we have reason we think to resent af∣fronts, or to deny such condescensi∣ons, or to complain, or to shift for our selves, and to be excused from hazardous employment. And yet Je∣sus who was the most perfect and ex∣cellent, the best of Men, and the Son of God, served God without reserve; resign'd himself to him without con∣ditions;
and by his Example hath taught us, that in such an intire sur∣render of our selves to God, we can only find our Interest and our Peace. For Fourthly, From the Life of Jesus, we are assured of the wisdom of be∣ing holy; that when we chose and act as he did, we cannot be mistaken. He who was the wisdom of the Fa∣ther could not be deceived, nor de∣ceive us; the Life that he led must therefore be wisest and fittest, most agreeable to the nature of Man, and most conducing to his Happiness. He perfectly understood the nature of things, and the needs of Men; the real and appearing worth of all the enjoyments of Life; and of what consideration all the afflictions of it are, both in themselves and compa∣red with that glory that shall be re∣vealed. He could have made the best of a prosperous state; yet he negle∣cted the pleasures of Life; he chose the Cross and the Afflictions of Righteousness; he preferred the plea∣sures
of Innocence and a good Con∣science, and the enjoyment of God. The reason was because his under∣standing was exalted above all the de∣ceptions of Sin and Satan; he saw through all the false Colours and dis∣guises of the World and the Flesh; and knew the real difference of things. He knew that Holiness is Truth and Wisdom, and Perfection, but Sin the Errour, Delusion, Ignorance, and Folly. Fifthly, The Example of Jesus is recommended to our imitation, from the consideration of his love; for he that loved us to the death, could have no other design, in giving us an Example of Life, but to oblige us to pursue our own good; and to se∣cure our greatest interests. The love of Christ constrains us to confess the goodness of those paths he leads us in; let the World say what they will, these will have the safest Issue; best secure our present and our Eter∣nal Interests. If Humility were not better than Pride, Charity than Ha∣tred,
Mercifulness than Revenge; if indifferency to the World did not more consult our Peace and Happiness than the grandeur and the affluence of it; he that loved us so intirely as to lay down his Life for us, would not have led us in such a way; and by his authority and love have obli∣ged us to follow him in it. Sixthly, When we consider that Jesus was both God and Man; we must consider the Life he led, not on∣ly as wisest and best, but as God-like, and as near to Divinity as was possi∣ble. So that it is both our Wisdom and our Interest, and our highest Dignity, the greatest Exaltation and perfection that we are capable of, to put on Christ, and to walk as he walked. We are therein Followers of God; we do what he did in our nature, or would do if he could en∣ter into the present circumstances of our state. We do that which hath a tendency to exalt our Minds into the nearest resemblance, approach and union, with the Divinity it self.
Such is the Influence and Energy of the Example of Jesus; that (while we set it before us) as we have an excellent pattern of the most noble and difficult Virtues, so it represents the whole Circle of our duty, as pos∣sible and natural, an easy, even and stea∣dy path and course of action; as Ami∣able and Lovely, as reasonable in all its difficulties which Jesus had con∣quer'd for us, as the wisest and best measure of Life, which the Wisdom of God and his tender love hath chalked out for us, and as the high∣est dignity and advancement of our nature, whereby we become like God, resemble as much as may be the Heavenly Pattern, and are partakers of the Divine Nature and Life. CLOSE. NOW the inference from all the Premises is this; That we run with patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus, Hebr. 12.2. That we suffer the Divine Light of
his Doctrine and Life to shine into our Souls, that we be affected with the true Spirit of his Religion, and in love with his amiable Conversati∣on. That we study the holy Gospels for this end, that we may thence re∣ceive the Light of Life; that being fill'd with admiration and love of the fervent Godliness, and insuperable unwearied Charity of Jesus; his con∣descending Humility, Peaceableness and Gentleness, his unshaken Reso∣lution, unvanquish'd Fortitude and Patience; and frequently comparing our selves with this admirable Pat∣tern, we may blush for our Noncon∣formity, and endeavour to write more exactly after so fair a Copy. Let this consideration have a place in all our self-reflections, whether we have duly imitated and well repre∣sented, our dearest Saviour; or have not rather cast a scandal and re∣proach upon him. In all our delibe∣rations propound we him for our Ex∣ample; and let us form our designs and prosecute our business, as we ve∣rily
believe he would have done. Let us always remember, that to be a Christian is to be made like Christ; that to know God as he hath decla∣red him, and to serve him as he did, this is the summ of our profession and substance of our Religion. This is the saving knowledge of Christ to have the true Idea of his Spirit and Life, continually directing and in∣fluencing ours: to acquaint our selves with God, and with the true mea∣sures of Holiness and Righteousness; to have our hearts affected with the Beauty and excellency thereof, and to study to approve our selves unto God, after the Pattern that he sent us from Heaven; according to the Instruction and Example of his well-beloved Son. But what cause of reproof, of self-judging and humiliation is this, to the most that call themselves Chri∣stians; and yet follow any Example sooner than that of Christ; or else make heavy blots and blurs, whilst writing after so fair and admirable a
Copy. What a scandal is it to see how Christians mistake and misrepresent their Master and his holy Religion; and what a fatal delusion is it to think to reconcile contradictions that can never consist. That he who calls him∣self a Disciple, a Follower of Jesus, should industriously conform himself to the guise and custom of this World, should be led by the Examples of Im∣pudent Vice, afraid to abet forsaken truth and vertue; that the Disciples of the Innocent and Spotless Jesus, should wallow in carnal delights, lead sensual, vain and voluptuous Lives: that the Friend, and those that say they have interest in the Merciful, Self-denying, and devout Jesus, should be heaping up Riches by rapin and oppression, or by fraud and unjust gain, utter strangers to bounty and works of mercy; or else ungodly and profane, or trifling, cold, and formal Devotionists. These things can never consist; if our tem∣pers and our lives be not the tran∣script of the Mind and Life of Jesus,
we may call our selves what we please, but Christ will not know us; he will call us Children of the Devil, if we bear his Image and do his Lusts and Pleasure; and our judgment will be more severe, for taking upon us the name of Christ, to dishonour and profane it. If we say that we have fel∣lowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie and do not the truth, 1 Joh. 1.6. If we walk contrary to his Example we frustrate the design of his appear∣ance, we reproach the Wisdom of God, that sent us from Heaven this Light of Life; and if he had not come and spoken to us, it had been far better for us; for then we had had no Sin, in comparison of that heavy load of guilt that will sink and crush every ungodly and wicked Professor of the Christian Name. But if we would adorn our Profession, and honour the Author, and reap the Fruits of it, we must walk as Chil∣dren of the light, Ephes. 5.8. or as we are exhorted, Rom. 13.12. Let us cast off the works of darkness, and
put on the Armour of Light; let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying; but put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no provision for the flesh to fullfil the Lusts thereof. And that, (to enforce the Apostle's Exhortation with his own Argu∣ment) knowing the time,Rom. 13.11. that now it is high time to awake out of sleep: for now is our Salvation nearer than when we believed. That the time is coming, when the Members of Christ shall be universally filled with his Spirit, and our Blessed Lord be more wor∣thily imitated by, and glorified in his Saints: is an Article of the pious Belief, and hope of good Christians. The Prophecies concerning the ex∣cellent effects of his holy Religion, have not yet had their accomplish∣ment in any tolerable sense; and yet are too plain to be any other ways evaded, than as the Jews may e∣qually avoid the Predictions, from
whence we prove, that the Messiah is already come. For it is not e∣nough to say (with them) that our selves are in the fault, that the Pro∣phecies cannot be accomplished, and hinder the production of that beau∣tiful Issue, which Christianity (ac∣cording to the Divine Predictions) labours and travels withal. For those Prophecies are express, that it shall be delivered of that happy Birth; and bring forth by the Power of God. Who will set his hand to this work, and cause the Branch of Righteous∣ness to grow up; and cleanse the iniquity of his people, and cause the Captivity of Judah and Israel to re∣turn; and bring them health and cure by revealing unto them the a∣bundance of peace and truth:Jer. 33.6, 7, 8, 14, 15, &c. For be∣hold the days come; saith the Lord, that I will perform that good thing which I have promised; and this Prediction (as it follows) is sure as the Cove∣nant of the day and night, firm and irreversible as the Ordinances of Heaven and Earth. This Epiphany
of the Branch, and Reign of Right∣eousness, Truth and Peace, the New Testament-Prophecies teach us to expect at the close of the Christian oeconomy; as the Consummation and finishing Scene thereof: When Christ shall plead his own Cause a∣gainst the powers of darkness, against Sin and Satan which have hitherto reigned; and so break their Empire in pieces, that it shall never be able to erect it self more. And now to infer the Conclusion; this Salvation is nearer than when we believed,Rev. 14.15, 18, 19. the night of Pagan and An∣tichristian darkness is far spent, the Harvest of the Reformation is alrea∣dy past, and we have encouragement to hope the Vintage is approaching: when all the Grapes of Sodom shall be gathered, and cast into the Wine-Press of the wrath of God; when Christ shall intirely purge his holy Religion from all depravation, and inspire all that profess it with the true Spirit, and fill them with the genuine Fruits thereof.Hebr. 10.24. Let us there∣fore
consider our selves and one another, to provoke to love and good works, so much the more as we see that day ap∣proaching. By a diligent conforming our selves to the mind and life of Christ, shewing forth the Excellen∣cies of his Spirit and Conversation, we shall prepare the way of the Lord, and walk as those that look for and love his appearance. By this we shall verify our Prayers, that his Kingdom may come; and confirm in our selves and others the hope of its approaching. For when the Spirit that rested on Christ, shall abide on the generality of his Followers, and his Life be manifested in theirs, then shall our blessed Saviour be satisfied concerning the travel of his Soul, and glorified in his Saints. Then shall his Kingdom come (as we daily pray) and his Will be done on Earth as it is in Heaven, Amen. Even so come Lord Jesus; for thine is the King∣dom, the Power and the Glory, for ever and ever. FINIS.
