S208 R214745 99826822 31231
The WONDER of SUFFOLK: BEING A TRUE RELATION Of one that Reports he Made a League WITH THE DEVIL for Three years to do Mischief; And now breaks open houses, robs people daily, destroys Cattel before the owners faces, strips women naked, &c. and can neither be Shot nor Taken; but leaps over walls fifteen foot high, runs five or six miles in a quarter of an hour, and sometimes va∣nishes in the midst of multitudes that go to take him. Faithfully written in a Letter from a Sober person, dated not long since, to a friend in Ship-yard neer Temple-Bar, and ready to be attested by hundreds that have been Spectators of, or Sufferers by his Exploits, in several parts of Suffolk. With Allowance. LONDON: Printed for D. M. 1677.
A Letter out of Suffolk. SIR, BEing of late, after a tedious Voyage, happily arrived (through the gracious providence of God) at Harwich; though I have naturally an aversion to the foolery of Impertinent Complements, yet I should hold my self guilty both of Incivility and Ingratitude, should I not pay my Re∣spects to my Friends; amongst which num∣ber your self must ever claim a principal place. As for News, I shall not trouble you with any thing Forraign, since I have met with an Adventure more strange and surpri∣zing since my return, than any I encounter'd abroad: which for the rarity of it, I think fit to acquaint you with; setting down only the truth of the matter of Fact, as far as pos∣sible
my Inquiries and Discourses with the most judicious and concerned persons can in∣form me; who have taken some pains (after I heard the vulgar Rumour which is spread over all this Country) to be satisfied in the reality of the matter, and finde the same as follows: A man in High Suffolk was some months ago put into a Goal for Debt, or some mis∣demeanour by him committed: for he was always a person of a very loose life and Con∣versation. Whilst he continued a Prisoner, 'tis reported, that he made a League with the Devil to do what mischief he pleaseth for the space of three years, with Impunity, or without any danger of being taken or puni∣shed within that Term for the same: Which Report is occasion'd by himself, who has ut∣tered words to that purpose: for the truth of the thing is impossible to be known or proved by any other, save what may be col∣lected from the prodigious effects that have since happened; which put many sober per∣sons to a loss, whether they should reject or believe it.
But certain it is, that about two months a∣go he made his Escape out of the Goal, and no body can tell by what way or means, and cannot by all the vigilance or art they can use be retaken, though he continue in that Coun∣try, goes openly in the day-time, and often comes neer Ipswich Town; but lives wholly upon Villany, and seems to study Mischief and doing of spoil and damage to other peo∣ple, even though he himself get nothing by it: for his Actions are as follows: He commonly breaks into houses and robs the people; takes Bullocks, and (though they are so large as would require several men to lift them) can all-alone hang them up by the heels, where he takes off their Hides and sells them to Tanners at remote Towns. He takes away Calves before the Owners faces; and sometimes, by I know not what Charms and Spells, makes the Calves run af∣ter him, and leap over hedges or styles to fol∣low him. He robs the Spinsters that have received money for their Yarn, and tells them he can tell them before-hand how much money to a
peny they have got about them. When he meets with women, he strips them naked and ties them to Trees, and uses other barbarous Incivilities; having, as I was informed by credible persons, served several modest Ma∣trons and young Maids so of late, insomuch that scarce any of that Sex in the Villages where he haunts dare go abroad to Market, or other lawful occasions. He talks with many people, and asks them whether they have not heard of such a fel∣low: If they say no, he certainly robs, beats or strips them, and tells them, now they may honestly say they have met with him. If they say they have heard of him, then he confes∣seth he is the man; but in such case commo¦ly tells them he will do them no harm, and i as good as his word. Though his general Residence is in the Woods and Fields, yet sometimes he lies in Ale houses, but then sel∣dom discovers himself till he is going away: he talks there strangely and extravagantly; drinks hard, but pays for whatever he calls for: he has been surprised in houses against Brick-walls, and places where it was thought
impossible for him to escape; yet he has got away, sometimes vanishing out of the house where the people had thought they had secu∣red him, and sometimes leaping over Brick∣walls 10 or 15 foot high. When the people have thought they have been neer him, he on a sudden has appeared as far di∣stnt as they could see, above a mile off. He has  that at several times, but no Bullet can touch or hurt him: He puts men, women, and Chil∣dren in great fear, and tells the people that seek to take him, That he has yet above two years to Reign, and they are fool o trouble themselves about him in that time; and that just before he shall be taken to be hang'd (for that he confesses is his Destiny) he must kill some Women great with Childe. He is, though formerly a dull hea∣vy clouterly fellow, of late become so devilish nimble and light of foot, that he commonly runs 5 miles in a quarter of an hour. Having some business in Suffolk, I my self lately saw and discoursed with his own Brother, who with much sorrow related several of these particulars, and told several others and my self, That this strange fellow his Brother was then in a Wood neer the Town, and told a Gentleman he might escape him in the Road to Woodbriggs. We would have gone to see him, but the Towns∣people assured us that it was seldom or never his manner to be seen to such as look after him out
of curiosity; but whereas he falls upon other men that he meets with by accident, and easily masters them though there be several of them to∣gether, yet of these at other times he seems to be fearful; and so vanishes they know not how, or leaps over Quickset hedges, and comes at them no more. Several other wonderful stories I heard affirmed of him, which at present I have omitted: For he is the general Talk and Terrour of the Country. What to think of it I know not, but am sufficiently assured and satisfi'd of the truth of the matter in general, having heard the same attested by hundreds that have seen the fellow, and those good sober people whose Credit is in no wise to be doubted. Yours in great haste to command, W. S. Harwich, June 10. 1677. Postscript. YOu may if you please, shew what I have writ to any of your Friends: For though it be a strange, yet it is so true a story (as hundreds can witness) that considering the strangeness of it, you will perhaps finde as many Truths in it as ever you did in any Relation of this kinde, consisting of particulars so very wonderful. FINIS.
