S3004 31355802 110686
Hooker Mayor. Jovis xxvii. die Augusti, 1674. Anno{que} Regni Regis CAROLI Secundi An∣gliae, &c. xxvi. ORdered by this Court, That Mr. Sharpe be desired to Print his Sermon, Preached on Sunday last before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of this City, at the Guild-Hall Chappel. Wagstaffe. Imprimatur. Sept. 11. 1674. Guliel. Wigan, Rev. in Ch. Pat. ac Do. Do. Humf. Episc. Lond. in Sac. Dom. The Things that make for Peace. Delivered in a SERMON Preached before the Right Honourable THE Lord Mayor, AND THE Court of ALDERMEN, AT GƲILD-HALL-CHAPPEL, Upon the 23. of August, 1674. By JOHN SHARPE, D. D. now Lord Arch-Bishop of YORK. The Second Editon. LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's Church-Yard, 1691.
TO THE Right Honourable Sir WILLIAM HOOKER, Lord Mayor OF LONDON, And to the COURT of ALDERMEN. Right Honourable, THE following Discourse was ne∣ver designed to go further than your own Chappel, otherwise it had not been left so Imperfect: But since you have thought fit to Order it should be more Publick, it would ill become me, who
do in it so earnestly press Obedience to Superiours, to dispute your Commands. Such therefore as it is, I humbly present it to you, heartily wishing it may in some degree mi∣nister to the Promoting Peace and Unity, and Brotherly Love among us, which is the only thing therein aimed at, by Right Honourable, Your most Humble and Obedient Servant, JOHN SHARPE.
ROM. xiv. 19. Let us therefore follow after the things that make for Peace. THE Apostle's design in this Chapter, is to per∣swade the Roman Christians to live Peace∣ably one with another, notwithstanding all their different Perswasions in matters of Re∣ligion. He doth not so much set himself to Resolve their Contra∣versies, to determine which Side held the Truest Opinions; as to Silence their Disputes, to allay those Bitternesses and Animosities with which the several Parties prosecuted each other, to oblige them to embrace one another in Christian Charity; and though there could not be an Ʋnity of Judg∣ment among them; (which certainly is a thing can never be expected; mens apprehensions concerning things being necessarily almost as various as are their Tempers and Com∣plexions;) yet nevertheless they should so order the matter, that there might at least be an Ʋnity of Affection, and an a∣micable communication one with another. He represents to them that they had nothing to do to Judge or Censure their Brethren; Ver. 4. & seq. for they were God's Servants, and to Him only they stood or fell; that though they were mistaken in their Notions as to the Points in Controversie, yet nevertheless, if what was done upon those mistaken Principles, was done out of a pure heart, and as in obedience to the Commands of God, it would be accepted of him.
Ver. 13, 14, 15.He is so far from countenancing their Religious Quarrels, that he adviseth even those that held the true side of the Question, to submit for Peace sake, and rather to recede from their right; to forbear doing that which they might lawfully do, than by undue use of their Liberty to cast a Stumbling-block before the weak uninstru∣cted Dissenters, and be a means of their forsaking Christi∣anity. Ver. 17.And the more to enforce this Discourse he as∣sures them, that however they might pretend Religion for their present differences, yet in truth, That was of all other things the least interessed in them. They were much mistaken in the nature of it, if they took it to consist in such small, inconsiderable, external things as they made the matter of their Dissensions. Christianity was not much concerned, whether they are such kind of Meats, or whether they did not eat them; whether they kept Sab∣baths and New-Moons holy to the Lord, or whether they e∣steemed every day alike. That was a more inward, and a more noble thing. It was the hearty practice of Righteous∣ness and Peace, and Rejoycing to do good. These were the things that made a man a Christian; Ver. 18. and in These things (faith the Apostle) be that serveth Christ is indeed acceptable to God, and approved of men. And then at last from these several Particulars he draws this general Inference by way of Exhortation: Let us there∣fore follow after the things that make for peace. I have given you a brief account of the Apostle's discourse in this Chapter; and I could heartily wish that I had no oc∣casion to deal any further upon this Subject. Happy were it for Christians, if things were in that posture among them, that they were no further concerned in these Discourses of Scripture, than only to be instructed in the sense of them. But, alas, whoever understands any thing of the state of
Christianity, now for these many Ages in the World, will easily see that no one Point of our Religion has been in all times more necessary to be daily preached, to be earnestly pressed, to be loudly sounded in the ears of Christians, than this of Peace and Love, and mutual sufferance under their different apprehensions of Religion. It has fared (as one hath observed) with Chri∣stianity in this matter, Mr. Hales. as it did with the Jewish Dispensation of old. The great and principal Commandment which God gave the Jews, and which (as they themselves teach) was the Foundation of all their Law, was to worship the God of Israel, and Him only to serve: yet such was the sottishness and perverseness of that People, that This was the Com∣mandment, that of all others they could never be obliged to keep; but they were continually running a whoring af∣ter the Gods of the Nations, notwithstanding all the various ways and methods that God made use of to reclaim them from that sin. What the Worship of one God was to the Jews, that Peace and Love, and Ʋnity is to the Christians, even the grand distinguishing Law and Character of their Profession: and yet with sorrow, and to our unspeakable confusion it may be spoken, There is no Religion that ever was known in the World hath given Birth to so many He∣resies, hath been intituled to so many needless Disputes and Quarrels, hath been crumbled into so many Sects and Parties, hath been prosecuted by all the several Pretenders to it with so much heat and fury, and implacable animosity, hath been made the occasion of so much Tumult, War, and Blood∣shed, as this excellent, this innocent, and gall-less Religion of ours. To go no further than our selves, and the posture we stand in at this day; if ever any Society of Christians could be obliged to live in Brotherly Love and Communion with one another, we certainly are the Men. For besides the
engagements of our Religion, common to us with other Christians, we have all the external advantages which a wise and well-temper'd Settlement of Church-affairs, a mild and just Government, and excellent Laws can give to the pro∣moting thereof. Religion is established among us in as great Purity as ever perhaps it was since the Apostles times. The Government we live under, is neither so Lax as to de∣feat its own ends, nor so Severe as to exercise Tyranny over our Consciences. The Terms of our Communion are more large, and mode∣rate, and easie to be submitted to by men of different Perswa∣sions, than any other Church-Society that I know of doth allow at this day. And this is so acknowledged, that there is scarce any of the several disagreeing Parties among us, but next to their own Church would prefer Ours before all others. The Doctrines that make up our publick Confession are ex∣pressed in such a latitude, that they have been, and are ge∣nerally assented to, by most of the Dissenters from us. And that wherein We differ from others, is not our adding to the Faith new and questionable Doctrines, but our rejecting, or not imposing their Innovations. Our Publick Service hath not a Prayer in it but what any Christian in the World may lawfully say Amen to. Our Ceremonies are but few, and those very decent, and un∣questionably of Primitive Antiquity. The Penalties which the Laws inflict upon those that sepa∣rate from our Communion are so easie, and so moderate, that methinks Sober men should be ashamed to call them Persecutions; and should rather sit down contentedly under them, than by endeavouring, or desiring any Alteration, endanger the bringing the Church, and possibly themselves into far greater inconveniences than those they now suf∣fer.
In a word, so excellent is the temper of our present Settle∣ment, that there is no Church in the World, with which men of differing Perswasions may more safely communi∣cate; and under which, even Dissenters, if they be peace∣able, may live more happily than the Church of England. But now, how do we demean our selves under this hap∣py Constitution of affairs? What Fruits of the Gospel of Peace do we yield suitable to these great external Advanta∣ges? One might rationally expect to see Religion in quite another Face among us, than it hath in other parts of the World; and that enjoying such excellent means of Peace and Ʋnity as we do, and especially having sufficiently ex∣perienced the Miseries of Discord; there should no such thing as Faction or Division he heard of among us, but that we should All like Brethren Christianly joyn together with our Common Mother, and in smaller matters bear with one anothers Weaknesses, and Ignorances, and Mistakes, as doubtless God himself will; and as the Church, which is prin∣cipally concern'd, in many cases doth. But alas, the event doth too notoriously discover the con∣trary to all this, and that to the shame of our selves, and the reproach of our Church, and the scandal of Religion, and the rejoycing of our Enemies, and the grief of all good men. Never were our Differences higher, our Oppositions one of another more violent, our Schisms and Separations more numerous, and more obstinate than they are at this day. We dispute eternally, we quarrel without grounds, and without measure; we stickle for every Trifle, and are as much concerned for the propagating a silly Notion, which might very well be let alone without our being a jot the worse Christians, as if the Fundamentals of our Religion lay at stake. We revile, we reproach, we bespatter one another; and
though we be extremely scrupulous in smaller matters, yet we make no scruple of sacrificing charity, and the Churches Peace to every humour, and every passion. And whilest we are zealous in the matter of an Opinion, or a small Ceremo∣ny; we often lose all sense of Religion, and good Manners, and even Humanity it self. What the Consequences of these unreasonable and un∣christian Feuds may be, we know not. I pray God they do not end, either in a very great Corruption, or a total Subversion of Christianity among us. It was these sins, if it be lawful to guess at the reasons of God's Judgments from outward Appearances, that brought desolation upon those once flourishing Churches of Afric and Asia; and who knows, if they be obstinately persisted in, but they may be an oc∣casion of God's removing his Candlestick from us also. And now is it not needful that every Christian should use his utmost endeavour to still that Spirit of Contention that is gone forth among us? Is it not needful that every Son of Peace should bring some water to the quench∣ing of our Flames? Let me therefore this day take up St. Paul's exhortation to you; let me beseech you, let me conjure you; if there be any Consolation in Christ, if any Comfort of Love, if any Fel∣lowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies, that now at length laying aside all bitterness and evil speaking, all vari∣ance and emulation, all needless Disputes and Contentions, you would unanimously joyn together in following after the things that make for peace. And that my Exhortation may be the more effectual to the purposes I intend it for, I shall pursue it; First, by way of Direction; Secondly, by way of Motive. First, I shall re∣duce the Duty here enjoyned of following the things that make for peace to its particular Rules and Instances, that you may know what is to be done by you in order to the performance of it.
Secondly, I shall set before you the very great Engage∣ments and Obligations that lie upon us to follow after the things that make for peace; that you may be perswaded the more vigorously to set about it. And both these things I shall manage as near as I can, with respect to the present state and posture of Affairs among us, and withal shall always remember that my business is not to prescribe Laws or Rules to my Superiors for their Car∣niage in these matters, but only to represent the Duty that Christians of a private capacity do owe to the Publick, and to one another. As for the First thing, which is, to direct and instruct you in the performance of this Duty of following the things that make for peace, you may be pleased to take notice, That this Duty hath a twofold Object, according to the two different Relations and Capacities in which we are to be considered; to wit, the Church our Mother, and particular Christians our Brethren. In the first Relation we are considered as Sub∣jects; in the second as Fellow Christians. With respect to the former, the Peace we are to pursue implies Obedience, and Preservation of Communion, in opposition to Schism and Sepa∣ration. With respect to the latter, it implies mutual Love and Charity, in opposition to Quarrels and Contentions. My business therefore upon this first head is to shew what are the Particulars of our Duty, what are the means that con∣duce to Peace, in both these respects. And first of all, I begin with what is due from us to the Church in order to Peace, as Peace stands in contradistinction to Schism. And this Point I shall beg leave to discuss very freely, and very particularly; because I fear we have gene∣rally many false Nations about it; and yet it is a matter of such consequence, that I doubt not but the right under∣standing of it would go a great way to the Cure of the sad Divisions that are among us.
And that I may discourse with more clearness, and more evidence, I shall deliver what I have to say in this matter, by way of Propositions; taking my Rise from the first Prin∣ciple of Church-Society, and so regularly ascending. The first Proposition I lay down is this; That every Chri∣stian upon the very account of his being so, is a Member of the Church of Christ, and is bound to joyn in External Commu∣nion with it where it can be had. For the clearing of this, you may be pleased to consider, that the primary Design and Intention of our Saviour in his undertaking for us, was not to save particular persons with∣out respect to a Society, but to gather to himself a Church out of Mankind, to erect and form a Body Politick, of which himself was the Head, and particular Christians the Mem∣bers: and in this method through Obedience to his Laws and Government to bring men to Salvation. And this is no more than what is the Sense and Language of the Holy Scriptures; wherein whatever Christ is said to have done or suffered for Mankind, he is said to have done for them, not as scattered Individuals, but as Incorporated into a Church. Eph. 5. 25. Thus Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it. Act. 20. 28. Christ redeemed the church with his own Blood. Eph. 5. 23. Christ is the Saviour of his Body, that is to say, the Church, with many passages of the like impor∣tance. The plain Consequence from hence is, that every person, so far as he is a Christian, so far he is a Member of the Church; and by virtue of that Relation to the Church it is, that he hath any Relation to Christ, or any Title to the Priviledges of the Gospel. And agreeably to this Notion, it is very plain, that Bap∣tism, which is by all acknowledged to be the Ceremony of Initiating us into Christianity, is in Scripture declared to be the Rite whereby we are entred and admitted into the
Church. Thus St. Paul expresly tells us, that by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body. 1 Cor. 12. 13. And again, that Christ hath sanctisied, that is to say, Eph. 5. 26. separated his Church by the washing of Water and the Word. Now then it being thus evident, that every Christian as a Christian, is a Member of that Body of Christ which we call the Church: there will be little need of taking pains to prove, that every such person is obliged to joyn in External Communion with the Church where he can do so: for the very nature of this Church-membership doth imply it. With∣out this, neither the Ends of Church-Society, nor the Benefits accruing to us therefrom can be attained. First, not the Ends of it: The Ends of Church-Society are the more Solemn Worship of God, and the publick Pro∣fession of our Religion, and the mutual Edification one of a∣nother: Now, how these can be in any measure attained without associating together in publick Assemblies, and mutu∣al Offices, and other Acts of External Communion with one ano∣ther, cannot any ways be imagined. And as little in the second place, can it be conceived how without this we can be made partakers of the Benefits and Priviledges that Christ hath made over to the Members of his Church. For we are to consider that God hath so ordered the matter, and without doubt for this very reason, to unite us the more firmly in Society, that the Priviledges of the Go∣spel, such as Pardon of Sin, and the Grace of the Holy Spi∣rit, are not ordinarily conveyed to us so immediately by God, but that there must intervene the Ministry of Men. God's holy Word and Sacraments are the Chanels in which they are derived to us; and those to whom he hath committed the Ministry of Reconciliation and the Power of the Keys, are the Hands that must dispence them. We have no promise of Spiritual Graces, but by these means: so that in order to the partaking of them, there is an absolute necessity laid
upon us of joyning and communicating with the Church. It is true indeed, God doth not so tie himself up to these means, but that he can, and will in some cases, confer the Benefits of them without them: as in case of a General Apo∣stasie of the Church; or of Persecution for Religion; or of an unjust Excommunication, or any other case where Commu∣nion with a true visible Church is denied to us. But though God doth act extraordinarily in extraordinary cases, where these means cannot be had; yet this doth not at all dimi∣nish, much less take away the necessity of making use of them when they can be had. From what hath been descoursed on this first Proposition, we may by the way, gather these two things: I only name them. First, How untrue their Position is that maintain, that all our Obligation to Church-Communion, doth arise from a voluntary admission of our selves into some particu∣lar Congregation, and an explicit Promise or Ingagement to joyn with it in Church-Ordinances. 2. How wildly and extravagantly they discourse that talk of a Christianity at large, without relation to a Church, or Communion with any Society of Christians. The second Proposition is, That every one is bound to joyn in Communion with the established National Church to which he belongs, supposing there be nothing in the Terms of its Commu∣nion that renders it unlawful for him so to do. For if we are bound to maintain Communion with the Catholick Church, as I have before proved, it is plain, that we are bound to maintain Communion with that part of it, within whose Verge the Divine Providence has cast us. For we cannot communicate with the Catholick Church, but by communicating with some Part of it: and there is no communicating with any Part of it, but that under which we live, or where we have our Residence. Well, but it may be said, that there may be several Di∣stinct
Churches in the place where we live. There may be the fixed Regular Assemblies of the National Church; and there may be separate Congregations; both which are, or pretend to be Parts of the Catholick Church; so that it may be all one as to our communicating with that, which of these we joyn with, supposing we joyn but with one of them; and consequently there is no necessity from that Principle, that we should hold Communion with the Publick Assemblies of the National Church. But as to this I desire it may be considered, that That, that lays an Obligation upon us to joyn in Communion with the Church (to wit our being Members of that one Body of Christ) doth also lay an Obligation upon us, as much as in us lies to preserve the Ʋnity of that Body, (for this both the Fundamental Laws of Society, and the express Precepts of Christianity do require of every Member:) But now to make a Rent in, or separate from any Part of the Body of Christ, with which we may lawfully communicate (and such we now suppose the established Assemblies of the Nation to be) is directly contrary to the preserving the Ʋnity of that Body: And therefore certainly such a Rent or Separati∣on must be unlawful. And if so, then it must be unlawful also to joyn with any Congregation of men among us that have made such a Rent or Separation. So that, let our pretences be what they will, so long as the fixed Regular Assemblies of the Nation wherein we live, do truly belong to the Catholick Church, and we can lawfully joyn with them, it is certain we are bound so to do, and not to joyn with those Congregations that have withdrawn themselves from them; for to do this, would be to joyn in Society with Separatists, would be a partaking of their Sin, and a breach of the Apostle's Precept of Avoiding those that cause Divisions. Rom. 16. 17. The third Proposition is, That the being a Member of any
Church, doth oblige a man to submit to all the Laws and Con∣stitutions of that Church. This Proposition is in the general so unquestionable, that no sober man will deny it. And indeed, it is the Basis upon which all Societies are founded, and by which they do sub∣sist. For to suppose a Society, and yet to suppose the Mem∣bers of it not under an Obligation to obey its Laws and Go∣vernment, is to make Ropes of Sand, to suppose a Body without Sinews and Ligaments to hold its parts together. So that all the question here, is concerning the nature and extent of the Churches Power over her Members, how far, and in what instances she hath Authority to oblige them. Which is a question not difficult to be answered, if men would come to it without passion and prejudice. For it must be acknowledged, in the first place, that the Church must, as all other Societies, be entrusted with at least so much power over her Subjects, as is necessary for the se∣curing her own Welfare and Preservation: For to think o∣therwise, is to suppose God to have founded a Church, and intended the Well-being and Continuance of it; which are things that every one must grant: And yet to suppose that he hath denied her the use of the Means without which that Well-being and Continuance cannot be attained; which is monstrous and contradictious. Furthermore it must be granted, that the Welfare and Preservation of the Church cannot be secured but upon these two Suppositions. First, That Provision be made for the due and orderly performance of the Worship of God. Secondly, That there be means of maintaining Peace and Ʋnity among its Members. This latter is necessary to the Welfare and Preservation of a Church, as a Society, the former is necessa∣ry to it as a Religious Society. Now then this being admitted, it follows in the general, that whatever Power over her Subjects is necessary in order
to either of these things, all that at least must be supposed to be lodged in the Church, that is to say, in Those that have the Government of it. So that from hence it is plain, in the first place, that the Church hath power so far to restrain the exercise of her Sub∣jects Liberty, as to oblige them to all such Laws, Rules, Or∣ders, and Ceremonies as She shall establish for the more So∣lemn, Regular, Decent, and convenient Administration of Religious Affairs. And if it be questioned whether her Ap∣pointments do indeed conduce to that end, of that She her self is to be the Judge; Her Members being no farther concern∣ed therein, than only before they obey her Impositions to see that they be not repugnant to the known Laws of God. This Power the Church must be supposed to have, other∣wise She will not be enabled to make Provision for the first thing whereon her Welfare doth depend, viz. the Perfor∣mance of God's Worship and Service in a due and orderly manner. Secondly, From hence also it is plain, that the Church must be furnished with a Power to end and determine Con∣troversies of Religion that arise among its Members: that is to say, to give such an Authoritative decision of them, as that all Parties are bound to acquiesce in it: for without this she would be defective in the second thing required to her Welfare and Preservation, viz. maintaining her self in Peace and Ʋnity. But here it may be taken notice, that this Power of ending Controversies, which we ascribe to the Church, doth not im∣ply any Authority over our Judgments; or that in vertue thereof she can oblige us to give an inward assent to her De∣terminations, any further than she gives us evidence for the Truth of them: (which is that extravagant Power the Church of Rome doth challenge to her self) but only an Au∣thority over our Practices, that she can oblige us to submit
so far to her Definitions, as not to act any thing contrary to them. A Power in the former sense is not necessary to the Churches Peace; and the reason is, because our Judgments and Opinions, so long as we keep them to our selves, can∣not possibly cause any disturbance in, or do any injury to Society. But a Power in the latter sense is absolutely neces∣sary; for if men may be allowed to vent and publish what ever fancies come into their heads, and the Church have no Authority to impose silence upon them, it cannot be avoid∣ed but she will be over-run with Heresies, and embroiled in infinite Quarrels and Controversies, to the destruction of her publick Peace. The fourth Proposition is, That we can have no just cause of withdrawing our Communion from the Church whereof we are Members, but when we cannot communicate with it without the Commission of a Sin. For if we are bound to Communicate with the Church when we can lawfully do so, as hath been before proved; it is plain we are bound so long to continue our Communi∣on with the Church, till it be unlawful to continue in it any longer: But it cannot be unlawful to continue in her Com∣munion, till she require something as a Condition of her Communion that is a Sin. So that there are but Two cases, wherein it can be law∣ful to withdraw our Communion from a Church, because there are but two cases wherein Communion with her can be sin∣ful. One is, when the Church requires of us as a Condition of her Communion, an Acknowledgement and Profession of that for a Truth, which we know to be an Error. The other is, when the Church requires of us as a Condition of her Com∣munion, the joyning with her in some Practices, which we know to be against the Laws of God. In these two Cases to withdraw our Obedience to the Church is so far from being a Sin, that it is a necessary Duty; because we have an obli∣gation
to the Laws of God antecedent to that we have to those of the Church; and we are bound to obey these no fur∣ther than they are consonant or agreeable to those. But now from this discourse it will appear how insuffi∣cient those Causes, how unwarrantable those Grounds are, upon which many among us have proceeded to Separation from our Church. For, first, If what I have laid down be true, it cannot be true that unscriptural Impositions can be a warrantable cause of separation from a Church; supposing that by Ʋn∣scriptural be meant no more than only what is neither Com∣manded nor Forbid in the Sciptures. For the Actions requi∣red by these Ʋnscriptural Impositions, are either in themselves lawful to be done, or not lawful to be done. If they be in themselves unlawful to be done, then they do not fall under that notion of Ʋnscriptural we here speak of; they are down∣right Sins, and so either particularly or in the general, forbid in the Scripture. If they be in themselves lawful to be done, then it cannot be imagined how their being commanded can make them unlawful: So that in this case, there is no Sin in yielding obedience to the Church, and consequently no cause of withdrawing our Communion from it. Nor secondly can it be true, that the Church requiring from us any doubtful or suspected practices as Conditions of her Communion, is a just cause of Separation: for we must have at least as much certainty of the unlawfulness of the actions enjoyned, as we have of our Obligation to the Authority that enjoyns them, before we withdraw our Obedience to it, otherwise we do not proceed upon safe grounds; but now we are absolutely certain, that God hath commanded us to o∣bey them that have the rule over us, but we are not certain that the actions we here speak of, are any where forbid by him; for if we were, they would be no longer doubtful or suspected, they would be certain Sins: so that if we will fol∣low
the surer side, as all Christians in these cases are bound to do, we must continue our Obedience to the Church, not∣withstanding we suspect or doubt the lawfulness of her Com∣mands. Neither thirdly can it be true, that Errours in a Church as to matter of Doctrines, or Corruptions as to matter of Pra∣ctice, so long as those Errours and Corruptions are only suf∣fered, but not imposed, can be a sufficient cause of Separation; the reason is, because these things are not Sins in us, so long as we do not joyn with the Church in them. So that so long as we can Communicate with a Church, without ei∣ther professing her Errours, or partaking in her sinful Pra∣ctices, as in the present case it is supposed we may do; so long we are bound upon the Principle before laid down not to separate from her. Neither in the fourth and last place, is the enjoying a more profitable Ministry, or living under a more pure Disci∣pline in another Church, a just cause of forsaking the Commu∣nion of that whereof we are now Members. The reason is, because we are not to commit the least crime for the attain∣ing the greatest good in the World: Now it is a crime to forsake the Communion of the Church whereof we are Mem∣bers, so long as her Communion is not sinful: But the enjoy∣ment of a less profitable Ministry, or a less pure Discipline doth not make her Communion sinful; therefore the enjoyment of a more profitable Ministry, or a more pure Discipline, cannot make a Separation from her lawful. The fifth and last Proposition is, That though we have a just cause to refuse Communion with the Church whereof we are Members in some instances, yet we are not therefore to proceed to so total a Separation from it as to erect New Churches in con∣tradistinction to it, or to joyn with those that do. The reason is clear from the foregoing Principles, viz. be∣cause we are bound to obey as far as we can, and where we
cannot, to suffer; but at no hand to disturb the Peace, or break the Ʋnity of the Church. Though we cannot comply with all that the Church requires of us, yet still we must joyn with Her in those o∣ther things where we lawfully can. Nay, though the Church should require those things as Conditions of her Communion so that unless we conform to them, we cannot at all communicate with her; yet still there is a Passive Obedience due from us: We must sit still and suffer, and not make a Rent in the Church by setting up one Altar against another. This is like the setting up a new and a distinct Govern∣ment in the Bowels of the State. Nothing can justify such a degree of departure as this, but only one thing; to wit, so great and general a Corrup∣tion of the Church, both in Doctrine and Practice, that the Salvation of all that communicate with her, is thereby en∣dangered: Which though it be the condition of the Mem∣bers of the present Church of Rome, yet I dare say, sew a∣mong us will affirm to be the case of them that communi∣cate with the Church of England. Thus have I as briefly as I could represented to you the Particulars of that Duty we owe to our common Mother, in the preservation of her Ʋnity and Communion. And I hope, I have not been so zealous for Peace as to have been at all injurious to Truth. I am confident I have said nothing but what is very agree∣able to Scripture and Reason, and the sense of the Best and Ancientest Christians. And I am certain, I have not in∣trenched upon any of those Grounds upon which our Ance∣stors proceeded to the Reformation of Religion among us. And for most of the things here delivered, we have also the suffrage of several, and those the most learned and moderate of our dissenting Brethren.
And now if after this any one be offended, as indeed these kind of discourses are seldom very acceptable; all I can say, is this, That the Truths here delivered, are really of so great importance to Religion and the publick Peace, that they ought not to be dissembled or suppressed, for any bad reception they may meet with from some men: but as for the manner of delivering them, I have taken all the care I could, not to give offence to any. I now pass on to the second part of my Task upon this Head, which is to consider the Duty recommended in the Text, with relation to particular Christians our Brethren. And here my business is to direct you to the Pursuit of those things that make for Peace; as Peace signifies mutual Love and Charity in opposition to Strife and Bitterness and Contentions. The things that make for Peace, in this sense, are more especially these that follow, which I shall deliver by way of Rules and Advices. The first Rule is to distinguish carefully between matters of Faith, and matters of Opinion; and as to these latter, to be willing that every one should enjoy the liberty of judg∣ing for himself. This is one thing that would help very much to the ex∣tinguishing of those unnatural Heats and Animosities, which have long been the Reproach of Christians. If men would set no greater value upon their Notions and Opinions than they do deserve; if they would make a difference between necessary points, and those that are not so: and in those things that are not necessary, would not rigorously tie up o∣thers to their measures, but would allow every man to a∣bound in his own sense, so long as the Churches Peace is not hereby injured, we should not have so many bitter Quarrels and Heart-burnings among us. But alas, whilest every one will frame a Systeme of Divinity of his own head,
and every puny Notion of that Systeme, must be Christn'd by the name of an Article of Faith; and every man that doth not believe just as he doth, must straight be a Here∣tick for not doing so: How can it be expected but we must wrangle eternally? It were heartily to be wished, that Christians would consider, that the Articles of Faith, those things that God hath made necessary by every one to be believed in order to his Salvation, are but very few, and they are all of them so plainly and clearly set down in the Scripture, that it is im∣possible for any sincere honest-minded man to miss of the true sense of them. And they have further this Badge to di∣stinguish them from all other Truths, that they have an im∣mediate influence upon mens Lives, a direct Tendency to make men Better; whereas most of those things that make the matter of our Controversies, and about which we make such a noise and clamour, and for which we so bitterly censure and anathematize one another, are quite of another nature: They are neither so clearly revealed or propounded in the Scripture, but that even good men through the great difference of their Parts, Learning and Education, may after their best endeavours vary in their sentiments about them. Nor do they at all concern a Christian Life, but are matters of pure notion and speculation. So that it cannot with any rea∣son be pretended that they are points upon which Mens Sal∣vation doth depend. It cannot be thought that God will be offended with any man for his Ignorance or Mistakes con∣cerning them. And, if not, if a man may be a Good Christi∣an, and go to Heaven whether he holds the right or the wrong side in these matters; for God's sake, Why should we be angry with any one for having other Opinions about them than we have? Why should we not rather permit men to use their Ʋnderstandings as well as they can, and where they fail of the Truth, to bear with them, as God himself without
question will; than by stickling for every impertinent un∣necessary Truth, destroy that Peace, and Love, and Amity that ought to be among Christians. The second thing I would recommend, is a great simplici∣ty and purity of Intention in the pursuit of Truth; and at no hand to let passion or interest, or any self-end be ingredient in∣to our Religion. The practice of this, would not more conduce to the discovery of Truth, than it would to the promoting of Peace. For it is easie to observe, that it is not always a pure con∣cernment for the Truth, in the points in Controversie, that makes us so zealous, so fierce, and so obstinate in our Di∣sputes for, or against them; but something of which that is only the Mask and Pretence, some By-ends that must be served, some Secular Interest that we have espoused, which must be carried on. We have either engaged our selves to some Party, and so its Interests right or wrong must be promoted: or we have taken up an opinion inconsiderately at the first, and appear∣ed in the favour of it, and afterward our own credit doth oblige us to defend it: or we have received some slight or disappointment from the Men of one way, and so in pure pet and revenge, we pass over to their Adversaries. Or it is for our gain and advantage, that the Differences among us be still kept afoot; or we desire to get our selves a name by some great Atchievments in the Noble Science of Contro∣versies; or we are possessed with a spirit of Contradiction; or we delight in Novelties; or we love to be singular. These are the things that too often both give birth to our Controversies and also nourish and foment them. If we would but cast these Beams out of our eyes, we should both see more clearly, and certainly live more peace∣ably. But whilest we pursue base and sordid ends un∣der the pretence of maintaining Truth, we shall always be in error, and always in contention.
Let us therefore quit our selves of all our pre-possessions; let us mortify all our Pride and Vain-glory, our Passion and Emulation, our Covetousness and Revenge; and bring nothing in the world to our Debates about Religion, but only the pure love of Truth: and then our Controversies will not be so long; and they will be more calmly and peace∣ably managed, and they will redound to the greater good of all Parties. And this I dare say further to encourage you to labour after this temper of mind, That he that comes thus qua∣lified to the study of Religion, though he may not have the luck always to light on the Truth, yet with all his er∣rors, be they what they will, he is more acceptable to God, than the Man that hath Truth on his side, yet takes it up or maintains it to serve a turn. He that believes a False∣hood, after he hath used his sincere endeavours to find the Truth, is not half so much a Heretick, as he that professeth a Truth out of evil Principles, and prostituteth it to unwor∣thy ends. The third Rule is, Never to quarrel about Words and Phrases, but so long as other men mean much what the same that we do, let us be content though they have not the luck to express themselves so well. I do not know how it comes to pass, whether through too much heat and eagerness of disputing, that we do not mind one anothers Sense; or, whether through too much love to our own manner of Thinking or Speaking, that we will not endure any thing but what is conveyed to us in our own Methods: But, really, it often happens that most bit∣ter Quarrels do commence, not so much from the different Sense of the contending Parties, concerning the things they contend about, as from their different Terms expressing the same Sense, and the different Grounds they proceed upon, or Arguments they make use of for the proof of it.
For my part, I verily believe that this is the Case of se∣veral of those Disputes, in which we Protestants do often en∣gage at this day. I do not think, in many points, our Dif∣ferences are near so wide as they are sometimes represented, but that they might easily be made up with a little allow∣ance to mens Words and Phrases, and the different Methods of deducing their Notions. It would be perhaps no hard matter to make this appear in those Controversies that are so much agitated among us concerning Faith and Justification, and the necessity of good works to Salvation, and Imputed Righteousness, and the dif∣ference between Virtue and Grace; with some others, if this were a fit place for it. The difference that is among us as to these Points, is possibly not much greater than this, that some men in these matters speak more clearly and fully; others more imperfectly and obscurely. Some men convey their sense in plain and proper words; others delight in Me∣taphors, and do perhaps too far extend the Figurative ex∣pressions of Scripture: Some reason more closely and upon more certain Principles; others possibly may proceed upon weaker grounds, and misapply Texts of Scripture, and dis∣course more loosely. But both Parties (especially the more moderate of both) seem to drive at much what the same thing, though by different ways, as appears from this, that being interrogated concerning the Consequences of their seve∣ral Opinions, they generally agree in admitting or rejecting the same. But fourthly, another thing that would make for peace is this; never to charge upon men the Consequences of their Opinions when they expresly disown them. This is another thing that doth hugely tend to widen our Differences, and to exasperate mens spirits one against ano∣ther; when having examined some Opinion of a Man, or Party of Men, and finding very great absurdities and evil con∣sequences
necessarily to slow from it, we presently throw all those into the dish of them that hold the Opinion, as if they could not own the one, but they must necessarily own the other: whereas indeed, the men we thus charge, may be so innocent in this matter, that they do not in the least dream of such Consequences; or if they did, they would be so far from owning them, that they would abhor the Opinion for their sakes. To give you an instance or two in this matter: It is a Doctrine maintained by some, That God's Will is the Rule of Justice; or that every thing is therefore just or good, because God wills it. Those that are concerned to oppose this Do∣ctrine, do contend that if this Doctrine be true, it will neces∣sarily follow, that no man can have any certainty of the Truth of any one Proposition that God hath revealed in Scrip∣ture. Granting now that this can by just consequence be made out, yet I dare say, those that hold the aforesaid Do∣ctrine would be very angry, and had good reason so to be, if they were told that they did not, no, nor could not, upon their Principles certainly believe the Scripture. Some Men think that they can with demonstrative evi∣dence make out, that the Doctrine of God's irrespective De∣crees, doth in its Consequences overthrow the whole Gospel, that it doth destroy the nature of Rewards and Punishments, cuts the very Sinews of mens endeavours after virtue; makes all Laws, Promises, Exhortations perfectly idle and insigni∣ficant things; and renders God the most unlovely Being in the world. Now supposing all this to be true, yet it would be a most unjust and uncharitable thing to affirm of any that believe that Doctrine (many of whom are certainly pious and good men) that they do maintain any such impious and blasphemous Opinions as those that are now mentioned. The sum of all is, that a man may believe a Proposition, and not believe all that follows from it: not, but that all
the deductions from a Proposition are equally true, and equal∣ly credible with the Proposition from whence they are de∣duced: But a man may not so clearly see through the Pro∣position as to discern that such Consequences are really deduci∣ble from it: So that we are at no hand to charge them upon him, unless he do explicitly own them. If this Rule was observed, our Differences would not make so great a noise, nor would the Errors and Heterodoxies maintained among us appear so monstrous and extravagant; and we should spare a great many hard words and odious appellations, which we now too prodigally bestow upon those that differ from us. The fifth Rule is, to abstract mens Persons from their Opi∣nions; and in examining or opposing these, never to make any reflections upon those. This is a thing so highly reasonable, that methinks no pretender to ingenuity should ever need to be called upon to observe it. For it seems very absurd and ridiculous in any Argument to meddle with that, that nothing concerns the Question. But what do Personal Reflections concern the Cause of Religion? what ever it may be to the Reputation of an Opinion, I am sure it is nothing to the Truth of it, that such or such a man holds it. And truly, if men would leave this impertinence, we might hope for a better issue of our Religious Debates: but whilest men will forsake the Merits of the Cause, and un∣manly fall to railing, and disparaging Mens Persons, and scraping together all the ill that can be said of them, they blow the Coals of Contention, they so imbitter and enve∣nom the Dispute, that it rankles into incurable distasts and heart-burnings. Christians would do well to consider, that these mean arts of exposing Mens Persons to discredit their Opinions, are very much unworthy the Dignity of their Profession,
and most of all mis-becoming the Sacredness and Venerable∣ness of the Truth they contend for. And besides, no Cause stands in need of them, but such an one as is extremely baf∣fled and desperate; and even then they are the worst Argu∣ments in the world to support it: For quick-sighted men will easily see through the Dust we endeavour to raise; and those that are duller will be apt to suspect from our being so angry and so waspish, that we have but a bad matter to manage. We should consider that Mens Persons are Sacred things, that whatever power we have to judge of their Opinions, we have no authority to judge or censure Them. That to bring Them upon the Stage, and there throw dirt on them, is highly rude and uncivil, and an affront to Human Socie∣ty, and the most contrary thing in the world to Christian Charity, which is so far from enduring Reproaches and evil Speaking, that it obliges us to cover as much as we can all the Faults, and even the very Indiscretions of others. The sixth and last thing I shall recommend to you as an Expedient of Peace, is a vigorous pursuit of Holiness. Do but seriously set your selves to be good: Do but get your Hearts deeply affected with Religion as well as your Heads, and then there is no fear but you will be all the Sons of Peace. We may talk what we will; but really it is our not Pra∣ctising our Religion that makes us so Contentious and Dispu∣tatious about it. It is our Emptiness of the Divine Life, that makes us so full of Speculation and Controversie: was but That once firmly rooted in us, these Weeds and Excre∣scencies of Religion would presently dry up and wither; we should loath any longer to feed upon such Husks, after we once came to have a Relish of that Bread. Ah! how little satisfaction can all our pretty Notions and fine-spun Controversies yield to a Soul that truly hun∣gers
and thirsts after Righteousness? How pitifully, flatly and insipidly will they taste, in comparison of the Divine entertainments of the Spiritual Life. Were we but seriously taken up with the Substantials of our Religion, we should not have leisure for the Talking Disputing Divinity; we should have greater matters to take up our thoughts, and more profitable Arguments to furnish out our Discourses. So long as we could busy our selves in working out our Salvation, and furthering the Salvation of others, we should think it but a mean Employment to spend our time in spinning fine Nets for the catching of Flies. Besides this Divine Life, if it once took place in us, would strangely dilate and enlarge our hearts in Charity towards our Brethren; it would make us open our arms wide to the whole Creation; it would perfectly work out of us all that Peevishness and Sowrness, and Penuriousness of spirit, which we do too often contract by being addicted to a Sect, and would make us Sweet and Benign, and Obliging, and ready to receive and embrace all Conditions of men. In a word, it would quite swallow up all Distinctions of Parties; and what ever did but bear upon it the Image of God and the Superscription of the Holy Jesus, would need no other Com∣mendatories to our Affection, but would upon that alone account be infinitely dear and precious to us. Let us all therefore earnestly contend after this Divine Principle of Holiness; let us bring down Religion from our Heads to our Hearts; from Speculation to Practice: Let us make it our business heartily to love God and do his will, and then we may hope to see Peace in our days. This, this is that that will restore to the World the Gold∣en Age of Primitive Christianity, when the Love and Ʋnity of the Disciples of Jesus was so conspicuous and remarkable, that it became into a Proverb, See how the Christians love one another. This, this is that that will bring in the Accom∣plishment
of all those glorious Promises of Peace and Tran∣quillity that Christ hath made to his Church: Then shall the Wolf dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with the Kid: Then shall not Ephraim envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; but we shall turn our Swords into Plough∣shares, and our Spears into Pruning-hooks; and there will be no more consuming or devouring in all God's Holy Moun∣tain. I should now proceed to the second general Point in my proposed Method of handling this Text, viz. To set before you the very great Engagements and Obligations we have up∣on us to follow after the Things that make for Peace; and that, 1. From the Nature and Contrivance of our Religion. 2. From the great weight the Scripture lays upon this Duty. 3. From the great Ʋnreasonableness of our Religious Dif∣ferences. 4. From the very evil Consequences that attend them; as 1. In that they are great Hinderances of a good Life. 2. They are very pernicious to the Civil Peace of the State. 3. They are highly Opprobrious to Christianity in general. And 4. and lastly, Very dan∣gerous to the Protestant Religion, as giving too many advantages, and too much encouragement to the Fa∣ctors of the Papacy. But I have I fear already exceeded the Limits of a Ser∣mon, and therefore shall add no more. God open our Eyes, that we may in this our day under∣stand the Things that belong to Peace, before they be hid from our Eyes. FINIS.
Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St Paul's Church-Yard. A Discourse concerning Conscience; The first Part; wherein an account is given of the Nature, and Rule, and Obligation of it. And the case of those who separate from the Communion of the Church of England, as by Law established, upon this pretence, that it is against their Con∣science to join in it, is stated and discussed. A Discourse of Conscience: The second Part; concerning a doubting Conscience. A Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men, Aug. 23. 1674. on Rom. xiv. 19. A Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Court of Alder∣men, Jan. 31. 1675. on 1 Tim. iv. 8. A Fast-Sermon before the House of Commons, April 11. 1679. on Revel. ii. 5. The Duty and Happiness of doing good, in two Sermons, the former Preached at the Yorkshire Feast, Feb. 17. 1679. on Eccl. iii. 10. the other before the Lord Mayor at the Spittle, Apr. 14. 1680. on 1 Tim. vi. 17, 18, 19. A Sermon at the Election of the Lord Mayor, Sept. 29. 1680. on Psal. cxii. 4. A Lent Sermon at Whitehal, March 20. 1684. on Luke xvi. 31. A Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, Apr. 11. 1690. on Gal. v. 13. A Fast-Sermon before the Honourable House of Com∣mons, May 21. 1690. on Deut. v. 29. A Sermon on the 28. of June, at St. Giles in the Fields, at the leaving that Parish, on Phil. iv. 8. all twelve by the most Reverend Father in God, John Lord Arch-Bishop of York.
Books Printed for W. Kettilby. Bishop Overall's Convocation Book MDC VI. concern∣ing the Government of God's Catholick Church, and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man, 12. The Third Edition. Dr Worthington of Christian Love, 8vo Animadversions on Mr. Johnson's Answer to Jovian, 8vo Mr Nichols's Answer to the Naked Gospel, 4to Turner De Angelorum & Hominum Lapsu, 4to Bishop of Chichester's Sermon before the King and Queen, June 1. 1690. Dr Pelling's Sermon before the King and Queen, Decem. 8. 1689. —'s Vindication of those that have taken the Oath, 4to Mr Lamb's Dialogues between a Minister and his Pa∣rishioner, about the Lord's Supper, 8vo —'s Sermon before the King at Windsor. —'s Sermon before the Lord Mayor. —'s Liberty of humane Nature, stated, discussed and limited. —'s Sermon before the King and Queen, Jan. 19. 1689. —'s Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Dr Hickman's Thanksgiving Sermon before the Honour∣able House of Commons, Oct. 19. 1690. —'s Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, Oct. 26. 1690. Dr Burnet's Answer to Mr Warren. —'s Considerations of Mr Warren's Defence. Bishop of Bath and Wells Reflections on a French Testa∣ment, Printed at Bordeaux.
