S3697 11910464 50790
A TRUE RELATION OF VIRGINIA AND Mary-Land; With the Commodities therein, which in part the Author saw; the rest he had from know∣ing and Credible persons in the Moneths of February, March, April and May: By Nathaniel Shrigley, Anno. 1669. Published by Allowance. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Milbourn for Thomas Hodson Book-binder, Living the next door to the Signe of the Blew-Boar in Redcross Street.
A TRUE RELATION OF VIRGINIA and MARY-LAND, With the Commodities therein, &c. IMprimis, the Capes are in the Latitude of 37 Longitude of 302. from whence a Large Bay called Chesebeack Bay flowes about seaven Leagues broad N. by E. betwixt three and four degrees in length; then it bran∣ches it self into many small Rivers: the depth of the Bay is seaven, ten, twelve, or fourteen Fatham; it hath several small Islands in it. Out of which Bay on the East side, these are the principal Rivers, Anamesax, Ockahanock, Nautecocke, little Choptauke, great Choptauke,
St. Michaels, Wy River, Chester, Sacifrax River. On the West side these are the principle Ri∣vers, Elizabeth, Nansemum, James, Back, Yorke, Rapahanock, Petomock, Patuxon, Soueth, Severn, Gunpowder River, Patapsco; from which River the Bay draws straiter, and devides it self into many lesser Rivers. Out of which Bay and Rivers, there are branched many Navigable Rivers and Creeks, the which no Ten men in the Land are able to nominate. The Shore on the East from the Bay to the Ocean, is but about twenty miles broad. The Rivers on the West of the Bay are Navigable, some 40. some 50. some 100. some 200. some 300. miles; which Bay, Rivers and Creeks are plentiful of Fowle from September till March, of all sorts, as Swans, Geese, Brants, Ducks, Widgeon, Teale, with many other sorts too tedious to relate, some of which tarry with them all Summer: And Fish multitudes, as Porposses, Grampases, Herring-Hoggs, Drums, Sheepsheads, Bass, Mullets, Pearch, Sturgeon, Eales, Salmon, Trouts, Thornbacks, Garrs, Cats, Oysters, Crabs, Turtles, with many more too tedious to relate.
The Cattle naturally of the Country, are Bucks, Does, Staggs, Hindes, Hares, Ratoons, Possums, Beavers, Otters, Lyons, Bears, Wolves, Panthers, Leopards, Foxes, Wilde Cats, with many more. Fowle naturally to the Land are Eagles, Hawks, Vultures, Cranes, Crows, Turkies, Partridges, Pidgions, Larks, Red-birds, the Baltenore bird, being black and yellow, blew Birds, mocking Birds, Woodpickers, and ma∣ny sorts more. English Cattle; plenty of Cows, Bulls, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Swine, Horses, and all manner of English Poultrey. The Country is naturally full of Vines, Fruit Trees, and Timber, As, F. Mulberries. F. Plumbs. F. Pesimmons. T. Ash. Holly. T. Elder. F. Cherries M. Beach. Locust. N Hasle.
T. Chesnut. T. Poplar. T. Pine. Oaks. A. T. White. Red. Black. Sasifrax. T. Ceder. Chesnut. Spanish. T. Cypress. Syccamore. T. Wallnut. Gum Trees being cut, runns Bal∣some, with many others Pekickery. Sasiperella. These Trees marked F. are fruite, M. are Mass or feeding for Swine, T. timber or plank, A. Acorns, N. Nutts, with Grape-Vines climbing up the trees very fruitfull; and Hops also in the Woods; multitudes of Rasberies, Strawberies, Barberies, Cranberies, with infi∣nite of all sorts of Hearbs; the best Garden in England affords not better. In Orchards all sorts of Apple-Trees, Pear-Trees, Quince, Peach, Apricocks, Cherries, Figg-Trees, and Vines; Gardens as good as England affords for flowers, hearbs and roots of all sorts; with Colworts, Musmillions, Cue∣cumbers, Watemillions, May-cocks, Hornes, Peshaues, RosTrees, sweet-Bryers, and many things more.
There is a Root common in the Woods called Tuckaho, the Natives eat it for bread; our Swine eat it; with Acorns and Nuts of all sorts, they are Fat; and is the sweetest Bacon that ever man tasted. The planters feed not their Swine nor Cattle, but kill them fat out of the Woods. There is Fullers-Earth, Marle, Salt-peter, Iron, Stone, Lead, Tin and Silver Oar. There is plenty of English graine, as Wheat, Barley, Beanes, Peas and Oats. The ground is very fruitful, and produceth plentiful Crops with great speed, what ever is planted or Sown; as for example, one careful laborious man will plant, tend, and get in 50. barrels of Indian Wheat, without the help of Man, Horse or Oxe; each barrel is five English bushels. And if the stone or see of any fruit be sown, it will bear the third year without graft∣ing; each Planter makes great Crops of To∣bacco; the Western limits of the Land are un∣known In Mary-Land; their Religion is free to all that profess to believe in Jesus Christ. FINIS.
