S5017 11911418 50836
THE HISTORY of GENEVA POST TENEBRAS LUX blazon or coat of arms I. Sturt sc: LONDON Printed for Bernard White. M.DC.LXXXVII.
THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA, From its First Foundation to this present Time. Faithfully Collected from several MANUSCRIPTS of Jacobus Gothofredus, Monsieur Chorier, and Others. BY ISAAC SPON, Doctor of Physick, and one of the Fellows of the Colledge of LYONS. LICENSED, Dec. 14. 1685. RO. L'ESTRANGE. LONDON, Printed for Bernard White. M DC LXXXVII.
PREFACE. THE City of Geneva being one of the most Considerable of the Protestant party, we may easily believe there is none but will desire to know its History; some, that they may under∣stand the State of that City with which they are link∣ed in Religion; others, that they may not be ignorant of the strength and policy of a State which they con∣sider as an enemy. Hitherto we have had but scat∣tered fragments, as in the History of Savoy or Switzerland, and in the Book called the Cavaleer Savoyard, and in the Genevoise Citizen; and in∣deed in these Historical Relations there is so much of sharpness and passion, that a man shall scarce know when to credit any thing. This I have endeavoured to avoid to the utmost of my power, though it be very difficult when it concerns the Religion of People and the pretensions of Princes, to keep such a just moderation as shall provoke neither Party: Yet I am apt to think I have done as much in this matter as could be ex∣pected. For as to the main of this History, if all people shall not find satisfaction, I shall look upon this only as a misfortune usually attending such sort of Writings, and not as an effect of my passion: see∣ing I have followed as much as in me lay the Coun∣sel given of old to an Historian, not to be of any Country or Party whilest the Pen was in his hand.
It is true, I wanted several things requisite to a bu∣siness of this nature, but on the other side I know full well, there is no one could acquit himself better in this affair than my self: seeing that a Gene∣voise would be sure to be suspected, and a stranger could not be so well informed of those things which I have known, and procure those Memoires and Manuscripts which I have by me, for which both the Publick and my self are obliged not a little to Msieur Chorier the French Kings Historian and Advocate in the Parliament of Dauphiné, who long since hath been urgent with me to follow this de∣sign: and had it not been for him, I should not so much as have thought of it. Certainly no one could have better performed this, than my Noble Friend; for having Written so Excellent an History of Dau∣phiné, with which our Libraries are adorned; this here would have been but an easie task to him, would he have undertaken it, and his affairs had permit∣ted him. The Manuscripts with which he hath fur∣nished me, are three Volumes in Quarto▪ taken out of the Library of the deceased Monsieur James Godefroy (Jacobus Gothofredus) famous for his Commentary on the Theodosian Codex: they plainly appear to he Written with his own hand, and I do not believe there is any other Copy to be found of them: (precious Remains) of the Closet of this great Man; and which ought to be rankt immediately after the famous Commentaries afore∣mentioned. And being made Counsellor and Syn∣dick of Geneva, his want of leisure, and other reasons of State withheld him from publishing his Memoires as he had designed. I have had more∣over
of Monsieur Chorier another Manuscript, of which I know not the Author. I have likewise made use of some Chronological Manuscripts of one Roset which are in every bodies hands: not to reckon other Collections, viz. of the Acts and Alli∣ances with Switzerland and Geneva, and the Printed Books as many as I could find, such as Paradins Historical Chronicle of Savoy, the History of Savoy, the Genevois Citizen, and Pictet's Harangue, the Sieur de Jussie's Book intitled the Leven of Calvinism, More's Harangues, Spanheim's and several others. These are the Materials from whence I have taken my Hi∣story; which I have more need to abridge than am∣plifie, lest I should exceed the bounds of a particular History, by introducing a thousand accidents which have hapned in the neighbouring Countries, or even in all Europe. I have added also of my own at the end of this History, those ancient Inscriptions which are to be seen at Geneva, and those of S. Peter's Chanons, with all possible exactness, and ex∣pect only this fruit of my labour, that  satisfying my own inclinations, I shall also gratifie the curious, though I cannot please the Criticks, who love to try their Wits, and value not a Book unless its periods are laboured and smoothed to the utmost exactness, and wholly freed from imperfections, not considering that excellent saying of Aristotle, that the faults of them who begin a Work, do rather claim indulgence than animadversion.
The Approbation of Monsieur de Mezeray, Histo∣riographer of France, and one of the French Kings Council. I Read this Manuscript four Months since, and find it to be an Excellent History, and License it to be Printed. Signed MEZERAY.
THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA. BOOK I. Containing the History of GENEVA before the Coming of our Saviour. ALTHOUGH I undertake the History of a very mean State, considering its small Extent and Compass, and the little Noise which it hath made in the World, yet my design to publish it, cannot be justly blam'd, seeing God himself is no less admirable in the small works of Na∣ture, than in the great, where the matter is fashion'd by his hands: neither is he less won∣derful in the Government of small States, than great Kingdoms; as a Pilot shews no less skill in resisting with a little Bark a Tempestu∣ous Sea, than in preserving a great Ship in the midst of a Storm. You must not expect here magnificent descriptions of Glorious Actions, Eloquent Harangues of Famous Generals, or Battels fought by infinite numbers of Soldiers; but instead of this, at every turn,
some Miracle of Providence, some Historical or Political passage worth your consideration: In this Scene will appear Actors, who, although they are not array'd in the glistering Attare of Princes, nor speak big, as Kings of the Earth on the spacious Theatres of their Dominions; yet do they not fail to act that part they have taken upon them, and to set before us excellent instructions, which are so much the more profitable, as they are every mans concern: for every man is either a Soldier, or Citizen of his Countrey. There you'l see examples of all kinds of Vertues and Vices; which will not be useless, if you mind not so much him that speaketh, as what he saith, whether it be to the purpose. For my part, I shall not be so solicitous after smoothness in my style, as after truth in my relations; and shall endeavour that no passion shall make me unworthy the name of an Historian, who ought chiefly to be a Secretary to Truth, and not to Falshood or Flattery. He who writes to shew his Eloquence, publisheth rather his own History, than that of the States or Persons, whom he pretends to write of: and it often happens, that such a one climbs upon the Scaffold of his Vanity, that he may make himself the more ridicu∣lous, and have the greater fall. Truth hath no need of Varnish, or any affected dress, to make it lovely; and provided it be not unsea∣sonably, or carelesly expos'd, its beauty which it borrows from none but it self, can never want hearty admirers. But before I enter upon the description of this History of Geneva,Ancient names of Geneva. it will be expected I should say something concerning its Name. Geneva is the most ancient it ever had; and the same we meet with in Caesar's Commentaries. A late Author hath mis∣took, in saying it hath been call'd Geneüa:Volateran. neither do I know up∣on what grounds he affirms Genes to be a Colony of the Genevoises; seeing Genes is a very ancient City, and bore that name in Hanni∣bal's time; Livy relating 'twas taken by go, Hamilcar his Son. Genabum as some Moderns have call'd Geneva, is the name of Orleans. That of Gebenna, by which Geneva hath been known for several Ages, began to be in use about Charlemain's time: for so we find it in that Emperours Life written by Aimoin the Monk in the Chronicles of the Abby of Rheginon, and thus used by almost all Au∣thors and Publick Acts for above eight hundred years down to 1536. Notwithstanding there be some who would make us believe, that Lucan meant Geneva under the name of Gevenna in these Verses; Qua Rhodnus raptum velocibus undis In Mare fert Ararim,Marlian Para∣din. qua montibus ardua summis, Gens habitat can pendentes rupe Gebennas. Where Araris with Rhodanus now meet Runs joyn'd into the Sea, the Men whose Seat Is on Gebenna Mount covered with Snow. But there he speaks not of a City, but of the Mountains of Ce∣vennes, which Csar means by the same word. I shall likewise
make it appear in the sequel of this Discourse, that it hath never been call'd Colonia Equestris. The Genevoises restored it to its an∣cient name in the year 1536. taking away that of Gebenna, which the rudeness of former Ages had given it.In his Opus∣cula. The Learn'd Scaliger hath observ'd, that Geneva must be sounded the second syllable short; and at this day in the Language of the Countrey 'tis pro∣nounc'd Zéneva. Geneva is a City of great Antiquity;Munster calls it Mirae vetusta∣tis Ʋrbem. and were we not so in∣form'd by Authors, the Beauty and Commodiousness of its Scitua∣tion would incline us to believe it: for it is seated on a rising ground,Scituation of Geneva. wash'd on one side by the Lake Leman and the Rhosne, which thence takes its course; bordered with fruitful Plains and Mountains. Hence we may imagine, a place so commodious, as well for necessity as delight, hath drawn thither Inhabitants at the same time the Countrey began to be cultivated. But Cities and Persons have the same fate: The more any Family is anciently Noble, the more difficult a matter it is to produce its Titles. An∣tiquity is as a dark Night, whose obscurity cannot be dissipated, and in which a man can do nothing but search about to no purpose. How many Fables do we find mixt with the Original of Troy, Rome or Carthage? And if this hath happened to such flourishing States, what can be expected from mean ones, whose mishap having been to have no Author to be the Guardian or Depositary of their History, they have therefore lain in obscurity. Julius Caesar is the first who mentions Geneva, yet there is no doubt, but it was then a City un∣der Government, and a place of strength, which kept one of the passages out of Gaule into Italy and Germany: For it was undoubted∣ly the Interest of the Allobroges, or Inhabitants of Gallia Transalpina, being neighbours to the Helvetians and Latobriges, a people of Gallia Belgica, who held Switzerland and the Country of Vaud at that time, to have a Fort, which should shelter them from the Incursi∣ons of this warlike people, and might serve as a place of Traffick and Correspondence. The Allobroges,Antiquity of Geneva. whose chief City was Geneva, held a great part of the Alps and low Countrey betwixt Rhosne and the Moun∣tains. They were a valiant people, and had gained great reputation by their courage; neither were they inferiour to the rest of the Gaules in Riches. Stephen de Byzance and Livy, who cannot be suspected of flattery, give them these Elogies. Geneva then was a great while before Caesar's time: And as well his silence, as other Authors, inclines us to believe, that its Original was unknown. All that the Moderns have asserted concerning this matter, is foun∣ded on an uncertain Author, and on a Chronological Manuscript of the Countrey of Vaud, being about four hundred years since it was written, as we may judge by the time which endeth the History. The Author of the Genevoise Citizen relates, that it was kept in his time in the Castle of Chillon on the Lake; and there is now one there to be seen, which perhaps is the same with that in the City of Orbe in the Countrey of Vaud. The little Book Printed at Lyons in 1614. Entituled A Chronology of the Countrey of Vaud, is an Epi∣tome of it; and 'tis out of one or the other of these, that the
Manuscripts of the History of Geneva have taken out several par∣ticulars relating to that City, which are not to be met with else∣where. Although to speak ingenuously, this Chronicle appears to be no∣thing else but a slight exercise of some half-witted Scribler of former times, and therefore deserves not much to be credited: howsoever, I shall here offer what he asserts concerning the Foundation of Ge∣neva, leaving the Reader to his own liberty to judge and believe if he pleases that in these fabulous relations there is some truth. See here then what he saith. In the year of the Worlds Creation 2729. and 1073. years after the Flood, the great Hercules coming into Spain to go over into Italy, he pass'd near the Lake which hath been since call'd Leman, where seeing so fine a Countrey inhabited, he left there one part of his Army which was sick, under the Command of Arpentinus. This Captain liking the Countrey, built on the side of the Lake, a City which he call'd Arpentras or Arpentrine, which was seated higher than where lyes now Lausanne (and in effect there yet may be seen some marks of a City) this was founded in the year of the Worlds Creation 2730. and fifty three years before the destruction of Troy. Arpentinus was succeeded by his Son Rigo: after the destruction of Troy, when Francus, Aeneas, Antenor, with many more, came to inhabit other Countreys; about which time Lemannus Paris's Son arriv'd in those parts with his Trojans, driving out Rigo from Arpentras; and being in full possession, call'd the Lake after his own Name, Leman. This Lemannus having reign'd a considerable time, was at length drove out from Arpentras by his own Subjects who rebelled against him, and killed one of his Sons: whereupon he in revenge, having taken again the City, demolish'd it; and seeking a new place whereon to build another, he came to the end of the Lake, whence issues forth the Rhosne; and finding a little Hill of (Genevriers, or) Shrubs, he layes there the foundations of a City, which he call'd for this reason, Genevra or Genebra. This was in the year of the Worlds Creation 2833. and fifty years after the destruction of Troy, and three hundred seventy nine years be∣fore the Building of Rome, and eleven hundred and thirty years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour. After Lemannus (who dyed whilst they were building Geneva) his Son Eructonius reigned eight and twenty years, leaving three Sons who divided the King∣dom betwixt them, viz. Sequanus, Allobrox and Helvetius. This Chronicle likewise makes mention of several other Kings of these Countreys, as Milius, Ergogus, Tigurus, Epantalus, Aviticus, Carphas and his three Sons Conodus, Gavotus and Equester, Caturigus, Flenans, Arulus, Centronius, Benevits, Algurus Ciricus and Oblius, who built a Fortress at Geneva in the Isle of Rhosne. These names rea∣dily offer themselves for the finding out the Founders of Cities, and the Etymology of the names of Provinces: which gives us plainly to understand, that this is a History devised at pleasure, see∣ing there are many of these Latin words, although that Tongue was not known till some Ages after. Sequanus (sayes the Chronicle)
gave his name to the County of Burgundy, from whence the people were call'd Sequaeni: Allobrox gave his name to the Countrey of the Allobroges; Equester to the Country of Vaud, where was Colonia Equestris; Ergogus to that of Ergau; Helvetius to that of Helvetia; Aventica, Helvetius his Concubine, to Avanche; Centronius, to the Centrons, who are them of Tarantoise; Arulus, to Arles; Gavotus, to Gavots; Benevits, to the City of the same name; and in short, Ciricus, to St. Cierge. Now that which I find the worst contriv'd in all this account,Derivation of the word Ge∣neva. is the Etymology of the word Geneva, which it derives from Ge∣névres, (or Jumper Shrubs) with which this little Hill on which the City was built was over-spread; as if the Latin or French Tongue were spoken four Ages before Rome was built; for the word Genévre comes from the Latin Juniperus: So it is also with the word Equestris, which was never heard of in the Countrey of Vaud till Caesur's time, as we shall have occasion to mention here∣after. Not that this great Antiquity of eight and twenty Ages need be suspected, seeing there are Cities, as that of Athens, ancienter by five hundred years: But we are never obliged to believe without proof; neither do we find Homer to mention Lemannus Paris his Son, al∣though it may well be expected, he should say something of him, to inform us of the posterity of that Heroe in his Poem. 'Tis cer∣tainly a very idle humour of some people, who would needs per∣swade the World, their Ancestors were sprung from the Ashes of Troy, and were no less than Founders of Cities; as if Troy had been sufficient to people all the World, after it self had been ruin'd. Be it how it will concerning these eleven Ages before the coming of our Saviour, we read of no considerable matters or Warlike feats performed by the Genevoises during that time, but what we have from this Chronicle: They laid waste the City of Benevits, which stood distant from that place where now standeth Nyons, because it would Lord it over the neighbouring Countreys, and exact Tribute. It addeth, that this Oblius dyed without Children, and left all these Countreys to the disposal of their own people, who by this means became free and under no Monarchy. The Genevoises had the advantage of the Lake and the Rhosne,The Genevoises formidable to the Romans. which serv'd them instead of Ditches, and the Alps which sheltered them as Ramparts. They separated them especially from the Ro∣mans, whose neighbourhood was chiefly to be feared, and against whom they have signalized their Valour with the rest of the Allo∣brogeses, who extended their Borders as far as Isere. The Air of the Mountains which they breathed, and the ignorance of carnal delights, which renders us soft and effeminate, made them Warlike and Dreadful to their Neighbours. The Romans have tryed them sufficiently in their Wars against them. The first proof which they gave of their Courage, was under the Consul Marcus Fulvius, in the year six hundred twenty eight from the Building of Rome, and one hundred twenty five years before the Birth of our Saviour.125. years be∣fore the Birth of our Savi∣our. The Auvergnats and them of Roüergue were joyned with the Allobroges. The Romans bragg'd they had defeated them, though 'tis certain
the Consul obtain'd not the Triumph; which is a sufficient proof, that the loss on the Gaules side was not great; and in effect the War broke out again three years after, and the Allobroges raised greater Forces.122. years be∣fore our Savi∣our. They fought the Romans near Orange, not far from the place where the Sorgue dischargeth it self into the Rhosne: the Romans got the Victory by a Stratagem, after they had for a long time vigorously disputed it. They had brought with them Ele∣phants, which they had caused to march against the Allobroges, be∣lieving the Gaules, having never seen them, would be affrighted, as it indeed fell out; their Horses being startled, set a running, after the same manner as it had happened heretofore to the Romans them∣selves, when Pyrrhus, who first brought them into Italy, fought against them so bloody a Battel, in which they were overthrown: the Gaules lost in this Conflict twenty thousand men, and Bituitus King of Auvergne one of their chiefest Captains was taken Prisoner, and led away in Triumph by the Consul Domitius Ahenobarbus, to whom the care of this War was committed. Notwithstanding this overthrow, the Allobroges who had been overcome rather by their Enemies Craft,Paul. Orose. than through their own want of Courage, took again the Field the year following with their Confederates, and ad∣vanc'd as far as Isere, offering the Romans Battel. The Consul Fa∣bius Maximus who was General, lost his Quartan Ague in the heat of the fight, and accompanied with his usual good fortune, obtain'd a signal Victory. Twenty six thousand Gaules were cut in pieces, and the Consul obtain'd the glorious Title of Allobrogick, and the great Triumph at his return to Rome. There might have been seen not many years since in the Village of Versoy, about a League distant from Geneva, an old Marble Stone, on which was engraven the Elogy of the Conqueror of the Allobroges. Caesar hath observ'd in the Conference which he had with Ario∣viste, that after this Victory, the Romans generously forgave the Au∣vergnats and them of Rouergue, not exacting of them any Tribute, nor so much as reducing them into a Province. From whence, 'tis likely, that the Allobroges, who were their Allies in this War, were no worse us'd: and that the Romans considering them rather as Friends than Vassals, did let them live after their own manner, and protected them against the insultings of their neighbours. For not long after,108. years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour. the Tigurits, who are they of the Canton of Zurich, had made themselves formidable, and ceased not to molest them, the Romans sent their Consul Lucius Cassius to repell the Ti∣gurins into their own Countrey;The Genevoises protected by the Romans against the Switzers. but he himself was defeated and slain near Geneva. Lucius Piso his Lieutenant General and Father-in-law to Caesar, had the same fortune; and from that time the Tigurins having joyn'd with the Teutons, Cimbres and Ambrons, made dreadful havock in Gaule, and often beat the Romans, till such time as they were subdued by the Consul Marius, who having slain great multitudes of them,102. years be∣fore the Birth of our Saviour. forc'd the rest to return into their own Coun∣trey; by which means he secured the Allobroges, who lay most in danger by their incursions. About forty years after the Allobroges took up Arms again against the Romans,60. years be∣fore our Sa∣viour. wasting Gaule Narbonnoise: the Senate sent the Praetor
Pomptinus, who caus'd Vence to be besieged (a considerable City of the Voconces) by Manlius Ventinus; but he was forc'd to raise his Siege and depart after he had wasted the Countrey. Catugnatus who commanded the Allobroges, came to help the Voconces, and falls into an Ambuscade laid for him by Ventinus. Pomptinus marches towards the Countrey of the Allobroges, and after some skirmishes with Catugnatus, he subdues them, who remain'd from that time faithful to the Romans. Two years after,58. years be∣fore our Sa∣viour, Helve∣tians invade the Gaules. the Helvetians thinking themselves pent up in their own Countrey, invaded the Gaules, burning their Towns and Villages with an Army of ninety two thousand men, besides old peo∣ple and children, which in all were about three hundred sixty eight thousand souls. They first began with the Allobroges, pretending only to pass thorough their Countrey, but were timely prevented by Julius Caesar, who was then Proconsul of Gaule; who, as soon as he had notice given him, raised Soldiers and came to Geneva, where he makes all necessary preparation to stop this Torrent. There was in this City a Bridge to pass over into the Countrey of the Helve∣tians. Caesar caused it to be broken down to hinder the Enemies from coming into the Countrey of the Allobroges and the rest of the Gaules. The Helvetians having heard that Caesar was come, sent Embas∣sadors to him at Geneva, shewing him they had no design upon any of the Countreys belonging to the Romans, intending only to pass thorough them. Caesar remembring how they had used Lucius Cas∣stus and Lucius Piso his Father-in-law,There are some marks of this to be seen near Gingin about a league from Nyons, and four leagues from Geneva. thought it not convenient to grant their request. Howsoever, that he might be better pro∣vided, he desires time to deliberate, and that they would return to him some few dayes after: In the mean time he gathers what Forces he could, and passing the Rhosne, he employes his Army in the making a Wall sixteen foot high, and about twenty thousand foot in length, with a Ditch of the same extent. The day which he had appointed them being come, he absolute∣ly refuses their request: and this was the beginning of that bloody War described by Caesar himself in his Commentaries, but which be∣longs not to our subject.Julius Caesar's name yet re∣tain'd in di∣vers Families at Geneva. There are yet some Remains of this great Prince (who by de∣grees made himself absolute Lord of the Roman Republick) in the Names of divers of the Families of the Julius's at Geneva, which may be seen there in several ancient Inscriptions. There are men∣tion'd one Cajus Julius Caesar Longinus a Free-man of this Emperour, and Quintus Julius Sergius, Julius Macrinus, and Julius Brocchus an Aedile and one of the Duumviri, as also Julius Marcianus, Julius Capito, Julia Vera, and Titus Julius Valerianus, Overseer of the Publick Buildings. Although perhaps not one of these were nearly related to him; yet this shews at least, that he had brought many Romans with him thither, especially them of his own Family, of which he himself was at that time the greatest. We must not here omit one Historical passage, of which ancient Authors have taken no notice; which is, that after the overthrow of the Swedes, and spoil of the whole Countrey of Vaud, which
was then comprehended under the name of Pagus Ʋrbigenus, to whom the City of Orbe gave that name: these parts were extream∣ly depopulated;A Roman Co∣lony sent to Geneva. which caused Julius Caesar to send a Colony thi∣ther, either to furnish the Countrey again with Inhabitants, or else to withstand the Helvetians, in case they should again set upon the Gaules. Now the greatest strength of this Colony lying in their Cavalry, they were hence called Colonia Equestris, or Civitas Eque∣strium, the Colony or Commonalty of the Equestres, as we find it in the four ancient Inscriptions which are at Geneva; and in a fifth Julia Equestris; which is an evident proof, that Julius Caesar had founded it.Deseruere cavo tentoria fixa Lemanno. For when the Civil War broke out between him and Pompey, he sent for the Troops which quartered near the Lake Leman,Lucan. to assist him. Geneva kept firm thenceforward to the Emperours who succeeded Julius Caesar; and the Stones which are yet to be seen there engra∣ven in honour of several Emperours, witness as much. Some there are which are dedicated to Augustus, others to Trajan, Antoninus, Marc. Aurelius and Trebonian, which we shall recite at the end of this History. There is also mention of several Roman Magistrates who administred Justice after the same manner as in other Colonies. There were likewise Sextumviri, who were six men established since Augustus's Reign; also Duumviri to determine Cases of Equi∣ty, and Surveyors of Publick Buildings; Prelats and Pagan Priests, and every thing else which the Religion and Custom of the Romans were wont to bring into conquered Contreys. There were also to be seen on these ancient Marble Stones several kind of Vows engraven to Jupiter, Mars and Apollo, whom they worshipped before the coming of the Romans, after the manner of the other Gaules, under the name of Tamaris, Theautate and Belenus. The little Rock in the Lake served instead of an Altar, which was dedicated to Neptune God of the Watry Element: And 'tis from his name, that the Rock called Neiton hath been deriv'd. There's to be seen on the biggest (for there are two near one another) a hollow place which hath been cut to kindle therein the fire for Sacrifices; and 'tis not long since some Fisher-men found at the foot of it two small Hatchets and a Brass Knife, which is the same which they call'd then Securis and Secespita, to cut the throats of those Beasts they sacrificed. To finish what may be said of Geneva in the time of Heathenism, 'tis certain that in Marc.Geneva burnt in Marc. Aure∣lius his time. Aurelius's Reign the City was wholly burnt, he having taken upon him the care to have it built anew. Others say, this was done under Heliogabalus, who likewise was called Marc. Aurelius. There are some, who attribute its rebuilding to Aurelian: Neither is it to be doubted, but that nearness of Names hath occasioned this confusion in History. There's yet to be seen at Geneva an Inscription of Marc. Aurelius, which gives some credit to our first conjecture; for Heliogabalus reigned so little a while, and behaved himself so unworthily and cruelly, that this alone is sufficient to carry us off from believing he had the least thought to become Benefactor to a City, for which he had not any kindness.
The Annual Manuscripts of Geneve which are not very old,274. years be∣fore our Sa∣viour. and the Author call'd the Citizen relate, that when Aurelian had conque∣red Tetricus,Geneva re∣built. he re-built Geneva and Orleans; to which he gave the name of Aureliana; but after his death the former of these Cities took again its name of Geneva. But all this is uncertain; being not founded on the testimony of any ancient Author. Sabellicus is per∣haps the first who hath brought it to light in these last Ages:Sunt qui Ge∣bennas in Allo∣brogibus ab eo conditas expe∣ditione illa Gallica dicant. There are some, sayes he, who assert, that Geneva was then built by Aure∣lian during the War with the Gaules, he means re-built: 'Tis ad∣ded likewise, that this Emperour granted to Geneva several neigh∣bouring Lordships, Fairs and Priviledges, which made it famous, and occasioned its being called Emporium Allobrogum. But of all the Gifts the Romans bestowed on them, I find none more remar∣kable or advantageous, than that of a Roman Lord named Lucius Julius Brocchus, which I read in a neat Inscription which Mr. Gode∣frey caused to be brought into his House from the Channon's Street: In my opinion it is the curiousest Monument of Antiquity to be seen in this City; and which deserves to be kept as the greatest treasure,See the In∣scriptions. in the Common Hall. Guichenon mentions it in his History of Savoy, but carelesly according to his manner. The Scituation of Geneva in former times,Scituation of Geneva. and before the coming of our Saviour, and in the following Ages, was as we shall describe it: Its Walls reach'd no higher than the height of the little Hill on which S. Peter's and other Streets are built: they were triangular, after the same manner as the City. The Gate of the Castle above the Borough de Four, which was one of the Gates of the City, made one point of this Triangle. The second Corner was where hath since been built the Bishop's Palace: and the third was on the high∣est part of the City, near the Buildings which were called hereto∣fore Boyaus Tower.Turris Botuli. So that the circuit of the Walls, was from the Gates of the Castle, and reach'd behind S. Peter's Church, very near the foundations; and so went thorough Perron's Street, where 'tis likely there was a Gate to come down to the Lake; from thence it reach'd the length of the Channon's Gardens, where there still re∣main some marks in the ruines: and going through the Pelisserie, they extend to that place which they call the City corner; where may yet be seen the ruines of a Gate: from whence it appears, that the Wall was as high as that Hill which reach'd to the Castle Gate, and was of the same height with those Houses at this day to be seen where the large Palace stood: And in effect the ancient Buildings in that part of the City, have Walls in thickness equal to most Cities. There might likewise probably be a Gate on the Walk leading to the large Palace. The Castle Gate was so call'd, because through it was the ready way to the Castle of Gaillard, the usual Dwelling-house of the Earls of Geneva. The Borough of Four in ancient times was only the Suburbs; which in the Language of Savoy, were call'd Borg de Feur, which is to say, an Outward Borough: from whence hath remain'd to it the Name of Bourg de Four. The low Streets which are now call'd Les Rivieres, because they were near the Bank of the Lake, and the adjacent parts of S. Magdalene, and the lowest places of the City, were not then, as now, in the
Heart of the Town; and the Buildings afterwards raised, were al∣wayes heretofore accounted but as Suburbs. Since that time, the City hath enlarged it self; and there is still to be seen near Longemale a great Arch, called the Ivory Arch; not that the Gate was Ivory, as some have imagined; but because it was the Gate which led to Yvoire, which is a Borough three Leagues distant from Geneva on the Lakes Bank on the side of Chablais. The Suburb of S. Victor, which was on the same side with de Rive, was demolished in the time of the Wars with Savoy, and Fortifications raised in its stead.
THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA. BOOK II. From the Birth of our Saviour to the Year 1536. THE time when first Geneva received the Chri∣stian Faith hath been hitherto no less uncertain,Geneva first received the Christian Faith. than the Original of that City. Observe here what the ancient Chronological Manuscripts written sixscore years since do tell us: Whilst the people of Geneva (say they) were wholly addicted to Heathenish Superstitions, our Savi∣our desirous of their Conversion, sent thither first Nazarius S. Peter's Disciple, who converted amongst others, a young man a Genevois named Celsus; who was baptized and sealed with his Blood the testimony of the Gospel, having suffered Mar∣tyrdom a while after together with Nazarius. 'Tis thought they were buried in S. Gervais; for which reason the next Street joyning
to the Church hath taken its name, from their bodies being interred there. The Manuscripts, and after them the Author called the Citizen do add, That the Christian Faith newly planted, was watered by the industry of Paracodus, or Paradocus, one of our Saviours Seventy Disciples, who came over into Gaule with Denis the Areopgite; that having together founded the Church of Geneva, Denis went to Paris, and Paradocus tarried at Geneva. This is the tradition of former Ages, in which there appears nothing of solidity. These Chronologists seem plainly to have taken this Story of Nazarius and Celsus out of the Golden Legend, which relates these two Saints came to a City of the Gaules called Gemellus, and were there Mar∣tyred and Buried at Milan. I cannot well understand how they should take Gemellus for Ge∣neva: this is certain, that S. Nazare hath been heretofore the Patron of the City of Autun, where there is yet a Church which is dedicated to him and S. Celse; it is called by the name of S. Nazaire. There was to be seen an ancient Coin which confirms it; seeing we read on one side of it S. Nazarius, and on the other Hedua Civitas, which is the City of Autun:Amongst Mon∣sieur de Pei∣resk's Papers. The Learned Monsieur Petau was of this mind, thinking the resemblance between Nazare and Lazare, had caused them of Autun in time to receive S. Lazarus for their Patron; whom they would make us believe, dyed in their City soon after his arrival in Provence: all which hath no other foundation, but an uncertain tradition. Concerning Denis and Paracodus,194. years af∣ter our Savi∣our. observe what is said of them; in the year of our Redemption 194. according to Baronius, Victor Bishop of Rome wrote to Didier Bishop of Vienna touching the Ce∣lebration of the Feast of Easter: This Didier was succeeded by Denis, who was followed by Paracodus,198. to whom Victor wrote to the same effect. So that here is already a great mistake, to believe that Denis and Paracodus first planted the Christian Faith at Geneva: for see∣ing they were both Bishops of Vienna, then chief City of the Allo∣broges, it is hence most likely, they sent some to Geneva to preach the Gospel, it lying in their Circuit: But that which gives greater confirmation, is what hath been found written in an old Manuscript Parchment Bible in the Library at Geneva, viz. Genevensis Ecclesia à discipulis Apostolorum Paracodo ac Dionysio fundata Viennensibus Epis∣copis: that is to say,194. Paracodus and Denis Bishops of Vienna, who have founded the Church at Geneva, were called the Apostles Disci∣ples, because they taught the same Doctrine. So that Paracodus could not be one of the Seventy Disciples, seeing he lived towards the end of the second Century. Likewise some would make him Contemporary with S. Irenaeus who was Bishop of Lyons, and suf∣fered Martyrdom under the Emperour Severus, about the end of the same Age, before which time the Gospel had made but small progress in Gaule, as we may read in Gregory of Tours. At the end of this fore-mentioned Manuscript Bible there is a list of the names of Bishops of Geneva,Sundry Bi∣shops of Ge∣neva. which is now almost worn out, with these three Verses towards the end of it.
Hos mensae Christi constat libamine pasci, Vascula terra Dei proprio de sanguine facti, In templo Domini prisca de Gente notati. The first we meet with in this Catalogue of Bishops,In the third and fourth Century. is Diogenus, the next Domnus, whom they of S. Martha call Dominius, and so in order Salvianus, Cassianus, Eleutherius, Theolastus, Fraternicus, Pal∣lascus, all which flourished about the third and fourth Century; but we know nothing more of them than their names. The fourth Century was lamentable to several Countreys, by the Invasions of those Nations which began to tear the Roman Empire. Geneva cruelly suffered, so that in a Council held at Turin in the year 397.397. there was care taken for its reparation: And from that time encreasing in Authority, it presided over the neighbouring Countreys, even to the Alpes; it being agreed in this Council, that the Bishops of Metropolitan Cities should be acknowledged Primates of their respective Provinces:426. so that the Primate of Geneva had under him the Chablaises and Genevoises. About the beginning of the next Century after the death of Theodosius, the Vandals over-ran the Gauls, one part of them setling themselves in the Countrey of Vaud, to which it is thought they gave the name.440. They built likewise seve∣ral Borroughs, which occasioned their being called Bourguignons, at which time there was one Isaac, called by others Isarius Bishop of Geneva, whom S. Euchere mentions in the Life of S. Maurice. These Bourguignons established a Kingdom amongst them,466. whose first King was Gundicaire or Gonderic; who dying, divided his Realm between his four Sons. Gondebaud had Vienna; Chilperic, Lyons; Godesigile, Geneva; and Gotmar, Besançon. Sidonius Apollinaris, who lived in those times, gave them the name of Tetrarchs. These Brethren being at variance, Chilperic and Gotmar drave Gondebaud from his Territories; but he having vanquished them, re∣turns; in which conflict Gotmar was slain, couragiously defending himself. Chilperic who was taken Prisoner was beheaded, and his Wife thrown into the Rhosne; But some years after Cloüis King of France, having espoused Clotilde Chilperic's Daughter, that he might be revenged on Gondebaud for his cruelty, proclaims War against him. Godesigile, to whose share Geneva had fallen, joyned with Cloüis against his Brother Gondebaud, who being vanquished, was forced to receive Laws from the Conqueror. He therefore renders himself Tributary to Cloüis, and left Vienna to Godesigile: but Gon∣debaud re-took Vienna, and the wretched Godesigile was slain in a Church by the Sword. Cloüis moved at this barbarous action, drove out Gondebaud, and gave his Son Sigismond the Kingdom. 'Twas this Sigismond who founded on the Alpes S. Maurice's Monastery, which foundation was subscribed by Maximus Bishop of Geneva. This same Emperour caused to assemble the Council called Ponense, Paunense or Epaunense,517. as Mr. Chorier hath very well observed in his History of Dauphiné and after him, the Abbot in his Epitome of Councils, at Ponas near Vienna in Dauphiné. Maximus was also at
this Council: His Successor Pappulus was present at that of Orleans. After him,549. the Manuscript Bible afore mentioned, recites Gregorius, Nicetius, Rusticus, Patricius, Hugo the First, Andreas, Graecus and Do∣mitianus, whom they of S. Martha call Donatianus. There is an Inscription in S. Victor relating to this Council, which is this, Haec acta sunt Episcopo Genevensi Domitiano; These things were done when Domitian was Bishop of Geneva. 'Twas also in his time the Body of S. Victor was transported from Soleurre to Geneva.570. Salonius his Suc∣cessor was present at the Council of Lyons and Paris.573. There hath been a Bishop of Geneva of the same name in the last Age: The Bishop of Geneva writ himself Salonius Episcopus Genavensis. After him succeeded Cariatho one of the Domesticks of King Gon∣tran of Burgundy. This King encreased the Church Revenues, and was the Founder of S. Peter's Cathedral. Monsieur Morus the Au∣thor of an Harangue, Entituled, De duobus Genevae Miraculis, proves by some passages out of Avitus's Homilies, that it was he who con∣secrated that Church, there being there before a Temple dedicated to Apollo: But the building was intermitted till the year 990 at which time the Emperour Othon caused it to be continued, and Conradus finished it in the year 1024. But I doubt whether we ought to credit those Chronological Manuscrips, which relate, that under the Reign of Gontran, a certain City named Taurodinum, was overthrown into the Rhosne by an Earthquake; whose course being stopped, there followed such a great Inundation, that it ran over the Walls of Geneva. But there is not so much as any single Geographer who mentions this City. Monsieur la Mothe le Vayer relates the matter after a different manner, and more likely to be true. Marius, saith he, Bishop of Laufare, reports in his Chronicle, that the Hill which he calls Tauretunensem in Valay, fell so suddenly on a Castle and neigh∣bouring Burroughs,President Fauchel men∣tions it. that it overwhelmed all the Inhabitants, being follow∣ed with such an Inundation of Water, as very much damnified the City of Geneva. Appellinus, whom some call Abelenus, succeeded Cari∣atho: The Legend of S. Columban Abbot of Lussienx mentions him, he lived till the year 613.613. The French King Clotairius the Second drove out the Burgundi∣ans from the Countrey of the Allobroges,620. and setled Magistrates at Geneva.Theodorick se∣cond Son to the French King builds se∣veral Chur∣ches in Geneva. Dagobert his Son succeeded him, and Theodoric second Son to Dagobert, built several Churches, according to the relation of Volfangus Lazius; whose words are these, Theodoricus secundus ulti∣mus Merovingiorum in Burgundia, qui cum ex Brunchilde uxore nihil procreasset, multa pro fulcienda sancta religione apud Gebennam funda∣vit. Theodorick the Second was the last King of the Franks in Bur∣gundy, who having no Children by his Wife Brunchilde, erected seve∣ral Churches and Religious Houses in Geneva. Soon after the death of Dagobert,650. Pappolus the Second, whom some call Paulus, and the Centuriators of Magdebourg, Papulus Genu∣ensis, was present at the Council of Chalons. The Book called the Citizene, tells us, there was one remained at Geneva, to reconcile the people of the Country of Vavx with them of New Castle in the year 726.726. who was succeeded by Robertus, Aridanus, Epoaldus, Albo, Hu∣portunus,
Eucherius, Gilabertus, whom they of S. Martha call Guber∣tus, Renembertus, Leutherius and Galbertus, who held that Seat six∣teen years, and whom some call Postbertus. Towards the end of the eighth Century,773. Charlemain came to Geneva,Rhegino, Ab∣bot Genuam Civitatem ve∣niens Synodum tenuit, and Charlemain comes to Ge∣neva and sets up there his own Statue. where he called a Council of War about his passing into Italy, against Didier King of the Lombards: He confirmed the Li∣berties and Priviledges of Geneva, both in Church and State; and caused to be set up on the great Gate of S. Peter his own Statue of Marble, and under it an Imperial Eagle with two heads: the Eagle remains yet to be seen. Some say it was Conradus the Second who caused it to be carved and set up, when he had finished the Church.816. The following Bishops were Valternus, who held the Seat six and thirty years, Apradus the First, whom some call Artal∣dus or Cataldus,About the year 860. Domitianus the Second: Boso held the Bishoprick but seventeen Months: after him Ansegisus, half of whose Epitaph is yet to be seen in a Marble Stone, taken out of the ruines of S. Vi∣ctor's Church. The Chronological Manuscripts of Geneva inform us, he was the same who was Archbishop of Sens: but they of S. Martha affirm the contrary, saying he was buried in the Church of Sens, where his Epitaph is yet to be seen. They call the afore∣mentioned Bishop of Geneva Anseguinus, contrary to the Manuscripts and Marble Inscriptions which we shall produce at the end of the Book. The Centuriatours of Magdebourg term Ansegisus only Arch∣bishop of Sens; saying, that he was declared Primate of Gaule in the year 876.876. The Author call'd the Citizen, tells us, the Bishop of Geneva dyed in the year 840. but then there would be too great an Interregnum between him and his Successor Optandus, who was not Consecrated before the year 881. His mistake lyes in taking Ansegisus, who hath written a Summary of Charlemain, and was but an Abbot, for him; resemblance of names oftentimes occasioning confusion in History. The Allobroges having been for a long time under Emperours af∣ter the death of the Kings of Burgundy (which were) Transiurane Gundicaire and his Successors, they fell again under the power of the new Kingdom of Burgundy, of which Boson of Vienna was the first King; who sometimes took upon him the Title of King of Bur∣gundy, otherwhiles that of Vienna; after the same manner as his Suc∣cessors Lewis, Hugo, Rodolphus I. Conradus and Rodolphus II. with whom ended this Kingdom in the year 1032. The Geneva Manuscripts in this particular are full of fabulous re∣lations, mentioning one Boson the Second, who, in fighting against the Genevoises, was slain; whereas there has been but one of that name. This State of Burgundy, sayes Monsieur Chorior in his Hi∣story of Dauphiny, after the death of Rodolphus the Second called the Sluggard, fell into a confused Anarchy; the Prelates making them∣selves Masters in the Cities of their Residency, and Earls in their Jurisdictions. The German Emperours not being able to hinder their Usurpations, were forced to agree with them, and gave them in trust, what they saw was impossible to get out of their hands: and from hence hath happened, (to apply this more particularly to
Geneva) the Original of those Differences and Feuds betwixt the Bishops and Earls of that City. During the ninth and tenth Ages, after Ansegisus the Bishops of Geneva were Optandus or Apradus II. consecrated by Pope John the VIII. as we gather by the Letters of this Pope to the Genevoises, after whom succeeded Bernardus, Riculphus, Fraudo,879. Aldagundus or Aldagandus I. Aymo I. Girardus I. Hugo II. who joyned S. Victors Monastery at Geneva to the Church of Clugny by the consent of Rodolphus King of Burgundy,930. and his Brother Burchard Archbishop of Lyons,1050. Conradus, Aldagundus the Second, Bernardus the Second, and Frederick, who was present at the Dedication of the Church called S. Stevens of Besançon by the Popes order, who was Leo the Ninth. Frederick was Bishop according to the account of them of S. Martha thirty seven years, and according to the Annals of Geneva fifty years. Borsadus who succeeded him, exercised the Episcopal Go∣vernment but five years. This is the Epitome of the eleven first Ages since the coming of our Saviour, and is in a manner all we can learn of them: Now the reason of this is, because the City hath been several times burnt, as in the years 1291, 1321, 1334, 1430. The following Ages will yield us more matter,1050. through the am∣bition of three Lords,Three Lords lay claim to Geneva. who would become Masters of Geneva: Which three, were the Bishop, the Earl of Genevois, and the Earl of Savoy, who have several times brought it near to destruction: But this their striving who should become Masters of it, hath been a means to continue its Priviledges and Liberties as an Imperial City, which the Magistracy claims time out of mind, as well by the death of Oblius, who left his Countreys free; as also by the priviledge of a Roman Colony under the first Emperours, and by a Confirmation from Charlemain. For they tell us, the Kings of Burgundy were Usurpers. It belongs not to me to decide the contrary Pretensions of these three above mentioned Lords: Guichenon and other Authors, call the Earls of Genevois, Earls of Geneva; which is contrary to several ancient Titles of these Earls, which name them Comites Ge∣bennesii, and not Gebennenses; for it is well known that Gebennesium is Genevois, which is separate from the Jurisdiction of Geneva. But it is very likely some have taken upon them this Title, as may be seen on an ancient Coin of an Earl, who lived about the year 1370. who called himself Petrus Comes Gebennensis, which the Bishops have resented ill, especially John Lewis of Savoy. The first Wars wherein Geneva was concerned, happened since the twelfth Century, upon occasion of Wido Bishop of Geneva's Grant to his Brother Ame.1120. They were both Sons to an Earl of Genevois, whose posterity for above five hundred years had posses∣sed this Lordship. The Bishops would have these Earls to be but only as Bayliffs in Genevois; but Wido, to strengthen his Family, gave his Brother in this Investiture, besides his Paternal Inheri∣tance, several Villages and Castles belonging to the Diocess of Ge∣neva, as Bonmont and Hautecombe, and what Temporal Offices he had in the City, making him his Rent-Gatherer or Bayliff.
Wido or Guido who was Bishop fifty years, and had been present at the Council of Tournus in the year 1117. dying in 1120. the same year Humbert of Gramont was chose in his place, who would not consent to the Grant bestowed on Ame Earl of Genevois by his Bro∣ther, saying, He could not consent to the Churches wrong: So that the quarrel increasing betwixt the Earl and Bishop, the Council endeavoured to make them friends: but their obstinacy hindering, the Archbishop of Vienna,Disagreement between the Earl of Gene∣vois, and Bishop of Geneva. Metropolitan of the Province, and Apo∣stolical Legate, being deputed for that purpose, united them. The chief Articles were as followeth; First, That the Bishop should have the Administration of Justice and Lordship in the City, the Coining of Money and Confiscations of Estates, as likewise the Fines of those who had dwelt a year and a day at Geneva: That the Earl should not build any Fort without the Bishops consent: That he should have a Vidame or Lieutenant for Secular Affairs: That he should moreover do Homage to the Bishop, not respecting any one but the Emperour before him; and several other Articles touching Toll,1124. Forfeitures and Fines. This Treaty was carryed on at Seyssell in the year 1124. After the death of Humbert of Gramont, Ar dutius a Lords Son of Foucigny was elected Bishop of Geneva. Bernard who was then Ab∣bot of Clervaux, and who was afterwards Canonized, lived in his time, and wrote two Letters to him, which were very remarkable, in these terms, calling him Ardutius.
To Ardutius Elect Bishop of Geneva.Bernard. Epist. 27. BEing perswaded your Election comes from God,The first Let∣ter. seeing you have been chosen by such an unanimous consent of both Clergy and Laity, we therefore congratulate you for the Grace bestowed on you. I will not flatter you, saying God hath recompensed your merits; for you ought rather to think, it is not in consideration of your Righteousness, but his Mercy. If you look upon it otherwise, (which God forbid) your rise will be your fall. If you acknow∣ledge his Grace, take heed lest you have received it in vain. Be holy in your Life and Office; and if Holiness of Life did not precede your Election, at least let it follow it. Then we shall acknowledge God hath prevented you by his Grace; and we hope you will increase and grow in it. We rejoyce that you have been established as a faithful and prudent Servant over your Lords houshold, that you may be one day possessed (as a Son) of all your Fathers Inheritance. Other∣wise if you mind more the making your self Great than Good, you may rather expect to be punished, than rewarded. But we wish and desire of God this may never happen; being ready to assist you according to our small power, in every thing which is meet and rea∣sonable.
To Ardutius. CHarity hath inspired me with the boldness to tell you the Seat (dear Brother) which you have lately obtained,Second Let∣ter. requires a man of great merit, which we are sorry to find wanting in you; or at least, not to have preceded your Election, as was sitting. In truth, your pass'd conversation hath not been like that of one who was to take upon him the Episcopal charge. But how! Cannot God from these stones raise up Children to Abraham? Is not God able to make those virtuous actions which should have preceded, to follow afterwards? Which we shall hear with joy, if it so happens: This sud∣den change from the hand of God, will be more acceptable and sur∣prizing, than if it had preceded by the merits of a pass'd life. We shall acknowledge it is the work of the Lord, and a work worth our admiration. So S. Paul from a Persecutor, became the Doctor of the Gentiles: and S. Matthew taken from being a Publican, to be an Apostle; and S. Ambrose from the Court, to the Dignity of a Bishop. Nay, we have known some Seculars enter upon this Charge to the Churches great advantage. In short, it hath often happened, that where Sin hath abounded, Grace also hath super abounded: You then, dear Brother, being animtated by these examples, gird up the loyns of your mind; amend your Life and Studies; call your self to an account at night for what you have done amiss in the day; endeavour to imitate S. Paul, in being an honour to your Office; You will bring honour to it by Gravity in your Maners, and Deli∣beration in your Counsels, and Justice in your Actions: these are the chief ornaments of a Bishop.S. Bernard re∣commends to the Bishop the Religiouses of the two Mo∣nasteries in his Diocess. Do all things by deliberate, coun∣sel: Take only advice of virtuous people: Let such have the ma∣nagement of your affairs, who may  be  of your holy conversation. And in so doing, you will procure a good esteem. We recommend to your Charity our poor Brethren near you, namely, them of Bonmont and Hautecombe; by which means, you may give us proofs of your love towards us and your neighbours.
THE Bishop Ardutius, as well as his Predecessor, had enough to do to withstand the Earl of Genevois; who being a Se∣cular Prince, would not acknowledge any dependance on the Bi∣shop and Chapter of Geneva, possessing himself of several Lands and Jurisdictions belonging to them; so that Ardutius was forced to have recourse to the Emperour Frederick Barberossa, who procured him the Popes Bull for confirmation of all his Rights. Some time after this,1153. he made an agreement with Amé Earl of Genevois, to the same effect as his Predecessor had done before him; and in the year following, mention being made of the Earls Office or Duty, it was expressed in these terms, Comes fidelis Advocatus sub Episcopo esse debet; the Earl ought to be the Bishops faithful Stew∣ard. Which was further confirmed by a Bull from Pope Adrian the Third given at Lateran.1157. But the same Emperour who had made such a Grant to Ardutius, gave to the Duke of Zeringuen the Sove∣raignty over three Cities; namely, Syon, Lausane and Geneva. Amé the Second the deceased Earl Ame's Son, who departed this life in the year 11621162. having insinuated himself into this Dukes favour, had obtained of him the Soveraignty of Geneva; at which Ardutius being allarm'd, goes directly to the Emperour, who was then at Besancon, to whom he represents the Churches Rights; and so pre∣vailed on the Emperour, that he repealed this Donation by two ex∣press Declarations, as granted by surprize. Which Declarations may be seen at large in the Book called the Citizen. This Bishop appeared mighty zealous for the Rights of the Church; but in truth, he designed chiefly thereby his own private interest. The Em∣perour remitting the sole Authority and Rule to the Bishop, thought to preserve the Town under a good Pastor; and by this means, to keep off Strangers from all pretensions to it.The Bishops of Geneva's claim of So∣veraignty over Geneva. Whilst in the mean time, on these Priviledges and Concessions, these Bishops have strengthened their claims of Soveraignty over this City; which, say they, the Citizens have consented to without contradiction, which they would never have suffered, had it been against their minds. To which they of these last Ages, who will not acknowledge their Soveraignty, have answered in the Book called the Citizen, and in their Chronological Manuscripts, that the Bishops have never had any other right to Geneva, but as Governours of the Chruch, to which belonged the City and suburbs, according to an ancient De∣cree recited by the Author of the Citizen, Notorium quod Ecclesia Ge∣bennensis domina est & princeps unica in solidum civitatis & suburbii Ge∣bennensis. It is well known, that the Church of Geneva is the only Dady and Princess of the City and Suburbs of Geneva. That the Bi∣shop himself when chosen, was sworn to maintain the Priviledges and Liberties of Geneva; that the great confidence they had put in their Bishops, was the cause why they took no more notice of the encroachments on their Liberties; that the Emperour could neither grant to the Duke of Zeringuen, nor to Bishops, the Soveraignty of an Imperial City as theirs was, without the suffrage of the whole Empire: That even when the Bishops were in most credit, it then appeared, that the right of Soveraignty was in the people: That
the Bishop was chief after the same manner as the Dukes of Venice and Genoa, for all publick Acts and Declarations ran in the names of the Bishop, his Vidame (or Steward) the Syndicks and other good Men of the City. The Bishop was chosen by the Laity as well as Clergy. His Chapter consisted of thirty two Chanons of S. Pe∣ters Church, the greatest part of which were Civilians; he had moreover for Assistants in Secular matters, four Syndicks, twenty Counsellors at Law, and one Treasurer, who were all chosen by the people: To these twenty five were added thirty five more, to advise with, upon any important occurrence; and from hence they have risen to the present number of two hundred, and have at length extended to the ta king in one out of every chief Fa∣mily in the City. The Bishop was obliged to confirm whatsoever passed. They have farther affirmed, that the Syndicks had power to coin Money, and the care and charge of the Town without the Bishops intermedling, the Jurisdiction and Imprisonment in the Night, and Sovereign Judgment in matters of Life and Death, provided the Prisoners were not Ecclesiasticks. That in Cases which called for Mercy, the Bishop had power of pardoning, but rather by his Epis∣copal and Ecclesiastical Authority than Secular; that in business of great concernment he could do nothing without the people; that the Commonalty and Syndicks should make what Alliances they plea∣sed, without the Bishop intermedling: As in the year 1285. with Amé Earl of Savoy; and in the year 1515. with Fribourg; with Bern in the year 1526. That the City Revenues should be divided amongst them, and that the Syndicks should have one third, and that in short, Charles V. writing to Geneva in 1530. directed not his Letters to the Bishop but to the Syndicks, Council and Commonal∣ty of the City, and treating with it as an Imperial City, in these terms; Honorabilibus nostris & imperii sacri fidelibus dilectis nostris Syndiis, Consulibus ac Civibus Civitatis Imperiali nostrae Gebennensis: And in other Letters written in French, the same year: To out trusty and well beloved Syndicks, Citizens and Inhabitaents of our Impe∣rial City of Geneva. But to return to our History. Ardutius having held the Episcopl,1185. See fifty years, left Nantelinus his Successor, who had the same difference with William Son of Amé Earl of Genevois. Neither could it be arbitrated by the interposi∣tion of the Archbishop of Vienna; so that this Bishop was forced to enter into a League with Thomas I.Dated Third Earl of Maurienne and Savoy:1211. Which Earl set forth a Declaration, wherein he asserted, That he had not the least design on the Priviledges and Liberties of Geneva, neither would he accept of that City if offered him. The Bishop invested him with several Lands and Castles about Geneva, which the Earl of Genevois pretended to belong to him. And these were the Motives of the War between the Earl of Maurienne and the Earl of Genevois, who had drawn to his side the Lords of Focigny, of Gez, and the Dauphin of Vienna. The Earl of Genevois came by the worst, and was constrained to yield (after the death of Nantelinus)1219. to the Arbitrement of the Archbishop of Vienna and Ayme de Granson then Bishop of Geneva. But between Nantelinus and this last mentioned Bishop, the List of Bishops place Bernard
Chabert, who succeeded him about the year 1206. and became Arch∣bishop of Ambrun, in the year 1212. They of S. Martha, make Humbert II. to succeed him, whom we find not in the Annals of Geneva, but in stead of him, Lewis of S. Claude, and after him Peter of Sessons. Armé de Granson,1220. who held the Episcopal Seat forty years, built the Fort of Peney,Fort of Peney built by Aymé of Granson. two Leagues distant from Geneva upon the Rhosne. That of La Bastie, which is but a Cannon shot distant from the Town, was built the year before by Gerard of Terny, who did Ho∣mage to the Bishop and Church of Geneva. Monsieur Lewis Moreri, who made the Historical and Geographi∣cal Dictionary, observed when he was at Geneva, in the Arms be∣longing to the Bishoprick, something, as he thought, more parti∣cularly relating to the Family of the Grandison's; whence he inferred, That Fort was built by that Bishop, and that he was of the Family of the Grandison's in Comte. But he found, after he had more nar∣rowly viewed them, that these were not the Arms of the Family of the Grandèson's, which bore a party par pale in Silver, and azure ban∣ded with Gules charged with three Shells in Sable, for the Scutcheon of these was not party par-paled, neither were there three Shells in them, as Monsieur Moreri imagined, but three Dolphins, which was the Arms of John Bishop of Rchetaille, as we shall shew in its place. Henry or Hubric Prior of the Chartreuse de Portes in Bugey,Bishop of Ge∣neva quits his Bishoprick. who was chosen after him, governed that Church seven years, and had some small difference with the Lord of Gez, called Simon of Joinville concerning several Villages which he held of the Bishoprick; but this being composed,1261. some years after there arose the same va∣riance between him and the Lord of Terny,1266. which was ended after the same manner:1268. At length this Prelate being sorry he had left his former manner of life, quitted his Bishoprick, and betaking himself again to the same Profession, dyed a Chartreu Monk, in the year 1275. Aymé of Menthonay succeeded him, and after him Robert of Geneva,1282. Channon of Vienna, Son of William Earl of Ge∣nevois, but he enjoyed it but two years. In the mean time here had passed some acts of Hostilty between the Earls of Savoy and of Genevoi. The first of these, who was Amé IV. came to Geneva,1285. where with threatnings he demanded they should pay him the charges of the War, which he had been at against the Earl of Genevois, upon the Cityes account. William of Constant, who was then Bishop, would have him be satisfied with what he had already gotten without the City, fearing to give him footing within:Articles of agreement between the Earl of Savoy and Bishop of Geneva. He also proposed an agreement to be made with the Earl of Genevois, but that party which was for Savoy carried it. They granted him what the Earl of Genevois possessed carried fore in the City, and were willing he should use the City as a place of retreat, to defend his neighbouring States. In this reciprocal Al∣liance, he promised on his part, to defend them at his cost. That he would not conclude any Peace without their consents: And that there should be a free commerce betwin his Courtrys and the Ci∣ty. Which Treaty was observed whilst he and his two Sons Ed∣ward and Amé the Great lived.1290. The Bishop seeing the greatest part on
the Earls side, was forced to agree, and confirm it: So that at this Treaty it was concluded, That the Earl of Savoy should become Earl of Genevois. But the name of Earl being hateful to the City, he was content with only that of Vidame, which signifies the same with Vice-Dominus, he had also a Bayliff, who was called in the Language of that Country Chatelatn du Vidomne. But he acknow∣ledged his dependance, notwithstanding, on the Bishop and Church of Geneva, who granted him this during their pleasure. But in process of time, the Princes of Savoy encreasing in power, scor∣ned to be acknowledged by a Word importing Subjection, where∣fore they gave their Bayliff this Title of Vidame. Six years after Humbert Dauphin of Viennois,1291. who was one of the Earl of Genevois's Confederates,Humbert Dau∣phin of Vien∣nois assaults the City of Geneva. set upon the Town, whilst the Earl of Savoy was fortifying it, that he might make him quit so advantagious a Post. Batrix of Savoy, Mother-in-law to this Dauphin, assisted him with a considerable number of Souldiers, which she had caused to be raised in Focigny. He would have secret∣ly surprized the City on Sunday after the Ascension; but he could not carry it so sliely, but his design was discovered. Notwith∣standing which, he fell on the Suburbs, and burnt a great part of them, and encamped before the City, intending to besiege it and win it by Assault. The Earl of Savoy was not in the City, and the good Bishop, William of Constance, knowing not which way to turn himself in this affair, writ to the Dauphin very submissive Letters, entreating him to desist from his purpose; but all his sub∣missions and Tears were ineffectual: For the Dauphin attacked the City with all his Force, and had near won it, had not the Citizens defended themselves most gallantly, and forced him to raise his Siege; but in requital he pillaged the Castles of Thy and Sala, be∣longing to the Bishop, and placed therein Garrisons. The Bishop finding himself not able to encounter him with Secular Weapons,1291. makes use of the Spiritual Sword, and Excommunicates him and his Mother-in-law. About the twenty seventh of October, in the same year, and a Month after, he aggravated his Excommunication. The Earl of Savoy having taken the Field to repel the Duke, march∣ed to L'Ecluse and the Castle of Laye, which places were very ad∣vantagious to him. William of Constance being dead,1303. one called Martin succeeded him, who held that Seat but a very small time, and had for Successor Aimé du quart,William of Constance dies. who had been Chanon and Chanter of the Church at Lyons. He found himself likewise to be in the same troubles as his Predecessors, occasioned by the differences betwixt the Earl of Savoy and Genevois, and inclining sometimes to one side, and some∣times to the other, he caused himself to be suspected by both par∣ties. Amé Earl of Genevois built the Castle of Gaillard,1304. a League distant from Geneva; from whence he made inroads into Savoy: Nevertheless, he paid Homage to the Church for several Lands, and made an Alliance with the Bishop and Commonalty of Gene∣va. This Bishop made a remarkable Decree, to wit, That they should begin the year from Christmas, and not as heretofore from Easter.1306. And in the year following, he made a Declaration, by con∣sent
of the Earl of Savoy, touching the Office of the Vidame or Stew∣ard. The enmity continued betwixt the two Earls. Amé III. Son of Amé the II. Earl of Genevois, would drive away Edward, who was then Earl of Savoy, and hinder his settling himself in Geneva, where he continually strengthned himself. Fain would he have gotten the other out, that he might come in; and joyning with the Dauphin Hugues,1307. he deals with the Governour of the Castle of En∣tremont, who was the Earl of Savoy's Vassal, and so far prevails with him as to obtain liberty to put in there a Garrison from the Dauphin. Whereupon the Earl, to whom this place was of im∣portance, leaves Geneva, to take, if possible, this Castle again: But whilst he was busied about this Siege,Earl of Gene∣vois treats with the City. the Earl of Genevois accompanied with the Dauphin, Lord of Focigny, came to the Bridge of Arve, where he desired to speak with some Chanons and Citizens who inclined to his side: He shews them they could pro∣mise to themselves no advantage, in driving him away, and re∣ceiving in his stead the Earl of Savoy, who had deserted them in their necessities, that he could if he pleased, enter by force, and put all to Fire and Sword, were he not withheld by the fear of God, the respect which he had for S. Peter, who was Patron of the City, and the kindness which he had for them, who took his part in it. That he had more right than his Enemy, and that if they would not receive him as a Friend, he would treat them as Enemies. The Deputies finding his request reasonable, made an alliance with him, under which they also comprehended the Dauphin, mutually promising to defend one another, and maintain the Priviledges of the City. But when it came to have the peoples consent, they of the Faction of Savoy would by no means hear of it, so that one half of the Town took up Arms against the other. The Captain of the Castle in the Isle was for the Earl of Savoy, and he of the Borough of Four for the Earl of Genevois. Each of which parties betook themselves to these two Captains. The first of these puts in a Garrison into S Peters and under the Piazzas; whilst the others introduce the Earl of Genevois and Dauphin into the City by the Ivry-Gate, called then by the name of Porta aquaria, with both his Horse and Foot.1307. Notwithstanding all which, the Faction of Savoy prepares to encounter them, animated by Widon, Tavel, Guiges of S. Apre, Vincent, Frombert and Perissodin of Bourdignin, who were principal Men amongst them.Earl of Gene∣vois defeated. The Earl of Genevois was routed, one hundred thirty and two being left dead upon the place. The Conquerors lay hold on the chief of the contrary Faction, causing Jacquemet and Peter Bosselets to be hanged, and confiscated the Goods of several others of their accomplices. In the Month of August these two Lords return, and having been repelled, they plunder the adjacent parts of the City, and demolish∣ed the Castle of Ville le Grand, which belonged to the Bishop. The year following was remarkable for several Jars between Lew∣is of Savoy,1308. Lord of Vaux, and the Bishop of Geneva: The first of these had caused Money to be coined in Nion, which was with∣in the Diocesse of Geneva, which the Bishop would not suffer:
But referring the Case to Arbitrators, it was declared, That the said Lord might coin Money of mixt Metal, of a different Stamp from Ge∣neva, even within the Liberties of the City, provided he did Homage for this, to the Bishop and Church of Geneva, a fourth part of the Profits whereof should go to the Bishop.Earl of Gene∣vois dyes. This happened about the beginning of April, and in the following Month dyed Amé Earl of Genevois, Son of William II. and was interred at Montagny, after a long War with the Earl of Savoy for the recovery of his right. Neither ought the year 1309.1309. to be forgotten, being remarkable for the wrangling of the people with the Bishop,The Bishop and City dis∣agree. for the Citizens having made open complaint against him, pretending he had usur∣ped over them, he therefore cites them to appear before the Metro∣politan of Vienna; and they notstanding to his decision, he excom∣municates them, and by this means made them condescend to his will. The people were assembled by the found of a Trumpet and ringing of the great Bell, together with the Bishop and Clergy in the Church of S. Gervais, where the Bishop was acknowledged Lord and Prince, with all Jurisdiction and mixt Empire, and that the Syndicks should not do any thing to the prejudice of his Authori∣ty: Being moreover ordered to satisfie for the damages which came by the aggressions of the Citizens, since the War with the Earl of Genevois; and farther, to build Halls at Molard, a two thirds of the profits of which should come to the Bishop, and the other to the Citizens,The Bishop of Geneva's Au∣thority over the City con∣sidered. for reparation of the City Gates. And this was like a clap of Thunder to the liberty which Geneva hath, and doth yet pretend to. Reminding one day a Genevoise of this, he answered me; That this Passage made rather for their Liberties than against them: For says he, The complaint of the people was a certain to∣ken of the Usurpation of this Prelate, and that Excommunication shewed very well the violence they suffered; that what was for∣ced was invalid, and might justly be repealed. That the Burgun∣dians had after the same manner usurped over their City, which had not therefore lost its Right. But we may observe, that it was not only the Bishops of Geneva, who had possessed themselves of the Temporalities of their Diocess, according to Monsieur Cho∣rier in his History of Dauphine, where he tells us: The Prelates alone were the obstacle to the ambition of the Dauphins, respect to their Authority carried it. Frederick I. had given the Citys of Gap, Valence, Grenoble and Die, and that of S. Paul, three Castles to be held by Homage to their Bishops, with all the Rights of the Regale. In the Letters Patents of these Concessions, he gives them the Titles of Princes, which was an honour common to all Bishops: But nevertheless their Successors have established preten∣sions to false and imaginary Principalities. Howsoever the case was, this Aimé du Quart enjoyed not long the effect of his Excom∣munication,1310. nor the Grant of Henry the Eighth, who gave him the Assessment of a Denier on every Bushel of Corn, and two on every Gallon of Wine which was transported out of the Town, in consi∣deration of those great services he had received from him. This Priviledge was given him from his Camp before Bresse, the third year of his Reign on the first of October.1311.
Peter of Focigny Provost of the Chapter of S. Peter,1312. was chosen in his place the Thursday after Easter;A new Bishop chosen. and the year following Wil∣liam the Third,1313. Son of Amé Earl of Genevois did him Homage for his Earldom, for his Commission of Terny, Balleyson, Remilley in Albany, Monfalcon, Les Eschelles, and for all that he held in the Courts of Arve and Rhosne, the Marches of Thonon, and Dependances on the Castle of Chatillon, save the Fidelity due to the Emperour; where∣upon he fortifies Gaillard on the Arve and places there a Garrison, which might serve for a place of retreat to his Souldiers returning from their Inroads into Savoy. On the other side, the Earl of Savoy caused the Castle of Malvaz on the Marches of Gex to be re-built:1317. But two years after they were both demolished upon the occasion of a Murder.1319. Edward of Savoy, Son of Earl Amé, did likewise ho∣mage to the Bishop Peter of Focigny; and they promised mutual as∣sistance. But this hindered them not from demolishing some time after the Castle of Genevois in Focigny belonging to the Bishop:1320. on the other side, William Earl of Genevois enraged against the City, cut down the Vines on the side of S. Victor; and Edward in requital, took the Castle of Seyssel, almost at the same time, that the said William dyed: after whom succeeded his Son, who continued his hostility against Geneva, coming oftentimes with them of Focigny, plundering the Countrey-houses about the City. The eighteenth of March in the year following,1321. a great Fire hap∣pened at Geneva;A great Fire at Geneva. all the Lakes side burnt down, as likewise the New Street called De la Riviere, which from that time was named La Rotisserie. The Book called the Citizen, mentions ano∣ther fire, which happened in the year 1330. but he is mistaken by a whole Age, as we shall make apparent in its place. This year 1330.1330. was remarkable, by a Battel fought under the Castle of Monthouz,A Battel fought be∣tween the Earls of Gene∣vois and Sa∣voy. between the Earls of Genevois and Savoy; two thousand men lay dead on the place, but he Earl of Savoy kept the Field. The Chanons of S. Peter made their advantage of it, by an Anniversary which was established to pray for the souls of the slain; and the Prebend of that day was of seven Florins value to every one of them. Hugues of Genevois took the Castle of Ville le grand, part of which he demolished; the Earl Amé of Savoy, and Lewis of Savoy pursued him, but he had already made his retreat, and they reduced the Castle to its first state. The City had never been well setled since the last Conflagration, which was also followed by another greater than the former: For on the fourth of September being Sunday,1334. there was two thirds of the City burnt down, together with the Cloister and Chanons houses, and Bishops Court, and S. Magdalens quarter, the whole Church and Parish of S. Germains, with the Bells, Reliques and Vestments be∣longing to the said Church: there perished eighty persons besides. Peter of Focigny being dead,1342. was succeeded by Alamand of S. Joire, after he had governed one and thirty years. In the same year dyed Amé the Fifth Earl of Savoy,The Earl of Savoy dycs. who left his Son Amé the Sixth his Heir, who since was the Earl of Verd, be∣cause at a Tilting in Chamberey, he and his company were attired in Green; and being very young when his Father dyed, he had for
Governours, Lewis of Savoy Sieur of Vaux his great Uncle, Vassal of the Church of Geneva, and Amé Earl of Genevois his God-father. He did Homage to Alamand in the Castle of Clermond,1346. upon condi∣tion this should not hinder the Rights of the Church of Geneva; forasmuch as the said Earl could not by reason of some urgent af∣fairs, be present at the said Church or Cloister, according to the manner of his Predecessors. The Earl of Savoy likewise promised great matters,1356. and charged his Vidame or Bayliff, and all his Officers at Geneva, to observe the agreement made by him, and to suffer the Citizens to enjoy their full Priviledges.1365. But in the same year he requested of the Emperour Charles the Fourth,Gerard Tavel, Rodelphus de Postella, Peronnnet of S. Germain, Perret Co∣pounay, Syndicks. the Vicaridge of the Empire in that Countrey, and obtained his desire: so that strengthened with this Title, and with that of Vidame or Steward, he laid claim to the Temporalties of Geneva, as Amé the First Earl of Savoy had done before him. The good Bishop Alamand being deceased, William of Marcossay obtained this Dignity; and a while after the Emperour Charles the Fourth came over to Geneva:1366. The new Prelate and Syndicks by or∣der from the great Council,Charles the fourth comes to Geneva. humbly besought him to revoke the Grant of the Vicaridge given to the Earl of Verd: neither had they any difficulty to obtain their suit. For the Emperour, by a Decree in Council, declared he meant not that the Vicaridge given to the Earl of Verd, should extend it self to the Temporalties of the Church, and particularly of Geneva: whereupon he issues out an Order, like unto that made by Frederick: but he Earl of Verd re∣fusing to obey it, he was suspended by the Emperour, till he quit∣ted his claim, after the same manner as it had heretofore happened to Earl Amé, in the time of Nantelinus the Bishop. This Emperor made two Deeds of Revocation the first at Francfort on the 10. of Sept. 1366. and the other in the same City, on the fourth day of the aforesaid Month. In the first he annulls and makes void the Vicaridge granted by error to the Earl Amé of Savoy, by consent of the Princes of the Empire, and restores them to their ancient Liberties. The second was in the nature of a Mandate to the Archbishops and Officers of the Empire, to publish it in all parts, to the end the said Earl might not pretend ignorance. In the year following there was a third Declaration made at Hertingfeld,1367. in which he expresly revokes the Vicaridge heretofore granted at the importunate suit of his dear Cousin Amé Earl of Savoy, making for ever void all Power, Jurisdiction and Right, which either he or his Successors might claim on Geneva or its Dependencies, qualifying the said City with the Title of Noble Member of the Empire. Finally, up∣on the Contumacy of the said Earl, there was issued forth a fourth Decree given at Prague the fifteenth of February, to strengthen this Revocation, under penalty of one thousand Marks of Gold, the one half forfeited to the Treasury, and the other part to others. Yet the Earl restored not what he possessed to the Church of Geneva;1371. whereupon the Bishop of Marcossay applys himself to Pope Gregory the eleventh, whose Seat was then at Avignon, into whose hands they both resigned the difference, promising to stand to his
decision. The Pope enjoyned the Earl to relinquish whatsoever he had belonging to the Church, and to deliver to the Bishop the Impe∣rial Letters relating to the Vicaridge; continuing to him the right the said Earl had to the Vidomnat or Stewardship, and to the Castle of the Isle, which he did by an Act made at Thonon; restoring to the Bishop and Church of Geneva, whatsoever he had taken from them, promising inviolably to observe the said agreement. This was Published on All-Saints day, in S. Peters Church: so that William having settled the Church in peace, died and was buried in S. Peters, on the left hand of the Quire; having presided eleven years. John of Murel or Morellis succeeded him, and was made a Cardinal by the Antipope Clement the Seventh.John of Mo∣rellis chosen Bishop. After him Ademarus Fabry, a Domi∣c Fryer was Elected, and only ruled three years: The Author of the Book called the Citizen, ranketh him thirty five years before; but it is certain then Alamand of S. Joire held that seat; and they of S. Mar∣tha,1385. cite the Acts of the Consistory of the Vatican, of the 17. July, 1385. And moreover a Bull of the Antipope Clement the Eighth, of the 21. of August in the same year, which make it plain, that he lived much about that time. He published an Act to confirm the Liberties and Priviledges of the City,1387. directed to Jaquement of the Hospital, and James Ramus, promising for himself and successors, truly to observe it. This was Printed since the year, 1507. And contains several Articles, some of which are not worth our notice; the chief of them are, That all Pro∣cesses brought before the Vidame or Steward;Priviledges of the City. shall not be transacted in Writing, but by word of mouth in the Mother Tongue. That Criminal Cases should be Tryed by the Syndicks chosen by the Citizens. That no one should be put to the Rack by them. That it should be lawful to none but Citi∣zens to sell Wine. That the care of Watching the Town, should be commit∣ted to none but Citizens: And that niether the Bishop, or any other deputed by him, should exercise any Authority after Sun-setting. That the Citi∣zens Burgesses, and Freemen of the City, might choose every Year Syndicks or Recorders for the Town; to whom the Commonalty should give full Power and Authority. In the mean time the Earls of Savoy,1389. that they might get footing by degrees in the City, and procure the peoples favour; sometimes applied themselves to the Bishop,The Earl of Savoy endea∣vors to insi∣nuate himself into the City. otherwhiles to the Syndicks; and sometimes to both together, that they and their Court might be admitted to sojourn there; prefixing commonly a certain time, which, when expired, they desired a prolongation of it; declaring they had no design on the City by these permissions. Sometimes also, they would require leave to do justice on their Sub∣jects; who now and then were found in the City during their abode. There is to be seen a dozen of these Acts and Concessions, since the Year,1391. 1390. to 1513. The Earl made moreover an Authentick Act, dated the 26. of April, 1391. By which he Declared that also what concerned the exercising of Authority by Lewis of Cossonney, and his Council resident at Geneva by the Concession of the Bishop and City: He did not mean this should derogate from their Power and Privi∣ledges; nor by this Deed, they had obtained to assume any power or advantage over the said City. Made at Geneva the said Year, in the
presence of Cossonney, R. of Chalens, G. Marchandy, Galey of Very, and signed with the Seal of the abovementioned Earl. William of Lornay,The Earl of Genevois charged with Felony. chosen after Ademarus, presided twenty years. This Bishop Cited by his Chancellor Humbert of Villars, the Earl of Genevois and Lord of Terny, upon case of Felony; for which he was declared an Outlaw,1398. and his Lands forfeited to the Church. It was thought the Bishop could not be judge in his own Cause, but it being not his, but the Churches interest; the sentence was held valid. About the end of the Fourth Century,1400. the Emperor Wencestaus, made a declaration to the same effect as Charles the Fourth,The Citys pri∣viledges con∣firmed. touching the Revocation of the Earls Grant, and farther confirmed the Cities priviledges in such terms, that no Emperors or Kings of the Romans should at any time violate them; which was done at Prague, the 22. of June, 1400. Humbert of Villars Earl of Genevois dying without male issue in the month of March,The death of Humbert. 1400. let his Countreys to Odo of Villars his Uncle,1401. who after hehad held them a year, agreed with Amé the Eighth, who laid claim to them; and so ended the quarrel between the two Earls. Nevertheless Blanche, Humbert's daughter,1402. laid claim to the succession, and appeared before the Bishop by proxy, requiring possession of Remilly, promising him to do homage for it. She was answered that the said Lands were fallen to the Church.1404. That moreover Amé the Eighth Earl of Savoy, terming himself also Earl of Genevois, had already requested this investiture, and promised homage for all the Lands of the said Earldom: so that they could proceed no farther till she had agreed with the above mentioned Earl, which done, she should be gratified in any thing reasonable, as it appears by an Au∣thentick Act of the 13 of March. Amé the Eighth got the better in this contest,Amé does homage. and did homage in the Church of S. Peter, before the great Altar according to Custom, and because the Lordship of Terny was judged lapsed to the Bishop and Church of Geneva, the said Bishop and Chapter willing to gra∣tifie the Earl, gave it to Girard of Terny, on condition he should hold it from Amé the Eighth; and the said Amé should pay homage for it to the Bishop and Church of Geneva. William of Lornay dying,John of Ber∣trandis chosen Bishop of Geneva. John of Bertrandis was chosen in his stead, who was Doctor in the Laws, and Chanon of S. Peters; he was sworn on the great Altar, and promised the Chapter, and four Syndicks deputed by the Commonalty,Jan. 10. to maintain the liberties and priviledges of it;1409. which was confirmed also at the same time by the Emperor Sigismond against the Earldom of Savoy's Vicar General;Allemand Will∣let. shewing him likewise how unreasonable he was in requiring homage of the Bishoprick and Citys of Lausane,will. de Wo∣rey, John de Eonnet, Mer∣met de Vuflans. Geneva, and Valay, of whom none was due, that the said dignity was revoked by Charles the fourth his father; wherefore he admonisht him to desist from such a de∣mand, not troubling any more the said Cities,Syndicks. which belonged only to the Empire. The Bishop of Bertrandis was present at the Council of Constance,1414. where John Huss was burnt,The Bishop a favourer of John Huss. and had some place of eminency there; for he was a Cardinal, and very learned, being suspected to lean to∣wards Huss his Opinions. From Constance, he went into Spain to the
Antipope Benoist, and passing over to Monpellier he obtained of the French King Charles the Seventh, that the Genevoises should not be molested by his Subjects, under pretence of the difference betwixt them and the Earl of Savoy; setting before him, that they not being subject to that Earl, they therefore ought not to be dealt with as Savoyards. The year following he accompanied the Emperor Sigismond to Geneva,1415. in honour of whom there was made for three daies together solemn processions.The Bishop builds Halls. The said Prelate built new Halls, to the Charge of which the Syndicks offered to contribute, provided they might have a third part of their Revenue. Some say that he also founded the Chappel of the Maccabees joyning to S. Peters Church; but it was more likely, John of Brognier, as we shall make it appear afterwards who was also Cardinal of Ostie. John of Bertranais became at length Archbishop of Tarentaise, having been nine years Bishop of Geneva. It was this Emperor Sigismond who erected Savoy into a Duke∣dom,1417. and created the Earl Amé the Eighth,The Earls of Savoy created Dukes. Duke at Monluel. About a year after he came to Geneva with Pope Martin the Fifth, in com∣pany of Fifteen Cardinals: He had his Lodgings at the Cordeliers de Rive, and sometimes after presented his request to Pope Martin, to obtain the Soveraignty of Geneva, pretending it was the Churches In∣terest in general.1420. This was granted him, provided he could get the Bishops consent; whereupon he addresseth himself to John of Pierre∣cize the present Bishop, promising him, if he gave his consent, such a Reward as he should never have occasion to repent of his kindness: The Bishop replied, he was newly entered in that Office, and not be∣ing as yet sufficiently acquainted with it, he referred the matter to the Clergy and people, of whom notwithstanding he would ask ad∣vice. He caused the people then to assemble in S. Peters Cloister on the last of February, the Bishop opens to them the Dukes suit; and first produces the Request presented to the Pope for that purpose, which contained what follows.The Duke of Savoy writes to the Pope. That at Geneva, and the adjacent places, there were several Gentlemen of considerable Estates, who protect∣ed them, who had been guilty of crimes in the City, and thereby escaped unpu∣nished; the Bishop wanting power to make himself obeyed, if the Duke of Sa∣voy did not interpose; which is the reason they could not live peaceably in the said Town, for which cause the supplicant would willingly give the Bishop a recompence far exceeding this Lordship in value: And for asmuch (added he) as it is impossible, holy Father, to prevent these dissentions, That it would therefore please your Holiness, to inform your self of the truth of the matter; so that the Temporal jurisdiction may be transferred to your devo∣ted Son Amé Duke of Savoy, who passionately desires to remove these scandals; preferring above all things, the exercise of Justice, and publick Peace. Which request was passed by Pope Martin on the 28. of March, 1419. And at the end of it was written; So let it be, if expedient and pleasing to the Bishops of Grenoble, Maeon, and the Abbot of S. Sulpice of the Order of Cistern Monks in the Dio∣cess of Belay. He set before them likewise, how the Duke not con∣tent with this, had required a Commissioner to execute the Com∣mission which he had withstood; and in fine he had made him an offer of exchange, whereupon he desired their opinion, and whether he
should continue his Oppositions with the assistance of the Church and City alone. The Citizens and Syndicks having heard the forementi∣oned business, and having withdrawn to consider on it, unanimously made answer in the name of the Commonalty by Hudriol Heremite a Citizen; that seeing for near four hundred years the City and de∣pendances had been under the power of the Church, under which they and their predecessors had received gentle usage, and been go∣verned in peace; it seemed to them, neither profitable nor honoura∣ble for the Church and Prelate; but rather dangerous and of bad con∣sequence to the State and Commonalty, to think of any Translation or Alienation; and although that in times past, there have been greater occasion for it, than at present; seeing there were Territo∣ries and Lordships contiguous to Geneva, such as of the Earl of Vaux, Lord of Statigny; and the Lord of Gex, brother of the Earl of Gene∣vois, and several others then living, who disturbed the peace and quiet of the Prelate. But now all the said Lordships being ended, and reduced under one single Prince; the Duke of Savoy, who ex∣ercises Justice in his own Dominions, and keeps a good correspon∣dence with them his Neighbours. They would never permit any alteration, but would remain both they and their successors, under the Government of the Church and Prelate; Requiring him therefore according to his duty, and Pastoral charge in pursuit of the Oath which he had taken at his entrance; well and faithfully to govern the Church, and keep its Rights as he had hitherto done; promising for their parts, to afford him any requisite aid and assistance against any who should molest him.The Bishop and Citizens make a contract. The Bishop thereupon, makes an ac∣cord with the Citizens and Syndicks, never to suffer any alteration or change in the State, without the express consent of the Syndicks and Citizens: Which he solemnly vowed, to observe according to the usual Ceremony at his first entrance, with his hand upon his breast; and the Syndicks and Counsel took their Oath on the four Evange∣lists. This Treaty is intitled in Latine, A Transaction between the Reverend father John Patriarch, and Minister of the Bishoprick of Ge∣neva on the one part; and the Citizens, Burgesses, and Commonalty of Ge∣neva on the other, against the endevours and suit of Duke Amé to Pope Martyn. At the bottom of which are written the most part of the Names, and Sirnames of them who were present at the said Council general, who represented the Commonalty; being in all to the num∣ber of 727. There being likewise the four Syndicks, Aymé Sallanche a Lawyer, Peter Gaillard, Nicod of Vigier, and John of Jussy. After whom some of the principal Chanons set their hands, Namely, John and Amé of Arenthon, Anselm of Chesnay, Chanon of S. Peters; Ro∣dolphus of Porta, and John of S. Thomas, Divinity Professors; Bar∣tholmew Lombard Dr. of Laws, Aymé Maillet, Raymond of Orsieres, Henry of Barmes Lawyers; Mounsieur Authony Dr. of Physick, Peter Roset, Pancasel de la Rive, Aymonet Fabry, Nicolas of New-Castle, Mermet Lulin, Jaquemet Gautier, John de la Roche, James Revilliod, Henry Chevalier, John of Boloz, Girard Milliet. In short, the said Act was signed by four Notaries, Fulsend of Bruille, John of Vaud, Ni∣cholas Chevrier, and Anthony Fontanelle; in the year and month aforesaid.
All persons who were interessed in the City,1420. were very well sa∣tisfied at this days work;The Empe∣ror declares Geneva an Imperial City. and they had new cause to rejoyce some months after, by a declaration from the Emperor Sigismond which contained that Geneva was an Imperial City; terming it, Nobile Im∣perit Membrum; wherein are mentioned at large the priviledes of Ge∣neva, which he declares he would take into his protection; strictly charging all Princes, Barons, Captains, and all other Officers of what quality soever; and especially Amé Duke of Savoy, not to molest in any sort the said Patriarch, and Bishop of the Church of Geneva; unless they would incur the indignation of the sacred Empire; given at the Monastery of the Royal Court near Prague the sixth of June, 1421.1421. Signed Michael Chanon of Prague. It is likely it was this Prelate who built the Bishops Palace,John of ierre∣scize, the founder the Bishops Palace. his Arms standing on the outside of it; which is a Band charged with three Dolphins. For Frison, in his Book intitled Gallia Purpurata, blazons the Arms of this Bishop, with Gules on a golden bar, charged with three Dolphins in azure; moreover in these Arms there's be∣hind the shield an Archbishops Cross, which cannot agree with A∣mé of Gransons, as we have already mentioned, seeing he never was an Archbishop; whereas John of Pierre-scize, hath been Archbishop of Besançon and Roüen. After John of Pierre-scize, whom others call John of Rochetaillé; there was chosen in his place John of Brievecuisse, or of Courtecuisse, Confessor to the French King Charles the sixth, and Bishop of Paris, who was Bishop of Geneva but one year; he was of the Country of Normandy, and had left Paris because he had opposed the K. of Englands interest; there hath been one of this same family Bishop of Grenoble. This last Bishop of Geneva was succeeded by John of Brognier, who was born in a mean Village near Annecy, called Brogny; where when a Boy, he kept Swine: A Cardinal passing by, took a likeing to him and carried him with him to Avignon; where he brought him up to Learning. It is reported before he went thither, he came to Geneva, to buy a pair of Shooes at the Taconnerie, which is the street wherein is sold Leather and Shooes; for Tacon in the ancient Language of the Savoyards,The predicti∣on of a Shooe∣maker con∣cerning John of Brognier. signified Leather: but he having not mony enough to pay for them, the Shoomaker observing his perplexity; said to him, Go go, friend, you shall pay me when you come to be a Cardinal: which proved a kind of a Prophecy, for being one, he called to mind this man, and requited him with the Office of Steward of his Houshold. He was called Cardinal of Ostie; and it is for this reason, that John of Bertran∣dis having had the same Title, it was thought it was he who built the Chappel joyning to the Maccabees; which at present is called the Philosophy School: for it is certain, it was John of Brognier who founded it; seeing there is yet seen a little Hog carved on the outside of it, which he caused to be set up for a memorial of his profession; and in several parts of his Arms, which are a Cross doubly traversed, covered with a Cardinals Cap. The same Arms are in a Chappel at Brogny, which he likewise founded, as Mounsieur Morery hath ob∣served passing through this Village; he lies buried in the Chappel of Geneva,1426. and had for his successor Francis of Mies, Priest of S. Marcel, his Nephew or Sisters son; some name him Francis of Savoy, Severt
would have him called, though I know not with what reason, John of Chalan, which is the name of a Noble Family in the Country of Vaud. In the Year 1430. there hapned a great Fire at Geneva; which1430. the Book,A great fire in Geneva. called the Citizen, affirms to have happened in the Year 1330. telling us, he had it out of a Manuscript belonging to the Li∣brary at Geneva: several others have mentioned it after him; for most Authors in this particular are like sheep, who when one hath leaped into a ditch, they all follow without observing whether their leader hath been mistaken. Three great Fires hapning in thirteen years seemed improbable, which caused a friend of mine to go and inform himself by the Original from whence this hath been taken. It is a Manuscript in Parchment, Entitled, the Dial of Wisdom, writ∣ten in the year 1417. but at the bottom of it was written some years after, an account of the Fire which hapned in the year 1430. on the 21. of April. These are the very words which though barbarous, yet are authentick as having been written about the same time. Anno Domini millesimo quadringentesimo tregesimo die vicesima prima mensis Aprilis, quae fuit dies veneris, fuit integraliter combusta Eccle∣sia sancti Petri Gebenn. excepta turri à parte lacus, que permansit ille∣sa. Ipsa siquidem die igne ruit seu cecidit altumThe Steeple called the Spire. campanule vocatum A∣vullieta, in quo fundita fuerunt duo cimbala communia: in turri vero à parteOf the Townhouse or Borough of Four. curie seu Burgiforis, fuerunt fundita, licèt non totaliter, duo magna & grossa cimbala. Ipsa siquidem die ibidem succubuit Campanule Orologii existens in summitate turris anterioris prope crucem lapideam, supra fores ipsius Ecclesiae, fuitque ibi destructum grossum, magnum & optimum Orolo∣gii cimbalm. Ipsa etiam die fuit incendio eodem combusta Ecclesia Marie Magdalenes, & multe domus alie, quas noloHere. ibi ponere: cepitque ignis pessima horâ in quadam grangia prope ripam lacus fortissimo borea tum reg∣nante, sitâ circa domum Petri Curtillieti, aliter Pecolati: consumavit predictum incendium cursum in predicta Ecclesia sancti Petri, nec ultra transivit. This Fire was so great, that it burnt intirely S. Peters Church, ex∣cept the Tower on the side of the Lake, and it melted down the Clock and Bells; that end of the Town which is called S. Magdalens, was likewise destroyed by it, the fire having begun in a Farm near the Lake, the wind lying Northward carried it into the very heart of the Town; and this was without question the same conflagration of which Bogge Florentin relates himself to have been an eye-witness. The time answers exactly,Lib. de misrid conditionis humanae. for he says, it was during Martin the fifths Popedom, and he died but in 1431. for his nocturno quoque igne is without doubt the same in meaning with the Manuscript,Nocturno quoque igne in urbe Geben∣na tempore Martini Quinti summi Pontificis plurimae egregiae que domus exustae sunt. Ipsi conspeximus rem visu miseram & fletu digam. Hujus ignis calamitas multos everti bonis. cepitque ignis pessimâ horâ. During the Regency of Francis of Mies,1432. the Duke of Savoy, Amé the Eighth, aged fifty six years, took a resolution to retire from the world that he might the more freely serve God, and turns Hermit at Ripaille near Thonon; he resigned to his eldest son Lewis,1435. the Duke∣dom of Savoy;The Duke of Savoy turns Hermit. and to Philip his youngest son, the Earldom of Gene∣vois. He would not howsoever let go the Revenues, left they
should grow extravagant; he therefore caused his son Lewis to dwell at Thonon with small attendance, and he being a Hermit, besure spent little; so that he gathered vast sums of mony which helped him to the Popedom, having been elected by the Council of Basle, in requital of Pope Eugene his obstinacy. The report of his holiness of life,1439. together with the Duke of Milan his son-in-laws diligence, did not a little contribute to his advance∣ment. He was named Felix the fifth, and was Crowned at Basle by the Archbishop of Arles; but by the opposition of Pope Eugene, who was then upheld by the Princes of Germany and Italy, it was some considerable time before he was acknowledged Pope, unless it were in Switzerland, Savoy and the neighbouring Countrys, for he had not yet arrived at Rome. After Eugenes death, those Cardinals who had been faithful to him, would not yet acknowledge Felix; they there∣fore made Nocolas the fifth Pope, so that Felix's Authority was very much lessened, insomuch that he was scarcely acknowledged Pope in his own Country; although he was at great expence to keep up his Authority,1444. having stript Francis of Mies of the greatest part of his Re∣venues, after whose death he makes himself Administrator of the Bi∣shoprick of Geneva and Lausane. He resided sometimes in one City, and sometime in the other; but oftner at Lusane, where he built the Convent of Cordeliers. During his Popedom and Administration of these two Bishopricks, he dispatcht several Letters and Bulls, dated from Geneva and Lusane; which are all collected into six great Vo∣lumes kept in the Library of Geneva. Felix the fifth desirous to main∣tain his Authority against Nicolas the fifth, sollicited very much his son-in-law Galeazzo Duke of Milan to help him to the utmost of his power; but he did but laught at him, saying, he hath given me a wife without a portion, and I have given him a Popedom without a Reve∣nue. For Amé had promised him much, but had given him nothing, he would also keep himself in favour with the Emperor Frederick III. who had consented to his Election. It was this Emperor who when he was at Geneva, caused to be painted on the top of the Arch at the entrance of S. Peters Court, the Imperial Eagle plum'd with sable in a golden Scutcheon. The Clergy had received him in procession, and had made solemn prayers for him during three days together, as the golden Writ of Frederick II. imported; Pope Felix hoping to draw him to his side, offered him his daughter with 200000. Crowns of gold for her portion, which the Emperor refused, and advised him further to lay down his pretence to the Papal dignity; which he did in the year 1449.1449. and for a recompence was sent Legat into France, and Cardinal of S. Sabine. Whilest he enjoyned the Bishoprick of Geneva, which was since the year 1444. to the year 1451. he had a Patriarch who served as a Vicar in Geneva; for there is to be seen in the sixth year of his Popedom a transaction between John of Groleé, Prior of S. Victor, Administrator for Felix in the Bishoprick of Ge∣neva on one part, and between the Syndicks on the other; and Richard of Terny Lord also of Terny, and the Lord of Montchenu on the con∣trary part; by which it is agreed that the said Administrator, Syndicks and Commonalty might make ditches and trenches at Vernets, to turn the Arve from its usual passage, the whole Course of this River
belonging to them, and that the said Lord of Montchenu should quit, upon consideration of a certain sum of mony, all the right which he could pretend to the said Vernets; there is likewise to be seen the names of Francis of Savoy,1445. and of one Amé of Monfalcon, during the Popedom of Felix the fifth. It is observable the house of Savoy,Duke Lewis quits his claims to Geneva. although then sufficiently pow∣erful, did not disturb Geneva by pretensions of dominion over it; for Duke Lewis, Felix's son, made certain contracts wherein he quits all claim to the Soveraignty of that City and places adjacent,16. May. peaceably resigning them to the Church and Commonalty: And Felix the fifth,1446. although enjoying the Popedom and Bishoprick of Geneva, decla∣red by an Express; but that his dear sons, the Syndicks, Citizens, Bur∣gesses and Commonalty of Geneva, having been by him requested to send him some Companies of Soldiers to the assistance of the City of Lausane,1448. where he then made his residence, having no obligation there∣to; they had sent him upon special favor a Company of 600. men, which have been very serviceable to him; and forasmuch as this may be made an instance of the Cities subjection hereafter, he therefore be∣ing desirous to obviate whatsoever may be disadvantagious to it, at∣tested with Apostolical authority, in truth and certain knowledge, af∣firms, that this assistance hath not proceeded from any acknowledge∣ment of servitude, but meerly out of a filial and kind liberality, with∣out any president or ancient custom; and that the said Citizens, Syn∣dicks, Burgesses and their Successors, are no ways obliged to such things, unless it come from their own free-will, leaving them in their ancient liberty. Two years after he was assisted by them against the Fribourgers,1450. under the Conduct of Captain Burdignin, who was then principal Syndick.Felix dies. Felix died soon-after at Lausane, and was interred at Ripaille. It is reported he had lying under his head in his Tomb in∣stead of a Pillow,1451. an old Parchment Bible, at the end of which were found these words touching Geneva.The City of Geneva situ∣ated between the Moun∣tains; of small extent, and encompassed about with Sand: Its peo∣ple are ever desirous of Novelty. Geneva Civitas situata inter montes, Arenosa, parva, gentes semper petentes aliqua nova. There was chosen in his stead, Peter of Savoy his young son of eight years of age, having left Thomas Cyprian Archbishop of Tarantaise, his Administra∣tor, and Vicar of his Bishoprick. But this young Bishop died in Piemont seven years and eight months after his election, and there suc∣ceeded him in the said Bishoprick, John Lewis of Savoy his youngest brother, last son of Duke Lewis; he was as yet very young, his father had designed him for some Ecclesiastical promotion; but his inclina∣tion lay not that way, for he wore always the garb of a Soldier and was much esteemed for his skill in Warlike affairs, defending Gene∣va from all oppression of its neighbours: none daring to violate his Authority, nor touch the liberties of the people. He had a brother called Janus, who was Earl of Genevois, and who took on him the title of Earl of Geneva; but he made him resign his Title and pretensions. He had another brother named Philip,The Story of Philip. commonly called Philip with∣out Lands, who, troubled that his father should leave him without any provision made for him, believing his mother was the cause of it, endeavoured to set his father against her, accusing her to him, as having some Gallants on whom she bestowed her riches. He was sel∣dom seen with his father,1460. who lay for the most part at Thonon sick of
the Gout. This young man grew so insolent, that at length he killed the Master of his Mothers houshold, whilst he was hearing Mass, and caused his fathers Chancelor to be seized on, and carried away to Morges; where by false accusations, he procured his being drowned in the lake: which disorders continuing, the Duke thought himself not safe in his own Country, and desired his son John Lewis Bishop of Geneva, and the Syndicks and Council to receive him into their City, as in a place of surety; which having obtained of them, he came and had lodgings in the Convent of Gray Fryers of Rive, his Court being likewise at Geneva; he lived some time in peace, only disturbed with the pain of the Gout. His Dutchess Anne of Chypre, being she had an opportunity of con∣cealing her treasure, whether she feared some disgrace might befall her, or whether she was willing to gratifie some friends, She cau∣sed several large Cheeses to be bought, the inside of which she made to be taken out, that she might put therein several pieces of gold, and lading them on mules sent them into her own Country; of which her son Philip being informed, and having learned through what parts they were to pass, he got before them near Fribourg, and caused the men to unload, and took away with him their carriage; he payed with one part of this booty those he had taken with him for his assistance, and secretly conveys himself to Nions; whence he sent to Geneva some of his company to treat with the young men of his ac∣quaintance, and with the Syndicks and others, desiring them to let him enter by night, which he obtained; and had no sooner entred, but he went directly to Rive to his fathers lodgings without the least stop, and having knocked at the door, one of the servants came and asked who was there; he answers, I am Philip of Savoy, who would speak with my father upon business of concernment; the servant return∣ing to his Master with this answer; Open, saith he, let what will hap∣pen. Philip then being entred, salutes his father, saying, good mor∣row father; his father replies, God grant thee unhappy days and years too; what Devil brings thee hither at this time? to whom Philip mo∣destly answer'd, Sir, it is not the Devil, but God almighty who occasions my coming here for your good; for I come to give you notice, you are robbed, and you do not know of it: Here is Madam my Mother who will leave us nothing; so that if you do not take care, she will leave not onely your Children the poorest Princes in Christendom after your death, but even your self whilst living; in saying which he shewed and gave him all the Treasure, save that which he had spent, which (added he) if you will suffer, I will not, but will punish these Thieves, wheresoever I find them. At the same time he began to look under the Bed, if there were any of the Country of Cyprus; for he mortally hated them, especially since this trick of his Mothers, for he imagined they were the inven∣tors of it. From thence he makes search in every chamber; but as it hapned, they having gotten notice of his coming, had timely saved themselves in several houses in the Town where Philip durst not at∣tempt to look for them, fearing to raise a tumult amongst the people, which occasioned his return without doing any hurt. The Duke his father enraged at this, desired the people to assemble in the Church where he was lodged; which they did, and he made his complaints:
but the Syndicks dared not to appear; the people excused themselves, and laid the blame on the Syndicks whom they sent for. The two first of them were found innocent, the third saved himself and de∣parted the City; and the fourth, who had hid himself in the lowest rooms of the Convent of Rive,A Syndick hanged. was convicted, confessing his intrigue with Philip, and was immediately hanged. This having not yet appeased the Duke, he leaves Geneva, and goes to his Son-in-law Lewis the Eleventh at Lyons; with whom having treated concerning certain places of Dauphiné, which he had held ever since the Resignation of the last Dauphin Humbert,The affairs removed from Geneva. he remitted the Titles of the affairs of Geneva to the King, of which he had possessed himself, to be revenged of the Genevoises, the Bishop his Son having given him the Records. So that the King transfer∣red them to Bourges in Berry, and from thence to Lyons, where they are kept at present; and all Merchants passing through his Countrys were forbid to go to Geneva,1463. but to France; and moreover the Duke obtained of the King, that his son should be apprehended and kept in prison till he grew wiser. The Genevoises did all they could to have their affairs restored, having gotten the chief Citizens of Ligues, to be their intercessors to the King, and at that same time humbly be∣sought Philips enlargement. The King having heard their request, consented to it, provided they would obey the Duke as their Prince; to which they would not agree. This Duke died a while after,1465. and his son Amé the ninth, succeeded him; who set effectually on the establishment of the affairs again in Geneva, as being indeed his interest, but in vain; whereupon he granted leave to the Merchants of Geneva to bring in, and carry out through his Dominions for ever,1466. all Merchandizes; which shews, say the Ge∣nevoises, that he accounted them as Strangers and not as Subjects. There was held the year following an assembly of Masters and Workmen in the art of Coyning at Bourg,1467. in Bress; where John Chabot, otherwise Porter, was chosen chief intendant on that work. There came thither from Geneva, Aymard, Faury, and Amé Blondel, with twenty seven of their workmen. We read in the Records of those times,1469. of one Philip de Compois, Vicar General of the Bishoprick; and after him Anthony of Malvenda,1473. who were sworn to keep the Liberties and Priviledges of the Town; the same did one, called Claude of Spain. Amé the ninth being dead in 1472. the last of March, left his Wife Yoland his Childrens guardian, who was Sister to King Lewis the 11. and the King had espoused the deceased Duke her Husbands sister; yet all Amé's Brethren had greater kindness for the Burgundians than French. The Duke of Burgundy having been defeated by the Switzers in the famous Battel of Morat, retreated to Gex; the Dutchess of Savoy who was then at Geneva,The Duke of Burgundy con∣veys the Dutchess of Savoy into Burgundy. gave him a visit with her children, after some discourse, took leave to return again in her Chai; but the Duke fearing she should take part with his enemies, bethought him∣self, and commanded one of his Captains to follow her, and carry her into Burgundy; whose design was perceived by a Gentleman of Piedmont, Master of the Dutchesses houshold, who endeavoured to
save her, but all he could do was onely to hide the young Duke in a heap of Corn, charging him to lie quiet. Whilst this was doing, Malcomanda being come up to them, commands the Dutchess to turn her Horse, and follow the Duke of Burgundy. She made some re∣sistance; and it is reported this Captain who was a rough fellow, gave her a box on the Ear, and conveyed her to S. Claude, where he kept her four months prisoner, and was from thence carried to Rouvre; where she remained for a while longer. In the mean time the Duke of Burgundy being vexed he had mist of the young Duke, commanded some Troops of his Lombards to forrage the Country about Geneva; whereupon the Bishop caused all the Lombards in the Town to the number of two hundred to be hanged and drowned for a requital. The Switzers after the overthrow of the Duke prosecuted their victory, and fell the second time upon the Country of Vaux; neither spared they them of Geneva, because the Bishop John Lewis, had made War with the Valeysans their Allies; but the Deputies of the Town with the Savoyards, went out to meet them, desiring them to desist; that if there were any misun∣derstanding betwixt them, it might be easily rectified at some ap∣pointed meeting, which was agreed to be held at Fribourg, where it was determined, the Switzers should restore whatsoever they had taken from the Dutchy of Savoy, upon consideration of a certain sum of mony, and some places which they should still keep in their hands. So that they of Geneva were forced to pay 2800. Crowns of gold as a reimbursment to the Switzers, for their expences in the War. But the City being impoverished by reason of the removal of the Fairs, could not suddenly raise this mony, desiring the Swit∣zers to allow them time for payment;The Switzers muiny for want of their pay. to which the Chief of them consented, but the Soldiers mutinied; saying, they would have their pay, let it come from whence it would; accusing them who had the management of affairs, that they had already received the mony and spent it, whilst they must undergo all the hardship of War. The common Soldiers then thus mutinying had private Cabals, wherein it was agreed to fetch their pay by main force. They therefore to the number of seven hundred of them, on the first day of Lent came to Zug; marching along the Road with flying colours without their Superiors leave, and in their march met with others who joyned with them with intention to plunder Geneva. So that being come to Fri∣bourg, they found they were two thousand; but the Embassadors from Ligue interposing appeased them, upon condition the Genevoises should pay both use and principal, which amounted to near six thou∣sand Florins of gold, and give Hostages for the more certain perfor∣mance of it, to which they were forced to give their consent; only obtaining some small time,1476. which being expired, they were as much put to it as before to raise the mony, being forced to borrow of the Citizens their Rings and Jewels, and to melt their Chalices and Cros∣ses and to lay great Taxes on the people. The Bishop John Lewis sensible of the miseries of War▪1477. endeavors a perpetual▪The Bishop John Lewis makes an alli∣ance with the Switzers. Alliance with the Switzers, to which they consented; but the people were so stupid as to slight the benefit procured them by the Bishop; which he perceiving, was contented to let it be only in
his name and during his life, by which means he secured himself from his enemys abroad, but not from his own Domesticks. He had two Favorites, the first of which was Prothonotary, and of the Family of Terny, whose name was Pommieres, Governour of Renel in Piedmont; and the other a Gentleman of the house of Chissy. These two Favo∣rites being jealous one of another as to their Masters favour, could ne∣ver agree, so that Pommieres not able to brook his Rival, betakes himself to the French Court, where he discovers himself to the King; telling him as a great secret that his brother-in-law the Bishop of Ge∣neva, and the whole State of Savoy at Chissy's sollicitation were about taking the Duke of Burgundy's part. The King liking this adver∣tisement, recompences him with the Bishoprick of Viviers. De Pom∣mieres not content with this, would carry it on further, and would have Chissy seized and brought to the King, that he might be made to discover all the Bishops intrigues. He came then to Geneva with three or four of his brethren, and staid there about fifteen days, pre∣tending their journey was only to see their friends, and recreate them∣selves awhile. In the mean time there came several into the City to help his undertaking, and to lay hold on Chissy; they being adverti∣sed where he lay with the Bishop, as Pommieres himself was ac∣customed to do when he was in favour,3. January. they ventured to take him in the very Bishoprick.1477. For though the Bishop had guards as is usual with great persons, yet he minded not whether they kept strict watch, but permitted them to go about the Town at their pleasure; so that they served only for show. In the morning as soon as ever the gates were opened, Pommieres and his company made a shift to get entrance into the Chamber, where the Bishop and Chissy lodged; the latter of which they made rise, and drew him out of the room in his shirt into the street where their horses were ready; they set him on one, his hands being pinioned, and carried him thus out in his shirt through the gate of Rive, the Bishop not daring to utter a word; but the youngest of Pommieres brothers was wholly taken up in the en∣tertaining some Ladies whilst his brethren were getting away. The noise of this rape being spread over the Town, they were immediate∣ly all up in arms; which the young Pommieres perceiving too late, he sets spurrs to his Horse thinking to pass through the gate of Rive, as they did before him; but finding it shut, he turns his horse think∣ing to get through Corraterie, but it was too late, for they had began already to fasten it; he endeavoured nevertheless to get out, but as he was under the wicket, they let fall the Portcullices, which light∣ing on his horses crupper struck him to the ground; so that he was taken, and led to the Bishop, who put him into the hands of Chissy's relations,1479. to keep him till the other should be restored, as they were forced to do a while after.The Bishop John Lewis kills the Bi∣shop of Viviers. The Bishop John Lewis was resolved not to pass by this affront, but to be revenged; whereupon he caused the Bishop of Viviers to be watched; notice being given him, that on a Sunday he had appointed to treat some Ladies in Piedmont; he there∣upon takes horse with about forty more, and arrives at Piedmont where De Pommieres was, enters without opposition, for little did they think of him, and finding him at Table, immediatly killed him and some of his companions.
In the same year there was a great scarcity of provision, so that a Bushel of Corn was valued at fourteen shillings; which was likewise followed by so great a mortality,The said Bi∣shops Chara∣cter. that 7000. died in the City. The Bi∣shop John Lewis went the year following to Turin, and died also a while after of a Pestilential feaver.1481. This Bishop was a younger brother, of a couragious and undaunted spirit, a lover of War, but unfortunate, yet of a free and generous temper, amorous, and revengeful against those who had affronted him; but on the other side very ready to forgive, when there was occasion, as he made it appear by this in∣stance; for being in love with a Millers wife, and the husband find∣ing him in the Chamber with her, could not refrain from thrashing him soundly, till he had left him near dead on the floor; yet John Lewis passed it by, and gave him the Cloaths he wore when he beat him. After his death, there rose a great contest between the People, Pope, and Chapter,1482. concerning the choice of a Successor. The people would have Francis of Savoy Archbishop of Aux,The disagree∣ment of the Genevoises in the choice of their Bishop. brother to the de∣ceased, and the Chapter would have Ʋrbain of Chivron; but the Pope not liking either of their choices, gave the Bishoprick to the Cardinal of S. Clements his nephew, called Dominique of la Rovere. This Cardinal thinking it a hard matter to settle himself in this Bi∣shoprick against the will of both People and Chanons; he therefore makes an exchange with John of Compois Bishop of Turin.1484. But Chivron who was chosen by the Chanons not willing to resign his pretended right, thereupon arose a great strife; but at length this last carryed it, and enjoyed it for some time. Ʋrbain of Chivron in re∣quital resigns his right to Francis of Savoy whom the people approv∣ed of, who entred by force with his brother Philip Lord of Bresse. Compois having heard of his coming,1485. got away in the night, so that on the 25 of July, Francis and Philip made their entrance into the Town, and put therein a Garison; a while after came their Nephew Duke Charles, who was highly honoured and treated by them; for they spent at one entertainment above four hundred Crowns, which was a great deal of mony in those days. On the other hand Compois goes to Rome to make his complaint to Pope Sixtus, who judged he had right to the Bishoprick from which he had been unjustly thrown out; which Francis not yielding, the Pope excommunicated the Town, which lasted three months; but at length Chivron having gotten to be Archbishop of Tarantaise, by Francis of Savoy's means, all was pacified; for Compois had given him the next presentation to this Archbishoprick, whereupon he resigned the right which he had to the Bishoprick of Geneva to Francis, who being sworn, took upon him only the title of Administrator or Pro∣tector of the Church of Geneva. Duke Charles the second of that name,1487. Duke of Savoy, son of Charles the first, and Godson to Amé the ninth; advertised by his Uncle the Bishop of Geneva of some Acts and Decrees set forth by his Council held at Chambery, to the Church of Geneva's prejudice; he therefore repeals and makes void the said Acts, strictly charging his Officers to forbear proceeding thereupon, which was given at Pignerol the 14. of December,1489. 1489.
These Letters were delivered to the Council of the Earl John of Genevois,1490. Uncle by the Fathers side to the said Charles.13 March The Duke de∣sires leave to remain for some time at Geneva. The Earl dispatched Letters of Credence, promising more care for the time to come. The Duke likewise sent to the Council of Geneva, intreating them to let him remain there some time, as his Predecessors had done before him. The Bishop being dead at Turin,3 Octob. the Chapter chose Charles of Seyssel, who enjoyed the Bishoprick for some time: but Anthony Champion President of Turin and Chancellor of Savoy,Two Bishops chosen to suc∣ceed in Gene∣va, who are therefore at variance. who had been married, and was then Bishop of Mont-Devis in Piémont, obtained of the Pope the Bishoprick of Geneva, and Charles of Seyssel having been chosen in due form and manner, would not give him place; whereupon there arose a great strife and Law-suit betwixt them; so far, that Champion having gotten a Decree from the Metropoli∣tan of Vienna against Seyssel, and assisted by the Lord of Bresse, came resolved to obtain his right, either by fair means or foul. There were several small skirmishes on both sides on the Bridge of Chancy, where some remained on the place,1491. and Seyssel was forced to yield to the strongest. Duke Charles the Second being dead, there started up in Foucigny one John Gay of Megiva,1492. who raised the Peasants into a Mutiny against the Nobility who oppressed them; setting before them the hope of Liberty,John Gay cau∣ses the Pea∣sants to take up Arms a∣gainst the Nobility. and the example of the Cantons of Switzerland, with whom and the City of Geneva they might make a League. These Peasants to the number of sixscore, wore Red Coats, who set upon the Gentry of the Countrey without any exception: but the Lord of Bresse having gotten them of Berne and Fribourg, to send to them Deputies; they drew to Geneva the chief promoters of these Tumults, and with fair promises softned them, and sent them home; but being scattered, they were laid hold on and hanged. Bishop Champion after the usual Oath called a Synod,1493. in which the Decrees and Constitutions of the Bishops were reviewed and amended; which were Printed in the same year, under the Title of Constitutions of the Synod of the Bishoprick of Geneva. He dyed two years after,1495. having held the Seat but four years. Philip of Savoy being but seven years of age, Son of the Lord of Bresse, was chosen in his stead, at the suit of Blanche Mary of Mont∣ferrat, Widow of Charles the First. Pope Alexander the Sixth, who confirmed his Election, assigned Aym of Monfalcon Bishop of Lau∣sane, and the Bishop of Nice▪ to be his Guardians: which Philip was Bishop under four Dukes of Savoy, Charles his Uncle, Philip his Fa∣ther, and Philbert and Charles his Brethren. As he increased in years, he grew more fit to be a Soldier than a Church-man, as his Uncle Lewis before him. 'Twas commonly said of him, that he was more fitting to be made a Duke than his Brother. Whilst he was young and his Father alive, he was forced to wear an Ecclesi∣astical Garb; but after his death Charles then being Duke, and very familiar with him, he threw it off, but not the Revenue. Return we now to the Government of Philbert.1498. This Duke came to Geneva with his Bastard Brother René.The Duke of Savoy comes to Geneva. They were so greatly pleased with the City, that they desired leave of the Bishop and
Council to keep Courts of Justice in it only for their own Subjects, which was granted them for some time. Philbert giving himself over to pleasure,René the Dukes bastard brother en∣deavors to make him Soveraign over Geneva. left the management of his affairs to René, a fierce and imperious young man, and who watched all opportunities to make his brother Master of Geneva, that he might be revenged on the Syn∣dicks who had refused to let him have some Writings wherein the City were concerned; his first attempt was the imprisoning of a Ge∣nevois, called Peter Levrier, by virtue of Letters Decretory from the Duke. The Lieutenant of Gex, had laid hold on him near the Town∣house, from whence he carried him to the Castle of the Isle which was the Dukes abode; whereupon the Attorny-General and Syn∣dicks made their complaints to René, shewing him that such an im∣prisonment was wholly unlawful, forasmuch as that jurisdiction and power belonged only to the Bishop, his Vicar or Steward, or other secular Officers; so that not being able to suffer such an action, they desired the Lieutenant should bring back the Prisoner to the place from whence he had taken him,1498. upon which there was an Act made in favour of the Bishop,24. of May. Church and Syndicks. These last returned him the same measure, for being informed that a Savoyard called Thomas Papuli, had coyned brass mony in the City, having given notice to René of the power and jurisdiction of the Church and City; they sentenced the malefactor to have his right hand cut off before his own door, and from thence to be led to Champel where he was be∣headed, and his body to hang on the gallows, and his hands and head to be set up in the place called the Liberties.1499. A marriage was resolved upon between the Duke of Savoy,12. of June. and Yoland of Savoy his Cousin German, the better to strengthen him in his Countrys, but she died before the marriage could be consumma∣ted; and was buried in the Chappel situated at the Cordeliers of Rive.1500. René who had the sole management of affairs intrusted him by his brother, endeavoured to strengthen his Authority and make him ab∣solute in Geneva;Eyria accused by René. both publick and particulars had every day some new oppression laid upon them, although he received from both more respect than he deserved, for he had every day Presents made him in hopes they might at length win him by kindness, and keep him from enterprizing any thing against them, by which means he received more profit than the whole revenue of that City amounted to;1601. all which could not make him desist from his violences. For remem∣bring there was a gentleman called Eyria, who in the time of the de∣ceased Duke had been in great credit, and whom he could not then in∣jure, he was resolved now together with his whole family. He there∣fore accuses him to have designed to poyson the Duke, by a perfumed Apple, & for a confirmation of this produces two witnesses who make Oath, they heard him together with a Physitian at Lyons contriving how they should effect it; the Duke being easie to be wrought on, believed it, whereupon it was resolved that they should surprize the Physitian: they sent therefore to Monlel the Provost of the Dukes houshold, who desired the Physitian by his man, to visit him; the poor Physitian who mistrusted nothing, as being innocent, came to him without delay; where instead of a Patient, he finds a Provost, who
seized on him,1501. and carried him away bound hand and foot to Geneva, where he was thrown into the Prison of the Island, and Judged by the Provost. At which the Syndicks and people were exceedingly moved, and complained to the Duke; shewing him this was an in∣fringement of their Liberties and Jurisdiction, which the Duke him∣self was sworn to observe; yet did not René forbear to pass on put∣ting him to the Rack and made him confess, and accuse whom he pleased; which done, he caused him to be beheaded, and set up his Quarters in the Liberties notwithstanding the Citizens opposition. Afterwards he seized on Eyria, and most of his kindred and friends, whom he had caused to be accused by the Physician, and would have dealt after the same manner with them; but several Persons of Qua∣lity having interposed, their sentence was deferred, and René began to grow odious to the people. The Duke after his affianced Ladies death, espoused Margaret, Ma∣ximilian's daughter, who was first betrothed to the young King Charles of France, but being repudiated by him, and married after∣wards to the King of Castile; after his decease she was married to this Duke Philbert. They made their publick entrance together into Gene∣va, which put the Town to great charge, in Plays, Masquerades, and other divertisements. This drew insensibly the Youth into debau∣cheries, and the Duke being young himself, and a great lover of these pleasures; it is no wonder if these pomps and divertisements were as so many charms to lay asleep the Genevoises. Eyria escaping out of Prison at Chilon flies to Berne, and makes his complaint to the Council there against René; beseeching them to shelter him under their protection, and to shew to the Duke his bro∣thers oppressions; which they did, so that he began to lessen his affe∣ction towards him.A Preacher declaims against René. There was at that time a Preacher belonging to the Dukes Court of the Order of Dechausser, or bare-legged, called Frater Mulet; who set before him one day in his Sermons, The po∣verty and misery of his Subjects; exhorting him to help them thence∣forward, in driving away the Thieves from about him, the real blood-suckers of the People. He compared the Duke to a great purse full of little purses filled with mony, the biggest of which was emp∣ty; meaning thereby them who enriched themselves at the Dukes cost, and advising that all the little purses should be emptied into the great. The Duke and those present, perceived very plainly that he designed the Bastard by these words, who was the greatest of those Tyrants that robbed the people;René begins to grow, the fourth of March, out of favor with the Duke his bro∣ther. and indeed his credit from that time diminisht, as well for what had past in the Pulpit, as his great pride; for he had ordinarily a greater attendance than his Master. The Duke beginning to slight him, his followers likewise deserted him; this abated a little his pride, and fearing he should be shamefully sent away, he thought it was better handsomely to ask leave, than to stay till it was granted him without asking. He came then one day to the Duke to whom he held this discourse: My Lord, I have ever been, and am still your most humble Servant and Subject, and moreover your poor Bastard brother; for your deceased father acknowledged me as such. I have served you hitherto with that zeal and devotion as might be expected from a servant and brother; so that if my service hath not been such as you de∣serve,
yet hath it been to the best of my power; but for as much as I perceive of late that my service hath not been acceptable to you, therefore I am not willing to trouble you any longer; wherefore I beseech you to suffer me to re∣tire into my own house, notwithstanding which you shall find me most ready to obey you as often as you shall please to command me. To whom the Earl thus answered, Bastard, you say you have truly and faithfully ser∣ved me; be it so, yet am I glad you ask leave to be gone, and I will have you depart not only from the Court, but likewise out of my Do∣minions in three days upon pain of death. The wretched René finding his brother so angry departed weeping attended only by his Dome∣sticks, and made what haste he could to be gone; of which the Syn∣dicks having notice, notwithstanding his oppressions, came to take leave of him, offering him their service. He went into France to King Lewis the Eleventh, whom he endeavoured to exasperate against the Savoyards.1502. At the same time Duke Philbert and Margaret his Dutchess departed for Chambery, being informed by the President of Divonne, and Amblard Goyet Deputies of the Town, that they had no right to that City. The Dutchess then perceiving Geneva belonged not to the Duke; she built not there a Church and Monastery as she intended, but at Brou, near the Borough in Bresse. After René's departure, Eyria was called home, and entertained in the Princes Service; and thus Geneva was freed from a great deal of trouble and vexation by René, and the Dukes departure: but instead of this it had worser sorrows;A malefactor dies under the torments he suffered to make him confess his crime. for besides the plague which raged vio∣lently in the City, there hapned another sad accident: the Syndicks kept in Prison one called Cotton, sufficiently convicted of a crime de∣serving no less than death; but it being customary not to pronounce sentence, before the Prisoner confessed his crime, he was therefore put upon the Rack; but whatsoever torment he suffered, he would not make any acknowledgement. At length a certain Person of the Country of Piedmont informed them, that the way of his Country was in such like cases to put a napkin with water in it down the throat of the malefactor to his stomach, and then at one jerk they pulled it out again. The Syndicks would needs try this fellows expe∣riment, which was immediately followed by the death of the Male∣factor, which put the Council and City into a great fear, let their enemies should lay hold on this occasion to trouble them, as indeed it happened; for some belonging to the Duke, and who had the same kindness for the City as René, represented this mishap to the Duke with the greatest aggravations imaginable, adding, they de∣served to have their priviledges taken away from them, and that moreover he might justly do it, seeing the City by right belonged to him; the Duke hearkning to them, Commanded his chief Attorny to undertake the business; the Syndicks sent Bonna and Levreri their Deputies, who shewed the Duke it neither belonged to him or his Council to take cognisance of that affair. The Duke not much mo∣ved by this tart reply, tells them it should be put to Arbitration. He for his part chuses some of his Counsellors, who with the rest of the Arbitrators were sworn to be impartial, and judge according to Right. The Titles of both parties were diligently enquired into, but they of Geneva got the better; the Arbitrators declaring by joynt
consent, that he had no right or title to the said Town; which having said, he plainly declared himself in these words: I have been given to understand otherwise, but seeing it is as you say, I vow to God, and S. Pe∣ter, to contest no farther; and touching this particular cause I confess and acknowledge it belongeth to the Bishop my brother to take cog∣nisance of it, and not to me; so that I refer the whole matter to him when he shall be of age to judge of it. After this manner all was pacified. The plague which continued at Geneva,A Famine in Geneva. was attended with a great want of rain, which brought along with it a scarcity of provision; which forced the Country people (who dared not before approach the Town) to come into it, whether moved by devotion or urged by want; for they came in procession from all parts to our Lady of Grace, to desire of her Rain, but they could not obtain it; and the scarcity continuing the next year following, a bushel of Corn which was worth before but two shillings, was now valued at a Crown, the Crown going but for three shillings and two pence, so that the poor Peasants were forced to live on herbs and roots, which sometimes they had not patience to dress. One Le Mortel a famous Thief made himself much talked of in those times,Mortel a fa∣mous Thief. it was known by all what trade he followed, the people about the Town securing their goods in the City for fear of him;1504. where likewise it was no sooner night, but the Masters called to their men to keep fast their doors for fear of Mortel, which afterwards be∣came a proverb; but all their care did not avail them, for he broke in every where, especially where they were most cautious of him; he seemed to be not so much sollicitous after the mony, as how he should do his work dexterously, for he took but small summs only to spend with his Comrades; whether he did his work by slight of hand, or by charms it is uncertain, yet it is reported of him that he so enchanted the people, that they lost all ability of speaking or resisting. The first thing he did when he came in, was to take the Keys even from under the Master of the houses pillow although awake; he open∣ed the Cup board, Sellar door, lighted a Candle, laid the Cloth, eat and drank, no body hindring him. The next morning after this he usually went to the Tavern with his companions, the Vintners recei∣ved him gladly, for besides his being a good Customer to them, he never defrauded them of any thing; when he wanted mony, he would bid his Host to seek in the Corner of such a Chamber, which perhaps no body had entred a long time, where they were sure to find their due to a farthing. Every body wondered he was not punished by the Magistrates: he was indeed several times imprisoned; but the Syndicks dared not act contrary to their Laws and Customs, which were to condemn no man without his own Confession; for when he suffered the Rack, he was more firm and constant in denying the truth, than a Martyr could be in confessing it; whether this came through want of the sense of pain, or that he was so stout as to despise it, so that he valued the Rack no more than a fillip; for when he was stretched upon it, he would pre∣tend to have been exceedingly tortured, and would desire them to take him off, promising to confess the fact; but when he was questi∣oned
about it he would answer, Well, what would you have me say? repeating their words after them, and desiring them to give him the other stroak for the sake of the Ladies. He died not such a death as he deserved, though dreadful enough, for he was seized with the Plague so vehemently as that it took away his speech; his Mother who at∣tended him in his sickness fearing he should escape it, and come one day to be hanged, put him into a Coffin, and caused him to be buried alive. Duke Philbert died in the flower of his age of a cold gotten in hunt∣ing,10. of Spt. and being a good and virtuous Prince,1504. he was much lamented; by Geneva especially,Duke Philbert dies. who met not with the same good qualities in Charles the second his successor. It was four years before he came to Geneva, though he had often promised it, which put the City to a needless charge in their preparations for him, whilst in the mean time his Officers frequently violated the peoples Rights and Priviledges. The Duke had daily complaints made of this, but he did not re∣gard it. Monaton Secretary to the Bishops Chancellour having been di∣spatched to Ancy,1505. (where the Duke then kept his Court) to obtain Letters in favour of the City as to the maintaining of its Priviledges,6. of June. brought others exceeding his Commission. There were sent other Deputies to annul what the former had done, and were commanded to carry the President of Divonne a present, who then governed, to the value of one hundred Crowns. Duke Charles being at difference with them of Valey, required help from Geneva, who sent him two hundred men under the Command of Captain Burdignin. The Duke not contented with this, sent for six piece of Ordnance which was fairly denied him, being answered, that those few they had were only sufficient for the guard of the Town; upon which Rollet Nicholas who held a correspondence with the Duke,22. of April. sent him an account of those who had chiefly opposed his request,1506. who were Peter Faccon, Levrery, de Fonte, Hurich, and some others whom the Duke vowed to destroy. The three first of these warned of this withdrew to Fribourg, where they purchased the free∣dom of that City, only paying a Crown every year, by which means they might live safely at Geneva, under the protection of this Canton, and so avoid the Dukes displeasure who would not enter the Town, nor swear to maintain its priviledges, till Levrery was delivered into his hands. The Prothonotary of Aux who was since Bishop, succeeding Amblard Goyet, Abbot of Filly, in the charge of the Bishops Chancellor, cast Levrery into Prison; but his friends giving notice thereof imme∣diately to Fribourg: that City sent their Deputies with all speed to procure his release, and from that time the Duke ceased his violences on Geneva, fearing the Confederates; yet his Officers brought in di∣vers innovations contrary to the Cities Priviledges,27. of July. for which cause Levrery was sent to complain to the Bishop who was then in Pied∣mont,1507. and Anthony Pecolat to the Duke, who having after long expe∣ctation now resolved to come to Geneva,1508.6. of April. they presented him with two little barrels of Silver,The Duke and Dutchess of Savoy come to Geneva. and the Dutchess his mother with a Ver∣milion Cup gilt with Gold, weighing nine ounces. At length he comes, having first taken an Oath to observe the Priviledges and Li∣berties
of the Town, and made farther declaration wherein he ac∣knowledged he had no power or jurisdiction in Geneva in these fol∣lowing Terms. For asmuch as our well beloved the Syndicks and Council of the City of Geneva, at our request have permitted us to keep our Court in the Hall over against the Statehouse, during our residence; we there∣fore attest and acknowledge this concession not to have proceeded from any sense of duty or acknowledgment of right from the Syndicks and Council, but purely out of good will; which we do not design shall extend to the prejudice of the Liberties of the said City. After this he soon returned to Anecy. Philip of Savoy Bishop of Geneva,1510. not liking the Ecclesiastical State, having presided fifteen years, gave his place to Charles of Seys∣sel brother to the Baron of Aix, who had been chosen seventeen years before, but driven out by Champion. Philip was by his brother made Earl of Genevois, and afterwards betook himself to King Francis the first, who gave him the Dukedom of Nemours, marrying Charlotte of the house of Longueville in the year 1528. he died at Marseilles, and was buried at Anecy. Charles of Seyssel was of a sweet and pleasant temper, but unlearn∣ed and imprudent.November. He made a journey to Strasburg at the Cities charge,1510. to request of Maximilian King of the Romans a Confirmation of the Cities Liberties, Authorized by an Edict made by the Empe∣ror Frederick Barberousse, by which it appeared the City was free, and exempt from some certain dues which were claimed at that time from her. It was in the year following,1511. that the Walls about the Suburbs of S. Gervais were finished;The Walls of S. Gevais finished. for the necessary expences of which there was an Excise laid on Wine and Mony raised by way of loan. The Duke likewise gave his assistance,18. March. but they procured a Writing under his hand that he sent workmen to advance the work, not as a Prince who had right to the Town, but onely out of kindness as a neigh∣bour; but his after-carriage answered not these his declarations. He was a Mediator of the Peace made betwixt the King of France, and the Confederate Switzers;1511. which induced him to believe his credit was so great with the King,The Duke endeavors to re-establish Fairs in Geneva. that with the joynt sollicitation of the Con∣federate Switzers, he should be able to procure the establishment of the Fairs in Geneva, from which he promised himself a double ad∣vantage. First, for that he should have Toll paid him for the goods brought through his Country. And Secondly, get foot∣ing in Geneva, and by degrees subject it to himself. He got then the Confederates to insert this Article in their Treaty, and to send at the same time Deputies to Geneva, promising them again their Fairs, if they would agree to these following Articles. First,Articles of agreement betwixt the Duke and City. That the City and Bishop should appoint an Officer to keep account of the profit of each Fair, one third part of which should be given to the Duke, Bishop, and City. Secondly, That the City should once a year make a Present to the Duke. Thirdly, That the warding the Gates should belong to the Duke, during the time of the Fairs. Fourthly, That the Duke should have henceforward Fines paid for every new building, both in City and Suburbs.
All which was proposed to the Consideration of a general Council assembled the twenty second of July,1512. and was as generally rejected; the Duke gave not over his pursuit for this, but tried other ways, which were likewise to as little purpose; the meeting held at Baden no more answered his expectation than the former. Corn being very dear in this year,Francis Mallet his liberality. Francis Mallet Governor of Berne, and Dean of the Chappel of the Maccabees, a native of Chambe∣ry, lent to the Lords of the City his Plate, which they caused to be Coyned to buy Corn, which was given to the poor, and for a requital was made a Citizen gratis. In this year there was an insurrection of the people against the Vidame or Steward Aymé Consilii; the occasion of it was this, There were two Prisons in Geneva, and to each of them a Jaylor; one was on∣ly for the Clergy and was called the Bishoprick, the other for Laymen in the Isle of Rhosne, of which the Vidame was Governor having under him a Jaylor; who having been excommunicated for a certain summ of mony which he owed, and not obeying, the sentence was aggrava∣ted, and the Creditor would constrain him by the Bishops Authority; the Bishops Treasurer went to the Isle to take him, and carried him to the Bishoprick, giving him in Charge to the Jaylor of that Prison; the Vidame supposing the Bishops Officers had not any such power on the Dukedom, demanded his Prisoner of the Bishops Jaylor, which he refused, excusing himself in as much as he dared not do it without his masters consent. The Vidame enraged at his denial, caused his Sergeant to seize on him, and carry him to the Prison of the Isle, which coming to the Treasurers ear, he ran about the City crying out like a mad man, help, help, Gentlemen, against the Vidame, who im∣prisons our Princes Officers for doing their duty:The Vidame imprisoned. the people thereupon tumultuously gather about the Vidame's house, and would break open the doors, but some in Authority coming in the mean time, the Vi∣dame surrendred himself to them, and so there followed no other mischief, he was carried to the Bishops Prison; but at length this breach was made up, and the Prisoners on both sides released▪ not∣withstanding the Duke when he heard of this was not satisfied▪ but came from Chambery to Geneva with the Bishop, desiring to have these mutinous persons (as he called them) punished; but the Bishop ha∣ving made full inquiry into the business, found that the Vidame was in the wrong; which he shewed the Duke, but he was not thereat satisfied, for that which was reason to the Bishop, was not the same to the Duke. The former of these thought they which had laid hold on the Vidame had reason to maintain his Authority, as being their Prince: and the Duke on the other side believed they had proceeded contrary to equity, forasmuch as he esteemed himself Prince of Gene∣va, he would therefore have the Bishop put to death the Authors of this Sedition, whom he thought were those who had obtained the freedom of Fribourg, for he would not do it by his own Authority, lest he should provoke this Canton; and the Bishop not consenting, he was so enraged against him, as to tell him he had made him Bi∣shop, but he would deprive him of that dignity, and make him the poorest Priest in his Diocess; but the Bishop dying at Moirane, some time after his return from our Lady of Puy,1513. saved him that labour.
Geneva much lamented his loss, having been ever a maintainer of the Priviledges both of Church and State. The Pope and Duke having heard of the Bishops decease, were both concerned in the choice of a Successor. The Pope would dispose of it as he had done heretofore, but the Clergy and Laity of Geneva, would not lose their right in this affair; whereupon they betake themselves to their Arms, and shut the City Gates, assembling in S. Peters Church to chuse their Bishop; they could not pitch upon a fitter person that Amé of Gingins Abbot of Beamont,Amé of Gin∣gins chosen Bishop of Geneva. and they were induced to such a choice by these following considerations. He was a Chanon, and of a noble and ancient fami∣ly, and moreover allied and beloved by the Confederates, who held at that time a good correspondency with Pope Julius the second; he was also very zealous for the Liberties and Priviledges of both Church and State, and of a very comely personage, whose onely fault was, that he was too great a lover of the female Sex. The Chapter then having chosen him by the peoples consent, dispatched a Messen∣ger to the Confederate Cantons, desiring their commendatory Let∣ters to the Pope to obtain his Confirmation, which being obtained, the Envoy sets forward to Rome, all at this good Bishops charge: but the Lords of Savoy were not all this while asleep, for John of Sa∣voy Prothonotary of Ax, whom we have heretofore mentioned, got the start of him, who is the same whom the Author of the Book, cal∣led Christian Gaul, terms John Francis of Savoy, and whom Severt takes for the Bishop John Lewis. John of Savoy was born at Angers,John of Savoy obtains the Bishoprick of Geneva. being son to a poor woman of the said Town, who could not be lavish of that which she never had, although free enough of her body; she lived in the same condition, when the Bishop of Geneva, Francis of Savoy, was Arch-bishop of Aux and Angers. This woman was kind to this Prelate as she had been formerly to several others, she had a Child by him which he was loth to own, whom his Relations brought up in the Court of Savoy. The Duke seeing this young man as he grew in years, to become neither amiable in body nor mind, only gave him some lean Benefi∣ces, which he held till Charles of Serssel Bishop of Geneva died; upon which he determined to procure that place for him, that he might use him as a fit instrument to obtain the temporal jurisdiction of Ge∣neva, when he should have advanced him to that dignity, as having neither courage nor conduct enough to oppose his design. It is re∣ported before his instalment, he took an Oath to resign him the jurisdiction which he desired. The Duke at the same time, to give less suspicion to the Syndicks, requested them to grant him leave to keep his Court in the Town,July. that he might administer Justice to his Subjects whilst he should stay there;1513. giving them a declaration in which he attests this Concession to have proceeded meerly from good will, and not from any obligation, neither did he intend by it any in∣vasion of their Liberties. Pope Julius not penetrating into this intrigue, gave the Bishop∣rick at the Dukes sollicitation, to John of Savoy, whom the City was obliged to accept to avoid the thunderings of the Vatican.31. of August. He made his entrance in as great pomp as the rest,1513. although with less welcom;
yet howsoever they dissembled it the best they could, and made their excuse for opposing his reception. The Bishop likewise disguising his designs, answered them with a great deal of mildness, (for he would not spur his horse before he was well seated in the Saddle;) farther, when he had taken the usual Oath, to testify he had forgotten all, he bestowed Offices and Pensions to those who had been his greatest opponents, amongst others to Berthe∣lier, whom he made Bayliff of Peny even against his will, and to the Abbot of Beaumont for a reimbursment of the charge of his Election on the day of his entrance, he produced the Dukes and Confederate Cantons Patents for to bring the Fairs from Lyons to Geneva, with the safe-conduct for traders who should come there, which were pub∣lished, yet were they kept at Lyons, so that this appeared plainly to be but an amusement: on All Saints-day having read his first Episco∣pal Mass with great solemnity, he bestowed largesses on the people, where that of Pardons was not the least. Towards the end of the year the Syndicks and Councellors being met in the Common-Hall,1513. where certain persons of Berne and Fri∣bourg entred into the Council,29. of Novem. who had followed Monsieur de Ville∣nefve President of Dijon, and the most Christian Kings Embassador to the Switzers, requiring he should be stopt at Geneva, making pro∣testation if they should let him escape, of the resentment of the Con∣federate Cantons. The Council knew not what to resolve touching this matter, foreseeing that if they should detain the Ambassador, they should incur the Kings displeasure; and if they should let him go free, they would disoblige the Switzers; so that not knowing what course to take,The French Ambassador confined. it was advised to have recourse to the Bishop upon this affair; but he being absent, it was concluded he should have guards set over him in the name of the City, Bishop, and Vidame; and for greater security he should be lodged in the Bishoprick, that the City gates should be kept shut, and a sufficient guard set to hin∣der violence either from one side or other, and in short that a Messen∣ger should be sent to the Bishop to know his pleasure; but before they could receive his answer, Deputies arise at Geneva from Bern and Fribourg; requiring that the President should be delivered to them. On the other hand the King of France, the Duke of Angoulesme, and the Duke of Bourbon writ to the City to release him; in this strait the Bishop was sent to, who ordered this answer to be given the Deputies, that the Bishop being a Churchman, he could not surrender the President, for should he be put to death, he should be guilty of an irregularity, and degraded from his Episcopal dignity, and the City deprived of its Pastour; and if the Syndicks should do it in their own names, it would prejudice their Liberties and Priviledges, which made them Judges in Criminal causes without appeal to any person; and that in grant∣ing the Confederate Cantons request, they would acknowledge them their superiours, by which means they would be esteemed betrayers of the peoples Liberty, adding withall they would do the King wrong, who perhaps might one day give them cause to repent it; so that the Confederates Deputies should be desired to forbear their request. That yet if they could convict the President of that which they accused him, they should soon have justice done them, rather out of respect to the divine Law than any other consideration. Which
answer was delivered them by the Syndick Levrier, but the Deputies replied, that the business was a matter of that nature as could not be ended by ordinary course of Law, instantly urging them again to de∣liver the President into their hands, which if they would not, their Superiors should highly resent it. To which it was answered, that they for their parts would not deliver him to them, but if they would take him, they would not resist them. They were contented with this shift, and went to the Bishoprick to take him by force, they carried him bound hand and foot to Fribourg, and from thence to Berne, where he underwent the Rack, and afterwards was released upon an agreement. The year following died John Amé of Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor,1514. and secular Abbot of the Abbys of Pignerol and Payerne,December. to whom suc∣ceeded by resignation his Nephew Francis Bonnivard. He had order∣ed in his Will, that five great Culverines should be broken in pieces after his death, which he had caused to be made to serve him in his Wars against the Baron of Viry,Five Culveris left by the Prior of S. Victor to Geneva. and that one half of the metal should make Bells for S. Victors Church; the Syndicks desired his Executors to let them have these pieces of Artillery, and they would give them the same quantity of metal to make Bells; which they refused, al∣ledging the intention of the Testator was to have them employed in the service of God and his Church, for an amends of the evil he had done, having made them with the Churches Treasure; but the Syn∣dicks to take away this their scruple, brought to them a Divine, who proved that in doing what they requested, they would do God and the Church greater service than in that manner the Testator had enjoyn∣ed, because the Bells should be made howsoever, and those pieces of Ordnance would serve to defend the Town which was the Churches Land, whereupon they were granted them. Pope Leo's Brother having espoused the Duke of Savo's Sister, he thereupon intreats the Pope to confirm the Concession which the Bi∣shop had made him of his Rights over Geneva,1515. which he granted him; but it was opposed by the Conclave of Cardinals, affirming the Prelate had not power to renounce his Temporal Jurisdiction, neither could the Pope confirm such a renunciation, unless the Sub∣jects had conspired against their Prelate, and that he had not strength sufficient to chastise them, so that this design could not take effect. The Duke remaining in Piedmont, and the Bishop of Geneva in his Abby of Pignerol which fell to him by the decease of Bonnivard, he abode there with small attendance, taking mony from all hands to pay the Pope and Duke the first-fruits of his benefice, and the charge he had been at in the Court of Rome at his Election; a certain person beseeching him one day to be favourable to a friend of his Condem∣ned to pay a Fine; he answered that he could not remit it, for as for his part he had nothing but a Crosiers Staff and a Mitre, the Duke of Savoy having the Bishoprick and Abby: and in effect the Duke had appointed one to receive the Revenue of the Abby, allowing him only enough to maintain him; he would have done the same with the Bishoprick, had not the Bishop hindered him by returning to Ge∣neva, where he was no sooner arrived, but he quarrelled with a certain person named Pasquet, who was accused of Usury; but
this was contrary to the Laws of Geneva, which forbad Citizens should be brought in trouble for this reason; There was great forma∣lities upon this point between the Bishop and Citizens, who could not obtain the Prisoners deliverance. His relations found out an expedient, which was, that having married his Daughter to a Citi∣zen of Berne, his Son-in-law came with letters in his behalf from his Superiors, and managed so well his Father-in-laws cause, that he was delivered for small charge. The Bishop John of Savoy conceived a mortal hatred against a Lawyer called Claudis Vandel,Vandol imprisoned. because he had pleaded a Cause against one of his Servants, whereupon he imprisons him upon a false accusation, being esteemed a very honest Man; the Syndicks and Counsel desired that the Informations should be put into their hands to proceed thereupon, as Judges in criminal Cases; on the other side the Bishop and Vidame would have it brought under their cognisance, and fearing a sedition, they would have conveyed him privately out of the Town, that they might deal with him as they thought fit. But Vandel had four Sons, one of which named Thomas, Curate of S. Morges, knew how to use a Sword, as well as a Prayer-book. Robert was of his Fathers calling, who with the other two having notice of the design, resolved to rescue their Father; but they lost their aim by mistaking the time, but the next morning they failed not to discover to the people what was become of him; the people enraged at this action, set upon the Bishops Pensioners, telling them, they loved their Mony better than the Cities Liberties. The Council be∣ing Assembled, the people made their Complaints to them, that the Priviledges of the City were violated, and that the Bishops Pensions occasioned it; the Pensioners informed of the business, presented themselves, bringing with them the Letters of their pension, which they tore before the Council, protesting they were not so much the Bishops servants,Popular tumults. as to forget their Obligations to the City, desiring nothing more than to manifest their zeal for the publick interest, for which they were willing to sacrifice both their lives and fortunes. The people flocked from all parts, John Bernard ran to the Steeple to Ring the great Bell, and Convocate the general Council, which was then of as dangerous consequence as to fire the Beacon in the Valley, which was a signal of some great emotion; Bernard finding the Stee∣ple door shut would have broke it open, had not he been withheld by much entreaty. The Syndicks went to the Bishop, beseeching him not to anger the people, whose rage was ever to be feared; but to preserve their Li∣berties according to the Oath taken at his entrance, delivering to them his Prisoner. The Bishop being alarmed at these Tumults, would not be obstinate but released Vandel, and desisted from prose∣cuting him. He bore notwithstanding a deadly hatred against Ber∣nard in his mind for his forwardness, and not daring to meddle with him in Geneva, he watcht him one day when he was gone out of the City upon some occasion; where some persons planted by him for that purpose seised on him, and led him away bound to Jussy where he determined to punish him; yet he released him at the request of the Earl of Genevois, and some Ladies, the Earl being then in the City, on∣ly making him to ask him forgiveness.
The Bishop and his Steward could not inrich themselves in Geneva, seeing the City had so little kindness for them; but their Covetous∣ness set them on the poor Priests of the Diocess, which rendred this Prelate extream odious; his person could not be acceptable to them, and his mind was as ill shaped as his body, so that he became the sub∣ject of every mans raillery. One John Pecolat a pleasant fellow and boon companion, dining one day with the Bishop of Maurienne, Chantre and Chanon of Geneva, incompany likewise of the Abbot of Beaumont, who discoursing of some unjust dealing which he had re∣ceived from the Bishop John of Savoy;Pecolat jokes on the Bishop. Pecolat bids him not be trou∣bled, for says he, non videbit dies Petri, he will never live to S. Peter's days, as is commonly said of all Popes, meaning he was taken with an incurable distemper, to wit the French Pox, and so by conse∣quence he could not live long; which words were taken notice of by two spyes who made report of them to the Bishop, interpreting them, as if he had a design to take away his life, which he either be∣lieved or pretended he did, that he might make this serviceable to his purpose, which was to bring the City into subjection. He dissembled his resentment the best he could in expectation of a fit opportunity, which at length thus offers it self after the Duke had been a while at Lyons, to visit the Queen his Neece; he sent to the Bishop to come to him, which he did, commanding his Caterer to provide Fish-pyes to eat as they travelled; the Caterer to save charges had bought stale fish, one of which pyes being brought to the Table, the Bishop either not having a stomack, or disliking the fish, would eat none of it; it therefore fell to the servants share, who eat it up every bit; now there was not one who had eaten of it, but ei∣ther died or fell dangerous ill. The Bishop glad of this occasion, al∣though sorry for his servants loss, caused his Vidame to draw up an accusation privately against Pecolat, who was not a man of that tem∣per to throw water on this fire; yet they proceeded no farther in it, being hindred by more urgent affairs which the Duke had then be∣yond the Mountains. This Prince willing to try the Syndicks affections towards him, de∣sired them to send him three pieces of the Cannon left by Bonnivard; which being refused him, he thereupon conceived a deadly hatred against the City, which was fomented by one of his Courtiers called Claudius of Seyssel, who had been Professor of the Civil Law at Tu∣rin, and since Master of the Requests under the French King Lewis the twelfth, afterwards Bishop of Marseilles, and lastly Archbishop of Turin. He Counselled the Duke not to suffer two Bishopricks in the heart of his Countries, to wit, Geneva and Lausane. The City was frequently disturbed by disagreements among them∣selves. There was no small strife once amongst them upon a very silly occasion, about a Mules skin. The Bishop had an Officer called Clau∣dius Grossi, who was at variance with a young man of the City, who was related to his wife,Grossi's Mule hamstringed. named Andrew Malvenda, his father came of a Noble Family at Valence in Spain. This young man aforemention∣ed having one day hamstringed Grossi his Mule in the Stable, spread a report, it was the Children of the houses Master who had done it; and not content with this, he gets ten or twelve young men of the
Town, of which Berthelier was one, and took along with them a fool called little John, with whom they walked about the City all night, making him bawl out at every turning, O yes, if any person wants a skin of the grossest beast in all the Town, they may be furnished at a very reasonable rate, alluding to the name of Grossi; whereat he makes his complaint to the Vidame and Episcopal Council, telling them that they were not content in putting this trick upon him who was in Office, but they must needs expose it in raillery throughout the Town. The Council ordered the Vidame to search into the matter, which having done, he found Berthelier whom he mortally hated to be one of the Crew; he would have apprehended them, but fearing they would be too strong for him, he requires the Syndicks and Coun∣cil to assist him, which they did, but the young men hearing of it hid themselves. They were publickly summoned to appear in the Ca∣stle of the Isle, on forfeiture of a hundred Florins a piece, which turned to their advantage; for it being contrary to the custom of the City to lay any greater Fine than a Crown, unless in case of Felony or such like; they complained by their Attorny, that they observed not the Statutes in their particular, this not being a Orime: their complaint was brought before the Episcopal Council, where it was declared they might defend themselves being at liberty, pede non li∣gato: they came forth therefore from the places where they had hid themselves, and came and followed their suit; in the mean time the Duke and Bishop being informed of the matter, came to Geneva with the Archbishop of Turin, who advised them not to be too hasty in taking vengeance; that this was not sufficient to make the Cardi∣nals consent to the taking away their Temporalities, but this might serve to continue the disunion amongst the people. The Bishop sends for the persons accused, and particularly those whom he knew were not against him, to whom he makes a remonstrance by the Archbishop of Turin, shewing them they had committed an action, for which they might be justly punished, having affronted the Bi∣shop and his Lieutenant; yet their Pastour was more inclinable to mercy than justice, having respect to their youth; and would there∣fore pardon all but the Authors, whom he said were Berthelier and his Confederates, desiring them not to take part with him: which having heard, they thanked him, and promised him they would submit to what he had enjoyned them, being glad they had thus escaped. The Duke returned to Chambery, from whence he sent his Brother the Earl of Genevois, to Geneva. He makes a hunting match, and the place appointed to meet in was at Wache. The Bishop, the Abbot of Beaumont, and several other persons of quality accompani∣ed him, whom he liberally treated; consulting privately with the Bishop about what they were suddenly to enterprize. The Bishop withdrew to a seat he had in Focigny called Thy, accompanied with some gentlemen belonging to the Earl, whom he sent to the Village of Presinge, where were two Genevoises, Claudius Servant, and John Pecolat, whom having apprehended, they brought them to the Bishop, who committed them to Prison; but he soon released the first of these, which caused it to be suspected that the said Servant had be∣trayed
his companion, which made him odious to the people. Pecolat was questioned about the Fish pyes, and the words he had spoken, non videbis dies Petri,Pecolat put upon the Rack. it being laid to his charge that he and his com∣panions (whom they charged him to discover) had a design to poy∣son the Bishop, he was Racked three times without confessing any thing; at length the Bishop caused him to be hanged up by the arms all the time he was at Dinner, his servants blaming him for his folly, in suffering himself to be thus tormented rather than confess the truth; telling him, Servant had confessed the whole matter, and na∣med particular persons, amongst others the Bishop of Maurienne, and the Abbot of Beaumont, whom his accomplices would make their Bishop, after they had dispatched John of Savoy; and entertaining him with these words, they made him say what they pleased, not be∣ing able any longer to endure the torments. After this the Bishop chiefly desired to get Berthelier into his pow∣er,Berthelier sought after by the Bishop. but he kept in the City and stood upon his guard, and at length got away, being attired like a Herald of Fribourg, where he went in company of some Merchants of that Canton; the Bishop and Vidame hearing of his escape, summoned him publickly to appear and an∣swer to his Accusation. He addresseth himself to the Council of Fribourg, complaining to them of the unjust dealings he met with at Geneva, adding moreover that all this had hapned to him for no other reason, but because he had been a Citizen of Fribourg; that they would entreat the Council of Geneva to inform the Duke and Bishop, that if they would send any one to Fribourg to impeach him, he would render himself Prisoner, or if he could obtain of them a safe-conduct to make his defence at Geneva before the Syndicks his lawful Judges he would there make his appearance, provided they of Fri∣bourg would depute some person to be present at the hearing of the Tryal: the Fribourgers granted his request, and sent an Express to the Princes, lodging Berthelier in the mean time who was but poor, in the Hospital. The Messenger found the Princes at Geneva, who had pur∣posely come there in expectation of meeting with Berthelier. They returned answer, that they would gratifie them of Fribourg in any reasonable request, but as to the sending one to prosecute Berthelier, they could in no wise consent to that. That if he would have Ju∣stice done he must come to Geneva, where he should not fail of it, provided no stranger assisted at the Tryal, it being contrary to the Cities priviledges, which assert the Syndicks to be the only Judges in criminal Cases, not suffering any others to assist at the Judgment but their own Council. In the mean time the Duke resolves upon a journey to the Cantons for some reasons of State, particularly about the difference which was not only at Geneva betwixt the Bishop and the Citizens thereof, but likewise betwixt the Citizens of Lausane and their Prelate. The Bishop of Geneva had the Duke on his side, and the Genevoises, the Confederate Cantons; on the contrary, the Bishop of Lausane had the Cantons for him, and the people the Duke of Savoy for them. He went first to Fribourg about Bertheliers business, fearing they might decide the business in his favour; from whence he went to Berne to confirm the ancient Alliances, and to add some new Articles. He
had passed through Lausane in his way to Switzerland, and had offer∣ed his mediation to them of that City, which they accepted; but he deferred it till his return, after which he gave his judgment, which was far from contenting both parties as he had promised himself; for there was neither of them but was very much dissatisfied: for instead of calling himself an arbitrary Judge, he terms himself a natural Judge, as if he had been their Prince and Soveraign; at which both the Bishop and People were so offended that they agreed without him, and began to seek an Alliance with the Cantons. After this the Duke returned to Geneva,1517. where he awhile about Pecolat and Berthelier's business, although his occasions requi∣red his presence in Piedmont; and it having been shewed him at Fribourg, that the Bishop of Geneva had acted contrary to their pri∣viledges in imprisoning Pecolat out of the City; he therefore caused him to be brought back, and to be imprisoned in the Bishops name in the Isle, causing him to be examined again by the Syndicks; he re∣tracted his former confession being before them as having been ex∣torted. The Duke and Bishop would have him again be put on the Rack, but the Syndicks refused it without greater evidence: the Prin∣ces proposed the matter to the consideration of several foreign Law∣yers, as well as to their own Council, to shew they were not carried away by passion; but these differed in their judgment: for the Civili∣ans being led by their Masters the Bishops interest, condemned him, and on the contrary the others acquitted him. The Syndicks whose Province it was to pronounce judgment, knew not what to resolve of, temporizing as much as possible to justifie these two Lords desire of revenge: the Duke and Bishop hastning this business to a conclusion, started a matter which they were not aware of, viz. That the Pri∣soner was a Clerk, and by consequence a Subject of the Ecclesiasti∣cal Court, and belonged not to the Syndicks jurisdiction. They tran∣sported him then out of the Prison of the Isle to that of the Bishop∣rick, where they were resolved not to spare him, but being sick, he was visited by the Physitians, to see whether he was able to endure the Rack; they differed in their opinions, but they who affirmed he was able to endure it, were soonest believed; but because at Thy, he was observed to be very constant in enduring the Torment, and being suspected to have some Magical charm in his beard, which rendred him insensible, he therefore had a Barber sent him to shave him close, for his beard was very long. Pecolat in this extremity rumina∣ted in his mind how to keep himself from being overcome by these torments,Pecolat cuts out his own tongue. which he saw were making ready for him, the Barber ha∣ving washed his chin, turned aside to empty his Bason, carelessly lay∣ing down his Razor near him, which Pecolat snatching up, cut out a great part of his tongue; the Barber seeing him bleeding in the mouth, wholly astonished called up the guards and Jaylor, notice being sent to the Princes of this, they took care to preserve him for greater sor∣rows; being recovered, they would have him again to the Rack, and because he could not speak, they would therefore have him write; but the Episcopal Council could never agree, and particularly the Judge of the Clergies excesses, whose office was to pronounce sen∣tence, being the Syndick Levrer's son, whom the Duke hated as
much as his Father, whose head he at length caused to be cut off. This Judge told his Friends in private, what a dreadful thing it was to let this poor Man be so long misused, that for his part he would never give his consent that he should be again put on the Rack; and that were it not out of respect to the Princes, he would have long since acquitted him; and to procure his Release they must have recourse to the Archbishop of Vienna, Metropolitan of Geneva. His counsel was followed, and an Order was obtained from Vienna, by which the Advocate of the Treasury was cited to give an account of the detaining of Pecolat, and forbidding him and all other Episcopal Officers, yea the Bishop himself, to touch the Prisoners person. Which Order being brought, there was no Body found who durst publish it, although the Duke and Bishop were not at Gene∣va; the bringers of these Acts were cudgelled for their pains: One Bonnivard, Governor of S. Victor, was so bold as to carry it to the Bishop; this Victor was a young Man more daring than wise, a Citizen of the confederate Cities, of good Kindred as well in Savoy as Piedmont, so that he valued neither Duke nor Bishop, but hated the later, and favoured Pecolat, and was very zealous for his Countries Liberty. He took then a Serjeant along with him, and as the Bishop came from parting with the Duke, he delivered to him the Archbishop of Vienna's Order. The Bishop being galled at it, complained to the Duke; the Duke sent for Bonnivard, and told him the Bishops Complaints. To which he boldly answered, My Lord, 'tis true, That the Bishop of Geneva detains one of my Ser∣vants, and hath put him on the Rack; and I have protected him in acknowledgement of his Services; but what I have done is justifiable by Law, having not suffered my self to be carried away by Passion; neither do I think you can take it ill that I have executed the Metropolitan's Order; you who are a Prince, and a lover of Justice, and who would not hinder Right though your own Interest lay at Stake. The Duke pretended to be satisfied, and parted the next Morning for Pied∣mont; having first caused Pecolat to be removed into the Castle of Penay. We read in the Chronicles of Geneva, That in this Year, before the Dukes departure, the Bishop John of Savoy lying sick of the Gout, and hearing a noise in the Street, asked what was the mat∣ter? His Nurse answered him, 'Twas a Thief who was led to be Hang'd; whom (added she) if you will pardon (my Lord) he will all his life time pray for your Health; Whereupon he sent him his Pardon.Decemb. We find likewise an Act made this Year, in which the Vidame is termed the Bishops Officer, although the Duke pretended he was his; for usually those who bore this Office were of Savoy. The Bishop about this time set out for Piedmont; and after his departure, the term allowed the Advocate of the Treasury being ended wherein he was to appear at Vienna, he stirred not, lest he should do any thing to his Masters dishonour.1518. Whereupon he was again cited: and at the third time this Clause was inserted, That if he did not appear, the Prisoner should be released, upon
Penalty of Excommunication. And not appearing, there lacked on∣ly the Excommunication to be taken out; which being effected, it was set up in the Night over the Church doors. Three Days be∣fore Easter (in those times they did the same for simple Debts) the Chanons and Priests coming to say Mass, found this bar forbid∣ding them to go farther.Geneva Ex∣communica∣ted. The People being informed of the Mat∣ter, began to murmur, and lastly to gather in Tumults, exclaiming against them who were the Promoters of this Excommunication. The Clergy and dependant Officers, who made up a considerable Party, seeing themselves deprived of the Sacraments, joyned to the People, and all together set a crying, To the Rhosne, to the Rhosne with those Villains and wicked Officers, who hinder us from Re∣ceiving our Lord. The Syndicks ran to appease them, seeking the Episcopal Offi∣cers, beseeching them to release Pecolat, otherwise they would be exposed to the Popular rage. They being affrighted at this, wrote to the Lieutenant of Penay to release him speedily; but the Peo∣ple not trusting to them, joyned with the Messenger to see Pecolat released; which fell out well for him, for immediately after came Letters from Rome, which made void the Metropolitan of Vienna's Censures, and forbad the Prisoners enlargement. Messengers were sent to hinder the first Order; but the People valued not the Popes Letters, bringing Pecolat along with them, whom they lodged at the Gray-Friers, as in a fit place for shelter, where he remained a long time before he could speak, by reason of the mutilation of his Tongue, but at length he recovered his Speech, at the intercession of a Saint to whom he was more particularly devoted, (if we may believe his own relation.) Whilst they were soliciting his deliverance,Berthelier pro∣poses an Al∣liance to the Fribour∣gers. Berthelier did the same at Fribourg, to be recalled from his Exile: and moreover negotiated an Alliance between the Cities of Geneva and Fri∣bourg, discoursing several of both Cities about it, shewing them the advantage which would accrue thereby; and not only to them, but to all the other Cantons, as well for the free Transportation of all Merchandizes, as also to make use of Geneva as a Fortress against their Neighbours, especially against the Duke of Savoy, he being always to be suspected, notwithstanding his pretences to the con∣trary, being not able to forget their Forraging his Country in the Wars he had with the Duke of Burgundy, they having at that time a part of it in their possession; that by means of this Alliance the Duke would be frustrated in his Design of Soveraignty over Geneva; which Discourses fell not to the ground, for they were ta∣ken into consideration by the Council; who sent to him, telling him, They would procure his Safe-conduct; which having ob∣tained,Febr. 24. he should endeavour to effect this Alliance. They ob∣tained then of the Duke and Bishop a Safe conduct for Berthelier to make his Defence at Geneva. He presented himself to the Episcopal Council, and afterwards to that of the City, requiring his Accusers to appear and declare what they had against him, and he would endeavour by Gods assistance to clear himself, and make it appear that he was an honest Man. This hapned awhile before
Pecolat was released. The Vidame, who had formerly prosecuted him, was cited, and made his appearance before the Syndicks, with the Solicitor Navis, who produced several Articles against Berthe∣lier,March 4. containing all the extravagancies and debaucheries of his youth; which indeed were not a few; and his frequenting Seditious Meet∣ings, amongst whom he was ever the chief. He excused himself touching this Article, alledging they were Persons who maintained the Liberties of the City against Usurpers; that he associated with them in nothing but this their just design. Then they accused him as having conspired to take away the Bishops life; which they grounded upon the Confession of Pecolat, and one called Car∣mentrant. Berthelier justified himself in this particular, alledging that Pecolat had been illegally Imprisoned, and that this Confession had been extorted by the Rack, which he had suffered on sim∣ple conjectures: And as to what concerned the other charge, it was evident 'twas but a trick devised by his Adversaries, Carmen∣trant having been hired by the Bishop (whose Pensionary and Dome∣stick he was) for this purpose. The Vidame not having sufficient matter against Berthelier, sent every day an account of his proceedings to the Princes who were in Piedmont; who fearing the Syndicks would clear him, desired them to admit some of their Party to as∣sist at his Trial: But the Fribourgers having understood it, wrote to the Duke how greatly they were surprised at his intention, see∣ing both himself and Bishop had but lately declared, That the Cu∣stoms and Rights of Geneva would not suffer any to be Judges in Crimianl Cases but themselves. The Princes perceiving that they were disappointed in this contrivance, offered Berthelier and his Accomplices their Pardon, if they would request it; which had been proffered him before at Fribourg. To which he returned the same Answer as before, That having not been guilty of any Offence, he had no need of Pardon; wherefore he intended to stand by the decision of Justice. The Princes considering his Trial would end in thier dishonour, would have Judgment suspended, forbidding them on great penalties to proceed therein, till they should ei∣ther come or send; which the Syndicks did to avoid the displea∣sure of these two Lords, whom they rather feared than lo∣ved. In the mean time Berthelier began again privately to carry on the Alliance with Fribourg, gaining as many Citizens on his side as he could: But the Duke had several Favorites at Geneva, amongst whom was the Syndick Monthion, who bore a great sway both amongst the Council and People. Moreover one part of the City being Sa∣voyards by their Original, and being accustomed to have the Duke for their Master, preferred his Dominion before the Alliance with the Switzers, valuing their profit more than their Liberty. Two young Men of Geneva coming to Thurin in expectation of some employ, were immediately laid hold on by the Provost and car∣ried away to Pignerol, before the Bishop of Geneva, who was the Abbot of that place. They were accused for being Berthelier's Ac∣complices, although one of them was his Enemy, and Son of Na∣vis the Vidame's Attorney; the other was John Viterman or Blan∣chet.
They met at first with gentle usage, to make them accuse those who were the objects of the Dukes and Bishops ha∣tred. But they answering, They knew nothing of that matter, were again sent back to Prison. In the mean time Bonnivard of S. Victor, whom we have already mentioned, passing through Tu∣rin in his Journey to Rome, recommended their cause to a Lawyer his Friend, and wrote to them a Letter before he parted, which he sent to the Jaylor to deliver it to them; who conveyed it to the Bishop; who upon the receit thereof was exceedingly en∣raged against Victor, who had already occasioned Pecolat's Release, he therefore caused them to be kept close Prisoners, and put them on the Rack. The great Torments they underwent made them confess the pretended Conspiracy of Pecolat, and to bring in Victor as a party. At the same time the Bishop sent this Deposition to the Syndicks, and withal, that if they would not believe it, they should send two Persons to hear their Confession; but not giving credit to the matter, they sent no Body. This forced Confession declared that Victor, with two other Persons in custody, had determined to poyson him; which if they could not effect, they would after this manner one Evening come a Mumming to his House, and raising a quarrel, he should be stabbed in the tumult; by which means Victor might succeed him. Which plainly appeared to be ill con∣trived, seeing Victor was not so familiar with the Bishop as to give him such kind of divertisement, being rather his professed Enemy: and farther, the Bishoprick was not so easily obtained, seeing the Abbot of Beaumont elected by the Clergy at the Peoples request, could not obtain the Papal Confirmation, who certainly would never have gratified an Assassin. These two poor Creatures then were by beheaded by the Dukes Authority,Two young Men behead∣ed having publickly retracted their Confession, and asked Almighty God forgiveness for their other sins. The Provost ha∣stened their Execution to silence them. Their Bodies being quar∣tered, Three of them were sent into several parts of Piedmont, and the Fourth part parboiled with the Heads to be sent to Geneva. Victor returning awhile after from Rome passed through Turin, where the Bishop had given order to have him apprehended; of which having notice, and having many Friends, he walked near eight days about the City to affront the Bishop; at the end of which he choused his Spies, pretending to stay there longer, but took Post one fair Morning for Geneva; whither within a short time were brought the Heads and Quarters of the Two fore-mentioned young Men in Two Barrels, marked with the Arms of the Earl of Genevois the Dukes Brother: they who brought them lodged that Night on this side the Bridge of Arve, and the next Morning early they set them up on a Walnut-tree, with a White Cross and this Inscription: These are the Traitors of Geneva. The first who saw them ran to carry the News about the Town; a great part of which came to behold them. This was a sad Spectacle, especial∣ly to the Father and Mother of Navis. The Father was still the Vidame's Solicitor against Berthelier, and saw himself so ill requited for his Services. The good Citizens were grieved, but durst not
shew their indignation, contenting themselves only with the Re∣novation of the Propositions made them by the Burgers of Fri∣bourg. The Council of the City,Deputies sent to the Duke. as likewise that of the Bishop, being met together to consult of the means to appease the Princes, whose displeasure they feared, deputed the Vidame Aymé Consilii, Michael Nergaz, and Francis Talichet, all three of the Dukes Faction, to shew the Prince in all Humility, that the City was very much amazed that they had thus used Two of their Citizens, and that the ge∣nerality of the City had given them no occasion of offence, but if any particular Person had, they might have had him punished at Geneva: and therefore desired them to declare who had offended them, and if they were in fault they should be obliged to a speedy reparation. They departed then to find the Duke, who openly gave them but slender welcome, but privately consulted with them as Friends, treating them with the greatest respect. He sent them to Pignerol towards the Bishop, who gave them as kind en∣tertainment; at length he made a Speech to them in publick to this effect: That he was very sensible there were several good People at Geneva, from whom they had received faithful Service, and which they should be ready at all times to acknowledge; but that there were al∣so several Mutinous and Seditious Persons, guilty of the highest Crimes, even of Conspiring the Death of their Prince, of whose number were these two who had been made Examples: that there were some in the Town, who to avoid the punishment due to their Crimes, endeavoured to perswade the People to make an Alliance with Fribourg; which would not only tend to the Princes disadvantage, but to the City's it self, which would lose by this means the Customs which were paid for the Carriage of Merchandizes into Fribourg. That if the Cities did embrance this of∣fer, they would certainly most severely punish the Authors of it; in which if the body if the Town would assist them, they should respect them for good and faithful Subjects: adding, they desired that the Princi∣pals, who were Berthelier and Ten or Twelve others, should be punished with the greatest severity. The Deputies, who had themselves dictated this Answer, desired it should be committed to Writing, being directed to the Coun∣cil. To which the Princes consented,Deputies pre∣sent the Dukes Letter to the Council. on condition they would not deliver it to them till they were sworn to execute what it contained. They at their return offered it to the lesser Council; the greatest part of which liked not the condition, saying, There might be perhaps something which respected the publick Interest, and therefore they could resolve of nothing without the general Council, which was assembled the next Morning, where the De∣puties appearing, related they had no other Answer than that which was contained in the Letter, and that they had in charge not to open it but upon the fore-mentioned condition. The Peo∣ple would not agree to the Proposal touching the Oath, but de∣termined to send back again the Letter whence it came. Nergaz then tells them, Gentlemen, say he, The Duke of Savoy hath de∣clared, That if his Letter be not read, and the Contents observed, no Genevoise shall enjoy his Possessions in safety. The People inraged
at this cried to the Deputies, Have you staid five or six weeks on the other side the Mounts, making your selves merry at our cost to bring us this news? To the Rhosne, to the Rhosne, with such Traitors; and it wanted but little but they had been sacrificed to the popular fury, but for fear of the Princes the Council appeased them: they returned the Letter to the Deputies, after they had severely reproached them with it, bidding them do what they would with it, for it should not be read on the condition offered. This advanced not a little the design of the Alliance with Fribourg, it being the only private and publick discourse of the Town,Besancon Hugues toge∣ther with some others make an Alli∣with the Fribourgers. but all would not consent to it; so that Besançon Huges one of the Syndicks, and several of the Council approved of it, and had several meetings about it with those who were men of courage and resolution. They concluded that if a general Alliance could not be effected, there should be a particular one made in behalf of those who had subscri∣bed to the number of three hundred, with charge to the Deputies, to confer abut it with those Fribourgers on whom Berthelier had pre∣vailed, which was done not without opposition from them who were Pensioners to the Duke, for he had such as well in Fribourg as Geneva. The Deputies had this answer both from the great and lesser Coun∣cils: that if the City, or at least the greatest part of it would make such a contract, it should be accepted on reasonable terms, provided no foreign claim hindred them, especially that of the Duke of Savoy; for if Geneva was subject to him, this could not be done without vi∣olating the Alliance with him; they then would be ready to consent to this Alliance or Burgership, and from that time would protect them as their own Citizens. The Deputies returned with an Express from Fribourg, to make relation of their negotiation; some accepted it, others refused it; so that this heated them one against another, not∣withstanding the remonstrances made them by the Deputy of Fri∣bourg. There were continually seen Assemblies of both parties, which day and night circuiting about the Town, made songs of one another, with mutual gibes and reproaches. Those on the Dukes side termed them who had accepted the Bur∣gership Eignots,Eignots or Huguenots whence de∣rive meaning Eidgnossen: which they counted not inju∣rious but rather honourable, this being a Dutch word signifying Al∣lyed by an Oath, it being the same the first Switzers made use of when they mutually assisted one another against the Tyrannical usurpati∣ons of the gentrv of their Country, and from hence hath sprung the word Huguenots, of which there hath been such different and ridi∣culous Etymologies: for some affirm that this term Huguenot came from the two first words which were delivered in an Harangue of some deputed Switzers to the French King, beginning thus, Huc nos venimus. Others imagine it is derived from a certain Gate called Hugon, in I know not what City, near the which Gate they held the first Synod; the learned Monsieur Peteau, found out another original derivation, as I have read in the Memoires of M. de Pieresk. He tells us then that at Tours or Amboisé, where as is pretended this name first began to be used, the people have a tradition of I know not what kind of spirit who ran in the night about the streets, whom they cal∣led Frier Bourru, and afterward King Hugues Ghost. It is well known
the Protestants at first went only to hear Sermons by night, not da∣ring to assemble in the day, and for that reason were called Hugue∣nots, which is as much as to say Spirits; people who appeared only in the night like King Hugue's Ghost: but the true Etymology is that which we have already given; they who understand not the Dutch Language differently pronounce it. The Boys of the Town ran about the streets hollowing, Long live the Eignots. The note of distinction was a Cross marked on their Doublet. They called the Dukes party Mammelusses by the name of those Souldiers who were the Soudan of Egypt's slaves, who having been Christians had renounced their Chri∣stianity, and abjured the liberty of their Country to joyn with Ty∣rants; designing by this name to accuse them of the Dukes faction of the same baseness, and from hence hath sprung the Original of these factions which lasted several years. These Eidgnots assembled in the night, took upon them to watch the City, and feasted one another. Which the Princes understanding sent Embassadors to Fribourg to make their complaints,The Princes complain against the Burgership. saying, they perverted their Subjects con∣trary to the ancient Alliances, in admitting them Citizens, entreating the Magistrates to desist; to which they answered, that they had not done any thing to the prejudice of their former agreements with them in treating with Geneva, for as to what con∣cerned the Bishop, they had no Alliance with him, and consequent∣ly might contract with the Citizens, who although they acknow∣ledged him their Prince, yet did not that hinder them from being free and at their own disposal, he having accepted them upon this, and not any other condition; yet would they do him no wrong, for if he could prove them of Geneva to be others than what they termed themselves, the Alliance should be void; that they were so far from diminishing his Ecclesiastical Authority, that they were rather on the contrary for maintaining of it to the utmost of their power, and as to the Duke of Savoy, they would make a reserve in what concerned his Rights in the Treaty, and that if he could make it appear the City was subject to him, they would proceed no farther. And lastly, if both of them had found themselves aggrieved, they were content to stand to the judgment which should be given, and not to act contrary to their Alliance. The Deputies from Savoy not satisfied with this came to Geneva, where by flattery and threatnings they required there should be no farther contracting of Burgership, and after all their endeavours per∣ceiving they could not obtain their design, they complained against the Fribourgers in the general Assembly of the Consedrate Cantons, de∣claring the wrong which was done the Duke of Savoy in admitting them of Geneva into the Burgership of their City, seeing they were his subjects; which was contrary to former Treaties: for supposing the Genevoises were not his subjects, yet were they comprehended under the title of Hindersassen, which is as much as to say, inhabitants of their own Country, which the Treaties of Alliance forbad to change in∣to Burgership. The Deputies of Geneva answered that their City had never been subject to the Duke or any of his Predecessors; that by this word Hindersassen, was not so much meant a City surrounded
by his Countrys, as strangers setled in his Dominions; that it was rather the Duke who dwelt with them, seeing the Country he held about Geneva had heretofore belonged to the Bishop, of whom the Dukes held it, for the confirmation of which they produced their Titles. These contests and proceedings held a long time before the War broke out. The Abbot of Beaumont, and Francis Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor, young Citizens, were zealous for the liberty of their Country; they together with several others sent to Fribourg, to request the priviledge of Burgership; which was granted them upon condition the general Council of Geneva consented to it, which was sworn to by the greater number of suffrages which carried it. In the mean time the Duke and Bishop united in their interest,May 7. gave Commission dated at Montcallier, to the Sieur de Salleneufve, a man expert in business, to be their temporal Deputy in Geneva, but the Citizens refused him, alledging it to be a new and unheard of thing to send them a Governor, seeing they never had any before but their Bishop. Berthelier had still sollicited for a definitive judgement of his Case,1519.Feb. 24. which had been suspended by the Bishops command;Berthelier ac∣quitted by the City. but after the Alliance made with Fribourg, he was no more fear'd, the City de∣claring she would reassume her liberty; and that it belonged to the Syndicks, and not to the Bishop, to try Berthelier. He was judged in the presence of the Vidame, and a definitive sentence pronounced in these Terms. That as to what concerned the Crime of High Treason, having examined the proofs, they were found invalid, and therefore they acquitted him; declaring him innocent of this crime: but touching the excesses he had committed, such as Assaults and Batte∣ries; they had Fined him according to the tenour of the Statute in that case provided. Some days after Duke Charles the third, fearing lest the Prosecu∣tions which he had began against the Genevoises before the Cantons, should turn to his prejudice, and that instead of acknowledging him for their Prince,The Duke raises an Army. they should pretend he was their Vassal, he deter∣mined to deal with them after a more violent manner. He raised then secretly an Army beyond the mountains, that the Fribourgers might take no notice of it, and the better to conceal his design he sent the President Lambert to the Cantons, desiring the business might be friendlily ended. The Genevoises having gotten intimation of the de∣sign, dispatched Besancon Hugues, and John Malbuisson to Fribourg; but Lambert entertained the Fribourgers with such fair speeches, that they knew not whom to credit; he endeavoured also to perswade Besancon Huges who was his kinsman, that his Master had no ill in∣tention; which caused Hugues to be suspected of corrupt dealings. In the mean time the Duke had gathered an Army of six or seven thousand men at S. Julien, before the Fribourgers could be perswaded to believe any such thing. He sent immediately an Herald to the Syndicks called Chablais,An Herald sent to Geneva. who required that the Council should be assembled, which being done, he was introduced. He had on his left arm, a Coat of Arms, and a wand in his right hand, and entered after this manner without discovering
himself, or so much as saluting the Council, he was requested to seat himself by the Syndicks, and make known his Message, which he thrice refused; but at length he sat down not by the Syndicks, but in a seat above them, and spake to them as follows: Let it not seem strange to you, O ye Lords, Syndicks and Council of Geneva, if I would not sit down at your command, and that I do it now of my own accord, for this is the reason; I am come here from the part of my most dread Prince, yours and my Lord and Master, the Duke of Savoy, whom it belongeth not to you to bid sit down, but to him to sit where and when he shall think fitting, above you, as your Soveraign Prince and Lord, and as representing his Person I have done. So from my seat I make known to you my Message, which is, That he biddeth and commandeth you to make ready his Lodgings in the State-house, with that splendor and magnificence which becometh a Prince of his quality; likewise that you furnish him and his company with victuals, which are about ten thousand footmen, besides horse: for he designs to come in this equipage to do Justice: Which spoken, he was desired to with∣draw, till they had consulted on the answer to be returned him, which he did, and awhile after he was recalled, and answer made him in these words. We are equally surprized, Seigneur Chablais, at what you say and do: when we offered you a seat, you refused it, and after your refusal have taken it of your own accord, saying, you did it as representing the person of Mon∣sieur the Duke of Savoy your Prince and ours: That he is your Prince we be∣lieve, but not ours; for although we reckon our selves his humble servants, yet are we not his Subjects or Vassals, nor do we understand upon what ground it is pretended: yea, we are willing to believe that he is a more duti∣ful Son to his mother our holy Church, to whom we have submitted our selves, than to usurp her jurisdiction; so that it belongeth neither to him, nor to you representing him, to sit where you do. As to that part of your Message whereby you command us to prepare his Lodgins in the Town-house, and not only Lodging for him, but for ten thousand foot, besides horsemen, adding that he will come hither to do Justice: truly we under∣stand not the meaning of it, for he did not use to lodge in the Town-house, much less with such a kind of attendance; and if his coming be as you say to do Justice, there is no need of so great multitude. For it belongeth not to him to do it here, but to the Bishop, Syndicks and Council, according to the Customs and Priviledges which he hath sworn to observe; and if there be any one amongst us who hath done him or any person else any wrong, we are ready to do him all the right he can desire; but our Kitchin is not large enough to entertain all his Company, yet if be pleases to come with his usual train, nay were there five hundred men more than ordinary, he should as heretofore be welcome, and chuse what Lodgings best please him, except our Town-house, which we cannot spare; he shall be entertained if not according to his merit, yet according to the best of his power. Which Discourse ended, the Herald replied, Gentlemen, you will not then great my Lord his request, nor obey his commands. No, said they. Whereupon he put on his Coat of Arms, and told them from himself, I declare you to be Rebels to your Prince with fire and sword, and for a proof of this, I throw before you this Wand, let him that dares take it up. Which saying, he threw it in the middle of the Hall, and went his way. He had no sooner departed, but twelve Gentlemen booted and spurred,
who came on the same errand, entred into the Council Chamber, and spake thus to them, Syndicks and Council of Geneva, resolve to obey my Lord, otherwise you will have cause to repent. Which they had no sooner said but they set spurrs to their horses and departed. The Syndicks and Council shewed to the people what had hapned, at which they were much amazed; yet the greatest part consider∣ing, either they must be slaves or lose their lives, generously chose the latter, resolving to sell their lives at a dear rate. The Syndicks com∣manded them to Arm themselves, constraining the Dukes faction to do the like; the Gates were shut, the Chains extended, and Senti∣nels placed. The Duke having received his answer by the He∣rald, drew near to Geneva, coming to Gaillard with all his Army, which encreased by the addition of those of Chablais and Focigny; he blocked up the passages lest any thing should be carried in or out of the City. Yet the Genevoises ventured to send a Messenger to Fribourg to give them notice of their condition; but he was taken at Versoy, and led to Gex, where he under went the Strappado, to make him give an account of the state Geneva. A Merchant named Marmet returning out of Germany had the same usage. The Bishops Officers and Chanons would needs make tryal what they could do to keep off this tempest which threatned the Town, saying,The Fribour∣gers send an Herald to the Duke. they would go to the Duke to try whether they could appease him. The Gates were opened then, and they were accompanied with several Citizens of the Duke factions. In the mean time the Fribourgers finding the passages to Geneva blocked up, pre∣sumed they understood the Dukes design, and therefore sent in hast to him Frederick Marty with an Herald, to know his pretensions; for if he injured Geneva either in general or particular, they would resent it. Marty arrived at Geneva, and was much astonished to find affairs in such a posture, his coming bringing along with it small consolation, they having more need of Soldiers than Deputies. He comforted them the best he could, departing immediately to expose his charge to the Duke. A Deputy from Zurich who was going in∣to France,The Dukes answer to the Deputies. accompanied him; and both addressed themselves to the Duke, who was then at Gallard upon the point of terminating the business with the Chanons. He at first entertained them but slight∣ly, and gave Marty some contemptible terms; at length by the ad∣vice of his Council, he answered that he had determined to enter into Geneva, not to injure the Town or any particular person of it; but to assist it to the utmost of his power: that having been informed of their dissentions, he very much feared their ruin, in whose destruction, his Country must bear a part: for this cause he designed to come into the City to make them agree by fair means, or otherwise by force: that his Cannon lay ready against the City in case of resistance; which indeed was false, he having not one piece throughout his whole Army bigger than an ordinary Musket; and that they would do well to perswade the Syndicks to come to a parly with him, that so they might appease these quarrels without further tumult, and for this purpose there should be no act of hostility offered during that night. The Deputy returned to Geneva with this answer, which he imparted
by his Herald whom he sent post to Fribourg to his Masters, sending after him a footman, to the end that if one failed, the other might pass. In the mean time they promised themselves security for that night upon Marty's mediation with the Duke, but the Earl of Genevois the Dukes brother, marched up as far as S. Anthony's Gate, whic alarm'd the City, and a lighted Torch was seen on the Pinacle of the Steeple which some of the Dukes party had set there for a Signal. All the Citizens put themselves in Arms, but they were so little experienced in Martial affairs, that every one forsook the place he was posted in, to run where the alarm was given, as if they enemy could enter no where else. Whilst these things were doing, there was heard three dread∣ful claps of Thunder, the last of which fell on the Dukes house at Gaillard, and was so extraordinary, that it astonished both parties, who attributed to it some bad presage. The Genevoises consulted with the Deputy of Fribourg, whether they should give the Duke entrance, to which he answered, The Duke your Enemy is with his Army and Artillery at your Gates, and my Supe∣riors your friends will not see you wronged; but I know not whether they can come timely enough: at the hearing of which they all threw down their Arms, as if the City had been already taken. The Syndicks with the Deputy went the next morning to the Duke at Gaillard, and agreed he should enter into Geneva with his Train, and five hundred men for his Guard, promising to hurt no body: which being concluded, all the Gates were opened, and the Chains taken down; the Duke declaring there should enter with him but five hundred men,The Duke enters with his Army in∣to Geneva. and that he would make no long stay there. But the Earl his brother entred first through S. Anthony's Gate, armed from head to foot well moun∣ted, and after him several Companies of Foot; he caused the Gate to be thrown down, that the Duke might pass over it as in triumph. The Duke entered likewise armed at all points, but his head; his Page James de Vatteville, who was afterwards made Avoyer of Berne,March 6. carried his headpiece. The Prior of S. Victor not trusting to the Dukes promise, got imme∣diately out of the City, but at Vaud he fell into the hands of two false friends Francis Champion, Sieur of Vanbrun, whom he trusted as a bro∣ther; and a Monk named Brisset, Abbot of Montheron, who carried him to Eschallans, which was subject to the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg, and delivered him to the Duke, who caused him to be transported to Gex,Victor impri∣soned. and from thence to Groleé, where he kept him two years prisoner. The Duke then being entred Geneva, brought in not only those he mentioned, but his whole Army. The Earl of Genevois took up his quarters in the Town-house, and at two of the Clock in the night he commanded them to deliver him the Keys of the Gates, their Artille∣ry and other Ammunition; in this Consternation he was refused no∣thing. He quartered his men in this manner, Montrotier with his Company of Focigny at S. Gervais; them of the Country of Vaud, from S. Leger as far as our Lady of Grace. Monsieur de Coudrees Troop, which was raised at Chablais, at our Lady Du Pont, as far as Molard. Them of Savoy and Genevois lay in the suburb of Four, and the Nobi∣lity
from the Molard to the Rive. These Soldiers being ill disciplin'd committed a thousand insolencies in the City, being not content to drink the Wine without paying for it, but set it a running about the Cellars, cut the Beds and scattered the feathers in the air: and yet were buneer cowards; for to try them the Earl caused a false a∣larm to be given, which made these paltry Rascals hide themselves up and down in holes. Montrotier caused the Chain posts to be ta∣ken up, and to be carried to the Dukes quarters, who to compleat the Citizens mortification, caused to be proclaimed in the chief parts of the City, the next morning after his arrival, Our Sovereign Lord the Duke of Savoy, gives notice that no person of ye shall dare to bear any Arms either offensive or defensive under pain of undergoing the Strapado; and further let what will happen, no person shall dare to appear in the streets, or put his head out of the window, because my Lord will do Justice. They who were not in favor kept themselves close; some there were who would needs brave it, and wear their Swords contrary to the Dukes order, but were forced to undergo the penalty, there be∣ing no remedy but patience. The Deputies from Geneva at the same time were urgent with the Fribourgers to assist them;The Fribour∣gers send assistance to Geneva. they granted them one company, which was very inconsiderable in respect of their need: but the flower of the youth of Fribourg, having listed themselves for this expedition, their number encreased where ever they passed, some of the Dukes Subjects joyning themselves to them; so that they immediately grew to the number of six or seven thou∣sand men, making themselves other colours, and advanced as far as Geneva, without doing any other hurt than victualling on free cost. Being come into the Country of Vaud, they apprehended the Gover∣nour the Sieur of Lulins, and having notice that the Duke was in Geneva, they bad him send his Master word, that whatsoever hurt should be done their fellow Citizens, should be returned them again. They carried him along with them, and entred in Morges without the least resistance, the inhabitants of which were fled, and had traversed the Lake. They encamped there, and Lulins advertised his Highness what had passed; this was on the day after this Proclamation had been made. The Duke judging he must change his note, caused it to be published that no Genevois should be molested either in his person or estate upon pain of death and sent Maylian Captain of the horse to keep the passage of Nyons. He likewise sent for the Deputy of Fri∣bourg,The Dukes Proclamation. and told him,The Deputies answer to the Duke. saying, Mr. Deputy, I desire you would endeavor to pacisie matters;The Deputies answer to the Duke. you see I have not injured anybody, and give you my word not to do it hereafter. Go you with my Deputies to the Camp, and let them safely return. The Deputy who remembred the entertainment the Duke gave him at Gaillard, answered him, Sir, do you believe such a man as I can do this? and continuing his jargon of Fribourg, Alas Sir, says he, would you have me go to my Lords and Superiors to carry your Mes∣sage, pray employ your own servants to carry your jokes, for my part I will not do it, you have not kept your promise with men or my Superiors, no more will you now. In short he refused. The Duke seeing this, left him, yet sent his Deputies, who in a short time arrived at Morges, and demanded of the Captains where∣fore they came in a hostile manner into the Dukes Country; to
which they returned the same answer, why they had entred Ge∣neva, their confederate City, in Arms. Which when the Duke had heard, he commanded his Deputies to go to the other Can∣tons, to intreat them to send to the Fribourgers to retire. The Duke Army all the while lay upon the Genevoises, and that of Fribourg at Morges, and in the rest of the Country of Vaud, which was subject to the Duke. 'Twas in the time of Lent: and because all Provision was scarce but Herrings, some termed this Campagne, The War of Herrings. The Duke assembled at Genevat he General Council, and demand∣ed two things: First that they should renounce the Bourgership of Fribourg, and fnd into the Camp as from the body of the Town, to assure them that neither the Duke, nor any of his Men, had com∣mitted any outrage, to occasion their coming in so Hostile a man∣ner. That Hogues and Malbuisson had not been sent by them as pub∣lick Deputies, but that they went of their own Authority with∣out the Councils leave. All which was granted him, because they dared not do otherwise, and they sent whom he was pleased to no∣minate. But when they came to Morges, the Fribourgers and the other Cantons gave no credit to them, because the former Deputies had shewed them the contrary.Articles be∣tween the Duke and Fribourgers. Yet the business was so throughly prosecuted, that an agreement was concluded on these following conditions: First, Because the Fribourgers required 15000 Crowns to defray their Expences in coming, they should have 4000 paid them in hand, and should return without hurting the Country, only Victualling as they passed on free cost. Secondly, That the Duke on his part should draw out his Army from Geneva, with∣out damnifying the City either in general or particular, leaving it in full possession of its former priviledges; and concerning other differences, they should be decided as heretofore. The difficulty lay in providing the 4000 Crowns, for the Duke would not pay them nor the Genevoises: but the Prince having called the Gene∣ral Council, they were forced to engage for the payment of 2000 of them, and for the other half the Earl of Genevoise delivered his Plate to the Fribourgers, upon condition the Genevoises would re∣deem it the next S. James's and S. Christopher's day. So the two Armies withdrew, but the Duke staid behind at Geneva, till the Plague, which swept away several of the People, obliged him to retire to Thonon; and immediately after Hugues and Malbuisson re∣turned to Geneva,The Duke sends for Hugues and Malbuisson. believing themselves secure; yet the Duke sent for them to Thonon, by the Vidame Consilii, whom that he might the more easily perswade to go along with him, he brought them a Letter of Safe conduct. They knowing the Dukes temper, would not carry his Letter with them, but left it with Hugues's Wife, enjoyning her, if she heard they were detained, to send it spee∣dily to Fribourg. They went then with the Vidame, who believed he had them safe enough, and that they might easily be dispatched when their Letter of Safe-conduct was taken away from them. They had scarcely gotten half a mile from the City, but he asked them whether they had it not about them? They answered him, they had not; at which the Vidame falling into a passion replied,
Wretches, as you are, wherefore have you set out then? How dare ye appear without it before my Lord, who ye know is enraged against you? and if any mishap should befal you, you would not receieve more hurt than I should dishonour. Return and fetch it then, otherwise I will not go along with you. Truly, Mr. Vidame (replied they) we can go no where to fetch it, but at Fribourg where we have sent it as soon as we received it, to the end if your Lord should misuse us, he should have in requital at least some trouble for violating his Faith. But if you are for returning to Geneva, with all our hearts, for we had rather be with our Wives and Children than to go turn Courtiers. To which the Vidame replied, Well if it be so, we had as good continue our journey; my Lord hath passed his word, which is of more value than a Letter. They kept on then their way, and being arrived at Thonon, the first word the Duke gave them was, Whether they had the Let∣ter of Safe-conduct? but was vexed when he heard them answer no. He committed them to the keeping of the Provost of his Houshold, forbidding them to be suffered to speak to any body but in presence of the Guards. The Provost led them to his House, sounding them about the secret concerns of the Town, where in the way they were followed by the clamors of the rabble, who cried out they should be thrown into the River. The Duke seeing all his endeavours could not obtain from them their Safe conduct, dismissed them, having first made them swear on the Altar of S. Hippolyte, Patron of the place, not to think any more on the Burgership of Fribourg, nor to do any thing against his Authority, nor to concern themselves in affairs of the State, with∣out his consent: and moreover made them to do him great submis∣sions. A while after he sent to the Council of Geneva, that they should borrow mony in Switzerland to redeem his Brothers Plate. The City sent in effect Secretary Porral, who had been a Syndick, and gave him Monathon for his guide, with the City Seal, to sign the Obligation. But passing through the Country of Vaud, this Secre∣tary was taken and carried to Thonon, and being examined where the Letters lay relating to the Burgership of Fribourg, the Secretary through fear revealed it; upon which the Duke sent immediately to Geneva, to demand them. Answer was returned him, They dared not enter in the Town-house, because a Servant-maid had lately died of the Plague there. But being not satisfied with this answer, he reiterated his demand, that notwithstanding he would have them, so that they were forced to obey him. This done he released Por∣ral, and suffered him to continue on his Journy with Monathon. They met with mony upon interest at Berne and Lucerne to redeem the Earls Plate. In May there was a general meeting of the Cantons at Zurich,1519. where the Duke and Deputies of Geneva promised to stand by their decision;May. which was as follow: That the Duke henceforward should not attempt any thing against the Bishop and Cities Juris∣diction. That the Burgership of Fribourg and Geneva should be suspended, neither party making any use of it; and that the Fri∣bourgers should rest satisfied with the 4000 Crowns received for their assistance, for they claimed more. This second Peace was
thus concluded betwixt the Duke and two Cities, and lasted Six years with much ado. The Eidgnots and Mammelusses began to be reconciled, and feasted one another, making Alliances by Mar∣riage, and forgetting ancient differeces. The Duke considering Berthelier as a person who ever withstood his Interest in Geneva,August. resolved to leave no means untried to be rid of him: but being desirous not to appear in it himself, he would therefore make use of the Bishops name, who was wholly at his service.Berthelier ap∣prehended, by the Duke. To which end he sent several of his Subjects from Focigny to Geneva, who joyning with the Mammelusses, lodged at the Eidgnots, and made almost as much disorder as the Army had done heretofore. All which had no other end but to take Berthe∣lier. He was sensible of it, every one giving him warning; yet he valued it not, declaring he was so far from fearing Death, as he rather desired it, as a Haven of rest after all his troubles. He had a Garden out of Town, where he went every day to walk, carry∣ing along with him a Squirrel in his Bosom, with which he was wont to recreate himself. Three days after the arrival of them of Forigny, the Vidame Consilii, with his attendants, had gotten before him in expectation of his coming. Berthelier saw him making to∣wards him, and not being at all daunted at it, kept on his way. The Vidame laid hold on him in the Bishops name, according as he was ordered, and took away his Sword. Berthelier boldly bid him keep it well; for said he, You shall give an account of it. He was carried to the Isle, no body interposing, and had Guards as∣signed him: whereas he to shew how little he was concerned, commonly diverted himself with his Squirrel. They advised him to beg my Lords pardon. What Lord? said he. The Duke of Savoy, replied they, our Prince and yours. He is not my Prince, answered he, and if he were, I would not ask Pardon, being innocent. It belongeth to Malefactors to beg Pardon, not to honest Men. You must die then, said they to him several times; but he, without an∣swering them, wrote on the Prison-wall: Non moriar, sed vivam & narrabo opera Domini. That is, I shall not die, but live and de∣clare the Works of the Lord. The first day of his Imprisonment there were sent to examine him, not the Syndicks, but a Provost made in haste, who had been heretofore a Tooth drawer, called John des Bois; (An honest Man would not have accepted a Commission of that nature.) who gave him notice, that he was commanded by the Prince to ex∣amine him, and to require his Oath. Berthelier boldly replied, When the Syndicks, who are my Judges, shall question me, I will answer them, but not thee, who hast nothing to do in the matter. The Provost summoned him to deliver his answer the next Morn∣ing, and sent Poste to the Princes to advertize them of the pro∣ceedings. The next Morning the said Provost, accompanied with them of Focigny, marched in Battle-array, carrying along with them a Confessor and an Executioner, to the Prison, wherein was Ber∣thelier, where his company drew up the Bridge. The Provost commanded him again to make his answer. Whereto he replied, He would not. The Provost added, Then I command you on penalty
of losing your head; and Berthelier answering as before, he pro∣nounced this Sentence against him: Seeing then, Philbert Berthelier, that is in this, so in other matters, thou hast always shewed thy self rebel¦lious against mine and thy dread Soveraign, having been guilty of the Crime of High Treason, and several other matters worthy of death, according to the Tenor of thy Indictment and Accusation: We therefore Sentence thee to have thy Head cut off, and thy Body to be hanged on the Gibbet of Champel, and thy Head to be set upon a Spike, and fastned upon a Gallows near the River of Arve. Which Sentence thus pronounced,August 5. he offered him the Confessor, with whom he had not much discourse. Afterwards he was delivered to the Executioner, who led him out of the Castle, in a place betwixt the Tower and Bridge; where, having made a short Prayer, he would have made a Speech to the Citizens before he died; but the Provost would not suffer him, bidding the Executioner, Dispatch, and do his Office. The Hangman caused him to kneel down, which Berthelier ha∣ving done,Berthelier Executed. he cried out, Ah! Gentlemen of Geneva; which he had scarcely said before his Head dropped on the Ground. which done, the Executioner put his Body in a Hearse, on which he got up, holding in his Hand Berthelier's Head, and crying out to the People, Behold the Head of the Traitor Berthelier, take all of you exam∣ple by him. Besides the Soldiers, who were strangers, there were some of the Town who followed the Hearse, and made a mock at their own evils: but good People kept within doors. The Head was set up near the Heads of Navis and Viterman, and some years af∣ter it was taken down and buried in Holy Ground by some Sol∣diers from Fribourg who passed by that way. There have been some, who considering the Heroical constancy of Berthelier, and the tyranny of his Judges, have given him this Epitaph: Quid mihi mors nocuit? virtus post fata virescit. Nec cruce, nec saevigladio perit illa Tyranni. How can death hurt? since virtue death survives, And Tyranny of Gibbets, Swords, or Knives. His death affrighted them of Geneva, who did not then dare to de∣ny the Duke and Bishop any thing; but it enraged the Fribourgers, who had a great desire to revenge it. Yet they thought it not convenient to raise an Army every time the Duke gave them cause of offence, they made their complaints to the Cantons, and demanded their Pay due to them for the former Levies, and that he should give them satisfaction for Berthelier's death. The Duke ac∣quitted himself from this Article, laying the blame on the Bishop, assuring them he did it unknown to him; and as to the payment, he denied that he was obliged to it, seeing the War had been un∣just, referring them to the Genevoises, and demanding on his side reparation for the Damages done in his Country of Vaud. This set the Genevoises in an uproar, and the Princes took the advan∣tage of their Dissentions to ruine the Eidgnots party, and bring their own in credit. They required the Council to be assembled,
and caused Eustache Chappuis the Bishops Chancellor, who was afterwards sent Deputy into England, to shew the people that the Election of Syndicks for that year had not been duly made, by the violence of some, who preferred their own private interest before the publick, and who had brought into the general Council persons excluded by the Statutes and ancient Customs, it belonging to none to sit there but those who were of principal Families: that they did this to have persons of their own Faction, which tended to nothing but to foment Rebellion: that the people for this effect had made an Alliance with Fribourg, which had put the Bishop their Prince upon calling in the Duke of Savoy his Cousin to his assistance, who had spared neither his estate nor his person to hinder such a bad effect, which would not only fall on his Countries, but likewise the City it self, as hath been found already by experience; seeing the Fri∣bourgers demanded yet great summs of mony, which could not be raised without impovershing the City. The Duke endeavoured to hinder them from paying the mony, and withal shewed them there could be no good correspondence between him and them, whilst they were governed by the Authors of this Alliance; and concluded, desiring the people to declare the said Syndicks not duly elected, and to put others less suspected in their places. The people desirous of Peace,Syndicks put by their Of∣fice. and that the mony should be paid, easily embraced this proposal. The Syndicks were discharged of their Office, after a declaration made to shew this, dismission proceeded from no other cause but only for want of a due Election, which done they laid down their staves, and others were chosen in their places; they substituted likewise some Councellors, who were best accepta∣ble to the Princes;Preter Versonex, Peter Monthy∣on, Peter de Fernex junior, Will. Daguet. especially them who were for breaking off with Fribourg: They caused the general Council to retract that Alliance, and deputed Richardet, and Goulaz, as from the Syndicks, to meet the Cantons assembled at Zurich with this instruction: First, that they should excuse the Duke touching the execution of Berthelier, and acquaint them it was done against his knowledge, the Bishop ha∣ving punished him according to his deserts, as a Seditious person, and as one guilty of the crime of High-Treason, the term likewise of his Safe-conduct being expired. Secondly, concerning the pay∣ment to be made to them of Fribourg; they should require it of them who called them, who were since put out of their Office, as Authors of these disturbances. Thirdly, that they should be urgent with the Fribourgers to renounce the Burgership contracted with Ge∣neva. The Assembly being sat, the Deputies from Fribourg made their complaints, and were answered by them of Geneva and Savoy, ac∣cording to the instructions given them.Fribourgers demand satis∣faction for Bertheliers death. The Fribourgers replied, that whosoever had put Berthelier to death had done unjustly, seeing he had been cleared by a definitive sentence of the Syndicks, who were his lawful judges, and he who had pronounced sentence against him being but a pitiful Tooth-drawer; and that the Princes had broken their promise, which they made them before they left Morges, that they would introduce no innovations till this difference was accom∣modated; that they had reason to desire a re-imbursement of their
charges, they having taken up Arms on just grounds, it being to help their fellow Citizens, received into their alliance according to Law, the Duke nor Bishop having no power to hinder them. They likewise maintained that the former Deputies were persons of worth, neither would they acknowledge these latter, whom the people say they have chosen by constraint. There were some replies made by both parties, but the Cantons decreed it after the same manner and form as at Morges, to which they were forced to yield, and agree with Savoy. The Duke ever since he had married Beatrix the Infanta of Portugal, kept his Court at Geneva, and desirous to leave a man of Authority for his Lieutenant, he displaced Consilii, and put the Sieur Salaigne in his room, who was of the family of the Beauforts. In the Year following,1520. before the Election of the Syndicks, on the twelfth day the Chanons were accustomed with other Ecclesiasticks to chuse one of the Chapter King by a bean with great expence: now it hapned to fall to Marcossay's share who was Governour of Pillounay, and being of the Country of Focigny,Marcossay's lot to be King. he had brought along with him as King several of his Countrymen for his Guard; at which the Townsmen who bore them ill will were displeased, and specially one Matthew of Confignon, Sieur of Marglie, who having been heretofore wounded by one of Bonne whose name was Goudard, resolved then to be revenged; and being accompanied with about a dozen resolute fellows, slid through the press, and singled out his man, who bore the Standard, ran him through the back for want of armour, and having left him dead on the place, made his escape out of the Town through the Halbards. The Duke and Bishop laid this Murther to the Charge of the Eidgnots though guiltless, but they who had done it returned two years after into the City, having obtained their pardon through Confignon's means. The Bishop John of Savoy lived not long after these troubles,1522. he died in the Abby of Pignerol, before he could arrive to S. Peters years,John of Savoy dies of the Pox. that is to say, before he had finished the twenty fifth year of his Office according to Pecolat's prediction; it was thought he was poy∣soned, search having been made accordingly: but a scandalous Chronicle relates he died of the Venereal distemper, which brought him into the Gout, which was accompanied moreover with filthy Ulcers, that left him nothing but skin and bones. It is reported like∣wise that after his decease, his body was found to weigh not above twenty eight pound: before his death he resigned his Benefices to Pe∣ter of Baume, who was of the family of the Earls of Montevel in Bresse; Regent of the Abby of Sure, and St. Claude, who declared his Pre∣decessor died with great remorse, especially for the disturbances he had occasioned in Geneva, which he intended to bring wholly under the Dukes subjection. Soon after him died Consilii, who a while before had been discharged of his Office of Vidame. His death was as tragical as his life infa∣mous, his house was the rendezvous of all debauched persons, his wife serving as a Bawd, by which trade she got wherewithall to keep house. De Sardet one of the two hundred Gentlemen belonging to the Court of France, and of the Family of the Vitry's, frequented there with a hundred others more: he lodged in the house whilst his mony
lasted, but having consumed it all in feasting and extravagant en∣tertainments, Consilii pretending to be jealous of him, thought by that means to get rid of him; but the Gentleman enraged at his base∣ness, their quarrel proceeded so far that Sardet's Valet meeting one day Consilii in the open street, accosted him with these words, 'S Death▪ Mr. Whoreson, You have made my Master beat me, and therefore now I will be revenged of you for it; which said, he struck him into the belly with his knife,Consilii stab∣bed. and fled out of the City. Consilii was carried home, and died immediately upon it. The good Gentlewoman his Wife counterfeited great sorrow, and pretended to be very much incensed for awhile against Sardet, but he made his excuses to her, and the better to make his peace with her they were married together. Sar∣det died some time after, and she becoming a widow the second time, made use of that little beauty she had left her, to draw young men to her house, till Old Age finishing his spoils on her, had wiped out all her charms, and she ended the rest of her daies in an Ho∣spital. On the twelfth of April in the year following Peter of Baume,1523. ha∣ving been chosen Bishop,Peter of Baume chosen Bishop. made his entrance, and took the Oath given him by the Syndicks on the Bridge of Arve; the people made great preparations for his reception, but he would have them re∣served for the Dutchess who was shortly to come there, as indeed she did awhile after with the Duke,Preparations made for the entertainment of the Dutchess and were magnificently recei∣ved. The Youth of the City were sumptuously apparelled in Da∣mask Silk, and in Velvet, and Cloth of Silver, armed each of them with a Half-Pike. But the comeliest sight was a Company of Ama∣zons, who were Women richly attired; their Petticoats trussed up to their knees, carrying a Dart in their right hands; and in their left a Buckler or Shield gilded with silver after the manner of the ancient she-Warriers. They were led by a Spanish Dame, the wife of Fran∣cis of S. Michael Sieur of Avoully, who was to complement the Dutchess in her own Language. They bore in their Colours the Effigies of a large handsom Woman the Daughter of an Apothecary called great James, who could flourish a Colours with the most ex∣pert Ensign. The Dutchess had desired for her welcome to have her lodgings in the Townhouse, but it was denied her. A rich Merchant offered her his own house, which was more stately and convenient than it, but she would not accept of it. Their entrance was after this manner: The Dutchess was carried from the Bridge of Arve in a triumphant Chariot drawn by four Horses, which were covered with cloth of gold, set with precious stones, which dazled the sight of the beholders. The Duke her Husband followed mounted on a Mule together with the Abbot of Beaumont, and one of his Gentlemen, all three cloathed after the same fashion with gray Clokes and Caps to pull over their necks. The Dutchess having passed over the Bridge was met by these Amazons, whose Captain presented her with a Spanish Sonnet full of Elogies, high Encomiums and offers of the Towns service; but she was so far from thanking them, that she would not so much as cast her eyes towards them. Afterwards she was met by the young men, who receiv'd as little respect from her as the former; at which the
Citizens were displeased; saying they paid her not these respects out of any sense of duty, but only to testify their affection to her as friends. Whereas on the contrary the Dutchess who was a Portu∣gais shewed she esteemed them not only as Subjects, but as Slaves, after the Portugais fashion. There were some who were of opinion that they should do well to pull down the Theatres and Scaffolds erected for their divertisement; seeing she seemed to take no delight in what they did for her; saying further, It were better to employ the mony spent on these entertainments in fortifying the Town, and keeping them out, than in drawing of them in: After which sort they wounded them∣selves with their own weapons. Yet they continued to feast them, being attended by the whole City with all the signs of mirth and jollity. The Dutchesses reser∣vedness was excused by some, saying, che eran los costumbres de Portu∣gal, that it was the Portugal fashion. Yet she did make the Ladies a sumptuous Feast, attended with Balls and Masquerades and Farces, so that since Philberts time the City had seen no such divertisements. There was likewise a Turney kept, in which the Townsmen shewed themselves as expert as the Courtiers: in short this year was spent in devising how to make the Duke and Dutchess welcome, furnish∣ing both them and their train with provision and houshold stuff, as well for delight as necessity. It may be truly affirmed, that they were better obeyed and served at Geneva on courtesie, than they would have been at Chambery by obligation. The year following,1524. the Dutchess was delivered of a Son who was baptized at Geneva. He was named Charles, and died awhile after in Spain, before his father could make him as he had vainly promised Prince of Geneva; the Dutchess passionately desiring she might enjoy with this son the Sovereignty of that City: for she used to say in her own Language, che era muouch buona posada, that it was a very good place to make an Inn of. About this time the Emperor and King of France were at variance,Emperor and King of France at variance. and would each of them fain draw the Duke over to their side but he kept himself Neuter, being the Emperors Brother-in-law and Vas∣sal, and the King of France his Uncle. The differences between Lu∣ther and the Pope began to break out about this time. The Duke ma∣king use of this juncture of affairs to fish, as we say, in troubled wa∣ters, and wholly to subdue Geneva to himself. The Walls and Ram∣parts were no ways amended; and the Bishop although well affecti∣oned to the liberties of the Town, and the priviledges of the Church, yet might easily be prevailed on, being very amorously inclined, and addicted to those pleasures which soften the severest minds, and sti∣fle the most commendable virtues; having moreover several consi∣derable Benefices in the Dukes dominions, of which he might be deprived if he opposed the Duke. Moreover the Youth of the City were so effeminated by Courtly delights, that they were more de∣sirous of a Licence for their Debaucheries than passionate for the Li∣berties of the City. The Vidame Salaigne being deceased, the Duke had put Verneau in his stead, who was caused according to ancient Custom to swear to be true to the Bishop; but the Duke pretended, it was to him or
his he ought to do it; the Bishop made some small opposition, and appeased the Duke the best he could. The Duke to pluck this thorn out of his foot, found out a means to send the Bishop into Piedmont in the Emperors service, which he dared not refuse as belonging to the Emperor. He left his brother S. Sorlin at Geneva to govern in his absence, who being likewise addicted to his pleasures, left the management of all affairs to the Episcopal Council. It was consul∣ted one day whether the Vidame his appeal should be carried to the Dukes Council or not; the greatest part of the Councellors were his Subjects born, and leaned to the affirmative; Levrery alone, Judge of excesses, son of the other Levrery whom we have aforementioned, maintained, the Duke had no Authority in Geneva, and that the Ap∣peal should be brought before the Bishop: of which the Duke ha∣ving notice by his Favourites, he sent for the Episcopal Council, who all went except Levrery.Levrery sent for by the Duke. He made several complaints, and used some threats toward them, but they laid all the blame on Levrery, whom he commanded to bring along with them, promising he should have no ill usage; who coming into his presence, the Duke spake thus very huffingly, There are some among you who say, I am not Lord of Ge∣neva, and no body answering, he added, it is one Levrery, is it not? will not he be here? Levrery presenting himself, it was I my Lord, said he, but when I said this, it was in Council, for which I am not to be que∣stioned. Get you gone, said the Duke, and make it appear by good sufficient proofs in three days time, otherwise look to your self. Lev∣rery departed the more troubled, by how much the more he saw it difficult to produce the City Writings, seeing they were in the hands of those who were affectioned to the Duke; so that his friends could not better advise him than to get out of the way: but he would not take their advice, chusing rather, as he said, to die in maintain∣ing S. Peters Authority, and the Cities priviledges, as Berthelier had done before him. He remained in the City beyond the time prefixed by the Duke, coming and going as before, which the more enraged his Highness, who believed he did it out of contempt: he caused him then to be laid hold on by his Bayliff and some Gentlemen as he wal∣ked out of S. Peters Gate: they brought him to the Duke, who com∣ing out of his Palace, was going to our Lady of Grace's Church to hear Mass, to the end he might be near the Bridge of Arve, and speedi∣ly retire into his own Countrys in case the people should attempt his rescue; but there was no danger of that, for they were afraid of ma∣king the matter rather worse than better, should they have appeared in his behalf. S. Sorlin had withdrawn himself to Remilly, that he might avoid the obligation of defending Levrery. The Prisoner clothed as he was in a Velvet Jacket, was set upon a sorry horse, as if he were some rascally fellow, with his hands tied behind him, and his legs fastned under the horses belly, and was led in this equipage to Bonne, accompanied with a crew, who ceased not all the way to injure him; but especially one Francis Noel, (who to ennoble himself would be called Mr. de Bellegard, by the name of a certain Farm.) This per∣son although formerly he had been his great companion, yet was more severe upon him than any of the rest; but his baseness was well requited, having broken his leg before he came to Bonne, where
they delivered Levrery to the Bayliff, after they had searched him. The next Morning the Ladies who had honoured the Dutchess at her entrance into Geneva, came to intreat her to pacify the Dukes anger against poor Levrery: but in vain; for he had already sent the Provost of his Houshold, the Confessor and Executioner to Bonne. Where they were no sooner arrived, but the Provost according to his Instructions caused him to be put on the Rack, and required him to confess his Accomplices. He answered, he had none; at which the Provost resting satisfied, without further discourse, Sentenced him to be beheaded; which was executed the same Night by Torch-light,Levrery put to death. after he had confessed himself to his Ghostly Father, and that he had written on the Prison wall the same words as Berthelier had done before him. It is said when the Executioner led him to the place of Execution in the Castle, he spake aloud as he went these words: God give me grace to die, for S. Peter's Authority, and my Countries Liberty. This business asto∣nished the Citizens, who complained of their Pastors forsaking them: and in this general consternation the Duke might easily have made himself Master of the City: but by good hap, he with∣drew to Thonon, and from thence to Piedmont, where Francis the First being taken before Pavie, he left his side and came over to the Emperor Charles the Fifth. In this Year Claudius Richardet,1525. one of the Syndicks of the Eid∣gnots Party, declared in Council, That the City had been at great charge in entertaining the Duke, the Revenues thereof being ex∣hausted they knew not after what manner, and that it was fitting Boulet the Treasurer should be called to an account for it. Who being one of the Faction of the Mammelusses, and enraged at the matter,Claudius Ri∣chardet breaks his Staff on the Treasu∣rers Head. cried out in a passion, What must we still be governed by these Eidgnots? The Syndick taking now his turn to be angry, broke his Syndical Staff on the others Head. Boulet thereupon makes his complaint to the Dukes Council at Chambery, who granted him a Writ to cite them of Geneva to make their appearance. He set it up at the Bridge of Arve. The Syndicks regarded it not▪ saying, That neither the Duke nor his Council had any authority over them. But they were condemned for their contempt; and in pursuit of this, their Estates which lay in Savoy were confiscated. The Ge∣nevoises sent their Deputies to the Duke and Bishop, desiring them to maintain, according to their Oaths, the Liberties of the City. But the Duke made them no satisfaction. The Bishop pretended to be troubled at it; although it may be judged he was very well pleased, as we may believe by what follows: For having gotten 300 Crowns of the Genevoises to carry their Appeal to Rome, he stirred not in the business. Some private Persons designing to do it secretly, the Duke hindred them, and made them fly into Ger∣many. And not content with this, he sent Judge Bartalais and the Vi∣dame Hugues of Rogemont to Geneva, to the end the Genevoises should renounce this Appeal, and remit the Recognisance of crimi∣nal Cases to himself. Which Article was delivered to the Gene∣ral
Council, and the chief Syndick Nergaz passed it, saying, That matter brought no great advantage to the City: Bonier another of the Syndicks strongly opposed it, saying, He would never con∣sent to it, and called them Traitors who would. But he remain∣ed not long in this mind, for a while after he took part with the Duke. Upon this refusal the Vidame, by the Dukes order, designed to weaken the Eidgnots Faction in apprehending some of the chief of them,Eidgnots Faction en∣deavoured to be weakned. who were Besançon Hugues, Peter and Claudius Baud, Amy Gerard the Treasurer, Francis Rosset Inn-holder at the Blacks-head, John Lulin Inn-keeper at the Bear, Peter of Toy, aliàs Poulain, and one Chabot. Which two last intending to save themselves by fly∣ing to Fribourg, fell at Versoy into an Ambuscade laid by their Ene∣mies. Poulain being well mounted made his escape, but Chabot was carried to Gex. Notice was given to the rest to stand upon their Guard. Williet the Bayliff of Gex intending to apprehend Hugues, who was his Gossip, came and lay at his House at Chatelaine; but he being informed of his design, was too cunning for him: for ha∣ving received him the Night before with the greatest outward ex∣pression of joy, he made his escape the next Night with some Friends, and took the Bayliffs Horse along with him. They were pursued by the Provost and his Men, and by his Highness's Guards, but they could not overtake them, having gotten already to Fri∣bourg, where they made their complaints of the Dukes violences, beseeching the Lords either to continue the Alliance, or to make another. They had fair promises made them; after which they went and Addressed themselves to the States of Zurich, who not∣withstanding the troubles which began at that time about Religi∣on, gave ear to them, and dispatched two Deputies to the Duke at Anecy. The Duke at their suit granted a Release to the Prison∣ers, and a Safe conduct to the Eidgnots, who had withdrawn them∣selves into Switzerland. Yet they would not accept of it, seeing it contained some dangerous points: wherefore they were more ur∣gent to make an Alliance with the confederate Cantons; which was promised should be effected by them of Berne and Fribourg, when they should have leasure to consider more narrowly of the Articles of that Treaty. In the mean time the Duke being arrived at Geneva,The Duke desires to be acknow∣ledged Sove∣reign over the City of Ge∣neva. caused a General Council to be assembled in S. Peter's Cloister, a place de∣signed for that purpose, where he assisted in Person, sitting in his Chair, his Chancellor behind him, and his Guards round about him, for fear of any Popular Tumult; which Council hath been since called, The Council of Halbards. The Chancellor, Gabriel de Lande, demanded of the People, as from the Duke, that in consi∣deration of the pains and trouble his Predecessors had underwent to maintain their State, they should therefore acknowledge him Soveraign Protector of the City, and that they should disown the Fugitives and Burgership, which they were contracting with the Switzers. Which Proposals amazed the People, and yet they gran∣ted him nothing; he therefore seeing his endeavours fruitless, re∣turned to Piedmont.August. Yet he came there again a while after, and
began to speak more gently to the Syndicks, assuring them he had expresly commanded that the Estates belonging to the City should be restored; adding moreover, that he would not in the least man∣ner derogate from the Liberties and Priviledges thereof; for which they thanked him. The Vidame and Judge Barralis presented themselves before the Council,Octob. shewing them as Friends to the City, who desired nothing more than its Repose and Establishment, That seeing the Duke was Vicar of the Empire, and Soveraign in all his Country, he might also be acknowledged Soveraign in Geneva, without any prejudice to the Bishop or City; by which means he would watch over it for its preservation: and that moreover it would be a difficult mat∣ter to hinder him, if he were minded, to take by force this Sove∣raignty upon him: that they might easily perceive the Bishop would not help them in their necessities: that the Duke was a mild and generous Prince, who would defend and maintain them against any who should oppose them. Upon which it was an∣swered, They would deliberate on the matter, and confer with the Episcopal and General Council, and with M. of Geneva. In the mean time the Vidame and Barralis plied the Councellors so fast with good words, or threats, that the greatest part of them told the Syndicks, If ye will acknowledge him, we will likewise. But they held firm, and troubled themselves no more about it. Twelve days after came the Deputies from Fribourg and Soleurre, who shewed the Council, That if they should be any more trou∣bled about their Priviledges,Council divided. their Superiors would take them into their Protection. The Council were very much divided, and those who took part with the Duke oftentimes carried it from the rest, as they did then; for the answer given the Deputies was this, That they who had made their complaints to them, did it without the consent of the Town, and so they were dismissed with this answer. They wrote to the Cantons of Berne at the same time; as also to Fribourg, Soleurre and Lucerne, that they should not give heed to all complaints made them, without the consent of the Ci∣ty. The Fribourgers wrote back again, desiring to see the Cities Charter; which was refused them, saying, They had no cause to complain against the Duke of Savoy. On the 10th of December the Duke caused another Council to be held,1525. of whom he demanded three things by his Chancellor:Decemb. First, That nothing should be done against his authority nor the Bishops. Secondly, That the Syndicks should be chosen according to the manner used six years ago. And Thirdly, That they should renounce all Foreign Alliance; which was promised and publickly proclaimed: but this being not gotten by common consent, on the 22d of the same Month,Bandieres ap∣pears before the Council. appear'd before the Council John Bandieres, accompanied with the Children of those who had with∣drawn themselves into Switzerlamd, together with Secretary Van∣delli, and above 200 others who presented a Writing to this effect: That they and their Party owned and acknowledged the Fugitives in Switzerland to have done a good office, both to the Bishop and Ci∣ty, in endeavouring an Alliance with the confederate Cantons,
protesting against the injury done them in their disowning of them, saying, They desired no answer, but only Letters testimonial from the City Secretary; which the Council would not agree to. On the same day a Letter was directed to the Bishop then at Pig∣nerol▪ to come and set the Affairs of the City in order, which se∣veral of the Citizens had deserted: and the Fugitives sent for their Wives and Children. The Bishop upon notice of this news returned,1526. and was recei∣ved by the whole City with great joy.Feb. 1. Two days after he sent for the Syndicks, to know how they had carried themselves; who ha∣ving given him an account of all the Traverses they had met with,The Bishop returns to Geneva. he said unto them, Neither have I been exempt from the like troubles, for the Duke told me once in his Brothers presence, That he intended to have the Soveraignty of Geneva: but resolving with my self to main∣tain the Rights and Priviledges of my Church, even to death, I made him this answer, That being Peter of Baume, I was his humble Servant and Subject; but as being Bishop of Geneva, I was not his Subject, and that he had no Right to the City. He moreover shewed them it would be very necessary the deliberations in Council should be carried on more privately, and that in business of consequence they should make use of little Balls, as they do at Venice. Eight days after new Syndicks were chosen.Feb. 8. The Fribourgers and Bernoises were very glad that John Philippe',Philippe cho∣sen chief Syndick. one of the chief of the Eidgnots, was chosen Principal Syndick: whereupon they who were fled to Fribourg, to procure the Alliance of that State and of Berne,Feb. 21. returned to Geneva. They informed the Council, by Besan∣çon Hugues, of what they had done concerning the Burgership, ef∣fected with such great labour, and so many obstacles from the Duke; which Alliance was agreed to, provided it should last 25 years, or rather for ever, if it pleased both Parties, it being to be renewed and confirmed every Five years.Alliance made with Berne. The Articles were these: viz. That the Three Cities of Berne, Fribourg and Geneva, should be faithful one to another; that if one should be invaded, the others should assist it to the utmost of their power.1526. Three days after the General Council was assembled, at the ringing of the great Bell,Feb. 25. where there were not above Five or Six Persons who would not consent to this Alliance: The Bishop being pre∣sent protested against every thing which might prejudice his Au∣thority in this affair. The Chapter of the Cathedral were startled at the matter,Feb. 27. the Chanons and Clergy desiring to know of the Syndicks, whether they might repute themselves safe in the City? It was answered, They had no cause to fear, for if the Chanon of Lutry had re∣ceived any ill usage, it was because he refused to deliver the Keys of the Church, when they would have assembled the last Council. Eight Deputies parted from Geneva to swear to the Agreement, and Eight others from Berne and Fribourg arrived to do the same at Geneva; they were met by the Syndicks out of Town, and sa∣luted with all the Cannon.
The next Morning the Oath was taken in presence of the Ge∣neral Council,1526. the People crying out,March 12. Thus would we have it, thus would we have it; in a good hour were they born, who have procured us so great good. At Night the Deputies were entertained and treated with Plays and Bonfires at Molard, in token of joy; af∣ter which they returned, carrying with them the Copy of the Oath sealed. Not long after the City had advice, by an Express from Berne, that Monsieur de Lulin had addressed himself to the Duke in a Council held at Lucerne,Mar. 14. to cause the Burgership to be revoked; and the same did Nergaz,Mar. 28. Servant, and Forty other Mammelusses. The business was referred to be transacted at Berne, in a Council there, where appeared the Deputies of Geneva, Hugues, and du Molard. The conclusion was, That the three Cities would by no means revoke their Alliance,April 7. and that if the Duke would not rest satisfied, he should have the Letters of the Alliance, which he had made with Berne and Fribourg, returned him. The Eidgnots, who were at that time the most powerful, ill re∣sented this appearance of the Mammelusses, who were forced to leave the Town by an emotion of the People. They withdrew to the Dukes Dominions.Mammelusses's Conspiracy. A while after they sent to know whether they might return? Answer was made them, They might, if they could prove themselves honest Men. But they dared not venture. At length, upon inquiry, it was found, That they, together with the Vidame, had conspired to seize on the chief Eidgnots, and to cut off their Heads. Peter Gruet, the Bishops Vicar, was suspected to be of the Dukes Party: whereupon he was deposed, and the Abbot of Beaumont put in his place. The 42 Mammelusses were sum∣moned by sound of Trumpet to make their appearance; but not one of them obeying this order, they were condemned for their contumacy, and their Estates forfeited; which produced a long Law∣suit before the Confederates. The Vidame, upon information given him that he was accused of a Conspiracy, left the City, substitu∣ting his Bayliff Dulcis in his room. Neither did he remain long in power; for the People would suffer no more pleadings in the Stewards Court, but would have all matters decided by the Four Syn∣dicks, so that he retired into the Country of Focigny. The Jaylor of the Isle did the same, leaving a Person to look after the Pri∣soners; One of whom, being convicted of Felony, was by the Syndicks condemned to die. The Vidame's absence was well known: but to take away all occasion from the Duke to complain, he was sought for in his House, by a Notary and Witnesses; where they were told, that he had left the Town. They had the same an∣swer at the Bayliffs House. Whereupon it was concluded in Coun∣cil, notwithstanding, to proceed on to Execution. The common Serjeant was ordered to supply the Vidame's place, which he did, and after the sentence was read, he led the Malefactor towards the Castle gate, causing the Bayliff of Gaillard to be called: ac∣cording to custom the Duke had bestowed this office on Servant, as a recompence for his Services and Exile from Geneva. Servant sent a Man in his place to receive the Prisoner, who demanded of
the Serjeant whether he was Vidame? he answered no, but that he was the City and Councils servant. Then the Bailiffs Deputy re∣plied, I will not receive him at your hands, seeing you are not my Lords Officer; for neither you nor your Syndicks have power to command me: which having said, he set spurrs to his horse, and returned. The Common-Serjeant gave notice of this to the Syndicks, who bad him proceed, and gave him order for the Execution, which he obeyed, and ever since that time,1526. the Duke of Savoy hath held no Office in the City. The Dukes Arms stood over the Castle-gate in the Isle,The Dukes Arms batter∣ed down. but in the night they were battered to pieces with a hammer by an unknown hand. The Bridge in the Isle over against the great Bridge, was like∣wise found broken down. The Duke joyned this amongst other complaints against Geneva, and it was debated before the Cantons, till the year 1530. All outrages on either side were forbid during this process, but there always hapned some disturbances. For to hinder the insulting of the Dukes party by the fear of disobliging the Switzers, there were six persons constantly residing at Berne, and as many at Fribourg. The Bishop undertook to bring in again the exiled Mammelusses;June 21. the Council agreed to receive the most moderate of them, paying as a Fine Eighteen thousand Crowns of gold; but the Duke hin∣dred, sometimes threatning to deal with them as enemies if they did, and otherwhiles promising to introduce them all in general upon ho∣nourable terms. The Articles of Burgership being made ready, when they were to be signed, several of the Dukes party absented themselves, and from that time they were suspected: a little while after, there was a Diet held at Soleurre, in which the Confederates answered the Dukes Embassadors, that they should not mention any more that matter, seeing he could not prove that he had any right to Geneva and Lausane, who on the contrary had produced their Titles. The Duke meditating revenge,1526. prohibited all Merchandises and provision to be carried out of his Dominions to Geneva;Octob. 19. but a He∣rald from the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg, passed through Ge∣neva in his journy to Chambery, to give notice to the Duke that his Am∣bassadors,Nov. 17. would not be heard in the general Assembly in Switzerland till he had taken off this prohibition, and reduced things to their for∣mer state;Decemb. 3. which he did some days after publickly in appearance, but he sent notice about privately, that he would have the former Order observed, and that his Subjects should be ready in their Arms at the first ringing of the Bell, and beat of Drum. Towards the end of this Year arose a difference about a Prisoner of the Mammelusses faction,1526. whom the Syndicks condemned to be be∣headed as a Taytor to the Bishop and City;Decem. 13. but his kindred obtained their consent to request the Bishops pardon, which should be pro∣duced at the place of Execution, with this proviso, that he should re∣main in Prison till he had paid a Fine; but the Bishop stood at the Castle gate,1527. and gave him his Pardon, and the Officers unbound him and let him go;The Gout cured. at which the poor man was so transported with joy, that although full of the Gout, he ran to the Prison, and en∣tred
into it joyfuller than he went out,Feb. 20. having never since felt his di∣stemper. The Dyet held at Berne, on the 22. of December, 1526. had again ratified the Burgership with Geneva, and concluded to return the Copy of the Alliance made with him, because it was made with∣out the peoples consent. In the month of May another being held, the two Cities of Berne and Fribourg sent to the Duke who was at Chambery,May 1. to demand the Letters of Alliance, which he would not grant, no more than he would make satisfaction for the damages done to Geneva, and do justice on the Murtherers, his Subjects, who had killed a Genevois named Gentil, and some other persons: neither would he suffer the fugitive Mammelusses to plead their cause at Gene∣va,1527. upon Letters of Safe-conduct offered by the Bishop. The Syndicks being informed that there were Soldiers lying in Am∣buscade at Lancy,July 13. beyond the Bridge of Arve,An Ambassa∣dor at Lancy. commanded Besançon Hugues, Captain-General of the Town to take care accordingly; who caused the Gates to be shut, the Chains to be extended, and an Alarm to be sounded. Which the Enemies perceiving, and finding they were discovered, withdrew. It was known afterwards that it was the Captain of the Dukes Guards, who had gathered some Troops to take the Bishop Peter of Baume, at our Lady of Grace's Church, where he went usually to Mass every Saturday, but by good for∣tune he was not there that day: it is thought they designed to put him to death,1527. and to chuse another in his room; which obliged him to withdraw secretly into the Franche-Comt,August 1. having first cancelled the Letters Testimonial, which he had heretofore made against the Alliance of the Town with the Confederates. Fifteen days after he sent the Syndicks a Copy of a Letter,Aug. 18. dated the first of April, which the Emperor had written to the Duke of Savoy, which fell into his hands in passing through S. Claude; the Contents of which were, that his Imperial Majesty having understood that they of Geneva had made an Alliance with the Cantons for to maintain themselves against the Dukes oppressions,The Emperor injoyns the Duke to desist from his en∣deavors after Soveraignty over Geneva. and his Officers, who had violated the Bishop and Cities priviledges; it enjoyned the said Duke to forbear his pretensions for the time to come of Sove∣reignty, otherwise he would make it appear that this displeased him, for he would maintain whatsoever his predecessors had established in this Imperial City. The two Cantons of Berne and Fribourg, wrote likewise to the Duke not to molest their Allies of Geneva. The Mam∣melusses finding they could not prevail with the Cantons, to enter again the City, removed their suit to Vienna; but the general Coun∣cil being met, there was a Copy of the Imperial Letter read, by which they were in hopes to find that Geneva was not subject to Vi∣enna, and from thence forward, it was concluded that no person for the time to come should prosecute any cause in that Court. The Bi∣shop Baume desirous to shew his affection to the City, and the care he took for its interest, made himself a Citizen thereof, as appears by an Act dated the fifteenth of July, 1527. at which the Duke be∣ing enraged, seized on the Abbies of Sure and Pignerol which belong∣ed to him, which he offered to him again for the Vidomat or Stew∣ardship.
The Bishop likewise at the same time remitted the cog∣nizance of civil Causes to the Syndicks, to lessen the charge which persons were at in his Court. After the Mammelusses faction,The fraterni∣ty of the Spoon. there arose another out of the Ci∣ty, which did much hurt to the Citizens, which was the Confraterni∣ty of Gentlemen of La Cuillier, or the Spoon, with whom were joyn∣ed some disaffected Chanons of the Dukes party. This Fraternity was instituted in the Castle of Vaud, where some Gentlemen being at Table, eating amongst other things Broth with Wicker Spoons; they bragged that they would make them of Geneva do the same. They hanged each of them their Spoons about their necks for a note of distinction, and those Francis of Pontverre, Sieur of Terny, a man couragious and skilful in warlike affairs, for their Captain; they had from that time several meetings to consult on their design, at which the Duke was not at all pleased; fearing it would end in his preju∣dice. They did great hurt to Geneva, wasting the Country there∣abouts, and misusing them whose business led them to the City. Complaints of this were made to the Cities, who instead of Soldiers sent Embassadors, which these Gentlemen valued not. They excu∣sed themselves on account of the troubles which the change of Reli∣gion had produced in Switzerland; yet they sent at length two Com∣panies consisting of about 800. men. These two Companies being arrived, they were desired to set upon the Enemy, but the Captains refused to do it; saying, that they were Allies of the Duke as well as Geneva, and that they were only sent to guard the City, so that they were forced to have patience, and to provide them good quar∣ters. The Deputies in the mean time went to the Dukes party, and concluded such a kind of Peace, that made these two Factions in some sort agree. Six weeks after they were called back again, by reason the Enemy continued his insultings: but the Soldiers in∣stead of fighting him, fell upon the Capons and Partridges. The Dukes party making a jest of it, said, That these Soldier▪s had made the Genevoises real Huguenots, seeing they eat the Birds and left the Feathers to the Genevoises, who wore them in their Hats for a token of their Alliance; for we have already mentioned that Eidgnots or Huguenots, as it was indifferently pronounced, signified Allies. It seemed the two Cities were very apprehensive lest they should break off with the Duke; for from the year 1527. to 1530. there was nothing enterprized against these Gentlemen of the Spoon, but onely one sally made on the side of Gaillard, which was effected by the contrivance of Amy Girard the Syndick, who sent word to him who watched in the Bell-Tower, that the Enemy was seen at the Gate de Rive, although there was then a Truce made, which put the City into an alarm. Three Companies of Foot issued out of the Ci∣ty in very bad order,Geneva alarm'd. there being but two Horsemen in the whole Army, which were the Prior of S. Victor and a Priest belonging to him. Bastien of Diespach Deputy of Berne, followed them with full speed on Horseback, who seeing the night approaching, by the con∣sent of Victor caused the Townsmen to march back: awhile after the Captain of the Company of Fribourg, who was at Cartigny, was ordered
to quit the Village and Castle. No sooner had they left it, but Gui∣gues of Grenant, Captain of the Dukes Guard took possession of it. The Mammelusses who were fled not returning after so many sum∣mons,1528. had at length sentence of death pronounced against them by the Syndicks,Feb. 21. to the number of forty four of them, and their estates for feited. On Sunday the fifth of April,A Meteor seen at Geneva. was seen at Sun-setting, a Meteor seldom appearing, and which the people making no distinction call a Comet; it was a flying torch in the form of a fire-brand, which went from the East to the West, and left behind it wheresoever it passed, sparks as it were of fire; a quarter of an hour after it had disappeared, there was heard a noise like the report of a great piece of Ordnance, which coming from between the West and the East ended it self to∣wards the North; and for at least an hours space afterward there was heard such a kind of noise as comes out of a fiery furnace, at which the very beasts being affrighted, wandered bellowing from one side to the other. It was in this Year that the Bernoises after several disputes and dis∣courses,1528. banished the Roman Catholick Religion from their City,Bernoises em∣brace the Protestant Religion. and embraced the Protestant Faith. Zuinglius and Oecolampadius Preached it up in Switzerland, and Bertholdus Haller at Berne, whilst Luther did the same in Germany. The Bernoises would have certain Villages which the Fribourgers pretended belonged to them, to receive the same Doctrine, which raised a disturbance betwixt these two Ci∣ties, who both demanded assistance from Geneva. The Genevoises fearing lest in pleasing one they should disoblige the other, sent to each of them a Company of Musqueteers, consisting of about one hundred and fifty men a piece: John Philippe went Captain of them who were designed for Berne, and Richardet Captain of those who were sent to Fribourg. It was observed that these two Companies began to quarrel, and annoy one another at Geneva; but at length these two Cities were reconciled, and the Forces sent home again. Some Roman Catholicks of Berne were forced to flie to Gene∣và, amongst others Conradus Wilhermin, and Anthony Bischebach, who farm'd the Revenues of S. Victor, who being gone to Cartigny with eight Horsemen, and thirty two Foot Soldiers, to gather his Tithes, had the boldness to attaque the Castle. He lost Thiebald Loffer there, but took Prisoner de Grenans whom he kept Prisoner three months in S. Victor. The Gentlemen of the Spoon desirous to try whether they could draw Bonnivard out thence, came one night with four or five hundred men beyond the Bridge of Arve,The Fraterni∣ty of the Spoon appear before Geneva. crying out, Treacherous Eidgnots, and you Cows of Switzerland, come over here and fetch Fodder: And at the same time they dis∣charged their Carbines, which did no other hurt than the alarming the Town▪ the Bell rang, and Bonnivard came to Coquet, Captain of the Borough of Four, who immediately got together five or six hundred men, maugre Hugues the Syndick then Captain General, who was thought to hold intelligence with the Enemies, to do Bon∣nivard an ill turn; there were some skirmishes, and so the Gentlemen withdrew.
From that time the Bernoises frequented more Geneva than the Fribourgers, and in all their discourses were still inveighing against the Priests, and their forbidding to eat Flesh in Lent, and on Wednes∣days and Saturdays; so that they perswaded several to disobey them. The Fribourgers on the contrary vehemently exhorted them to follow the Religion of their Ancestors, or otherwise they would forsake their Alliance.Victor his ad∣vice to the Genevoises. In this confusion the Genevoises ob¦serving how Mens minds began to be divided, and that there were some who talked of Reforming the Clergy, and the corruptions which they said were crept into the Church, they addressed them∣selves to Bonnivard, Prior of S. Victor, who had the reputation of an honest and knowing Man, to have his advice in this matter. Who made them this bold answer, If you will be ruled by me, you shall do one of these two things: That is, If you continue debauched, as ye are at present, you must not wonder if others be so too. And, Secondly, If you will reform the Clergy, you must first shew them the way by your good examples. These and other Remonstrances, which he afterwards made them, gave them occasion to pry more narrowly into Religious matters. The Fugitive Mammelusses had obtained of the Archbi∣shop of Vienna, a Writ of Excommunication, upon their com∣plaints against the Genevoises, which they caused to be set up. It hapned that Bonnivard travelling to Berne, with the Deputies of Geneva, was minded to read this Excommunication, set up on the Church porch, in the Road to Switzerland. But the Deputies bade him have a care what he did: For as soon as ever you shall have read it, said they, you will stand excommunicated. Bonnivard, smi∣ling at their scrupulous simplicity, replied, You are much mistaken, for if ye have condemned the Mammelusses unjustly, ye are excommu∣nicated by God himself; but if justly, what power has the Archbishop of Vienna over your Consciences? These solid Discourses, together with the Exhortations of the Bernoises, inspired the Genevoises with courage to deny first obe∣dience to the Pope, although they had not then renounced the Doctrine of the Roman Church; and these Sparks were the pre∣sages of a greater Fire which would be kindled amongst them. About the end of this year, before Christmas, the Fraternity of Gentlemen of the Spoon were to have a meeting at Nyons,Fraternity of the Spoon hold a meeting at Nyons. con∣cerning Geneva. They were permitted to pass through the Town, as they were wont heretofore. Their Captain Pontverre came last. He entred through the Gate of La Corratiere, and would have went through that of S. Gervais. But finding it shut, although the Porter was endeavouring to open it, yet he falls into a Rage, abusing the poor fellow, and gave him a box on the Ear after he had opened the Gate, saying, 'S Bud, You Rogue, must Gentlemen wait all this while? and continuing to swear, it shall not be long first, said he, before we shall beat down your Gates, and march over them as we have done heretofore. Which having said, he set Spurs to Horse and rode away. The Porter failed not to relate this to the Council and City; at which the People, moved with instigation, said, Will it not suffice
them to do us all the injuries they are able out of our Walls, but they must needs come in the City to affront us? Let what will happen, this must not be suffered. Yet the Council durst not openly shew their indignation, the Suburb of S. Gervais being only inclosed with Turfs of Earth, patched up in haste upon report of Wars. Yet Guards were placed there, as likewise on the Bridge of Rhosne. In the beginning of the following year,1529. about twilight, Pont∣verre, accompanied with three other Horse-men,Jan. 2. entred again in∣to the Town.Pontverre en∣ters Geneva. He was discovered on the Bridge, although he muf∣fled himself in his Cloke; when immediately there arose a cry, Here is Pontverre, here is Pontverre. They who were nearest him, clapped their Hands to their Swords, as he for his part did the like, endeavouring to defend himself in his retreat: but he could not so well guard himself, but that he received an ugly blow on his Nose. Yet he, together with his companions, makes his way through the crowd; one of them who was with him was Mon∣sieur de S. Simon, who endeavouring to get to the Gate of la Cor∣raterie, he found it shut. Pontverre knowing not where to be∣take himself, he climbs up the Stairs of the Hospital de la Mon∣noye, upon his Horse; and being at the top, he lights off and hides himself under a Bed. They pursued him; and having found him, they made at him with their Rapiers, one of them pricking him in the Thigh, which made him crawle out in a fury; he wound∣ed Amy Bandiers with his Dagger. But he was immediately so beset on every side with blows, that he was soon killed in the place. The Syndick, Amy Girard, being present, caused the Clothes and Arms of Pontverre to be delivered to his Companions, whom they conducted beyond the Arve, lest the People should serve them as they did the Captain; his Body was conveyed to the Chappel of the Hospital of Monnoye, and viewed by the Syndicks: but be∣ing dead, there was no remedy. Two days after he was interred by mada de Brandis; who having obtained leave, she caused him to be carried to the Convent of Rive, and to be buried in the Chappel belonging to the Family of the Terny's. There was found about him Orders relating to his Military Office, sum∣moning his Men to appear at such a place of Rendesvous, appa∣relled in White. The Gentlemen of the Spoon were extreamly inraged at his death,Fraternity of the Spoon in∣raged at Pont∣verre's death. especially the Baron of La Sara, who threatned more than he could do: and Francis of Beaufort, Governor of Bellevaux, who afterwards laid down his Gown, and took up the Sword, naming himself Monsieur of Rolle, (from a Mannor he had purchased, known by that Title) They made their complaint to the Duke, who was not much moved at the matter, yet he sent Deputies into Switzerland to have satisfaction. The Genevoises were wil∣ling to go there to justifie themselves; but the ways were so block∣ed up by the Dukes Party, that it was impossible to get safe pas∣sage. Yet Vandelly ventured on the Lake, taking the advantage of the Wind, and got to Berne; where he so well answered the Duke of Savoy's Deputy, that the Bernoises remained satisfied that the Genevoises Fact was not so hainous as it was represented. The
Bernoises made up an agreement betwixt them, and Vandelly re∣turned. Yet the Confraternity of the Spoon ceased not to molest the Ci∣ty,1529. intercepting their provision,Jan. and making inroads even as near as the Suburbs. Berne and Fribourg granted some Troops to the City, and sent, together with them of Basle and Zurich, Deputies for a day which they intended to hold at S. Julien. These pas∣sing over to Geneva, informed themselves of the Rights of the Town, and found them much to the Inhabitants advantage. The Deputies made several Journies from Geneva to S. Julien; in all which they did nothing else but obtain the Dukes consent to the payment of a certain summ of mony towards the remo∣ving the Troops of Berne and Fribourg, who were about Seven hundred Men. Yet the Gentlemen continuing their onsets,March 18. Eighteen Cavaleers amongst them apparelled in White,The Suburbs of S. Victor alarmed. alarmed the Suburb of S. Vi∣ctor, but there issuing out some Troops of the Genevoises and their Allies, they were forced to retreat. They returned on Thursday before Easter, coming up to the Gates to the number of 800, with Ladders to scale the Town.March 25. But their courage failed them; a Gentleman who had promised them 1400 Men, having failed in his promise. The Dukes declarations, which enjoyned these Gentle∣men to forbear molesting the Genevoises, were not observed: for the Confraternity, having the whole Country at their command, did but laugh at these orders. Several Houses about Geneva were plundered. The remaining part of the year was spent in Deputations from the Allies of the Duke of Savoy and the Bishop, in order to the disannulling of this confraternity; on which these two last men∣tioned insisted as prejudicial to their Liberties. The Duke pro∣duced his Reasons in the Assembly at Payerne, which were an∣swered the best they could by them of Geneva.July 13. His Highness's Right was also examined: and this meeting was continued to the first of October. There were sent from Geneva, Besançon Hugues▪ and Nicolin du Crest; the Earl of Gruyers being chosen chief Arbitrator, who determined that this Confraternity should be dis∣annulled. The Deputies of Geneva made their Addresses to the Ber∣noises and Fribourgers, who told them they would break off with the Duke, and continue the Alliance with them. Which they did, ha∣ving cut the Seal of the Treaty of the Alliance made with Duke Philbert.Octob. 3. About this time there was held a General Council, wherein the Syndicks complain'd they could not attend so much to the Go∣vernment of the City: and seeing the Bishop laid aside all busi∣ness, it were better to depute Judges for this matter. Which proposal being approved, Claudius Richardet was chosen Steward, and had Four Assistants allotted him,Nov. 14. who have been since called Auditors.Nicolin du Crest, Girardin of La Rive, Claudius Sa∣voy, John Balurd. This having been heretofore the Vidame's Office, the Bishop was sent to for his approbation of this choice, who was at that time in the Franche-Comté. He privately told the Depu∣ties, He was very well satisfied, but he would have his consent con∣cealed
from the Duke, because he did not like to be troubled with him: for he had promised never to come into Geneva but in the Dukes company. There were sent other Deputies to him, who were not suffered to speak with him. In the year following,1530. the Plague raging in Geneva, there was one Michael Caddoz, who pretending to be struck with it, de∣sired to be put into the Hospital.Caddoz spreads a Plague in Geneva. Which being granted, and his forty days expired, he began to acquaint himself with the Keeper of the Hospital, with the Priest, and several poor People belonging to it, who commonly for a small gain were wont to perfume and clean the Sores of the infected. Caddoz finding them disposed to hearken to his pernicious designs; he thereupon proposes to them an infallible means to get mony in bringing the Plague where it had not yet been, especially in great Houses, whose Estates might fall to them by Inheritance; or otherwise they might pilfer with∣out controul. They needed not much entreaty, all the difficulty lay in the manner how they should effect this. They concluded then to make a pestilential powder of Linen-rags, with which they had wiped the Sores of the sick, and to disperse them in several places. Caddoz passing then one day over the Bridge of Rhosne, let fall a Linen-Cloth, thinking no body had seen him; but a certain Per∣son, perceiving he had dropt something, cried out, This Rascal Cad∣doz hath let fall a Cloth, in which I believe there's not any thing of value; which said, he would have taken it up. Another more cautious, bid him have a care what he handled. They therefore with a Stick tumbled open this packet, from whence proceeded such a stink as infected the whole Bridge, no Body know∣ing whence it came. There was a Woman sent for, lately reco∣vered of the Plague, who seeing it, said, It was the matter of a Plague-sore. The Syndicks informed of the business, caused Caddoz to be apprehended and carried to the Bishoprick, where he was examined. It being asked him, what was in that Cloth he had dropt? He replied, It was the Corruption of a venereal Cancer in his Leg. Being questioned what moved him to do it, He an∣swered, There were several who jeared him, because he had the Pox; whereupon he in revenge would give it them. The Magi∣strates not content with this answer, ordered him to be put upon the Rack. He then confessed it was designed for to breed the Plague. He was examined again wherefore he did it: and ha∣ving told them who were his Accomplices, and their designs, they were apprehended: and he and the Keeper of the Hospital had their Flesh torn off with red hot Pinchers, their Heads cut off, and their Bodies quartered; the Priest was degraded, and after∣wards executed. The Keeper of the Hospital's Son was much pi∣tied, being very young; but a word slipt from him, which cost him his life: for being demanded if he knew how to make this Drug as well as his Father: He replied, Yes; and so was behead∣ed: and immediately after the Plague ceased. In the Month following, the Genevoises having granted to Ron∣nivard a monthly allowance of four Crowns and a half, in consi∣deration of the loss of the Revenues of S. Victor, which the Savoy∣ards
had seized on, and which he had bequeathed, after his Death, to the City of Geneva. The Duke being informed thereof, en¦deavoured to do him an injury. He had, to draw him into his Dominions, given him a Letter of Safe-conduct, with which he went to Sessel, to visit his Mother who lay sick, being very ancient. A while after he went to the Bishop at Modon, where there was held an Assembly. He became acquainted with Francis Neel, who called himself Monsieur of Bellegarde:Bonnivard be∣trayed. he trusted a Gentleman whom he gave him for his Guide and Companion to Lausane; but he was betrayed by this perfidious Wretch. For he had no sooner come up to the top of Mount Jura, but he was set upon by one called Rosey of Thonon, who had espoused one of D. Phil∣berts Bastards, and Bishop Eyries the Duke of Beaufort's Bastard. These were two desperate Villains, who having spent their Estates needed a Recruit which they expected from Bonnivard. Their Accomplices at Modon had observed his Purse, and it being full of Parpilloles, which was a Coin used in those days, of small value, all of them which he had about him, not amounting to above twenty Crowns of Gold; they believed each piece was a Crown. It was known since, the Duke did not give order to take him, but Bellegarde and the others having written to him about it, he consented he should be detained. Bonnivard perceiving he was like to be set upon, spur'd on his Horse, but being not well mounted, he could not ride far, they soon overtaking him. Nevertheless he lost not his Courage, but clapt his hand to his Sword: but his guide planting himself before him, gave the others opportu∣nity to enclose him; they took him, and then carried him away to Chillon, where he remained Prisoner six years and an half: the first two years he was not kept close Prisoner, but the rest of the time he spent in a Dungeon which lay lower than the Lake, in which the Duke, when he was at Chillon, caused him to be put. During all which time he was not examined, nor put upon the Rack. At last when the Bernoises had taken the Country of Vaud, they drew him out thence. It was observed that he had hollowed and worn the Rock by much walking in the Dungeon. The Bishop favoured the Insultings of the Gentlemen of the Spoon:August for his Letters dated from Arbois were intercepted,1530. in which he gave Commission to chastise his rebellious Subjects of Geneva, who intrenched upon his Authority.The Frater∣nity of the Spoon favou∣red by the Bishop. One of the hottest of these Gentlemen was called Monsieur of Alussans, who killed one day a Merchant of Geneva's Servant in the Country of Vaud. The De∣putations from the Allies to the Duke availed nothing, because he could not hinder this disorder,Septemb. and was moreover glad to see the Genevoises damnified. Notice was given that these Gentlemen having gathered Soldiers from all Parts, were resolved to make themselves Masters of the Town, three days after the Feast of S. Michael, and to put all to the Sword. An account of which was sent to Berne and Fribourg, the City in the mean time standing upon their guard, and continued to strengthen themselves. There was a Skirmish passed betwixt them and the Citizens in the Suburb of S. Victor,Octob. 2. near la Corraterie, where the Enemy had
the boldness to present himself. In the night they came to the very Walls, but were not so resolute as to scale them. The next Morning they plundered the Suburb of S. Leger. Some Prisoners taken by the City,Bernoise sends Forces to the assistance of Geneva. discovered their design. In the mean time the Allies understanding in what extremity Geneva lay, by messages continually sent them, there set out from Berne seven thousand Men and twelve pieces of Ordnance, under the conduct of the Go∣vernour of Erlach; from Fribourg two thousand with four pieces of Cannon: and some time after five hundred from Soleurre with two pieces of Cannon. Two or three thousand Voluntiers joyned to this Army; which being arrived at Morges, stayed there four days, being given to understand that the Enemy was returned back. At the same time arrived Deputies from the ten Cantons and du Valey, to propose some Articles in order to an Agreement between the Duke of Savoy and Geneva. De Vauru, Ambassador from his Highness, approached the Bridge of Arve, to parly with the Deputies of Fribourg and Berne. He desired them to send to their Masters to call home the Army, telling them the Duke knew nothing of this last enterprize against Geneva, nor he neither: although it was well known he was one of the Captains. The Commanders of the Army of the Confederates sent to Geneva, bidding them appoint a place of Treaty, but they desired they might be excused, desiring to speak with them first, to consult together what was needful to be done. The Army then began to disincamp from Morges,The Castle of Rolle burnt. having fired, as they passed, the Castle of Rolle, and most of the other Castles which belonged to the Gentlemen of the Spoon, whose Garrisons were retreated to Thonon or into Bur∣gundy; all the Goods in them were burnt, and the Country of Vaud almost ruined. A Party of Fribourgers, with the Genevoises, pillaged the Villages about the City, and could not be withheld, alledging for their excuse, That they would not dye with Hunger. Six score Musketeers belonging to Geneva, came to seek Forage at Megrim, where the alarm Bell sounding, they perceived they were discovered by a Body of eight or nine hundred Foot, and fifty Horse, who had divided themselves into three Companies, one of which lay in ambush in the Wood, and the two others lay along the side of the neighbouring Mountains; they came to the Wood, and set upon them there so vigorously, that they left sixty dead on the place, the rest were either taken or fled. Which affrighted the two other Companies so, that they retreated as fast as they could, the Genevoises having lost in this Encounter but one young Man, who was killed, having parted from his Company to fly away. Two days after came the Army of the two Cities,Octob. 8. and were quartered both of them in Geneva; where it was no sooner arrived, but there was a Discourse of a Treaty of Peace with the Duke. S. Julian was pitcht upon for the place,Octob. 10. where the Deputies were to have safe Passage.A Peace con∣cluded. A Peace was hastily concluded, leaving the Differences about the Vidomnat or Stewardship, to be deter∣mined in the next Assembly, which was to be held in Switzerland, as also the Charges of the War. It was agreed, that Prisoners should be released on both sides, and that no acts of Hostility
should pass from either Party, under Penalty on the Dukes part of the Forfeiture of the Country of Vaud; and on the Genevoises, of the revocation of the Alliance. Which done, the Army de∣parted home, having remained ten days in the City, which had been eaten up within by Friends, and plundred without by Enemies. The Gentlemen of the Spoon threatened it continually, because their Castles were burnt. Neither did the Duke of Savoy cease from raising Soldiers. The Confederates sent notice to the City, that there were 10000 Lan∣cers at Montbeilliard, whom the Earl of Genevoise had raised to de∣stroy Geneva. Upon which they desired them to send a Company of two hundred Men to strengthen the City Guards. At the same time there was an Assembly held at Payerne,1530. where both the Genevoises and his Highness had their Deputies.Dec. 3. The Duke required that the Alliance with Geneva should be cancelled,Assembly at Payerne. as it was determined by the Earl of Gruyeres; and that the Vidomnat or Stewardship, and other Rights which he had in the City, should be restored; that the Exiles should have their Honours and Estates returned them, and that the two Cities should pay him two hundred thousand Crowns for the Charges of the War. The Deputies of the Cantons would have put the matter to Arbitration, chusing the Emperor Judge in the case: but the Genevoises refused to stand to his decision, chusing rather that their Cause should be legally debated before the Cantons, who promised to determine it without partiality. On the 21th of December they thus decided it touching the Stewardship,Dec. 21. that it should be restored to his Highness: that the business of the Exiles should remain as it was: that the Alliance with Geneva should hold firm, and that Bonnivard should be re∣leased: that the Duke of Savoy should pay to the three Cities con∣cerned in the Charge of the War one and twenty thousand Crowns at three Payments; which Summ he might require of the Bishop and his disobedient Gentlemen, who could never raise so many Soldiers without his knowledge; and in short, that the Treaty of S. Julian should be observed. The Duke consented only to those Articles which favoured him, but he would not hearken to those Proposals which concerned the Payment of the Money, nor the releasement of Bonnivard, whom he looked upon as a Person able to do him mischief. He chose a Steward, and sent him to be established at Geneva. The Council demanded the seven thousand Crowns which remained due, and why Bonnivard was not released: to all which they had no answer. Upon this there arose new Troubles, and there were continual Deputations on both sides to remove this Difference. These Jars made the Syndicks think of fortifying the City,Geneva forti∣fied. and to encompass S. Gervais with Walls, and farther to joyn the Bo∣rough of Four to the City, and to pull down the other Suburbs, which were only a hinderance to its defence. Wherefore it will not be needless to shew the Condition it was then in. There were at that present, besides the Boroughs of S. Gervais and de Four, which are now incorporated into the City, these four other follow∣ing
Suburbs, viz. the Borough of Rive, which reached from the Gate, bearing the same name, to Eaux Vives. That of S. Victor, as far as S. Legier, which reached beyond the large Palace, even to the Bridge of Arve; and the other which extended from La Corraterie as far as the Post-house. These four Boroughs con∣tained near as many Houses as the City, and were almost all of them pulled down, to bring it into a round Form, and to make it compact, and instead of six Gates which it had, there were only left two. The Bulwarks were made of the Materials of the Suburbs: The City, with its out parts, contained seven Parishes; the first was that wherein stood the Cathedral of S. Peter, under the Title of the Holy Cross;Description of the City. the second, a little distant from S. Peter's, was called our new Ladies Parish, which serves at present for an Auditory, wherein Divinity Lectures are read: the third was S. Magdalens; the fourth S. Germans; the fifth S. Gervais's; the sixth S. Legier's; and the seventh S. Victor's, where stood the Church of the same Name. These two last Parishes were demolished. There were three Monasteries in the City, and two in the Suburbs: those in the City were the Convent of the Grey Friers at de Rive; and the Nunnery of S. Clare, where now standeth an Hospital; the white Friers were seated in the Street of La Corraterie, in a Convent called the Palace, by reason of its largeness; wherein the Dukes of Savoy have been often entertained, and where stood the Clock on the Bridge of Rhosne, which was consumed when the Bridge was burnt in the year 1670. Without the City there was the Monastery of S. Victor, of the Order of Clugny, with a Prior and nine Monks, who lived on its Revenue. It is thought that formerly this was a Temple dedicated to Mars, Jupiter and Mercury, which was since consecrated to S. Victor, S. Vincent, and S. Ours, although the first was its right name. Though there was a Convent of Augustin Monks near the Bridge of Arve, called, our Lady of Grace; because the Bastard René had caused a fair Picture of our Lady to be drawn, which he ordered to be set up in the Chappel he had built: and from the gracefulness of this Picture, hath the name been derived, as it is commonly received: but it is more likely this name hath proceeded from the Graces which she hath bestowed: for it was declared that she wrought great Miracles, and particularly raised up Children to Life, which were brought from all Parts to be baptized in that Chappel; there was likewise another Abby of rich Monks at S. John's in the Groves, over against the Tower; there were se∣veral other Chappels, as beyond de Rive, one called the Temple, otherwise S. John of Jerusalem's Chappel, where still-born Children were buried; another Called S. Margaret's, another S. Laurence's, and another of our Ladies of the Bridge, where at present stands the coining House. There were besides seven Hospitals, which have since been reduced to two, the common Hospital, and the Hospital for the infected near the large Palace. These Differences with the Duke still continued; he had pro∣hibited all manner of Provision to be brought into the City.1532. There was a report that he had sent for ten thousand Italians and three hundred Lancers to assist him against Geneva.
These Differences were followed by others,June 9. which arose amongst the Citizens about Religion.Protestant Re∣ligion begun to be main∣tained by some young men in Gene∣va. Some young Men of Geneva had set up, at every corner of the Streets, certain Articles whereby it was apparently seen, they were inclining to the Protestant Religion; upon which one Verly a Chanon of Fribourg, having taken a young Man named John Goulas, who had pasted up a Bill on the Pillar before S. Peter's Church; he gave him a box on the Ear, and drew out his Sword: for at that time the Chanons wore Swords in Geneva. Goulas put himself in a posture of defence, and wounded the Chanon in the arm. There were two persons of the Borough of Four, who taking the Chanons part were likewise wounded; the Syndicks observing these divisions among the people, made a Decla∣ration enjoyning all persons to live peaceably, and to set up no more of those kind of Writings, nor broach any novelty without their permission. During these transactions,1532. two Ministers came to Geneva, viz. William Farel of Gap,Septem. and Anthony Saunier, who came from preach∣ing in Piedmont.Farel comes to Geneva. They had Letters of recommendation from Berne, and being settled at Geneva, they held several discourses in their houses to make the people understand the Doctrine they taught. There were several who hearkned to them, and wished the City would follow the example of Berne: but this being noised abroad, the Chanons and Priests resolved to remedy this for the future. They cited then Farel and Saunier before the Episcopal Council, where were present the two Syndicks, who had promised to shelter them from all danger, if they would maintain their Doctrine before the Priests. After several disputes and discourses on both sides,1532. it was decreed by the Episcopal Council,Saunier and Farel banish∣ed the City. that they should leave the Town upon pain of Imprisonment. They departed then, being accompanied by some Citizens who favoured them, and went and Preached at Orbe and at Granson. A while after came to Geneva a young man of Dauphiny, named Anthony Froment,Fromènt comes to Geneva. who had been a disciple of Farel, who had earnest∣ly perswaded him to make this tryal.1532. This Froment had caused Bills to be set up in the City,Novemb. wherein he promised to teach people to Write and Read in a Months time; and under this pretence he in∣structed both young and old in the Protestant Religion: the forward∣est of them leading along with them several persons of their acquain∣tance both men and women, whose number every day encreased notwithstanding the peoples muttering; saying, that Froment en∣chanted the women after him. There was a Grey-Frier called Chri∣stopher Bouquet, who was a Protestant in his heart, for he was so far from opposing that Doctrine then springing up, that commonly one part of his Auditors after Sermon, went into a Hall to hear Fro∣ment. One New-years-day Bouquet having ended his Sermon,1533. so great a multitude thronged into the Hall to hear Froment,Froment Prea∣ches at Mo∣lard. that all the stairs and corners of the house were full of people: so that they cri∣ed, To Molard, to Molard, where those who were next him carried him, so great was the throng, the people calling out to him, Preach
to us the word of God. Froment then having begun again his discourse, the City Serjeant came thereupon and commanded him to forbear. He answered, it was better to obey God than man, and so held on his discourse: the Council being Assembled upon this occasion, gave Order that he should be speedily apprehended; and sent men well armed to lay hold on him, but he escaped into a Citizens house where he lay concealed. There was an Order from the Magistrates forbidding such kind of Preaching upon penalty of undergoing the Strapado; a while after Froment not being able to stay any longer in safety at Geneva, left the Town in the night, and returned from whence he came. The Fribourgers informed of this,Feb. 23. sent Deputies to Geneva; de∣claring, that if they received this new Doctrine,Protestant Do∣ctrine oppo∣sed by the Fribourgers. they would break off their Alliance: the Council answered, they had done their endea∣vour to hinder it, and had moreover requested the Grand Vicar vi∣gorously to prosecute this Ecclesiastical affair; and so they returned satisfied: yet the Protestants ceased not to Assemble themselves in several houses, where strangers and the most knowing amongst themselves, interpreted the holy Scripture. They received their first Communion in a Garden out of Town, where one called Mr. John Guerin a Capmaker distributed it; the Common people esteemed him learned in Divinity, although he was but a Mechanick; some days after, search being made after him, he fled, and was afterwards Minister of New Castle. It hapned likewise that a Frier Preaching in the Convent of the Palace, and railing against the Lutherans, a person named Peter Ro∣bert Olivetan, Tutor to the Children of John Chantemps, arose up and disputed against him; which caused a great disturbance: so that if he had not been defended by some of his own party there present, he would certainly have come by the worst of it. This was that Olivetan, who first Translated the Bible into French, which Translati∣on hath been received by the Protestants. He caused it to be Print∣ed at New Castle in the Year 1538. and it is thought he was poyson∣ed at Ferrara. Olivetan having been banished,1544. another stranger who had dwelt near a year at Geneva, openly maintained that they who went to Mass were Idolaters; which caused the Magistrates to banish him from the City upon pain of death. The Bernoises who had already embraced the new Doctrine,March 24. being informed of all these transactions,Brnoisis threatned the Genevoises if they opposed the Protestant Religion. sent a Herald to Geneva, with Let∣ters to this effect, That they did ill to persecute those who Preached to them the Gospel, as they had done in the person of Farel; that if they would not suffer them, they who were their Allies would resent it. Whilst the Council had this matter in deliberation, came above two hundred persons, who desired Justice to be done on those who had obliged the Bernoises to write this, who they said were Lutherans; the Council had much ado to appease them, promising to take care in the business; for they continually cried out, that if they would not punish those persons who would hinder them from living after the manner of their fore fathers, and as they had promised the Fribourgers, they would take a course with them themselves.
Four days after,Mar. 28. whilst the Syndicks were yet in consultation, no∣tice was given them of a great Assembly of people at S. Peters, as al∣so of a considerable company in the street of Allemands at Baudichon's of New-house, where several had withdrawn themselves, who had procured these Letters from Berne. Two of the Syndicks went immediately to S. Peter's, and the two other to Baudichon's, to ap∣pease these two parties and hinder any disorder. The Ecclesiasticks and other Catholicks who were at S. Peters, having understood that the Protestants at Baudichon's house were well armed, rang the great Bell, and took up Arms likewise. Peter Vandel whom they believed to be their enemy,Vandel woun∣ded. was wounded with a Dagger, and had been killed without the interposition of a Syndick. A general Alarm being gi∣ven, he Ecclesiasticks assembled in Molard with all them of their party, and were encouraged by several persons of the Council who were there present. Claudius Ballesserd passing from S. Gervais to go to Molard, was hurt before the house of Baudichon, and had been killed without the Syndicks assistance, who appeased the multitude the best they could. The City was near falling into a sad confusion; the air was filled with the clamours of the people animated by the Priests, and the lamentations of the aged, who expected to see their children kill one another, or they themselves to perish by the hands of those to whom they had given life. The City gates were shut, and the great Guns made ready to besiege Baudichon's house, wherein there were near two hundred resolute men: The City being in this condition, no body dared so much as to speak of Peace, left he should be suspected to be a Lutheran. By good chance there were in the City some Merchants who were Fribourgers, persons of known honesty and reputation; who interposing, and calling both parties fellow Citizens, exhorted them to agreement. The Protestants con∣sented, but the Catholicks would have executed their enterprize; but understanding the others were considerable for their number and pre∣paredness, they gave over and consented to an agreement. Hosta∣ges were given on both sides, the Protestants delivered Michael Sept, John Lullin and Stephen Redhat, into the hands of the Syndick Mal∣buisson: the Catholicks gave the Chanon Goyet, John Malbuisson, and John Pesmes, who were kept in the house of the Syndick John Phi∣lippe. The Syndicks caused to be published on the Morrow these follow∣ing Articles of Peace.Articles of agreement between the Protestan's and Romanists in the City. That all enmity on either part should be laid aside, and that they should live in peace without offending one another, either in word or deed. That no person should offer to speak against the Sacraments of the Church, and that all persons might use their own Liberty. That no Flesh should be eaten on Wednesdays and Saturdays. That none should Preach without Licence from the Syndicks and Supeiors, and that nothing should be maintained in Sermons which could not be proved out of the Holy Scriptures. At which every one lifted up his hand, the Seculars before the Syndicks, and the Clergy before the Vicar, promising to observe these Articles.
In the Month following the Bernoises sent an Herald to Geneva,April 7. de∣siring the Magistrates not to permit Paste and Baudichon to be molest∣ed, who called themselves Gospellers. After Easter they sent Depu∣ties along with Farel to Geneva together with another Minister, to dispute against him who had preached the Lent Sermon. On Sunday the fourth of May towards the Evening,May 4. notwithstand∣ing the Articles of Peace which were to be observed sworn, there was a disturbance raised at Molard between certain particular persons of both parties who drew their swords, and yet a while after drank together and were friends. Whilst they had their swords drawn, Marin Versonnex ran to the Priests at S. Peters for help, who caused the Bell to be rung. The Chanon Verley came one of the first, saying, he would lose his life for the Christian Faith: he was Armed from head to foot, holding his naked sword in both his hands, crying out, Follow me good Christians, dear God, where are these Lutherans? This alarm raised indifferently both parties to the number of one thousand five hundred, some swords were drawn; and Verly who saw the place too hot for him,Verly slain. when he would have gotten away, was killed; it was not known who did it, because it was dark. The Syndick John Coquet having run in to part them, was wounded in the head. At length both parties withdrew at the sollicitation of the Syndicks; Ver∣sonnex and Marguillier were imprisoned for alarming the City. The next morning Verly was honourably buried;May 5. and because he belonged to Fribourg, Letters were sent to the Magistrates of that Canton, informing them how that they were making search after them who had killed him, to do justice on them. Two of his kins∣men, together with an Herald came with Letters from Fribourg to demand his body, which was granted them. Some days after they came again requiring justice to be done, not only on those who had killéd him, but who were likewise present, and who did not hinder the Murther; and amongst others on the Syndick Coquet. He an∣swered that he was present with his Syndicks-staff according to the duty of his Office, and that he had endeavoured to the utmost of his power to suppress this tumult. After this Deputies from Berne presented themselves before the Council,May 27. to offer their mediation, and proposed that every person might be at liberty either to go hear Mass or Sermons.Liberty of Conscience granted. A month af∣ter an Oath was taken to observe this proposal for the future, and the agreement made on the twenty eighth of March, that they might not appear disunited at the Bishops coming, who was shortly expe∣cted at Geneva, who in effect arrived on the first of June, the Syndicks having gone a league out of Town to meet him, he immediately cau∣sed several Priests to be released, who were imprisoned for some mis∣demeanors. The General Council being held, after a Mass of the Holy Ghost was celebrated, and a general Procession, at which the Bishop assisted with the Deputies from Fribourg, a President of the Franche Comté spake in the Bishops behalf, exhorting the people to be faithful to him,Verlys Relati∣ons bring with them 120 Soldiers to revenge his death. entreating them to live in unity, and not to enter∣tain the new doctrine. At the same time Verly's kindred had brought with them six score Soldiers to revenge his death; and having passed over the Lake, they came and encamped themselves at Gail∣lard,
from whence they sent to demand justice Their suit was delayed upon the account of a difference betwixt the Bi∣shop and Syndicks about Jurisdiction in Cases of life and death, which the Syndicks would not yield to the Bishop. The Syndicks at the instance of the Attorny-General drew up an In∣dictment against nine Men and Woman, the greatest part of which were found not guilty: at night there was a Watch kept left the Bi∣shop should take away the Prisoners, and bring them to answer it at his Bar. But whilst these things were doing, he left the Town about the midst of July,July 15. to take part with the Duke of Savoy against the City, although he was so strictly bound to the contrary by the Oath which he had taken not only at his Election to the Bishoprick, but likewise in making himself free of the City. The Council earnest∣ly besought him to set the City in Order, but whether he feared some Tumult upon the account of the Prisoners, or that he had some other secret design, he coloured over his departure with a pretence of going into Franche Comté, where the Emperor held an Assembly of the Estates, and he promised that he would shortly return. Verly's relations returned home all but two who remained at Gaillard with about twenty Soldiers, who sued for justice to be done on them who were guilty of the Murther. They who returned met on mount Jura, Thomas Baudichon together with some Merchants of Stratsbourg. Peter Verly brother to the deceased set upon him cal∣ling him Traytor, and had it not been for his company, his life had been in danger, his horse having been already killed under him. The Syndicks declared one part of the Prisoners innocent, which caused the Attorney-General to make an Appeal; but he was imme∣diately told,August 6. we having no Superiour, do therefore admit no Appeal: but at the same time Peter Thoberet was found guilty of the Murther of Verly,Thoberet sen∣tenced to lose his head. having stabbed him in the back as he went up the Stairs of a House and was sentenced to lose his head. Towards the end of the Year,Decem. 2. Guy Furbity Dr. of the Sorbon, was sent for from Montmelian,Furbity oppo∣sed by Froment to Preach during the Sundays in Advent at S. Peters Church, who speaking against the doctrine of the Prote∣stants was contradicted by Froment, who was returned; and by ano∣ther named Alexander Camus: the last of these upon this, was banished the City, but Froment was secured, and yet these disorders ceased not. The Bernoises sent a Herald with Letters to the Syndicks,Decem. 27. requiring first, To be paid their dues according to the agreement made in the Assemblies held in Switzerland: and in the second place, They com∣plained that their servants who had Preached Gods Word to them, were driven away by them; whereas they ought rather to have ex∣pelled Furbity,Furbity com∣plained against by the Bernoises. and such as he who Preached erroneous and blasphe∣mous doctrine; and thus they expressed themselves. The people before ever the Letters were read, imagined there were Luther an Mi∣nisters come to Town, whereupon there arose immediately a great disturbance, the greatest part taking up Arms, and sticking small branches of Trees in their Caps for distinction. The Proctor Ge∣neral likewise caused the Clergy to Arm themselves. The Council having debated the matter, would have delivered Furbity, against whom the Bernoises had complained, into the grand Vicars Custody,
but he would not receive him. He left not off Preaching, and affirm∣ing continually, that all those who received the new doctrine were people who lived ill, and that they were worse than others. The Syndicks wrote to Berne, the Furbity was under an Arrest, and yet they knew not wherein he had offended them, but if they had heard him, they would not have suffered him, so greatly did they value their Lordships friendship. Some days after this came an Herald from Fribourg,Decem. 27 who deliver∣ed Letters to the Council to this effect,The Fribour∣gers threaten to break off with Geneva. That the States of Fribourg undèrstanding that Farel and others were at Geneva to Preach the new Law as they termed it, they therefore requested them not to suffer him, otherwise they would break off with them. The first day of the following Year,1534. the grand Vicar published through all Parishes,Jan. 1. that none should Preach either in publick or private without the Bishops or grand Vicars Licence, and that they who had any French or Dutch Bibles should burn them, upon pain of excommunication. Four days after arrived other Deputies from Berne and Fribourg.Jan. 4. These last said they understood there had been a great Tumult occasi∣oned by the Luther an Preachers, and that if they intended to suffer them, they would break off with them. They were answered, that they designed to live as heretofore, according to what they had for∣merly determined. The Deputies from Berne urged the payment of the charges of the former War, and demanded satisfaction for what Furbity had said against them. The Syndicks made answer they were sorry, if Furbity had done them any wrong, but that they had no power over any Ecclesiastical person. The Deputies were not content with this answer, threatning still to break off with them; and in effect they would have returned them the Letters of Association which they flung on the Table. The Council instantly besought them to take them again; and to satisfie them, Furbity was caused to answer for him∣self in the Town house, the Syndicks having first declared that they in∣tended not thereby to prejudice the Bishops authority, nor the Clergies priviledges. The Tryal was prosecuted upon condition both parties should submit to the Syndicks decision, in the mean time a Messenger returned, who had been sent to the Bishop into Franche Comté, who brought word that the Bishop would have Furbity sent back to the Spiritual Court. The Deputies from Berne returned,Jan. 18. and made the same demands as heretofore, telling them moreover that their Superiors meant that Furbity should be tried by the Syndicks, and not by any others. They required further, that a Minister should be permitted to Preach in the City to them who would hear him, and in case of refusal to re∣nounce their Alliance. In the mean time there continually hapned some quarrel between the Citizens of both parties. Amy Perrin of the Protestant party, al∣most mortally wounded a Catholick Preacher called Besancon,Quarrels about Rellgi∣on. and Nicholas Pennet Warder of the Bishoprick, of the Catholick party, killed with a Dagger, Nicholas Porral on the contrary side; which made both parties take up Arms; and had not the Deputies of Berne interposed, there had been more mischief: yet they would not lay
down their Arms till Justice was done on the Murtherer, who had gone and hid himself with Portery the Bishops Secretary in S. Peters Steeple,1534. that he might at midnight ring the great Bell; but the Syn∣dicks understanding where he was, went thither and took him at eleven of the Clock at night, and the next morning condemned Pen∣net to lose his head,Pennet senten∣ced to be be∣headed. which made all quiet again. There were found in Portery's Closet blank Bills signed with the Dukes Coat of Arms, as also an order for the constituting of a Governor over Geneva in Temporals as the Bishops Lieutenant, with power to punish the Lu∣therans. There were likewise found Letters from the Bishop, dated the twelfth of January,Feb. 10. 1534. which were read in the general Coun∣cil at the time of the Election of the Syndicks; upon which occasion the Bernoises earnestly exhorted the Council, not to suffer after this manner their priviledges to be invaded, seeing they alone were Judges in matters of Life and Death, putting them in mind of the last War which the Bishop had been the chief instrument of in pro∣moting it: that for their parts they would maintain the Alliance with all their power.Feb. 29. Whilst Portery's Indictment was privately drawing up, his Relations produced the Bishops pardon; but the Syndicks would take no notice of it, saying, he stood convicted of Manslaugh∣ter, Sedition and Conspiracy, together with the Bishop, against the liberties of the City; so that he was executed. They had a while before appointed a disputation to be held be∣twixt Furbity and the Ministers,Feb. 13. before the 200. which was afterwards Printed;Furbity en∣joyned to Recant. the Council after it was ended condemned Furbity to a publick Recantation to be made in the same place where he had inju∣red the Bernoises and their party; and according to this sentence he was led on the Sunday following to S. Peters Church, where was gi∣ven him, what he was to say, in Writing; but-when he was got up into the Pulpit, he began as he was accustomed with the sign of the Cross, and implored the assistance of the Holy Ghost, through the in∣tercession of the blessed Virgin. The Bernoises and Protestants of the City seeing this, hindred him from proceeding in his Sermon; say∣ing, he came there to make his Recantation: and immediately he was haled down from the Pulpit and kept close Prisoner. The Deputies from Berne were instant with the Council touching four Articles.Feb. 22. First, They demanded justice to be done on the Preacher, who they said had injured them.Articles of the Bernoises, and their answer. Secondly, They represented that the Lent Preacher in the Convent of Rive taught erroneous Doctrine, which they delivered in Writing. Thirdly, They required that one of their Ministers who had been expelled the Town, might be recal∣led. Fourthly, That a Church might be granted them for one of their Ministers to Preach in during their abode in the City. To which the Syndicks and Council thus replied. First, Concerning Furbity, that he should receive such punish∣ment as his faults deserved. Secondly, That the Preacher of Rive should be warned to Teach no other Doctrine but what is maintained in the Holy Scripture. Thirdly, That they could not Repeal the Sentence of the Ministers banishment. Fourthly, That they might chuse what place they liked best for their Chaplain to Preach in.
In this same day there arose a great disturbance in the Church of S. Francis de Rive, occasioned by a Protestant Minister's contradicting a Catholick Preacher on the first Sunday in Lent, and it seldom hap∣ned otherwise at all Sermons. On the first day of March,March 1. after this Preacher had ended his Ser∣mon, the Protestants animated by the presence of Baudichon,Farel Preaches publickly. Amy Perron, and several other Citizens who had heard him, caused Farel to get up into the Pulpit.Mar. 30. And this was the first Sermon the Prote∣stants heard in publick, at which some Counsellors made their com∣plaints to the Council, setting before them the danger that might ensue thereupon. Deputies from Fribourg likewise came to make their complaints to the general Council, upon the leave granted to the Lutherans to Preach, notwithstanding they had promised to live as heretofore; and that they had already given them notice, that if they suffered any innovation, they would break off their Alliance. They were answered, that they approved not of it, yet could they not withstand the desires of the Gentlemen of Berne, who had brought these Ministers along with them; and that they ought not for this to break off with them, but rather aid them against the Bishop, who would deprive them of their priviledges.Fribourgers break off with the Genevises. There were also Deputies sent from Geneva to Fribourg on purpose to appease them, but to no effect, for they broke off the Seals from the Articles of Agreement; saying, they would have nothing to do with Lutherans, nor with peo∣ple who would not obey their Bishop, and sent to Geneva for their Articles of Agreement. The Protestants had taken possession of the Church of Rive, in which they Baptized, Married, and Administred the Communion. The two parties about this time were equal in power;Protestants and Papists equal in number. great was the divi∣sion in families; here the wise against her husband, and there the fa∣ther against his son, who used one another perhaps like Turks or Jews. It was observed that on Whitsun-Eve, the heads of all the Images standing over the Church gates were cut off in the dark, no body knowing the Author. These heads were found in a Well; at which the Syndicks being troubled, caused them to be set together the best they could; the Protestant party every day gained ground. Lewis Bernard Priest of S. Peter's Church, laid down his Gown, and having taken to wise Amy Perrin's sister, was married by Peter Viret. The Bishop of Baulme coming to Chambery towards the Duke of Sa∣voy, notice thereof was sent to them of Berne, who writ to his High∣ness that they had been informed, the Bishop came purposely to Cham∣bery to resign his Bishoprick to Monsieur of Bresse his son,June 23. which would be a means of involving their Allies of Geneva in farther trou∣bles; wherefore they intreated him to let them live in peace, and to observe the Agreements made at S. Julien and Payerne. A Plot was discovered of some Citizens dealing with the Bishop about his coming again,July 29. and extirpation of the Protestants. The Syndicks having learnt the day before the enterprize was to begin,A Conspiracy to bring in the Bishop, &c. that the Bishop was at Salleneure, and that the Nobility of Savoy had rai∣sed great numbers of Soldiers, who were to surprize the Town very early the next morning; they thereupon at nine of the Clock at night, caused the people to arm themselves, and to keep strict watch. The Conspirators were to give notice to them without by a fire to
be made in some place from whence it might be best seen. The City Smith was designed to open the Gates, and several Pieces of Ordnance, which commanded the Lake, were left on purpose without Ammunition The Bishop was within two Leagues of the City, near the Village of Leluyset, and every thing seemed to fa∣vour them. But they within, from whom most was expected, and who were to meet together at Molard under a Red Colours, were constrained to keep within doors for fear of the Guards, which were doubled. The Enemies had sent two persons, to see if the Gates of Rive and S. Anthonie were open: But when they saw they were fast shut, and that there was a Torch in S. Peter's Steeple, which shewed that they within expected their coming, they cried out one to another,1434. We are betrayed, we shall never enter into Geneva, seeing we have failed this bout. So that this contri∣vance was rendred ineffectual by the care of the Syndicks. The Enemies finding themselves, next Morning, near Gergonant, retired, Drum beating and their Colours flying, contenting themselves with only plundering some Country houses, and leading away Prisoner Peter Vandel; who was returned by way of exchange for Monsieur of Coudreé,Vandelled a∣way Prisoner. who was detained at Geneva upon his account. The Bi∣shop withdrew into Burgundy whence he came, and some time after, turned his Officers at Geneva out of their places, chusing new ones in their stead, and removed his Court to Gex. He designed to have had the Seal of the Bishoprick from Geneva, but the City would not send it him. The Deputies of Geneva represented their grievances to the Ge∣neral Assembly held at Baden; and the Bernoises sent to the Duke to have them redressed. But he gave them no satisfaction: he like∣wise complaining against the Genevoises, who had battered his Arms in the Castle of the Isle, and pulled down his Altar at S. Fran∣cis of Rive, and had excluded him from the Vidomnat or Steward∣ship, which he would have restored him. He required moreover that they would receive their Bishop again. The Genevoises made an∣swer, they would stand to the Agreement made at S. Julien and Payerne. And as to what concerned the Bishop, they durst not trust him, and therefore would not permit his entrance. There was a meeting held at Thonon, and another at Lucern, where the Deputies of Berne and Geneva could effect nothing. The City received Letters from the French-King, informing them that out of respect to them and the Bernoises,Octob. 5. he had set at liberty two Genevoises,Furbity's en∣largement requested by the French-King. who had been apprehended at Lyons for their Re∣ligion, viz. Baudichon, and Cologny: entreating them to do the like by Furbity; which they would not consent to before they had leave from the Bernoises, through whose means he had been all this while detained. Their consent was obtained, yet he was not set at liberty, till the end of the year by way of exchange for Mr. Sau∣nier a Minister,Feb. 12. whom the Duke kept Prisoner in Piedmont. In the Month of February in the Year following, a Grey Frier of S. Francis's Order, came and presented himself to the Syndicks, that he might be permitted to preach;A Frier preaches in Lent at Gene∣va. who having requested the Cha∣nons of S. Peter to lend him their Pulpit, they would not grant
it. But the Curate of S. Germans offering him the use of his Church, he began to preach on the first Sunday in Lent, and held on till Easter. It was known before-hand that he was a Protestant, as well as the Curate of S. Germans, Thomas Vandel, who had been one of the Chanons of S. Peter. About this time the Protestant party was the strongest, there being three Syndicks of it. They kept constantly with them a Captain and a Herald of Berne,1535. under pretence of the differences between the Duke and them, but in ef∣fect to authorise their party, and prevent their being molested. They likewise encreased by the additional numbers of Protestants in France, who being persecuted in their own Country, withdrew to Geneva.April 4. There was amongst others a Woman of the Borough in Bresse, who came there under pretence of Religion, but was ex∣ecuted for attempting to take away the lives of three Ministers, by putting poyson in their Mess of Broth: but there was none but Vi∣ret who eat of it,Viret almost poysoned. and thought he sould have died with it. She accused the Chanon of Orsiers for confederacy with her, who was by the Syndicks order imprisoned. On Ascension Eve the Genevoises,May 5. at Eleven of the Clock at Night,Penay Castle assaulted by the Genevoises. went to surprize the Castle of Penay with 500 Men, and 7 pieces of Cannon. They within, although they were but few in number, yet defended themselves most couragiously: they lost but one Man, but the Genevoises two or three, besides several that were wounded. The Night being spent to no purpose, and the Country round about being alarmed by break of day, they pre∣pared to relieve the besieged, which made the Assailants withdraw. This caused them of Penay to begin again to molest Geneva; and that the more eagerly, because the chiefest of them were for their obstinacy condemned to pay a Fine to the City of 100000 Crowns. These disorders obliged them to finish the walling in of S. Gervais, and to pull down the other Suburbs. Some days after, the Bishops Chancellor, and the Judge in Secu∣lar Matters, who had removed themselves to Gex, cited the Gray Friers of Rive to make their appearance, because on the first of May Father James Bernard, Guardian of the Convent, who was Lewis Bernard's Brother, who had forsaken the Convent the year before,Bernard makes publick pro∣fession of the Truth. had caused Bills to be pasted up in the principal places of the City, wherein he openly declared his acknowledgment of the truth, and that he determined to maintain publick Theses, touch∣ing the Mass, the Invocation of Saints, and such like points. These Disputations were to begin on the 30th of May in the Convent of Rive.May 30. The Bishop strictly forbad the Catholicks of his Diocess, and the Duke his Subjects to appear there. On the contrary, the Syndicks encouraged both Parties to meet there, promising both should have a fair Hearing. These disputations lasted till S. John's day. There were but two Persons who vigorously maintained the Catholick Doctrine, viz. Caroli Dr. of the Sorbon, and a Domini∣can Frier of the palace, called Chapuisy. The Syndicks had ordered Four Secretaries to write what should pass on either side, to the end that the whole debate being considered by the Council, they might thereupon advise what was farther to be done. After this
the same James Barnard embraced the Protestant Religion. And within a while Married a Printers Daughter, on whom he settled a Joynture. On the Feast of S. Magdalen,July 22. Farel, accompanied with a great number of hearers,Farel preaches at S. Magdalens. having caused the Bell to ring according to cu∣stom, came and preached in S. Magdalen's Parish-Church, the Priests not having time to make an end of their Mass, and the People who were there running away with them.Aug. 5. Six days after he preached at S. Gervais, where the Syndicks had set a Guard of 50 Men to pre∣vent any disturbance. On the 5th of August he preached at S. Do∣minick's of the Palace, and on the 8th day of the same Month at S. Peters, notice being first given by the sound of the great Bell. In the same day the Reliques and Images of the said Church were defaced and spoiled by the common People. The Statue of Charle∣main, which stood at the entrance of the Church, was like∣wise overthrown, whereat understanding Men were much dis∣pleased. The next Morning the three Captains, Nicholas Baudichon, Peter Vandel,Aug. 6. and Amy Perrin, marched with their Companies, beating their Drums as they went to S. Gervais, and to S. Dominick; where they did yet worse, for they spoiled a stately Picture which had cost 600 Ducats. And from thence they went to the Bridge of Arve, to our Lady of Grace's Church, where the Syndicks hastned with their Staves, to hinder them from demolishing the Chappel of René of Savoy. On the next day, Farel came and preached to the Council of 200,Aug. 10. and mightily inveighed against the Priests and their Mass. It was thereupon ordered that the Disputations held at Rivè should be looked into.Farel preaches be∣fore the Council. Two days after the Syndicks sent for the Augustin Monks, Dominicans and Grey-Friers, and caused the chief Heads of the afore-mentioned Disputations to be read before them, asking them whether they had any thing to object against them? They answered, It belonged not to them to meddle with Articles of Faith, which had been received and believed by their fore∣Fathers. At length the Syndicks made an order,Aug. 27. That all the Citizens and Inhabitants should embrace the Protestant Doctrine,Mass aboli∣shed in Gene∣va. utterly abo∣lishing the Roman-Catholick Religion. The Nuns of S. Clare kept to their old Priciples. There was only one Blasine, the Daughter of Dominick Varembel, who forsook the Monastery, and presented her request to the Lieutenant, to the end the Sisters might give her a Dowry. Which they refused, saying, She had brought nothing to the Convent: yet to avoid all Suits of Law, they were content to put the matter to a reference. There were ordered her 200 Crowns to be paid out of the Housholdstuff of the Convent. They a while after requested the Syndicks to have Mass permitted them as heretofore, or otherwise leave to depart the City. The Syndicks answer was, That they might either stay or go. So that they de∣termined to depart to Vitry, and from thence to Anecy, where the Duke caused a Convent to be fitted up for them.
They left Geneva,Aug. 30. being accompanied by the Syndicks and the Lieutenant as far as the Bridge of Arve,The Nuns leave Geneva. according to their re∣quest, lest they should have any rudeness offered them. There were but Nine, and there were some of them who for 30 years together had not stirred out of the Convent. They reached no farther than S. Julien all that day, which is but a League distant from Geneva. And they were moreover so astonished to find them∣selves in the open Fields, that in seeing either Cows or Sheep they took them for Lyons and Bears, according to Sister Jussie's relati∣on, who hath described this Sally, in a little Book called, The be∣ginning of the Heresie of Geneva. This Book is written with all the simplicity and confusion, which could be expected from a poor Nun; for she was, as well as her Companions, in great fear before she got away, thinking every minute they should have some vio∣lence offered them. Yet, as may be seen in this relation, they were more afraid than hurt. The greatest mischief they received, was an Exhortation to leave their Veils and Marry. Farel preach∣ed in their Convent, and took his Text from these words of the blessed Virgin, Exsurgens Maria abiit in montana: And Mary arose and went into the hill country. Shewing them, That she was never a Recluse, although a perfect pattern of Holiness. But this shook not their constancy. Baudichon a while after was chosen Captain General,Beudichon made Captain General. in the place of John Philippe, and made a general Muster of them who had vo∣luntarily Listed themselves under him, who amounted to the num∣ber of 400. This Militia being not strong enough to take the Field against the Enemy, Claudius Savoy, who was sent to Berne from Ge∣neva, not obtaining help, went to Newcastle to raise Men for Geneva, who in their march thither had some skirmish near Nions with them of the Country of Gex: but the Deputies of Berne caused them to be disbanded, promising to reconcile the differences be∣tween the Genevoises, and the Duke and them of Penay. This did not at all please the Genevoises, because the Savoyards had detained their Three Deputies, Darlod, Lambert, and Tocquet, whom they had carried away Prisoners to the Castle of Chillon. There came another supply from Lyons of about 600 Men,Nov. 16. who found the passages blocked up by the Savoyards as far as Salleneuve. This Levy of Soldiers were for the most part People sprung Origi∣nally from Geneva, who were most of them Printers and other Ar∣tists,The French come to the assistance of Geneva. whose Commanders were a Printer named Roboan, and a French Captain called Francis of Montbel, Sieur of Veray. The lat∣ter of these ventured to give notice to them of Geneva of the Aid they had brought them. He was seen first at the Gate of Corne∣vin, where he was in great danger of being killed, having been taken by them of the City for a Spy. He shewed them he had left 400 Horse and 200 Foot at S. Claude and on the Mountain, desiring them of the City to sally out, for the facilitating of their entrance. The Genevoises then took the Field, with 400 Men and four pieces of Ordnance.Decem. 14. They advanced as far as the Village of Or∣nex, where the night having overtaken them, they returned, till they should have farther notice. The first account they received
was, That a part of them venturing to come to Geneva, and being ignorant of the way, had fallen into the Enemies hands, who lay about Gex. The rest gained, as well as they could, the Town. The Savoyards and M. de Rolle having entred the Castle of Pency as Friends, they carried away those within Prisoners to Gex, accu∣sing them of Treason. They likewise abused the Women and Children of strangers, who were sent out of the City as unprofita∣ble mouths; they stripped them to their Shifts, and caused them to return back again. There were several little conflicts on both sides, while the Cantons endeavoured to reconcile these differences. The Protestants continued to pull down the Images, and spoil the Reliques of Churches. Some days after the Officers of the City,Farel causes a Fast to be proclaimed. at the instigation of Farel, published by sound of Trumpet, a Fast, enjoyning all per∣sons the next Morning to Assemble themselves in S. Peter's Church,Dec. 18. to pray to Almighty God to send them Peace. Farel preached, and the Congregation was greater than ordinary. About the end of this Year, with which we will finish this our first Part,Mony Coyned in Geneva with the City Stamp. the City being surrounded with Enemies, wanting Pro∣vision, and destitute of Mony; this put the Magistrates upon Coyning some with the City Stamp, the Savoy Coyn having been most currant before amongst them. And for better assu∣rance in this point of Priviledge, there was search made for all old pieces of the City Coyn. At length there were found some pieces, on one side of which there was S. PETRƲS, written round S. Peter's Head; and on the other side a Cross, with this Motto, GENEVA CIVITAS, the City of Geneva; after the same manner as we have represented it in the next side. And be∣cause the ancient device of the City in its Arms was Post tenebras spero lucem, I expect light after darkness; there was Coyned on one side of the new Mony Post tenebras lux, or lucem, After darkness, light. On the other side was the Arms of Geneva, the Key and Eagle, with this device, DEƲS NOSTER PƲGNAT PRO NOBIS, 1535. Our God fights for us. There were likewise some Coyned the Year following, which instead of this Superscription, had this about the Name of Jesus, MIHI SESE FLECTET OMNE GENƲ Every knee shall bow before me. Here you may see both sorts to satisfie your curiosity. The End of the Second Book.
map of area around Geneva A VEIW OF THE Country Round about GENEVA
THE HISTORY OF THE CITY and STATE OF GENEVA. BOOK III. From the Year 1536. to this present. THE Change which hapned at Geneva in Religion,1536. contributed not a little to encrease the differences betwixt the Duke and Genevoises; there passed se∣veral skirmishes from the begining of the Year near the Bridge of Arve;1536. and the enemies made themselves Masters of the Convent,Jan. 3. called our La∣dy of Grace, on the third day of January at night, but at break of day they quitted that poste, which made the Magi∣strates resolve to rase that Convent,Jan. 4. and the houses thereabouts. Some days after,Jan. 14. the Enemy came at ten of the Clock at night, and approached the Walls to scale the City on the side of S. Gervais de Rive,Jan. 16. and S. Victor; but the Alarm being given, they were beat back with some loss.The ernoises promise the Genevoises their assi∣stance. In the mean time the States of Berne having notice of all these proceedings, promised them of Geneva their assi∣stance,
stance, and wrote to the Duke a Letter to this effect, That seeing he would not keep to the Agreement made at S. Julien, and the decree of Payerne, but on the contrary had injured their Allies, and blocked up their City,They break off with the Duke. they therefore had sent back his Articles of Agree∣ment, and proclaimed War against him; whereupon the Duke pre∣pared to send his Troops into the Country of Vaud, to expect them there. The Genevoises seeing themselves blocked up,Jan. 24. and pressed with hunger, made a sally out with three hundred men to disorder their Enemies.The Genevoises sally out. Now between Chené and Colony, there lay a Party of about five or six hundred men of the Enemies forces, which they set upon so briskly, that having routed their horse, the foor lost their courage, and suffered themselves to be slain without ressistance. So great was the slaughter, that Captain De Verey, who was chief in that enterprize, moved with compassion, desired his men to forbear, saying, Ah Sirs, let us leave some alive to till our grounds. The Duke of Savoy's Provost was found dead amongst a hundred more of his Company, several taken Prisoners; the Genevoises having onely lost three or four of their men. Two days after,Jan. 26. having notice given them by some Prisoners that there were several Troops garison'd in the Castle of great Sacconez, they marched thither, giving them a false Alarm to draw them into an ambush, but they would not stir out before they had fresh sup∣plies; whereupon they returned back after they had taken some plunder. In the mean time the Genevoises having heard no news of the Troops which the Bernoises had promised them,Jan. 29. and there being no way to bring them provision by land,A Bark fitted out by the Genevoises. they thereupon set forth a Barque, and four other Boats man'd with eight hundred Soldiers commanded by De Verey, and so make to the Lake, on which they had no sooner arrived, but the Country of Savoy ringing their Bells, sounded an alarm; as they were about landing on Bellerive, they found three Companies ready to receive them: wherefore they tack∣ed about to the other side of the Lake, and set their men on the shore of Gentoux and Versoy, where finding none but old people and chil∣dren, they carried away with them all they could, even to the very Bells of these two Villages, and this was all this whole days ex∣ploit. The next Morning having learned that the Enemy at the approach of the Bernoises,Jan. 30. had quitted Sacconez and Peney; they marched out with De Verey, and put in them Garisons. They found in these Castles great store of provision, which they caused to be transported into the City, and not long after they blew up that of Peney, which had been so often a shelter to their Enemies,Peney blown up. and discontented Ci∣tizens. The Bernoises advanced as far as Nions, burning and destroying all the Fortresses and Abbies along the Country of Vaud;Jan. 31. but Morges and Nions, although subject as well as the rest to the Duke, had been al∣ready plundered by seven hundred Italians belonging to the Troops of his Highness of Savoy.Gex surren∣dred. The City and Castle of Gex rendred them∣selves upon composition, those of Thonon did the like of their own
accord, passing over the Lake that they might joyn with the Ber∣noises. The Castles of Jussy and Gaillard,Feb. 1. being summoned, sur∣rendred in like manner to the Genevoises. The Forces of Berne,Feb. 2. having joyned with those of New Castle, made up 700 men,Bernoises ar∣rive at Geneva who arrived at Geneva. The chief Com∣mander Hans Franez shewed his Orders to the Senate of 200, and asked their opinion, whether it were not best to continue their Alliance with Madam De Nemours the Countess of Geneva, who had offered to furnish them with Victuals. Whereupon it was agreed they should not break off with her. The Troops marched forth on the side of S. Julien and Du Wache to batter the Fort of La Cluse, whilst those they had sent on the Mountain should roll great Stones upon them.La Cluse surrenders. After the Cannon had played, they rendred themselves, and the Garison which was about 500 Soldiers, being most Italians, were carried Prisoners to Gex. They returned la∣den with Booty and Provision: But the Genevoises could hardly sa∣tisfy the Bernoises, who demanded the Vidomnat, the Revenues of the Bishoprick and its dependances, to defray the Charges of the War. The Senate conjured them, That seeing they had gene∣rously assisted them in maintaining their Liberty against the Duke and Bishop, they should not sully so glorious an action by a de∣mand which tended to their oppression: and that they would endeavour to gratifie them in any other way that was reason∣able. Duke Charles the Third was overwhelmed with misfortunes from all sides. The French-King, Francis the First, being incensed against him, had possessed himself of Savoy, de la Bresse, and Pied∣mont, and had sent his Grand Provost from Paris to them of Berne, desiring them to Bound their Conquests by the Countries of Vaud, du Chablais,Feb. 18. and those on this side la Cluse. The Fribourgers, who had no difference with the Duke, notwithstanding seized on the County de Romant (which was much to their advantage) under pretence of preventing the Bernoises from doing it. These took the last good places which remained in the Country of Vaud,Chillon Castle besieged. viz. Lausane and Yver∣dun, which surrendred on composition. The Castle of Chillon gave them more trouble, and the Genevoises sent thither their Frigate to besiege it likewise by Water. It being at length surrendred, there were found in it several Prisoners,March 29. amongst whom was Bonnivard Prior of S. Victor, who had been a long time confined to his Dun∣geon, as we have already observed.Bonnivard set at liberty. The Valesans taking the ad∣vantage of these disorders, took up Arms and possessed themselves of one part of Chablais, which reached as far as the River of Dranse. The Genevoises having made themselves Masters of Jussy, Thy, Peney, Gaillard, Bellerive, and Seligny, settled Officers in these places, having first demolished the Castle of Gaillard. The Syndicks published an Order,May 21. enjoyning every one to go to Church and hear Sermons, utterly abolishing the Mass: An Oath having been administred to the People,Mass aboli∣shed. and an Inscription set up over the Town-house, in Letters of Gold, in memorial of this, and their deliverance by succours from Berne.Saunier teaches School. They erected a FreeSchool at Rive, and chose Anthony Saunier chief Master of it.
The Country People kept still to the Catholick Religion. The Magistrates caused a Convocation of all the Priests in their Juris∣diction to be held, who were told by the Principal Syndick, Farel and Bonnivard being then present, That if they did not make it appear from the Holy Scriptures, before Whit-Sunday, That the Mass, and other Popish Institutions, were approved of by God, they should no longer be permitted the exercise of them. The anci∣entest of them, in the name of all the rest, made this ingenious reply: My Lords (said he) We are not a little surprized at this sud∣dain command, to forsake without any farther deliberation a Religion, which hath been received for so many Ages as holy and safe, without the least conviction of the contrary. Ye have indeed left this Religion, but not in a moment of time, as ye expect we should do, seeing ye have had several Sermons for your instruction. And although we are your most humble Subjects, yet are we nevertheless Christians, Redeemed by the Blood of Christ, as well as your selves, and as much concerned for our own Salvation as ye can be for yours. We therefore intreat you for our Saviours sake, our common Lord, That you would give us the same liberty ye have taken your selves. Send us Preachers who can instruct and shew us wherein we err, and then, if they can convince us, we shall without further delay follow your example, and submit our selves wholly to your disposal. The chief Syndick having heard this answer, caused them to withdraw, that he might consult on the matter. Bonni∣vard was of opinion it were expedient to grant their request, and not to force their Consciences, but to inform them: for if they should shew themselves so light, said he, as to pass so soon and ea∣sily from one Religion to another, it was to be feared they would on the next occasion return to the old one again. Whereas Farel on the contrary, being less moderate, answered him, saying, Will you hinder the immediate work of God? And proceeding in his Exhor∣tations, he made the Lords consent to his opinion. The Priests were again sent for in, and had the same command laid on them as before. Some who said Mass privately in the City, were found out and brought to Farel, who sharply reprehended them. The Country People were enraged at this, and would have returned as bad, or rather worse, usage to the Ministers who preached about in the Villages, had they not been well guarded. The Bernoises insisted still on their old demands,1536. and there was a Meeting appointed to be held in Berne to decide fairly this dif∣ference.Aug. 7. The Alliance between the two Cities was confirmed to last for 25 Years on these conditions: That the Genevoises should pay in six Months time, to the Bernoises, the summ of ten thousand Crowns, for the charge of the War: that they should give them entrance into their City as oft as they had occasion: and that they should quit to them the Lordship of Gaillard, the Abby of Bellerive, and the Castle of Cholex. The Genevoises keeping in their own possession the Vidomnat or Stewardship, the Revenues of the Bishoprick and of the Priory of S. Victor, which they designed as a maintenance for Ministers and the Hospital. It was about this time that John Calvin of Noyon in Picardy,Calvin comes to Geneva. ac∣companied with his Brother Anthony Calvin, intending to retire in∣to
to Basle or Strasbourg, and leaving, by reason of the Wars, the direct Road, came to pass through Geneva, not intend∣ing to tarry there. Yet Farel knowing him to be a learned Man, would needs retain him. Which he would not a long time con∣sent to; till Farel was so urgent with him as to admit of no de∣nial, desiring him only to read Lectures in Divinity.Sept. A while af∣ter the Bernoises caused publick Disputations to be held at Lau∣sane, to which he was called, together with Farel and Viret, who was now become a Preacher. The Protestant Religion was con∣firmed by these Disputes, and the Catholick banished. The Ber∣noises would have had the Monks of Payerne to receive the Pro∣testant Doctrine: but they refused it, being upheld by the Fri∣bourgers, who had an equal right with the Bernoises in this Abby: And upon this account these two Cantons were like to have en∣gaged in a War. The latter of these had already sent to Geneva for 200 Men to assist them, but the other Cantons interposing they were made Friends. In the Month of March,1537. in the Year following, there came a stranger out of the North Country,An Anabap∣tist disputes with Farel. who publickly disputed against Farel, and the other Ministers, before the great Council, maintaining, amongst the rest, That the Baptizing of Infants was unlawful, and that the Sacrament of Baptism ought not to be ad∣ministered to any but to those who could give an account of their Faith. Farel proved the contrary, and convinced him of several other Errors held by the Anabaptists. He was, together with his Companions, banished the City; from whence they went to Swit∣zerland, where the Bernoises caused some of them to be put to death. The Ministers had another Disputation with one Carolyn,March 10. who undertook to prove the lawfulness of the Mass,Carolyn main∣tains the law∣fulness of the Mass. and Prayers for the dead. The Magistrates of Berne, having heard both Parties at Lau∣sane, banished Carolyn out of their Dominions. Farel compiled a form of Confession, which was read every Sunday in S. Peter's Church. But the Bernoises complained that these Constitutions were not agree∣able with theirs, for they observed still some chief Festivals, and used unleavened Bread in the Sacrament, and married Women af∣ter the old custom with their Hair discheveled; which Farel did not approve. He was present at the Synod of Berne, consisting of 300 Divines from Switzerland, Strasbourg, and other neighbouring Countries, who rejected the opinion of Consubstantiation, or Cor∣poreal presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which some at that time held,Calvin com∣piles a Cate∣chism. especially the Lutherans. Calvin composed a Catechism for the instruction of Youth: whilst they who had sworn to live according to the Protestant Discipline, becoming unruly, made a disturbance in the Council, crying out, They had made them Per∣jured. The Syndicks for that Year favoured the discontented Party,1538. and indeed were yet Catholicks in their heart.The Syndicks still Catholicks in their hearts. Calvin, Farel, and Cou∣rant, who was blind, but accounted learned, presented themselves before the Council, offering to make good their Confession of Faith. But this not prevailing, they under pretence of preserving
the Liberties and Priviledges of the City, and because they would not conform to the custom of Berne in Celebrating the Commu∣nion, they therefore made an Order in Council, enjoyning these three Ministers to leave the City in three days.April 23. Calvin had no maintenance from the City,Calvin with others bani∣shed the City. living at his own charge there; where∣fore he went to Basle, and from thence to Strasbourg; where be∣ing entertained by Martin Bucer, Capito, Hedio, and other learned men, he obtained leave of the Magistrates to set up a French-Church, and became the Pastor of it, and had a competent main∣tenance allowed him. Farel withdrew to Neuf-Chatel. After the departure of these three Ministers,Mare com∣mitted to Prison. the Minister of Jussy, Henry la Mare, refusing, as the rest had done before him, to Administer the Sacrament with Wafers, was thrown into Prison. But he was soon released,Decemb. and served the City, together with the other Ministers, who were sent for. out of the Villages. Their opinion was required, before they were admitted, concerning the old Ceremony of Womens being Married with their Hair hang∣ing down loose about their Ears. They made answer, (for fear this trifle should hinder their entrance) That they did not find it for∣bidden any where in the Holy Scripture. Whereupon they were admitted, and gave the Communion, in the Easter following, with Bread without Leaven; which custom continued a long time af∣ter at Geneva. They who had been the chief instruments of the Ministers ba∣nishment, did not a little triumph at the matter, carrying along with them throughout the City a Stove, on which things are wont to be broiled, and the Wick or Cotton of a Candle, which is cal∣led in that Country Language Farets; as much as to say, they had broiled Farel.Calvin writes to Geneva. Yet this hindred him not from writing to them, Exhorting them to Union in Doctrine: the same did Calvin, one of whose Letters had this Superscription: To my well-beloved Brethren in the Lord, the remnant of the scattered Church of Geneva: By which and what he wrote at the end of his Letter, it seemed that he foretold the confusion in which his Enemies would be invol∣ved 16 months after.Saunier with others ba∣nished. At Christmas, Anthony Saunier, Maturin Cor∣dier Master of the Free-School, and several others, refusing to give the Sacrament with Wafers, were ordered to depart the City. In the Year following there was a Decree made in the General Council,1539. That whosoever should so much as advise a change of Government should lose his Head.Nov. 5. In another Session of the said Council,1540. three Deputies were condemned for having made an agreement with the City of Berne touching the Lordship of S. Vi∣ctor,June 5. which they demanded, and upon other Articles which ten∣ded to the oppression of the City. Two of these three Deputies had been Syndicks in the Year 1538, and had procured Farel and Calvin's banishment. This condemnation made a great noise, and moved the People to Sedition, because these Persons were some of the Principal Men in the City, and had great Friends. John Philippe, who was Ca∣ptain General, and had been Syndick in that Year, and moreover
joyned in Friendship and in the same Faction with them, spake publickly against it, and was the first Author of the Sedition:Philippe kills a Man with his Leading-staff. He killed a Man with his Leading-staff in this quarrel. And a Ger∣man on his side was slain in the place. The Council issued out a Warrant to apprehend Philippe, who having shut himself up in his House, made some resistance, there having been a Man shot dead in this tumult; he got away at last over the tops of the Houses, and hid himself in the Stable belonging to the Tower of Perse, amongst the Hay, where having been found out, he was carried to Prison. The Syndicks, with the Watch, guarded him from the violence of the People, who otherwise would have torn him in pieces. Whereupon we may observe the inconstancy of the vul∣gar, and how little their Friendship is to be relied on. It was not eight days since Philippe was exceedingly respected, and had more credit than all the rest of the Syndicks besides; but now every bo∣dy exclaimed against him, and desired he should be put to death, even those who were most obliged to him. He had made a Party who were no friends to the Protestants, and who had already pro∣cured the banishment of several Ministers.Artichauds Faction. The two Syndicks who were condemned, were of it. They were called Artichauds or Ar∣tychokes, because this Faction had taken these Plants to distinguish themselves, having cut down as many of these Roots as they could find in the Gardens. It was likewise a word used in the Wars amongst them. Others say this word of Artichaud came by corruption of Speech from Articlers, by reason of the Articles which they had inserted in the Treaty at Berne. The contrary Faction had green Flowers for a mark of distinction, and their word was Farel, which name was often heard about Streets, and likewise that of Artichaud. Claudius Richardet, chief Syndick in the Year 1538, one of the Principal of the Artichaud Faction, ha∣ving been ingaged in this Sedition, would have made his escape over the City Walls,Richardet dies by a fall. but being a corpulent Man he was so bruised by the fall that he immediately killed himself. These are the mis∣fortunes usually attending diversity of opinions in Religion. Phi∣lippe was condemned to lose his Head, notwithstanding the inter∣cession of the Bernoises.June. So that this Faction of the Artichauds was very much daunted by the disgrace of the four who were Syndicks in the Year 1538, and who had been the chief upholders of it. Yet the three Deputies at length obtained favour by the intercession of them of Berne and Basle, and were only enjoyned to make an humble acknowledgment of their fault before the Coun∣cil of 200, and had a small Fine laid upon them. These dif∣ferences made them think of calling back Calvin, who was busied in the Ecclesiastical Synods of the Empire. About the end of these troubles,August. the Genevoises received Letters from Charles the Fifth, Dated the eighth of August, 1540. by which he gave them to understand, that he had been informed, That they of Berne sollicited Geneva to do them Homage, which he did not believe they would consent to, strictly charging them the contra∣ry, upon pain of his high displeasure; expecting likewise that the Bernoises, to whom he intended to write, would desist from these
demands, and enjoyning the City of Geneva to remain as hereto∣fore in obedience to the Empire, as an Imperial City, not permit∣ting the Liberties and Priviledges thereof to be lost which were granted them by his Predecessors, which administred matter of no small joy and comfort to the City. The banishment of the three Ministers was repealed by the Ge∣neral Council,The banish∣ment of the three Ministers repealed. it being openly declared, they might come again in∣to the City when they pleased. A while after, there was an Or∣der made, forbidding all undecent Dancings and profane Ballads. There was a discourse of Establishing a Consistory.May. 1. Calvin was sent for to Geneva,Calvin sent for to Geneva. at the suit of them of Zurich to the Strasbour∣gers, who could scarcely be perswaded to part with him. Nei∣ther was he, indeed, willing to come, finding his endeavours so successful at Strasbourg. But Bucer threatned him with Gods Judg∣ments, if he obeyed not this call, setting before him the example of Jonas, who refused to preach to the Ninevites: but at length, with much entreaty, he was prevailed on and came to Geneva, having first made a journy over to Ratisbonne. He immediately fell to work with unwearied diligence,Sept. 13. preached almost every day in the Week, read Lectures in Divinity, and never mist being pre∣sent at the Consistory on the days in which it was held.Calvin's pain∣fulness. And answered multitudes of Letters which were sent to him from all parts for his advice in points of Learning and Controversie.1541. About this time he set up Catechising according to the Form he had com∣posed.Nov. 21. He established that Ecclesiastical Policy, the Liturgy and publick Prayers, which have been ever since in use: there came se∣veral French Men and their Families, who had embraced the Pro∣testant Religion, to settle in Geneva, as a place of refuge. The Plague raging at Geneva, several of the infected were put into the Hospital of the large Palace;1542. the Magistrates designed to send a Minister there to comfort them.Plague at Geneva. But some refused to go, which Calvin and Castalio observing, they offered to undertake it. But the Council would not permit the former of these, in considera∣tion of his serviceableness both to the Church and City. Peter Blanchet was appointed, who quickly lost his Life in that ser∣vice. A while after Calvin went to Strasbourg, to dispute with Ca∣rolyn, who had been heretofore Minister at Lausane,1543. where ha∣ving been condemned for Preaching up the Mass and Prayers to Saints,Calvin Di∣sputes with Carolyn. he fled for it, and endeavouring to be reconciled with the Bernoises, he made his Recantation at Strasbourg: But he turned his Coat the second time, opposing Farel who had preached at Metz. From thence he went to Strasbourg, where he would not dispute with Calvin. Death put an end to his inconstancy, and punished him for his fickleness: for he died at Rome in an Ho∣spital. The Bishop Peter of Baume, dying in Franche-Comté, Auberive was substituted in his place by the Pope.1544. He took on him the Title of Bishop of Geneva, and kept his Residence at An∣necy.
About this time Sebastian Castalio of Chastillon in Bresse,Castalio his Opinions. Regent of a College, who formerly had preached, propounded and agi∣tated several questions in Divinity. He disliked the Canticle of So∣lomon as profane and lascivious, and did not approve of the Mi∣nisters interpretation of that Article touching Christs Descension into Hell; for which being reprehended in a full Congregation, he accused the Ministers of pride, rashness, and other vices: which the Council having disapproved, he was deposed, and withdrew to Basle. He broached several Errors, and made a Translation of the Bible into Latin and French, wresting several places thereof to countenance his own opinions. He wrote likewise a Book which he Intituled Theologia Germanica, and a Treatise of the old and new Man. The City began again to be overspread by the Plague,1545. it being first brought thither (as it was thought) by some Switzers Sol∣diers who went to Italy in the French-Kings service. A certain Person, named Lentilles, who had been a Servant to the Keeper of the Hospital in Caddoz's time,Lentilles spreads the Plague in Geneva. began to practise what he had learned of him, carrying about the Plague in Rags and Linen-Cloths, which had been bound about the Sores of the infected. He had prevailed upon almost the Nurses and Women who clean∣ed and perfumed the Housholdstuff of the infected. They had gotten a bie-word amongst them, by which they signified the Plague, calling it Clauda, rejoycing upon the encrease of it. When ever they met, they were wont to enquire one of another how Clauda did. The answer was commonly, She is goood for nothing, she doth nothing but sleep; or if there was any House newly infected, they were wont to answer, She is very well, she makes way in such a place. A certain person named Bernard Tallent, one of Lentilles Accomplices, was apprehended by the Bayliff of Thonon, to whom he confessed the whole design; who sent a Copy of his confession to Geneva. Whereupon Lentilles was laid hold on and examined, but he would confess nothing whatsoever torment he suffered. He was sent to Thonon to be confronted by his Com∣panion, who maintained the charge against him; yet he ceased not to deny it, for all the torments of the Rack which he again under∣went, even to that extremity as to have his Shoulder broken; at which being let down, and put to Bed, he immediately died, with∣out saying any thing more, than only advising them to seize upon all them who attended the Hospital. Which was done, and the greatest part confessing the Fact, were burnt alive, to the number of seven Men and twenty four Women. They declared, that Len∣tilles had obliged them by horrid Oaths to execute their mischie∣vous designs, to besmear the Gates and encrease the Plague, so far till they of Geneva were reduced to that extremity, that the re∣mainder of them might be maintained with a Bushel of Corn. A Man would scarce believe that so great a number of Persons should be prevailed on to work so horrid a villany, had they not all severally confessed it, without communicating one with ano∣ther. The Surgeon and two others had their Skins pulled off from them alive with red hot Pinchers; some of these Wretches
were taken in the very Fact whilst their Companions were lead∣ing to Execution. After this the Plague ceased by degrees about All-Saints-day, it having swept away near Twenty thousand People. The Divisions of the City,1546. another kind of Contgion, and no less dangerous than the former, succeeded. For the young Peo∣ple would not suffer themselves to be deprived of their Sports, Taverns, and other places of debauchery; and the Ministers insisted earnestly upon it, both in the Council and Pulpit, threatning the Contumacious with no less than Excommunication. One of the Council accused Calvin,Calvin accu∣sed for teach∣ing false Doctrine. That he had for the space of Seven Years taught false Doctrine: but the Council committed him to Prison, without Calvin's sollicitation, enjoyning him to do Penance by carrying a Torch in his Hand throughout the City. Viret's Ser∣vant receiving a Letter from Calvin, instead of carrying it to his Master as he was directed, he delivered it to the Syndicks, who having broken it open,1548. were not a little displeased at some pas∣sages in it; especially where he tells Viret, That they of Geneva would govern without God, and that he had to do with Hypocrites. Being sent for to answer for this before them, he justified his com∣plaint, by the instances of several debauched Persons who were suffered to scoff at the Word of God, and to slight their Instructi∣ons. He left the City at the same time Farel departed from Neuf-chatel to go to Zurich, to be present at a Synod composed of Di∣vines from Switzerland and Grisons: the Points debated there have been since Printed. At his return, he set forth his Commentaries on the Epistle of St. Paul to Titus, which he dedicated to Farel and Viret, in consideration of the strict friendship and unity be∣twixt them. Galeacius Caracciola,1550. Marquiss of Vico in the Kingdom of Naples, where he had left his Estate and Family,Marquiss of Vico comes to Geneva. withdrew to Geneva upon the account of Religion. Before his arrival, some Persons spread a report that he came as a Spy, but his conversation gave sufficient proofs of the contrary.Bolsec charges the Ministers with preach∣ing false Doctrine. Bolsec a Carmelite, who had left the Order, and under pretence of embracing the Protestant Religion, had betook himself to the profession of Physick and Divinity; contradicted the Minister in a full Congregation, charging the Pro∣testants with making God the Author of sin,1551. and by that means contributing to the condemnation of the wicked, as if God had been a Jupiter or a Tyrant;Octob. 6. alledging farther, That S. Augustin was forcibly drawn into be a Patron of this Doctrine, although 'tis certain he was not of that opinion, of which he warned them to take heed, it being a new and dangerous Doctrine, and of which he charged Laurentius Valla to be the Author.Calvin clea∣reth himself and Brethren. Calvin, being present at the Mee∣ting, he heard Bolsec discourse, with an admirable patience, and af∣ter he had said as much as he could, Calvin presented himself, and answered most ingeniously to every Article for the space of an hour: and besides an infinite of places which he cited out of the Holy Scripture, he quoted so many passages out of S. Augustine as would make any Man believe he had studied no other Author; so that every one admired it, and shut up all with this saying,
Would to God that he who hath so much cited S. Augustin, had seen more of him than his covering. Farel, who was then at Geneva, made a distinct Oration to confirm what Calvin had said before him, and to shew that they were to blame who charged them with error. Bolsec was thereupon committed to Prison, where Calvin endeavoured to convince him of his error, as well by per∣sonal Conferences as by Letters. A while after, by the consent of the Churches of Switzerland, he was banished the City. 'Tis re∣ported, That ten Years after,Bolsec writes Calvin's Life. he recanted in a full Synod at Or∣leans: but yet writ a Book of Calvin's Life, wherein he very much injures his Reputation: which occasioned Calvin's setting forth a Treatise concerning Predestination and Providence, which the Ma∣gistrates of Berne did neither approve nor condemn: prudently for∣bidding1552. their Ministers to preach to the People a Doctrine which they and all Men else so little understood. Troillet, who had been an Hermit, openly censured likewise Calvin's Institutions. The Council enjoyned him to be silent, but yet this hindred not of∣ten disturbances about this matter. The young people of the City accusing Calvin of Pride and too much Severity. About this time came Michael Servetus,Aug. a Spaniard, who had escaped out of Prison from Vienna,1553. to Geneva, where he began to dogmatize.Servetus comes to Geneva. He had composed a Book, Intituled Christianismi re∣stitutio, full of execrable Heresies. He annulled the distinction of the three Persons in the Godhead, affirming the Son and Holy Ghost to have been Created in the beginning of the World. That the Essence of God was common to all Creatures, even those who were inanimate, which brought forth in Man a free will, yet did not this hinder, but that the knowledge of good and evil was stifled in him till he was twenty years of age; before which time a man could not commit any mortal sin. That it was sufficient to believe that Jesus Christ was the Son of God, it not being absolutely necessary to lay hold on his promises; All men, both Jews and Heathens, being justified by their good moral works. That Baptism of Infants was but a meer foppery. At first he was countenanced by some of the Magistrates who hated Calvin: so that besides his natural maliciousness, he was so rude in main∣taining his Blasphemy, as to give Calvin the lye above fifty times in one discourse, and as often calling him wicked wretch, and Si∣mon Magus. The Council could no longer endure his impudence, and therefore committed him to Prison; and Articles were drawn up against him, which were sent to the four Protestant Cantons for their concurrence; after which he was burnt alive, not shew∣ing the least sign of repentance, but only a great fear of death. Several were not displeased that so dangerous a person was rooted out, who had sowed his wicked Doctrine for the space of thirty years amongst Christians. Others thought he was punished too severely, his Fact being only a matter of opinion, which was at the bottom of it but only a mixture of Judaism and Anabaptism, and that it were better to have expected his repentance; which occasioned the setting forth of a Book, De non puniendis haereticis gladio, composed, as it was thought, by Castalion, under the name
of Martin Bellius, which Book was answered by Theodore Beza. The Magistrates of Geneva and Switzerland, who had condemned Servetus, considered him as an Apostate, a Seducer, and an Athei∣stical person. Calvin likewise set forth a Book wherein he con∣futed his Heresies,Grybalde pro∣pagates Ser∣vetus's errors. and exposed all the proceedings against him. In the Year following Matthew Grybalde Sieur of Farges spread the same errors, but he would not enter into a publick conference with Calvin, but withdrew into the Countries of Berne, where he made his Recantation, yet living, as before, to the Year 1564. when he died of the Plague. The City was fortified,1554. and the poor People of Merindol and Cabrieres, who had fled for refuge to Geneva, were employed about the work; the reason of this precaution was, That they had no∣tice given them by the Bernoises, that the French had some design upon them; and that which occasioned this suspicion was, The great multitude of French men who had withdrawn thither. The Libertines of thè City bore them ill-will, and were not willing to grant them the Burgership,The French designed to be massacred in Geneva. as they had done to others. They de∣signed one Night to massacre them all, the Captain-General, Amy Perrin, a seditious and factious Person, being the chief of their Party. But the Council getting notice of it, took care to hinder them. There were some of them made severe examples. Thirty of them fled, and were sentenced though absent. And thus the City was cleared of these seditious People:1554. but yet they made se∣veral disturbances in the City, and towards the Bridge of Arve, endeavouring with all their powers to be permitted to return by the sollicitation of the Bernoises: which lasted for some time. The number of strangers visibly increasing in the City,The English Church in Geneva. several Eng∣lish came and settled themselves there, and founded a Church of their own Nation,1555. as the Italians had done before them in 1551. and the Spaniards some time after; but Queen Elizabeth having succeeded Queen Mary, and bringing in again the Protestant Religion, the En∣glish returned again into their own Country, and thanked the City for their protection.1560. The first Minister of the Italian, Church was Maximilian of Martinengue, brother to the Earls of Martinengo, an il∣lustrious family in Italy; he was a very learned man. The French Church at Francfort had some difference which Calvin went thither to pacifie. The term of the Alliance with the City of Berne being expired,1556. Ge∣neva endeavoured to renew it, which was not effected without a great deal of trouble.1557. The other Cantons were busied in the Dyet of Baden, it was at length concluded that it should last for ever.Octob. Some Italians began to disturb the Churches peace by their opini∣ons of the Trinity; for to remedy which,1558. the Council enjoyned them to subscribe to the Churches general Confession;Jan. but there were seven persons of them who absolutely refused it, some of them lea∣ving the Town upon it, the others signed it but by constraint, keeping still the same mind,Gentil di∣sputes against Calvin. amongst whom was Valentin Gentil, who gave not over dogmatising. He was thereupon committed to Prison, and di∣sputed before the Lords against Calvin, whom he charged with op∣pressing the Truth. Gentil had run himself into Arianisme and his
drift was to shew that the Divine Essence belonged properly to none but the Father. It was the opinion of some Lawyers, that his Here∣sie was of that nature, as to deserve death; but he thought to escape all punishment by a seeming repentance, retracting his opinion by a writing made for that purpose; which the Magistrates taking notice of, inflicted on him no other punishment besides the burning his Writings, and a command not to stir out of the City without their leave, which he obeyed with much submission and seeming compli∣ance; after which he had leave granted him to go about the City; but at length he withdrew with some of his followers into the neigh∣bouring Countries at Grybald's, where he taught the same Doctrine as before. The Bayliff of Gex obliged him to a new recantation: but he still returned to his old error, whereupon he was at length ex∣ecuted at Berne in the Year 1566. Calvin wrote a Book against him, wherein he excellently confuted this Heresie. The number of the Youth encreasing who came from all parts to study at Geneva,A Colledge founded at Geneva. the old School was not large enough to hold them, wherefore the Council thought fit to raise a new Colledge. There were immediately settled in it seven Classes, and three Professors of Greek, Hebrew, and Philosophy; besides Divinity Lectures which Calvin read himself, to whom was joyned Theodore Beza, who Prea∣ched the following week after Calvin. The Statutes of this Colledge were first published in S. Peters Church, the Council being present, together with the Ministers and Scholars,1559. which Statutes have been since Printed.June 5. Duke Emanuel Philbert entring again upon one part of his estates, of which his father had been almost wholly dispossessed, required the Bernoises in a Dyet held at Neuf-Châtel, to restore him those places they had taken from him, which he obtained but in part: some years after he endeavoured likewise at an Alliance with all the Cantons, but there were none but the six Cantons who granted it him. In the Year following the Genevoises made two persons severe ex∣amples of Justice after the manner of the ancient Romans,1560. a Citizen having been condemned to be whipt by the lesser Council,Adultery se∣verely pu∣nished. for the crime of Adultery, he made an appeal to the Council of two hun∣dred, from whom he hoped to obtain favour. His Indictment being revised, and the Council observing that he had been guilty of the same crime heretofore, and had been reprehended for it, condemned him to die, to the great astonishment of the Offender, who com∣plained he was too severely dealt withal. Some time after there was executed for the same fact a Banker, who died very penitent, blessing God that Justice was so strictly observed. The young King Charles the ninth writ to them of Geneva by an express,1561.Jan. complaining that the source of all the divisions in his King∣dom sprung from the Ministers whom they had sent into France,The French King com∣plains a∣gainst the Ge∣nevoises for sending Mini∣sters into France. de∣siring them to recall them, and to take a course that for the future they should come there no more. To which they answered, that in∣deed they had not hindred any persons from coming into their City to study there, in order to the fitting themselves for the Ministry; but they were so far from fomenting the troubles of France, that on the contrary they had endeavoured to keep back them who would
have went to Amboise, as knowing well that Holy Scripture recom∣mends to Subjects obedience to their Prince. But the King not satis∣fied with this, gave not over threatning them. The Duke of Savoy likewise laid to their charge, that they had privately assisted his Sub∣jects of the Valleys of Angrogne and Luzerne, although they protested to be no farther concerned in it, than in praying to God to deliver them from the Soldiers cruelty. The Protestants of France enjoying again the clams of peace (whom the Catholicks call Huguenots) the chief Cities of it sent to Geneva for Ministers, who did not refuse them. Theodore Beza and Peter Martyr, Divinity Professors at Zurich, were sent for by Letters from the King of Navarre, dated the twelfth of August, 1561. to be present at the Conference of Poissy. On Saturday the twenty seventh of May,1564. 1564. died John Calvin aged fifty six years,Calvin dies. having by overmuch study brought upon himself several distempers. He was buried the next morning in the common Church-yard of the large Palace, according as he had desired in his Will, without any Pomp or Epitaph; his Corps was attended by al∣most the whole City. Simon Goulard of Senlis who came to Geneva, a while after was chose in his place. Theodore Beza wrote a Discourse of his life and death, which was published in the same year together with his Testament. His death was followed two years after by another more Tragical,1566. James Paul Spiffame Bishop of Nevers having left his Bishoprick,Spiffame his Tragical end. and forty thousand Livres a year, had withdrawn himself to Geneva, to live according to the Protestant Doctrine. He had presented a Re∣quest to be admitted Citizen, which he obtained, having been re∣ceived into the Council of two hundred, and of sixty. The Magistrates and Scholars esteemed him for his Learning. A while after he was sent into France to serve there in quality of a Minister, but they had notice that he privately endeavoured to get some other Bishoprick, which was the occasion that at his return he was more narrowly ob∣served, and his former life searched into. It was found that he had a child before he was married, of her whom he had espoused, and to the end it might not be declared a Bastard, he had forged a Contract of an antedated Marriage, and false Seals, for a greater confirmation to make his Son capable of his inheritance, which was very conside∣rable; for all which he was imprisoned,1566. and having confessed the whole matter, he was beheaded at Molard, being very penitent for what he had done, expressing his sorrow by an excellent speech which he made on the scaffold. Some persons have thought that these ac∣cusations were only for a colour, when in effect it was to gratifie Catherine de Medicis, who had prevailed on the Syndicks, at the in∣stance of the Pope. Duke Emanuel Philbert,1567. who had been a long time urgent with the Bernoises to restore him his lands, prevailed so far by the Empe∣rors intercession, that they released to him Gex, Gaillard and Terny with Chablais, on condition they should remain in the state they were in, having the free exercise of the Protestant Religion permitted them; which agreement when he was in possession, he did not observe. The Country of Vaux fell to them of Berne, as it was agreed by the De∣cree
made at S. Julien and Payerne in case he violated the agree∣ment. The Duke D' Alva being to pass through Savoy, and near Geneva, Emanuel Philbert would have laid hold of this opportunity to make himself Master of that City, and therefore raised great numbers of Soldiers on this side and beyond the Mountains. The report of his enterprise being spread in France, there came in a short time several French men especially Burgundians and them of Provence, to offer their service to the City;May. the Magistrates likewise took all possible care for its preservation, they made out seven Companies of these strangers, four of which were commanded by Captains belonging to the City, and the three others by them of Provence, besides the in∣habitants who mounted the Guard by turn. I. F. Bernard second Syndick was made Captain-General, Amy Varro Sergeant-Major, Amblard Corne Colonel of the Infantry, and Paul de Mouvans his Lieu∣tenant. The Duke De Alva being informed of the nature of the place would not stop there, but traversing the Franche Comté he pas∣sed over into Flanders, where there were affairs expected of grea∣ter concernment,Sept. the Hollanders having taken up Arms, the Troops composed of strangers which were at Geneva were not willing to re∣main idle, but took likewise the same road to assist them of the Reli∣gion; they Alarm'd Gex and Versoy as they passed by, the inhabi∣tants being seized with a panick fear forsook these two Boroughs, this exploit hath been since called The battel of Gex, no sooner begun than ended, concerning which there is a poem extant in Burlesque Verse in that Country Language. It was about this time that the Arse∣nal of Geneva was built.1567. These rumours of War were followed by the Plague which swept away several people:Grimaud en∣deavors to spread the plague. there was again a discovery made of several persons who endeavoured to spread the infection about the City, and who had learned this cursed art in Lentilles School. There were di∣vers burnt for this fact, amongst others one called Grimaud and his Accomplices;1972. yet the Plague ceased not till 1572. which year being very cold put an end to it, being one of the sharpest as could be re∣membred to have hapned in Geneva. People passed over the Lake on the Ice almost over against Cologny, and the Mills could not work, which caused a great scarcity of flower. The City was likewise twice shaken with Earthquakes,May 3. April 24. the first of which overthrew the Gate of Cornevin into the Ditch,1574. and in the years 1576 and 78. there appeared two Comets which were fol∣lowed by the joyful news of an Alliance which Henry the third made with the Switzers,1575. in which Geneva was comprised, it being stipulated that for the defence of the said City,Novemb. which was stiled the Key and Bul∣wark of Switzerland,1578.Hn. the 3. of France makes an Alliance with the Switzers, &c. the Cantons should send in case it should be be∣sieged a sufficient number of men to its assistance at the Kings charge, and on the other hand the City should suffer his Troops to pass through it, marching orderly in rank and file, granting no retreat or passage to his Majesties enemies. This Treaty was concluded at Soleurre betwixt the King and the Cities of Berne,Aug. 29. Soleurre and Gene∣va, Zurich was afterwards comprehended at the suit of the Sieur of Cocumartin Ambassador from the King to the Switzers.1579.
This hindred not the Duke of Savoy,1582. from making a new Tryal upon Geneva.The Duke of Savoy makes at∣tempts on Geneva. A Dauphinoise who lived at Thonon informed him that he held intelligence with the chief of that City, which put the Duke upon raising some Regiments of Horse and Foot out of Pied∣mont, Provence and Savoy, under the conduct of Bernardin of Savoy Earl of Raconis. These Forces lay hid in several Castles and Mona∣steries, the place of their Rendezvouz was to be the great Wood of Ripaille, which was enclosed with Walls, where they were to have Arms and other necessaries. In the mean time they tampered with some of the City, who let themselves be won: but they more especially applied themselves to the Captain Lieutenant Lance, who commanded at S. Gervais. He took what mony soever they brought him, and promised great things; but he informed the Council of the whole transcation. The Dukes Forces marched through Terny, and came to Gex, from whence they were to march to S. Gervais, Lance having promised to set open the Gates to them. The day ap∣pointed being come, the Earl of Raconis told the Dauphinoise, that he would not have him leave him; but he fearing if the enterprize took not effect, it would go hard with him, got away and came to Gene∣va; so that Raconis perceiving how the matter went dared not to ap∣proach the Town, although the Gate stood a long time open, and he had the appointed sign given him, but he withdrew to Terny, and S. Julien; his conjecture was not ill grounded, for besides the inhabi∣tants of the City who were all in Arms, there were five hundred Musqueteers with other Companies who waited his coming. The Earl having mist his mark, and considering what a gallant Army he had under his command, there being besides others, one thousand five hundred Switzers belonging to the Catholick Cantons, whom he had raised (maugre their Allies) for to set them by this means at variance; he resolved not to return home, without doing something. On the other side,1582. the City was very well mann'd with Soldiers both French and Switzers who were Protestants, a considerable num∣ber of which they posted near the Bridge of Arve, where there pas∣sed some skirmishes. The Enemy was worsted, which made him withdraw, having first plundered and wasted the Villages about Gene∣va. After their departure the Genevoises permitted their Troops to range at pleasure,Aug. 16. 1582. and sent away others who came to their assi∣stance. Inquiry was made after those who had dealt underhand with the Enemy.1582. a Traytor to the City.Des plans April 18. One called Des plans of Thonon, had settled himself in Ge∣neva for that purpose. He was made free of the City, having pur∣chased an house near the Gate of Rive, where he sold Wine to the Soldiers of the Guard. He had sent to the Duke the height of the Walls, and had introduced some Officers, and made a Mine in his Cellar to let in Soldiers into the City who were to surprize the Guard: he was beheaded with three of his Companions. They who saw them executed, related a strange and incredible accident, which was, that one of the heads which was cut off, made a leap on the Scaffold, and fell on the ground, from whence it leaped upon a person there present, and so fastned its teeth in his Cloak, that it
was not possible to loosen it otherwise than in cutting off a piece of it; now if this be true, this head was of the nature of the Viper, who is no less dangerous when his head is separated from his body, than before. During these Transactions,The Jews re∣quest to Geneva. the Sieur of Candole returning out of Germany, brought along with him a request from the Jews who were threatned to be banished out of the Empire; they proffered to come to Geneva, to the number of eight or ten thousand, to build houses at their own cost, towards S. Johns or S. Victors, and to close in their apartment with walls where the City should set a Guard at their charge. They promised, moreover, to be the first in fight when oc∣casion required, and to pay a yearly tribute to the Republique, and to undergo any other Taxes which should be laid upon them, desi∣ring onely to have this place for a retreat, and as a convenience for Trade into Piedmont and Valais. Some were of opinion to ac∣cept of their proposals, representing to themselves and others, the enriching of their Country by this means, and that they would be as so many good Soldiers who would do the City service for nothing; and that they might be tolerated, seeing they were permitted in I∣taly. They who were of the contrary opinion alledged that the Pro∣testant States found them dangerous, and that they could not be trusted in any strait; that they would make provision scarce, and thereby enrich themselves by impoverishing the Citizens with their Usury, and that they had been already driven out of France for that reason, as they were now about to be out of Germany. This last ad∣vice was followed, and they on their side agreed with the Germans, who permitted them to live where they were. On the first of March 1584.1584. on Sunday about noon, the skie being very clear,March 1. there was felt on a sudden a great Earthquake, which lasted ten or twelve minutes,An Earth∣quake. and shewed it self not only by the clat∣tering of the Windows, Tiles, and Pent-houses; but shaking the very foundations of the Houses, throwing down several Chimneys; it shattered the Houses about the Lake, and waxed greater three days following, producing at length this unheard of disaster. Half a League distant from the City of Aigle in the Canton of Berne be∣twixt nine and ten in the Morning, there was seen a prodigious quan∣tity of Earth driven out by the exhalations of a Rock, which divided it self into two parts, which poured down like a showre of rain, and overwhelmed in an instant the Valleys and neighbouring Plains. The Hamlet of Corbery was all of it immediately buried save one house, the Master of which astonished at the strange clatter he heard, told his Wife, he believed the end of the World was at hand. They fell to their prayers, and in the mean time the Earth passed like a wave over their house without hurting any body but the Master, who was slightly bruised in the head by a splinter. There was found in ano∣ther house a Child safe in the Cradle, and the Mother of it killed by the ruins of the house, lying with her arms stretched over it; more∣over the Earth augmenting, as it rowled like a Snow-ball, over∣whelmed in the Village of Yvorne sixty nine Houses, one hundred six Barns full of Corn, a hundred persons, and a great quantity of Cattel: This Village being one of the best in Switzerland, inhabited
by Farmers, who maintained themselves by their labour, most part of the men were out at work and so escaped, there was no house out of which some one or other was not saved. The Earth was mixed with a kind of hail stones, and with a cloud of sparks and smoak, which spread a smell of Brimstone thereabouts. The showre of Earth, be∣ing as wonderful as those of the Ancients have been suspicious, co∣vered at least a League in length, and about twelve Acres in breadth; it was unequal in thickness, but the shallowest place was ten foot deep. All the ground which it covered, was made so smooth, that a man would have thought it to have been run over by a rowling stone, there being not the least appearance of any houses. This Earthquake was moreover so violent, that near the Village of Morteru, the Lake overflowed its usual limits at least a quarter of a Mile, and at Ville-neuve at the head of the Lake there were found Tuns of Wine standing upright on their bottoms. Near the City of Aigle, a piece of a Rock was unloosned and stopped without doing any harm in a cleft of a Mountain. In the Month of October in the same Year the City of Zurich,Zurich makes a perpetual Alliance with Geneva. con∣sidering Geneva as a place whereon depended the Safe-guard of Swit∣zerland, made with it a perpetual Alliance; for a Memorial of which, there was set up a neat Latine Inscription in the Town-House. If this Alliance was matter of rejoycing to the City, the mis∣hap of the year following gave them sufficient cause of sorrow.1585. A famine and scarcity of Provision befel them,1586. which lasted a whole year.A Famine in Geneva. The worst of it was, That what was eaten did not satisfie, and it was then it might be pertinently said, That God had broken the staff of Bread: For People were as hungry, an hour and a half after they had taken their repast, as before. There were seen several poor Villagers expiring in the Fields. They who had Bread in the Oven were forced to go and guard it home, lest it should be snatched away. And the extremity was so great, that the young Men of several good Families were forced to rob and steal to sustain themselves.1587. In the beginning of the Year 1588.Vita di Sixto V. the Duke of Savoy, Charles Emanuel, sent an extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, under pretence of paying his acknowledgment to the Pope:The Pope re∣quested to assist the Duke against Geneva. but the real intent of it was, To desire his assistance against Geneva, resolving to leave no means untried whereby to become Master of it. The Pope received the Ambassador with the greatest signs of respect: but as to the business of Geneva he would not concern himself with it, whether he feared the charge would be too great, or that he thought the enterprize too difficult. There was then at Rome a Genevois named Francis Fabry, Son of Peter Fabry, of one of the chief Fa∣milies in Geneva, who was Bishop de la Cave. Sixtus had some conferences with him, which proved not ineffectual: for the Pope answered, at length, the Ambassador, That if it were a War wherein Religion was concerned, it were then fitting he should be interested in it, as being head of the Church: but if it was a War which concerned the State, he could not in Conscience employ the Churches Treasure in main∣taining other Peoples interest.
The Duke was not a little displeased at this answer, and being of a cholerick temper, he could not forbear saying in a passion, That Sixtus had rather shed the blood of Catholicks at Rome, than that of Hereticks at Geneva.1588. At the same time he wrote to his Ambassador to return home: And that if he could not subdue the Genevoises by the help of the Spiritual Sword, he would try what he could by the Temporal one, which no Priest was able to with∣stand. The Count Olivarez, who had received Orders from Spain to promote, as much as in him lay,Olivarez's Counsel to the Dukes Ambassador. his Highnesses interest, com∣forted his Ambassador in this following manner, after he had in vain endeavoured the same thing: Alas, said he, I know very well the temper of the Ecclesiasticks of this Court, and especially of this Pope whom I have often dealt with. His Highness ought not to ex∣pect any thing from him towards the War with Geneva. For should be take the City, he would keep it himself. Wherefore I believe it would be better to let that City alone: for these Hereticks respect the Duke, and bring him profit by trading with his Subjects: whereas if it should fall into the hands of the Ecclesiasticks, they would not fail to trouble the Duke and Neighbouring Princes. So that the Dukes Subjects would be losers by it, and would find such a Neighbourhood un∣easie to them. The Duke taking advantage of the disorders which the League occasioned in France,1588. had seized on the Marquisdom of Saluces; at which the French-King, Henry the Third, requiring satisfaction, sent Nicholas Harlay Sieur of Sancy to the Genevoises, to stir them up to make War against the Duke,Sancy ani∣mates the Genevoises against the Duke. knowing well the differences betwixt them. Sancy promised on the Kings part, to send them Men, and to bear all the charges of the War, and to let them hold whatsoever they should take from him. The Council was divided about the matter, some alledged, That Henry might die, and his Successors forget the kindness received from them. That the Duke would be sure to remember it, and be revenged when he was able. That War was hazardous, and that the City was not in a capacity to hold out long in case it should he besieged. Others on the contrary represented, That in obliging a great King they might thereby procure an able Friend in their time of need; that the Duke had declared himself an open Enemy; that the French-Churches would be more kindly used upon this account; and that the Prince Palatine, and the Switzers would furnish them with mony sufficient to carry on this design. This last advice was fol∣lowed, and afterwards Sancy went to stir up the Switzers, whom he promised that the Duke should be attached on the other side from Dauphiny. The Prince perceiving this tempest which threat∣ned him, would have made himself Master of Lausane and the Country of Vaud, under the conduct of the Baron of Hermance, whose Troops lay about Thonon and Ripaille. The Bernoises per∣ceiving the Dukes design on their Country, were easily won to enter into a War with him. In the mean time the Genevoises edged forward by Sancy's Let∣ters, set out from the City, with six Companies of Foot, and three
Troops of Horse, in the Evening, under the command of the Sieur Quitry a French-Gentleman, and a Knight of the Order who was sent to them, together with the Sieur of Baujeu, by the French-King for to command their Forces, who in the same Night seized on the Castle of Monthoux, having forced open the Gate, with a Pe∣tard. In the Morning they took the Town of Bonne, with its Castle standing at the entrance of Focigny. And from thence marched along the River of Arve,Bonne taken by the Gene∣voises. where they broke down the Bridges of Tremblieres and Buringe to hinder the Enemies passage. They presented themselves before the Castle of S. Joire a place of strength, and the Key of the Baillage of Chablais, with a design to win it, not only for the impor∣tance of the place, but likewise to find Letters and Commissions concerning the enterprises on the States of Berne and Geneva, of which the Baron of Hermance, the Lord of this Castle had been the principal promoter. The Castle being taken, these said In∣structions were found in it, and great store of Arms and Provisi∣on besides. They returned, having left a Garison in this place, without the loss of a Man, because that the Duke seeing neither Switzers nor Grisons in the Field,1589. did not imagine the Genevoises had dared to brave it thus in his Dominions. But the Country sounding an Alarm, he sent away several Troops from Remilly to observe the Enemies motion. The Genevoises,April 7. animated by this success, marched out the next Night after their return, to besiege Gex, and in the Morning made their approaches to it. But the besieged pretended to capitu∣late: yet after several messages from both sides, this Treaty proved ineffectual, so that the Soldiers in the Castle began wholly to de∣fend themselves against the Assailants, some of whom were wound∣ed, and two or three killed.Gex surren∣dred. Yet at length, foreseeing their ruin if they held out till the Cannon played, they surrendred it up, and received a Garison that Night. The next Morning Claudius Pobel Baron of Peter, and Governor of Gex, rendred himself to Quitry at his discretion, who made him Prisoner of War, together with two Captains, an Ensign and eighty Soldiers, who were all Piedmontoises, and were carried away the same Night to Geneva. These last were all soon released, except those who would again take part with their Enemies. But the Baron had his lodgings as∣signed him in a Councellors. House till he paid his ransom. The Duke having notice of this siege, sent away Sonas Gover∣nor of Remilly to succour the place. He set forth with eight Troops of Horse, and nine Companies of Foot: but hearing of its surren∣der, he came and presented himself before Bonne, having first re∣paired the Bridge at Buringe. There were not above ninety Sol∣diers in this Town; and some Peasants who were sent thither to work on its Fortifications: one Captain Bois was left Governor of the place. Sonas perceiving they were prepared to receive him, turned aside to seek other more favourable occasions. In the mean time the Genevoises had made an attempt on la Cluse;La Cluse at∣tempted by the Genevoises. which is a Fort made out of the hollow of a Rock of Mount Jura, and bounded by the Rhosne, which slides along at its foot. They fixed their Petards against the Gates; but taking wet,
they had no effect. Quitry marched thither after the taking of Gex.1589. He met at Cologne with some Soldiers belonging to la Cluse, whom he, with twenty nine Men, beat back to their Trenches and brought up the Cannon; which played in the Morning, but being ill placed and ordered, it could do no execution. They of la Cluse had posted some Musqueteers on the Mountain, to hinder all ap∣proaches to the Fort. Quitry sent the Sieur of Ville-Neufe with a Party of Foot to beat them off. He immediately set upon them so vigorously that he routed them. There were several killed with the Musquet-shot, and others precipitated from the Rock. He came down thence from the other side of the Mountain, and went and forti∣fied himself in the Village of Longerray in the way to Lyons, to the end he might the sooner end the siege: but besides that he had no re∣cruits sent him, the most part of the Soldiers being tired with∣drew in great numbers; and there remained with him but a hun∣dred Men, who being charged by Sonas, at the head of 300 fresh Soldiers, were forced to retire. On the other side,1589. the Bernoises and Genevoises endeavoured to take the Fort by assault, resolutely attempting it, although there was no considerable breach made: the latter of these lost several good Soldiers, and amongst others the Baron of S. Lagier, whose loss was much lamented as well for his Valour as Piety.Baron of S. Lagier slain. The Bernoises lost likewise several of their Captains: and it was well so despe∣rate an attempt cost them no more. Sancy being returned to the Camp at Cologne,April 12. where were arri∣ved several Companies from Berne, under the conduct of Colonel Erlach, having called a Council of War there, it was determined to leave the siege of la Cluse, seeing their attempts upon it had been all this while ineffectual, and to go joyn with the Forces which came from Soleurre and Grisons, to consult together what was far∣ther expedient. So the Army returned in good order to Geneva,April 16. expecting the promised recruits; which being come, they marched on the side of Thonon, which is a little City seated near the Lake, having nei∣ther Walls nor Ditches, but a good Castle standing on the highest part of the Town. The Cannon was brought by Water, to avoid the difficulties of the way, and was three days before it came, by reason the Wind was contrary: the Enemies in the mean time ap∣peared on the top of Pinchat, which is a rising ground about a quar∣ter of a League from Geneva. They were beat back and came and forraged the Bailywick of Terny. Whilst the Castle of Thonon was besieged, that of Baleyson, and the other of Yvoire, were taken, together with the Tower in the Village of Concise. There were not above seventeen or eighteen Soldiers in this Tower, who held out some hours against Erlach's Regiment. The Colonel having set fire on the neighbouring Houses, they surrendred themselves, and five of the chief of them were hanged for their rashness. The Sieur of Dingy who was Go∣vernor of the Castle of Thonon capitulated, and was permitted to depart with eighty Soldiers, their Swords and Daggers hanging by their sides,April 26. and their Musquets on their shoulders, their Matches
not lighted, nor Drums beating, nor Colours flying. The next Morning the Hospital of the Fort of Ripaille began to be built,April 27. the Wood having been gained by the Lancers: some of the out parts of it were taken; but the Fort had a good Trench, and was very well fortified with a thick Wall, and seven Towers stand∣ing in the midst of it, whence the besieged might easily kill the choicest Soldiers in the Army: moreover they relied on the suc∣cours the Duke had promised them. In effect he came the next Morning within two Leagues of Thonon, with 1500 Lancers, 1000 Foot, and 500 Argoulets, commanded by the Earl of Martinengue and de Sonas. These Argoulets were a kind of light horsemen, much in request at that time, without any Breast plates, armed with Pi∣stols and a Carbine, which hath since occasioned their being cal∣led Carbineers. The Lancers were another kind of Cavalry, armed Cap-a-pe, with a Spear and Pistols. Sancy and Quity sent out some Troops to observe the Enemies motion:The Royal Army con∣sisted of 10000 Foot and three Troops of Horse. but not agreeing, they did nothing, although the Enemy was the weakest by two thirds: for the Royal Army consisted then of 10000 Foot, Switzers, Grisons, French-men, and Genevoises, to∣gether with three Troops of Horse belonging to the latter, and some Horse of the Retinue of the two Commanders. Two days after, Quitry having posted the three Geneva Cornets on a rising plain,1589. called Creste, near Thonon, they ranged themselves into the form of a Hedge,April 29. expecting till they should be sheltred by some Musqueteers or Pikes: but they not coming in, and the Ene∣my having discovered them, came and attacked them with three or 400 Lancers; who finding the Match unequal, drew back with full speed to Thonon. They were pursued as far as the Bars by the Enemy, who lost the Baron of Vitry. After this the Cornets re∣turned to their Post, and with some Foot, drawn out in haste, made the Enemy give ground; but they being reinforced by a body of Lancers, beat them back the second time as far as Thonon. Puffed up with this success,The Regi∣ment of So∣leurre re-at∣tacked. they attacked the Regiment of Soleurre, which had in the Front and Flank some Genevoises and German Foot: the Pikes of that Regiment bore up bravely against the Effort, and compelled the Enemies to retire with some loss, and the Earl of Martenengue their General was wounded in the Leg, not having been able to put in succours into Ripaille. These skirmishes did them a kindness: for the Switzers finding themselves attacked so briskly, by so small a number of the Dukes Forces, resolved thereupon to forsake those quarters, and to pass over into Franche-Comté. The building of Ripaille was continued, but they within it, perceiving no succours coming, rendred upon composition.May 1. There came out 500 Men, who were permitted to depart with their Rings, their Swords and Daggers by their side, and the Captains Compois, Bourg and Sinalde on Horseback. Af∣ter which the place was demolished. They of Thonon, who had a Gentleman of the Country of Vaud for their Governor, were sworn to be true to the King. The Army removing,May 14. passed through Geneva to the Franche-Comté: the three Cornets and Companies of Geneva-Foot tarried
behind with some Soldiers drawn out from the Garrisons of Bonne and of Monthoux, and those beyond L'Arve, and five Colours of Erlach's Regiment; besides which the Bernoises sent immediately three thou∣sand men to defend the two conquered Bailliages. The departure of this Army put the Genevoises to a great deal of trouble, who saw themselves by this means burthened with the charge of the War, their Treasure, Provision and Ammunition being almost ex∣hausted. In effect the Duke made greater Levies, and was resolved to have his revenge. The Baron of Hermance began with Focigny, and took the Castle of Boege,Boege taken. in which there were not above eighteen Soldiers, who after they had a while stoutly defended themselves, were per∣mitted to depart with their Matches lighted, and retired to Bonne. The Castle of S. Joire in which there were not above 30. Soldiers with a Serjeant was taken likewise, who was very much blamed for leaving so soon so tenable a place, having held out but two daies; but he was killed a while after in a skirmish, and the remembrance of his fault was buried together with him. The Baron holding on his career sat down before Marcoussey, giving the Captain who commanded there a summons: he returned him an answer with Musquet shot, and made a Sally out wherein several of the Enemy were killed. The next morn∣ing there set out from Geneva about three hundred Soldiers, with the Garrison of Bonne, to its assistance, which the Enemy understanding withdrew in haste. In the mean time the Duke advanced with his Vaunt-guard of one thousand five hundred Foot,May 25. and five hundred Horse to attack the Fort which the Genevoises had begun to raise near the Bridge of Arve.The Duke advances to attack the Fort near Arve There was a Sally made out upon them, and they were constrained to give back in disorder with the Petards and Ladders which they had made ready, the City not losing a man; they took one of Sonas's Trumpeters. Afterwards the Enemy made two attempts on the Castle of Terny, where they lost Charles of Grnoble, one of their Com∣manders. The Genevoises at the same time forsook Marcousser,May 27. having set it on fire, it being a place too troublesome for them to keep, being four Leagues distant. Yet the Savoyards came and quenched it, and found some provision left there; they did the same to several other places of small importance, reserving only Bonne and Monthoux. The Ene∣my to be revenged for the spoil made in their Country, wasted the Bailliage of Terny. The Duke himself came in person with two great Cannons and four Field-pieces before the Castle of Terny, which was but an ancient Tower without any fence, only enclosed with a thick Wall. The besieged having refused to render after Summons, the assault began,June The Castle of Terny surren∣dred to the Duke. and after six score shot of Cannon bullets, which wounded the Lieutenant who commanded in the Captains absence, the besieged surrendred upon promise of their lives; yet they were no sooner come out, but they were by the Dukes order hanged, al∣though those about him set before him the ill consequence of it. There was some daies after a skirmish near the Fort of Arve,June 3. where his Highness was worsted, although his Army consisted of eight thousand men; the Baron of Bressiac, who commanded a
Party of the Regiment of Maurevel was taken. There was on the third of June,The Genevoi∣ses engage the Enemy. a very remarkable encounter on the plain of Oüattes. Half a League from this Fort five hundred Musqueteers having disco∣vered the Enemy, went out with a design to attack them, but they had immediately three thousand Foot and a thousand Horse to deal with, yet did they resolutely fight them for four hours together, kil∣ling 200. of them, besides several Captains and persons of quality amongst whom was the Earl of Salenove master of the Camp, one of the best Soldiers in the Army; he had rashly sworn to enter that day into the Fort, and so he did, being carried in dead, after the same manner as another Spanish Earl. Strange it is that the Genevoises should lose on their side but two men, and only four or five wounded. There was solemn thanks returned to God in all the Churches for this Success, and from that time the Enemy fearing this small hand∣ful of men, who had given them such sharp entertainment, barri∣cadoed themselves up in Villages, and built a Fort in Sonzy, which they called S. Katherines Fort by the name of the Dutchess. The Duke having notice that one part of the Army from Berne, which was sent to the assistance of Geneva, was advanced within a League of La Cluse,The Savoyards attack the Forces from Berne. ordered several Companies of Foot to attack them. The Switzers keeping their close order sustained vigorously the onset in the Village of Escoran, and forced the Enemy to retreat with loss in disorder. Colonel Erlach fearing they would come the second time to set upon them with more Forces, sent to Gex for suc∣cours, to Nyons and Geneva, where he came after he had sent back this reinforcement, of which he saw he had no need. The Dukes affairs were little better in Focigny, his Troops were recruited by a Party of the Bressans, and came and quartered in the Village of Felinge,June. near Bonne, in which commanded a Captain of great valour who often alarm'd them; challenging the Baron of Hermance or any other principal Officer to fight in single combate, who receiving a reinforcement of some Troops, he constrained them to leave that post, where they would have made an effort to block up Bonne. The Army of Berne, which approached, consisting of forty Com∣panies, and commanded by the Advoyer of Vatteville, put the Duke upon other resolves. He concluded by the advice of his Council, that it were best to set upon the Genevoises before the arrival of this Army, and to waste the Bailliage of Terny, and endeavour to draw them into an ambush. There being some proposals afterwards made by some of his Highnesses Council, and the Lords of Berne, in order to a peace, the Duke finding himself strong enough, demanded restitution of the Bailliages which had been lately taken from him, as likewise the Bailliage of the Country of Vaud as far as the gates of Berne, and required ten Millions for the charge of the War; but the Bernoises gave him to understand, that they were able to make him more moderate in his pretensions. The rest of this Month was spent in several encounters near the Fort of Arve and Bonne, which the Earl of Maurevel would have taken one morning by surprize with his Regiment,June 28. and Troops from Focigny. The Garrison consisted of not above one hundred and fifty men, and they believing that they
were already sure of the place, called out to them in raillery, That they should make ready their Dinner, but they were feasted with no∣thing but hard Pruins, which forced them to sound a retreat, having lost several of their men. In all these rencounters and some others that followed,July 14. the Gene∣voises could get no help from the Bernoises,The Bernoises agree upon a cessatlon of Arms. because they had agreed with the Duke upon a cessation of Arms which held three weeks, which being expired, they passed by Geneva, and battered down the Bridge of Buringe, and came before the Castle of S. Joire, having the Genevoises for their vauntguard. They took several Forts, ran∣sacked Focigny, and especially the Priory of Pilloney; the Enemies doing as much in the Lordship of S. Victor,July 26. where they burnt the Village. There were several light skirmishes, and the Genevoises lost one of their best Captains named Bois, a gallant and stout Soldier, who was killed with a Lance which ran into his mouth. The death of Henry the third, which hapned about this time, fil∣led the Duke of Savoy with great hopes, especially considering his great intelligence in Provence. He designed first to make an end of the War with Geneva,1589. and afterwards to march with a great Army against Bonne,Aug. 22. which was kept by three Companies of Foot. The Switzers finding themselves not strong enough to relieve the be∣sieged sat still, and the place having been battered with two hun∣dred Cannon shot, the Garrison surrendred upon promise of their lives saved;Mercier the Minister flead alive. but in coming out they were enclosed by the Horse, and cut in pieces, reserving only Mercier the Minister to be flead alive, which was done two years after in Bonne. Some counselled his High∣ness to prosecute his Victory, and to seize upon part of the Bernoises Country, whom he had quelled; but he chose rather to come to an agreement with them, that he might afterwards go into Provence: He endeavoured likewise to get the Genevoises to make him some offers of submission, but they would not yield to it; so that to keep them in, he erected a Fort called S. Maurice at Versoy and raised a plat∣form on the side of the Lake, for to batter with his Cannon the Barks, which should venture,Octob. to set out from Geneva; he left the Baron of Serra Governor there, and he withdrew his Army beyond the Mounts. The Genevoises having this thorn in their foot, called a Council, wherein it was resolved to obtain this Fort at any rate; having ga∣thered then all their Forces, viz. 800. Foot, two Troops of Horse, two Troops of Argoulets of Light-Horsmen, and 150. Volun∣teers, under the Command of the Sieur Lubigny, whom the King had sent them, they set out about ten of the Clock at night, after they had been at publick Prayer, being furnished with Petards and scaling Ladders.Versoy be∣sieged and taken. The Garrison of Versoy who had been harrased all day on purpose by false Alarms, were a good part of them asleep. The Ge∣nevoises being arrived at two of the Clock in the morning before Ver∣soy, divided themselves into four Companies. The Horse made a halt, and the body of Foot went to the Gate which looks directly to Copet to set the Petard, against it. The other party climbed up the Walls, and seventeen of the resolutest of them followed a Peasant who was their guide, with iron barrs on their shoulders; he led them between the Lake and the Borough, to a passage where there was a
private entry into the place. The nearest Sentinel gave the alarm to the Corps du Guard, but these seventeen Soldiers not giving them time to bethink themselves, knocked down several of them with their Partisans and Cutlaces. Some Captains being awaked would have put themselves into a posture of defence, but they were soon di∣spatched; the Baron endeavouring to rally the rest, saw himself at∣tacked by those who had broken open the Gate, and scaled the Walls. All that he could do before it was day, was to retire in haste with a∣bout two hundred Soldiers into the Castle, having left in the Bo∣rough near two hundred of his men dead on the place.Nov. 8. This same Baron, who had often threatned the Genevoises to force them by Fa∣mine to come with halters about their necks to cry the Duke mercy, found himself then not a little in trouble, being destitute of both Wine and Water, and the most part of his Soldiers having nothing but their Wastecoats. Yet to divert the Assailants, and to give notice to the neighbouring Garrisons to come and help him, he made his Cannon thunder the next morning till night against the houses of Versoy; having continued thus the day following to little purpose against the besiegers, and seeing no succours coming, he came to composition. They marched out with their Drums on their back, their Matches put out, and their Colours rolled up, and were con∣veyed as far as Gex; great store of Ammunition which was found there was carried to Geneva. Sixty Turkish Slaves who had wrought at the Fort were permitted to depart, the Fort was afterwards de∣molished, and the greatest part of the houses burnt. The remaining part of the Year was passed over in several exploits of small conse∣quence. On the first day of the following Year,Jan. 2. a party of Horse from Geneva beat a party of Savoyards;1590. and a body of Genevoise Foot at∣tacked the Castle of the Bastie on the side of Versoy, from which they were vigorously repelled; but twelve days after they returned again, bringing along with them their Cannon. The Garrison surrendring, the place was demolished. Some days after the Genevoises surprized the City of Gex,Gex surpri∣zed. and so straitly beleaguer'd the Castle, that it was surrendred the next morning.Jan. 18. The Castle, of Monthoux which was full of resolute persons, sworn Enemies to Geneva, was forced to yield, and all those who were in it were put to the sword.March 29. The Savoyards on their side attacked the Fort of Arve, from which they were twice beat off. The Genevoises, after the taking of Gex and some other small places, resolved to attack the Castle of Pierre, which had often molested them. Lurbigny then marching out with some Troops, there were 50 Argoulets or light-horsemen,April 16. who set upon the first, and met about 30 Harquebuzieres or Carbineers, belonging to La Cluse, near the Village of Farges: they had taken away the Bell of the Church, which they paid dearly for: for the light-horse set upon them so fiercely that scarcely four of them escaped, the Genevoises having only one of their Serjeants wounded. D'Arsene, who was Governor of the Castle of Pierre, pretended he would come to their assistance; but seeing the Troops come upon him so fast, he shut himself up, and surrendred two days after, without offering any great resistance.
Lurbigny laying hold of this opportunity, determined to try what he could do on la Cluse. He dispatched away for this purpose three Companies to the other side of the Fort to block up the passages. He placed, at the same time, People on the Mountains to roll thence great Stones on the besieged, causing the Cannon to play from his side, which beat down the murthering Pieces, and the Cloister of Ravelin, which lay before the Fort. This Ravelin was won three days after notwithstanding the vigorous resistance of the besieged, and the frequent shot from the Fort of Wache on the other side the Rhosne. The next Morning the Assailants seat∣ing themselves at the foot of the Fort, they plied the besieged with Petards, Mines, and Granadoes. Moreover, there was thrown down into the Fort lighted Straw, which almost choaked the be∣sieged with smoke. Their fellows from Wache encouraged them, telling them their relief was approaching; as indeed it was. The Troops from Savoy gave notice of their coming to their relief from three several parts.La Cluse sur∣renders. Yet notwithstanding , Lurbigny per∣ceiving his Men in good heart, and resolved to carry away the place, more vigorously continued his Mines; so that the besieged seeing themselves in this extremity, and upon the point of being taken by main force, capitulated, promising to leave the place if they were not relieved before such an hour the next day, which was consented to. The Troops from Savoy being tired, and having rested that Night at Chatillon, came not within the time. Lurbig∣ny used a stratagem, to the end the besiged might not hear the hollowings and shouts of Joy, which they of the Fort of Wache made, seeing the succours approach; for he caused the Drums to beat, and the Trumpets to sound continually near the Fort: so that the Captain, a Piedmontois, who commanded it, marched out with 28 Soldiers,April 21. being all that were left; and at the same time Lur∣bigny entred into the Fort. The Savoyards coming near, and be∣lieving the place still belonged to them, called the Captain by his name, and were much amazed to be answered with Musquet-shot. Yet after some skirmishes, Dom Amedée Bastard of Savoy, having seized on an advantagious Post on the neighbouring Mountain, through the cowardise of Captain Esgaillon who was left there, Lurbigny saw plainly he could not hold la Cluse against a whole Army and in an Enemies Country, which caused him to leave it, having blown up part of it. He brought back his Troops to Ge∣neva, and at the same time the Enemy made a furious spoil in all the Bailiwich of Gex, and put the Fort again in a posture of de∣fence. Esgaillon was afterwards sentenced by the Council of 200 to be beheaded;Esgaillon beheaded. which Sentence was executed, notwithstanding the intercession of many Persons of quality for him. Eight days after the Garisons of Thonon and other neighbour∣ing places,May 21. having notice that three Barks were set out from Morges bound for Geneva, laden with Merchandises, and had in them 10000 Crowns besides,The Savoyards set upon three Barks bound for Geneva. and that they sailed slowly without any Convoy; they thereupon began to devise how to take them. For this ef∣fect they imbarked 130 Soldiers on two Frigates and some Boats: but the Bayliff of Nions having notice of their design, gathered
immediately what Forces he could to prevent them. Colonel Diespach, attended by a Party of Horse, advanced towards Rll, where the Barks then gently sailed. Yet could not he come there so soon, but that the Savoyards had already seized on a Bark, and began to divide the spoil, having for their greater security planted 30 Musqueteers on the shoar. But seeing People from all parts coming in upon them, they let go their Prize, and were contented to carry away only some Cheeses and other Provisions to the va∣lue of 50 Crowns. They retired in disorder, but for want of Boats they could not be pursued; there were only two of them kil∣led. And Geneva thanked their Allies of Nyon for their so ready help. There seldom passed a Week without some act of Hostility on one side or other. Captain Guiche, who was Governor of the Ca∣stle of Crest for Geneva, going out to Doveine and the neighbour∣ing Villages,Guiche assaul∣ted by the Peasants. to receive the contributions laid on the Peasants, they began to  their Beacons, and in a little time there were ga∣thered 300 Men, who set upon this small Company of seventeen Foot-Soldiers, and seven Horse, who having been several times routed, rallied again by the valorous Conduct of two of these Horsmen, and in a strait passage knocked down the chief of these Peasants, and killed three others, having taken three more who were woun∣ded. But fortune did not always favour the Genevoises: for march∣ing forth two days after to surprize the Garison of Brant in the Bailywick of Thonon, they were vigorously repelled, having lost twenty of their Men. In the Week following there was a very considerable encounter, the Peasants having alarmed the City by break of day upon ac∣count of the Savoy Troops, who had set fire on the Bailywick of Gex, and had driven away 300 head of Cattle: an hour after some Horse and Foot pursued them, being 400 Foot-men, and 150 Lancers. The light-horsemen of Geneva frequently skirmished with them as they retired, Lurbigny not intending to hazard a Bat∣tle with them. The Savoyards finding it difficult to carry off their prey, there being several of the hindermost of their company already slain,Lurbigny defeats the Savoyards. left their Booty and kept close together. Lurbigny taking good notice of them, and judging them to be weary, gave the Lancers a rough charge: who amazed at so fierce an on∣set, and seeing several overthrown, fled, having good Horses and better Spurs, leaving their Foot behind, who finding themselves no longer guarded, endeavoured to get on the side of la Cluse: but being hemmed in by Lurbigny, he gave them such a fierce charge, that in the Village of Farges, or thereabouts, there remained 120 dead on the place, both Spaniards and Italians, and the rest were put to flight. The Geneva Troops, wearied and almost spent with heat, having performed all this, fasting from five of the Clock in the Morning, returned back into the City towards six of the Clock in the Evening, bringing along with them three Drums, two Co∣lours, and great quantity of Arms, and five Prisoners. Lurbigny lost but one Man: but he being hot in pursuit, and coming in to the rescue of one of his Troopers who had advanced too far, he
got a fall off his Horse, and being a corpulent Man, he bruised his Body in several places, which caused him a great while to keep his Bed. Two days after Dom Amedée, the Duke his Brother's Lieutenant, sent a Drummer to Geneva, to know the number of the Prisoners, saying, That he found his Army diminished by 400 Men, com∣plaining he was too rudely dealt withal, they having not so much as spared his Drummers. Answer was made him, That they were found, as the others, with their Arms in their hands: setting before him the cruelty which his Troops had exercised in all the Villages, where they had made War against the weakest of their Subjects, setting upon old Men, Women, and Children, who were not able to resist them. They hindred him not from doing yet worse in all the Country of Gex. Another time, when the Light-horse and Cavalry made a sally out of Geneva, the Enemy made himself amends for his former disgrace. They were gone with a Company of Foot, and some Volunteers, on the side of the Fort of Wache to Forrage the Coun∣try. Half a League distant from Vourban they spied 120 Lancers, who were strengthened by four divisions of Foot. One of the Ca∣ptains of the Horse would not tarry till they were advanced near them, but caused the Trumpets to sound, so that the Light-horse∣men began to run in upon them a full gallop, and overthrew them, having likewise put the Lancers to flight. But instead of prosecuting the Victory, this Captain who had been too hasty in sounding the Charge, was as hasty in sounding the Retreat, be∣ing affrighted at some shouting which he heard afar off, which he thought was an Army making up to them. Having then several times cried out, Let us turn back; these words being reiterated, so greatly dismaied his Party, that they began to retreat disorderly. The Lancers perceiving that they began to turn backs, rallied themselves and pursued the Genevoises for two Leagues together,Genevoises worsted. as far as Bernay, slew twenty of them, and carried away forty of them Prisoners to Wache. It is certain that this defeat had been greater, had they pursued but half a League further these Run∣aways, who were stupefied with shame and a panick fear. There were endeavours made to wipe off this disgrace by several inroads into Savoy. The absence of the Sieur Lurbigny, who still kept his Bed, was partly the occasion of this rout, and of another more to be lamen∣ted, which hapned awhile after: for the Soldiers wanting an ex∣perienced Captain,1590. and one whom they might respect, observed no order.July 6. Dom Amedée coming into the Country of Gex, with 500 Horse, and 1500 Foot, placed a Guard in several Villages a League distant from Geneva. The next Morning he laid an Am∣bush near Bouchet and Chatelaine of several Squadrons of Horse and Companies of Foot,Amedée says Ambushes about Geneva. leaving the Plain which lay betwixt these two Villages at liberty. A Company of Foot, coming out of the Town by break of day, had been inclosed by them, but they de∣fending themselves, by means of the Hedges and Ditches, got off. Dom Amedée, desirous of drawing a greater number of the
Genevoises into these Ambuscades, commanded a Party of Horse to drive away openly several Herds of Cattel, and to kill some Peasants: An alarm being given to the City thereupon, both Horse and Foot croud out of it in throngs, half armed, and without any Leader, to the assistance of their Companions, who discovering no Body in the Plain between Chatelaine and Bouchet, kept on their way to the end, not minding how they should return, and in an instant saw themselves surrounded by the Savoy-horse, attended by seve∣ral Companies of Foot who thundered upon them. This skirmish was exceeding sharp,The Genevoises defeated. and lasted almost an hour: at length the Geneva-horse finding themselves weakened, and unable to hold out, began to give back; and so did the Foot, when the Enemies ha∣ving disordered them, wholly defeated them. An hundred Citi∣zens and Inhabitants lay dead on the place, and as many Peasants who bore Arms. They who could reach the Town, died for the most part of their wounds, and especially those who were carried to the Hospital, whose Physician instead of curing them poyson∣ed their wounds. The villain some seventeen or eighteen Years af∣ter received the reward of his crimes. This defeat gave such an alarm to the City, that they within thought the Enemy was at their Gates, as indeed he drew near, and was saluted by the Can∣non: But moreover in this encounter there was nothing but con∣fusion, there being neither Cannoneers nor Ammunition at hand. They who have since considered this fatal day, have marvelled that one of them who went out could return alive, so great was the confusion. Yet this Victory was dear bought by the Enemy, at the beginning of the fight, so that he might say with Pyrrhus: If we win another Battel, which costs us as much as this, we are undone. The Savoyards expected that at Night the Genevoises would come and carry away their dead, to the end they might make a new slaugh∣ter: but the present consternation of the City, and the prudence of Lurbigny, who notwithstanding his ilness, stood without the Gates in his Night-gown, to hinder any farther mischief they were kept back. The Company of Foot-Soldiers, who had been beset in the Morning, came off best, for they having couragiously de∣fended themselves, returned at Night into the City, having lost not above eight or nine Soldiers. The arrival of the Sieur Clugny Baron of Conforgien, who was an excellent Soldier,Aug. 23. gave them fresh hopes, being sent to command the Geneva Forces:The Baron of Conforgien arrives at Geneva. for an hour after he had light of his Horse, three Companies were commanded to be in a readiness in the Evening, and to make their appearance before their Captains Lodgings. They Embarked at nine of the Clock at Night, stear∣ing their course towards Roolle, to pass over immediately to the shoar which lies over-against the little City of Evian, on which they had a design. But those of that City hearing of their coming, strengthened themselves by an addition of five companies to their Guard; which the other perceiving, hoisted up ail and re∣turned without doing any thing. Yet the Frigats made some courses on the Lake, and brought home some booty.
Towards the midst of September, the Enemy not appearing it was thought they were retired: besides that several Peasants either over∣credulous or suborned for that purpose assured the Magistrates that there was not in all Focigny, above three hundred Foot, and a hun∣dred Horse, upon which it was resolved to forrage within half a League from Bonne; But a spy carrying notice thereof to the Baron of Hermance, he sent to all the Garrisons, so that the night follow∣ing there came to him two hundred Horse and five hundred Foot, with which Forces he designed to inclose the Genevoises by an ambush, when they were laden with spoil. The Genevoises were as little careful of their Enemies as if they had been thirty Leagues off, and imagined their booty so easie to be obtained, that although the Baron of Conforgien was so prudent to give order to march out with their greatest strength, to defend themselves if need required, yet the greatest part of them having slept that Night at their ease, without thinking on their equipage, could not get themselves ready. So that the train of these Vin∣tagers consisted only of 150 Foot, and 130 Horse, who went out with their Chariots and Tuns, about six or seven of the Clock in the Morning, not dreaming of fighting, being accompanied with several Peasants,Hermance lays an Ambush for the Gene∣voises gather∣ing their Wine-harvest to gather the Vine-harvest, which they imagined would be done without the least trouble. In the mean time came the Baron of Hermance, whilst they were busie at work, through bie-ways and beset the passages, placing eighty Musqueteers in a Mill on the River of Menonge, posting others on the Banks, and the rest in Ambushes, and so waited for them of Geneva, without any noise, till Noon, about which time they were to return. Three Squadrons of Lancers being discovered, with Foot-Soldiers in seve∣ral places; notice hereof was given to the Baron of Conforgien, who, without seeming astonished at the matter, encouraged his Soldiers, and said Prayers himself; which done, observing the Ene∣my as near as he could, he sent a Company on one side to begin the attack, and on the other fifty stout resolute fellows to gain the Mill, thirty Horse to relieve both Parties as need should re∣quire, and to get some advantagious ground, keeping with him the greatest number to help where there would be most need. The fifty went resolutely through the Musquet-shot to the Mill, killing and taking Prisoners as many as they found there. Whilst the Baron of Hermance's Lancers making no reckoning of the thir∣ty Horse, whom they imagined would be soon dispatched, they set upon a Company of Light-horse: but they had no sooner as∣sailed them, but that the foresaid Party of thirty Horse broke in upon their Squadrons through their Flanks, and, assisted by the Light-horse, put them to a rout. Another of the Enemies Squadrons having seen ten or twelve of their Company slain by an Ambuscade, began to fall back, and was immediately set upon and overthrown by the Horse, who being assisted by the Infantry, fell upon a great Body of the Enemies Foot, who yielded after some resistance, and the greatest part of them lay in the dust. This combat lasted three hours, and was one of the notablest Victories the Genevoises had ever yet ob∣tained.
The Baron of Conforgiens Horse was killed under him, who ma∣naged his business with a marvelous prudence and presence of mind. One of his Foot Captains likewise bravely signalized himself,The Valour of a Captain. and having slain five of the Enemy with his Sword, he at length lost its guard, yet did he continue fighting with the Blade of it, with which he strook a Halbard out of a Serjeants hand, took him by the Col∣lar and stabb'd him; got a Horse and a Sword from another whom he pursued, and animated the rest by his example. Although at first there were several who had more mind to get away than to stand it out and fight, yet the resolution of some edged on the rest, and the present strait made them all resolute. The spie who had advertised the Baron of Hermance, and a rash Monk who bore a Mace, were found lying amongst the dead, with two Captains, besides several Lieute∣nants and Ensigns. In fine this was so general a defeat, that some days after, several Horsemen riding out to number the dead, found two hundred and sixty two lying in the Field, and almost as many amongst the Vines and along the Banks; so that it was judged the Savoyards lost three hundred and fifty who were slain, and one hun∣dred who were taken Prisoners, besides eighty who were wounded. The Baron of Hermance having had almost all his Company of Red∣coats killed, saved himself on a Spanish Gennet. The booty was very considerable, for the most of them were well clad, and several Gentlemen had Velvet Coats or of rich stuffs laid in with rich gold and silver, as if they were going to a wedding; so sure were they (as they imagined) of the Victory. It is reported they intended to put all to the Sword, without troubling themselves with taking any Prisoners. The Genevoises lost but ten Foot-men, and one Trooper, and had but fifteen of their men wounded, who were all of them curable. This Victory was owing to the Baron of Conforgiens pru∣dent conduct, and the exact obedience of the Soldiers; so likewise did he solemnly return thanks unto God in the midst of his little Ar∣my, before he stirred out of the place. The rest of the Month was spent in making inroads into Savoy, and in the demolishing some Castles. Towards the end of the following months the Genevoises made a very desperate attempt.Octob. 29. In the evening all the Companies both Horse and Foot marched out through the new Gate, and passed over the Arve, and took the Road which leads to Crusille, a small and weak City about three Leagues distant from Geneva. There were in it three Companies of Neapolitans, Spaniards, and Italians, great Bou∣tefeus, and who had extreamly wasted and destroyed the Country of Gex. The Peasants perceiving these Forces making towards them, alarm'd the whole Country; and the noise of this reached to Cru∣sille at one of the Clock at night. One part of the Garrison made no reckoning of it, but the wisest of them went and kept watch about the Walls, and some other betook themselves to a Platform, fortifi∣ed with part of their Baggage. A little before day, the Genevoises ap∣proached near it,Crusille sacked ad burat. and Prayers being ended, the Baron of Conforgien sounded a Charge, and offered to scale the City; the besieged made some resistance, but confiding in the Castle and Platform, the Soldi∣ers withdrew thither; the City was sacked, and the greatest part of
it burnt; those Soldiers who were found in the houses, were all of them put to the Sword: for the Genevoises would not trouble them∣selves with Prisoners, the Prisons being already full, and they on their side desired no quarter. The Baron observing his men to be scat∣tered and laden with booty, and fearing lest they should be set upon by the Enemy from the Castle, and perceiving likewise the whole Country to be alarm'd, he sounded a retreat, having staid there six hours, and having lost but three Soldiers and a Lieutenant; the Ene∣my lost on their side a hundred men. The Year was ended in the performance of actions of small importance, they of Geneva having burnt the Villages of Thyole and Frangy. Sancy returned with fresh Forces, and set on foot new designs. On New-years-day following,1591. the Castle of Buringe was besieged by the Kings Army, together with the Forces of Geneva;Jan. 1. both of which consisting of two thousand men,Buringe be∣sieged. were commanded by the Sieurs of Sancy, Lurbigny and Conforgien. Three hundred of the Dukes Lan∣cers pursuing some Geneva Curriers, came into the very quarters of the Besiegers, and had surprized a party of them, had they come with less noise; some Light-Horsemen and Albanoises whom the French Ambassador had sent from Venice, got immediately on Horse∣back, and with the help of some Foot fell upon the Lancers, overthrow∣ing in an instant their Captain Christopher Guevara. The Lancers fought on still, but seeing sixty of their men lying on the ground, they drew back and retired in disorder; the next morning the as∣sault began a fresh more vehemently than before, and the besieged who had at first appeared very hot, desired to come to composition: but no other terms were admitted but to render themselves at the Ge∣nerals discretion, being threatned with no quarter if they tarried till the next assault. They perceiving that they could not obtain what they desired, got through a back door to the Bridge of Arve, from which the Assailants could not hinder them; they escaped in disorder, and were pursued as far as Bonne. This hapned well for the Soldiers, a great many of whom would without doubt have perished had they given another assault to the place, the breach being a Pikes length from the ground, and fortified with a Ravelin, and an inward Wall and a Bulwark behind it. This Castle was demolished, but the Enemy built it again and made it tenable. Thonon was likewise retaken by Quitry.Feb. 6. The French Soldiers mind∣ing nothing but their plundering,1591. committed several outrages. The Castle was rendred up on composition, and there was found in it Am∣munition to the value of six or seven thousand Crowns of gold; the same was done at Evian, they of the Castle whom the Sieur of Bon∣villars commanded,Feb. 11. held out for some days, but seeing no succours coming,The Dukes Army ap∣proaches. surrendered, their Arms and Jewels saved, the Country was afterwards plundered. In the mean time the chief of the Royal Ar∣my holding a Council, they were told that the Dukes Army was ar∣rived at Roche consisting of six thousand Foot, and four hundred Dra∣goons, and five hundred Lancers. Olivarez an old and experienced Captain who commanded the Spaniards in the Dukes Army, counselled them not to advance, but to watch the motions of the French for to take them upon an advan∣tage, alledging that want of Provision would force them to retire,
or if they engaged farther into Savoy, their defeat would be ea∣sie. Dom Amedee liked well this Advice, but Sonas the Marquis of Treffort, and the Earl of Chateau Neuf, who had more heat than light in his head, was of opinion they should march forward without de∣lay, alledging there would redound more honour and advantage to them in chastising the French, than in expecting till they should re∣turn of their own accord. That Quitry's Camp consisted most of pillagers who were laden with spoil, and who for fear of losing it, would chuse rather to use their feet than hands; and in short, that their own Army being ill paid would soon disband themselves, if they stood still without fighting. This Counsel was taken, and the attack was resolved upon. The Sieurs of Sancy, Quitry and Conforgien, who were encamped at Buringe, being advertised that this Army was coming to break in upon them, took out immediately the Garrisons of Polinge and Visery, and fired these Castles, and sent out Scouts to view the Enemy. They had an account by some Prisoners, but lest it might be thought they were afraid, they remained one day more in the same place, and the next morning instead of advancing further into Focigny, they came and encamped on this side Menoge at Anemasse, and Ville-la-grand, to keep themselves from any surprizal, and to hinder the enemies from posting themselves towards this River between Geneva and them.1591. Dom Amedeé having passed over the Arve,March 12. came and seated himself at Bergue Lussinge and other Villages. At noon the Kings Army and Genevoises possessed themselves of the highest part of the plain of Mon∣thoux, where they did not believe the Dukes Army, although ex∣ceeding them far in strength, durst to attack them; but scarcely were they seated, when five hundred Musqueteers chosen out of the Dukes Army,The Kings Army attach∣ed by the Savoyards. came and charged a French Regiment posted about a mile distant from the main body to keep a Copse at the bottom of a little hill, where they had begun to block up themselves. The at∣tack was so vigorous, that the French were immediately put to flight. Quitry sent three or four hundred Musqueteers of Chantals and Che∣ron's Regiments to help them, with three Companies belonging to the Baron of S. Remy; but Dom Amedeé and Olivarez sent forth a party of about thirteen hundred Musqueteers who won the Copse, Ditches, and Counter-scarps; Sonas and the Earl of Tressort riding up at the same time to second them, leaping over a thick short hedge to en∣ter into the plain. When the Baron of Conforgien seeing them al∣most half over,Sonas slain. he took this opportunity to fall upon them, and charged them so vigorously, that Sonas, and the most resolute of his fellows being killed in the place, the rest were put to flight, and pursued beyond the hedge, as far as the main body of the Army; where lay intrenched Dom Amedeé, and Olivarez, having a thick hedg on one side of them. On the other part Chantal and Cherons Regi∣ments had newly attacked the one thousand three hundred Musque∣teers, with whom they had a sharp conflict; but the Spaniards and Neapolitans seeing their Horse routed, began to quit their ground, and were beat back as far as the place where their main body lay, consisting of three thousand men, who had not stirred all this while. They retired so fast that they threw one another into the Ditch, and unhappy was he who was so tall that he could not stoop low enough
to avoid the Shot. Their main Body defended them: and the victo∣rious rallying with much difficulty, having first rifled the slain, who were near 300, amongst whom were found above 100 Gen∣tlemen, with Sonas their Leader. The Two Armies kept afterwards in sight one of another till Night. At midnight the Savoyards dis-encamped and marched to Focig∣ny, and passed over the River at Buringe, whose Bridge they broke down lest they should be pursued. On the side of the French, al∣though their loss was not half so great as their Enemies, yet did they find themselves much weakned, so that to avoid an utter dis∣sipation of their Forces, they took the way which led to the Franche-Comté, and instead of the Baron of Conforgien, were left at Geneva the Sieur Chaumont, and Captain Caron. During these transactions died at Geneva Anthony Sadeel Baron of Chandieu,Sadeel dies at Geneva. who had been Minister of Paris, of Nismes, of Rochelle, and at last of Geneva; to which City he left several Writings and Monuments of his Eloquence and Learning in Divinity, and espe∣cially in the Holy Tongue: he had taken this Hebrew word Sadeel for his name, which signifies in our Language, Gods Field, being the same with his French name. The Savoyards being withdrawn,May 17. there were several inroads made into their Country, in one of which there was taken at Thonon the Baron of Hermance, who was honorably lodged in the Town house, but endeavouring to make an escape six Months after, he was kept close Prisoner in the Bishops Palace, where he remained till the Month of February in the following Year, having paid 8000 Crowns of Gold for his Ransom, by the mediation of some Lords of Valais, who came for that purpose to Geneva. The Baron of Conforgien being returned to Geneva with some Horse,1592.Octob. caused them to gather in their Vintage-harvest towards Bonne in the beginning of October, the Baron of Hermance not daring to hinder him, although he was the strongest, remembring the overthrows which he had received from him in the Year 1590. He surprized afterwards Bonneville,Nov. made inroads into Anecy, and beat three Companies of Soldiers who guarded the Suburb of Roche.1593. After which,March 19. by the consent of the City, he came to a Treaty with the Baron of Hermance, but which produced nothing. And in the following Month,April 17. having taken distaste at some proceedings which were a little too precise against him and his Men,Conforgien re∣turns home. he ob∣tained leave to return. Soon after his departure Joachim of Rye Marquiss of Treffort, came and incamped with 300 Horse and 800 Foot at Lancy, near the Fort of Arve, where there was some skirmishing, in which the Master of his Camp was killed. He being retired, the Genevoises concluded to demolish the Village of Lancy,Lancy demo∣lished. in consideration of its being a place which might serve hereafter for a retreat to the Enemy; which resolution was put immediately into execution, but with much regret, it being a very pleasant Village, having near seventy Houses in it. The Baron of Conforgien was sent for to oppose the Marquiss of Treffort, but it was two Months before he came, about the time when there was a Truce made to last
three Months betwixt the King of France and the Confederate Princes.Sept. 9. The Duke of Savoy likewise was comprehended, and ac∣cepted of the proposal. The Duke's Secretary Esdiguieres bring∣ing a Copy along with him, of this Truce, to Geneva, to know whether they would accept of it; which was consented to by the Council of two hundred, and published on the 16th of Sep∣tember. Six days after arrived Deputies from the four Cantons,1593. ma∣king offer of their mediation between the Duke and the City; for which they had thanks: And answer was returned them, That they could not leave the French-Kings interest, who would be sure to resent it, should they conclude a Peace. The Truce was after∣wards continued,1594. and lasted two Years, without any publication; and during this time the City Officers demolished the Fort of Arve,The Fort of Arve demo∣lished. it occasioning oftentimes the Enemy to invade them. During this Truce the Genevoises kept a Governor under the Kings name in the Country of Gex,1595. who held his Court of Justice in Geneva, after the same maner as the Stewards of Gaillard, Cha∣blais, and of the Country beyond the Arve. The Savoyards and Genevoises began to be conversant one with another, and to ex∣change Prisoners. There was a Genevois who had been taken thir∣ty Years since, and had all that time served in the Gallies, never sending word what was become of him, so that he was supposed to be dead; his Wife, seven Years after his detention, was mar∣ried again, and had lived another seven Years with her second Husband. At the end of thirty Years, this her first Husband re∣turned to Geneva, and would have entred into his House. His Wife took him at first for an Impostor: whether that this long space of time had deprived her of all knowledge of him, or that the grayness of his Hair and wrinkles in his Fore-head had made this alteration, he having few charms left him to attract a Womans love. The Husband might swear as long as he pleased that he was the Man, yet for all this would she not believe him. The business at length came to a trial at Law, where he brought such proofs of his being her Husband, that she openly acknow∣ledged that it were impossible, for any but him, to have know∣ledge of so many minute particulars. Having then at length owned him for her Husband, they lived afterwards a great while toge∣ther. In the Year 1597.1597. there was spread a report throughout Ger∣many, Holland,Sep. and Italy, that Beza had renounced his Religion be∣fore the Senate,Beza reported to have turn∣ed Papist. and had exhorted the Magistrates to reconcile them∣selves to the Church of Rome. And, that by a special order from the Pope, the Bishop had absolved him before his death, and that in effect the City had sent Deputies to Rome to yield obedience to the Pope: which caused several People in Italy to resort to Rome to see these supposed Deputies. And yet Beza died not till six Years after. There was a more likely report of a Peace concluded betwixt the King and the confederate Princes:1568. it was not yet known whether Geneva should be comprehended:May. for the Dukes Subjects committed acts of Hostility, having driven away some Herds of
Cattel belonging to the Genevoises: whereupon they detained some Troopers, who were Spaniards, being in the Dukes service. The Savoyards had apprehended Hosea André a Minister, whom they had taken in Michaille; and for a requital the Earl of Salenove was de∣tained at Geneva. Two days after Dom Philippin the Bastard of Savoy,The Bastard of Savoy makes his en∣trance into Geneva. made his entrance into the City with a moderate Train, where he was highly treated by the Citizens. He on his part sparing no com∣plements. He departed the next Morning, and promised to pro∣cure the releasement of Hosea André; upon which the Earl of Sa∣lenove was released before-hand. Yet the Minister was not set at liberty, neither was there any likelihood of it, had he not dexte∣rously made his escape. The Peace was at length concluded betwixt the King of France,A Peace concluded. of Spain, and the Duke of Savoy; in which were likewise compre∣hended the Switzers and their Allies, and so by consequence, Gene∣va, as the King of France openly declared it by word of Mouth as well as by Letters; understanding thereby that the Duke should withdraw his Army. The Duke, who affirmed it was not com∣prehended, having not been named as the other Cities were, would not return answer by writing, lest he should prejudice his preten∣sions, causing only those Forces to withdraw who had marched over into Lombardy. Monsieur Villeroy in the printed Copy of the Treaty of Peace, had added to the 34th Article, written with his own Hand for the instruction of the Sieur Botheon, who was sent by the Duke to take the Copy of the Oath, That under the generality of the Allies and confederate Lords were comprehended them of Geneva. Chapeaurouge, their Deputy to the French-King, brought home Letters, wherein that King promised to defray all charges of the War.1598. The City to testifie how acceptable this news was to them,May. caused their great Guns to be discharged, and solemn Thanks to be returned to God in all their Churches. Yet was this rejoycing allaied by the return of the Plague, al∣though the mortality was not great, and by the troubles wherein they of Thonon were involved upon the account of Religion, occa∣sioned by a Capucin-Frier called Peter Cherubin, who would constrain the Inhabitants of that place, and them in the Countries there∣abouts, who were thought under obedience to the Duke, to return likewise to their old Religion. This Frier challenged the Mini∣sters to dispute publickly with them; which they would not agree to, chusing rather to defend themselves by writing: yet the Ma∣gistrates of Geneva made them consent to a verbal Conference: and in the mean the Duke arriving at Thonon to forward the mat∣ter, the greatest part of the People returned to their old Religion, alledging they were forsaken; upon which there were printed several Disputes and Libels, which served only to exasperate Mens spirits.May. Towards the end of May, John Serres died at Ge∣neva, having withdrew there after he had wrote the Histo∣ry of France:Serres dies at Geneva. his Wife and he were buried both together in the same day.
The Duke of Savoy continued his claims on the City, and got the Magistrates to consent to a Conference, which was held at Hermance by Deputies from both Parties, and lasted from the seven∣teenth of October, to the eleventh of November. His Highness's Deputies were the Sieur Jacob his Lieutenants on this side of the Mountains, the President Rochette, the President Berliet Baron of Bourget, Lambert Baron of Terny, and Marin Earl of Viry. The Deputies of Geneva were, the Councellors Maillet, Daufin, Lect and Roset, together with Secretary John Sarrasin. Them of Savoy made their demands, and were answered by them of Geneva in defence of their Priviledges. Whereunto the former made their re∣ply; and the latter returned a second answer: so that this con∣ference at Hermance, Copies of which having been taken, is a kind of Collection of all that can be said on that subject, and is sufficient to make a large Volume. The difference remained as before, it being a very difficult, if not impossible matter, for these two States, so opposite in their Interests and Religion, to come to any perfect agreement. Even the King himself, that he might allay the heats of both Parties, wrote Letters which bore Date from the 11th of No∣vember, 1599. in favour of the Genevoises, shewing that he took the City and its Territories into his Protection, understanding it to be comprised under the name of Ally and Confederate, as it had been already declared by the Deputies in the Treaty. The Duke being gone to Paris,1600. towards the beginning of the following Year, about the Marquisdom of Saluces, which King Henry urged him to restore,The Duke of Savoy desires that the King would desist from Prote∣cting Geneva. would have inserted in the Articles of Agreement, That the King should desist from protecting Geneva. He got the Bishop of Moderne the Popes Nuncio to mention it to his Majesty. This Prelate, watching his opportunity, tells him, There was a means whereby he might fairly end the difference between him and the Duke. That the same reason which enjoyned the Duke to render him the Marquisdom, insinuated in like manner, that his Ma∣jesty should not hinder the Duke from obtaining what belonged to him as his right. To which the King assenting, he drew from thence this consequence: That the City of Geneva belonging to the Duke, and nothing hindering him from re-establishing the Authority which his Fathers had in it, but only his Majesties Protection, it is therefore reasonable (said he) that if he restores to you the Marquisdom of Sa∣luces, which belongs to you, you should in like manner permit him to have the City of Geneva which is his own.1600. The King to answer this Argument, tells him the case was different; for it was not he who had taken the City into his Protection, but his predecessors, and that he was obliged to it by the Oath taken at the Treaty, and by the respect he owed his Predecessors: And farther, That what he had done, proceeding from the acknowledgment of the good services he had received from that City, it was neither handsom nor just to violate this Obligation. The Prelate had his answer ready: You will not Sir, said he, leave protecting Geneva because of the example of your Ancestors; and by the same reason the Duke is not obliged to restore you the Marquisdom of Saluces, because
it belongs not to you, but to the deceased King your predecessor who took it. To which the King replied, The Duke of Savoy hath usurped my Mar∣quisdom, nothing can excuse an Ʋsurper from restoring that which he hath taken; neither will I hinder his claims on Geneva, provided he pro∣ceeds not against them in a hostile manner: for if he uses violence, I know what I have to do. And whereas he is of opinion that if I should abandon them, he could soon subdue them to himself, I would therefore have him consider, how much thereby I should dishonour both my self and Kingdom. And thus dropt the Duke of Savoy's proposal, and consequently the Treaty of agreement. The King took the Field, and won in a short time Bresse and all Savoy, except the Castle of the Borough, and S. Catherines Fort which lay two Leagues distant from Geneva, before which he came and encamped. This Fort was built with five corners, and raised on four firm Bastions incompassed with Ditches, which laid the Campain level and open, on the highest part of which this Fort was situated. There was in it a Carrison of six hundred men, this was the sorest thorn in the Genevoises foot. So the King who desired to gratifie them, kindly received their Deputies, who were enjoyned to request of the King in consideration of the service which they had done the Crown, and of their sufferings in the late War, he would be pleased to put this Fort into their hands to be de∣molished, it having been so prejudicial to him. The Duke of Saully introduced these Deputies into the Kings presence. Theodorus de Beze chief Minister,Beza makes a Speech to the King. whose age and learning made him venerable amongst his own party, made a speech in behalf of the rest, which was but a general complement, in these terms: Sir, Humane Eloquence, being not sufficient to raise your praise to the pitch of your admirable actions; and my stile being too loose, and voice too weak to celebrate the fame of your Majesties virtues, which the Ʋniverse will pub∣lish without ceasing, seeing you never cease from performing actions worthy of glory and praise, I shall leave the celebration of the Elogies which are due to you to the holy Angels, for having rescued the Churches of God from oppression, and obtained for his children the liberty of serving him according to his divine Precepts, and to invoke him alone in the Trinity of persons. I shall content my self in saying and applying to hu∣mane things what Simeon said of divine, Now Lord, let thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, seeing that mine eyes have seen before I die, not only the deliverer of us your humble servants, but of all France, and of the faithful in general, who have tasted the effects of your precious bounty. To which the King answered,The Kings answer. Father, These few words which signifie much, are worthy the reputation which Monsieur Beze hath acquired by well speaking. I take them in good part, and accept them with those kind resentments they deserve. I will tell you, the Kings my predecessors ha∣ving ever held your City under their protection, I am resolved not onely to imitate them in this, and in all other things answerable to the glory of a King of France, but likewise to requite the sincere affection which your City hath ever shewed me, and would have him who hath presented you, whom I hold here by the hand, and who is so affectionate towards you, to be your Sollicitor; and that you signifie to him what you desire I should do for
you: for the matter must be a very difficult one which I shall not grant you. And whispering to the Deputies he told them, I know what you most de∣sire I should do, (for they had already mentioned it to the Duke of Sul∣ly,) You would have S. Katherines Fort demolished. There are seve∣ral people who would perswade me to desist, but I see plainly it is through envy, and therefore I shall not mind them. I will leave nothing undone which respects your advantage. S. Katherines Fort shall be razed, and here is a man in whom you confide, and that not without cause; (meaning the Duke of Sully,) to whose charge I commit this affair. From that time the City Gates were set open to all belonging to the Court and Army, so that there was reckoned one Evening to be in it above four thousand men; and amongst others, several Lords, as Messieurs of Guise, Elboeuf, Espernon, Guiche and Biron; the last of these walking with some Councellors of Geneva as he came to S. Gervais, upon some discourse begun, he clapt his hand to his Sword and told them, Gentlemen, This shall do your work, or I will lose my life. They thanked him for his good will, but he made it appear after∣wards that he meant otherwise than they understood him. Monsieur Sully who came likewise, eased them of their trouble in being so crouded with people, having ordered his Horse and several Volun∣teers to return to the Camp. The Fort capitulated soon after the Trench was made, they within promising to surrender, if they were not succoured in ten days,Decem. 16. which was only a formal business, seeing it was well known the Duke was not in a capacity to relieve them. The Garrison marched out beating their Drums,The Fort razed. and their Colours flying, with three pieces of Ordnance. Monsieur Sully blew up im∣mediately the Bastions by means of the Mine, of which the Genevoi∣ses having notice, according to the Kings Order, there came so ma∣ny of them, and fell so wholly to their work, that within a day or two there was not the least trace to be seen; the King gave them six Cannons which were found in the Fort. There hapned three months before a thing very remarkable:1600. After several great Claps of Thunder which lasted all the Morning,Sept. 16. the Rhosne after several ebbings and flowings,The Ebbings and flowings of the Rhosne. at length became dry in some places, where it was wont to be five foot deep; the Boats which were at the Lakes mouth relying on the ground, so that chil∣dren took up little Fish; and Smiths who dwelt on the Bridge came down, and picked up old Iron; but the waters immediately return∣ing, happy was he who could soonest get away. If one of these refluxes had lasted but one quarter of an hour, the houses on the Bridge, and part of S. Gervais would have been drowned; it is very likely that this prodigy was occasioned by some kind of Earthquake or up∣rising of the Earth, by which the ground where the Rhosne issues forth from the Lake, being twice or thrice lifted up by the subterra∣nean agitated vapours, hindred the Rhosne from running, and that the same ground sinking down again, by reason of its own weight, it took again its ordinary course. The same hapned in the year 1584. in that great Earthquake, which raised up that heap of Earth, which we have already mentioned, and caused the Lake to overflow twen∣ty paces, which instance may serve to confirm the other. All the difference lies here, that these exhalations were not strong enough to
force a passage, and to shake the neighbouring parts. That which makes this more clear, was an Earthquake which reached from Ge∣neva as far as Switzerland, which hapned a year after in the same month, with so great a violence, that Monsieur James Godefroy observed in his Memoires, that he was rocked in his bed with it after the same manner as if he had been in a Cradle. The War with Savoy was ended by the interposition of the Legat Aldobrandin,1601.Jan. 17. the Duke exchanging with the King the Marquisdom of Saluces for Bresse.The King of France de∣clares Geneva comprehen∣ded in the Treaty. His Majesty declared in his Letters dated the thirteenth of August, 1601. that Geneva although not expressed in the Treaty, yet was understood, and ought to enjoy the benefit of the Peace. The Duke yielded likewise the Bailliage of Gex with La Bresse which was held by the Genevoises, who desired the King to let it remain in their possession, as a place whereon depended the safeguard of their State: but the King told them he could not grant their request, seeing that by the Treaty held at Lyons betwixt him and the Duke, La Bresse, Veromey, and Gex, were to be incorporated into the Crown, and were never to be cut off from it, upon any oc∣casion. Immediately after this Liberty of Conscience was granted, and the Mass said in S. Peters Church at Gex. The Savoyards did not forbear their insultings over the Genevoises, having possessed themselves of the Villages of Focenay and Thonex; and would have in like manner seized on Vandoeuvres,April 5. but this Vil∣lage was defended by James des Arts, accompanied by a Minister, and some Soldiers who kept the Church, and drove out thence the Priests, who were brought in by force. In the Summer following the Jubilee was celebrated at Thonon,1602. where was contrived the famous enterprize of scaling Geneva.A Jubilee at Thonon, where the design was laid to scale Geneva. Cer∣tain Frenchmen whose occasions led them to and from the City, got notice of the design, and gave an account of it to their friends at Ge∣neva; which the Citizens could hardly believe, the Articles of Peace having been sworn to by both parties to be observed, resting secure on the two Treaties held at Verins and Lyons, not considering that the Invasion of these Villages, and the seizure of several Impropria∣tions, were the sparks of a fire which would soon break out into a flame. There were complaints made of this to the Sieur Albigny, Lieute∣nant General on this side of the Mountains; his proper name was De Gordes, son to him who had been Governor of Dauphiny; but he had left the Kings service for his Highnesses. He made answer to the Messengers from Geneva two several times, that it was both his own and his Masters intention to let them live in peace; and that his Highness meant the Treaty should be religiously observed. Moreover the President Rochelle Counsellor of State was arrived at Geneva some days before this Scalado, for to lull the Magistrates a∣sleep, to observe their countenance, and to understand the condition of the City; telling them it was expedient to make some lasting a∣greement, profering his assistance for the carrying on so good a work.A warning given to the Genevoises concerning the attempt on their City. Whereupon the Genevoises resting secure, and distrusting nothing, neglected the guarding of the City; although they had warning
given them even by the Dukes Subjects. Amongst others there came one from Chesne, who drawing near to the Gate, the day before the execution of the enterprize, told them positively that the Enemy was coming, and that they should stand upon their guard: but this advertisment was slighted, either for want of due heed, or else that they reputed this person to be some dealer in Visions. The Duke had caused several Troops to advance undiscerned into ocigny, the Duke of Nemour's Country, yet under the jurisdiction of Savoy; amongst the rest the Regiment of the Baron of La val d'Iseare, who was born in Picardy, which Regiment consisted of near eight hun∣dred men, the most part of them French fugitives, and people who would undertake any thing right or wrong. Brunaulieu this Ba∣rons Lieutenant had with some others viewed the City at his ease, taken the height of the walls, and the depths of the ditches in the night and had assured Albigny of the facility of the enterprize; moreover the intelligence which they held with the Syndick of the guard, who was to displace the Sentinel from that part where they were to scale, made their undertaking so sure, that on Saturday the eleventh of December, which was the day before the execution of their intended enterprize, several persons came into the City to buy Horses, and had spoken Aenigmatically that they would come the next day to conclude the bargain. It was confidently affirmed (how true I can∣not tell) that Brunaulieu before he set forth on this enterprize, had by a special dispensation received the extream Unction, swearing he would live no longer, if he could not effect his design; and that the rest had confessed themselves and taken the Sacrament upon it. The Jesuits and Capucins failed not to exhort both great and small to ob∣serve the Oath made at the Jubilee in Thonon for the extirpation of Hereticks. In the mean time Albigny began to draw up his men towards six of the Clock in the Evening near Bonne,Albigny draws up his men near Bonne. La Roche, and Bonneville. It was on the 11. or 12. day of the Month according to the old stile, and the longest night in the year. He had his Company of guards, the Regiment belonging to Baron de la val d' Isere, four Troops of Horse, and some Gentlemen of Savoy. The Spaniards and Neapoli∣tans quartered at Anecy, and were to make up the Rear-guard, and march up as soon as they had notice. Out of the first Troops were chosen three hundred men, armed at all points with Breast-plates, and their Helmets on their heads, their Pistols at their Girdles, their Cutlaces in their hands, and another party of them with half Pikes and Musquets. As they marched along they stopped the Pea∣sants in their way, lest they should alarm the City; yet were there some who escaped and came to the Gates thereof,Warning a se∣cond time gi∣ven to the City. giving notice to the Sentinels to stand upon their guard, the Enemy approaching but their words were not regarded, being taken for people who jested. The Watch whose duty was to lie out of the City, in order to discover any who should approach it, had dispersed themselves, and perceived not the Troops, who advanced undiscovered along the Arve. The Duke who doubted not of the success, came post Incognito from beyond the Mountains, and caused himself to be called Mon∣sieur
the Ambassador. He came the same Night to the Bridge of Tremblieres, which is a little Village about a League distant from Ge∣neva, that he might animate by his presence those who were fear∣ful. First of all a Hare starting up amongst them, as they drew near to Champel, where was the place of their Rendesvous, struck some of them with terror. About five or six hundred paces from the Ditch they spied several Stakes drove into the Ground, on which workmen were wont to hang their Serges to dry them. The Night being dark, and neither Moon or Stars appearing, there were them who took this for some Ambuscade laid by the City, and were thus ranged in a row in expectation of their coming. Yet they took courage, and having left the main Body of their Army in Plein-Palais, Brunaulieu and the resolutest of them, who had undertaken to scale the City, and who were come on Horse∣back, light off, and made towards the Counterscarp, and went down into the Ditch of Corraterie. No sooner were they there but a light of Wild-ducks arose, and put them to a start, they fear∣ing lest these Birds (like the Geese of the Capitol who saved Rome) would wake the Sentinels, and spoil their Enterprize. At length taking courage,The Savoy∣ards raised up Ladders against the City-Walls. they passed softly over the Ditch upon Hurdles, which they had laid to keep themselves from sink∣ing into the Mud, and raised up three Ladders against the Walls, near the Watch Tower towards Monnoye, and to try if any body heard them, they took up Stones and knocked with them against the Walls, as they since related. Brunaulieu had made the same tri∣al heretofore, and was not heard, because that for a long time they had placed no Watch there. But before we proceed, we may take notice of the form of their Ladders: they were coloured with black, to make them undiscerned in the dark, and made of several joyn∣ted pieces, that they might be more easier carried by the Mules, and shortned or lengthened as they had occasion. The Feet of them were shod with sharp Iron Spikes, that they might be easilier fastned, and stand firmer in the ground. The top of these Ladders, which were to touch the Wall, were furnished with a Pully, and covered with a thick Cloth, that they might slide the easier and with less noise. They who would better comprehend the fashion of them, may see part of them still kept in the Arse∣nal of Geneva. Besides these Ladders they were furnished with great Steel Ham∣mers, one end of which had sharp edges to cut the Chains of the Draw-bridge, the Locks and Bolts; they had likewise great Pin∣chers to pluck out Nails and Hinges from the Gates, and several Petards to burst them open. And being thus furnished, they began to climb. Sonas who was one of the resolutest of the Company,Sonas bleeds at Nose. and was determined to revenge the death of his Father, who was killed at Monthoux, began by a bad omen to bleed at Nose, before he ascen∣ded the Ladder, and being gotten half way up received such a blow by the fall of a Stone from the Wall, as almost took away his senses, and was forced to come down. Albigny, whom it most concerned that this enterprize should take effect, stood at the Lad∣ders
foot, encouraging his Soldiers, by setting before them the ho∣nour and booty which they might expect if they prevailed. He animated likewise Sonas, who began to climb again. A Scotch Je∣suit called Father Alexander,Alexander a Jesuit encou∣rages the Enterprizers. besides the exhortation which he had made them in Plein Palais, confessed them at the foot of the Lad∣der, assuring them, That if they should die in the Enterprize, the Rounds of the Ladders would be as so many steps leading them directly to Heaven. But the good Father could not foresee that it was on an other kind of Ladder provided for them that they were to get thither. He had likewise given them little Bills, wherein were written some passages of Holy Scripture; and other pieces of Paper, in the Form of Conjurations, which would preserve them, who carried them, from any violent death. It was about one of the Clock in the Morning when they be∣gan to mount,Dec. 12. and the 12th of December according to the old Style,Sonas with six others first climb up into the City. and the 22d of the said Month according to the new; all things were quiet and still, so that Sonas, Attignac, and six others, who were first entred into the City through Tartasse, which is a Gate within, always left open, walked about the Streets by couples, to observe whether the People were fast asleep, and whether this great silence was not some trick to intrap them. But all was quiet; And they behind climbed up in great numbers. The Duke understanding that the most couragious amongst his Men were entred without resistance,The Duke dispatches Messengers to all parts, to impart the news of their success. sent to the Spaniards and Nea∣politans, commanding them to come up quickly, and dispatched Curriers to all parts to carry news of this happy beginning, which caused it to be confidently reported in Piedmont, Savoy, and Dau∣phiné, that the City was taken. And indeed the Duke might well believe himself to be Master of it, there having already entred 200 of the stoutest Men in the Army; some of which lay flat on the Ground under the Trees of the Parapet, others stood up close against the Houses in Corraterie, till they should be stronger: for Brunaulieu and others who were chief mannagers of the design, in∣tended not to appear till four of the Clock in the Morning, that their Men might have more time to climb up, and that the Rear∣guard might draw near, and likewise that they might have more light to carry on a business of so great consequence. But before that time, betwixt two and three in the Morning, a Soldier, who stood Sentinel in the Tower of Monnoye, having heard some noise in the Ditch, called his Corporal, to know what it might be. The Corporal sends a Soldier with a Lanthorn; who takes along with him his Musquet, and gets upon the Parapet, and perceives some armed Men making towards him, to whom he cried, Who comes there? and having no answer, he discharged his Musquet at them. They immediately fell upon him, and as he cried, Arm, Arm, they knocked him down. Which the Soldier who stood on the Senti∣nel perceiving, he discharged his Piece to give notice to the main Guard, who, alas, were but six Men. Brunaulieu, and the most resolute amongst them, perceiving they were discovered, and that it was impossible for them to put it off any longer, and finding moreover that they were strong enough
in number in the City, resolved immediately to stand to it, and to dispose of their Men to the best advantage, and to set upon those who should oppose them, in four several places, viz. at the new Gate, at Tartasse, at Monnoye, and at the entrance of the Town-house, which they would keep till the Petards could be brought to the new Gate, to force a passage, and let in the Troops which lay at Plein-Palais: reserving a considerable Party to assist them, who still were climbing up. They fiercely then set upon the Guard at the new Gate, who were no more than thirteen Men, some of which belonged to the neighbouring Sentries. The most part of the Guard, when they had Fired, betook themselves to their Heels, and ran to give the Alarm to those who watched the Town-house, to the Bourg of Four, and to the gate of Rive. They were pursued as far as la Treille, which was speedily clapt to. The Enemies then finding this passage shut, came down to the new Gate, of which they were Masters. In the mean time, of the three who remained at this Gate, two of them hid themselves, and the third getting on the top of the Gate, advisedly thought to let down the Percul∣lice. The Person who mannaged the Petard, was amazed to find his design of applying it ineffectual, being prevented by the Per∣cullice. A Citizen, who was one of the first who awaked at this noise, came out of his House, which was near the Gate of Tartasse, and would have passed down half dressed, with his Halbard, to repair to his quarters at the new Gate. In coming down, he discovered four or five armed Men who made up to him to get before him to Tartasse. He believing they belonged to the City, asked them aloud, whereabouts the Enemy was: they still advancing towards him, cried out to him, Peace, Slave, come hither, and be on our side, God bless the Duke of Savoy: upon which, per∣ceiving it was the Enemy, he flies back, and alarm'd the neigh∣bouring streets. In the mean time the Enemy won the Gate of Tartasse, keeping their ground, and endeavoured to make good the passage. The Citizens ran thither, and began to barricado the way which led to this Gate. Some of them having been per∣ceived with their Torches, were wounded; others passing boldly on were killed. Canal, who was of the City-Council, and Captain of those parts of the City, a Man in years, but of great courage, was slain after this manner: He was helped in his passing over the Chain, which was fastned at the corner of the Street, and was de∣sired to venture no farther: yet, not believing the Enemy to be so near, he would needs go on till it was too late for him to think of returning. The Enemies perceiving the Citizens to ga∣ther apace, left the place, and returned to their fellows at the new Gate. In the mean time the City being througly alarm'd, some of them rendred themselves according to custom at their usual place of Ren∣dezvous; others without any stop, ran where was the greatest dan∣ger, directly upon the Enemy, who believing that they had fini∣shed their Enterprize, shouted out a-long Corraterie, God bless the
King of Spain, God bless the Duke of Savoy, the City is our own; Kill, kill, kill them; Down with them, down with them. The first who met were known to one another by their Watch-word, which consisted in a kind of noise like the croaking of a Frog, or like unto that which Riders use in incouraging their Horses. When they were asked by them of the City, Who goes there? They answered, Friends. There were some, who to divide them who might come in to help their Companions, cried out aloud, Arm, Arm, Arm, the Enemy is at the Gate of Rive. The Enemy had broke twice through the Guards at Monnoye, and having burst open one of the Doors, behind which the Soldi∣ers had barricadoed themselves, would have passed on further, and have rushed into the City: but being met by the Grand Rounds, who made head against them, there were some of them left dead in the place. The Citizens likewise coming in, briskly charged those who put themselves in a posture of passing through this Gate of Monnoye, killed one on the Bridge of Rhosne, and another be∣tween the Gate and the Percullice, which was let down. Being driven back thence, there were some who endeavoured to break into the Houses in Corraterie, to plunder them, or to pass through into the City-street, and began first with Julien Piaget's House, where they killed the Serving man, and applied a Petard to the Stable-door, from which they were beaten away. Whilst these things were doing, a Canoneer having fired a Cannon from the Bulwark of Oye, which lay level to the Walls, he had the good hap to shatter the Ladders, and threw them all down. The first report having been heard by the Regiment of La Val d' Isere, who lay quiet in Plein-Palais, some of them cried out in amaze, March up, march up, the City is our own, thinking that the Petard had made this noise, and the Drums without any farther notice began to beat: which set them all a running towards the new Gate, di∣viding already the spoil amongst them: but they were very much surprized to find it still shut; so that descending into the Ditch, near their Scaling-Ladders, the Gunner having fired his Cannon a second time, charged with small Shot, made a slaughter amongst them. The Horse, some distance off, having heard the sound of the Drum, and perceived the light of the Torches in several parts of the City, had a short joy in approaching unto it, of which they believed their own Men had made themselves Masters. At the same time a small party of Citizens, who issued out through the Gate of Treille and S. Leger, resolving to sacrifice their Lives in defence of their Country, came down to recover the new Gate. They set upon the Guards there in a most resolute manner, and had two of their Men immediately slain, they con∣tinued fighting vigorously. Picot, who managed the Petard, being busied about it, was killed. Seconded at length by others who ran to their assistance, they drove the Enemy from their Court of Guard adjoyning to the Gate, and made them retreat to the middle of Corraterie, to the Party who lay to assist those who scaled the Walls.
The Savoyards being greatly astonished to find themselves shut up betwixt the Walls and the Houses, and knowing not which way to turn themselves, began to lose their courage. They proffered to let down Brunaulieu from the Wall with a Rope. But he chose rather to die than to live with shame: The Shot flew about their Ears like Hail-stones, out of the Windows and tops of the Houses. Baudichon, one of the City Captains, who was half dressed, signa∣lized himself most eminently.The valour of a Taylor. A Taylor who brandished a two-handed Sword, did wonders. A Woman throwing out on purpose an Iron-pot on the Head of one of the most resolute amongst them, split his Scull. The Citizens courage increasing, and the Savoyards seeing above fifty of their Men lying on the Ground, betook themselves to the place where their Ladders stood, on which some already had sa∣ved themselves, making more haste to get down than they did to get up, fear having given them wings: but finding no Ladders, they cast themselves down from the Wall, at which the good Fa∣ther Alexander found himself besides his reckoning, one of these armed Men having sadly bruised him in falling from the Wall. The Chevalier Dandelot sliding down broke his Nose. Others were maimed or killed by so dangerous a leap. They who lay dead in the City were reckoned to be about 54. the greatest part of them being Officers and Men of note, and 13 were taken Prisoners. The Cannon was brought on the Platform of Treille, and was levelled against Plein-Palais, and perfectly routed both the Horse and Foot which lay there. Albigny being astonished at the unsuccessfulness of his underta∣king, so well contrived and so ill performed, and finding the Shop∣keepers (as he was wont to term the Genevoises) had courage to defend themselves, and to make his Men leap over the Walls, soun∣ded a Retreat, which was very welcom to his dispersed Troops, who were benummed with fear and cold. They marched back in haste to the side of Bonne, and brought the Duke the news of the unfortunate success which the Sieur of Albigny's rashness had pro∣duçed. The Duke said nothing else to him, but that he had made a very fair flourish: For this was his common expression. In the same day the thirteen Prisoners were condemned to be hanged,Thirteen of them who had scaled the City, hanged. which some have censured as too severe; but the Magistrates alledged that they considered them not under the notion of Enemies, but Thieves who broke in in the night, and who had violated contra∣ry to all right, a Peace which had been so solemnly sworn to. It is said of Sonas, that he would have redeemed himself for his weight in silver. Chaffardon, Attignac, and other persons of Quality, were treated af∣ter the same manner, and were accompanied by the Ministers to the place of Execution. The Council of sixty ordered that their heads, as likewise of the others who were killed between the Walls, should be cut off, and ranged on the Wall of the Bullwark near the place where they scaled, and their bodies to be thrown into the Rhosne. They were found to be sixty seven in all; and it was superstitiously observed, that it had been so many years since they had thrown off the Romish yoke: but if we reckon those who were slain in the Ditch,
and died by the way, the number will amount to two hundred; whose quality the Enemy kept secret: it is known they lost Cornage, the Sieur Albigny Lieutenant, De Gruzy, La Tour, and Payen. On the Genevoises side there were but thirty wounded, amongst whom was the principal Syndick Peter Forbry, and John Bodichon; and seventeen killed, who were interred in S. Gervais with an honoura∣ble Epitaph. It is said that Theodore de Beze, who was then alive but very ancient, heard not the least noise of this uproar and distur∣bance, and was amazed when he was led forth to see the slain, who lay stretched out along Corraterie.Beza Preaches a thanksgiving Sermon for their delive∣rance. He had left off Preaching, yet did he get up into the Pulpit, and caused the 124. Psalm to be sung, Now may Israel say, if the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up against us; which Psalm hath been ever since sung on that day, which is observed by an Order of Council once a year, with publick Thanksgivings and rejoycing; two days after was kept a publick Fast, to offer up unto God their solemn acknowledgements. There was likewise set up in the Town-house a Latine Inscription for a la∣sting remembrance. The Magistrates dispatched immediately an Express to Berne to carry them the News, and to desire their assi∣stance in case the Enemy should set upon them afresh. The four Protestant Cantons sent them immediately twelve hundred men, promising them more if they had occasion for them. The Duke rode Post back again over the Mountains, leaving his Forces in Fo∣cigny, and in the Bailliage of Terny. The Genevoises wrote likewise to the Sieur of Guiche, who was Governor of Lyons, this Letter. SIR, YOU have heard before by several Letters that his Highness of Savoy,A Letter from the Genevoises to the Sieur of Guiche. notwithstanding he knew and acknowledged we were comprehended in the Treaty of Peace, made in the Month of January, 1601. betwixt His Majesty of France, and himself, hath yet several times oppressed us not only by keeping back our Re∣venues, Prohibitions of Commerce, and other Violences; not at all minding the just Remonstrances reiterated by is said Majesty: but hath also set on foot several designs to surprize our City in the midst of the Calms of Peace. It hath hapned then, that for to obtain his pernicious ends, that the Sieur Albigny on Saturday last, the Eleventh of this Month, about Midnight, brought before our City on the side of Plein-Palais, about two thousand chosen Men, both Horse and Foot, and hath caused two hundred of them to descend into our Ditch towards Corraterie, where was heretofore a Gate leading to the City; and having provided Ladders, caused them to climb the Walls about three of the Clock in the Morning, on Sunday the Twelfth of the said Month, he standing in the Ditch, and encoura∣ging them; so that having gotten down into the City, some of them marched directly to the new Gate, endeavouring to force it open,
and to bring in their main body to assist them, which lay at Plein-Palais: others would have gained the Gate of Monnoye, to enter by this means into the heart of the City: but it hath pleased our good God to look down upon us with an eye of pitty, and to encourage our men in such a manner that they drove them back, and slew the greatest part of them; some have been taken and hanged since by our Order. The remaining part have cast themselves down from the Walls, so that several of them being wounded, have died thereupon. This is a marvelous deliverance which God hath wrought for us, and for which we are bound to praise him. But it being very likely that the said Sieur Albigny intends to prosecute his design; and in as much as we do also understand that his Highness lies not far hence, we therefore earnestly intreat you, that you would please to take into your Consideration, the prejudice his Majesty would suffer by the ta∣king of this City; and to continue your favour towards us, and to as∣sist us by your wise and prudent Counsel. The King was immediately informed that Geneva was taken, the design appearing so likely to take effect, that there was less reason to doubt of it than to believe it. He was not undeceived till he received Letters from the Sieur de la Guiche, which preceded the account which the City published. His Majesty vouchsafed to write to them of Gene∣va Letters full of sincere affection, and becoming the generosity of so glorious a Monarch. The Contents of the Letter were as follows. Most dear and well beloved. I Have heard to my great grief,A Letter of the French King to the Genevoises. of the enterprize made on your City by the Duke of Savoy's Subjects; and having known how couragiously ye have repelled and chastised them, let me tell you, I am heartily glad thereat. I have promised my assistance to pre∣serve your City, and have told the Duke as much by word of mouth when I last saw him; and likewise them who have come from him: an occasion then now offering it self, I am resolved to shew you effectu∣ally what I then did put promise, hoping that God will revenge the breach of those Protestations and Oaths which have been made at the Treaties of Vervins and Lyons. I cannot yet guess what the Dukes after-Designs may be, nor yet what need you may have of my help, which shall neither be refused you, nor deferred; and having not as yet understood what resolutions ye have taken in this affair with our other Allies and Confederates, I shall defer the discovering of my thoughts to you till I understand yours, and then I shall be better able to judge of the Remedy, which we must use in a matter of so
great importance; you will oblige me in sending notice of whatsoever shall occur, and what you shall resolve upon touching this last oc∣casion. In the mean time I will tell you, if the Duke sets upon you either by open force or fraud, you shall not want my assistance, and if occasion requires it, my person too: howsoever let me have notice how he deals with you. I intend without delay to Write to all the Governors and Lieutenant-Generals of my Provinces who are near you, to watch diligently over you, and assist you at your need to their utmost power, and that with the same care and diligence as if it were for the saving of the most important places of my King∣dom under their Government. I beseech God, most dear and loving friends, to have you in his holy keeping. Written at Paris the Eighth of January 1603. Signed Henry, and underneath de Neuf-ville. The day wherein the Walls were scaled, had been a day of trou∣ble and confusion to every body in general; but it had like to have proved double dangerous to the Syndicks: for on Saturday night a man came to the Gate of Rive, to give notice of the Enemies ap∣proaches, which news was carried to the chief Syndick; who remit∣ted the affair to the fourth Syndick who was a savourer of the Ene∣my, so that this was like sending a Patient from the Physician to the Hangman. The people who could not brook this proceeding, consi∣dering the danger threatning them, and what they had already suf∣ferred, determined thereupon to be revenged on these two Syndicks: but they were so prudent or fearful as to keep their Chambers till noon, the time when the Prisoners were led to execution; the peo∣ple then running to behold this spectacle, were taken off from the thoughts of being revenged on them. The Sermons at night allayed the heats of some. One of the Senators had made answer, when they went to him for the keys of the Arsenal to take out Arms, Surely these are not Birds to flie thus over the Walls: not believing it was possi∣ble for them to get in. In the beginning of the Year,1603. there arose a great difference in the general Council,Jan. in the choice of Syndicks, by reason of the scaling the Walls which had hapned three weeks before, for fear they should fall into the hands of some Magistrates ill affected to the publick. At length there was chosen John Maillet, John du Pan, John Favres, and John Budé, which gave occasion to this Proverb, We are at S. John's, and because that the Lieutenant too was named John Rillet. Maillet was soon after clapt up in Prison upon suspicion of Treason,Maillet com∣mitted to Prison. and likewise for that contrary to his Oath, he had betrayed the Li∣berties of the City in the case of the Village of Moin, at the instance of one of his Creditors who was a Counsellor in Berne. He re∣mained a Prisoner seven years, and at length was released, and with∣drew with his family into Savoy, where he had a small Pension allowed him, but not sufficient to maintain him; so that he was forced to
live very sparingly, he died in the year 1625. having persevered in his Religion, amongst them of the contrary party. He was much pittied, being a man learned; for it was he who composed those neat Inscriptions which are to be seen in the Bishops Palace. The Duke gave out that the principal motive which induced him to make the late attempt on Geneva, was the establishment of the Catholick Religion amongst them; for the promoting of so good a work, he having neither spared his Soldiers, his Treasure nor his Person. But the Genevoises replied thereupon, that he took not the way to shew himself zealous for Religion, when he gave such a plain demonstration how little he valued his Oath; and that doubtless God would not let them escape unpunished who had taken his name in vain. On the other side the Earl of Tournon his Hignesses Resident amongst the Cantons, came from Fribourg to Berne, for to make this following Harangue to the Lords of that City, and to endeavor to palliate the matter, according to the instructions sent him from the Duke by his Secretary Caron. These were his Words: Most Mighty Lords, &c. FRom the day and hour I heard of the enterprize against Ge∣neva,Tournon his Harangue to the Lords of Berne. I was desirous of nothing more than of knowing from my Soveraign Lord and Prince, how the matter really had passed, to the end that I might, in the name of his Highness, inform your Lordships and other affectionate Friends; seeing that in such like affairs, false Reports never fail to be spread abroad by the Adver∣saries. For being destitute of all lawful reasons and equity, they have endeavoured to colour over their bad cause, to the dishonour and prejudice of his Highness, and to render him odious to his friends. Wherefore having been advertised by his Highness as well by word of mouth as by writing, and also by his Secretary who is joyned with me in this affair, of the whole truth of the matter, and having received an express charge to communicate the same unto you, according to the good correspondence which ought to be amongst Neighbours, to the end ye may no longer doubt of my Masters good will and affection. My self I say, and his Secreta∣ry would not be wanting likewise to inform you according to the instructions given us of this late undertaking; this then in short is the true account of it. Your Lordships know very well the rea∣sons moving his Highness to make the late War against the City of Geneva, it being upon the account of the Tallies, Imposts, and other ordinary Charges on the Estates which the Genevoi∣ses hold in his Highnesses Dominions. They were sollicited and intreated to submit to reason and equity, after the same manner as their other Neighbours who possess Estates in his Highnesses
Countries. But they on the other side have never ceased from ma∣king their complaints, and representing their cause to his Majesty of France, as also to your Lordships, although they have been rebuked by several noble Lords about his Majesty, for their unsea∣sonable requests, and sent back to make satisfaction to those equi∣table demands, after the same manner as your Lordships have dealt with them. Yet have they still obstinately continued in their unjust pretensions, and have not only endeavoured by force to maintain their pretended right, as his Highness hath been well informed; but en∣deavouring moreover contrary to his Highness's declaration, to bring and convey into their City Corn, which ought not to be transported out of his Highness's Countries, for the relief of his Subjects, and to preserve in store against time of need; so that they have by this means infringed and violated this Edict, for which just causes and reasons, his Highness had a design of bringing Geneva to Reason, but he hath deferred his resentments till some other oppor∣tunity, especially till his Highness can be present in his own person, to prevent all mischief and confusion, which commonly happens in such like occasions. But forasmuch as the said Genevoises do al∣ledge the priviledges granted them by your predecessors of blessed me∣mory, against the pretensions of hs Higness, they are of no vali∣dity, seeing they have not acquitted themselves in what they were obliged to on their parts, and have by this means made void their pri∣viledges. And thus it is likewise in the claims which they lay to the Treaty, as if they were comprehended in it, and included with his Majesty of France, and the Duke of Savoy my Master: where∣as it ought to be considered in this case, they have no grounds or rea∣sons for their pretensions, for it is certain they cannot be understood under this word of Allies, seeing they are not in League with all the Cantons of Switzerland, and that they have not been expressly specified and named as the other Allies; and so consequently could they not be inserted in his Highness's absence against his will and pleasure, as being a party principally concerned. Moreover I will not forbear to tell your Lordships, that his Highness has been credibly in∣formed that my Lord Esdiguieres designed to surprize the said City; which had he effected, it would have proved highly prejudicial to his Highness and to your selves, and therefore his Highness thought it his most prudent course to prevent him. But lest your Lordships should suspect that he had any design against you his ancient Neigh∣bours, with whom he hath all this while held so good a correspondence; He hath therefore withdrawn his men on this side the Mountains,
resolving to keep up a good understanding with you, as his predeces∣sors had done before him; and for this effect he will maintain and encourage all Traffick and Commerce betwixt the two States, expe∣cting in the mean time an answer from you, which we hope will prove satisfactory to our desires, and worthy your resolutions. This Harangue of the Earl of Tournon was heard by the Council of Berne,Bernoises not satjsfied with this harangue. yet did it not satisfie them; for they dismissed both him and the Secretary without answer, and had they not speedily de∣parted, it is very probable the people, forgetting the respect due to persons of their quality, would have affronted them, so much did they slight his apology for an attempt, which was not only condemned by them, but as it is said, by all Europe, and even by the Pope himself. The Duke of Boüillon passing about that time through Geneva, was desirous of being informed of all the circumstances of the enterprize, and went to see the places where they entred and made their efforts. In the mean time they of Geneva strengthened by the Troops of their Allies, and several French Soldiers both Horse and Foot, whom the King permitted to assist them, maintained themselves against the Garrisons with which they were surrounded, and drove away them who approached their Walls; they cut down the Trees about the City to take away all shelter for the Enemy, and made several incursions into the Countries of Savoy, and surprized the City of S. Genis d' Aoste,Genis taken by surprize. where they setled the Baron of Vilars Governor, from whence they continually molested the Dukes Sub∣jects, and kept Chambery in exercise, marching many times up to their Gates, and had it not been for the death of a valorous Gentle∣man named Monsieur de Nesle, Chambery would have run the same risque as S. Genis. The King gave order to de Vic,De Vic order∣ed to assure the Geneoises of the French Kings favour. his Ambassador in Switzerland, that in his return home through Geneva, he should assure the Citi∣zens that he was not one of them who only love their friends whilst they advantage themselves by them, and that he would never be wanting to defend and protect them; he therefore desired to know of them the means they intended to use in making an offensive War, to the end that the succours which he should send them might be profitably imployed. They received the Sieur of Vic with the greatest respect, and heard his general proposals and particular re∣monstrances, which tended rather to exhort them to a lasting peace than a short War. He was desired to offer this to the Council, be∣cause there were several who judged that a War would be no less conducing to the advancement of the publick Weal, than it had been in the time of Duke Charles; that all who were interessed in their preservation would undoubtedly assist them; that several stout men who were desirous to shew their courage, would come and prof∣fer their service. De Vic on the contrary very elequently and truly shewed them, that Peace was so necessary for them, and War so pernicious, that there was an indispensable necessity of chosing the former, and avoiding the latter; that although the inducements to War were specious, and the means easie, yet were its effects never
the less terrible, and the success uncertain. That War in general was profitable, and ought to be undertaken, when Peace could not be procured; but that a well governed State which had ever thriven by Peace,1603. ought not to set out in these storms, nor to please it self in Warlike incounters with its Neighbours.May. In short he prevailed so far by his perswasions that they all inclined to Peace, provided it was an honourable and profitable one, and so well setled as to take away all occasions of it for the future. Immediately after this there was a Truce made, and this Treaty of Peace which was deemed so necessa∣ry, was for some time in agitation; but at length it broke off, the Genevoises not being willing to accept it on any other terms but what were honourable and advantagious. The Earl of Fuentes, the King of Spains Lieutenant in the Dutchy of Milan, hearing of the Treaty which had been ended, sent orders to Don Zanche de Luna Master of his Camp to renew it, and bring it on again. He sent for this purpose a Spanish Captain named Sebastien Culebro to Geneva, who having obtained a safe-conduct, presented himself to the Council, telling them that the Earl of Fuentes having been informed of a Treaty be∣gan between the Deputies of the Duke of Savoy and Geneva, which yet had produced nothing; he had thereupon sent an express to Don Zanche de Luna, enjoyning him to dispatch a Captain to Geneva, to desire them of that City to think of Peace, and of the good resul∣ting from it, openly declaring, that in case they did not agree with the Duke, his Catholick Majesty as his Highness's Ally, and having his Country in protection, could do no less than assist him in this War. And at the same time he delivered them the Original of his Com∣mission, being the same which Don Zanche had given him, which runs thus translated out of Spanish. Captain Sebastien Culebro shall go to La Roche,Culebro his Orders. and desire Mon∣sieur Albigny to conduct him safely to Bonne, taking along with him Captain Vatanour and Peter the Drummer belonging to his Com∣pany; the said Captain being at Bonne, shall desire safe-conduct to go speak to Messieurs of Geneva, telling them as from me, and giving them to understand his Excellencies pleasure; which is, That his Catholick Majesties Forces are obliged to defend the Duke, and to oppose them in whatsoever they shall undertake against him, and that they should endeavour as soon as they can to comply with him, because that if it falls out otherwise, he will order his business accor∣dingly. At Anecy, the 28▪ of May, 1603. Signed Don Zanche de Luna, and lower de Roza. The Terms of the Spanish Laconisme are remarkable: Para hir allar à los Sinores de Sinebra, disiendo les come va di mi parte, y dandoles a entender la voluntad de su Excellentia, que es, Que la gente de su magestad a de deffender al Duque, y opponer se a quantos intentaren, y que vean conciertar secon el luogo proque donde se tomara forma. The King of France foreseeing that this War would not end only amongst them between whom it was begun, but that the flame of it would break out farther, was desirous to maintain Chri∣stendom in that Peace, for the sake of which he had laid down his Arms, at that time when they would have procured him great ad∣vantage: wherefore his Ambassadors in Switzerland, by his order, prepared the Cantons of Glaris, Basle, Soleurre, Schaffonse and Appen∣zel,
as them who were least suspected and interested for to be the mediators of this accord. Which with much difficulty was at length obtained. The Genevoises considering that the profits which might redound from the War could not equal the damages there∣of, and that all their hopes of advantage by it depended on the as∣sistance from their Neighbours. That the hope which is foun∣ded on a Foreign prop is usually uncertain. That undoubtedly the Catholick Cantons would not break off with the Duke upon their account, and that being his Neighbours it was absolutely ne∣cessary to come to some terms or other. These reflections, and the perswasions of their Allies, made the Genevoises relent; so that both Parties by degrees calmed their passions,A Peace con∣cluded be∣tween the Duke and Genvoises. and laid down those Arms which they had taken up with so great an animosity. The Deputies from the five Cantons mediated this Peace at Remilly, and it was concluded at S. Julien. During all these several Journies backwards and forwards, which these mediators of the Peace made from Geneva to S. Julien which lasted a Month, the High-ways from the Bridge of Arve to S. Julien were almost continually filled with People, especially Sa∣voyards, who passionately breathed after this Peace, and blessed the Deputies who gave them hopes of it.July 21. So that immediately upon the Signing of it at S. Julien, the President Rochette put his Head out of the Window of the House where was held the Conference, and cried out to these poor People who thronged the Streets, My Friends, praise God, the Peace is concluded. Upon which they shouted for Joy, and the Trumpets sounded forth the publick gladness. This Treaty of Peace may be seen described in the printed Book, called The Citizen of Geneva. Both Parties having laid down their Arms, a while after they began to combat with their Pens. Buttet Advocate of Chambery, entered the Lists,Buttet writes a Book which he calls, The Cavalier of Savoy. setting forth his Cavalier of Savoy, wherein he described all his Highnesses pretensions on Geneva. It was debated in Council whether this Book ought to be answered. They who were for it, represented, that should it not be done, the World would be apt to believe that the Dukes Reasons were well groun∣ded. Whereas they who were of the contrary opinion, alledged, That in so doing they would expose their cause to the censures of passionate Men, who being pre-possessed with prejudices, would make use of their reasons against them. The first advice was fol∣lowed, so that a learned Man of the Council,Sarrazin sets forth his Book called The Genevois Citizen. a Person zealous for his Countries honour, whose name was John Sarrazin, was enjoyn∣ed to write an answer: which he did, and called his Book the Ge∣nevois Citizen; against which there was published a little Book by a Savoyard, under a feigned Title, called Monsieur Picter's Ha∣rangue, or the Mischief of the Aristocratical Government of Geneva; these Books abound with sharp invectives, and are good for nothing but to renew former differences. Philibert Blondel,1604. who was Syndick in the Year when the attempt of scaling Geneva was on foot,Blondel his villanous actions. had been several times censured in the Council, and blamed by the People for having been so care∣less in securing the City, although the principal Syndick had put
him in mind of it the Night before the execution of their design, according to the notice he had brought him of the Enemies march. Blondel took it ill that he should be suspected, and had the impu∣dence to complain thereof to the Council, pretending much zeal for his Countries service. His complaint ended in his confusion, for a Cutler, whose name was Guidonet, whom he had heretofore sollicited to be confederate with him in his Treachery, having a quarrel with him▪ could not suffer his Pride, and called him Tray∣tor before Witnesses. Blondel taking it to heart, addresseth him∣self thereupon to the Council, and obtains an order to imprison his Adversaries; amongst whom was Combe, who at length brought such proof, and alledged so many reasons against Blondel, that at length for his Neglect and Treasons he was fined 2000 Crowns of Gold; for the payment of which they seized on his Mills: yet did he still stand upon his justification: but the Witnesses proved again their Charge so clearly and fully against him, that he was fined to pay 2000 Crowns of Gold more, and degraded from the Council of 25. But he valued not the Mony, having gotten in a short time an Estate to the value of 40000 Crowns, no Body knowing how: but he could not suffer his degradation with a quiet mind. He resolved thereupon rather to lose his Head, than to lie under this imputation. The business was so agitated, that at length the truth was bolted out, it having been made apparent that he held the Lordship of Compois, without paying any Taxes to the Duke: that since the taking of Bonne he was observed to grow rich on a suddain: that he had some private discourse with a Stranger the Night before the Walls were scaled; and that to avoid the Officers deposition, who had seen him, he had sent the said Of∣ficer to Genes, and given him a Horse: that he being dead, Blondel now thought himself secure; and that there was found a Lant∣horn in the Ditch having his mark; and that a certain Person from Chesne brought him oftentimes Letters from the Governor of Savoy. But this Article not being proved so clearly against him as the others, he was sentenced only to lie in Prison for the space of seven Years, and to pay another Fine of 2000 Crowns. And forasmuch as the Persons deposition, who carried the Letters, was the chief cause of this his Condemnation, he determined therefore to send for this Peasant, to try whether he could not make him re∣tract what he had declared against him; he used such means that at last this poor fellow was clapt up in Prison, where he offered him a great summ of Mony to deny what he had before affirmed. The Jaylor, whom Blondel had won by his gifts, brought him word that he would not move a jot from his former deposition: whereupon Blondel offereth the Jaylor fifty Crowns to strangle him in the Night. Which being done, and the Magistrates coming the next Morning to hear what this Witness had to say, found him dead. The Physicians were called to search him, and make their report, that he had not killed himself, but had been strangled by some other. The Jaylor and Porter are thereupon apprehended; the latter of which only was wont to visit the Peasant. He was put on the Rack, and confesses the Fact, and persists in this con∣fession
till death, namely, That what he had done, was at Blondel's instigation; who being convicted of the Murder, and consequent∣ly of the crime of High Treason, of which he was accused, was put on the Rack. It was supposed that the ordinary torment would not move him, wherefore he was put into an Engine made of Wood, called the Beurriere, and had immediately Escarpins ap∣plied to him: but all these torments could not draw from him a confession of his being privy to the Enterprize of scaling the Walls; but he owned the Murder, and that he had offered his Service to the Duke of Savoy, But this was enough to deserve death. He was therefore condemned to be hanged and quartered: and was led to be executed, without shewing any great remorse. 'Tis reported that he mentioned the Name of God but once, upon occasion of a Womans crossing S. Peter's place: for having used some great injustice towards this Woman when he was Syndick, she broke out into this Imprecation, wishing that he might one time or other receive as just a punishment, as that which he had imposed on her had been unjust: and he hearing her reproaching him with it at the time he was leading to execution, he said to her, holding up his hands: Alas, pray to God for me, you see the miserable condition I am in. This was the end of this wretched Man. After this Execution the Walls were raised higher, and the num∣ber of Watch-men was increased, and Palisado's were drove in∣to the Ditches, and the City fortified that they might be the bet∣ter prepared against such-like Enterprizes. In the Year following died Theodore de Beze,1606. whose life hath been written by Anthony de la Faye.Octob. 13. The last time he preached, was on the day the Peace was proclaimed 1598,Beza dies. and expounded the 85th Psalm, Thou hast made peace, Lord, with the people. He was present at the Conference held at Poissy, and presided oftentimes in France at the National Synods.1605. The Catholicks commonly cal∣led him, The Huguenots Pope. He was interred in S. Peter's Cloi∣ster, and not in the Cemetery of the Plein-Palais, because the Sa∣voyards gave out, That they would take up his Corps, and send it to Rome. The King of France dispatched about that time the Baron of Luz to be Governor of Burgundy, and Boisse to be Governor of Bourg, and the Sieur de Nerestan, for to desire the Genevoises to grant him a place where he might build an Arsenal, to prevent the Cities being in the like danger for the time to come. The Council was divided. One part said, That God shewed himself propitious to them in sending them a Foreign assistance of that importance, and that in ac∣cepting of it, the Enemy would have no means left for making his in∣cursions. Others opposed on the contrary, That the who had such assistance did thereby bring themselves under an Obligation to them from whom they received it: that perhaps this Arsenal might be given in trust to such a Person, who by his liberalities, and winning behaviour might gain the hearts of the Citizens, and dazle their eyes with the brightness of Royalty: And farther, Perphaps all the Kings of France would not be so candid in their intentions as Henry the Fourth, and then it would be too late to repent. So that upon this different advice,
the Common-Council remitted the business to be determined by the Council of 200, and they to the General-Council. These FrenchLords interpreting these delays to be a kind of mannerly de∣nial, departed home: and there was no mention made of it after∣wards. In the first day of the following Year the Foundations of a Bul∣wark were laid near the Lake,1606. the better to defend and fortifie the Gate of Rive,1607. and it was finished in the Month of October fol∣lowing. There was an Inscription Graven in Stone for an acknow∣ledgment of a Present made the City of 12000 Crowns by the Landgrave of Hesse,The Landgrave of Hesse makes the City of Gene∣va a Present. who had passed through it, and of 6000 which the Prince Palatin had given them, which was a great help to∣wards carrying on the work. The City acquired every day learned Men, and lost them as fast. Charles Perrot,1607. a knowing Divine, and very Charitable to the Poor, died about this time. He was a Man of an exemplary Life, but of a strange humor, causing himself to be called always Pecca∣tor, for which some blamed him, saying, That this smelt of the Monk. His hands were always lifted up towards Heaven: a great contemner he was of the World and its Vanities, and a great ad∣mirer of Antiquity. His care for the Poor caused several abuses to be reformed in the Administration of the Revenues belonging to the Hospital, which were consumed before in feastings. He wrote a Book, Intituled, De extremis in Ecclesia vitandis: which made some disturbance, and was suppressed after his death. In the War-time there were appointed extraordinary Prayers to be read on Wednesdays and Fridays,1608. but one Minister not being suf∣ficient to perform all these Offices, they reduced it to Fridays on∣ly. There were likewise Proposals made touching the reducing the Sermons made on Week days to the number of them of S. Mag∣dalens Church, to save the allowance which must be made to a Minister. But the Consistory would not hear of it, chusing ra∣ther to give them another Collegue. King Henry the Fourth gran∣ted, in the same Year, Letters of Naturalization to the Genevoises, to free them from the Aubeine and other Taxes. They were dated from Paris in the Month of June, 1606. Signed, Henry, and on the fold, by the King. Brulart. The City was extreamly surprized by an information,1609. that no∣tice of whatsoever passed in the Council was sent into Savoy.Canal a Tray∣tor to the City. At length it was discovered, That one named Canal, the Common-Serjeant of the City, sent an account thereof to a Lady of Savoy, un∣der the feigned names of Chapmen, and under pretence of a Law∣suit which he had at Chambery: he wrote daily, no body being able to discover the mystery, when his Letters should be inter∣cepted. But at length, when he was apprehended, not being able to give satisfactory answers to the questions proposed to him, he was committed to Prison, and an Indictment was drawn up against him for this crime, and likewise for Sodomy, whereof he stood convicted,Feb. 2. and for an execrable design of blowing up the Council by a Mine.1610. He was first broken alive upon the Wheel, and after∣wards burnt in a small fire; he seemed to be very sorry for his crimes.
A more dangerous Enterprize was at the same time carried on against the City,Terrail his designs on Geneva. by Lewis of Comboursieur Sieur of Terrail. He was a French-Gentleman of a very good Family, and of a goodly personage, he had been chosen heretofore by King Henry the Fourth to be a Cornet in the Dauphin's Company, who was afterwards Lewis the 13th.1609. But being a stout Man, he had a quarrel with a Gentleman, whom he killed in his Majesties sight, who was then at the Windows. Which obliged him to fly quickly out of France, lest he should carry his head to Greve. He retired into Flanders to∣wards the Arch-duke's, where he was well received. He under∣took three Enterprizes to no effect, two on Berg op-zom, and the other on L'ecluse. Afterwards there being a Truce made in those Countries, he went on Pilgrimage to Lorette with a Bourdelois called la Bastide, a great Ingeneer. At their return passing through Turin, they saluted the Duke of Savoy, who discovered to them the desire he had by some Enterprize to make himself Master of Geneva. They set before him the means, and offered their service, which he accepted with great expressions of kindness, and there∣upon presented du Terrail with 700 Ducatoons, and with a Ring worth 300 Crowns of Gold; and gave to Bastide 260 and Philip∣pes, injoyning them to go first to Geneva, and observe the State of that City, and what Guard they kept there. La Bastide went to Geneva, and took an exact notice; and being returned towards his Highness, gave him an account what alte∣rations there had been made in the Fortifications of that City since the Enterprize of scaling the Walls of it. Upon which the Duke amended his ancient Platform; and they discoursed together on their design. Du Terrail was for surprizing by a Petard, or other∣wise, one of the Gates of Geneva. La Bastide alledged it was im∣possible and too hazardous, considering the great number of Fences which were before the Gates, and the strict Watch kept at them. That which was he proposed was opproved of both by the Duke and Terrail, which was to surprize the Gate leading to the Lake, where there were no appointed Guards, and where, with a good num∣ber of Soldiers making a descent, they might seize on the Gate of Rive, and by this means become Masters of the City without any difficulty. It remained only to resolve upon the manner. They passed over then both of them from Evian to the Lake side, where they remained eight days, informing themselves, by the Boatmen who frequented Geneva, of the dispositions of the Watch-men, and the search made in Boats. They learned several defects, but to be the more certain, La Bastide passed over the Lake, and went to Morges, where he imbarked himself in Genevoise Bark, and being brought into the City, he observed the condition of the Port and the Gate of Rive, and returned by Land. Being with the Duke, they as∣sured him of the success of their undertaking, which was put off to the end of May. They were to take along with them from Sa∣voy five large flat-bottom Boats, and lade them with Wood, which should be piled after such a sort that 200 Soldiers might lie in each Boat under these piles of Wood; with which lading they might enter the Port without the least suspicion, and easily kill
the Searchers, and seize on the Gate of Arve, and likewise let in the Troops of Horse, who were to lie ready near Geneva at an appointed hour, and in the mean time they were to conceal them∣selves in the Vallies on the side of Evian, which lies at a small distance from Geneva, together with some select Soldiers who were to be put into these Boats, who were not to be imbarked till a favourable Bize should carry them in a short time to Geneva. As to what concerned the Horse, they were to meet about Anecy, un∣der pretence of the Marriage of the Duke of Nemours. But this design could not be so privately carried on but the Ge∣nevoises got some intimations thereof, although they could not dive into the bottom of it. The greatest knowledge they had of it was this:Terrail's design disco∣vered. Du Terrail having plaid at Tennis in Chambery till he sweated, whilst he was rubbed and dried, la Bastide and some others presented him a Paper, wherein was contained a draught of Geneva, discoursing together softly, as in matters of great im∣portance; yet the Valet who warmed his Shirt, heard them talk of Geneva, which made him give the greater attention; and he comprehended they talked about some Enterprize designed against it, having heard these words from Terrail: They are taken, there is no remedy. This Valet, who had a Brother in Geneva, went and reported this to a Merchant of that City, who was then at Cham∣bery, desiring him to give his Brother notice, to the end he might save himself from this danger. The Merchant at his return not only advertised his Brother, but likewise the Magistrates, who did not slight this warning,1609. yet they held it secret, and sent Spies throughout all Savoy to discover and pry into all Terrail's practices. They got his Picture, and having understood that he was coming to Geneva to view the City, they sent Tokens to several Persons how to know him, that he might be apprehended. Some days being past over, du Terrail and la Bastide, having set forth from Turin to pass over into Flenders to take their leave of the Arch-dukes, and to fetch their Baggage which they had left there, and having received an Order from the Duke of Savoy to bring along with them as many as they should judge fit and able Persons to help forward their Enterprize,Terrail sets out from Savoy for Flanders. they were discove∣red as they passed over the Mountains. Notice hereof was given to the Bayliffs of the Countries belonging to Berne. Where∣as they suspecting nothing, crossed over the Lake and part of the Country of Vaud, lodging only in Villages and Hamlets, and so arrived at Yverdun a little City belonging to the Bernoises, which lay on the borders of Franche-Comté Du Terrail, passing over the Bridge which leads into the City, saluted the Bailiff, who met him, and took no notice of him: but a Deacon, who was in his Garden, and to whom a Syndick had sent marks whereby he might know him, seeing him coming afar off; saluted him, and doubting that he was the Person, he obser∣ved whether he was bald; which perceiving, he went immediate∣ly to the Bayliff, and gave him notice of it, who sent two Men after him to watch which way they took their course, and to fol∣low them till they took up their abode. Which they did, and
viewed them more nearly, compared them with their Pictures which had been given them. One of these returned to Yverdun to give no∣tice that they had taken up their Lodgings in the Village of Ville∣beuf. Whereupon immediately the Bailiff sent four Troopers with an Order to apprehend them by main force, and to bring them a∣way; they found them ready to mount their Horses, and brought them back to Yverdun.Terrail ap∣prehended. Du Terrail told the Bailiff that his name was Paul de Constans, and that he went to Lorrain to prosecute a suit of Law: but the Bayliff took not this answer for payment; where∣fore he wrote to Geneva, to the end there might be some person sent who knew him; two Soldiers, one of whom had belonged to his Company, were dispatched to Yverdun, and were caused to come into his Chamber when he was at Supper; the Souldier knew him again: Du Terrail who suspected the occasion of his being there, draws him aside, and promises him a thousand Crowns, if he would go and advertise the Earl of Chamite in Franche Compté of the dan∣ger he was in La Bastide offered him a hundred more, but the Sol∣dier refused both their proffers. Du Terrail being after this manner known, was committed to prison in the Castle of Yverdun; the Genevoises deputed one of their Syndicks to desire the Bernoises to deliver them into their hands; which was granted, and they were both conveyed to Geneva. La Bastide being first put on the Rack, confessed the whole design; af∣ter his confession, he was confronted with Terrail, who at first earnest∣ly denied it, but seeing that Bastide persisted in his confession, and he being threatned with the Rack likewise, with tears in his eyes he confessed the whole project, and requested that he might be shut up for ever between four Walls, hoping that his relations would come and intercede for him, as indeed they did as soon as they knew he was taken: but for reasons of State, the Council quickly dispatched his Tryal, and condemned him to be beheaded at Molard, two daies after La Bastide was hanged.April 19. Du Terrail was much la∣mented, for he was a person of a very good mien,Bastide and Terrail exe∣cuted. and extream cour∣teous. In his going to the place of execution, he begged the peo∣ples pardon, and the people on the other hand wept bitterly for him; some people blamed the Magistrates of Geneva for their seve∣rity, but they replied that they did not consider them so much as Enemies, but as authors of a Conspiracy in a time of peace. Mon∣sieur de L' Esdiguieres, who had interceded for him and his relations, were very much inraged at this execution. The first of these came never after that into Geneva as he was wont, and his kindred were made to believe that he had been forced to change his Religion; but being informed of the contrary, they comforted themselves the best they could. This their design appeared very easie, which they were resolved to put in execution in the time when they of Geneva make a King of the Harquebuze, because then all the people are in Plein-Pa∣lais, and these Soldiers upon this occasion might be taken for them who belonged to the City, and it had been an easie matter to have fastned the Gates against them. The Republick suffered a great loss by the death of Michael Roset,1610. who had composed a Chronicle of Geneva.Roset dies at Geneva. He was a person of
great gravity, and a real lover of his Country; he had been Depu∣ty in Ordinary to the Cantons, having been fifty years a Counsellor, and Master of a Colledge twenty years more. An Italian named Giovani coming from Rome,Giovani ac∣cuses one of the Council of Treason. maintained that a certain honourable person of the Council was a Traytor, and that he had seen his Picture in the Dukes Closet, which he could easily verifie. When his Lord was brought to him whom they thought he meant, he said this was not the person; which caused him to be hanged as a Calumniator and Impostor. It appeared afterwards that they had been too rash in their judgment, seeing there were two persons of the same name, one of which often frequented Savoy; the Attorney∣general required▪ satisfaction for this, and desired that the Process might be prosecuted according to the form of the instructions which were given him; but because the person was dead, all farther pro∣ceedings were laid aside. The French King Henry the fourth having been treacherously as∣sasinated, the Duke made great preparations of War against Geneva, as it was before suspected.1610. The Protestant Churches of France col∣lected several sums of mony,1611. and sent a considerable number of men to assist them, which the Queen ill resented; but Anjorrand, the Ge∣nevoises Deputy to the French Court, making it appear by the Trea∣ty at Soleurre, that his Majesty permitted his Protestant Subjects to assist Geneva both in their persons and estates, this satisfied her. A∣bout that time arrived M. de Soubize of the house of Rohan, M. de Be∣thune the Duke of Sully's nephew, the Sieur Desmarets son to the wife of the same Duke, and several other Lords and Gentlemen. M. de Bethune raised Fortifications near S. Victor, and S. Pauls, and not far from the Bullwarks of S. Anthony and Pin, making trenches all along. Yet after the French Switzers had remained a considerable time in the City, and perceiving no act of hostility, every one re∣turned home. A while after died James Lect (Jacobus Lectius) a great Orator,Lectius dies at Geneva. Poet and Lawyer, who held great correspondence with several learn∣ed men in Europe. He was towards the latter part of his life chosen several times both Syndick and Counsellor, and but once Lieutenant, because that being very exact and strict in his Office, the people would chuse him no more. About this time the side of the Gate of Rive, was fortified by a Rampart and Ditch,1613. with a good Esperon or Spur of green turfs at the end of it.A Serjeant executed. The Sergeant of the River was put to death, who was an excellent Soldier, and had signalized himself in the former Wars; but to terminate a Law-suit which he had at Chambery against his Fa∣ther, he had offered his service to the Marquiss of Lans of the house of Est, who was Governour of Savoy, and designed to bring in his Troops into S. Anthony's Bulwark. A Gentleman of Dauphiny, who was in an antichamber belonging to the Marquiss, heard some part of the discourse, and gave notice thereof to the Council. A great Tempest which hapned in the year following,1613. did much hurt in several places near Geneva,1614. and produced a lamentable effect at S. Claude, which is a little City on this side mount Jura, where a flash of lightning burnt a whole street. The Genevoises perceiving the fire,
sent immediately to them, offering, as good neighbours, to relieve them; which they at first refused, but afterwards accepted of it. There is reported a very remarkable story concerning them, which was, that in the year 1590. and 91. they being fearful lest S. Claudes bo∣dy (from whom the City takes it name) should suffer violence by the Genevoises or Bernoises,S. Claudes Re∣licks imbalm∣ed and sent to Geneva. they therefore imbalmed his Relicks, and sent them as a case of Merchandises into the Halls of Geneva, where they knew it might remain a long time without discovery, no body coming to claim it, and there they let it lie till the Peace was conclu∣ded. There are some who place this to the year 1636.1614. then when they were afraid of the French, but M. Godefroy who carries not on his Memoires any farther than to the year 1627. mentions it as a matter hapning in the preceding Wars; yet I have been told as a certain truth, that this hapned in the year 1636. for fear lest the French should Transport these Relicks. The following year was dreadful to the Genevoises by the Contagi∣on,The Plague in Geneva. which was brought into their City from Piedmont. There died to the number of four thousand people, who were most of them of the meaner sort; for there were but two Counsellors and two Mini∣sters, who perished amongst all these; one amongst them named Ger∣vais, offered himself of his own accord to visit and comfort the sick; there died several of his servants, but he had the good hap to escape. This Christian service he did the sick, keeps his memory. ll alive a∣mongst good people, although he died five years after. Come we to affairs of State;1616. The Duke of Nemours having often demanded satisfaction of the Duke of Savoy touching his pretensi∣ons, to no purpose, had recourse to the Spaniard, who supplied him with men. The Duke of Savoy on his side, seized on several lands be∣longing to the said Duke, and placed a Garrison in Anecy, and sent to the State for Arms, Ammunition and Soldiers, which were grant∣ed him; and several belonging to the City went to him, and offered their service. He obtained likewise contrary to the Treaty of S. Ju∣lien to quarter his men along the Rhosne, and he had almost drawn out of the City its whole Forces;The Battel between the Duke of Ne∣mours and the Duke of Savoy. the Prince, Major, and the Duke of Nemours met and fought in the Valley of Cheisery, there being on∣ly a Brook which parted these two Armies; they of Gex being im∣patient to know the event of this combat, went down the mountain of Farges, where they could hear them talk, and behold them fire one at another; but they could see none fall down: which made the Ge∣nevoises believe that this was but a trick, to weaken their City, un∣der pretence of driving away the Spaniard, and as a testimony to the Duke of Savoy of the Genevoises gratitude for his kind usage of their Subjects in the time of the Plague, which had already devoured the best Soldiers: yet the Duke of Savoy, the better to resist the King of Spain his Brother-in-law, and the Duke of Nemours, addressed himself to the Bernoises,1617. and treated about a perpetual Alliance with them, and for that effect quitted all his claim to the Country of Vaud. They sent him three thousand men, and they marched by Geneva, but there returned not back again three hundred of them, the War and Sicknesses having carried away the rest.
The City of Geneva subsisted by Trade.1617. A rich and able Citizen having undertaken some Manufacture, perceived that instead of grateful acknowledgments he had nothing but ill will returned him; whereupon for a revenge, he withdrew to Yverdun, where he set up a Work-house, a Printing-Press, and a Shop wherein he made Ser∣ges, which did very much prejudice Geneva. About the same time the Genevoises suffered a great loss by the death of M. Cusin, a most affectionate Preacher, who was much lamented by the people and his Colleagues. Chenalat a person of good quality,1618. and who was capable of doing the City good, had he followed the example of his Ancestors, offe∣red his service to the Marquiss of Lans, Governour of Savoy; for which proffer he received five hundred Pistols, with a promise of twelve thousand Crowns of gold, and to be made Captain of the Guard. He would have purchased a house near S. Legers Gate to undermine it. Nicholas le Fert his Brother-in-law, caused him to be apprehended, and discovered his intrigues. The Baron of Aubonne who was likewise his Brother-in-law, was at the same time a priso∣ner in Berne upon suspicion of Treason.Chenalat exe∣cuted for Treason. Chenalat being pressed, con∣fessed his intelligence, with most solemn protestations that he had no other design than only to draw mony from the Marquiss, but this sa∣ved not his head. The Republick sent afterwards John Diodati and Thedore Trochin Professors in Divinity into Holland,1619. to reside as their Deputies in the Synod of Dort,Diodati, &c. sent to the Synod at Dort. whom the States had invited, together with the En∣glish and Dutch Divines, to oppose the Doctrines of Arminius; at their departure, they were each of them presented with a Medal by the States. The Duke of Savoy having begun to make great Levies, alarm'd thereby the City of Geneva;1621. Monsieur d' Alincourt who was Gover∣nour of Lyons sent notice thereof to the King, who was sollicitious for their preservation; and desired that he might be informed if a∣ny thing was undertaken against them: this occasioned the fortifying of S. Gervais. Mottet an Engineer, whom the Prince of Orange had sent, drew a Trench which reached from the Rhosne as far as the Lake, the better to shelter the Burrough, being assisted by Ferault a French Gentleman who had led to Geneva. In this same year on Whit-Sunday there hapned such an Earth∣quake, that the Ministers in the time of their Preaching were fain to hold fast by the Pulpit for fear of falling. In the following year,1622. there died a Woman who was learned both in Greek and Latine, and who had passed through her Exercises in Philosophy in the Colledge. She was M. Offredy's Wife, a skilful Physician who writ several Commentaries on Hippocrates. And lie having but bad eyes, his Wife assisted him in his Studies, writing his Bills, and reading to him. A National Synod of the Protestant Churches being held at Paris, the Ministers of Geneva wrote to it, that they being conforma∣ble to the French Churches in Essentials,A Synod of Protestant Mi∣nisters at Paris. they would likewise be the same in indifferent matters, and give the Communion henceforward with unleavened Bread, as the Bernoises had already began to do,
adding moreover that the Elders should no longer give the Cup as they were wont, but the Pastors after the same manner as in the French Churches. Tronchin being injoyned by the Council and Con∣sistory, gave notice hereof to the people one Sunday night after Ser∣mon, and shewed the reasons moving them to this change in so in∣different a matter. Some small differences had like to have broke the peace:1624. for al∣though it was agreed in the Treaty made at S. Julien, that there should be a free Trade; yet had the Duke strictly forbidden any Corn to be Transported to Geneva: and the Council by way of re∣quital, prohibited the carrying out of Iron, Salt, or any other Com∣modities into Savoy: but Wake the English Ambassador passing through Geneva, and observing how scarce Corn was amongst them, interceded for them to the Duke, and got off the prohibition. The Marquis of Bade a Lutheran Prince,Marquiss of Bade retires to Geneva. being stript of his Estate by a Decree from the Imperial Court, withdrew to Geneva with his Wife and a Minister. The Council permitted him to have preaching in his House for his own Family; but several Germans,1625. inhabitants of the City, and others, resorted thither, at which the People muttered, saying, That in time the Mass would be permit∣ted to be read in the City, seeing Lutherans were permitted after this manner. The Council of twenty five, understanding the mat∣ter, sent a Syndick and the Lieutenant to intreat him not to let any Citizens into his house at Sermon time; which request of theirs he despising, instead of granting it, sent them word, that the City belonging to the Empire, and he being one of its Princes, he had as much right there as they had themselves; some say that he lifted up his hand to strike the Syndick, which caused the Magistrates to repeal the permission they had granted him; at which he being inraged, left Geneva, and withdrew to Thonon, where the Duke permitted him the exercise of his Religion. Another great Lord who in the Year 1624.1626. had withdrawn to Ge∣neva as to a place of refuge, ended his daies there; his name was George Erasmus of Tzernembel,Biron of Esclavonia, &c. retires to Geneva. an Hereditary Baron of the Marches of Esclavonie and of Carniole, who had been formerly Counsellor to the Emperors Rodolphus the second, and Matthias the first, and one of the Directors of Bohemia; but after the new Kings defeat, he was forced to give place to the Victorious, and to flie out of the Empire. He came to Geneva with his Wife and Daughter, and another Relation, and was a second Job in his miseries and afflictions; for having been deprived of all his Offices, and tortured with the Gout, and other vex∣ations both of body and mind, he at length had news brought him that his son who stayed behind to gather up the pieces of his shattered fortune, was drowned, and all that he brought with him; so that ha∣ving nothing left him but patience, the Magistrates and the Church gave him a monthly allowance for his families subsistence, and con∣tinued it after his decease; he was honourably interred in S. Peters Cloyster according to his quality.1627. Emilia of Nassaw Princess of Orange,The Princess of Orange re∣sides in Gene∣va. and sister to Prince Mau∣rice, and Widow to Don Emanuel son of Anthony King of Portugal, after that the Spaniard had made himself Master of that Kingdom,
she came and dwelt at Geneva with her six daughters; but having purchased a Castle near Nyons, she withdrew thither. She died in the year following, and was interred at Geneva in the Chappel on the left hand of S. Peters Quire. This Princess,1628. although of great quality, resided several years at Ge∣neva, living in a condition much beneath her quality and desert, her Daughters were married to ordinary Gentlemen of the Country of Vaud; one of them who had espoused Colonel Grol, was buried near her Mother in 1647. Madam the Dutchess of Rohan, remained for some time in the City with her Daughter, and afterwards went to Venice. Geneva likewise served for an Asylum to the Sieur of Aubigné a French entleman,Aubigné comes and lives at Geneva. who having published his History of France, had thereby so much displeased the King, that he would have him taken into custody for it; and moreover his Son, whom the Jesuits had won to their party, heightened the Kings displeasure against his Father: but he foreseeing their design took about thirty thousand Crowns of gold, which he hid in the Saddles of his Horses, and fled to Geneva a∣bout the year 1619. He was received by the Magistrates and Church with great respect, for they had been informed of his zeal for the Protestant Religion,1628. and of his valour and conduct in Military af∣fairs. So likewise when there was any kind of Fortification under∣taken, they always asked his advice. It is said that he had a secret en∣abling him to speak to any person a hundred paces distant from him. and they who stood by should not hear him.Aubigné's death. He died at length, being aged Eighty years,1631. and was interred in the Cloyster where is a kind of Epitaph or Testament which he left to his Children, Com∣posed by himself, which is as well remarkable for its Latin as ingenuity of matter. It was about this time that the Swede entred into Germany. The Chevalier Rache was sent to the Switzers to engage them in this party. He had likewise an order to visit Geneva, to assure that City of the Kings good will. He was received with extraordinary respect, and stayed there some time.1632. A while after there was a person executed,Antoine his errors and abominable practices. whose death caused as great a noise as that of Servetus. His name was Nicholas Antoine who had Apostatized from the Christian Religion. Some people murmu∣red and were displeased at the proceedings, saying they were too se∣vere, to put people to death meerly for an opinion. But the Coun∣cil considered him not only as an Apostate and Blasphemer who trea∣ted the Blessed Trinity as a Cerberus or three-headed monster, but like∣wise as a seditious Impostor and perjured Villain, who Preached his false Doctrine contrary to the Oath which he had taken at his recepti∣on. Here follows an account of his Tryal and Condemnation, by which it may be judged whether the Genevoises were to blame in their proceedings against him.
A Criminal Process, Made and formed before Us the most Honoura∣ble Lords, Syndicks and Counsellors of this City, at the instance and pursuit of the Lord Lieutenant in those Causes, against Nicholas Son of John Anthony,1632. of Berry in Lorrain, who being committed Prisoner, hath freely confessed, That from his Youth he had dili∣gently set himself to the study of Philosophy, and conceived damnable and execrable Opi∣nions touching our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. ITEM, That about seven or eight Years since, he had applied himself to the study of the false doctrine of the Jews, and for to be the better instructed in it, he had addressed himself to them of the City of Metz, who after several Conferences had sent him to other Jews, and namely to them of Venice. Item, He hath confessed, That had it not been for fear of being discovered, he had undertaken to have perswaded his Kindred and Relations to return to Judaism. Item, That about five Years past he went to Sedan, and there perverted a young Student of that place, and inticed him along with him into Italy, entertaining him in their way thither with the Articles of his abominable Creed. Item, That being arrived at Venice, they went and visited the Jews, the said Anthony desiring them to admit him into their Synagogue, and to Circumcise him: but they refused him, fearing lest they should fall under the Magistrates severity. Whereat he remained satisfied, being told by them, That he might live amongst the Christians, and yet be a Jew in his heart: and that he was told the same by the Jews of Padoua. Item, That embracing this detestable doctrine, he came to this City, under pretence of stu∣dying Divinity, and offered to dispute in Philosophy, and for some time had exercised the charge of chief Regent in a Colledge; yet
all this while counterfeiting himself a Christian, although private∣ly he lived and prayed after the Jewish manner, not daring to make an open profession of his belief. Item, That being called by a Church near the City to be their Minister,The Church of Divonne in the Coun∣try of Gex. after his examina∣tion and consent to the Doctrine of the Orthodox Religion, he took an Oath to live and teach according to the confession of the re∣formed Churches, although in his heart he believed in the Jewish Faith, and by a cursed equivocation, his meaning was different from his Oath. Item, That instead of preaching Jesus Christ, according to the Oath he had taken, he had only insisted in his Pul∣pit on the explication of the Old Testament, and falsly wre∣sted and applied passages thereof pointing to our Saviour,The second Psalm. and ap∣propriated them to other Persons, and above all in his last Ser∣mon: from whence it followed by the just Judgment of God, that he the said Anthony became deprived of his Senses, and ran about the Field like a distracted person, and came bare-legged in∣to the City, uttering horrid blasphemies against our Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ. Item, That after he had been under the hands of Physicians, and carefully looked after in the Hospital of this City, coming again to his Senses, and being out of his mad fits, he had persisted in his blaspemies against the Holy Trinity and the Person of our Blessed God and Saviour, maintaining as well by word of mouth as writing, That Jesus Christ was an Idol, and that the New Testament was but a meer fable. Item, He hath confessed, That in Administring the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, in the Exhortation to the People, he said only, Remem∣ber your Saviour: And that in reciting the words of the Apo∣stles Creed, where our Saviour is mentioned, he pronounced not those words, but muttered them betwixt his Teeth. Finally, That notwithstanding the serious exhortations and remonstrances which have been made him since he hath been in custody, as well by the Magistrates as venerable Pastors of this Church, tending to per∣swade him to renounce these cursed and damnable Opinions, yet hath he persisted in his horrible and impious blasphemies, having com∣piled and signed a Treatise, in which he endeavours to combat and overthrow the Holy Trinity, still obstinately denying the Deity and Incarnation of our Blessed Saviour, having several times re∣nounced his Baptism: as it plainly appeared at his Trial. Here follows his Sentence:
The Sentence of Condemnation against Nicolas Anthony, which was read, and executed on the 20th of April, 1632. WEE the most Honourable Lords, Syndicks and Council of this City, having seen the Criminal Process made and formed before Us, at the instant suit of the Lord Lieutenant in the said Cases, against Nicolas Anthony, by which and by his own confessions it appeareth, That he forgetting the fear of God, hath been guilty of the crime of Apostasie and High Trea∣son against God his Creator and Saviour, having fought against the Holy Trinity, denied our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, bla∣sphemed his Holy Name, renounced his Baptism, for to imbrace the Jewish Religion; and hath been perjured in dogmatising, and teaching his damnable doctrine; a case, and crime deserving the greatest punishment. For these and other causes moving the said Lords, sitting in the Tribunal of their Ancestors, according to ancient custom, having the fear of God and the Holy Scriptures before their Eyes, and having invoked his Holy Name, that they might thereby be able to make a right Judgment, beginning, in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, do by this final Sentence, which they have committed now to writing, condemn the said Anthony to be bound and led to the place of Plein-Palais, to be there fastned to a stake on a pile of Wood, and strangled according to the usual man∣ner, and afterwards to have his Body burnt and consumed to ashes, and thus to end his days, for an example to others: Decla∣ring moreover, his Goods confiscated to the City, and charging the Lord Lieutenant to put the said Sentence into due and intire execution. The Genevoises had in the Year following some apprehensions on the side of France and Savoy, Cardinal Richlieu being supposed to have no great kindness for them. It is thought likewise that he offered the Duke of Savoy to change with him the City of Ge∣neva for that of Nice, and that he would put him in possession thereof at the charge of France,1636. and it should cost him nothing: but the Duke would not accept of the Proposal, because he valued Nice at a greater rate, having no other Sea-port in his Dominions.
The Duke of Rohan had an honorable Funeral made for him a while after in Geneva.1638. He had a stately Marble Tomb erected,May 17. The Duke of Rohan his Funeral, &c. with a Statue placed on the top of it, in the Chappel of S. Pe∣ter's Church. His Body was Embalmed and wrapt in a Sheet of Lead, where it was to be seen preserved intire, at the time when Madam of Rohan was interred, which was 23 Years after, to wit, on the third of January, 1661. There was moreover Engraven on his Tomb stone a Latin Epitaph for a memorial of his Heroick actions. The Flemmings, Spaniards and Germans had felt the effects of his valorous Conduct. Yet his last Victory obtained against the Emperor near Rhinfield cost him his life, for he died awhile after of his wounds, to wit, on the fourth of April, aged 55 years. His Body (according to his order) was carried to Geneva, for he was a great lover of that City. He had taken up his abode there a considerable time some years before: and it was he who made the Mele in Plein-Palais. His Son Tancredus was placed by him three or four years after, with an Epitaph which Madam of Ro∣han the Duke's Daughter caused to be effaced, having obtained of the Parliament of Paris a Decree whereby he was declared ille∣gitimate. The Alliance between Zurich,1638. Berne and Geneva, according to the seventeenth Article of that Treaty ought to be renewed from time to time. Which was effected in the Year 1642, and was solemnly sworn to be observed in each of these Cities. The De∣puties from Switzerland were received by the Citizens in Arms,1642. a Company of which went out of the City to meet them, all the great Guns were discharged at their coming, and they were sumptuously entertained in the Arsenal, where at every Health they drank, there was fired a Gun. We must not here forget a remarkable accident which hapned two Years and a half after this; which was, That on Sunday the 19th of January,1645. 1645. between seven and ten of the Clock in the Morning, there arose such a great Wind, that it drove back the Water in the Rhosne and Lake, so that for the space of two hours several Persons passed over to the Chains upon the Land, and others crossed over from Monnoye to the Isle: this Wind was so violent that it carried away the House-tops, blew down several Chimnies, and plucked up Trees by the Roots; 'tis reported that it did two thousand Crowns damage as well in the Windows as Tiles of publick build∣ings. Monsieur Calendrin hath mentioned it in a Latin Poem, which is to be seen in the Works of Monsieur de Zuilichen. Seeing we have mentioned the Rhosne and the Lake,A discourse of the Rhosne. it will not be amiss to clear a difficulty stated by Authors; which is, Whe∣ther the Rhosne passeth cross the Lake without mingling its Wa∣ters with it? and whether its course can be discerned amidst the calm Waters of the Lake? Observe here what Marcellinus hath wrote of it in the 15th Book of his Roman History. Seeing, saith he, we are led by our discourse to these parts, it will not be amiss to speak something of the Rhosne, which is a most famous River: It takes its rise from the Alps, where several Fountains furnish its Springs; and from thence swiftly descending from a rising ground, it runs into the
Lake; and crossing it, doth not mingle its Waters with it: but passing over the calm Waters of this Lake, makes way by its swiftness: and by this means losing none of its depths, pierceth through the thickest of its streams, and dis-intangling it self, slides to the borders of the Sequa∣noises, &c. Several of our Moderns have followed this ancient Author; and others have reputed this his account fabulous.1645. But this is the truth which I have learned of several Persons who dwell near the Lake, and who have often passed from one side of it to the other. The Rhosne coming into the Lake with great swiftness, runneth about half an hour or more without confounding her Waters with it, distinguishing it self by its gray colour: but near Vevay, Laurane, Rolle and Nyons, that is to say, almost all the length of the Lake, the Rhosne cannot be distinguished by its colour nor motion, every part being equally calm and of the like colour. 'Tis certain that for about two Leagues from Copel to Geneva, the bottom of the Lake beginning to rise higher, it beginneth therefore towards the middle to slide softly, to discharge it self of the Waters of the Rhosne, and other Rivulets which it hath received into its bo∣som. The swiftness of the Rhosne,1645. before it enters into the Lake, is the occasion of a rarity hapning in Winter in that place, which is, That only the bottom of the River freezes: and the reason of this is obvious, because the bottom of it being still, is by that means sooner seized on by the cold: whereas the surface of it is in conti∣nual agitation, and renewed by a perpetual succession of Wa∣ters.Gothofredus his Latin Inscription. The Suburb of S. Gervais was fortified this Year by a Bulwark which they named S. John's, near the Temple of S. Gervais, on the side of which there was set up a Latin Inscription made by Monsieur James Godefroy, better known under the name of Jacobus Gothofredus the Author of the Theodosian Codices, and 'tis specially to this learned Man we owe the Memoires of a great part of this History. He had been Syndick five times, and died aged 65 Years, in 1652. His loss was lamented by his Country and by all Scho∣lars. Denys Godefroy his Father had likewise written a Commenta∣ry on the Body of the Justinian Laws. John Deodati died a while before,1649. aged 73 Years, he was of the Noble Family of the Luquesses,Octob. 3. Deodati's death. and had been made Hebrew Pro∣fessor in Geneva, being but 19 Years old, and afterwards Profes∣sor in Divinity. He was sent to the Dort-Synod in 1619. by the Church of Geneva with Theodore Fronchin his Colleague. Deodati was so esteemed in this Synod, that he was chosen with five other Divines to draw up the Canons; for he was a knowing Person and an expert Preacher; he translated the History of the Council of Trent. The Year 1651.1651. was not otherwise remarkable than by a great overflowing of the Arve,Nov. 21. which swept away most of the Bridges, and made the Rhosne rise on the side of the Lake,Dec. 7. even to the ma∣king the Mills turn backwards. In the Month following there hapned an Earthquake in the Evening, which yet did no hurt.
Two Years after, the Subjects of the Countrys in Germany un∣der the Jurisdiction of Berne, complained they were overburdened by their Bayliffs, and thereupon rebelled against their Sovereigns, under the Conduct of one named Leüberg:1653. the City of Berne was in great danger, being blocked up by this multitude of Peasants: Geneva sent 300 Men to their assistance, who were divided into three Companies, which were commanded by three Captains, viz. Debons, Corne and Dumont: divers of the chief of these Rebels were hanged, and Leüberg quartered. In this Year 1653.Gautier hanged. Isaac Gautier of Portentru, was arrested Pri∣soner at Geneva at the suit of the Republick of Venice, in whose ser∣vice he had been a Captain, having been found guilty of a Massacre committed by him on a Spanish Family, which were passing over to their own Country, and pillaged the Vessel. The Command of which had been intrusted to him. He was hanged on the ninth of August.Aug. 9. The Genevoises received a Letter from Cromwel,1655. written in the Latin Tongue.Cromwel writes to the Genevoises. The Contents whereof were these: He told them, That the extream miseries wherein to the Duke of Savoy had reduced the Protestants in the Vallies of Piedmont, had so far mo∣ved him with compassion, that he had ordered Collections to be made throughout all England, that he might give proofs of the great Charity of that Nation towards its afflicted Brethren. And for∣asmuch as these Collections required some time, and the necessities of these poor People admitted no delay, he hath therefore judged it meet to send in the mean while the summ of 2000 l. Sterling out of his own Treasu∣ry, which summ he ordered to be paid into the hands of the Officers of Geneva, to distribute it to them who had most need, according to their prudence, supposing they would readily accept this trouble in their Neigh∣bours behalf, as in whose miseries he believed they had a fellow-feeling, beseeching God to strengthen all those who profess the Orthodox Religi∣on, that they may maintain their common cause, and assist one another against their Enemies, in which service he shall be glad to be employed. Dated from the Palace in Westminster the seventh of June, 1655. He sent afterwards the Lord Morland to the Duke of Savoy, to inter∣ceed for the said poor People of the Vallies; and whilst this affair was in agitation, this Ambassador resided several Months in Ge∣neva. In the Year following the Protestant Cantons had a War with the lesser Cantons upon the account of their exercise of the Reformed Reli∣gion, who dwelt in the individual Bayliwicks. Geneva sent imme∣diately 300 Men to assist their Allies of Zurich and Berne, who set out from Geneva, on the fifth of January, under the Command of Captain Debons, Captain Girard, and Captain Fabry, and were at the Siege of Rappersvil. A Peace was concluded a while after, and these Companies called home. There was begun a Work on the Mount of S. Victor before the Bastions of Pin and S. Anthony,1656. whose corners reached a great way into the Country, but it was pulled down again in the Year fol∣lowing, as being judged to require more Men than they could spare to guard it; it was at first carried on by People of all ranks
and qualities of both Sexes,The King of France comes to Lyons, &c. who wrought unweariedly at it. The French-King much about this time being come to Lyons, the State sent the Sieurs Voysine and Pictet to complement him, as well for that he had recovered his Health, having been sick of the Small-Pox, as for to intreat him to continue his favour to their City. To which the King answered, I thank my Friends of Geneva for the sense they have had of my sickness, and for the joy they have received at the news of my recovery: I shall always keep them under my Protecti∣on; and ye may assure them of this from me. He gave each of them a Golden-Chain with a Medal. And they presented him with de∣licate Trouts, weighing forty or fifty pound apiece, for these are the greatest which are to be met with at Geneva,1658. although some Per∣sons would make us believe there are Trouts which are of eighty and a hundred pound weight. In the Year following there was a Work carried on in the form of a Moon, in the same place where the other was begun, but not so far advanced from the City. There were found several Urns and Medals in the Ditch of Ravelin de la Noüe. But it being deter∣mined that the City should be considerably Fortified, and Mony fal∣ling short, there was sent the Sieur Turretin Professor in Divinity, into Holland,The States of Holland con∣tribute to the building of the Fort on S. Victors Mount. to intreat their assistance, who ordered Collections to be made throughout all their States, and there was gathered a hundred thousand Franks, with which Mony he returned to Geneva, where they immediately fell to work again. The Ingineer Ivoy (who is at present chief Ingineer to the Prince of Orange) traced four great Bastions Royal with Courtines, on the side of Plein-Pa∣lais, inclosing them from the Rhosne to the Bulwark of S. Leger; these take up no less than 1700 paces in compass round the Walls, they were finished and inclosed with a Wall in ten Years space, but the Mony from Holland held out no longer than to finish the first Bastion near the Rhosne, which hath therefore been called the Dutch Bastion:1660. there was an Inscription Engraven on a black Marble-Pillar, for an acknowledgment of the Hollanders libera∣lity. In the Year 1661. the Bishop of Geneva residing at Annecy, made an Address to the King,1661. as being Sovereign of the Country of Gex,The Bishop of Geneva presents a re∣quest to the French-King. which is part of his Diocess, beseeching him to suffer him to settle Curates in the Villages of Chansy, Avoully, and Moin, which were held by the Republick of Geneva; and over which, as this Bishop affirmed, the King was Sovereign. Now the better to un∣derstand this affair, it is needful for us to speak something of these Villages. Moin belongs wholly to the Chapter; that is to say, the Jurisdiction, the Tenths, Fee-Farms, Salt, Ministers, sentences of Death, all these belong to Geneva, and the King hath the last Ap∣peal in Civil Causes, and the execution of the Sword. As to Chan∣sy and Avoully these are Lands belonging to S. Victor, which are al∣most of the same nature as them of the Chapter (these appertain∣ing to the Chanons of S. Peter, and the others to the Prior of S. Vi∣ctor) but by the Treaty at Lyons in the Year 1601. the King in re∣storing all the Countries of Savoy to the Duke which he had ta∣ken from him, reserved to himself all the Ports of Rhosne from Ge∣neva
as far as Lyons, and so that the Sovereignty of Chansy and Avoully, which are Ports belonging to the King, although situa∣ted on the Borders of Savoy. The Genevoises, who were greatly in favour with Henry the Fourth, represented to him, That they were already in the possession of these Villages, and so this Sove∣reignty was of no value to him, bringing him in no profit. The King desirous to gratifie them,1661. remitted it to them by his Letters, but the worst of it was, That these Letters were never attested in Parliament, and ever since they have exercised Sovereignty over these two Villages, and even in the Year 1675. they put to death a Malefactor at Chansy. I specifie this not only for the better un∣derstanding the Bishops pretensions, but likewise upon the account of another affair, which lies at this present before the King, which shall be mentioned in is place. To return then to the Year 1661. John Lullin was dispatched immediately to Paris, but before he could come there, the Bishop had already obtained, by surprize, a Decree conformable to his demand, and Monsieur Bouchu, the Inten∣dant of Burgundy,1662. came to Gex in February, 1662, to establish Cu∣rates in these places according to the Kings Decree. But there was such care taken, that the Intendant deferred to perform it, it having been represented to him, That the States Deputies were at Court upon that occasion, and that if they could not get that Decree repealed, yet might it be put soon enough in execution. Lullin having sollicited his business for the space of two Years in Paris, at length gained his cause, and the Bishop was put by his de∣mand, and the Villages left in the same condition they were in be∣fore. In the year 1664.1664. the Duke of Crequi returned from his Ambas∣sage at Rome,Crequi passes through Gene∣va. passed through Geneva; he had not that honour done him which was desired, for want of timely notice. The Council sent their Deputies to meet him out of the City, and three or four Companies of trained Bands stood ready to welcom him. The Council went to complement him, and presented him with Wine and Trouts. But he staying no longer with them than Dinner-time, the City could not shew him as they desired, the affection they had to do the King service. In parting thence he passed through two Files of the City Trained Bands, which reached from his House where he refreshed himself, as far as the new Gate, beyond which there stood six Companies belonging to the Garison who attended him as far as the Bridge of Arve.1664. As soon as ever he was in Plein∣Palais, he was saluted by the City Cannon, he was attended half a League farther, beyond the Bridge of Arve, by a Troop of Horse, and then four Deputies from the City complemented him, and took their leave of him: he seemed to be very well pleased with his entertainment. Although there passed no act of Hostility in the Year 1667.1667. be∣tween Savoy and Geneva, yet there arising a considerable difference wherein they were both concerned, I shall not therefore here omit it.
After that the Officers of Savoy had for a long time molested divers ways them of Geneva, which shewed that the Duke had a design to break off with them, having several times declared that he thought himself no ways obliged to observe the Treaty at S. Julien, because (said he) it hath been already broken by both parties in sundry parti∣culars; he brought into Savoy towards the Spring in the Year 1667. 1000. men as well Horse as Foot, under the command of the Mar∣quiss of Pianezze,The Duke of Savoy quar∣ters Forces about Geneva. who were quartered round about Geneva; but yet five or six Leagues distant from it, according to the Articles contained in the Treaty made at S. Julien, that is to say at Anecy, at Remilly, at Salanche, at Cluse, at Thonon, at Evian and other places; and there they lay till December following. The Savoy Squadron consisting of five hundred Gentlemen, was commanded to be in a readiness to mount their Horses at the first word of command; likewise all the Militia were inrolled, and ready to march upon the first order; and forasmuch as the greatest part of them had no Arms, there were therefore brought into the Country great store of Musquets, Swords, Pikes, Powder, Match and Bullets, together with other Ammu∣nition, and the Peasants of every Village were exercised once a week. Moreover for to facilitate their Communications with Geneva, there was a stone Bridge made over the Arve at a place called the Trembieres not above an hours Sail distant from Geneva; and that they might have forces on the Lake, there were several Seamen and other workmen sent for from Nice, who built three flat bottom Boats which went only with Sails, and lay at Bellerive in a Port which they had made for the same purpose, which was secured by a Chain, and seve∣ral firm Pallisados, and strengthened besides by a building which they had reared, which was fenced with two Towers. The Genevoises called this building a Fort, and complained that they acted contrary to the Treaty at S. Julien, one of whose Articles was, that his Highness should build no Fort within four Leagues of Geneva. The Savoyards who would not acknowledge that they had broke the League, because the Switzers were the undertakers or sure∣ties for it, made answer, that his was not a Fort, seeing it had no Dit∣ches, it being only a Magazin, wherein they would lay their Salt, which was wont to be carried by Water through Geneva; but now they would Transport it in Carts by Land from Seissel to Bellerive, the Bridge of Trembieres having been made for that purpose; and that the Vessels they had built were only designed to carry the Salt which they usually sent to Chablais, Valais, Fribourg, and several other Cantons, for most of the Switzers have alwaies brought their Salt by the way of Geneva: and indeed the building at Bellerive, and the Boats there have not yet been used to any other purpose than what they mentioned. But the Genevoises in so dangerous times, suspected all these pleas, and imagined there lay some design concea∣led under this pretence, as knowing that the Magazin and the Boats might be fitted out for War in two daies time: and these were in∣deed the Savoyards preparations for War. Yet were not the Genevoises asleep all this while, so many Soldiers lying near them, and the Dukes Subjects continually threatning them, besides the notice given them from all parts, put them out of
doubt, that the Duke had a design against them; yet they imagined that it was not likely the Duke would openly besiege them, but ra∣ther set upon them by surprize, whether by day or in the night they could not tell; being perhaps encouraged by some private intelli∣gence which he might have in the City,The Genevoi∣ses fortifie the City. which made the Genevoises take all possible care to secure their Gates and Walls. They increa∣sed their Garrison, by an addition of ten men to each company, be∣sides the usual guard of Citizens, thirty of which were joyned with the Garrison every night, and were not relieved till the next evening by a like number; the Grand rounds set forth every quarter of an hour, besides the usual Watch, the four Beadles belonging to the Council of two hundred, and the two Majors, who never failed to perform their Office in their own persons; and by this means the Sen∣tinels had no opportunity to sleep: the Watch who lay without the City were reinforced, and some placed in Boats on the Lake. For better security in the day time, the Sentinels were doubled, and they who stood on the Draw-Bridge were enjoyned to wear Breast-plates to prevent Poynarding; there were new Percullices fitted to the Gates, and other machins to prevent surprisals, and new Barrs or Pallisado's a hundred paces distant from them. All the Hedges and Trees were cut down within a Musket shot of the City Gates, espe∣cially those towards the Gates of Rive, to the end there might be made a clearer discovery of those who should approach them: be∣sides the persons whose Office was to watch at the Gates, there were others appointed by the Council of two hundred (called Nota∣bles) to search all strangers whether they were armed. The Hay-Carts were likewise pierced, to find if any person was hid therein; and several other such like precautions. At the Chains which went cross the Lake, there stood a guard of Citizens; the Chains were always extended, neither were the Boats suffered to pass till the Guard belonging to the Port had searched them at Nilons Stone, and had given the sign that there was no danger. Moreover every House-keepers arms were viewed, and every per∣son was obliged according to his ability to furnish himself with Corn, Powder and Bullet, and all things else that were necessary. It was ordered that every Citizen should wear a Sword, and that all Merchants and Tradesmen should continually have their arms lying ready by them in their Shops, to the end they might be in readiness on the first occasion. Two hundred of the wealthiest Citizens were obliged to keep each of them an able Horse, besides others which are kept commonly in the City. There were several strangers, especial∣ly French-men, quartered on the rest of the Citizens who came from all parts to offer their service to the City, and M. de Balthazard the Quarter-Master-General, offered to command the Horse. In the mean time there was care taken to send several Spyes into Savoy,Spies sent in∣to Savoy. but especially in those places where the Troops lay, to the end they might have notice of their motions; and that their Coun∣cels might not be divulged, there was setled a private Council, which consisted only of seven chosen men, who had full power in all Cases unless of extraordinary importance, for such matters were brought before the general Council.
In Switzerland, they of Zurich and Berne raised a considerable number of Soldiers to assist Geneva, and to the end they might not be burdensom to the City before they had need of them; they were quartered in the Cities and Boroughs near the Lake, that so they might be in a readiness in a short time at Geneva, when occasion re∣quired, by means of a sign which they had agreed upon. The Bernoi∣ses moreover caused two great Gallies to be made, which were able to hold two hundred men a piece. The Genevoises likewise built a great one. Monsieur Joffery called du Torrent hath been since made Commander of these Vessels, one of which carried fourteen, and the other ten cast Guns. This is the nearest account of the preparations on both sides, which yet served to no purpose. It is almost impossible to imagine how de∣sirous and well disposed the Genevoises were to receive their Enemies, several of them being troubled that the Savoyards should remain all this while armed, and yet not declare a War; and indeed it is strange that the Duke should maintain such considerable Forces about Gene∣va during eight or nine months time, it being unknown for what end: it is likely he had some design on the Genevoises, but their pre∣parations and watchfulness hindred it. We must not here forget how chearfully the people in general laboured at the fortifications,The diligence of the people in working at the Fort. all the Corporations of Merchants, Artists, and other professions strived to out-do one another, march∣ing round the City with a Drum beating to shew themselves. The Students, and Divinity-Professors, went before them with four Drums, every man endeavouring to exceed his companion; they thought it not enough to work themselves, but brought workmen a∣long with them, one man ten, and another twenty; there was a rich Dutch Merchant then at Geneva, who brought a long with him two hundred workmen. In the mean time there was carried on a kind of Process or Law-suit between Savoy, Geneva, and the French Ambassador, which was managed before the Confederates, upon account at first of an in∣considerable difference, which yet had given occasion to all this bustle. In the Month of March,The Savoyards and Genevoises at variance about their priviledges. in the Year 1667. The Curates of Meg∣ny, and of Choulex, gave the Sacrament to a sick person lying in a house at Coursinge, which depended on the Soveraignty of Jussy, al∣though the rest of the Village belonged to Savoy. The State sent the elder Syndick Colladon to be informed further of the matter, who cites these Curates to appear on such a day. The Senate of Chambe∣ry on the other side cite Colladon to make his personal appearance be∣fore them, and publish a Declaration against him by beat of Drum, with an Order to have him apprehended that he might have his Try∣al. The Council marveiling at this proceeding, sent the Syndick Liffort to Chambery to the chief President of La Perouse Commandant in Savoy, to make their complaints to him, and to shew him their Title, and to justifie their right of Soveraignty over that House; but he refused to peruse it, and to hear their reasons; which put the Syn∣dicks and Council to send Deputies into Switzerland, who made se∣veral journeys to the Dyets of Arau and Baden, where the Baron of
Greisy the Ambassador from Savoy alledged his reasons: he published a Factum, which was answered by another. At length towards the latter part of the year the State deputed André Pictet, and John Du∣pan to Turin, to end this difference with his Highness himself; who caused them to be received and treated with much civility and re∣spect in all his Dominions; but the Marquiss of Pianezze, and other Commissaries whom the Duke had appointed to regulate this affair, used such delays, that the Deputies were forced to tarry three Months at Turin without concluding any thing. At length the King wrote a Letter to the Lords of Geneva, which was brought by Mon∣sieur of Lionne: and M. of Servient his Majesties Ambassador at Tu∣rin, desired the Deputies for his Masters sake, and to preserve the peace, they would release this house at Coursinge, which they did. They were yet at Turin, and the Forces of Savoy were still in the field,City divided. whilst a matter hapned at Geneva, which lacked but little of ruining it: for the Council of twenty five, and the Council of two hundred could not agree, but were divided, which difference lasted all Sunday being the 7. of December. I would here relate all the par∣ticulars of it, but it having been ordered to be scratched out of the Council Registers, to the end that it might be for ever forgotten: it will be sufficient to say that John Sarrasin the Auditor, having presi∣ded in the Council of two hundred in the Syndicks absence, and over the Council of twenty five, the lesser Council committed him to Prison, and set a guard over him belonging to the Garrison. The Council of two hundred not being able to endure that he should be used as a Criminal, who had been guilty of no other fault but of be∣ing their head, resolved to release him by force; finding themselves backed by all the people who were assembled at S. Peters, where the two hundred sat in Council. The lesser Council who had the Garrison on their side, would not endure to be imposed upon. At length when they were just ready to fall upon one another, the Pri∣soner was discharged, and all things quieted. On the 27. of Jan. at night 1670.1670. there hapned a fire amongst the Houses on the Bridge of Rhosne,A fire on the Bridge of Rhosne. which being all Timber-Hou∣ses, the greatest part of them were burnt down in less than two hours space, six score persons perishing in the flames. A Miller chose ra∣ther to save his Mother than his Wife, but she followed after in a rage, wading in the water up to her chin, and escaped; another Woman who lay sick, and was to take Physick the next morning, cast her self out at the window, and recovered both her life and health in the Rhosne; having had the good hap to escape out of the water after she had shunned the fire. In short this Conflagration had done more mis∣chief, had it not been stopped by the Towers of Monnoye and of the Isle which served as barrs against the flames; and it is observable that several pieces of Timber kept burning in the water, so great was the violence of the flames: but that which was more strange, and which all the inhabitants beheld, was that the Channel of Rhosne between the Isle and the City, which contained two hundred sixty five foot in breadth, was filled and dried up by the ruins of the Houses; The other Channel, although commonly running very swift, and swelled by the
overflowings of the other, yet four days after was frozen up. There were collections made for the relief of those families who were suf∣ferers by this fire. There were six thousand Crowns gathered for them of Geneva, and the Bernoises made liberal contributions. The Prince Elector Palatine came to Geneva in the Year 1671.1671. and stayed there some Months;The Prince Palatine en∣tertained at Geneva. he came there in the Evening, and there∣fore had not such reception as was intended: but the City being sen∣sible of their obligations to that family, during his abode in the Ci∣ty, he had all the respect they were able to shew him. But that which appeared most considerable, was his entertainment on the Lake; for the great Gally was fitted out and manned by the flower of the Youth of the City: M. the Prince was received on Board her with part of the Council. All the Morning was spent in the sport of fishing, when at Noon they landed at Secheron, and went to the Castle of Roset to eat the large Trouts they had taken; there was a stately dinner provided and made ready for them, where the Prince was attended by the sons of persons of quality belonging to the City, and the Lords of the Council, by the Princes Gentlemen. After Din∣ner they walked forth on the Lakes side, the Cannons which thundred from the Gally were answered by the Drums and Trumpets, from the Boats which were to the number of thirty attending on the Gally: there was nothing thought of but mirth and divertisement, when on a suddain there appeared a Frigate, having fifty Moors on Board her, and an Algerine Flag on her main top. Whereupon immediately all the people made ready to fight, and several Guns discharged on both sides, and at length they came to boarding; but in the end the Alge∣rine was vanquished, there being good reason for it, and the Captain of the Frigate came to Complement the Prince. At last they returned into the City towards the Evening, but the night was kept off a while by the light of the Cannon, which were discharged from all the bat∣teries of the City, and other places along the Port. Some weeks after, the Prince fell dangerously sick of the small Pox, and Prayers were made for his recovery in all the Churches, which at length obtain∣ing, he set out for Grenoble, being very well satisfied with his enter∣tainment at Geneva. The Citizens and the Garrison appeared in their arms, for to do him honour, and the Council accompanied him, and the Cannons were not silent in this occasion. It is not above six years since an enterprize was discovered on Ge∣neva,1673. which hath been known to few.An account of another pro∣ject for the taking of Ge∣neva, discove∣red by its Author. In the year 1673. on a Com∣munion day in September, the chief Syndick found at his House (at his return from Church) a Letter which a person unknown had left in his absence; the Contents whereof were, That upon a Proviso of a proportionable reward, he would make such a considerable disco∣very, that the publick safety depended on it, and if they desired to speak with this person next morning about it, the Superiour of the Convent of the Capuchines of Gex would inform them where he was; but if they neglected this advertisement, they might be certain of finding the City in a short time reduced to the greatest extremity. Wherefore the Council failed not to send the next Morning the Ad∣vocat Dunant to Gex, who discoursed this unknown person in the Capuchin's garden, and dexterously drew from him part of the secret:
he learnt that what he had to discover was an enterprize against the City, the particulars whereof he might well discover, seeing him∣self was the Author of it; that having conceived some distaste-against the Duke of Savoy, he was resolved to discover the design; but first desired to be rewarded with a thousand pounds, and that he might have a place where he might live secure. Dunant replied, that he had no power to treat with him about that particular; and that it would be more convenient for him to come to Geneva, where he might more easily treat with the Council about it in his own person. And whereas he desired to have a Letter of safe-conduct, he answer∣ed him, that this was not their Custom, but that he had power gi∣ven him to engage the Publick Faith upon it; and that he might come into the City with the same surety, as others had done before him. This person was contented with this, and came the next morning and presented himself before the Council at Geneva, telling them that his name was John Baptiste Noroy, of Nozeray in Burgun∣dy; that having found out an easie way to surprize Geneva, he had passed over into Piedmont some months since for to make it known to the Duke, which he did in a long conference he had with him at Rivoles, in which the Duke told him amongst other things that he had a score of Pensionaries in Geneva, four or five of which were of the Council; that some days after his Highness said, that he had con∣sidered the matter and found it too difficult, and moreover this jun∣cture of time was not proper to enter into a War; yet he thanked him for his good will, and had at the time ten pieces given him: and to make it appear that what he said was true, he produced Letters from the Dukes Secretary, and from some Lords belonging to the Court. His project was to be effected in the time of Vintage-harvest, at which season a great part of the Citizens are in the fields, and to send on several daies, and through several Gates, under divers pretences, four or five hundred men without Arms, who as fast as they came, should have their lodgings prepared for them in the Houses of their Confederates, where they were to be furnished with Arms, and lie hid till the day of the execution of their enterprize, which was to be in Sermon time about eight of the Clock; all these people who were hid coming out with their Arms, were to divide themselves into several parties, three of which consisting of about 80 men a piece, should speedily seize on all the doors of the three Churches, and not only hinder the people from coming out, but in the fright would constrain them to get up upon the top of the Churches, and by this means there would be no place needing a guard but only the Steeple stairs: another company should scour the streets, and kill the Citi∣zens, who being not at Church would come out of their Houses to rally themselves; the rest were to set upon a certain Gate of the City, which being not succoured by any Citizens would be soon won; which done, there should be let in Forces who were to march all night, that they might be at the Gates at the hour of this execu∣tion. He added that he was moved to make this discovery for two reasons, First that the Duke had given him but ten pieces, which he took as a great undervaluing of him; and Secondly, that having de∣sired
to be made governour of Geneva when it should be taken, his Highness instead of promising him it, set to scoffing at him. He was earnestly desired to declare the names of those persons who were Pensionaries to the Duke, but he solemnly protested he knew them not, and that it might be easily imagined that his Highness would not discover to him a secret of that importance before it was time. They who judged charitably of their fellow Citizens, could not believe there could be any so wicked, and that this was but an artifice to raise suspicions in the people against some of their Go∣vernours The lesser Council after they had heard him,Novoy secu∣red. sent him to Prison to secure him, and the next morning the Council of two hundred were assembled, before whom the whole matter was opened; they were not a little perplexed in their resolves about this man, some would have him set at liberty, seeing the Publick Faith was engaged for him, although but in words; others were of opinion to put him on the Rack to make him discover the Traytors, this being a matter wherein the security of the City was concerned; others would have have him put to death, considering the apparent danger there was in setting at liberty a man of this disposition, that he had not disco∣vered his design out of any good motive, but only out of spite and for money; and that moreover the Publick Faith was not engaged by the promise which was made him, that he might come with the same security as others before him, these terms being very general and am∣biguous, seeing that by the last of these forementioned words might be understood, that he might come with the same surety, as other such like enterprizers had done before him, who were put to death when they could be taken. In the mean time the greatest number of voices carried it, who were for avoiding both extreams; to wit, to save his life, and to condemn him to perpetual imprisonment, un∣der which sentence he still lies. The two Princes Philip and George brethren to Charles Landgrave of Hesse-Cassel,1674. came to Geneva to tarry there for a while.Prince George dyes at Geneva. Prince George the youngest of the two, who was but eighteen years of age, died there of the small Pox.1675. The whole City was concerned at his death, because that this Family holds a considerable rank amongst Protestants; and hath ever expressed a particular affection to Geneva. The Council having waited upon Prince Philip, and the Prince now reigning, ordered that for three days there should be an intermission of all publick business, to testifie thereby their sorrow and respect; and because that Prince Philip would have his brothers body buried amongst his Ancestors at Cassel, it was therefore embalmed, and laid in S. Peters Chappel, where lies buried Emilia of Nassaw, till the time should serve to transport it, which was not till eight months after. He was conveyed to the Chappel with great solemnity, being carried out in the night, accompanied with a great number of Torches, which was not a thing usual among Protestants in those parts.July 7. The Soldiers of the Garrison were placed in two rows along the Streets, to keep the crowd off; ten German Gentlemen carried the Bier, and the four eldest Syndicks held up the Pall. The Prince who was bro∣ther to the deceased, and the Prince of Chourland his cousin, fol∣lowed
the Corps; and after them, the Earls of Stolberg and Dona, the four Syndicks, and the whole Council with the Lieutenant and Auditors, all in Mourning all the Ministers and professors were in their Gowns, and Mourning Hat-bands; and last of all the whole body of the German Nobility. About this time there hapned some differences with Savoy con∣cerning Salt. The principal Farmers who have the Farming of the Salt of France,1675. Savoy and Geneva, that is to say, the only permission to sell it, for which they pay the City twenty thousand Franks per an∣num: but their time being expired in the Year 1675. There was a greater price required of them, but they resolved to give no more than heretofore, and so they held it no longer; this so greatly moved them that they determined to resent it when occasion of∣fered. In Savoy they would have taxed the quantity of Salt which eve∣ry Subject of Geneva within the limits of Savoy ought to take,Savoy and Ge∣neva at diffe∣rence about the impositi∣ons of Salt. under pretence that there was committed an abuse. which put the Coun∣cil upon sending six Waggons loaden with Salt in the night to Jussy, with a guard of twenty Soldiers for to keep up their priviledge in that matter; this made a great noise in Savoy, the Regent wrote to the Ambassador in France, and to the lesser Cantons in very sharp terms against the Genevoises,1675. whom he charged with making an In∣vasion, and entring in an Hostile manner by night into her Coun∣try.In Autum. The minor Cantons, and the Kings Embassador in Switzerland, wrote to Zurich and Berne, and they to Geneva. Information was sent them of the whole matter, and they approved of the proceed∣ings of them of Geneva, promising them assistance in case of a rup∣ture, wherewith the Savoyards threatned the City. The Militia of Savoy consisting of eight hundred Gentlemen having been command∣ed to be in readiness; and there were frequent Musters made, and great quantity of Arms and provision brought into Savoy, which obli∣ged them of Geneva to stand upon their guard. A while after the City received a Letter from the King,1676. by the hands of Monsieur de Gravelle,The French King assures the Genevoises of his good will. whom he sent Embassador into Swit∣zerland in the place of the Abbot of S. Romain, in which he assured the City in very obliging terms of the continuation of his good will. John Dupan and Amy du Chapeaurouge were deputed into Switzer∣land about the affair with Savoy.June 12. They went to Berne and Zurich, and afterwards to Soleurre to the French Embassador,Deputies di∣spatched from Geneva. and from thence to the Dyet held at Bade, where Dr. Leonardi her Royal Highnesses Resident having had audience; the Deputies of Geneva had theirs afterwards, and fully refuted whatsoever he had alledged; at length they returned very well satisfied at their journey. This business hath layn dormant all this while, yet hath the City been acquainted by Monsieur de Pompone, that Madam Royalle remains as yet very much discontented at the Transportation of Salt to Jussy through her Coun∣tries,July 18. and requires still satisfaction. The same Farmers did the like in France as they had done in Savoy, against the Genevoises.Octob. Monsieur Bouchu Intendant of Burgundy came to Colonges, with a design to make the Villages of Chancy, Avoully and Moin, whom we have above mentioned, to take the Kings Salt, and
likewise all the Houses dependant on Geneva included in the Country of Gex; to wit, in the Villages of Malagny, Ressin and others. In fine▪ notwithstanding all the Remonstrances made by them of Gene∣va, he sent Guards into each of these Villages who took away all their Salt, and commanded the inhabitants to fetch it at Gex.. No∣tice hereof was sent into Switzerland,Roset ha∣rangues the Queen and Dauphin. and the Sieur Roset was depu∣ted to wait on the King about it. He had a favourable hearing at S. Germans, and harangued afterwards the Queen, and my Lord the Dauphin. The King ordered Monsieur de Pompone to examine the business, who had several Conferences with the Deputies, but they could not come to any Conclusion; in the mean time the King ha∣ving fortunately won Valenciennes,Stoupe inter∣cedes with the French King in behalf of Geneva. Colonel Stouppe seeing him in a good humour by this success, took this as an occasion to mention to him the business of Geneva. Whereupon his Majesty granted that the Villages of Chancy, and Avoully should take Salt of Geneva, but not the others.1677. In the mean time Roset died at Paris, and the Sieur Fabry was sent to succeed him to obtain the same favour for Moin,March. and other places in like manner as in the two above mentioned Villages. He had publick Audience of the King, and finding that he advanced nothing in the Court, he desired leave to depart, and was dismissed with very courteous languge by the King,Novemb. who gave him a Chain of gold with his Medal:1678. but this affair hath remained undetermined in the same state as heretofore,Feb. 1. which hath obliged the Peasants of Moin and other places in controversie who could not live without Salt, to go fetch it at Gex. The Earl of Harach Embassador from the Emperor returning from1677. Spain came to Geneva,Octob. 23. where he stayed but a day. The City pre∣tended ignorance of his quality till after his arrival,The Empe∣rors Embassa∣dor passes through Geneva. to the end they might make a difference between his reception, and that of Monsieur Crequi's the French Embassador in the Year 1664. yet he had the same Complements and Presents made him at his departure. The Vice-Roy of Galice Embassador from Spain,1678. going towards the Emperor, took Geneva in his way,March 24. and parted thence four days after his arrival.The Spanish Embassador passes through Geneva. He had the same Civilities shewed him, as the Earl of Harach had before him, and was the more satisfied with them, in that he came from Lyons, where scarcely any body took notice of him. In parting from Geneva, he wrote his Master word of the Civilities he had received there. And thus hath Geneva subsisted to our times,Conclusion. whilst several flou∣rishing Cities have perished; and divers mighty States have been overturned: which God often permits by his admirable providence, to let both great and small States know, That their subsistence or ruin depend not on their own strength or weakness; but that they are all in his hand, and their happiness or misery come only from him. FINIS.
ANCIENT INSCRIPTIONS Which are to be seen AT GENEVA. I. At the ascent of the Trellis. IOVI O. M. CINGIDVO STABULO ET AVLVS. THIS is the foot of a Stall or Booth which was found thirty Years since on the side of the Arve, having been thrown up by an inundation. Guichenon is the first who hath mentioned it, but he hath forgot the word Stabulo. The Stone is hollow in the upper part of it, wherein was kindled the fire for the Sacrifice which was offered to Jupiter Optimus Maximus, for this is the mean∣ing of these two Letters O. M. I am not yet satisfied whether CINGIDVO is some Sirname of Jupiter, or whether it is to be read as two words CINGI DVO, that is to say, Cingii duo Sta∣bulo
& Aulus: for there hath been a Roman Family called Cincia, which perhaps might be the same with Cingia. Yet it seems, up∣on a through consideration, that this is but one Word. II. IOVI ASSIGN. M. F. N. THis fragment is another Vow to Jupiter, and hath been men∣tioned by Gruterus. III. At the great Street. APOLLINI M. AVFVSTIVS CATVSo. THis is a Vow to Apollo by Marcus Aufustius Catus, or Catuso: for it is a hard matter to say whether the o which is at the end, is a Letter which should be joyned to Catus, or a kind of pointing. IV. At the Colledge near the fourth Classe. APOLLINI M. VERATIVS MERCATOR. IT is a common Opinion in Geneva, that in the time of Heathe∣nism, Apollo was particularly worshipped, and that he had a Tem∣ple in this City in the same place where now stands S. Peter's Church. There is to be seen, on a Gate behind this Church, a
Head made to resemble that of the Sun. Monsieur Morus alledgeth this proof in his Harangue de Sole & scuto Genevensi, for to confirm the common opinion. But this Head seems to me to be nothing else but the Carvers fancy, and doth not look as if it was very old, it being made only of Molasse Stone. Being some Years since at Geneva with Monsieur Patin, who is a competent Judge in these matters, I shewed him this piece, and he was of opinion that it was not very old. Neither do I believe with others, that this part of the Church, near which stands the fore-mentioned Head, is the remains of a Heathenish Temple, seeing there is not to be seen any difference in the other parts of it, neither in its Frame nor Mate∣rials. But this Temple might perhaps have been built on the Foundations of that of Apollo. V. On the Wells du Four de Fer. MARTIAVG. SACRVM SENNIVS SABINVS THis Stone was dedicated to the god Mars Augustus by Sennius Sabinus. This title of Augustus is oftentimes joyned to the names of the Deities, since the age of Augustus: for the Heathens by a ridiculous superstition believed that they honoured their gods in giving them sometimes the names of Illustrious Men, after the same manner as they thought to honour Men in giving them the names of their gods. VI. At the same place. M. CONNI SECVNDI M. IVL MARCIANVS FRATRI. MArcus Julius Marcianus had caused this Inscription to be En∣graven, in remembrance of his Brother Marcus Connius Se∣cundus: but why, seeing they were Brothers, did not they bear the name of the same Family? But it may be they were Brethren but by the Mothers-side.
VII. At the Borough of Four at Monsieur Sarrazin's. M. IVL. MARCIANVS SIBI VIVOS POSTERISQ SVIS FECIT. NEither Gruterus nor Guichenon have mentioned this, it being nothing but a plain Monument, which Julius Marcianus caused to be made in his life-time for himself and posterity. Vi∣vos is commonly used for Vivus. VIII. This Inscription was seen heretofore near S. Peters. D. M. S. C. IVLIVS CAESAR LONGINVS D. FIL. C. IVL. LEIBERTVS PERRVPTIS MONTIBVS HVC TANDEM VENI VT HIC LOCVS MEOS CONTEGERET CINERES APOLLO TVAM FIDEM VIXIT ANNOS XLI MESS. III. DIES XIII HOR. NVL. T. FVLVIVS D. D. L. COMMILITO COMMILITONVM VALE LONCINE AITERNVM S. T. T. L.
THere were few Epitaphs which were not dedicated to the gods Manes. Which are meant by these three Letters D. M. S. Dis Manibus Sacrum. I have inserted on the third Line, instead of D. CIL. which are not of any signification, and which I take therefore to be a mistake, D. FIL. Decimi Filius. The freed Men took often upon them the name of them who delivered them out of Bondage, adding thereunto some Surname, as this Cajus Julius Caesar Longinus, who was Julius Caesar's freed Man, had done here. Such was his destiny, that after he had taken a great deal of pains in traversing the Mountains to come to Geneva, he died there soon after his arrival. The Pagans esteemed it a great misfortune to die in a strange Land out of their own Country. This Inscription then is one of the ancientest in Geneva, seeing it was made in Julius Cae∣sar's time. Its whole Phrase is good Latin, especially that of per∣ruptis montibus is very pretty: for doth it not seem that a Man must break through the Mountains to find his way from Italy to Geneva along the Alpes? This Longinus lived forty one Years, three Months and just thirteen Days exactly to an hour, for this is ap∣parently the meaning of these two abridged words HORam NVL∣lam. The everlasting farewell which his Companion gives him, is this S. T. T. L. Sit tibi terra levis, Which were usual expres∣sions to Friends: That the Earth may be light to you, and not hin∣der the Soul by its weight, from disintangling it self from the Body. IX. In S. Peter's, over-against the Princess of Portugals Chappel. Q. IVLIO SERGIO MEMORIAE EIIVS FVLLON. IVSTINVS ET TE RENTIA BELATVL LA ET IVL. MACR INVS PATRONO HERED FACIEN sic DVM CVRAVER. THis is a Memorial which Fullonius Justinus, Terentia Belatulla, and Julius Macrinus have set up in honour of their Protector Quintus Julius Sergius, whose Heirs they were.
X. CN. ARVTIO CN. F. CELERI PRAEF. COHORTIS LVSITANORVM. THis fragment is in honour of one Cneus Arutius, or Aruntius Celer, Son of Cneus, Prefect of the Cohort of Portugaises. Gru∣terus hath mentioned it twice in Page CCCLXVI. 5. and in Page DXXIII. I. with this difference, that in one he inserts the whole, and in the other Page only the first Letters, as we have here re∣presented it. XI. In the great Street over-against the Pelisserie. NVMINIBVS AVG. ET DOM. DIV. VICTOR AVG. LIB. P. P. S. THE freed Men oftentimes testified to their deliverers how much they were concerned in their preservation, causing the Vows which they made for them to their gods to be Engra∣ven in Marble; as we have here an instance of it in Victor, who was Augustus's freed man, who invocates those particular gods, to whom the Romans believed the preservation of the Emperor be∣longed, and that of all their divine Family. And whereas we call the Family of our Kings and Emperors the Royal Family, they to shew it greater respect, gave it the Epithet of Divine.
XII. In the City-Walls, on the outside of them, over-against la Corraterie▪ T. IVL. T. FIL. CORN. VALERIANO PATRONO COLON. II VIR. AER. III VIR. LOCORVM P. PERSEQVENDOR. TRIB. MILIT. LEG. VI. VICTR. PRAEF. FABRV. FLAM. AVG. PONT-IFICI IVLIA T. F. VERA PATRI OPTIMO. FOrasmuch as that few Men are acquainted with the abbrevia∣tions of Inscriptions, I will here set this down at length. Tito Julio Titi Filio Cornelia (tribu) Valeriano, Patrono Coloniae, Duumviro Aerarii, Triumviro locorum publicorum persequendorum, Tribuno militum legionis Sexta Victricis, praefecto Fabrum, Flami∣ni Augustali, Pontifici, Julia Titi Filia vera Patri optimo. So that this is a Monument dedicated to the memory of Titus Ju∣lius Valerianus of the Cornelian stock, Protector of the Geneva-Co∣lony, chief Overseer of the Treasury and publick Buildings, Camp∣master of the sixth Legion which was called Victorious, and Overseer of the Workmen, Priest of Augustus, Pontifici, by his Daughter Julia Vera. It need not seem strange that I render Patrono Coloniae, Pro∣tector of the Colony of Geneva: for although this is not expresly declared, yet must we understand him to be Patron and Protector of that Colony where the Inscription was placed: for this Stone is too large to be brought thither from any other place: it being likewise inlayed with the City-Walls, which were built long since. We need not doubt, but that Geneva had the Priviledges of a Roman Colony, seeing it had all the Offices thereunto belong∣ing, as we may observe in these Inscriptions of Duumviri's and Sextumviri's. The word Colony seems still to be preserved in the name of the Village of Cologny, which is not above a quarter of a League distant from Geneva.
XIII. At the Colledge and other places are seen some fragments of Letters of a foot high; or, Onciales, as they call them. C. IVL. .. IVLIA And near to this. RATRV.. VRVM From whence some have conjectured that it might be thus supplied: C. IVLius & IVLIA aRATRVm circumduxerunt & mVRVM aedificaverunt. AND so that Julius Caesar had built the Walls of Geneva. But this is but a meer conjecture, for C. IVL. doth not ne∣cessarily signifie Julius Caesar; but only some Person of that Fami∣ly, as it is in XXVI Inscription thus: C. IVL. SEMATVS. XIV. This was heretofore seen at Monnoye. C. VALERIOT.Titi Filio Auli nepoti. F. A. N. TR. MIL. LEG. II. PATRONO OPTIMO GENEVENS PRO∣VINCIA B. M. P.Bene merenti posuit. VIXIT ANN. LX. M. II. DIES XVII. THis is a considerable Inscription. Here is mentioned one Ca∣jus Valerius Master of the Camp of the second Legion, to whose memory the Province of Geneva had caused this Stone to be Engraven for the benefits which it had received by him as a good Patron: for this word Patroni signifies something more than
Protectors: And these two words of Genevensis Provincia are re∣markable, seeing they inform us, That the Genevois was erected into a Province, of which Geneva was the Capital, seeing it gave it its name. XV. At S. Peter's, near the Steps. Q. STARDIVS MACER C. STARDIVS PACATVS C. ALBVCIVS PHILOGENES STATIVS ANCHIALVS NOVELLIVS AMPHIO CORNELIVS AMPHIO IIIIII VIRI THese are the names of six Sextumvirs of Geneva. This Ma∣gistracy was established since Augustius his Reign, consisting of six Persons who were changed from time to time, after the same manner as 'tis now with the four Syndiks. XVI. At the Colledge. SEX. ATTIO CARPOPHORO IIIIII VIRO AVG. IERIA CASTVLA. SExtus Attius Carpophorus was, it seems, one of these Sextum∣virs, to whose memory his Wife set up this Monument.
XVII. Another in the same Colledge. ...XTI FIL. ...RINAE ...MINICAE ...MATERNAE THis fragment hath been made for some Roman Nun whom they called Flaminica. XVIII. Again. MEMORIAE AETERNAe VERR VERVLAE COLVSAE STVRD. CONIVGI INCOM PARABILI F.Fieri curiavit sub Ascia x di∣cavit. C. ET SVB ASC DED. THis Epitaph was Consecrated to the everlasting remem∣brance of Verria Verula Colusa by her Husband Sturdius, who had dedicated it, together with the Ax which he used in cut∣ting out and polishing the Stone. The severity of the ancient Romans, who would have retrenched the Funeral expences, had caused them to make a Law, Rogum ascia ne poleant: but their va∣nity was too strong to be curbed by the twelve Tables, and their luxury extended it self as well to the dead as the living.
XIX. At S. Peter's, towards a back Gate. CAL. VERNAE VER. VERVLA FIL. PIENTIS P.Ponendum curavit. C. S.Sub Ascia dedicavit. A. D. THis short Inscription had been made by Verria Verula, for her Son Cal. Verna. XX. At the Colledge. .......RI ...IONI LEGIONIS X HERED. EXTEST. THis fragment tells us nothing else but that the Heirs of a certain Centurion of the tenth Legion had acquitted them∣selves of the charge laid upon them by his Will. We may ob∣serve here, as likewise in several other Inscriptions, that the word Heres is only written with a single e, and not by an ae: for this word comes from Herus, because the Heir becomes Master of the Testators Estate.
XXI. Under the Clock at Molard. D. VALERIO ASIATICI LIBERT SISSI IIIIII VIRO COL.Coloniae Equestris. EQ. EXT.Ex Testamenta. THis Inscription, as well as that which follows, hath been brought heretofore from Versoy, where they stood in Grute∣rus's time. See underneath what we say of the Colony of Eque∣stres, amongst whom Decimus Valerius the freed man of Asiaticus was Sextumvir. It seemeth that it is of this Valerius Asiaticus of whom spake Suetonius: Talibus principiis magnam imperii partem, non nisi consilio & arbitrio vilissimi cujusque histrionum & aurigarum administravit & maximè Asiatici liberti. The Geneva Manuscripts tell us, That it was he who gave his Sirname of Sessius to a Vil∣lage of the Country of Gex called Seyssi, and in Latin Sissium. XXII. Near the same place. D. M. Diis Manibus L. AVR. RESPECTO IVVENI ERVDITO CAVSIDICO IS CIVI VALLENSE ET EQVESTRE DEFVNC TO ANNOR XVIII FILIO PIENTISSIMO L. AVREL. RESPECTVS PATER PONENDVM CVRAVIT.
THis Epitaph being dedicated to the gods Manes, is in honour of Lucius Aurelius Respectus a learned young Man, who had twice pleaded at the Bar, although but eighteen years of age, as his Father Lucius Aurelius Respectus testifies of him. The Son is named Civi Vallense & Equestre, Citizen of Valay and the Equestres: The one lying on the East-side of the Lake, and the other on the West. Some read it VALINSAE, and thus hath Gruterus cited it; but I have read it distinctly Vallense, although that the rest be worn out. XXIII. At the Gate of Rive. ANNOR. XII. L. PLINIO FAVSTI FIL. SABINO C. PLINIO M. F. C. N. FAVSTO AEDILI II VIRO IVL. EQ FLA∣MIN. C. PLINIVS FAVST. VIVOS THis Inscription was made for a Monument of a Father and his Son, who were of the Family of the Plinies, which was Illustrious under the Empire of Trajan and his Successors: we must read the Fathers thus, Caio Plinio Marci Filio Caii Nepoti Fausto Aedili Duumviro (Coloniae) Juliae Equestris, Flamini, Caius Plinius Faustus vivos, or vivus sibi fecit. So that he raised this Monument himself, when his Son Lucius Plinius Sabinus being but twelve years of age died. Some who understood not this word E Q. have ren∣dred it Equiti a Knight: which it cannot signifie, for it would have been placed immediately after the name, and before the other qualities; and moreover the Ediles, or they who had the super∣intendance over publick Buildings, were not chosen from amongst the Knights, but the People. And in effect what would IVL. sig∣nifie. As for the word Coloniae it is understood, as in the name of Corinthe, which hath been called heretofore Colonia Latina Julia Co∣rinthus, and sometimes LAVS IVLIA CORINTHVS: for the name of Jules hath been given to several Colonies which have been sent over in his time, or favoured by him, as without doubt the Colony of Equestres were. What I have said of this Colony
may be seen in Munster, p. 23. T. 1. Guilliman, and the Author of the Book called the Citizen, thought that the Colony of Equesters was Geneva, or at least that it was the Capital, and that Chablais had taken its name from Caballis, or Equis; and that which hath inclined them to be of this Opinion, is the great number of Inscriptions which are to be seen in Geneva, where there is mention made of it. Guichenon hath very well judged, that they might have been brought from some other place, and I have read in the Manuscripts, that those two which are at Molard, where there is made men∣tion of a Sextumvir of the Equestres, and of a Citizen of the same Country, had been brought from Versoy, in the Year 1590. and likewise another Inscription wherein is mentioned Civitas Equestri∣um, is cited in Authors who have written of the Country of Vaud, as if it had been heretofore to be seen there. It is likewise very probable, by the right of Neighbourhood, that several Persons of Quality who had Offices in the Colony of Equesters, had like∣wise the same in Geneva, or at least that they had died in that City. The true situation then of this Colony was in the Country of Vaud, betwixt the two small Rivers of Versoy and Aubonne, and the word Enquestres, which is used still in this Territory amongst the People of that Country,Guichenon in his History of Savoy, p. 8. is a sufficient proof of this. There is likewise an ancient Act made in the Year 1011. wherein this small Country along the Lake is called Pagus Equestricus. Nions, which was in the middle, was the Capital City, which was the occasion that this name was added, as in the Notes of the Empire, written in Theodosius his time, it is called Civitas Equestrium No∣viodunum under the Province of the Sequanoises, in which likewise Pliny placeth it, whereas Geneva was comprehended under the Province of Vienna. The Itinerary of Antoninus distinguisheth ve∣ry well Geneva, which he calls Civitas Genavensium, under the Province of Vienna, and Nions Civitas Equestrium, id est, Nevidu∣num, under the Sequanoise Province, the same with that above∣mentioned. obverse of coin SEDES LAVSANE reverse of coin ✚CIVITAS EQVESTRI For a confirmation of what I have said, I should have added, That there has been found an ancient Coyn, which hath on one side CIVITAS EQVESTRIS, and on the other SEDES LAVSANE, which shews that the Colony of Equestres acknow∣ledged the Episcopal Seat of Lausane.
In effect what reason had Munster and Gailliman to place the Caval∣ry in Chablais, which is a Country surrounded with Mountains, or in Geneva which is situated on a little Hill? The Country of Vaux which abounds with pasturage, and which is hardly any thing else but a flat Campagne, was far more proper for this. There are like∣wise several Villages in this Country, which seem to have taken their names from some ancient Romans, who perhaps had been Lords of it,Vide Inscript. in the time when this Country flourished. There are yet such names as these:XXI. Roscy, which perhaps might come from Roscius, Crassy from Crassius, Dudy from Duellis, Sey from Sissius, who are mentioned in an Inscription at Geneva. Prmenon, which is not far from Nions, taketh likewise its name from the neighbouring Cape of this Village, for the Latins called a Cape promontorium. The Tower in the Isle of Geneva is attributed to Julius Caesar, which hath his name given it, but I know not for what reason: for my part I see no cause to make me believe that this was built in his time, on the contrary the materials which are the most part of but Mollasse Stone, as one of S. Peters Steeples is, moves me rather to think that it is the work of some King of Burgundy, several of which have dwelt at Geneva; and perhaps; (not to oppose a received oppinion) it hath been raised on foundations of another building by Julius Caesar, or by some one of his successors in the Empire, who have all taken upon them the name of Caesars. Munster hath misunderstood that passage of Caesars Commentaries,Cosmograph, L. 2. thinking that the Bridge which is there mentioned, belonged to the Switzers. Exeo oppido pons ad Helvetios pertinet, where this last word signifies not appertaneth, but only looketh towards, or spectat; for on this Bridge men passed over from Geneva into the Country of the Helvetians, who ld that which we now call Switzerland, and the Country of Vaud. This likewise may serve to convince us of the popular error which taketh a row of stakes which appear above water in the Lake, for the remains of this Bridge; for it doth not face the Helvetians Country, but the Country of Chablais, which then belonged to the Allobroges; and it being a hard matter to root out opinions which have sunk deep into peoples minds, I shall therefore make bold to relate here the ob∣servations made by a friend of mine, to whom I am obliged for se∣veral Memoires relating to this present History. Be pleased then to observe what he hath written to me thereof. In a walk (said he) I made some days past on the Lake to inform myself in the matter of these pretended ruins of a Bridge, I observed that these were two rows of Stakes which were all like one another, one row being only two paces distant from the other, which beginning at the head of the Isle where stands Caesars Tower, and from thence going up the River, reach through the Chains, and the Isles called Barques, drawing towards the Village of Cologny, and reaching no farther than the end of it; so that these two rows are in length about three thousand paces, the Fishermen call them Fi∣ches. These Stakes are of Oak, squared, and about the thickness of a mans thigh, and being not above two or three foot above ground, are al∣ways at the bottom of the water, the Stakes on either row are not above three foot distant one from another; which makes me believe that this never
never was a Bridge, because the States are too small and too near one another, and that the Bridge thereupon would have been too narrow; moreover how absurd would it have been to have made a Bridge of this length, which doth not cross the River, but leads upwards against the stream; and besides what oc∣casion could there be of making a Bridge to pass from Geneva to Cologe, seeing one may go by Land thither. I suppose therefore that these stumps have served heretofore for a Ditch or Entrenchment, which had been raised to make the Rhosne pass cleverty between the Isle, and S. Gervais, and to hin∣der the water from overflowing the low streets as it has done heretofore when the pavement was not raised, so that this Bridge which is mentioned in Caesars Commentaries stood no where else but in the same place, where is at present that whereon we pass over from the City to S. Gervais. XXIV. L .IVL. P. F. VOL. BROC. CHVS VAL. BASSVS PRAEF. FABR. BIS TRIB. MIL. LEG. VIII. AVG. II VIR IVR. D. IIIVIR LOC. P. P. AVGVR. PONTIF. IIVIR FLAMEN IN COL. EQVE∣STRE VIANIS GENAVENSIBVS LACVVS DAT THis curious Inscription was not known to Gruterus, having been found since the impression of his Book. Monsieur Godefroy had caused this Stone to be brought into his Court, where it still lies. Guichenon had seen it, but hath not exactly copied it, or the Printer hath not followed his Copy: for there is five or six mistakes which spoil the sense, LEVI for L. IVL. BROCCI∣VS for BROCCHVS. AVG. for AVGVR. VTANIS for VIANIS. LACCVS instead of LACVVS, and D. M. for DAT. Observe here how it must be read without abbre∣viations. Lucius Julius Publii filius Voltinia tribu Brocchus Valerius, or Vale∣rianus Bassus, Praefectus Fabrum, bis Tribunus Militum Legionis Octa∣vae Augustae, Duumvir juri dicundo, Triumvir locorum publicor. perse∣quendorum,
Augur, Pontifex, Duumvir, Flamen in Colonia Equestre Vianis Genavensibus Lacuus dat. Except the word Vianis, which may be a mistake of the Carver, all the rest is easie, and is thus in English: Lucius Julius Brocchus Valerianus Bassus, Son of Publius, and of the Tribe of Voltinia, Overseer of the Workmen appointed to make Engines for War, twice Camp master of the eighth August Legi∣on, one of the Magistrates who are appointed Judges in matters of Equity, Superintendant of the publick Buildings, Augure, chief Pre∣late, Duumvir and Priest in the Colony of Equestres, giveth the Lakes to the Genevoises. The Lords and Roman Magistrates, who were Lieutenants for the Emperors in their Provinces, had great Authority, seeing we read that they have sometimes disposed of Crowns. So that it need not seem strange to us that this Person here-mentioned hath given the Lakes to the Genevoises, for he puts Laus in the Plural, com∣prising perhaps other lesser Lakes of the Country, with the Lake Leman. His great Offices in the Province and the advantage he had in being of the Family of the Juliusses, gave him without doubt this power: and what can make more plainly appear, the esteem which the Romans had for the City of Geneva? That I may therefore the better set forth this illustrious Family of Julius Brocchus, I shall produce some other Marbles which are to be seen at Geneva and its adjacent places. XXV. At Nions. D. IVL. F. VOL. RIPANO CAPITONI BASSIANO EQVO PVBLICO HONORATO PRAEFECTO FABRVM TRIB. MIL. COH. I. GAL. L. IVL. BROCCHVS VALER BASSVS FILIO DEcimus Julius Ripanus capito Bassianus was Son to the said Ju∣lius Brocchus, and had likewise very honourable Employs: for besides that, he had a Horse which was kept at the publick charge, he was likewise Overseer of the Workmen, and Camp∣master of the first Gauloise Legion. Nions was the Colony of Eque∣stres where his Father was Duumvir.
XXVI. At Geneva heretofore in the Halls was seen. D. IVL. D. F. VOLT CAPITON AVGVRI IIVIRO AERAR. FLAMINI MARTIS TR. MILIT. THis Decimus Julius Capito was Son of the fore named Deci∣mus Julius Ripanus Capito, and was Augure and Duumvir of the publick Treasury, Priest of Mars and Master of the Camp. And thus did they unite Religion and Arms with the Gown, in giving all these Offices to one Person: and since that the Emperors have become great Pontifexes, their Lieutenants and Subjects might well take upon them that of Augures and Priests, although they follow∣ed Arms or were Gown-men. XXVII. At Pragin, near Nions. C. IVL. C. F. VOLT. SEMATO II VIRO ITERVM FLAMINI AVG. L. IVL. CAPITO AMICO OPTIMO CAjus Julius Capito Son of Cajus, was of the same Family with them above-mentioned, and of the same Tribe, and held like∣wise the Office of Duumvir and Priest of Augustus. Lucius Julius Capito his Friend was some collateral branch, and this following Inscription, which I have seen, belongs to him.
XXVIII. At Aix in Savoy. L. IVLIO CAPITONI ET IVLIAE TERTIAE CN. IVLIVS LVCINVS PARENTIBVS CNenus Julius Lucinus and not Lucinius, as Guichenon would have it, was the Son of Lucius Julius Capito, and of Julia Tertia, for whom he had caused this Stone to be Engraved. I have produced all these Inscriptions, because they confirm the number of the Family of the Jul's settled in these parts, as we have noted in Page 22. T. 1. And because likewise that they guide us to the knowlege of the Family of L. Julius Brocchus. XXIX. This hath been heretofore in the Walls of Geneva towards Corraterie. VIXI VT VIVIS MORIERIS VT SVM MORTVVS SIC VITA TRVDITVR VALE VIATOR ET ABI IN REM TVAM THis fancy is very ingenious: I have once lived as thou livest now, but thou must die as I am dead: so our life flies away: Adieu, Traveller, and go and mind thy business. This was, (saith the Author of the Book called the Citizen) omi∣nous to the Savoyards, when they scaled the City near this place: but can any Man think they were so much at leasure as to read Tomb-stones, and that they brought Lights along with them? I do not believe it.
XXX. Beneath the Clock du Molard on the side of the Lake. IMP. CAES NERV. VLP. TRAIAN. AVG. GERM. PONT. MAX. TRIBVN. POT. COS. II. M. P. VIII. THis Stone is one of those Columns or Millinary Stones which serve to mark the distance of places. The deceased M. Revilliod, who caused it to be brought from Versoy, had copied out the Inscription: we are not able to make sence of every particular Character in it, because that the Rain and overflowings of the Lake have washed out a great part of the Letters of it. It was made under the second Consulship of the Emperor Nerva Ʋlpins Trajan, and was to give notice that it was 8000 paces distant to some part of the Country from that place where this was set. Which perhaps might be Geneva, which lay at the entrance into the Countries of the Allobrogeses, Helvetians, and Sequanoises. XXXI. Over the Treillis or Lattice. IMP. CAES. DIVI MAGNI ANTONI NI. PII. D... NE POS... IA... TRIB. POT. MIL. P. THis is a Stone set up for the same purpose as the former, for it is made in the fashion of a Pillar, and there is at the end of it MIL. P. Milliarium posuit: although that the Character which should shew us how many Miles it meant, was worn out,
yet that little which is to be seen, gives us to understand, that it hath been set up in the time when Marc. Aurel. was Emperor, who was the adopted Son of Antoninus Pius. XXXII. In S. Peter's Wall. IMP. CAES. M. AVRELIO ANTONINO PIO FELICI AVG. PONTIF. MAX. TRIB. POTEST. COS. CIVITAS EQVESTRIVM THis Stone it is probable hath been brought from the Coun∣try of Vaud: for Guilliman mentions one like it, in his Me∣moires of Switzerland, where it then without doubt lay. Civitas Equestrium is the same with Colonia Equestris. Although that these Names and Titles of Marc. Aurelius Antoninus, &c. are common to three Emperors, viz. to Marcus Aurelius, to Caracella and to Helio∣gabulus, yet I am of opinion it belongs to the first, because there hath been seen heretofore in these parts this inscription quoted by Guilliman, and by Gruterus after him, wherein was read TRIB. POTEST. XVI. COS. III. Now of these three Emperors whom we have named, the last hath not so often had the power of Tribune. And Caracalla was Sirnamed when he held the sixteenth time the Office of Tribune, Germanick and Britannick, which would not have been omitted in this Inscription: whereas Marcus Aurel. to whom this belongs, had not then any Title when he was in the 16th year of his Tribuneship, seeing it was then but the second year of his Reign: for Antoninus had granted it him when he was but Caesar, that is to say, designed for the Empire. Neither is there seen in this Inscription any title added to his name.
XXXIII. On the Treillis or Lattice D.. RVFIAE AQVILINAE C. F. THis is nothing but the ruins of a Stone dedicated to the Ma∣nes of Rusia Aquilina.caii Filla. XXXIV. Under the Hall of the Auditory. L. NAMMIO NVMIDAE NƲmida might be the name of Lucius Nammius's Country: but the name and praename being Roman, there is more likelihood that it is but a Sirname.
XXXV. In S. Peter's-Wall, on the side of the Stairs of Poule. Supply D. M. & qu IETI AETERNAE ma NSVETINIAE IV lia NAE LIBERTAE ca RISSIMAE ET CON jug I INCOMPARA bili FEMINAE SAN eti SSIMAE C. MA ns VETINIVS PA ter NVS PATRO NVS THis was dedicated to the gods Manes, and to the everlasting repose of Mansuetinia Juliana a freed Woman and Wife of Cajus Mansuetinius Paternus, which testifies of the holiness of her Life. XXXVI. In the Wall of the same Church over-against the Bishops Palace. —RICCIO T. F..... C. L. FRONTONI VIR AERARI ....R. EX TESTAM. RIccius Fronto Son of Titus, the freed Man of Caia, Overseer of the publick Treasury, is the Person for whom this Inscription hath been made by one of his Heirs, who was enjoyned thereto in his Will. There is mention made of the same Office of Duumvir Aerarii in the twelfth Inscription.
XXXVII. Near S. Germains. DIIS MANIB. SEXM.... ATRO VI. SAGAR.... NI.. NARCISSVS.... AN.. SAgarius is a dealer in Gowns: Negotiator Sagarius is in other In∣scriptions. Narcissus is the Sirname of a freed Man, as was this famous Narcissus whom the Emperor intrusted with the chief care of the Sale. XXXVIII. At la Pelisserie. IMP. CAES. C. VIBIO TREBONIA NO GALLO PIO FELICI AVG. PONTIFICI MAX. TRIB. POTES. COS. II. P. P. IMP. CAES. C. VIBIO ANNIO GALLO.... IANO VOLVSIANO
THis was a Millenary Column made in the time when Treboni∣an and Volusian held the Empire. We may observe, that the latter of these carried these six: Cajus Vibius Anintus Gallus Tre∣bonianus Volusianus, which observation you will not meet with elsewhere. Aurelius Victor mis-names these two Emperors, Virius Gal∣lus and Volesianus. XXXIX. This was seen heretofore at Geneva. D. M. S. VETVRIAE C. F. BELLAE HEV POSITAE GNATAE TRISTES POSVERE PARENTES C. VETVRIVS. Q. F. C. N. OVF. IVLIANA O. F. SCAPT. LIBB. MER. CAjus Veturius of the Ousentine Tribe, and his Wife Juliana of the Scaptian Tribe, had caused this Inscription to be set over the Tomb of their Daughter Veturia Bella. O. F. that is to say Cajae filiae, the praenames of Women being marked by a Letter turned backwards: but it seldom hapned that they had any prae∣names.
XL. This was heretofore at S. Gervais. D. M. PAPIRIAE POLCRAE QVAE VIXIT ANN. VIIII. MESS. II. DIES XII. MAGNA FREQVENTIA LEG. XIII. EL. EST L.Caii filius. PAPIRIVS. C. F. PROBVS TRIB. MIL. AELIA AELIANA PAR.Parentes mae∣rentes filiae meritissimae. MOER. FIL. MER. P. C. THis Inscription, which is for a Monument to preserve the memory of Papiria Polcra, who had lived but nine Years, and two Months and twelve Days, had been set up by Lucius Pa∣pinius Probus a Military Tribune, and by his Wife Aelia Aeliana; the Father and Mother being afflicted at the loss of so dear a Daughter. MAGNA FREQVENTIA LEG. XIII. EL. EST. which signifies, if I mistake not, Magna frequentia legoni tertiae elata est; that she had been attended at her Burial by a great num∣ber of Soldiers of the thirteenth Legion, of which her Father was without question the Commander or Tribune. Sertorius Ʋrsatus in his Book de Notis Romanorum, hath expounded after the same manner these Characters EL. EST. Elata est.
XLI. This was found in the Year 1678. at the foot of the Tower of the Isle, and may be seen at this present at the House of Mon∣sieur Minutoli the publick Professor. DEO SILVA NO PRO SALV TE RATIARIOR. SVPERIOR A. MICOR SVOR. BASIM SANCT. M. ARRIVS CIVIS HEL. V. S. L. M. THis is the Basis of a Statue dedicated to the god Sylvian, for the health of the Superior Boatmen, or who had their Quar∣ter assigned them in the upper-part of the Lake and the Rhosne, by Marcus Arrius Citizen of Switzerland or Helvetia, their Friend, who had by this means discharged himself of his Oath. Sylvian was the god of the Woods, and the Bargemen honoured him, upon the account that he should furnish them with good Wood, either to make Barks, or to bring along with them in thier Rafts (Ra∣deaux) or flat-bottom Boats: for this word Radeaux is derived from Ratis; from whence hath been formed the word Ratiarius, which is seldom used. Rates, saith Festus, vocantur tigna inter se colligata, quae per aquam aguntur: quo quidem vocabulo interdum etiam naves vo∣cantur. Eodem nomine significamus remos.
These following Roman Inscriptions are to be seen in several parts about Geneva. XLII. In the Church of S. Saflorin, neer de Vevay. TI. CLAVDIVS DRVSI F. CAESAR AVG. GERM. PONTIF. MAX. TRIB. PONT. VIII. IMP. XII. P. P. COS. IIII. F. A. XXXVII. THis is a Millenary Stone, by which the Romans were wont to mark out the distance of places, for it is made in form of a Cosumn, and the numerical Characters are Engraven on it. It was perhaps thirty seven Miles thence to Avanche; for this may be the meaning of these two Letters, F. A. Faederata Aventicum. Gui∣chenon and John Baptiste Plantin have not read correctly the first word TIT. which signifies Titus, instead of TI. which signifies Tiberius, and which is the praename of Claudius, in whose Reign this Stone had been set up. For to confirm what I have said of the two Letters, F. A. behold here another Millenary Stone, where∣on the word Aventicum may be read at length. It was found in 1640. and is not any more than the preceeding, observed by Gru∣terus.
XLIII. At Entreroches. IMP. CAES. TIT. AELIO. HADRIANO AVG. P. M. TRIB. POT. COS. III. P. P. AVENTICVM M. P. XXXXI. THat is to say, Imperatori Caesari Tito Aelio Hadriano Augusto, Pontifici Maximo, Tribunitiae potestatis, Consuli tertium, Patri patriae, Aventicum milliarium posuit quadragesimum primum. Plan∣tin and Guichenon, insert on the second line TR. P. AELIO, which is a palpable mistake, for TR. P. signified Tribunitiae po∣testatis, which would have then been twice repeated, seeing there is the same again. XLIV. At Nions. C. LVCCONI CO.. TETRICI PRAEFECT. ARCEND. LATRO.. PRAEFECT PROIIVIR IIVIR BIS FLAMINI AVGVST. THere are several Inscriptions at Nions, but I only produce this, because it is not taken notice of by Gruterus, and that it is remarkable for the charge which Cajus Lucconius Tetricus had, de Praefectus arcendis latronibus, the same with what they call in
French, Grand Provost. whose Office was to keep the Road free from Thieves. The charge of Duumvir, Produumvir and Priest of the Emperor, were held by the same Person: and we have already observed that the Sword, the Gown, and the Priesthood were not inconsistent amongst the Ancients. XLV. At Coppet. D. M. PHILET BRIT TAL. ANNORVM XXIIII DEFVNCT O CLAVDIA NVS FILI VNICI ET PIISSIMI P.Pendum ravit. C. SVB. ASC. DED. THis Inscription is not correct in Gruterus, Plantin and Guiche∣non: which obliged me, some Years since as I passed by to light of my Horse to take a Copy of it, although there is no great matter in it. Gruterus readeth PHILETI BRITAI & D. II. VNC.. OS for DEFVNCTO: & Plantin PHILE. II. BRITTAI. Philetus Brittallus was a young Man of twenty four Years, for whom his Father Claudianus had caused this Stone to be Engraven, and had dedicated it sub ascia, as a token of his Paternal affection. This is all that can be made out of it.
XLVI. At Seligny, a Village dependant on Geneva, near Coppet. D. M. CORNELIO BILCAISIONIS FIL. PVBLICIA PERPETVA CONIVGIS INCOMPARA BILIS. THis Stone is in the Temple wall of this Village, and the top of it hath been made hollow to serve instead of a Font, or Holy-water-pot: Gruterus and Guichenon read Biicaisio, instead of Bil∣caisio: which word savours of the rudeness of some ancient Helveti∣an or Gauloise name. The Stone is nothing else but a Monument set up for a remembrance of Cornelius the Son of Bilcasio by his Wife Publicia Perpetua. XLVII. At Annemasse, a Village belonging to Genevois. D. M. ET MEMORIAE ATTI∣NIAE TIBERIAE MAXIMAE AV∣RELIVS ROMANVS PROTECTOR DVCENARIVS CONJVGI INCOMPARA∣BILI
THis Office of Protector Ducenarius, which Aurelius Romanus held, is remarkable: Mercius in his Lexicon Graecobarbarum saith that Ducenarii were Tax-gatherers; concerning whom there is a Law in the Codex L. Ducenarii de exact. Trib. ne ducenarii plus quàm qua∣draginta octo in singulis habeantur. The Greeks used the same word. Photius Biblioth. , where I believe the word  ought to be corrcted and  put before  making it , for Perennia is not the name of a Roman Family, but rather Herennia, to which this Publius Herennius belonged, Ducenarius or Receiver of Tributes. XLVIII. In the Village of Meyseri, three or four Leagues distant from Geneva, between Beauregard and Nermier, on a Co∣lumn. ..EPI SEVER.. CAI SABADIA M.. RIBTO T. IX. DESIC.... III P. P. PT ET ANTONIN... TII... P. C. IIII COS. DESG. GƲichenon who thus describes it in his History of Savoy, thought he had discovered that the ancient name of Savoy had been Sa∣badia, and which consequently had been in use in Severus his time. Inscriptions are in truth of great use in the knowledge of History, and Geography; but when they are ill transcribed, and so by conse∣quence ill misunderstood, they commonly introduce several errors. And this may serve for a proof of all the rest, for there never was such a word as Sabadia, and the whole of that Inscription produced by Guichenon, is a confused piece of nonsence, in which a man may make some uncertain guesses. For thus it ought to be restored.
Imp. sEPT. SEVERO Aug. ParthiC. ARAB. ADIAB. Pont. Max. TRIB. POT. IX COS. II. DESIGN. III. P. P. ET m. AurE L. ANTONINO TRIB. POT. III. COS. DESIGN. M. P.... So that it will be no hard matter for us to understand how-Guiche∣non in these two words ARAB. ADIAB. should make such a mistake. This Column was a Millenary Stone erected in the time when Septimus Severus Augustus surnamed Parthick, Arabick, Adiabe∣nick, was Emperor, who took on him these names, because he had vanquished the Parthians, Arabians and Adiabenians, when he was chief Prelate, having exercised the Office of Tribune nine times, and having been then twice Consul and designed again to the same Office, being entrusted for the third time with the power of the Tri∣buneship, under Marcus Aurel. Anotoninus his son, and designed Con∣sul. M. P... signifies Millarium positum, or posuerunt, or as others ex∣pound it. Milliaria passuum, to which we must add the number of Miles which is worn out. Upon which I would advertise the lovers of Antiquity, that a man must use his own judgment in the Reading of Guichenon. He hath collected several Inscriptions which are not in Gruterus, but we should have been farther obliged to him had he been more exact. Lo here is one which he hath pitifully deciphered.
XLIX. At the Castle of Monfalcon. IVN. AL AVG. MA. IEIS. CASIROR S. III. MIVS HO NORARIVS PROC. AVGG. H. CAES. Observe how I have restored it. IVLIAE AVG. MA TRIS CASTROR. SEPTIMVS HO NORATVS PROC. AVGG. ET CAES. THis is an Inscription set up in honour of Julia Augusta the wife of Severus, to whom as we learn by the Medals and Inscripti∣ons, there was given the name of Mater Castrorum, the Mother of Armies. The Stone having been engraven by the order of Septimius Honoratus Procureur, or Lieutenant to the Emperors Severus and Ca∣racalla, and of Geta Cesar who was designed to the Empire. These corrections may be proved to be right by uncontroulable reasons, but it is not necessary to lose time in these matters; seeing they will ap∣pear thus to any person who is versed in ancient Inscriptions.
L. This and the following fragment are to be seen over the Gate Du Bourg of Four at Geneva. ....S. N. PATRIT... AS... P. P... ....RITFERO...AE ROMV... D. ...NIVGIT....LLI ...S MIL. LEG. XXII. ADI... ..FECTVM ......BI ...OICA...... THere can be nothing else made of this, but that it had been en∣graved by a Tribune or Colonel of the twenty second Legion, called Adiutrix. LI. In the same place. ....ADVS REX C .. M ..MO IVMENT. PROP. ...PATIO MVT...CA THis might relate to Gondebaud King of Burgundy, who dwelt at Geneva: and the first Line might be GVNDEBADVS REX CLEMENTISSIMVS, for in the Ancient Courts we read indifferently, Gundebadus, Gundebaldus, and Gundebaudus. There is kept, in the Town-house, several ancient Urns, the greatest part of which are very large, because one of them served a whole Family. There is one of these at Monsieur Mestrezat's the Professor, on whose Handle there are these Letters, C. V. VA. which perhaps are the Letters of the Potters name.
LII. A fragment of the Epitaph of Ansegisus Bishop of Geneva, standing at the Corner of the Channons-street, in Monsieur Tremblet's House. NON MERITIS PRECOR VIV... PRAEVALEAT PIETAS QV.... ET QVICVNQVE LEGIT E.... SIMQVE SVIS PRAECIBVS F.... ADSIT ALMIFICVS VI∣CTOR.... PERPETVIS VALEAM.... ANSEGISVS ERAM P.... SIS MEMOR IPSE MEI.... HE died in the Year 840. those kind of cornered C's which are in the Original were in use in those days. Near the Temple of Cologny there is seen the remains of a Character like this, where we find—GISVS EPS, that is to say, Ansegisus Episcopus. But it is great pity that this Epitaph is not intire, it consisted of four Dystichs. In the first of which he seems to say, that he desires not to be judged according to his merits, but according to his faith and trust in Gods mercy. In the second, he recommends himself to the Readers prayers. In the third, he implores S. Victor's help and the Churches, out of which this Epitaph was taken; when that of S Vi∣ctor was pulled down to make fortifications, and in the last Dystich, he declares his name to be Ansegisus, and entreats again the Reader to remember him in his prayers.
LIII. At a little Gate of S. Peter's-Church, on the Shoulders of this Apostle's Statue. PETRE AMAS ME TV SCIS DMN QA AMO TE ET. EGO DICO TIBI PASCE OVES MEAS THis is several hundred years old, as may be seen by the Cha∣racters although they are not Gothick. So it is likely to have been made in the time when Conradus was Bishop who finished S. Pe∣ters Church.
MODERN INSCRIPTIONS. I. On a Bell which belonged to the Dominicans, and which hath since been used for a Clock in Monnoye. Reverendissimus Dns Jo. de Brogniaco Eps Ostien. & S. Roman. Ecce Cardinalis & Vicecancellarius me fieri fecit, Anno Mcccc quinto Die xx mensis Decembris Ave Maria. JOhn of Brognier was Bishop of Geneva in 1423. and was Cardi∣nal and Bishop of Ostie in the year 1405. as it appears by this In∣scription; so that this quality of Cardinal Bishop of Ostie, could not be attributed at the same time to John Bertrandis Bishop of Geneva in 1414. according to Roset's account in his Chronological Manuscript. II. In the Philosophy-School, or Chappel of the Cardinal of Ostie. L' AN MCCCC & XIIII was made this Inscription which was Engraven by M. John Prindal Sirnamed de Brucesses Pfues which you may read if you please.
THis Inscription may serve to convince those who will notallow this Chappel to have been built in 1416. or in 1414. of the same date with this Epitaph, by the Cardinal John of Bertrandis, who was then Bishop, and not by John of Brognier who was but in 1423. but this reason is not so prevalent as the Arms of John of Brog∣nier, and of his Nephew Francis of Mies which are to be seen there: and this Stone perhaps might have been brought thither either when it was finished, or perhaps since. III. At S. Gervaises Steeple. Anno MCCCCXXXV ET... IANVAR...... THis was dated from the Year 1435. when this Steeple was re∣paired by Francis of Mies Bishop of Geneva. IV. In S. Peter's Church, round a Tomb-stone. HIC IACET VENERA∣BILIS ET EGREGIVS VIR Dnus Ansermus de Che∣nay Can. Eccliar Viennen. & Gebenn. QVI OBIIT Die XXVII. mensis Octobris, Anno Dni M.o. CCCCo. XXXVIIo. Cujus aia in pace requiescat. Amen. THis is the ancientest of all the Chanons Epitaphs in S. Peters Church. It is in Gothick Letters, and the Arms of this Anselme of Chenay are joyned with it. The Shield is charged with two Bends. The Bishoprick of Geneva was under the jurisdiction of the Metro∣politan
of Vienna, so that there was great Communication held be∣twixt these two Churches. The Canon is signed in an ancient Act cited by the Author of the Book called the Citizen, in p. 256. V. In Verdaine-street, on a Gate belonging to the Hospital, which was heretofore the Convent of S. Claire. PATRONVS NOSTER MILES GVI LLIERMVS BOLOMERIVS FABIVS IN ANNO MCCCCXLIII NOS FVNDITVS INSTAV∣RAVIT THis Inscription informs us that the Noble William Bolomier Fabius had founded the Convent of S. Claire at Geneva in 1443. his Arms are engraven on it, of...with a pale of Gules, and for his Crest a Dogs head. This William of Bolomier was Chancellor of Sa∣voy, and the Dukes chief Minister of State there; but three years after this foundation, viz. in the Year 1466. he was thrown alive into the Lake with a stone about his neck, for having falsely accused of Treason the Lord of Varembon. You may read this History at large in Guichenon's History of Savoy, page 508. Roset tells us that the Colledge of Geneva was built in 1558. in the same place where Bolo∣miers (Hutins) lodgings lay. It is very likely they were called af∣ter this manner, because he had several houses near the Convent of S. Claire, and that he took thence an occasion to build anew the said Convent.
VI. At S. Peters. Hic jacet Reverendus Pater Dns Humbertus de Chilliaco Vtriusque jur Doctor sancte sedis Aplice prothonotarius Canonicus Ecclie Geben. & hujus capellae fundator qui obiit die VI Augusti, Anno Dni MCCCCLVII, cujus aia in pace requiescat. THis is in Gothick Letters on black Marble at the entrance into the Chappel, of which he was the Founder ten years before his death: there is written in the windows of it these words Dns Hum∣bertus de Chilliaco 1447. This Humbert of Chilliaco was qualified Doctor of Laws, and Prothonotary of the Apostolick See, (which I believe was but onely a bare title without any profit, (and Channon of Geneva: he departed this life in 1457. Chilly is a Village five or six Leagues distant from Geneva, from whence his Family spang. VII. At the same place. Hic jacet Nobilis & Potens vir Gallelius....Ginessiati, qui obiit die IIII. Februarij, Anno Dni Mo. CCCCo. LXIX. Aia Requiescat in pace. Amen. THis is written in Gothick Letters, and hath the Coat of Arms belonging to it joyned with it, which are three Barrs wavy. The termination (i) makes me apt to believe that this Ginessiati was an Italian.
VIII. At the same place. Hoc Antro recubat R. Pr. Grener. inclyti de Viry Amblardus prot.....MCCCCLXXV. die VIII. Septembris. AMblard Prothonotary of the family of the Viry's departed this life in 1475. the Eighth of September. This which follows is of the same stock. IX. Near the same place. Marmoreo tegitur isto vir genero∣sus venerandusque pr Dns Petrus inclyta Viriacorum famila, in∣signis hujus Ecclie Annorum 4o super......& Canonicus prebendatus pro suo tpe oes impetus magnanimiter.....Anno salutis 1494. PEter de Viry Channon of Geneva was of the illustrious Family of the Viry's. This Epitaph is engraven in Roman Letters, and the Coat of Arms adjoyning thereunto is a Shield paly, and over all a bend, and charged with a Crescent; in Chief and under the Shield is written Viry. Menestrier in his Abridgment of Blazonry, p. 85. yet blazons them of this Family of Viry in Genevois, paled with silver and azure without and bend or crescent. Perhaps there are labels belong∣ing to them.
X. Near the same place. Hic jacet Venerandus Petrus Fe∣rodi de Grandivalle in legibus licent.... confrater confratrie Sancte Trinitatis & can.cus Geben. generalem expectans re∣surrectionem, qui obiit anno Dni MCCCCLXXXXVI & die V. mensis Novembris. THis is in Gothick Letters, and the Arms belonging to it are an Anchored Cross, this Confraternity of the Holy Trinity of which this Peter Ferodi de Grandeval a Licentiate in the Laws was one, had been established at the Gray-Fryars of Rive, as I have learnt by the remnant of an Inscription at Chapoterie, where this Convent heretofore stood. XI. In the same Church in Roman Letters. Reverendus Pr Dnus Andreas de Malvenda utriusque juris Do∣ctor & sedes Applice Prothonota∣rius, ac hujus insignis Ecclie canonicus & cantor, defunctu occubat in tumulo. Orate Deum pro eo. Migravit e seculo, anno salutis 1499. die 21. mensis Julij. THis is an Epitaph belonging to Andrew de Malvenda Channon and Chanter of S. Peters at Geneva, Doctor of Laws, and A∣postolical Prothonotary. There is a great Vineyard near Geneva called still by that name of Malevendes, and there is farther a famous
Author of the same name: the Arms engraved on this Tombstone, are a Flower-de-Luce, the Crest is a Hat with three Tassels. They are moreover to be seen painted in the Church-windows in green co∣lour with the Flower-de-Luce. XII. Another in Roman Letters. Hic jacet No.lis Gondissalvus de Malvenda Burgen. Geben. & Me....obiit dictus No.lis Gondis∣salvus, die 25. mensis Augusti 1505. & dicto anno M. die mensis... THis Family descended originally from Spain, and the Christian name of this Malvenda was Spanish, Gonsalve, Burgensis, Geben∣nensis, Citizen of Geneva. This was the way of speaking in those days, his Coat of Arms were in a shield impaled, in the first side of which there is a Flowerd-de-Luce as in Malvenda's Coat. XIII. Another in Gothick Letters. Hic jacet vir venerabilis Dns Andreas de Croseto Canoni∣cus .........qui obiit die XV. mensis Junii, Anno Dni 1501. Orate Deum pro eo. THis Channon Andrew du Croset died in 1501. and beareth in his Arms a Kid with three Roses.
XIV. At the foot of one of S. Peter's Towers. Haec Turris e fundamentis instau∣rata est anno MVX WHich tells us, That it hath been built anew in the Year 1510. XV. In S. Peter's-Church, in Gothick Letters. Hic jacet R. Pr. D. Fran. de Men∣thone Apus Pthon & vener. D. Richardus de Rossillione ejus nepos Geben. Canon & Decanus Annessia. qui occubuerunt anno Dni, primus 1490. 3o. non Octob. & alter anno 1508. 28. Junij, quorum animae requiescant in pace. THis Epitaph was made for an Uncle and his Nephew, the for∣mer of these is called Francis of Menthon the Apostolical Pro∣thonotary, who deceased in 1490. and the other Richard de Rossillion, Channon of Geneva, and Dean of Anessy who died in 1508. The first of these bears in his Scutcheon a Lion and over all a bend com∣poneé, the second a Cross, which are the Arms of the County of Rossillon near Geneva, in Sable with a silver Cross.
XVI. In the same Church. Joannes Ronzerius hujus insignis Ecclesie Canonicus & Archi∣diaconus Chamberiaci istic pro∣cessionem annualiter fiendam fondavit, anno Dni 1516. 26. Aprilis cujus anima requiescat in pace. Sic transit gloria mundi. JOhn Ronzier Channon of S. Peters at Geneva, and Archdeacon of Chambery, had instituted an annual Procession in this City, and died in 1516. XVII. In the same Church. R. I. XP. D. Amblardus Goyetus I. V. Doctor & Theol. insignis Ap. Prot. Abb. Filiaci, Geben∣can. pietate in Deum & religio∣ne devotus, apud principes, nobiles & plebeios, consilio, gratia & liberalitate conspi∣cuus, in pio fato concessit, anno à cunis Xi. 1517. 7. Martij. THis is cut in Roman Letters as well as the eight Verses follow∣ing on the same Stone, whose expressions are very neat.
Parce precor lacrymis fatum gravare, quid urges? Omnibus heic solido est scripta adamante dies. Pulvis & umbra sumus tantum, post funera virtus Nomen inextinctum sola super∣stes habet. Nil aurum, nil pompa juvat, nil sanguis avorum: Excipe virtutem caetera mortis erunt. Hanc cole & ante oculos imitanda exempla parentum Pone: sed interdum sit tibi cura mei. He hath for his Arms a Fess engraled between three Stars. They are yet to be seen over the Counsellors seats, with a Crosier and a Hat with four Tassels. Filly, the place of which this Amblard Goyet was Abbot lies three Leagues distant from Geneva on the side of Tho∣non, and was comprehended under the Bishop of Geneva's jurisdicti∣on: the Gentlemen of S. Martha recite the names of the nine Abbies dependant on the Bishoprick of Geneva, viz. Entremont, Filly, Sisse∣ray, Six, S. Katherine, Hautecomte, the Alps and Bonnemont.
XVIII. Another in Gothick Letters. Sub hoc lapide jacet R. P. D. Petrus de Bona I. V. Doctor, Archid. Tarantasien. ac hujus insignis Ecclie Geben. & Ber∣nensis Canon. qui postquam LVI annorum spatio pie vita fuit potitus, illam feliciter finivit, in die 4 Martij, cujus anima in pace requiescat. HIS Coat of Arms is a Tree with two Stars. Peter de Bona held several Benefices, being Archdeacon of Tarantaise, and Chan∣non of Geneva and of Berne. XIX. In Gothick Letters. Precipue nobilitatis & prudentiae columen ℞ Dnus Ludovicus de Arlo hujus Ecclie Canonicus & Curatus Sarravallis hoc ca∣pulo tectus religiose animam ex∣halavit: anno à natali Chri∣stiano 1519. & die 15 mensis Octobris. HE hath a Lyon in his Coat of Arms: the next is a womans Epitaph of the same Family.
XX. In the same Church. Hic jacet nobilis Beatrisia de Lu∣lier R. V. Claudij de Arlo Dni .............quae obiit 27 Octobris Anno 1494. Requiescat in pace Amen. THis Beatrix de Lullier Wife to Claudus of Arlo, was perhaps the Mother of the forementioned Lewis of Arlo. The time and the names agree with the Arms: for she beareth party au premier a Lyoned Leopard crowned, and in the second a Lyon. XXI. Another in Gothick Letters. Marmore sub isto recubat Rdus Hugo de Viola Sancte sedis Applice Prothonotarius ac hujus insignis Ecclie Canonicus, gene∣ralem expectans resurrectionem qui viam universe carnis in∣gressus dies clausit extremos die XIII. mensis Sept. anno Xria∣nae redemptionis Mo. Do. 25o. cujus aia pace fruatur. Amen. THe Arms of this Hugues Violette Channon of Geneva, who di∣ed in 1525. are a Cheveron with a beaufil in base point.
XXII. In the same Church. Hic jacet generosus Reverendusque Pr. D. Fran. de Viriaco Eccl. Lau. praepositus & hujus Cano∣nicus ac Epatus sigillifer, qui Dnis populoque gratus probè vi∣vens, dierum plenus mortem memorans lapidem hunc, obi∣tum autem paravit & Deo ani∣mam reddidit. MD.XXI. & die XIX mensis Maij. Requies∣cat in pace; Amen. HE bears the same Coat as the preceding doth in number nine, being of the Family of the Viry's, which is yet the name of a Village which leads from Geneva to Chambery. This here mention∣ed was a Prefect or Provost of the Bishoprick of Lausane, and Chan∣non of Geneva, and keeper of the Seals belonging to the Bishoprick of this City, and who departed this life in the Year 1521.
XXIII. Reverendus vir Petrus Gruetus Apostolicus Prothonotarius, Gebenn. Canonicus & Genera∣lis Vicarius meritissimus, ju∣rium Doctor celeberrimus, vir∣tute gratia & consilio potens, isto examinis capulo tegitur, die sui obitus vigesima tertia mensis Novembris 1531. Orate pro eo. THe Arms of Peter Gruet who was a Channon likewise, are a Column accosted with six Stars, and the shield covered with a Hat having three Tassels pendant. His Effigies, and these four Di∣stichs are annexed to the Epitaph. Qui nostrae fuerat custos gratissimus Ʋrbis, Virtutis decus, & relligionis honos: Praesule sub quinto sceptri donatus habenis, Nunc diro mortis subdit ur Im∣perio. Marmoreo clausus jacet hic resu∣pinus in antro. Astra tenet virtus, caetera pul∣vis habet. Disce tuum quisquis simili pede claudere passum, Et tergant oculos haec monumen∣ta tuos. The third line tells us, that this Channon had been Vicar-General under five Bishops, as we have already observed in our History.
XXIV. In S. Peter's Cloyster there is this Epitaph of M. d' Aubigné Historiographer of France. D. O. M. TESTOR LIBERI QVAM VOBIS APTVS SVM SOLO FAVENTE NVMINE ADVERSIS VENTIS BONIS ARTIBVS IRREQVIETVS QVIETEM EAM COLERE SI DEVM COLITIS SI PATRISSATIS CONTIN∣GAT SI SECVS SECVS ACCIDAT HAEC PATER ITERVM PATER PER QVEM NON A QVO VERE VIVERE ET BENE DATVM VOBIS STVDIORVM HEREDIB. MONVMENTO DEGENERIBVS OPPRO∣BRAMENTO SCRIPSIT THEODORVS ALBINAEVS OCTVAGENARIVS. OBIIT ANNO MDCXXX APRIL DIE XXIX.
THE stile of this Epitaph is not common. He had made it himself, and had left it as a publick Testament to his Children. The sense of it is so excellent that it deserves to be universally known. He begins then thus, In the name of the Almighty and most merci∣ful God. Behold here, my Children, my last Will and Desires for you, that ye may enjoy that ease and plenty which I have purcha∣sed for you with a great deal of trouble, although by lawful and honest means, maugre the tempests which have threatned me on all sides. And ye will live comfortably, if you serve God and tread in your fathers footsteeps: otherwise you will not fail to meet with the contrary. It is your Father, who hath been twice your Father who gives you this Council, from whom although not primarily) ye have received your being and well-being. And this hath he written for to be an honourable testimony to you, if ye follow his example; but if ye degenerate, he designs it for a reproach and publick dis∣grace. Theodorus d' Aubigné Octuagenarie, who departed this life, 1630.the twenty ninth of April.
depiction of sepulcher THE TOMBE oF THE DUKE of ROHAN XXV. At S. Peters. The Duke of Rohan's Epitaph. D. O. M. S. HENRICVS ROHANII DVX INCLYTVS PRISCORVM ARMORICAE REGVM GENVI∣NA ET MASCVLA SOBOLES,
NAVARRAE ET SCOTIAE PRINCEPS, SVMMIS EVROPAE DYNASTIS AFFINITATE INNEXVS, HIC IACET. O VIATOR, NOLI IN GESTA ALTVM INQVIRERE, NON SVNT ILLA MAVSOLEI, MANENT IN ANIMIS HOMINVM; FAMA RERVM, AETERNITATE TEMPORVM ABI CONTENTVS: QVOD STRICTIM TIBI EDISSERO ANNO AETATIS XVI FATIS OSTENSVS, SVB AMBIANI MOENIBVS OBSESSIS ANTE HENRICI MAGNI ORA EQVO PROSTRATO CAESOQ. AVDAX IVVENTA OPIMA REPORTAVIT. APVD BELGAS GROLLACENSI, APVD SICAMBROS IVLIACENSI OB∣SIDIONE ILLVSTRIS; IN TAVRINIS AD FELISSANVM FELI∣CITER PVGNAVIT, GERMANOS ET IBEROS IN RHOETIA ET INSVBRIA QVADRVPLICI PRAELIO DEBELLA∣VIT AD RHENIVM IN CAMPIS RHINFEL∣DIACIS, IN DEVEXO HIRCINIAE KALENDIS MART. ANNO M.DC.XXXVIII. CAESARIS EXERCITV FVSO,
CONFOSSVS VVLNERIBVS, PARTAE VICTORIAE SVPERSTES, MACTVS GLORIA, OBIIT KVNIGSFELDAE IDIB. APRIL. ANNO AETATIS LIX. FELIX CLARITATE LETHI, FELICIOR CLARITATE VITAE, MORTALITATIS EXVVIAS TOTVM PER ORBEM DIVIDENDAS SVPRE∣MA VOLVNTATE IN VRBE DILECTA PERPETVVM SERVARI VOLVIT. EX DECRETO SENATVS POPVLIQ GENEVENSIS MARGARETA BETHVNIA MAXIMILIANI BETHVNII SVLLIACI DVCIS FILIA, CONIVX TANTI MARITI FATA INTREPIDE SECVTA, MENTEM INGENIO ASSECVTA MANDATA INVICTO ANIMO EXECVTA DOMI MILITIAEQ IN FLVCTVS ET BELLA COMES, POSVIT INFELIX AETERNVM AETER∣NI LVCTVS MONVMENTVM, QVOD MANES CINERESQ. DIV TESTETVR AMATOS. THis is written in Letters of Gold on a black Marble-stone.
1. St. Peters. 2. the Borough de Four. 3. St Leger. 4. la Trelle. 5. the Gate of la Trelle. 6. Arsnall. 7 the Town house. 8. St. Germans. 9. the Gate of la Tartasse. 10. the Coraterie 11. the City. 12 the Bullwork de Loye. 13. the new gate. 14. the Churchyard and Hospitall for those that are inseted with the Plague. 15 the Mony gate. 16. the Isle 17. St. Gervais 18. the Lake of Geneva. 1. the river Rhosne.
XXVII. On the front of S. John's Bulwark. Viator Munita licet satis sit si probè morata civitas Ipsique cives armati satis si benè animati & ambo secura nimis si cura numinis excubet: Externa tamen haudquaquam vetat Deus praesidia. Ea propter Senatus populusq. Genevensis vnica semper in Deum fiduciâ munimentum istud hanc ad diem desideratum Collato aere Lapide cingere coepit Kal. Mai A. D. M.DC.XLV. Eique rei monumentum hoc conlocari voluit. I Have transcribed this Inscription which was made by Monsieur Godefroy, because some persons have judged it to resemble the beauty and virtue of Antiquity. Yet we shall meet but with few such like affected Antitheses, or sporting with words, amongst the ancients, as munita & morata, armati & animati, secura nimis & si cura numinis, munimentum & monumentum, although it is in the main of it very ingenious.
There are several other modern Inscriptions which are in the Prin∣ted Book called The Citizen, and likewise several particulars, and acts which might serve for proofs in this History, but we do not think fitting to ingross our Book with them. FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE FIRST and SECOND BOOK. A ANcient names of Geneva pag. 2 Antiquity of Geneva 3 Articles of agreement between the Earl of Savoy and Bishop of Geneva 22 Articles between the Duke and Fribour∣gers. 69 Alliance with Berne and Geneva 81 Ambuscade at Lancay 84 Articles of Agreement between the Prote∣stants and Romanists in the City 97 Amé the Eighth does homage 29 Articles of agreement between the Duke and City 47 Amé of Gingins chosen Bishop of Ge∣neva. 49 Assembly at Payerne 93 Articles of the Bernoises 101 B BIshop of Geneva 12 S. Bernards Epistles 18, 19 Bishop of Geneva's claims of Sovereign∣ty over the City considered. 20 Bishop of Geneva quits his Bishoprick. 22 Bishop and City disagree 25 Bishops of Geneva's Authority over the City considered. ibid. Battle between the Earls of Genevois and Savoy. 26 Bishop of Geneva a favourer of John Huss. 29 He builds Common-Halls 30 Duke of Burgundy conveys the Dutchess of Savoy to Geneva. 37 Bishop of Geneva kills the Bishop of Vi∣viers. 39 Bishop of Geneva's character 40 Berthelier sought after by the Bishop 55 Berthelier proposes an Alliance to the Fri∣bourgers 58 Bernoises threaten the Genevoises if they opposed the Protestant Religion 96 Bernard makes publick profession of the Truth. 104 Baudichon made Captain-General 106 Besancon Hugues with some others makes an Alliance with Fribourg 62 Burgership complained against by the Prin∣ces. 63 Berthelier acquitted by the City 64 Berthelier apprehended by the Duke 71 Berthelier Executed 72 Bandiers appears before the Council 80 Bishop returns to Geneva 81 Bernoises embrace the Protestant Reli∣gion. 86 Bonnivard betrayed, &c. 91 Bernoises send Forces to Geneva 92 C ROman Colony sent to Geneva 8 Culverins left by the Prior of S. Victor to Geneva. 51 Consilii stabbed 75 Claudius Richardet breaks his Staff on the Treasurers head 78 Council divided 80 Several Churches built in Geneva 14 Charlemain comes to Geneva 15 Contract between the Bishop and City of Geneva. 31 Caddoz spreads the Plague in Geneva 90 Castle of Rolle burnt 92 Conspiracy to bring in the Bishop 102
D DErivation of the word Geneva 5 Disagreement between the Earl of Genevois and Bishop of Geneva 17 Duke of Savoy writes to the Pope 30 Duke of Savoy turns Hermit 33 Duke Lewis of Savoy quits all claims to Geneva. 35 Disagreement of the Genevoises in the choice of their Bishop. 40 Duke of Savoy desires he might for some time remain at Geneva 41 Duke of Savoy comes to Geneva ib. Duke Philbert dies 46 Duke and Dutchess of Savoy arrive at Geneva. ibid. Dukes Arms battered down 83 Deputies sent to the Duke 61 Deputies present the Dukes Letter to the Council ib. Duke raises an Army 64 Dukes Answer to the Deputies 66 Duke enters with his Army into Gene∣va. 67 Dukes Proclamation 68 Deputies Answer to the Duke ibid. Duke sends for Hugues and Malbuis∣son 69 Duke desires to be acknowledged Sovereign over Geneva. 79 E EArl of Genevois treats with the City of Geneva. 24 Earl of Genevois defeated ibid. Earl of Genevois dies 25 Earl of Savoy dies 26 Emperor Charles the fourth comes to Ge∣neva. 27 Earl of Savoy endeavors to insinuate him∣self into the City 28 Earl of Genevois charged with felony 29 Earls of Savoy made Dukes 30 Emperor declares Geneva an Imperial City. 32 Eyria accused by René 42 Eignots or Huguenots whence derived 62 Emperor and King of France at vari∣ance. 76 Eidgnots faction endeavoured to be weak∣ned. 79 Emperor enjoyns the Duke to desist from his pretensions of Soveraignty over Ge∣neva. 84 F FOrt of Penney built by Aymé of Grandson 22 Fire at Geneva 26 Another. 33 Felix dies 35 Fairs removed from Geneva 37 Famine in Geneva 45 Francis Mallet his liberality 48 French Ambassador confined to Gene∣va. 50 Fribourgers send an Herald to the Duke. 66 Fribourgers send Forces to Geneva 68 Fribourgers demand satisfaction for Ber∣theliers death 73 Fraternity of the Spoon 85 Fraternity of the Spoon appear before Ge∣neva. 86 Fraternity of the Spoon hold a meeting at Nyons. 87 They are enraged at Pont-Verre's death. 88 They are favoured by the Bishop 91 Farel comes to Geneva 95 Froment's arrival at Geneva ibid. He Preaches at Molard ibid. Furbity opposed by Froment 99 Furbity complained against by the Ber∣noises. ibid. Fribourgers threaten to break off with Geneva. 100 Furbity enjoyned to recant 101 Farel Preaches publikely 102 Fribourgers break off with the Genevoi∣ses. ibid. Furbities enlargement requested by the French King 103 A Fryer Preaches at Geneva in Lent, ib. Farel Preaches at S. Magdalens 105 Farel Preaches before the Council ibid. French assist Geneva 106 Farel causes a Fast to be proclaimed 107 G GEnevoises formidable to the Ro∣mans. 5 Genevoises protected by the Romans a∣gainst the Switzers 6
Geneva burnt in Marc. Aurelius's time 8 Geneva rebuilt 9 Geneva first received the Christian Faith 11 Gay causes the Peasants to take up Arms against the Nobility 41 S. Gervais Walks finished 47 Grossi's Mule ham-stringed 53 Geneva excommunicated 58 Gout cured 83 Geneva Alarm'd 85 Geneva fortified by the Syndicks 93 H HElvetians invade the Gauls 7 Hubert Dauphin of Viennois as∣saults the City of Geneva 23 Humbert of Villers dies 29 A Herald sent to the City 64 I JUlius Caesars name yet retained in sundry Families in Geneva 7 John of Morellis chosen Bishop of Ge∣neva. 28 John of Bertrandis chosen Bishop of Ge∣neva. 29 John of Pierre seizes the Founder of the Bishops Palace 3 John of Savoy obtains the Bishoprick of Geneva. 49 John of Savoy dies of the French-Pox 74 L LEvrery sent for by the Duke 77 Levrery put to death 78 Liberty of Conscience permitted to both parties in Geneva 98 M MAlefactor dies under the torments which he suffered, to make him con∣fess. 44 Mortel a famous Thief 45 Marcossay's lot to be King 74 Mammelusses Conspiracy 82 Meteor seen at Geneva 86 Mass abolished in Geneva 105 Money Coyned at Geneva 107 N NƲns leave to Geneva 106 Names of Geneva 2 O OLivetan first translates the Bible in∣to French. 96 P PRiviledges of the City of Geneva 28 Philippe chosen chief Syndick 81 Peace concluded between the Duke and Ci∣ty of Geneva 92 Protestant Religion began to be maintain∣ed at Geneva 95 Protestant Religion opposed by the Fri∣bourgers 96 Pennet sentenced to be beheaded 101 Protestants and Papists equal in number in the City 102 Peter of Focigny chosen Bishop of Ge∣neva. 26 Penay Castle assaulted by the Genevoi∣ses. 104 Priviledges of Geneva confirmed 29 Popular Tumults 52 Pecolat joques on the Bishop 53 Pecolat put upon the Rack 55 Pecolat cuts out his own Tongue 56 Peter of Beaume chosen Bishop 75 Preparations for the entertainment of the Dutchess. 75 Pontverre enters Geneva 88 Q QƲarrels about Religion 100 R REné endeavors to make his Brother Sovereign over Geneva 42 René declaimed against by a Preacher 43 René begins to be out of favour with his Brother. ibid. S SItuation of Geneva 9 Shoomakers Prediction concerning John of Brognier 32 Switzers mutiny for lack of their Pay 38 Alliance made with the Switzers by John Lewis Bishop of Geneva ibid. Syndicks put by their Office. 73 Suburbs of S. Victor alarm'd 89 Saunier banished the City 95 T THoberet sentenced to lose his head. 99
V VIdame Imprisoned 48 Vandel imprisoned 52 Victor imprisoned 67 Victor his advice to the Genevoises 87 Vandel wounded 97 Verly slain 98 Verly's Relations bring along with them sixscore Soldiers to revenge his death ib. Vandel led away Prisoner 103 Viret almost poysoned 104 W WIlliam of Constance dies 23 The TABLE of the THIRD BOOK. AN Anabaptist disputes with Fa∣rel 113 Artichaud's Faction 115 Adultery severely punished 121 Amede lays ambushes about Geneva 137 Albigny draws up his men near Bonne 150 Alexander the Jesuit encourages the en∣terprizers 152 Aubigné comes and lives at Geneva 174 His death ibid. Anthony his Errors 174 Abominable practices and end 175 B BArk fitted out by the Genevoises 110 Banishment of the three Ministers repealed 116 Bonne taken by the Genevoises 128 Bernoises agree upon a Cessation of Arms 133 Baron of Conforgien arrives at Gene∣va 138 Beza Preaches a Thanskgiving Sermon for their deliverance from the attempt of the Savoyards 156 Buttet sets forth a Book called the Cava∣lier of Savoy 163 Blondel his villany ibid. Beza dies 165 Bastide and Terrail executed 169 Battel fought by the Duke of Nemours and the Duke of Savoy 171 Bernoises promise them of Geneva their assistance 109 They break off with the Duke of Sa∣voy 110 Bernoises arrive at Geneva 111 Bolsec charges the Ministers with teach∣ing false Doctrine 118 —He writes Calvin's life 119 Baron of S. Lagier slain 129 Boege taken 131 Buringe besieged 141 Beza reported to have turned Papist 144 Bastard of Savoy comes to Geneva 145 Beza makes a speech to the King of France 147 Baron of Esclavonia retires to Gene∣va 173 Bonnivard set at liberty 111 C CAlvin comes to Geneva 112 He compiles a Catechism 113 Was together with others banished the City 114 He writes to Geneva 114 Sent for again to Geneva 116 His painfulness ibid. He disputes with Carolin ibid. He is accused for teaching false Do∣ctrine 118 He answers Bolsec ibid. His death 122 Castalio his opinions 117 Colledge built in Geneva 121 Captain Guiche assaulted by the Pea∣sants 136 Crusille sacked and burnt 140 Conforgien returns home 143 Culebro his Orders 162 Canal a Traytor to the City 166 Cromwel writes to the Genevoises 180 Crequi passes through Geneva 182
City divided 186 Chillon Castle besieged 111 Carolyn maintains the lawfulness of the Mass 113 Chenalat executed for Treason 172 D DƲke of Savoy makes new attempts on Geneva 124 Des Plans a Traytor to the City 124 Duke advances to attack the Fort near Arve 131 Dukes Army approaches 141 Duke of Savoy desires the French King to desist from protecting Geneva 146 Duke dispatches Messengers to all parts to publish his good success 152 De Vic Ordered to assure the Genevoises of the French Kings favour 161 Duke of Rohan's Funeral 178 Discourse of the Rhosne ibid. Deodati's death 179 Duke of Savoy quarters great number of Soldiers round about Geneva 183 Diligence of the people in working at the Fort 185 Discovery of a late design on Geneva 187 Deputies dispatched from Geneva 190 E ENglish Church at Geneva 120 Earthquakes 125 Esgaillon beheaded 135 Ebbings and flowings of the Rhosne 184 Emperor's Embassador passes from Gene∣va. 191 F FRench designed to be Massacred in Geneva 120 French Kings complaint against Gene∣va 121 Famine in Geneva 126 Fort of Arve demolished 144 Fire on the Bridge of Rhosne 186 G GEnevoyses sally out against the Sa∣voyards 110 Gex surrendred ibid. Grybalde propagates Servetus his opini∣ons 120 Gentil disputes against Calvin 120 Grimaud endeavors to spread the Plague 123 Gex surrendred 128 Genevoyses engage the Enemy 132 Gex surprized 134 Genevoyses shamefully worsted by the Sa∣voyards 137 Genevoyses defeated 138 Genis taken by surprize 161 Giovani accuses an eminent person in the City of Treason 170 Gothefredus his Latin Inscription 179 Gautier hanged 180 Genevoyses fortify their City 184 H HEnry the third of France makes an Alliance with the Switzers 123 Hermance layes an ambush for the Gene∣voyses gathering their Wine-Harvest 139 I JEws request to Geneva 125 Jubilé at Thonon where the design of scaling Geneva was laid 149 K KIngs Army attached by the Savoy∣ards 141 King of France declares Geneva compre∣hended in the Treaty 149 King of France comes to Lyons 181 L LA Cluse surrenders 111 Lentilles spreads the Plague in Geneva 117 La Cluse attempted by the Genevoises surrenders 134 Lurbigny defeats the Savoyards 136 Lancy demolished 143 Letter of the Genevoyses to the Sieur of Guiche 156 Letter of the French King to the Gene∣voyses 157 Landgrave of Hesse makes the City of Geneva a Present 166 Lectius dies at Geneva 170 M MAss abolished 111 Mare committed to Prison 114 Marquis of Vico comes to Geneva 119
Mercier the Minister flead alive 133 Maillet committed Prisoner 158 Marquis of Bade retires to Geneva 173 N NAtional Synod at Paris 172 Noroy secured. 189 O OLivarez Counsel to the Dukes Em∣bassador 127 P PEney blown up 110 Peace concluded 145 Peace concluded between the Duke and Genevoyses 163 Philippe kills a man with his Leading∣staff 115 Plague at Geneva 116 Pope requested to assist the Duke 126 Prince Palatin's entertainment at Gene∣va 187 Prince George dies there 189 R RIchardet kills himself by a fall 115 Regiment of Soleurre attached 130 Roset Harangues the Queen and Dau∣phin 191 Roset dies at Geneva 169 S SAunier teaches School at Geneva 111 Saunier with others banished 114 Syndicks still Catholicks in their hearts 113 Servetus comes to Geneva 119 Spiffame his Tragical end 122 Sancy animates the Genevoyses against the Duke 127 Savoyards attack the Forces from Berne 132
They set upon three Barks bound for Ge∣neva 135 Sonas slain 142 Sadeel dies at Geneva 143 Serres dies at Geneva 145 Sonas bleeds at Nose 151 He together with six others first climb up the City walls 152 Sarraz in compiles a Book called The Ge∣nevoise Citizen 163 A Sergeant executed 170 Spies sent into Savoy 184 Savoy and Geneva differ about the imposi∣tion of Salt 190 Spanish Embassador passes through Gene∣va 191 Stouppe intercedes in the behalf of Gene∣va ibid. T TOurnon his Harangue to the Lords of Berne 157 Terrail his designs on the City of Gene∣va 167 His designs on Geneva discovered 168 He sets out from Savoy for Flanders ib. Apprehended and executed 169 V VErsoy besieged 133 Valour of a Captain 140 Valour of a Taylor 155 W WArning given to the City of Ge∣neva 149 Warning given a second time to them 150 Z ZUrich makes a perpetual Alliance with Geneva. 126 THE END.
