S5 99831225 35688
THE Gentleman's Compleat Jockey. WITH THE Perfect Horseman, AND Experienc'd Farrier. CONTAINING, I. The Nature of Horses; their Breeding, Feeding and Management in all Paces, to fit them for War, Racing, Travel, Hunting, or other Recreations and Advantages. II. The true Method, with proper Rules and Directions to Order, Diet and Physick the Running-Horse, to bring him to any Match, or Race, with Success. III. The Methods to Buy Horses, and prevent being Cheated; Noting the particular Marks of the Good and Bad Horses, in all their Circumstances. IV. How to make Blazes, Stars and Snips: To  Horse with little Charge, and to make him Lively and Lovely. V. The whole Art of a Farrier, in curing all Diseases, Griefs and Sorrances incident to Horses; with their Symptoms and Causes. VI. The Methods of Shooing, Blooding, Roweling, Purg∣ing, and prevention of Diseases, and many other things, from long Experience and Approved Practice. By A. S. GENT. LONDON: Printed for Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil. 1697.
diagram of horse The Gentlemans Compleat Iockey
THE PREFACE. READER, I Here present you with a Laboured Work, contain∣ing all that is Excellent to be known, relating to Horses and Mares, &c. the most necessary and useful Creature to Man, in Peace and War; Enrich∣ing with their Labours, and pleasing in their more nicer Industry and Management; and consequently, their well-Breeding and Instructions, as to what they are ca∣pable, is necessary to be known; therefore I have laid i down in such an easie, tho' perfect Method, that the meanest Capacity may soon understand it, and the lar∣gest, sind Subject Matter enough to busie it self. That these Creatures have been highly Esteemed in all Ages, and their Ʋnderstanding very great, History makes frequent mention; So that their Preservation was had in much regard: And Hypocrates, and other Eminent Physicians, Studyed it, next to Man's, lay∣ing down Rules and Methods to discover and cure the Diseases incident to them. And this Example I have also follow'd, that so generous a Creature may at no time be lost for want of suitable Remedies in any matter that may besall him. The Station it has pleased God to put me in, has led me to Experience in this Creature; and I have found many things concerning them, to which, as far as I can perceive, the Ancients were Strangers:
I have put them into a suitable Method, and Incerted them in this Book, besides what are taken from the Works of the most Expert Managers and Farriers that have ever been made Publick: So that I may without straining a point of Modesty, truly say, it not only An∣swers, but much exceeds what is promised in the Title-page, and is the best of its kind that has hitherto been abroad in the World. To prove this, I could incert many Particulars, but they being plainly to be seen in reading the following Pages; and Brevity (as I conceive) always most commendable in a Preface, I draw to a Conclusion: As well knowing that when all that I can say, is said, I must leave it to the Censure of the Reader, and there∣fore will only desire one Favour, (which no reasonable Man will refuse) and, that is, not to pass Sentence before you Read and put in Practice so much of it as shall be suitable to your Occasion. And so not fearing its coming to the Touch-stone, to prove its real Worth and Value, I remain, Reader, Your Friend and Servant, to Oblige you in what I may, A. S.
THE Gentleman's Compleat Jockey: WITH THE Perfect Horseman and Farrier. Of the Natures and Properties of Horses. HOrses, of all the unreasonable Creatures upon the Earth, are of the greatest Understanding, having in them (as the Learned affirm) a certain natu∣ral Instinct, not only of the knowledge of their Riders and Keepers, but also of their own Generation and Descent, knowing their Sires and Dams, in such a manner as they will refuse (as Pliny says) to couple or ingender with them! They are also Creatures the aptest to learn any Motion, and the readiest to obey their Teacher, having a greater love to Exercise than any other Beast. They are of an infinite great Courage, taking an exceeding delight in the Wars; and (as some do affirm) have a certain fore-knowledge of the Battel, and will prepare themselves for the same. They will mourn for the loss or deaths of their Masters; and are so apt to indure Labour, that it is written of the Horses of the Samarans, That they'll gallop a hundred Miles end-ways, without rest or stay; they are naturally long liv'd, and by choice Keepers have been brought up to fifty Years; but for thirty it hath been ordinary with them: the Mares are shorter liv'd, surviving till twenty or twenty five at the far∣thest. They are of all Beasts the most beautiful of shape. They are fit for the Saddle at four years of age for the Wars at six, for the Race at eight, for Hunting, and ex∣tream Matches, at ten or eleven. The Females bear their
Foal full eleven Months, and foal in the twelfth: the best time for their ingendering is March, at the increase of the Moon, or in part of it; the Mare foaleth standing; they are supposed to be so loving and kind to their Generation, that if a Foal lose the Dam, yet the other Mares, which are with milch, will, of their own accord, lend their teats, to feed and nurse up the Orphan foal. Horses are subject to more Diseases then any other Beast; some write three hundred, or as many as belong to Man. The Means to make the Seed ef the Horse perfect for Genera∣tion. The Seed of the Horse ought to be hot and dry, so that all excessive moisture of Seed must be abated and taken a∣way: Now the means to make hot and dry Seed for Gene∣ration, is Labour and spare Diet, the Digestion being made perfect, through heat proceeding from Labour, so that the meat that the Horse and Mare should feed upon, should be in quality of Nature hot and dry, and then moderately ta∣ken: The seed doth naturally pertake of the quality and temperature of the meat; his meat will increase an uniform Seed, so that the Colt will be like unto the Siers: The meat should be old sweet Hay or Wheat-straw, moderately given them; sweet Oats, winnow'd and cleans'd from the dust and filth, mingled with old dried Pease or Beans, with a scat∣tering of Bay-salt and Anniseeds; the Provender, for their better digestion, may be given them three times a day; their Water sweet and pure; and every day early in the morn∣ing, when they are fasting, moderately exercised until they sweat, their Stable clean'd, and then painfully dressed and rubbed dry, and thorough cold before any meat be given to them; the which doth not only perfect digestion, and exhaust the moisture from the Seed, but also strengthen∣eth and cleanseth their blood and bodies from all raw and imperfect humours, whereby you shall perceive them to exceed in pride and lust. About eight or ten days before they come to action, add to their diet some sweet Wheat, equal in mixture and quantity with the rest of their proven∣der; for Wheat is a great  of the Heart, and an
increaser of the vital-spirits, which above all things for that action is principally to be moved and stirred up; sometimes put in a pint of White-wine, or a bottle of Ale, to abate the cold quality of their Water. These Means being rightly used, you shall plainly discern the endowment of a good temperature, to possess a sufficient power to shape a perfect body; which some of the Gentry would give any rate for. Observations for the better Directions in Breeding of the Mare. There must be a great discretion used in feeding of the Mare, until she hath foaled, least by the long use of over∣bad Meats, the Colt in the Womb be impaired from that quality and temperature it had from the Seed; therefore the Mare may not so far eat of contrary Meats, least the Colt lose of those good qualities, which it received (as hath been said) of the Seed whereof it was made. Of what Age the Horse or Mare ought to be that Bget and Bring forth. Observe every Horse until he be six Years old is a Colt, but never after, and that is his first Age, and if after that time he lose any of his Teeth they come not again, because the excess of his Moisture doth then begin to abate, being until then predominate in Moisture; and from five Years of Age until he be ten, is counted his middle, youthful and perfect Age, for his vigor, spirit and action, because he is then more Hot and less Moist; and from ten Years of Age to fifteen is his declining because then Heat and Moisture do much decay; and from fifteen Years of Age until twen∣ty his old Age, because that then he is cold and dry. The best time for their Ingendring is March, at the increase of the Moon or in part of it; the Mare carrieth (as hath been said) her Foal eleven Months and foaleth standing in the twelfth. To know whether a Mare hath conceived, and how to order her after time of Conception, until the time of Foaling, for the better Breeding and Nourishment of the Colt. If she cast not her Seed, but eateth freshly when she
cometh to Meat, and so continueth, and doth not neigh nor piss often, neither casteth her eye gazing after a Horse, and within a Day or two begins to be gaunt-bellied, because her Womb in Conception and closing it self together in keeping the Seed, trusseth up and maketh it show less to the fight then before, as if she were suddenly become lean, and her Hair lyeth very smooth, and brighter then before; as also about ten Days after, offering her a Horse two or three Days before the Full, and likewise before the New Moon, (and she abhorreth Copulation) it assureth that her Nature is satisfy'd, and are manifest Signs of her Comception. And as touching her Keeping, let her not drink so much as Na∣ture desireth, and still keep her with the same Meat and Dyet for twelve Days after: Presently after her Foaling milk the Mare as clean as you can, which will not only draw down her Milk, but make the same encrease, and also keep the Udder in a good temper, that the Milk do not clod, which if it should, the Mare will quickly become dry. Boil her Milk with the top of Lavender, bath all her Ud∣der therewith, and so continue till the clods and knobs in the Udder be dissolved. After foaling give her a good Mash made of Malt, or Wheat-meal; let the Stable be o∣pen and airy, and the Floor paved and not planked; in the Provender you may also put the Powder of Brimstone, the Powder of the Roots of Enula Campana, of White∣lilly-roots, of Polipodium of the Oak, of Saven, Marsh∣wormwood, Tobacco, Garlick chopt small, and such like, and when she goes to Grass, let her run no longer then Bartholomew-tide. Of Taming of Colts. The yearly wintering Colts in the Stable, will make them tame and domestical, as also bring many other benefits both to the Owner and the Colts, until they come to be iden, which should not be until five Years of Age, if you would have them strong, sound and durable Colts. When the Colt is made gentle to suffer the saddle and cruppler to be set on his back, shooes on his feet, and also load to water; then take another gentle Horse, and ride
upon him leading the Colt in a halter; cross gird your Colt, and ride him a mile or two, and make much of your Colt, and with this gentle usage the Colt will love and desire your Company, and oftentimes when you are in the Stable with him, cause some Drum to beat, or Gun to play or shoot to harden him, at which time stand by and cherih him. Of making of Colts to Amble, from the time of their Foaling. Put on a halter, bridle and saddle, at your pleasure, on the Mare's head, in the morning lead her forth, let the Colt follow her gently, as soft a pace as she can go, into some even, plain, and hard Ground, and be sure that the Colt be not inforced to go faster then you lead the Mare; then observe and you shall find the Colt going by her, that he doth altogether go and strain his Legs in an Amble, after you have practised several times, the Colt will in∣crease in the swiftness of the pace of his Amble, and then when you think fit, you may Back him. Of the Stable. First, For the scituation of the Stable, it should be on a dry Ground, so as all the seasons of the Year, both Man and Horse may come and return from the same clean and dry; also it should be builded and so placed that there be a continual Current for cleansing and keeping the same sweet from all things that are noysome. It should be ceal∣ed over the Horses, to keep both Horse, Rack, Meat and Manger from all dust; it must not have any filthy Gutter or Sink near, in, or under the same, neither any Privy, nor any other unwholesome savour of Hogstis, Hen-houses, or such like. Some ancient Writers affirm, that the strong air of a Privy will make a Horse blind; the Horse is natural∣ly a proud Beast, and delighteth in cleanness; the Rack should be set high and stooping, that no dust or filth may annoy the Horses Eyes or Maine, or indanger his Crest, by crooked or wry feeding; the Manger shou'd be deep and strong, for casting Provender out of it with the Horse's Noe, with posts and partitions, as you may see in all well-ordered Stables; the Floor should be paved and not plank∣ed
for these Reasons: First, it is more durable and lasting, and less charge, it maketh your Horse more bold upon sto∣ny and hard Grounds, as also it is an excellent convenien∣ey for Colts being unshoo'd, for it hardeneth the Hoof so as by continuance and custom, they will be as bold on the Stones as if they were shoo'd. The Pavement should be e∣ven, not higher before, where the fore-feet stand, for it will prove painful to the hinder Legs, so as the Horse, un∣less necessity compel him, cannot stand strait or be bold in the Stable; there should be divers Windows, the which should be so placed, that the Stable be therewith cleared with the Air, and to be close shut, or open'd as occasion shall serve, in the night-time, especially in the Winter, at other times it should be kept something cold, for the Horse will feed and digest the better. There should not be any dust or Loam-walls about or near the Rack or Manger, for the Horse will naturally lick them to his great hurt. The ung must not by any means lye close to the Stable. The Grooms should be lodged near to the Stable to be ready at all times, and upon all occasions; and joyning to their Lodging should be a convenient Room, with a Press therein to set their Saddles, Bridles, Girts, and such like; with all kind of necessary Instruments, to mend such Furniture, with all things necessary for Shooing, letting of Blood, and such like, together with Medicinable things, either for in∣ward Diseases, or outward Hurts. There should also to the Stable be annexed certain Sheds or Rooms to lay Horse∣litter in, both new and old, for it is most unfit for the Lit∣ter to be under the Manger, as commonly is us'd, left the Horse should either feed on it, or be offended with the sa∣vour. Besides, there should be a little inclos'd Room, such as Horses, after their labour, might be put into, to wallow themselves, wherein most Horses take exceeding delight, it being also most healthful for them so to do, the which the antient Writers affirm, doth so much comfort a Horse, that if they be tyred, having afterwards wallowed himself, being clean rubbed, will couragiously travel presently again, there should also be Places or Sheds for the Horses to be cleans'd, rry'd and trimm'd in, neither would I have any Horse
having the Glaunders, or any other Sickness, Hurt or Di∣sease, to remain in the Stable at such a time, but kept in a Shed for the present from the rest of the Horses, by which means, and all other good Dyet, there cannot be any great doubt of Health and long Life to the Horses. Of Shooing of Horses. If the true knowledge of Hoofs were rightly under∣stood, then shooing could not be difficult: First, I will set down what is a perfect Hoof, it must be lean, smooth, deep, tough, narrow towards the Toe, and conveniently broad in the Heels, much like an Asses Hoff, for it should be round. A Hoof that wants the deepness of the Coffin cannot be of long service; and because all the weight of the Horse resteth upon the Quarters and Heels of the Fore-feet, therefore those Quarters, I mean the edge of the Coffin on the hinder part of the Forefeet must be main∣tain'd and taken off as little as may be, for thereby the Horse treadeth and beareth equally, which is a special means to keep him from interfering behind. Therefore the Farrier must to his uttermost preserve the hinder quar∣ters of the Forefeet, taking little or nothing away from the edge of the Coffin, because, as we said, all the weight and burthen of the Horse resteth upon the Quarters and Heels of the Forefeet, which few Farriers little think up∣on; but the Toes of the Forefeet being naturally thick and hard, must by them be always abated and pared thin as the edge of a Knife, whereby they make the Hoofs of the Forefeet to be low before, and high in the Quarters. Therefore when they do par the Coffins of the Forefeet, let them do it so even and plain as the Ee can discern, that the Shooe laid upon the Coffin may seem to be glew∣ed thereunto, for that you cannot see the light betwixt the Shooe and the Coffin in any part, otherwise the Shooe is not well turned or welded, or the Hoof truly pared, but before it be nailed, be sure to amend the fault, so that it may bear even and just upon the edge of all the Coffin; then before you let the Farrier set on the Shooe, in both the quarters of the Coffin of every Foot next to the Frush,
let him cut out of the end of the corner of the Coffin, as near to the quick of the Heel as may be, as much of the Coffin as you may lay your Finger in it, whereby it shall never gather too near the Frush, to close up, and become narrow in the Heels, so as when the Horse is shoo'd, you shall have a very good distance betwixt the broad end of the Frush, and the sponge of the Shooe, whereby all Gra∣vel and Stones will wash and work out of the sponge of the Shooe, being cut aslope; then when the Shooe is tacked on with nails, set down the Horses Foot, and stand direct∣ly behind the Horse, and view whether the Frush of the Foot be direct and of just proportion, even betwixt the Webs of the Shooes, and whether the Horse stand right, and the Frush equally betwixt the Webs or Sponges of the Shooe, and you shall be assured thereby that the Shooe standeth right, the continual use whereof will cause the Horse to tread and traverse boldly and surely, because his Quarterns being the bearing place, will be broad and even to support the whole Body. And for the true making of the Shooe, all the Web should be strait and plain, not drawn in at the Heels and Quarter narrow, or beaten to the Heels which many use to do, neither hallowed, if the Feet be perfect but even and flat, with a broad Web, and the Sponges thicker and more substantial than any part of the Shooe, to cause the Joynt to stand upright, and so wide in the Quarters as both sides may disbord the coffin of the Hoof the breadth of a Straw, to guard and save the Coffin of the Hoof, being the only strength of the whole Foot, and also the shooe so far set back to guard the Heels, as may save the same from bruising and cutting with Stones, and unless the Coffin be continually so kept open from hard oppressing, and closing of the Tuel of the Foot, which is inclosed within the Coffin, whereby the Tuel becometh bound to the great grief and lameness of the Horse, but the Foot and Joynt of the Horse maintained as a principal post to support the whole Building, for other∣wise the Horse will become Hoof-bound, which many ig∣norantly call dry foundred, and also make the Joynt to be∣come weak, lame, and full of Windgalls. And therefore
when he comes to the piercing of the Shooe of the Fore-foot, let him not spare to piērce it from the Quarter to the hard Toe, but not backward to the Heel, and let the Shooe be so pierced, as the holes be much wider on the outside of the Shooe then within, for the holes of the inside of the Shooe should be no wider then the Shank of the Nail may well fit, otherwise the Shooe will never fit fast and steady, and the circle of the piercing more distant from the edge o'th' toe, then from the edge of the Quarter, be∣cause every Smith knoweth that there is more hold to be taken with less danger, in respect of the Tuel and Quick of the Foot, and all the Nails would be untoled without Shoulders, which will so sink, and strongly fill the Hole, as that the Shooe will be well fixed, and by cutting the Hoof a little with the point of a Knife, let the Clinh be clean hid, the which shooing should always be done, eight or ten Days before you travel your Horse, for by that time the Hoof will be grown to the Nails to hold the Shooe fast. And for the helping of interfering, you must keep him full of Flesh, and always preserve the Coffins on the inside of the Hoofs, without paring away more than to make them even for the Shoes, and abate the outside of the Coffin of the same Foot, and besides, make the Sponges of the Shooes on the inside of the Shooes much thicker then the outside. How to know a Horse that is durable, and of continuance in Journey, &c. This observation must also be from his shape, the others follow: First, It is to be considered that Strength is the cause of the continuance of Travel, then consider in what part of the Body of the Horse that Strengh prinipaly and naturally resteth, for as the Strength of the Bull is naturally in the neck, of the Lyon and Bear in the pws, of the Dog in the chops, so of the Horse in the fore-part, whre Na¦ture hath imposed the Burthen, and the is and must be his principal force and strength, the whist fore-part must be deep and broad from the point of his too, or  to the Bottom of his chest or breast; hi
the lid or cover of a trunck, whereby he will appear broad, full, round, and bearing out in the chest or breast, with an evenness of chest and belly to the flank, so as that his belly hung not deeper than his chest, nor his chest deeper then his belly, with lean, upright, and strait pasterns, somewhat narrow hoofed towards the toe, assure your selves such a Horse will be durable, and as good almost at the end of his labour as at the beginning; if he be of a contrary shape; then will his actions be contrary, namely, the longer he is travel'd, the more Jade. How to know a free and perfect spirited Horse. This powerful spirit proceeds from the vital spirit and arterial blood that goes wandring through the whole bo∣dy, to stir up the power of the Beast, to give him force and vigour to work; and as this spirit is of substance most pure, so when it is plentifully infused it maketh and work∣eth all the Creature, and quality of the same pure, so as Man not knowing or finding the reason, cannot but won∣der at the work and Workmaster. Wherefore, for the satis∣faction and confirmation of this Proposition, how to know a perfect, quick, and free-spirited Horse, you must also still retain all the description of shape before describ'd, by all which discriptions you shall assuredly know his qualities, only upon the view, as if you had made tryal of him many years; but if the Horse be defective in his shape, as I have describ'd, then assure your self that he wanteth that natu∣ral perfection I have referred the rule unto. Observe then, I beseech you, that a perfect Horse by Nature is thus shap'd, viz. a lean slender head, broad fore-head, great black eyes, full and plain over the lids, slender, thin, and lean jaws, broad, thin, long, and a high reared neck, the head set to the neck as naturally as a Ram's head when he sighteth, high withers, and a deep broad chest or breast, his ribs of an equal evenness from his chest to his flank, lean, upright pasterns, with a lean and deep hoof; such a Horse, assure thy self, will be found in all his actions naturally bold, lo∣ving, easie, sure-footed, durable, and free-going. But be∣cause I know and do assure my self, that unus Mens no est
capax tanti Motis, that it is unpossible that one head should be so well furnish'd as to neglect the opinions of the anti∣ent Writers, I have therefore annexed their Description, humbly submitting my self to the censure of the Experi∣enced and Learned. Of the Shape of a Horse. The last thing to know a good Horse is his Shape, which originally made by God, was no doubt most excellent, for the works of God were all perfect. The particular Obser∣vations and Descriptions of the perfect shape of a Horse are in number 32, against which I question not but that there may be Objections raised, which I will not trouble my self to answer, as being conscious that what I shall write of this Subject, I have partly by experience, and partly received from the most approved Authors. I will begin with the Hoof, and so ascend till the whole Body be described. First therefore, they say, That the Hoof should be black, smooth, dry, large, round and hollow: Some write, That if it be soft and tender, and the Heel broad, that is a sign of lightness, and that the Male will from her Foaling, tread light upon the ground, being afraid to trust her Hoofs be∣ing tender, and therefore straineth her Legs and Back the more. 2d Rule is, That the Hoofs should be small and heavy answerable to the Joynt, that it should be hairy, his Fet∣terlock to be good, in that it also answereth his na∣ture. 3. That his Pasterns should be short, neither too low nor too high, and therewithal strong beneath, nor apt to founder, the strength of the Pastern being the uprightness thereof. 4. That his Joynts ought to be great, with long Fetter∣locks behind, this greatness of his Joynts must: also be an∣swerable to the proportion of his Body. 5. That his Legs ought to be strait and broad. 6. That his Knees should be great, lean and plain, 7. That his Thighs should be full of sinews, tho Bones
whereof to be short, equal, just well proportion'd; that when he standeth with his Legs together, they should be more distant one from another towards the Breast then beneath, which proceeds from the fulness and breadth of the Breast, which causeth that distance. 8. That his Shoulders should be long, large, and full of flesh proportionable to his Body. 9. That his breast should be large and round. 10. That his Neck should be rather long than short, great towards the Breast, bending in the midst, and slen∣der towards the Head. 11. That his Ears should be small, sharp, and upright. 12. That his Forehead should be lean and large, that largeness to be both of breadth and length, according to his natural proportion. 13. That his Eyes should be great and black. 14. That the hollowness of his Brows be well filled and shooting outward. 15. That his Jaws should be slender and lean. 16. That his Nostrils should be open, and puffed up that you may see the red within apt for Air. 17. That he ought to have a great Mouth. 18. And which is strange, that his Head should be like a Sheeps-head: I answer, That Sheeps-heads being as other Beasts, are of divers Shapes it cannot be directly answer∣ed, for if I should conceive the shape thereof contrary to the Writers meaning, I should wrong them, and there∣fore leave it, having already given my description as to my own knowledge, but if you take it according to the proportion of most Sheep, it is a good Shape. 19. That the Main should be thin and long, which betokeneth strength, and the thinness, aptness to be taught. 20. That his Withers and Walleys should be sharp pointed, right and strait, so that a Man may see from thence the Posture of his Shoulders. 21. That his Back should be short, even and plain. 22. That his Sides should be long and large, with small space betwixt the hinder Rib and the Huckle-bone.
23. That his Belly should be long and great, orderly hidden under his Ribs. 24. That his Flank should be full and not graunt, with natural frizled hair on both sides, and the higher such hairs mount the better. 25. That his Rump should be round and plain, with a large space betwixt the Huckle-bones. 26. That his Thighs should be large and long, with Bones well proportioned and full of flesh. 27. That his Hams should be lean, dry and strait. 28. That his Hoofs should be large and crooked like a Hart, which should be a sign of swiftness. 29. That his Tail be full of hairs, long, down to the the ground: or as some write, lean and crisp. 30. That his Truncheon should be of a measurable bigness and well couched. 31. That his Stones and Yard should be small. 32. That he be proportioned like a Stag, lower before then behind. Of the Colours of Horses. Now we proceed to the examination of the certainty of the knowledge that might be taken from the Horse's colour, which most Men do so embrace, my purpose is to name those which they call the best, viz. brown, bay, dappled, black full of silver hairs, black like the Moor; the roan, bright bay, dark bay, bright sorrel, flea-bitten, whitely yard, &c. The ancient Writers tell us that every Horse is coloured as he is complexion'd, and according to the com∣plexion he is good or evil dispositioned, as he doth parti∣cipate of the Elements so he is complexion'd; affirming that if he have most of the Element of Fire, then he is cholerick, and therefore light, hot and fiery, and of no great force, as the bright sorrel; but if of the Element of Water, then dull, slow, heavy, cold of Nature, and such are most com∣monly milk-white; but if of the Element of the Air, then more full of blood, sanguine, pleasant, and of colour bay; but if of the Earth, then melancholy, faint-hearted, sad and heavy; the colours of these are dark, dun, russet or black.
the Learned say, there are four Complexions, as there are four Elements; but Horses do almost yearly alter their colours, the Mare at the time of her foaling; Opianus says that the colours of Horses were chosen and maintained for the hunting of wild Beasts; if a Horse be of a brown bay, which the Frenchmen do call Bayarie, loyal trusty Bayard, which they account to be the Captain of all colours, if withal this brown bay have a white star, white foot, and such like, he is valued oftentimes more then he is thrice worth. Thus hath many Ages taken that for a cause which is no cause. Of the Horses Marks. The Italian Writers have drawn particular Names, from whom the People borrow their Opinions, and therefore when a Horse hath a white-foot or a white-mark, which the Italian calls Balzano, if the white extend high and large (they say) it pretendeth debility, because whiteness beto∣kenth weakness, dulness, and the like, and that they call Balzani, they tell us of Calzoti, Arteglio, Travato, Trustra∣vato, Rapicano, Attusuato, Guzzo, Zuino, &c. and sure I am that neither with foot, white star, white list, strake, snip, phillet in the forehead, white rump, black and red flea-bytings, ostrick-feather, where it cannot be seen, meal-nose, meale-slank, bearded under his chops like a Goat, black and long fetterlocks, long main, black tail, black list, and such like, are not to be depended on as the assurant of a good Horse, for undoubtedly you shall find good and bad of all colours, but to overcome Custom, is a hard fight. How to know a Horse that is bold by Nature. A Horse that is fearful by Nature may, by compulsary means, after long use make little or no shew of fear, as be∣ing in a Ship upon the Sea, where are trumpets, guns, and the like, not having means to avoid the same, by use and continuance thereof, seemeth not fearful. But the phy∣sogmony of a Horse is much more certain, for he cannot keep secret or conceal as Man can, but being in perfect health remaineth ever one and the same in countenance,
To conclude and make the truth hereof appear, choose a Horse with a broad forehead, a great black full eye stand∣ing out like a Hare's, and a high rear'd forepart, and be assured that by Nature he is bold, and to give you a farther assurance, mark a Horse with a narrow forehead, little eyes and low forepart, which is meer contrary, and assure your self by Nature, that he is starting and fearful, and to seal up the truth thereof, the tryal will confirm you. How to make a white Scar or white Spot in a Horse's Face, or in any other place. Take two or three Apples, the sowrest you can get, and roast them at a quick fire, then being extream hot, take one of them in a cloath, and having cut off the skin, clap the hot Apple to the Horse's forehead, and hold it hard thereunto till the heat be asswaged, then try if the hair will come off, which if it will not, then take another hot Ap∣ple, and do as you did before; then when the hair is come off, as broad as you would have it, then take another hot Apple, and clap it to the scalded skin, holding it hard to, till all the skin blister and come off as well as the hair; then anoint the sore place twice a day with Honey, and the next hair which cometh will be white. To keep your Woollen Horse-cloaths, Breast-cloaths, Rubbers, and the like from Moths. When you turn your Horse or Horses to grass, take all your Woollen Cloaths, of what kind soever, and first wash them clean and dry them, then hang them in the Sun, dust them, and brush them, then lay them on some Fleaks or some other open things, a pretty distance from the ground, and spread all open; then take the hoofs of Horses and Kattel, and chopping them in pieces, burn them under the Woollen things, so as the smoak may come to them in every part; then, being thorowly smoak'd, fold them up handsomly, and between every fold strow the powder of Walnut tree-leaves well dried, and so lay them up in a Chest, and you shall never be troubled with Moths, which are very unwholsom for the Horse, and troublesome
to him. Others use to rub their Cloaths on the wrong sides all over with the tops and tender parts of Worm∣wood, with the same effect. How to defend a Horse from Flies. This is a noisome offence in the Summer-time; there∣fore when you find the trouble thereof, take Arse-smart, and keep it in running Water, and make it exceeding strong of the Herb, and therewith sprinkle and wash the Horse all over, and no Fly will touch him a second time. The Ivy, Rue, or Herb of Grace will do the like. Observations in the Electing of Horses, and the Ʋses. That which giveth the noblest Character to a good Horseman, is, the well-electing of Horses for that use and purpose he intends to employ them; and in this Device there is no better nor readier a way than the knowledge of Races and Strains from whence the Horses descend; for (as I have already intimated) it is certain, that the Cli∣mate, Heat, and Cold, are the three excellent Elements in a Horse's Composition. As to the election of Horses by their shapes and proportion, by their colour and complex∣ions, and by their marks and other outward semblances, I have already written sufficiently, and intend to iterate nothing. To come then to the election of Horses, ac∣cording to their Races, Breeds, and Climates; if you will elect a Horse for service, of martial and warlike Employ∣ment, then these are best: the Neapolitan, the Sardinian, the Almain, the French, or any of these bastardiz'd in them∣selves, or with fair well-shap'd and well-metal'd English Mares. If you will elect for Swiftness and Service, then the Arabian, the Barbary, the Spanish, the Grecian, or any of these bastardiz'd in themselves, or with our best En∣glish Mares. If you will choose for long Travel and Ser∣vice, then the English, the Hungarian, the Swedstand, the Poland, the Irish. If you chuse for Draught or Ser∣vice, the Flanders, the Friesland, or any of the Netherlands, either bastardiz'd in themselves, or with our English races; and these are excellent for Coach, for Cart, for Pack, or for any Burthen.
I shall end this Discourse of Horses of several Countries with a general Observation I have entertain'd of the Pro∣perties of Horses: A Horse hath two Properties of a Man; the first is, to have a proud Heart; and the second is, to be bold and hardy. He hath two Properties of a Badger, the first is, to have a white rase or ball in his Forehead; the second is, to have a white Foot. He hath four Pro∣perties of a Lyon, the first is, to have a broad Breast, the second, to be stiff-docked; the third, to be wild in the Countenance; the fourth is, to have four good Legs. He hath nine Properties of an Ox; the first is, to be broad Ribb'd; the second is, to be low-brawn'd; the third is, to be short-pastern'd; the fourth is, to have great Sinews; the fifth is to be wide betwixt the Challet; the sixth is, to have great Nostrils; the seventh is, to be big on the Chine; the eighth is, to be fat and well fed, the ninth is, to be upright standing. He also hath nine Properties of a Hare; the first is, stiff-ear'd; the second, to be green∣ey'd; the third, the eyes round; the fourth, to have a ean Head; the fifth, to have lean Knees; the sixth, to be light of foot; the seventh, to turn upon a light ground; the eighth to have a short Buttock; the ninth, to have two good Fillets. He hath nine Properties of a Fox; the first is, to be prick-ear'd; the second, to be little ear'd; the third to be round-tided; the fourth, to be side-tail'd; the fifth, to be short-leg'd; the sixth, to be black-leg'd; the seventh, to be short-trotting; the eighth, to be well colour'd; the ninth, to have a little Head. He hath nine Properties of an Ass; the first is, to be small mouth'd; the second, to be long-rein'd; the third, to be thin∣crested; the fourth, to be streight-back'd; the fifth, to have small Stones; the sixth, to be Lath-leg'd; the seventh to be round footed; the eighth, to be hollow footed; the ninth, to have a rough Foot. He borrows ten Properties of a Woman; the first is to be lightsome, and of a merry cheer; the second is, to be well-paced; the third is, to have a broad Forehead; the fourth is, to have well-siz'd Buttocks; the fifth, to be hard of Ward; the sixth, to be always busie with the Mouth; the seventh, to be chewing
of the Bridle; the eighth, to be good at a long Journey; the ninth, to be easie to leap upon; the tenth, to be stir∣ring under a Man. My Reader may perceive, that I descend to those fami∣liar Instances, the better to inculcate the shape of a per∣fect Horse into his Mind, without which there can be no∣good nor safe Election, let the Horse be of any Country whatsoever. To fatten a lean Horse in a short time. Take him from Grass and Soil, bring him into the Sta∣ble, curry and rub him, so as to loosen the Skin, and chafe it with Neatsfoot-oyl; give him three times a day, for a week, Mashes made of boiled Oats, Beans, and Bran, to a good quantity; after this, for a week, make up Balls of Barly-meal, Honey, Enula campane beaten into powder, the Juice of sweet Fennel, and Cummin-seeds; make these up into Balls with new Ale, and give him three of them a day as big as Pullets eggs for a week, and after each half a peck of Oats and two quarts of split Beans. This done, give him only Oats and Hay; and in a month, unless very old, he will be in extraordinary good case. A certain way to know the Age of Horse by his Teeth, Eye Eyebrow, Hoofe, &c. A Horse's full number of Teeth are accounted Thirty four, tho' there are some few that never arrive to that number, having only Thirty, or Thirty one; and the times they come are these: A yearling Colt has six on ei∣ther side above and below, and at three years old, ten in the same mmanner; and half a year after, those that are ill shaped, call'd Dog-Teeth, drop out; and between that and six years, others spring up in their room; and at full six they have as many as they will have, the great Cheek-Teeth and Eye-Teeth, in that space, falling out and re∣ceiving others in their stead, being altogether hallow. These perfected black marks or Specks appear in the fore Teeth, and continue till eight; at twelve the sides of his Teeth turn black, and so grow longer as his years en∣crease,
except he feeds upon very hard Meats, and be rong Jaw'd, to wear or keep them at a stay; and after welve his Age is not to be found in his Mouth. Then observe his Temples, to be satisfied in it, which are ss or more crooked and hallow, as he encreases in years. The next is his Hoof, which is seamed one over ano∣her; and if upon paring off a piece of the Hoof you find brittle, dry and crusty it denotes great Age. His Tail likewise denotes his Age; feel it with your fin∣er and Thumb, close to the setting on, and if the Joynt e knobby, and sticking out more than in other parts of it,  the bigness of a small Birds-egg, he exceeds not Two ears. His Eyes standing out, full, round, and sparkling, not nking in the pits, appearing even with his Temples, and ot wrinkled, and not none apearing in his Eyebrows, then e is a young Horse; but the contrary denotes him old. If his skin come up easie and fall smooth when let go, denotes him young; but if he be of a dark colour, and he Hair of his Eyebrows turn grey or grisled, or it be so nder, it betokens Age: Or if a white Horse have a ack or red Mannel over his Body, it signifies the same. If the Bars of his Mouth be large and deep, rough in andling, then he is aged; but if the contrary, then young and fit for Service. urther general Rules necessary to be known by the Horseman and Farrier, from warrantable Experience. A Mare's best breeding-time for a race of good Horses, between three and ten years, and in suffering her sooner o take the Horse, she will produce weak and sickly Colts, r such dull ones as are not worth rearing. Put your Stal∣on to her in close warm Pasture, and feed them well; t great care be taken of the Mare when she has con∣eiv'd, often housed, and fed with warm Mashes. The tallion ought not to exceed her in Age above a year, to e firm limbed, strorngly chested and crested, free as pos∣ble from Diseases and Sorrances: Ride the Mare some∣mes, but gently till she has quicken'd, and the Colt be
come to some perfection; House her in rainy, damp, a cold weather; let her Litter be easie, and cherish her w dry Meats, scattering in a few Cummin-seeds. For gelding Colts, the Spring and Fall are the b¦times, the weather being open and warm; do this in t wain of the Moon, the Sign being either in Aries or Virg Some geld them at nine days; but I hold it much bet at half a years end, then they will be more strong, livel and metalsome. Wean them at a year, or sooner, it yo find your Mare ickly, or deficient in Milk; then p them out of the hearing of their Dam, that they may th sooner forget her, and not pine after her; but after he seven months old, let him not have his fill of suck, abo once in two days: Feed him with Pollard, boiled Barl and put him in short sweet Pasture every day. Back him not till three years old, lest you make hi weak in the Loins, or sway-back; besides, it hinders h growth, and generally renders him lame in his Limbs, th you may make him familiar with you, that when yo come to do it, it may be done with little trouble: A then consider for what exercise he is best proportion'd and to that chiefly adapt him. In managing him to  Paces, and other Exercises, and in all, it is requisite  should have a good Mouth, trot freely, amble smoothl lifting up his Legs in trotting neither too high nor to low; that he gallop strongly, be in motion swift, and r ground apace. Directions for the better Ordering a Horse design'd for Exercise¦as, Hunting, Travel, &c. In these cases, the day and night before the day you intend to set out, give him a due proportion of Provin∣der, litter him very well, and let him be clean rubbed down; lead him not abroad, but give him warm Wate in the Stable; rub and chafe into his Joynts, Neats-oo Oyl, Trotter-oyl, Dogs-grease: In the morning let him have Oats and Beans, but no Hay: if he be brisk and lively, Water him not before you ride him out of the Stable, then ride him a mile or two a wracking pace, and
when well heated, ride an Amble, Trot, or other Pace, at r discretion; and coming in to your Inn or Stage, pe off the eat before you rub him down: This Knife y be made of a piece of a Scyth or broken Sword: then e him a proportionable allowance of Provinder, some∣at more than usual. If he be any hing ho, give him warm Water, other∣ old Water will do as well; and bringing him home,  he like measure; put on his Cloth, and tuck dry ps betwen his Girts and Body; let him stand in the dle , then toss a Knop of Hay into the ck, and soon  him about two quarts of Oats  split Beans,  which scatter a little Hempseed l cleansed, and when he come, to the last Bait, give him m Water and Oatmeal, light up his Litter, and let  take his rest: And thu ordering, if he be not a de∣ive Horse, he will perform what you put him to, to r content. inions as to Saddling and Bridling a Horse, much approved. f the Horse be wild and skittish, impatient of the Sad∣ and Trench, and when they are offer'd to make him iliar with the sight of them, always hang them near  in the Stable: Offer it till you see some willingness in  to accept it; girt the Saddle on gently, and put wisps ween his Body and the Girts; put on an easie Bridle t, and so a harder by degrees; in a fair day carry him lain ground, trot him round you, and sometimes che∣ him with your Voice, strike him a little with your nd, and lay your weight on the Saddle without mount∣, shake and strike the Stirrups against his sides, and do uch other things as may usually happen in riding; by  means you will become familiar with him, and he with : Then take off the slight and easie Bridle you first try, gid the Saddle hard; wash his Mouth with Ale and eacle, and put into it a full-mouth'd Trench Bit, so wing the Reins over his Head, lay them on the Saddle, e them now and then a gntle pull, that he may feel it,  champ on it; fasten then Martingals from the Chaul∣bands
to the Girts, yet with some slackness, unless he apt to startle and toss up his Head, then fasten a bro piece of Leather about his Neck, at his Withers, and b¦fore the middle of his Windpipe, about six inches benea his Throple, between which and his Neck draw the Ma¦tingals, to prevent his ducking down his head; and th will make him him carry his Neck Archwise, like a Swa and add much to his comeliness. And thus use hi nine or ten days before you actually attempt to ba him, The best Method for Backing a Horse. Having made your Horse patient of the Saddle a Trench, carry him abroad, then make many offers ¦mount, by putting your Foot in the Stirrup, at leng leap on his Back, sit fast, and keep your Legs close  his sides, give him a little head, and draw him on  Ploughed Ground, where let him run till he sweat then breathe him again, then cherish him; shake yo Legs and Stirrups, keep his head streight, and his Ne Archwise, yet venture not to ride him far before he  Familiar; after this feed him with Bread or Grass, if  will take it out of your hand. Having thus done t or three Mornings or Evenings, lay by the Trenc Caveson and Martingals; let another ride out befo you, on a well manag'd Horse, and ride him slow or fa as you see him disposed, letting him go equal with the ¦ther Horse, but not before him, till well perfected to be his Burthen.
THE Compleat Horseman: OR, TRUE ART of Horsemanship, In all its Parts and Perfections; Under sundry Heads. And first of all,  Brief Introduction to this Undertaking, to render it more apt to be understood by the READER. BEfore I come to speak of the Action, wherein the true Understanding hereof is most proper, I pur∣pose to give a little further Instruction; and first of the Voice: When you mind to help your orse therewith, it must be with a most mild and cheerful e; as to say, Hey, hey; hola, hola; so boy, so; hup, hup; ough, enough, no more; and many other such-like; but a orrection is clean contrary, when with a terrible and undering Voice; whereas in cherishing, the most mild d sweet Voice is used, as, My good Boy, so my good boy, th an Inclination of tending your Body to him, and h-like Encouragements. So as also the sound of the
Voice to be used, as well as a Voice pronounced, by givin a chirk with the Tongue, which may be called clacking, i pronouncing whereof the tip of the Tongue striketh the roof of the Mouth: And so also there is another sound o the Voice, as Hah halo. The next is the Hand, the true use and government whereof is the Ground of the whole Art; and as for the Bridle and the Rod, they are but dead and sensless Instruments, without all use, when they are not appointed for the right one, of the temperate and steddy Hand bearing upon a firm and moderate stay neither too much slacking, nor too much drawing in, eve∣ry good Horse causeth a true and just Rein, bearing a staid¦ness, with a light and sweet Mouth in all actions; so a whatsoever the Horse doth, is both easie, ready, and per∣fect, and being done with delight, must of necessity be best done, because it best pleaseth both Man and Horse, nei∣ther of them being moved to any perturbation, grief, o pain, and as for the rod and wand being instruments onl for the hand, how and when they are to be offered, use or not used, and for the Bridle which the Italians proper∣ly call, Il manico deltimone, the handle of the sterne, w shall for the present pass them by. The third thing is the Legs, wherein the use of the calve of the Legs, the Heels, the Stirrup, and the Spur are to b handled, I shall, to avoid repetition and all manner of tedi¦ousness, refer them also to their proper places, and at pre¦sent divide this our immediate concernment into certain general Grounds or Rules, to follow which the Rider may have daily use in teaching the whole Art to his Horse. For as a young Scholar is to be taught, so a young Horse in the beginning is to be managed, whereby all their Acti∣ons might bring delight and admiration to the Beholder and this must be done by mild and slow teaching, not to much, for a Horse may be wearied with long teaching  one time, but giving him often breath, high keeping  courage, often rewarding, cherishing, using great famili∣rity, and observing he has no change of the Rider till he  perfect, no change of bit, nor rough bit, no cutting or ga¦ling of his nose or mouth, but gentleness to render hi
easie, no beating nor whipping, no violence or passion, but proceed with all manner of immitation of Nature's delight, this maketh all the Horses actions more then won∣derful, because Nature hath a natural love to it self, and an innate hatred to all things that are Enemies to the same, which is plainly testifyed by that natural sympathy and an∣tipathy, which may be observed in all Creatures, as the Lamb which never had experience of the Wolf's cruelty, yet at the first sight of him doth tremble and fly for fear, Of Correction. Secondly, That the Rider never correct his Horse, but when gentle means and cherishing will not prevail, for no doubt but that he will willingly yield by gentle means, if it be made sensible unto him, what, how, and when to do, but that Horse that will not be moved by gentle means, let the Rider assure himself that he is of a bad Nature, but if any thing shall happen wherein of necessity correction is to be used; but if he offend, in the instant that he erreth, correct him, wherein how many do offend, all Mens eyes are Witnesses, beholding the common Horse-breakers, and ignorant Rider to minister violent correction, when the Beholder cannot so much as find a cause, nor himself ex∣press the reason, but error evermore taketh that for truth which is false, so as it plainly appeareth, that when a Horse hath been taught, and yet notwithstanding erreth in his discipline, correct him for error, but not for ignorance, which renders the Rider either to be mad, or as ignorant as the Horse. Teaching, not fit for such Horses, as Nature hath not framed sit to be taught. Thirdly, That all Riders lose no time in teaching of good Horses, but as for club-headed, distorted, ugly-countenan∣ced, fleshy, gouty-limm'd, short thick-necked, fleshy-chop¦ped, having their heads set to their necks as a hog, low fore-parted, narrow, shallow-breasted, and evil-shap'd Jade turn them either to the Cart, Plough, or other fervile I¦ployments, for every particular Nature, (that is the ten
perature of the Elements in every particular Body, without all contradiction) causeth and maintaineth the particular action of the Body wherein it is; and such shaped Horses were never compounded or framed of a true temperature of the Elements, and therefore impossible to be reduced to perfection of Action, otherwise than by abuse and great force, which Nature abhorreth, and that is but for a small time, such as these made use of do fully the glory of the Kingdom, disparage the judgment thereof, discourage ma∣ny Gentlemen, either to become Breeders, Riders, or Main∣tainers of Horses, and cast mists over the perfections of our English Riders. Of the Bridle, Saddle, and bringing the Horse to the Block; the mounting and seat of the Rider, and of the Ring and first entering on that Exercise. When the Horse is made gentle, familiar and fit for the Rider to teach, put on a head-stall or cavetsane over his nose, with a pair of strong reins, but so lose and easie for his nose, as may neither hurt nor abate his courage, or his quick and fresh feeling, and in a most gentle manner set a saddle upon him, with an upright short pommel, so as that the true use of the Hand may not be hindered or inju∣red, the holsters whereof should be broad in the top, to inclose the thigh, and yet to bear so slope that the knee be not pinched, neither the thigh kept from the true rest∣ing-place; the seat whereof should be of a reasonable length and largeness, the bolsters behind bearing forward to in∣close and support the thigh to the formost bolsters, the straps broad and strong, with broad girths, and very strong and broad buckles, cross girded, so as the saddle may rest firm on his back, whereby the seat will be easie, sure and certain without motion, leaving the near stirrop-leather almost half a hole longer then the right stirrop, and altho' the Horse be gentle, yet because he hath a new Master and Rider not known unto him, being neither assured of him∣self, nor of that his Rider would have him to do, so as it may be truly said, he is not himself, but that he is trou∣bled in mind, therefore to keep him from fear and pertur∣bation, I would have a quiet staid Horse also sadled to be
rid before him, and then bring them both to the Block, ut the old Horse first, and then the Colt, at which time let he Rider use all the mild and gentle words to the young Horse, making the reins of the bridle even and just, holding hem in his left hand, not stiff, nor altogether remiss or loose nd as soon as he is mounted on his back, let him sit quiet∣ there a while, least any sudden motion should breed any erturbation in the Horse, until the Rider has setled him∣lf in the saddle, his nose directly answering the Horse's retop betwixt his ears, his legs hanging strait down, nei∣er thrusting down the toe, nor lifting up the heel, but ith his foot with such evenness in the sturrop, as if he stood pon the ground, the sturrop-leathers rather short then ng, winding his toes something nearer to the Horse's de then the heel, holding the reins even with his crest, nd the point of the withers, a little above the main, with s thighs and knees close to the saddle, and his feet rest∣g in the sturrop in due place, not too far thrust into the urrop, with an upright and strait body; his ridge-bone swering the ridge-bone of the Horse, so as the Horse d Rider may ever seem to be as one body in all motions, ring which time let the Rider claw the Horse with his nd, to remove from him all fear or hard conceit of his ing, that done, let him go forward about two paces re and softly, and stay again, making much of him, and  softly and quietly to the place where he intendeth to ead out a ring, all which must be done by the Rider, dly and without fear; and as he must be thus used in ing forward, so must he be used in treading and pacing t the Ring, in some new plowed ground, that is most ep of mould; where first let the old Horse enter betwixt o furrows, so far as the Rider may have space and mould ugh, and follow with the young Horse close to him, which l cause him the willinger to go, because he is directed  guided by the old Horse, by which means he will not  any way discouraged; then let the old Horse (the young se following) enter on the right Hand, overthwart the ows, and tread out twice together a round ring, con∣ing in a circuit about thirty paces, and being come about
the second time where he began, let him tread out the like ring on the left hand, and after he hath gone twice about, let him begin again on the left hand, and so continue until he has gone four times about the left ring, and the righ six times, that done, let him go fare and softly out of the self-same furrow where he began, about thirty or forty pa¦ces, and there stand still, keeping his head and his body right in the path, remembring always to have one go by, to signifie his true performance, and to help if need be, and then let him go very gently back from the place he came and there let the Rider alight, and make much of him, by coying him, giving him a little grass, hay, or bread in hi mouth, to procure and win love, and thus let him be used for two days, with a Horse before him, and after him; let him then lead and begin himself, to tread and pace the ring in this gentle manner for the space of ten days, keeping a temperate, staid and firm hand upon the reins, with a swee feeling stay, carrying his forehead as Rams do, when they go to fight, whereby he will not only rein well, but bea his head staid, just and right, and when he knoweth what to do, and that for it he is always cherished, he will strive to do it faster and faster; through the Rider's continua keeping of his hand steady, the Horse will do it with a won¦derful pride and delight, by giving him liberty, but a to hasty treating of the Horse will work the contrary in hi exercises, &c. Of Trotting in the Ring, and other Paces to be taught Horse, to bring him to be manageable and fit for prope Services, &c. In the pacing of the ring, the Rider must not carry an over hard hand to dull the sense, but so temperately a the feeling may be always fresh, otherwise by the violen haling and much galling his Nose, where he'd willingly hav ease, to avoid it, he will set his head and his neck awry, th true use whereof is, that standing in the furrow just an streight with his Body, the Rider moves him gently to g forwards, and in the very motion turns him on the righ hand, by drawing very softly the right rein shorter with h
right hand, low under the pommel of the Saddle, whereun∣to if he yeild (as no doubt but he will) especially having trod the same before; let the Rider presently make much of him, neither drawing nor slacking the rein: At which time of his doing, both for the ease of the Rider and the Horse, if need shall be, let some skilful Person, his Keeper were most fit, come on his left side to his fore Shoulder, and thrust him in by little and little, and the Rider also by the Calf of the left Leg, and the cluck of his Tongue to be a help to make him go forward: If the Horse be such an one as I have describ'd, he will do it; but if he should not in the very motion of the turn, then let the Rider draw the Rein with his Hand as before, whe∣ther it be on the right hand, or on the left, all which must be done by gentle dealing, so as the Horse may hope for rest and quietness, whereby he will be ready to do what∣soever his Rider will; but if he be a Jade, or of an evil disposition by Nature, for my own part, I esteem him not of any worth, not fit to be kept. Having spoken of pacing the Horse in the Ring, it fol∣loweth, that after ten days expir'd, the Horse be taught to trot the Ring, which must be begun in as slow and as gentle a trot as he was in his first beginning of pacing; en∣crease his Ring-turns by two and two every day, until he make ten turns for the left Ring, and twelve for the right, which will augment his swiftness, whereof he should be restrained, until he be most perfect, and then he will do is with the greatest grace and pride that may be imagined, which is the true Property and Quality of all Art, ever∣more to affect and to effect Perfection; during which time of beginning of trotting, he may not be ridden with a Wand, nor wear any Bit, until he be most perfect in his trot, stop, and turn well on both hands,; and not by any means suffer'd to gallop, until that he can also perfectly dvance: By taking of this course he will be just in his Pace, and trot and stop with a staid Head and Neck, be∣ng the chief lustre and goodness that Nature and Art affordeth. Wherefore when you begin to trot the Ring, be sure
that at the first he is moved thereunto as gently an quietly as you can devise, and so in every Action what¦soever, upon a restrained, temperate, and firm hand, with a sweet Stay, and with a true Rein, that is, that his Nose be just under his Forehead, neither too much out, nor too much in, which is the just placing and setting of his Head, and will make him have a pleasant Mouth, when he cometh to wear the Bit, in which consisteth the chief point of Horsemanship, because he is so to be maintain'd in all his Actions: This is most easie to be done and continued, if the Horse be of perfect shape and spirit; but if he should make resistance, for that he is either rammage or evil broken, then trot him swiftly with quickness of Voice, Rod and Spur, for the time of his troting is the fittest time to make him forget his Toyls, and to attend his way; and  an this will not help, hen spare not to gallop him; and if this fails, then be sure he will be a Jade from the begin∣ning to the end, for a Horse of a good temper and perfect shape can never be of so bad a nature and quality. I shall next tell how to make the Rider perfect in Stop. After he hath ended the number of his Ring-turns, which is, to trot his Horse right out in the middle Furrow, betwixt the Rings, until he come to the place of stop, and there to make a pretty stay, keeping his Body right in the path, wherein if the whole Body or any part stand overthwart, seek not at first to correct him for it thro' your too much Passion, but let a a Foot-man direct him to stand right in the Path, as we said before, by thrusting in that part which stands out of order, or that he may cause the Horse to go farther in the same Path, and stop him, holding that Rein streighter on that side whereon he most forceth his Head than the other, which will enforce him to keep right; which when he yieldeth, ever cherish him; and after it will be convenient to trot and stop him on a Ground that is a little steep, which something falleth, and immediately riseth; but when he is perfect then he may do it on a Ground very steep. But to teach him to go back, you must keep a firm staid hand on him, without giving him any Liberty, and then gently striking him on the Neck
with his Rod, in that instant say, Back, back; but if he refuse, let a Foot-man with a rod gently strike him on the Knees, and so, by the gentle puiling in of the Rider's hand, and fair means, oblige him to it. The proper Ʋse of the Wand, Bit, and Spur, for the well teaching a Horse, and to bring him to his Pacings and Management. Having shew'd how to ride a Horse without a Wand, Bit, or Spur, I will now shew you how to manage all three, together with the true Use of the Hand upon the Bit, one of the principal pieces of Horsemanship. First therefore, when he that rides with a Wand, let him take it warily, that the Horse be not frighted there∣with; and to ascertain the Horse thereof, presently after he has receiv'd it, toy and scratch him about the Neck with the end thereof: And for the carrying it, it must be in the right hand, with the Joynt upright, and when he must use it, let the point fall close unto him as occasion shall require; but in his management of of it, let him lay his hand on his right Thigh, and the Wand across the Horse's Neck; and when he hath made his course, and turned on the right hand, then before the end of his se∣cond course, when he is almost ready to turn on the left hand, let him lift up his hand and rod, and hold the point right forward on the right side against his Eye, and as he changeth turns, so let him change his rod of the one side and of the other; but if his Horse will not turn on the side he would have him, let him strike him on the con∣trary side; and when he is any way disorder'd, let him carry the Wand on the contrary side; and when he would have him carry his fore part right, strike him on the Shoul∣der or Fore-legs; and when he would have him light be∣hind, strike him on the rump and hanches. And thus much for the Use of the Wand, as occasion shall serve. Now for the use of the Bit, which is an Instrument only guided and directed by the hand, and because the Ground of the Art, of Riding depends wholly upon the use and true government of the hand; being guided by Reason and
Discourse, so as the Horse, in all Motions and Actions,  and ought to answer to that Motion which the hand mo∣veth; I must not pass it over lightly. First therefore, let the Bit that you first bit your Horse withal be gentle and pleasant, yet so, that the gen∣tleness cause him not to despise the Rider, nor the hard∣ness drive him to despair; for you must understand, that Knowledge always presupposeth Reason, and Reason Sence and Sence and Reason; all which consists in a true medio∣crity; and therefore amongst the most learned Precepts that were written in the Temple of Apollo in Greece, this was in the second place, Nothing too much. For, if you press him with the Bridle, if he carry his head well, yet must you presently ease your Bridle-hand, and make much of him, because he sheweth himself obe∣dient to you and whensoever he doth any thing well, and with delight, you must be very careful not to vox him, but ever so to win him, that he may be willing to please you. So likewise when he bears a firm hand with a stay, that thereby the Horse brings in his head, and yields to his hand, yet he must shorten the Reins of his Bridle till his head be setled in its due place, that is, neither to carry his Forehead too much out nor too much in, and still to maintain him in that form in all his doings, yet not so that it exceed mediocrity or temperature, but remain light on the hand with a sweet mouth. Thus having shew'd the Rider, that it must be done by keeping this order, I proceed. Let him stay his Horse temperately upon an even hand, as his resistance shall require, without giving any other Li∣berty, then with his Rod to strike him gently upon the bowing of the Neck, provoking him mildly with the Spur on that side on which he most wryeth his Buttock, to the nd that he may go just, until he draw back one of his fore Feet, which if he do, make much of him, and then stay a while and do the like, drawing only the Bridle, for the former cherishing will make him to understand, and then  go lightly back with both the fore Legs, when he is
touched on the Neck with the Rod, saying with a loud Voice, Back; at which Voice, with the feeling of the Rod and drawing of the Bridle, he will go back to the Rider's desire: And always after, when he is out of the due and true stay upon the Bridle, let him do the like, that is, to go back in form aforesaid; and altho' some disorder be committed, let not the Rider despair, for he shall find him easily won to a good Mouth, by this use of a tempe∣rate and firm Hand, which is by the mediocrity of slack∣ing and drawing, properly named a sweet Stay, making him light upon the hand, champing the Bit with great pleasure, and a stay'd Head in due place, the true Tokens whereof are just Reins, staid, and a light-born Head with pleasure on the Bit, being Properties inseparable in every perfect∣shap'd Horse's Actions. But because it may seem very dif∣ficult to have a continuance of Perfection in every action, altho' it is common upon stop, or standing still, to be in order, yet perhaps, upon motion, he will leave playing upon the Bit, and bear upon the head, especially upon the main courier, which proceeds from the want of true Know∣ledge how to maintain and continue the hand just and firm with a sweet stay, so as that he may take pleasure on the Bit: And therefore how to maintain a Horse both in furi∣ous and quiet doings, is to be consider'd of: If then that at any time he make any disorder, note it diligently, so stay him, and make him go backward; for in going back, he will bring himself to his right order agen: Then present∣ly make much of him, and forthwith move him forwards fair and gently, till he come to the place of stop. And as he must be thus used in going forward, so he must be used in treading of the Rings, first gently upon the pace, upon the trot, and upon the gallop, in practising whereof he must precisely observe that it be done with a tempe∣rate, staid, and firm hand, otherwise he will gape, thrust his Tongue upon the Bit, or over the Bit, to defend him∣self, thrust his head out suddenly, pluck it in disdainful∣ly, or else shaking or moving his head one way or other, to be freed from the pressing of the intemperate hand, which is to him uncouth and contrary to Nature the
which Art should evermore labour to please. The true form and practice of drawing the Bridle is also to be learnt; which is, that being mounted in the Saddle, let the Rider draw the Reins equal; and if the Horse know not the Bit, then let the Bit be very slack, and let him hold the Reins in his left hand, with the little finger and Ring-finger between, under the Pummel of the Saddle, as near the Withers as he can, and then with the right hand draw the Reins softly and equally together through the left hand, so as the Standers-by can scarcely perceive it, the which he must not remove until he feel the Horse to stay upon the Bit, and there hold them without slacking or further drawing, until he perceive whether the Head stand in true form; which if it be not, then let him a little yield his left hand again, and standing so a pretty while, bring his left hand to his former place again, where the Horse made the first stay upon the Bit; then let him draw the Reins with his right hand somewhat more through the left, as before, but so little and gently, as, scarcely to be percei∣ved, for so must all the motions of the Hand be, and then keep it firm and staid a pretty while, and if he yield, tho' very little, let him keep his hand still at one stay, nei∣ther slackening nor drawing it, whereby he will feel the ease that he hath got by yielding; and then presently make much of him: But if it so happen, that the Reins fall slack, let him not remove his left hand, but draw them through his left hand, as before, for they must not be slack until they stay again upon his right hand, where∣unto whensoever he yieldeth, make much of him, conti∣nuing still in this manner to solicite him till his Head be in its due place, that is, neither too much out, nor too much in; after which, if he bear not light, let his Rider strike him gently on the Knees of his fore Legs, to make him to go back, whereby he will bring in his head, and then will the Bit move, and his Hand find ease; but let him be very careful at that instant to keep his hand so firm as that he neither slack nor draw in, to the end he may feel and receive the ease of his own motion of yielding, which willingly he will not loose, it being delightful to
his nature, but take some pleasure to stir the Bit in his Mouth, and go backward with it; the which when the Rider finds, are tokens of the winning of his Mouth, which to his great satisfaction being won, with observati∣on of good order, he may be brought to a more conti¦nued Perfection. Thus I have shew'd the expert Rider so much as the Art may help him; but if the Shape and Nature of the Horse be opposite and repugnant, as in the greatest num∣ber of Horses, it is to no purpose; howsoever, for a time it may seem to be taught, yet questionless it cannot be of any continuance. But because in the whole Art of Riding there is no one thing more difficult than to make a Horse trot just: And that the Perfection thereof is the Perfection of all other of his Doings I purpose to give further Rules. Particular Rules and Directions for the Management of a Horse, to train him up to a good and commendable Trot, being the Foundation of all. 1. Let the Rider observe, that when he is teaching his Horse herein, or any other Lesson, that he do not trou∣ble him with any other thing at that time, neither suffer him to begin to learn any other. 2. That he do not suffer any other to ride him until he be perfected by himself in such Lessons as he taught him, lest he should be confus'd by the diversity of Teachers, and their manner of Teaching. 3. That when he is brought to a just Stay of Head, and assurance of the Bit, that then the Rider is to maintain him therein to a full perfection. 4. When he is out of order, then let him stay him, and make him go back, as before was mentioned. 5. When he is in order, then let him make much of him, and stay not long, but with a firm hand gently put him into his Trot again. 6. If he continue in his good order, cherish him, gui∣ding his Body, with a pleasant and gentle motion of the Calves of your Legs move him to do it more expeditiously,
which if he be of a good nature, he will speedily per∣form; always remembering to keep a firm hand, unless he bring in his Head. 7. if his Trot continue not light upon your hand, stay him, and cause him to go back, which will bring him in order again, and then gently put him into his Pace, and so to his Trot, as before; which being well done, che∣rish and delight him with all the sweetness that may be, so that the Rider may ever win his Love thereby; guide him home by some leading Lines, and give him a little Grass or Hay out of your hand; tickle, scratch him, and speak to him most loving words, which will make him at his next Exercise do all things to his Rider's greatest content, and within twenty days, or thereabouts, he will Pace and Trot in such order, as that the Rider may al∣ways afterwards trot him most swiftly in the Rings or in the Manage. 8. In his swift Trot, by all means keep your true Seat and firm Hand, so that he lose not that excellent form and grace before prescribed; but do not Gallop him till he be just and perfect in his swift Trot, and then out of that trot, to put him to a swifter gallop in the large Rings, even to the Stop: But beware you draw not your hand hastily to you, but by a little sway of your Body, Back and Hand together, and stay your hand there until he retreat a step or two, and there stay him, and suffer him not to go forward, and at that instant to make much of him, and so let your hand and body reassume the same place again. 9. If he should then offer to go forwards, stay him with the like sway, and then alight, and lead him home, making much of him, as you did before. 10. I dare to assure the Rider of the right use of what hath been said, and of the success thereof, therefore let him follow his Practice, and continue it; let him pace his Horse overthwart some deep Fallow as fast as he can for half an hour, but suffer him not by any means to trot, keeping his hand in a firm and temperate stay, as before, and if he still find his head in due place, his carriage
light and pleasant upon the Bit, he may assure himself that he hath gain'd the perfection of the Hand, and the true use thereof, for the teaching and making of a young Horse; wherein observe, that if he be of a perfect shape, his Head will be in the due place, and light upon the Bit. Of the Manag'd Horse, with further Instructions, &c. I now intend to discourse a little of the Horse that is already taught, and brought to perfection; with him the expert Rider hath small need to make use of any Rod, or other help, but to keep his true, just, and perfect Seat, because his Horse, by the least token of the Bridle or Spur, will do all things in such time and measure, as the Behol∣ders will judge the Man and Horse to be but one Body, one Mind, and one Will: And therefore, how the Reins should be carried, placed, and used, is the only thing to be spoken of: The Reins he must hold in his left hand, placing the little finger betwixt the two Reins, and the thumb close upon the Reins, so as the hand remove not from the Crest of the Horse, for by the motion of the hand it is signified to the Horse which way you would have him turn, slacking it on the other: The Order and Manner whereof hath been, and is yet diversly used of the best Horsemen, and therefore I leave it to every man's use, as he findeth it most fit. But in the running at the Tilt, where the Horse neither doth nor can turn, the Rider must not draw the Bridle towards the Tilt, but only strain the Rein that is next the Tilt, to make him carry his head towards it. (1.) Because the true shape and goodness of the na∣ture of the Horse, is it that Art attendeth and worketh up∣on, in those Horses the Rules of Art have Perfection with continuance; so as the Horse that is of perfect shape, and well trught, shall not endanger Wind, or Limb, or Defor∣mity of Body. (2.) His Person shall never be in peril by rearing or running away. (3.) Nor shall the Rider never be grieved with heavy bearing upon his hand, but perform all with great delight.
Neither shall he need Canetsan, Musrole, or Martingale, or such-like, but only false Reins. (4.) And lastly this Teaching will manifest the diffe∣rence betwixt the true Knowers and ignorant Riders, which will be perceiv'd by the Doings the Horse doth re∣present and express when he would appear most beauti∣ful, and thereby render both the expert Reader, not the ignorant, and himself, to appear most nobly, with such delight to the Beholders, that they will seem to be ra∣vish'd with it; all which is attain'd by Discretion, taking of Time, with Moderation and Temperance, which is little regarded, and of very few, who will rather chuse to ride out of order, and that with such extremity of Spur and Rod, that for want of Breath they commit many strange Disorders, whereby the poor Horse is cruelly tor∣mented, having no other to ride him than one without Discretion. After your Horse hath perfectly learned swiftly to trot, and to stop, and as well to go back, then ought he to be taught rightly to advance; which is by lifting up both his fore-Feet just and even together, like to a Goat, some∣what above the Ground, and so to let them fall even and just twice or thrice together, the true doing whereof will cause him to make a just perfect manage, and a ready and true turn: for the attaining whereof, trot him gently forty or fifty foot in some plain way, then give him a just stop, which he will truly perform, because be hath before perfectly learned the same; let him always keep a steady, pleasant, and perfect hand on the Bridle, then in∣stantly, with a mild Voice, say, Hup, hup, striking him at that instant with his Wand on the right Shoulder, and also with both the Calves of the Legs together, but spur him not, if possibly without it he will advance; and this with a little labour and patient teaching, no doubt but he will attempt to do twice or thrice together, which if he do, then in that instant make much of him (although he did it very meanly) then let him pause a little time, and give him breath, and trot him again in the same manner the like distance of ground, and as before, so gent∣ly
use him again; but if he do not better every time he is taught, he must be still solicited until he do bet∣ter. And after that he can in plain ground perfectly ad∣vance, then teach him gently, upon the hanging knole of a Hill, to bring him perfectly to stop, and run sliding upon his Buttocks or hinder Legs, which is very handsom, beautiful, and graceful for Manage and Turn; and there∣fore let him do it before he is taught any other Lesson then what is shown; and when he will do it upon a soft trot, upon the swift trot, and afterwards upon a soft gal∣lop, and not before, but never upon a swift gallop, until he be perfect both in Turn and Manage. If he advance too high, and not just and even, with a good grace, as he ought, then may the fault speedily be found, and easily amended by immediately correcting him with one even stroke over his Legs, the Wand again order'd and con∣vey'd out of his sight, with a sweet staid hand on the Bri∣dle: Few Tryals will soon amend and perfect what is a∣miss in the Horse. And whereas some appoint many helps for Horses that are harder to turn on the one side than on the other, (al∣though I confess their general Desire is more apt to the left hand than to the right) yet to a Horse of good Na∣ture and perfect shape, a little Art will speedily teach him to teach others. Of Half-turnings, Doubles, Chambetta, Manage, Cou∣reir, &c. It now remaineth to shew when to make the Half-turn, and the Double, the Chambetta, the Manage, to pass a swift Coureir, the Corvet, and such-like. After he is very perfect in those I have set down, he is to make a true and a just half and double turn, which should be in this manner: First, when the Rider hath gently trotted, stopped, and advanced his Horse the length of a short Coureir, let him teach him gently and midly to make the half turn, (beginning always on the right hand) that is, for the Rider to turn him with the help of his left Leg, that his Head may stand that way which
before his Tail stood; it is called a half-turn, because he maketh but half a circle; but if in the turn he set his Head that way it stood at the first, that is a whole circle, and therefore called a whole-turn: But let him first do the half-turn perfect, which must be done by helping him with his Voice and Calf of his Leg, and not at first by any means to have him spurred, if he can be otherwise brought un∣to it, because a Spur is a correction which is not to be u∣sed, but at that instant when he hath committed an Er∣ror, and not while he remains ignorant what to do, by which means undoubtedly, being a sensible Creature, he will perceive his Errors and Offences, whereby with little correction he will easily amend any Fault: Let the Rider never go about to make him despair, but continually en∣courage him; for having formerly attain'd a perfection of a just, even and swift Trot in the Rings, (the very true ground of all other Lessons,) he will easily turn on the right hand, setting his Head that way his Tail stood; the which being perfectly attained, then close it up with ano∣ther half-turn on the same hand, with the perscrib'd helps, setting his Head and all his Body in the same way it was at first; so give him Breath, and make much of him, then mak him do as much on the left hand, and to change from hand to hand, leaning always on the right. 1. In the doing whereof, observe whether he bring on the contrary Leg orderly. 2. That he do it after the first bound of advancing, and after the second or third bound. 3. That the Rider always, as hath been said, begin on the right hand, and end on the right. 4. That after he is perfect in doing of the whole turn, that he make him to do it swiftly and roundly, without stop or stay of the half-turn, and speedily in closing of every whole-turn, and in as narrow a compass as may be. 5. After he is perfect, as aforesaid, give him on each hand three whole turns, whereof let the first be very fair and softly, beginning at the right hand, and ending at the right; in performing whereof, the Rider must always help him with his Tongue, his Rod and his Leg, by which
continual use, before he teacheth him any other Lesson, (which should never be done, unless he be perfect in the Lesson he is learning) so that the Rider shall in the end, with discreet and temperate teaching, bring him to an mirable Perfection, keeping time and measure, that the one be not swifter than the other; if either, the last, which for the most part is as speedy as perfect. Now, to proceed to the Managing of a Horse, the true signification whereof i to be rightly understood, by such as intend to be expert in Horsemanship, for to be ignorant of the Terms, is to be ignorant of the Art; I take it to be a compound word of the word manus and ago, (the Hand in this Art being the Instrument of Instruments) doth guide and govern the Horse to every Action, and there∣fore may fitly be said Mannagere, or as the Italians pro∣perly call it, Maneggiare, which is as much as skilfully to handle. And therefore when the Rider shall exercise the Horse perfectly and gracefully in his place, Trot, Stop, Advance, Double or Single-turn, Coureir, Gallop, Leap, Caperiole, Corvet, Assault, or whatsoever the Hand, being the prin∣cipal Order, or prime moter, may truly and aptly be called Manage; which cannot so rightly be done without the general knowledge of the Practice of the Precepts of the whole Art. And altho' many worthy Horsemen have and do only rest and refer Managing to Galloping, and to bring a Horse to and fro in one self-same path, by half-rest, whole-rest, and when the Rider manageth with a half-rest, causing the Horse, at the end of every managing path, after he hath stop'd, to advance twice together, and at the second bound to turn and rest one bound; doth not the Rider therein exercise the Trot, the Stop, the Advance, and the Turn, which he formerly learned, and according to the same manner? Or, when he manageth with the whole-rest, and turns him at the third bound, or manage him with∣out the rest, by turning him immediately upon the Stop, without any tarryance or rest at all, which only is most common with us in England; and yet the managing of the
half-rest is most necessary for the attaining of perfection; doth not the Rider keep and maintain the Horse in one path, one place of stop, making him keep his Ground, and therein became his Head, Neck, Legs, and his Body just, closing his turn roundly, and in a narrow room, with true time and measure in every action, as he hath been former∣ly taught? How then can managing be properly refer'd to one only Action, when it is the perfect acting of every action and Lesson he hath learned, wherein when the Ri∣der's Horse is most ready and perfect, he may encrease the often doing of his Lessons as he will, and make an altera∣tion of his Turns and Exercises, to find out the truth of his Obedience: and when they are first artificially, and then exactly perform'd, then may the Rider be truly said to be a perfect Manager. Sundry principal things yet remaining to be known, by such as would be Expert or Compleat Horsemen, relating to the True Managing. Now are to be shewed what are the principal things that are to be observ'd in the true Managing of a Horse. He is to be taught his Manage with a soft Trot, and not with a Gallop; my reason is, because thereby he may be at the first sensible of Apprehending what he is to do, and how to do, and that gracefully, by the bowing of his Hoofs behind, by turning round with the Chambetta, which is by holding up the fore foot on the side he should turn, whilst he brings over the contrary Leg, and setteth it not down until he have closed his turn, so as thereby he shall carry both his fore-feet above the ground, not trayling upon the ground, which is disgraceful. When the Rider teaches his Horse (which is after he can stop well) let him advance before, and turn readily on both hands, then with a soft Trot come to the place of stop about twenty paces in length, and make him ad∣vance twice together, and at the second bound turn him on the right hand, (for on that hand you must always be∣gin) helping him so, that by bowing his Hoofs behind, he move his forepart orderly, then immediately in a gen∣tle
manner trot him back to the place that you came from, and then there, after he hath made his stop, at the second bound of his advancing, turn him on the left hand, observ∣ing the like order until the Rider has gone ten or twelve times, and at the last cause him to advance twice together. And thus much for the half-rest, which is to advance thrice, and at the third bound to turn; but be sure he be perfect in one Lesson before you teach him another. In all the Rider's Managings, let his body still accom∣pany his Horse with a good Grace; and when that he hath very perfectly learned his Manage on a soft Trot, then he may manage him with a Gallop, giving him on each hand one single turn; and a little before he is turned, let the Rider hold his Wand on the contrary side, whereby he will know on what side to turn; and at the stop let the Rider make him to advance, either with his Voice, Rod, or Spur, always being careful to give him breath, evermore beginning with a gentle Gallop until he be per∣fect; but I wish the Rider so to use and exercise his Horse, that he may be long Master of a good and perfect Horse, and not to spend or spoil him in a little time, in teaching him needless toys, as some ignorant Persons use to do. After the Horse is perfect in such Lessons as have been formerly taught, and is grown to his full and perfect strength, then let the Rider begin him with a short Cou∣reir, in a fair sandy way, and with a lively Voice put him forward, forcing him to run swiftly, roundly, and smooth∣ly, with a steddy Head, and lightly to stop himself on his Buttocks; then let him turn him on the left hand, and softly pace him to the other end of the Coureir-path, and there stop him, and turn him again to the right hand, and so leave off and rest him. And as this passing Cou∣reir or swift Gallop must never be done or taught, until the Horse be most perfect in all the Lessons; so must it be done very sparingly and seldom, as once or twice in a month at the most. of
Of the Bound, Leap, and Yerk. Some have a desire for to have their Horses to Bound, Leap and Yerk; and tho' I know it might be most axact∣ly done by the best-spirited Horses, but tending altoge∣ther to their destruction, and a matter rather of foolish delight than of any use, I leave it to the disposition of the Owner, wishing much rather to have such dangerous Exercises omitted than practised, unless that there were more plenty of Horses that are fit for the same, or to be spared to be utterly spoiled: Therefore let not my Rea∣der admire that he meets here with so short Remarks on them. Of the Caperiole and Corvette. The difference betwixt these two, is, that the Caperiole, or Goats-leap is always in going forwards, and the Corvette still in one place: These are to be learned and taught by one Order, but neither of them will ever be learned, and therefore never exactly done, unless the Horse be very perfect for to stop, which must be much bending of the Elbow of the hinder Hoofs or Heels of the Horse. Now the Corvette may, in some sort, resemble the dancing of the Bear at a Stake; for when he danceth and pranceth up and down in one place, lifting his forefeet even and just together, seeming to turn if he might be suffer'd; that of the Bear is a proper resemblance of the Corvette, the which is never well done, unless the Horse be just and steady of Head and Body, bowing the hams of his hinder Legs, as if he would sit or slide on his Buttocks. And the Caperiole is in the same manner, but still going forwards, seeming as though he would yerk behind, by advancing his rump, but doth not; and as he doth it forward, so will he do it backward and side-long. Now the Rider need not to teach his Horse either of these, until, as hath been said, he be absolutely perfect in those Lessons formerly mention'd, because these Lessons are only learned by stopping and advancing; the which if he have once perfectly and long practised, the Trot him sundry days upon some hanging Ground, and upon
the knole of the Hill on the same ground; make him to advance twice together, the which he will do, and then help him with the sound of your Lips, to trot two paces farther, and there to stop and advance twice together at the end of the two paces all the length of a hanging Hill downwards, still remembring to cherish him when he does well, and to give him breath, that all his Performances may be done with delight. And if he be helped with the word, saying, hup, and with the Rider's Rod, by strik∣ing him upon the fore-part of his Shoulders, he will go from stop to stop, advancing both the fore Feet and hin∣der Loyns, with time and measure, as often as the Rider pleases, and in such a just, even and staid a manner as will be very pleasant to the Beholders. Now, because I would not have the young Rider to be∣gin any Lesson, but by the direction of a perfect Master, and in that course to continue, so must the young Rider endeavour with himself to know the reason of all his Pra∣ctices; and therefore he must be sure to be present at the Exercises of tho most skilful Horsemen, and, as Solomon saith, Let his Foot tread often upon their Threshold; let him be acquainted with the best Practitioners, and when he is able rightly to judge, and to make a true difference be∣tween good and bad, then let him practise as often as he can, and never doubt to become a Perfect Horseman, so as to be able to teach whatsoever is fit for a Horse to do, and a Young Gentleman to know. Short Infallible RƲLES to be Observ'd and Practis'd by every Horseman. I. DO not gallop your Horse before he can stop well. II. Do not run him before he can stop in his Gallop. III. Do not swiftly gallop him before he can stop. IV. Do not make him a Runner before he be six or seven years old.
V. In all his doings, form the beginning to the end, keep his Reins true, and his Head steady; for this Rule is the Foundation of all other Rules. VI. In the morning early, when he is empty, before he eat any thing, teach and exercise him untill he be per∣fect; and after, twice or thrice in a week is sufficient. VII. In all his teaching and exercise, do it moderately and temperately, and leave him, always after the well-doing of his Lessons, both in breath, and with a good Mouth. VIII. After he is perfect in his Lessons, let the Rider exercise him not always in one place; neither let him confine himself to a just and certain Instant of Time, viz. neither more nor less, neither longer nor shorter. IX. In managing of his Horse, set him not gallop him swiftly at the first, but with a soft pace, and seldom with a gallop. X. In correcting of his Horse for an Error, let him cor∣rect him even in that instant he commits it. Other Ways and Methods for the Management of a Horse for War, Travel, Hunting, Racing, &c. Though these I have mention'd are by all expert Horse∣men accounted the best for training up Horses to their exact Paces and Management, because herein native Free∣dom without Shackles is the most agreeable; yet since some use another method, I shall give a brief account of it, and leave them both indifferently to the choice of those that are to practise herein, viz. When you are to teach your Horse the true Amble, which is the Ground of all others, ead him a wracking pace in your Hand, and observe the Motion he is most in∣clinable to, whether Trot, running, bastard-Amble, or others; so mount and wrack him deliberately, by the help of his Mouth-weeks, with his Snaffle smooth and large; and when you have brought him to some Manage∣ment, to endure the Tramel without stumbling or flying out, form it in this manner: Take strong Packthread, and twist it into a Cord about
the thickness of a Jack-line, so firm, that it will not give the least way; let your Hose or Parts fastned about the Legs be close, soft and immovable, the Backbands light and somewhat broad, that they may not injure the Horse's Fillets; the length of the side-ropes thirty six inches, but if the Horse be of a long reach, you may add an inch; more: Place the Hose on the small of the fore-leg, and upon the hinder just above the Fetlock, made of fine Girthweb made of Cotton, Flannel, or some such-like soft matter, fasten'd with Neats-Leather Tabs of even lengths, uppl'd with Tallow, and divers holes punch'd in them t an even distance, to pass through the Nooses that are to e on the side-ropes, so that by buckling the Ropes, may e drawn up or let out at pleasure, the Tabs not exceed∣ng ten inches, nor the holes in them four; then let the Backband that are to hold up the Side-cords, if you tramel ll your Horse's Legs, be made of Girthweb lined with lannel; but if only two Legs, Filleting or strong Tape; ut observe it keep the side-cords even in a line, without ither twitching up or suffering it to fall, for rising shortens he side-cord, and falling makes it apt to entangle the Horse. The Ʋse of the Tramel. The Tramel well made, proceed to use it in this man∣er, viz. Bring your Horse into a place, that is even free from Clumpers or Stones, and put on the Tramel, your Horse tanding a even as may be, not straining forward nor crimp∣ing inward, but in a just and even proportion; then laying our hand on the Bridle, by gently straining his Head, blige him to move forward, compel him to Amble about he Ground chosen very leisurely, using him with much entleness, and often cherishing him with your Voice, till e eel the Tramel, and begin to be acquainted with what e is to perform: And by this means, though at first he ip or stumble, he will be brought to it more at leisure, nd become familiar with it, if your harshness hinder it ot: Though it is not amiss, if at first, when he begins to arn, you permit the side-ropes to be longer than the
measure mention'd, to prevent his twitchings; but when he begins to be perfect, have them ever of a constant length, lest the over-length render him a slow Ambler, and the over-length cause him to halt or shuffle. Times proper to alter the Tramel, and convenient to Mount, &c. When the Horse can Amble pretty well by hand, change the half-Tramel, by removing it from one side, and placing it on the other; and so, as you see occasion, put on the whole Tramel, till he run pretty swift, without the moti∣ons of snapping or stumbling; then try him upon uncer∣tain and uneven ways, up and down hill, and in such Roads as you think you shall after have occasion to ride him: Then having inur'd him to it, mount on his Back, or set another to do it, whilst you stay his Head, and keep him from any inconveniency, and observe well how he treads: After that your self may mount, cherish him often, and so oblige him to mend his pace, till he move with as much agility as you can desire; and forget not between whiles to put on sometimes the half-Tramel, and at other times the whole, shifting often from one side to the other, lest he forget his pace; and in so doing twice or thrice a day, he will in a month or six weeks be brought to good order, and then without a Tramel ride him on the Road, without chusing the Way: Have with you also a half-Tramel, so that if he faulter, alight, and put it on; which will quickly mind him of what you intend he should do. How to Stop in a full Career, Advance, &c. To make Horses stop in any Pace, draw suddenly your Bridle hand, streight and steady, Hard and Sharp, and by that means, he will stop Firm and Close, also Even: But if after you have drawn in your Hand he turn Side ways, or more Forward, put him to it again, and when he stops well, attempt to make him Advance upon your stop; that is, rise with his fore-Legs, which is done by a sudden clapping the Calves of the Legs close to his Sides, forbearing to touch him with your Spur, but shake your
Whip or Switch over him, which will add much Grace to his stopping; and try him till he well understands, an will perform it. How to oblige Horses to Retire, and endure the various sorts of Bits. To make him do this, draw him back with a steady Rein, that with his Legs lifted up as in a Trot he may retire, he may suddenly retreat three or four Pace; which in case you design a Horse for War, i a very com∣mendable thing, and indeed in any other, on several Oc∣casions; observe herein to make him do it in a direct Line, not turning to one side or the other, nor suffer him o Shuffle in his retiring, but to take his Legs up even and clever from the Ground. Having brought him to this, if you design him so War, take away his Trench and Martingal; leave only the Cavezan of three or four Pieces or Joynts to be used, viz. A Joynt in the middle, and a strong Ring fastned to it, and on each side a Joynt with Rings before them, and fasten to them divers Reins, in drawing of which you may use your Horse at command: Or, if this be too hard, put into his Mouth a common Bit, made up with a French Check, fitted to the proportion of the Horse's Neck, for if it be otherwise, there can be no true Management, for the long Check lifts up the Horse's Head, and the short one pulls it down. Turnings, and strait Turns, &c. The Turnings are when the Face of the Horse in the motion is kept to the Centre or Post, or tho' he wheel with his Buttocks swiftly, yet keeping his Face properly to the Enemy. The strait Turns are when he keeps his Buttocks in∣ward, or close to the Center or Post, and bearing about, makes the Circumference with his fore-part advancing a little toward the Enemy, that would avoid him. To do the first, called the strait Turn, fasten a Rein to a ring in the middle of your Cavezan, about three Yards
in length, and to the other two Rings two Reins some∣what shorter; so Bridled and Sadled bring him to the Post; put the Reins over the Saddle-bolster, and fasten them at such straightness to the Pummel that he may feel them, and if you be then desirous to turn to the Right, take the short Reign on the left hand of the Cavzan, and bring it under the Saddle fore Bolster up to the Pummel, and fix it at such a straitness that may rather sway his Head from, than to, the Post, his Eyes looking to the Right; then let a Stander-by hold the Rein on the right side of the Cavezan at the Post, moving it so, that the fore-part of your Horse's Body may at full turn about; then take the long Rein in your own Hand, causing the Horse to bear his hinder parts inwards, which may be done by gen∣tle striking him on the outward Shoulder and Buttock, as occasion is found, causing him to turn about the Post, his hinder part being the Centre, the fore-part in motion, making the Circumference. Thus use him on the one hand till indifferent perfect, then change the Rein to the other on the outward ring of the Cavezan and so in the like manner teach it him on the other hand; and by so doing Morning and Evening, you may soon bring him to it with a touch of your Switch; observe as he swiftly Trots round, that he place his outward fore-Leg over the inward, and so by degrees, in his Wheeling, oblige him to mend his pace swiftly and distinctly, and in as direct a Compass as can easily or conveniently be performed, till at last he flie with such celerity, that his fore and hinder Legs move equal. This Lesson perfectly learned, Mount, and let one hold the long Rein, and another the short one, and then with the motion of your Hand upon the left Rein of the Cavezan and Bit, bearing him Head from the Post, and by the mo∣tion of the Calves of your Legs and Switch upon his out∣ward Thigh, cause him to bear his hinder parts to the Post, and Exercise him till he perform it as well with you on his Back as he did before; then take away the Cavezan, and Exercise only with the short Rein: And so having brought him to do it at the Post, he will be induced to do it in the open Field without one.
The strait Turn in keeping his Face to the Post as the Centre, and swiftly flying about with his hinder parts, the Reins both long and short, must be used as before, on∣ly you must not give the short Rein any scope, but darw it nearer to the Post; still as he moves about, follow his hinder parts with the long Rein, and observe in his moti∣on whether he bear his hinder Legs one over the other, a is expressed by the four Legs. By the help of your Rod making him bring his hinder part swiftly round the Post, and when he is perfect, Mount him, and cause him to move swift or slow, sometimes at the Post, and then in open Ground, as you see convenient: These will accomplish him for the Wars, Racing, Hunting, and other Matters. Particular Observations on Ambling, Racking and Galioping. Observe as to the fitness of pace, the Horse's motion of his Legs when he takes them from the Ground, and you will perceive in his cross moving what he is properly de∣signed for. Viz. If his hinder and fore Leg move together then at one and the same instant, and in this motion the nearer he takes up his Limbs from Ground, the open∣er, evener and shorter is his Tread; but if he do it unea∣sie, slovenly, and in a shuffling manner, that denotes Stum∣bling, Lameness, or some such Imperfection. If he tread Cross or Narrow, it signifies he is subject to Interfering and will hardly be enduced ever to Tread sure. If he takes his steps Askew and Uneven, it denotes him subject to Faint and Tire, unable to perform long Journeys or hard Service. If he treads Long, it signifies him subject to Strains and Over-reaches: And therefore a moderate even pace, and the clever carrying of a Horse's Legs is to be chosen, that your labour in Teaching may mot be thrown away. But to Particulars. As for Ambling. If you chuse your Horse for Pleasure and Ease, then none is more suitable than this, it being opposite to Trot∣ting; as thus, both the Feet on one side must have equal motion, viz. The far fore Leg and the far hinder Leg
which must move just Even, Smooth and Swift, for if the Horse tread false or a wry, it takes away much of the easiness of his Pace; and if Short, then no more Ground is ridded than if he went a round Foot-pace: If he treads Rough, it denotes Rouling in a shuffling manner, and is a false Pace, which had been taught him by an Unskilful Hand, and he will be apt to fall out of it into a Trot, or in a short time forget it. As for Racking. This is a Pace most used in Hunting or riding Post, be∣ing between a Pace and full Gallop, by some termed a full Speed, yet little differs from Ambling, except in be∣ing more Swift and of a shorter Tread, tho' in Ambling the Ground is better ridded, yet this pace is more easie, and highly approved by many expert Horse-men, who use particularly to teach it, tho' I find no certain Rule to it, but conclude it a Motion natural to most Horses that are brought to the Amble. As for the Gallop, It is most appropriated to the Trotting Horse, for fal∣ling out of his Trot, he has no other pace but the Gallop, as likewise a Horse well used to Racking, will naturally take this Motion; but the Pace is very aukward to be brought to it, although in a while, with good Usage and Gentleness, he may be brought to it; and the reason why this is at first irksome to him, is, because having been train∣ed to a set Pace, when he is forced to a Motion somewhat of the like nature, (tho' much swifter) by straining to swiften his pace, he scambles with his Legs; but in a Month's time understanding the alteration, he will be apt enough to take it with little trouble; however, beware that you Gallop him not too often, nor to Excess, lest it spoil his pace, rendring it hard, coming something near the Trot, by reason of Straining. Observe in the cleverness of Galloping, that your Horse raises his Feet nimbly from the Ground, but not too high, that neither he rouleth or beateth himself, but stretch∣ing
forth his fore-Legs, his hinder Legs keep Time clever∣ly and swiftly, that he cuts not his Knee, nor crosses or strikes one Foot against another, but still leadeth with his far-Foot. If he Gallop short and round, his fore Feet well rising, denotes him Strong, but not Swift, and so consequently fitter for War than Racing If you perceive he takes up his Legs consusedly as if he did it in pain, he will never make a good Galloper, for it denotes the Sin∣news to be shrank, that with little Travel, he'll often be subject to Halting and Lameness. As for the Trot, it i natural to all Horse's; but the loftly prancing Trot is for War accounted the best, and that for Travel that rids most Ground with least pain to the Horse, he taking up his Feet cleverly and even from the Ground without Inter∣fering. The Running Horse, or Racer, how to Manage, Feed, Phy∣sick, bring to the Post-start, &c. Having spoken pretty largely as to what hitherto relate to this noble Creature in many Particulars, I shall now, for the Accomodation of Gentlemen and others, who have much desired it, give Directions Plain, Easie, and with as little Charge as possible, how to Order and Manage a Horse for bringing him to run a Race, or more properly, to be Matched: I know that there were some who aver, It is impossible it should be done under six Months; others allow five, and none of past times under. This I look up∣on as a design not so much to rob a Gentleman of half a Year's Pleasure, as to put him to treable Charges, to the advantage of such who undertake to look to, and order Running-Horse's; and therefore I thought fit to Undeceive such as have been Imposed on, by plainly laying down a nearer, less Chargeable, and more easie Method, altogether as safe and Effectual. Viz. If you design to Match your Horse, consider well the State of his Body, and do it not inconsiderately; and this may be observed in three Particulars. (1.) If he be Foul or Fat, or newly taken from Grass or Soil.
(2.) Note; If he be very Poor or lean by over-Travel∣ig, Infirmity or hidden Cause, you cannot at present di∣scover. (3.) Take notice, if he has had good Usage, moderate Exercise, and be in good Estate and Plight; And from these observe in the first Case, to take a longer time for Keeping, Matching, and bringing him into good Order, fit for Running, which indeed if long, is the most violent of Exercise; in this case get two Months, or if you can something more. In the second Estate of the Horse's Body, you need not take so long a time, especially in case only of Leanness, because the Grease cannot injure him, and you may exer∣cise him with his Feeding, that is, at all seasonable times. In the third Estate, which I consider as a Mean between the other Extreams, he may be Dieted for the Match in a Month or six Weeks. But to come nearer to my purpose, I allow two Months to be a sufficient time to prepare a Horse under any of these Estates of Body to run a Match; and these for the better leading to the end of what I purpose, may properly be divided into shorter Periods of time, viz. The first Fortnights Ordering the Running-Horse, &c. If the Horse be Fat or Foul, newly taken from Grass or Soil, and you have, or intend to Match him, bring him to a clean dry Stable Litter him well, and over Night give him two Quarts of splent Beans and as many dry Oats, Rub him down and Litter him well with dry clean Wheat∣straw, and early in the Morning rouse him, if laid; dip his Bit in Beer and put on his Bridle, dress him and cleanse him in all Parts; if the Weather be cold, have a large strong Body-cloath of Kersey, but in warm Weather Cot∣ton, or such light Matters will do, (for in Heats you must be very careful he take no Cold or Surfeit) fold this well about his Body plaee on his Saddle, bring close the fore-most Girt, but the other leave so loose as to thrust a Whisp between it and the Horse's Body; let your Breast-cloath cover his Shoulders, and washing his Mouth with eer eave him for an Hour, then lead him forth and Rack
him gently in even Ground a Mile or more, then Gallop moderately up some Hill, so Rack or Walk him down a∣gain, then Cool him a little, and ride him to some pleasant River or Spring, and let him Drink, which if he refuses, Exercise him again till he will do it; When he has drank, Rack him Home and put him cool into the Stable fresh Lit∣tered, having first, if possible, made him on the foul out-cast Litter void his Urine and Dung. Being in the Stable, tye him to the Rack, and with hard Whisps let his Legs be rubbed down, and all his Parts the like, taking off his Saddle, and cloathing him warmer or lighter, as the Season requires, so Whisp him round, cleanse his Feet, and throw into the Rack a knop of Hay well dusted▪ to tear whilst he stands on his Bridle, which may be half an Hour; then give him a Quart of the whitest and heaviest Oats, and if he seem desirous of more, you may give him an∣other like quantity, then leave him to his Rest till eleven a Clock; then Visit again, and rub him over gently, give him three Pints of the like Oats, and close the Stable as dark as may be; at two Hours end Visit him again with the like quantity of Oats as before, Rub him gently and remove the Excrements; give him a Bottle of Hay, and leave him for 3 Hours more, if in Summer, but if in Winter, only two and an half; then wash his Mouth and the Muzzle of his Bri∣dle with Beer; Saddle him and bring him forth, having well rub'd him down, then endeavour to make him empty on the old Litter; Ride him forth and give him gentle Breathings by some pleasant River or Meadow, that he may take de∣light in it, but upon a full Stomach Gallop him not up a Hill, left it endanger his Wind; heat him both before and after Water, and in the approach of Dark, bring him home; so by early and late Airings the foulness will be deminished, and the gross Humours dispersed: Use him in Stabling as be∣fore, and visit him three Hours after with a like quantity of Oats; toss up his Litter and let him rest till Morning. Things proper to be observed in Heats, &c. Two Heats in a Week, if they be thorow ones, are suf∣ficient for any State of Body. If the Match be made for
Running on a Tuesday, then let the Heating days be Tues∣day and Saturday in each Week, and the Greatest on the usday: but in rainy slabby Weather, you may shift these days, and chuse those that are fair; or the hours in those days may be changed where necessity requires it: If the Weather be dull, heavy, dripping or cold, it will be con∣venient when abroad, to have a Hood with large Ears on our Horse, to keep out the Rain or Damp, the Nape of it hickned with a Lineing, that the Wet may not easily pe∣ntrae, lest the wet falling on his Ears Neck, or Fillets, sub∣ct him to Diseases, and hinder his Performance; carry him never to Heats before day, nor keep him out after it is dark. Rules for the second Fortnight's Keeping. Use him in Littering, and Dressing as before, only what Hay e has let him take i out of your Hand to be the more Familiar; when he has eaten his portion of Oats, Bridle him, Ride out, Air and Water him, as in the foregoing ortnight; and when you return, you may give him near three pints of Oats; let him take Hay out of your Hand, Litter him well, and so leave him and order him as before: Then observe to make him a Diet-Bread in the following manner. Grind three Pecks of Beans with one of Wheat, dress them through an indifferent fine Rag to a fine Flower, then put Ale. Yest and fair Water to make the Dough; Kneed it exceeding firm, then let it lye till it rise and be∣cme Light, then Kneed it again and make it into six penny Loaves, let them soak well in an Oven, and being hot, turn the Bottoms uppermost and let them cool, and three days after Baking use them in the following order. Cut the Bread into thin slivers, and lay it a while to dry, umble it small among the Oats, and give it the Horse, not exceeding a pound to half a peck of Oats; This do first in the Morning, and about Eleven repeat it again, then let him rest two Hours, and feed him then the like again, and so at distant spaces, as his Appetite best serves him, keeping every thing clean about him; Let his Heats Air∣ings and Waterings be the same, unless in foul Weather,
as I have said; but when he is led to his Heats, give him Oats only, and when he is returned and Fed, put on his Muzzle washed in Beer. This use of the Muzzle is to prevent the Horse from feeding on his Litter, biting or gnawing the Rack-staves or Mainger, licking Loam, and many other Inconveniencies: They may be made of Lea∣ther, Pack-thread, or double Canvas, tho' the latter with Lattice is preferable, the Leather being the worse, by rea∣son of its Scent, yet these must be kept clean, lest offen∣sive smells nauceate and sicken the Horse's Stomach. For the rest of this Fortnight, observe he be duly Cloa∣thed, and Dieted as is requisite according to the Season; then put a new-laid Egg whole into half a pint of new Ale, and oblige him to swallow it, so lead him forth, and cause him to Empty, by smelling to the Litter or old Dung, which will oblige him to it; then Rack him gently for a Mile or two, so by degrees mend his pace till he come to a full Speed, and bring him to the Starting-post, if any such be appointed, or if none, than to some other Post∣near the place where the Race is to be performed, then alight, take off the Body and Breast cloath, place on the Saddie, Mount him, let him smell to, and grow Familiar with the Post, as likewise to the wagling-post, and so run him three quarters Speed, from the beginning of the de∣signed Race, to the end, if you find he will endure it without pain or loss of Wind; but if it be Irksom to him, then slacken your pace, and by degrees he will come to it with Delight; and particularly remark on what Ground he most naturally affects to run, whether Sot, Hard, Smooth, Hilly, Dauk or Dry, and make it to your advantage in the Race. This done, bring him under some Hay or Corn Rick, Hedge, Pit, or dry Ditch, and there scrape off the Sweat with your Glazing-knife, and rub his Ears, Head and Crest, clap on his Cloaths and the Saddle on them, and ride him gently so that he may cool before you bring him to the Stable, but keep such a pace that he may not cool too fast, or all on a sudden: Having Stabled him, tye his Head to the Rack, and having the following Scowring in readiness, give it him as shall be directed.
First Scowring. Take an Ounce and fix Grains of the transparentest Roach-Allom, a pint of Malaga, in which dissolve the Al∣lom; to these put three ounces of Olive Oil very sweet, mix them well together with an ounce and an half of brown Sugar-candy in Powder, these set on a gentle Fire till pretty hot, and upon the Horse's return from the first thorough Heat, give it him in a Drenching-horn, and it will infallibly bring away the Molton Grease and bad Hu∣mours, or other Obstructions that remain in the Body, and wou'd make him unfit for this Exercise. Directions to Order him after the taking this. When you have given the Horse this Scowring, rub him well all over with Whisps and a Curry-comb; follow these with a Brush, and dust him well, then rub him with a dry Cloath till no Sweat appears; put his Cloath on again, and truss under the Cloath warm Wisps, let him fast for the space of two Hours, and keep him in continual motion that he sleep not, that the Humours may disperse and evacuate, then give him a handful of Wheat-ears: If upon handling him under the Ears and near the Heart, you perceive no more Sweat arises, but if he be faint or sick∣ish, after the expiration of the time, toss up his Litter, tke off his Bridle, and let him rest for the space of two Hours, and he will be well again, then give him Wheat∣ears gradually, and rub him down; after that, let him feed on Hay out of your Hand, and an hour after crum three shivers of the Bread mentioned, with a quart of Oats and a pint of split Beans; let him rest after this three Hours; that expired, Visit him again, and before you Dress him, give him a like quantity of Oats, Beans and Bread, then Ride him, his Cloathing being on, a little way, but suffer him not to Water till about an hour and an half after; then wash a pint of Oats in Beer and give them to Cool him, and in so ordering leave him till Morning with a lit∣tle Hay, and continue after, his usual Feedings and gentle Breathings.
Thus having ordered him, observe the other three Heat∣ing days, to improve his Speed, and give him the aforesaid Scowring, and he will be very Pleasant and Lightsom. The third Fortnight, how to Order him. Having thus far proceeded, mingle half a Bushel of the best Wheat, and a like quantity of Beans, grind them very small, so that the Flower be finer than the former, and make it up into Loaves the same way, and it being Baked, after three days cut the Crust away, slice it out and crum∣ble it as before with Oats and Beans the same quantity, and let the feeding be as in the foregoing Fortnight, and his Heats must be more moderate, lest you overstrain him: omit likewise the Scowring, not giving any more after his Heats, lest being empty of Humors, his Body open, cold and watry Humours enter at his Vents and Pores; but when at any time he is moderately heated, bring him home and cool him by gentle Racking before he comes to the Stable, giving him Cordial Balls according to the following Receipt. Cordial Balls for the third Fortnight. Take Carthumus Seeds, Anni-seeds, Fennel-seed, Elecam∣pain Roots and Colts-foot Leaves, each two Ounces, dry them well, that when bruised, they may become a Pow∣der, sift it thorough a Lawn Sieve, add two Ounces of the flower of Brimstone, an Ounce of iorice-Juice, put these into a pint of White-wine, Chymical Oil of Anniseeds, Sugar in Syrup, and Sallad-Oil, each half a pint, and being well mingled, mix them with so much Wheat-flower as they may reduce it to a Paste; make it up into Balls as big as French Wall nuts, or pullets-Eggs; these encrease his Wind, expel Cold, purge away Molten Grease, and produce good sound Flesh; he may take one of these in the Morning, and another at Night, whole, or dissolved in a pint of warm Ale. Rules for the fourth and last Fortnight. This requires more Caution than any of the preceedent, let his Bread therefore be finer than any hitherto, three
pecks of Wheat to a peck of Beans, and Boulted as fine as may be; make it up with the Whites of twenty Eggs, and New-milk instead of Water; let the Oats you give him with it be well Winowed and Sifted, and the split Beans clear from Husks, tho the quantity you give him may not differ from what has been Directed. In the first Week keep the Heating days as before, but in the next, which is the last, bate one of them, so that he may for five days be at ease, to recover his Spirits and Strength, yet you may give him considerable Airings to keep his Wind in good Length, however, give him no Scowring, but the better to expel the Fumes or Vapours, burn Albanum Storax, or Frankinsence, in the Stable, when close shut, on a Cha∣sing-dish of Charcoal; sometimes sprinkle a little Muscadine on his Meat, at least twice a day, and give him once a day hlf a pint of that Wine, with the whites of two or three Eggs beaten in it, omiting the Hay, unless a small quan∣tity after his Heating. The Muzzle may be laid aside the last Week, unless the three days before he Runs, except he be a foul Feeder, and prove to eat his Litter, &c. Let him be well fed before and after Airings. The day before the Wager is to be run, Water as fer∣merly, yet a fourth part of his Meat must be with held, and in your Evening Airing bring him home sooner than usual, even before Sun-set, and this day let him be well Shoo'd, and every thing that is necessary done to him, that nothing may be new to him, or trouble him the day he is to Run. On the Morning the Match is to be run, come early to him, take off his Muzzle and rub him well, especially his Head, Ears, Neck and Withers; make him a Mash with Muscadine, Bran, Oats and Bread, made as directed; if he refuses this, give him dried Oats, and after them a pint of Muscadine, with three new-laid Eggs in it, then wash his Muzzle with the same Wine, lead him out, and endea∣vour all you can to make him Empty; lead him among reaks, Stubble, or the like, let him smell to old Dung, &c. which will provoke him to it, which emptying is a great advantage in Running: You must bring him covered, his
Saddle and Girths lightly on him, that he may not feel any weight; wash his Mouth if he Foam, and gently cherish him with your Hand and Voice, &c. ☞ Note, If you are to Ride with a Person, who, by reason of his being Lighter than your self, or who gives you any advantage, that there must be Way-bits in the case, be sure to order them, that you are not deceived in the Management; so make your Agreement if you can, That he who Rides against you, carries not the Weights in his Saddle, for then they are in a manner as if he carry'd none, and the Disadvantage, is yours, for they neither dis∣advantage the Horse nor Rider, unless great Odds be gi∣ven in the weight of the Riders, which seldom happens; but if he carry them about him, then is the Advantage much to your purpose, for they will both hinder the Horse and his Management. As for the Ground, you must (as I hinted) observe which your Horse takes best when you give him his Heats and Airings, and in the Race chuse the most agreeable, as well as the Place and Opportunity will give you leave, but throw not your self out in being too curious in this matter, if it be not easily gain'd from those that Ride with you, for by such Niceties many have lost topping Matches. Stars, Snips and Blazes for Beautifying a Horse, how to make them. To make a white Star, Snip or Blaze, in a White or Sor∣rel Horse, cut a piece of Led flatted and smoothed pro∣portionable to your Fancy, then the Hair being shaved off in the place intended, open the Skin with a Lancet, so hol∣low, that you may thrust the Led in when dipped in Spike Oil, close it up and anoint it with Oil of Mallards and Cammomil, laying over it a Plaister of Bees-wax; when it has been there four days, take the Led out, clap the skin close, and Anoint it as before, and when the Hair (which it will soon do) grows again, it will be Milk-white. Red Stars on a White Horse are done in the like manner, in forming your Led, shaving and opening the Skin; but you must use to cause the Colour, Oil of Cassia, Soot and
Vermilion, finely temper'd together, and the Lead anointed with it: Take out the Lead at the same days as the former, and anoint the sore place with Ointment of Tobacco and Marsh-Mallows. A black Star in a white Horse, make as the White, only the Ingredients must be Soulters Ink, or Lamb-black, and Oil of Tartar; and in this manner you may make Feathers or Marks on any part of the Body for Beauty and Orna∣ment, tho too frequently used by some, who do it by way of Disguise, that a Horse ill come by, may not be Disco∣ver'd. And thus one Star, Snip or Blaze may be taken out, and one of a different Colour put in. Things to be observ'd when you put your Horse to Grass. Having spoken many times about dry feeding, it will not be amiss for the Horse-man to know how he should be Order'd at Grass for his Health sake, and to keep a comely proportion of Body, for in the knowledge of this there's much Advantage. When he has stood in the House and you intend him for Grass, abate or change his Cloaths, putting him on daily thinner, that by degrees he may be weaned from them, and, in the end, wearing none, take no notice of it, or be pre∣judic'd with Cold, or blasts of Wind abroad. This done, let him Blood twice or thrice, there being a day or two's respit between; give him heartning Meats; by degrees lessen his Allowance; and in the end let him for two or three days before you send him out, feed on Hay alone, and put not any valuable or tender Horse into wet Pastures, where Foggs, Damps, and unwholsom Airs arise, from Fens, Marshes, Ditches, Rivers, Bogs, or the like. However, the better to fortifie him against Sickness or Lameness, give him the following Drink very warm three Mornings and Evenings. The Drink to be given before Grass. Take Bay-berries, Myrrh. Gentian, Aristilochia, and the shavings of Ivory, each an Ounce, bruise them when dryed, so that they may be reduc'd to Powder; give him half an
Ounce at a time in Muscadine, Malago, or for want of it, sweet Wort, a quart of either pretty warm. Thus having fitted him for the Field, put him out in a warm dry day, that the cold weather may seize on him by degrees, so that shutting the Pores, he may be harden'd against it with little damage to himself. How the Horse is to be used when taken from Grass. Observe in taking him up you do it in a dry day, the Horse by the Heat and Air freed from damps or wet; and this is best done about Bartholomew-Tide at farthest, un∣less the Weather be exceeding clear and warm, and then he may run to the first of September, but not conveniently lon∣ger; and for a Week or two after taken up, give him no immoderate Heats, nor over-Travel him, lest you melt his Grease, for the Fat gotten at Grass is exceeding tender, and apt to be dissolv'd by any violent Motion, whereby if the Blood happen to be Inflamed, it will endanger his fall∣ing into mortal Sickness: A day after he is Stabled, bring him forth into the Air, and bleed him well; cleanse his Feet, and Shooe him well, and give him the Drink in pro∣portion before prescrib'd for going to Grass. Other material Direstions. Three days after your Horse is taken from Grass, if th Weather be fair, ride him abroad, and after a gentle Heat, bring him home, smooth down his Hairs and sleek them with Soap rubbed in the Palms of your Hands, but let not any Soap get into his Eyes, Nostrils, or Mouth, cleanse him then with some warm Water and a linnen Cloath; af∣ter that dry him well with a wollen Cloath till no wet re∣main about him: And being thus cleansed from Dust and Filth, cover him as warm as is usual in cold weather, and this will make him Slick and Lively, and seem not to be the same Horse, for his colour will be somewhat alter'd. Blood-letting, on what occasions it ought to be us'd. Opening the Temple-Veins is proper to ease pains in the Head, if caused by cold Rheums, Fevers, Drowsiness,
Clavers, Distempers in the Eyes, and other Maladies pro∣ceeding from afflictions of the Brain, or any Swellings or Inflamations about the Head, or Throat; and for these you may give him some of the Blood to drink mixed with Bay-Salt. Opening the weeping Veins under the Ears is ve∣ry proper to prevent Blindness, and cure Distempers in the Eyes: Opening the Pallate Veins prevents or cures the Lampas, Slavers, Anticor, Yellows, Drowsiness, Surfeit, Tire∣ing, &c. The Vein in the side of the Neck is proper to disburthen the Body of gross blood, ease the Heart of Oppressions, Anticor, Faintings, and the like: Opening the Breast-Vein is proper for Moor-foundring, occasion'd by molten Grease, contracted in the body by hard Riding, preventing Diseases in the Liver, Lungs, and other inter∣nal Parts, and is convenient to be done in any Sprain or Hurt in the Shoulder, to prevent Lameness. Opening the Thigh Veins prevents foundring in the Fore-feet, Screwzing-bone, Mallender, or the like excres∣sential Infirmities. To bleed on the four Shackle-Veins before, is good against the Crown-scab, Quitter-bone, &c. To open the Spur-veins is good against Moor-foundring, Farcine in the Side, Swelling under the belly, or the like. The Toe Veins being open'd, help fretting-foundering, Hoof-bound, or any grief occasion'd by the beating the Horse's Hoof upon any hard stony way. The bleeding the two Thigh Veins behind, ease grief in the Kidneys, swelling in the hinder Legs, Swellings, Scratches, Pissing blood, Foundring, &c. To open the Shoulder Veins behind, prevents pain in the Feet, Foun∣dering, Uneasiness, &c. Open the Flank Veins in case of a Fevor, swelling of the Stones, Poorness, or the Tielt-Worm. The Tail Vein open'd, prevents the Mange, Scab, Itch, and falling off of the Hair. And these blood-lettings pre∣pare a Horse or Mare the better for Physick, and greatly enliven him. What Season is best to let Blood in. If present danger require letting blood you may wave Critical times, and do it immediately, otherwise observe the following days, viz.
The Third and Fifteenth of January. The Fourth and Ninth of February. The Sixth and Tenth of March. The Fifteenth and Twentieth of April. The First and Thir∣teenth of May. The Fifteenth and Nineteenth of June. n July and August, forbear letting of blood, unless on some urgent occasion. In September, bleed the Eleventh and Twenty eighth. October, the Eighth, and Twenty third. November, the Fifth and Sixteenth. And in December, the Fourteenth, Sixteenth and Twenty sixth. These days by the most Skilful, are held to be safer and better than others n sundry regards, but especially in that of the Signs, who then Govern. Viz. Aries, the Head; Taurus, the Neck; Gemini, the Shoulders; Cancer, the Stomach; Leo, the Heart; Virgo, the Guts and belly; Libri, the Reins and Buttocks; Scorpio, the privy Members; Sagitarius, the Thighs; Capricorn, the Knees, Aquarius, the Legs, and Pisces, the Feet. From which, Note, that it is not at any time safe to let Blood in that part at the time the Sign is predominant or go∣verning in it. bservations on a Horse, as to the Brain, Sinews, Veins, re∣lating to Health, Strength, &c. He that will be expert in Ordering a Horse, must not be unskilful in knowing the parts from whence Defects and Diseases chiefly arise; the most material I shall briefly Enumerate. First. Consider the Seat of Life to be in the Brain, Heart and Liver, from whence it contributes to, and disposes every Member, and for that cause, those are called the Three principal Members; to which, some would add a Fourth, viz. The Stones: But that Addition by the wisest Practitioners has been rejected, because if taken away, Life still remains, which it is impossible to do if any of the o∣ther be removed. Secondly. The Sinews, which are these, viz. Two white Sinews or Tendons, beginning at the Nose, and passing through the Neck and Back, branch into the fore-Legs, and end in the hinder Legs, taking their Ligaments in all the
four Feet. Two Sinews called the main Sinews, which descend from the Brain, and passing down the Cheeks, fa∣sten the Jaws. Three from the Shoulder to the first Joynt of the Arms or fore-legs, besides two other great Sinews. Four great Sinews from the Knees to the Pasterns, with the same number in the hinder part above. As well with∣in as without the fore-part of the Breast, are ten Sinews small and great. From the Reins of the Back to the Stones, are four great Sinews or Ligaments, and another great Sinew running to the end of the Tail. To conclude, a Horse has great and small, Twenty Nine; or, as some will have it, Thirty. Thirdly. The Veins through which the Blood Circulates the whole Body, are many; yet seeing they centre in the Liver, the Seat and Fountain of Blood, distributing it in∣to every part; divers are of opinion, that all other Veins in the Horse's Body, are but branches of the Median Vein, proceeding directly from the Liver, and when-ever that is afflicted with Wind, has the Blood corrupted in it, or is subject to any other Infirmity, it afflicts all at once, the whole Body of the Horse. Those Branches that ascend to the Head and upper parts of the Body, are called Ascendants; and those that run down into the Legs and other parts of the Body, Descen∣dants: And through these branches, sleeping and waking, the Blood continues its Course, Ebbing and flowing like the Ocean, by the course of the Moon. The things herein chiefly to be consider'd, are the Branches properly to be open'd, as I have directed in Bloot-letting, Page 64. The Bones that frame a Horse's Body, their Number, and how they are Placed. In the Body of a Horse, the Bones, not accounting the Teeth, which are visible, thus are Numbred, viz. His Head-bones, comprehending the Crooks and handle of Skull, are (although they are compiled of parts and par∣cels of other Bones) likewise two flat handles, which form the Pallate and Fork, or Throat, have Five. His Breast-bone
and his Chine, Fifty two other Bones. His Ribs, long and short, are Thirty six. His fore-Legs and fore-Feet, contain Forty four. The hinder Legs and Feet, Forty. So that the whole Structure of the Body of a Horse, com∣prizing his Teeth, consists of 177 Bones. Of the Four Humours in the Body of a Horse, &c. As Fire, Air, Water and Earth produce and give Life and Nutriment to all Living Creatures, so the Humours, viz. Choler, Blood, Phlegm, and Melancholly, are the principal Agitators in the Bodies of all Creatures, and, as it were, Compose, or at least Preserve them: Choler, by reason of its heat being alluded to Fire: Phlegm, by reason of its Moisture and Coldness, to Water: Blood, by reason of its heat and Moisture, to Air: And Melancholly, through its cold and dryness, to Earth. Choler has its Seat near the Liver, which by reason of its heat and dryness accords with the Blood which has its Fountain in the Liver, and from thence disperseth it self through the Body. Phlegm has its chief Seat about the Brain, which is a principal Seat of Life, and frequently afflicts when out of temper, with Rheums, Colds, Coughs, Catarrhs, &c. Melancholly has its Seat about the Spleen, being the gross and earthly part of the Blood and Choler. As for the Offices and Dispositions of these Humours, they are four; viz. Choler causeth Concoction and voiding of Excrements; Blood Nourisheth the Body; Phlegm gives Motion to the Joynts; and Melancholly disposeth to Apetite, Creating a good Stomach. The Humours or Constitution of a Horses Body to be taken from the Colour, &c. The Humours are to be known, that a Farrier or any skilful Horse-Doctor may the better prepare the Medicine which I am hereafter to prescribe; and this may be done divers ways, and particularly by the Colour of a Horse, Sympathizing with the Humours; viz.
If a Horse be Cole-black, and has nothing of changeable about him, then Choler is predominant in him; and by reason of the great heat in him, he is incident to Inflama∣tions of the Liver, Yellows, and Pestilential Fevers; and in that case he must have suitable Medicines to allay Heat, and purge out the superfluities of Choler; yet these Medi∣cines must not be of a quality too much operating, lest they impair his Strength; for the cholerick Horse, though he be fierce and fiery, has nevertheless no great Strength. If your Horse be Dark or bright Bay, neither scouling Countenance, bad Mouthed, white Flanked, white Fleabitten, white Lyard like, Silver or black with a white Star, white Rash, with a black Foot; then he is Sanguine, and the Disea∣ses to which he is most subject, are the Consumption of the Liver, Glanders, Leprosie, and such other Distempers caused by Infection. Those of this Complexion are very strong and will endure strong Medicine without impairing strength. If these Medicines are not compounded of ex∣traordinary hot Ingredients to over-heat the Blood. If your Horse be perfect White, Yellow, Dun, Kite co∣lour, Mous-dun, or the like in mixture, then is the prevail∣ing Humour in him Phlegm; and such are slow of Nature, subject to lose his Flesh, also to cold Rheums, Head-Ach Coughs, Staggers, and many other Distempers proceeding from cold watry Distillations; and therefore he must have hot Medicines, viz. Simples of a hot and strong working nature, that may effectually operate on the Mass of Phlegm. If a dark Bay colour, having long White Hairs, called Goats-hairs, on his Legs, Russet, Chesnut, Ash-coloured, o Gray; Then Melancholy is predominant, and his Distem∣pers are Inflamations of the Spleen, Frenzies, and other the like dull and Melancholy Distempers, and Require col and moist Medicines; for those of a hot or drying quality are very hurtfull. These Horses are very strong, though they appear no so; and consequently, are fit for fervile Labours; and when you find a Horse mixed with many, or all of these Colours, then he, little or more, (as the Colours are more or less on him of one or the other kind) participates of th
Humours; and Medicines must be temper'd accordingly; as also to the Nature of the Sickness, if it has continu'd ong, and he is enfeebled thereby, then you must not give him over strong Potions: but more of Medicines hereafter. How to prepare a Horse to receive Medicines, if any Distem∣per has seiz'd him. Observe twenty four hours before you intend to admi∣nister the Medicine, (whether Powder, Pills, or Drench, composed of Simples, &c.) that you restrain him from eat∣ng Hay or Straw, or any hard Meats that admit not of easie Digesture, thereby to hinder the Operation of the Physick; and for twelve hours before keep him fasting, for the Emp∣tiness of Stomach gives a free Operation to any Purge, when Fulness hinders greatly the working of any Medicine, much obstructing it, and thereby frequently injuring the Horse, by turning the force of it on the Vitals. The safest Meat to prepare him, is, either Rye, or Wheat Bran, mix'd with white split Beans, Wheat flower mix'd with white Oats, and his Drink, warm Water; into which dust a little fine Bran. What Purgations, with the least Danger, may be given to a Horse. The most Effectual and gentlest Purgations are Pills; but it must be consider'd, as is said, according to the state of the Horse's Body; And, for Example, to make the gen∣tlest Pill against Pestilential or Infectious Diseases. Peel twenty Cloves of Garlick, bruise and well temper them with a pound of fresh-Butter, Roll them up in balls as big as Walnuts, give four or five of them, one soon after another; and if the Contagion have not seiz'd the Heart, Brain, or Liver, it will work it out. Approved Rules to be observ'd by such as either Travel or Ex∣ercise Horses; for want of the due Observation whereof, many excellent Horses have been lost; though hereby they may be kept from Sickness. First, when your Horse is lusty, pleasant and clear in ody, then he is fit for Labour or any Exercise: but if he
be sad, heavy, or dejected in Countenance, do not Labour him until you have found the Cause, and removed it. Secondly, let not your Horse eat any thing for two or three hours before you travel him, and then not much until you come to your Lodging; for baiting at Noon is naught and hurtful, except you rest four or five hours, so as that he may not travel upon a full Stomach, and let his Bit be small, and be sure he never wear a rusty Bit or Snaffle, for fear of the Canker. Thirdly, let your Travel be moderate, except necessity (which cannot be limited) enforce it; then be sure not to let your Horse either eat or drink until he be very cold; and if it be in Winter-time, be sure to cloath his Head and Breast very warm after your Travel; and every Morning either squirt a little Vine∣gar into his Nostrils, or else rub them with Oyl of Bay, with a Cloath nointed therewith fastned to the end of a Stick, and thrust up and down him Nostrils to purge his Head. Fourthly, neither wash nor Water your Horse (especially in the Winter-time) for when he is very hot, to walk him in the cold Air is dangerous, and washing is a speedy Preparative to bring him to some dangerous Di∣sease; for there is no desperate Disease incident to a Horse, but the fame proceeds from the Causes of too much Heat or Cold; and none more dangerous then this. Fiftly, when you travel, alight often from your Horse (if Cause of Necesity enforce not the contrary) and lead him to some place of Grass, Straw, or Brakes, and there stay and whistle until your Horse Piss, which he will hardly do except it be in such places, because the sprinkling of his Water will scald his Legs. Sixthly, if your Horse be very hot, let him not drink cold Water, but rather at some House give him a quart of good Beer, or a pint of Wine; and if you do Water him by the way, let him not drink until he have washed his Mouth, which is done when he thrusteth his Head into the Water, presently pull up his Head which will cleanse his Mouth; and if you are forced to let him drink, ride him so that he may be sure to keep the same Heat he was in before. Seventhly, After his Labour, if you can have a convenient place, let
him wallow himself, for it is no less delightful then com∣fortable to his Body. Eightly, If he happen to fall sick in your Travel (which proceeds commonly either from eat∣ng or drinking too much at a time, or otherwise) give him a pint of Sack or Malmsey, a quarter of a pint of Aqua-ita, with six penny worth of the best Treacle, and a quar∣er of a pint of the best Olive-Oil, brew them well toge∣her, and give him a draught, and then take a new laid Egg, and pull out his Tongue, bruise the Shell, and thrust t into his Throat, and then let go his Tongue; do this wice, then let him blood in the Pallet of his Mouth, and ub it well with Salt, and afterwards order him as he should e in the Stable. Another Excellent way, to the like purpose. If you cannot get Sack-Wine, or Treacle, give him a int of Aqua-Vita, or any other comfortable Water, with wo Eggs, in the form aforesaid, to comfort his Heart. irst, at night give him a good comfortable Mash, if he ill eat it, and clean sweet Provender, such as he will eat; athe his Legs with Butter and Beer, cleanse his Feet, and op them with Caw-dung, and after he is sufficiently fed; ve him plenty of Sweet Litter, shut him dark in the Sta∣e, and early in the Morning let him be throughly dressed d rubbed, and before you ride, two hours, let him eat lf a Peck of old sweet Oats, with a pint of the strongest le, Beer, Malmsey, or White-Wine for his Breakfast. condly, If your Horse be young, that you do travel on (which is the Overthrow of all fine mettled Horses) en you come home, and may let him rest, then let him ke his Ease and bleed; and if you find his Blood hot d dark coloured, spare not to let him bleed until there me perfect Blood; after three or four days keep him th god Mashes, and give him the purging Drink be∣e mentioned, with a pint of White-Wine, an ounce of es dissolved into powder, half an ounce of Agarick,  a spoonful of the Powder of Liquorice, made blood-m, and well brewed together, and let him not drink  Water for four or five days after, and in his Proven∣der
put the Powder of Brimstone, Enula Campana, and Po∣lipodium of the Oak, well mingled together, a spoonful at  time, two or three hours before his Watering, and he wil remain a healthful and sound Horse, if he be thus used ti he be eight years old; for then the chief danger is past. The Order of Curing Horses that are Diseas'd▪ The Causes, the Signs, and the Cure thereof. Of the Ague or Fever in Horses. THE Learned do hold Three gential Kinds: First When the Vital Spirits are inflamed, wherein he is predominant more than Nature requireth. Secondl When the Humours are distemper'd by heat. Thirdl When the firm parts of the body are continually hot,  that the Ague cometh by the excessive heating of the Hors and thereupon a sudden Cold, or by fullness of bad H¦mours, which principally grow from foul, full, and ra feeding, and too much rest; and for that reason it take the Horse either hot or cold, and to keep due hours to mak him shake and tremble as a Man; also we may know ho the same appeareth from the Inflamations of the Stomac which scaldeth and maketh the Tongue raw; there a¦other causes, viz. by spare feeding, not clean feeding, a¦dry feeding, and for want of moderate labour. The Cu shall be when you perceive his dejected Countenance, a that he beginneth to tremble, enforce him into a Heat, a give him this purging Drink: Take a quart of White-Win put therein an Ounce of Aloes small beaten: Of Agar half an Ounce, of Liquorice and Anniseeds half a Dra and some Honey warmed a little on the Fire; and th ride him until he be hot, and let him sweat moderately  the Stable, and take a special care of him; wash his Tong with Allum water, Vinegar and Sage, and give him swe
Straw to eat, and a Gallon of old sweet Oats,; at Nigh give him a good Mash, and the next Night after let him led a quart; and if his Blood be very thick, dark, yei ow, let him bleed two Quarts, and afterwards keep him warm from the Air for three or four days, and give him warm Water to drink, and a little Saliet-Oyl in it, if he will drink it. Another of the same. Let him blood, take of Garmander Four ounces, of Gum-Dragon, and of dead Roses, of each an ounce: Of Oyle live Four Ounce; put them into a quart of strong Ale, and give it warm to the Horse to drink, then ride him un∣il he sweat, and clath him, and keep him warm as afore∣aid. Of the Ague in the Head. The cause of  Disease, proceeds either from cold, or aking of too much heat, or of a raw imperfect Digestion of the Stomach, which proceeds principally also from full and foul fding; for betwixt the Stomach and the Brain s such Assinity, as that they do equally communicate their amage: The Signs are these; The hanging down of his ead, his Eyes will swell and run with Water, and he will orsake his Meat. The Cure is, to let him blood in the allet of his Mouth, and rub it with Salt to make it bleed well; then take a tick with a Linnen-cloath fastened to he end of it, well anointed with the Oyl of Bay, thrust it p and down his Nostrils, thereby to open and purge his ead: Also prfume him with the smoak of Garlick-stalks roken into small pieces: Also air him with the smoak of rankincense, belding the same in a Chafingdish under his Nostrills, with a great Cloath cast over his Head, and let be done Morning and Evening: Keep him with spare yet and moderate Exercise, the which will cleanse his omack, and make it empty, then his brain will not be quieted. Afterwards let him blood, and give him good hes to drink for two days, and no cold water; as I all write down the Causes of some Diseases that are most known to the people; so for those that they are so well quainted with, I shall only set down the Cures.
Of the sudden Sickness of a Horse. The cause is, for that the Heart, which is the Charriot o Life, wherein the Soul of the Horse liveth, wanting the use of the Veins and Arteries, to carry the vital spirit o heat to all the parts of the body, to give the Horse feel∣ling and ability to operation, by reason of some obstructi∣ons of Humours and Cold, which, for want of Heat, can∣not be dissolved, for that the nature of Cold is to bind and conglutinate together, and keep them from their natura Course, proceeding from some violent Exercise, and im¦moderate Feeding and Rest. The sign is, the sudden de¦jectment of his Countenance. The Cure is, to let him blood on both sides of the breast, next the heart, whereby the Veins and Arteries being evacuated and emptied, the▪ may begin to do that office whereunto Nature hath ap¦pointed them: Let him bleed the quantity of two quarts then give him a comfortable drink, to stir up the vital Spi¦rits to actions, viz. Take a quart of the best Sack, and burn it with Grains, Cloves and Cinnamon, and a quarte of a pound of the best Sugr, and burn it altogether with half a pint of Sallet-Oyl, and Four pennyworth of the bes Treale, then ride him very gently till he begin to sweat and so turn him into the Stable, and let him stand  Meats, but beware you do for him there, according t your direction, and be sure you cloath him not too warin for the Drink will throughly warm him, and make hi sweat; let his drink be warm water, wherein boyl Mallow and a handful of Water-Cresses, of Fennel and Parsly-seed, o each an Ounce, and twice in a Morning or Evening, whe he is most fasting, ride him gently a mile or two. Of a Horse that cannot Piss. Take a Pint of white Vinegar, half a pound of Gimgree bruise it small, and wring out the Juice, take a handful  Fennel, a handful of Fox-Gloves, the Leaves or the Flower two ounces of Grommel-seed, and half a pint of sweet Honey stamp them well together, and strain them into Vinegar, le him stand without Meat and Drink Twenty four hours.
Of the Pains in the Head. Take a Pint of Malmsey, Five new laid Eggs, a head of bruised Garlick, small Pepper, Cinnamon, and Numegs beaten fine, give it him to drink three days together, and let him fast five hours after. To bring Hair again. To bring Hair again, take the Dung of Goats, some Honey and Allum,, and the blood of a Hog, boyl them toge∣ther, and being hot, rub the place therewith. Of the Stone and Cholick in a Horse. Take a Pint of White Wine, half a Pint of Burr-seed, and beat them small, two ounces of Pursy-seed, half a hand∣ful of Hop, half a handful of new-set eeks, and ha a handful of Water-Cresses, half an ounce of Black-Soap, and mingle them together, stamp and strain them, but put the Burr-seed and Parsley-seed to it after it is strained, and then warm it, and give it him to drink. Of killing the Fire, either in Burning or Shot. Take Varnish, or Oyl and Water beaten together, and noint the place with a Feather. Of a Horse that stumbleth, which is called the Cords. This is called the Cords: The Cord is a Sinew that reedeth amongst the Sinews, the one end cometh down o the shankle Vein, and so up thorough the Leg, goeth ver the inner side of the Knee, and so over the Shoulder, d so along the Neck by the Wesant, and it goeth over he Temples under his Eye, down over the Snout, betwixt oth the Nostrils, and the Gristle, there knit the length f an Almond; take a sharp knife and cut a slit even at e Top of his Nose, just with the point of the Gristle; pen the slit, and you shall perceive a white string, take  up with a Boars Tooth, or a Bucks Horn, that is crook∣d, or some crooked Bodkin, and twine it about the rait, and cut it asunder; you may twine it so much as
that you may rear his foot from the ground, and then stirch up the slit, and anoint it with Butter, and the Horse doubtless will be cured. Of the Canker. The Cure is, let him blood abundantly in the Veins that be next to the Sore, then take of Allum one pound, of white Coperas a quartern, and a good handful of Salt, boyl them together in fair running water, from a pottle to a quart; this water being warm, put part thereof into a dish, and with a Clout wash the same till it begin for to bleed, and let it dry; then take of Black-Soap one pound, and of uick-silver half an ounce, and incorporate them, till that the Quick-silver be not seen, and always after you have washed the same with a slice, cover the Ulcer with this Medicine till it be whole, but he sure still to let the blood he about the Ulcer for many days together, and when it is killed, then cast upon it the powder of unslack'd Lime, or of Brimstone. Of the Farcin. This Ulcer is not unknown to any that have enjoyed Horses, and yet unknown almost to all; I mean the true cause of this Disease, and the Cure; some say it is a cor∣ruption of Blood, some an outward hurt, as of: pur-gall∣ing, biting of Ticks, Hogs-Lice, or such like; some say an infimity bred in the Breast near the Heart, and in the side Vessel and God near the Stones, many evil humours con∣gealed together, which afterwards disperse themselves into the Thighs, and sometimes into the Head, and do send forth wary humours into the Nostrils, and then it is cal∣led the unning Farcin. Indeed if the true Cause of a Disease be known, the Disease it self is easily cured. The Mange, the Lepsie, and this Disease of the arcin, are most per∣niions to a Horse, for oftentimes it falleth out, that many Horse infected therewith, though they live, and the Di∣sease meth to be healed, yet are they rendred of small or no use: For my own part I conjecture the cause of this Disease grow either from abundance of bad Blood, or by a great Dismper of the Blood, through a violent heat, changed into a sudden cold. To cure this Distemper, first
let him blood on both sides of the Neck, three quarts at least, for it is most certain that the Loyns which is then the Fountain of Blood, is corrupted, and so sendeth the Fume into every part of the Body, as to become loathsome to behold: Then give him this drink; Take a Gallon of fair water, put into it a good handful of Rue, a good spoonful of Hemp-seed, and a handful of the inner Rinde of green Elder, bruise them in a Morter together, and seeth it till it he half consumed, and being cold, give it him to drink: Evermore continue to let him blood in that Vein which is nearest to the sore place, a great quantity, as you see occasion; let his Diet be thin, but very clean and sweet, then take this approved Medicine following; which, though the Disease be never so foul, it will undoubtedly ure it. Take of Herbgrace a handful, Fetherfew a hand∣ful, of Chick-weed of the House, a handful, of Kikswood, a andful, of Heart-Robert, a handful, keep the residue thereof in a Pipkin close cover'd in the earth, stop the mouth thereof close with Herb-grace and Dock-leaves, and a green Turf laid upon it, no air to come in, and every third day untye his Ears and dress it, and so continue it till all the Facine be dead; for undoubtedly at three or four dressings it will kill it; wash all the Hearbs so clean that no durt nor filth be on them: Boyl Cham∣berlye and Bay-Salt, with a little Copper as and Strong-Net∣ties to wash the Sores if need be; but beware of burn∣ing them either with Fire or other Corrosives, for al∣though it may kill the Ulcer, yet being dispersed, it will burn and scorch the Horses skin; for burning doth purse the Skin, and maketh it run together, so as the Horse will never after prosper. I would have you get cases of Leather, fasten'd to a head-stall, made hollow like the shape of a Horses Ears, or make them lank-eared, which thing the Sadlers will help you in; for many times, by long binding, the Ears are spoiled, so as that they must be cut off. After that you see the filthy Ulcer kill'd and dead, yet you must know whether the Blood is still putrified and cor∣rupted, therefore you must at least let him blood, but always in several places; And when you see the Blood fine
and pure, then give him some good scouring Drink, a quart of White-wine, a quarter of an ounce of Rhubarb in very thin sices, and laid in steep all night; an ounce and an half of Alloes in powder dissolved therein, half an ounce of Agarick, an ounce of Sena steeped in the Wine all night, and Three Races of Ginger, sliced and laid also in steep all night, and two ounces of Syrup of Roses; but the Ruburb, Sena, and Ginger, take out of the Wine before you put in the other Simples, and then make it blood warm, and give it the Horse, and so let him rest all that day, giving him nothing but Wheat-Straw at night, and the next day following a Bottle of sweet strong Wort, and a quarter of a pint of Treacle, and keep him warm. After all this wash his Body with Bucklye, and Black-Soap, and after cloath him and give him a sweat, and he will recover. Of the Fistula. This is a filthy Ulcer also, bred from some Ulcer not throughly cured. The Remedy is to search the depth thereof, with a Quill, or some oer Instrument of Lead, for unless you find the bottom it is hard to cure, and having found the bottom, if it be in a place where you may cut with a Razor, make a slit against the bottom, so wide that you may boldly thrust in your Finger, to feel if any Bone or Gristle be perished, or spungy, or loose Flesh, which must be gotten out, then boyl a quartern of Honey, and an ounce of Verdegrease in Powder, stiring it conti∣nually until it look red, then Tent therewith and Boulster with Flax that it get not out; but if the place be where the Tent cannot conveniently be kept in, fasten on each side of the hole a Shoe-makers Thread over the Bolster, to keep the Tent in, renewing it every day until it leave Mattering, and make the Tent lesser and lesser, and sprinkle thereon a little slack Lime: But if you cannot come to tent it to the bottom, then take strong Lye, Honey, Roch-Alom, Mercury, and seeth them together, and apply them to the bottom of the Fistula. If the Fistula be in the Head, take the Juice of Houseleek, and dip a lock of Wool in it, and put the same in his Ears, and use it every day till it be whole.
These Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine; all broken Bones, all Bones out of joint, swaying of the Back, weakness in the Back, Horse-hipped, Horse-stifled. The Bones being placed in their true and proper places, according to the form of the number, you shall first bath the grieved place with warm Patch-grease, or Piece-grease, then clap about it a binding Plaister of Pitch, Rosin, Mastick, and Sallet-Oyl, well mixed together, and molten on the Fire; then fold the Limb hard about with fine Flax, and splint it with broad, flat, strong, and soft Splints, and remove not the dressing for the space of Fifteen days, except that you find the Rowlers to slacken, which is a very good sign, and then you may straiten them again, or if you find the Member to increase in swelling, and that the Rowlers grow straiter and straiter, then you may give the Member eas; for it is a sign that it was rowled too strait before; and thus you shall dress it but twice in Thirty days, or there∣abouts, in which time the Bones will be knit; but if through the breach of Dislocation, you find any gross substance to appear about the grieved place, then you shall twice or thrice a day bath it with Patch-grease, and that will take away the Eye-sore in a short space. Of Leporsie and universal Manginess. The Horse that is infected with this Disease, will be full of Scabs, Rawness, and Survey, continually scratch∣ing. The Cure is, first for to let him blood on one side of the Neck, and give him a quart of New-Milk, and half a handful of the finest powder of Brimstone, throughly strained together, for that will expel the Mange; in all his Provender and Mashes, continued for Five or Six days, give him Brimstone and hot Grains; but if he will not eat it, give it him with Milk, and new Ale-wort: Then the next day let him blood on the other side of the Neck, at each time a good quantity; within two days after let him blood in the Breast-Veins; within the other two days in the Flank-Veins; within two days after un∣der the Tail, so as that he becometh weak therewith: Keep his blood in a Pail, then seeth Chamber-Lye and Bay-Salt
together, and let it be strong of the Salt, then take a quan∣tity of the blood and stir them together, that the same be thick, and let him be rubbed all over with a Pease-wisp when he is hot, and let it dry upon him as much as may be, and the next day more of the same upon the old, that it may be as it were plaistered with the same; the which being done in the Sun, will easily be performed. Af∣ter he hath rested upon the same two days, take Buckly and Black-Soap, being very warm, and wash all his body, d give him a quart of Sack, and half a pint of the best cle to drink; and anoint his body with this same Oint∣ment in every place. Take of Lamp-Oyle a quart, of fine Powder of Brimstone, a pint of the best Treacle to drink, and anoint his Body with this Ointment in every place. Another of the same. Take of Lamp-Oyl a quart, fine Powder of Brimstone a pint, two pounds of Black-Soap, a pint of Tar, a pint of Barrows-Grease, and so much of Soot in the Chimney, a will thicken it; compound them well together, anoint him all over with the same, being very hot, so let it rest till it fall off from him, then when it is all gone, wash him clean with Soap-suds, and throughly dry him, then cloath him and put him into a Sweat, and after dy him again, and keep him warm, and he will be in perfect healh; and remember within a Month after, to let him bleed a ot∣tle at least, give him a Purging Drink, and with your best conveniency put him to Grass. Of the Running of the Frush. The Cure is, pare away the corrupt places, until you see it raw, and where the Issue is, then take a handful of Soot, and as much Salt, and the White of three Eggs, and beat them together, and having made the Shooe hollow, and tacked on, stop the Feet therewith very hard, and re∣new it every day for Seven days, and let not the Horse
touch any wet, and when he is whole, be sure after Tra∣vel to keep that Foot clean from the Gravel. To make a Horse that he shall not Neigh. Tye a Woollen List about the middle of his Tongue, and he shall not Neigh so long as it remaineth. To make a White Mark on a Horse. Take a Tyle and burn it to Powder, take Daisy-Roots, and the Roots of White-Bryer, of each alike, dry them, and make Powder thereof, then shave the place you will have white, and rub it very much with the Powder, then wash the place with this Water: Take a quantity of Ho∣ney-Suckle-Flowers, and a quantity of Honey, and the wa∣ter that Moles have been sod in, and wash the place, and rub it very sore therewith; do this five days, and it will be White. To ripen an Imposthume. Take Mallow Roots, and Lilly Roots, and bruise them, and put into them Hogs-grease, and Lynseed-Meal, and Pla∣ster-wise lay it too. Of a Farcin, or sudden breaking out in any part of the Body. Take this Oyntment, and have it ready in your Stable: Three ounces of Quick Silver, put it into a Bladder; and two spoonfuls of the Juice of imonds and Oranges, shake them together, then take a pound of Hogs-grease, and of Verjuice an Ounce, beat them all in a Dish, and work them throughly together; and take a pound of fresh Hogs-grease, and anoint the same therewith, and slit the same if need be, then wash it, and put into his Ears the juice of Ruge-weed, and he shall recover.
Of sinking a Fistula, or Wind-gall. First sear the Fistula, and then take Rozen, Sheeps-Tallow and Brimstone, boyl them together, lay it on hot with a Cloth, and it will sink down. Of a Wrench in the Fetter-lock, or any other Joynt that is suddenly done. Take of Narvile, and Black-Sope, and boil them together a little on the Fire, and anoint it therewith. Of a Blister. Take the Juice of Ground Ivy, so much Brimstone, a quan∣tity of Tar, and some Alom, and lay it to the Blister. Of a Wind-Gall, that it shall not grow again. When you have cut the Skin, take a Spoonful of Oil-de-Bay, a Spoonful of Turpentine, One pennyworth of Verdi∣grease, the white of an Egg, and a quarter of an Ounce of Red-Lead, boyl them together to a Salve, and lay the same to the place. Of Curing a sudden Hurt. Take Wax, Turpentine, Rozen, and Hogsgrease of the like quantity, and half so much Tarr as any of the other Sim∣ples, melt and boyl them together, and keep it ready for any accident. Lay it Plaister-wise. Of the dangerous Galling of a Horse. Take a Pottle of Verjuice, Two Penny-worth of green Copperas, boyl it into a Pint and half, wah and search the Hole therewith, and fill it with Red Lead, so let it remain three days untouch'd, then wash it with the same, and fill it with Red Lead, this will heal it, though it be galled to the body. Repairing a broken Hoof, to make it grow again. Take of Garlick-heads seven Ounces, of Herb-grace three handfuls, of Allum beaten and fifed, of Barrows-grease that is old Two pound, mingle all these with a handful of Asses-dung, and boyl them together, and anoint the Horse there∣with.
Of Fretting of the Guts. Take in the Morning a quart of good Ale, Four Ounces of Fennygreek, Seven Ounces of Bay-berries, as much Long-pepper, and an Ounce of Ginger, Two handfuls of Water∣cresses, a handful of Sage, another of Mint, beat them al∣together in the Ale, then strain it, and give it him blood-warm; rope all his Legs, and tye him that he lye not down, put him into a sweat, keep him warm, give him no cold Water for Three days after, and feed him with dry Beans and Oats for his Provender. To make a Horse follow his Master. Take One pound of Oatmeal, a quarter of a pound of Honey, half a pound of Lumary, and make a Bag thereof, and bear it about you next your Skin, and labour therewith till you sweat, and wipe the sweat with the Bag, and keep the Horse a day and a night fasting, and give it him to eat, and also use to give him Meal and Bran, and he will follow you. Of Bones out of Joynt. The Cure is, bind all the Four Legs together, and to cast him on his back, and then to hoyst him from the ground with his heels upwards, so shall the weight of his Body cause the Joynt to shoot in again in its right place. Of pulling out of Shivers or Thorns, and of Swelling. The Cure is, to pull it out if it may be seen; but if it swell and cannot, then take Wormwood, Paretory, Bears-foot, Hogs-grease, and Honey, boyl them together, and be∣ing hot, make a Plaister; it is excellent for any Swelling, so also is Wine-Lees, Wheat-Flower and Cummen boyled toge∣ther; and when it is at a head Launce it. Of a Spungy Wart. The Cure is, if it be long enough, to tye a Thread about it very hard, and it will eat it off, or else take it off with a hot Iron. Of the Sinews cut and bruised. Take of Tar, Bean-flower, and Oyl of Roses and lay it hot to the place: Of the same effect are Worms and Sallet-Oyl
fryed together: So is the Oyntment of Worms, which you may have at the Apothecaries. Of the Curb. This is commonly known; the Cure is, take a pint of Wine-Lees, a Porringer full of Wheat-flower, of Cummin half an Ounce, and stir them well together, and being made warm, charge the sore place therewith, running it every day once, for the space of Three or Four days, and when the swelling is almost gone, then draw it with a hot Tron, and cover the burning with Pitch and Rosin molten toge∣ther, and laid on warm, and clap on Flocks of his own colour, and let him rest, and come in no Water for the space of Twelve days. Another for the same. Take an Iron, and make it red hot, and hold it against the Sore as nigh as you may, but touch not the Sore, and when it is warm, then take a Fleam and wet it in Six or Seven places full of Nervil, then take a Spoonful of Salt, and a penny-weight of Verdigrease, and the White of an Egg, and put all these together, and take a little Flax and wet it therein, and lay it to the Sore. Of Wind Galls in Horses. This Grief most Men know. The Cure is, wash the places with warm water, and shave off the Hair, then draw it with a hot Iron, in this manner ▪; that done, slit the middle Line which passeth right down through the Wind∣gall with a sharp Knife, beginning beneath and so up∣wards, half an Inch, and thrust the Jelly out, then take al∣so Pitch and Rozen molten together, lay them on hot, and Flocks upon them. Of the Pipes, or Crutches in Horses. This is a frettish, waterish Matter, bred in the Pasterns of the hinder Legs, sometimes by foul keeping, but prin∣cipally of liquid and thin humours resorting to the Joynt, whereby the Legs will be Swoln, Hot, and Scabby: The Cure is, to wash the Pasterns with Beer and Butter, which being dry, clip away all the Hair, saying the Fet∣terlock,
then take of Turpentine, Hogs-grease and Honey, of all a like quantity, mingle them in a Pot, and put unto them a little Bole-Armony, the yeolks of two Eggs, and as much Wheat-lower as will thicken them, then with a Slice lay it on a Cloth, make it fast to go round about the Pastern, and bind it fast, renewing it every day, let him not come into any wet, but stand still, some will wash it only in Gun-powder and Vinegar. Of the Gravelling of Horses. The Cure is to pair his Hoof, and get out the Gravel, then stop it with Turpentine and Hogs-grease, molten hot, and then with Tow, and beware he come not out of the Stable till he be well. The Ring-bone in Horses. This is a Gristle growing about the Cornets of the Feet. The Cure is, to fire the Sore with the right Loyns from the Pastorn to the Coffin of the Hoof, in this manner, I. I. I. and let the edge of the Drawing Iron be as thick as the back of a good thick Knife, burn it so deep that the Skin may look yellow, then cover it with Pitch and Rozen molten to∣gether, and lay thereon Flocks of the Horses colour: Some will eat it away with Corosives, as the Splent. Of the Crown Scab. This is a filthy stinking Scab, growing about the Cornets of the Hoofs: The Hair will Stair like Hgs bristles, and be always mattering, anoint when the Hair is shaven away, with the Oyntment for the pains, Pag. 76. and keep it from wet. These Infirmities are cured by the following Medicines, viz. Splints, Spavins, Curbs, Ringbones, Quinterbones, and all other Boney Excressions. Take White-Wine, Arsnick, or Mercury, ground to Pow∣der, and make a little slit upon the head of the Excression, the length of a Barly-corn, and down to the Bones: then raise up the Skin with a sine Corner, and put in as much of the Arsnick or Merry as will lye upon Three half pence,
then bind upon the Sore, a little hard Flax-hurds; which done, tie up the Horse's head to the rack so as he may not bite the sore place, and let him stand for the space of Two or Three Hours, for in that time the anguish will be gone, and the Medicine shall have done working, then put the Horse to his Meat, either in the House or Abroad. And the Concression will fall away of it self; which seen, you may heal up the Sore. Of the Retreat or cloging the Foot with the pick of a Nail. The Cure is Turperntine, Wax, and Sheeps-Suet, moulten together, and pour into it melted and hot. Of Surbaiting. The Cure is, take off his Shooes, and make his Feet very clean, but pare no hoof away, then tack a hollow Shooe on, and take half a pound of the Sword of Bacon, a quarter of a pound of White-Soap, a handful of Burnet, a handful of Bay-leaves, and Four or Five Branches of the Herb Grace, stamp them well and fry them, and lay them to his Feet as hot as you can, both under and over the Foot, and keep him dry, re∣newing the Cure as you find occasion, Four or Five times till it be perfected. Another. When you find your Horse to be Surbaited, presently clap to each of his Fore Feet two new laid Eggs, and crush them therein, and then upon the top of them lay good store of Cow-dung, thus stop him four hours, and he will recover. Instructions in giving of Fire, or using of Corrosives, which heal all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistulas, Leprosies, Man∣gies, Scabs, &c. There are two ways to give Fire, the One actual, and the other potential; the First is done by Medicine, either Corrosive, Putrefactive or Caustick. The actual Fire stoppeth the Corruption of Members, and stancheth blood, provided the Sinews, Cords, and Ligaments, be not touch∣ed; the best instruments to Cauterize, or Sear with, are of Gold or Silver; the second best are of Copper, the worst of Iron. The Potential Fires, are Medecines, Cor∣rosive,
Putrefactive or Caustick (as we said before) Cor∣rosives are simple or compound, the simple Corrosives are Roch-Allum, burnt and unburnt, Red Coral, Mercury sublimed, &c. The Compound Ʋnguintum, Apostolorum, Ʋnguintum Aegiptiacum, and Ʋnguintum Coroceum, with others. Medicines Putrefactive, are your Arsnick, Resal∣gar, Chrisocolo, and Aconitum. Medicines which are Cau∣stick, are strong Iye, Lime, Vitriol, Aquafortis, and the like. Corrosives are weaker than Putrefactives, and Pu∣trefactives, are weaker than Causticks. Corrosives work in the fost Flesh, Putrefactives in ihe hard, and Causticks break the sound Skin. Thus you see the Use of these things, you may apply them at your Pleasure; for these cure all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistula's, Leprosies, Maungies, Scabs, and such like poisonous Infections. Of a Horse that is prick'd in the Foot with a Nail, or otherwise. The Cure is, Cut the mouth of the Hole where the Prick is, as broad as a Two-penny piece, and search it clean, for else it may prove very dangerous; for Remedy take a handful of red Nettles, and beat them in a Mortar, put thereinto a spoonful of red Vinegar, and a spoonful of black Soap, and three spoonfuls of Boars-Grease or salt Ba∣con, beat them altogether, and make a Salve thereof, and thrust as much into the Sore as you can, and stop it from falling out; let it take no Wet, and it shall never rot farther. Of the Quitterbone. This is a breaking out of the top of the Cronet of the Hoof, commonly on the inside, and it cometh by pricking or gravelling; it will break forth with Matter, or a little deep Hole like a Thistle. The Cure is, To burn it about with a hot Iron, then take of Arsnick the quantity of a Bean, beaten into fine Powder, and put into the bottom of the Hole with a Quill; stop the mouth of the Hole close with Tow, and bind it so that the Horse may not come at it with his Mouth, and so let him rest that day; the next, if the Hole look black it is a good sign, then tent
it with Hogs-grease and Turpentine molten together with a Tent of Tow, and cover it with a Bolster of Tow dipt in that Ointment; continue so to do till you have got out that Core, and then see whether the loose Gristle in the bottom be uncovered, and feel with your Finger or a Quill if you be nigh it, and if you be, raise it with a crooked Instrument, and pull it out with a pair of Nippers, and then tent it with the said Ointment, and after take Honey and Verdegrease boiled together till it look red, and heal it therewith, laid upon Tow. Take heed that it heal not too soon, or close up too suddenly. Of the Hoof-bound. This is a shrinking together of the whole Coffin of the Hoof, whereby the Tuel of the Foot, which is inclosed in the same, is so pinched, that the Horse is very lame therewith, and especially after Travel; and if you knock them they will sound a little like to an empty Bottle; and if both Feet be not bound, you shall apparently see the Hoof that is bound to be less than the other. This proceeds from suffereing the Feet to remain dry after great Travel. This Distemper is also common with a Fennets or Asses Hoofs, for that only wrinkleth and waxeth brittle, and by reason of the breadth and shallowness of the Hoof it cannot inclose the Tuel of the Foot, to strengthen it; and yet it is the worst Hoof. The Cure is, to open the Feet in the Quarters very much, so that you may well lay your Thumb betwixt the Frush of the Foot and the end of the Coffin where it principally bindeth; then raise both the Quarters of the Hoof with a Drawer from the Cronet un∣to the Sole of the Foot, so deep as you see the Dew come out, and also two rases of each side; then open the Foot within, and let him bleed in the Toes; if it be old, the Blood will be as cold almost as Water, fr that it hath not been fed with Blood, wherein the vital Spirit is; and that is the cause of the Coldness, whereby it i apparent that the Hoof hath not prospered, but starved, for you shall see the Frush and all the sole of the Foot shrunk up and star∣ved; then take away the sole of the Foot, and stop it with
Nettles and Salt bruised gently together, not over hard, renewing it once a day for nine days, and be sure every day twice to anoint the Cronet of the Hoof; and at the end of the nine days, be sure every day twice throughly to anoint the Cronet of the Hoof; and after the nine days end, let his Feet be stopped with Bran and Hogs-grease boiled toge∣ther, bound too as hot as may be, but still anoint the Hoof; and when you put him to Grass, let him not wear any Shooes, but put him into a Marsh or Meadow, deep of Grass, whereby his Feet will be always wet, and so enlar∣ged again. Some ignorantly call this Dry-Foundering, when as all Foundering in that Foot proceeds from the descend∣ing of the Humours to the Feet, and this is clean contra∣ry; and my Experience hath cured Horses that have been Hoof-bound four or five Years. Of the Loosning of the Hoof. Thi Grief, if it be loose round about the Hoof, then it cometh by Foundering; if it be in part, then by some other Anguish: if it come by Foundring, then it will first break into the Fore part of the Cronet, against the Toe; but if a hanel Nail or Prick, then the Hoof will loosen equally round, but if other Hurts, then right about the place that is offended, which should be well observed of the Farrier; but what Cause soever it is, be you careful for to keep open the hle in the bottom of the Foot, and restrain it above with the restrictive Plaister of Bole-Armony, Bean-ower and Fgs, mentioned in the Cure of the Prick of the Foot. You may take three spoonfuls of Tar, a quar∣ter of a pound of osen, a handful of Tansy, a handful of Rue, a handful of Mint, and as much of Southernwood, beat them altogether with a pound of Butter, and one penny-worth of Virgin-wax, and so make a Plaister, and bind it too for seven days, and it will be whole. Of the casing the Hoof. The cure is, Take of Turpentine one pound, of Tar half a pint, of unwrought Wax half a pound, of Sallet-Oyl half a pint; boil all these together, until they be throughly in∣corporated,
then make a Boot of Leather with a strong Sole, fit for the Horse's Foot, to be buckled about the Pastern, then take a good quantity of Flax or Tar, and lay this Salve upon it for to cover the Foot, so as that the Boot may not any way grieve the Horse, renewing it every day until it be whole; then let him stand in the Stable upon a Bed of Cow-dung and Snails beaten together, which will in∣crease the same, for fifteen days, and then put him to Grass. This Ointment should be in a readiness to anoint the Horses. For Foundring, Fretezing, or any other Imperfection of the Feet, or Hoofs of a Horse. First pare thin, open the Heels wide, and shoe large, strong and hallow, then take a good quantity of Cows∣dung, half so much Grease or Kitchinstuff, a like quantity of Tar, and a like quantity of Soot; boyl all these very well together, and when boiling-hot as may be, see you stop your Horses Feet therewith dayly; and it will not only take away all Anguish, but also strengthen the Hoofs, and make them to endure any Labour. But when you journey or travel the Horse, (as Exercise availeth much for this Cure) then put in the aforesaid Stopping cold, the first night after his Labour, and add unto it the White of an Egg or two, for that will take away from the Heat and beating of the former days Labour, and will keep the Frush strong and dry. But in time of Rest, let it be boyling-hot as aforesaid. Now if the Heat be naturally brittle, or by Accident broken, or by the former Infirmity dryed up and strained, then to enlarge it, to make it tough, and to make it to grow swiftly, take of Pigs-Grease, or of Hogs-Grease, of Turpentine, and of Mastick, of each a like quantity, and half so much Lard as of all the rest, melt all but the Turpentine, and being melted, take it from the Fire, and put in the Turpentine, stirring it about till it be well incorporated together; then put it into a Pot; and when it is cold be sure you cover it close. With this Salve twice or thrice a day anoint the Cornets of the Horse's Hoofs, close by the Hair, at the setting on of the Hoof: it will make it shoot fast, and grow rough and large.
For Hurts upon the Cornets of the Hoofs; as, an Over-reach, Stub, or Prick, &c First take of Soap, and of Salt, of each a like quantity, and ixt them together like a Past; then having cut out the Over-reach, or Hurt, and laid it plain, first wash it with rine and Salt, or Beer and Salt, and with a Cloth dry it, hen bind on the mixed Soap and Salt, renewing it once in wenty-four hours; and thus do (if the Wound be great) for three or four days; then having drawn out all the Venom ▪as this Salt will quickly do) take a Spoonful or two of Train-Oyl, and as much Ceruse (which we call White Lead) and mix it together to a white Salve, then spread that upon the Sore Morning and Evening until it be whole, which will be affected suddenly: for nothing doth dry up ooner, nor is more kindly and natural for the breeding of a ew Hoof than this, as you shall find by Experience. To help the Surbating or Soreness of the Feet. When you find your Horse to be surbated, presently lap on each of his Fore feet two new-laid Eggs, and crush hem therein; then upon the top of them lay good Cow∣dung: thus stop them for four hours, and he will recover. Of the Dry Spavin. The Cure is, to wash it with warm Water, and shave off the Hair so far as the Swelling is, then scarifie the place, that it bleed, and take of Cantharides a dozen, and of Eufirbium half a spoonful, break them into a Powder, and boyl them together, with a little Oyl of Bay; and being boyling-hot, with Feathers anoint the Sore and tye his Tail for wipeing it, and within an hour after set him in the Stable, and tye him so that he lye not down that Night (for the rubbing of the Medicine) and within a day after, anoint it with butter, for six days, then draw the ore place with an hot Iron; take a sharp one like a bod∣kin, somewhat bowing at the Point, and so upward be∣wixt the Skin and the Flesh, and thrust it in at the nether end of the middle Line an inch and a half, then anoint it
with Turpentine and Hogs-Grease molten together, and mad warm, renewing it every day once, for the space of nin days: but remember, that after this burning, you take u the Master Vein, which must be done in this manner: Ca the Horse upon some Straw, then having found the Vein mark well that part of the Skin which covereth it, and pul that aside from the Vein with your left Thumb, to the in¦tent that you may slit it with a Razor, without touching the Vein, and cut no deeper then through the Skin, an that longest wise that the Vein goeth, and not above a inch, then wil the Skin return again to the place over the Vein, with a Cronet uncover the Vein, and make it bare  thrust the Cronet underneath it, and raise it up, and put  Shooe-makers Thread underneath, somewhat higher then the Cornet standing, slit the Vein long-ways, that it may bleed  and having bled somewhat from above, then knit it with  sure knot somewhat above the Slit, suffering it to blee only from beneath, a great quantity, then knit up the Vei also beneath the Slit, with a sure Knot, then betwixt thes two Knots cut the Vein asunder where it was Slit, and fill the Hole with Salt, then lay on this Charge. Take half a pound of Pitch, a quarter of a pound of Rosen, a quarter of a pint of Tar, boil them together, and being warm anoint all the inside of the Joint, and clap on Flocks of the Horses Colour, and turn him to Grass, if it may be, ti he be perfectly whole, and the Hair grown again. Another for the same. Cut the Skin over the Veins, as aforesaid, and slit the Vein and cut it as aforesaid, then where the Spavin is high∣est, with a small Chissel of the breadth of a penny, strike off the quantity of an Almond, and no more; then take two penny worth of Verdegrease, another of Narvil, beat them small, and put it into the Spavin, and three days after wash the Corsey, with Bark-water or Vinegar: then take Col∣man and Diaconum upon a Linnen Cloth, and lay it to the Spavin every day, and for seven days after, a new Plaister; then draw it with a hot Iron, as aforesaid, and also a Change, and Flocks, as is before recited.
Of the wet or blood Spavin. This Disease also is commonly known, and some call it the horough Spavin, it is fed by a thin flexible Humour, by the laster Vein. The cure is, to shave off the Hair, and to take p the Vein in every part, as I shall describe in the Cure of he Bone Spavin, and then cut the Vein asunder, and draw it with a hot Iron, charge it and put on the Flocks, and it will perfectly heal and cure it, for I have proved it certain. All these Distempers are cured by the Medicine following. All Watry Eyes. All Blood-shotten Eyes. All Dimness of Sight. All Lunatick Eyes. All Cankers in the Eyes. The Pin and the Web in the Eye. All pearles or Spots. All Fistula's in the Eyes. The Haw in the Eye. Take true Ground-Ivy, which some call Alehoof, or the rdinary Ground-Ivy, and beat it well in a Morter and if it e very dry, drop a little White Rose-water into it, or a little f the Water of the Herb Eyebright, then drain it well into a lean Glass, and with that Juice wash, anoint, or tent the ores in the Eyes at least three or four times in a day: As or the Haws or Haggs in a Horse's Eye, every common mith knows how to cut them away, and that easily. For a Wrench or Sprain in the Pastern. Take a Quart of Brine, seeth it till the scum arise, and hen strain it, and put into it a handful of Tansy, a handful f Mallows, a Sawcer full of Honey, a quarter of a pound f Sheeps-Tallow, beat them together, and set them on the re, till they be well sodden, and then lay it hot to the Taint, and sew a Cloth fast about it, and so let it rest five ays: and if this prevail not, wash the place, and shave way the Hair, saving the fetterlock; scarrifie it, and lay antharides to it, and heal it as the Splint. Of a Horse that is Hipped. The Horse that is hipped, is when his Hip-Bone is out f the right place; it may come by Stripe, Stretch, Slip∣ing, Sliding or Falling; he will go sideling and the low∣ Hip will fall lower than the other. The Cure is speedi∣ly
to take of Oyl de Bay, of Dialthea, of Nerval, of Swines-grease, of each half a pound, melt them together, stirring them continually until they be throughly mingled together, and anoint the sore place against the Hair with this Oint¦ment every day once a day for fifteen days together, and make the Ointment to Sink well into the Flesh, by hold∣ing a broad bar of Iron over the place anointed, to make it enter into the Skin; and if at the end of those days it doth not mend, then slit a Hole downward into the Skin, and inch beneath the Hip-bone, make the hole so wide that you may easily thrust in a Rowel with your Finger, and then with a little broad slice of Iron, loosen the Skin from the Flesh above the Bone, and round about the same, so broad as the Rowel may lye flat and plain betwixt the Skin and the Flesh; which Rowel should be of soft Calves Leather, with a Hole in the midst, like a Ring, having a Thread ty'd to it, to pull out when you would cleanse the Hole: and if the Rowel be rowelled about with Flocks fast ty'd on and anointed with the Ointment of Hogs-grease and Turpen∣tine boiled together, it will draw so much the more. That done, tent it with a long Tent of Flax, dipt in Turpentine and Hogs-grease made warm, and so renew it every day for fifteen days; and before that you dress him, let him be walk'd every day a quarter of an hour, and as it healeth, make the Tent every day less than the other; and as soon as he is whole, draw a hot Iron cross his Loins of eight or nine inches long, right over against the Hip-bone, so as the rowelled place may be in the midst thereof, and burn him no deeper, but so as the Skin may look yellow; then charge all the Skin over all the Buttocks with this Charge: Take of Pitch one pound, of Rosin one pound, of Tar half a pint, boil them together, and being well warmed, spread it with a Clout ty'd to a Stick, clap as many Flocks on the Horse as will stick, that he may travel the more at his own Will. Of Stifling, and Hurts in the Stifler This is when the Stifling-bone is removed from its right place; but if it be not removed, then the Horse is hurt, and not stifled. The Cure is in all Points like to the Shoul∣der-Pight,
saving that the Pins need not to be so long be∣cause the Stifling-place is not so broad; and standing in the Stable, let him have a Pastern with a Ring upon his Fore-leg, and thereunto fasten a Cord, which Cord must go about his Neck, and let it be so much strained as may bring his Fore-leg forward; then the other to keep the Bone from starting out: but if it be but a Hurt with some Stripe or Strain, then the bone will not stand out, but perhaps the place may be swoln, then anoint it with the Ointment last mentioned in the Receipt going before, every day for fifteen days; then rowel him with a heme Rowel, and cleanse the Hole every day, by running the Rowel anointed with the said Ointment. Of Wounds. The Cure is, Take of Turpentine, of Mel Rosarum, of Oil of Roses, of each a Quartern, and a little Unwrought Wax, and melt them together, stirring them together continually; and so use the Tent or Roll, as occasion shall serve. A Receipt for any extraordinary Cold or Cough, or Pursiness in a Horse, which the weak Farrier calls Broken-Winded. I will here set you down the Secrets of my Knowledge, in some ready, easy, approved Receipts, which I never ound to fail. When you find your Horse taken with any extream Cold, or dry Cough or Pursiness (which ignorant Farriers call Broken-winded) you shall take three quarters of an ounce of the Conserve of Elecampane, and dissolve it in a pint and a half of the best Sack, and so give it to the Horse with a Horn, in the Morning fasting, and ride him a little after it; and this you may do divers Mornings to∣gether until you perceive the Infirmity decrease and wast away. The Simple Conserve of Elecampane is of excellent use; it taketh away any ordinary Cold, or Stopping, it omforteth the Lungs, enlargeth the Wind, purgeth the Head of all filthy Matter, and dissolveth many other Ob∣structions, yet is not the best Conserve, nor worketh the best Effect, if the Infirmity be old and dangerous, or if here be any Attainture in the Lungs or Liver, therefore in
that Case you shall fly to the compound Conserve, which is made in this manner: Take the best candy Roots of Ele∣campane that can be procured, and beat them in a Mortar with the Syrup of Coltsfoot till it be brought to a very thin Substance, then with the finest refined Sugar thicken it, till it be reduced to the true Body of a Conserve; then keep it close in a Galley-pot, and use it with Sack. I have known by the daily Use of this Conserve, divers dry (and suppo∣sed incurable) Coughs that have been taken away, toge∣ther with the Heaving of the Body, and the Wind so en∣larged, that albeit the Motion was before swift, like the broken-winded, yet it hath come to a moderate and slow Temper, and the dry Cough which did accompany it hath been quite gone. Now if you find any Difficulty in ma∣king or proving of these Medicines before shewed, or that the Infirmity not being great or dangerous, you may pos∣sibly think a Medicine of less force, and easier to compass would accomplish it; then you shall take of the Syrup of Coltssoot an ounce, of the fine Powder of Elecampane, of Anniseeds, and of Liquorice, of each half an ounce, of brown Sugarcandy an ounce, divided into two parts, then with as much Sweet Butter as will suffice, work all the former Powders, and one part or a half of the Sugarcandy, and all the Syrop into a stiff Past, then divide into two or three Balls, and roll them into a round form, or of the Fashion of an Egg, and after roll them all over in the other half o part of the Sugarcandy, and then give the whole quantity at one time to the Horse in the manner of a Pill, and give them in the Morning fasting; then ride the Horse half an hour after the giving, and let him fast two hours at the least after he cometh in, and let him be warm cloathed, and stopped, and his Limbs well rubbed, especially his Head; let him by no means drink any cold Water, but so as that he may have Exercise after, and let his Exercise be moderate, and not violent; let his Hay be a little sprin∣kled with Water, and his Cats with Beer and Ale; as for the Bread, 'tis of it self moist enough; and let all his Meat be generally well dusted, ited, or chipped, for nothing is more offensive to a Horse than Foulness and Driness,
nor more comfortable than Cleanness, provided that your Corn be not green and unsweet in the Mow or Reek, nor your Hay rank or rotten. Thus you shall do several Mor∣nings till you find Amendment, neither shall you spare any Travel or Occasion, but, having Medicine about you, use it in your Journeying, for this doth not take away any thing to weaken Nature, but adds to the Force thereof. For any dangerous Bots or Maw-worms. Take as much Precipitate (which is Mercury calcined) as will gently lye upon a Silver Two-pence, and lay it on a piece of Sweet-Butter almost as big as a Hens Egg, in the manner of a Pill; and then in the Morning Fasting, the Horse having stood on the Mussel or empty Rack, if it be possible, or otherwise (if the Extremity of the Disease com∣pel you) at any other time, draw forth the Horse's Tongue, and make him to swallow the Pill, then chafe him a little up and down, and after set him up warm, making him fast full two hours after, and it will kill all manner of Worms whatsoever; yet in the Administration hereof, you must be wondrous circumspect and careful, for in the Precipi∣tate there is a strong poysonous Quality, so that by no means there must be taken more than is prescribed, except with good Caution. Again, If you mix the Precipitate with a little Sweet-Butter, as much as a Hasel-Nut, before you lap it up in the great Lump of Butter, it will be the better, and allay much of the evil quality. But this I leave to your own Discretion, assuring you, that there is not any thing comparable to this for this Infirmity. To heal or dry up any old Ulcer or Cancerus Sore. Take Mastick, Frankincense, Cloves, Green Coperas, and Brimstone, of each a little quantity, of Myrrhe double as much as of any one of the other; beat all to a fine Powder, then burn it on a chafing-dish of Coals, but let it not flame; then as the Smoak ariseth, take a handful of fine Lint, or Tow, and hold it over the Smoak, so that it may receive all the Perfume thereof into it; then when it is well per∣fumed, put the Lint into a close Box, and so keep it: When
you have occasion to use it, first wash the Sore with Urine, then dry it, and lastly, lay on some of this Lint, or Tow; and thus do twice a day, and it is a speedy Cure. And as this is sovereign for any Horse, so it is sovereign for any Man also. For any Sore Eyes in Horses. Take the Shells of seven or eight Eggs, and cleanse away from them the Slime, then put those Shells between two clean Tiles, and so lay them in hot glowing Embers, and cover them all over, and on every side, and so let them lie a good space, till that the Shells be all dried, then take them up, and beat the Shells to a very fine fearst Powder, then with a Goose's Quill blow this Powder into the Horse's Eye that is offended with Pin and Web, Film, or any other of those Distempers, and it is a certain Cure; and thus do Morning, Evening, and at Night. But if it be a watery or inflamed Eye, for any Bruise, Stripe, or descending Hu∣mour, then take a spoonfull and a half of fine fearst Pow∣der of White Sugar-candy, and being mixt together with as much May-Butter, (if you can get it, or for want there∣of, the best Sweet-Butter) work both these Powders into a gentle Salve, and therewith anoint the Horse's Eye Mor∣ning, Noon, and Night, for it cleanseth, purgeth, comfor∣teth, and cooleth. For an old Strain or Lameness in the Joints sinewy. Take Boars-Grease, Belearmoniack, Black-Soap, and Nerve-Oil, of each a like quantity, boil them altogether, and then apply it hot to the Grief, rubbing and chafing it in excee∣dingly, and also heating it very well, either with a hot Brickbat or hot Fire-shovel: thus do once a day until the Pain be gone. Of a Back-Sinew Strain, or any other Strain. Take an ounce of Turpentine, and two or three spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, and beat them together in a Bladder, or other vessel, until they come to a perfect Salve; then anoint the
Strain very well therewith, and heat it in, either wih a hot Brick, or else a Bar of Iron; and thus doing three or four times, it will take away the Strain. For any desperate Strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden Parts, or any Fistula, Pole-Evil, or other Impostumation and Swelling. Take a large Earthen Vessel of a Gallon, and almost fill it with the Herb Arsmart and Brooklime equal in quantity, and equally mixt; then put to them as much of the old∣est and strongest Urine that can be got, as will cover the Herbs all over, and fill the Vessel full; then cover the pot close with a Stone, Board, or such like thing, and so let it stand, for this can never be too old. Now when you have occasion to use it for any Grief aforesaid, you shall take an Earthen Pipkin, and put thereinto both of the Urine and of the Herbs, so much as shall be convenient for the Grief, and you shall boil it well upon the Fire: Then if it be for a Shoulder-Strain, you shall take an old Boot, and cut off the Foot, so that you may draw it over the Horse's Foot, and about his Knee, almost to the Elbow of his Shoulder, keeping the nether part of the Boot as close and as strait about his Leg as may be, but the upper part (which covereth all the Shoulders) must be wide and spa∣cious; into this Boot thrust all your Mixture as hot as the Horse can suffer it, and lay it fast and close about the Shoulders, especially before and behind; then driving up the upper part of the Boot, so fusten it to the Main of the Horse, that it may be no means slip down, but keep constant and firm: and thus you must do once or twice a day, till the Grief be gone. As for the Effect thereof you shall find it, for this is the most violent of all Medicines; so that if there be any soul Matter that must come forth, this will in an instant bring it to a Head, ripen, break it, and heal it; if there be no such things, then in as short a time it will drive away the offending Humours, take away the Swell∣ing and give present Ease. Yet would I have you to use this but in Extremity, because for the time the Torment is almost insufferable, and indeed not to be endured but
only by Horses. Now if it be a Fistula, or any such like Impostumation or Swelling, then you may spare the Boot, and only lay on the Medicine in the manner of a Poultis, and it will be as sufficient. Of a False Quarter. This is a Rift most commonly on the inside of the Hoof; it cometh by the evil paring of the Hoof; the Horse will halt, and the Rift will bleed. The Cure is, Cut so much away on the side of the Shooe where the Grief is, so as that the Rift may be uncovered, then open the Rift with a Dra∣wer, and fill it with a Roll of Toe, dipt in Turpentine, Wax, and Sheeps-Suet molten together, renewing it every day till it be whole. When the Rift is closed, draw him betwixt the Hair and the Hoof with a hot Iron overthwart the Place, whereby the Hoof will shoot all downward, and ride him with another Shooe till he be throughly whole. For an Over-reach on the Heel. Take the White of an Egg, and Bole-Armony, mingled to∣gether with a little Flax, and renew it for four or five days. For an upper Taint or an Over-reach upon the Back, Sinews of the Shank, somewhat above the Joint. This is a swelling of the Master-Sinew, which proceeds from this, that the Horse doth over-reach, and strike that Sinew with the Toe of his Hinder-Foot, which causes the place to swell, and the Horse to halt. The Cure is, To wash the place with warm Water, and to shave off the Hair as far as the Swelling goes, and to scarifie every place of the Sore lightly with a Razor, that the Blood may issue orth; then take of Cantharides and Euforbium half an ounce, mingle them together with half a quartern of Soap, and with a Slice spread some of the Ointment over all the Sore, and let him rest for an hour after; let him stand without Litter, and the next day dress him so again; the third day anoint the Sore with Butter, and continue so to  for nine days after; then take three handsuls of Mallows,  of Sage, and a Rose-cake, and boil them in Water,
and when they are soft, put a pound of Butter, and half a pint of Sallet-Oil, to the Water; and being warm, wash the place four or five times together therewith. Of the Nether Joint. This is a Bladder full of Jelly, like to a Wind-gall, not apparent but by feeling, growing in the midst of the Pa∣stern, above the Frush. It proceeds from some Strain, Wrench, or Over-reach; the Nether-Joint towards the Fet∣terlock will be hot, and somewhat swoln. The Cure is, Tye him about the Joint with a List somewhat hard, and it will cause the Bladder to appear to the Eye, then lance it, and thrust out the Jelly; then take the White of an Egg and Salt beaten together with a little Tow, and bind it unto it, re∣newing it once a day for five or six days. Of the Serew, or Serow. This is like a Splint in manner of a Gristle, as great as an Almond; it groweth on the Foreleg. The Cure is, Take an Onion and pick out the Core, and put therein a spoonful of Honey, a quarter of a pound of unslack'd Lime, three penny-worth of Verdegrease, and rost the Onion, and bruise it, and lay it hot, having first cut the Skin. All these Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following: Fe∣vers in general, the Pestilence, the Falling-Evil, the Pa∣se or Shaking-Evil, the Night-Mare, the Hide-bound, all Consumptions, the Breast-grief, all Tiredness, the Loathing of Meat, casting out of drink, all Sursits, the Hungry-Evil, the sick Liver, sick Gall, sick Spleen, sick Kidneys, the Yellows, the Dropsie, Costiveness in the Body, the Bos, all Worms, Pissing Blood, mattering of the Yard, shedding of the seed, Falling of the Yard, Earing of Hens-dung, the falling of the Crest. If the Horse has been brought weak by Sickness, and that you find it proceedeth from some inward Infection, or Corruption of Blood, you shall give him in the Morn∣ing, fasting, two spoonfuls of the Powder of Diapente, well brewed with four spoonfuls of Honey, tost to and fro
in a pint of White-wine, or Muscadine, and Malmesey, and ride him afterwards an hour in the Su; then set him up warm in the Stable, and let him fast an hour; give him such rovender he will eat, and his Hay sprinkled with a little Water. But if his Sickness proceed from any cold Cause, or from any riding and too sudden cooling, or from washing when he was hot, or such like; then you shall give the same quantity of Diapente and Honey in Sack, or other hot Wine in the manner aforesaid: But if his Sickness be less contagious, or that Wine is not ready to be had, then you shall give the same quantity of the Powder and Honey, either in a quart of strong Ale, or a quart of strong Beer, observing all the Instructions formerly decla∣red. Now for as much as this Powder of Diapente may be be many times wanting, or at least hard to be got on the sudden, as we have formerly said, therefore in case of such Extremity you shall take a good handful of Celandine Roots, Leafs and all, and having pick'd and cleansed them, you shall take of Wormwood and Rue, of each half a handful, boil these in a pot of strong Ale or Beer till the full half be consumed, then strain it, and dress the Herbs, and dis∣solve into the drink, half a pound of Sweet Butter, and an ounce and a half of the best Treacle; being no more but lukewarm, give it the Horse to drink in the Morning fast∣ing, and walk him an hour after, then set him up warm, and let him fast another hour; then give him meats as aforesaid: And do this divers Mornings, according to the greatness of his Sickness. Now for this Cure you must by no means for∣get to let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, an hour or two before you give him the first drink, and let him bleed till you see the corrupt Blood change, and begin to look pure; to know which, you shall save the first Blood and the last Blood in two Sawcers, and as they cool they will easily shew you the difference. Now if your Horse happen to fall suddenly Sick upon you as you travel, when there is no Town nor Help near you, then you shall presently alight from his Back, and with a sharp pointed Knife, or Bodkin, or for want of both, with a sharp-pointed strong Tag, you shall let him Blood in the Roo of the Mouth,
amongst the Bars, somewhat near to his uppermost Teeth, and make him bleed well, walking him forward, and suf∣fering him to champ and eat his own Blood; which is very wholsome for him at that time, and almost a present cure. Now if the Blood stanch of it self, (as commonly it will) then you shall presently piss in his Mouth, and so ride him with all Gentleness and Ease homeward; and being set up warm, wash his Mouth and Nostrils with Vinegar, and the next Morning let him Blood in the Neck-Vein, and give him either of the Drenches before prescribed, and no doubt but you may hold on your Journey without danger. Now if in the pricking of the Mouth, you either stick your knife too deep, or else cut the Vein asunder, whereby you cannot stanch the Blood (as many times it happeneth) in this case you shall put some big round piece of Wood into the Horse's Mouth (to keep him from biting,) and then take a little of the fine Down of a Hare's Skin or Cony-Skin, or (for want of them) the fine Lint of any Woollen or Linnen cioth, and hold it hard to the Wound; and it will stanch it, such care being taken, as that it be not to be lick'd away with the Horse's Tongue. For the Malender. This is a Scab growing in the form of Lines or Streaks over the Bend of the Knee, in the inside of the Leg. The cure is, wash it with warm Water, and shave the Scab clean away, then take a spoonful of Soap, as much Lime, and make it into a paste, and spread as much on a Clout as will cover the Sore; bind it fast, renewing it every day for three days together, then anoint the same with Oyl of Roses, to cause the Crust to fall away, and then wash it with Urine, and strow on the powder of Oyster-shells. Another of the same. Take a Barrel'd Herring with a soft Row, and two spoon∣fuls of Black-Soap, half an ounce of Allum, and bruise them together, and lay it to the Sore three days.
Of the Splint. This Soreness is known to most Men: The Cure is, Wash it with warm Water, and shave off the Hair, and lightly scarify all the sore place with a point of a Razor, so as that the Blood may issue forth; then take of Cantharides half a spoonful, and of Euforbium as much, beaten into fine powder, and mingle them together with a spoonful of Oyl de Bay, and then melt them in a little pan, stirring them well together, so that they may not boil over; and being so boiling-hot, take two or three Feathers, anoint all the sore places therewith, and let not the Horse remove from the place for two hours after. Afterwards carry him away, and tye him so that he cannot touch the Medicine with his Lips, and also let him stand without Litter that day and a night, and within two or three days after anoint the Sore with Butter for nine days. Another for the same. Take an Onion and pick out the Core, and put therein a spoonful of unslack'd Lime, and four penny weight of Verdegrease, and half a pound of Lavender-seed, and rost the Onion until it be soft, and then cut the Skin a little, that the Medicine may enter to fret the Malady out, and let the Hair remain, and the Medicine lye to it three days. For Foundring. Before I enter to express the Cure, I would have you diligently to note the cause of this Disease. The Causes of Foundring are either from superfluous and over-much Eating and Drinking, or from immoderate and extreme Labour, or abundance and fulness of Humours. The un∣doubted and infallible Cure is, Garter each Leg immediate∣ly one handful above the Knee, (and with a List good and hard) then walk him, chafe him into a Heat, and being somewhat warm, let him Blood in both the Breast-Veins, 2 or 3 Quarts, and reserve the same, continually stirring it with your hands together, to gather out the clods there∣of: then tae thereof two quarts, of Wheat-flower half a
peck, six Eggs, Shells and all, and of Bole Armony half a pound, of Sanguis Dragonis half a quartein, and a quart of strong Vinegar, mingle them altogether, and charge all his Shoulders, Breast, Back, Loyns, and Fore-legs, there∣with, and walk him upon some hard Ground, suffering him not to stand still; and when that the Charge is dry, re∣fresh it again; and having walked him three or four hours together, lead him into the Stable, give him a little Mash of Malt, and some Hay and provender, and then walk him again, for four or five days, renewing the Charge upon him as it dryeth, so long as it lasteth, and keep it warm, with a thin Dyet: but if you see the Horse to be afraid to set his Hinder-feet to the Ground, and to be so weak be∣hind, as to stand quivering and shaking, and coveting to lie down, Garter him also about the Hoofs, on the Hinder-legs, and let him Blood also in the Thigh-Veins, to the quantity of a Pottle, and so double your Charge in quanti∣ty, and therewith charge both Hinder-legs, Reins and Flanks, and all against the Hair; and if you find him feeble, by drawing so great a quantity of Blood, give him a quart of Malmsey, and a little Cinnamon, Mace, and Pepper, finely beaten into a Powder, made lukewarm, and let him be walk'd and chafed up and down, if he be able to go; but if he be not able, than tie him to the Rack, and let him be hanged with Canvis or Ropes so as he may stand upon the Ground on his Feet, and not suffered to lie down; then pare all his Feet so thin, that the dew come forth, and tack on the Shooes again, Stopping the Feet with Bran and Hogs-grease boiled together, as hot as he can endure it, and wrap them in Cloaths even to the Pasterns, tying the Clouts fast. Let his Diet be thin, and give him no cold Water, and so soon as he is able, let him almost be continu∣ally walked, unless he be so long gone that his Hoofs begin to loose,  that it break forth at the Cronets of the Hoofs; then take two Eggs; as much Bole Armony and Bean-flower as will then the same, and mingle them well together, and make thereof a plaister, such as may close each oot round about, somewhat above the Cronet, and bind the same fast that it fall not away, or be removed for two days togther;
let the Soles of his Feet be cleansed and stopt every day once, and the Cronets but every two days, and not walk'd for loosing his Hoofs: but when he amendeth, walk hi upon some soft Ground fair and softly; but if it break out above the Hoof, then take all the fore-parts of the Sole clean away, leaving the Heels whole, then stop him, and also dress him about the Cronet, as aforesaid; if this Grief (tho it be very dangerous) be espied in time, it may be cured. For the Shoulderpight. This is when the pitch or point of the Shoulder is dis∣placed; which if it be, the point will stick out farther than his Fellow, and the Horse will halt downright. The Cure is, To make him for to swim in a deep Water eleven or twelve turns, to try if he be able to make the Joint to return to his right place, then make two tough Pins o Ash-Wood, of the bigness of your Little-singer, sharp, and thrust in one of the Pins from above downward, so as both the Ends may equally stick without the Skin; and if the Pin of Wood will not easily pass through, make it way with an Iron pin, then make two Holes cross to the first Holes, so as the pin may cross the first pin right in the midst, with a right Cross; the first pin should e somewhat flat in the midst, to the intent the other being round might pass the better without stop, and close the Inster together; then take a piece of a Line, somewhat bigger than a Whipcord, and at one end make a Loop, which being put over one of the pins ends, so as it may lie between the pins ends and the Skin, fasten the least end with a Pack-Needle and Thread unto the end of the Cord, so as it may not slip; but first anoint both the pricks and Cord with Hogs-grease, then bring him into the Stable, and let him rest the space of nine days, but let him lie down as little as you can, and put a Pastern on the Fore-leg, so that it may be bound with a Cord unto the Foot of the Manger, to keep the Leg in the Stable more forward always than the other: and at nine days end pull out the pricks, and anoint the places with Diathea, or Hogs-grease, and turn him to Grass.
For a Frothy Hoof. First with an Instrument make hollow the Extremities of the Hoof on the outside till the principal Vein break: et the Blood run forth, then fill up the Hole with fine Salt and Hurds steeped in Vinegar, and then bind them so that they shall not fall off: This is a sure way to make a hard and a sound Hoof. For the blasting of the Hoof. You must first cut the Hoof round about the out-side, then pull away the Sole of the Foot, then let the part bleed well, then put in a Tent of Whites of Eggs, bind the Foot about with a Band; after two days wash the ore in Vinegar somewhat hot, fill it with fine Salt and Tarta beaten together, cover it with Hurds steeped in strong Vinegar. Probatum est. For a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers. First cut out the dead Flesh, and make a Tent with the White of an Egg, and then wash the part with warm White-Wine, and afterwards anoint the sore place with White sweet Suet. A present Remedy for the Staggers. When you find your Horse distempered in his Head, then take a piece of Woollen Cloth and bind it fast to the end of a stick, being well rubbed with good Barbary-soap, and then put it into both his Nostrils with as much ease as you can, and withall draw it forth very gently again. This is a perfect Remedy. For the Strangles. First, when you see the Strangles growing, prick them under the Throat in the Morning, and after cover the Horse's Head with a Linnen Cloth, and then rub him often under the Throat with Fresh Butter on the sore place. For the swelling of the Fore-legs. This Distemper cometh after great Pains and Labour; the efficient Causes are many, but principally, that he was
travell'd when young, before he was cleansed from his Humours; that he hath been travell'd when he was full; that he might also have too much Rest, and was not kept with moderate Diet; that he fed too much on green Meat; that he washed after Labour, and such like. But if the Horse be naturally fleshly-limbed he will never be free, but as soon as he is cured upon Travel he will swell again, and therefore such Jades should be gelt and put to Cart, and never suffered to get Colt. The Cure is divers; Take of Mallows three or four handfuls, Rose-cake and Sage a hand∣ful, boil them in Water, and thereunto put half a pound of Butter, and half a pint of Sallet-Oyl; being made warm, wash him twice a day for three or four days. Another for the same. Take Hemlock and stamp it, and mingle it with Sheeps-dung and Vinegar, and having made a Plaister, lay it all over the Swelling. Another for the same. Take Wine-Lees and Cummin, and boil them together, and put thereinto a little Wheat-flower, and charge all the Swelling therewith, and walk him often and apace to heat him; and if this will not serve, then take up the great Vein above the Knee, on the inside, suffering him not to bleed from above, but from beneath: If he be clean and lean-limbed, use him, as I have exprest, to a little Butter and Beer warmed, and his Feet well stopped with Cow∣dung is sufficient after his Travel; but if he be so fleshly-limbed that this will not help, cut his Throat, and wash him with his own Blood, and he will never after swell. All these Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine: Impostumes in the Ears. Ulcers in the Nose. All Wens whatsoever. The Colts-Evil. The Swelled Stones. Incor∣ding or Bursting. For any of these outward Remedies or Swellings, you shall take a penniworth of Pepper beaten to fine Powder, a spoonful of Swine-grease, the Juice of a handful of Rue,
two spoonfuls of any Wine Vinegar, and mix them well together; then if the Swelling be about the Horse's Head, Face, or Throat, you shall take Flax-burds, and steep them therein, and stop it hard into the Horse's Ears, and stitch the Tops together with a Needle and Thread, renewing it once in two days, till the Swelling go away: but if it be in any other part of the Body, then with this Ointment you shall anoint the grieved place twice a day, till the Infirmi∣ty consume away. Now for the swelling about the Cods, or Privy-Members, it shall be good before you anoint them with this Ointment, to bathe them with cold Water, as either by trotting the Horse into some deep Pond, or else by taking a pail of cold Water, and dipping a Cloth into the same to bathe, clap and wash the Cods therewith; then drying them with another clean cloth, lay on the Oint∣ment, which is a present cure. For a Grief in the Shoulder, that hath been there a long time. The cure is, Give him a slit on both sides, an Inch un∣der the Shoulder-bones, then with a Swan's Quill put into the slit, blow up first the one Shoulder, and then the other, as big as you can possibly even up to the Withers, and with your hand strike the Wind equally into every place of the Shoulders, and when they are both full, then beat all the windy places with a Hasel Wand over all the Shoul∣ders, then with a flat slice of your Iron loosen the Skin from the Flesh; that done, rowel the two slits or cuts with two round Rowels of Leather with a hole in the midst, that the Matter may issue forth; and let such Rowels be three Inches broad, and so put in, that they may be plain and flat within the Cut: Then take of Pitch, and of Rosin, of each a pound, of Tar half a pint, boil these together, and when it is somewhat cool, draw all the Shoulders very thick therewith; that done, clap on as many Flocks as will stick, of the Horse's colour, and every day cleanse both the Wounds and Rowels, and put them in again, continu∣ing thus for sixteen days; then take them out, and heal up the Wounds with Hogs-grease and Turpentine molten toge∣ther, renewing it until the Wounds be whole; but let the
Flocks lie until they fall off, and let the Horse run at Grass at least half a year. Of the Wrinching of the Shoulder. This may proceed from a Fall, sudden or short Turning, rash running out of some Door, or by some sudden stop, Stripe of a Horse, or such like; which being done, he shall trail his Legs to him close as he goeth. The cure is, To let him blood in the Breast as soon as it is perceived (and the sooner the better) three pints at the least, and to keep all the same blood in a pot, and thereinto put a quart of strong Vinegar, six Eggs broken, shells and all, and so much Wheat-flower as will thicken that Liquor; put there∣into one pound of Bole-Armony, beaten into powder, and two ounces of Sanguis Dragonis, so as the Flower may not be perceiv'd; and if it be too stiff, soften it with Vinegar, then with your hand dab all the Shoulder from the Main downward, and betwixt the fore-bowels, all against the Hair; and let not the Horse remove until the Charge be surely fastned to the Skin; then lead him into the Stable, and suffer him not to lie all that day, keeping him with a spare Diet at least fifteen days together; and let him not remove out of his place, but only lie down all that time, and eery day refresh the Shoulder-point with this Charge, laying still new upon the old; and at fifteen or twenty days end, lead him gently, to see if he be amended; the which if he be, let him rest for the space of two Weeks without Travel: but if he be nothing amended, then rowel him with a Leather-Rowel upon the Shoulder-point, and keep him rowelled for the space of fifteen days, renewing the Rowel, and cleansing the Wound every other day: walk him up and down very gently, always turning him on the contrary side; and if he go well, pull out the Ro∣wel, and heal up the Wound with Turpentine and Hogs-grease, and a Tent of Flax. But if the Hurt were so vio∣lent, that all this will not help him, then draw him che∣querwise with a hot Iron over all the Shoulder-point, and let him go to plow two hours every day in soft ground, where he may not be over-much strained; and if it be pos∣sible,
let him be let blood as soon as he is hurt in those place Veins, and also in the place, or as near as is possible, where the Hurt or Blow is, to the intent that no Blood do congeal there, or that it tarry till the Flesh become black with the Bruise. Of Splayting of the Shoulder. This also may proceed from some Slip, whereby the Shoulder parteth from the Breast, and so leaveth a Rift or Rent in the Flesh and Film under the Skin, which causeth him also to trail his Leg after him. The Cure is, to put a pair of strait Pasterns on his Fore-feet, and to let him stand still in the Stable; then take of Dialthea one pound, of Sallet-Oil a pint, of Oil de Bays half a pound, of Fresh-Butter half a pound, and melt them together, anoint the grieved place therewith round about the inside of the Shoulder, and within two or three hours after all the Shoulder will swell; then with a Pleam strike all the swel∣ling places, or with a sharp hot Iron, the head whereof should be an Inch long, to the intent the Corruption may run out: and still anoint the same very often with the said Ointment; and if it gather to a head, then lance it where it is most soft, and tent it with Hogs-Grease and Turpentine, and a Tent of Flax. A Remedy for the Spavins. First, When the swelling appears first in the Ham, lift up the Thigh, and strike the principal Vein with a Fleam, let out the Blood till no more will come, and then burn the Spavin long-ways and a cross: Heal the Burn as you do for the swelling of the Pastern. For the Colt-Evil. The Cure is, Wash the Sheath clean with lukewarm Vinegar, draw out his Yard, and wash it also, then. ride him to some running Stream up to the Belly, to allay the Heat, and do this lustily for a quarter of an hour, and so every day after for three or four days.
For the swelling of the Cods. Take strong Vinegar, white Chalk well powdered, stir it well, and make a Paste, mingle good store of Salt fine∣ly powdered, and with that Paste anoint the Cods of the Horse about three times a day; and in few days this will help him. For the Mattering of the Yard. Take a pint of White-Wine, boil therein a Quarter of Roch-Allum, and with a Squirt thrust it up very far into his Yard, squirt the same three or four times, to pierce and cleanse the bottom from the Filth; and thus continue un∣til he be whole. For the Tetter. Before you meddle with the place, first draw Blood from his Legs, and then strike the Veins of his Legs on the outside and on the inside, but not on the place where the Hoof comes forth: then wash the place with White-Wine, and mingle the Juice of Prunella with Powder of Galls and clear Water, and with this Liquor beat the Hogs-grease and Liquid Pitch, that all become like Honey; and having so done, anoint the Tetter, and in six times dressing this will be a present help. How to remedy the Wind-gall. Cauterize or burn them five times with a large hot Iron on both sides, and then open them overthwart only once: but if there be occasion to use it under the Knee on the forepart of the Leg, then you may cure it as they do other Burns. An excellent and speedy Help for the Glanders. First, you must take one ounce of Fenugreek, boil it in Water till it split and open in tw, and after that mingle it with the Decoction, and two pound of Wheat-Meal, and give it the Horse to drink twice a day; keep him fasting. Prob. est.
An excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye. First, take up the Haw with a little Ivory Needle or Pen-knife, and then cut it all away with your Scissers; for the way to cure it, is to cut it out. A rare Medicine for a sore Back, be it never so wrung with a Saddle. Take of Sheeps-dung to the quantity of three parts of your Plaister, and the fourth part of Dry Wheat and Rye-Flower, and mingle them well together, and let them boil a quarter of an hour in good fair Water; and then lay it on warm, and at two or three times applying it will cure the Back. This is a tryed and approved Plaister. An excellent Cure for the Scab and the sore Crupper. You are to take a little Frankincense, Nitre, Tartar, and the Bark of Ash, Vitriol, Verdegrease, and Helebore white and black, Round Birthwort, and stamp them altogether with Yolks of Eggs and ordinary Ale; then after that boil them, and anoint the sore place. For the Foaling of the Yard. The Cure is, To wash the same with warm White-Wine, and anoint it with the Oyl of Roses and Honey mingled to∣gether; then put it up, and with a Codpice or Truss keep it up still, and dress him every day once till he be whole. For the swelling of the Cods or Stones. The Cure is, To let him Blood on both sides in the Flank-Veins, then take of Oyl of Roses and Vinegar, of each a pint, half a quartern of Bole Armony beaten into Powder, mingle them together, and being lukewarm, anoint the Cods therewith with two or three Feathers, and the next day ride him into the Water, and give him two or three turns, then bring him to the Stable, and when that he is dry anoint them again, and so continue until that he be whole, but if the Cods do swell through any Hurt, then cover them with a Charge of Bole-Armony and Vinegar wrought together, renewing till the swelling
go away, and if it will then break, then tent it with Mel∣rosarum, till it be whole. For a bony Excression arising upon any Member of a Horse. Take the Root of Elecampane well cleansed, and wrap it in a Paper and rost it, as you would rost a Warden, in hot Embers, as hot as the Horse can suffer it (for you must not scald him;) after you have rubbed and chased the Excression, clap this thereunto, and bind it on hard, and in once or twice dressing it will consume the Excres∣sion; also in a Morning and▪ Evening you must rub the Excression with the Oyl of Origanum, which will consume away the Hardness. To cure the running Frush, or any Impostumation of the Sole of the Foot; to dry Scratches, Pains, and such Ulcerous Sores. Take old Urine, and burn it with good store of Allum, and keep it in a close Vessel by it self; then take a good handful or two of green Nettles, strong and keen, and spread them on some Plate, or other Vessel, and dry them either before the Fire, or in an Oven (after the Houshold Bread is drawn) then crush and bruise them into a very fine Powder, and look what a quantity of Powder there is, and take the like quantity of Pepper beaten also into a very fine Powder, and mix both very well together; then keep this Powder in a close Bladder, and when you have occasion to use it, first wash the sore place with the Urine and Allum, made very warm, and the Sore throughly scowred; after dry them with a very fine Linnen Cloth; and lastly, strew the Pounce of the Powder, so as that it cover all the Sore. And thus always do after Travel, or once a day in the time of Rest. For Incording or Bursting. This is, when the Rim that incloseth the Guts is bro∣ken, so that they fall into the Cods of the Horse, which is apparent to the sight and feeling: The Cure is, to put four Pasterns on his Feet, as the Horse-gelders use, then bathe his Stones with warm Water and Butter, then raise
them up from the Body with both your hands, being closed by the Fingers fast together; and so holding the Stones in your hands, work down the Gut into the Body of the Horse▪ by stroking it downwards with your Thumbs, one after another, until that side of the Stone be so small as the other▪ then having returned the Gut into its right place▪ take a Woollen List of two fingers broad, throughly anointed with Fresh Butter, and tye his Stones both together, or so nigh his Body as may be, not over hard, but that you may put your finger betwixt; that done, in all Quietness take the Horse away, and let him not be stirred three Weeks after, but the next day unloosen the List, and take it away, and every day after, twice or thrice a day, cast cold Water up∣on his Cods, to make him shrink up his Stones, and at three Weeks or a Months end, to geld him of that Stone; which done, let him eat little, and continually drink Water, but a little at a time, till three Weeks be ended. For the Botch in the Groins of a Horse. The Cure is, To take of Wheat-flower, Turpentine, and Honey, of each a like quantity, stirring it to make a little Plaister, lay it to the Sore to break it, and then lance it, and tent it with Turpentine and Hogs-grease as before. All these Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All Head-ach, all Frenzies, the Lethargy, the Staggers, the Posse, all Colds, all Coughs, wet or dry, all Shortness of Breath, Broken-winded, Rotten Lungs, the Glanders, the Mourning of the Chine, the Lux or Loosness, the Bloody Flux. For any Diseases of the Head, or Lungs, or other parts of them offended, you shall in any wise first let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, and let him bleed much, that is to say, until you see the Blood change, and that the Cor∣ruption comes to Pureness; than stanch the Vein▪ and take of Assafaetida as much as a Hasel-Nut, dissolve it in a Saw∣cer of strong Wine-Vinegar, and then take fine Flax-hurds and dip them therein, then stop the same hard unto the Horse's Ears, and with a Needle and Thread stitch the Horse's Ears together to keep the Medicine in from shaking out; then take of the white cankerous Moss which grows upon
an old Oak-Pail, or other Oaken Wood, a good handful or more, and boil it in a Pottle of new Milk with a Root or two of Elecampane, till one half be consumed; then strain it, and press the Moss exceedingly; it being luke∣warm, give it the Horse to drink fasting in the Morning, and ride or walk him an hour after it gently; then set him up very warm, and having stood an hour, offer him Meat, which he will willingly accept, and eat heartily, and in any case sprinkle, his Hay with Water. But if you shall perceive that he casteth foul and filthy Matter at his No∣strils, then you shall every Morning as soon as you have given him the Drench, take of Auripigmentum, two drams, of Tussilage or Coltsfoot, made it into Powder, as much; then with Turpentine work them to a stiff Paste, and make little round Cakes or Troches thereof, of the compass of a Groat, but much thicker, dry them a little, then set a Chafingdish on the Coles, and laying one or two of thse Cakes thereon, cover them with a Tunnel, such as you un Wine or Beer into Bottles with, that the Smoak may ascend through the same; and having made the Horse's head fast, put the Smoak to his Nostrils, and perfume him well with the same; and though at the first he be somewhat coy to take Smoak, yet having once felt the Smell thereof, he will take such delight therein, that he will of his own Accord thrust his Nose to the same. As soon as you have perfu∣med your Horse, you shall ride him forth till he begin to sweat, then set him in the Stable, and do as aforesaid; and let him not for a great while drink any cold Water either in his Sickness or out of his Sickness, but when you ride him after it; but if your Occasions will not permit you to do so, then you shall heat a Bottle of Water on the Fire scalding hot, and put it into a Gallon or two of cold Wa∣ter, so that it may only take the Coldness away; then cast a handful or two of Ground-Malt, or Wheat Bran into the same, and so give it the Horse to drink. For surfeiting with Provender. When a Horse hath eaten more than the Stomach can well digest, he is in such pain, that he is not able to stand,
but lieth and walloweth, as if he had the Bots. The Cure s, to let him blood, and to draw his Yard and wash it; o put a piece of a Clove of Garlick into it to make him iss; also to rake him behind, and to give him a Glister. For the Navel-Gall. The Cure is, Take Soot of a Chimney and Yeast mixed ogether, and Plaister it once or twice a day. Another Remedy for the same. If it be sore, Take a Pottle of Verjuice, three pennyworth f Green Coperas, boil it to the one half, and wash the Sore herewith, then fill the Sore with Red-lead, and let it not e dressed again in three days; then you may dress him as ou shall see cause. Another Cure for the same. If it be inflamed, cut it round about with a sharp Knife, ven to the Bone, leaving no rotten Flesh behind; then ake the White of an Egg and Salt beaten together, and lay  upon Tow, Plaisterwise, renewing it so for two days ogether; then take a quarter of a pint of Honey, and an unce of Verdegrease, beaten into a Powder, and boyl hem together, stirring them till it look red; and being warm, make a Plaister thereof with Tow, and wash the me with Vinegar or White-Wine, and lay that Plaister on ; and when it begins to heal, scatter the Powder of burnt yster-shells on it, or else the Powder of Honey and slack'd ime, being made in a Cake and bak'd, to dry it up. For the sweying of the Back. The Hurt cometh by some Strain. The Cure is, That s soon as he beginneth to complain, which is by reeling or owling in the hinder Parts, which is easily discerned, en take a Sheeps-skin as hot as it can be taken from the heep, and clap the fleshy side along his Back, and pre∣ently put many Cloths upon it to keep his Back as warm s may be, and so let him continue till it begin to smell, hen prepare another in like manner, and take away the
old, and so continue him for twenty one days at least, and let him not be travell'd, but still rest. And if this help him not, then draw his Back with a hot Iron right out, on both sides of the Edge of his Back, from the pitch of the Buttock, to a handful within the Saddle, and then over∣thwart; and let not the Strokes be deep, but so burned that they may look yellow; then presently lay on this Charge. Of Pitch a pound, of Rosin half a pound, of Bole Armony half a pound, made in Powder, and half a pint of Tar, and boyl them together in a pot, until they be throughly min∣gled; then being lukewarm, daub it very thick upon the Burning, and clap as many Flocks, of the Horse's Colour,  you can make to abide and let them remain till they fall off▪ Of the Guarded of foul swelled Legs, or other Parts, by reason of the melting of the Grease, or other Accidents. First, with the Fleam prick the Parts that are swelled take a pint of Wine-Lees, of Cummin-seeds, and a handful o Wheat-flower, and boil them together till they are thick then apply this Poultis very hot to the swelled parts, re¦newing it but, once in 24 hours; then if this, in two or three times, draw it to a head, lance it and heal it, either with a Plaister of Shoomakers-wax, or else with the Yolk  an Egg, Wheat-flower and Honey beaten all to a Salve. Bu if it do not draw to any Head, and yet the swelling con¦tinue, then take of Pitch a quarter of a pound, and as muc Virgin-wax, of Rosin-half a pound, of the Juice of Hys half an ounce, of Deers-Suet half a pound, of opuleon ha an ounce, of the drops of Storax half an ounce, and boyl all together in an Earthen pot; and after it is cold, tak of Brimstone half a pnd, of Armoniack an ounce and  half, of Costus as much, beat these ino a ine Powder, an then incorporate them with the other, and boyl them a over again very well; which done, pour the whole Mi¦ture into cold Water, then roll it in seven big Rolls, Plai¦sterwise; afterwards spread this Plaister upon a piece  Leather, and fold it about the swelled Member, or lay i upon the swelled part; and if any thing will do it, th will asswage it, and afford much Strength to the Sinew
You shall by no means remove this Plaister, as long as it will stick on. This Plaister, I must confess, is costly, and curious to make; but that Horse that hath it applied to his Limbs when he cometh from Travel, shall never be troubled with swelled Legs, or ever throw out Wind-galls: but if you will not be at such Cost, then continually both before and after the travel of your Horse, when he is in the House, several times in a day, lave and wash his Limbs or other swelled parts, with the coldest and clearest Fountain Wa∣ter that you can get, and sometimes let the Horse stand in some cold clear River for the space of a quarter of an hour or more, up to the Knees, and Lamterels, but no farther. This Medicine, how poorly soever you may look on it, is of in∣finite Vertue; and though I write of cold Water, yet is the Operation hot and fiery; only this you must take to your Remembrance, that this Application appertains not to Impostumations, but to Strains and Swellings, which are without much Anguish. How to keep a Horse or a Jade from Tyring. If you ride on a tyring Jade, and fear the perplexed Cruelty of this lazy Beast, then be sure to carry about you, the fine scarse Powder of Elecampane, and when others Bait their Horses, or that you come to the place of Bait for your Horse, the first thing you are to do, is, to set him up warm, and do not walk him. After he hath been well rubbed, take a quart of strong Ale, and put thereun∣to half an ounce of the Powder of Elecampane, and brew hem together, then give it the Horse with a Horn; which one, tye his head to the Rack, for you need not care for Provender till Night, at which time Provender him well, nd in the Morning give him Oats, or Bread, or both, in  plentiful manner; and being ready to back him, give im the former quantity of Ale, and the Powder aforesaid, nd doubtless you shall find him to travel with great Cou∣age and Spirit. Also, take a bunch of Penny-Royal, and ye it to the Mouth of your Bit, or Snaffle, and you shall nd it very comfortable to him. Now if your Horse, not∣withstanding all this, do happen to tire, then you shall take
off the Saddle, and with the Herd called Arsmart, rub his Back very hard, then laying Arsmart also under the Saddle, so ride him; and if there be any Life in him, it will make him go, for this is a notable Torment, and the Smart is al∣most intolerable. Two sorts of Balls to cure any violent Cold, or Glander, to pre∣vent the Hearts sickness, to purge away all molten Grease, to recover a lost Stomach, to keep the Heart from fainting with Exercise, and to make a lean Horse to be suddently fat. Take of Anniseeds, of Cummin-seeds, of Fenugreek-seeds, of Cathanus-seeds, of the Powder of Elecampane-Roots, two ounces, beat them and searse them to a very fine Powder, then add to them an ounce of the Flower of Brimstone, and take an ounce of the best Juice of Liquorice, and dissolve it in half a pint of White-wine; which done, take an ounce of the Oyl of Anniseeds, and as much of the Syrup of Coltsfoot and of Sallet-Oyl, and of fine Life-honey a pint, then mix all this with the former Powder, and with as much fine VVheat-flower as will bind them together, then work them into a stiff Paste, and make thereof Balls somewhat bigger than French Walnuts, and to keep them in a close Gallipot, for they will last all the Year; and when you have occasion to use it, take one and anoint it all over with Sweer-Butter, and so give the Horse every Morning one, in the manner of a Pill, and ride him a little after it, then feed or water him abroad or at home, according to your usual Custom; and thus do (if it be to prevent Sickness) for three or four Mornings together; but if it be only to take away an Infirmity, then use it at least a Week or more; if it be to take away molten Grease or Foulness, then instantly after his Heat, or in his Heat only; but if it be to fatten a Horse, then use it at the least a Fortnight, or more. Now if you find any difficulty of the giving of it as Pills, you may then at your Pleasure dissolve one of those Balls either into sweet Wine, Beer, or Ale, and so give it the Horse to drink with a Horn. But if it be to fatten, and take away Infirmi∣ty, as, the running Glanders, or such like, then besides these Balls, you may make these second Balls. Take
of Wheat-flower six pound, or more, as shall suffice to make stiff the Paste, then take of Aniseeds, of Cummin-seeds, and of Cathanus, of Fenugreek, and ordinary Brimstone, of each two ounces, Sallet-Oil a pint, of Honey, of White-wine a Pottle, beat those hard Simples to a fine Powder, and searse them, then with the rest make them into a stiff Paste: then of this Paste take a Ball as big as a Man's Fist, and dissolve it into two or three Gallons of clear cold run∣ning Water, by washing and laving the Paste therein, and so give it the Horse to drink at the ordinary watering times, or any other times when he is disposed to drink, which can't be too often; then ride and warm him a little after it: then when the Water is spent, do not cast away the Bottom, but filling up the Vessel again with new fresh Water, dis∣solve another Ball therein; and thus do for fourteen days together at least, and you shall see wonderful Effects arise. This Water scowreth, cleanseth, and feedeth in an admira∣ble manner. And the other lesser Balls first spoken of, purge the Stomach or Intrails of all Foulness, void mol∣ten Grease, fortifie nature so powerfully, that it leaves behind it no evil in the Body. And this small Ball (if it were for my Life) would I give to a Horse immediately upon his drawing forth, if he went either to run, to hunt, to use any violent and extreme Labour. Another way how to fatten a Horse suddenly. There is another way to fatten a Horse suddenly, which I have found to be both good and certain. Take of Ele∣campane, of Cummin-seeds, of Turmerick, of Aniseeds, of each two ounces of  an handful, boyl all these very well with three Heads of Garlick, cleansed and stamped in a Gallon of strong Ale, then strain it well, and give the Horse a quart to drink lukewarm in the Morning fasting, then ride him that he be warm, set him up warm, and thus do for four or five Mornings, and then turn the Horse to Grass (if the time of the Year be suitable thereunto) and he will feed heartily. But if the time of the Year serve not for Grass, then you must keep him in the House, and over and beside the drink before shewed, you shall take
sine Powder of Elecampane, and the fine Powder of Cum∣min-seeds, a like quantity, mix them well together, then every time you give your Horses Provender, which should be at least thrice a day, in the Morning, Noon, and at Night, take half an ounce of this Powder, and sprinkle it by little and little into his Provender, for fear of Offence, till it be all eaten up. And thus do for fourteen days together at the least, and you shall see the Horse prosper in a won∣derful and strange manner. For the Hide-bound. The Cause hereof is sudden Cold after great Heat; when the Pores are open the Cold entereth, and maketh an At∣traction of the Sinews, so as the Horse seemeth to go or Travel with great Grief, his Skin being as if it were starch∣ed, being shrunk and clinging to his Ribs. The Cure is, to let him Blood in both the Flank-Veins, being next the girding place and the Flanks: then take a quart of good White-Wine, and put thereunto three ounces of Sallet-Oyl, and of Cummin, one ounce, of Aniseeds two ounces, of Liquorice, two ounces beaten into a Powder, and give it him warm, then let him be rubbed half an hour together; cover all his Back with a Sack, thoroughly soak'd in a Tub of Water, and the Water wrung out of it, and upon that cast many Cloths, and gird them fast unto him to bring him to a Sweat, which is the only and chief thing to reco∣ver him, and keep him good Mashes, and every day let him be so used; for seven or eight days together, give him much sodden Barly and Beans for his dyet, and green Malt on the floor, and after the eight days let him Blood in the two breast Veins, about a pint; then give him a pint of Sack, and quarter of a pint of Sallet-Oyl, four penniworth of the best Treacle, and ride him until he sweat, then pre∣sently set him in a warm Stable, and cloth him very warm, and at Night give him a good Mash of Malt, with the Pow∣der of Brimslone to the quantity of two spoonfuls. For the Navel-gall. The Cures thereof are divers, and so they ought to be; for Medicine is to be ministred according to the hurt, as it
may be more or less. If it be but galled, take Soot of  Chimney and Yest mixed together, and Plaister it once or twice a day. Another Remedy for the same Sore. Take a Pottle of Verjuice, three penniworth of Green Coporas, boil it to the one half, and wash the Sore there∣with, then fill it with red Lead, and let it not be dressed of three days, then dress it as you shall see cause. Another Cure for the same. If it be so hurt as that it swell and is imposthumed, the lance it on the nethermost part of the Ulcer, so that the matter may have issue downward, for if you should lance it aloft, then the Corruption that remaineth will fistulate; if you find the Concavity deep, then make a Tent of Flax, and dip it in this Salve. Take of Deers-Suet, of Wax, of Tar, and of Turpentine, of each three ounces, and one ounce of Rosin, mingle them together, and tent the Wound; and if you see any dead Flesh grow in it, then sprinkle the Pow∣der of Verdegrease upon it, lay upon the Head of the Tent a Plaister of a Yolk of an Egg, Honey, and Wheat-flower, and thus dress it Evening and Morning until it be whole. For the Worms. They are ingendred of raw and evil Humours: there are three kinds of them; the Worm, the Bot, and the Trenche∣on. The Horse will lie down and wallow when they feed on him, his breath will stink, and his Mouth be clammy. The cure is for to give him a quart of new Milk, and half a pint of Honey in it Blood-warm; this will make them rest from gnawing of him, because they will suck thereof until they are ready for to burst; then the next day give him this drink following. First take a quart of wort, or of the strongest Ale, then take a quarter of a pound of Fern, half a pound of Savin, half a pound of Stonecrop, stamp them, and put them together with two spoonfuls of Brimstone, and as much Chimney Soot beaten to Powder, and let them lye in steep two hours, then strain them and
give the Horse a little warm; bridle him and let him stand six hours after without Meat, and there is no doubt but the Horse will be quiet, for the strength thereof is such to strain the Maw, as that the Bot will not meddle, but fly from it, but it doth not kill them. After these former Drinks given him, the third day make him purging Pills, viz. Take of Lard a pound, laid in Water two hours, take nothing but the clean Fat thereof; stamp it in a Mortar, and thereunto put of Liquorice, of Aniseeds, of Fenugreek, of each beaten into Powder three ounces; of Aloes in Powder two ounces; and of Agarick an ounce, knead them into a Paste, and make six balls thereof, then the Horse having fasted over night, give him the next Morning three of these Pills, anointed with Honey; when you have opened his Mouth, catch hold of his Tongue, hold it fast till you have hurled in one, and thrust it down his Throat with a rolling-pin, and then let his Tongue go till he hath swal∣lowed it down, and so do with the rest, and keep him close from all Air, and at Night give him a strong Mash, and warm Water three days after; my reason is, for that these Balls will purge out of his Body all the Bots and Worms, and all the Humours that breed and cherish them; so as that your Horse will be perfectly clean: and you shall find most of the Bots alive, when they are purged; for you cannot kill them with Medicine, but only make them to forbear vexing of him; for so long as his Maw resteth so bitter and stinking, they dare not feed on it, but upon other Humours. For the Lax. Take of Bean-flower and Bole Armony, of each a quatern, mingled in a quart of red Wine, give it him lukewarm, and after it let him drink warm Water, with Bean-flower, but if that will not stay him, then give him half a penny-worth of Allum, beaten into Powder, and Bole Armony beaten small, in a quart of Milk, stirring them till the Milk be all of a Curd, and this will stop him. For Costiveness or Belly-bound. Take of the Decoction of Mallows a quart, put it to
half a pint of Oil, or so much Butter, an ounce of Benedick Luxature, and pour it into his Fundament with a little Horn, and hold his Tail close to his Fundament, whilst another doth lead him, and so keep it in him as long as you can, and after keep him warm and give him warm Water to drink. All these Infirmities are cured by the Whey only contained in this following Medicine: The Bloody-Rifts, the Bladders, the Lampus, all Mouth-Cankers, all Hurts in the Mouth, The Tongue-hurt, the Paps, the Tooth-ach, the Shedding of Hair, the Fetter-worm. Take of New-Milk three quarts, a good handful of Plan∣tain, let it boil till a full pint be consumed; then take six ounces of Allum, and an ounce and a half of White-Sugar-candy, both being made in a very fine Powder, six spoon∣fuls of strong Wine-Vinegar, and put them into the Milk; then let it boyl a little till it have a hard Curd, then drain it, and save the Whey wherewith you shall first bathe the Sore; the Whey being warm, then with a clean Cloth dry the Sore, and apply this Salve to it: Take of Turpentine, Yellow-wax, and Hogs-grease ground to a fine Powder, and ounce and a half; mix all these together on a soft Fire, and then put it in a Gally-pot, and let it cool; but in case where the Bruise is not broken, nor is likely to break, you must apply another Medicine, which I shall hereafter ac∣quaint you with. For the Yellows. The Cause hereof is also the abundance of bad Humors; the Cure is plain, let him Blood, if you see it yellow, a Pottle, then give him a quart of White-Wine, of Saffron and Fenugreek of each half an ounce, and the juice that is wrung out of two handfuls of Selandine, and being Blood-warm, give it him, and keep him warm, and with good Mashes, wherein put two spoonfuls of the Powder of Brimstone: some will give in this drink the green ordure of Gese strained.
For the Surfeiting and Foundring of the Body. The Cause of this Disease is over-much eating after La∣bour, whilst the Horse is hot, whereby his meat not be∣ing digested, breedeth evil Humors, which by little and little do spread through all the parts of the Body, and at length oppress the whole Body; and so do take away his Strength that he hath not power to go or move his Joints; and being laid is not able to rise, whereby he wanteth the use of pissing, as also of dunging; Nature being over∣come, then doth the Humour rule the body to the destructi∣on of it: In like manner it is when the Horse being over hot with Travel drinketh so much as the Cold thereof suppres∣seth his natural Heat: the Cause is, that the evil Humours being predominant according to their Nature, being heavy and moist, immediately fall down into the Horse's Legs and Feet, and there rest, which if not prevented will make great gordy Limbs, as the Pains, Cratches, Spavins, Wind-galls, casting of the Hoofs, and such like. The Cure here∣of must be according to your Effects that are wrought in the Horse, if it be perceived, as when the Hair beginneth to stare, that he will be chill, and shrug for Cold, for∣sake his Meat, hang down his Head, quiver after cold Wa∣ter, and after two or three days, begin to cough, which is a sign that his surfeit is not great, and that he may be thus cured; Cover his Belly with the Glister last mention∣ed, and give him this Drink: Take of Malmsey a quart, of Sugar half a quatern, of Cinamon half an ounce, of Liquo∣rice and Aniseeds, of each two spoonfuls beaten into ne Powder, put into it Malmsey, and give it him Blood-warm, keep him warm, let him drink nothing but warm water, four or five days after let him Blood. For the Collick. The Cause of this Disease is twofold; either it proceeds from abundance of Humours, or of Wind; and although it be Wind, yet I judge the Original to be an Obstruction of Humours which will not suffer the Wind to have its free passage, which otherwise Nature would expel as his Enemy.
The Cures may be divers, and because it is a Disease that few Farriers understand, I will set down several Cures, that if one thing cannot be speedily procured, another may. First, it may be an Obstruction, for that the Horse hath the stone, and cannot stale: for this take a quart of White-Wine, half a pint of Bur-seed beaten small, two ounces of Parsly-seed, of Smallage, Saxafrage, the Roots of Philapen∣dula, Gromwel-seed, and Broom-seed, of each two ounces, bea∣ten to fine Powder, a good handful of Water-Cresses, and lay them in steep all Night, and in the Morning strain them clean, and put into it a little Black-Soap, and a little But∣ter, and ride him until that he begin to sweat; then set him in a Stable with a great quantity of sweet Litter under him, and cloath him warm, and so let him stand Meatlss seven or eight hours; then give him dried Oats and warm Water, with a quantity of Sallet-Oyl to drink; and before he have this Drink let him fast all Night. Another Cure for the same. Take a pound of Malmsey, of Cloves, Pepper, Cinamon, of each an ounce, of Sugar half a quartern, and give it the Horse lukewarm, and Labour him upon it an hour that be dung and stale, keep him to warm Water; but if he be a stoned Horse, there is not any better thing than for him to have his full desire with a Mare. Another for the same. If you think that it proceeds chiefly from Wind, it may be so occasioned when he is ridden hot and set up cold; he will pine away, and forsake his Meat; keep him empty all Night, in the Morning take a quart of White-Wine, four ounces of Fenugreek, seven ounces of Bayes, as much Cor Pepper, an ounce of Grains, an ounce of Ginger, two hand∣fuls of Water-Cresses, a handful of Sage, a pound of Sea-green, and wring out the Juice; Another of Mint, stamp them and put them into a pint of White-Wine, and let them stand on the fire till they boyl, strain them out, and give it him Blood-warm with a little Honey.
For Surfeiting with Provender. When a Horse hath eaten more than his stomack can well digest, he is in such pain, as that he is not able to stand, but lyeth and walloweth as if he had the Bots, the danger whereof I have written. The Cure is, to let him Blood, and to draw his Yard, and wash it, put a piece of a Clove of Garlick into it, to make him piss; also to rake him be∣hind, and give him a glister with the Water of Sodden-Mallows, Fresh-Butter and Sallet-Oyl; keep him harm, and let him eat very little for four or five days. These Infirmities are cured by the following Medicine: All Con∣vulsion of Sinnews, all Cramps whatsoever, your Neck-crick, the Shoulder-Splat, all swelled Legs, the Over-reach of the Back-Sirew, all Wind-Galls, Wrenches in the nether Jins, all Bruises unbroke, all Strains whatsoever. Take strong Vinegar or Patch-grease, or Peece-grease, of each a like quantity, and boyl it on the Fire; then with Wheat-Bran make it into a hot Poultis; and being so warm as the Horse may endure it, apply it twice a day to the grieved place; but in case that the soreness be where you cannot bind any Poultis unto it, then you shall only take Patch-grease, and being molten very hot, with the same bathe the Horse twice a day, and give him very moderate Exercise before and after his dressing; it will not only take away all Pain and Anguish, but also remove all Swellings, Guordings, or any other Sore whatsoever. For the Wens or Knobs in the Body. The Cure is, Take of Mallows, Sage, and Red-Nettles, of each a handful, boyl them in running Water, put there∣unto Butter and Honey a little quantity, and when that the Herbs are soft, bruise them, then put thereunto of Oyl of Bayes two ounces, and two ounces of Hogs-grease, and warm them together over the Fire; which being well stir∣red and very hot, make a Plaister as big as the Wen, upon a piece of Leather, and so renew it for the space of eight days, always laid as hot as may be; and if it come not to a head then lance it very deep, afterwards heal it with
very clean washed Turpentine, the Yolk of an Egg, and a little Saffron, well wrought together, with a Tent of Flax, well rowled therein, renewing it every day. Another Cure for the same. Take a pound of strong Lye and Soap, a quarter of Vi∣triol Roman, an ounce of Sal Armoniack, as much of Roch-Allum, and boil them together till they are thick, and use it for an Ointment. Another remedy for the same. Take Gipsiaecum, the strongest, and lay it on with Cotton three or four times, and it will take it away. For the falling of the Crest. The Cure is, First let the Crest be supported to stand upright; then on the contrary side that it falleth, draw his Crest the depth of a Straw with a hot Iron, the edge of which Iron should be half an Inch broad, and make your Beginning and Ending somewhat beyond the Fall; but the first Draught must go all the way upon the edge of the Main, even under the Roots of the same, bearing your hand right downward into the neckward, then answer that with another Draught beneath, and so far distant from the first as the Fall is broad, compassing all the Fall; and be∣twixt these two Draughts, right in the midst, draw ano∣ther Draught, then with a Button of an Inch about, or else crossing the same with your Iron, burn at each end a hole, or else cross the Spaces betwixt the Draughts; the Reason is, that by the pursing up and shrinking of the Skin on the contrary side, the Crest may stand upright: Some will afterwards anoint the same with Fresh Butter, or something to asswage the Heat; but this is a way to enlarge the Skin, and for my own part I hold it best un∣til nine days are past, then to take away the Scab will not be amiss. For the crick in the Neck. There are many Opinions how this should come  a Horse, and therefore many means ought to be used before
any extreme means be used; first therefore, if the Horse have such a Crick that he holdeth his Neck streight, and cannot have the use to lift it up and down as was usual, then let two Men on each side rub his Neck, rub him stout∣ly; sparing no pains till his Neck be grown very hot; which being done, put a Bit into his Mouth, and make tryal if he can or will rein in any seemly Proportion; the which if he do, then it is to be concluded the same came by some Cold or some Strain; and then I would have him let blood on both of the Breast-Veins, and all his Neck throughly anointed and laboured with Aquavitae and Nerve-Oil, that it may drink into the Skin, and two Sheep-skins wrapt about him with the Wool next to the Neck to keep it in a great Heat, and so to rest twenty-four hours; and if he do not by this means amend, but carrieth his Head still down and feedeth slowly, then make a hole in his Forehead close under the Foretop, and thrust in a Cronet to raise the Skin from the Flesh a handful deep, then take a Goose's Feather well anointed with Hogs-grease to keep the hole open that it may run ten days together, and every day twice let the Feather be cleansed and new anointed, and let his Neck be still laboured with rubbing, covered very warm to keep it in a Sweat, and if you perceive no Amend∣ment, then draw him with a hot Iron from the Root of the Ear on both sides of the Neck through the midst of the same, even to the Breast, a straw deep, that both ends may meet on the Breast; but if he carry his Neck awry on one side, then only draw the contrary side with a hot Iron, and fail not every Morning when he is fasting to ride him with a Bit till he sweat, and the hotter he is, the more pull in his Rein, and when he cometh to the Stable, cool him moderately, and rub him throughly. To draw the Wolves Teeth. These are two little Teeth growing in the upper Jaw next to the great grinding Teeth, which hinderr the Horse from grinding his Meat, so as he will let it fall unchewed, and sometimes you shall see some Teeth so long and over-hanging in his Jaws, that they race and cut his Cheeks, so
that he cannot feed. The Cure is, Tye the Horse's Head to some Raster or Post, his Mouth being opened with a Cord, so as you may see every part thereof, then take a round Iron Tool half a yard long, made at the end like a Carpen∣penter's Gouge, and with your Left-hand set the edge of that Tool at the foot of the Wolves Teeth, on the outside of the Jaw, turning the hollow-side of the Tool downward, holding your hand steadily, then with a Mallet in your Right-hand strike on the head of the Tool, a pretty hard blow to loosen it, and make it bend inward, then wrench the Tooth outward with the inside of the Tool, and thrust it out of his Head; and do the like to the other Tooth, and fill the holes with Salt; and if any Tooth do over-hang the nether Teeth, to the Prejudice of the Horse, then with your Mallet and Tool pare the Tooth, or as many as over-hang for hurting the Horse's Mouth. For the swelling of the Gums. The Cure is, To make him to bleed well in the Pallate of the Mouth, and also to scarifie the Gums that the rank Blood may come out, and then rub them throughly with Vinegar and Salt. Of the Rifts, or Corruption in the Pallate of the Mouth. Take sharp Vinegar and Salt and wash the same, and then anoint it with Honey. For the Lampus or Hadders in a Hor∣ses Mouth, every Farrier can cure it. For the Cumey in the Mouth. This proceeds from the eating of filthy Hay, that Cats, Dogs, and other Vermine have pist upon, which will cause the Horses mouth to he surred or clammy, so that he will not eat. The Cure is, to let him blood in two great Veins under the Tongue, and to wash his mouth with Vinegar and Salt, and to give him new Bread that is not hot. For the Heat in the Mouth. Turn up the upper Lip and jag it with a Lancet, that it may bleed, and wash it with Vinegar and Salt.
For the Canker in the Mouth. Wash the sore place with strong Vinegar, made thick with the Powder of Allum, two or three days together, to destrroy the exulcerate matter; then take a quart of fair Water, of Allum four ounces, of Honey four or five spoon∣fuls, of Maudlin Leafes, Sage Leafes, and Columbine Leafes, of each a handful; boil all these together till half be con∣sumed, and then every day being warmed, wash the same two or three times a day, and it will heal it. For the Barbels or Paps under the Tongue. The Cure is, to clip them away, and to wash them with Vinegar and Salt. For the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit. The Cure is, To wash it with Allum-water, then take Black Bramble Leafes, and chop them with Jard, and put them within a Clout, and make them as round as a Ball; then dip the same in Honey, and anoint the Tongue there∣with until it be whole. For the Giggs in the Mouth. They are Swellings with black Heads, growing in the inside of the Lip. The Cure is, to slit them and thrust out the Corruption, and to wash the same with Vinegar and Salt. These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following: Mangi∣ness in the Main, Manginess in the Tail, the Mallander, the Sellander, the Pains, the Scratches, all kibed Heels. The Leprosie, the Farcyn, the General Scab, all Lice or Nits, or other Vermin. First, in any wise you shall let the Horse blood in the Neck-Vein, and suffer him to bleed very well (because the Corruption of the Blood is the only Breeder of these In∣firmities) having with a Knife, Lancet, Curry-comb, Hair-cloth, and such like, opened the Knots and Pistules, and rubbed away all Scurf and Filthiness, laying the Sores
open and raw, as it were ready to bleed; then you shall take of Yellow Arsnick or White Mercury beaten to a fine Powder, or Belagar and clarified Hogs-grease, of each a like quantity, and beat them well together till they come to a perfect Ointment; then having tied the Horse's Head up fast to the Rack, in such wise that he can neither lick nor bite himself, with this Ointment anoint all the Sores and other offended places very well over, holding some hot Bar of Iron, or Fire-shovel, heated against the same, that the Ointment may the better and speedier soak in; and be∣ing thus anointed, let him stand the space of two or three hours at the least tyed as aforesaid; which done, take of the strongest Urine you can get, and with the same wash away all the Ointment, wheresoever it was laid, and then untye the Horse, and put him to his Meat; and thus do once a day, till the Sores dry up and begin to waste away. For the Bleeding at the Nose. This may be derived from many Causes which cannot be truly known, as proceeding from within the Body, and therefore I shall only direct how to cure the same. Take a pint of Red-Wine, and put thereinto a quarter of Bole-Armony beaten into a fine Powder, and put the one half into his Nostrils that bleedeth, holding up his Head, and this may do well if in the Nostril or Head there be the original Cause; the next day give him the rest into his body, and that will surely bind his Body, and it may help the bleeding inward. Another Remedy for the same. Let him blood in the Breast-Veins, of each a pint, for that is most likely to turn the Course of the Blood; take two or three spoonfuls of his Blood, and put it into a Sawcer, and boyl it until it be dried to a powder; then take the Powder thereof, and blow it into his Nostrils, hd if it come of a Wound; put it into the same, and it will presently stanch it; as also Horse-dung, Asses-dung, Hogs-dung, Sage-Leases bruised and put into the Wound; or take of Frankncense an ounce of Aloes half an ounce,
and beat them into a fine Powder, and mingle them throughly with the Whites of Eggs until it be as thick as Honey, and with soft Hares-hair thrust his Nostrils so full, as that it cannot fall out. And lastly, some will throw cold Water upon him against his Hair, and 'tis likely that the over-cooling of him that way may stop the Flux there∣of: And this a worthy experienced Friend of mine did use to do, if at any time such a sudden Accident did hap∣pen. Of the Vines. This Distemper proceedeth from the Corruption of Blood: The Cure is, Draw them with a hot Iron right∣down the midst, from the Root of the Ear so far as the Tip of the Ear will reach being pulled down, and again under the Root of the Ear, with a hot Iron draw two strikes on each side like this Figure, ‡; then in the midst of the first line lance them with a Lancelet or Razor, ta∣king hold of the Kernels with a pair of Pinchers, but be∣ware that you touch them not with your bare Fingers; pull them so far out with your Pinchers as that you may cut the Kernels out without hurting the Vein; then fill the Hole full of Salt. Another Cure for the same. Take Aegremony, Honey, and Violet-Leafes, stamp them together, and slit the Sinew under the Ear, and lay a Plai∣ster thereunto two or three days. For the Canker in the Nose. This proceeds from corrupt Blood, and consumed Flesh, which makes it raw within, and in the end will eat the Gristle thereof; it will also cause the Horse to bleed at the Nose, and to yield a filthy savour. The Cure is, take of green Coperas and Allum of each a pound, and of white Coperas, one quarter of a pound, boyl these in a Pottle of running Water il it  alf consumed, then take it off, and put into it half a part of Honey, hold up his Head with a staff, but not too high, and with a Squirt, squirt the Wa∣ter,
being lukewarm, three or four times together into his Nostrils, and give him liberty to blow out the filthy mat∣ter least you choak him; and with a Stick and a Rag wash his Nostrils twice a day until he be whole. Another Cure for the same. If you see the Canker be of great heat and burning in the Sore, with exceeding Pain, take the Juice of Purslane, Lettice, Sorrel, and Night-shade, and wash the Sore with a fine Clout, and with a Squirt, wash the same, and this will kill it. For the Canker of the Eyes. This proceeds from the Corruption of the Blood, by reason whereof you shall see many red Pimples both within and without the Eye, and through Inflamation the Eye will look red, and be full of Corruption. The Cure is, To let him Blood (on the side of the Neck that you see the Eye is grieved) a Pottle or more, if you see the Blood very foul, and the Inflamation great, then take three pints of fair Water, and Roch Allum, and green Coperas, of each half a pound, and of white Coperas an ounce, and boil them until half be consumed, then once a day, being made warm, with a fine Cloth cleanse the Eye, so that it look raw; and this do every day until it be whole. For the Impostumes in the Ear. This may proceed from some Blow or evil Humours: The Cure is, Take Powder of Linseed, and of Wheat-flow∣er, of each half a pint, of Hogs-grease one pound, warm them in a pot on the fire, until they be throughly incorpo∣rated, by continual stirring, then take a piece of white Lea∣ther, somewhat bigger than the Impostumation, and spread it, being very warm, as far as will cover the swelling, and renew it every day until it break, then lance it, so as the Corruption may go downward, and tent it to the bottom with a full Tent of Flax, dipt with this Ointment follow∣ing: Of Melrosaum, of Oyl of Life and Turpentine, of each two ounces, and mingle them throughly, then make him a
Biggin of Canvas to close in the Sore, so as the Tent and Ointment may abide within, renewing it every day once until it be whole; but if the pain be in the Ears without any great swelling, which may be only with Cold, then take Blackwood dipt in the Oyl of Camomile and thrust it in∣to his Ears. These Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following, all Light Galls, to skin Sores, to dry up Humours. First, bathe the Sore place with hot molten Butter; then strow upon it the Powder of Rosin for a day or two: lastly, Take a spoonful or two of very thick Cream, and with the Soot of a Chimney bring it to a very thick Paste; then spread it upon the Sore, and it will heal, dry, and Skin in a short space. Of the Pole Evil. This proceedeth likewise from the same Causes, and groweth like a Fistula betwixt the Ears or the Nape of the Neck, you shall perceive it by the swelling; if it be not broken, ripen it with a Plaister of white Hogs-grease, as tho' you would scald it therewith, and make him a Biggin to keep him very warm, and renew the Plaister twice a day very hot and it will ripen the sooner; then where it is softest, and where the Corruption may best issue forth, with a round hot Iron as big as your little-Finger, two Inches beneath the soft place, thrust it upwards, so as the point of the Iron may come forth at the ripest place, then Tent it with Flax dipt in Hogs-grease, and lay also a Plaister of Hogs-grease on the same, renewing it four or five days; then afterwards take half a pound of Turpen∣tine clean washed and dry'd from the Water, with two Yolks of Eggs and a little Sasfron, and mingle them toge∣ther; then with a Quill search the depth of the Hole, and tent it with a Sponge so big as the Hole to the bottom, and so thrust it with a Quill into the Wound to the bottom, and a warm Plaister of Hogs-grease to cover it, renewing it twice a day; but when the swelling ceaseth use no Plaister.
For Impostumes in the Ear. This proceeds from some Blow or evil Humours. The Cure is, ake a Powder of Linseed and of Wheat-flower of ach half a pint, of Hogs-grease one pound, warm them in a Pot on the Fire, until they be throughly incorporated, by continual stirring; then take a piece of white Leather, somewhat bigger than the Impostumation, and spread it, being very warm, as far as will cover the Swelling, and renew it every day until it break; then lance it, so as the Corruption may go downward, and tent it to the bottom with a full Tent of Flax, well dipt in the Ointment follow∣ing; of Melrosaum, of Oyl of Lie and Turpentine, of each two ounces, and mingle them throughly, then make him a iggen of Canvas to close in the Sore, so as the Tent and Ointment may abide within, renewing it every day once until it be whole; but if the Pain be in the Ears, without any great swelling, which may be only with Cold, then take Black Wool dipt in the Oyl of Camomile, and thrust it into his Ears. For the Canker in the Eye. This proceeds from the Corruption of Blood, by reason whereof you shall see many red Pimples both within and without the Eye, and through Inflamation the Eye will look red, and be full of Corruption. The Cure is, to let him Blood, (on that side the Neck that you see the Eye is grieved) a Pottle or more; if you see the Blood very foul, and the Inflamation great, then take three pints of fair Water, and of Roch-Allum and Green Coperas of each half a pound, and of White-Coperas an ounce, and boil them un∣til that half be consumed, then once a day being made warm, with a fine Cloth cleanse the Eye, so as it look raw; and this do every day until it be whole. For the Haw in the Eye. This Distemper is known unto all Farriers; no doubt but it is ingendred from some gross Humour descending out of the Head: the Cure thereof is, to pull both the Eye-Lids
open with several Threads stitched with a Needle to either of the Lids, then catch hold of the Hair with the stich of another Needle and Thread, and pull it on so far as you may stay it with your Finger, to the intent it may cut all round to the breadth of a Penny, and leave the black behind, for by cutting away so much of the fat and black of the Eye, the Horse many times becomes bleer-eyed, and therefore you must spare the Fat which is the wash of the Eye, and the Film, wherein the Eye groweth, but cut be∣tween the Film, and the Crush, and then squirt in a little White wine or Beer. For Lunatick Eyes. For as much as they are so called, I am content so to continue the name; and it is said that the Horse becometh blind at certain times of the Moon, and thereupon most Men do gather that his Sight is good or bad, according to the natural Course of the Moon; but the Truth thereof is from the natural Sight of the Eye, which is a blueish Eye or Sight; and all Horses that are so sighted, after extra∣ordinary Heat and Travel, will be blue, and have a Film overgrow the Sight, so as he cannot see, although he be cured, but upon the like occasion will fall blind again. An experienced Friend of mine always cured this Disease by thrusting Tuty into the Eyes with his Finger: But if you lay upon the Temples of his Head a Plaister of Pitch, Rosin, and Mastick, and then with a sharp Knife make two slits on both sides of his head an inch long, somewhat towards the Nose, a handful beneath the Eyes, not touching the Vein, and with a Cronet loose the Skin upwards, the breadth of a Groat, and thrust therein a round piece of Leather, as broad as a two-penny piece, with a hole in the midst, to keep the hole open; and look to it once a day, that the Matter may not be stopped, but run ten or eleven days, then heal it with Turpentine, Hogs-grease, and Wax boyled together, with Flax dipped in it, and take not the Plaist∣ers off till they fall away; then burn him with a small hot drawing Iron, made like a Star, with a hole in the midst in each Temple-Vein where the Plaister did lye, in this
manner * *: and if this help not, set him to Cart: Beware you breed no Colts of Horses that are so ed, for upon every hard Travel they will be blind. These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine; All Wounds in general, all Sinews cut, all Wounds with sbot, burning with Lime, Mad-dog biting, Foundring, Fretizing, Surbaiting, all loose Hoofs, casting of the Hoof, Hoof-bound. Take of Turpentine, Wax, Hogs-grease, of each a like quantity; first melt the yellow Wax and Hogs-grease, up∣on a soft fire; then take it off, and dissolve the Turpentine into it, and stir it very well together; then put it into a Gally-pot and let it cool; and with this Salve tent or plaist∣er any Wound or Sore, and it will heal it. Also with the same anoint the Cronets of the Horses Hoofs, and putting Wheat-bran unto it, it being boyled hot, stop your Horse Feet therewith, in case either of Founder, of Frettize, Surbait, or such like Infirmities. For the Staggers. The Cause of this Disease is, for that the Brain and the Stomack are united and chained together with certain Sinews, and thereby interchangeably communicate their damages, so as when the Stomack is oppressed with the gross and tough Humours, or some strong Vapours, as when the Horse hath eat some strong Herb, as the wild Parsnips, or such like, by the strong vapouring Spirits pro∣ceeding out of the Stomack to the Brain, oppressing the same, as the strong vaporous Spirit of Wine, Aquavltae, and such like, do the brain of Man, he is dizzy, and reeleth as if he were drunk; at the first he doth only reel and stagger as if his Back were swayed, and will eat his Meat, but afterwards he will forsake it, and not be able to stand. The Cure is, let him blood in the Temple-Veins, one hand∣ful under the Eyes, then take Garlick, Herb-grace, a little Leaven and Bay-salt, stamp them together, and then put thereinto a little quantity of Aquavitae, and put it into the Horse's Ears, and bind them close, and so let it remain twenty four hours, and wash his Tongue with Vinegar and
Salt; let him not drink any cold Water, and once a day gently walk him. Another for the same. Take Bitter Almonds one once and a half, of Ox-Gal two drams, of Black Hellebore stamp one half penny-worth, of Groins, of Castorum, of Vinegar, of Varnish five drams; sethe them together until the Vinegar be consumed; strain it, and put it into his Ears, as aforesaid: but bind them with a Woollen List, not with a cutting String. A Soveraign Medicine called the Emperour of all Medicines concerning Horses. Take of Wheat-meal six pounds, or as much as will bring all the Simples following to a stiff Paste: of Aieeds two ounces, of Cummin-seed six drams, of Carthamus one dram and a half, of Feaugreek-seed one ounce and two drams, of Brimstone an ounce and a half, and of Sallet-Oyl one pint and two ounces, of Honey one pound and a half, of White-Wine four pints; and all this must be made into a very stiff Paste, the hard Simples being pounded, and searsed to a fine Powder, and so mixed with the sweet Simples: After this Paste is made, it must be kept in a very clean Cloth; and when you have occasion to use it, you shall take thereof as much as will make a round Ball as big as a Mans Fist; and this Ball you shall by continual washing, laving, and squeezing, dissolve into a Gallon of running Water, to give it the Horse to drink, either after his Heats, or any violent Labour or Exercise, or when he is sick, poor, lean, or inwardly diseased, and full of foul Surfeits; and then you shall suffer him to drink thereof as much and often as he pleaseth; the Colour of the Water will offend him to take it, therefore at the first offer it him in the dark, of which when he hath but once tasted, he will then sorsake all. Water whatsoever to drink of this only. Now touching the Virtues which appertain to this Medicine, they are these: First, if your Horse be never so poor, lean, surfeited, and diseased, if you give your Horse of this Water with the Ball dissolved in it as afore∣said,
it will in fourteen days not only cleanse and scoure him, but also purifie the Blood, enliven and quicken him in a wonderful manner. Secondly, it will be a means to prevent any Sickness for a long time. Thirdly and Lastly, t will make him continue in good Case, feed lustily, and gain Flesh apace, though before he was very Lean. A safe Purge to prevent Sickness. Take a quarter of a pound of red Saunders, and the like quantity of fresh Butter, make them up, and give them as the former; or Rosemary Leafs bruised and mixed with Butter or green Figs, so ordered; and let those that under∣take the Cure of Horses, observe particularly these five things: 1. To what Diseases Horses are inclinable. 2. From what Cause they proceed. 3. By what means the Causes do accrue. 4. The Tokens by which any Distemper is known. 5. And how to apply apt and seasonable Remedies. For the Cramp, or Convulsion of the Sinews. The cause of this Disease, is over much Fulness, or very great Eating and Feeding, much Rest, want of moderate Exercise; or by over-much Bleeding, extream Labour, or extream Cold. That which proceeds from great Fulness and Rest, comes suddenly. That which comes by Empti∣ness, or Penury, goes on by little and little. I have seen a Horse had his Head awry, and Neck so stiff, as if he could not bow any manner of way, nor the strength of Men open his Jaws, or Mouth, without breaking of them: His Eyes hollow in his Head, and the fleshy parts thereof turned backwards: His Tongue so henumed, that he could not eat nor drink, but by sucking of his drink by little and little, with his Lips: All which came by a full and foul Feeding, and too much Rest; bing, notwithstand∣ing, exceeding Fat when he Dy'd. The cure of this Dis∣ease is, to take a great quantity of Blood from him; rake him behind, and give him a Glister of Mallows, Cammomile and Fennel, boyled in Milk.
How to order him after this, for the Recovery of his Limbs, &c. Let him be rubbed by two or three lusty strong Men, and keep him in a very warm Room; then take two quarts of strong Ale, and two pound of black Soap, and boyl them together till they look like Tar, and anoint and rub all his Body therewith, so as that it may drink it in; then Cloath him, and stuff his Head and Neck close, and all the parts of his Body, to bring him into a great Sweat; give him a pint of White-wine, two ounces of Alloes, and half an ounce of Agarick infused therein, beaten small, putting therein three spoonfuls of clarified Hogs-grease; and, if that will not do, give him every day a Glister; keep him warm, and well rubbed; then give him small Ale to drink, wherein Mallows and Liquorish have been boiled; let his Diet be small, but sweet and good. For a cold in the Head. The cause hereof, proceeds from some Heat, or stand∣ing too much still; or from having some Air piercing his Head when he is hot; or from some Humours congealed after long Rest, and full Feeding; or through his wanting of moderate Exercise to expell the same. The Signs are, a continual distilling Rheum, waterish Eyes, or his short drawing of Breath at the Nostrils, when the Canes and the Passages of the Breath are stopped. The Cure is, Put up∣on his Head a double Hood, and every Morning when he is Fasting, ride him; take two Goose Feathers dipp'd in Oyl of Bay, and thrust them up into his Nostrils; through the ends whereof, with a Needle, put two Threads, to fasten the same to the Head-stall, so as the Feathers cannot fall out; and to the Snaffle or Bit, that he is ridden with, fasten a root or two of Polypodium of the Oak, which hath been steeped all Night in Spike Oyl, and every time you ride him, anoint the same with the said Oyl; and when he cometh home, put on his Head the double Hood, and Per∣fume him hot with Frankincense, casting a Cloath over his Head. Use him thus nine days together, and give him warm Water, or good Mashes, during the said nine days;
for all Rheums having continuance, are dangerous, and many times (having continuance) Remediless, and leave behind them a worse Disease than themselves. These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following. The Poll-Evil: The swelling after Blood-letting: The Weathers hurt; galled Backs: Sit-fasts: The Navel-Gall: Fistula's: Bite∣ing with Venomous Beasts, or Worms. For any of these filthy Impostumations, Galls, or Swel∣lings, you may take the Earth-loam of a Mud-wall, which hath no Lime in it, but only Earth, Straw, or Litter, and you shall boil it in strong Wine-Vinegar, till it become very thick, like a Poultess; then, being very hot, apply it to the Sore, renewing it once in Twelve or Twenty four hours; and it will not only ripen and break it, but also Draw it, Search it, and Heal it most perfectly; as Experi∣ence will manifest. For the Glaunders. The original cause of this Disease, is the Rheum, which being an aboundant Moisture, and naturally very cold, at length congealeth, (according to the nature of Cold) and then proceedeth to Kernels, and so to Inflamations; which become so great in the end, that they seem to strangle and stop the breath of the Horse; from whence he is said to have the Strangles; and by continuance of time, the same perish either the Liver or the Lungs, by a continual distil∣ling of putrify'd and corrupt Matter: The Signs are ap∣parent to every Man that hath Sight, and the diversity or Medicines, infinite. The beginning always of this Disease, is taking of Cold, after too much Heat; the which cannot be avoided from a Horse that hath full Feeding, and great Rest; more especially, if his Diet be naught; or by the use of continual Travel upon a full Stomach; or, before his Body be made clean after long rest; for the standing Pool is ever Muddy. The Cure is, First, Clear his Head, as is prescribed for the Cold of the Head, in every part, (if he be able to be Rid or Walked) that he may receive Breath; then give him this Drink: Take a pint of Malm∣sey,
and six penny-worth of the best Treacle, and a quarter of a pint of sweet fresh Butter; then presently rub him un∣der the Jaws with plenty of Hogs Grease, and leave it thick anointed; then make him this Poultis: Take two handfuls of Mallows, a handful of Wormwood, as much Rue, and as much Smallage; a quart of Wheat-bran, and a quart of Hogs-grease, boil them together, and stir them continu∣ally in the boiling, untill the Hogs-grease be almost con∣sumed; and being as hot as may be suffered, bind it un∣der his Jaws and Thropel, and wrap all his Head very warm, leaving Air for his Mouth and Nostrils; then Air him again with Frankincense, and keep him warm in the Stable, and so let him rest with that Poultis twenty four hours: The next Morning give him a quart of the best New-Ale, with a spoonful of the Powder of Liquorish, and Aniseeds, and a good piece of Butter, blood warm; then rub his Nostrils with a clout bound to the end of the Stick, well anointed with Oyl of Bay and Butter; then remove the Poultis; and if you find the Kernels and Inflammation to be very soft, Lance them through, and stop the holes full of Hogs-grease and Turpentine, boiled hot together, and soft Tow boiled therein; then warm some of your Poultis and bind it on, as before, but not altogether so hot, and so let it remain untill the next day. How to order the Horse after this, for a perfect Cure. Keep his Head warm, as before. If he will eat, give him clean sweet Oats, steeped in New-Ale, or Maimsey, if he will eat them; and Wheat straw, but no Hay: Give him no cold Water for nine days, but good Mashes, if he will take them: Keep him in a spare Diet, and every day, gnt∣ly walk or ride him, if he be able; then keep him warm after it; and if it be possible, let him sweat every day a little, and after rub him very dry, and let him not drink in his sweat. In his Provender, Take of the root of white Lilly, of the root of Enula Campana, and of the root of Polypodium of the Oak, very finely cut or chopped, the quantity of two Spoonfuls, every Morning that you give him Provender, and be sure that he be hungry and eager
of Provender when you give it him, and so continue for Nine days; and besure that you keep him very hungry, and (as hath been said) with spare Diet. At the Nine days end, give him his purging Drink: Take a quart of White-Wine, or of strong Alewort, an ounce and an half of Alloes, beaten into Powder; half an ounce of Agarick; two spoon∣fuls of the Powder of the Root of Enula Campana; three spoonfuls of Honey; brew them well together, give it him blood-warm; and keep him warm: Within six days after, let him blood, and if it be good, take but a quart; but if very bad, take two quarts at least. After this, use him both in Feeding and Labour, moderately, and he will afterwards be in perfect Health. The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause and Cure. The Cause hereof, is great Heat, and afterwards taking of Cold: And, First, It beginneth with Rheum; then the Glaunders; and afterwards the Mourning of the Chine; (s it is usually termed) but more truly and essentially, it be∣ginneth with the Rheum, which proceedeth to Inflammation of the Liver and the Lungs, by continual distilling upon them; then to the Glaunders, which is the Imposthumation thereof; and lastly, to an Exalaration, which abruptly, and untruly, is called the Mourning of the Chine. The Signs to know the Disease, are these: 1. The continual distil∣ling of Rheum in the Head. 2. The continuing Knobs betwixt the Jaws. 3. The keeping of his Hair without casting. 4. The continual running of thick stinking Matter at the Nose. 5. The fastning and growing of a knob as big as a Walnut, to the inside of one of the Jaws; which if so, commit his Carkass to the Crows, for he is past all help. The Cure for such a Horse as may be cu∣rable, is to follow these Directions. For the First, which is Rheum, the cure I have mentioned for the Cold in the Head. For the Second, which is a congealed substance, gathered into two knobs betwixt the Jaws, it is cured as the Glaunders. For the Third, which is keping still his Winter Coat, and not casting off his Hair, let him Blood often, until you see that he hath pure and fine Blood, and
give him good Mashes, made very strong with Malt; and put in his Provender, Polypodium of the Oak, small cut; the root of the White Lilly, small cut, of each a good quantity, if he will eat; and shred in also, a quantity of Liverwort; and, if he be a Horse of value, at every time, a six penny weight of Rubarb; and every Morning, being Fasting, give him a pint of the Drink prescribed for the preserva∣tion of the Lungs, and keep him only with Wheat-straw, (but not Hay) and old sweet and clean Oats. The manner of Ordering him after this. Every Morning, after he hath taken that clean Drink, ride him two or three Miles. For the Fourth, which is the thick running at the Nose, continually clear his Head, as hath been prescribed for the Cold in the Head; and so in every part, as the rest are prescribed, only adding of purg∣ing Drinks; viz. After all these prescribed Orders, give him two several Mornings, a pint of White-Wine, an ounce and an half of Alloes, half an ounce of Agarick, two drams of Liquorish and Aniseeds, and a spoonful of pure Hogs-grease, warmed and well dissolved together; and after he hath Purged, the next day let him Bleed in both the Breast-Veins, the quantity of a quart, and still keep him with good Mashes, and moderate Travel: Give him every Morn∣ing fasting, for Nine days after, a pint of that Drink which I prescribed for the clearing of the Lungs. For the Fifth, If you find no amendment, but a knob grown to his Jaw, then you must give him a Purge with Pills, as I have pre∣scribed; and if that help him not, then without all doubt, he is Remediless. These following things are most excellent to put into Horses Pro∣vender, to preserve them from Diseases. The Powder of Wolfs Liver; the Powder of Enula Cam∣pana; the Powder of Polypodium of the Oak; fine cut pieces of Ruburb; the Powder of Brimstone, made fine; the Pow∣der of Liquorish; Aniseeds, Fenugreek, Turmerick, Bay-berries, Long-Pepper, Agrimony, Cammomile, Wormwood, Saven, Lin∣seed, Smallage, Parsley, Rue, Hysop, Colts-foot, Horehound, and such lke.
Broken Wind, the Cause. The Causes why a Horse draws his Breath very short, may be many; as Sickness, great Fulness, or violent Ex∣ercise: But the reason of the cause is, For that the Heart being the only hottest part of the Body, from whence the Arteries and Veins do carry the heat thereof to every part of the Body; (and therefore 'tis truly said, to be the Chariot of Life) when that by Sickness, Fulness, or vio∣ence of Exercise, is choaked, and as it were, smothered with great heat, then do the Lights, being the Bellows to draw Breath, according to that Office that Nature hath or∣ained them unto, presently labour with all Violence, to draw it, to cool and comfort the Heart, and so consequent∣y, all the Members and parts of the Body, to fill all the mpty corners with Air, which naturally and in predomi∣ant Qualities, is moist; and when they have drawn suf∣cient Breath, the driness and heat, by the moisture of the Air, is quenched; which being so, then doth the Creature raw Breath leisurely and coldly, and not before; but so ong as the Heart is oppressed by the violent heat of Sick∣ess, or by great Fulness, or violent Exercise, the Canes, Pipes, and Passages for the Breath, are almost stopped nd choaked up; then do the Lungs labour very extream ick, to preserve the life of the Creature, which is the Heart; and therefore it is said to be the first thing that Li∣eth, and the last that Dieth. And to make the same a lit∣e plainer, Observe a Horse that is Broken-winded, (as he usual term is) and you shall find, that he setcheth his reath much shorter, when he is kept in the Stable only with dry Meat, than when he goeth to Grass; and the nly reason is, the coldness of the moist Food, which epeth the Heart and all the Body in coolness, because e Humours that proceed from the digesture of Grass, are ool and moist, according to the natural qualities of Grass nd raw Herbs. For a broken Wind; the Cure. Take the Dung of a Boar dried to Powder, a spoonful;
Diapenthe, two ounces; the juice of Spanish Liquorish dissol∣ved, an ounce, in a quarter of a pint of Ale; put these in∣to a pint of new Milk, and give it him warm fasting; re∣peat it for five or six Mornings, and ride him a gentle pace after it, if the Weather be warm, or any ways seasonable, without letting him water, or eat any thing; then put him into a warm Stable, give him a Mash of Oats and split Beans, and keep him clean Littered, and free from any noisom Scents: And the Lungs by this means, as also the Wind pipe, being cleansed, the Breath by degrees, if you do not over labour, heat, or ride him in too much rainy Weather, will return to its former easie and moderate Breathings. A most Soveraign Drink to preserve a Horse's Lungs and Liver clear; the most excelling Knowledge in a Horseman or Far∣rier. Take the Tartar of White-Wine Lees (which is no other than the Lees of White-Wine dried to Powder) an ounce and a half, of Isop two handfuls, of Colts-foot two handfuls, of Horehound one handful, of Enula Campana-Roots an ounce, four Liquorish-sticks bruised, Aniseeds an ounce, Red Sugar∣candy four ounces, boyl them all in a quart of Ale; and when it is half boyled, put to it of Hysop-water twice Di∣stilled, one pint, boyl them again, then strain it, and give it him very warm to drink; the charge hereof is very small. If you have a delicate Horse, and have Cleared him, and Dieted him, (for I would not have the Master to be at any extraordinary Charge with a Jade) then every Morning that you shall Hunt him, or Exercise him, give him Fast∣ing, a pint of this Drink, and so continue him, until you find him clean and in perfect Breath. The Lungs most prin∣cipally ought to be kept clean, as they continually draw fresh Air to them, filling all the empty corners with Moist∣ness; and that is the reason why Horses are broken win∣ded, because the Lungs are imperfect to do their Office. And likewise your broken-wined Horses, when they are kept only with a dry sort of Meat, do draw their Breath much shorter than when they go to Grass, because Grass
is naturally Cold and Moist; and thereby his Heart being the more cold, the Horse draweth his Breath much better, and more at length: But if the Horse be clear, empty, and sound in Body, then doth he always draw his Breath alike: From which ground of Reason, three things may be colle∣cted and observed: The First is, That the Horse's Head be kept clear from all Obstructions, (the which evermore cometh of Cold) which greatly hindereth the drawing of Breath in the Body. Secondly, That the Skin of the Horse be kept clear and open, to draw Breath at the Pores of the Skin into the Body. Thirdly, That the Canales Pulmo∣nis, the Pipes or Lanes of the Lungs, be not opilated or stopped through viscuous Phlegm, or tough Humours, like Bird-lime, or with Imposthumation in the Pipes, and so become Putrified; every one of which, in continuance of time, will destroy the Horse. Of the Signs of the inward Sicknesses of Horses. To know the true Signs of the Sicknesses: If they pro∣ceed from the first occasion, which is Heat, then the Signs are these, First, heaviness of Countenance, swelling in the Limbs, Scowring, or Looseness of the Body, in the begin∣ning of the Sicness; and Driness, or Costiveness in the latter end; short Breath and hot, with a loathing and for∣saking of his Me. If it proceed from the second occa∣sion, which is Col, then the Signs are also heaviness of Counterane; either dull, or else closed up Eyes; hard Bos o big ustles betwixt the Chops and the root of th Tongue; and sometimes a hard swelling up from the Chops to the roots of the Ear; a rotten and moist Cough, the Horse ever chewing some loose filthy Phlegmatick Matter in his Mouth, after his Coughing, which in one respect is no evil Sign, because it sheweth a rotten Cold that is but newly gotten, and soon to be cleansed; whereas, to cough clear and hollow, and not to chew after it, shews a dry Cold, that is of long continuance, sore, festered, and hard to be recovered. Lastly, His Body will fall away, and when he drinketh Water, it will issue forth at his Nostrils; his Eyes will be ever mattery and running, and
his Hair rough and stirring. If it proceed from the Third occasion, which is the Surfeit of Meat and Drink, either natural, or un-natural, then the Signs are these: First, Hea∣viness of Head and Countenance, in such a violent manner, that the Horse can hardly lift his Head from the Manger; a dull and dead Eye; a staggering and reeling Pace, and (if the Disease be far grown) a frantick and mad Behavi∣our, as biting the Rack and Manger, and at such as shall come about him; sometimes biting at himself, and beating his Head against the Wall, Boards, or Ground, and other frantick Passions: But if the Disease be less contagious in the Brain, but more inwardly settled at the Heart, then the Signs are Yellows in the Whites of the Eyes, and in the inside of both the upper and the neather Lips; (if the Di∣sease be far gone) then a Yellows over all the Skin, and a continual faint Sweat doth break forth: And therefore by all means remember, that tho' the alteration of Colours is unnatural, yet withal you must understand, that it is not so in all cases: If the Dapple-gray, in process of time, turn to White; the dark Iron-gray, to a bright colour; the Black, to an Iron-gray, and such like, that this is a natural, and no unnatural alteration, and so no signs of Sickness: And therefore not to be deceived at all, or to be doubtful, acquaint your self with the true colour and complexion of your Horse, which you shall best discern when he is at the pride and hight of Lust; when he is wan∣ten, proud of flesh, and smooth, sleek, shining: And when you shall see this Complexion alter in part, or all, then ever expect some Sickness. As you thus acquaint your self with the Complexion of your Horse, which I include in the Colours, so you must also have a settled knowledge of his Countenance and Gesture; and to that end, you must be careful to mark and note them, in all his Actions and Motions, as well within doors as without, as well in his play, as in his rest; at his times of Feeding, and at his times of Exercise: You shall note the cheerfulness of his Eye, the carriage of his Head and Neck; which are his angry Characters, and which be his pleasant; and when he biteth for Wantonness, or Offence: And these you shall
best find out in his Feeding, in his Exercise and Playing in his Dressing; and if at any time you find any of these Cha∣racters fail on a sudden, and that his Gesture is more lump∣ish-heavy, then call your self to an account of what you have done, either in Exercise, Feeding, Airing, or Order∣ing; for there is no doubt but there is Distemperature and Sickness approaching, if it be not prevented. Observations to be taken from the Horse's Feeding and Dung, as to the State of his Body, &c. Having thus acquainted your self with Complexion and Countenance of your Horse, so you must also not be igno∣rant, but observe divers other outward and inward Qua∣lities, for they are the greatest Light that can be, both to Health and Sickness; and to this end, you shall especially mark his Filling and his Emptying; that is, his manner of feeding, and the manner of discharging his Body. In his feeding, whether he eats with a good Apperite, or a weak Stomach: The first is Healthful, the latter unwholsoma: For if he eat with a good Appetite, he will Neigh and call for his Meat before it come: when either he seeth his Keeper, or a preparation for feeding, as sifting the Oats, chipping of the Bread, or the like; he will receive it cheer∣fully and greedily, shaking his Head, and shewing other signs of alacrity and rejoycing; which Qualities after he hath used, if on the sudden he refrain, and so receiye his Meat dully and unpleasantly, it is a great sign of Sickness. As in his feeding, so you shall mark his Qualities in emp∣tying; as, the time, the place, the substance. The time, as whether he emptyeth in the night time better than in the day: The place where he emptyeth, better in the House, or Abroad; or when you are Mounted, whether before you begin Exercise, or else after some gentle motion, or stirring; whether at the Stable-door, or at some unusual places by the way, or in the ground where you give him his Exercise. Lastly, For the substance, whether it be much or little; if it be much, you must forbear Exercise, and make him empty the oftener; if it be little, then you may fall to labour at pleasure: Whether it be good or bad,
and that commonly falleth out according to the Food he eateth. Things to be inferred from the before going Observations. If it be clear, firm and pale, with white Grains, in com∣plexion like sweet Soap, then it is wholsome; if it be Black, it shews Heat in the Body; if Greasie, then it shews Foul∣ness; if Red and hard, it shews Costiveness; if Pale and loose, then inward Coldness. And as you thus observe his Ordure, so you must also observe his Meine, whether High, Low, &c. As these qualities of Feeding and Emptying, so you shall note his qualities in Rest and Watchings; that is, in his lying down and standing up; what hours and times he observeth for either, and how long he continueth in them: And if at any time you find sudden or gross alte∣ration, then be assured of some Sickness approaching; and thus do of any other particular Quality in your Horse, (which you shall observe in his Health) for it is impossible to nominate all; and if you find them suddenly to surprize, it is doubtful that there is some Sickness following. As you thus observe the Complexions and Qualities of the Horse, so you must observe his natural Customs and Con∣ditions, and how in his livelihood and best health, he stand∣eth affected: To particularize or name them, I cannot, be∣cause they proceed most from hidden Inclinations, or else accidental Apprehension, which, by continuance of time, grow to natural Habits: And any of these, when they shall increase, or fail, are true prognostications of Distempera∣ture and Sickness. Many other signs of Sickness there are; as the not casting of the Coat in due time; Hide-bound: Continual dislike and Leanness, where there is good Feed∣ing. But on these I shall inlarge my self hereafter. Some other choice Observations, for the preventing of all inward Sicknesses. The preventing of inward Sicknesses, consisteth in two special Observations and Considerations: First, To prevent it before it come, that it may not offend at all. The Second is, To take it at the first appearance, and so to prevent it,
that it ariseth not to any great danger or hazard. To pre∣vent Sickness, that it offend not your Horse at all. Tho' I have already treated on this Subject, yet I shall not omit to write what is of excellent concernment to the Practiti∣oner. When you put your Horse to Grass, every three or four days before you turn him out, take blood from his Neck-Vein, then the next day after, give him a pint and a half of Muscadine, and half an ounce of the Powder of Dia∣penthe, or three quarters of an ounce of the Horse-Mithri∣date, and then by degrees to abate his Cloaths. You shall also observe, when you let your Horse blood, to propor∣tion the quantity you take from him, according to the good∣ness or badness of the Blood, for the loss of good Blood, is unwholsome, and doth hurt; and to preserve ill Blood, is dangerous and noisome. Also, if you observe when you take Blood from your Horse, to receive it into a Vessel, and stir it about continually, as the Horse bleedeth, to keep it from clotting; then having bled him, take the Blood and besmear it all over the Horse's Back and Body, you shall find it wonderful wholsome to him, for it comforteth his Body, cleareth his Skin, and breedeth a rejoycing in all the Horse's internal parts. Now if you have no determina∣tion to put your Horse to Grass, and yet you would pre∣vent inward Sickness, then you shall observe once in two or three Months, (when you have the best leisure to rest your Horse after it) not to fail to give him Muscadine and Diapenthe, and Horse-Mithridate, as was before shewed, and not to let him Blood at all; for this very Potion is the greatest purger and purifier of the Blood that can be, and voideth all that yellow Cholerick Matter, and other evil and undigested Humours, which corrupt the Blood. Now you are to observe here, that although I only prescribe Muscadine, wherein you shall dissolve your Powder, or Mithridate; yet know, that when you cannot get Musca∣dine, or other sweet Wine, that then you may take strong Ale, or Beer, but in a greater quantity; for whereas you take but a pint and a half of Wine, you shall take of Beer or Ale, a full Ale-quart; as for the Powder of Mithridate, you shall keep the first quantity already prescbed; ad
if you warm your Beer or Ale a little on the Fire, it will not be amiss, but better. Now to take a Sickness at the first Approach, and to prevent it, that it may not arise not to any great danger, you shall by all means observe to look well into the Occasions of Sicknesses, which are al∣ready shewed, and into the Signs of those Occasions; and if you find your self guilty of any of them, or that the Horse discoered any of the former Signs, then presently let him Blood, and three several Mornings after, give him the Drink or Potion before prescribed, and undoubtedly it will prevent all the force of Sickness, and restore the Horse to his Strength, and good estate of Body. To refine the Blood, and save the Liver from Infection. Take of Polipodium of the Oak, made very clean, cut it into small pieces, then take a handful of Liver-wort, cut it in small pieces, together with six-penny weight of Rheu∣barb cut small, and every Morning, for three or four days in a Month, give it the Horse in his Provender, very early, two or three hours before his watering; and once in half a Year make tryal of his Blood how pure it is, and accordingly Minister help if need be. This Medicine is highly esteemed of by those that have experienced it. Of Bleeding in any Heart-Sickness, or in any ordinary in∣ward Sickness. I will now descend to the Cure of these inward Sick∣nesses: And though every several Sickness have a several Cure, yet I will draw all here into one sudden, but cer∣tain and infallible proved Method, ever found prosperous and▪ fortunate. Whensover, by Signs before rehearsed, or other Accident or Knowledge, you shall find your Horse grievously pained with inward Sickness, the first thing you shall do open his Neck-Vein, and receive some of the first Blood into a Pewter Porringer, which, if you set it in cold Water, will presently discover the Foulness and Putrefaction; then let the Horse bleed well till the Blood change; neither must you be nice or tender-in this Action, because you must understand that all inward Sicknesses in
Horses draw their Effects from the Putrefaction of the Blood only. And this is the Reason. It is certain that the Horse, of all other Creatures, hath no natural Vessel into which to receive the scummy and putrefied matter which ariseth from corrupt and Cholerick Blood, but it is either voided in Excremental Humours, or moderate Exercise and Sweats, or else by immoderate Exercise and violent Labour. By too much Repletion and Fulness, by unwholesome Food and evil Diet, or by some other natu∣ral Defect, this Cholerick Corruption increasing and over∣flowing, it presently, and in an instant overspreads the whole Body, having its Course through every Vein, and so discoloureth the Skin, and makes all the outward parts yellow, especially the Eyes and inside of the Lips; also mixing with the better Blood, and confounding the Strength and Vertue thereof, it brings a general Fairness over the Body, and in the end suffocateth the Heart; of force there must follow sudden and certain Mortality; and hence pro∣ceeds those sudden Deaths of Horses, for which our weak Farriers can give but a foolish and idle Account. But to return to the purpose; after you have taken away good store of Blood, and (as you imagine) all, or at least, the most part of that which is corrupt, then set him up in the Stable, tying his Head to the Rack gently, and at Liberty, neither so high that he shall be compelled to rest his Head upon the Bridle, nor yet so low, that he may thrust hi Head into the Manger; and thus you shall let him stand at least two hours. How to prepare your Horse after bleeding to receive what is ne∣cessary for remedying dangerous Sickness. If the Sickness be not contacious and dangerous; admi∣nister not any Potion to him that day, because the Vein being opened, and all the mous Powers and Faculties of the Body disturbed, it will be a double Vexation to his Spirits to go also through the working of the Potion; therefore in this case, the Sickness not beng violent, you may forbear farther Administration and only after the Horse hath asted you shall give him such Food a he will
eat, whether it be Hay, Bread, or Corn; and always provide that it be strong, savory, sweet, dry, and clean drest; as for the Quantity it matters not, for a small Pittance at that time will maintain him; besides Empti∣ness is no great Displeasure. At high Noon you shall give him a sweet Mash of Malt and Water made in this manner: Take half a peck of good Malt well ground, and put it into a Pale by it self, then take a Gallon of fair clear Water, and set it on the Fire; then when it is come to the hight, that it is ready to boyl, put as much of it to the Malt as will moist and cover the Malt all over, and stir them exceeding well together, crushing the Malt with a flat Rudder as much as you can, ever and anon tasting it with your Finger, till it be as sweet as any Honey, and then cover it over as close as you can, and so let it stand and stove for two or three hours at the least; then the hour being come in which the Horse is to receive it, uncover the Mash and stir it about; but finding it to hot, then put to it some clear cold Water, that may temper and al∣lay it, but in any wise not so much as may take away any part of the Sweetness; and in this tempering, with your hand crush and squeeze the Malt as much as you can; the Mash being lukewarm, give it to the Horse to drink; and if he eat of the Malt, let him take thereof at his Pleasure. This is the best manner of making of an ordinary Mash, or Horse-Caudle, for it is of that nature and quality; and to that purpose that a Caudle is administred to Man, is this given to a Horse; for you must understand, that in these contagious Diseases, nothing is more pestilent than cold Wa∣ter, and especially when that Exercise cannot be used. The ruder Farriers and Horse-Grooms, do make the Mash an∣other way, putting the Malt to the Water at the first, and so boyling them both together; but this is unwholsom and nought, and that every good Hoswife can witness; for this long boiling over-scalds the Malt, and takes away the Strength and Sweetness, and gives a harsh and unsavory Taste, which is offensive to the Horse's Nature. If your Horse be coy, and refuse to take the Mash, as many are, partly for want of Use and Custom, and partly for Weak∣ness
of Stomach, than you shall strain the Water from the Malt exceeding hard, and so give him with a Horn to drink; then take the Grains which you have so strained, and put them in the Manger before the Horse, on which, whether he feed or no, it matters not; for if he but smell and snuf∣fle his Nose upon them, it is sufficient; for the Fume there∣of is wonderous wholesome for his Head. After you have given him the Mash, see that he be warmly cloathed, as name∣ly a good Woollen Body-cloath to come round about his Heart, a large Cloath or two to come over it, and to be wispt round about, with soft, thick, and large Whisps; for the little, hard, and neat Wisps, though they are comely to the Eye, yet they are unwholsome for the Body, for Hard∣ness and Smallness makes an Impression into the Horse's sides, causeth him to forbear to lye down, when Nature and Rest requireth it. The Horse being thus warm cloath∣ed, you shall then cause one or two to rub all his four Legs from his Knees and Lamtrels downwards, with very hard Whisps, and to rub them as hard as may be; and whilst his Limbs are thus in rubbing, take a coarse Rubber or two, made of new hardned temper Cloath, and warming one after another over a pan of Coals, with them rub the Horse exceedingly much in the Nape of his Neck, and the Pole, just betwixt his Ears, and on the Temples of his Head; for there is nothing that is more wholesome than these Frictions and Chasings, for they dissolve Humours, and re∣vive all natural Heat, being a cheerful Nimbleness to the Limbs, and purge the Head of gross Cold, and rough Matter, cleansing and purifying the Brain, by which the Members and other Faculties are fortified, and the whole Body reduced back to its full Strength and Ability. As soon as you have ended this Friction of rubbing, you may then let the Horse take his Rest for two or three hours, and only leave a Lock or two of sweet Hay in his Rack, and no more; for the least quantity of any thing is too much, and soon cloys a sick Horse. An Excellent Perfume for Inward Sickness, &c. In the Evenng come to your Horse again, and having
rubbed all his Limbs and Head, as you did before, then perfume his Head in this manner. Take of the best and pu∣rest Olibanum an ounce, as much of Benjamin and Rax, and bruise them all together; I do not mean bruise them to small Powder, but only break them in small Lumps, and mix them well together, and so taking them up between your Fingers, you may not take up one Ingredient alone, but some of all; then take a Chafing-dish, if you have one, let it be after the manner of the perfuming Chafing-dishes, which are wide below where the Fire is, and narrow at the top, where the smoak avoideth; and in this Chafing-dish put well-kindled Wood-Coals, or small Charcoal, then take some of the aforesaid Perfume, and lay it upon the Coals, but in any wise so that it may not flame, but smoak; then hold the Chafing-dish to the Nose of the Horse, and let the smoak go into his Nostrils, and thus perfume him well for the space of a quarter of an hour, or half an hour at the most. Now it may be the Horse may seem coy to receive this at the first, because it is strange to him; but do you continue the Action, and cherish him; for be you well as∣sured, after he hath once received the Smell into his Head, he will be as greedy to have it, as you are willing to give it, for there is nothing that delighteth a Horse more, or more rejoyceth his Spirits than sweet savours, and odorife∣rous Smells, of which this Perfume is one of the chiefest; the Effects which this Perfume worketh is, that it purgeth the Brain of all filthy and corrupt Matter, (as you shall find by experience in the working) it dissolves tough Mat∣ter into Water, and brings it away in such abundance, that it is sometimes ready to extinguish the Fire as it fall∣eth. It is the greatest comforter of the Brain that can be, and from thence sends such Cheerfulness to the Heart, that it rejoyceth the whole Body. An excellent Receipt, with Directions for Ordering a Horse in extream Sickness and danger of Life. After your Horse hath been well Perfumed, as aforesaid, let him rest for a quarter of an hour, and then give him such Food as he will eat, either Bread, or Oats, how little he
eats it skills not, for it is to be intended that his Stomach is now at the weakest. After he is fed, you shall toss up the Litter; for you must know, that he is to stand upon the Litter all night and the next day: Besure to have him Fast∣ing, and then the next Morning early, you shall take half an ounce of the Powder of Diapenthe, as the Greeks call it, because of the number Five: Take half an ounce of this Powder, and put it into a pint of the best Muscadine, and Brew them well together in two Pots, tossing it to and fro, because otherwise the Myrrh will clotter and lump together; and after it is well brewed, give it the Horse in a Horn, then, if he have any small strength, mount his Back and walk him up and down in some warm or Sunny place for an Hour, then set him up in the Stable warm and well Littered, and tying his Back to the Bridle, let him so stand, and Fast for another hour, or more; then give him Meat, and so let him stand till betwixt Twelve and One of the Clock in the Afternoon; at which time rub him as formerly, then Perfume him, as was before said: Both them Works being finished, give him a sweet Mash, and so let him rest to the Evening, at which time, offer him Meat, but in a little quantity, as handful by handful, and let him rest till Eight of the Clock at Night, at which time again Perfume him, then give him Meat, and cloath him warm, make clean his Stable, and leave him to his Rest that Night. A closing Method to perfect the Cure of dangerous Sickness in a Horse, pursuant to the former Rules. The next day, being the third day, you shall do all things as you did the second day, already rehearsed; at first, you shall give him his Potion of Diapenthe and sweet-wine, then Air him: At Noon give him his Mash: At the Evening and Night, his Perfume, with all observations that were before declared. The next day, which is the fourth day, there is no dout (with the blessing of God) but you'll find alteration, and health approaching; you may know it by his Stomach, and by his more cheerful Countenance; as also by other outward Gestures: And finding that Health
is coming, you my then forbare to give him any more Potions, only attend him with good Food, good Dressing, and moderate Exercise: Neither shall you give him any more Mashes; for tho' they be wholsome in the extremity of Sickness, yet being any thing too much used, they will take away the Horse's Stomach, and bring him to a Loath∣ing of other Meat; and therefore instead thereof, in the Morning when the Horse is well rubbed and drest, take a Pottle of fair Water, and heat it scalding hot, then put it into a Gallon or two of clear cold Water, that it may take away the extream coldness thereof, and then, being scarcely luke-warm, give it the Horse to drink: You may, if you please, throw a handful of Bran, or a handful of Wheat-meal into the Water, for it is good. As soon as the Horse hath drank, Back him, and ride him forth gently for an hour or two: At Noon, Perfume him: At Evening Water him, as you did in the Morning, and ride him in the like manner: Feed him at usual Hours, as in the time of Health: And thus do for two or three days more: then finding his strength increasing, you may by degrees (according as the Season is) abate the Cloaths; you may also Water him a∣broad at some clear River, or Spring: Gallop him after his Watering; and draw every thing to the same custom as you did in his best Health▪ An Excellent Medicine for any violent Sickness, if the Horse be at the point of Death. If you have a Horse in this extremity and desperate case, then the first thing you do, shall be to open his Neck-Vein, and let him blood very well; then two hours after his bleeding, take two ounces of the Powder of Diapenthe, and beat it in a Mortar with as much clarified Life-Honey as will bring it to a substantial Treacle: When this Confecti∣on is made, take half an ounce thereof, or more, and dis∣solve it in a pint and an half of Musadine, and so give it to the Horse to drink with a Horn, and if he have so much ability of Body, walk him up and down for half an hour, either in some Sunny place, or close Barn, or empty House; then set him up, and let him fast another hour: At Noon
give him, if you can get it, a Gallon, or near thereabouts, of the first running of the strongest Ale, before it be put to Barm, when it is clear, strong, and carrieth a Royal on the top: But when this is not to be had, then give him a sweet Mash, Perfume, Rub, Cloath, Diet, and Order him in all respects as were shewed you in the former Cure. And thus you shall do for three days together without fail, and then no doubt but you shall see Health approach∣ing. How to Order your Horse after receiving the fore-going Medicine, to perfect his Recovery. At the end of three days, forbear all sorts of Mashes of both kinds, and follow all the Prescriptions before decla∣red. Now, if during the Cure, either through the violence of Medicine, or the foulness of the Horse's Body, you shall find any hard Pustles to rise up betwixt the Horse's Chaps and at the root of the Tongue, then you shall first clip a∣way the Hair as close as may be; then you shall take a Wax-candle, and therewith burn the Swelling, till you scarifie the Skin, then take a piece of Leather somewhat larger then the Swelling, and having prick'd it all over with the point of your Knife, sread thereupon thick, your black Shoo-makers Wax that is well season'd and new; then warming it upon a few Coals, laying it upon the Swell∣ing, and remove it not, till either it fall off of it self, or else the Sore breaks; then renew the Plaister, and with it heal up the Sore. This Plaister for the cheapness and mean∣ness, will hardly gain credit with those that are Curious; but I dare assure you, that there is not a more excellent or soveraign Plaister which belongs to a Horse; for it ripen∣eth and breaketh any Impostumation whatsoever: It asswa∣geth any hard Swelling or Tumor, whether in the Joints, or any other fleshly parts, and it healeth what it breaketh, or ripeneth; and with its heat, dissolves all manner of Humours that are knit together, or occasion pain and swelling.
To help a Horse that cannot Dung, after having been Sick. There is another Accident which attendeth the Sickness of Horses, and that is Costiveness, or Belly-binding, which maketh a Horse that he cannot Dung, or avoid his Ordure. This Accident, when at any time it happeneth, it shall be good for you first to rake him, then anoint your Hand all over with sweet Butter, or clarified Hogs-grease: Some use Oil of Bay; but it is too sharp and too hot, and many times (if the action be used too roughly, or unadvisedly) it breedeth an exulceration or soreness in the I all and in∣ward parts: Therefore either take sweet Butter or Hogs-grease, and your hand being all besmeared therewith, thrust it up into his Tuel until you feel his Ordure, then draw out as much thereof (if it be black) as conveniently you can; also, take a great Candle of three or four in the Pound at least, and cutting off an Inch or two at the up∣per or smaller end, with your Hand anoint as before, thrusting the great end forward, put it up into his Tuel so far as you can get it; then suddenly drawing out of your Hand, and leaving the Candle behind you, clap down his Tail close to his Tuel, and drawing it up between his Legs, hold it with your Hand hardly and constantly for the space of an hour or more, in which time the Candle will dissolve in the Horse's Body, and so separate and break his Ordure, and upon the letting loose of your Hand, he will presently Dung. This you may do in every case of Extremity, but not otherwise: And believe it, you will find this the most excellent Suppository of all other; and there is no Glister that can work with greater efficacy or more wholsome∣ness. Of the danger of Laxativeness in a Horse, and how to Re∣medy it. There is another Accident which attendeth the Sickness of Horses, and this is quite contrary to that before rehear∣sed, and it is called Laxativeness, or Looseness of the Body, which is expressed by a vehement and violent Scowring: This, if at any time it shall happen, you shall at first note
the violence thereof, and the continuance thereof. The violence is known by the thinness or sharpness, and the often and speedy voiding of the Excrements. The conti∣nuance is known by the unchangeableness of the Infirmity, and by the process and long continuance of time, contra∣ry to all natural and wholsome custom; for you are to observe, that a Horse may have a Scowring for a day, or a little more, and this is not unwholsome, but natural and good; and if after, it stay of it self, then it worketh no evil effect; but if it continue longer, and bring the Horse into an extraordinary weakness of Body, then seek to stop it in this manner: Take a quart of Milk, putting thereto a good spoonful or two of fine Bean-flower, and as much Bole-Armoniack finely beaten to Powder, boyl altogether till the Milk thicken, and then being made luke-warm, give it the Horse with a Horn; and doing thus a Morning or two, no doubt but that it will Bind the Horse; which if it doth not, then you shall take a quart of Red-wine, and put thereunto a handful of the Herb call'd Shepherd's Purse, and half so much of Tanner's Bark, and boyl all very well together, till the Herb and the Bark be soft; then strain it, and put thereinto of the Powder of Cinnamon, and be∣ing made lukewarm, give it to the Horse to drink with a Horn; and this do a Morning, two or three, if need re∣quire. The means to help and preserve Horses from inward Diseases. There are four ways and means to keep Horses from in∣ward Diseases, viz. Purging, Sweating, letting of Blood, and Vomiting, whereof in Order. First, Of Purging; which may be said to be two-fold, Outward, and Inward: The time of Purging or cleansing the Horse, must be presently after the taking of the Horse from Grass, into the Stable, which should be at or before the Feast of St. Bartholomew, by reason of the great moisture and cold that then happen∣eth, and to be taken up very gently, for fear of Over-hea∣ting of him, lest his Humours thereby should be dissolved by the Veins and Arteries, into every part of the Body. And that every Horse at such times are full of Humours, ap∣appeareth
in the best Spirited Horses, if you then perceive their Actions, how heavy they perform them at such times. The manner of purging and clearing the outward parts of the Body, should be in this manner. First, shave his Ears, and a little place behind, for the Head-stall to lye flat and even; then take Soap and anoint his Head and Jaws therewith; and then take warm Bucklie and wash and cleanse the same in every part, so clean as is possible, from all Sweat or Scurf, and presently rub his Head and every part with clean Linnen Cloaths, and after with Woollen Cloaths very dry; then put thereon a double Hood or Biggen, made on purpose to keep all the parts of his Head very warm: If it be a fair warm day, in the Sun, in like manner wash, purge and cleanse all his Body, and every part thereof, especially his Main, Tail, and Cods: Then rub him and clear him very dry; Cloath him and stuff him very warm, and give him plenty of sweet and clean Litter; then anoint all his Hoofs (having first wash∣ed them and made them dry) with this Ointment; Take of Turpentine and Sheeps-fuet; half a pound of unwrought Wax; a quartern of Allem; of Sallet Oil, half a pint; of Tar, a quarter of a pint: Boil them altogether until they are well Incorporated; keep it in a Pot, and every day (his Feet being clean) anoint his Hoofs therewith; neither let him go to Grass (if he be a Horse of worth) a∣bove one Month in the Year. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS. OF the Nature and Properties of Horses. Page 1 The Means to make the Seed of the Horse Perfect for Generation. 2 Observations for the better breeding of a Mare. 3 Of what Age the Horse or Mare ought to be that Beget and Bring forth. ibid. To know whether a Mare hath Conceived, &c. ibid. Of Taming of Colts. 4 Of making of Colts to Amble from the time of their Foaling. 5 Of the Stable. ibid. Of Shooing of Horses. 7 How to know a Horse that is durable in a Journey, &c. 9 How to know a free and perfect spirited Horse. 10 Of the Shape of a Horse. 11 Of the Colours of Horses. 13 Of the Horses Marks. 14 How to know a Horse that is bold by Nature. ibid. How to make a white Scar or Spot in a Horse's Face, &c. 15 To keep your Woollen Horse-Cloaths, &c. from Moths. ibid. How to defend a Horse from Flies. 16 Observations in Electing of Horses, and the Uses. ibid. To fatten a lean Horse in a short time. 18 A certain way to know the Age of a Horse by his Teeth, &c. ib. Further general Rules necessary to be known by the Horseman and Farrier, from warrantable Experience. 19 Directions for Ordering a Horse defigned for Exercise, &c. 20 Opinions as to Sadling and Bridling a Horse. 21 The best Method for Backing a Horse. 22 The Compleat Horseman: Or true Art of Horsemanship, &c. 23 Of Correction. 25 Teaching not fit for such Horses as Nature hath not framed fit to be Taught. ibid. Of the Bridle, Saddle, and bringing the Horse to the Block; the Mounting, and seat of the Rider, &c. 26 Of Trotting in the Ring, and other Paces, &c. 28
The proper Use of the Wand, Bit, and Spur, for the well Teach∣ing a Horse. 31 Rules and Directions for the Management of a Horse, &c. 35 Of the Manag'd Horse, with further Instructions. 37 Of Half-turnings, Doubles, Chambetta, Manage, Courier. 39 Sundry principal things yet remaining to be known by such would be Expert or Compleat Horsemen, &c. 42 Of the Bound, Leap, and Yerk. 44 Of the Caperiole and Corvette. ib. Short infallible Rules to be Observ'd and Practis'd by every Horseman. 45 Other ways and methods for the Management of a Horse, &c. 46 The use of the Tramel. 47 Times proper to alter the Tramet, and convenient to mount. 48 How to stop in a full career, Advance, &c. ib. How to oblige Horses to Retire, and endure various Bitts. 49 Turnings, and strait Turns, &c. ib. Observations on Ambling, Racking and Galloping. 51, 52 The Running Horse, or Racer, how to Manage, Feed, &c. 53 The first Fortnights Ordeeing the Running-horse, &c. 54 Things proper to be observed in Heats, &c. 55 Rules for the second Fortnights Keeping. 56 Directions to Order him after this. 58 The third Fortnight how to order him. 59 Cordial Balls for the third Fortnight. ib. Rules for the fourth and last Fortnight. ib. Stars, Snips and Blazes for the Beautifying a Horse, how to make them. 61 Things to be observed when you put your Horse to Grass. 62 The Drink to be given before Grass. ib. How the Horse is to be used when taken from Grass. 63 Other material Directions. ib. Blood-letting, on what occasion it ought to be used. ib. What Season is best to let Blood in. 64 Observations on a Horse, as to the Brain, Sinews, Veins, relating to Health, Strength, &c. 65 The Bones that frame a Horse's Body their Number, and how they are placed. 66 Of the four Humours in the  Horse, &c. 67 The Humours or Constitutions  orse's Body, &c. ib.
How to prepare a Horse to receive Medicines: if any Distemper has seized him. 69 What Purgations with least danger may be given to a Horse. ib. Approved Rules to be observed by such as either Travel or Exer∣cise Horses. ib. Another excellent way to the like purpose. 71 The Order of Curing Horses that are Diseased: The Causes, the Signs, and the Cures thereof. 72 Of the Ague or Fever in Horses. ibid. Another of the same. 73 Of the Ague in the Head. ibid. Of the sudden Sickness of a Horse. 74 Of a Horse that cannot Piss. ibid. Of the Pains in the Head. 75 To bring Hair again. ibid. Of the Stone and Cholick in a Horse. ibid. Of killing the Fire, either in Burning or Shot. ibid. Of a Horse that stumbleth, &c. ibid. Of the Canker. 76 Of the Farcin. ib. Of the Fistula. 78 These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine; all broken Bones, all Bones out of joynt, &c. 79 Of Leprosie and universal Manginess. ib. Another of the same. 80 Of the running of the Frush. ib. To make a Horse that he shall not neigh. 81 To make a white mark on a Horse. ibid. To ripen an Imposthume. ibid. Of a Farcin, &c. ibid. Of sinking a Fistula, or Wind-gall. 82 Of a Wrench in the Fetter-lock, &c. ibid. Of a Blister. ibid. Of a Wind gall that it shall not grow again. ibid. Of Curing a sudden Hurt. ibid. Of the dangerous Galling of a Horse. ibid. Repring a broken Hoos, &c. ibid. Of retting of the Guts. 83 To make a Horse follow his Master. ibid.
Of Bones out of Joint. ibid. Of pulling out of Shivers or Thorns, &c. ibid. Of a Spungie Wart. ibid. Of the Sinews cut and bruised. ibid. Of the Curb. 84 Another for the same. ibid. Of Wind-galls in Horses. ibid. Of the Pipes or Crutches in Horses. ibid. Of the Gravelling of Horses. 85 The Ring-bone in Horses. ibid. Of the Crown-Scab. ibid. These Infirmities are Cured by the following Medicines, viz. Splints, Spavins, Curbs, Ring-bones, &c. ibid. Of the Retreat or clogging the Foot, &c. 86 Of Surbaiting. ibid. Another. ibid. Instructions in giving of Fire, or using of Corrosives, which heal all sorts of Farcies, Cankers, Fistula's, &c. ibid. Of a Horse that is prick'd in the Foot with a Nall, or otherwise. 87 Of the Quitter-bone. ibid. Of the Hoof-bound. 88 Of the Loosning of the Hoof. 89 Of the casting the Hoof. ibid. For Foundring, Fretezing, or any other Imperfection of the Feet, or Hoofs of a Horse. 90 For hurts upon the Cronets of the Hoofs, &c. 91 To help the Surbating or Soreness of the Feet. ibid. Of the Dry Spavin. ibid. Another for the same. 92 Of the wet or Blood-Spavin. 93 All these Distempers are ured by the Medicine following. All Watery Eyes. All Blood-shotten Eyes, &c. ibid. For a Wrench or Sprain in the Pastern. ibid. Of a Horse that is Hipped. ibid. Of Stifling, and Hurts in the Stifler. 94 Of Wounds. 95 A Receipt for any extraordinary Cold or Cough, &c. ibid. For any dangerous Bots or Maw-worms. 97
To heal or dry up any old Ulcer or Cancerous Sore. ibid. For any Sore-Eyes in Horses. 98 For an old Strain or Lameness in the Joints, &c. ibid. Of a Black-Sinew Strain, &c. ibid. For any desperate Strain in the Shoulder, or other hidden Parts, or any Fistula, Pole-Evil, &c. 99 Of a Flash Quarter. 100 For an Over-reach on the Heel. ibid. For an upper Taint or an Over-reach upon the Back, &c. ibid. Of the Nether Joint. 101 Of the Serew, or Serow. ibid. All these Infirmities are Cured by this Medicine following: Fevers in general, the Pestilence, &c. ibid. For the Malender. 103 Another of the same. ibid. Of the Splint. 104 Another of the same. ibid. For Foundring. ibid. For the Shoulderpight. 106 For a Frothy Hoof. 107 For the blasting of the Hoof. ibid. For a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers. ibid. A present Remedy for the Staggers. ibid. For the Strangles. ibid. For the Swelling of the Fore-legs. ibid. Another for the same. 108 Another for the same. ibid. All these Infirmities are Cured by this following Medicine: Im∣postumes in the Ears. Ulcers in the Nose, &c. ibid. For a Grief in the Shoulder, &c. 109 Of the Wrinching of the Shoulder. 110 Of Splayting of the Shoulder. 111 A Remedy for the Spavins. ibid. For the Colt-Evil. ibid. For the Swelling of the Cods. 112 For the Mattering of the Yard. ibid. For the Tetter. ibid. How to Remedy the Wind-gall. ibid. An excellent and speedy help for the Glanders. ibid.
An Excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye. 113 A rare Medicine for a sore Back, &c. ibid. An excellent Cure for the Scab and the sore Crupper. ibid. For the Foaling of the Yard. ibid. For the swelling of the Cods or Stones. ibid. For a bony Excression upon any Member of a Horse. 114 To cure the running Frush, or any Impostumation of the Sole of the Foot, &c. ibid. For incording or Bursting. ibid. For the Botch in the Groins of a Horse. 115 All these Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All Head-ach; All Frenzies; the Lethargy, &c. ibid. For surfeiting with Provender. 116 For the Navel-Gall. 117 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. Another Remedy for the same. ibid. For the sweying of the Back. ibid. Of the Guarded or soul swelled Legs, or other Parts, &c. 118 How to keep a Horse or a Jade from Tyring. 119 Two sorts of Balls to cure any violent Cold, &c. 120 Another way how to fatten a Horse suddenly. 121 For the Hide-bound. 122 For the Navel-gall. ibid. Another Remedy for the same Sore. 123 Another Cure for the same. ibid. For the Worms. ibid. For the Lax. 124 For Costiveness or Belly-bound. ibid. All these Infirmities are Cured by the Whey only contained in this following Medicine: The Bloody Rifts, &c. 125 For the Yellows. ibid. For the Surfeiting and Foundring of the Body. 126 For the Collik. ibid. Another cure for the same. 127 Another for the same. ibid. For surfeiting with Provender. 128 These Infirmities are cured by the following Medicines: All Conusions of Sianews, all cramps whatsoever, &c. ibid. For the Wens or Knobs in the Body. ibid.
Another cure for the same. 129 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. For the falling of the Crest. ibid. For the Crick in the Neck. ibid. To draw the Wolves Teeth. 130 For the swelling of the Gums. 131 Of the Rifts, or corruption in the Pallate, &c. ibid. For the Cumey in the Mouth. ibid. For the Heat in the Mouth. ibid. For the Canker in the Mouth. 132 For the Barbels or Paps under the Tongue. ibid. For the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit. ibid. For the Giggs in the Mouth. ibid. These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following: Mangi∣ness in the Main, Manginess in the Tail, &c. ibid. For the Bleeding at the Nose. 133 Another Remedy for the same. ibid. Of the Vines. 134 Another Cure for the same. ibid. For the Canker in the Nose. ibid. Another Cure for the same. 135 For the Canker of the Eyes. ibid. For the Impostumes in the Ear. ibid. These Infirmities are cured by this Medicine following, all Light Galls, to skin Sores, to dry up Humours. 136 Of the Pole-Evil. ibid. For Impostume in the Ear. 137 For the Canker in the Eye. ibid. For the Haw in the Eye. ibid. For the Lunatick Eyes. 138 These Infirmities are cured by this following Medicine: All Wounds in general, all Sinnews cut, &c. 139 For the Staggers. ibid. Another for the same. 140 A Soveraign Medicine called the Emperor of all Medicines concerning Horses. ibid. A safe Purge to prevent Sickness. 141 For the Cramp, or Convulsions of the Sinews. ibid.
How to order him after this, for the recovery of his Limbs, &c. 142 For a Cold in the Head. ib. These Infirmities are cured by the Medicine following. The Pool-Evil: The Swelling after Blood-letting, &c. 143 For the Glaunders. ib. How to Order the Horse after this, &c. 144 The Mourning of the Chine, its Cause and Cure. 145 The manner of ordering him after this. 146 These following things are most excellent to put into Horses Provender, to preserve them from Diseases. ib. Broken Wind, the cause. 147 For a broken Wind, the Cure. ib. A most Soveraign Drink to preserve a Horse's Lungs and Liver clear, &c. 148 Of the Signs of the inward Sicknesses of Horses. 149 Observations to be taken from the Horse's Feeding and Dung, as to the state of his Body, &c. 151 Things to be inferred from the before going Observations. 152 Some other choice Observations, for preventing of all inward Sicknesses. ib. To refine the Blood, &c. 154 Of bleeding in any Heart-Sickness, &c. ib. How to prepare your Horse after Bleeding, &c. 155 An Excellent Perfume for inward Sickness, &c. 157 An Excellent Receipt, with Directions for Ordering a Horse in extream Sickness, and danger of Life. 158 A closing Method to perfect the Cure of dangerous Sickness in a Horse, pursuant to the former Rules 159 An excellent Medicine for any violent Sickness, &c. 160 How to order you Horse after receiving the fore-going Medicine, to perfect his Recovery. 161 To help the Horse that cannot Dung, &c. 162 Of the danger of Laxativeness in a Horse, and how to re∣medy it. ib. The means to help and preserve Horses from inward Di∣seases. 163 FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT. SETS of Cuts for Bibles, in Folio, Quarto, and Octavo, curiously engraven on Copper, containing near two hundred Plates, are now sold to Book-sellers at a cheaper Price than usual, viz. The Folio at 9 s. The Quarto at 7 s. 6 d. The Octavo's at 6 s. Also various Bibles of the several Volumes, fit for the said Cuts to bind with: By Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star in Cornhill. Where Gentlemen, or others, may be furnished with the said Bibles ready bound, either with, or without Cuts: Also Common-Prayers with the best Cuts extant. At the said place may Country-Chapmen be furnished with all sorts of Bibles, Common-Prayer-Books, Testa∣ments, salters, Primmer, Horn-Books; or other Saleable Chapmen's Books. BOOKS newly Published, and Sold by Henry Nelme, at the Leg and Star in Cornhll. FAmiliar Letters on several Occasions: Written by Mr. Dryden, Mr. Wycherly, Mr. Congreve, Mr.—Mr. Den∣nis, with some Passionate Love-Letters, and a Translation of Voiture's Letters; by Mr. Dryden, and Mr. Dennis. rice bound 2 s. 6 d. An Essay on the Agreeableness of the Christian Faith with Natural Reason: By way of Dialogue. Written in Latin by Sebastianus Castellio, with his Apology for himself: Englished by C. B. Price bound 1 s. Hugo Grotius's second Part of the Truth of Christian Re∣ligion: or, the Confutation of Paganism, Judaism, and Mahometism. Translated by C. B. a Divine of the Church of England: Exemplified by Memorials of the truly Pious and Christian Lives of Alderman Whitmore, Bishop Wilkins, Bishop Reynolds, Alderman Adams: By the same Author. Price bound 1 s. Alcander and Philocrates: Or, the Pleasures and Disquie∣tudes of Marriage. A Novel. Price bound 1 s.
Love in Distress: or, the Lucky Discovery. A Novel, Written by the Honourable, the Lady—Price bound 1 s. The Husbandman, Farmer, and Grazier's Compleat In∣structor, in feeding, breeding, buying and selling Cattle; with approved Remedies for all Diseases and Grievances incident to them; viz. Bulls, Cows, Calves, Oxen, Sheep, Goats, Hogs, and all other domestick Cattle and Poultry, with the Experienced Vermin-killer. Price bound 1 s. Vox Corvi: or, the Voice of a Raven, that thrice spoke these words distinctly, Look into Colossians the 3d. and the 15th. To which is added, Serious Addresses to the People of this Kingdom; shewing the use we ought to make of this Voice from Heaven. By Alex. Clogie, Minister of Wigmore, &c. Price 6 d. The Mystery of Husbandry: or, Arable, Pasture and Wood-Land improved: By Leonard Meager, Price bound 1 s. The new Art of Gardening, with the Gardener's Alma∣nack: containing the true Art of Gardening in all its Par∣ticulars. 1. The site of a proper Plat of Ground for plan∣ting Fruit-trees; with the manner of Planting, Grafting, Imbudding, Inoculaing, and ordering all sors of Fruit-trees, and Fruits in all seasons. The Art of making Cyder, Perry, and Wines of divers sorts of Fruits. 2. Of the Kitchen-Garden, and what things are proper to be done in it, as to Herbs, Plants, Roots, Berries, Fruits, &c. 3. Of the Flower-Garden, how to order it, and rear choice Flowers, Slips, Layers, sow Seeds, make Off-sets, and plant them in their proper Earths, Seasons, and due Waterings; with the Names and Descriptions of the most material ones. 4. Of Greens, how to order and preserve them; with Rules for the Conservatory and Green-house. To each Head is added an Almanack, shewing what is to be done every Month in the Year. By Leonard Meager. A True Exact and Impartial History of the Horrid and Detestable Plots and Conspiracies, carry'd on by Papists, and other wicked Persons, for the compassing the Death and Destruction of His Sacred Majesty King William III.
and Introducing Popery and Slavery, by an Invasion from France. With the manner of its Miraculous Discovery, when ripe to be put in Execution. Also, an Account of the Trials, Speeches, Confessions, and Executions of those that have suffer'd for it; with their Characters, from the first of them, to Sir John Fenwick, who was Beheaded on Tower-hill, on an Act of Attainder, with the Paper he left behind him: And many other things, worthy of particular Remark, for informing the present and future Ages. The Second Edition, with Additions. Price bound 1 s. The Secretary in Fashion: or, Instructions for Writing Letters. Price bound 2 s. A Dictionary of hard English Words, with their Inter∣pretation. By E. Coles. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. The Compleat English School-Master, or the most natu∣ral and easie Method of spelling English. By E. Cole, Au∣thor of the English Dictionary. Price bound 1 s. School-Books Printed for H. Nelme. More English Examples to be turned into Latin, begin∣ning with the Nominative Case and Verb, as 'tis varied throughout all the Moods and Tenses, and after sitted to the Rules of Grammar. To which are added, Cautions for Children to avoid mistakes in making Latin, &c. By Edw. Leeds, Scool-mastr in Bury St. Edmunds. Seneca's agedies. Printed at Oxford. Greek Testament in 24, of a large Print. Price bound 1 s. 6 d. Lucius Florus, in 24. Quintus Curtius, in 24. Price bound 1 s. Books of Divinity Printed for H. Nelme. Certain Sermons, or Homilies appointed to be read in Churches, in the Time of Queen Elizabeth, in Folio, of a large Roman Print. Price bound 6 s. Christ's Famous Titles, and a Believer's Golden Chain, handled in divers Sermons; together with his Cabinet of Jewels, or a Glimpse of Sion's Glory; As also, Christ's
Voice to London. The great Day of God's Wrath. The ne∣cessity of Watching and Praying, with a Treatise of Death. By W. Dyer. Price bound 1 s. Supplications of Saints, a Book of Prayers and Praises, in four Parts: By T. Sorocold. Price bound 1 s. The Sinner's Tears, in Meditations and Prayers: By T. Fettiplace. Price bound 1 s. The Child's Instructor, leading to true Spelling and Reading English; with useful Counsel, and weighty Argu∣ments, persuading them to remember their Creator in the days of their Youth. Also a Confession of Faith, and Cate∣chism for younger People: By B. Keech. Price bound 4 d. Clavis Bibliorum: The Key of the Bible, unlocking the richest Treasures of the Holy Scripture: By Fran. Roberts, D. D. Price bound 7 s. Sion in distress: Or, the Groans of the Protestant Church, for many Ages past, under the cruel Tyranny of Popish Persecution, and merciless Torments. As also the Marks of the Antichristian Romish Church; the Arraignment of the Scarlet Whore, and the Complaints of the Persecuted Nati∣ons against her, from the Primitive Times, down to the Year 1680. with her final Doom and Sentence. To which is newly added, Sion's Relief, and Joyful Triumph over all her Enemies, under the Reign of His Sacred Majesty, King William III. Price bound 1 s. Mr. Rutherford's Letters, the Third Edition. Now divi∣ded in three Parts: The first containing those which were written from Aberdeen, where he was confined by a Sen∣tence of the High Commission, drawn forth against hi partly upon the account of his declining them, partly up on the account of his Nonconformity: The second and third, containing some which were written from Anworth before he was by the Prelates Persecution thrust from his Ministry; and others upon occasions afterward, from St. Andrews, London, &c. By a Well-wisher to the Work and People of God. Price bound 3 s. 6 d. Index Biblicus: Or, an exact Concordance to the Holy Bible, according to the last : By J. Jackson  bound 4 s.
